STANDARD 



NOVELS. 



N LXXXVII. 



" No kind of literature is so generally attractive as Fiction. Pictures of 
life and manners, and Stories of adventure, are more eagerly received by 
the many. than graver productions, however important these latter may be. 
APULEJUS is better remembered by his fable of Cupid and Psyche than by 
his abstruser Platonic writings ; and the Decameron of BOCCACCIO has out- 
lived the Latin Treatises, and other learned works of that author." 



THE WIDOW, AND THE MARQUESS; 

OR, 

LOVE AND PRIDE. 

COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME. 



LONDON: 
KICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH ; 
J. CUMMING, DUBLIN. 

1842, 



LONDON: 

Printed by A. SrorriswoonE, 
New-Strfet-Square. 










/L424*6(m/ ^T^^U^- 

u<yt^ >vx/ vjS-m^s, /i&z*s 

<r 



2+tisZ/ t^Z^,' 

stsrz/ 'sdfo' / 



I 



IF 




>&/(> ft&ic;/.' 

:1/7^Z*2 6'-', 



E WTILE Y, 



THE WIDOW, 



AND 



THE MARQUESS) 



OR, 



LOVE AND PRIDE. 



BY 



THE AUTHOR OF " GILBERT GURNEY," " MAXWELL,' 

" THE PARSON'S DAUGHTER," 

&c. 



LONDON: 

RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

BELL AND BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH; 
J. GUMMING, DUBLIN. 

1842. 



THE WIDOW. 



CHAPTER I. 

" AT three to-morrow, then," said Charles Saville. 

The assenting look of the heautiful girl to whom these 
words were addressed in a whisper, left no doubt upon 
Charles's mind of the punctuality of her attention to the 
appointment which he had just made to call in Harley 
Street, and form one of a party, which was to visit that 
most instructive and entertaining receptacle for natural 
curiosities, the Zoological Garden in the Regent's Park. 

The heautiful girl was speedily hurVied away from his 
side by her mother, and consigned to the care of an elderly 
gentleman ; and after receiving an injunction to wrap her 
shawl closely about her, was by the same elderly gentleman 
handed down the Opera House staircase, followed by the 
said affectionate mother, who had accepted the arm of the 
aforesaid Charles Saville. 

They reached the carriage which " stopped the way." 
The elderly gentleman deposited his treasure within it, and 
then having placed her mother by her side, bowed some- 
what coldly to Saville, and stepped into the chariot himself. 
Flip, flap, flop, went the steps, bang went the door, up 
went the glass, up jumped the servant at the word ff Home," 
off dashed the horses, and away went the carriage, leaving 
Saville (somewhat wounded by the abruptness of the part- 
ing,) under the Haymarket Colonnade encircled by a cloud 
of smoke rising from the surrounding links, and enveloped 
in a still deeper cloud of thought and mystification. 

Saville had made his acquaintance with Mrs. Franklin 
and her daughter Harriet (the ladies in the carriage,) early 
in the season which was now drawing to a close j to the 
latter he became daily and hourly more attached, and, truth 
to be told, the development of her amiable character and 



2 THE WIDOW. 

intellectual qualities entirely justified the opinion which 
he had formed of her on their first introduction to each 
other. Mrs. Franklin liked him, found him agreeable, 
good-natured, and kind, and received him cordially and 
warmly at her house, where for the last five or six weeks 
he had been a very frequent visitor. 

The intercourse, however, between the young people, 
constant as it had been, gave rise to no suspicions in the 
mind of Harriet's mother, that any thing of a tenderer 
nature than friendship would be its result; and it is 
extremely probable that she would have gone on in this 
blissful state of security for months and years, had not her 
suspicions been awakened by her elderly and worldly friend 
Mr. John Smith, who, on his first visit in Harley Street, 
after his return to London, saw at a glance the real state 
of the case, and established in his own mind the extent to 
which the attachment between the lovers, as he decided 
them to be, had already gone. 

Mr. Smith, it must be mentioned, was not wholly dis- 
interested in the investigation of this delicate matter. He 
had been a particularly intimate friend of Miss Franklin's 
father, he continued the particularly intimate friend of Miss 
Franklin's mother, and this of itself might be considered 
quite sufficient reason for his anxiety with regard to the 
welfare and prosperity of Miss Franklin herself; but this 
was not all, Mr. Smith had formed the resolution of 
uniting his fate with the Franklins, by a more tender and 
permanent connection, and had, since his return from Italy, 
where he much rejoiced to pass his winters, become as 
constant a visitor at the house of his late friend, as Charles 
Saville ; and it was in consequence of thus frequently 
meeting him and the young lady together, that he had 
come to 4he conclusion, that it was quite right Mrs. Frank- 
lin should be put upon her guard with respect to the 
gentle Philander, whose fortune was purely personal, and 
covered with his hat ; he had, in fact, nothing but an al- 
lowance of three or four hundred a year, and a dim and 
distant prospect of success at the bar, towards which, at 
the period we now refer to, he was eating his way, in 
Lincoln's Inn Hall. 






THE WIDOW. 3 

In the eyes of Mr. Smith,, who was immensely rich, no 
sin was so crying, no shame so fatal, as poverty. Having 
by industry and application to mercantile pursuits amassed 
a vast fortune, he felt that, in respecting wealth in others, 
he was paying himself a tacit compliment ; and having 
pretty well ascertained the amount of the possessions and 
expectations of Charles Saville, he thought the moment 
had arrived, when the eyes of his excellent friend should 
be opened to the dangerous position in which her lovely 
daughter was placed, by the permission of such an inti- 
macy as evidently existed between her and the ill-starred 
object of the old gentleman's anger and suspicion. 

It was rather unfortunate, by way of a coincidence, that 
this most opulent and respectable gentleman should have 
fixed one o'clock of the following day for a conversation 
with Mrs. Franklin, upon the subject of her daughter's 
sentiments towards Mr. Saville, who, it will be recollected, 
intended to do himself the honour of calling in Harley 
Street at three. 

The moment Harriet heard of the arrangement, she 
felt a sort of intuitive certainty as to what would be the 
subject of the elderly gentleman's observations; in her 
confidence touching which she was greatly supported by 
the circumstance of his having, during the preceding even- 
ing, thrown out one or two gentle hints of his displeasure 
at the intimacy which he perceived to exist between her 
and the young lawyer. That she dreaded the consequences 
of his discussion with her mother, is quite sufficient proof 
of the justice of Mr. Smith's suspicions : a sleepless night 
of anxious thoughts was the result of Mrs. Franklin's an- 
nouncement of his intention; and when she came to 
breakfast, there was evidence in Harriet's eyes that she 
had shed abundance of tears. 

The sound of the clock striking one was followed almost 
instantaneously by the arrival of Mr. Smith ; who, much 
to Harriet's relief, preferred her absence from the lecture 
he was about to read, and begged to be left tete-a-tete with 
her mamma. 

One has heard of the proverb which treats of the dexte- 
rity of killing two birds with one stone : the respectable 
B 2 



4 THE WIDOW. 

Smith, at the moment to which we are referring, afforded 
in his own person a beautiful illustration of the venerable 
adage ; for at the instant that his knock at the door in 
Harley Street set Harriet's heart in a flutter of fear, it put 
that of her mamma into a state of gentle agitation with 
hope. 

Mrs. Franklin had nothing to live upon but a jointure 
which, at her death, reverted to the family of her late hus- 
band, and Harriet had, in all the world, but four or five 
thousand pounds. From what had at different times es- 
caped Mr. Smith's white lips, she had for more than two 
years expected that which she now felt certain was at 
hand ; and although the respectable gentleman would be 
her third husband, still it would be so desirable a thing in 
point of money and comfort for a lone woman needs a 
protector and of such wonderful advantage to dear 
Harriet, that the plump and buxom widow of fifty-five 
saw no just let, hindrance, or impediment to her accept- 
ance of the "lean and slippered " bosom friend of her late 
husband, at the age of sixty-four. 

Thus were two hearts nearly allied to each other set 
beating with very different passions, while the respectable 
Smith proceeded to open his mind to the senior lady of the 
two. We call him respectable from his age and station ; 
but he had a sobriquet : he was generally known in the 
extensive circle of his own acquaintance as Twaddle 
Smith. Smith is a common name, and it is absolutely 
necessary to prefix some distinctive epithet to it in order 
to mark the Cl man." The " Rejected Addresses " have 
signalised two Smiths Adam Smith is secured from the 
general confusion by the peculiarity of his Christian name 
(if Christian name Adam can be called) Sidney Smith, the 
revered leader of battles, and Sidney Smith, the reverend 
conductor of reviews, are also well distinguished from the 
common Smithfield herd ; and so, in order to point the 
moral or adorn the tale, our elderly friend just mentioned 
was always called Twaddle Smith, for reasons, the value of 
which the reader will probably best appreciate, after having 
been permitted to hear the subject-matter of his dialogue 
with his fat, fair, and fifty-five friend, Mrs. Franklin. 



THE WIDOW. O 

" Mrs. F." said Mr. Smith,, it was a way he had or 
initialising " I have long wished to speak to you upon 
certain matters connected with the state and arrangement 
of your family and establishment, and I have been at 
length driven peremptorily to put my design into execu- 
tion, by circumstances which appear to me to be extremely 
likely to embarrass you if they continue in their present 
state." 

" I shall be ready and too happy/' said the expectant 
widow, " to adopt any suggestions which you may throw 
out for the better regulation of my little family affairs." 

" I will be candid upon one point in the outset," said 
Mr. Smith ; " I think that your favourite, Mr. Saville, is 
here considerably more than he should be. He is a 
beggar ; smart and pert, I admit, and sees, I dare say, a 
good deal of what is called the world ; but I cannot endure 
that flippant manner with which he speaks upon all sub- 
jects, a fellow of three hundred a year, ma'am, has no 
right to talk so." 

" I never observed that sort of thing," said Mrs. 
Franklin; e< I think him pleasant and good-humoured" 

" So does Harriet," said Mr. Smith. " However, my 
dear madam, if what I have more particularly to propose 
for your consideration to-day, should prove acceptable to 
you, all that will be remedied by your removal, for some 
time, from the metropolis." 

" I am all attention," said Mrs. Franklin. 

" There is a prejudice," said her elderly companion, 
" which has very generally obtained, but which I am sure 
is very ill founded, that a man long accustomed to bachelor 
habits is ill calculated to understand the happiness of mar- 
ried life ; I repeat, my dear Mrs. Franklin, that I am con- 
vinced of the fallacy of this opinion, or, as I before called 
it, prejudice." 

e( I really don't see," said Mrs. Franklin, who thought 
that she already began to perceive the drift of her most 
respectable friend's observations, C( I really don't see why 
a man who has long lived single should be the less capable 
of appreciating the advantages of matrimony." 

Ci You agree with me, then," said Mr. Smith, " and I 
B 3 



(y THE WIDOW. 

agree with you as to the advantages of which you speak 
and who so well as a lady who has already twice entered 
the happy state ? There can be no testimony so favour- 
able to matrimony as a second marriage ; for who would 
return to a course of life after having been released from 
it, had it not been agreeable ? " 

" I quite coincide with you there/' said Mrs. Franklin, 
who began to feel the blood mounting into her cheeks, and 
her heart bumping not very gently in her bosom ; u I am 
sure, Mr. Smith, that as far as personal feelings go, a 
second, or even a third marriage, is practically the greatest 
compliment to those who are gone ; for, as you have justly 
observed, who would contract a second matrimonial en- 
gagement if they had not been happy in the first ? " 

" Or who," said Mr. Smith, with an extremely gallant 
smile, " would enter into a third, unless she had been 
happy in the two former ones ? " 

Mrs. Franklin smiled at the remark, which was a perfect 
corroboration of all her best suspicions. 

Mr. Smith was old, but he was rich he was dull and 
prosy, but then he was good-natured and kind. He had 
no family connections, although his namesakes were nume- 
rous ; and she thought, considering the slender character 
of her jointure, and the graceful smallness of her daughter's 
fortune, that if, as she foresaw, he intended to make her 
the offer, she would "pluck up a spirit," and take him as 
her third husband, not less estimable in her eyes from 
having been the intimate friend of her late much lamented 
second. 

" 1 confess, Mrs. F.," said the exemplary proser, (C that 
having now retired from business of every kind, I feel 
time hang heavy on my hands. I don't see to read very 
well ; I am too old to learn. I have nothing to write 
about, and although I belong to a most excellent and con- 
venient club at the bottom of St. James's Street, I find 
few contemporaries, or indeed companions there. I think 
I should like quiet and a fine climate, and, if I could 
establish myself, return to Italy, the garden of the world, 
for which I contracted a feeling of devotion when much 
younger, and to which I constantly look back with a long- 
ing anxiety to return to it.' 



THE WIDOW. 7 

te What could be more delightful ? " said Mrs. Frank- 
lin. ; 

" Now, what is your opinion ?" said Mr. Smith. " I 
am quite aware that I am a little farther advanced in life 
than the general run of bridegrooms ; but do you think 
ah ! I see you smile do you think I might find a being 
disposed to join her fate to mine,, and permit me to make 
her the sole object of all my care and affection ?" 

<e Dear Mr. Smith/' said Mrs. Franklin, " how very 
oddly you talk ! how should / know ? " 

" And yet/' said Mr. Smith, " you are the only person 
in the world whom I should desire to consult upon the sub- 
ject. Franklin, poor fellow, was considerably your senior 
when you were married ; and yet, pardon me for recurring 
to what is lost to us for ever, you were as happy as people 
could be." 

" Very true," said the lady ; " and I am quite sure that 
any people may live happily and comfortably who, when 
they become, as in time they must, acquainted and fa- 
miliarised with each other's tempers and dispositions, make 
up their minds to concede a little now and then ; for as I 
have ever found it, the subjects of disagreement between 
men and their wives are generally matters of very trivial 
importance in themselves." 

" I flatter myself that in the event of succeeding in my 
object, I should be found quite ready to adopt your ideas 
upon these points," said the matured lover ; " and thus en- 
couraged, I honestly admit that I consider my hopes of 
future comfort and enjoyment to be in your hands." 

" My dear sir !" said Mrs. Franklin. 

" So it is," said the elderly gentleman. tf I think you 
must have observed the general tenor of my conduct and 
conversation for the last few days ; and I have no diffi- 
culty in throwing myself upon your consideration. I 
never have seen a being calculated to form my happiness 
until now ; and having made the admission, I shall wait 
an answer with a patience proportioned to my anxiety." 

" Why, really," said Mrs. Franklin, " I I declare 
to you, you have taken me so completely by surprise, 

that " 

B 4 



8 THE WIDOW. 

" Did Harriet never mention any thing to you of what 
I have said to her upon the subject ? " 

" Harriet," said Mrs. Franklin, " not she ; have you 
spoken to her ? " 

" Not, perhaps, in direct terms," said Mr. Smith ; 
" but I have thrown out such hints as I thought she could 
not fail to understand." 

" But why address her in the first instance ? " said Mrs. 
Franklin ; " I honestly confess that her position as relative 
to mine, is one of the difficulties I feel in listening to the 
proposition what would become of her ? " 

" Of course," said Mr. Smith, " she would go to 
Italy." 

" But that might interfere with her prospects," said the 
mother. 

" Her prospects ! " said the old gentleman ; " of course 
our prospects would be in common." 

" Oh, I am quite sure of your honour and generosity," 
said Mrs. Franklin ; " but at her time of life, she naturally 
expects attention and beaux, or, as we used to call them in 
former days, Mr. S., sweethearts." 

" Why, to be sure," replied the lover, " and naturally 
enough ; but not after she marries." 

" Oh ! no," said the lady ; (< but she is not married 
yet." 

" But," said Smith, " going to be, I hope." 

" What, to Mr. Saville ? " said her mother ; "how can 
you fancy such a thing why, you say yourself the man's 
a beggar." 

" I flattered myself, I had enlightened you upon this 
subject," said the elderly gentleman. u What I mean is 
that, Harriet will not hesitate to accept of any advantageous 
offer which you yourself might approve ; she would not 
suffer any of the common prejudices against what is called 
a sad disparity of age to interfere with her comfortable and 
respectable establishment in life." 

" She has not," said Mrs. Franklin, " that I know of, 
had any occasion to form a determination upon such a 
proposal." 

" The time, then, has arrived," said the elderly Smith, 



THE WIDOW. 9 

getting animated. " Surely I have already said sufficient 
with regard to my views, intentions, hopes, and propo- 
sitions." 

" Ay," said Mrs. Franklin, " as far as you and I are 
concerned, Mr. Smith ; but however willing I might be to 
listen to your solicitations, I suspect the effect produced 
upon her, by any such arrangement, would not very mate- 
rially change her condition." 

" My dear Mrs. Franklin," said Smith, who found that 
his aim was mistaken, and his object misunderstood, ff I 
fear I have not been sufficiently explicit in my conversa- 
tion. You mistake me ; my proposition applies to Harriet ; 
her hand I solicit ; and my present view is to interest you 
in my behalf, and induce you not only to sanction my offer, 
but support it with your influence and authority." 

'* My dear sir," said Mrs. Franklin, opening her eyes to 
their very greatest width, and elevating her eyebrows to 
their extreme altitude, " you surprise me ! Harriet 
why, she is a mere child." 

" I am quite aware, as I before mentioned," said the 
matured swain, " that there exists a f disparity of age' be- 
tween us ; but still I flatter myself that her happiness will 
not be endangered by our union ; and I hope more espe- 
cially for your aid and assistance in obtaining her consent, 
because, if I do not forget, your first marriage was made 
under somewhat similar circumstances : there was a f dis- 
parity of age' in that case, and " 

" You are perfectly right," said Mrs. Franklin, who, 
although greatly disappointed at the moment, by her com- 
panion's announcement of the real object of his affections, 
suddenly collected herself sufficiently to run through a hasty 
calculation in her mind, the result of which was, that 
Harriet would, if she married him, eventually become the 
possessor of all the wealth of the respectable Croesus before 
her ; and that, giving him the fair chances of an insurance 
office annuity table, he must infallibly leave her a young 
and blooming widow ; circumstances, of the value and 
importance of which she was quite aware, from having 
undergone a similar process herself. So far, therefore, 
from checking the ardour of the swain, she confined her 



10 THE WIDOW. 

present exertions to concealing from him the mistake into 
which she had at first fallen, by fancying herself the 
goddess of his idolatry ; and concluded a brief but inter- 
esting conversation,, by sending for Harriet herself; and 
having given her counsel for her conduct in accordance 
with her own views of the merits of the case, led her, loth 
enough, to the drawing-room, where the aspirant to her 
hand was waiting in breathless anxiety, and left the ill- 
assorted pair to their own inventions. 

It was by this time just three o'clock ; and scarcely had 
that hour arrived when the punctual and devoted Saville's 
well-known knock was sounded on the door. He was ex- 
pected and admitted; and as the servants could know no- 
thing of what was passing in the higher circles of the family, 
was ushered into the room where Corydon and Phyllis were 
billing and cooing. Any thing much more unlucky could 
not well have happened. Saville in a moment felt himself 
de trop. Smith scarcely recognised him, but there were 
tears in Harriet's eyes. Any attempt to rally would have 
been vain ; and Charles was only rescued from his painful 
dilemma by a message from Mrs. Franklin, who begged 
him to come to her in her boudoir. 

The conversation which passed between the parent and 
the pretender to Harriet's love was brief and bitter. Anti- 
cipating considerable difficulty in persuading her daughter 
into the very advantageous match now proposed, she did 
not think it wise, or just, or prudent, or proper, to tell 
Saville distinctly or positively that she was " otherwise 
disposed of." She liked Saville extremely, and did not 
desire to wound his feelings more deeply than necessary ; 
indeed, a most whimsical notion came into her head, to 
which, as she never mentioned it except in strict confidence, 
it may appear unfair to allude, which was neither more 
nor less than the faint possibility of inducing Saville to 
change the direction of his affections in favour of herself; 
for Saville had, during his acquaintance with the Franklins, 
acted so sedulously upon the proverbial advice that 

" He who would the daughter win, 
Must with the mother first begin," 

that Mrs. Franklin, who moreover thought it might be 



THE WIDOW. 11 

well to offer her Harriet a practical justification of unequal 
marriages, was not quite sure that she might not be ac- 
cepted by a young man, although she had been overlooked 
by the older one. Mrs. Franklin, in making this calcu- 
lation, throwing into the favourable scale the fact, that 
Saville was poor, and she was personally rich, and an 
opinion which she entertained that the lover's assiduities 
displayed to her daughter were considerably stimulated by 
a belief in her wealth, the histories about which were all 
without foundation. At all events, Mrs. Franklin wished 
to make Saville feel as easy as possible ; and therefore, in 
a few hurried words, she endeavoured to explain that their 
party to the Zoological Gardens was temporarily postponed, 
but that she would let him know the moment it was re- 
arranged. 

Having said this and rang the bell, she advanced so 
rapidly upon the astonished Saville, that he was obliged 
to back out of the room in double quick time, convinced 
in his own mind, that whether he was destined or not ever 
to see the nyl-ghaus, zebras, emus, bears, and bisons, 
of the Regent's Park, it was a matter of infinitely less 
probability that he should soon again behold the gentle, 
amiable, and beautiful Harriet Franklin. 



CHAPTER II. 

IT must be confessed, that the sudden appearance of 
Charles Saville in the drawing-room was anything but 
gratifying to the feelings of Mr. Smith, and little calcu- 
lated to further his views with the young object of his 
affections. He came like a reproaching spirit, and stood 
before his love, and she acknowledged the rebuke which 
he thus tacitly and unconsciously gave; for, whatever 
might be his misgivings with regard to his own ultimate 
success, it had not yet flashed into his mind that the 
silver-headed Smith, he of the Twaddle, cased in a sable 
coat, and black satin shorts, shining like sticking-plaster, 
was doomed to be his rival. 



12 THE WIDOW. 

It is strange, and every hour we live the feeling grows, 
upon reflection, stronger still, that the great and certain 
change which time inevitably works on the human mind 
and constitution, is, from its gradual and gentle course, 
imperceptible to the individual "worked upon," unless 
some great and sudden accession of disease falls upon him : 
the comparison between what he was at twenty-four and 
fifty-five, is never made by the subject himself; the only 
comparison he makes, is between Monday last and Tues- 
day last, in which brief space no difference arises ; and 
thus it is, that if blest with health and if with health 
the animal spirits continue a man from constant habi- 
tude, feeling no change in himself from day to day, goes 
on believing that others see no change in him ; and it is 
rather to this natural imperceptibility of physical alter- 
ation, than to senile childishness, or matured vanity, that 
we find men advanced in life like our present friend 
Smith, presenting themselves to the favour of blooming 
girls, who were unborn at the period from which these 
respectable lovers date their perfection, and at which they 
set up their standard, and who seeing nothing but what is 
placed before them, cannot comprehend how the corpulent 
Mr. Fussocks, or the lanky Mr. Latham, can have the im- 
pertinence or temerity to enter the lists of love or flirtation 
at his time of life. 

Smith, twaddler as he was, was, however, a man of 
plain common sense ; he saw in Harriet a being calculated, 
if she could divest her mind of the very small quantity of 
romance which it possessed, to make any man happy. He 
put into the opposite scale to his advanced age the in- 
creased luxuries and comforts which the advantage of his 
fortune would secure to her; and considered from the 
gentleness and steadiness of the young lady's character and 
disposition, that she would consider the case dispassion- 
ately, and eventually prefer the certainty of opulence 
through life, to the precarious shiftings to which she 
might be exposed if she united herself to an idle student 
at law, who possessed too much versatility of genius to 
plod his way through the heavy road to the high places of 
the profession, and who, if he married, would in all pro- 






THE WIDOW. 13 

bability devote himself more assiduously to the silk gown 
of his wife, than the stuff one of his profession. 

But Smith, old and experienced as he was, miscalcu- 
lated ; he fell into the commonly received error of mis- 
taking gentleness for weakness, and diffidence for want of 
energy. Harriet was unassuming and tender, and full of 
feeling ; but she could resist oppression and withstand in- 
justice. To be sure the battle being in modern times 
generally to the strong, the influence of her mother, upon 
whom she depended for every thing in the way of fortune 
she was to possess, strengthened and enforced by that of 
Mr. Smith, the intimate and favoured friend of her father, 
required no trifling exertion to counteract its effects. 

Harriet listened calmly and patiently to the elaborated 
lecture which Mr. Smith was pleased to deliver upon the 
philosophy of love, and the pre-eminent advantages of that 
peculiar species of passion which is founded upon esteem, 
and a long acquaintance with the merits and virtues of the 
desired object, for nearly two hours j at the termination of 
which period, she flattered herself that she had dexterously 
contrived a reprieve for herself, by telling her respectable 
suitor that she must, in the first instance, consult her 
mother, and that after referring the whole subject to her 
consideration, she would, in the course of the evening, 
pronounce her own decision upon it. 

This delay was by no means unpleasant to either party. 
Smith was gratified by receiving this sort of qualified 
attention to his proposal instead of a plump denial, and 
Harriet delighted in giving herself an opportunity of 
discussing it with her mother, conscious as she was of a 
preference for Charles Saville, and satisfied, even putting 
that out of the question, that the destruction of her happi- 
ness would be the inevitable consequence of her filial 
obedience. 

Mr. Smith, at this juncture of the campaign, was not 
quite decided as to the next step he should take in the 
siege, which it appears he was carrying on as systematically 
as the French proceeded with that of Antwerp ; he felt 
himself already in the third parallel, and was nearly as 
much surprised as Gerard at the faint opposition he had 



14 THE WIDOW. 

met with from the garrison ; but, like that hero upon the 
occasion to which I refer, he doubted the security of the 
calm which he was suffered to enjoy, and attributed the 
facility with which he had been permitted to make his 
advances,, to a secret determination on the part of the 
besieged to undermine and blow him up the moment he 
attempted the storm. 

If, thought he, I take my hat and go, at this crisis, it 
may seem as if I had been discouraged, and were dissatis- 
fied with my reception ; if I hastily follow up what I 
believe to be a blow, I shall violate the truce to which I 
have agreed, and break in upon Harriet's design of a con- 
ference with her mother ; therefore will I steer the middle 
course, and merely give Mrs. Franklin the outline of my 
conversation with her daughter, and having thus " reported 
progress," ask leave to " come again to-morrow." 

What his prudence and judgment suggested in this 
behoof, the cautious Smith forthwith put into practice; 
and having found the much excited parent just recovering 
from the exertion of having ejected poor Charles Saville, 
imparted to her the particulars of his dialogue with Miss 
Franklin, and referring to the condition which she had 
exacted, or which rather he had conceded to her suggestion, 
proposed a visit the following day at two. 

Harriet had a stormy evening before her with all her 
filial obedience and the partiality which natural affection 
necessarily begets, she could not blind herself to the feline 
feeling which prompted her excellent parent to be the most 
amiable of amiables while things went smoothly, but which 
drove her into an excess of passion if she were ruffled or 
thwarted ; yet she resolved to make one effort for Charles 
Saville, who, although constantly " fended off," as the 
sailors say, never relaxed in his efforts to evince to her the 
sincerity of his attachment. 

It should, perhaps, be mentioned, that several swains 
had been caught by Harriet's charms before our young 
lawyer had " entered himself " in the list of her suitors ; 
at present the house was well rid of them. A white-haired 
viscount, and a red-haired baronet, had been numbered in 
her train, but they had trained off, upon finding, much to 



THE WIDOW. 15 

their chagrin and disappointment, that Harriet's boasted 
fortune was visionary ; still, however, Mrs. Franklin talked 
of Lord Pertwood and Sir Harry Fitch in such a manner 
as to let Saville understand what sort of lovers Harriet had 
discarded, and consequently what sort of lovers she felt she 
had a right to expect. Saville, who knew from the earliest 
stage of their acquaintance, the extent of Miss Franklin's 
precarious expectations, rendered in his eye more precarious 
still by the very matrimonial disposition of her already 
twice married mother., felt neither care nor anxiety upon 
the subject he talked of his profession, ardently antici- 
pated success, and in the very few tete-a-tete conversations 
which he had been lucky enough to enjoy with his Dulcinea, 
perfectly convinced her that he loved her for what she was, 
and not for what she had ; and that he had not an inter- 
ested thought or wish concerning her. 

Dutiful as she was, grateful to Mr. Smith as she might 
be, was it possible she should eternally relinquish such a 
lover without a struggle? Nor was her embarrassment, 
after the departure of her new old lover, at all diminished by 
her anxiety to know how poor Charles had departed ; whe- 
ther he had been so far enlightened upon the subject of 
the tete-a-tete which he had unintentionally broken in 
upon, as to destroy all his hopes ; or whether her mother, 
acting upon her usual prudential system, had not com- 
mitted herself upon a point, where, in fact, she was not 
yet perfectly secure of success. Poor girl, she was dread- 
fully agitated, and her tremour did by no means cease 
when her maid Johnstone, who, for the express purpose of 
watching his departure, had craned her neck out of one of 
the windows of her young lady's dressing-room, pronounced 
Mr. Smith gone. 

Saville's dismissal, as it turned out, had been any thing 
but harsh or uncivil : it was neither Mrs. Franklin's policy 
nor her disposition to be either to so amiable and accom- 
plished a person, and one for whom it has been gently 
hinted she felt an especial regard. She wanted most par- 
ticularly to get him away from the house at the moment 
of his visit, because his presence at that immediate juncture 
was extremely inopportune; and she charged upon him 



16 THE WIDOW. 

formidably, and he fell back and retreated : but there was 
no explanation of the real state of affairs, no injunction not 
to return, no "warning off," for the same smouldering 
feeling in the matron's heart, which sometimes made her 
think she might change her name again, induced her to 
recollect that if Harriet should become the rich wife of old 
Mr. Smith, there would .exist fewer objections to her 
assuming the character of helpmate to the young Mr. Saville. 
This sounds odd as a matter of calculation and of nar- 
ration but we are all odd creatures and it is human 
nature. 

So trifling, however, had been the effect of Mrs. Frank- 
lin's ejection of her daughter's lover, upon the lover him- 
self, that he left the house without any serious apprehen- 
sion that he might never enter it again. He was conscious 
of a strange excitement in Mrs. Franklin's manner, and 
he thought the breaking up of the party to the Zoolo- 
gical Gardens abrupt and strange ; and he saw that there 
was an anxiety to get him away from Harriet and Mr. 
Smith in the drawing-room ; but none of these things 
opened his eyes to* the real state of the case. Smith he 
hated, merely because he appeared to be upon extremely 
familiar terms with Harriet; but he was not jealous of 
him, nor did an idea of a rival in his person ever enter his 
head. He was quite conscious that he was his enemy in 
the family ; but that he attributed merely to the justifying 
cause of his own poverty, and the tender care of Miss 
Franklin's interests, which was taken by the white-headed 
gentleman in the court-plaster shorts, in the character of 
friend of her late father, trustee of his property and ex- 
ecutor of his will, but for himself, the idea never struck 
him. And as he walked along, just conscious of a dis- 
agreeable sensation, for to a lover the slightest variation of 
conduct in any body concerned or connected with the object 
of his affection is instantaneously felt, a dread that the 
white-haired viscount was " on again," and that Smith 
was talking over financial measures with Harriet upon that 
possibility, assailed him with a hideous probability, just as 
he was turning down Hay Hill into Berkeley Square. This 
horrid vision lasted till he had passed the end of Bruton 



THE WIDOW. 17 

Street,, and there the "fetch" of the red-haired baronet, in 
the very act of heing accepted by his dearest Harriet, ap- 
peared before him ; and thus by turns all things which he 
fancied possible or probable to happen to overturn his 
hopes, passed through his mind ; while the only thing 
which seriously threatened and truly endangered his hap- 
piness never once entered into his calculations. 

It would be doing a serious injustice to the maternal 
influence of Mrs. Franklin, and the filial obedience of her 
fair daughter, were I to attempt any description of the 
prolonged discussion which took place on the proposal of 
the elderly gentleman during the evening of the day on 
which it was made. The arguments adopted by the lady 
the manner in which she enforced them the resolu- 
tions she expressed with regard to the future interests of 
her child her language her action the inducements 
she held out the threats she fulminated, all these it 
would be painful to detail, because it would exhibit such a 
scene of domestic discord and unhappiness as ought not to 
be submitted to the public eye. How the wonder was 
worked, how the great end was accomplished, therefore, 
the reader is not destined to know; but this fact may 
amply satisfy him before eight o'clock, Harriet Franklin 
was irrevocably doomed to become MRS. SMITH ! 

There are mysteries in all arts, professions, and trades, 
which, to the uninitiated, seem miracles. What can ap- 
pear more marvellous to those who know nothing about 
it, than that the ashes of a water plant, a thistle, or 
bramble, or fern, mixed up with sand and stone and flints, 
should, in combination, give us glass ? Or who that had 
not considered the matter would think that we might de- 
rive a brilliant light from smoke ? But glass or gas, or any 
other artificial product, would fall far short in exciting as- 
tonishment in the untutored mind, compared with the 
result of the long and animated dialogue which passed on 
that memorable evening between Mrs. Franklin and her 
daughter. It is, to be sure, enough for those who have no 
occasion to dive into primary causes, to '* take the goods the 
gods provide," without labouring at inquiry and investiga- 
tion ; and so long as the light beams brightly, and the 



18 THE WIDOW. 

glass shines clearly, what have the e very-day people of the 
world to do with the means by which those comforts or 
conveniences are secured to them ? So thought the anxious 
mother upon the present occasion; she had carried her 
point, she had achieved her object, and little else remained 
but to offer up the sacrifice on the shrine of mammon, and 
proceed to deck her victim for the altar. 

Smith the respectable was to be at Mrs. Franklin's at 
two ; but as it happened that the lady and her daughter 
had engaged themselves to accompany Mrs. Thompson, a 
friend and neighbour of theirs, to the Somerset House 
Exhibition at three, a slight discussion arose between the 
parent and child as to the delicacy or possibility of a young 
lady accepting an elderly gentleman's offer of marriage, 
and going to a public exhibition two hours afterwards. 
Breaking the engagement with Mrs. T. would look so odd 
she might think something and then Harriet did not 
like to remain at home ; and Mr. Smith, perhaps, would 
like to go with them ; and then there was no room in the 
carriage ; and even if it could have been permitted that he 
should, upon an emergency, share the box with the coach- 
man, his mounting was altogether out of the question j 
and so at last it was decided to leave this minor point to 
settle itself, and, at all events, suffer the Somerset House 
engagement to rest as it was. 

It would be more agreeable, and only just to our poor 
dear Harriet, to let the reader into some of the arguments, 
and statements, and asseverations, by which Mrs. Franklin 
worked upon her daughter's mind and feelings, until she 
consented to forego the inclinations of her heart, and accept 
as a husband a man who would have been considered old as 
her father ; but it would be a breach of confidence. How- 
ever, it may be allowable to say, that Mrs. Franklin as- 
serted, upon what she called good authority, that Saville 
was a gambler, that he was idle, dissipated, and extrava- 
gant ; the fact being that he was one of the most econo- 
mical young gentlemen about town ; never took a card or 
box in his hand, drank no wine, and never was idle, ex- 
cept, if that could be called idleness, when he was devoting 
to Harriet herself the time which at least she ought not 
to have thought could be better spent. 



THE WIDOW. 19 

In addition, however, to all these visionary vices and 
imaginary failings, Mrs. Franklin hurled one maternal 
thunderbolt at her daughter's devoted head, which finally 
settled the business. ' ' Were he prudent, learned, amiable, 
and rich/' said the elder lady to the younger, l( so long as 
/ live you should never marry Mr. Saville, at least with my 
consent ; and I think, without it, you would have little 
cause to rejoice in the felicity of your choice." 

Harriet's mind was admirably well regulated, and the 
state of its discipline was the more to be wondered at, con- 
sidering the hoity-toity fly-away manner of her surviving 
parent ; yet during this potent denunciation of her dear* 
Charles, she certainly did see before her eyes a sort of 
phantasmagoria of post-chaises and horses, and hymeneal 
blacksmiths, and other objects therewith concomitant ; 
they, however, speedily faded ; principle overcame predi- 
lection ; and, as we have already said, she sank a devoted 
victim to her mother's wishes. 

The whole affair is an unpleasant one to think of ; but, 
as it is a bad bit of road in the journey of our narrative, 
let us pull down the blinds, and jolt over it as fast as we 
can. The night passed a dreadful night for her the 
morning came noon came one o'clock came Smith 
came and, let it suffice, before two o'clock came, he was 
made certain of his happiness ; three came, and with it 
the carriage. The Exhibition question was put to the re- 
spectable suitor, who thought it wisest to make no altera- 
tion in the arrangement. In fact, the matured lover was 
considerably exhausted by the strength of his feelings, and 
considered it wiser to separate himself from his affianced 
bride until dinner-time, soit fait comme il est desire 
the respectable Corydon retired to his house till seven 
o'clock, to ruminate on his approaching happiness, while 
the contented mother, and the bewildered daughter, ful- 
filled their engagement with their friend, and proceeded to 
Somerset House. 

It may strike the reader (more especially if the reader be 
a female), as something strange and unfeminine, that 
Harriet should have consented to this visit to the Exhi- 
bition ; but it must be remembered, that Mr. Smith had 
c 2 



20 THE WIDOW. 

not only voluntarily but anxiously suggested a " respite/' 
and, that any expression of anxiety on the part of Miss 
Franklin to remain at home,, would have heen construed 
into a hope and wish of seeing Charles Saville, in order to 
explain the circumstances which had led to her acceptance 
of his rival, or, perhaps, to make such arrangements as 
might most effectually frustrate the completion of the con- 
tract. It was thus, and under these circumstances, that 
the poor agitated girl was hurried away from the most im- 
portant tf scene " of her life, to a display, which, as illus- 
trative of the freaks of nature, fell far short in interest of 
' that which she had been engaged to visit the day before in 
the society of her dear Charles. 

Forced thus unnaturally into a crowd, at a moment 
when solitude would best have suited the temper of her 
mind, Miss Franklin, with her mother and her friend, 
began to mount the extremely inconvenient, wretchedly 
dark, filthy, dirty, and eminently disagreeable staircase of 
the Royal Academy, slipping over scattered orange-peels, 
covering their gloves with dust, if accidentally touching 
any part of the balusters or walls, during the horrid ascent, 
the abominations of which are scarcely recompensed by the 
entertaining absurdity of beholding Hercules with his 
apples in a brass wire bird-cage, at the bottom of it. 

Up they went, poor wearied travellers Bunyan's pil- 
grim was happy by comparison ; they passed that (i Slough 
of Despond," the apartment stored with the mad fancies of 
juvenile modellers, or doting architects, quitted that " Val- 
ley of Humiliation," the chamber of monsters and minia- 
tures, which adjoins it, and boldly and resolutely mounted 
the " Hill of Lucre," the great room, " top of all," where 
the wealth of thousands hangs round the walls, scattered at 
their pleasure, and converted into ugly faces, and ungainly 
figures, for the peculiar gratification and satisfaction of 
themselves and friends. 

Just about the period that the party had reached the 
enviable summit, and were beginning to examine the pic- 
tures, No. 1., ic Portrait of a Gentleman," which could 
not be like, as representing that character, be the man whom 
he might, No. 2. " Innocent Pastime/' a chubby child, 



THE WIDOW. 21 

playing with a pig what does the reader imagine was 
happening below in the street, the Strand? why, there 
passing to or from chambers, (the which mattereth little,) 
went or came Mr. Charles Saville, who, with his eyes con- 
stantly wandering in search of the well-known livery of the 
Franklins, was most suddenly attracted by its appearance 
casing the body of her favourite footman, just preparing to 
take up his seat on the bench under the entrance to Somerset 
House. An inquiry, scarcely necessary under the circum- 
stances, tf whether the ladies were there," was answered in 
the affirmative j and in one minute after, having purchased 
his dark blue passport at one barrier, and deposited it at 
the other, Charles Saville was to be seen labouring on the 
tread-mill which his fair friends had just conquered and 
quitted. 

It was only for him to reach the summit and enter the 
room, to see Harriet. What were the glazed and glaring 
gorgons which were on all sides suspended, to him, where 
lived and breathed the one sole hope of his heart, the idol 
of his adoration ! In an instant he discovered her ; the 
pleasing viridity (as the poet would have it) of her mother's 
pomona pelisse indicated that lady's presence, and with them 
was a stranger. What then ! it was a female j and em- 
boldened by this conviction, he squeezed, and pushed, and 
elbowed his way, till he reached the trio, who were, at the 
moment, deeply engaged in poring over the minute beauties 
of a gem of Wilkie's. 

The toil of the squirrel in his cage is one of the most 
provoking examples of " labour in vain/' that can be well 
imagined ; but perhaps the very most provoking that has 
ever fallen under the reader's notice, was this feat of 
Charles Saville's. He encountered climbing, and a crowd, 
and dust, and difficulty, and having reached the ultima 
Thule of his hopes, was received by Mrs. Franklin with a 
look which seemed to say only that ladies never swear, 
even with their eyes What the devil brought you here ? 
" Oh ! Mr. Saville," said the mother ; the sound caught the 
daughter's ears mother, daughter, and Saville, all shook 
hands to be sure why not ? the daughter's shaking, 
however, was not local she trembled from head to foot, 
c 3 



22 THE WIDOW. 

" What on earth brought you here ? *' said Mrs. Franklin 
to Saville. 

" You,, Mrs. Franklin," said Saville. 

" Me ! come " 

" I saw the carriage at the door, and found you were 
up stairs/' said Charles ; <( so of course I flew to attend 
you." 

Mrs. Franklin smiled and tossed her head, but Harriet 
kept her face close to the pictures, and the catalogue clasped 
in her hand. Mrs. Thompson, who was boring] y fond of 
portraits, and liked to see " Lord Whiskin in the uniform 
of the North Somerset Militia/' and " Lady Mary Fopsey, 
and child/' in order that she might find them out, when 
she next saw them at the Opera, (for the Franklins were 
quite of that school,) kept the maternal fair one in constant 
exercise in looking up, and hunting down the pictures in 
the catalogue. 

About her, Charles did not very much trouble himself, 
but it was clear to him that something very strange, some- 
thing very decisive, had happened with regard to Harriet. 
He saw that her eyes were fixed upon the pictures, but that 
she looked not at them ; the evident indifference, not to 
say distaste, with which she seemed to glance over the 
beauties of our first artists, the clearness of Calcott, the 
simplicity of Collins, the magic attractions of Wilkie, and 
the incomprehensible brilliancy of Turner, satisfied him 
that his suspicions were well founded ; and he determined 
to take the only advantage a crowded room affords, (except 
indeed to pickpockets,) to ascertain, if possible, the grounds 
of the extraordinary change of conduct in both ladies, from 
warm to cold, and to discover what external influence had 
been used upon their mercurial dispositions, which in so 
very short a period of time as had passed since his last 
interview, could have suddenly tumbled their mental 
thermometers from blood heat to several degrees below 
freezing. 

The opportunity Charles sought soon arrived, as oppor- 
tunities inevitably will, if a man has but a little patence ; 
and while Mrs. Franklin, jammed in amidst a bustling 
ring of half-a-dozen plump-looking misses, and as many 



THE WIDOW. 23 

male plebeians as were necessary to constitute a small 
mob, was endeavouring to elucidate to Mrs. Thompson 
some of the more delicate touches of a " pretty bit." (per- 
fectly satisfied in his own mind, that a man and woman 
who were most unceremoniously riding her as she stooped 
to descant upon the picture, were the two persons about 
whom she was most anxious,) Saville hastily inquired of 
Harriet in an under tone, " what on earth was the 
matter ? " 

" For Heaven's sake" whispered the lovely girl, " don't 
speak so loud," pointing most assiduously to a number in 
the catalogue, as if she were in the highest degree in- 
terested about it. 

" Have I offended you ? " said Charles. 

(f Oh, no no," said Harriet. 

" Tell me, then " 

<e Some other time pray don't not now " 

" To-morrow ? " 

(f Perhaps," said Harriet, her lips quivering, " we may 
not see you to-morrow." 

" Merciful Heaven ! " exclaimed Saville ' ' tell me 
tell me " 

<c Oh, nothing nothing," answered she, moving one 
step nearer her mother, who was still absorbed in the pic- 
tures. Saville took her hand, which she gently withdrew ; 
Tie, like an ardent lover, forgetting every thing but his de- 
votion ; she, like a well-bred girl, remembering where they 
were what a tight-rope life it was they led " The 
truth is," said Harriet "I " 

" My dear Harriet, are you there ?" said Mrs. Franklin; 
" I thought you and Mr. Saville were behind us." 

" No," said Saville, affecting jocularity ; " here we are, 
quite safe." 

Harriet was confused not by the interruption of her 
mother, but by the indiscretion of her late lover. 

" By Jove, that's capital ! " said one man just behind 

them to another next him, and who had been watching the 

whole of the little scene in progress between Charles and 

his beloved, to whose eyes and thoughts during its perform- 

c 4 



24 THE WIDOW. 

ance, the whole world had been lost, not excepting Mrs. 
Franklin herself. 

The old a thousand pardons the elder lady, who 
had perhaps afforded the young people an opportunity for 
a moment's conversation, in order that Harriet might 
give Charles's hopes the coup de grace, by telling him the 
real state of the case, now became particularly anxious to 
get away, and taking her daughter under her arm a most 
extraordinary and significant precaution she hurried the 
dear interesting, near-sighted Mrs. Thompson along the 
room and down the stairs, with a rapidity which quite sur- 
prised and disconcerted the connoisseur, who had looked 
forward to a long day of it. 

They reached the sculpture-room, but even that could 
not stay Mrs. Franklin's flight ; she looked at her watch 
and declared it impossible ; and thus simultaneously fidget- 
ing onwards and downwards, they found the carriage in 
readiness Mrs. Thompson stepped in first then Har- 
riet then mamma. 

" Good-day," said Mrs. Franklin to Saville. 

" Good-bye," said Harriet. 

" What do you do, this evening, Mrs. Franklin ? " said 
Saville. 

" We are engaged," replied she. 

' ' Shall I see you to-morrow ? " 

"To-morrow we shall be busy all day," said Mrs. 
Franklin, 

Busy ! thought Saville, about what, I wonder ; and he 
cast his eyes toward Harriet her eyes met his eyes will 
meet sometimes she looked as if she wished to know 
whether he believed her mother's story : a sudden return 
of those eyes to the downcast direction in which they were 
before placed, served to render him somewhat sceptical. 
However, Mrs. Franklin had said they were to be engaged, 
and it was not for him to express a doubt about it. If she 
had called over her own staircase that she was " not at 
home," as he was ascending it, he must of course have 
believed the statement. So, finding the parley cease, he 
removed his white-gloved hand from the sill of the car- 



THE WIDOW. 25 

riage window, and made way for the servant to take his 
mistress's orders ; saying, as usual, " Good-bye." 

" Good morning,," again said Mrs. Franklin ; Mrs. 
Thompson said nothing nor did Harriet speak but she 
bowed her head slowly, and fixing her eyes expressively 
for a moment on Saville, seemed to bid him farewell for 
ever perhaps she did. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE character of Harriet's parting look must have been 
strongly marked, for when the carriage drove off, some- 
thing struck Charles Saville that he had seen and separated 
from her for the last time. But then, lovers are easily 
agitated, and no cameleon in the world borrows colours 
from surrounding objects so readily as the fancy of one, 

" who dotes, yet doubts, 

Suspects, yet fondly loves." 

As he walked along a somewhat unromantic street for a 
sighing swain the Strand, he revolved in his mind a 
thousand different subjects, in order, if possible, to hit 
upon the particular circumstance or event, which had so 
decidedly changed the manner of both mother and daughter 
within four-and- twenty hours. At length he began to 
think, that perhaps the time had arrived, when Mrs. 
Franklin considered it proper that he should either come 
forward and make a declaration, or retire ; and he re- 
flected, that whatever reasons and they were pretty 
cogent he might have for suspecting and hoping that 
Harriet was favourably inclined towards him, he had 
never come to any sort of explanation with her ; and that, 
after all, their unrestrained association unrestrained, at 
least, till this very morning might be merely the result 
of esteem for his character, or admiration of his talents and 
accomplishments. Yet, there was something ardent and 
soul-felt in their intercourse which he never saw displayed 
in her conversation with others ; at all events, the dif- 



26 THE WIDOW. 

ference between the earnestness of her manner towards 
him, and her indifference towards every body else, seemed 
fully to justify his opening his heart to her ; but then he 
had in the world but four hundred pounds a year ; and 
was not within three years of being called into the exercise 
of a profession, in which twenty more might be laboriously 
passed, before he should in any great degree increase his 
income. But his thoughts were full of hope, which 
" springs eternal in the human breast," and always holds 
out flattering prospects to sanguine lovers ; and his heart 
was full of love, who, being blind, never troubles his silly 
head about any prospects whatever. 

It appeared to Saville, at all events, nothing more than 
reasonable that he should make one struggle for the sole 
object of his life, and although nothing, that he knew of, 
had actually happened to awaken his fears, or endanger his 
security, still the very apprehension of losing her, perhaps 
by his own lukewarmness or want of zeal, set his brain 
in a whirl ; and when he recollected the implied doubt 
conveyed by the lovely girl herself of their ever meeting 
again, threw him into a perfect agony of desperation. 

His first impulse was to set off directly for Harley 
Street, and throw himself and his four hundred pounds per 
annum at the dear girl's feet ; and since he knew enough 
of the family affairs although, in fact, he knew very 
little about them to know that her fortune was of a very 
elastic character, and depended entirely upon the will and 
pleasure of her mother as to its eventual extension or con- 
traction, he thought at all events that no interested motives 
could be attributed to his declaration ; and that if Harriet 
felt but a twentieth part of the affection for him which he 
entertained towards her, she would not hesitate to realise 
those scenes of rural felicity of which they had so often 
talked, and locating herself in some blest retreat of health 
and peace, bid adieu to all the follies of " the flaunting 
town," and settle herself with her loving spouse in a se- 
questered cottage, until the much wished-for period should 
arrive, when their means might afford them a better, yet 
perhaps not happier residence. 



THE WIDOW. 2/ 

How to make his proposal ? That was the next ques- 
tion. It seemed most likely, that as Mrs. Franklin and 
her daughter had informed him that they were to be busy 
the whole of the next day, he might not be admitted if he 
called upon them ; indeed the announcement of their occu- 
pation seemed to him a sort of forewarning not to come 
till the following day. He satisfied himself upon this 
point the more easily, because it would give him an addi- 
tional twenty-four hours for deliberation, although before 
the first six had elapsed, he had resolved to convey his 
sentiments, his hopes, and wishes, to Harriet in a letter. 
He should then be sure that his tale would be told, without 
any danger of interruption from her mother's numerous 
morning visitors, who were perpetually dropping in and 
popping out ; nay, without any fear of interruption from 
the mother herself: and thus, whatever Harriet's feelings 
might really be, she would not have the power of checking 
him in the outset of his declaration, or nipping it in the 
bud with a rigid frown or a freezing look. The moment 
she had broken the seal, he was perfectly sure that she 
would go through the whole letter; for, even if her 
offended delicacy should prompt her to return the epistle, 
he felt certain that her excited curiosity would induce her 
to read every line of it first. 

For the purpose of arranging the affair, and concocting 
this interesting address, Charles absented himself from so- 
ciety for the day, and having dined hastily and alone, devoted 
the whole evening, manifestly to the prejudice of his pro- 
fessional advancement, to the preparation of his appeal to 
the feelings of his beloved Harriet. He proceeded to make 
an ardent and unequivocal declaration of his devoted 
attachment, and unalterable esteem and affection, dwelling 
at the same time with becoming diffidence upon the unsa- 
tisfactory state of his own prospects in life, and attributing 
to the narrowness of his circumstances the tardiness of 
the avowal which he thus ventured to make, but which, 
until the present moment, he had not felt sufficiently bold 
even to whisper. 

The intervening day between writing and despatching 



28 THE WIDOW. 

this most important missive, gave him ful] and frequent 
opportunities of revising and correcting it, and he 

" - perusing the epistle 

Believ'd he had brought her to his whistle, 

And read it like a jocund lover, 

With great applause to himself twice over," 

at least ; and after the second perusal, having turned it 
and shaped it exactly to what he considered the standard 
of perfect letter-writing, put it carefully by, so that it 
might he despatched early on the following morning, 
which in due time it was, and left at the door of his Dul- 
cinea's house in Harley Street, so, as he flattered himself, 
to catch her just at the very moment she was quitting her 
dressing-room to descend to breakfast. 

Those only who have been similarly^ circumstanced 
and, thanks to the generous feelings and social impulses of 
our nature, few there are who have not can duly appre- 
ciate the anxiety in which the whole of that morning was- 
passed. Dinner time came and went the dusk of even- 
ing and the shades of night covered the face of the earth ; 
no answer that was painful but the letter had not 
been returned that was cheering ; every now and then 
the door of his room opened, and his servant entered ; his 
heart fluttered he looked up through the dimness of the 
distance at one time the man brought a bill at another 
a billet now a three-cornered note now a square card 
" to remind;" and from each of these intrusions arose a 
separate and distinct disappointment. He would not leave 
home lest the answer should come he could not bear to 
stay at home lest it should not ; and thus hoping and fear- 
ing, expecting and wishing, he lingered out a long and 
dismal evening ; and at last found relief from his anxiety 
by reading a very highly praised work of the day, which, 
luckily, secured him, what laudanum had denied, and at 
half-past twelve he retired to rest, with a hope of sleeping 
which he had not previously entertained. 

Short, however, and troubled, were his fitful slumbers ; 
the little repose he got served only to give reality to a 
series of horrid dreams, the heroine of every one of them 
being, of course, Miss Harriet Franklin. Sometimes he 
beheld her with a full-grown pair of well-fledged pinions, 



THE WIDOW. 29 

like one of Moore's angels, winging her way to the skies, 
and beckoning him to follow. Then he saw her like 
St. Pierre's Virginia, shipwrecked on a coral reef, and 
dashed amongst the billows ; and fancying himself another 
Paul, half precipitated himself out of bed, in order to 
snatch her from danger and death. Then he beheld her, 
like another Andromeda, chained to the entrance of a 
cavern, in which her exemplary parent sat snarling in the 
shape of a green, scaly-tailed dragon, attended by the 
white-haired viscount, and the red-haired baronet, as atten- 
dant devilkins of an inferior class, with hoofs, horns, talons, 
and tails ; fired at the sight, poor Charles, like Perseus, 
tried to destroy the threatening monster, but again awoke, 
conscious of no result, except that of having overthrown 
the candlestick, which stood on a table by the bed-side. 

More horrible visions were never procured by Fuseli 
himself under his raw-pork regimen. He could not again 
settle himself he listened looked day never was so 
long in breaking clocks never were so slow in striking 
yet, after tossing and tumbling, not in the least degree 
after the fashion of Gay's Polly, the morning dawned ; 
the sun began to shed its influence through the curtains of 
his chamber window, and very shortly after, that is to say, 
about the time when sober men are retiring to their homes 
and families, from Crockford's, and well-regulated ladies 
are announcing to their daughters that " this must be the 
last quadrille," he started from his sleepless bed, and has- 
tily dressing himself, left his lodging in Charles Street, to 
breathe the yet unsmoked, unheated atmosphere of one of 
the finest mornings that ever beamed from the heavens. 

Unconscious whither he strolled, and careless where, in- 
stinct, our second nature, led him to direct his steps to the 
rural regions of Harley Street. His walk was for health 
the fresh air of that northern district suited the " present 
temper of his mind ;" and there he could see the casket 
that contained his jewel, and watch the window within the 
which slept Harriet. He reached the accustomed street. 
It was just at the period of the day when the sun conde- 
scends to gild the chirnney-tops on one of its lengthened 
sides, that the lover arrived : all was calm and serene 



SO THE WIDOW. 

there was the dwelling there the window his east 
his sun the daughter of Mrs. Franklin was there the 
shutters were closed no sign of life about the house. 

Ah ! thought he, there she slumbers my loved letter, 
perhaps, beneath her pillow perhaps even yet waking, 
and repeating to herself every word it contains ; I shall 
have an answer by-and-bye ; she will yet be kind, and I 
shall still be blest ; all which rhapsodical suppositions and 
expectations merely going to prove, as the reader already 
knows, how prodigiously mistaken the wisest amongst us 
may sometimes be. 

In matters of love, Charles Saville was, to say truth, 
wise enough ; at least, wise enough to make a tolerable 
fair estimate of a young lady's feelings by her looks ; and 
as he himself said, when summing up the pros and cons, 
as regarded the despatch of his formal proposal, he felt 
conscious that when he approached her, the sparkling 
animation which lighted up her handsome and expressive 
countenance, was infinitely more brilliant than any pro- 
duced by similar addresses from any other persons with 
whom she associated. There was a provoking downcast 
look of cold and distant diffidence which she could assume 
or, perhaps, it would be more just to say, which she could 
not conceal, from those in whom she felt no interest ; a 
resolute envelopement of her bright eyes in the silken shade 
of their long lashes, which, to a stranger, was positively 
repulsive ; but which to those who, like Charles, were ac- 
customed to bask in the sunshine of the brilliant orbs, and 
revel in all the intellectual blaze of her mind, was almost 
comical ; but all her little arts were untinctured by co- 
quetry, and this very display of preference was the result 
of ingenuousness, warm-heartedness, and candour ; and yet 
there was no letter sent to Saville. 

Two days had elapsed his patience worn to a thread 
himself proportionably attenuated his breakfast again 
over no letter one o'clock, ditto two, ditto. It 
ceased to be endurable the delay was torture he had 
suffered the peine forte quite long enough ; the certainty of 
wretchedness was preferable to the agony of suspense. At 
three he determined upon his course of action, and pro- 



THE WIDOW. 31 

ceeded with new resolution in his mind, and fresh courage 
in his heart, once more to Harley Street. He reached the 
interesting spot; when, who shall describe his horror at 
finding the whole of the windows closed ! What could it 
be ? had death been at work ! He started back was 
it possible ! In a few fleeting hours however slow to 
him some dreadful event had occurred. Harriet was 
dead dead, perhaps, for love of him. His letter had 
never been delivered, and she, in despair at his apparent 
neglect, had swallowed poison ! Perhaps Mrs. Franklin had 
been summoned hastily from the world ! What other 
perhaps ? Another moment could not be lost, and flying 
rather than running across the street, he vaulted up the 
steps, and gave a gentle rap with the knocker, ringing the 
bell at the same time with a corresponding delicacy. 

This double appeal was replied to by the appearance in 
the area below, of an elderly and somewhat portly person- 
age, habited in a blue cotton gown illuminated with black 
dots ; and wearing a cap of no inconsiderable dimensions, 
decorated with a bow of dirty ish blue riband ; her shoes 
were down at heel, and she held a broom in her hand ; 
and lifting up a face, broad, but by no means beautiful, 
she inquired in a shrill tone, <e What the gentleman pleased 
to want ? " 

As much astounded by this appeal from below, as Den- 
mark's Prince was at the groan of old Truepenny (as his 
highness most respectfully calls his lamented sire), "in 
the cellarage," Charles Saville, not considering it specially 
directed to himself, repeated the operation of knocking at 
the door, when a repetition of the demand ascended in a 
more shrilly tone, and with an emphasis which clearly 
proved, that if the knocking visiter did not condescend to 
hold parlance with the inquirer below, he was not likely to 
obtain a satisfactory answer to his questions. 

" Is Mrs. Franklin at home ? " said the half angry and 
quite indignant Saville. 

" No, sir," said the woman she's left." 

Left ! What, thought Saville, does she mean by left ? 
" Have the goodness," said he, " to step up for a mo- 
ment." 



32 THE WIDOW. 

" In a minute, sir/' said the woman ; and shortly after 
he heard her unlocking and unbolting the street door, an 
operation not, however, very rapidly performed, but which, 
when concluded, presented to his view the well known hall 
of his Harriet's home. 

" Have you got a ticket, sir ? " said the woman. 

" A ticket for what ? " said Charles. 

" To view the premises," was the reply. 

<f I don't want to view the premises where are Mrs. 
Franklin and her family ? " 

fl They went from here early yesterday morning, sir," 
said the female. 

" Gone ! Where are they gone to ? " 

"I can't exactly say, sir into the country, I believe." 

" When do they return ? " 

" Not at all as I knows of," said Mrs. Richards ; such 
was the individual's name. 

" I think you do know," said Saville, just entering the 
hall ; " come, recollect." 

(f Upon my word I don't," answered she. 

Saville knew the power of gold, and although he had 
never yet personally experienced the delight of seeing a 
certain number of guas. marked on a brief of his own, he 
felt convinced that a fee could not be misinterpreted into 
a bribe ; and accordingly slipped the four hundredth part 
of his annual income, into the hard and furrowed palm of 
his newly-made friend and informant. 

" Here," said he, "take this" she did, " I am sure 
that something strange must have happened, to send Mrs. 
Franklin off in so great a hurry; but that I care little 
about: you can tell me all I wish to know where is 
Miss Harriet?" 

Mrs. Richards appeared all at once staggered whether 
by the sight of the sovereign, or by some new light which 
had broken in upon her, it is impossible to decide ; but the 
whole expression of her countenance changed in an instant 
when she heard Saville's question. 

" Why do you want to know ? " said she. 

"No matter why do you know me?" 

!f No," replied Mrs. Richards, I can't say as I does." 

" You have not been here long then ? " 



THE WIDOW. 



33 



" No," said Mrs. Richards ; " nor must I let you stay 
here long, or I shall get my head in my hand, as the saying 
is. You are the gentleman, I suppose, as has been a hank- 
ering after Miss Harriet for some time past I've heard 
of it." 

" Hush, hush ! " said Saville, dreading the notoriety of 
his attachment, which equally surprised and alarmed him, 
and 

" Trembling at the noise himself had made." 

" I see you understand what I mean. Is Miss Harriet 
gone out of town ? " 

" Not a hit of it," said Mrs. Richards, " that's all a 
fudge, a catfaddle of my old missuss's but I'll tell you 
plainly, there has been a regular quandary, as I call it, 
about you." 

"Well, well, never mind that" said Charles, " don't 
enter into particulars now : where is your young mistress ? " 

" Mind what you are about," said Mrs. Richards ; " she 
is gone to stay in Carbur ton- street, Fitzroy-square." 

" Carburton -street," repeated Saville, " what an odd 
place ! What has taken her there ? " 

" She was here this morning," said Mrs. Richards, " and 
I do believe somehow expected as you would call." 

Confound it ! thought Saville, so then, after all, I have 
lost her by my own neglect. Thank Heaven she is alive, 
and yet within my reach. fl Why," said he, to Mrs. 
Richards, " did she leave this or why quit her mother ? " 

"Because missus was in an unmerciful passion, and 
forced her to go on a visit to her aunt Dowbiggin," said 
Mrs. Richards. 

Saville had never heard Mrs. Franklin mention this rela- 
tion, but considering the lady's name and her place of 
abode, that did not so very much surprise him " And 
where is your old mistress ? " 

" Gone to Margate," said Mrs. Richards, " about some 
business or other relating to Miss." 

Margate was a strange place for a lady of Mrs. Franklin's 
pride and pretension to visit, but a faint recollection passed 
through Charles's mind of having heard that the red-headed 



34> THE WIDOW. 

baronet had taken a house at Broadstairs ; and " putting 
that and that together," he immediately conjured up some 
new conspiracy against his happiness, which rendered it 
more than ever important for him to steal an interview 
with his beloved, and if things came to the worst, to " steal 
her " herself from her arbitrary mother. Indeed, to the 
suggestion of an interview with the lovely girl, he was 
more particularly induced, because he flattered himself that 
Harriet's evasion of the journey to Margate was a con- 
trivance of her's, in order to bring about such an event ; 
and this view of the case was considerably strengthened 
by the fact of her having visited the house in her mother's 
absence, in the hope, as his venerable communicant had 
more than hinted, of meeting him, when he should make 
what she evidently considered his expected call, about their 
luncheon-time. How exciting ! how encouraging ! how 
emboldening ! 

" Would you," said Charles, " would you, Ma'am," 
slipping another sovereign into her half-open hand 
" would you undertake to convey a note for me to your 
young lady ? it shall be a very small note and very short." 

" Why," said Mrs. Richards, " I do think, sir, it is a 
shame to keep fond hearts apart, for as the song says, what 
is gold compared with love ? " at the same moment, drop- 
ping the second sovereign into her long dark pocket, to 
mingle and jingle with its already deposited brother coin, a 
brass thimble, a lump of bees-wax, seven halfpence, the 
key of her trunk, and a much-used once red leather house- 
wife. 

"Will you then ?" 

" Trust me," said the veteran ; " I shall go from this 
about eight on some errands bring your letter to me 
before that, and it shall go as sure as the post." 

Amiable dragon, thought Saville. " I will bring my 
letter here then." 

" Yes, do, sir," said the old body ; " but don't make it 
up like a letter double it up square, and I can give it 
Miss Harriet myself, as if it was some parcel left ; and, 
above all, don't direct it, so that if anything should be found 
out, nobody can fix it a-top of nobody." 



THE WIDOW. 35 

Excellent contrivance, thought Saville. " I will be back 
again shortly/' said he, " I feel I may trust in you so 
you may confide in me." 

So saying, the ardent lover bounded away, and hurrying 
himself down to the extensive Oriental caravansara in Vere- 
street, known as Ibbotson's Hotel,, which he selected as the 
nearest convenient spot for such a purpose, he wrote the 
following lines hastily, and in such a state of trepidation, 
that even the waiters wondered at his emotion, and warned 
each other to keep a sharp look-out on the spoons and salt- 
cellars belonging to the Coffee-room. 

" You will perhaps blame my intemperance, and be 
angry with my presumption, but I cannot resist making 
this one appeal. The sudden departure of your mother 
for Margate, your equally sudden removal from home, at 
first reduced me to despair; but I found you were not 
gone that you were even to-day in Harley-street how 
provoking to have missed you. 

" I have never been introduced to your aunt, nor do I 
recollect having heard you mention her name ; but as you 
are with her, there can be no earthly impropriety in my 
calling, nor in your admitting me, while under her care 
and tutelage. 

" I know you will be angry with me for writing ; but 
recollect our position : circumstanced as we are, some al- 
lowance may surely be made. I have taken advantage of 
the good old soul in Harley-street, to convey this to you ; 
the same medium will bring me an answer. 
" Yours always affectionately 

" CHARLES SAVILLE." 

This dispatch, so speedily scrawled, and so incautiously 
signed, was nevertheless most carefully folded according to 
the suggestion of the venerable spider-brusher, and in a very 
short space of time delivered into her special care, and by 
her received with the most ardent promises of entire zeal and 
perfect secrecy, and moreover a certainty, at least, as far as 
her ideas of things in general went, of an answer the next 
day. It was clear that the old creature wished well to her 
amiable and kind-hearted young mistress, but she became 
D 2 



36 THE WIDOW. 

flurried, and actually trembled with the alarm of responsi- 
bility j and when a large elderly female falls into a state of 
flusteration, it is not in a minute that she can be calmed. 
Like a three-decker in a gale of wind, it is a long time be- 
fore she begins to pitch and roll, but when she does, it 
takes an infinitely longer time to get her steady again. 
Whether Mrs. Richards felt that Charles might be disposed 
to heal the wound which her present conduct in his behalf 
seemed to make in her conscience by a fresh application of 
gold-beater's skin, or whether, like much more important 
official old women in blue ribands, she began to tremble at 
the responsibility she felt she had incurred, it is not for me 
even to guess ; but certain it is, that her agitation prevented 
Charles from making any of the inquiries he had intended 
with regard to the disposition of the establishment, and 
sundry other little matters in which he was most deeply 
interested : however, amply satisfied with the progress 
he had already made, he once more left his ancient go- 
between, under a promise to " call again tomorrow" for 
his answer. 

How different were the feelings by which he was ani- 
mated to-day, from those which had for the two prece- 
ding ones depressed him almost to despair. He visited 
chambers, little in the mind, it is true, to drudge through 
deeds, or pore over precedents, but still with a heart firm 
of purpose, and an assurance that if he were once possessed 
of his Harriet, she, herself, would be the most powerful 
stimulus to exertion ; and at the moment abandoning 
all his former plans of a cottage, a cow, and comfort in the 
country, he felt himself with an ascending power, rising 
over the heads and wigs of his more erudite and learned 
brethren, to the highest pinnacle of preferment and pre- 
eminence. He went to his club it was not of the first 
class, but very convenient arid there, having fallen in 
with one or two of those free and easy good-natured crea- 
tures who fancy their society always agreeable, joined 
them, because they would not permit him to enjoy one of 
the great luxuries of such communities a quiet dinner 
in a corner ; for who goes to clubs to dine ? men go there 
when they have nothing else to do, to " take their feed" 



THE WIDOW. 37 

and have done with it and there, accordingly, he stayed 
in the highest possible spirits, until it was quite time he 
should retire to rest, in order to be ready for the events of 
the following day. 

How differently was this night passed from that, the 
dreams of which have already been recorded. At once 
lulled and excited by the copious libations which he had 
poured, he fancied, as he slept, that his dear friend Mrs. 
Franklin was transformed into a Margate steam-packet, with 
a chimney, paddles, and a safety-valve ; while Harriet ap- 
peared to him as the genius of Britain, chipping his name 
upon a chalky cliff with a silver chisel. Butterflies, 
sylphs, bunches of roses, showers of gold, spice-trees all in 
full bearing, and honeysuckle bowers in full bloom, danced 
before his eyes ; and in the midst of all this tumultuous, 
confused happiness, the ardent and enthusiastic lover slept 
until ten o'clock the following morning. 



CHAPTER IV. 

PUNCTUALITY in love is neglect to avoid the imputation 
of which, our anxious hero was at his post in Harley-street 
while yet the dial of Vere-street chapel was announcing it 
to be half-past eleven o'clock ; and as if a certain sympathy 
had operated upon the feelings of the venerable duenna, he 
beheld her peeping and peering from the well-known door, 
just as he caught a distant glimpse of it. The much- 
wished-for port in view, he crowded sail, and speedily 
reached his object ; and much to his satisfaction, and not a 
little to his surprise, received from her withered hands the 
answer of his Love : such, however, was the old body's 
alarm and trepidation, that she would not allow him to 
stop in the house to look at a line of it, and it was not 
until he reached the square, that he was able to burst open 
the seal, and read as follows : 

" You are a shabby fellow however, never mind we 
will settle that another time. I might have been carried off 
D 3 



38 THE WIDOW. 

against my will, for all you have done to prevent it never 
mind. My aunt's temper has grown unbearable, she is a 
perfect divil ; don't come here upon any account. I will 
be walking down the sunny side of Portland-place to-day 
at two ; if you happen to be there, we may meet. 

c< Yours truly, 

" HARRIET." 

This note, directed and secretly delivered to Saville ; the 
language so extraordinary; the hand so well disguised; 
the point of assignation so well selected ; Portland-place ! 
the only street in London or its suburbs, in which ladies 
may walk unattended by a servant ; so much tact displayed, 
and so much more energy and decision than he had anti- 
cipated in his tender, gentle Harriet, could he believe his 
eyes, his senses ! What wonderful creatures women are, 
thought he ; to fancy that a girl all reserve, all diffidence, 
all shrinking modesty, when in the presence of those who 
might be supposed to have a controul over her, the moment 
she is released from restraint, should give the rein to her 
feelings, and commit to paper the outpourings of her heart 
and mind, in language the most unequivocal, not to say the 
most extraordinary. To be sure, the word descriptive of 
her respected parent's prototype, was spelled divil, with an 
i instead of an e a circumstance which makes a consider- 
able difference in the strength of the expression. But it 
cannot be denied, that his surprise and pleasure at the frank- 
ness and readiness with which she met his views were 
mingled with something very like disappointment and 
regret at the sudden abandonment of her general rule of 
conduct. But those feelings speedily gave place to another, 
which, if not quite so well or reasonably founded, was, at 
least, infinitely more consoling and gratifying. He could 
not help admitting that her precipitancy of action, and free- 
dom of expression, bordered very closely upon something 
extremely like indecorum ; but having placed it all to the 
account of the strength and power of her affection for him- 
self, he very shortly became reconciled to this natural ex- 
travagance, and set down the whole proceeding as one of 
remarkable energy and peculiar independence of character. 



THE WIDOW. 39 

Of one thing there could be no doubt ; namely, that he 
should be at his post at the appointed hour. He made his 
arrangements accordingly, and turned the corner of Lang- 
ham-place exactly as the clock of that beautiful and sense- 
lessly censured church was striking the hour of two. It 
was a remarkably fine day ; the broad pavement of Port- 
land-place was thickly studded with belles of all ages, sizes, 
professions, characters, and descriptions ; their figures, 
various as their avocations, were beautifully developed by 
the influence of a brisk southerly breeze, from which they 
endeavoured, or seemed to endeavour, to protect themselves, 
by divers and sundry evolutions and devices highly illus- 
trative of female ingenuity, and which, if they failed of 
their implied purpose, afforded the more sheltered spectator 
the opportunity of witnessing the multiplicity and diversity 
of attitude into which it is possible to throw the human 
form. 

The feelings of our hero, whose delicacy in regard to the 
conduct of females was proportionate to his admiration of 
their charms and virtues, had scarcely recovered their tone, 
or rallied from the shock which they had received, from 
the something so terribly like an assignation which Harriet's 
note contained ; and it is curious enough, but not more 
strange than true, that although dying to see her, he almost 
hoped she might not be there, and that he had miscon- 
strued the real meaning of what, it must be confessed, 
appeared a ' ' palpable hint " on the part of the young lady. 

Full of nervous apprehension, sickening anxiety, and 
the mingled expectation and dread of finding his hitherto 
timid and retiring Miss Franklin, wending, or rather wind- 
ing her way down the Eolian parade, Saville proceeded on 
his tour of inspection. He walked and gazed, and gazed 
and walked but no Harriet did he see. Many a favour- 
able glance was shot from the bright eyes of sundry single 
damsels, who, from their manner and the expression of 
their countenances, appeared to be upon something of the 
same errand as himself, looking for companions; but to 
him, the beloved of whose heart is far away, weak and 
impotent is the artillery of other eyes, and he shrank from 
the bright weapons by which he was assailed, and turned to 
D 4 



40 THE WIDOW. 

seek the sweet and mild expression of that countenance 
which was all the world to him. 

Missing an appointment, or being discomfited in one, is 
extremely disagreeable, more especially when the venue is 
laid in some extremely well frequented spot. The constant 
walk to the top of the street, and the equally constant 
return to the bottom of it, in time attract the eyes of the 
groups who are taking healthful exercise without a grain of 
sentiment in their souls ; and after four or five rencontres, 
they find it difficult to restrain (that is, if they have even 
the charity and consideration to try to conceal) the amuse- 
ment which they feel at the disappointment of the wand- 
ering and forgotten walker, until at length their barbarity 
drives him entirely away, almost more angry than disap- 
pointed at the frustration of his scheme. 

Saville had been polishing the purbecks of Portland- 
place until the clock, which had stricken two when he 
arrived, had sounded four. Harriet, the punctual, the well- 
regulated Harriet his very encomiums sounded like watch- 
work to have so overstaid her time, if she meant that he 
should come or perhaps forgotten or neglected it altoge- 
ther it was passing strange. Indeed, as he was conscious, 
from the steps which had been taken, and the movements 
at head-quarters, that matters did not look favourably for 
him, he began to apprehend that his darling Harriet had 
gotten involved in some difficulty, or entangled in some 
embarrassment with her aunt Dowbiggin on his account, 
and that Mrs. Franklin had taken some measures unknown 
to her daughter, in order effectually to prevent any inter- 
course between her and himself. 

All surmises were vain, all delays dangerous ; Harriet 
did not appear, and Saville resolved upon another trip to 
Harley- street, and another letter to the young lady. Pru- 
dence, however, which seldom interferes with the pursuits 
of gentlemen suffering under Saville's complaint, so far 
checked him in his preceedings, as to suggest that as the 
old servant had exhibited strong marks of repugnance and 
disinclination to continue the office of forwarding letters, 
he had better send Harriet a verbal message, to say that 
he had kept the appointment she had proposed, and re- 
gretted to find her not equally punctual. 



THE WIDOW. 41 

This he considered a masterly bit of policy. It lessened 
the danger of discovery ; it diminished the weight of re- 
sponsibility ; and although he did not carry on his affaire 
de cosur upon the prudential system of " never, writing a 
letter and never destroying one/' he had fancied Harriet's 
aunt into so formidable an enemy, that he congratulated 
himself upon any contrivance which was likely to keep 
him out of the range of her malice. 

He accordingly saw and confided to the old woman in 
Harley-street the announcement of his obedience to the 
commands, or rather the suggestions of his beloved, and of 
his unsuccessful saunter at the appointed place ; but the 
satisfaction which was afforded him by the readiness of his 
venerable messenger to be the bearer of this little history 
was somewhat weakened by an explanation which she 
thought proper to give touching the real cause of the 
watchfulness of Miss Harriet's aunt, and the consequent 
difficulty of keeping open a literary correspondence. 

" I believe, sir," said Mrs. Richards, " that something 
happened at the last Epsom races, what I don't exactly 
know, but so we in the house hear, about some soldier 
officer, which makes Mrs. Dowbiggin keep a sharp look-out 
after him and her; and I know sometimes, lately, when 
she has been talking about you, Mrs. D. has snubbed her, 
and bid her give up all such stuff, and turn her thoughts 
to marrying as her ma wishes her. 

" What ! " said Saville, wondering how a person in the 
condition of Mrs. Richards could be so well informed in 
the secrets of the family, " she meant Mr. Smith, I sup- 
pose ? " 

" To be sure she did," said the woman ; " because, you 
know, it's a great catch for miss, all things considered ; 
howsumdever I^am quite sure she'll be fit to break her heart 
to think of not meeting you. I am certain she meant to 
go, because just afore I came from her aunt's she was 
getting a bit of cold beefsteak pie and some pickled inions, 
and scarcely gave herself time to swallow a pint o' porter, 
so that she might get to Portland-place in time." 

" Onions and porter ! " exclaimed Saville ; " my good 
woman, what are you talking about ? " 

" Oh, sir," replied she, "you musVt fancy that young 



42 THE WIDOW. 

ladies are always the prim stuck-up things they seem afore 
company, when they turn their eyes up at this thing, 
and throw them down at the other thing, and look as if 
butter would not melt in their mouths ; Miss Harriet's as 
good as another at her knife and fork ; and as for a wee 

drappie " 

" You are mad ! " interrupted Saville, " raving mad." 
" La, no, sir," said Mrs. Richards ; " after that affair 
with Lieutenant O'Rotherham, poor Miss Harriet took on, 
and was as peeking as peeking, and eat nothing for a whole 
fortnight ; I'am sure we were all glad enough to see her 
take to it again." 

" Lieutenant O'Rotherham ! " muttered Saville ; " then 
there is an end of every thing in the world ; death and 
destruction stare me in the face. This comes of rashly 
plunging into an attachment, and blindly devoting one's 
self to an object which, after all, proves unworthy ! Har- 
riet is depraved, abandoned ; and I am the dupe of her 
hypocrisy, the victim of her duplicity ! " 

This was almost more than he could bear. Such a blow 
tells doubly ; it wounds the amour propre of a man in two 
places ; it stabs him to the heart to find that he has a fa- 
voured rival, and it cuts him to the quick to think that 
he has been deceived by her whom he thought so long de- 
voted to him ; his feelings and his pride are thus equally 
martyred, and his mind is full of anger, jealousy, and 
shame. 

Saville, however, resolved upon pausing before he wholly 
abandoned himself to misery, and his once loved Harriet 
to the ignominy to which, it appeared at the moment, she 
had so justly subjected herself. The exaggerations of 
servants ; their misconstructions and perversions of the 
simplest circumstances ; the position of the family of 
this old woman ; her evident ignorance upon many points 
of Mrs. Franklin's domestic arrangements, all weighed 
with him as so many reasons for receiving her hateful 
hints with caution. He was resolved to meet his death- 
blow, if he were doomed to suffer, from Harriet herself, 
from herself to ascertain, if possible, the reasons for 
her extraordinary conduct, and learn from her own lips 
the motives of a double falsehood, which could lead her to 



THE WIDOW. 43 

express a wish to meet and maintain her acquaintance with 
him, while, if her own messenger were to be trusted, she 
had in some way, not extremely intelligible, seriously com- 
mitted herself in another quarter. 

" Make my compliments," said Saville, all that has 
been written upon the subject of his doubts and fears 
having flashed through his mind in a couple of seconds 
l< make my compliments to your young mistress, and en- 
treat her, if possible, to let me hear from her tomorrow ; 
and however or wherever it may best be accomplished, fix 
some time and place where I may see her, if it be but for 
five minutes." 

" La, sir," said the old woman ; " she'll be sure to do 
that bless your eyes, she's dying to see you. But don't 
stop now ; come tomorrow, and you shall see her per- 
haps here. You keep up your spirits : even if she should 
marry old Smith, to please her mother, she don't care the 
value of a brass farthing for him ; but as I was a saying, 
don't you stop here now ; come tomorrow about noon." 

" I may rely ? " said Saville. 

" You may, sir," said Mrs. Richards, ef you may be sure 
o' me ; you are a gem 'man, and behaves as sich, and you 
need not fear that I shall play you foul. So good day, sir ; 
now go along, there's a good man." 

Saying which she shut the door, and left Saville over- 
come by a combination of feelings which it would be diffi- 
cult to describe. His opinions of women were the most 
exalted. Of all women he naturally fancied, being a lover, 
that Harriet Franklin was the perfection ; and yet, from 
what had dropped from her retainer, it seemed as if the 
match with Smith had been hurried on to conceal, or rather 
patch up, some indiscretion of which she had been guilty. 
So ! the eyes which had beamed with the sweet expression 
of affection upon him, had shone with equal warmth upon 
another; and the rosy lips over which had flowed the 
purest sentiments of friendship and esteem, had, rterhaps, 
been pressed by a half-pay Irish lieutenant at Epsom races. 

This seemed in some degree to account for the hawk-like 
activity with which Mrs. Franklin had pounced upon the 
matured millionaire in the sticking-plaster shorts. This 



44 THE WIDOW. 

solved the mystery of placing her daughter under the 
charge, almost in the custody., of an aunt, unheard of in 
their happier days ; and oh ! what a pang did these reflec- 
tions cost him ! to lose the object of his devotion was surely 
enough, hut to know that such a being as Harriet Franklin 
could have so committed herself was worse than death. 

To death, indeed, it seems extremely probable that our 
much to be pitied young hero would very shortly have con- 
signed himself, had he not been awakened from one of his 
horrid reveries in which he was indulging, as he almost 
unconsciously paced the pavement of Albermarle-street, on 
his way to his lodgings, by the astounding appearance of 
one of the tall, leggy footmen belonging to the establish- 
ment of Mrs. Franklin, whom he beheld dissipating his 
dignified leisure by sucking the gold head of his long cane 
at the door of a milliner's house, as he stood attentively 
watching two small boys playing marbles on the pavement. 

Saville looked at the man, who saw him, and capped 
accordingly. 

" With whom are you living now ? " said Saville to the 
servant, struck with the similarity of the livery to that of 
his once much-esteemed friend, and thinking it rather odd 
that Isaac, so was this two yards and a quarter of 
humanity called, should have been so speedily enlisted 
into another service, and so very rapidly equipped. 

" With missus, sir," said Isaac. 

" What Mrs. Franklin?" said Saville. 

" Yes, sir," replied Isaac. 

" When does she come back to town ? " inquired Saville. 

" She harn't left it yet," answered the footman. 

" Not gone ! " exclaimed the lover. " Where is she 
then ? " 

" In here, sir," said the man, " buying things." 

11 Where is your young mistress ? " 

" At her aunt's, sir," said Isaac. 

A thought a notion an idea flashed into Saville's 
mind; it was desperation, but what of that violent 
diseases require violent remedies, why not strike the 
blow, and risk an effort which should make or mar him at 
once. He resolved upon the instant ; one more appeal to 



THE WIDOW. 45 

Mrs. Franklin should be made ; her departure seemed 
providentially delayed: should he? Yes the yeas 
had it. 

Having screwed his courage to the sticking place, he 
accordingly knocked at the milliner's door. A sweet pretty 
girl, with melting blue eyes, mantling blushes, clustering 
curls, and a pinafore, opened it ; she was dressed like a 
pattern doll, and might have served as a sign for her 
mistress's tireshop, and would at any other time have 
attracted somewhat more of Saville's attention than at this 
particular crisis he felt disposed to pay her. He hastily 
inquired for Mrs. Franklin, and the little portress, almost 
without consideration, admitted him. She was preceding 
him up stairs, when she suddenly hesitated, as if she had 
too readily granted the gentleman's request ; but then 
recollecting the age and standing of Mrs. F., which to the 
eye and mind of a being in the hey-day of sixteen seemed 
infinitely more serious than they really were, she felt 
assured in the course she had adopted, and without much 
apparent repugnance, threw open the door of the front 
drawing-room, and in a moment the lover stood in the 
presence of the person he most dreaded upon earth. 

If the trepidation of one of the performers in this scene 
was great, the surprise of the other even transcended it. 
Saville stammered, trembled, and endeavoured to explain 
how he had gotten there ; Mrs. Franklin threw an expres- 
sion of astonishment into her still handsome countenance, 
and the fair portress (whether wishing to spare both par- 
ties the pain of having a witness to their embarrassment, 
or because it was the custom of the establishment, it is 
quite impossible to say) no sooner saw that the lady and 
gentleman were known to each other, than she quitted the 
room and shut the door ; a measure which, as Madame 
et Chose," the woman of the house, was gone hunting for 
echantillons for Mrs. Franklin's inspection, left them 
tete-a-tete. 

" My dear Mr. Saville," said Mrs. Franklin, " why are 
you here? Of all things in the world it was my object to 
have spared you this. I hoped to have left London with- 
out our meeting, for I candidly admit I esteem you too 



46 THE WIDOW. 

much to wish, or to be compelled to cause you needless 
pain or uneasiness." 

ft I entirely appreciate your kindness and consideration," 
said Saville, much relieved, yet somewhat overcome by the 
conciliatory tone in which he found himself addressed by 
his Harriet's mother. 

' ' Your letter to Harriet, Mr. Saville," said Mrs. Franklin, 
" I honestly confess I did not deliver to her, nor does she 
even know now of your having sent it. When you are aware 
of my motives for this apparent neglect of your wishes, I 
trust you will approve of them. I did not intend to return 
it to you until I had actually left town, in order, as I have 
just said, to avoid an interview, which, without advantage 
to either of us, could not fail to be painful to both." 

" Miss Franklin," said Saville, " is " 

" At her aunt's," replied Mrs. Franklin ; " where she 
will remain for a short time ; indeed until I leave town." 

f( I had heard you were already gone," said Saville. 

" I had intended to go earlier," replied the lady, " but 
poor Harriet's health is extremely delicate, and the flurry 
occasioned by the circumstances in which she is placed 
has quite upset her ; so that although I had given up 
Harley-street, I could not let her leave me till the day be- 
fore yesterday. She is but a weak plant, and requires 
great care ; and the loss of appetite which I have observed 
in her during the last week has alarmed me considerably." 

It was delightful to Saville to hear Harriet thus spoken 
of, as yet his friend at least, and one in whom they both 
had an interest ; the^ loss of appetite he hoped might be 
only a maternal fancy ; a hope considerably strengthened 
by the anecdote of the " beefsteak pie and pickled onions." 

" Under the circumstances," continued Mrs. Franklin, 
who, apprehensive that she had suffered the conversation 
to take a turn which Saville might misconstrue into the 
' favourable/ " I thought, knowing as I could not fail to 
do, the subject of your letter *o my child, and knowing her 
fate to be irrevocably fixed, it would have been barbarous to 
give her, what I felt convinced was a declaration of your 
sentiments, which, whether she ever felt a disposition to 
listen to them or not, would, at this juncture, have only 



THE WIDOW. 47 

excited and agitated her,, without any possible advantage 
to either of you." 

" Is it then quite decided ? " said Saville, tremblingly. 

" Irrevocably settled," said Mrs. Franklin ; " the 
trousseau is ready, and the day fixed." 

" Is there no chance, then, of " 

" Not a hope," said Mrs. Franklin ; " or rather, I should 
say, not a fear." 

" And is Miss Franklin equally pleased with the match 
with yourself ? " said Saville ; " pardon my question ; but 
next to enjoying happiness with her, to know that she her- 
self is happy, will be some consolation." 

" Indeed I believe so/' said Mrs. Franklin. 

" Are you quite sure ? " said Saville, who grew ener- 
getic, in proportion to the calmness and readiness to listen 
which Mrs. Franklin evinced : ' f Has there been no 
compulsion used to force her into this union ? Be candid, 
my dear madam, with one whose fate seems linked with 
her's. Has not the affair of Lieutenant O'Rotherham 
I see you start, I am aware of the circumstances, has 
not this business, which, after all, may be but a trifle, been 
urged upon her as a reason for consenting to a marriage 
with a man old enough to be her grandfather." 

" Lieutenant who ? " exclaimed Mrs. Franklin. 

" O'Rotherham," replied Saville. " I mean the affair 
at Epsom races ; the cause, as I am told, of your sending 
her to Mrs. Dowbiggin's for safety sake." 

" Mercy on us ! " exclaimed Mrs. Franklin, jumping 
from her seat, and ringing the bell most violently ff has 
your sorrow taken so serious a turn as this ? What shall 

I do what will become of me alone and " 

At this moment several alarmed virgins of the esta- 
blishment rushed into the apartment. 

" Save me !" continued the lady ; " protect me I 
had no idea of the effects of misplaced affection." 

" Lor ! " screamed the mistress of the house, who fol- 
lowed the vestals into the drawing-room, armed with a 
yard measure : " Vat, has he presume to be rude to 
madame ? " 



48 THE WIDOW. 

" Rude ! " screamed the matron ; " quite the contrary, 
ma'am ; he's mad mad as a March hare ! " 

" Indeed, Mrs. Franklin/' said Saville, " I am as en- 
tirely in my senses as ever I was in my life." 

" Send for a porter or two to get him out," muttered 
one of the misses to an assistant, who glided forth to pro- 
cure a couple of chairmen from the corner of Stafford- 
street, in. case of necessity. 

" All I have said, or repeated," continued Saville, " I 
heard from a person who ought to know Mrs. Richards." 

" And who may Mrs. Richards be ? " said Mrs. Franklin, 
who was standing in the centre of a circle of guardian 
nymphs : " who are all the people of whom you have 
been talking ? Really, Mr. Saville, you must be crazy." 

" Mr. Saville ! " screamed one of the girls ; ' ( Oh, where 
is Mr. Saville ? show him to me show him to me ! " 
saying which she fell nearly lifeless into the arms of a 
sister of the society. 

At this most unexpected event, Saville was infinitely 
more surprised than any body else of the party. Mrs. 
Franklin began to think the insanity was infectious, and 
looked as if she expected to be bitten on the instant. 

" Vat, in de name of all de saints, is de matter with 
you, Ma'mselle Harriet," exclaimed Madame " Chose." 

" Nothing, ma'am oh, nothing," faltered^ out the 
poor girl. 

" And who," screamed Mrs. Franklin, involuntarily 
snatching the yard measure from the lady abbess, " in the 
name of wonder, are Lieutenant O'Rotherham and Mrs. 
Dowbiggin ? " 

" I'll tell you, ma'am," sobbed the recovering, yet still 
half-fainting girl ; " Lieutenant O'Rotherham, ma'am, 
is an Irish gentleman on half-pay, to whom I was once 
attached; Mrs. Dowbiggin is my aunt, and Mr. Smith is 
the respectable individual to whom I am engaged to be 
married." 

This was a thunderstroke to Saville, who never having 
seen the " young person" in the whole course of his ex- 
istence, was overwhelmed at finding her so perfectly au fait 
as to Mrs. Franklin's friends and connections, a knowledge 



THE WIDOW. 49 

of whom she had appeared so furiously resolved to dis- 
avow ; but the reader will vainly attempt to comprehend 
the nature of his feelings, when Mrs. Franklin,, turning 
upon him a look expressive of mingled anger and con- 
tempt, exclaimed 

" So, sir, your visit to this house, then, was intended 
for this young lady, rather than for me ? " 

" Indeed, indeed, no," said Saville ; " the Fates, to call 
them nothing worse, seem to have taken the management 
of this affair into their own hands. I do assure you I 
never saw this young lady in my life, before this minute." 

" Indeed ! " said Mrs. Franklin, incredulously. 

" Indeed, ma'am," said the distressed damsel, " the 
gentleman never did, nor did I ever see him in the whole 
course of my existence till now." 

" What for you faint, Miss Harriet," said the supreme 
head of the establishment, " if you no know him ? " 

" Because," said she, li in Mr. Saville I expected to see 
a person totally different from that gentleman ; a person 
with whom I am slightly acquainted, but whose name I 
did not know : and who, from the description given me by 
one of my father's servants, I concluded to be Mr. S." 

" And pray, Miss," said Mrs. Franklin, who could not 
bear to be imposed upon, and who did not believe one 
syllable of the young person's story, " who may your 
father happen to be ? " 

t( His name, like mine," replied Miss Harriet, " is 
Hammerman ; he is the auctioneer and house-agent of 
whom you hired your house in Harley Street, and has now 
again the letting of it." 

" And then," said Saville, " Mrs. Richards is " 

" One of my father's servants, who is living there in the 
day-time, to show it to any body who wishes to see it." 

" And your name is Harriet ? " 

" Exactly so." 

" And you wrote the " 

" Yes, yes," anxiously interrupted the young lady, not 
anxious that Madame should become more than necessarily 
acquainted with all her little amatory proceedings ; " and 
E 



50 THE WIDOW. 

all this mistake may be attributed to the stupidity of that 
old woman." 

" Or," said Saville, " to my own blindness. Oh,, Mrs. 
Franklin, what sufficient apology can I make for having 
permitted myself for a moment to believe that your daugh- 
ter could have been guilty of the indiscretion which I 
have attributed to her, or imagine her capable of conduct 
so incompatible with her station or feelings how can 
I atone " 

" Well, I am sure, sir/' said Miss Hammerman ; " you 
may as well keep a civil tongue in your head, or perhaps 
some of these fine mornings you may get yourself affronted. 
The gentleman I took for you would be preciously angry 
with me if he knew who I had mistaken him for ; and as 
for conduct, and compatibility, and all that, my father is 
one of the churchwardens, and if you offer to talk scandal 
about me, he'll make no more ado than whip you up in 
a white sheet, and force you to do penance in the parish 
church." 

ee Hoity-toity !" exclaimed the lady of the house ; " vat 
all dis put your tongue into your teeths, Miss, and 
leave de room, incessament instantly go out wid you. 
Miss Farrow, go down and tell Miss Frowsty to send away 
the chairmen/' 

Saville felt considerably relieved by the discovery that 
he had been the victim of a blunder only ; and that the 
voluntary eclaircissement afforded by Miss Hammerman 
was so admirably apropos : it did, indeed, what few other 
things could have done clear up a mystery in which 
he had been most extraordinarily involved, and which, in 
the outset of the adventure, appeared likely so far to have 
incensed Mrs. Franklin against him, as to induce her to 
forego the pleasure of ever hearing anything more about 
him. 

Mrs. Franklin, as we have already seen, was, like many 
thousand others, always extremely good-humoured when 
she was pleased. Recollecting what she had been ex- 
tremely fond of in her youthful days, and not indeed 
having entirely abandoned, the practice of flirting, when- 
ever an opportunity offered, she was always disposed to 



THE WIDOW. 

afford every facility to the soft communings of lovers ak? 
their beloveds; and as we have ventured already to premise,, 
she liked Saville. She saw that Harriet liked him they 
found him extremely pleasant; and it is extraordinary 
what rapid strides a man makes, and what a firm hold he 
obtains in a house where he is so fortunate as to please 
both mother and daughter. If Mrs. Franklin had been 
asked what would have been most agreeable in the way of 
matrimony for her child, she would have confessed a mar- 
riage with Saville ; but the admission which he had made 
of his inability to "" settle/' or indeed to maintain the 
charges of an establishment, joined to the extreme tenuity 
of Harriet's fortune, and the overpowering influence of her 
father's friend, decided the question, and so separated two 
fond hearts. 

With these feelings, however, towards him, Mrs. Franklin 
listened not only with tenderness, but even anxiety to 
Saville's vindication of his conduct, until she became at 
length satisfied, that even Harriet herself could not have 
been offended at what were proved to be his misfortunes 
only ; unless indeed it were that he had intimated a belief 
of her being the companion of a rakish half-pay lieutenant 
in an excursion to Epsom, and entertained a suspicion of 
her having committed the infinitely greater atrocity of 
eating beef- steak pie and " pickled inions," moistening her 
ruby lips at the same time with a t( swig" of Whitbread's 
" heavy wet." 

Convinced, therefore, that as he had never seen Miss 
Hammerman, and was perfectly unknown to her, that he 
was perfectly exonerated upon the score of infidelity, 
Mrs. Franklin, who admired constancy to her very heart, 
disarmed herself of the yard measure and a roll of gros de 
Naples, which, in the moment of alarm, she had pressed 
into the service of her threatened dignity and person, and 
kindly offered Saville a seat in her carriage to the hotel in 
Jermyn Street, whither she had shifted her quarters pre- 
vious to her departure for the country. 

Miss Hammerman got severely lectured by her principal 
for her numerous blunders, and left the house, declaring 
she never would return to it. In the sequel, she, like the 
E 2 



52 THE WIDOW. 

young lady for whom she had been mistaken, married her 
Mr. Smith, to the popularity of whose name very much of 
the mischief that has already occurred to our hero may be 
attributed. 

It is a common, although now, perhaps, somewhat 
formal expression, that such a one has been (( kind in his 
carriage" towards another ; never could it have been said 
with greater propriety or a stricter regard to truth,, than in 
the case of Mrs. Franklin, who " in her carriage/' on the 
way to her hotel, expressed herself not only completely 
satisfied of the absurdity of the incident from the effects 
of which Charles Saville had just been extricated, but 
sorry that circumstances, inevitable and imperious, should 
have induced her to advocate a marriage for her daughter, 
not only not in perfect accordance with her views or prin- 
ciples, but which was practically in decided opposition to 
the encouragement which he must be conscious she had 
given him to visit, and indeed, for a short period, almost 
domesticate himself with her and her daughter. Yet to 
Saville, what was kindness, what was civility it is true 
they conciliated and soothed ; but a murderer who smiles 
is still a murderer ; and in the present case the murder of 
his happiness was actually committed, and would soon out ; 
for it appeared that Harriet was at the present moment 
staying with her aunt, somewhere in the vicinity of London, 
where she was to remain until her marriage, her respectable 
intended being constantly associated with her, twaddling 
and toddling after her, wherever she went. 

" I have candidly told you the whole history," said 
Mrs. Franklin ; " and I will now return you the letter 
which you intended for my poor child. All efforts to 
change her destiny would now be unavailing ; and when I 
repeat that I am sure the avowal of your affection for her 
would have exceedingly distressed her, I trust you will 
think me justified in what I have done ; and above all, 
that in the present stage of our affairs, you will not avail 
yourself of any information I may have given you, to 
attempt any plan for seeing her clandestinely, or persuading 
her to any step which could only terminate in the ruin of 
both of you." 



THE WIDOW. 

<f I cannot so quietly admit the necessity of ruin," sa^ 
Saville, encouraged by the suavity of Mrs. Franklin's 
manner, and his own belief that women of her turn of 
character generally desire men not to do any thing which 
they particularly wish to have done ; fe I have an inde- 
pendence,, small, I admit, but with Harriet's, surely, if 
her opinion coincides with yours, a cottage and true af- 
fection " 

" Are beautiful things in a novel or a poem, Mr. Saville," 
said the matron. ef Nothing sounds prettier in rhyme or 
melodious prose, than twining woodbine at the casement, 
and curling smoke in the valley ; but in real life " 

" Oh, in real life, with a competence, however small, 
we might surely be happy." 

" Not with the anger of a parent, and the recollection of 
a broken promise hanging over her," said Mrs. Franklin. 
" I have been a close observer of life for many years, and 
I scarcely recollect, in the whole course of my observation, 
to have seen a runaway match turn out well. The spirit 
which prompts rebellion to a parent, subsequently may 
induce revolt against a husband ; and those feverish dispo- 
sitions, which, taking fire on the instant, excite a young 
woman to commit imprudent actions while she is single, 
are extremely likely to drive her to the perpetration of 
vicious ones, when she is married." 

Arguing to a lover is like preaching to the wind, or 
whistling against thunder ; yet Saville had so much method 
in his madness, as to admit the improbability of Harriet's 
acceding to such a proposition, and the impropriety of his 
suggesting it ; and parted from her mother with a con- 
viction that she was a most amiable parent, and shook 
hands with her when he left the hotel, where she had re- 
delivered him his letter, in perfect friendship, and certainly 
more in sorrow than in anger at the course she had consi- 
dered it right to adopt. 



E 3 



54 THE WIDOW. 



CHAPTER V. 

THERE are certain human acts which may be considered 
unquestionably decisive : knocking away the dog-shores of 
a ship just ready for launching, cutting the last rope which 
holds a balloon just ready for ascending,, drawing the bolt 
of the new drop when the culprits are ready for execution 
such proceedings, brief and momentary as their con- 
tinuance may be, are clearly irrevocable. The last smile 
which Mrs. Franklin bestowed upon Charles Saville, was 
not one bit less conclusive than any one of those ; nor was 
the bitterness of his lot at all qualified, by the suddenness 
with which he had tumbled from his regions of fancied 
happiness. It lost none of its misery by its abruptness ; 
and when he turned away from the door of the hotel, 
although Jermyn-street was as full of carriages as usual, 
and he was jostled by the unsentimental foot passengers, 
who ' e pushed on " to their different occupations with the 
most inveterate energy, he felt as if he were alone in all 
the wide world. 

To reflect on what was past was worse than death, and 
to look forward to what was to come, was equally terrible. 
It seemed not only as if he had in a moment been deprived 
of the stay and comfort of his present existence, but as if 
he had lost the point of sight in the perspective of his 
future life. For whom was he now to toil and labour ? 
who was to excite and encourage his exertions ? who was to 
reward those exertions? Harriet was another's and such 
another's. The viscount, or even the baronet, would have been 
better than this. Mrs. Smith plain Mrs. Smith to be only 
that one of a hundred thousand Mrs. Smiths and if 
distinguished from the vast herd, to be recognised as Mrs. 
Twaddle Smith ; and then that " disparity of years," of 
which the said Smith had twaddled, was it likely that the 
idol of his heart could be happy under such circumstances ? 
surely not. Surely she did not quite hate him Charles 
Saville ; he knew she did not. Should he pursue his flying 
fair ? should he snatch her from the arms of her respect- 
able intended, and in the teeth of all his promises to him- 



THE WIDOW. 55 

self, and his protestations to her mother, force her into 
disobedience, and cany her away to the pastoral scenes of 
which he had spoken so rapturously and yet so unsuccess- 
fully to that amiable gentlewoman. 

She was domiciliated with her aunt not indeed in 
Carbur ton-street, Fitzroy-square, but in the neighbour- 
hood of Weybridge. Various means were canvassed, and 
sundry devices considered by the wavering lover, coupled 
with a careful inspection of the map of Surrey, in order 
to ascertain the shortest cut from the retreat of his fair 
one into the North Road, if so lengthened a flight should 
be necessary. He had by no means come to a resolution 
upon this important point ; but he had, as it will be seen, 
admitted the principle, and that was going a considerable 
way into the matter. 

A lover without a confidant is like a watch without a 
spring a well without a bucket or a lady without a 
looking-glass ; and accordingly Charles Saville, like the 
rest of the fraternity, forthwith provided himself with one. 
During the prosperous days of his attachment, he did not 
discover the absolute necessity for such support, and to 
his vain independence during that blissful period may be 
attributed much of the embarrassment into which he had 
plunged ; but now that he had to moan and complain, he 
felt how great an alleviation it would be to his grief, if he 
could find an ear wherein he might pour some of his sor- 
row. This feeling, which was not very dissimilar in prin- 
ciple to that of the Irishman who rejoiced in the notion, 
that a journey of eighteen miles performed by himself and 
friend, would be divided into two portions of nine miles 
each, he resolved to indulge ; and after a due and delicate 
advance upon so nice a subject, he opened the whole 
matter to a friend long known, and often tried in matters 
of worldly concern, but to whom he had never yet con- 
fided the state of his heart as regarded Miss Harriet 
Franklin. 

The name of this friend was Alvingham ; and although 

his Majesty still retains a confessor at court, for the use 

of the royal household, it was not because Mr. Alvingham 

was already in orders, and an officiating minister in one of 

E 4 



56 THE WIDOW. 

the fashionable churches in the metropolis, that Saville 
selected him as the depository of his secrets : oral confes- 
sion formed no part of the lover's creed, nor did he believe 
that having the cure of souls did in any way qualify his 
reverend friend for the cure of hearts. His object in 
putting him in possession of the state of his affairs with 
Harriet, was to receive from him such counsel as might 
regulate his conduct, as it might affect the object of his 
love ; for after all, he affords the strongest proof of sincere 
affection towards a woman, who, without one selfish feel- 
ing, consents to give her up rather than injure her worldly 
comfort, and thus abandons his own happiness for the 
sake of securing hers. It was this view which Mr. Alving- 
ham took of the subject under discussion. With a sober 
moderation, suited to his habit and calling, he represented 
to his more ardent friend the imprudence of rashly 
violating his word, or at least his implied promise to 
Mrs. Franklin, and incurring the heavy responsibility of 
engaging a child in a league against a parent. 

" Ah, but," said Saville, " I do really believe by her 
manner that she would not be sorry if I rescued her 
daughter from the fate that awaits her." 

" In that case," replied Alvingham, " she must be 
doubly base and culpable. If she have sufficient clearness 
of perception to anticipate unhappiness for her daughter 
in the marriage to which she has destined her, what can 
be offered in extenuation of her concluding such an 
alliance ? " 

" The influence of her late husband's friend," answered 
Saville ; (f the executor of his will ; the trustee of his 
child." 

" Let the man possess all the influence," said Alving- 
ham, " to which his three-fold occupations in the family 
may entitle him, and yet I cannot perceive that his mar- 
rying a girl young enough to be his grand- daughter forms 
any part of the duty of any one of them." 

" Well, then," said Charles, eager to get an opinion 
favourable to his eloping scheme, " would you have me 
risk the momentary anger of all the interested parties, and 
strike the blow ? " 



THE WIDOW. 57 

" By no means/' said Alvingham. " We have hitherto 
discussed your proposal merely as affecting the relative 
feelings and duties of parent and child. Now look deeper 
into the question. You have already told me her mother's 
opinion of the poetical notion of ' love in a cottage ; ' 
examine the case yourself. You have but a very small 
independence; her fortune, as far as it extends, is depend- 
ent upon the will of her mother ; and that mother is appa- 
rently dependent upon this formidable trustee. You must 
labour for the means to live, to support your wife, and, if 
Heaven should so ordain, your family; ask yourself whe- 
ther you are justified in snatching this amiable young 
creature from a sphere of life in which, although perhaps 
she may not have partaken of the more splendid gifts of 
fortune, she, has enjoyed at least an undisturbed and happy 
competence. Ask yourself, I say, my dear friend, whether 
you have a right to withdraw her from scenes of comfort 
and serenity to place her amidst the stormy elements to 
which a young, unknown, professional man must natu- 
rally be exposed." 

" I deny," said Saville, (f that Harriet is at this mo- 
ment enjoying either serenity or comfort. She is unhappy 
and miserable, as all girls must be whose inclinations are 
forced, and who are " 

" Stay, stay, Saville," interrupted Alvingham, " by 
what rule, by what criterion are you judging the young 
lady's feelings ? by what standard do you regulate the 
admeasurement of her sufferings ? All you know of the 
history seems to me to be, that having been introduced to 
a very charming person, you began first to admire, and 
then to love her. You never declared your affection, but 
lingered on, basking in the sun-shine of her bright eyes, 
until a more active and yet more wary suitor took the de- 
cisive step which you had neglected, and obtained the 
prize, which, by your own admission, you did not think 
worth asking for, until, in fact, it was disposed of to your 
rival." 

" My dear friend/' said Saville, " it is perfectly clear to 
me that you were never placed in the position in which I 
found myself relatively with Miss Franklin. I was living 



58 THE WIDOW. 

constantly with them, almost from the first until the last 
day of my acquaintance with her. I had no thoughts of 
happiness out of her sight ; the minutes seemed hours 
when I was away from her ; and it seemed as if nature 
contrived to maintain the equation of time by turning the 
hours into minutes when I was with her. The incidents 
of one day led to engagements for the next ; and then I 
was fascinated and happy. I knew for even a dullard 
such as I can find out that I was not disagreeable either 
to mother or daughter ; they both esteemed me, each in 
her different degree. I knew what were her expectations 
for her daughter in the way of marriage. I saw that she 
was almost aware of the imprudence of permitting my con- 
stant association with her child, being herself conscious that 
our marriage was out of the question. I saw more I saw 
that they both dreaded lest I should make the declaration 
which would infallibly separate us eternally, while I trem- 
bled under the daily anticipation of some remark on the 
subject from the elder lady herself ; and thus we went on, 
until Croesus in the sticking-plaster shorts hobbled in upon 
all the confidence of half a million, and snapped up my 
unhappy Harriet." 

There we differ," replied his friend. '< I admit all 
your doubts, and delicacies, and difficulties they were all 
natural enough; but I do not admit that you have any 
right to presume that a young lady who accepts an offer 
has thereby rendered herself unhappy. She has decided 
she is gone ; and if you will take the advice of one 
rather your senior, and whose professional avocations and 
their preparatory studies have caused him to sober his 
feelings and regulate his passions, you will reconcile your- 
self to a loss which may be repaired by a second choice, 
and permit the young lady who has decided for herself to 
put in practice her scheme of happiness without further 
interruption." 

" My dear Alvingham, you talk so rationally that I am 
sure you can have no idea what a man really in love feels," 
said Saville. 

" My dear Saville," replied Alvingham, " there you are 
as much mistaken as I fancy you may be with respect to 



THE WIDOW. 59 

Miss Franklin's misery. I have been in love ; I am in 
love ; and I should be extremely sorry if I were not." 

" Well, but then," said Saville, " your beloved has not 
been snatched from you at the moment she was within, your 
reach." 

" No/' said Alvingham, smiling/' she certainly has not. 
If I had delayed and procrastinated she might have been. 
I, on the contrary, have woo'd and won her." 

" And with the consent of all parties ? " 

" Of all," replied the other. " It would look ill for 
one of my cloth to appear in the character of a scheming 
lover ; although such parts have been enacted by some of 
my reverend brethren. I have obtained the consent of my 
Eliza and the sanction of her parents, and her brother 
unites us, next week, at St. George's, Hanover-square." 

" Why, I hate you," said Saville, " absolutely hate you. 
Do you imagine, my dear friend, that if I had had the 
slightest idea that you were yourself a happy lover, a well 
received son-in-law, and a welcome nephew, that I would 
have consulted you upon my unfortunate case not I ; as 
Sir Robert Howard says 

" The happy seldom heed th' unhappy's pain." 

And with every respect for your kindness of disposition 
and tenderness of heart, it is impossible to make you, a 
' prosperous wooer,' comprehend, in the smallest degree, 
the wretchedness which a being placed in my present situ- 
ation is doomed to suffer." 

" You do me injustice," said Alvingham ; cf my own 
happiness for I am happy so far as worldly matters are 
concerned does not in the least incapacitate me from 
sympathising most heartily with you in your distress ; all I 
mean to offer to your attention in any thing I may venture 
to say, is the fact, that your happiness will not be secured, 
you may rely upon it I am right, by overthrowing 
the present scheme of happiness which the Franklin family 
have now arranged. And recollect what a pang will you 
feel, in addition to all the others which the ruin of your 
Harriet's prospects will some day or other inflict, when you 
have to reproach yourself, or, it may be, even are reproached 



60 THE WIDOW. 

by her, with having disunited her from her mother, by ex* 
citing her to disobedience and rebellion." 

" Her mother would be glad I did this c gentle violence' 
of saving her," said Saville. 

f( Upon my word/' replied Alvingham, " the Franklins 
seem to be a most extraordinary race : the daughter, devoted 
to you, very quietly consents to marry your rival ; and the 
mother, who advocates the match, would be extremely glad 
if you were able to break it off. Really, you must see this 
family through a curious medium, or with eyes not much 
clearer than Cupid's own. However, you have asked my 
advice, and I have given it; whether you will act upon 
it is another question." 

Saville's answer to the doubt implied in the last observ- 
ation was evasive. The truth seemed to be, that, like all 
men, where love or marriage form the subject-matter of 
debate, Saville had made up his mind as to his future con- 
duct long before he took the pracaution of consulting his 
reverend friend ; and like all his bewitched compeers, under 
the magical influence of woman, agreed with his counsellor 
only just so long as his advice exactly tallied with his in- 
clinations. 

Alvingham saw this, and therefore concluded his lecture, 
having himself an appointment to call on his intended, 
almost precisely at the time fixed upon by Saville for his 
confession ; and preferring, as a good pastor ever does, 
practice to preaching, he rather gladly dismissed the dis- 
cussion and the disciple ; not however without begging him, 
whatever he might think proper to do with regard to Miss 
Franklin, not to forget that the parsonage-house of Har- 
lingham was always open to him, and expressing a hope 
that as it soon would have a mistress, it would not lose any 
of the attractions which, as the residence of an old and 
faithful friend, it might be supposed to possess. 

Thus parted these worthy compeers ; affording in their 
minds, tempers, characters, dispositions, and circumstances, 
two of the most striking examples of dissimilitude that, 
perhaps, were ever exhibited under one roof. Alvingham, 
happy, contented, and blest with quiet, competence, and 
every hope of domestic happiness ; Saville, wretched, rest- 



THE WIDOW. Cl 

less, and dissatisfied with himself, and everybody else, 
looking for support to a profession for which it seemed he 
had but little turn or talent, separated from her with whom 
alone he imagined it possible to exist, and not in the 
slightest degree decided as to the course of action which he 
had best pursue, either to recover her forthwith, or relin- 
quish her altogether. 

One incident occurred on his return home to his lodg- 
ings in the evening, which excited him in an awful degree, 
and roused him from the stupor of grief into which he 
appeared to have fallen. He found a square packet of 
papers upon his table ; a momentary glance sufficed to 
convince him, that the address was written by either 
Mrs, Frankin or Harriet. Habit, association, and perhaps 
the same master, give so strong a family likeness to the 
hand-writing of mothers and daughters, in these days of 
elegant education and literary unintelligibility, that he 
could not, at first sight, decide which of them " had done 
the deed ;" but that the parcel came from the family he 
was convinced. 

It seemed an age till the servant left the room he felt 
that he dare not trust himself to open the magic paper while 
he remained near him, and might be a witness to the vio- 
lent emotions which its contents might produce. At length 
alone, he made a desperate plunge, and cut the string with 
which it was tied ; and found in his hands three or four 
of Haynes Bayley's sweetest and most touching melodies ; 
the all-accomplished Mrs. Norton's " Undying One, and 
other Poems ;" " The Pleasures of Memory ;" and two 
volumes of " Debrett's Peerage ;" all of which he had at 
different times, on different occasions, taken or sent to 
Harley-street ; and which were now, after the general 
rummage, returned to their lawful owner, with " Mrs. 
Franklin's compliments," written on a slip of paper, and 
deposited within the parcel. 

Amongst the innumerable ingenuities of a lover, none 
are more remarkable than those which he displays in 
groundlessly exhilarating or depressing his spirits ; exciting 
or damping his hopes, and perverting whatever he sees or 
hears, or whatever happens, however accidentally, into 



62 THE WIDOW. 

something bearing most pointedly and decidedly upon him- 
self, and his own particular affaire de cwur. 

Nobody., except a lover, or one who at some period of 
his life had laboured heavily under the complaint, could 
picture to himself the assiduity with which Charles Saville 
searched and sought over every corner and cranny of 
Mrs. Franklin's parcel, to discover something about it that 
might convey a hint or a meaning, either from herself or 
Harriet. There certainly was a dash under the Mrs. in 
the brief note what did that mean ? to point out parti- 
cularly that Harriet had nothing to do with returning the 
books ; did it mean that he was not to consider that return 
any thing more than a mere matter of course ; did it imply 
that, although Mrs. Franklin sent them back, Miss Frank- 
lin would rather have kept them as relics of former foregone 
happiness ? 

This consideration of the question, which had, in point 
of fact, nothing whatever in it, occupied him at least a 
quarter of an hour. Then an investigation of the seal 
was commenced ; a thistle, with the device, " dinna for- 
get" that was odd it must mean something ! " dinna 
forget" was such an extraordinary injunction just at the 
breaking off of an engagement was he to gather much 
encouragement from this ? Lover-like, he attributed a 
motive to the commonest action of his Harriet's life. 
" Dinna forget," he repeated at least a hundred times in 
a hundred different tones ; and if he had implicitly obeyed 
the injunction contained in the important words, he could 
not have failed to remember, that the blood-stone bearing 
this trite and hackneyed impression (without which no 
Scotch woman, married or single, matron or daughter, is to 
be found) was one of a circular cluster of seals, moving on 
an agate handle, at the purchase of which, at Grayhurst 
and Harvey's, he had himself been present. There is little 
doubt, however, if even this had entered his mind, he would 
have drawn some favourable conclusion from the coinciding 
circumstance of his having been one of the party when it 
was bought, and its appearing on the packet destined, as it 
outwardly appeared, to terminate his connection with the 
family ; he never taking into the calculation, that which 



THE WIDOW. DJ 

happened to be the fact, that the memorable parcel, upon 
which so much appeared to depend, had been made up by 
Mrs. Franklin's maid, who had concluded her operation of 
packing, by giving it the seal which had so strongly excited 
all his tenderest feelings. ,/ 

There were, however, other circumstances upon which 
Saville dwelt which might have been rather more important. 
In turning 'over the v leaves of Mrs. Norton's poems, he 
perceived that some passages had been doubled down ; 
some even appeared to have been pencil-marked. 

" Would I were with thee ! every day and hour 
Which now I spend so sadly far from thee ! 
Would that my form possess'd the magic power, 
To follow where my heavy heart would be ; 
Whate'er thy lot by land or sea, 
Would I were with thee eternally ! " 

This, page 259v was doubled down. It is impossible to 
describe the thrill the chill the glow he felt at seeing 
the mark. The ninth page farther on, he received a similar 
distinction. 

" Oh, Edward ! dark my doom this heart will love for ever, 

Though thou wilt never share its joy or pain ! 
Thine eye will turn to mine, and meet its glance ; but never 

Beam fondly back on her's who loves in vain ; 
But when weary life is o'er, and in the grave I'm lying, 

(Silently a woman's heart should hide its love and break) 
Then dearest, then some voice shall tell thee sighing, 

How weary was my life to me for Edward's sake." 

" For Edward's sake ! " repeated Saville. "Old Smith's 
name cannot be Edward," thought he his vanity whis- 
pered " nomine mutato de te," she sings, or rather marks 
what others sing. It certainly was very odd the lines 
were apposite and applicable she had avowedly no op- 
portunity of directly communicating her sentiments, even 
had she the boldness to make a confession. Here was a 
delicate mode of explaining the real state of her heart, and 
expressing the true character of her feelings ; it must be 
so. All the schemes of contrivances and stratagems with 
which the pages of novels and romances were formerly 
filled occurred to his memory. Telegraphic signals 
sympathetic inks cyphers, and keys, lemon juice of new 
milk, and every other imaginable device for clandestine 
correspondence, flitted before his sight ; and upon these 



64 



THE WIDOW. 



grounds, and no better, he resolved to put into immediate 
execution, at all events, the preliminary arrangements for 
carrying off the broken-hearted Harriet. 

Debrett's Peerage, which lay next to the poems on the 
table, became mechanically the next object of his observ- 
ation, and he took the first volume in his hand. He 
threw it from him with a toss of indifference ; when, lo, 
and behold ! the book of fate, that magic tome, which 
displays to longing eyes the wonders of ie the creation," 
fell open at a particular page, as if it had been long " used 
to it." When he examined it, he found that the page 
was particularly thumbed and tumbled, and moreover duly 
marked by a " dog's ear," even more decided than that 
which had attracted his notice to the poems, he read as 
follows : 

' ' Henry Augustus Baxter, Earl of Kencherton, Viscount 
Pertwood, and Baron Baxter of Saxmundham, in the 
county of Suffolk, G.C.H. ; a General in the army ; 
Colonel of the 103d regiment of foot, and a Commissioner 
of the metropolitan roads; married, July 7. 1798, the 
Right Honourable Lady Mary Witherington, only daughter 
of George, late Earl of Crawley, by Mary-Jan.e, third 
daughter of William, fifth Duke of Twickenham. Her 
ladyship died March 4. 1830, leaving the earl the follow- 
ing issue, 

1. Charles George Augustus, b. April 15, 1799- d. 

young. 

2. Emily Mary, b. June 4. 1800. m. 8 Sept. 1819, the 

Hon. William Boggis, third son of Lord Pauperton, 
of Killymidamnimo, N. B. 

3. Henry Augustus, Viscount Pertwood, b. June 18. 

1802 ; a Lieut.-col. in the army and M.P. 

4. William, who d. young. 
Creations. Barony, 1584. Earl, 1766. 
Motto. ' PERSEVERANCE.' 

Town residence. Grosvenor-square. 
Seats. Kencherton House, Gloucestershire, Turflauds, 
Suffolk, Twickenham Castle, Cumberland." 



THE WIDOW. 6'5 

No sooner had Charles perused this much loved, much 
read page to the bottom,, than his ardour cooled., his 
enthusiasm drooped, and from the heights of ecstasy he 
precipitated himself into the " deepest " depths of despair. 
With how much reason he had previously exalted, or 
what ground he had for at present thus debasing his 
hopes, it is impossible to say j but the immediate cause of 
the sudden and desperate change in his feelings was the 
fact, that this very Lord Pertwood, as the reader may 
perhaps remember,, was at one time, and oh ! (which 
made the matter still worse) at the very period when 
Harriet Franklin borrowed this very book, a dangler, as 
the world thought, and a professed lover, as her mother 
said, of that very Harriet herself. 

Did she then seriously think of him ? had she, with 
all the' dislike and distaste for him, which she had pro- 
fessed to Charles, really contemplated an union with him ? 
Had she with anxiety and interest traced his lineage, 
scanned his pretensions, and read over the list of the titles 
inherent in his race ? Could it be possible ? What she 
had done with the baronet he could not, from equally good 
authority, determine ; there were no data in Debrett to go 
upon ; but the one case was quite sufficient to overturn his 
visionary schemes, and rase his castles to their ethereal 
foundations. 

It is curious to think how these " trifles light as air " 
should set a sensible man up and pull him down again in 
so brief a space of time ; that it had the latter effect may 
be easily believed, when the reader learns that all the pre- 
parations which Saville had resolved to make for his 
northern expedition were for the moment abandoned ; and 
the intensity of devotion with which he had, an hour 
before, loved his Harriet, was metamorphosed into a sort 
of restless discontent with himself for having so easily been 
made the dupe of her heartlessness. What effect upon 
his future life this newly-excited feeling produced, the 
reader will, perhaps, learn in the following chapter. 



66* THE WIDOW. 



CHAPTER VI. 

How long the sensitive lover remained in this desponding 
mood, it is neither possible nor necessary for us to know. 
His feelings were destined to undergo a new trial, in con- 
sequence of his having accepted an invitation from his 
friend Alvingham to accompany him to dine with the 
family out of which he had selected a daughter, the charm- 
ing and accomplished young lady to whom he was on the 
eve of marriage. In the circle of this happy and con- 
tented family he saw his friend received with warmth, 
affection, and cordiality, each of its members appearing to 
strive who should render him most welcome and comfort- 
able ; every allusion which was made spoke of anticipated 
happiness; and Charles came away fully convinced, that 
a man treated and circumstanced like his reverend friend, 
must be the happiest of his sex ; but then, charming as 
were the Miss Simpsons, there was not one out of the 
whole nine, for of that number did the muse-like family 
consist, at all comparable with Harriet Franklin. 

Still it was impossible for him, in his then temper of 
mind, not to be painfully and forcibly struck by the con- 
trast which Alvingham's position afforded to that in which 
he himself was placed. Why had not he taken orders and 
gone into the church ? Why had not he thus secured 
at a coup a competency, which, however moderate, was 
enough, since it gave his friend a right to make the match 
he had, instead of choosing a profession in which nothing 
but lengthened toil, superior ability, and constant appli- 
cation, could make him either affluent or eminent. There 
are professions in which favour and affection may rapidly 
promote a man, but in Law and Physic, however much 
adventitious circumstances may sometimes aid the latter, 
merit alone can stand, and make its way. Let a man be 
never so kind of heart or generous in disposition, health 
and wealth, life and property, are matters not to be trifled 
with ; civility and ceremony, partiality and patronage, are, 
in such affairs, out of the question ; and he that is en- 
tangled in difficulties, or assailed by sickness, will seek the 



THE WIDOW. 67 

best lawyer and the best doctor, without any great regard 
to personal feelings or private predilections. 

" And yet" thought poor Saville, by way of consoling 
himself, " I could not have done as Alvingham has done. 
I had no interest to procure such preferment as he holds. 
Why do I lament not having done what I could not do ? 
or why repine at the complete success of his scheme of 
rational happiness,, when circumstances have barred me 
from a similar course." 

The future Mrs. Alvingham ^ and the reader is des- 
tined to know more of her hereafter, was the very pic- 
ture, as the old nurses say, of good humour. She was 
fair, rosy- cheeked, red-lipped, and inclining to plumpness ; 
a description which will no doubt inspire the skinny and 
consumptive of my readers with horror : all the wither- 
ing spectres about town, with long fleshless fingers and 
ribs, affect to shudder at any thing bordering upon the en 
bon point ; a fat woman (and what they call fat is, like 
Miss Mary Simpson, only plump) is associated in their 
ideas and conversation with vulgarity and coarseness, and 
they strain their ghost-like countenances into an expression 
of horror at the idea of any thing bearing more flesh about 
it than themselves. 

To these, the kind-hearted, good-natured Mary would 
have been " oppressive," dear girl, to those who were less 
refined, but infinitely more delicate than the anti-obesity 
phantoms who haunt the world, she was every thing that 
was amiable and prepossessing. Of course, as Saville was 
Alvingham's friend, she knew the whole history of his love 
and disappointment before she had seen him. Women 
are full of consideration and kindness, and sympathy, and 
Mary felt a deep interest in the fate of their new ac- 
quaintance : she was pleased with his manners, admired 
his accomplishments, and although his conversation, under 
the influence of his sorrow, was not so gay and brilliant 
as it sometimes was wont to be, she could judge of what 
its bright days were, by what she saw of it in its gloom ; 
as a man looks at a villa in winter and says, " What a 
lovely spot this must be in summer ! " and she rejoiced 
that her future spouse had such a friend, and sincerely 



68 THE WIDOW. 

hoped, in all the hospitality of her heart, that he would 
come and be a frequent guest at Harlingham Parsonage. 

Scarcely any thing more seriously annoys an unsettled, 
distracted lover, than the spectacle of a happy family 
going on almost mechanically in its round of quiet ar- 
rangements : the sons pursuing their avocations, or en- 
joying their pleasures ; the daughters dividing their time 
between study and recreation, amusement and charity ; 
obedient children to indulgent parents, who, blessed with 
competence, and not cursed with vanity, permit the feel- 
ings and inclinations of their offspring, as to their eventual 
settlement in life, to have, at least, fair play, and evince a 
readiness to conduce to their happiness in the most im- 
portant particulars, by moderating their expectations in 
making alliances for them, and preferring modest worth 
and unassuming merit to the more brilliant but much 
less suitable pretensions of exalted birth or extensive 
fortune. 

When Charles Saville returned to town from Mr. Simp- 
son's snug, well-placed villa at Clapham, he was haunted 
by the recollection of the smiling countenances of all the 
young ladies, made restless and uncomfortable by the re- 
membrance of the ease and comfort which his friend 
seemed to enjoy in his well-chosen road to matrimony. 
It struck him, however, in the midst of his woes, that the 
amiability of the old gentleman, or " Governor," as his 
sons were jocosely in the habit of calling him, would be 
very speedily extended to himself, if he could direct his 
feelings, and conquer his attachment for Harriet Franklin, 
and attach himself to one of his amiable daughters ; and 
to be sure Sarah-Jane was an extremely nice girl, ex- 
cessively good-natured, quite enough accomplished, and 
although, as Edmund Burke said of his wife, not made to 
be the admiration of every body, she seemed formed to 
make the happiness of one ; but thus to abandon all the 
hopes of his life, to surrender a chance of his beloved for 
the sake of Miss Sally Simpson, the idea only flashed 
into his mind to be extinguished for ever. 

He resolved not to re -visit the philanthropic plains of 
Clapham ; he determined no longer to consult Alvingham 



THE WIDOW. 69 

on the measures to be pursued. He was convinced that a 
matter-of-fact, jog-trot lover, feted, favoured, and ac- 
cepted, could never sympathise with him ; and therefore 
hastily bidding him adieu for the present, he came to a 
decision of even more importance than that of abandoning 
his friend, and that was, to carry off his beloved. He 
had heard Mr. Simpson talk of the real, inherent, and 
unalterable affection of parents for their children ; he felt 
convinced of the genuineness of all that gentleman's doc- 
trines ; and before two o'clock in the morning, after his 
return from the villa, had completely satisfied himself that 
if he made the dash, pounced on his innocent dove, and 
carried her off, long before the honey-moon waned, he and 
his bride would be welcomed back by his amiable mother- 
in-law, who would, as he believed, do every thing in her 
power to compensate to the elderly willow-wearing swain 
for his loss, even to the extent of offering herself to be- 
come Mrs. Smith, in lieu of her daughter. 

This resolution once formed, the reader may easily sup- 
pose that the hours until he could obtain the attendance of 
his servant passed heavily with Saville. The inevitable 
delay, however, gave him time to arrange his plans ; and 
long before his valet and prime-minister was up, and 
down, he had settled the programme of the whole per- 
formance. 

This valet was a character that is to say, if having no 
character except that which he brought from his last place 
justifies one in saying so. His name was Twigg ; he was 
his master's counsellor and adviser upon many occasions ; 
and it was to his not having employed him in the Harley- 
street stratagem, that Saville attributed its lamentable failure, 
and his consequent disagreeable exposure. Saville had a high 
opinion of Twigg's judgment upon many topics ; he had, 
before this, discussed the subject of the elopement, and 
had been much edified by his man's remarks and observ- 
ations ; he was attached to him for his fidelity and pru- 
dence, and considered him "quite a treasure" in the' way 
of guarding him against imposition, and directing him to 
bargains ; the truth being, that Twigg had not three ideas 
in the world beyond taking the best possible care of him- 
F 3 



70 THE WIDOW. 

self. The only virtue he possessed consisted in a studious 
accommodation of himself to his master's will and opinion., 
and in always agreeing with him upon every point under 
discussion ; constantly appearing to originate something 
which his master pronounced exceedingly wise and clever, 
but which, in fact, was neither more nor less than a new 
version of some old proposition which had been previously 
made by Saville himself. 

'< Twigg," said Saville, shut the door/' The door of 
course was shut. ' ' I am resolved to put my scheme in 
practice with regard to Miss Franklin. Have you got the 
paper about the line of posting down the north road, which 
you had from Newman ? " 

" I have sir," said Twigg. 

" I cannot sit down quietly and give her up," said Sa- 
ville ; ts the affair is perfectly simple/* 

if Very, sir/' said Twigg. 

" Of course every man knows his own business best," 
said Saville ; ee but I upon my life I don't know 
I think it is better at once to make the plunge ; and I 
question whether it is not wiser to be rash for an hour, 
than miserable for life." 

tf It is a question, sir." 

ie Yet, Twigg, if I hesitate, the opportunity is lost/' 

" So it is, sir." 

" She cannot fail of being wretched with Smith/' 

" Impossible ! " said Twigg. 

" He is a worthy man," said Saville, muttering to him- 
self. 

" Very, sir," said Twigg. 

" But not suited to her." 

" By no means/' said Twigg. 

" He's sixty-three at least." 

" Yes, sir, full sixty-three," said Twigg. 

' : That, to be sure, is not so very old." 

" No, sir," said Twigg, " not so very old." 

<f Too old for a girl of nineteen/' ' 

' < Oh ! much too old, sir," said Twigg. 

f( I believe she is fond of we," said Saville like a fool. 

" Very, sir," said Twigg like a knave. 



THE WIDOW. 71 

" Do you think so, Twigg ? '' said Saville. 

" I do, sir/' replied Twigg. 

<f How d'ye know ? " 

" Umph ! I don't know," said Twigg : " servants talk, 
sir." 

( < To be sure they do very proper they should." 

Very, sir." 

" Did Miss Franklin's maid ever touch upon the subject 
with you ? " 

" Do what, sir ? " said Twigg. 

" Speak of her young lady's affection for me ?" 

" In course, sir," said Twigg, li what I say to you upon 
that wo'n't go to the old lady ? " 

" Certainly not." 

" Well," said Twigg, " we have argued it over now and 
then ; and one night as we were sitting in the servants' 
hall for there is no second table at Mrs. Franklin's 
Thomas the footman comes to the door, and he says, says 
he to me, ' Saville, you're wanted/ " 

" Saville ? " said Charles, " Twigg, you mean." 

" I mean Twigg, sir," replied he ; " but we are always 
called after our masters' names it saves trouble. ' Sa- 
ville,' says he, you're wanted.' ' Ah,' says Miss John- 
stone, Miss Harriet's maid, says she, ' the time isn't far 
distant, I think, when we shall all be united in one esta- 
blishment.' " 

" That looks ominous," said Saville. 

' f Very, sir," answered Twigg. 

" And with that, sir," continued Twigg, " we began 
talking of one foolish thing and another, and at last we 
talked about you, and I thought thinks I if my mas- 
ter marries Miss Franklin " 

" Saville the second might marry Miss Johnstone," in- 
terrupted Charles. 

" Exactly so, sir," said Twigg ; " it's the way they does 
it in books, and plays, and novels, and " 

" Perfectly natural," said Saville. 

" Very, sir," said Twigg. 

This enlightenment of the master as to the views of 
the servant was by no means disagreeable to Charles ; he 
F 4 



72 THE WIDOW. 

felt that the community of interest between himself and his 
valet would insure the exertions and secure the fidelity of 
both domestics, and thought he perceived an additional 
zeal and ardour flash into his man's countenance and 
manner the moment after he had confided his real feelings 
and intentions to his master. 

It may seem incompatible with the elegance of Saville's 
mind, and the delicacy of his feelings, that he could thus 
sympathise with " his flunky," as the Scots have it ; but 
those who Jknow the human heart, know that love, like 
misfortune, makes men acquainted with strange bedfellows. 

Love levels ranks, lords down to cellars bears, 
And bids the brawny porter walk up stairs ; 
There's nought for love too high, nor aught too low, 
Oh, Huncamunca ! Huncamunca, oh ! 

At all events, Twigg's exertions would be stimulated by 
the prospect of obtaining the hand of Miss Johnstone ; who, 
according to his description of her, was " a delishos creechur, 
who wartzed like a German, and danced the gallipot to 
perfection." 

Half of what had transpired during the colloquy between 
Saville and his' servant was not necessary to decide the 
love- stricken gentleman in his course ; all the arrangements 
necessary to the great enterprise were immediately can- 
vassed. Charles had studied that part of the county of 
Surrey in which his beloved damsel was, as he believed, 
confined, with all the tact and zeal of a quarter-master- 
general ; not a lane nor a brook was unknown to him ; and 
he was as familiar with the circuit of country lying be- 
tween Botleys and Littleton in one direction, and Oatlands 
and St. Anne's Hill in the other, as he ought to have been 
with the interior of Mr. Nibble's chambers, or the shady 
recesses of Paper Buildings and King's Bench Walk. In 
pursuance of designs originating in his knowledge of all 
the localities, he resolved upon fixing his head-quarters at 
Rattew's, the Swan at Chertsey, whence he could despatch 
his faithful Leporello to the mansion of Harriet's aunt, and 
thence, under favour of " Miss J." (as Twigg always 
called her), receive those communications, upon which 
the happiness or misery of two fond hearts so entirely 
depended. 






THE WIDOW. ,75 

Accordingly, having previously put himself in commu- 
nication with the Crown at Uxbridge, where horses were 
to be ready to convey him and his prize (with Twigg and 
Miss J. in the rumble) to St. .Adban's, and thence to 
Gretna, he proceeded to the domicile of the said Rattew, 
into the yard of which he was driven, and where he de- 
scended from the carriage (jobbed from Messrs. Fell and 
Briggs, of Charles Street), and stepping with a dignified 
air into the midst of a group, composed of (( mine host," 
Mrs. R., and a chambermaid, announced his intention of 
honouring the Swan, by occupying a sitting-room and bed- 
room there for a day or two. 

" Sorry, sir," said Rat, " God bless me, so I am not 
a bed or a room in the house but what is full. All en- 
gaged, sir, for Ascot races." 

f{ Dear heart !" said Mrs. Swan. 

" The deuce take it !" said Saville. 

" Here's a pretty commence," said Twigg. 

" This is very provoking," said Saville. 

fi Very, sir," sighed the servant. 

" It always happens so," said Rattew ; " for weeks and 
weeks we have not a soul near us, and then comes a crowd 
all in a lump. However, sir, walk in, we must try to get 
you a bed over the way, and as for a sitting-room, there's 
the assembly-room up stairs, with only one or two small 
parties, very genteel and agreeable, perhaps you would not 
mind joining them." 

The idea of mingling in a mixed society, huddled toge- 
ther in an assembly-room, to a being, whose mind absorbed 
by one idea alone, was seeking the deepest solitude, in order 
to indulge his thoughts and arrange his plans, was worse 
than death. But what was to be done there was, to be 
sure, another inn, but an inferior one; and that, in all 
probability, as full as the Swan. Calling, therefore, a little 
of the rationality of ordinary life to his assistance, Charles 
acceded to the double proposition of the landlord, and while 
the maid was sent in search of the promised bed, he pro- 
ceeded up stairs to the apartment in which the various par- 
ties, designated " genteel and agreeable," were placed. 

The company consisted of a city wine-merchant and his 



1 \ THE WIDOW. 



\his wife's sister (both ladies being natives of 

lEssex, as it should seem), and a lover of the 

\ They were surrounding a large table in the 

_..ne of the room, OH which were placed an extensive tea 

equipage, and a huge round of cold beef, an admixture of 

late dinner, well-timed tea, and early supper, with which 

all the practitioners showed themselves highly delighted. 

This knot of laughers was shortly joined by a " stout 
gentleman'* on crutches, who, it seemed, had selected that 
particular stage of his recovery from some serious accident 
to attend a race-course. He did not appear to have been 
previously acquainted with the party, but soon amalgamated 
with them ; a process which the more rapidly took place 
after the return of the wine-merchant, from an expedition 
which he had undertaken for the purpose of making, with 
his own hands, a quantity of hot punch, sufficient to fill a 
bowl of proportions equal to those of the round of beef be- 
fore noticed. 

These worthies were enjoying themselves in a manner 
perfectly dreadful to Saville ; they joked, they laughed, 
they discussed the court, the Maldon election, Sir Walter 
Scott's belief in ghosts, and what they should have for 
dinner the next day. At last it was agreed that each mem- 
ber of the party should choose a dish ; and to Saville's 
horror and amazement, who had in vain attempted to close 
his ears to the conversation in progress, each individual of 
the coterie chose a roasted duck stuffed with sage and 
onions ; the only variety arising in the selection of the stout 
gentleman with the crutches, who voted for goose with the 
same sauce. 

The boisterous rapture with which this announcement 
was received rang through the lofty apartment ; and, be- 
sides striking to the very heart of Saville, seemed most 
violently to discompose the serenity of two new associates, 
who, having previously secured stabling for their team, had 
abandoned their " coach and four " for a table at the " west 
end " of the room, where they were dining at ten, and giv- 
ing and taking information from a jockey belonging to one 
of them, who had cantered down on his pony from Ascot 
to meet them. 



THE WIDOW. 75 

The house began to fill ; arrivals accumulated. The 
wine-merchant's agreeable wife, and her pretty and viva- 
cious sister having retired, the wine-merchant, the lover, 
and the " stout gentleman/' began a fresh bowl of punch, 
and seemed to be setting in for the evening, when Twigg 
was announced as wishing to speak to his master. 

Every particle of intelligence, however minute, con- 
nected with the object of his visit to Chertsey, was of first- 
rate importance to Saville ; he flew to grant an audience to 
his active minister. 

" What is it ? " said Saville. 

" Miss and her Ma are to be at Ascot to-morrow, sir/' 
said Twigg. 

(( How d'ye know ? " 

" They get their horses from here," said Twigg ; t( and 
four are ordered to be at the Lodge at twelve." 

" Good you must get horses for me, then/' said Sa- 
ville "I'll go to." 

" We can't get any horses for our carriage, sir/' said 
Twigg, 1 " all bespoke. If I was you, sir, I would not 
go ; better not be seen let me alone for to-morrow." 

" What will you do ?" said Saville. 

<( Go to their house when they are' gone/' said Twigg, 
" see Miss J., and carry any message or note, or what not, 
that you may choose to send. If you meet Miss Harriet 
and the old one on the race-course, they'll all be in a regu- 
lar lantarum pufi^ and we shall all be beaten." 

" Faith," said Charles, not exactly comprehending the 
meaning of his excellent domestic's phraseology, but making 
a tolerably fair guess at its general bearing, " I think you 
are right there are, as you say, strong reasons for my not 
going." 

" Very, sir," said Twigg, " and one in particular, which 
beats all the rest, you have no means of getting there; 
no you keep here, sir, while I go skrimmiging about the 
premises, and I'll back my life to do some good ; I don't 
speak without book, sir." 

if It shall be so," said his master ; " you shall take the 
opportunity of the family's absence, and see how the land 
lies." 



76 THE WIDOW. 

tc Oil ! " said Twigg, with a most melancholy expression 
of countenance ; " but do you write, sir. I'm sure Miss 
Harriet would like to have a billy of yours, ever so small a 
one, sir." 

" Well," replied Charles, " there will be time enough for 
all that in the morning. Call me at nine, and in all pro- 
bability I shall have written a few lines just stating " 

" Oh ! never mind what it is, sir," said Twigg, whose 
delight at finding himself his master's confidant seemed to 
have no bounds, " so you do but say something to her, 
just to cheer up her spirits." 

(f We'll see," said Saville; convinced, by the manner in 
which Twigg descanted upon the subject, that Harriet's 
maid had given him some very strong grounds for believing 
in the strength of her mistress's attachment to him. 

Having dismissed his anxious retainer for the night, 
Saville proceeded to his bed-room on the opposite side of 
the street, to which he was ushered by the landlord him- 
self, who in crossing the way, inquired how his guest 
intended to travel to the course in the morning. 

" I am not going to the races," said Saville. 

" No, sir ! " said Rattew, with an expression of astonish- 
ment strong upon his countenance. 

" No, I have other business to occupy me," said Saville ; 
ff besides, even if I had not, as you have no horses dis- 
engaged, I have no means of getting thither." 

" Dear me, sir," said the civil Swan ; " I'm very sorry 
for that I dare say indeed I am sure, if you wished 
for a cast up to the heath, Sir Harry Amadou would be 
delighted to take you in his four-horse coach, which is 
standing in the yard, provided as how you'd no objection 
to go inside and keep the blinds up ; 'cause he can't bear 
to let people see he has got any inside passengers." 

" Thank you for your consideration," said Saville, " but 
I prefer staying away." 

" Perhaps you'd like to take a day's fishing till dinner- 
time, sir ? " said Rattew. " We can get you a comfortable 
punt, with a nice easy arm-chair in it, and my missis 
would lend you an umbrella, and we'd send down a basket 
with a few sandwiches and something to drink ; and under 



THE WIDOW. 77 

the bulrushes in the mud just hy the bridge,, you might sit 
as snug as a bug in a rug all day long,, and perhaps catch 
summut -afore you corned in at night." 

" No, I am obliged to you/' replied the distracted 
lover, not a little amused at the description of " sport 
made easy," after the Rattew fashion, Cf I prefer doing 
nothing." 

" Oh, well, sir, so long as you won't be dull." 

" Not I so good night I shall breakfast about ten, 
and " 

" When shall I send your servant to you ? " 

" I have already given him his orders," said Saville; 
and having so said, began to mount the minute staircase 
which led to his compact sleeping room, destined that 
night to be the scene of much meditation, many waking 
thoughts, and a few feverish dreams. 

Long before nine o'clock, Chertsey was all alive ; groups 
of pretty girls, dressed in their best, were seen either 
standing at doors, or peering from windows. Carriages of 
all descriptions were rolling through its lengthened street ; 
and Saville was anxiously waiting the arrival of Twigg, at 
least an hour before he made his appearance. It was not 
even then without a struggle, that Charles acceded to his 
servant's suggestion of staying from the heath. Inde- 
pendently of the almost certainty of his being near his 
Harriet, of seeing her smile, perhaps hearing the melody 
of her voice, he had a worldly feeling of inclination to go 
to the races. 

There are about Ascot a charm and interest created 
almost unconsciously, which give the annual meeting there 
a character totally distinct from that of any other races in 
the empire. Newmarket, as a place of business, of course 
transcends it; Epsom, for horses, and crowd, and bustle, 
far surpasses it ; but there are in all the accessories of 
Ascot, a grace and beauty which every where else are 
wanting. 

The being brought into contact with the sovereign upon 
a footing of equality has much to do with this feeling, as 
far as the multitude is concerned ; they see the king in the 
enjoyment of the amusement of which they are themselves 



78 THE WIDOW. 

partaking : there is a fellowship of feeling, a community 
of interest in this,, which is gratifying to those who have, 
perhaps, no other opportunity of beholding the monarch 
in his private circle, and in moments of unstately leisure. 
Add to the complacency which this association confers, 
the very circumstance of his approach with all his brilliant 
cortege, the well-appointed carriages, rolling noiselessly 
along the velvet turf, surrounded by innumerable gaily- 
dressed servants, mounted on the finest horses, the party 
itself combining the greatest and most distinguished of 
our fellow-subjects passing to its destination, amidst the 
cheers of the people ; add to this again, that the scene 
is adorned and beautified by the presence of thousands of 
the loveliest women in the world, who here promenade the 
course between the races ; and who shall wonder that even 
he, whose heart was fixed on one alone, should have felt 
some slight regret, at not mingling with that one, in an 
assembly so graced, so glorified. 

Still, however, with all these feelings full and strong 
upon him, Charles felt conscious that the advice of the 
sagacious Twigg was to be implicitly followed ; and 
although he sighed to relinquish so much gratification as 
his meeting with Harriet could not fail to produce, he did 
not flinch from his purpose of abandoning the expedition, 
which, however agreeable in its immediate results, might 
produce the eventual overthrow of all his future hopes. 

Twigg was charmed to find his master so firm in his 
resolution, and having again urged the subject of the billet 
doux, succeeded at length in procuring from Saville such a 
note as must require, and would, in all probability, obtain 
an answer; the procuring which answer Twigg clearly 
foresaw would compel him to make another visit to the 
lodge, and so obtain another interview with his dearly- 
beloved Miss Johnstone. This note announced Saville's 
proximity to Harriet, and his unconquerable desire to say 
farewell, and hear one last adieu from her own sweet lips, 
leaving to fate and Miss Johnstone the arrangement, 
if it were practicable, and his adored girl would consent to 
it of a melancholy yet painfully satisfactory interview, 
with which their acquaintance was to terminate. 



THE WIDOW. 79 

It was not without much consideration, and some diffi- 
culty, that Saville prevailed upon himself to take this step ; 
for although, as we have already stated, he was not yet 
sufficiently a man of the world to have adopted the doctrine 
of the agreeable and noble Mephistopheles, of i( never 
writing a letter to a woman, nor ever destroying one which 
he had received," he felt a repugnance to address her, who 
although dearer to him than life, was actually the affianced 
bride of another. He had fancied himself into the belief 
that she was wretched and miserable, and forced to commit 
Smithism against her will ; but perhaps, after all, he might 
be wrong. His amour propre certainly induced him to 
doubt whether a young lady of Harriet's standing and under- 
standing, for the bandage with which Cupid blinds the 
eyes of his votaries is long enough to tie over the ears, 
could possibly prefer Smith, at sixty-four, to himself, at 
twenty-five ; but then she had sunk very tranquilly into 
her captivity and wretchedness. She had Cl died and 
made no sign." If she really were so persecuted, if she 
really hated the elderly gentleman, and, above all, if she 
really loved the young one, why had she given no evidence 
of her feelings to her disconsolate swain ? She might have 
been too timid ; she might have considered it indelicate ; 
she might have fancied it undignified ; well, and if she 
had, it was evident that the present attempt to persuade 
her into the decisive step of an elopement would be fruit- 
less. Yet why ? the offer would come from her suitor, 
whom at the very moment in which he was debating the 
question, she might consider as having tamely and quietly 
abandoned her; to be sure she might; the letter in 
which, for the first time, he had openly declared himself, 
she had thanks to the prudence of her mother never 
received ; so that both of the ardent, dying lovers might, 
for all that any body knew to the contrary, have been 
all this time sympathising in the desire to meet to part 
no more either anxiously expecting the advance of the 
other. 

The letter was therefore despatched. Twigg departed ; 
Saville returned to the assembly-room, where more groups 
of fresh arrivals were breakfasting at different tables ; the 



80 THE WIDOW. 

wine-merchant's family, with which the stout gentleman 
with the crutches seemed to have formed an alliance offen- 
sive and defensive, now occupying the bay window next the 
street ; the head of the clan being extraordinarily loud in 
his praises of the excellence of Chertsey bread, and the 
beauty of the butcher's daughter. 

One by one, and two by two, did all these felicity- 
hunters take their departure : gigs, tilburies, coaches, and 
cabriolets, all were in motion ; and before noon Saville 
found himself the sole tenant of the hostelry, save those 
indeed whose occupations detained them under its roof. 
The day was a dreary waste to look forward to ; neither 
occupation nor amusement appeared upon the surface of 
the arid plain ; all was flat and dry as a desert. He 
walked unconscious alike of the distance and the objects 
which he passed, until he had paced from his inn to the 
bridge, in one direction, and to the Rhododendron Walk, 
at St. Anne's Hill, in the other. Still was Twigg absent ; 
he was, no doubt, occupying his time much more satisfac- 
torily in the society of Miss Johnstone ; the poor master 
was all alone, with ef nobody by but himself," but it was 
not until gentle force had been used by the fair demoiselle, 
in order to get him clear of the house before the family 
returned from the races, that Twigg made his bow, and 
.bent his way back towards Chertsey, where he arrived to 
report progress to Saville, just as the advanced guard of the 
cockneys was entering the town on their return from the 
sports. 

The intelligence Twigg brought was of first-rate im- 
portance ; and if detailed, as Saville was obliged to hear it, 
would occupy the greater part of this volume : it will 
luckily lose nothing by condensation. 

It appeared from the evidence of Johnstone, that Miss 
Franklin had, during her brief residence in that neighbour- 
hood, been extremely unwell ; that disagreements, hitherto 
unknown, had taken place between her and her mother ; 
that from the observations she had thought proper to make 
upon these very disagreeable differences to her maid, the 
maid fancied she had gathered enough of her young lady's 
inclinations on the subject to be assured that if Saville were 



THE WIDOW. 81 

to propose an elopement, he would find her " nothing 
loth ;" that the mine was all properly charged, and that 
nothing hut the contact of the match was wanting to ex- 
plode it ; nay, it appeared from what the smart and intelli- 
gent Soubrette hinted (coloured a little more highly, perhaps, 
by the anxious Twigg), that the only disheartening feeling 
which pervaded the young lady's bosom originated in the 
apprehension that the affection of her lover had undergone 
some serious deterioration, or that his zeal was not of a 
corresponding character with her own ; for, as the reader 
already knows, Mrs. Franklin had carefully concealed from 
her daughter any mention of the letter which Saville had 
attempted to send, he may easily anticipate that she never 
told her of her subsequent interview with him, or of the 
scrape into which he had gotten himself in the ardour of 
his pursuit of her. As the most minute particulars of the 
affairs of a family are always circumstantially related by 
servants one to another, there can be no doubt that the 
news of the interview between Saville and Mrs. Franklin 
would have reached Miss Johnstone, but for the circum- 
stance of the footman who was at the milliner's door having 
been discharged when his mistress left town the next day, 
and the coachman happening to be a " Job," who quitted 
his functions at the same period, resigning his temporary 
mistress's odious blue chariot to the care of posters, with 
which she hastened to Chertsey, her maid and her butler 
being the only permanent officers of her personal staff. 

There can be no question as to the effect produced upon 
Charles's mind by the information retailed to him through 
the medium of the sanguine Twigg, who interlarded his de- 
tail with frequent eulogies of Miss Harriet's beauty, and 
goodness, and mildness, and sorrow, and affection for his 
master, convinced in his own mind that his own Dulcinea 
would not for a moment hesitate to follow the example of 
her mistress, and upon such excellent authority in the way 
of precedent, unite herself to the squire of the knight, upon 
whom the fair lady herself was willing to bestow her fair 
hand. 

Saville saw but one course to pursue : it was true he had 
received no answer to his note ; could receive none until 



82 THE WIDOW. 

the next day ; and it would be the height of folly to make 
preparations for flight until sanctioned at least hy a gentle 
refusal on the part of his mistress ; and, moreover, it was not 
practicable at the moment, because post horses, so essential 
in such cases, could not be procured. But he might have 
spared himself all the pain which these reflections moment- 
arily caused him, inasmuch as there was a sequel to Twigg's 
history, which as yet he had not heard : the whole party, 
Franklins, Smith, the aunt, and all, were going the very 
next morning to the Isle of Wight for a month, previous 
to the celebration of the marriage between the young folks. 

This was conclusive; and Saville's anger with his man, 
for not having come to this deciding incident in the history 
at first, had nearly proved fatal to his further connection 
with Twigg ; who, however, excused himself upon the plea 
of keeping up the interest, and expressing his conviction, 
that if his master had heard of their approaching departure, 
in the first instance, he would not have listened patiently to 
the developement of Miss Franklin's true love, evidence of 
which he believed- himself most satisfactorily to have ad- 
duced. 

Twigg, however, contrived to redeem himself in t his 
master's good opinion, by making him understand that he 
had arranged to see Miss Johnstone early in the morning 
before the departure of the family, in order to receive from 
her whatever answer, if any, her young mistress might 
choose to send. This pacified Saville, who, however, de- 
claring himself incapable of enduring another evening in 
the assembly-room, and another morning in the street, 
resolved to put himself into the stage-coach and return to 
town, where Twigg was to join him ; Rattew undertaking 
to send back his carriage to the coach-maker's, the^moment 
he had a pair of horses disengaged. Thus the first part of 
the expedition might have been considered a failure, if he 
had not anticipated such a reply from Miss Franklin as 
might, perhaps, have the effect of continuing the action, 
only changing the venue. 

Under this arrangement Saville reached his lodgings in 
London the same evening, at which Twigg was to arrive 
the following afternoon. 



THE WIDOW. 83 



CHAPTER VII. 

NOTHING is read by a Protestant, es^Scially a Protestant 
woman, with greater interest than the details connected 
with the ceremony of taking the veil. Pratt, an author of 
great merit in his day, but now nearly forgotten, was one 
of the earliest, if not the first, who, mingling fact with 
fiction, gave an account of the proceedings at one of these 
European suttees. Many other writers have followed in 
the same track, and none of them have failed to attract and 
engage the attention of the reader. No wonder ; there is 
in the nature of the ceremony, in its details, in the occa- 
sion, in the consequences, something seriously touching ; 
the lengthened processions moving slowly along the dimly- 
lighted aisles, the deep-toned organ, the swelling choir, the 
wafted incense, the weeping friends, the sympathising 
spectators, all these accessories are sure to effect the object 
for which they are thus combined. 

If such an immolation, then, be really matter of stirring 
interest, something better than indifference may be claimed 
for poor Harriet Franklin ; true it is, that she was not des- 
tined to crop her hair, and, casting away her jewels with 
disdain, assume a veil ; nor was she to be buried in a cell, 
with an iron bedstead and one chair, by way of furniture ; 
nor was she absolutely to renounce the society of all her 
early friends and acquaintance ; but it is equally true that 
she was about to be married to an elderly gentleman in 
despite of her feelings and inclinations, and give up one, 
who, as it appeared, was more to her than a crowd of 
worldly associates, 

Those, and there are some, but in these days very few, 
who have not had the advantage of " foreign travel," and 
who have formed their notions of a conventual life upon 
what they have seen in the nunneries of Essex, Middlesex, 
or Warwickshire, can form but a very faint opinion of the 
continental establishments of a similar nature. In England, 
a few strange- looking old bodies in black gowns, with a 
plump confessor, " bien poudre" smart, smug, and smirk- 
ing, huddled round the outside edge of a low-roofed par- 
G 2 



84> THE WIDOW. 

lour, with no high walls to bound their view, and no rigid 
ordinances to restrain their harmless conversation, look all 
mighty snug and comfortable; but far different is the 
position of the clostty immured girl, who, compelled by the 
imperious commands of a bigoted parent, is doomed to 
eternal solitude and sorrow. It was to this last victim 
that poor Harriet bore the strongest resemblance ; nor was 
the positive command of her mother to marry Smith less 
cruel perhaps, taking all things into consideration, it was 
more so than the decree which would consign the inno- 
cent novice to her premature grave. 

Oh ! it was sad to see the once lively, laughing Harriet, 
reduced, in so short a space of time, to melancholy and 
mourning, her rosy cheeks blanched and her bright eyes 
dim ; arid to watch the innocent attentions of her doting 
suitor, and listen to his observations and remarks. The 
man had from his youth been ignorant of all things, save 
in the particular of expertness in book-keeping by " double 
entry," and money-gathering by any entry through which 
it would come. Like Nelson on his quarter-deck, he was 
mighty in his counting-house, but, out of that sphere of 
action, he possessed every quality to justify the nickname 
which we' have already mentioned was bestowed upon him, 
of Twaddle Smith. 

He had, however, a fine house in a fine street, and he 
had fine pictures, for Segueir honoured him with his 
notice. He had a splendid library, for what is a merchant 
without his books? He had plate, and carriages, and 
horses, and wines ; and, although on the stock-exchange, 
which is represented to the uninitiated as the mart of fun 
as well as of funds, he had been be- twaddled by general 
consent, yet in society, to which his golden key was as 
sure a passport as that of an Imperial chamberlain, he was 
called " a good creature" " a well meaning, kind-hearted 
man," and, above all, (f so very quiet and gentlemanly." 
He had, moreover, besides his actual wealth, another re- 
commendation to the men of certain sets in which he 
mingled ; he was remarkably fond of whist played par- 
ticularly ill backed himself highly and always paid his 
bets ({ prompt." 



THE WIDOW. 85 

" My dear Harriet," said Mrs. Franklin to her daughter, 
only a day or two before the Ascot meeting, " I must 
insist upon your shaking off this sort of apathetic indif- 
ference to every thing around you, which you either feel 
or affect ; what must Mr. Smith think of your gravity, and 
your sighs, and even tears, which", if he is not as blind as 
a beetle, he must occasionally see ? " 

" Can I command my feelings ? " said her daughter. 
" I have in all things obeyed you ; have met your wishes 
in direct opposition to my own. It is not in my power 
entirely to check the natural impulses of my heart." 

" You ought to be the happiest girl in England." 

et Would I could think so," said Harriet. 

" You do not think so," replied her mother, " because 
you have established some romantic ideas in your mind, 
which the most favourable events could never realise. 
You have already rejected a viscount and a baronet, because 
you did not like them, and they did not suit " 

" And surely, mamma," said Miss Franklin, interrupt- 
ing her voluble and somewhat irritated parent, " there 
could have been no better reason, even were the fact as 
you have set it down. That I most certainly should not 
have accepted either Lord Pertwood or Sir Harry Fitch, is 
most true, supposing they had given me the opportunity of 
refusing them,, but they never did me the honour of making 
me any offer that I heard of." 

" Offer ! " said Mrs. Franklin, " of course not ; why 
should men propose with the certainty of being rejected ? 
You took the greatest possible pains to display your senti- 
ments towards both of them." 

" I am not aware of that," said Harriet. 

" They were," answered her mother. " A lover, how- 
ever blind to every thing else, is peculiarly sensitive as to 
the manner of the lady to whom he is paying his addresses ; 
the least taunt a look a word " 

" Well, then," said Harriet, smiling, " if both these 

lovers of mine, as you call them, were driven away by my 

mariner, and I am unconscious of having done any thing 

which ought to displease them, it only proves the sin- 

G 3 



86 THE WIDOW. 

cerity of my disposition, and the singleness of my cha- 
racter." 

" Conscious, Harriet \" exclaimed Mrs. Franklin ; " what 
earthly object had you in making a fool of young Saville, 
by devoting yourself to his conversation when they were 
present, listening to his singing, and poring over his 
drawings ? You never could have had any serious view 
in such hehaviour, unless to declare, in the most con- 
vincing manner, not only your indifference towards them, 
but your partiality for him." 

" That, again," said Harriet, colouring a little, " proves 
my sincerity. It never struck me that I showed any 
special favour, or paid any particular attention to Mr. 
Saville. 1 dare say I did, if it appeared so to you, because 
I really felt the greatest pleasure in his society. I 
admired his talents, and I enjoyed his conversation ; yet I 
think you must have been more observant of my par- 
tialities than he was; for, like the viscount and the 
baronet, whom you represent me to have chasseed for his 
sake, Mr. Saville made good his retreat upon the approach 
of a rival, and like them spared me or rather you the 
pain of a refusal." 

t( Me ! my dear child," said the mother, feeling herself 
look confused and agitated by the consciousness that Saville 
had actually made a declaration and proposal, which she 
had intercepted and returned. " Me ! not only me but 
you ; surely, however pleasant Mr. Saville may be as a 
companion or an acquaintance, he would be any thing but 
desirable as a connection. These talking, and drawing, 
and singing men are all mighty well in society, but a 
woman, in settling for life, wants something more than a 
pun, a pencil, and a piano-forte." 

<( And yet," said Harriet, shaking her head, and affect- 
ing to look judicially grave at her mother, " you yes, 
you, my dear mother, married for love yourself, in de- 
fiance of my excellent and exemplary grandfather and 
grandmother." 

" Ah ! " answered Mrs. Franklin, rather staggered by 
the attack, " ah ! that's quite another thing where there 
is a powerful feeling of attachment and so I -" 



THE WIDOW. 87 

tf Spare yourself, my dear mother/' said Harriet ; ff I 
presume neither to arraign your conduct,, nor justify my 
own rebellion by your example. Whatever my feelings 
were, they are conquered ; whatever my scruples, they are 
overcome; but they will still occasionally flash into my 
mind ; and when the recollection of other days, and of the 
prospects which I thought those days presaged, occur, 
some few natural tears will fall, but they shall be dried. 
All that is wanting to reconcile me to what I know you 
think best for me, is time. The bitterest afflictions are 
conquered by time ; and it will be hard if I, who am 
about to form a connection which, you tell me, is the envy 
of all my unmarried acquaintance, am not able to over- 
come regrets which I ought now most certainly not to 
cherish, and which, perhaps, after all, have been erro- 
neously excited." 

The truth is, that the grief and sorrow of Harriet were 
of a two-fold character : giving up Saville was one cause 
of wretchedness ; marrying Smith was another and a 
greater one ; but the most poignant of all was the belief 
that Charles had deceived, and then deserted her. He cer- 
tainly, perhaps as unconsciously as herself, had taught her 
to fancy that he loved ; and yet, from the instant that so 
questionable a rival as Smith appeared, he had withdrawn, 
without one effort to rescue her from that respectable 
dragon, and without having given her the option of re- 
fusing or accepting him. She little thought what Saville's 
sufferings had been ; she could not guess at the cruel du- 
plicity of her mother ; she attributed his silence and ab- 
sence either to neglect, or perhaps disgust, excited by what, 
if he thought at all about her, he must have considered her 
ready acceptance of her now intended husband. 

She had accepted him ; but it was a conditional accept- 
ance : she had demanded time before she surrendered ; 
that time elapsed, and no Saville appeared. The election 
was to be made ; he still kept away ; and, at the very 
moment when his efforts should have been the most ener- 
getic, he came not wrote not as she thought ; and, ac- 
tuated by the influence of her elderly lover, and the autho- 
rity of her anxious parent, she arrived at the conclusion 



88 THE WIDOW. 

which was eternally to separate her from the only man 
who had ever excited an interest or affection in her heart. 

The tete-a-tete of Mrs. Franklin and her daughter was 
broken up by the arrival of Mr. Smith, who, in spite of all 
the dim-sightedness of age, occasionally caught a glimpse 
or two of his unpopularity in the family. To this he was 
magnanimously callous ; it was his will and pleasure to 
have a young and handsome wife, and Harriet's mother 
was evidently disposed to gratify his inclination that way ; 
upon him, therefore, any looks or sighs, or tears, even of 
his intended, however much they might convince him of 
her real feelings towards him, produced but little effect ; 
he looked upon the whole affair as a transaction in which, 
for valuable considerations on either side, a bargain had 
been struck, and he went on making preparations for the 
marriage ceremony as he would for any other ordinary 
event. 

The honeymoon, and five or six moons more, as he pro- 
posed, were to be passed in continental travelling. He had 
hitherto visited only France and Italy ; and somebody had 
suggested that an extended excursion through Europe 
alone was wanting to complete his education ; he therefore 
determined to see every thing that the Continent could 
show, as fast as he possibly could ; and what would be 
pleasanter than pursuing his gratifying researches in the 
society of a young and accomplished wife. Harriet ob- 
jected to nothing that was proposed, and even if she had 
made a choice, the excursion was rather preferable to re- 
maining in the same scenes and the same society which she 
had enjoyed before her marriage. To him, such a com- 
panion was every thing ; she spoke two or three of the con- 
tinental languages fluently, of which he himself had not 
the slightest knowledge ; these, in his capacity of guardian, 
he had made a point of her acquiring, and now felt the 
importance of reaping the harvest which himself had sown. 

Little amusement and less information would be afforded 
to the reader by the details of conversations such as those 
in which the family party indulged during the sojourn at 
Chertsey. Mr. Smith had grown particularly good-tem- 
pered within the last few days, in consequence of having 






THE WIDOW. 89 

let his house in London for six months, at a most advan- 
tageous rate. It would just suit for the time they were to 
be absent ; and besides pocketing five-and-twenty guineas 
a W eek which to a man of his extensive wealth was a 
matter of infinitely greater interest than it would have 
been to the less opulent Mrs. Franklin,, or any body of her 
grade the rooms would be kept aired, and the furniture 
in order till their return, and he might disband his domes- 
tic establishment, retaining only his own man, who, with 
an ambi- dexterity highly valuable to an economist of 
Mr. Smith's disposition, performed the double character of 
valet and butler. 

Smith always declared that more fortunes were saved 
than made ; and although, perhaps, he had not, like some 
of his wealthy contemporaries, the prospect of the parish 
poor-house constantly before his eyes, he certainly ap- 
peared to take the most anxious precautions to avoid the 
possibility of outliving his income. Indeed, the evidences 
of his parsimonious character, which were discernible from 
the proceedings of the last fortnight of their acquaintance, 
had not tended to increase the affection of Harriet for her 
betrothed, however much they might have added to her 
respect for his prudence and forethought. 

In this state were affairs when Harriet returned from 
Ascot Heath, tired and jaded, and worried, and even dis- 
appointed disappointed too, because, although she had 
gazed and looked, and looked and gazed in every direction, 
she had not seen Charles Saville ; having strangely, and 
even improperly, as her maiden aunt would have thought, 
anticipated that he would be there. Yet why ? if he 
knew where she was, he certainly would not seek that 
neighbourhood, after having so evidently relinquished all 
intention of bringing their ill-fated acquaintance to a happy 
conclusion ; and if he knew nothing about her present resi- 
dence, which was most probable, why should he visit 
Ascot? Why should he not? all the world went to 
Ascot ; why not Charles Saville ? All these questions 
Harriet had asked herself, and had answered them all, so 
as at the conclusion of the colloquy to have wound herself 
up into a hope that he might be there, and therefore, as 



90 THE WIDOW. 

the reader must be told, coute qui coute, she came back 
disappointed that he was not. 

This was not the sort of feeling which should have ac- 
tuated a young lady within a month of her marriage to 
another man ; but whether it were or were not, the reader 
may easily anticipate how a note from the regretted ob- 
ject which had excited it was received, and how awfully 
agreeable to the young bride elect was the sight of the 
hand-writing of the rejected lover, just at the moment of 
her enlightenment upon the subject of his feeling towards 
her, with the whole history of which she was at this junc- 
ture favoured by her maid. That she had now, for the 
first time, discovered that he had been rejected, diminished 
neither the pain which she derived from the intelligence, 
nor the vexation it might almost be called anger which 
was excited in her breast by the exposure of her mother's 
mistaken duplicity, as related to the suppression of his de- 
claration and proposal. 

Harriet, in the first instance, received Saville's billet 
from the all-accomplished Miss Johnstone, without know- 
ing what it was, or whence it came ; the experienced sou- 
brette was too great an artist in her particular line, and 
understood her metier much too well to subject the question 
of opening a letter from Mr. Saville to Miss Franklin's dis- 
cussion ; she did not humanely warn her young lady of 
the trap that was set for her ; and she knew enough of 
her sex to be quite assured that if her principle were once 
compromised, and the seal once broken, the letter would 
be read. It is necessary that the reader should be put into 
possession of this fact, in order that my heroine should be 
exempt from the reproach which many of the elderly 
Dianas of society would, no doubt, be inclined to cast upon 
her, for her want of delicacy or, what they talk about 
quite as much, and think about, perhaps, a little more, 
her want of dignity, in opening a note addressed to her by 
a faithless lover, as she supposed Charles to be ; or indeed 
a lover of any sort, while she was actually under an en- 
gagement, and on . the eve of bestowing herself upon 
another. 

" Is it possible ! " said Harriet, still holding the note 



THE WIDOW. 91 

in her trembling hand, her heart palpitating rapidly, and 
her eyes filling with tears. " Can my mother have be- 
trayed me so cruelly ? Had the letter of which he speaks 
ever reached me, although it might have made no serious 
alteration in the resolution to which I came, of acting 
according to my mother's wishes, I should, at least, have 
had the merit of making a sacrifice to duty ; and I should 
have done so with comparative happiness, if I had known 
that I had not lost the esteem of so dear a friend as 
Charles. But this I cannot bear ! to be cheated into obe- 
dience, when I was ready to submit to all she wished ; to 
be blinded, duped, and even taught, carefully taught, to 
banish Charles from my memory, not upon principle, but 
upon the low and petty feeling of retaliation because he 
had forgotten me, is more than even I can endure." 

" Why," added she, addressing her maid, who stood 
near at hand, to watch the working of the subtle poison 
which she had administered, f: why did I not know this 
before ? why do I know it now ? " 

" Why, ma'am," said Johnstone, " I'm sure I never 
had the least suspicion of Mr. Saville's intentions, only 
what I could pick up from Mr. Twigg; and I'm sure, if 
you'll believe me, I thought I felt my heart up in my 
mouth when I saw him here this morning." 

" I certainly should like to see Mr. Saville," said Har- 
riet, "" if it were only for five minutes, to exculpate myself 
from the imputation of heartlessness, of which he must so 
naturally consider me guilty." 

" Why, yes, Miss," said Johnstone, " that's very na- 
tural ; but don't yoft think he deserves something more 
than a mere farewell ? '' 

" How do you mean ? " said Harriet. 

"Why, Miss," replied Johnstone, " I mean nothing 
particular only that I don't think if / were ydu I should 
have the heart to send him away." 

" I don't comprehend," said the young lady, " I don't 
in the least comprehend what you would do. To-morrow- 
morning we leave this for the Isle of Wight, and this day 
month is fixed for my marriage." 

" Why, certainly, Miss," said Johnstone, " as to the 



92 THE WIDOW. 

Isle of "Wight, and the journey to-morrow, there is no 
getting off those ; but for the marriage, I am sure if I had 
such a sweetheart as Mr. Saville, ready to fly to my arms, 
I could not make up my mind to give him up for such an 
old " 

" Pray be quiet, Johnstone," interrupted her young 
lady, " recollect that I have made up my mind." 

" But why, Miss ? " said the maid. " You have made 
up your mind to marry Mr. Smith, half out of spite, be- 
cause you thought Mr. Saville had behaved ungenteelly ; 
and now here, poor dear gentleman, he tells you all the 
truth. I am sure, if I were you, I would take my mind 
to pieces again, as I had made it up, and show them the 
difference." 

" How ? " 

" How?" said Johnstone, "leave me alone for settling 
that ; why, by giving the slip, and running away." 

" Good heavens ! what a suggestion ! " said Harriet 
not, however, in so angry a tone as some people might 
have expected " What could have put such a thing into 
your head ? " 

" Why, Miss, I believe," replied Johnstone, f< it was 
your telling me that your Mamma ran away with her first 
husband, and " 

fc Ay yes," said Harriet, " so she did." 

" And to avoid a match she disliked, I think you said." 

True but then " 

" What, Miss ? 

fc Nobody can j^be more convinced of the rashness, and 
indelicacy, and imprudence of such an act, than Mamma 
herself." 

" Ay," said Johnstone, " it is part of her duty as a 
parent to say so, but don't the best books tell us that 
practice is before precept, and better than preaching ; 
she would not be seriously angry for long." 

" Her case, if you mean that," said Harriet, " was to- 
tally different from mine. But why do I permit myself 
to entertain such a subject for a moment? " 

" Because you cannot help it, Miss." 

" But I will help it, Johnstone ; am I not pledged ? " 



THE WIDOW. Q3 

tf If it is merely a question of time, Miss," said John- 
stone, " I don't think it signifies the value of an old gown. 
Do you love Mr. Smith ? " 

" No," said Harriet, sharply, " not as I ought." 

" Why marry him ? " 

" My mother wishes it desires it orders it and 
I have consented." 

" Her mother wished her to marry a man she did not 
love ; and desired it and ordered it and what did she 
do ?" said Johnstone, "jumped out of a one pair of stairs 
window, and ran away with the man she did love." 

ee As I shall most assuredly not do/' said Harriet ; 
" my word is given, my faith is plighted." 

e< And when you gave your word and plighted your 
faith," said Johnstone ; " did you or did you not believe 
that Mr. Saville had given you up ? " 

Harriet sighed. 

" And who made you' think so, Miss, but your Ma ? " 
continued the maid. " She it was that took Mr. Saville's 
offer of his hand and heart, and crumpled it up and poked 
it into her bag, and never said a word about it to you 
good, bad, or indifferent." 

(t That is true," said Harriet. 

" Well, then, I am sure," said Johnstone, " that one 
single thing puts an end to all obligations from you to 
your Ma. What I says is this trust me, and I'll never 
deceive you play me false, and I '11 show you 1 am as 
good as my neighbour at the game." 

" I conclude my mother thought it best to conceal the 
offer from me," said Harriet. 

(f Well, then, Miss, if she thought it best to conceal the 
offer from you, it shows she must know you don't like the 
old fogey." 

" Johnstone," said Miss Franklin, " do you recollect 
of whom you speak ? " 

" I do, Miss ; of a very worthy old gentleman, with a 
very good fortune, of which he is extremely fond and vain ; 
but no more fit for your husband " 

" Come," said Harriet, "end these remarks; even if 
I could properly or correctly listen to such language, I 



94" THE WIDOW. 

have no time : I am waited for in the drawing-room, so 
tell me at once, is Mr. Saville' s servant gone ? " 

" He is, but he will be here again before any body is 
stirring in the morning. I have promised your answer." 

" I can send no answer," said Harriet. " What could 
I say?" 

{( Very little will do of that, I am quite sure," said 
Johnstone ; ft do not forbid him to hope let him see you 
once." 

" But even if I did wish to see him," said Harriet, 
thoughtfully, " I could not." 

The moment Harriet uttered these words, the acute 
Johnstone felt that she had triumphed; the main objection 
was overcome. The seeing or not seeing him ceased now 
to be a matter of principle, and had resolved itself into a 
question of time, and which seemed still more difficult 
opportunity. 

" Oh ! Miss/' said Johnstone, " I'll answer for your 
being able to see Mr. Saville ; we are to be a month at the 
Isle of Wight where is the difficulty ? " 

" No/' said Harriet ; " I dare say the difficulty might 
be overcome but no, no it is impossible there 
would be such duplicity in it. What on earth should I 
do if my mother were to speak of him, or allude to him, 
and I felt conscious that I had seen him since she had ?" 

" If things turn out as I hope, Miss," said Johnstone, 
" I don't think you would see much of your Ma after you 
had seen Mr. Saville, until you appeared before her with 
him as your husband." 

t( Oh ! ridiculous," said Miss Franklin ; " as if it were 
possible to break off with Mr. Smith, even if I desired it ; 
every thing is prepared for the marriage and for our jour- 
ney afterwards ; my clothes and jewels are all ordered and 
nearly ready." 

" What signifies, Miss?" said Johnstone; " Mr. Smith 
is too good a manager to lose by that ; besides, if he had 
the generosity of a gentleman, when he found you had 
married the man of your choice, he would make you a 
present of all the wedding- clothes ; and as for the jewels 



THE WIDOW. 95 

pooh what is the value of a long suit of diamonds in 
a game where hearts are trumps ? " 

" Rely upon it, Johnstone," said Harriet, " that I am 
not actuated by any great envy of wealth in this con- 
nection ; they did not catch me as they do birds, by daz- 
zling. I can see plainly and clearly, and I know I shall 
be miserable for the rest of my life, as well as any of the 
indifferent lookers on ; but my pride was hurt by Charles's 
apparent negligence; his silence left me no defence for 
what I could not have considered any thing short of dis- 
obedience j and mingled duty and resentment, I am 
ashamed to say, led me to consent." 

" Well then, Miss," said Johnstone, " since your Ma 
has so bitterly deceived you, you should let resentment 
lead you to fulfil your first intention, and reward the ill- 
used, constant Mr. Saville with your hand." 

" I tell you it is nonsense to talk of such a thing," said 
Harriet ; ll the idea of running away with one lover a 
month before my proposed marriage to another ! " 

" Better by half do that, Miss," said Johnstone, " than 
run away a month after, which I'm sure you'll just be 

ready to do if you " 

Here a knocking at the dressing-room door attracted 
Miss Johnstone's attention ; it proved to be the summons 
of the domestic black-rod to coffee, which was announced 
to be ready ; and Harriet hurried down stairs, not, how- 
ever, without promising Johnstone that she should have 
some decisive answer for the enterprising Twigg on his 
arrival in the morning. 

Johnstone, who was an adept in what in better society 
is called finesse, but who, spite of all her overstrained edu- 
cation and fine language, got credit for nothing better than 
cunning, congratulated herself, not without reason, upon 
the tone she had assumed, and the line she had adopted, in 
pleading the cause of Saville with her young lady. She 
found her unassailable where mere self-gratification, at the 
expense either of her " dignity," or her filial duty, was the 
object ; these she had resolved to support and maintain, 
even to the annihilation of all her best and dearest hopes 



yO THE WIDOW. 

of future happiness ; but the moment the pleader made 
her sensible that she had been cheated into compliance with 
her mother's wishes by a trick, by the suppression of a 
confidential communication, the case was altered : not only 
did she then feel that she had been treated like a child, and 
duped and trifled with, but she recalled to her mind all 
that she imagined Charles must have felt regarding her 
apparent contemptuous neglect of him; for she was of 
course not aware that her mother had herself confessed to 
him her interception of his letter, and the concealment of 
its contents. Johnstone, in truth, had piqued her 
wounded her pride, and excited a spirit, which, during the 
wakeful restlessness of the night, prompted her not to 
write to Saville, but to do what, in fact, if less indelicate, 
was assuredly more dangerous permit her maid to enter 
into such a negociation with his man, as might produce an 
interview between them previous to her marriage,, in which 
she might vindicate her own conduct, and bid farewell 
for ever to a being, of whose importance to her happiness 
she had no just idea until she had been deprived of his 
society. 

The delegation of power to weak or vulgar minds is at 
all times perilous and imprudent. The necessities of so- 
ciety, which invest the tax-gatherer or the toll-taker with 
personal authority, are great and flagrant evils, the obvious 
results of which are impertinence of manner, coarseness of 
language, and an unqualified disposition to tyrannise. It is 
recorded somewhere, that an eminent brewer, now no more, 
finding himself universally despised in all companies with 
which he mingled, his facts doubted, his arguments re- 
futed, his opinions ridiculed, and his capacity questioned, 
enjoyed a pleasurable counterpoise for the miseries of his 
insignificance, in walking forth into the yard of his brew- 
house, and kicking the pigs that were feeding on the 
grains. It was a triumph to his little mind to tyrannise 
over something that had breath and life. Harriet, when 
she appointed Johnstone her minister plenipotentiary and 
extraordinary extraordinary indeed ! did not foresee the 
vast accumulation of power which she surrendered by so 
doing. That her scruples about writing were just and 



THE WIDOW. 97 

proper, no one can for a moment doubt ; but it is question- 
able whether the justice and propriety of her resolutions 
upon that point were not altogether compromised by the 
equivocal course she had actually chosen to adopt. The qua- 
lification of the sin of writing by the weakness of a personal 
communication, is not very unlike the contemptible dis- 
tinction made by a well-known puritanical parson, between 
the delicacy of a young lady who sang with her back to 
the company, and the impropriety of her who did the 
same thing, facing it. 

So it was, however ; and there could be little doubt that 
in the matinal meeting between Twigg and the fair object 
of all his hopes and anxieties, enough was said by the 
amiable diplomats, to justify the conclusions at which her 
companion very speedily arrived. 

The reader may easily picture to himself the feverish 
state of anxiety in which Charles Saville remained in 
London, until the arrival of his minister, by whose hand 
he expected such important despatches. He lived, how- 
ever, to be disappointed in that particular, but gratified by 
the appearance of the faithful Twigg, who reached town 
just about the period at which the Isle of Wight travellers 
were eating their luncheon, at the sign of many quarter- 
ings, at Murrell Green. 

" Well ! " exclaimed Saville, as he entered the room, 
" what answer ? " 

" None, sir," said Twigg. 

"Not a line?" 

ff Not a scratch." 

" Are they gone ? " 

" Gone, sir," said Twigg. 

16 And no answer to my note ? " 

" No; miss would not write, sir," said Twigg. 

" That's strange .'" said Saville. 

" Very, sir," said Twigg ; " I wish you had been there 
this morning, instead of here." 

" Why ? " 

tf Because Miss Franklin would have seen you, sir." 

" How do you know ? " 

" She said so." 



98 THE WIDOW. 

" That/' said Saville, " is tolerably good authority." 

t{ Very, sir." 

" Did you see her ? " 

tf No," said Twigg ; (e but Miss Johnstone told me all 
about it that her young lady would not write ; she said 
she could not write that I s'pose is her way of excusing 
herself she said she could not write, but if " 

" What?" 

" If you choose to go down quietly to Cowes, where 
they are to stay, she will endeavour to see you, and bid 
you good-bye." 

" And is that all ? " said Saville ; " meet to part 
that's sad work." 

<c Very, sir," said Twigg ; " but I have a notion that if 
you mind your P's and Q's, as I mean to mind mine with 
Miss J. that is, with your permission, sir you need 
not part at all. I think, from all I know, that the day is 
your own ; and that even now she would take a long run 
to get away from Smith." 

" What ! at the eleventh hour ? " said Saville. 

" Why/' replied Twigg, " we have not come to sich 
close calcilations as to fix the hour yet, but very nigh it, 
sir. She'll go." 

" Do you really believe so ? " said Saville. 

" I do, sir," said the servant, <( and she has said as 
much. You can't expect a horse to come to corn without 
shaking the sieve a bit ; and I reckon she may want a bit 
of pressing ; or rather I should say encouraging she 
can't bear the old one, and is dying for love of you." 

" Is this the opinion of Miss Johnstone ? " said Sa- 
ville. 

" She knows it, sir ; she is her considerate in the whole 
.affair." 

" Confederate ? " 

" Yes, sir, all the same, that's it," said Twigg ; " and 
she commissioned her to commission me to make the same 
.known to you in any way I thought most properest." 

" That is good news, Twigg." 

"Very, sir," replied Twigg; ts and so I took the 
liberty of meeting Miss Johnstone half-way in the matter 



THE WIDOW. 99 

of arrangements ; for as Miss Franklin had appointed her 
minister penitentiary on one side, I thought it was right 
for me to appoint myself minister penitentiary on the 
other." 

" You seem to have a very just idea, Twigg," said 
Saville, " of the dignity of your principal ; I suppose 
you picked up this quality in the service of your late 
master ? " 

" I got a smattering there, sir," said Twigg, looking 
rather shy ; " one ought, you know, sir, to live and learn ; 
and no better school, of course, than a cabinet minister's 
stable. I assure you, sir, though I say it, my lord, more than 
once, when he's been a looking at the horses, afore he went 
down to Downing Street, has asked me what I thought of 
things in Portugal, and Turkey, and them sort of outlandish 
places, and regular as could be I've noticed in the news- 
papers that he did whatsumever I advised." 

" I delight in your adroitness go on." 

" So I fixed, sir," said Twigg, " that we should go 
down upon the sly to Portsmouth, in two or three days ; 
put ourselves up at the Queebec Hotel, where nobody will 
see us ; pop over in the Ryde steamer in the afternoon, 
and so reach Cowes in the dusk. The time Miss will 
meet you will be when she goes out in the morning as if 
she was going to bathe, and takes Johnstone along with 
her. Miss J. and I have settled where she is to turn off 
up the hill towards Northwood, and, for that morning, 
take a stroll instead of a dip. You will have half an 
hour for conversation ; and I and Miss J. will play pro- 
priety, and, like good seconds, follow the example of our 
principals." 

" The notion is good," said Saville, " arid practicable." 

cc Very, sir/' said Twigg ; " I know every inch of my 
ground, and I'll answer for the ease, safety, and security 
of the meeting the rest I must leave to you." 

" You have done wonders, Twigg," said Saville, <e and 
when shall we go ? " 

(f Oh, the sooner the better, sir," said Twigg, " I can- 
not bear to think of the poor young lady's sufferings under 
the courtship of that old fogey, as Miss J. calls him : 



100 THE WIDOW. 

I saw him out on one of the gravel walks this very morn- 
ing, when he little thought who was so near him, trying 
all he could to make himself insinivating, sir. It's quite 
shocking to look at." 

" It is an intricate web in which she has got entangled/' 
said Saville. 

" Very," said Twigg ; " and to keep up the meteor, as 
my lord used to say, old Smith is the spider what paws 
and mumbles her, just like an innocent fly and I'm sure 
she'll die of him, just like the fly, if we don't rescue her." 

" But, Twigg," said Saville, " I see no encouragement 
to hope for more than this transient meeting ; there is no 
hint no allusion nothing prospective as to her going 
off." 

" Never you mind, sir," said Twigg ; " you can't ex- 
pect a young lady to jump down your throat, if you won't 
open your mouth. She's in love with you, and hates 
Smith, that's one good thing; she's unhappy where she 
is, and would be happy with you, that's another good 
thing ; but the best thing of all is, that she is as savage 
as can be with her Ma, as she calls her ; and Miss J. 
has put it into her head that turn-about is all fair play, 
and that as Ma cheated her, she may cheat Ma, and so 
play tit for tat without committing the slightest impro- 
priety." 

e< It matters little, as far as our visit is concerned," said 
Saville, " what may be our ulterior proceeding ; we will 
not lose a moment in preparing for our expedition to 
Portsmouth. How are we to go ? " 

" Per Rocket, sir," said Twigg; " < Faulkner's four' 
that's the surest way steady pace uphill and down 
lull, and round the Devil's Punch Bowl all at the same 
pat." 

"Well, all the arrangements I leave to you; and the 
day after to-morrow we go." 

" Ay, ay, sir," said Twigg ; c< rely upon me ; you 
have not another word to say, nor another order to give till 
'/ou find yourself in the bow -window of the Queebec." 

" Why there?" 

" Close to the packets, and away from every thing else, 



THE WIDOW. 101 

sir," said Twigg ; " and if we should have to sleep there, 
you won't mind for one night, whether the beds are " 

" Oh, not I," said Saville, " you have your reasons, 
no doubt they are good, so do exactly as you please." 

With these extensive instructions, Twigg, who saw in 
the approaching elopement of Harriet Franklin with his 
master, the precedent and gratification of his own union 
with " Miss J.," departed to make the requisite prepa- 
rations for the start, leaving Charles overwhelmed by a 
multitude of conflicting hopes and fears, doubts and dis- 
tresses. 

Amongst the gloomy feelings which afflicted him, few 
were more remorseful than those excited by the recollection 
of the base injustice of which he had been guilty towards 
the character and attributes of his adored Harriet, in fan- 
cying it possible even in the haste and blindness of love 
that she could have been the contriver of a Portland- 
place assignation, and the authoress of the note suggesting 
their meeting. She, the sensitive, delicate girl, who now, 
at a moment when her happiness or misery was depend- 
ing ; when her feelings were harassed, and her indignation 
roused, could not prevail upon herself to write one line to 
the man for whom she admitted the warmest esteem, and 
upon whom, consequently, she must have the most implicit 
reliance. But it was now no time to reflect upon former 
indescretions, or by-gone follies ; the future alone was to 
be looked to. He was about to incur, if she granted his 
prayer, the weighty responsibility from which he had be- 
fore felt it a duty to shrink; he was on the eve of inducing 
an innocent girl to take a step, her mother's opinion of 
which he already knew ; he was about to withdraw her 
from competence and comfort, to partake of his hazardous 
and precarious means of existence. But what of that ? 
they loved ; and as she had already expressed her detest- 
ation of a marriage made for money, it was not unreason-- 
able to expect that she had made up her mind to the 
extreme alternative of taking a husband who had none. 

It was in vain that Saville endeavoured to collect and 
concentrate his scattered thoughts during a long day and 
evening in the society of his exemplary friend Alving- 



102 THE WIDOW. 

ham, and the family of his betrothed : his absence of 
manner, his unconsciousness of passing events, were no- 
ticed, and even joked upon, by his better-fated companion; 
but neither malice nor jest could provoke or entice him 
into a second confidence with the young priest, for whose 
want of sentiment and unqualified happiness at that period 
he felt the most sovereign contempt. It may appear that 
such a feeling was a somewhat extraordinary return for 
the kindness and hospitality which Alvingham had uni- 
formly exhibited towards him ; but as every body knows, 
with a man in love all absurdities are reconciled, anti- 
pathies are transformed into affinities, extremes meet, and 
opposites assimilate. Saville, who had, on his first intro- 
duction to the Simpsons, been considered by the whole 
family as extremely agreeable, was nevertheless pronounced 
a bore ; and the question heretofore so cordially asked, of 
"When shall we see you again?" was purposely omitted 
by the head of the family, in the ceremonial of parting. 
Saville did not notice the omission, which shared the fate 
of every thing not immediately connected with the expe- 
dition he was about to undertake, and returned to town to 
pass the next day in completing all the preparations neces- 
sary for its execution. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

BRIGHT beamed the morning of Saville's start to Ports- 
mouth ; and fortunate would it be for me were the scene 
of his departure more romantic than truth compels me to 
admit that it was. There is nothing to be found in strict 
accordance with the feelings of a love-sick heart at the door 
of the Gloucester Coffee House, in Piccadilly, nor any 
sound responsive to the plaintive sigh, in the hoarse bawl- 
ing of the porters, or the more eloquent appeals of the can- 
vassing cads of the short stages, borne on the eastern 
breezes from the neighbouring White Horse Cellar. 

Twigg had arranged every thing so that his master 
should have neither need of trouble nor time for delibera- 



THE WIDOW. 



103 



tion. He had booked him for the inside, not because he 
considered it the more convenient or pleasant position, but 
because he anticipated that his own disposition for research, 
and talent for conversation, might be in some degree re- 
strained by the presence of his immediate superior on the 
roof. To those who are regardless of dust, rain, and heat, 
and to whom broken legs and arms are every day incidents, 
the outside of a coach is, no doubt, more agreeable than 
the inside ; but to those who were born when the insides 
of carriages were considered the better places, and in 
which a man is secured against the sudden and frequent 
changes of our extraordinary climate, the right-hand corner 
facirg the horses seems to be no uncomfortable position. 
In sich a corner was Saville deposited, when the Rocket 
darted forwards on the high road to Portsmouth. 

And what road is fuller of interest to thousands of our 
fellow-subjects. It is one of the great paths of our nation 
which leads the anxious merchant to his foreign store, the 
sesman to his fearful trade, and on which the devoted lover 
jotrneys from his anxious mistress, and the faithful hus- 
band from his constant wife. Along that road has many 
a noble soldier travelled, to whom there has been no return ; 
dong that road the British sailor has often sped to victory 
or death. It does not strike the ordinary run of admirers 
3f well-appointed public carriages, who stand and praise 
the neat " turn out," and the " well-bred cattle " of these 
Portsmouth coaches, what interest for others hangs upon 
their wheels ; nor as they roll along the level ground, does 
the casual observer think what feelings, what hopes, what 
fears, what doubts, what anticipations, and what regrets, 
are pent within their pannels. 

In the coach with Saville were three other passengers 
the full allowance : two were friends ; the third, like 
Saville himself, was an independent, isolated traveller. 
What he was, or what the object of his journey, of course 
remained within his own bosom. Of the other two, one 
was a partner in a mercantile house at the Cape of Good 
Hope, where he never had been, and the other, one who 
had recently arrived from that fine colony, and had suc- 
ceeded in persuading his companion to go out, as Southey 



104 THE WIDOW. 

says the Devil did, when he visited his " snug little farm, 
the earth," in order 

" to see how his stock went on." 

The experienced voyager, the active speculator, was all 
alive and in excellent spirits, full of jest, and glee, and 
gaiety ; to him the trees looked green and the sun shone 
bright, and not a word could he spoken, nor an incident 
occur, that he did not turn to jest and merriment. Not 
so his companion : he was grave and pale ; and, July as it 
was, wore tight blue worsted pantaloons and Hessian 
boots. He spoke little, but sighed much ; complained of 
the heat in murmured accents, and, for want of other con- 
versation, augured rain and thunder ; he dozed a little, 
and then needlessly apologised to his companions for vhat 
he thought unseemly conduct, by telling them that he had 
been married eleven years ; that he had never been apart 
from his wife and children one whole day since his mar- 
riage ; and that he had, at the persuasion of his excellent 
friend, resolved to undertake a voyage to Africa, upon 
business, although he had never before been at sea, or even 
beheld it, except from the Steyne at Brighton, or the Pier 
at Margate. " I slept little last night," said he ; " I air. 
not used to partings, and it has been a sad morning for 
me, gentlemen." 

The appeal was uncalled for ; but having been made, it 
was received by the stranger travellers with courtesy and 
sympathy ; it was met with a horse laugh by his friend, 
who, being a bachelor on his return to what he had esta- 
blished as his home in Cape Town, wondered how any 
man could be so silly as to waste a thought or a sigh upon 
an affectionate spouse and seven children, and a country 
like England, when he was travelling at the rate of ten 
miles an hour towards Africa and the detection of a pilfer- 
ing partner. 

Charles's feelings were just in a fit state to sympathise 
with this " parted husband," but even his commiseration 
seemed light by comparison with that of the fourth passen- 
ger, whose melancholy appeared to increase with the dis- 
tance from London. To Saville, the general disposition to 






THE WIDOW. 105 

silence (with the exception of the Cape Town Winkle- 
keeper) was particularly agreeable ; and while his eyes re- 
mained unconsciously fixed upon the houses and hedges 
that seemed to dance by the rapidly-moving coach, his 
thoughts remained fixed upon Harriet, while amidst the 
measured rumble of the wheels, he fancied he could trace 
the melody of the air " she loved so much to sing." 

After a transient refreshment, the party seemed more 
familiarised to each other, and even Saville himself con- 
descended from his stilts and joined in the conversation ; 
the melancholy man in the left-hand corner unbent his 
brow, and added his mite to the verbal contribution of his 
companions, till at length the subject of lotteries was started 
by the Winkle-keeper, who declared an opinion that nobody 
ever got a prize. 

This statement was stoutly contradicted by the melan- 
choly man, who seemed to derive a vast reinforcement of 
animation from the subject : he enumerated dukes, mem- 
bers of parliament, Hampshire squires, Bloomsbury attor- 
neys, and Pall Mall pastry-cooks, who had, all to his own 
knowledge, been splendidly and suddenly enriched by the 
acquisition of large sums. Indeed, sir," added he, i( even 
I myself might have been worth thirty thousand pounds 
more than I am at this moment, by the same means, if it 
had not been for an accidental circumstance, over which I 
had no control." 

<f What might that have been ? " said the Winkleman, 
" choosing the wrong number, perhaps ? " 

"Not so, sir," said the melancholy gentleman, his coun- 
tenance at the same moment assuming an expression rather 
of " anger than of sorrow," I did choose the right num- 
ber bought it brought it home and had it in my 
library table drawer but " 

" It was stolen, perhaps, sir ? " said the Winkleman's 
friend, in a piteous tone. 

" No, sir, not that. I had it it was mine it was 
in the days when lotteries lasted a month, and tickets rose 
in value as they continued undrawn. I went into the city 
on business a friend, who knew of my ticket, called in 
my absence offered my wife a hundred and twenty 



106 



THE WIDOW. 



guineas for it ; she knew that it had cost me but five- 
and-twenty ; sold it him all for my good, poor soul 
she's in heaven now, sir it's no use scolding about it 
it wo'n't bring it back and the very same afternoon 

d n me I'm sure you'll excuse my swearing at the 

recollection it came up a thirty thousand pound prize ! " 

A general exclamation of horror followed the announce- 
ment. 

iC And now, sir," continued the gentleman, e< as I walk 
along the streets in wet weather, because I cannot af- 
ford a hackney-coach, my friend Dodman, the lucky pur- 
chaser, dashes by in his carriage, and splashes me with 
mud. He lives in the house which I had all my life an 
anxiety to possess ; and has refused his consent to his son's 
marrying my daughter on the plea of her poverty." 

It was evident that the melancholy gentleman felt the 
circumstances keenly. 

" Well," said Saville, " I don't think I could have sur- 
vived such a thing." 

" Only conceive, sir," said the gentleman, seeming to 
delight in aggravating all the miseries of his loss, "only 
conceive my coming home out of the city having seen 
my number placarded at Cornhill as the prize having 
compared it with the memorandum in my pocket-book 
having bought a necklace and pair of earrings for my wife 
upon the strength of it and finding, upon my arrival, 
that she had sold my thirty thousand pounds, which I was 
sure was in my pocket, to a man I hated, for one hundred 
and twenty guineas, which she exultingly exhibited, and 
which, with thirty-five more, went to pay for the baubles 
I had brought her home." 

' e I could not have stood that," said the Winkleman. 

" Nor I," said the weeping husband. 

" I," said Saville, " shtuld have cut my throat." 

" So I did, sir !" said the melancholy gentleman, " and 
here are the marks where it was sewn up !" exhibiting, 
at the same moment, a huge scar right across his windpipe. 

To describe the sudden coil-up of the three listeners, 
when the narrator of his own misfortunes made this dis- 
closure, would be impossible; in a moment they unani- 



THE WIDOW. 107 

mously construed all his previous observations and remarks 
into symptoms of his yet latent malady ; and never were 
rightly at their ease until they were blessed with the sight 
of his back, as he descended the steps of the coach at the 
door of the Dolphin, at Petersfield. 

The occurrence of this circumstance was a great relief 
to Saville, as it furnished ample conversation for his two 
fellow-travellers to the end of the journey, which was ac- 
complished with ease and punctuality, and terminated about 
half-past four in the centre of a labyrinth of dirty courts 
and blind alleys, of which the Quebec (or Queebec, as 
Twigg called it) is the Minotaur. In an instant, the 
coach was surrounded by crowds of the amphibious animals 
thereabouts indigenous each vying with the other to haul 
out our desponding lover, and ship him forthwith by the 
Ryde Packet, whose tall chimney gave black and certain 
evidence of her readiness to start. 

" How are you, Master Falkener ? " said a man who 
made his appearance at the tavern door, his face flushed 
with the heat of the weather, and of some powerful po- 
tation, which he had just swallowed, with a view to cool 
himself tf I say, did you meet that ere new hoppo- 
sition ? " 

" Yes," said Falkener, " passed her just t'other side 
Godalming." 

" All safe ? " 

" I suppose so," said Falkener ; ft I did not ask. Why 
not ? " 

" Vy, only yesterday," said the other, " she had a 
reg'lar upset coming round the corner by Horndean 
twelve outsides damaged, more or less all sprawling in 
the middle of the road." 

" Oh," said a horsekeeper, who was standing by, " that 
ere's nothing : he's got so much custom, that he can't count 
his passengers without spreading them." 

This bit of humour had its effect : it was received with 
a shout of laughter by the landsmen, and taken into serious 
consideration by the boatmen, who (their technicalities 
lying in another direction) did not at once see the merit of 
the jest. 



108 



THE WIDOW. 



During this brief interchange of words, Saville had ex- 
tricated himself from the stage-coach, and was preparing to 
accept the invitation of some of the mermen around him to 
embark ; but Twigg interposed his authority,, and informed 
his pliant master, that he could not permit him to start 
until he had visited the Post-Office, in order to get the in- 
structions which he expected from " Miss J.," and begged 
him to go into the house, and wait his return. 

To Saville's eye, the Queebec did not present exactly the 
appearance which Twigg's previous description and praise 
had led him to expect : the red-curtained bar the 
sanded passage the larder, lined with Dutch tiles, con- 
taining half a yellow cold fowl, dotted with black stumps 
of feathers, a dry bone of beef, two purple kidneys, and a 
brace and a half of limp whitings the narrow coffee- 
room, redolent with the fumes of rum and tobacco, with a 
hot waiter in his shirt-sleeves standing at the entrance, 
these were the leading landmarks of the place, with nothing 
to redeem them, except a pretty, smart-looking young 
woman in the landlady's parlour, and at this juncture of 
Saville's life, as one woman alone engrossed all his cares 
and consideration, her charms were literally thrown away. 

Here, however, spite of his prejudices, Saville was or- 
dered by his Leporello to remain concealed until his return. 
His portmanteau, bags, &c. were all put " just inside the 
bar," while he, the disconsolate, lingered about, "just outside 
of the door," unwilling altogether to abandon the hope that 
he might not be compelled eventually to enter it ; wholly 
unaware of the danger in which he was placing the fate of 
his expedition by so doing, seeing that the very position he 
occupied, however obscure in point of situation, was open 
to the observation of every individual embarking or disem- 
barking for or from the Isle of Wight, and utterly unsus- 
picious that within half an hour his beloved Harriet and 
her bridegroom elect, with all the family party, would 
actually pass by it, for the purpose of returning to Ryde, 
whence it appeared they had that day come on a visit to 
Portsmouth. 

" It's a good thing, sir," said Twigg, who returned in 
breathless haste, " that I went to the Post-Office as I did. 



THE WIDOW. 109 

Miss J. writes to let me know, that her folks were all to 
go to Ryde to-day, and come over here to see the dock- 
yard^ and the deuce knows what, and return to Cowes in 
the evening. A hundred to one if we hadn't popped upon 
'em in the packet; and even now, sir, do get into the 
house, and " 

" But when are we to go ? " 

" Not till the morning, with any safety, sir," said 
Twigg ; " get into the house, sir, and don't come out of 
it till after dark, at any rate." 

f( It was lucky, indeed," said Saville, implicitly obey- 
ing the mandate of his minister, and turning round to 
ascend the steps of the Queebec, " that you thought of 
going to look for a letter." 

" Very, sir," said Twigg. " Oh, I knew < Miss J.' 
wouldn't be idle she has every thing at stake " 

" I am aware of that, Twigg," replied Charles, not a 
little amused at his self-satisfaction. 

In compliance with Twigg's instructions, a private 
room was secured if that, which in shape and size re- 
sembled a cocked hat-box, might be called a room 
wherein he was to dine and sit after his dinner, which 
Twigg also ordered. Twigg, moreover, selected the bed- 
room, which was immediately over the sitting-room, and 
adjoining the official window of the Custom House, which 
commands the entrance of the harbour. 

To Saville, the view to which the little window of his 
little den gave admission was delightful, and compensated 
for all the inconveniences of the apartment itself, and the 
noisy nuisance of a group of little children, playing on the 
beach immediately beneath. There he beheld some in 
commission, and some in ordinary various of his ma- 
jesty's ships, whose names were not unknown to fame ; 
and there, in the centre, distinguished by the banner of St. 
George, which floated at her maintop-gallant-mast head, 
rode the Queen Charlotte. 

If this huge floating citadel possessed not the fatal in- 
terest of the Victory, it was impossible to look at her, ma- 
jestically resting upon the unruffled surface of a peaceful 
harbour, and not think upon the places she had occupied 



110 THE WIDOW. 

in other days; or not to contrast the still and tranquil 
scenery around her with the blazing batteries of Algiers, 
within a hundred yards of which, the gallant Exmouth 
led her to the terrific work of glory. She seemed like a 
giant reposing, and yet extending protection to all around 
her. 

It is when the mind is softened by affliction, or excited 
by hopes and fears, such as agitated Saville at this mo- 
ment, that the heart is most susceptible to the impressions 
which such objects cannot fail to make. He saw her, in 
imagination, dealing death and destruction on every side ; 
her huge artillery roaring like thunder, responsive to her 
deadly-freighted lightning ; her decks wet with the blood 
of heroes, her tall masts veiled in clouds of smoke ; and 
towering above all, at once the beacon and the guide of 
thousands, floated the blood-red cross, the banner of our 
country the symbol of her faith. 

" They are off, sir, they are off!" said Twigg, rush- 
ing into the room, and destroying at one fell swoop the 
whole airy fabric of Saville's fancy. 

Who the Algerines ? " said Charles. 

" No, sir," said Twigg , " the Franklins." 

Off where?" 

" In the packet, sir," said Twigg ; " for the island. 
1 was close to them at the corner of the baths. There was 
Mrs. Franklin leaning upon the arm of that Colonel 
O'Lollocky, as he calls himself, that used to come to Har- 
ley Street, a twisting and a shaking herself about, just like 
a girl of fifteen, and pointing her toes, and in her Tooting 
assembly, appearing for all the world younger than Har- 
riet " 

" Than whom, sir ? " 

ee 1 beg pardon, sir," said Twigg, " Miss F. : we al- 
ways that is, Miss Johnstone and I enter nows 
always calls her Harriet, and sometimes Harr. ; but we 
mean no harm, sir ; its only for shortness, as I call Miss 
Johnstone herself Nancy for Anne." 

" Rather impertinent, I think," said Saville. 

fe Very, sir," said Twigg. 

" Well, and Miss Franklin was " 



THE WIDOW. ill 

"Walking with Old S.," said Twigg: "he carrying 
her parasol, and talking some of his unintelligible stuff; 
and she, poor dear, her head a constantly going round and 
round, first this way and then that way ; in my belief, a 
looking to see if she could see any thing of us ; and you 
know, sir, for young women as likes to look about 'em, 
them poke bonnets is old nick." 

"Ah!" said Saville. 

" There was a young creechur came down outside to- 
day," said Twigg; " a going governess to some gentleman's 
children in the island. She seemed uncommon pretty, and 
sociable, too ; but I could not get to see much of her coun- 
tenance, on account of her unmerciful large bonnet ; and, 
as for conversation, it spoiled it completely ; for, as she 
had not room to turn round, all she said inside her poke 
as I call 'em sounded to me not a bit more distincter 
than so much wind down a chimley." 

" And was Miss Franklin the elder of the party ? " said 
Saville. 

" Yes, sir, she came last," said Twigg, " with a tall 
moon-faced girl, with a straw bonnet and green ribands, 
which I takes to he a Miss Macpherson, a friend of theirs, 
who I knew was to come down with them for the benefit of 
washing." 

' c And they did not see you ? " 

tf Me," said Twigg, " no : I'm too good a judge for 
that. And now, sir, if you have finished your dinner, I'll 
let you out for a walk, on the lines, or in High Street, or 
where you will." 

" I have no desire for such a luxury ; I prefer sitting 
here," said Saville. 

" Here, sir," said Twigg ; fe what, looking at that great 
ship in the middle of the pond? You'll be moped to 
death here up in the street there are capital shops, and 
a nice pavement you might almost fancy yourself in 
London." 

" I have no great anxiety," said Charles, " to conjure up 
any such a delusion ; I prefer the ship and the pond to 
the shops and the pavement." 

Twigg retired, wondering at his master's bad taste; and 



112 THE WIDOW. 

so deeply commiserating his melancholy position, as to de- 
sire the landlady to send him some books to wile away 
time; and accordingly, with the Ladies' Magazine, the 
Percy Anecdotes, Paul and Virginia, and a small collection 
of Tracts, diversified with occasional slumbers, Saville got 
through the dark hours, by the aid of a couple of mutton 
candles, till it was time to go to bed. 

The sun had set redly, but the clouds looked wild, and 
as the evening closed in, sharp and sudden puffs of wind 
shook the windows of the Quebec; towards midnight 
those puffs increased, until before one it had actually begun 
to blow a gale. Saville's thoughts, his position, the 
natural anxiety of his mind, contributed to keep him 
awake, and it was not until the sun had again shown him- 
self through the dirty white dimity curtains of his ricketty 
tent-bed, that our hero felt inclined to sleep. 

At length he was conscious of the welcome symptoms of 
drowsiness, and laying his head on his pillow, was roused 
suddenly by the throwing up of a creaking window close 
to his ear ; he listened, not at all certain what next was to 
happen, when a stentorian voice bawled out 

" Brig, a-hoy ! What brig is that ? " 

The answer was inaudible. 

( ' Where are you from ? " 

Still the answer was unheard. 

" What's the name of your master ? " 

Ditto, as to inaudibility. 

f ' What have you got in ? " 

Another answer, and down went the window. 

Ah ! thought Saville, settling himself again, now that's 
a fancy a passion some man has got out of his bed to 
inquire about a brig coming into the harbour perhaps he 
has a fond, affectionate girl on board some vessel, and is 
anxious " 

Up went the window again again the same voice and 
the same questions but not exactly the same results; 
the schooner which now entered the harbour, and which, 
by the in-and-outishness of the Quebec, Saville could not 
see for he had the curiosity this time to look out was 
nearer the Portsmouth shore than the brig which had pre- 



THE WIDOW. 113 

ceded her, so that the replies to the inquirer came tumbled 
about by the wind in a sort of unintelligible noise, always, 
at least to Saville's ears, exactly alike, varied only in length 
and pace of utterance, and reducible to writing only by 
the words, wulla, wulla, wulla. 

" Schooner, a-hoy ! " bawled the inquirer through an 
immense speaking-trumpet ; (f what schooner's that ? " 

" Wulla, wulla, wulla." ' 

" Where are you from ? " 

" Wulla, wulla." 

" What's your master's name ? " 

' Wulla, wulla, wulla." 

" What have you got in ? " 

Wulla." 

Down went the window, and away went the schooner, 
and so did Saville to his bed. But all in vain : to the 
schooner succeeded a lugger, after her came a ship, and 
then a brig, and then a lugger again, and to all of these, 
and to fifty more, were all the same questions put, and 
the same answers given; until Saville at last became 
reconciled to the annoyance, which he found proceeded 
from the neighbouring official window belonging to the 
Custom-house, whence the inquiries he had heard were 
authoritatively made, and satisfactorily replied to, before 
the vessel catechised was permitted to pass. 

Habituated for two hours to these queries, and to the 
violence of the wind, which even out-roared the stentorian 
Custom-house officer, Saville had responded to the claim 
of wearied Nature in his first unromantic snore, when a 
noise not very much unlike a march of cavalry up the 
ladder-like staircase of the hotel, once more aroused him 
from his rest. 

" Hallo," cried a voice, nearly as loud as that of him 
with the trumpet ; " mind my dressing-case, you sir." 
^ " I say," cried another, " give me some soft bread." 

" Tea for twelve," cried a third. 

" And toast and butter for sixteen," bellowed a fourth. 

Bang went boxes and bundles : men scrambling along 
passages, children crying, and women scolding ; but all, 
men, women, and children, unanimously demanding some- 
i 



THE WIDOW. 



thing to eat and drink, but more especially tea and toast 
and butter. 

" Anna Maria, my dear/' said a man close to Saville's 
door, " we must get the children's hair cut the first thing, 
their heads are like mops." 

" And I must get a bonnet somewhere, Frederick/' said 
a lady in reply. 

" What is it o'clock by land time ? " cried a rough 
voice ; ' ' is the barber up ? I say, waiter, what news is 
there ? have you got the cholera here ? who's king 
now ? are the Whigs in or out ? " 

The waiter, who had been roused from his sleep, was 
mightily enraged by the confusion of domestic and political 
questions which were put to him j and the chambermaids, 
who had not wasted the precious time in dressing, were 
running about in all directions, in the extreme of des- 
habille, appearing to the famished eyes of the new arrivals 
like so many divinities. 

Truth to be told, the uproarious party, who, like 
Macbeth, had murdered sleep, and entirely awakened 
Charles, comprised the captain and some of the passengers 
of the Lumper, a country ship from the East Indies, who 
had preferred getting ashore in the pilot-boat, to waiting 
on board until the vessel reached Blackwall ; a place which, 
abounding as it does in all the pleasing reminiscences of 
" mud scrambles," and white bait, is placed at a very con- 
siderable distance from the Isle of Portland, at which 
place the present invaders had got into the boat, in which 
they had been overtaken by the gale of the preceding even- 
ing, and had endured ten times as much wretchedness as 
they could have anticipated, and at least as much as they 
deserved, for not sticking to the old ship to the last. 

All these ravenous animals, who had been for four 
months grinding hard biscuit, and digesting salt junk, 
sprang into the Quebec, afflicted with the most hor- 
rible appetites ; and the noises which they made were 
merely the usual evidences of hunger, which all living 
creatures are in the habit of affording when in a state of 
incivilisation. The anxiety to have up their boxes, in 
order to be " rigged out " ready for a start in the morn- 



THE WIDOW. 115 

ing, and the necessity for cutting the four months' exube- 
rance of hair from the heads of the young girls and 
children, and the imperious demand for bonnets, " some- 
thing like those worn in England/' made the Welkin ring, 
and determined Saville to abandon all further hopes of rest, 
and dress himself at the earliest opportunity. To what 
purpose, except, perhaps, to make good a retreat to his 
sitting-room, and there ensconce himself, it would be diffi- 
cult to say ; for, early as it was, the clouds gave promise 
of a wretched day, the rain already poured in torrents, and, 
driven against the windows, must have added a new zest 
to the meal, or rather meals, which the half-famished, half- 
drowned passengers were devouring, without regard to 
decorum or ceremony, some even in Saville's room, the 
door of which had chanced to stand open, and others in 
their bed-chambers, and some even upon the stairs. 

To a quiet, peaceably-disposed person, all this emeute 
would have been distracting. Saville, little inclined to rest, 
liked 

" the rocking of the battlements ; " 

and he could not resist the amusement offered him in the 
spectacle of such a dispersion from the ark, accompanied 
throughout, as it was at intervals, by the imperious de- 
mands of the trumpeter out of the window, and the never- 
failing answer of wulla, wulla, wulla. 

It was not much after seven, when Charles finally made 
good his footing in his own particular hat-box, to which 
the ever attentive Twigg, with his own proper hand 
had conveyed his breakfast, snatched as it were from the 
teeth of the passengers j and before eight, our hero was 
seated at a small ricketty table, covered with a diaper 
napkin, in order to eat, or rather look at (for eating with 
him was out of the question), two lately imported French 
eggs, Avhich, however, had been long enough from la belle 
France to have become naturalised, a slice of black ham, 
milk of London quality, stale bread, and rancid butter ; the 
contents of the larder, before noticed, having all gone to 
satisfy the Lumpers, so called from the name of the fortu- 
nate vessel which bore them to our shores, 
i 2 



116 THE WIDOW. 

Nothing could be more wretchedly uncomfortable to 
Saville than the wearisome, long morning before him. 
Confined to the house by weather, which would have been 
infinitely more seasonable in November, and rendered 
doubly dismal by the beauty and brightness of the pre- 
ceding day,, he read and re-read his magazines, and his 
anecdotes, and gazed on the Queen Charlotte, and watched 
the ferry, and listened to the inquisitor next door, until his 
patience was totally exhausted. 

At length, it blowing a perfect hurricane, the Cowes and 
Southampton packet was announced as ready to start. In 
that they were to proceed, Miss Johnstone having informed 
her correspondent, that the Franklin party were to remain 
at Ryde until the following morning, suggesting either the 
stay of the lovers at Portsmouth till their return, or their 
immediately crossing to Cowes, where every arrangement 
might be made before the enemy arrived; Johnstone 
having contrived to excuse herself from attending upon 
Harriet, who with great good nature and a perfect under- 
standing of the reasons of her absence, had readily agreed 
to accept the services of her " Ma's" maid during their 
little excursion ; an excursion made at the suggestion of 
Mr. Smith, under the pretence of pleasing his betrothed, 
but, in fact, for the purpose of ascertaining whether he 
could not engage a house at Ryde upon cheaper terms than 
one at Cowes. 

The wind blew so violently that it was scarcely possible 
to stand ; and in the time before hot water and paddles 
bade defiance to the elements it would have been considered 
impossible for the vessel to go. However, the packet in 
question had steamed round to the point, where she lay 
under the lee of the houses, the wind having shifted in the 
morning to a gale at south-east. Twigg, who was an ad- 
mirable land officer, was the least in the world like 

" That maritime soldier, the royal marine." 

He was as helpless at sea as a cat, and his want of skill was 
in no degree compensated by any excess of courage. In 
the bubbling of the water, and the spray which he saw 
splashing against the graduated stone facing of the point, 



THE WIDOW. 117 

he thought he heheld death and destruction staring him in 
the face. In a hurry not to be described, he bundled his 
master's luggage into the boat, tumbled himself down the 
narrow steps, without regard to the law of precedence, and, 
in his alarm, actually scolded Saville for his want of expe- 
dition in relieving him from what he considered the perilous 
situation of dancing upon the little toppling waves within 
a yard and a quarter of the street. Squalls of rain beat in 
their faces, and although covered with cloaks and umbrellas, 
and the distance of the packet not being more than four or 
five boat-lengths, they were nearly wet through when they 
reached the gangway, whence Saville slipped down the 
companion into the cabin ; and Twigg, almost unconscious 
what he did, was hauled forward and deposited down the 
fore hatchway, to be dried by the heat of the boiler. 

To be sure there was a vast deal of noise and bustle, and 
the packet was under way when they reached her. Saville, 
anxious not to be seen or recognised by anybody who might 
know him, and equally anxious not to be bored with the 
conversation of anybody who did not, rolled himself up in 
a corner of the cabin, which was dark, hot, and ill-smelling, 
owing probably to the circumstance of all the company 
having been soaked through on shore, before they were de- 
posited on board. 

Away they went bang, bang, went the engines, shake 
went the vessel, and rattle went the bulk-heads, and Charles, 
worn out with worry, and fatigued by his want of rest 
during the night, fell into a profound slumber, from which 
it appears he did not awake for upwards of two hours and 
a half. 

At the termination of that period he shook off his 
slumber, and sat upright on the sofa, where he had been 
so long reclining. The weather seemed to have moderated ; 
he thought a little air on deck would be agreeable ; and to 
see the island which contained his fair one, even although 
he was not that day to be in the same town with her, would 
be something. Having accordingly scrambled over the 
legs of various people who were huddled up in different 
corners, and begged a proportionate number of pardons, 
he ascended the companion, and cast his eyes around to 
i 3 



118 THE WIDOW. 

trace the line of land from Ryde to Cowes ; but to his sur- 
prise, on turning to the south, he saw no land at all, neither 
to the west; nor could he anywhere distinctly make out 
anything, except right astern, quite on the horizon, where 
he beheld a ridge of something dark which, for any cog- 
nizable land-mark he saw upon it, might have been Cape 
Fly-away itself. 

" Why," said he to the man at the wheel, ce you give the 
island a wide berth to-day." 

" Yes, sir," said the man, " we don't want to have no- 
thing to do with she this weather ; and we can hold our 
own 'tan't with us as with sailing wessels." 

" No/' said Saville, "but when do you get "to Cowes, 
then?" 

{e Cowes, sir," said the man, " I can't say as ever I were 
at Cowes in my life, and I don't think as I shall be, please 
God, for some time to come." 

" What do you mean ? " said Saville ; " why this is the 
Cowes packet ? " 

"Cowes, sir!" Lord love your heart," said the man, 
" you might put the Cowes packet into our cabin." 

if Then where are we going ? " said Saville, in a tone of 
agony which made the steersman stare. 

' ( To Granville, sir," said the man, " where, please the 
pigs, we shall be by to-morrow dinner-time." 

ft France!" exclaimed Saville. " What on earth shall 
I do ! Where is my servant?" added he, speaking to the 
steward's mate. 

" Dead sick below, sir," said the man. 

(( And I raving mad above ! Never mind," continued 
Saville, "it matters not what the mishap was that brought 
us here, here we are ; the next thing to ascertain is the 
soonest time at which we can get back." 

fc We come back, sir, next Friday," said the man. 

" An age I " thought Saville. 

" I thought somehow your servant was wrong," said 
the steward's mate ; " but he would persist he was right, 
so I said no more about it. I'm very sorry, sir I " 

" Sorry ! thank you, thank you," said Saville, " it is 
the very deuce to me. But I must bear it of course ; it is 



THE WIDOW. 119 

nobody's fault but my own. Five days ! Mercy on us !" 
and so he went on muttering and moaning, as if not yet 
quite convinced of the real state of the affair, and nourish- 
ing one of those hopes in which none but desperate lovers 
ever indulge, that even yet they might fall in with some- 
thing in the Channel which would put them back sooner 
than the packet possibly could. To discuss the point with 
Twigg, under the influence of alarm and sea-sickness, 
would be ridiculous ; and, accordingly, he retired to his 
place in the cabin, and witnessed, with the closing night, 
all the preparations for eating, drinking, and sleeping, 
which his fellow-passengers were making, in every di- 
rection, to his utter discomfiture and annoyance. 

All worldly evils have a termination. By the middle of 
the next day they were safely anchored at Granville ; and 
Saville, having previously vented his long-dormant misery 
upon Twigg, who made his appearance shortly after the 
packet had slipped into smooth water, composed his coun- 
tenance and moderated his manner into something like 
placid civility, when the officer of the port came on board. 
He saw that the master of the packet had communicated to 
that gentleman the mistake under which he had become a 
visiter there; and that the officer was consequently ad- 
vancing to make some civil observations upon the misad- 
venture. 

" I shall be sorry to hear," said the officer, in English, 
" dat you have come to us by mistake. I am ver much 
afraid it shall be serious loss to you for de time J ' 

" Why, sir," said Saville, " it is extremely provoking ; 
but not so seriously injurious as it might have been." 

" No ! but," continued the Frenchman, " under de cir- 
cumstance it may be worse dan you tink." 

" No, no," said Saville, with an assumption of gaiety in 
his manner, " I shall go back on Friday, and have seen a 
little bit of the continent which will be new to me." 

C( Ah !" said the Frenchman, opening his eyes to double 
their ordinary width, "dere he is; dat is what I meant. 
You cannot go back Friday ; nor can you see our country. 
Dere is orders from our government to put you in quarantine 



120 THE WIDOW. 

forty days, because dere has been in dis packet a case of 
cholera !" 

" Forty days, sir ! " said Saville ; " a whole life sacri- 
ficed would not be worth so much as forty days ! How can 
I write to explain ? " 

" Oh ! you must not write, sir," said the officer ; te I 
am to allow no communication with de vessel, and you are 
to stay here till you get well." 

' c But, sir, I am not ill," said Saville. 

" I don't know dat," said the officer ; " it may come out 
upon you some day or other when you little tink of him." 

if What, sir," said Saville, " do you mean to say that I 
am to be shut up in this vessel in order to get the cholera ? " 

l( I cannot speak to dat," said the officer ; " my orders 
are vary simple ; dis vessel must remain where she is forty 
days, or such less time as de government may hereafter de- 
cide upon." 

Saying which the French gentleman turned upon his heel, 
and left Saville standing transfixed as it were to the deck ; and 
when Twigg, not yet aware of all the consequences of his 
mistake, came aft to inquire, unluckily for him, something 
about taking the luggage ashore, he was received by a vol- 
ley of words from his master, which nothing but love or 
distraction could, in these civilised days, have either pal- 
liated or justified. 

It would neither be entertaining nor instructive to the 
reader to repeat the angry expressions of Mr. Saville, or 
the energetic defence of his servant, upon whose zeal and 
activity no imputation could be cast, seeing that his fate in 
love and life was linked with his master's ; nor will it be 
necessary to detail all the proceedings of the ill-fated couple, 
who, after having been in the packet three days, were car- 
ried ashore in the hospital boat, and placed apart in 'a 
lazaretto, where they remained twenty-nine days of the 
prescribed forty, and whence they were released exactly in 
time to arrive back again at Portsmouth four mornings 
after the departure of Mr. and Mrs. Smith (now united in 
the holy bonds of matrimony), to spend the honey-moon 
on the continent. 



THE WIDOW. 121 



CHAPTER IX. 

IT may easily be imagined that the intelligence of Harriet's 
marriage and departure was bitterly painful to Saville ; 
and the horrors arising from the dreadful certainty that her 
fate and his were irrevocably fixed, received additional 
strength from the conviction, the certainty which existed 
in his mind,, that she ignorant of course of the unfortu- 
nate mistake of the bewildered lacquey, and of their con- 
sequent delays and detentions would naturally attribute 
his sudden silence and abrupt disappearance (after having 
by his ambassador pledged himself to active measures for 
her rescue) to coldness or caprice, corroborated by his 
former apparent negligence about her ; she being unable to 
ascertain whether all she had now heard about his offer 
and his letter was true or not, seeing that she dare not 
apply upon the subject to her mother, the only person who 
could have given her any authentic information upon it* 

The reflections, therefore, in which Saville indulged 
were of the most galling and irritating nature. That she 
was lost, irretrievably lost, was the great and fatal truth 
connected with his misfortunes ; but, convinced as he was, 
that she was ready to be rescued from the grasp of her 
present lawfully wedded husband, if he had been at hand 
to favour her escape, it really was too bad to lose her. 
Besides, what would she think of his conduct? How 
must she despise him for his neglect of her ; how debased 
he must be in her opinion ; and the more so, as having 
frivolously revived the feeling in her heart, which she had 
in some degree successfully struggled to overcome. He saw 
all his misery ; for although he was studying for the chan- 
cery bar, he was convinced, whatever the practice there 
might be, that, in the cause of love, attachment does not 
always follow contempt. 

Too true, however, was the news. In one of the libra- 
ries, Saville read the details of the marriage, set forth in 
the imperishable columns of the Morning Post ; and as he 
read of the beautiful bride, enveloped in her beautiful veil 
of Brussels lace, he thought of the odious bridegroom, so 



122 THE WIDOW. 

far advanced in the vale of years, and launched forth in 
imprecations deep and heavy on his head. 

The faithful Twigg was, for the moment, as incon- 
solable as the unhappy Saville. Miss J. was gone, but not 
married ; there was yet a gleam of hope for him ; it was 
but a spark, yet he fanned it with his sighs, and wished 
himself into the belief that she would remain constant and 
true, attributing their non-appearance at Cowes to the 
timidity or indecision of his master ; qualities for which, 
knowing him as well as she did, it was not probable she 
would give her own sweetheart credit. 

When the first shock, which the sudden cut of the 
Gordian knot of Saville's love-affair excited, had somewhat 
subsided, his thoughts reverted to himself; his present 
position, his future prospects, and the course of remedies 
he should adopt to staunch the wound he felt assured he 
could never heal. To return to London would be absurd : 
it was long vacation ; chambers were deserted, and lawyers 
at liberty ; and besides, could he, at such a moment, apply 
himself to study, or divert his mind from subjects of such 
deep interest as those which now wholly engrossed them, 
into the dry and confined channels of legal education ? It 
was open to him by a desperate resolution to study to ob- 
literate his fondest recollections ; for he 

" The better to improve his taste, 
Was by his parents' fondness plac'd 
Amongst the blest, the chosen few 
(Blest, if their happiness they knew), 
Who, for three hundred guineas paid 
To some great master of the trade, 
Have at his rooms, by special favour, 
His leave to use their best endeavour, 
By drawing pleas from nine till four, 
To earn him twice three hundred more, 
And after dinner may repair 
To 'foresaid rooms, and then and there, 
Have 'foresaid leave from six till ten, 
To draw the aforesaid pleas again." 

Whether Saville, admitting the efficacy of the medicine, 
considered the remedy worse than the disease, history does 
not inform us ; all we know is, that, instead "of flying 
from the scenes recently hallowed by the presence of his 
beloved, he resolved to remain where he was, having first 
ascertained that the family party had separated and de- 



THE WIDOW. 123 

parted from the island, on the day when the marriage was 
celebrated. What occurred to our hero there we shall here- 
after see ; in the meanwhile we must take a glance at our 
dearly beloved friends, Mr. and Mrs. Smith. 

To describe the state of Harriet's existence, from the 
moment in which she had so far committed herself as to 
encourage Charles's proposition of visiting, and, as he called 
it, rescuing her, until the fatal morning, when the cere- 
mony which eternally decided her lot in life, would be 
impossible. The consciousness that she had failed in her 
duty to her mother, and faltered in her allegiance to her 
betrothed husband, was made a thousand times more pain- 
ful than it otherwise would have been, by the mortifying 
reflection that she had permitted herself to be duped by 
empty professions, and sacrificed either to the ignorant zeal 
of her new confidant, or the heartless vanity of a worthless 
pretender to her love. Day after day passed, the lingering 
hours were counted, and yet no news of Saville came ; it 
was one continued fever and irritation ; for while she pined 
and sickened at his protracted absence, she was in a con- 
stant state of alarm lest he should unexpectedly appear. 

Miss Johnstone, in whom the spirit of enterprise was 
strong, had, by permission of her mistress, made an ex- 
cursion to Portsmouth, where, by application at the post- 
office, she discovered that her letter to the faithless Twigg 
had been safely delivered to its right owner. This cer- 
tainty, far from being consolatory, added new fuel to the 
flame which was already consuming the lady and her 
maid. Nothing could have happened to keep their lovers 
away, except distaste and a determination to put an end to 
an affair which, with a duplicity scarcely paralleled, they 
had themselves originated. 

Miss J., as Twigg called her, was not to be baffled so 
easily ; she determined to " know the rights of it ; " and 
as she was acting in the double capacity of principal for 
herself, and agent for her mistress, Harriet could not per- 
mit the authority which she undoubtedly possessed over 
her in the one character, to control her operations in the 
other. It was by thus temporising, that the young lady 
permitted her servant to try the experiment of writing to 



124 THE WIDOW. 

Saville's London lodgings, to inquire not after him for 
the world but after his valet, satisfied with believing that 
any answer which Twigg might send to " Miss J.'s " letter 
would, while it described his own pursuits and occupations, 
necessarily contain a detail of those in which his master 
might be engaged. 

Here, again, they were doomed to be disappointed : the 
epistle of the anxious damsel remained unanswered, unno- 
ticed ; and at the end of a fortnight, both the " forsaken " 
agreed, that it would be quite unworthy the dignity of the 
sex to take any farther steps for the recovery of their lost 
lovers ; Miss Johnstone, however, specially consoling her- 
self with her negative loss, which she contrasted in glowing 
colours with the positive calamity which awaited her be- 
trothed mistress. 

It was easy to make this determination, and, with a 
mind like that of Miss J,, not difficult, perhaps, to 
abide by it; but to Harriet the struggle proved nearly 
mortal. The continued conflict between duty and incli- 
nation, and hope and despair, added to the remorseful 
regrets which she experienced at having betrayed her 
weakness, and compromised her dignity of character, by 
the admission of a claim upon her heart, which appeared 
to have been made but in sport, were almost too much for 
her delicate frame and constitution ; yet she endured them 
all with that meek and unworldly patience which exclu- 
sively belongs to woman. 

It was a piteous sight to see her selecting and choosing 
bridal ornaments, and accepting from the trembling hand 
of her dotard lover gifts which could scarcely be con- 
sidered any thing but bribes; and there was in her manner 
a quiet resignation, a total abandonment of herself to the 
views and will of others, which at times even wounded the 
feelings of her mother. It was, however, too late now to 
retract ; although Mrs. Franklin suspected that the total 
silence which Harriet observed with regard to Saville, and 
the entire absence of any attempt on his part either to see 
or prevail upon her to take the desperate measure which 
could alone relieve her from her approaching thraldom, 
was merely maintained as a cloak for stratagems, which 



THE WIDOW. 125 

she imagined to be in a regular course of progress, and 
never did she rise in the morning without expecting to 
hear that the bird was flown. 

She could not otherwise account for the appearance of 
implicit obedience which characterised every action of her 
poor devoted daughter's life. She little knew the awful 
struggle by which her mind was torn, and least of all could 
she suspect that the calm resolution of her daughter had 
been produced by the believed infidelity and heartlessness 
of her lover. 

Time passed one day succeeded another and still 
the aching pain of dread and expectation continued. The 
ring was bought which was to bind her to her Mezentian 
spouse ; he placed it sportively on the finger which it was 
to bind for life a mark, at once, of duty and affection. 
To him, this (to others, easy task) was not so trifling an 
achievement ; his hand, trembling neither " with love nor 
fear," but with a more incurable malady, old age, was not 
well calculated to place the golden mark of bondage apt 
illustration of such a match on his captive ; yet, in three 
short days, he was to do so in earnest, to secure his passive 
victim. He affected to be gay and jocose, and concluded 
the rehearsal of his performance by holding in his hand 
the finger he, after two minutes' pottering, had enslaved. 
There sat the pale, placid girl, patiently undergoing the 
protracted operation, her mother looking archly and al- 
most mischievously on j while " Miss J./' entering the 
apartment on tip-toe, stood eyeing the scene with an 
expression in her countenance of mingled surprise and 
disgust. It was a subject for a painter ; and with 
" Ringing a Belle" by way of title, might have made no 
inconsiderable figure in one of the exhibitions. 

Ringing of bells indeed there was, within three days of 
this occurrence ; and favours, and gloves, and cake, and 
all the other concomitants of nuptial ceremonials. 

" I pass each previous settlement and deed, 
Too long for me to write, or you to read ; 
Nor will with quaint impertinence display 
The pomp, the pageantry, the proud array : 
The time approached to church they went-^" 

and were made man and wife ; Harriet, absorbed in tears, 



126 THE WIDOW. 

and wholly unconscious of what was passing ; Mr. Smith 
himself not being entirely delighted with the observations 
of some of the spectators, made as he led,, or rather lifted, 
with the assistance of the bride's-maids, his broken-hearted 
better-half to the carriage. Mrs. Franklin looked at the 
by-standers and her daughter, as if she could have killed 
the former, and eaten the latter : her pride was hurt by 
hearing a murmur amongst the crowd, in which the word 
fl shame " was distinguishable ; but Colonel O'Lollocky, 
who handed her from the door, hurried her through the 
knot of people who surrounded it, in order that she might 
escape the reproaches which they seemed unanimous in 
breathing forth. 

The reader knows that with this ceremony the residence 
of the party in the island terminated. After a dejeuner- 
d-la-fourchette, the bride and bridegroom proceeded to 
Southampton, on their way to Bath, Cheltenham, Malvern, 
Leamington, and eventually the Lakes ; and Mrs. Franklin, 
with her sister-in-law, her niece, and Colonel O'Lollocky, 
started at the same time for Portsmouth; Miss Johnstone 
having nearly cried her eyes out at being compelled to 
share the rumble of her young mistress's carriage with her 
old master's favourite servant a favourite of two-and- 
twenty years' standing ; and who, before they had tra- 
velled two and twenty miles, gave several indications of an 
ardent desire to follow his excellent master's example in 
the way of matrimony, if Miss J. could be prevailed upon 
to accede to his entreaties. 

Our dramatis persons are now scattered, and the reader 
must make up his mind to a long separation from them. 
It would be worse than useless to record in detail the 
miseries which poor Harriet found herself destined to 
undergo. Dissatisfaction with himself soon rendered her 
husband dissatisfied with her; and a parsimony, as absurd 
in him, as it was distressing to his wife, added to the most 
restless jealousy,, kept her in a state not to be described. 

Saville, with a mind completely overthrown by the cir- 
cumstances which had deprived him of his Harriet, con- 
scious what her opinion of him must be, and yet feeling 
that any attempt to undeceive her as to his conduct could 



THE WIDOW. 



127 



only be construed into a desire to maintain a correspond- 
ence with her, which, in their relative positions, it would 
be most indelicate to keep up,, determined upon abandoning 
his profession, and travelling. The moment the reader 
hears this, he will construe such a determination into the 
result of a restless anxiety and an undefined hope of meet- 
ing his loved and lost angel (by accident of course) on the 
Continent ; or as an intermediate step between writing to 
her in his own vindication, and giving her up altogether. 
But it turned out that he thought better even of this 
scheme, and generously relinquished what might have 
afforded him the greatest gratification now left within his 
reach, that of seeing tind explaining to her the circum- 
stances by which he had been forced into apparent incon- 
sistency and frivolity; because he could not but apprehend 
one of two evils as likely to result from his putting it into 
execution : he might either succeed in withdrawing her 
from her matrimonial allegiance, or do what, as far as the 
world was concerned, would have been equally injurious, 
subject her to the imputation of tolerating the advances 
of a lover, who had been discarded, not by her, but by the 
authority of her mother. 

After much deliberation, he came to the resolution of 
applying himself to the drudgery of his profession, in the 
hope of diverting his thoughts from their one dear object ; 
and in the certainty that, however much study and other 
pursuits might temporarily relieve his mind, his heart 
would still remain constant to his Harriet. To wait years 
and years for the consummation of happiness dependent 
upon the death of another, may be thought neither Chris- 
tian-like nor proper ; but, certain as he was of her affection, 
convinced by the last communication which passed between 
them, that she reciprocated his love, his resolution was 
nothing but a fitting return for her kindness. What he 
hoped, or what he looked forward to, could in no wise 
affect either the health or happiness of the far distant pos- 
sessor of his beloved. No tie of friendship bound him to 
the veteran husband ; and his anxiety for Harriet's comfort 
and welfare was so pure and disinterested, that, if he could 
have believed which of course under the circumstances 



128 THE WIDOW 

he did not that she was happy, he would have satisfied 
himself with watching her career through life without a 
murmur of discontent. 

The career of her mother as a widow was very speedily 
stopped hy her accepting the hand of Colonel O'Lollocky, 
who found little difficulty in convincing her of the im- 
portance of the loss she had sustained in the society of her 
daughter, or in impressing upon her mind the advantages 
which, in every worldly point of view, would attend her 
union with him, whose whole life would be devoted to her 
happiness, and who felt that his own would he assured to 
him by her consent. This assurance of the colonel's had 
its effect j and in less than a month after Harriet had set 
her the example, Mrs. Franklin entered the holy state of 
matrimony with the gallant officer, who had, before that 
ceremony took place, proposed taking his matured bride 
over to Ireland to see a remarkable fine property which he 
had there, at least in expectation, upon which there 
were a fine mansion, a valuable farm, capital shooting, and 
a beautiful decoy. This journey, however, he postponed 
immediately after the wedding ; and Mrs. Franklin, al- 
though, for a time, blinded by a passion which she fancied 
love, began to see pretty clearly, that of all the promised 
valuables of her gallant spouse in the f( green island," 
nothing was entirely to be depended upon except the 
decoy. 

Time rolled on, and Saville persisted in his assiduous 
attention to business, until his health became visibly and 
seriously impaired, and he was compelled to seek change of 
air as the only chance of restoration. To his kind friends, 
the Alvinghams, then some time married and settled, the 
broken-hearted young man was indebted for a hospitable 
welcome to Harlingham Parsonage ; and under their happy 
roof, and in the enjoyment of that tranquillity which is 
afforded to the mind, almost unconsciously, by the society 
of such people, he recovered both health and spirits ; and. 
when he quitted them after a lengthened stay till the end 
of the year of Harriet's departure, he promised to revisit 
them annually at the same season. 

It was after his return to London from his first agree- 



THE WIDOW. 129 

able visit to Harlingham, and seven or eight months after 
Harriet's marriage, that as he was sitting at breakfast, just 
ready to start to Chambers, Twigg entered the room with 
an opened letter in his hand, his countenance was ani- 
mated by an expression of interest and importance, a 
sort of triumphant giggle was on his lips, and in his man- 
ner a consciousness of having something to impart which 
his master would be most anxious to hear. 

" I've got a letter, sir," said Twigg, <( come all the way 
from where the sallad ile comes, in the basket-bottomed 
bottles full of news, sir." 

" Indeed ! " said Saville, ' ' that must be agreeable 
enough for you." 

" Very, sir," said Twigg. 

" Who is it from ? " asked Saville. 

" From ' Miss J.,' sir," said Twigg, " who moreover is 
' Miss J.' still. 

Saville was not prepared for this announcement ; he did 
not know the particular place at which the Smiths had 
fixed their residence ; and when Twigg mentioned his 
letter, and described its date, there was nothing in Saville's 
mind to associate it with his loved, lost Harriet. 

" It's full of news, as I have just said," continued the 
anxious valet, " and you may read it, sir, in welcome 
all but just a little bit where I have doubled it down." 
Saying this, he handed the precious document to his mas- 
ter, who proceeded to peruse its contents. They had best 
speak for themselves : 

" Florence , 

<( DEAR ALEXANDER, 

" You will think me vastly foolish, I dare say, and 
perhaps laugh at me for writing to you ever again, after 
your extraordinary conduct ; but, as I say, if you have 
behaved bad to me, your master has behaved worse to my 
mistress " 

" You must not mind that, sir," said Twigg, interrupt- 
ing Saville's reading; " she means all for the best you'll 
see presently go on, sir." 

" I don't know enough of him to know what his real 
K 



130 THE WIDOW. 

principle at bottom is, and cannot therefore judge how 
much he is to he blamed, or how much to be pitied ; but 
you, I cannot think, would wilfully have made me the pro- 
testations you have made, if you wasn't in earnest, and 
serious and honourable in your intentions " 

" That, you see, sir," said Twigg, means " 

" Oh, I see perfectly," said Saville ; " well." 

" It is because I quite believe this, that I take the op- 
portunity of Miss Mill who is Lady Frances Fothering- 
ham's maid going to England, to write, in order, by 
giving you our address here, to afford you an opportunity 
of explaining your conduct to me that is to say, if you 
are yet alive, and in Charles Street, St. James's Square. 
She has promised to carry my letter home, and put it into 
the twopenny-post-office before she leaves London." 

" But," said Saville, having read thus far, ft this letter 
seems wholly to concern you, and I have no right " 

" Right, sir ! " said Twigg ; " what's right to do with 
it ? I'm not ashamed nor afraid of what's in the letter, 
as far as I am concerned : and if you'll go on, you'll see 
something more about yourself " 

" Equally flattering with the former observations," said 
Saville. 

" Write, if you please, Alexander, to me here that 
is, if you continue to care at all about me and explain 
your real feelings, and the reason for your extraordinary 
conduct in never coming to the Isle of Wight, after all 
the pains I had taken ; because, if you are in the same 
mind, and was prevented by sickness or accident from keep- 
ing your appointment, I tell you straight-forward, that I 
neither have changed, nor am likely to change my mind, as 
Miss Mill could tell you, if you had the opportunity of 
speaking to her ; but if you have wilfully neglected me, 
and do not reply to this, I shall consider you have done 
with me altogether ; and as I have a very good opportu- 
nity of bettering myself, in that case, shall accept the offer 
of an Italian marquis, who is very fond of me, and has a 
fine estate in his own country of more than a hundred and 
thirty-two pounds a year. He says that I " 

" Ah, sir ! " said Twigg, " that's what I have doubled 
down, because it's all about myself, sir " 



THE WIDOW. 131 

" Oh, of course that is sacred/' said Saville ; well, where 
may I turn to?" 

" Up there, sir," said Twigg, " where it begins, ' My 
mistress.' " 

' ' Oh ! " said Saville. 

" My mistress has been very very ill ; she has not entirely 
recovered the shock and disappointment occasioned by Mr. 
Saville's cruel conduct, I thought she would have died. 
There she was, Alexander, day after day going down to 
the bathing-machine, which was where I told you to tell 
Mr. Saville to meet us ; a washing and washing herself 
every morning of her life, till there was scarce any thing 
of her left j and what with that, and weeping, I do assure 
you I thought we should have lost her. She is better a 
little, and now speaks of your master, and will let me men- 
tion his name. But there is a book of his one which 
she did not send back when she returned all his bits of 
things that he had left at our house and I often see her 
reading in it, and crying ; but she tries not to let me see 
it ; and the minute I come into the room she jumps up 
and hides the book, and affects to laugh and talk something 
about nothing, just merely for conversation." 

" There, sir," said Twigg, " I told you, sir, there was 
something about you." 

" And extremely consolatory, as well as complimentary, 
that something is," said Saville. 

(( As for my mistress's husband, he has been at the very 
point of death. What has been the matter with him I 
cannot rightly tell you, because 1 do not exactly know ; 
but the doctors say he has got something the matter with 
his something, in Latin, which I believe is his liver in 
English, and he has great pain in his side, and is always 
sick ; but I am no great hand at Italian, and don't know 
the names the people here give to complaints. One thing 
I can make out, and that is, that he is not long for this 
world. And between you and me and the post, when he 
goes it will be no great loss ; for he leads my poor young 
lady such a life, that if he was the great mogul, stuffed 
with diamonds, I would not stop with him. Nobody dare 
speak to her, nor she to nobody ; and every body is run- 
ic 2 



132 THE WIDOW. 

ning after her here, because she is what they call leggiadra, 
and bella, and all that ; hut if any man hows or stops a 
moment to talk to her, old Smith is in one of his tantrums, 
and scolds her worse than ever her mother did, and that's 
saying a good deal. However, when the old man pops off, 
there she'll be just as young and as handsome as ever ; only 
a little thinner and paler than she was before, and if I am 
not very much mistaken, if your master can make out, as 
I hope you can, a good explanation of his behaviour, just 
as ready to be Mrs. Saville." 

" Psha ! " said Charles, " how 

" ' These fools rush in where angels fear to tread !'= 

The most delicate points are discussed and settled ; every 
thing upon which the tenderest feelings are excited can- 
vassed with carelessness and flippancy, and the fate of 
half a score people sealed, with as much ease as a gown is 
pinned or a curl twisted." 

" Fools ! sir," said Twigg, reproachfully, fe you can't 
think Miss J. a fool ? " 

" No, no, Twigg," said Saville, endeavouring to hide 
the emotions caused by her abrupt, but clearly correct 
communication of the state of the case ; " no, let her be 
one of the angels ; she is very like one." 

" Very, sir," said Twigg ; adding parenthetically, and in 
an under tone, (" Not that I ever see'd one.") 

" You may tell Mr. Saville of this letter, and give 

my dutiful respects to him, if you are yourself able to let 
me see that both you and he are wrongfully accused by us. 
I say us, for although Miss Harriet I cannot bear to 
call her Mrs. Smith is as mute as mute can be on the 
subject, I am sure in her heart she would be happier, and 
in her mind easier, if once she could think she has not 
been forsaken by him on purpose ; for to be an abandoned 
woman, Alexander, is, as I know, a very sad thing indeed. 
I don't mean to say much, because I am afraid of the 
worst ; and sometimes fear he may be one of them vile 
wretches of men who sport about and trifle with the feel- 
ings of the softer sex, and that you may, perhaps, be as 
bad ; but, nevertheless, I will hope, and, as I said before, 






THE WIDOW. 133 

if you can clear yourself, write to me ; and if he can clear 
himself with my young lady, there's nothing I won't do 
to serve him ; and whatever he may write in a letter, I 
will give her, provided it is all fair and honourable. But 
I will not have a hand in any thing wrong ; only I am 
sure if she was satisfied about his not being fickle and 
changing, she would be more at ease: and how could she 
be so well satisfied as by having the assurance under his 
own hand ? 

" When I recollect, Alexander, " 

" That's doubled down, sir," said Twigg ; " there's 
nothing more about you, sir, not a syllable ; it's only about 
Miss Mill, and two pots of soap, and some other little con- 
lindrums which Miss J. has sent me, and which Miss M. 
is to give me, provised I am single and constant, sir. You 
may read it all for the matter of that, only " 

' ' Oh," said Saville, " I have no desire, I assure you. 
I am much obliged to you for a sight of the letter, 
and " 

" In course," said Twigg, " you will take Miss J.'s hint, 
and write." 

tf That," said Saville, <f requires consideration, and 
must be deliberated upon at leisure ; there will be plenty 
of time for that, before you send your answer." 

" I shall write to-day, sir," said Twigg, " and if I can 
lay my hands upon Miss Mill, give her ocular proof of 
my constancy, and get the soap and the enceteras." 

" Well," said Saville, " I shall be prepared with my 
answer when your letter is ready." 

Twigg retired in high spirits, and left Saville in a state 
of mind difficult to describe. His beloved Harriet was 
suffering a martyrdom from which he might have rescued 
her. That he was accidentally and unavoidably prevented 
from achieving this most desirable object, she did not 
know ; and he perfectly agreed with Miss Johnstone that 
the knowledge of the fact would relieve her mind and 
diminish her remorse. Then ought he not to commu- 
nicate this fact simply ? No. It appeared to him that 
the certainty of his constancy, and the immutability of 
K 3 



J 34 THE WIDOW. 

his affection, would equally excite and agitate her; and 
that it would be cruel to open a new source of grief, 
when, perhaps, time had in some degree alleviated the 
sorrow derivable from another. 

As to this, however, it was pretty clear that Twigg's 
vindication of his own conduct to Miss Johnstone, over 
which Saville could have no control, would inevitably 
involve his master's exculpation. Yet he dare not him- 
self write to Harriet. It would be dishonourable; it 
^vould be dangerous to her comfort and welfare; and 
what are so dear to man as the ease and security of the 
woman he loves ? She might think him cold cruel, or 
even yet inconstant, if he let slip the opportunity of com- 
municating the few facts connected with his delay in 
France. But why should he undeceive her? why, for 
the personal gratification of setting himself right in a 
matter where, whether he were right or wrong, fate had 
decided that no good could accrue to either himself or 
his beloved, should he farther endanger her tranquillity ? 
She now believed him false ; let it be so. Better that 
he should suffer under unmerited reproach, than that she 
should again be agitated or disturbed. 

If he wrote she would answer; could he had he 
the stoicism to hear the complaints with which no doubt 
her letter would be filled, and not be moved to a line of 
conduct which, if persisted in, might lead to the saddest 
and bitterest results, and perhaps eventually mar the 
brightness and sully the purity which he had so long wor- 
shipped and adored ? 

The Sortes Virgiliance have, before now, influenced the 
conduct and affected the minds of the greatest and 
wisest; and although, upon the present occasion, Saville 
had not recourse to any book of fate to decide his choice 
in the course which he had to steer amongst the baffling 
winds of love and honour, it did so happen that while 
doubting and hesitating for his principle almost faltered 
when he thought of her misery and his own debasement in 
her estimation his eyes fell upon an accidentally open 
page of poems, which lay on his breakfast-table. The 



THE WIDOW. 135 

lines which were presented to his sight were these, by 
Soame Jenyns. 

" Too plain, dear youth, these tell-tale eyes 

My heart your own declare ; 
Let it, for Heaven's sake, suffice 
To know your triumph there. 

Forbear your utmost power to try, 

Nor further urge your sway ; 
Press not for what I must deny, 
. For fear I should obey. 

Could all your arts successful prove, 

Would you a being undo, 
Whose greatest failing is her love, 

And that her love for you ? 

Say would you use the very power 

You from her fondness claim, 
To ruin, in one fatal hour, 

A life of spotless fame ? 

Ah ! cease, dear love, to do an ill, 

Because perhaps you may ; 
But rather try your utmost skill, 

To save me, than betray. 

Be you yourself my virtue's guard, 

Defend, and not pursue ; 
For ah ! I feel the task too hard, 

To strive with love and you." 

It would, perhaps, be doing an injustice to the firmness 
and integrity of Saville, to attribute his determination not 
to write to Harriet to the accidental presentation of this 
appeal " from Chloe to Strephon " to his view. It cer- 
tainly was a curious coincidence ; and, accordingly, when 
Twigg came in, and announced that he had got his soap 
and his encetras, as he called them, and had written his 
letter, and meant to send it next day, Saville, much to the 
disappointment of his servant, and, as I suspect, to that of 
many of my female readers, who " thought better of him," 
announced that he had no note to send. 



CHAPTER X. 

IT was singular enough that Saville' s 'scrupulousness was 
needless; as it turned out, Harriet had her sorrow per- 
mitted it might have received his letter, and returned an 
answer ; for, before Twigg's letter reached Florence, she 
had become a WIDOW. Mr. Smith had been suddenly at- 
K 4 



136 THE WIDOW. 

tacked with some violent spasmodic affection in the middle 
of the night his medical man was sent for he grew 
worse three other physicians were called in and he 
died. 

Harriet's situation after this event would have been em- 
barrassing and difficult,, had it not happened that her mother 
and Colonel O'Lollocky had been her guests at Florence for 
a few days previous to its occurrence ; and, although Mrs. 
O'Lollocky 's jointure had been so secured by Smith after 
his marriage with the daughter, that she was placed in a 
permanent state of independence,, it appeared that the gal- 
lant colonel had discovered the climate of England to be 
much too keen for him, and that the more genial air of the 
continent was infinitely better suited to his constitution 
than that of his native country. Such had been the libe- 
rality of the young couple since their happy union, that the 
circumstance of having an establishment at their command 
was by no means disagreeable ; and as, of course, Harriet 
would be charmed with their society, it was settled that 
they should pass a few weeks with her and her husband at 
Florence, an indefinite sort of engagement, which 'the 
colonel reasonably imagined might be considerably extended, 
if convenient. 

The death of their hospitable host made no kind of dif- 
ference in their arrangements ; and Harriet, accustomed to 
the sway of her parent, suffered her to take the reins which 
in fact were her own ; and satisfied, by circumstances, that 
her maid's interpretation of Saville's conduct, communi- 
cated in Twigg's letter, could not be a correct one, or at all 
events not one upon which, with her sense of delicacy, she 
could act, or even rely, she abandoned herself to a grief 
which her common acquaintance attributed to the loss of 
her husband, with many observations and remarks upon 
its oddity and extravagance. 

The arrival of Mrs. O'Lollocky, her assumption of power 
upon the death of the old gentleman, combined with the 
announcement of the widow's determination not to return 
to England until the year of mourning was past, produced 
a serious change in the administration of her domestic 
affairs. Miss Johnstone, who had anticipated, with more 



THE WIDOW. 137 

anxiety of feeling than apprehension of the result, the de- 
mise of her master as the termination of her residence 
abroad, newly fired by the certainty of Mr. Twigg's fidelity, 
confided to her "young lady" her resolution of quitting 
her service, and proceeding to England ; adding, that as an 
opportunity offered of her getting home with a <f return 
family," she trusted her immediate departure would not 
be inconvenient. 

Of course, Harriet, who,, having been made the confi- 
dante of her attachment, and necessarily of the exonera- 
tion of her lover from [the charge of inconstancy and 
neglect, would not suffer any little worry to herself to in- 
terfere with her maid's views and objects. To part with 
a maid is as unpleasant an affair for a lady as can be well 
imagined: she has got used to all her mistress's habits 
and ways anticipates her likings, and obviates her anti- 
pathies and is altogether so important a depositary of 
confidential matters, that, puzzled as a king sometimes is 
to get rid of his prime minister for want of a successor, 
the royal embarrassment is scarcely so great upon such an 
occasion as that which is felt by a lady in parting with her 
soubrette. 

The arrangements for " Miss J.'s" departure were, 
however, speedily made, Mrs. O'Lollocky accelerating her 
removal as much as possible, she having conceived an un- 
conquerable aversion from the " young person ;" whom 
she believed and we know how justly to have been 
the confederate and counsellor of her daughter while she was 
single and married ; and anticipated in the reciprocity of 
dislike, which Miss J. made no great effort to conceal, 
some plot against herself and her ornamental husband, who 
was no great favourite with either mistress or maid. 

Harriet did not part with her without much regret. 
Her fidelity and attachment had been proved; and she 
quitted her mistress's service with nearly as much money 
including a legacy from her late master as would 
produce her an income in England equal to the rental of 
the territorial domain of the rejected nobleman, who had 
been dangling about her for some time. 

Before she went, Miss J. played the same game with 



138 THE WIDOW. 

her mistress at Florence, as Twigg had tried with Saville 
in London ; and, although the state of affairs was consider- 
ably altered since the latter period, it made no change in 
Harriet's determination she strenuously refused to per- 
mit Johnstone to he the bearer of a message or even a 
word to Saville. She saw, it is true, in the vindication of 
Twigg, a vindication of his master ; but she could not be- 
lieve that if he were equally anxious upon the subject, he 
would have permitted such an opportunity as had offered 
for his exculpation to slip, or have neglected to disabuse 
her mind upon a topic to her the most galling and mor- 
tifying. 

" No, Johnstone," said Mrs. Smith, { ' my parting in- 
junction to you is, not to mention my name to Mr. Saville ; 
and, above all, I entreat and indeed command you not 
to permit my reason for coming to this determination to 
escape your lips. Circumstances have occurred, under 
which I might have been justified in sending him my re- 
gards and remembrances, if he had thought proper to clear 
himself from the imputation which he must know rests 
upon him : I have new reasons afforded me, since my 
mother's arrival here, to be satisfied why he remained 
silent." 

tf What does the old lady say ?" said Miss Johnstone. 

" It is of no consequence," replied Harriet, trembling 
from head to foot, the tears standing in her eyes, her cheeks 
pale as death " of no consequence whatever ; he was 
right it was I who first faltered in my affection for him 
it is right and just, but I cannot help feeling he is on 
the very point of marriage to a sister-in-law of his friend 
Mr. Alvingham." 

lf I don't believe one single syllable of it, ma'am," said 
Johnstone ; ff I am sure it can't be so, from what Mr. 
Twigg writes, and what " 

" It is not likely he would have admitted him to a con- 
fidence upon such a subject, at a moment when he knew his 
man was about to write to you." 

" I won't believe it, ma'am," said Johnstone. " All I 
ask is, if I find it out to be a fib, I'm sure it is one, 
may I write to you to tell you so ; nay, if I am sure it is 



THE WIDOW. 139 

a fib, may I tell Mr. Saville what I know to be really the 
case ? " 

" Hush, hush, Johnstone," said Harriet, ' I cannot 
suffer you to do any of these things time will show us 
all. If Mr. Saville has been calumniated, he will be free 
to take what course he pleases ; after what you know, and 
what he knows of my feelings, it would be worse than 
useless to deny how deeply interested I am in every thing 
concerning him ; but I have already stooped too much, and 
I cannot, particularly in my present position, think of 
communicating with a gentleman who did not consider it 
worth while to acquit himself in my eyes, or run the risk 
of admitting the affection I feel for one, who, before you 
reach England, will perhaps be the husband of another 
woman." 

" Oh, I don't say, ma'am," replied Johnstone, " but 
that you show a proper spirit there ; but however fond 
Mr. Saville may be of the society of his friend Mr. Al- 
vingham, I am quite sure, from what Mr. Twigg told me 
almost the very last time I ever spoke to him, that none of 
the Miss Simpsons would do for a wife for him; he used to 
laugh at them, and quiz them, and call them the dear in- 
nocents of Baa-lamb hill." 

" Ah ! Johnstone," said Harriet, " it has very often 
happened that first impressions have entirely worn off, and 
that men have married women, who in the early stage of 
their acquaintance they have laughed at infinitely more 
than Mr. Saville ever laughed at those young ladies. How- 
ever, let the case be as it may, my injunctions to you are 
positive and unqualified ; and although I cease to have any 
control or authority over you, I think I may rely upon you 
for a compliance with my wishes, the neglect of which 
could not fail to lower me in the estimation of Mr. Saville, 
and (which is much worse) in that of my own." 

What effect this " preachment," as Mr. Twigg would 
have called it, eventually had upon Miss Johnstone's con- 
duct after her return to England we may presently see ; 
for the moment, our care is only to wish the kind-hearted 
creature a pleasant journey to her native country, and all 



140 ^ THE WIDOW. 

the happiness which she evidently anticipated in her union 
with the constant Twigg. 

The intelligence of Mr. Smith's death reached Saville 
before the arrival of Miss Johnstone. A thousand natural 
feelings filled his mind his beloved Harriet was free 
from the chains which had fettered her inclinations ; and 
although the customs of society prescribed rules for the 
exercise of a proper grief, he could not but consider the 
demise of her husband as the first step towards the realiza- 
tion of all his hopes, and the consummation of all his earthly 
happiness. 

It was evident that he could not with delicacy take any 
decided step at the moment ; he felt anxious and alarmed 
for her in her lone and isolated station, not knowing that 
she was supported by the presence of her mother. But 
what could he do ? he had no pretence to be her champion 
or protector, and although time might secure his eventual 
comfort, time was absolutely necessary. He now regretted 
that he had not strained a point, and written a few words 
of exculpation to the wife of Smith, which would have 
been read by her only as his widow. Yet he consoled 
himself with the assurance that Twigg's explanation must 
have satisfied Harriet of the real cause of his failure in 
keeping the appointment at the Isle of Wight, which he 
had been so anxious to make, and that she must know him 
too well to attribute his silence to any but its real cause, 
his anxiety not to subject her even to an imputation of 
impropriety on his account, while she remained the wife 
of another. 

When Miss Johnstone arrived, and explained not only 
the actual state of circumstances at Florence, but of the 
report which Mrs. O'Lollocky had carried thither, Saville's 
feelings were excited in a very eminent degree ; he de- 
nounced and anathematized not only himself, the cholera, 
and the French quarantine laws, but his own timidity, and 
the old lady's mendacity. His first impulse was to pro- 
ceed forthwith to Italy ; but this scheme he abandoned; 
because he felt he should needlessly involve himself in 
contentions with Mrs. O'Lollocky, who, now that she was 



THE WIDOW. 141 

married, appeared infinitely more inveterate against him 
than she ever had been before ; while her distaste for him 
was upon all occasions excited and corroborated hy her 
amiable husband, who hoped, by keeping him off, to secure 
to himself all the comforts of his daughter-in-law's con- 
venient residence, her easy carnages, and her well-bred 
horses, which, if she married again, would of course be 
wrested from him, and both the colonel and his lady 
agreed, that knowing as they did, the character and dis- 
position of Mrs. Smith, it was only necessary to keep her 
separate from Saville, to hinder her from again entering 
into a state in which she had found little but sorrow and 
vexation. These people, intimate as they were with her, 
fell into the error which has been before noticed of mis- 
taking gentleness for weakness, and mildness for want of 
firmness, and under that impression believed they could 
manage her exactly as they pleased. What their success 
was, events must show ; in the outset of their vice-royalty 
over her, she seemed implicitly to bow to their will. Still 
uncertain about Saville, his approaching marriage uncon- 
tradicted, she could not venture to rely upon what, in due 
season, he might do, and therefore until that due season 
came, when the truth or falsehood of the stories which 
had been told her would also be proved, she resolved to 
bear every inconvenience with meekness and patience, and 
sustain her character of the obedient daughter which she 
had so truly acted up to, to the day of her marriage ; the 
entirety of her obedience in the last instance, having been 
preserved, it must be confessed, rather by accident than 
upon principle. 

The viceroys suggested an immediate removal from 
Florence, the colonel undertaking to transact all the 
necessary business connected with her accession to a part 
of the fortune, and some of the estates of her late husband. 
Smith had left a considerable portion of his property to his 
own relations ; so that, in fact, when things were wound 
up, it appeared that, besides the house in Buckinghamshire, 
and that in London, Harriet had about three thousand 
pounds annual income from the funds, making nearly, one 
way and another, five thousand a-year. 



142 THE WIDOW. 

The Widow, who knew little enough of what are called 
the ways of the world, had yet a sufficient perception of 
the sort of man Colonel O'Lollocky was, to desire in her 
own mind that he should have as little as possible to do 
with the management of her concerns ; the colonel,, on the 
contrary, was all anxiety, civility, and affection, and called 
her his " little daughter-in-law," his " dear child," and 
his ff sweet love," in a manner so wonderfully warm and 
easy, that Harriet could scarcely comprehend the character 
in which the endearing words were addressed to her. 
Patience was still her motto ; and during this reign of 
encroachment and submission, the notable colonel and his 
superficial lady firmly believed that they were managing 
the Widow, and completely superseding Mr. Charles Saville 
in her thoughts and recollections. 

Saville, who was greatly affected by the new imputation 
of an intended marriage, considered that circumstance, of 
itself, a sufficient ground for writing a few lines to Har- 
riet, although Miss Johnstone entreated him for her sake 
to do no such thing. That in the first place, it would 
prove to Mrs. Smith that she had broken her promise, 
which, although it was true she had done so, she had done 
with the best possible intentions ; and in the second place, 
it might expose her late mistress to some unpleasant dis- 
cussions with her mother and her father-in-law, who 
would not fail to see and inquire into the particulars of 
any letter she might receive from England. 

Saville who, the reader must have already perceived, was 
infinitely more careful of Harriet's happiness than his own 
listened to the plausible reasonings of Harriet's ci-devant 
maid ; and at length acceded to her earnest request to manage 
the matter according to her own method, which was to allow 
her to write all the facts of the case to the Widow, stating 
the nature of the circumstances by which she had ascer- 
tained the falsehood of the report of the marriage, and 
Mr. Saville's anxious desire to have one line of intelligence 
concerning her views and projected movements, telling her 
at the same time that it was in compliance with her 
request that he had not written himself, and begging her, 
if she had any regard for a gentleman, who was entirely 






THE WIDOW. 143 

devoted to her, to commission her in her answer to say 
something to him to keep up his spirits, or to suggest, if 
she felt so inclined, the best mode of avoiding the con- 
troversy which she was but too certain would arise, if he 
either went to Florence, or sent her any letters openly; 
winding up all these statements, petitions, and observa- 
tions, by declaring her conviction that no man upon 
earth would more gratefully receive a favourable word or 
two, or more zealously strive to deserve the preference 
which it was impossible for her to deny, and which she, 
" Miss J.," knew her young lady felt for him, beyond all 
other living beings. 

Satisfied with the wisdom and prudertce of this half- 
measure, Saville became considerably tranquillized by the 
reflection, that, in a few days, Harriet would, upon good 
authority the best except his own be informed of the 
injury which had been attempted on his character for con- 
stancy, and busied himself in looking out for a successor 
to Twigg, who, in a fortnight, was to leave him in order 
" to better himself/' marry Miss Johnstone, take pos- 
session of a tavern in the neighbourhood of Covent Garden, 
and begin life with his dear partner, upon their united 
funds, the produce of mutual industry and integrity. 

Time passed, and Twigg was blessed. The happy 
couple left town in a one-horse chaise to pass the honey 
week for they had not time to make a moon of it at 
the Crooked Billet on Penge Common, where they only 
remained till the next day ; both parties being perfectly 
agreed upon the false delicacy of seclusion, which to them 
was so novel and uninteresting a system, that six days' re- 
sidence there would have been a season of gall instead of 
" treacle," as Lord Byron calls it ; they accordingly re- 
turned to the metropolis in their buggy, and in a very 
short time were in active employment in their new vo- 
cation. 

A month elapsed not of honey to Saville before 
the amiable Mrs. Twigg received any acknowledgment 
from her late mistress of the budget of news which she had 
sent her. At last, however, it came ; it contained a kind 
of April scolding, half clouds, half sunshine, for 



1 44 THE WIDOW. 

having, as she almost feared, violated all her instructions 
with regard to Saville, when she saw him ; some good 
advice, and a request that she would write no more. 

In one corner were these words, which she desired Mr. 
Saville might see. 

"It is of the greatest consequence to me that I should 
not receive any letter from Mr. Saville, even if he had any 
thing to say which should induce him to write. We shall 
he moving about without any fixed residence, for some 
months. I should be greatly annoyed if he were to visit 
the continent. At a future time I shall be most happy to 
see him, when he can give me all those explanations of his 
absence from the Isle of Wight which he seems anxious 
to do. But again I beg of you, if you should accidentally 
see him, to impress upon him the danger and impolicy of 
his neglecting my request. Situated as we are, it does not 
require a correspondence to maintain a friendship. The 
day will come when less restraint upon my actions may be 
necessary." 

This was all that was wanting to ensure not his per- 
fect happiness, for that, he could not be supposed to enjoy 
while thus debarred the presence of his beloved but his 
confidence in Harriet. It was clear that her position was 
painful and disagreeable in an eminent degree ; but what 
she said clearly proved that she was aware of the difficulties 
by which her mother's unfortunate marriage had surrounded 
her. It also showed that she was firmly resolved to defeat 
whatever machinations they might be employed upon, and 
when the time came " which must come," and which 
Saville construed into the termination of the year of 
mourning, act with decision and firmness upon the point 
where her happiness or misery was so deeply concerned. 

It is scarcely possible to describe the manreuvres of the 
gallant colonel ; but his last grand coup was the introduc- 
tion of his younger brother, a lieutenant on the half pay of 
his former regiment, who met the party unexpectedly on 
their way from Rome to Naples, and who was immediately 
quartered upon Mrs. Smith. It was impossible for her to 
decline the acquaintance of her mother's brother-in-law, or 
to refuse him the hospitalities which she had extended to 



THE WIDOW. 145 

his brother ; but nothing could be more annoying. He 
was a pert, impertinent, vulgar dandy, than which nothing 
on earth can be more odious. He was decked out in 
tawdry chains and rings, all badly made, (some of them of 
Mosaic gold,) and wore huge bunches of ringlets over his 
ears, and a Charley on his under lip. Add to this that he 
smoked incessantly, and repeated jokes said to have been 
made by eminent persons, at what he was pleased to call 
" the West End," (all of which had, centuries before his 
existence, graced the ancient jest books whence Mr. Joseph 
Miller culled his choicest flowers,) and a pretty fair judg- 
ment may be formed of the advantages of his society. 

It was evident to Harriet, from the clumsiness of the 
fellow himself, that it was intended, if she evinced a dis- 
position to marry again, she, like her mother, should be- 
come Mrs. O'Lollocky Mrs. Eneas O'Lollocky it would 
be. The gallant colonel's first desire was that she should 
not marry at all, and therefore the first object in having 
over the lieutenant was that he might act scarecrow, and 
frighten away the flutterers from the fruit. The secondary 
point to gain was, that if she married any body, she should 
marry him. 

This " double-barrelled scheme," as the colonel called it, 
was instantly seen through by the timid Harriet, who re- 
solved that the question should be speedily set at rest ; her 
pride not being less hurt at the supposition that she could 
ever admit such a person to her heart, than at the flagrant 
indelicacy of foisting him into the family before the first 
month of her widowhood had expired. 

Of this speculation Saville was, of course, ignorant ; but 
had he been aware of it, his uneasiness would only have 
been excited for the lady's sake. He had now a regular 
admission of her feelings, under her own hand; of the 
needlessness of any correspondence to maintain and keep 
those feelings alive, and he had only patiently to endure the 
flight of time, until she should be at liberty to avow her 
resolution, for the enjoyment of all earthly happiness. 

It is true that it required some stretch of philosophy to 
look forward with calmness to so distant a period ; but it 
was inevitable, and satisfied with the wisdom of, his pre- 



146 



THE WIDOW. 



cautions, he endeavoured to ff kill the enemy/' as Lieute- 
nant Eneas O'Lollocky would have said, by a constant 
succession of occupations and amusements, which carried 
him on to the autumn, when he accepted his annual invita- 
tion to Harlingham parsonage, for which place he speedily 
left town, little expecting that the peaceful dwelling of the 
parson of the parish was to become the scene of events of 
the highest importance to his future prospects, arid, which, 
whatever the reader may do, he did not at tbf time of his 
arrival there, imagine could possibly occur. 



END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 



THE WIDOW. 



147 



VOLUME THE SECOND. 



CHAPTER XI. 

NOTHING could be prettier than the parsonage at Har- 
lingham. It was situated on a green knoll beyond the 
church, at about a quarter of a mile's distance from the 
town, which lay almost buried in the richly-tufted trees 
that towered round it, ^so that if it had not been for the 
blue smoke which " so gracefully curled " in the autumnal 
evenings, it would never have been known from the par- 
sonage windows that there were any houses there. The 
town possessed one feature of gaiety not commonly inci- 
dental to such retired spots : it was the head-quarters of 
the reserve companies of regiments on foreign service, and 
the periodical sound of drums in its streets, and the occa- 
sional sight of red coats in its walks and rides, gave an 
agreeable relief to its otherwise quiet neighbourhood. 

To Alvingham's table the military were occasionally 
invited, and in a circle so easy and agreeable, found a 
delightful variety to the sameness of a military routine in 
peace time. The other principal inhabitants, including the 
'squire, were similarly disposed to hospitality, and Har- 
lingham was universally known in the army as " good 
quarters." 

In the enjoyment of this charming retirement, Saville 
rode and read, and walked and talked the hours away ; and 
it required very little pressing on the part of his reverend 
host to induce him to continue a regimen which appeared 
so well to agree with his health, bodily and mental. He 
extended his visit through a period of four months, and at 
the end of that time only quitted his friends on condition 
of repeating it very shortly. 

L 2 



148 THE WIDOW. 

Circumstances connected with his own family, however, 
detained him in London ; and although perfectly confident 
in the truth of his Harriet, his anxiety because he did not 
hear from her, preyed upon his mind, and occasioned an 
illness which kept him long confined to his bed ; his 
recovery from which was the signal for his return to the 
country, where the kind and unaffected Mrs. Alvingham 
most cordially welcomed the intimate friend of her husband, 
amiable and agreeable as he was, and rendered so peculiarly 
interesting to a female heart, by the circumstances of his 
attachment and disappointment, the subsequent events 
which had occurred, and the renewed hopes which at- 
tended it. 

" My dear Mr. Saville," said Mrs. Alvingham, receiving 
him at the door of the parsonage, " most truly glad am I 
to see you here once more. Our accounts of you have been 
dreadfully alarming, which, however, I should not even 
now mention to you, if I did not see by your looks and in 
your manner that all danger was past, and that nothing 
but quiet and good country air were necessary for your 
perfect restoration." 

" I am not so sure," said Saville, smiling, ( ' that these 
admirable remedies of themselves will effect a cure. How- 
ever, we shall see. Where is Alvingham ? " 

" He is gone shooting with Major Brown," said Mrs. 
Alvingham. 

" And who may Major Brown be ? " asked the newly 
arrived visitor. 

" He is the commanding officer here," answered Mrs. 
Alvingham, " recently returned from India, and appointed 
to this depot, where he expects to be fixed for some time. 
He is an extremely agreeable person, and as I believe, 
from what I can understand, engaged to be married to a 
widow lady, somewhere in the country, whither he is 
almost immediately going in order to fulfil his engagement, 
and bring back his bride to an extremely pretty cottage 
which he has just taken ; the cottage opposite Williams's," 
added Mrs. Alvingham ; " that one which you said the 
last time you were here was so beautifully situated." 






THE WIDOW. 149 

" Ah, happy man ! " said Saville, "every hody can fulfil 
engagements except me." 

" And marry widows," said Mrs. Alvingham archly ; 
" and so will you, my dear friend. Trust in Providence, 
and have patience, and your sufferings will be recompensed, 
and your merits rewarded." 

" We shall see," said Saville ; " I am a nervous fool, 
and have my misgivings." 

" Recollect the proverb about faint hearts," said Mrs. 
Alvingham. 

" It has no reference to my case," replied Saville. 

" Excuse me," said the lady of the house, " you may 
have won your fair lady already ; your courage must be 
proved " 

"In wearing her," interrupted Charles; "and there," 
continued he, " is centered all my anxiety. For now twelve 
months has she been exposed to all the assiduities of a train 
of lovers, added to the constant attentions of her Irish con- 
nection, through her mother's marriage, which I presume 
continue. Is it not enough to alarm a man conscious, as I 
am, of the importance of habitual communion with any 
one object; and aware, as I cannot fail to be, of the 
genuineness of Harriet's character, and the artless candour 
with which she would make evident, by her manner, any 
favourable impression she might receive from the attentions 
of an agreeable and assiduous admirer ? " 

" These are all jealous fears and idle fancies," said Mrs. 
Alvingham, "unworthy of you, believe me. I know 
nothing of your Mrs. Smith beyond your account of her ; 
but if she be the person you describe, and possess the heart 
and mind which you attribute to her, you are as secure of 
her love at a thousand miles' distance as if you were at her 
elbow." 

" Ah ! " said Saville, " the distance is not the point, 
the time is what I dread. Consider, a whole year." 

"A year is but a moment in the scale of constancy," 
said Mrs. Alvingham. " I'll stake my existence that you 
will find your ' widow ' as constant as ' courage to the brave 
in battle ; ' or, to use another and rather more ancient com- 
parison, the needle to the pole. ' ' 
L 3 



150 THE WIDOW. 

" The period she prescribed as one of patience and pro- 
bation ends this week/' said Saville. " I have heard of 
her but three times during the whole of the twelve months ; 
from her, not once. 1 know her mother's temper too well 
to infringe the rule Harriet laid down about my correspond- 
ing with her ; and all I have ascertained from others who 
have accidentally met them on the continent, is, that her 
determination is to come to England, (now, I suppose, 
almost immediately,) and establish herself at her house in 
Buckinghamshire. Another piece of news which I have 
also learned through the same channel, is, that she has 
formed an acquaintance with a most agreeable family, of 
which, to my infinite satisfaction, all the members are 
females." 

" Well, then, my dear Mr. Saville," said Mrs. Alvingham, 
tc with all this satisfactory information, and the certainty 
of her being in England in so short a time, why worry 
yourself with groundless apprehensions, and conjure up 
miseries and misfortunes which never are likely to occur ? 
Pray, do smile, and look a little less lover-like, or ghost- 
like; for here come the shooters, and I should not like 
to present you to our new friend with such a melancholy 
face." 

A few moments brought Mr. Alvingham and the major 
to the drawing-room windows, which opened on the lawn. 

" My dear fellow," said the rector, " how happy am I 
to see you here again ; looking, too, so much better than 
I had hoped, after all we had heard of you." 

" Thanks, my kind friend," said Saville ; iC I have rallied, 
and am conscious of it." 

" And as I tell him," said the rector's lady, " a little of 
our care will set him all to rights again." 

" Allow me to introduce Major Brown to you," said 
Alvingham. " Major Brown Mr. Saville." 

" Mr. Saville" repeated the Major, starting back invo- 
luntarily, ' f I am extremely happy to" -. here a 
bow, rather formal, evidently constrained, and a sort of 
muttering, as little intelligible to the company as it seemed 
intentional on the part of the mutterer, put an end to the 
ceremony. 



THE WIDOW. 151 

(C When did you arrive, Charles?" said Alvingham. 

" About half an hour since," replied he. 

ff Did you come from London, sir ? " said Brown, 
eyeing him with an interest so peculiar as to attract the 
attention of both host and hostess. 

" I did," said Saville. 

te Town is empty, I suppose ? " said Alvingham. 

"A desert in its western provinces," replied Saville, 
but as much crammed with nobodies in the east, as ever." 

" For my part," said Brown, fe I admit an inveterate 
affection for the metropolis ; as the Lord Chesterfield said, 
f there is no place so good in the winter, and none better 
in the summer.' " 

" Except," said Mrs. Alvingham, (C that one would 
seek the country, for the sake of air." 

" Air, my dear madam," said Brown, " upon my ho- 
nour, I don't see why one should go into the country for 
air. London is open at top. No, no. Unless called 
farther afield by duty, I think I never should desire a 
longer range of country than the space between those 
mountains of Cockaigne Blackheath and Richmond 
Hill." 

<f You have been much farther lately, Major Brown," 
said Saville, " at least so I understood from Mrs. Alving- 
ham." 

" Yes," said Brown, looking rather confused ; why 
nobody could guess "I have " 

" You are just returned from India; are you not?" 
said Saville. 

" I am from India," said the major ; " but I have 
been on the continent latterly ; that is to say, I came from 
India by the Red Sea, to Alexandria, and thence down the 
Mediterranean to Naples, where I remained a short time, 
and then proceeded homewards as fast as I could." 

" Naples ! " muttered Saville, and he cast his eyes upon 
the fine person of the gallant major, with an inquiring 
glance. The last time he had heard of Harriet she was at 
Naples. 

" I," said Saville, " I have some friends at Naples 
L 4 



152 THE WIDOW. 

at least I believe they are there they were, when 
I heard of them last." 

" English ? " said Brown. 

" Yes/' said Saville, " I " 

" Oh, come, come/' said Alvingham, " I'll speak for 
you. You must know, Major Brown, that this is a sore 
subject. He is too much interested about it to make in- 
quiries himself. Did you happen to see or hear any thing 
of a very charming widow of the name of Smith, and her 

mother and father-in-law, a Colonel O' what, Sa- 

ville?" 

' Lollocky/' said Charles : so lost in the interest with 
which he awaited the major's answer, that he was not at 
all aware of the absurd effect produced by his melancholy 
pronunciation of the gallant officer's euphonic surname ; 
but which, nevertheless, threw the merry-hearted Mrs. 
Alvingham into a violent fit of laughter. 

The effect produced upon Major Brown by the question 
was, nevertheless, considerably stronger than might have 
been anticipated. He stammered out an affirmative, " That 
he had not only heard of the party, but had seen them, 
and he believed the lady herself was on her way to this 
country." 

ec I told you so, Mr. Saville," said Mrs. Alvingham, 
" patience, patience, patience." 

" You are intimately acquainted with the family ? " 
asked Major Brown, addressing himself to Charles. 

" Oh," said Alvingham, " as I told you before, this is 
much too tender a subject to touch upon in his present 
state of health ; so let us postpone the discussion until we 
shall be better prepared to enter upon it say, after 
dinner." 

Saville, who did not exactly comprehend the nature of 
the major's intimacy with the Franklins, and who, above 
all, disliked the embarrassment under which he could not 
fail to observe that he laboured during this 1 brief dialogue, 
rejoiced mightily at Alvingham's prudential delay of ex- 
planation ; and availing himself of his hint, that the dinner 
hour was approaching, quitted the drawing-room to dress, 
leaving Alvingham, the major, and the lady together. 



THE WIDOW. 153 

" It is curious enough/' said Mrs. Alvingham, " that 
Major Brown should so recently have seen the being, of all 
others in the world, so interesting to poor Mr. Saville." 

" It is exceedingly strange," replied the gallant officer, 
" but such things will occur in this life. He seems ex- 
tremely gentlemanly and agreeable." 

" Seen, too," said his ardent champion, Mrs. Alvingham, 
" to such a disadvantage. His health shockingly impaired 
by his anxiety respecting this very lady, to whom he is 
devotedly attached ; and his spirits, once gay and buoyant 
in the highest degree, broken by his disappointment, and 
the extraordinary mishaps which have befallen him in the 
course of his attachment, he is scarcely like the being he 
was a year and a half ago." 

" You have known him some time?" said the major. 

" I have known him from boyhood," said Alvingham ; 
" we were at school and at college together a more 
honourable, better-hearted creature does not exist ; and I 
am sure, if the lady is as constant as she ought to be, the 
termination of their attachment will be a life of perfect 
happiness/' 

During this conversation, the attention of the major to 
the subject of it, evidently proclaimed an interest far be- 
yond that, which could have been produced by a short and 
casual acquaintance with the widow and her family ; and 
when Alvingham pronounced the words which have been 
last recorded, his agitation became perceptible, not only to 
Mrs. Alvingham, who had been more attentively watching 
the working of his countenance, but to her husband. The 
major seemed as anxious now to escape from the topic, as 
Saville had been a few minutes before ; and abruptly looking 
at his watch, pronounced the time to be within half an hour 
of dinner ; and seeing that he had to go to his lodging 
for he had not yet taken possession of his cottage to 
dress and return, there were but a few minutes to spare ; 
accordingly he departed; and as soon as he had quitted the 
room, Mrs. Alvingham said to her husband, in a prophetic 
tone 

" William, I would lay my life our friend Major Brown 
will turn out to be a rival of poor Charles." 



154 THE WIDOW. 

" If so," said Alvingham, " after all we have heard of 
his plans and prospects, he must be a successful one." 

" What an unpleasant circumstance to think that 
they should meet here ! " 

" Well, my love/' said Alvingham, ' ' recollect that we 
have no ground for believing it to be the case. The 
marriage of the major may not be connected with the 
Franklin family at all ; and, at all events, don't let either 
of us awaken a suspicion upon the subject in Saville' s mind. 
A few days may let us more into the secret ; time will 
develop all ; and, of course, if the case should eventually 
turn out, as it seems just probable it may, the major will 
come to some explanation upon the subject, and we shall be 
better able to meet the difficulties, and assuage the grief of 
our poor friend, who, in that case, will of course leave us, 
before the major returns from his matrimonial expedition 
to settle in Harlingham." 

" Oh, my dear life ! " said Mrs. Alvingham, " you are 
going too fast; I only suggested the possibility that such 
an unhappy circumstance might take place : recollect, as 
you say, we have no ground for suspecting it, except the 
major's evident agitation j but, dear me ! do not let us 
encourage any fears upon so slight a foundation." 

The second dinner bell (rung even before they had gone 
to dress) put an end to this conversation, which, however, 
had a sequel before the happy couple made their re-appear- 
ance in the drawing-room ; in which both the rector and 
his lady had resolved, and pledged themselves mutually, 
not to take the slightest notice of what had passed, or even 
touch upon the subject of the Franklins, or of Naples, 
or of Harriet, unless one or other of their visitors first 
broached it. 

Their compact was scarcely necessary. Saville, from 
fear and delicacy, did not recur to any of these, to him 
vital topics, nor did Brown ; but it was impossible for the 
host and hostess not to perceive the most striking change 
in the deportment of the latter from that which he had 
hitherto adopted in their society. His spirits appeared 
subdued, his manner to Saville was remarkably kind, he 
seemed to watch every word that he uttered with a scru- 



THE WIDOW. 155 

pulously attentive care, almost unaccountable, never making 
the slightest allusion to any circumstance hearing upon the 
point most interesting to Charles, who, as we have already 
seen, (from different motives, perhaps,) did not venture to 
refer to it even distantly. 

The evening was passed differently from any evening 
during which Major Brown had been a visitor at the Par- 
sonage before ; and, in spite of all the meritorious efforts 
of Mr. and Mrs. Alvingham, it was impossible to dissipate 
a gloom which seemed to hang over the whole party, not 
one of them exactly knowing the cause of the evident dul- 
ness whith had overcome the others. 

At breakfast next morning, Alvingham expected Saville 
would have said something respecting Brown's acquaintance 
with the family ; but he was disappointed. Saville spoke 
of the major as an extremely agreeable person ; but, either 
it had not struck him that he had been particularly intimate 
with Harriet's party when at Naples, or he had determined 
not to subject himself to the ridicule of Mrs. Alvingham, 
by exhibiting any symptoms of jealousy or mistrust of his 
beloved, in consequence. The fact was, that he was dying 
to get a little more information out of the major, and not 
able to set about it, lest he should hear something likely to 
disturb his peace of mind, and perhaps overthrow the whole 
fabric of his hopes. 

He, therefore, like his friends, resolved upon trying what 
time would do ; and whether, in the course of a few days, 
opportunities might not occur for drawing out the gallant 
officer, and obtaining a clearer view of the real state of 
parties. Alvingham had made up his mind that they should 
see no more of the major ; for, recollecting some of the 
circumstances which had occurred, he at once settled the 
question in his own mind, and set down the major as the 
man. 

Upon what grounds all these different speculations were 
bottomed it is impossible to guess, nor can we yet say what 
might have caused the agitation and subsequent melancholy 
of the gallant officer ; certain it is, that, so far from absent- 
ing himself so far from shrinking, or skulking, or showing 
any marks of sorrow or anger, he was at the parsonage just 



156 THE WIDOW. 

at luncheon -time ; and, as usual, sauntered about till it was 
time to take his daily ride ; from which he returned, and 
sauntered again with Saville himself. 

During this stroll their conversation, drawn to the sub- 
ject, in the first instance, by the beauty of the scenery 
around them, turned upon pictures. Saville had not only 
great taste, but considerable skill as a draftsman, (not 
perhaps in equity, but in water-colours ;) the major was a 
proficient in the art. Of course, this community of accom- 
plishment led to discussions, and remarks, and observations, 
which terminated by the major's begging Saville to call on 
him the next day at his quarters, in order to look* over his 
portefeuille, which contained some specimens too large to be 
moved conveniently to the parsonage. 

" I have found," said the major, " infinite delight and 
comfort in my pencil. The greater part of my military 
life, except the short period of a local war in India, has 
been passed in peace. The great Duke had consummated 
all that was to be done, while I was yet a young subaltern ; 
and thus my otherwise tedious hours of mere routine duty, 
which I have enlivened and given interest to by drawing, 
formed, instead of a dreary waste in existence, one of its 
happiest portions ; and I am rewarded with a collection of 
records, to me invaluable." 

" You are about to settle in this neighbourhood, I think," 
said Saville. 

(f Yes," answered the major. " I have secured that pretty 
cottage, but the most valuable part of its furniture has not 
yet arrived. I suppose the Alvinghams have told you that 
I am on the point of marriage of course to the most 
charming of her sex, as all bachelors' wives are ; however, 
as you are likely to be a fixture here, I shall perhaps have 
the pleasure of introducing her to you. I don't think, for 
a man with a sketching mania upon him, any part of 
England can afford better opportunities for indulging in his 
madness than this very spot." 

" When do you think of going, Major Brown ? " said 
Saville. 

" In a very few days," replied the major. " I am in 



THE WIDOW. 157 

hopes, if I can get leave, of starting for Buckinghamshire 
on Tuesday or Wednesday." 

l( Buckinghamshire !" said Saville, "are you aware 
that the Mrs. Smith whom you met in Naples has a house 
in Buckinghamshire ? " 

"Yes/' said the major, his cheeks colouring to the 
deepest crimson et yes it's yes the same county 

yes exactly " 

" Perhaps," said Saville, " I should not be asking too 
much of your kindness, if you should happen to be in that 
part of the country, to inquire whether she is returned. 
You know them, and, perhaps " 

" Yes !" said the major, "I I know them certainly, 
yes and of course shall make a point of seeing them, if 

that is if they should have arrived." 

" I am most anxious for news of them," said Saville. 
" I fear, from what I have heard, that the husband of the 
widow's mother is not a very happy acquisition to the 
family ; he has a younger brother, too." 

" Oh," said Brown, " yes Mr. Eneas O'Lollocky 
true. He was not with them when I was at Naples. I 
believe, from what I heard then, that he had gone the 
length of something very like making an offer to Mrs. 
Smith, which, luckily for her, brought the acquaintance to a 
speedy termination, and justified her in { warning him off.' " 

"It is a melancholy thing," said Saville, " to see a 
woman at Mrs. Franklin's time of life hazarding her com- 
fort, and overthrowing her respectability, by such a mar- 
riage." 

" Yes," said Brown ; " so it is so it is ; but not 
more absurd, when absurdity was the order of the day, 

than her daughter marrying Smith." 

" Then, perhaps," said Saville, " if you should not 
return immediately, you would write me one line, just to 
say if she is at her own place." 

" You shall hear from me," said Brown, " depend upon 
it. I am not so entirely devoted to my own interests, but 
I can spare time to communicate with a gentleman whose 
acquaintance, I honestly and sincerely declare, I am most 



158 THE WIDOW. 

happy to have made. Now, pray remember to-morrow 
at one ; if I am not in, do me the favour to wait. I will 
leave the portefeuilles out, so that if my drawings can afford 
you any amusement, you may entertain yourself, in case I 
should be delayed in my return, by duty." 

The acceptance of this invitation concluded the dialogue 
between the gentlemen, just as some of the neighbours 
joined them ; and Brown being engaged to dine at some 
distance from Harlingham took his leave. A detail of 
what had taken place between them, which Saville subse- 
quently gave to Alvingham, greatly relieved the mind of 
the latter, who saw in what had occurred the most satis- 
factory annihilation of all his doubts and fears respecting 
the dreaded rivalry between them. This raised the rec- 
tor's spirits, his good spirits infected his wife, and Saville, 
cheered by the prospect of early intelligence, and from the 
best authority, of all he valued in the world, seemed to 
emulate the gaiety of his friends. 

The morning came and punctual to his appointment, 
Saville proceeded to the major's lodgings, (in military 
phraseology, quarters,) which, in fact, consisted of the 
first-floor of the library, blest resort of idlers, which 
graced the main street of Harlingham. As Brown had 
suspected might be the case, he was not at home, but the 
servant had orders to invite Mr. Saville up stairs, which 
instructions he fulfilled, and Saville, in pursuance of his 
acceptance of the delegated bidding, mounted the small 
staircase and entered the front drawing-room, where, ac- 
cording to promise, lay the huge receptacles of the absent 
host's performances. 

According to his new friend's suggestion, he opened the 
first collection, and was delighted, if not surprised, to find 
some views in water-colours, executed with all the power 
of our best masters. Some Indian scenery, which would 
have done credit to Westall ; and some Italian subjects, of 
which neither Turner nor Calcott need have been ashamed. 

Having satisfied himself with examining minutely the con- 
tents of the first volume of these splendid sketches, Saville 
prepared to remove it to another table, or rather escritoire, in 
order to make room for a second detachment of drawings; in 



THE WIDOW. 159 

doing which, he somewhat awkwardly upset a small writing- 
desk, or as it is technically called by cabinet-makers, a slope, 
which stood upon the flat part of the larger piece of furniture. 
Vexed at his excessive awkwardness, as he considered it, he 
hastily scrambled up the papers which had been under it, in 
order to restore them to their places : judge then oh ! sen- 
sitive reader his horror, his wonder, his agony, when 
he found amongst them, an open letter directed to his gal- 
lant host, in the hand- writing of his own Harriet the 
post-mark, Wycombe the seal, " dinna forget." 

Here was a situation in which to be placed ! What 
on earth could he do ? Read the letter he dare not de- 
grade himself by spying into the private concerns of a 
man who, in the warmth of friendship and esteem, had 
confided to him the charge of every thing belonging to 
him he must not ! Yet how could he see, how could 
he speak to that man, while yet a doubt remained upon his 
mind, like that which the sight of this hateful document 
had excited ! 

Honour, propriety, honesty, demanded that he should 
instantly replace the paper where it had been before the 
overthrow of the desk ; yet love, exasperation, madness 
perhaps, stood in the way between him and the fulfilment 
of what was right, and just, and honourable, and honest. 
The trial was too great, the temptation too strong ; jea- 
lousy, and all its accessories, filled his mind ; and scarcely 
thinking what he did, or what the enormity of his conduct, 
he paused before he put the paper down, and casting a 
look of guilty consciousness around him, dared to sacrifice 
his principle to his passion and open the letter, in which he 
was rewarded for his defection from the high path of 
honour, by reading as follows : 

" Melcombe House, Thursday. 

" MY DEAREST GEORGE, 

" We have reached this safely, and I am much more 
pleased with the place than I had hoped to be. I have not 
a moment to spare, except to announce our arrival, or I 
shall lose the post. Mamma and the colonel positively 
leave me next Tuesday ; Maria remains. Pray, pray re- 
member your promise, so fervently made at Naples, and 



160 



THE WIDOW. 



come to me as soon as possible. In your affection, my dear 
George, I look for every thing that is to comfort and support 
me. Whatever arrangements you have made with regard to 
a house, they will be quite acceptable. Your comfort and 
convenience must be in all things first attended to ; and as 
for situation or convenience, a fond and dutiful wife will 
never complain, or even question her husband's will and 
wishes. I am delighted to be once more in England ; but 
my happiness will not be complete until I see you, and 
endeavour to secure your happiness. 

" Ever, dear George, your affectionately attached 

" HARRIET SMITH." 

This was the climax now could he readily account 
for the agitation which his friend friend indeed ! evinced 
when expressing his belief that he should see the widow 
when he was in Buckinghamshire ! Why, he was going 
direct to her house, at her own earnest bidding, to marry 
her and bring her in triumph to Harlingham. <f Never ! " 
thought Saville ; " this day ends the life of one of us 
this day decides her fate false, fickle, faithless she ! " 
Yet stay, stay ; Saville, with all his natural anger, must 
stifle these feelings, and swallow all the indignities of Har- 
riet, and endure all the duplicity of Brown. How had he 
obtained the intelligence of the falsehood of the one, or 
the hypocrisy of the other ? by an act which he dare not 
confess ! 

Would Brown condescend to notice or meet the man, 
who, coming to his house an invited guest, had debased 
himself by prying into his private letters ? Letters so pri- 
vate, it seems, that they were hidden away out of sight 
for who would believe the story which Saville should seem 
to invent of the accident by which this epistle was brought 
to his view ? Neither dare he venture to ask commisera- 
tion from Alvingham or his wife he could not explain to 
either of them the means of his enlightenment ; no, he was 
doomed to all the pangs of silent consciousness of misery, 
and all the throes of stifled grief and restrained revenge. 

What ! could she be so false so fickle and yet so 
fair? 



THE WIDOW. l6l 

" She's lost ! She's gone the beauty of the earth, 
All that in woman could be virtue called, 
Is lost ! corrupted are her noble faculties, 
The temper of her soul is quite infected, 
Inconstancy has spotted all her white, her virgin beauties." 

The reader may easily understand the nature of the feel- 
ings under which Saville was labouring, as he replaced 
the odious letter, and made immediate preparations for 
quitting the house : in effecting the former object he 
succeeded ; but in the latter, he was most notably defeated 
by the inopportune arrival of the major, who had picked 
up Alvingham in the street, and brought him home with 
him. 

" How wretchedly ill you look/' said Alvingham to 
Saville. 

" Why," said the major, " you are as pale as death ; 
have some wine some brandy something." 

" No," said Saville, " 1 have had enough I these 
views, which I have been looking at, have recalled cir- 
cumstances to my memory that " 

" I thought," said the major, (i that you had not tra- 
velled much on the continent." 

" No, I have not," stammered the unhappy victim to 
his own want of discretion fe but there are persons 
dear to me, who " 

' ' Ah," interrupted Brown, " I know ; you told me, 
the Franklin party at least the lovely widow Smith. 

Immeasurable villany unparalleled deceiver, thought 
Saville bursting to disclose all he knew, and rush upon 
his victim, his betrayer. 

:: I went upon one or two excursions with them," said 
the major, " but I had not much time to spare, because 
I was most anxious to make my arrangements about the 
reserve companies here, previously to my marriage." 

Saville could scarcely remove his eyes from the present 
object of his detestation ; a detestation not excited merely 
by jealousy, but by the contempt which such callous, such 
wanton duplicity could not fail to produce. And yet he 
was tongue-tied, fettered, manacled, by his own inex- 
cusable conduct with regard to the letter. 

" These," said Brown, turning over the pages of the 

M 



162 THE WIDOW. 

portefeuille, f( are more interesting than the Italian views. 
These are drawings made in the Tyrol, and are, I believe, 
many of them of points and places hitherto untouched. The 
valley of the Adige from Roveredo to Botzen is full of in- 
terest. This is a view of Mount Brenner, and all these 
sketches were made on the banks of the river between that 
and Roveredo itself." 

Had they been views of Fleet Ditch before the improve- 
ments which now veil it from our sight had obliterated all 
traces of its course, save, indeed, where civic patriotism 
has raised two lamp-posts to the honour of Wilkes and 
Waithman, they would have been to Saville just as inter- 
esting, or at all events not less so. All he saw dancing 
before his eyes as they glanced over the paper were the 
lines of Harriet's letter, addressed to the gallant and ac- 
complished artist who was exhibiting them. Those lines 
were engraven on his heart and fixed upon his sight, and 
all his mind was occupied in calculating what means he 
could adopt to punish the treachery of the major without 
exposing his own. 

It surprised Brown to find the eloquent and enthusiastic 
amateur of the preceding day, metamorphosed into a dull, 
unobservant inspector of his performances ; and he could 
not help attributing the alteration to some bodily ill, to 
which his new friend had become obnoxious since they 
separated. Saville' s observations were few, his agitation 
remarkable, and when at length he quitted the major's 
lodgings, man as he was, his feelings found relief in a flood 
of tears. 

ft What is all this, Charles ? " said Alvingham, (( have 
you heard any bad news from Italy ? " 

" None, none," said Saville; "but I am sure I know 
my doom is sealed, and that I am destined to be the most 
miserable of men. However, if I am correct in my sus- 
picions, the day of retribution will come shall come it 
may be late too late to save my happiness, but it will yet 
be in time to punish my betrayers." 

' ' What ridiculous crotchet have you got into your head 
now ? " said Alvingham, suspecting in a moment that what 
had first caused his alarm with respect to the major's 



THE WIDOW. 163 

attachment had now struck Saville ; and coupling the cir- 
cumstances of the interview which he had with Brown on 
the preceding day, and his embarrassment which Saville 
had described to him after dinner, with what he and his 
wife had previously noticed,, he began to think that his 
worst suspicions were really well founded it could be 
nothing else. But Saville remained silent as to the true 
cause of his distraction, for the same reason which forced 
him to stifle his resentment. 

Should he write to Harriet, should he fly to her on the 
instant ? He knew she was in England, he even knew her 
address ; yet how could he account for the possession of 
that knowledge ? There again was he checked ; and again 
felt, deeply and poignantly, the baleful effects of the 
slightest deviation from the straight and open path of 
honour. Yet, thought he, had I not been driven by des- 
peration, caused by her neglect, to do this shabby thing, I 
might have lived on, a deluded happy victim, until I saw 
the faithless creature's marriage to this man announced in 
the public newspapers. 

All efforts to console or reason with him were unavail- 
ing : even Mrs. Alvingham, with all her sweetness of dis- 
position and earnestness of manner, could not succeed in 
either extracting the reason for his despair, or its imme- 
diate cause. She charged him with having <e dreamt a 
dream," which augured unpropitiously, or having seen some 
sight, or heard some sound, which he had construed into 
a presage of misfortune. Raillery, however, had as little 
effect as persuasion ; and Saville retired to his room early, 
completely beaten by the events of the day, the nature of 
which nothing of course could induce him to disclose. 



CHAPTER XIL 

" THE trouble 's a pleasure, Major Brown," said Mrs. Al- 
vingham to the gallant officer, who, so soon as breakfast- 
time, and even before the appearance of Saville below 
stairs, was at the Parsonage, soliciting its kind-hearted 
M 2 



l64f THE WIDOW. 

mistress to take the trouble, as he called it, of occasionally 
looking in at the preparations in progress for the reception 
of himself and his bride at the cottage, during his excursion 
into Buckinghamshire, whence he was to return a Bene- 
dick. He had taken the last moment, early as it was in 
the day, to bid his hospitable friends adieu ; his leave of 
absence had arrived by the morning's post, and his horses 
were ordered for his immediate departure. 

" So," said Alvingham, when Saville entered the break- 
fast-room, "our agreeable friend the major is off; he 
desired me to say you should hear from him in a few 
days." 

" Major Brown," said Saville, trembling with mental 
excitement and bodily weakness, " is, as I believe, a vil- 
lain.'' 

" Mr. Saville/' said Mrs. Alvingham, who heard his 
violent expression with scarcely less alarm than she beheld 
the effect produced upon her. visitor by the effort to de- 
nounce him, (i why should you speak thus of a gentleman, 
whose conduct, during his residence here, has been unex- 
ceptionable ; whom we hope to reckon amongst our most 
agreeable neighbours ; and who, certainly, as far as you are 
personally concerned, deserves your esteem and friendship, 
by the manner in which upon all occasions he speaks of 
you ? " 

"Does he speak well of me?" said Saville " then he 
is a hypocrite into the bargain." 

" What, my dear Saville," said Alvingham, " can in- 
duce you to launch out into these invectives, the moment 
after his departure, against a man with whose conversation 
and society you only yesterday morning expressed your- 
self so much pleased ? " 

c< Alvingham," said Charles, " it is useless to talk upon 
this subject. I have the strongest grounds for the lan- 
guage I use, but circumstances must keep me silent. I 
must appear blind to all that is passing. The time, how- 
ever, will come must come when, although too late to 
save me from misery, his duplicity shall be unmasked, and, 
please God, revenged, by me." 

" Saville," said Alvingham, " I must not hear this ; the 



THE WIDOW. 165 

name of our Creator and Preserver must not be profaned 
by such an application ; nor can I permit you for a mo- 
ment to fancy yourself justified in thus talking of revenging 
your wrongs upon a fellow- creature for an imaginary or 
even a real injury. If you believe yourself ill-treated, it 
is natural that you should feel resentment ; but resentment 
and revenge are widely different from each other : revenge 
is the result of meanness of your character, Charles, 
meanness forms no component principle ; I cannot, there- 
fore, endure to hear you talk of it, much less coupled with 
an appeal to your Maker." 

" Ah ! " said Saville, " could you know all that I know, 
you would not wonder at my excitement or want of caution 
it is a tale of horror, wretchedness, and woe." 

The manner in which Saville pronounced these last 
words, seriously alarmed Mrs. Alvingham, who apprehended 
the most frightful results from the irritation under which 
she saw him labouring. Nor was she far wrong in those 
apprehensions. Although the weakness of his constitution, 
deteriorated as it had been by his recent illness, gave surety 
against the worst consequence which she had anticipated, 
he grew weaker and fainter during the day, and early in 
the evening was removed to his bed, the village apothecary 
and the physician of the district having both been called 
to his assistance. 

For three or four days the result of his attack was 
extremely doubtful ; but skill and a rigid attention to regi- 
men, under the directions of his medical attendants, so far 
restored him by the end of the week, that he was able 
again to appear in the drawing-room, and even sit at 
table, although a settled melancholy, which had superseded 
the violent excitement of mind under which he had at first 
laboured, rendered him a silent and almost unconscious 
observer of what was passing around him. 

On the evening of the tenth day from the time of 
Brown's departure, Mr. Alvingham received a letter from 
that gentleman, which ran as follows : 

" Wycombe 

" MY DEAR SIR, I have delayed fulfilling my pro- 
M 3 



166 THE WIDOW. 

raise of writing to you, until I could with certainty give 
you an account of my intended movements. I have now 
completed most of my arrangements, and accordingly 
trouble you with the detail. 

" It may, perhaps, have appeared strange to you, that I 
should never myself have mentioned any of the particulars 
of my approaching marriage; there were reasons which 
induced me to refer to it as seldom and as slightly as 
possible. You will, I am sure, rejoice to know that all 
difficulties are now smoothed away, and that I purpose 
being with my future wife at Harlingham on Monday 
next, where, at my wish, she has consented that you 
should unite us by a special licence, which 1 have procured 
for the purpose. From Harlingham we shall start on a 
short tour, and she will have had the double advantage of 
making your acquaintance and that of Mrs. Alvingham, 
and of seeing the residence which is so soon afterwards to 
become her own. 

" Your friend, Mr. Saville, requested me before my 
departure, to give him some account of Mrs. Smith, of 
whom he spoke in terms of regard and friendship. It was 
your having previously informed me of the real state of 
his feelings with respect to that lady, that kept me silent 
and reserved upon that point, and which now prevents my 
writing directly to him. It is, however, my duty to 
inform you leaving it to your discretion to make him 
acquainted with the circumstance o r not that my con- 
nection with Mrs. Smith was of an infinitely earlier date 
than his acquaintance with her. 

" Notwithstanding her mother's influence over her is 
naturally very great, I attribute her consent to her mar- 
riage with the late Mr. Smith entirely to the circumstance 
of my being abroad. I knew only of the marriage after it 
had been concluded, and of course too late to interpose my 
claim to attention in opposition to it. 

f( I think it my duty to state, that since the death of 
her late husband, I have succeeded in prevailing upon her 
to marry again ; and I hope that Mr. Saville will not 
object to meet her upon the happy occasion of our visit to 
your house, where, as 1 have already said, I shall require 



THE WIDOW. 167 

your professional aid to complete my happiness. Upon so 
short an acquaintance as mine with Mr. Saville, I should 
certainly not venture upon this request, but Harriet most 
earnestly joins me in making it. 

" I trust we shall not inconvenience you by our invasion 
of the parsonage. Our stay will be short ; but nothing 
will give me more pleasure than returning to your delight- 
ful neighbourhood, and remaining there so long as the 
rules of the service will permit, satisfied that, in the future 
Mrs. Brown, I shall bring to the circle of your agreeable 
society, a valuable, and, 1 trust, an estimable addition. 

" With my best compliments to Mrs. Alvingham, and 
your friend, Mr. Saville, believe me, my dear sir, 
" Yours, very faithfully, 

" GEORGE BROWN." 

" My love," said Alvingham to his wife, after reading 
the letter, "what is to be done? poor Charles's worst 
suspicions about the major are realised, and the duplicity 
of his behaviour towards him is aggravated a hundred-fold, 
by this most extraordinary proposal of making a triumphant 
display of his success, here in our house, and in Saville's 
presence." 

" It is extremely odd," replied the lady. " I feared, 
from the major's evident embarrassment, when he first met 
Mr. Saville, that it was so ; but can it be possible, even if 
he could in so unprovoked a manner wish to insult a 
defeated rival, that such a woman as they both describe 
Mrs. Smith to be, could be induced to agree to so indelicate, 
so barbarous a measure ? " 

" He must be mad," said Alvingham, " and she too ! 
If Saville were not here, nothing could be more agreeable 
to us, nothing more natural in them, than honouring me 
by a preference in performing the ceremony ; by which 
arrangement, as he says, she could see her house in time 
to suggest any alterations or new arrangements, before her 
arrival as a permanent resident in it. What's to be 
done ? this is Saturday there is not time to hinder 
their coming." 

" There is but one thing, I think, to do," said Mrs. 



168 THE WIDOW. 

Alvingham ; " state the circumstances to Mr. Saville, and 
let him decide for himself " 

"And perhaps," interrupted Alvingham, "have my 
house made the scene of conflict and even bloodshed ! for 
to what act of desperation may not poor Charles be driven, 
if he sees his betrothed and affianced, as he really believed 
her to be, the bride of another, and that other professing 
to be his friend ? " 

" It is quite impossible, my love," said Mrs. Alvingham, 
" that we can turn Mr. Saville out of the house. What 
can we say to him but the truth, to account for a desire to 
be rid of him all of a sudden, when our invitation was 
unlimited as to extent ? " 

" Perhaps, my dear," said Alvingham, who was all for 
a quiet life, and dreaded the idea of a rencontre between 
the rivals, " perhaps it will be best to let him know the 
worst at once ; one thing is certain, as I have just said ; it 
is perfectly impossible to stop their coming; here, this is 
Saturday, and one day only intervenes : no post goes out 
to-night from this ; and if it did, theirs is a cross-road, so 
that no letter would catch them their arrival is, there- 
fore, inevitable." 

" I should really think," said Mrs. Alvingham, whose 
apprehensions of consequences were greatly augmented by 
perceiving the expression of her dear husband's countenance, 
" that the very circumstance of Mrs. Smith's wishing to 
come here to be married, would cure Charles of his passion. 
What can the woman mean is she distracted?" 

" It is most extraordinary conduct/' replied the rector ; 
" and so incompatible with the gentle, generous feelings 
by which women are universally actuated, as to be per- 
fectly unaccountable. Besides, that she was attached to 
him is most certain ; her readiness to elope her confes- 
sions of regard her request that he would abstain from 
any correspondence likely to interfere with the ultimate 
success of their affection " 

" All that must have arisen from some mistake or mis- 
representation of her maid, of whom Charles Saville speaks," 
said Mrs. Alvingham. " Recollect, she never wrote to him 
herself; he has no pledge no promise of hers." 



THE WIDOW. ]9 

"Nor is it likely he would have had/' said Alvingham, 
" if, as the major says, his connection with her is of much 
earlier date than Saville's acquaintance. However, it is 
useless our arguing ; it matters little what view we take of 
the subject, the main point is to ascertain how Saville 
will choose to act upon the information of their intended 
proceedings, which we have no means of checking or pre- 
venting." 

" Go to him, William," said Mrs. Alvingham, (< show 
him the letter, and talk the matter over. In my opinion, 
he is too ill to leave us, let him feel as he may. To be 
sure, there is no necessity for his meeting the party, be- 
cause he happens to be in the house. Go then, dear, and 
see, and arrange it with him." 

te I will immediately," replied her husband ; " he is in 
his room, but not yet, as I think, gone to rest, at least, 
if rest he ever obtains in bed ; I fear his nights are sleep- 
less as his days are wretched. If he appears unwilling to 
enter upon the question this evening, I will only open the 
business to him, and give him the night to consider what 
course he will eventually pursue, under circumstances which, 
I confess, appear to me to be as extraordinary as any that 
man was ever placed in." 

" The first shock will be the greatest," said Mrs. Alving- 
ham ; " I mean the realisation of what I thought your 
groundless anticipation of the widow's being the intended 
wife of the major that will be the blow. If he have 
strength to bear that, I do think he will have sufficient for- 
titude to witness the sequel with comparative calmness 
I am sure I should if I were he." 

" I'll go to him this moment," said Alvingham ; f( wait 
till I come down ; if he should still be up, and I want an 
advocate, come to us when I send for you. I have always 
found that women's are the wisest heads in such critical 
conjunctures as these." 

Mrs. Alvingham accepted her husband's retainer in the 
cause with an assenting smile, and waited for some time in 
expectation of being called in to counsel. At length a ser- 
vant announced that his master would be glad if she would 
" step up" stairs ; and having obeyed his commands, and 



170 THE WIDOW 

proceeded to the sitting-room of the invalid, was most 
agreeably surprised by the manner in which he received 
her, and by the firm and assured appearance of his coun- 
tenance. 

ff He knows all, my love," said Alvingham ; <e and has 
already made up his mind what to do." 

" To leave us, I fear ? " said Mrs. Alvingham. 

" By no means," said Saville, " unless you wish it. In 
the first place, as I hear 'you have already suggested, there 
is no absolute necessity for my seeing any of the party, 
if I should decide upon secluding myself; but, in the 
next place, if it be possible that Harriet, after having, 
by the most extraordinary conduct of which woman was 
ever guilty, violated all the ties which are supposed to 
bind hearts, and minds, and feelings, and affections, really 
desires to consummate all her crimes for what else can 
I call them ? by a triumphant and immodest display of 
the success of her schemes, I think I have sufficient pride, 
not only to bear the sight of such an exhibition with firm- 
ness, but even to despise the principal exhibitor in it." 

" Ah, you must not trust to that," said Mrs. Alvingham. 

te But indeed I may," said Saville. " And as for the 
history of your friend Major Brown having a prior claim 
upon her, is it likely that I should not have heard her 
mother, who was fonder of bragging of her daughter's at- 
tractive powers than doing anything else in the world, swell 
the list of her admirers with his name ? " 

" Why," said Alvingham, who was delighted to see the 
turn Saville's feelings had taken, "by way of a name, 
Charles, Brown would not go for much in such a list." 

et As good as Smith, at any rate," said Saville, the milk 
of whose disposition appeared suddenly to have turned to 
gall. " No, Alvingham ; you, and my dear friend here, 
may give me credit for affection and devotion which I 
have long cherished for Harriet Franklin ; I admit them 
I glory in them ! because those feelings resulted from 
an esteem for her character, her principles, and her ingenu- 
ousness ; but you must also give me credit for something 
better than blindness and fatuity. The moment all these 
attributes are falsified, and the veil is withdrawn, I can see 



THE WIDOW. 171 

as plainly as my neighbours; and were she here this mo- 
ment " 

" You would fall at her feet/' said Alvingham, " and 
beg pardon for having even doubted her." 

" What ! oh the eve on the day of her marriage to 
another man ! " said Saville. " No no it is all too 
plain, too palpable I may be wretched, but I will 
never be contemptible. Let them come I may not see 
them, or I may, as the humour takes me j but as I have 
reasons for knowing that her attachment to this major, 
whether the beginning of the acquaintance be recent or 
remote, is both ardent and strong, I do assure you, if my 
animal strength hold out, I shall as calmly and quietly 
give them the meeting, as if I had never seen either of them 
before." 

" I am absolutely delighted," said Alvingham, " at this 
display of reason and resolution. Let them come then 
you will be at liberty to act as you please ; all I entreat is, 
that no intemperance no rashness " 

" No, no ! " said Saville, " rely upon me. So long as I 
believed her devoted to me, and married to another against 
her will so long as I thought she still retained the affec- 
tion for me, which she had not hesitated to express so 
long wasll utterly and entirely hers, and in danger or to 
the death would I have vindicated my claim to her heart ; 

but, knowing the character of her attachment to another, 
I " 

" But how do you know that, Mr. Saville ? " said Mrs. 
Alvingham. 

" Ay, that's a secret," replied Saville, a blush suffusing 
his still pale cheek ; " but, no matter I know I am 
in possession of that part of the history ; and being so, feel 
released from every tie, except indeed those of which I 
cannot so easily rid myself ; while I hold, that I should be 
the maddest fool that ever lived to quarrel with her favoured 
lover, who, if he did win her before I knew her, had 
really a prior claim to her heart ; and who, if he has won 
her since I left her, knew nothing of me, nor was aware 
that he was wounding me in the tenderest point, and de- 
stroying my only chance of happiness on earth." 



172 THE WIDOW. 

" You are now," said Alvingham, <c exactly in the temper 
of mind in which I wished to find you. No more visions 
of revenge haunt you ; you see plainly the circumstances 
as they have arisen ; and, although you feel them as a man, 
like Shakspeare's hero, you are resolved ' to bear them like 
a man.' Come, my love," continued he, addressing his 
anxious wife, " we will not keep him up any longer : I am 
sure I can rely upon him now ; and I think it will be a 
triumph worthy of him, to let his false fair one see that the 
effects of her infidelity are yet to be overcome." 

The worthy couple quitted the room, and retired to their 
own apartment ; but Mrs. Alvingham, who saw, in the 
hollow eye and sunken cheek of poor Saville, sad evidence 
of the ravages which mental anxiety had made, differed 
a little with her husband, as to the conclusive testimony 
which his personal appearance would afford to the inno- 
cuous character of Mrs. Smith's extraordinary vacillation. 

During the Sunday, Saville remained calm and quiet ; 
he attended church morning and afternoon, and seemed 
deeply to feel those parts of the service which might be 
supposed to apply to the temporal afflictions of mankind ; 
but it was quite evident to Alvingham and his wife, that 
he had devoted that sacred day to the regulation of his 
mind, and a suitable preparation for a trial, such as few 
men were ever subjected to, and such as still fewer would, 
as he had done, voluntarily consent to sustain. 

When Monday came, it must be confessed that the party 
at the Parsonage were each of them agitated in an eminent 
degree. Mrs. Alvingham was kept in a constant flutter by 
the apprehension of the arrival of her new visitors ; bound, 
as she felt herself, to be extremely civil and courteous, and 
with the prospect of having the faithless fair one a neigh- 
bour, for some time after her marriage, being, at the same 
time, most desperately prejudiced against her. Alvingham 
continued in constant communication with Saville, sensi- 
tively alive to the delicacy of his situation, and still appre- 
hending that the sight of the major would fire the train and 
explode all his anger and resentment, now rendered more 
powerful than ever by compression ; while Saville himself, 
resolved in his purpose, continued pacing his room inces- 



THE WIDOW. 



173 



mtly ; looking from its windows to the gates of the Par- 
sonage, whenever he heard " the sound of coaches." 

They had not said at what time they would arrive. 
Breakfast was prepared served but not eaten. Noon 
came. Every carriage that passed along was fancied into 
theirs. But no ! the noise died away another succeeded, 
but with no more decisive results ; till, about half past two, 
a sharp ringing at the gate startled the whole family, and 
filled the rector, his wife, and friend, with a sensation not 
unlike that which agitated the heart of the fair Imogene, 
when 

" The bell of the castle tolled one." 

The bustle of the servants hurrying to the door was ac- 
companied by the rolling of wheels, and in less than a 
minute, an elegant travelling carriage was drawn up, " short 
and smart," to the entrance of the peaceful residence, on 
the steps of which stood the reverend master of the house, 
to receive his unwelcome visitors. 

Mrs. Alvingham remained, scarcely conscious whether 
she was standing on her head or her heels, in the drawing- 
room, looking as pale as death, and trembling from head to 
foot. Saville was at one of the windows of his room, hidden 
carefully behind the blind thence he saw the major step 
from the chariot, and hand from it a delicate young lady, 
who was, doubtless, acting as bridesmaid; and then, he 
saw so long, at least, as his eyes could bear the sight 
his Harriet his Harriet how his ? why call her so ? 

why think her so ? accept the proffered hand of her 
" dearest George," and undergo the ceremony of presenta- 
tion to her reverend host. 

He saw no more. All the firmness all the resolution 

all the contempt which for two days he had been nou- 
rishing, vanished at the moment with the sight of every 
thing around ; and he sank upon the sofa in an agony 
of grief, and hiding his head in his hands gave vent to 
his sorrow in a copious flood of tears. 

Meanwhile the bride and her friend had been introduced 
to Mrs. Alvingham, whose surprise, when she saw the lovely 
Harriet agitated beyond measure, was perhaps, not great, 



174 THE WIDOW. 

considering all the circumstances of the case, and the 
curious position in which she had thought proper to place 
herself ; but she was not prepared, even by Saville's de- 
scription, for any thing half so beautiful. As for Harriet 
herself, she could not speak, but having pressed Mrs. Al- 
vingham's hand, sank upon a chair in a state of insensibility. 
Her fair assistant, whose emotions were by no means of so 
violent a character, entreated Mrs. Alvingham to leave her 
to herself for a few moments; the excitement was too 
much for her, but she would soon recover. 

Why in the name of common sense, thought the lady of 
the house, did she expose herself to any thing so agitating ? 
She, however, obeyed the injunctions of Mrs. Smith's tra- 
velling companion, to whom she spoke of their journey, 
and made inquiries how long they had been on the road, 
and whether they found it agreeable travelling ; during 
which forced and senseless conversation Harriet sufficiently 
recovered her presence of mind to look round the room and 
inquire where " her dear George was." 

Dear George, it appears, was closeted with Mr. Alving- 
ham, making the necessary arrangements for the ceremony 
which was to secure his happiness; and the widow, it 
must be confessed, seemed ff nothing loth" to expedite 
the proceedings. The major soon returned but without 
the rector who, it seemed, was gone to Saville's room to 
announce the arrival of the party, and inquire if he could 
bear the interview a meeting which he was commissioned 
by the major to say was absolutely necessary to the com- 
pletion of the contract into which he was about ,to enter, 
as there were explanations to be made which could only be 
made to him personally, and without which it was impos- 
sible Harriet herself could be satisfied. 

" George," said Mrs. Smith, " where is your friend 
Mr. Alvingham gone?" 

" To apprise your friend, Mr. Saville, of our arrival, my 
love," said the major. 

" And will he come? how can I bear it?" sobbed 
the widow, clinging closely to her beloved George, as she 
again called him. 



I THE WIDOW. 175 

" He will come, rely upon it," said the major. " Nay, 
e is here." 

Saville entered the room calmly and steadily, as pale as 
death, but without the discomposure of a feature. Harriet 
turned to see him, and uttered a shriek so loud and pierc- 
ing, that it struck into the very hearts of those who 
heard it. 

" Mrs. Alvingham," said the major " Louisa sup- 
port her I did not expect this." 

" Oh, Charles," said Mrs. Smith, recovering after a 
moment, " how can I justify myself for this conduct ? " 

Saville stood amazed, while his once loved Harriet clung 
to the major, and hid her burning cheeks in his bosom. 

" Why, in the name of Heaven, am I brought hither?" 
said Saville, his eyes flashing fire. 

" To receive a treasure," said Alvingham, "which your 
merits and constancy have righteously won." 

<c What ! Alvingham," said Saville, " do not mock me 

do not sport with me or, by the sacred name of " 

" Stop, Saville !" exclaimed fthe major ; "Harriet, my 
beloved, look up. Saville, my friend I cannot speak 

Saville, I say " 

" Go to her, Charles," said Alvingham. 
" For what ! " exclaimed Saville. 

" My sister herself must speak for me," exclaimed 
Brown. "Take her! take her, Saville! she is your's 
for ever." 

" Sister ! " exclaimed Mrs. Alvingham. 
Harriet, overwhelmed with tears, sank from the support 
of her brother into the arms of Charles, who, yet uncon- 
scious of the meaning of all he saw and heard, clasped 
her, beloved and faithful as she was, close to his beating 
heart. 

" Your sister, major ? " said Mrs. Alvingham, " and 
not your wife ? " 

" Here," said the major, a little recovering from the 
excitement into which he had been betrayed ; " this, my 
dear Mrs. Alvingham, is my treasure, a widow too, and 
the friend of my sister, who is so much better disposed of." 



176 THE WIDOW/ 

It is quite clear that if a stranger were accidentally to 
drop into a party similarly situated, he would feel himself 
in an extremely embarrassing and disagreeable situation. 
The reader is that stranger, at present ; he shall be taken 
from it as soon as possible. 

Major Brown, who was the son of Mrs. Franklin by her 
first husband, had seriously offended his mother previous 
to his departure for India. His name was an interdicted 
word in the family. Saville was, therefore, in perfect 
ignorance even of his existence. On his return to Europe 
he found his favourite half-sister a widow. To him she 
confided the real state of her heart, as regarded Saville ; 
but, apprehensive that he might have failed in his truth, 
during the period which she had assigned for his proba- 
tion, she commissioned her brother, if possible, to ascertain 
his precise position and pursuits when he returned to 
England. 

By accident he speedily discovered him, became convinced 
of his worth and fidelity, and, having himself been 
attracted by the charms of his sister's intimate friend, 
resolved to make a double marriage the result of the two 
attachments. Unconscious, of course, that Saville had 
possessed himself of what he believed to be the secret of 
his intended marriage with Harriet, he saw nothing in the 
generous deception which he eventually put into execution, 
but a good-humoured surprise which was to unite all 
parties. For Harriet's agitation at the denouement he 
could readily account ; but not so easily for the tone and 
manner which Saville had thought proper to assume. This 
was a mystery which could not be solved now as it 
eventually turned out, all parties were made happy; and, 
at the present moment, while Colonel and Mrs. O'Lollocky 
are living at Dieppe, in an agreeable retirement, Major 
and Mrs. Brown may be found domesticated at their pretty 
cottage at Harlingham, and Mr. and Mrs. Saville happily 
established at their beautiful villa in Buckinghamshire. 




THE MARQUESS. 



THE MARQUESS. 



CHAPTER I. 

" THIS comes of walking upon the earth/' said a Spanish 
Hidalgo, when he tumbled down and broke his nose. 

" I never shall go to those races again/' said the Mar- 
quess of Snowdon to his daughter, Lady Hester Plinlim- 
mon ; " the people push forward and break in no proper 
means are taken to secure one against the mob the ar- 
rangement is bad they choose the worst possible men 
for stewards; who is Mr. Simmons, of Raggleby, or 
Major Stubbs, of Walford ? I never heard any thing so 
absurd in my life. I conclude, Hester, you have no in- 
tention of going to their ball ? " 

" Why, papa/' said Lady Hester, "I did promise " 

" Promise whom ? Mrs. Simmons or Miss Stubbs ? " 
asked his lordship. tc Of course, if you have promised, 
Hester, you must go : I have no desire that any of my 
family should break a promise ; but / did not promise, so 
you must send over to your aunt to be your chaperon." 

" Indeed, papa, said Lady Hester, " I have not the 
slightest wish to go. I thought you would go as a matter 
of course, and therefore promised to go too." 

(C You should never consider any part of my conduct, 
Hester, as a matter of course/' said his lordship; " I re- 
gulate myself according to circumstances. If I had found 
the society and arrangements on the course this morning 
either suitable or agreeable, I should have made a point of 
going to the ball. I saw no evidence of any thing like 
consideration for me on the part of the people concerned, 
therefore I shaU not go." 

et Nor I either," said Lady Hester. " I can easily 
excuse myself a cold " 

(( You must do no such thing, Hester," said Lord 
N 2 



180 ' THE MARQUESS. 

Snowdon ; te the Plinlimmons never have colds how 
should they get colds ! No, if you really have no personal 
desire to go, say that I am not disposed to go, and you 
cannot go without me." 

" Any thing you please, papa/' said Lady Hester. 

" And the play, sir, which you were to patronise " 

' f Psha ! more absurdity did you promise that for 
me too ? " 

" Not exactly," said Lady Hester ; " but you always 
have ordered one play while the actors were here." 
" I hate plays," said Lord Snowdon. 
" I do believe, papa," said Lady Hester, advancing 
towards her father, and motioning as if she were going to 
pat his cheek, a mark of kindness which he successfully 
evaded by elevating his head beyond the reach of her fair 
hand, "I do believe your hatred of plays arises from 
your having been told of your great personal likeness to 
Mr. Buggins the actor." 

" Hester," said Lord Snowdon, turning almost purple 
with rage, " if there be fools or impertinent persons in the 
world who give themselves the liberty of fancying such a 
resemblance, it is neither becoming your station as a lady, 
nor your character as a daughter, to listen to such absurdity, 
much less to permit me to hear it." 

" My dear papa," said Lady Hester, " I was only 
joking." 

t( I never joke, Hester," said his lordship ; <( jokes with 
me are very serious things ; more mischief has arisen from 
jokes than any thing in the world. If the poor devils of 
actors want the sanction of my name, some of the servants 
shall find them out, and give them permission to use it ; 
but there is no reason, Hester, why you should compare me 
with one of their fraternity." 

ff Oh, my aunt says you are like Mr. Buggins," said the 
bold favourite of her father. 

" Your aunt is extremely facetious, I dare say," said 
Lord Snowdon ; " but, considering her advanced age, and 
the state of her eye-sight, her ladyship does not appear to 
me to be a very competent judge of likenesses ; however, 
whether it be so or not, Hester, I desire I may hear no 
more of it." 






THE MARQUESS. 



181 



From this brief dialogue the reader may perhaps dis- 
cover that the Spanish Hidalgo, who broke his nose, and 
the noble marquess, who was particularly vain of his, very 
much resembled each other in character. There is no 
denying the fact : Hugo Plinlimmon, marquess of Snow- 
don, Earl of Malvern, and Baron Plinlimmon, was of 
opinion, that upon the face of the earth which he 
seemed to despise as much as the Spaniard did there 
was no living creature his peer or equal. 

His person was fine,, his air noble, his countenance 
handsome, and his manners dignified. He spoke little in 
society, because he held few men worthy of his attention. 
He mixed rarely with the world, for he found he could 
not exact the universal respect and adoration to which he 
believed himself fully entitled. Ambition mingled with 
his pride, and he had always some objects of aggrandise- 
ment in view to those in sullen silence all his efforts 
were directed. In his family, his reign was absolute, and 
one of terror. His daughter, Lady Hester, was the favoured 
one ; and she alone, of all that were about him, dared to 
trifle with him ; even she met his stern rebuke at times; 
and although she felt conscious of her father's partiality, 
yet her independence never reached to the extent of enter- 
taining a belief that any body in the known world was 
either so great, or so brave, so wise, or so learned, or so 
good, as the most noble Hugo, marquess of Snowdon, Earl 
of Malvern, and Baron Plinlimmon. 

His lordship's family consisted of one son and one 
daughter ; he had been several years a widower, and the 
education of Lady Hester had been conducted under the 
care of her aunt. Lord Malvern, his lordship's son, had 
gone through a regular course of Eton and Oxford, and 
was now absent on the continent, accompanied by a tutor 
of about his own age, and who had been chosen for his 
task by the noble marquess, because he appeared to him 
extremely well mannered, and that his grandmother had 
been a gentlewoman. 

Upon this son all his hopes were fixed in him all his 
anxiety centered. For his daughter, Lady Hester, he be- 
lieved he had secured a suitable husband : her gentle cha- 
N 3 



182 THE MARQUESS. 

racter, derived from a broken-hearted mother, seemed to 
offer no prospect of resistance to her father's wishes, or 
rather commands. And having thus far ordered his do- 
mestic affairs, the marquess anxiously looked forward to 
another important arrangement, with the precise nature of 
which the reader will in due time be made acquainted. 

The establishments of Lord Snow don in town and 
country were characterised by the solemn dignity which dis- 
tinguished their noble master. The servants moved noise- 
lessly about the various rooms with a soft step and a light 
tread, as if they feared to betray the ordinary symptoms of 
humanity, the lofty windows were never opened to admit 
the vulgar air into apartments redolent with perfume, which 
burnt silently, and seemed to fill the space around with 
sullen vapour, every one spoke in whispers. While the 
noble lord was present, the conversation consisted of little 
more than answers to his lordship's questions, and its 
spirit was that of perfect acquiescence in all his lordship's 
opinions. 

Unhappy as those who surrounded this proud man 
might be, the proud man himself was more unhappy still. 
His life was one perpetual effort for effect : to be natural, 
with him, was to be vulgar. He regulated his actions 
neither by his passions nor his feelings, but by a calcula- 
tion of what the results of his conduct might be ; and,, 
however much his lordship might be annoyed by a compa- 
rison with Mr. Buggins, of the Theatre Royal Covent Gar- 
den, in acting a part, his lordship was in no degree a less 
indefatigable labourer for public admiration and applause 
than the salaried mime. 

It so happened that fate had all through his lordship's 
life opposed him in his dearest in his only pursuit. His 
attempts at grandeur were somehow always marred ; all 
his projects for self-exaltation were failures ; and it gene- 
rally happened with his lordship, as it did with the monkey 
in the fable, that when he jumped the highest he exposed 
himself the most. 

In politics, Lord Snowdon was a Whig ; the ministry, 
at the period of which we treat, was Tory. His lordship 
had two objects of ambition, upon which his hopes and 






THE MARQUESS. 183 

anxieties were constantly and immovably fixed ; but what- 
ever might be his own estimation of his talents and influ- 
ence, they were, in fact, not sufficient to alarm the govern- 
ment into a compliance with his wishes, while his views of 
<f things in general " were not such as to induce it to favour 
him by forwarding them. 

In the outset it may not be amiss, as far as his lordship's 
public pretensions are concerned, to say, that a blue riband, 
and the governor-generalship of India, were the marks at 
which he aimed : the one he naturally sought, because he 
was proud ; the other, with equal sincerity he desired, be- 
cause he was poor. 

It was just at the time when our brief narrative opens, 
that his lordship had hit upon the expedient of soliciting 
the honour of a visit at Lionsden from his Majesty ; and 
when' the acceptance of his lordship's invitation arrived, 
the delight of his lordship seemed to know no bounds. 
Not only was the honour itself in the highest degree agree- 
able to him, but he should have an opportunity of exhibit- 
ing to his sovereign the taste and magnificence with which 
his menage was conducted ; and he did flatter himself, that 
perhaps the two days' sojourn which were almost promised 
him during the royal progress, might so far prejudice his 
Majesty in his favour, as to induce him, at some distant 
period, to gratify his ambition upon one at least of the 
points nearest his heart. 

That his son should be absent at such a time was one 
drawback to his happiness ; yet still it was such an object 
such a triumph too over his Tory enemies. His lord- 
ship evidently hoping that an act of mere kindness and 
good nature on the part of a gracious and condescending 
monarch, would be construed by his opponents into a matter 
of vast public importance, and an indication of royal favour, 
which might serve them as a precedent or justification for 
any conciliatory measures which they might subsequently 
be induced to adopt, in order to secure his lordship's ad- 
hesion. Ridiculous expectation ! the king, God bless 
him ! thought neither of adhesion nor opposition neither 
of Whig nor Tory. When he accepted the invitation, he 
thought it pleasant to go so did the queen ; it lay in 
N 4 



184 THE MARQUESS. 

their way. There was no good reason why they should 
not go, and so they agreed to honour Lord Snowdon with 
a visit. 

Every hour, every minute, of Lord Snowdon's time was 
now occupied in preparations for the reception of the royal 
party. Gunter was forthwith called into council ; Edging- 
ton was summoned in the tent and marquee department ; 
the best artists were sent for to arrange brilliant displays of 
fireworks for the evenings; Weippert, Colinet, and the 
other procurable bands in London, were put in requisition, 
to make u a concord of sweet sounds; " while in the sanc- 
tum of the marquess himself was proceeding the arrange- 
ment of special invitations, under the sanction of a confi- 
dential member of the royal household, who had been spe- 
cially invited to Lionsden for the purpose. 

Anxious as Lord Snowdon was to render this fete per- 
fect, and elated as he was at the prospect before him, there 
did exist a feeling in his breast, connected with the royal visit, 
which was of even still higher personal interest to himself. 
Lady Hester noticed that her father's manner was much 
changed during the early days of his preparatory operations, 
and could not exactly account for what appeared to her a 
paradoxical appearance of humility, and softness, and kind- 
ness in his manner towards herself, which she did not be- 
lieve knowing every turn of his mind as she did could 
naturally result from the circumstances in which he was 
just then placed. Her ladyship was destined soon to com- 
prehend the meaning of this agreeable change. 

" Hester, dear," said his lordship, sitting with his 
daughter tete-d-tete after dinner, " I think 1 have now 
made every arrangement for the reception. The whole 
south wing is appropriated to their majesties, and their 
immediate attendants. Nothing can suit better ; the rooms 
are laid out exactly as they ought to be ; and I flatter my- 
self the thing will altogether be as well done as possible. 
With respect to visitors in the castle, I have desired our 
friend, who left us this morning, to do me the favour of 
taking the king's pleasure ; and as to those who are to be 
feasted in the park, I have complete accommodation for 
two thousand." 



THE MARQUESS. 185 

" Oh, with your taste, my dear papa," said Lady Hester, 
" there can be no doubt of complete success in the effect." 

ee Hester," said his lordship, suddenly altering the tone 
of his voice to the pathetically paternal, " you speak of my 
taste ; I have a few words to say to you, which you must 
do me the favour to hear patiently,, and then give me an 
opinion upon them." 

Lady Hester was a good deal startled at the manner in 
which her father addressed her, and certainly not less at 
the idea of his asking her opinion upon any subject, or of 
proposing to adopt any which she might venture to give. 

ef Hester, my love," continued the marquess, " in my 
progress through life, since the death of your excellent 
mother, the advancement and happiness of my children have 
been the main objects of my care and solicitude. Parental 
duty, as well as self-respect, has prompted me to make all 
sacrifices at all times for the benefit of yourself and your 
brother Alfred. To both of you I have looked as to the 
only objects of my affection and devotion. You will find 
that I have made such provision for him and for you, 
besides that which is naturally his own, as may prove to 
you hereafter the sincerity of my present explanation." 

(< My dear father," said Lady Hester, surprised and 
even alarmed at the tone and character of his conversation, 
which appeared so strangely introduced, and so curiously 
misplaced, " neither I, nor Alfred, I am sure, ever doubted 
your kindness and affection. Have I done any thing to 
induce you to think me remiss in duty, or deficient in 
gratitude ? " 

" No, Hester," said his lordship " I do not believe it 
possible in the course of nature, that children of mine 
should be obnoxious to such vices. There is in our family 
an inherent contempt of baseness. Filial ingratitude is 
the basest of crimes ; and, therefore, Hester dear, I am 
quite satisfied that it cannot be nourished in the blood of 
the Plinlimmons. No: on the contrary I have every 
reason to be gratified and pleased with your conduct to- 
wards me. My motive for entering upon this conversation 
you will presently see." 



186 



THE MARQUESS, 



Lady Hester, who now began to anticipate, dreaded the 
discussion which she believed would follow. 

tf You will recollect/' continued the marquess, " the 
position in which you are now placed. I consider you, as 
indeed you consider yourself, the affianced wife of Lord 
Elmsdale, a nobleman whose family is unexceptionable, 
whose character is unimpeachable, and whose attachment 
to you is now a matter of notoriety to ah 1 the world. He 
has made proposals which you have finally accepted ; and 
with the sincerest possible gratification I sit down, con- 
tented with having established you in a highly enviable po- 
sition in society." 

Lady Hester bowed. Upon this subject a reply would 
have produced a domestic earthquake. 

e< Well then," continued Lord Snowdon, (f you are now 
settled independently of me ; and your brother, of whose 
judgment and principles I have the highest opinion, will, 
I am perfectly certain, in any alliance he may make, 
maintain his station in the world to my complete satisfac- 
tion. We are on the best terms. I have no fault to find 
with him; he thinks exactly as I do; feels with me 
upon all subjects ; and L, on the other hand, am perfectly 
ready to meet his views in marriage by any temporary sa- 
crifice which may conduce to his comfort and dignity." 

Lady Hester bowed her head, which was all that her 
noble father expected her to do. 

" Now comes the point of my observations, Hester," 
said his lordship. ff I have recapitulated what / have 
done in my capacity of parent, for my children ; you are 
now to hear what I expect my children to do for me. You 
and your brother will shortly quit me. When you are 
both gone, my position will be materially changed. I mix 
little, as you know, with my neighbours in the country ; 
my visiting circle in London is necessarily confined ; for I 
cannot submit to an intercourse with persons for whom I 
feel no regard or respect ; and the principal happiness I 
enjoy is in retirement from a world which now possesses 
for me little of interest or excitement. I feel it, therefore, 
necessary to establish resources within my own reach ; 
society that will amuse and gratify me, and a companion 



THE MARQUESS. 187 

who may take the place of a daughter whom I so dearly 
love, but to retain whom near me would be a most un- 
worthy sacrifice of her interests to my enjoyments." 

Again Lady Hester bowed. 

" There is," continued Lord Snowdon, " a person 
coming here with her mother to meet the royal party a 
friend of yours upon whom, with that mother's sanction, 
I have fixed my choice. She is in every way qualified to 
assume the rank which I can bestow upon her. Her 
blood is noble ; her family in the highest degree honour- 
able ; her mind pure and spotless ; her person fair and 
beautiful." 

In a moment all the truth flashed into Lady Hester's 
mind. Her father, who, during his solemn pronunciation 
of the last part of his address, had ri vetted his eyes upon 
her countenance, saw that it had done so. 

' ' Well, Hester," said his lordship, " can you guess who 
the lady is ? " 

I really," replied Lady Hester, I ." 

" You know her, madam, as well as I do," said the 
marquess ; " you are only acting, and you play your part 
ill, Hester. However, there can be no use in fencing with 
this matter. Miss Oldham is destined to become the future 
Marchioness of Snowdon." 

Lady Hester's eyes filled with tears at the announce- 
ment, which, however, did not greatly surprise her; but 
she smiled through them, and unable to utter a word, 
rose from her seat, and throwing her arms round her 
father's neck, imprinted a filial kiss on his cheek. 

A volume could not have said more. 

" There, there, Hester, said his lordship, gently disen- 
tangling himself from her embrace ; " sit down, dear, sit 
down." 

Lady Hester did as she was commanded, after a repulse 
which could only have found a precedent in the conjugal 
reproof of the Duke of Somerset, whose " first wife was a 
Percy." 

" I am to understand then," said his lordship, with a 
graciously solemn smile, " that my project has the sanc- 
tion of Lady Hester Plinlimmon." 



188 THE MARQUESS. 

" Sanction ! my dear father," said Lady Hester, " what 
wish can I have but for your happiness ? Heaven grant it 
may be secured by this marriage ! " 

(e The results, Lady Hester," said her father, (: are not, 
in my opinion, sufficiently problematical to require so so- 
lemn an appeal ; they must be left to futurity. From you, 
I expect merely that you should receive your visitor with 
kindness and friendliness. You have always esteemed and 
spoken highly of her before she was invested with the cha- 
racter in which she will now appear at Lionsden ; continue 
to her in that character the same amity and affection of 
which you thought her worthy, before you had any idea of 
her assuming it." 

" Is it, sir," said Lady Hester, " so entirely decided, that 
it is to be spoken of as a thing settled ? " 

" I should think, Hester," said the marquess, elevating 
his head, " that when I decided to make Miss Elizabeth 
Oldham, Marchioness of Snowdon, little else remained to 
conclude the affair." 

" I merely asked, sir," said Lady Hester. " For myself, 
grateful as I am for all your kindnesses, and, above all, for 
the consideration which has so long delayed your second 
marriage, I have but one course to follow to receive 
Elizabeth as an old friend for whom my esteem and affec- 
tion are justified by your decision." 

" Thank you, Hester," said Lord Snowdon ; " I thought 
I knew how you would act j I am not disappointed in 
my estimate of the feelings of a daughter of mine." 

Of her ladyship's conduct the marquess certainly might 
have formed his opinion ; but he little knew what were 
her feelings upon the occasion : they were of a nature not 
to be revealed ; they were even of a character not to be 
encouraged. It was not because her father chose to marry 
again, that she trembled and wept ; it was not because 
Miss Elizabeth Oldham was so considerably his junior in 
years, that she felt alarmed for his happiness ; she 

" Had not the smallest doubt or fear of her revolt, 
For she had eyes and chose him." 

These were not the grounds and sources of her anguish and 
apprehensions; but there were reasons why she believed 



THE MARQUESS. 189 

in her heart that the match would turn out ill, which she 
dare not as yet reveal to any human heing. She admitted,, 
however, to herself", a possibility of her being much re- 
lieved in her mind after she had seen and spoken with her 
future mother-in-law, although the point to which she 
would most desire to bring their conversation was one on 
which upon no account in the world she ought to touch. 
One thing was certain her duty was to obey her father ; 
she had pledged herself to do it ; and, as we shall see, 
she did it. 



CHAPTER II. 

No sooner had the welcome intelligence that their majesties 
were expected to visit Lionsden Castle circulated through 
the neighbouring town of Shuttlework, than a meeting of 
the corporation, presided over by the mayor, was held for 
the purpose of considering the propriety of presenting two 
addresses upon the occasion one to the king, and another 
to the queen; the latter accompanied by a petition that 
her majesty would condescend to accept some specimens of 
the manufacture for which that ancient place had been so 
long famous : and after several speeches had been made, 
several resolutions were passed, and it was resolved that the 
mayor should forthwith put himself in communication with 
the Marquess of Snowdon, who, in addition to all his other 
claims upon their attention, was their recorder, with whom 
it was absolutely necessary the corporation should advise 
as to the time and place of presentation. 

Accordingly the mayor despatched a letter to his lord- 
ship, requesting the honour of an interview, and begging 
his lordship to have the goodness to fix a time most con- 
venient to himself for that purpose. To this letter the 
marquess was pleased to return one of his most gracious 
answers. He saw the propriety of the proposition, he 
anticipated the increased eclat which the presentation of 
the addresses in his house would confer upon the fete, and 
was so much pleased at the prospect before him, that he 



190 THE MARQUESS. 

appointed the mayor to call upon him at five o'clock the 
same afternoon, or, as his lordship expressed himself, " he 
hoped the mayor would do him the favour" of a visit at 
that hour. With such unlooked-for humility and con- 
descension, how could the right worshipful the mayor of 
Shuttlework but be delighted ? His lordship's suggestion 
was a command, and accordingly the worshipful the mayor 
made himself ready to fulfil the engagement. 

Lord Snowdon, having quitted the castle for the purpose 
of personally superintending some of the multifarious ar- 
rangements in preparation, left a message for the mayor, 
begging him to wait, if it should happen that his lordship 
was not returned when the "right worshipful" should 
arrive. It so chanced, that the day, as it wore on, became 
foul and stormy ; and the mayor;, who rode to Lionsden, 
got completely drenched with rain on his way thither, and 
arrived at his destination while yet his noble host was de- 
tained by " stress of weather" at some distant part of his 
magnificent domain. 

The marquess had left word that the mayor should be 
shown into his lordship's own room, (as it was called,) the 
ante-room to his bed-chamber, and of the same size with 
that apartment ; which, while it was adopted for the sanc- 
tum, in which he passed all his mornings, and transacted 
all his business, served also for his dressing-room. Thither, 
according to his lord's direction, the groom of the cham- 
bers ushered the right worshipful ; who, dripping wet as 
he was, did not appear at all displeased at seeing a fire 
burning in the room, although the season of the year was 
not yet very far advanced. 

<e My lord desired me to say, sir," said the servant, 
c( that he expects you to dine here to-day." 

" Dear me," said the mayor, " I don't know what I 
shall do, I am wet through, I " 

ec Why, sir," said the man, "my lord, you know, is 
very particular ; he will expect you to dress for dinner." 

< f To be sure yes;" said the mayor, somewhat puz- 
zled. 

" You can dress here, sir," said the man. 

" Oh ! then, that will do exceedingly well," replied the 



THE MARQUESS. 9 

iayor ; " have the goodness to let my servant boy wait, 
till I send for him." 

te Yes, sir/' was the answer, and the groom of the 
chambers retired, unconscious of the mischief he had 
occasioned by one single, simple, and perfectly correct 
observation. 

The mayor, left alone in the room, wet, dirty, and un- 
comfortable, had been told that the marquess would expect 
him to dress for dinner the servant had also told him 
that he could dress " here" His worship, taking this hint 
au pied de la lettre, felt convinced that all the stories of 
Lord Snowdon's excessive pride were calumnies, and in- 
stanced to himself, as a proof of his lordship's great con- 
sideration for his humbler visitors, the fact, that he himself 
had not only been told that he might dress " here," in this 
extremely comfortable room, but that with a delicacy of 
attention quite unparalleled, directions had been given to 
provide him with the means of " making himself comfort- 
able," the moment he arrived. 

" 'Gad," thought the mayor, " here are the things put 
ready for me, all airing by the fire ; I had better lose no 
time, but get off my wet clothes before my lord comes, and 
pack them away by the boy. Upon my word talk of 
the aristocracy I should like to see any man more mindful 
or attentive to his visitors, than this." 

Saying which, having first bolted the door, the right 
worshipful began by divesting himself of his saturated 
garments, and seating himself by the fire, proceeded to 
habit himself in the different articles of dress which had 
been carefully disposed for the use of the marquess, by his 
trembling and attentive valet ; a process which he so 
speedily performed, that long before a rattling on the lock 
announced an arrival, the right worshipful was cased in the 
noble marquess's shirt, stockings, waistcoat, and pantaloons, 
which, to the infinite delight of the right worshipful, fitted 
him, as he said, " like a glove." 

The noise at the door hurried his operation of collecting 
his wet " things," which he had got rid of, and which he 
was in the act of tying up in a red silk pocket-handkerchief, 
(superseded in its natural office by one of the marquess's 



192 THE MARQUESS. 

finest squares of cambric) when the marquess, finding ad- 
mittance to his sanctum denied through its ordinary en- 
trance, proceeded along the corridor into the bed-room, and 
thence into what the reader already knows was its ante- 
chamber, erst the region of his lordship's retirement, and 
now the scene of the right worshipful's activity. 

fc Good heavens ! " said the marquess, starting back, 
" what does all this mean ? Mr. Mayor, I " 

" Thank you, my lord," said the mayor, " I have availed 
myself of your lordship's good-nature the things fit 
capitally I'm sure I don't know how to thank your lord- 
ship enough, for my clothes were quite soaked, as you may 
see," pointing to the yet reeking bundle deposited upon one 
of the most delicately cushioned fauteuils in existence. 

Lord Snowdon, proud as he was disgusted as he was 
and angry as he was saw in a moment the nature of 
the mistake : how produced he did not stay to inquire ; he 
felt that the mayor had not intentionally presumed, but 
that he had committed an unparalleled solecism in good 
manners, which might r as his lordship thought, have origi- 
nated in the negligence of his own servants, or the perfect 
ignorance of the usages of society on the part of his visitor. 

" I am glad," said his lordship, smiling at the absurdity 
of the event through the indignation which he struggled to 
conceal,, " that you have made yourself so comfortable, Mr. 
Mayor ;" saying which, his lordship rang the bell. 

" Oh, it is a comfort, sir," replied the right worshipful, 
te a great comfort, to get rid of wet things, 'specially when 
one is liable to rheumatiz. I'll just wash my hands, and 
then I shall be ready, my lord, for our talk.", 

Suiting the word-to the action, the mayor, to the increased 
horror and dismay of his noble host, proceeded to pour 
water into a basin which no touch but that of the marquess 
had before profaned, and to go through the operation of 
washing his hands, indulging, towards its termination, his 
face with a general visitation of the towel, while the mar- 
quess stood looking on in a stupor of astonishment. 

" Put some clothes for me to dress, sir," said the mar- 
quess to his valet, who entered the apartment. 

" My lord I " said the valet. 



THE MARQUESS. 193 

( ' Do as I tell you, sir/' interrupted the marquess, cc put 
some clothes for me to dress." 

The expression of the valet's countenance, when he 
beheld the mayor habited in the costume of his lord, is 
indescribable ; he saw that he must not speak, and 
accordingly turned from the room to get a new supply of 
drapery. 

" Hallo ! I say," said the mayor, " I wish you would 
just give this bundle to my boy, and tell him to bring up 
the gig at what time shall I say, my lord ? " 

" Whenever you please, sir," said Lord Snowdon ; " we 
are very early people here." 

" Say ten half past ten," said the mayor. 

" And here, Stephens," said Lord Snowdon, " show 
the mayor into the library. I will come to you there, sir, 
when I have dressed." 

" Oh ! I see, my lord I see," said Mr. Wiseman 
such was the name of the right worshipful " you are 
wet, too. Ha ! Providence makes no distinctions, sir : a 
mayor or a marquess all one, eh ay, you are right ; at 
your time of life, wet boots are very dangerous." 

The look which the marquess cast upon the unhappy 
man was withering parching killing; but it was lost 
upon its object. The mayor of Shuttlework was, in his 
own circle, as much of a divinity as the marquess at 
Lionsden ; and the very circumstance of the condescension 
to which he attributed the convenience of the change of 
clothes, added to a conviction, already established in his 
mind, that the marquess knew whom he had to deal with, 
and that, although proud to the world at large, to tha 
right worshipful the mayor of Shuttlework he wished to 
make himself particularly agreeable. 

The explanation given by the valet to Lord Snowdon of 
the causes of the mishap which had occurred, convinced 
him that as it was his present object to conciliate the cor- 
poration, and gratify its head, his only course was the 
observation of perfect silence on the subject ; arid a deter- 
mination not to excite that combination of regret, shame, 
and remorse in the mind of the right worshipful, which 
must utterly overwhelm him if he ever were made sensible 
o 



194> THE MARQUESS. 

of the offence he had committed, and the outrage he had 
perpetrated. 

The perfect ease and independence of manner which 
the mayor assumed, when, after a lengthened preparation 
at the toilette, the nohle marquess joined him in the 
library, were infinitely more shocking to his lordship's 
feelings, than the effects of his ignorance. The true in- 
dication of a vulgar mind is presumption upon conde- 
scension ; and Mr. Wiseman, who had been taught to dread 
the great inhabitant of Lionsden as something superhuman, 
was so completely overcome by the extraordinary civility 
of his noble host, that, as has been already hinted, he 
fancied himself an exception to the general rule, and deter- 
mined to conduct himself accordingly. 

The party at dinner consisted of Lady Hester, Miss 
Everingham, (an humble companion,) the marquess, and 
the mayor. A vacant chair at the table was to be occupied 
by Sir Henry Winscott ; but as one of the rules fixed as 
those of the Medes and Persians or, as the mayor would 
have read it, maids and parsons was, that dinner was 
served punctually at the hour named, it never was de- 
tained or delayed on account of the non-arrival of any of 
the invited guests, be their rank what it might. To this 
established custom of the house, founded rather upon 
common sense than pride, was attributable the agreeable 
circumstance, that nobody ever failed in punctuality, who 
knew the rigid adherence to a law once laid down in his 
family, which the noble marquess was in the habit of 
maintaining. 

The dinner proceeded without one observation upon the 
absence of Sir Henry, and, indeed, without many observ- 
ations of any kind. 

" Lady Hester," said Mr. Wiseman, " may I have the 
pleasure of drinking wine with you ? " 

" Lady Hester does not drink wine, Mr. Mayor," said 
his lordship. 

" I thought," said the mayor, " I saw her ladyship 
drinking some just now." 

" With me, sir," said the marquess, (! her ladyship 
sometimes does." 



THE MARQUESS. 195 

Lady Hester cast a commiserating look at her father in 
behalf of their guest. 

" Well, then, my lord, what say you to a glass ? " said 
Wiseman. 

ee Give Mr. Wiseman some wine," said Lord Snowdon 
to the butler. 

In vain did the mayor hold his glass in his hand in 
vain endeavour to catch the eye of his noble host ; he 
waited for a minute or two, but finding no preparation 
making upon " the reciprocity system," he swallowed his 
own champagne, and continued eating. 

" I was thinking, Mr. Mayor," said his lordship, who 
felt it necessary to keep his visitor in mind of the business 
to which he had been indebted for the honour of an in- 
vitation to Lionsden, " that the addresses should be pre- 
sented by you at the head of the corporation." 
' " No, my lord, I believe not," said Wiseman ; "your 
lordship will have to read them as our recorder. You 
know the recorder is the servant of the corporation ; and 
as the proverb says, we are not the sort of people to keep 
a dog and bark ourselves." 

" The servant of the corporation!" faltered the mar- 
quess. 

".Exactly," said Wiseman, tf our recorder is very much 
assimilated to the recorder of London ; only, my lord, the 
London recorder is always a lawyer, and understands his 
business. Now, in your case, we are too proud to have 
you with us, without troubling you to do any work, except 
by deputy ; but when an occasion of the present kind 
offers, it would be an indignity to the king and queen to 
surfer the addresses to be read by a deputy while the prin- 
cipal was present ; and as for the mayor's reading them, 
that's totally out of the question, because, although as far 
as my own private feelings goes, I should not hesitate to do 
it, yet, you see, I must consider my office and its privi- 
leges, with a view to the rights of my successor." 

" I see," said the marquess, " it is inconsistent with 
your dignity to condescend so far." 

tf Exactly so, my lord," said Wiseman. ei Lady 
Hester, shall I give you some of this dish before me ? " 
o 2 



196 



THE MARQUESS. 



se Hand those entrees round," said the marquess to 
the servants, in an agony at the officious civility of his 
civic superior. 

" Still/' said Lord Snowdon, " I think in my own 
house I ought not to read them I think it would be in- 
convenient." 

" Oh ! " said Wiseman, t on account of your eye-sight, 
my lord ? Ay, now if you would but wear spectacles 
the glass you use is of no service whatever, compared with 
a good pair of spectacles. My grandmother, my lord, 
who was a very fine woman of her age, was uncommon 
conceited about her looks, and we could not persuade her 
to put on regular spectacles till she was very old ; but when 
she did, she never left 'em off again." 

" I did not mean, sir," said Lord Snowdon, <e that in 
that sense it would be inconvenient for me to read the 
addresses ; I meant that it would be more convenient that 
the addresses should come to this house from the corpora- 
tion, without my appearing to have any personal parti- 
cipation in them, which might with some people lower 
their character for spontaneous loyalty and dutiful attach- 
ment, which, in fact, so eminently distinguish them." 

" Oh ! I see what you mean, my lord," said Wiseman ; 
I thought it was on account of your eyes ; well, I'll 
think about it; I'll consult my brethren, and we'll get 
your lordship's deputy to tip us a law opinion upon it ; 
for I should like to do the thing regular if it is to be done 
at all." 

" / should like," thought the marquess ; " poor 
wretch ! " 

By this time dinner was ended, and having been served 
a la Russe, the dessert remained, the only additions to 
which were two ices. At this moment Sir Harry Winscott 
was announced. Lord Snowdon waited till he had reached 
his eye,, before he expressed the slightest conviction of his 
arrival : when he approached his chair, the marquess 
bowed; Sir Harry bowed to Lady Hester, and sat down." 

" Which ice do you choose, Sir Harry," said the marquess, 
without moving a muscle of his countenance, " cream or 
water ? What are they, Hall ? " 



THE MARQUESS. 



197 



" Brown bread and grape, my lord," said the butler. 

" I beg your pardon, my lord/' said Sir Harry, (quite 
aware that as he had missed his time he had no chance 
for a dinner,) te I will wait a moment, if you please 
ice, when one is hot, is not quite safe." 

" I never am hot, Sir Harry," said Lord Snowdon. 

c( No, I dare say," said Sir Harry, " but when one is 
late." 

" I never am late, sir," said the marquess. " Will you 
take some wine ? " 

"Presently," said Sir Harry; "not having eaten any 
thing, I " 

" I did not inquire, Sir Harry, what you had eaten," 
said the boiling magnifico. Take tjie wafers to Sir Harry 
Winscott." 

Wiseman, the mayor, saw that something was wrong. 
Lady Hester knew how to soften down the asperities, and 
in addressing the last arrival, expressed with her looks 
what even she, dear soul, would not have ventured to speak 
with her tongue. The mayor thought it delicate to change 
the subject. 

" It's very wonderful, my lord," said the intrepid 
Wiseman, " how beautifully and correctly art now-a-days 
imitates nature." 

t( Yes," said, or rather bowed, the marquess* 

" Wonderful improvements, sir," continued the right 
worshipful ; u now, nothing upon this human earth can 
look more like natural hair than your lordship's. Nothing 

only that I know what it is would make any body 
believe that that wasn't your own hair." 

ef Put the wine round, Hall," said the marquess ; 
" yes." 

" And then, my lord," continued this dreadful person, 
" your way of combing it up a little, now and then hey 

that carries on the deception doesn't it, my Lady 
Hester ? " 

The mayor, on making this appeal, turned to the fair 

daughter of the house, whose eyes were fixed upon him 

with an expression of wonderment and fear ; wonderment 

as to how far he was inclined to proceed with hisfacetifs, 

o 3 



198 THE MARQUESS. 

and fear for the visitation which her father might inflict 
upon his sins against his personal sensitiveness ; ' ' the wig" 
being the very tenderest point upon which any living crea- 
ture could impinge, not even Hester herself being per- 
mitted to know, or even believe, that it was not " all his 
own." 

" I see, miss," said the mayor, addressing her ladyship, 
" you have got your eyes upon me." 

The marquess shuddered. 

" You think these things of your pa's fit me uncommon 
well." 

i( Mr. Wiseman," said his lordship, writhing with 
agony, " Lady Hester has not had the advantage of an 
initiation into the arcana of my dressing-room. Help your- 
self, sir. Hester, dear, it is getting late." 

"Hester dear" immediately gave Miss Everingham a 
look, and rose from her seat. They proceeded to the door, 
which the marquess himself opened. As they passed the 
right worshipful, he said, in an under tone, to her lady- 
ship, " I hope I haven't driven you away by any observ- 
ation of mine, miss ? " 

The marquess resumed his seat : to the mayor he con- 
tinued his little attentions, but of Sir Harry he took no 
more notice than if he had been only the cushion of the 
chair upon which he sat. 

t( I remember, my lord," said Wiseman, " an old 
alderman of ours who traced a relationship to your lord- 
ship. It was when I was a boy " 

Here his lordship told the butler, who remained in the 
room to put round the wine, that he need not stay. His 
lordship was getting nervous as to matters of genealogy. 
The man went. 

' f When you were a boy, Mr. Mayor ? " said the mar- 
quess. 

" Yes, my Lord," said Wiseman, " he was an alder- 
man, it was in your lordship's father's time, the cor- 
poration used to dine here tlien very often he, he, he ! 
very often indeed, my lord." 

" Yes, I have heard they did," said his lordship, with 
a look expressively indicative of his own determination 
that such horrors never should happen in his time. 






THE MARQUESS. 199 

ec And this man/' continued the mayor, " was a very 
good man ; his name was Plinlimmon, like your lordship's, 
and he traced back to your house, and proved the con- 
nection quite clearly." 

" Indeed ! " said the marquess. " In what line was he? " 

" In the bacon and butter line, at first, my lord," said 
the mayor; " but he afterwards got up in the world, and 
became a general merchant, and died at his villa, on the 
other side of Shuttlework." 

Lord Snowdon would have given the world to explain 
to Sir Harry Winscott, (who was what his lordship con- 
sidered " a very decent sort of baronet, in the neighbour- 
hood,") how, and under what circumstances, his vis-d-vis 
got admittance to his table, but that the indignity which 
he fejt had been cast upon him by the baronet's want of 
punctuality, was so much greater in his estimation, than 
those inflicted by the mayor's want of worldly knowledge, 
that he could not so far relax as to give his ff worthy " 
friend the slightest information on the subject. 

Sir Harry guessed it all. Like every body else within 
the sphere of Lionsden, he knew all about the royal visit, 
and saw in the strained courtesy and forced condescension 
of the noble host, an endurance which he could not have 
exerted, unless he had some one of his " great points " to 
carry points upon which, be it recollected, so willed it 
fate, his lordship was invariably defeated. 

The conversation slackened; for the mayor, notwith- 
standing his imperturbable self-satisfaction, felt his social 
powers very considerably weakened by the perfect silence 
of the baronet, for whom, in his own circle, every body 
had a very high respect. He had sense enough to argue 
with himself, even under the influence of the marquess's 
wine, that if such a person as Sir Harry Winscott felt so 
much awe for the great man as to be kept mute and 
silent, that he must be going at somewhat too fast a pace, 
by keeping the whole of the " talk " to himself ; his tem- 
porary embarrassment was, however, utterly useless as an 
inducement to Sir Harry to come forward, who, between 
hunger and indignation at the treatment he had received, 
(but for which, as he knew the rule of the house, he ought 
o 4 



200 THE MARQUESS. 

to have been prepared,,) remained as dark "and as gloomy 
as ey^er, sipping his wine gravely and mechanically, at the 
same time drawing himself up, and affecting, like the frog 
in the fable, to look as dignified as his magnificent host. 

The marquess most devoutly wished both his guests at 
the bottom of the sea, and would not have endured their 
society ten minutes after his daughter's departure, but that 
he dreaded the exhibition which he was convinced the 
right worshipful would make if they went to the ladies, 
and anticipated the annoyance which his observations and 
remarks would inflict upon bis daughter. He therefore 
sat on, touching upon the business of the addresses, in 
hopes either that his visitors would make a move, or that 
if they did not, Lady Hester would have retired before 
they should think proper to do so. At length, finding the 
mayor immoveable, his lordship rang the bell, and ordered 
coffee to be brought to them in the dinner-room. The 
servant who received the command, mentioned that Sir 
Harry Winscott's carriage was ready. 

" Is my gig come ? " said the mayor, turning round to 
the servant with a conciliatory smile. 

" Yes, sir," said the man, " it has been here some 
time." 

" Dear me ! " said the mayor. ' ' Is it a fine night ? " 

e: I don't know, sir,'' said the man j fl I will inquire." 

" My poor old mare, my lord, has got a bit of a cold 
upon her," said the right worshipful "and I should not 
like to get her wet. She has been a good un in her time, 
my lord ; but as I was saying t'other day to Mrs. W., 
we none of us get better as we get older ; he, he ! I 
dare say you feel that, my lord ? " 

(f It rains very hard, sir," said the servant, returning. 

The mayor, within doors, now fully expected that his 
lordship would have made an offer to protect the mare 
without, from the inclemency of the weather, by desiring 
that she might be sent to the stables ; but, no she might 
have " melted, thawed, and resolved herself into a dew," 
for all his lordship cared ; indeed, except as tending to in- 
terrupt and mar the preparations for the fete-champetre, 
the state of the weather was highly consolatory to him, as 



THE MARQUESS. 



201 



being likely to act upon the humane feelings of the right 
worshipful chandler, and so induce him to beat a retreat 
a consummation which the marquess most devoutly wished. 
His lordship was not wrong in his expectations : the mayor 
moved,, and the marquess breathed again ; but judge his 
lordship's horror and amazement, when Sir Harry, who 
in the plenitude of his indignation at -the treatment which 
he had met with, had hitherto remained either perfectly 
silent or merely assenting with a nod to any general propo- 
sition said, 

"Mr. Mayor, as the night is" so bad, send away your 
open carriage, and I will set you down. You know I must 
go through Shuttlework in my way home ; I shall be most 
happy " 

ie Sir, you are very good," said Mr. Wiseman ; " I shall 
be very, very much obliged to you. I'll send away my 
poor old Jenny ; and I am sure, if she could speak, she 
would thank you too, Sir Harry." 

Saying which, the right worshipful Mr. Wiseman, with- 
out any further ceremony, laid violent hands on the cord 
which led to the marquess's chair, and pulling it con amore, 
rang the bell with a strength and violence fully proportioned 
to his gratitude and delight. 

"What may your commands be with the servant, t Mr. 
Mayor ? " said the marquess, as Hall entered the room. 

' Oh ! " said his worship, " Mr. Hall, have the good- 
ness to tell them to send away my buggy ; and tell the boy 
to tell his missuss, as she need not set up for me. And, 
Mr. Hall, sir, will you be kind enough, sir, to put my 
bundle them things in the silk pocket-handkerchief 
just in, under the seat. I am sorry to give you so much 
trouble " 

Hall, who glanced his eye towards his lord, thought it 
best for all their sakes to cut these directions as short as 
possible, and retreated to execute the mandate of the 
mayor, followed up to the door of the room by that right 
worshipful personage, who seemed fearful that if he once 
lost sight of Mr. Hall, his bundle would be lost to all 
eternity. 

11 A very civil man Mr. Hall, my lord," said the mayor. 



202 THE MARQUESS. 

ff Do you take any more coffee, Sir Harry ? " said the 
marquess. 

" No more, I thank you," said the baronet. 

<c Don't you think, my lord, we had better'go to the young 
ladies ? " said Wiseman ; ' i won't they think us long ? I 
hope I sha'n't get blamed. Mrs. W. often says to me, that 
I must be very agreeable when the females are gone ; for 
that she never can get me or my friends up to tea when- 
ever I have a spread, or we go anywhere to dine out." 

Of all the offences which plain simple man could com- 
mit against the marquess, the most heinous and the least 
pardonable, was that of instituting a comparison between 
his lordship and any thing that was his, and any other 
person or any thing that belonged to him. The idea of 
putting his parties, and his ladies, and his house, in com- 
petition with the saturnalia of the mayor, or the tea parties 
of his " females," as he called them, was absolute torture. 

" I dare say," said the marquess, " Lady Hester has re- 
tired long before this : it is near twelve o'clock." 

" Mercy on us ! " said Mr. Wiseman, te 1 had not the 
slightest idea of that. Time flies, in pleasant company, my 
lord. This is uncommon good, my lord," continued his 
worship, smacking his lips as he imbibed some remarkably 
fine Cura^oa, <f uncommon good, indeed something 
with orange peel in it. I don't know, my lord, if you 
drink much rum-shrub it's something like that, only 
this, being Frenchified in its name, is of course much 
better. Mrs. W. makes excellent shrub, my lord : if you 
will allow me to send up a bottle or two, I shall be very 
glad." 

Lord Snowdon bowed. 

" I can send it up," said Wiseman, " when I send back 
the clothes I borrowed. They shall come up on Wednes- 
day, my lord ; Mrs. W. will get them washed and ironed, 
and all, by that time." 

Sir Harry, who saw the workings of Lord Snowdon's 
countenance during this last speech, although he was him- 
self in utter ignorance of the meaning of the mayor's 
thanks and promises, was certain that the force of nature 
could go very little farther, and that his noble host was 



THE MARQUESS. 



203 



within one moment of an explosion. Not to be rude to the 
creature, who, with his myrmidons, was to add fresh im- 
portance to his reception of royalty, he struggled hard ; 
besides, he saw and understood the source of all the ease 
and familiarity of his entete guest; but his patience was 
nearly exhausted, his forbearance nearly expended. 

Sir Harry, who was in fact extremely anxious to be 
freed from a scene, the fun of which was considerably 
diminished by the apprehension of results, suggested to 
Mr. Wiseman, that, although his horse was secured from 
the weather, his (Sir Harry's) horses were not, and that he 
was ready to obey his commands. 

" What ! was you a- waiting for me to start, Sir Harry? " 
said the mayor. " Dear me, I am very sorry ; only think 
I should have sot here another hour : I do like a little 
talk in the evening." 

Hall here brought Lord Snowdon a tumbler of what was 
called at Lionsden, " King's Cup." 

" Sir Harry," said his lordship, descending from his 
stilts, " will you drink some of this ?" 

" If you please," said the worthy baronet, who looked 
upon this as a sort of potable calumet at parting. 

" Mr. Mayor," said his lordship, inquiringly, " will 
you ? " 

" If you please, my lord," said his worship ; " never 
refuse a good offer. Dear me ! " continued he, " this is 
very nice and cool very nice, indeed." 

" I am very partial to this beverage," said the marquess, 
addressing himself to Sir Harry. 

c ' Oh, it's very good ! " replied his worship : " I don't 
think I ever tasted any beverage before, my lord, upon 
my word, it is very nice." 

Lord Snowdon could not resist exchanging a look with 
Sir Harry, who with difficulty resisted a fit of laughter, 
into which he was near bursting. 

i( Come, Mr. Mayor," said Sir Harry, " I attend you." 

" On Wednesday, then, my lord/' said Wiseman, " I 
will bring up the drafts of the addresses, and the opinion 
of the deputy recorder." 

" If you please." 



204 THE MARQUESS. 

" What time shall I come, my lord ? " said Wiseman ; 
ce about the same time as I came to-day, or rather yesterday, 
since it is past twelve o'clock ? " 

" Oh ! " said Lord Snowdon, f< no I beg you 
to come early say, eleven o'clock in the forenoon." 

" Good night, my lord," said Wiseman ; " I say, my 
lord, I'll not forget the shirt and pantaloons, and things 
good night." 

His lordship exchanged adieus with his parting visiters ; 
and, returning to his chair, threw himself back in it, and 
exclaimed, with the affrighted monarch, 

" ' So being gone, I am a man again." 



CHAPTER III. 

To Lady Hester, the resolution of her father which, 
knowing him as she did, she had anticipated of not 
bringing his guests to the drawing-room, was a great relief. 
It gave her an hour or two to consider and reflect upon 
the peculiarity of her own position, and upon circumstances 
connected with the intelligence which had been conveyed to 
her, the day before, by her father, touching his proposed 
marriage with Miss Oldham. 

" I wonder," said Lady Hester to Miss Everingham, 
" whether my brother Alfred is aware of papa's intention 
of marrying again ? I would give the world to know ; and 
whether, if he knows so much of the affair, whether he 
knows for whom the honour of being my mother-in-law is 
destined. For myself I dare not write to him on such a 
subject, and am equally afraid of asking my father ; but 
still it seems to me absolutely necessary that I should do 
something in the business." 

" Why, my dear Lady Hester," said Miss Everingham, 
" you may rely upon it, that if the marquess has made up 
his mind to the marriage, nothing that cither Lord Malvern 
or you could say, would have any effect in altering his 
determination." 

" I have no wish to alter his determination," said Ladjr 



THE MARQUESS. 



205 



Hester, " my father has always been a kind parent to me 
to me his manner has always been affectionate he is per- 
fectly justified in taking any step which he may consider 
conducive to his happiness ; and he may rest assured that 
if this event occurs, he will meet with no conduct on my 
part, in the slightest degree calculated to mar the bright- 
ness of his prospects. It will be, to be sure, strange enough ; 
Elizabeth Oldham and myself have been so long intimate 
and confidential friends, that, at first, her new character 
will sit oddly upon her in my eyes ; but if it is decided, it 
is my duty to conform myself to circumstances : and I am 
quite certain in such cases, even if at first a child may feel 
some natural repugnance to a foreign influence, it is wisest 
as well as most proper to smooth all difficulties, and seem 
satisfied even if one is not quite happy." 

" With these feelings, Lady Hester," said Miss Evering- 
ham, " which do you so much honour, why do you appear 
so anxious about your brother's concurrence in the ar- 
rangement ? " 

ec Ah, Miss Everingham," said Lady Hester, " there are 
secrets in all families ; if I were convinced that Miss Old- 
ham of herself had willingly and readily consented to this 
marriage, all my anxiety upon that point would be set at 
rest. I cannot ascertain that fact if even I might 
until I receive her here ; and then perhaps a confession, 
that it is on her part not a matter of choice, but one of 
compulsion on the part of her mother, who is a worldly, 
calculating woman then, I say, I shall learn the truth 
too late. As far as my own opinion goes, knowing, as I 
think I do, all Elizabeth's tastes and feelings, I cannot 
loving my father affectionately, and seeing all his merits, 
and aware of his power and place in society I cannot 
yet believe that she would of herself form a connection, in 
which the striking difference of age between herself and 
her husband, forms an objection which, however idle it 
may be, I always believed in her mind to have been 
insurmountable." 

" Oh ! Lady Hester," said Miss Everingham, with an 
expression of countenance which to her companion needed 
no interpretation, " I think there is scarcely any young 



206 THE MARQUESS. 

lady in existence, who would be found likely to decline the 
offer of Lord Snowdon's hand." 

, " I am not discussing the advantages or evils of such 
marriages," said Lady Hester, " I merely speak of them 
because I know Elizabeth's opinions upon the subject were 
very decided j and I have a reason for wishing to know 
what her real feelings are now, far more important than 
the mere girlish desire of finding out whether she have 
changed her mind or not. It is not alone her own happi- 
ness that is at stake even that, I would do much to 
secure but the happiness of another, dearer to me than 
anybody on earth except my father." 

"How do you mean, my dear Lady Hester?" asked 
Miss Everingham. 

' f For Heaven's sake, Anne, never mention a syllable of 
this," said Lady Hester ; t( it is a subject full of difficulty 
and delicacy. All last night I lay awake considering how 
I could best conduct myself in it. Elizabeth has been a 
great deal with us : I like her, I might almost say, love 
her. Alfred, my brother, was constantly here too, arid I 
know now promise me, Miss Everingham, not to whisper 
a word of this Alfred is seriously attached to her. My 
father's manner, and, as far as Alfred is concerned, his 
temper, are such, that Alfred never dared to hint such a 
thing, nor in his presence ever pay her the slightest atten- 
tion. If Alfred's love were not requited, I have no desire 
that Elizabeth should not become my mother-in-law. 
She will not be the first woman who has so served a lover; 
and I hope and trust that Alfred will have sufficient sense 
and spirit to regard such a termination to his attachment, 
rather as an escape than a grievance. But I do yet be- 
lieve in my heart that Elizabeth is equally attached to 
him. She was, Anne she told me so her whole de- 
light was to talk of him to me, to praise his character, his 
manners, his person, all, with a warmth and earnestness 
which I then knew to be sincere. I do not believe that 
she, in whom I found by experience so much to admire, 
and even imitate, can have so far changed in mind and 
qualities within a few months, and since I last saw her, as 
not only to have abandoned, without compunction, the 



THE MARQUESS. 



207 



being she then owned she loved, in favour, not even of an 
ordinary rival, but of that being's father. It is impossible, 
because it is unnatural : a young woman of delicacy, of 
intellect, of feeling and she is all ,these could not 
act so." 

" But/' said Miss Everingham, who was much more 
deeply interested in the discussion than the amiable Lady 
Hester even suspected, " did Lord Malvern ever make 
known his sentiments to her ? " 

te No," said Lady Hester, " certainly not in any set 
fashion of words ; but Elizabeth is much too clever, and 
much too intelligent, not to form a tolerably clear judgment 
of the feelings of one who took no pains to conceal his 
admiration, who sought all opportunities of enjoying her 
society, and who postponed to the latest possible period his 
departure for the continent, because he could not endure 
the thought of a separation from her." 

" I should certainly endeavour," said Miss Everingham, 
"if I were you, to ascertain her real feelings, and 
then " 

ef Ah, what then ?" said her ladyship ; " when I have 
received her here, I have received the acknowledged future 
mistress of our house ; it will be then too late, Anne, to 
discover the wretchedness which is in preparation. Sup- 
pose she owns her affection for Alfred, tells me that 
she is forced into this match with my father, what am I 
then to do ? Am I to suffer it to proceed ? How am I 
to avert it ? " 

"Why not get your brother home?" said Miss Ever- 
ingham. 

" I would but then, suppose I were to set about the 
execution of such a design ; suppose he came, and suppose, 
then, that I found my hopes and expectations of Eliza- 
beth's firmness and constancy acted upon, as I supposed, 
only by compulsion, all ill-founded ? See what mischief 
I should do. I should bring father and son in contact 
- that father being my father, and that son being my 
brother." 

" Would it not be possible," said Miss Everingham, 
" to write to Mr. Burford ? " 



208 THE MARQUESS. 

" For what earthly purpose, my dear Anne ? " inter- 
rupted Lady Hester ; " why why write to him ?" 

" Why, my dear Lady Hester," said Miss Everingham, 
" as your brother's tutor, and so nearly of his own age, 
rely upon it, he is perfectly in his confidence ; he might 
know how far his happiness is implicated in Miss Oldham's 
constancy, and by what he knew of his feelings you might 
regulate your subsequent proceedings." 

' ' Me ! " said Lady Hester, looking deadly pale, and 
trembling like a leaf ; f< I, my dear Anne ; I would not 
write to Mr. Burford for the whole world." 

" Why, my dear," said Miss Everingham,, by the 
way, a Miss of six-and- thirty, " you have nothing to do 
with Mr. Burford, except in his professional capacity ; 
and I am quite sure with such an object in view as you 
have, there could be no sort of indelicacy in obtaining his 
assistance." 

" No, no," said Lady Hester, " that must not be. Be- 
sides, my father has a very high opinion of Mr. Burford, 
and I would not for the world compromise him in any 
scheme I might undertake for the securing of Alfred's 
happiness." 

" When does the marquess seem to think this marriage 
will take place ?" said Miss Everingham. 

" He has not told me, but" said Lady Hester, co- 
louring and hesitating " I think, from what I under- 
stood, it will not be before " 

" Your marriage with Lord Elmsdale ? " 

" Exactly," said Lady Hester. 

"And when is that to be?" said Miss Everingham, 
somewhat archly. 

" Oh ! Anne, don't ask me ; I really don't know ; there 
is no time fixed. Good Heaven ! what a sad thing it is, 
that the ways and prejudices of society are so frequently 
opposed to the wishes and inclinations of our hearts. My 
father's temper, softened as it always is to me, I am sure 
would not bear the serious contradiction which it would 
receive in my positive refusal to marry Lord Elmsdale ; 
but I am bewildered when I think of it. I have no ob- 
jection to Lord Elmsdale : he is amiable and good- 



THE MARQUESS. 



209 



natured ; but in my mind he possesses no qualities calcu- 
lated to excite that warmth and enthusiasm of affection 
upon which I am weak enough to believe the best hopes of 
mutual happiness are founded. It is a connection which 
my father says is desirable : Lord Elmsdale appears to be 
of the same opinion ; but I am sure, if I could look into 
his heart, his feelings towards me are nearly similar to 
those I entertain for him. He does not dislike me he is 
well enough pleased when he is here, and has made up his 
mind that the alliance will answer ; but there is no sym- 
pathy between us. And yet, Anne, I dare not hesitate ; 
to refuse would be to incur the most dreadful of all inflic- 
tions a father's curse." 

<f Well now, I think/' said Miss Everingham, (whose 
opinion of men, and particularly marrying men,, was gene- 
rally favourable,) " Lord Elmsdale is very agreeable, un- 
objectionable in person or manner ; and to a disengaged 
heart like yours, I " 

" Yes, Anne," said Lady Hester, " I am perfectly 
aware of his being very good, and quite unexceptionable, 
but ' 

" Oh, I am not going into his vindication or eulogium/' 
said Miss Everingham ; " and as far as your brother is 
concerned, I certainly think your apprehensions are natu- 
rally and laudably excited ; and if I were you, / would do 
something, much, as I think, depending upon the time at 
which the marriage of your father is intended to take 
place." 

" Elizabeth is coming here on Tuesday," said Lady 
Hester, ( ' and, I presume, will be presented to the queen as 
the intended Lady Snowdon j at least so I suspect from 
something papa said." 

" Well, then, my dear Lady Hester/' said Miss Ever- 
ingham, f( you will have sufficient opportunity during her 
stay to satisfy yourself of her views and feelings with re- 
spect to Lord Malvern." 

" What a task ! " said Lady Hester ; " and how shall 
I act if I find myself mistaken in her, and discover that 
the proposed marriage with my father has been settled with 
her consent and concurrence ? " 



210 THE MARQUESS. 

" You can do no more," said Miss Everingham. 

" True ; I must not argue for my brother against my 
father," said Lady Hester. " It is remarkable enough, 
that for the last five or six weeks I have not heard from 
her, although we have generally been regular correspond- 
ents : that looks, I think, ominous." 

" No," said Miss Everingham, " her silence may be 
easily accounted for under either circumstance. If she has 
really given up your brother, and enters con amove into the 
present arrangement, knowing your devotion to him, and 
aware that you knew the progress of his attachment, and 
suspected her consciousness of it, she would not venture to 
confess her defection ; and if, on the other hand, she is 
forced into the present match by her mother, she would be 
ashamed to admit the inducements under which she had 
submitted to renounce the son for the father. No : wait 
till she comes ; discover from herself the real state of the 
case, and then, as far as my humble advice goes, dear Lady 
Hester, you may command me." 

Here the conversation of the ladies upon this interesting 
topic was terminated by the arrival of the servants with 
coffee ; but it had already produced a very powerful effect 
upon the mind of Miss Everingham, who, if not actuated 
by feelings so highly honourable and exemplary as those 
of Lady Hester, was considerably agitated by the certainty 
of the Marquess's marriage ; it having, throughout her 
long career in the family, appeared to her to be just within 
the scope of probability, that if she waited patiently till 
the time should arrive when Lord Snowdon became, even 
in his own opinion, old, and desirous of that moderate and 
philosophical consolation which an elderly gentleman might 
prudently and respectably obtain, from an union with a 
lady of good family and connections, who had lost the 
bloom of youth, but upon whose once beautiful face, Cupid 
had left his footmarks, in the shape of wrinkles, she might, 
without interfering with the prospects of the younger 
branches, become the head of her noble cousin's establish- 
ment, of which she had. for so many years been the con- 
stant ornament. 

To her, therefore, the news of the Marquess's marriage 



THE MARQUESS. 211 

was important in the highest degree ; and if Lady Hester 
had desired by any means to break it off altogether, she 
could not have hit upon a more efficient ally than her 
friend Miss Everingham. It was, however, not her wish 
to do so. We have- seen whither her anxiety tended, and 
may yet see if we have patience in what manner it 
was rewarded. 

It was curious enough that amongst the gay party ex- 
pected upon the coming occasion, the intended husband of 
Lady Hester, and the intended wife of her father, should 
both be numbered. Much more curious will it prove, if 
it should turn out that the beloved of his son was also pre- 
sent in the character of his future mother-in-law ; these 
are the intricacies and interests which chequer even the 
brightest scenes of human life. 

In the morning after this discussion between the ladies, 
the marquess was more than usually occupied in his ar- 
rangements. There seemed to be a constant interchange 
of messengers and despatches between Lionsden and the 
Marquess's private friend at Windsor. Nothing that 
could conduce to the ease and comfort of the royal party 
was left undone ; and as the time approached for its arrival 
Lord Snowdon seemed to gain new life, and an activity 
and animation scarcely natural to his character. 

On the Wednesday he completed his business with the 
corporation : he acceded to the proposition of reading the 
addresses to their majesties himself; and it was settled 
that the mayor, aldermen, and burgesses should be waiting 
the arrival of their majesties at the great entrance to Lions- 
den, while the marquess, with a party of the neighbouring 
nobility and gentry, mounted on horseback, should receive 
the cortege at the park gates ; that they should escort the 
carriages to the door of the castle, where the corporation 
would form a lane across the hall through which their ma- 
jesties would pass to the great drawing-room, in which 
two chairs of state were to be placed. That as soon as the 
king and queen had reached their chairs, the corporation 
should be presented by the recorder, who afterwards was 
to receive the addresses from the mayor, and read them to 
p 2 



212 THE MARQUESS. 

their majesties, copies of both having been sent off to 
Windsor so soon as they were completed, in order that 
suitable answers might be prepared. 

The county yeomanry, of which the noble marquess was 
colonel, were to form the escort and guard of honour, and 
a park of artillery, brought from London on purpose, were 
to fire a double salute, when the royal standard was hoisted 
upon the Knight's Tower, at the moment their majesties 
entered the castle. 

After the presentation of the addresses, a cold collation 
was to be partaken of by all the municipal officers, and the 
festivities without the castle were to commence ; pony 
phaetons were to be in readiness for the royal party to drive 
to different points where the marquees were pitched, and 
where they would, no doubt, condescend to gratify their 
loyal subjects by a sight of their august persons. 

Nothing could be more exhilarating, nothing more de- 
lightful ; yet Lady Hester smiled not ; she seemed ab- 
stracted in the midst of the gaiety, and when, upon the 
eve of all this splendour, she found herself seated next 
Lord Elmsdale, her affianced lord, she found no consola- 
tion in his presence to compensate for the absence of others 
who had been expected. Lady Katharine Oldham and 
her daughter were prevented from joining the party by the 
illness of the former, and Lady Hester was doomed to 
exist how much longer she knew not in ignorance of 
the real state of her friend's feelings. 

Lord Snowdon was evidently mortified at the absence of 
his intended bride. The circumstances under which she 
would have been declared the future mistress of Lionsden, 
were full of brilliancy and effect, and having the sanction 
of royalty to his choice, would have been extremely agree- 
able to his lordship. 

" I am very much vexed at Lady Katharine's illness," 
said the marquess to his daughter ; " these things always 
turn out so. Nothing could have been more agreeable or 
opportune than this gaiety; but, however, we must not 
complain ; health must be attended to ; fallible mortals, 
let their rank and pretensions be what they may, must 
submit to the decrees of Providence." 



THE MARQUESS. 



214 THE MARQUESS 

the moralists of middling life give to their children, " to 
marry and settle." With us, the marrying is as easy as 
with them, but when we come to 'settle,' the cases are 
widely different." 

Lady Hester had now got a reprieve and in that light 
she considered it for three or four weeks ; and she re- 
joiced in the information ; for from Lord Elmsdale him- 
self she heard nothing of the sort ; he seemed to consider 
their union a settled thing, and that the delay which 
occurred was owing to the necessary proceedings of lawyers, 
and others concerned in the arrangements. But he neither 
expressed impatience at the procrastination of his happiness, 
nor indeed, as far as 'his manner went, did it appear that 
he anticipated any very considerable share of felicity even 
in the conclusion of the affair. 

Lady Hester, on the other hand, yielded to her father's 
wish in accepting the offer which he had persuaded his 
noble friend to make. It was decided ; the marquess had 
commanded her to tell him if her heart was pre-engaged ; 
she denied that it was ; she dare not tell the truth ; but to 
her own conscience, in her self-communings, could she 
boldly and honestly avow that her affections were free ? 
No : if ever woman was devoted to man, Lady Hester was 
heart and soul the captive of one, truly worthy of her, in 
mind, in character, in principle ; in every point, save two 
fortune, and, in another still more important to her 
noble father, blood. Who this fondly loved and secretly 
treasured object was, it would be useless here to mention j 
for, as we have just heard, the Lady Hester was to become 
Lady Elmsdale early in the following month. 

The hurry and bustle of preparation for the royal visit 
seemed to increase as the day of its occurrence approached. 
The party destined to meet the illustrious guests began to 
assemble, and on the evening previous to the important 
day, Lord Snowdon sat himself down, perfectly satisfied 
that nothing had been left undone to give eclat to the 
affair. He retired to rest, only to dream of royalty, drums, 
trumpets, cannon, ribbons, stars, music, feasting, and!fire- 
works. 

Every servant and officer of the household had been 



THE MARQUESS. 215 

furnished with a paper of instructions special to himself, 
and with a programme of the general proceedings ; arid 
when the morning dawned, every one was alive and on the 
qui vive to execute the great design of their magnificent 
master. 

The first failure was a very serious one, but it was the 
fault of nobody. The morning was ushered in, not by a 
salvo of artillery, as had been proposed, but by one of the 
most violent storms of hail, rain, and wind that had 
occurred in the memory of man. Before eleven o'clock, 
all the flags which had been displayed were blown from 
their masts, and two thirds of the admirably constructed 
dinner-tents levelled with the ground, crushing in their 
fall crates of crockery, and mixing with the mud all the 
inciting condiments which were to have given zest to the 
abundant viands. The orchestra, erected for the Russian 
Horns, was blown into the sheet of water near which it 
was placed, and the barge in which the band of the county 
militia were harmoniously to have circumnavigated its sur- 
face, was cast high and dry upon the land ; in short, such 
a scene of confusion was never before witnessed. 

At a little after noon came the corporation, not in 
state, or in procession, but as they could, by detachments : 
some in post-chaises, others in gigs, flies, and 'similar con- 
veyances the sword and mace having been cautiously 
forwarded in the carrier's covered cart, wrapped up in a 
blanket, which served to protect " the baubles" from the 
effects of the weather. A crowd of rain-defying urchins 
had clustered round the gates, by whom every new and 
well- wetted comer was greeted with a shout of laughter. 

It was at these gates that the noble marquess proposed 
to meet the royal cortege ; but as the storm showed no 
symptoms of abatement, instead of waiting its arrival on 
horseback, the horses of his lordship and of three or four 
inveterate toadies, who alone could be prevailed upon to 
face the tempest, were placed under cover, while his lord- 
ship and these faithful adherents were huddled into one of 
the lodges, a servant being placed on the look-out to give 
timely notice of the approach of their majesties. 

Pain, Lord Snowdon could endure without flinching, 



216 THE MARQUESS. 

sorrow, he could feel without weeping, he could suffer losses 
without regret, and bear privations without murmuring, 
but any thing like ridicule was death to him. Already 
mortified beyond measure by the badness of the weather 
and its consequences, the cheers of the dirty little boys by 
whom his hiding-place was surrounded struck upon his 
ear as discordantly as the yells of so many demons. 

"What are those fellows shouting about?" said his lord- 
ship ; " do they see the royal carriages ? " 

" Oh, no, my lord," said an unfortunate servant, " they 
are only making fun of the mayor and corporation as they 
come in." 

" Making fun, sir," said his lordship ; " what do you 
mean by fun ? Have them removed instantly." 

The idea of one of the most important component parts 
of the solemnity being already converted into fun, went to 
his lordship's heart ; but when he heard the roars of 
merriment with which they received the orders of the in- 
dividual who had been directed to disperse them, his lord- 
ship's agony lest the illustrious visitors should arrive just at 
the moment of the disturbance, superseded all his other 
feelings, and he speedily countermanded the orders which 
he too late discovered he could not carry into effect. After 
this, shout succeeded shout, as the dripping visitants made 
their appearance, till at length the concerted signal an- 
nounced the approach'of royalty. The horses were speedily 
brought to the door of the lodge. The marquess and his 
friends mounted, a performance which required more 
strength than grace, on account of the power of the wind ; 
and in a few minutes all was in readiness for the reception. 

When his majesty's carriage reached the gates, a mo- 
mentary pause was made amidst the genuine cheers of the 
people ; and the marquess, seated on his favourite charger, 
and dressed in his yeomanry uniform, welcomed the royal 
visitor, who, however, came without the queen in itself 
a sad blow to his lordship. His lordship took off his re- 
gimental chacho with an air and manner which had on a 
thousand different occasions attracted the admiration of all 
who had witnessed the graceful display, and acted as fugle- 
man in the cheers which welcomed the sovereign. But, 



THE MARQUESS. 217 

how shall his misery be adequately described how his 
position sufficiently well pourtrayed when the truth 
shall be told ! In uncovering himself, the tight-fitting 
chacho parted from its noble master's head with such re- 
luctance, that the wig nature's shame and art's master- 
piece came with it, and in an instant was blown over the 
heads of the populace, till it caught in the bough of a tree, 
leaving the marquess as clean shorn as a dervise, exposed to 
the pitiless pelting of the weather, the shouts of the mob, 
and the irresistible mirth of majesty itself. 

Never was man so distressed. There he was, with his 
bald head, mounted on a plunging horse, curvetting 
amongst the umbrellas of the populace, having totally lost 
his presence of mind, not choosing to put on his chacho 
before the king, and not daring to look round ; the car- 
riage proceeding at a foot pace amidst the motley throng. 
To complete all his miseries, just as they reached the great 
entrance, where, according to previous arrangement, the 
magnates of the corporation were assembled, an active boy, 
who had climbed the elm which had caught the missing 
peruke, ran up to his lordship's side holding the dishevelled 
article in his hand " high up in air," looking more like a 
bird's-nest than a Brutus, at the same moment crying out, 
with the voice of a Stentor, " Here's your wig, my lord ; I 
got it down, my lord ; hope you won't forget the poor boy, 
my lord." 

The corporation stared and wondered to what straits 
may magnificence be reduced ! Unconscious of what he 
did, the noble lord, in an agony of despair, replaced the 
well made yet much damaged covering upon his head, 
having, in the confusion of the moment, put that part 
which was destined for the front upon the nape of his 
neck. 

It was quite impossible to help laughing at the scene, 
even had the example not been set in the highest quarter ; 
and this laugh it was that wrung him to the very soul. 
Having affected to smile at his own misfortunes, his lord- 
ship procedeed in attendance upon his illustrious visitor 
to the great drawing-room where the chairs of state had 
been according to arrangement placed, the absence of her 



218 THE MARQUESS. 

majesty having been accounted for by the badness of the 
weather, which had induced the queen to proceed direct to 
Windsor. 

This disappointment having been generally announced to 
the company, the ceremonial of presenting the address 
began. The mayor delivered it to his lordship, who, posi- 
tively refusing the aid of glasses, (although perfectly con- 
scious of the difficulty of seeing without them,) com- 
menced reading the dutiful and affectionate testimonial, 
standing at the right hand of the king, the mayor and cor- 
poration being in front, and the apartment filled with all 
the company forming the invited party, and by a great 
number of the most respectable inhabitants of Shuttle- 
work, who, wet as they were, had been permitted to wit- 
ness the interesting and magnificent ceremony. 

The moment the fine sonorous voice of the noble mar- 
quess was heard, silence the most profound reigned amongst 
the assembled throng. His lordship read as follows : 

<f May it please your majesty, 

<e We, the mayor, burgesses, and aldermen of the 
ancient and loyal town of Shuttlework, beg to be per- 
mitted to approach your royal presence, in order to offer 
our dutiful congratulations upon your majesty's arrival in 
our neighbourhood. 

" Accustomed as we are to hear your majesty's praise 
on all hands and from all quarters, it cannot but afford us 
the highest gratification to be permitted thus personally to 
express our affectionate regard for your majesty's person, 
and our unbounded admiration of your majesty's cha- 
racter and qualities. 

" In venturing thus to address your majesty, we have 
to request that your majesty will be graciously pleased to 
accept at our hands, as a testimonial of our sentiments, and 
as a proof of our anxiety to merit that patronage which 
your majesty is known so generously to afford to the 
artisans of the united kingdom, two specimens of the 
manufacture of our native town, consisting of a blue silk 
pelisse and a white lace veil ; and to entreat that your 
majesty will be pleased to appear in them in public upon 
the first fitting occasion." 



THE MARQUESS. 219 

At the conclusion of this paragraph, a shout of laughter 
rent the splendid saloon ; the king himself first stared with 
astonishment, and then burst into an immoderate fit of 
mirth ; upon which the mayor and the corporate body, re- 
leased from the apprehension of committing a solecism by 
indulging in their merriment, re-echoed the peal, leaving 
the marquess in a state of perfect stupefaction, unconscious, 
in his anxiety to puzzle out the writing, what were the 
words he had uttered, and completely unaware that, in the 
hurry and bustle of the moment, and the crowd, his un- 
fortunate, but well-meaning friend Mr. Wiseman, had 
handed his lordship the address which had been intended 
for her majesty, instead of that which was to be read to the 
king! 

Any attempt to restore gravity in the audience would 
have been vain, to describe the marquess's indignation, 
equally so: rage kindled in his eye, and the look of com- 
passionate contempt which he cast upon the crowd, who 
could see anything comical or absurd in a grand cere- 
monial, in which he himself was one of the principal per- 
formers, was worthy the pencil of a Wilkie. To add to all 
his miseries, and conclude the spectacle in the most ap- 
propriate possible manner, the band stationed in the ante- 
room, hearing the burst of noise within, concluded that the 
ceremony had terminated j and, according to directions 
previously given, struck up one of the liveliest airs from 
Auber's Massaniello. 

Too great a liberty has, perhaps, already been taken 
with the sovereign, in introducing his majesty's name into 
a fictitious narrative : a sense of humble, dutiful, and af- 
fectionate loyalty prevents the appearance here, of any 
detail of the conversation which passed between the king 
and the marquess during the rest of the day ; suffice it to 
say, that the impression made upon the minds of all the 
party was exactly the reverse of what his lordship had 
wished and anticipated. In consequence of the absence of 
the queen, a masque, which was to have been performed in 
her majesty's honour, remained of course unrepresented ; 
and for the same cause, his majesty, instead of remaining 
to sleep and pass part of the following day, took his de- 



220 THE MARQUESS. 

parture at a few minutes after ten, about a quarter of an 
hour before the display of some magnificent fireworks ; a 
circumstance, the grief for which was in some degree com- 
pensated by the complete failure of the exhibition, caused 
by the fall of the heavy rain, and the consequent disap- 
pointment of all those to whom fireworks would have been 
a " sight." All that we may venture to repeat of what 
passed before his majesty's departure was of itself enough 
to kill the marquess : " God bless you, my dear Snowdon," 
said the king, stepping into his carriage ; " we have had a 
delightful day excellent /un : I shall never hear the 
name of Lionsden again without laughing." A dagger to 
Lord Snowdon's heart could scarcely have done him 
greater injury than the avowal of such an association in 
the royal mind. 

Every thing, in fact, had gone wrong ; nothing had oc- 
curred but disappointment and vexation. Lionsden was 
associated in the minds of the visitors as a castle of storms]; 
the ceremonies performed in it had been made burlesques ; 
the premature destruction of the provisions by wholesale, 
had caused a melancholy scarcity of eatables when the 
proper time for eating came ; and the ill humour of the 
noble host, resulting from these failures, left a dark and 
gloomy impression upon the spirits of the assembled 
hundreds, relieved only by the merriment which his lord- 
ship had himself unwillingly caused by appearing literally 
bare-headed before his sovereign. Lord Snowdon retired 
to bed, harassed, fatigued, and mortified, relieved from 
absolute misery, only by the consolatory reflection, that his 
beloved Elizabeth Oldham had not witnessed an exhi- 
bition in which every thing had turned out so wonderfully 
ill. 



CHAPTER IV. 

" BETTER," says the proverb, " be at the end of a feast 
than at the beginning of an affray : " it may be so ; but 
nothing can be more wretched than the general appearance 



THE MARQUESS. 221 

of the site of a fete, the day after the fair : smoked and 
burnt out lamps, withered flowers, exploded cartridges, 
broken dishes, smashed tea-cups, and the scattered skeletons 
of wasted bon bans, are but sad memorials of what is past. 
At Lionsden, all the habitable part of the house had re- 
sumed its wonted appearance long before the ordinary time 
for breakfast ; but at the extensive outposts of the park and 
domain, evidences palpable and painful yet remained, of 
the ravages which circumstances and the elements combined 
had committed. 

A night more stormy without had not for many years 
raged ; but it was a calm compared with the tempest of 
Lord Snowdon's mind. When he recalled to himself all 
the incidents of the day, the day which was to have 
been marked not with a white, but a golden shell, in the 
calendar of his existence, and recollected all his hopes and 
expectations, and compared the anticipation with the reality, 
the imagination with the truth, he could scarcely bear the 
torture of the solitude from which his beloved Elizabeth 
was so shortly to relieve him. That the king should have 
come under such circumstances ; that under such circum- 
stances the queen should have staid away ; and that having 
arranged all things, as he considered, best fitting to the 
state and ceremony of such an event, that his majesty 
should have left his house with an assurance that he never 
should think of it again without laughing these were re- 
flections all too dreadful for endurance. 

The breakfast passed off heavily : some of the ladies did 
not appear Lady Hester and Miss Everingham did 
Lord Elmsdale was at Lady Hester's side ; three or four 
other guests were scattered along the table ; and the mar- 
quess himself, apparently unconscious of their presence, 
hastily finished the tasteless meal. 

" Hester, dear," said his lordship, (C come to me in my 
room when you have finished your breakfast, I have 
something to say to you." 

Lady Hester bowed " yes," and cast a look at her be- 
trothed which seemed to say, " my father is going to talk 
to me about our marriage.'* Lord Elmsdale understood the 
expression of her countenance, and sighed deeply ; not as 



222 THE MARQUESS. 

lovers sigh, but as a man would sigh who in his heart 
did not anticipate perfect happiness in that which a little 
close observation of the family politics had induced him to 
suspect was not altogether a marriage of inclination. Lady 
Hester speedily followed her father, anxious, as it were, to 
plunge into the misery for which she was prepared, and 
which, sad but true to say, was generally the result 'of a 
conversation with her noble parent. 

Her ladyship gently rattled the handle of the door of the 
marquess's sanctum no one in Lionsden being permitted 
to take the liberty of knocking at it and received the 
permissive " come in," with a feeling which nobody un- 
accustomed to such scenes and circumstances can properly 
appreciate. 

" Come hither, Hester," said the marquess ; " you look 
pale and worried, child ; I am not surprised : yesterday was 
too great an exertion, too great an excitement for you. Sit 
you down, dear. To be sure, nothing could be more mortify- 
ing than the whole affair. However, there is no kind of use 
in lamenting over what is past and irrecoverable ; we had 
better devote our thoughts to arrangements for events which 
are yet to come." 

Lady Hester seated herself opposite her father. 
" Hester," said the marquess, " I have received a letter 
from town, which will make a considerable alteration in my 
projected movements. Ladies are not formed for poli- 
ticians, at least I hope no lady with whom I have any 
connection either is, or fancies herself so ; but nevertheless, 
I think it my duty, as the communication which has been 
made to me will make a change in our general proceedings, 
to mention the circumstance to you, in order that you may 
be assured that public affairs, and nothing in any way re- 
lating to yourself personally, have operated to induce it. I 
intend going to London next week." 

" Indeed, papa," said Lady Hester, " I am ready to do 
anything you wish, and require no explanation of your mo- 
tives." 

" I know that, dear child," said Lord Snowdon ; " but 
it will also make an alteration in the ceremonial of your 
marriage, which I had intended to have celebrated here ; it 



THE MARQUESS. 223 

will now be solemnised in town : and I have been think- 
ing, that as Malvern must soon be apprised of the approach- 
ing change in my condition, it would be an excellent plan 
to invite him over to your wedding, and take that oppor- 
tunity of announcing my proposed alliance with Miss Old- 
ham." 

tf My brother, sir ? " said Lady Hester, turning pale as 
death. 

" Yes, why not ? " asked the marquess. " Have you 
any objection to your only and so much-loved brother's 
presence upon that occasion?" 

" Oh ! no, sir," said Lady Hester, <( none : only I 
thought perhaps it would interfere with 1 his continental 
tour, and " 

" Dear child," replied Lord Snowdon, " you are a kind 
considerate girl ; but if I calculate rightly, not more than 
three weeks would be required to bring them to London, 
and return them to the place whence they would have to 
start j and it struck me that Malvern, who is so extremely 
and so very justly attached to his tutor, Mr. Burford, would 
feel it a mark of attention on my part, and of consideration 
on yours, if he were to perform the ceremony. As my 
chaplain, it would be well that he should. Several of the 
bishops have already behaved extremely civil about it, and 
have volunteered, but I think I " 

What his lordship might have been pleased to think of 
the right reverend prelates, and their extraordinary civility, 
it is not for us at present to know ; for upon looking at his 
daughter in the midst of this flight of magnificence, he saw 
she had fallen back in her chair senseless, and apparently 
lifeless. 

" Hester, Hester, dear ! " exclaimed his lordship, rising 
from his seat, " what is this ! speak, dear child, speak !" 

His lordship rang the bell; Lady Hester's maid was 
summoned, and with her, came rushing into the apartment 
Miss Everingham, nearly as pale as her unhappy young 
friend. 

" Raise her carefully," said the marquess ; " I cannot 
imagine what can have caused this sudden attack." 



224 THE MARQUESS. 

" Oh ! my lord," said Miss Everingham, Cf it's nothing; 
she has fainted, that's all." 

" Fainted, ma'am ! " said the marquess, raising his head 
to the highest point of elevation, ' ' the Plinlimmons are not 
in the habit of fainting." 

" My lord," said the terrified dependent " I don't know 
what else it can be." 

" No, madam," said his lordship, no more do I. There 
carefully now carry Lady Hester to her own room, 
and bring me word in a quarter of an hour how she is." 

Lord Snowdon was a good deal puzzled as to the cause 
of this scene. He considered over all the possible physical 
causes for such an effect, but he never glanced at any 
mental agitation as likely to have produced it. In Lady 
Hester's marriage with Lord Elmsdale, he saw nothing 
but a most agreeable termination to the single life of his 
daughter. She had rank, fortune, and a gentlemanly man 
at her command ; and he could not of course attribute an 
excess of agitation, so violent as to produce a fainting fit 
which, in spite of the extensive privileges of the Plinlim- 
mons, it certainly was to the suggestion that her brother 
should be present at the celebration of her marriage. 

No: although beyond measure unwilling to admit of 
any physical infirmity, either in his own person, or those 
of his family, the marquess had resolved to call in the aid 
of the leading physician at Shuttlework, when he received 
intelligence that his daughter was much better, indeed 
nearly sufficiently recovered to return to him, if he desired 
it ; this he would not hear of, but accompanied the mes- 
senger back to her boudoir, where he found her calm and 
composed, and almost herself again, under the care of her 
valuable friend and companion. 

To the suggestion of medical advice, Lady Hester re- 
turned a distinct negative ; she knew that medicine could 
not restore Tier to health or happiness, and was perfectly 
aware that neither Dr. Leech, the whig Galen, nor Dr. 
Wright, the tory Paracelsus of Shuttlework, could " mi- 
nister to a mind diseased." This pleased, because it flat- 
tered, the marquess, who had a very strong idea of the 
natural immunities of the family of the Plinlimmons,, in 



THE MARQUESS. 225 

spite of the well filled vaults under his pew at Lionsden, 
or the exquisitely chiselled vanities by which they were 
surrounded. 

" What was the matter with you,, dear Lady Hester ? " 
said Miss Everingham, anxious beyond measure to obtain 
a proper and acceptable reason for the direful impropriety 
of allowing nature to have her way before the marquess ; 
" was it heat, or cold, or fatigue ? " 

(f No, no," said Lady Hester, ' ' none of those, Anne : 
it was what I never may describe ; it was what I never 
dare reflect upon. Conceive think imagine Alfred's 
coming to England to witness my marriage with Lord 
Elmsdale, and Mr. Burford being specially sent for to per- 
form the ceremony ! " 

" Nothing more natural," said Miss Everingham, settling- 
two or three ringlets which had been dishevelled in the 
struggle of bearing Lady Hester to her room ; " you love 
your brother, and therefore his being here will give you 
pleasure ; your brother is warmly attached to Mr. Burford, 
and therefore if it will please him that Mr. Burford should 
marry you to Lord Elmsdale, you of .course must be 
pleased at the whole arrangement." 

" Oh ! Anne, Anne," said Lady Hester, f( would I 
were to be placed in my winding-sheet on the morning of 
that day, rather than in my bridal dress. What, I ask 
you what is there in Lord Elmsdale to attach me to him ? 
He is amiable and good, I believe ; but goodness and ami- 
ability are not so rare, that for merely those I should for 
life bind myself to a man about whom I cannot feel in- 
terested ? But, I will obey my father he has fixed his 
heart upon this connexion it shall be done but, oh ! 
not with Alfred by, and not with Mr. Burford for the 
clergyman." 

" Why not, dear ? " said the excellent toady. 

" Why ? " said Lady Hester, " I could tell you why . 
Alfred I could not bear but no matter, no matter 
this is all wildness all folly do persuade my father not 
to have Alfred here upon that occasion." 

" Me, Lady Hester ? " said Miss Everingham ; (f I have 
no power here now ; I once thought I had some little in- 
O 



226 



THE MARQUESS. 



fluence over the marquess, but since the avowed and de- 
clared dominion of Miss Oldham, I have no chance of per- 
suading, and dare not even suggest." 

" Why," said Lady Hester, " as your relative positions 
are so different, I really do not see how your influences 
could clash." 

This was delicate ground. 

" No, certainly," said Miss Everingham, " your father 
never made me an offer, but " 

" Oh ! no," said Lady Hester, a faint smile gleaming 
through her tears, ff I am quite sure he did not." 

" But why so sure ? " said Anne as the old thing 
was still called. 

" Why, I don't know," replied her ladyship, " I am 
sure, as far as I am concerned, I would give worlds that 
he had, and that you had accepted it ; all that I mean 
in short, Anne, I don't know what I mean ; only that I 
believe, really and truly, I shall go mad. What is to 
happen to me, what to become of me, I do not know." 

" Oh ! " said Miss Everingham, rising, and making a 
sort of formal curtesy, " What does the Countess of Elms- 
dale desire ? " 

" To be any thing on earth," replied Lady Hester, 
" rather than Countess of Elmsdale." 

"Why, my dear child," said 'dear Anne,' "every 
thing seems to be at cross purposes in this house just now ; 
what objection have you to Lord Elmsdale ? he is of a 
suitable age, of desirable connexions, and extensive for- 
tune ; gentlemanly in his manner, and kind in his dispo- 
sition." 

" I grant all that," said Lady Hester, " but in a con- 
nexion like that which I am about to form with him, it 
seems to me that something more is necessary to secure 
mutual happiness, than the negative good qualities which 
you describe him to possess. His rank is adventitious 
his fortune hereditary his connexions are naturally 
good education has polished his manners and the 
easiness of his circumstances has left his mind unruffled 
but where is the ardour, and warmth, and genuineness of 
.feeling, to which a woman, full of enthusiastic admiration 



THE MARQUESS. 22? 

of talent and genius, looks for a reciprocity of affection and 
devotion ? " 

" Oh ! my dear love," said Miss Everingham, " you 
are the most unreasonable of your sex. What ! you expect 
every thing should combine to secure your happiness. The 
admiration of genius and talent is highly creditable to your 
taste and feelings, but an appreciation of the value of place, 
pre-eminence, and twenty thousand a year, would be more 
likely to establish your character for judgment." 

" Ah ! my friend," said Lady Hester, ff I am not so 
foolish as to disregard the advantages of wealth, and the 
absolute necessity of competence, to secure a family from 
disquietude and unhappiness ; but I am wise enough to be 
assured, that gold without love is incapable of producing 
that sort of happiness which I consider essential in mar- 
riage. Look at my father it is true he is not so 
rich as a vast many others of his own rank ; but his pos- 
sessions are extensive, his income great, and yet do they 
insure happiness ? Is not his life one anxious struggle to 
be something more than he is, one continued effort to gain 
some new point, which, when achieved, would only be 
valued as raising him one step nearer the next object he 
might covet ? " 

" Ah, but then," said Miss Everingham, e< your father 
is a very extraordinary man ; he has a mind full of restless 
ambition : consider the height at which he is placed above 
the common herd." 

" I do consider it," said Lady Hester, " I do feel it, 
and I must say it would be very difficult to forget it, being 
so often reminded of the circumstance by himself; it is 
to his sensitive pride that you will have to attribute the 
ruin of my hopes and happiness. I felt that Lord Elms- 
dale was so estimable, so amiable, and so unobjectionable, 
that I dare not refuse him without adducing to my father 
some reason which he could bear to hear. I had none 
my heart was broken when I consented to the match ; but 
could I bear to hear the malediction of a father, which I 
knew too certainly would follow the disclosure of the real 
state of my feelings ? " 

" So then, Lady Hester," said Miss Everingham, " you 
Q 2 



228 THE MARQUESS. 

confess,, do you, that your disinclination to Lord Elmsdale 
arises not from his demerits, but because your heart is pre- 
engaged ? " 

" Oh ! dearest friend/' said Lady Hester, " as you value 
my happiness, my tranquillity of mind ; as you would 
support me in the fulfilment of one duty, and strengthen 
me in the exercise of others, -never, never whisper a word 
even, to me of this confession. I will conquer every 
feeling which I have entertained for the being whose name 
I dare not whisper even to myself, except that of pure and 
disinterested friendship." 

" You will not, Lady Hester," said Miss Everingham ; 
(< the struggle will kill you ; the continued effort will wear 
down your health and spirits, and you will be a wretched 
woman through life. Hear me, my dear girl I can have 
no interest in this affair beyond yours. I have suspected 
the state of your feelings for some time indeed, ever 
since the fatal acceptance of Lord Elmsdale ; since which 
event, the struggle of which I speak with dread has been 
going on. I ask no further confidence ; indeed, I would 
rather know no more ; but, as I have a perfect reliance 
upon your taste, and judgment, and feelings, I have no 
doubt that, although circumstances may exist which at 
present would inevitably prevent a result favourable to your 
happiness, the object of your choice is essentially worthy 
the prize he has obtained." 

ce Indeed, indeed," said Lady Hester, " it is I who am 
unworthy of his affections." 

"With these feelings with this conviction," said Miss 
Everingham, {C risk every thing rather than marry Lord 
Elmsdale." 

<c But how is it to be avoided ? " asked Lady Hester. 

" You should never have consented," said Miss Evering- 
ham. 

" Had I dared to tell my father the truth," replied Lady 
Hester, " I should not have hesitated for a moment ; but 
the dread I have of his anger, and its consequences upon 
himself, as well as others, is such, that I sank at his feet, a 
martyr to my fears ; and now it is too late to do any thing 
but lament." 



THE MARQUESS. 229 

" I hope not/' said Miss Everingham. " The wedding- 
day, you say, is postponed ? " 

" And, oh ! for what for what ! " sobbed Lady 
Hester. 

e< That your brother may be present, and that Mr. 
Burford may perform the marriage ceremony.'' 

" Oh ! Anne, Anne ! " said Lady Hester, <f I must die 
first ! I cannot bear it ! I am sure, quite sure, I should 
sink dead before the altar ! " 

" May I come in ? " said a voice, which the ladies 
instantly recognised as that of the marquess. It struck to 
their hearts. Had he heard any part of the conversation 
in which they were engaged, could he have accidentally 
listened ? An affirmative answer to his lordship's question 
was given by Miss Everingham, and the dreaded sire stood 
beside his wretched daughter. 

({ Are you better now, my child ? " said his lordship. 

" Yes," said Lady Hester, " much better ; I shall be 
quite well by and by." 

" I have come to you," said the marquess, (C to tell you 
my plans, if you can bear to hear them. I have been 
talking them over with Elmsdale, and we have agreed, that 
as I must visit town, and may be detained, it will be 
best for us all to go up on Thursday. I have written to 
Malvern, to beg him to come over ; and as an inducement 
to Mr. Burford to perform his duty with a good grace and 
proper emphasis, I have announced to him the death of the 
incumbent of Silgrove, and his presentation to that living : 
the best in my gift, and which, I am sure, I could not 
better bestow than upon him." 

ie Your lordship's kindness will be appreciated, I am 
sure," said Miss Everingham. 

" Why," said the marquess, " the living is five or six 
hundred a year, with a very comfortable parsonage-house ; 
and to a man in Burford's circumstances will afford a most 
satisfactory retreat, when Malvern shall have no longer 
need of his services : he will perhaps marry some respect- 
able young woman in bis own sphere, and so settle down 
contented. I have a very high regard for Burford, he 
is a very respectable sort of person. My dear Hester," 
Q 3 



230 THE MARQUESS. 

continued the marquess, ff you are not yet recovered. Do 
I worry you by talking is it too much for you ? " 

" No, papa/' said Lady Hester, scarcely able to speak ; 
" pray go on." 

<f Well," said Lord Snowdon, " then on Thursday we'll 
start for London. Elmsdale will go up on Wednesday, 
and be ready to receive and welcome us ; but I must not 
have you ill, dear Hester." 

" Oh, I shall be better soon ! " said his daughter. 

" I have had a long letter from Lady Katharine," said 
the marquess, " full of regrets at her unavoidable absence, 
and a pressing invitation to her house. Elizabeth desires 
her best love to you. I shall write by to-day's post, in- 
forming them of my change of plan ; and I dare say they 
will also go to town : if so, we shall make a little circle of 
our own, in empty London, and congregate together, like a 
tribe of wandering Arabs in the middle of the desert. So 
then, Hester," added his lordship, with one of his most 
gracious inquiring smiles, " we may consider that arrange- 
ment settled ? " 

(f If you please," said Lady Hester. 

" And now, my dear Miss Everingham," said his lord- 
ship, " do your best to make the poor child well. The 
fatigue of yesterday has knocked us all up. Elmsdale is 
wandering about the house by himself, seemingly in search 
of a companion, Hester ; take pity on him, for I have 
many letters to write ; and the weather is so execrable, that 
we can have neither rides nor drives to-day." 

"I will cure my patient as fast as I can," said Miss 
Everingham, affecting a gaiety which nobody knowing 
what she knew could really feel ; and the marquess, having 
bestowed a paternal kiss upon the pale cheek of his child, 
quitted the room. 

Things now appeared to the ladies to have arrived at a 
crisis. Lord Malvern was sent for : this of itself would 
have gratified his sister, inasmuch as it would enable her 
to ascertain the state of his feelings with regard to Miss 
Oldham, and enable him to satisfy himself as to the 
character of her consent to the approaching marriage of 
his father ; but his arrival was so distinctly coupled with 



THE MARQUESS. 231 

the confirmation of her unhappiness for life, that she looked 
forward to what otherwise would have been a most desirable 
and delightful meeting, with dread and trembling ; besides 
she felt, independently of the misery which his arrival 
would speedily afterwards entail upon her, the most serious 
apprehensions of the consequences likely to result from his 
being made acquainted, perhaps abruptly, with what Lady 
Hester could not but consider the defection of Miss Old- 
ham, and the acutely painful circumstance of his father 
being his successful rival in her affections. 

One thing, however, was pretty certain : Lady Hester, 
as Miss Everingham had suggested, would have plenty of 
opportunities of conversing with her future mother-in-law, 
previous to her brother's arrival ; and as Lord Snowdon 
made a point of his daughter marrying before (as he him- 
self had said) any stranger should become mistress of his 
house, she was morally certain that until her doom was 
finally sealed, the union of her parent with her friend 
Elizabeth would not take place. 

Perhaps the reader may already anticipate the full extent 
of Lady Hester's wretchedness. It seemed as if every 
thing, except those accessories which wealth could pur- 
chase or rank command, had combined to entangle, perplex, 
and thwart all Lord Snowdon's ambitious schemes. To 
those who envied, and those who hated his lordship, the 
small failures in his speculations were extremely amusing : 
they floated on the surface j deeper and lower down were 
the points and objects for which the greater energies of his 
mind were exerted ; yet such were his vanity and super- 
ficiality, mixed with talents of a high order, that the failure 
of a fete, or the ridicule of losing his wig, would more 
seriously affect him than the overthrow of one of his most 
important projects ; and a recommendation to wear spec- 
tacles, upon the authority of the mayor of Shuttlework's 
grandmother, more grievously offend him, than the infliction 
of what other men would consider a serious injury. 

The consequences of all this sensitive delicacy, and its 

almost constant irritation,, we have already witnessed in a 

few instances ; and those who knew him best would have 

seen, in his air and manner during the whole of the morn- 

4 



232 THE MARQUESS. 

ing succeeding the fete, the mortification of its failure 
rankling in his heart, while by his smile and courteousness 
he affected to display the excellence and evenness of his 
temper, and, by a pretended activity and interest in what 
were, in fact, matters of ten times more serious importance, 
to exhibit his entire forgetfulness of all the contretemps of 
the preceding day, which were, in truth, incessantly and 
grievously tormenting him. 

Hence arose the real motive for his sudden departure 
from Lionsden. He could not endure the scene of his 
defeat ; he could not bear even to pass through the apart- 
ment in which he had approached his majesty with a sug- 
gestion as to the justice and wisdom of his opening or 
proroguing parliament, dressed in a blue silk pelisse and a 
white lace veil, he actually avoided the room through 
which, otherwise, he would naturally have passed to his 
daughter's boudoir, and sickened as he cast his eyes 
towards the hall in which his majesty had graciously 
assured his lordship that he never should think of his 
house again without laughing. Nay, to so childish and 
extraordinary a pitch did this morbid sensibility proceed 
in his character, that the only drawback in his mind to his 
immediate departure from his magnificent castle was pre- 
sented in the fact that, in quitting it, he must necessarily 
pass the gates where his most ludicrous personal exhibition 
had been made in the presence of the admiring populace. 

The more serious reason for his desire to visit the me- 
tropolis at a period when, except life-guardsmen, treasury 
clerks, doctors, and dustmen, nobody is seen in the streets, 
was founded upon a circumstance which appeared to him 
of some importance in his political career. It seemed, 
from certain occurrences of which he had been apprised, 
that a dissolution of parliament might shortly be expected. 
His influence at Shuttlework remained as powerful as 
ever; and, from some observations which had recently 
been made to him, it appeared that his desertion of his 
own political party would not go unrewarded by the 
existing ministry. 

Lord Snowdon, from a very early period of his career in 
life, amidst a brilliant display of perfect independence, and 



THE MARQUESS. 233 

an unqualified avowal of the purest Whig principles, had, 
as we have already mentioned, manifested a particular 
desire to occupy one public station, and one in which 
alone he believed he might, in the highest safe degree, 
emulate the power and dignity of royalty. The point, as 
the reader knows, to which he looked, was the governor- 
generalship of India. In that high station, with millions 
of subjects making their salaams before his musnud, with 
armies at his beck, and princes in his train, Plinlimmon, 
Marquess of Snowdon, fancied be could be happy. His 
magnificent ideas might then be realised, and all his plans 
of splendour acted upon to their fullest extent. 

For years he had waited and watched every turn of 
affairs, in order to put in his claim for this envied appoint- 
ment the moment a change of government should enable 
his friends to evince their gratitude for his long and steady 
support; but all in vain. The Tory ministers seemed 
immovable ; year after year passed away : one died, an- 
other retired, a third seceded j but no matter, the heads of 
the hydra-like party sprouted again, and the Marquess of 
Snowdon could only console himself by hope, which, 
" long deferred, maketh the heart sick." 

Time, and the conversation to which we have slightly 
alluded, had produced a visible effect upon his lordship's 
political opinions ; what, in his early youth, he had con- 
sidered patriotism and virtue, began, in his riper years, to 
look very like chicanery and delusion. The spread of 
liberal opinions, as they are called, had rendered more 
obvious the real designs of those whom, in earlier life, he 
had mistaken for heroes and sages ; and convinced that 
even the men who had previously upheld their anti-social 
doctrines, and maintained their revolutionary principles, 
were themselves aware that the fruits of their labours 
would, at a much less remote period than they had at one 
time anticipated, rise up and overwhelm those who had sown 
the seed, his lordship began seriously to reflect upon the 
folly of clinging to a party grown desperate by protracted 
disappointment, and which, if it attained to power, must 
either ruin the constitution, in redeeming the innumerable 
pledges it had given to the people while yet unfettered by 



234 THE MARQUESS. 

official responsibility, or sink into the merest faction of ad- 
venturers that ever made its way to office, by promises 
then to be broken as readily as they once were made. 

These reflections, combining with the curious enough 
coincidence of the probable dissolution of parliament, and a 
positive vacancy in the much-coveted governor-generalship, 
led the Marquess of Snowdon to put himself in communi- 
cation with a very great man, who at that moment held the 
reins of state ; not, of course, with any ostensible political 
view, but merely because some circumstances had occurred 
in Lord Snowdon's county which he considered it right to 
submit to the minister, in the narration and discussion of 
which, however, his lordship thought it possible to let slip 
so much of his opinion upon (f things in general," as might 
allow his noble friend justly to appreciate the true charac- 
ter of his opposition to the government. That he had 
much at his disposal which it would please any minister to 
secure, there could be no doubt, and when the premier 
received his lordship's first note, begging to know when he 
could see him upon the subject of the supposed or, 
perhaps, real discontents and conspiracies reported to 
exist in the county of which Lionsden was the chief orna- 
ment, the reply was not only courteous in the extreme, but 
contained an appointment to receive the marquess in 
Downing Street any day during the ensuing week. 

It was a step to take. There is a fascination in the 
very air of that little cul de sac, an hour's inhalation of 
its atmosphere affects some men with giddiness, others 
with blindness, and, very frequently, with the most oblivi- 
ous forgetfulness. A residence in it for half a year will 
convert the most violent reformer into the most immovable 
vindicator of public abuses; change a republican into a 
satrap ; set a philanthropist flogging soldiers ; convert the 
reviler of courtly honours into a Knight of the Garter ; 
change a public demagogue into an imposer of taxes, and 
metamorphose the yelling denouncer of a profligate govern- 
ment into the holder of numberless sinecures, and the dis- 
penser of uncountable pluralities. 

It was to this mysterious street Lord Snowdon proposed 
to pay a visit during the week after his arrival in town. 



THE MARQUESS. 



235 



The candle had been lighted, and the moth was on the 
wing. Be it ours to watch its flights and flutterings 
pending the progress and development of the numerous 
plans and arrangements in which were involved the private 
interests and the public principle of the head of the ancient 
and noble house of Plinlimmon. 

The establishment at Lionsden moved with the precision 
and punctuality of clock-work ; Lord Elmsdale having re- 
mained till Wednesday, as it was proposed, quitted it for 
London on the afternoon of that day. The other guests 
had previously gone j and on Thursday, exactly as pre- 
arranged, the noble marquess, accompanied by Lady 
Hester, and (as the court newsman would say) attended by 
Miss Everingham, left the castle in a travelling carriage 
and four, and after calling at Mrs. Edgeworth's villa, (to 
go to which they left the park not by the gates at which 
his lordship's mishap had occurred,) proceeded to the me- 
tropolis, which they were to reach in the course of the 
following day. 



CHAPTER V. 

IT is not to be expected but that during the last hours of 
their stay at Lionsden, Lady Hester and Miss Evering- 
ham, who had now become more than ever essential to her 
comfort, from having become the depository of a confidence 
as to the pre-engagement of her heart, which the unhappy 
girl had never before ventured to make, their conversation, 
when opportunity occurred, turned chiefly upon the com- 
plication of events which seemed to involve and entangle 
them. 

f ' I really," said Miss Everingham, " am at a loss now 
what to advise. I am unable to see my way. I still 
maintain that marrying Lord Elmsdale appears to me to be 
worse than madness. Yet, as you say, how is it to be 
avoided ? No risk of your father's displeasure, or of his 
finally terminating my acquaintance and connexion with 
you, would prevent my speaking to him upon the subject. 



236 THE MARQUESS. 

if I saw the remotest possibility of his being moved by my 
entreaties. If we had an alternative to propose to him, it 
might be done, for he is devotedly fond of you ; but we 
have not. The very name of the object of your affection 
would, I really believe, drive him mad." 

" I sometimes think," said Lady Hester, " that when 
Alfred comes I might interest him ; he has influence over 
my father, and " 

" Depend upon it," said Miss Everingham, " the in- 
fluence of Lord Malvern over his father will have infinitely 
less effect than your father's affection for you. I should 
and I will undertake it if you like I should think the 
must probable chance of succeeding would be an appeal to 
Lord Elmsdale himself. This is no time for compliments, 
no season for flattery, and I am sure you will not be vexed 
when I pronounce, upon all the knowledge of such affairs 
which experience has afforded 'me, that he is no more in 
love with you than I am with him : he has been awed into 
the connexion by the marquess, and, naturally delighted 
with your society, and charmed with your accomplish- 
ments, wiU in time be inspired with an affection for you 
of a pure and lasting character ; but he did not begin with 
being in love." 

" I rejoice at that, Anne," said Lady Hester ; " and if 
I thought, without hurting his feelings, or wounding his 
pride or delicacy, you might suggest to him the gloomy 
prospect which must lie before two people united for life 
under such circumstances, I would in treat and urge you to 
such a conversation. And yet what could he say in 
explanation to my father ? He would insist upon the ful- 
filment of his engagement ; and if Lord Elmsdale referred 
him to me to account for his apparently strange conduct, 
we should be exactly in the same position as if we began 
with my father in the first instance." 

" Suppose we resolve to wait Lord Malvern's arrival ? " 
said Miss Everingham. 

" I would happily do that," said Lady Hester, " but 
recollect he does not come alone. The ceremony of our 
wedding only waits his arrival ; and who will be with him ? 
the man who is to seal my fate to unite me to Lord 



THE MARQUESS. 237 

Elmstlale. One day, perhaps, will not elapse between 
Alfred's coming and the wedding. There will be no time 
no hope no' chance for me, if it be left to that, and 
yet it must be." 

" Unhappy girl/' said Miss Everingham, " all your 
misfortunes are attributable to the candour of your character, 
and the singleness of your mind. You saw, admired, 
esteemed, and loved, and permitted the merits of your 
suitor to obtain possession of your heart, without waiting 
to consider how he could support his claim to the pre- 
ference you so ingenuously admitted." 

The real fact seems to be that Lord Snowdon had so 
played his cards that nothing could result from his ma- 
chinations but misery and unhappiness to every body con- 
cerned or connected with him. To himself this was of 
little importance : accustomed by his mere presence to awe 
all his family and dependents into silence and submission, 
he was in the habit of considering them as beings scarcely 
one degree intellectually removed from his dogs or his 
horses. Lady Hester he thought he loved ; and he certainly 
permitted her to express opinions and make suggestions. 
That he neither attended to the one, nor adopted the other, 
is not at all derogatory to her ladyship's mental qualifica- 
tions. The mere permission to speak in his presence was 
a prodigious condescension ; arid therefore, having esta- 
blished in his own mind that the whole tribe of which he 
was the chief, the entire clan of which he was the head, 
were all although infinitely superior to every body else 
lamentably inferior to himself, he undertook their special 
care and safety ; and provided for them to the right and to 
the left, as seemed meet and fitting to him, without 
either caring for their wishes or consulting their inclina- 
tions. 

The ray of hope which alone beamed sufficiently bright 
through the gloom to keep Lady Hester alive, glimmered 
in another quarter altogether. Knowing her own heart, 
she had still faith in the constancy of her friend, Elizabeth 
Oldham, to what she knew was the early, the earliest at- 
tachment of her life. To disturb her father's prospect of 
happiness was the last of her objects ; but to secure that 



238 THE MARQUESS. 

of her brother was the first. How the marquess had suc- 
ceeded in obliterating the recollection of his son from 
Elizabeth's mind, and how he had contrived to establish 
himself, lord paramount in his place, she could not exactly 
comprehend. She could perfectly understand the anxiety 
of Lady Katharine Oldham to make her daughter a mar- 
chioness she was just the person to do it ; but the ab- 
surdity of the present case was, that Elizabeth might have 
married the man of her choice the man of suitable age, 
and of congenial character and disposition and be not 
only a marchioness but the very same marchioness 
the marquess, to be sure, being different, but the difference 
being so marvellously in her favour. 

In Elizabeth, at all events, Lady Hester looked forward 
to a powerful ally, and almost counted the minutes till they 
were to meet ; from her she would discover the principle 
upon which the whole affair had been arranged, and if, as 
she hoped and expected, she found in her a fellow-sufferer, 
she did not think it impossible but Alfred's arrival might 
make such a sensation as should boulcverser the whole of 
that affair, which in its wreck might probably involve hers 
and Lord Elmsdale's ; but this was all hope, and fancy, 
and she might find Elizabeth changed, and now as devoted 
to the father as she had, six months before, appeared to 
have been to the son. 

Lady Hester was perfectly correct in her calculation of 
Lady Katharine Oldham's intentions and wishes ; but still 
it required either a deeper insight into human nature, or 
some new mode of looking at it, to discover how the 
daughter had been brought so readily to comply with the 
inclinations of her mother. 

Of Lord Elrnsdale, the reader as yet knows as little as 
Lady Hester feared she knew of Miss Oldham. Nor would 
he become very much better acquainted with his lordship, 
if he were constantly associated with him for twelve months. 
He was, as Lady Hester has already acknowledged, ex- 
tremely amiable, very good, very gentlemanly, very quiet, 
and very unsatisfactory. Unlike the ordinary run of human 
beings, he agreed with every body, upon all occasions, and 
under all circumstances. He perfectly coincided with his 



THE MARQUESS. 239 

intended father-in-law in the dignity and propriety of cele- 
brating his nuptials at Lionsden ; the next day he with 
equal readiness supported his lordship's proposition that 
the marriage should take place in London. On Tuesday 
he agreed with Miss Everingham, that yellow was the best 
colour for his carriages ; and on Wednesday, at the 
suggestion of the marquess, ordered them to be painted 
dark green. In the course of the last week he considered 
it essential, because Lord Snowdon did, that they should be 
married by a bishop; in the beginning of the present one, 
he perfectly coincided in his lordship's opinion, that Mr. 
Burford, as his Lordship's domestic chaplain, would be, of 
all others, the person to officiate ; the marquess having 
been pleased to administer his large dose of sugar-plums to 
the said chaplain, in order to secure his interest with Lord 
Malvern (over whom he knew he had great influence) to 
reconcile that young nobleman to the second marriage, of 
which projected affair his Lordship had not yet been ap- 
prized. 

In manner, Lord Elmsdale was so calm and quiet, that 
even when he took the trouble to express his assent to 
whatever was going on, it was extremely difficult to catch 
his meaning; his placidity was imperturbable; and his un- 
bending stiffness of manner formed a curious contrast to 
the extraordinary pliability of his mind : he looked as if he 
had been fed upon dry toast all his life, or just as if he had 
been iced when he came to his full growth. Nothing ap- 
peared to ruffle his temper ; nothing to excite his feelings. 
His noble father-in-law, to those with whom he con- 
descended to be familiar, always called him his gentle 
automaton, and it certainly seemed that his lordship, very 
early in the acquaintance, had acquired the secret of pulling 
his wires and directing his movements. 

When Lord Malvern received his father's announce- 
ment of the approaching marriage of Lady Hester to this 
piece of negative excellence, he was any thing but pleased. 
He knew but little of Lord Elmsdale ; and however amia- 
ble his character might be, however unencumbered his for- 
tune, and however unexceptionable his family, he felt as- 



240 THE MARQUESS. 

sured that he was not the man calculated to make his sister 
happy. 

" Who/' said Lord Malvern to Mr. Burford, " could 
e have moved this dish of skimmed milk to so honourable 
an action / as marrying my sister ? it must be all my 
father's management. What am I to do about it, Charles? " 
so his lordship was wont to call his reverend tutor 
<e it seems a settled affair, and I suppose Hester likes it, or 
she would not have agreed to it." 

tf Heaven knows ! " said Burford. f( You. have but one 
course to pursue. I I have no choice left ; indeed, I 
am not called upon for a decision. Your father has loaded 
me with favours. In addition to other marks of kindness, 
he announces to me my presentation to the living of Sil- 
grove, close by Lionsden, where he hopes I may eventually 
settle, and continue in after life that friendship to his son, 
from which he is convinced he has already derived so much 
benefit." 

" Indeed, I quite agree with Lord Snowdon there," said 
Lord Malvern, "and I sincerely rejoice that he has given 
you such a substantial proof of his gratitude. He has only 
anticipated me, Charles ; and I suspect it seem sun dutiful 
that his lordship did not particularly regret the oppor- 
tunity of administering a little of his patronage just at the 
moment when he thought your counsel as to my conduct 
on the occasion of my sister's marriage might be serviceable 
to the cause." 

et He has assigned me a duty, Malvern," said Mr. Bur- 
ford, ' ' which, I confess, is an arduous one one I would 
give the universe, if I possessed it, not to perform : he 
desires that I should perform the marriage ceremony." 

"Well!" said Lord Malvern. "What's the matter, 
Burford, are you ill ? " 

" No oh, no ! " stammered the reverend tutor, " not 
I why should you think I am ill ? " 

" For the same reason that I thought you well two 
minutes since," said Lord Malvern ; " because you look 
ill." 

" No," replied Burford, " I am not ill ; I dare say I 
look flurried and agitated ; I confess I did riot expect to 



THE MARQUESS. 241 

have the task of marrying Lady Hester to the earl assigned 
to me." 

" Why not ? " said his companion ; f( nothing seems 
more natural his domestic chaplain what can be more 
correct ? And then, Charles, perhaps Lord Elmsdale may 
' thaw and resolve himself into the splendid feat of pre- 
senting you with a magnificent snuff-box." 

" I I doubt whether I have sufficient nerve to 
comply with your father's request," said the tutor. 

"Obey his command, his lordship would read it, 
Charles," said Lord Malvern. 

"If my refusal," said Burford, " is to be considered 
disobedience, I had better decline the preferment his lord- 
ship here announces, and resign you back into his hands, 
at least not the worse for my tutelage." 

" Why, what on earth," said Lord Malvern, " is there 
in marrying two people ? Burying a person who has 
been dear to one " 

" Is not so dreadful a task as marrying a person, 

about whom one is deeply interested, to another if 
the prospect of her future happiness is not quite clear and 
bright." 

" Oh ! " said Lord Malvern, "my dear fellow, don't fret 
yourself about Hester's happiness : I know her ; and rely 
upon it, afraid as we all are of our noble father, she would 
not have consented to marry this man, if she did not love 
him." 

" There is an awful feeling," said Burford, " which you 
cannot perhaps entirely appreciate, in linking for life two 
hearts which never can, by nature, sympathise. To me, 
the service of matrimony has more of solemnity in it than 
that of burial ; the responsibility incurred by those who 
pledge themselves, in the presence of their Maker, to the 
fulfilment of duties, and the performance of obligations, 
against which the fallibility of our nature, and the per- 
verseness of our passions, may afterwards rise in conflict 

d opposition through a lengthened life, is tremendously 
serious. Remember what the contracting parties swear to. 
Suppose, Malvern, that either of these kneel before me with 
a mind pre-occupied by thoughts of others, and take that 



; 



242 THE MARQUESS. 

solemn oath which it will be my duty to administer, with 
a mental reservation, arising not from a premeditated design 
to its infraction, but from the recollection of other days and 
other circumstances, which had destroyed the integrity of 
the pledge by anticipation " 

" I grant," said Lord Malvern, " that the ceremony is 
important and imposing in the highest degree ; but I can- 
not admit the possibility of any person's kneeling before 
you, and binding him or herself to the other contracting 
party, while entertaining a thought of other days or, 
rather of another person. As for Hester, I am sure you 
are safe she was heart-whole when we left her. Indeed, 
I really believe that if any body ever wounded her, in that 
generally vulnerable part, it was yourself, my most reverend 
minister." 

Bur ford fixed his eyes on the young lord for an instant. 

" Well," said he, " all I know is, Malvern, that I can- 
not at least so I feel at this moment and will not 
perform the ceremony." 

" Send no negative/' said Lord Malvern, "but go with 
me, for go I must. Fight off the wedding, if you please : 
be ill make any excuse but do not irritate my father 
by a plump denial, and, least of all, by refusing his living : 
you will make him an enemy for life, and I shall be de- 
prived of the advantages and agremens of your society, 
from which I have, my reverend friend, already received 
so much essential benefit." 

" I assure you, Lord Malvern," said Burford, " although 
I hate making professions, that nothing would distress me 
more than the occurrence of any of the results you antici- 
pate by my refusal to officiate ; but I have that feeling 
about it, and that apprehension of unhappy consequences 
likely to arise from the union of your sister with Lord 
Elmsdale, that I would die rather than be instrumental to 
the connexion/' 

" Ah, well ! " said Lord Malvern, ' ' you shall have your 
way. Now, I tell you what : will you be satisfied by this 
arrangement ? we will start for England to-morrow 
reach it as fast as we can. When we arrive, say nothing 
to the marquess about your feelings or your resolutions, 



THE MARQUESS. 

and he will take it for granted that every thing is going 
smoothly,, and that you are ready to perform your office. 
In the mean time see Hester : she has the highest possible 
opinion of you ; and although I must confess she never 
says any thing about you in her letters to me, when any 
thing occurs to draw her out, I can see that she has a real 
regard for you. See her, act the part of confessor to our 
household, and you will soon ascertain the true state of her 
feelings about the match ; and if you are satisfied that it is 
in accordance with her own views and wishes, you cannot 
hesitate to put the seal to the compact." 

" I do not feel myself quite justified," said Burford, 
" in taking that course ; nor, indeed, do I quite see the 
necessity of my volunteering so extraordinary a task. Lady 
Hester is much more likely to confide the real state of her 
feelings to you, a beloved brother, than to his tutor, whose 
magisterial prerogative never was intended to extend to the 
female branches of the family." 

" As you will, Charles," said Lord Malvern j " all I 
mean is as 1 cannot care much about Lord Elmsdale 
if you find her satisfied and happy, your objections about 
marrying her will be at an end. I know what an infernal 
explosion your refusal will cause, if the illustrious head of 
our house has set his mind upon it ; and, therefore, as a 
personal favour to me, say 'ay ' to my proposition." 

" Ay, then, be it," said Burford ; f( I agree to the terms 
why should I not ? " 

" Done, then," said the pupil ; " so let us set about our 
preparations, and once more for my native land, for a re- 
turn to which I begin to feel as anxious as a Swiss. I 
wonder, by the way, who will be Hester's bridesmaids ? 
our dear Anne is too for advanced is not she ? " 

" I believe there is no statute of limitations touching 
that matter," said Burford. 

" I dare say Miss Oldham will be one." 

tf Probably, my Lord," said Burford, (C a charming per- 
son, too." 

<c Come now, Mr. Burford, no nonsense," said Lord 
Malvern ; " let us have no joking ; as the ' illustrious ' says, 
I cannot bear a joke." 

B 2 



244 THE MARQUESS. 

cc I assure you, Malvern," said the mentor, " I never 
was less inclined to joke in my life than at this moment : I 
merely said what I think, and what I know you think, that 
Miss Oldham is a charming person." 

" Ah ! " said Lord Malvern, "my dear Charles, if the 
day should ever come, and I am my own master, I know 
nothing much more likely to secure happiness than a match 
with Miss Oldham ; she is so amiable, so handsome, and so 
fond of Hester, and so fond of all of us she already 
seems one of the family ; hut it would he downright barba- 
rity in me to lead her astray with the hope of marriage 
which, in spite of your notions of its awful responsibility, 
I should delight to offer her during my father's life- 
time." 

" I really do not see," said Burford, " what his objec- 
tions could be : she is of a noble family : not rich but 
what of that ? " 

" Oh ! my dear Charles," said Lord Malvern, " the 
' illustrious ' has settled my fate already. I have a wife 
growing up for me a minor, with millions. He has never 
yet confided the name of this Eldorado princess to me, but 
I think I can guess ; and as for Elizabeth Oldham, I 
might as well, or better, for all I know, mention our dear 
old Anne Everingham to him as the object of my affections. 
No, I honestly admit my firm belief, that in Miss Oldham 
every thing likely to insure domestic comfort is combined ; 
but I am equally conscious that I should be doing her gross 
injustice, by encouraging the idea of a successful issue to 
our attachment, and I have therefore felt it my duty to 
withdraw myself entirely." 

" Will not your anticipated meeting renovate the dor- 
mant embers ? " said Burford. 

" No," said Lord Malvern : <f it may cost me a strug- 
gle, and may occasion me pain, scarcely outweighed by the 
pleasure I. may fairly receive in again seeing and convers- 
ing with her ; but I hope I have strength of mind sufficient 
to support me in acting upon a principle which 1 know to 
be just and honourable, and which I have determined 
rigidly to adopt." 

" Far be it from me," said Burford, " to doubt your 



THE MARQUESS. 245 

strength of mind ; what I doubt, is your just estimate of 
the power you will have to contend with. However, we 
shall see/' continued he ; "all I am anxious about at this 
moment is,, that if you, in your conversation with Lady 
Hester, have reason to think that my suspicions of her dis- 
inclination to her marriage are correct, you will aid me in 
escaping from the performance of the duty demanded of 
me." 

" And all I bargain for," said Lord Malvern, " is, that 
if I should find your estimate of the power of Elizabeth 
Oldham as just as that which you have formed of the re- 
sponsibility of marrying an unwilling couple, you will 
not laugh at my vanity, nor show me up to the c illustrious ' 
for having sinned against his implied commands, by the 
renewal of an old attachment for as lovely and, as I be- 
lieve, as amiable a girl, as ever breathed the air of heaven." 

The reader should be informed that this conversation 
occurred at Tours, whither Lord Malvern and his " fidus 
Achates," had betaken themselves on their road to Spain ; 
and whence, very shortly after the arrival of Lord Snow- 
don's letter, which reached them at that place, they started 
for England, via Paris. 

Meanwhile, the preparations for Lady Hester's marriage 
went on. Lady Katherine Oldham, and her daughter, had 
not yet arrived in London, and neither Lady Hester nor 
her friend had ventured to attack Lord Elmsdale in the 
shape of appeal. Lord Snowdon, in whose presence all 
was calm and tranquil, felt assured that he was sailing 
smoothly along in his great undertaking of securing his 
own happiness, and promoting that of every body else con- 
nected with him ; while this visit to Downing Street had, 
as was anticipated it might probably do, afforded him an- 
other subject for self-gratulation, and a faint hope of the 
possibility of realising his dearest political hopes. 

Lady Hester's trouble and anxiety daily increased. She 
saw herself gradually approaching the vortex which was to 
engulf her earthly happiness, without having the power of 
resisting the influence which was involving her. In the 
arrival of her brother and his companion she saw nothing 
but horror ; and, as yet unable to ascertain the real state of 
B 3 



24-6 THE MARQUESS. 

Miss Oldham's feelings, she remained wholly unprepared 
with any intelligence likely to soften the asperity of the 
blow which poor Lord Malvern would most certainly receive, 
in the astounding intelligence of her approaching marriage 
with his father. 

At length, she heard that Lady Katharine and her 
daughter had arrived at their house at Richmond, where it 
was intended they should remain for the present, and 
whither Lord Snowdon suggested that Lady Hester should 
go and make them a visit. To this proposition she most 
readily assented ; and an arrangement was entered into by 
the marquess for the completion of his scheme, which 
would make the thing agreeable to all parties. 

The marquess had solicited Miss Oldham to sit for her 
picture. Lady Katharine had been charmed with the re- 
quest, and, as it appears, was cooping up her daughter in 
the country under a strict regimen of diet and exercise, in 
order to get her into good looks. It was now settled that 
Lady Katharine and Miss Oldham should come into town 
on the following day ; that the marquess and his betrothed 
should proceed to one of the most eminent living artists 
(him upon whom they believed the mantle of our late 
illustrious Lawrence to have fallen,) and after examining 
his gallery, impart to him Miss Oldham's intention of sit- 
ting for a whole length portrait. And then Miss Oldham, 
as specially instructed by Lady Katharine, was to pout a 
little, and look cross, and declare she would do no such 
thing unless the marquess would sit for another whole 
length ; and this scene, which had been actually rehearsed 
at Richmond between the mother and daughter, was to be 
enacted in the studio of the painter, who would naturally 
join his solicitation to that of the young lady, and so secure 
to himself a double job. 

Thiseffect having been produced, the young folks were tore- 
turn home, and subsequently the marquess and his daughter, 
and Lady Katharine and hers, were to proceed to Rich- 
mond ; where, to use her ladyship's words, " dear Lord 
Elmsdale would, perhaps, be good-natured enough to join 
them at dinner." 

The morning came, and with it Lady Katharine and Eliza- 



THE MARQUESS. 24?7 

beth. It is scarcely possible to describe the meeting of 
Miss Oldham and Lady Hester. They sprang towards 
each other as they had been wont to do in other days. But 
Miss Oldham seemed too much overpowered to return the 
warm embrace of her early friend : she sank on a sofa and 
wept, while Lady Hester held her hand, which was as cold 
as ice,, between her own. 

' ' Dear, dear ! " said Lady Katharine. " Elizabeth 
now, how silly crying do recollect where you are going 
presently ; the painter will think you have got the ophthalmia, 
or that somebody has been ill-treating you." 

Lord Snowdon luckily was not in the room ; his dignity 
would, if not offended, have been strangely puzzled by the 
scene which was going on. 

Had he been present, he would have undoubtedly con- 
sidered the violence of Elizabeth's emotions quite uncalled 
for, and have deprecated with his strongest indignation, the 
character of the embrace of the long parted friends. For- 
tunately they had dried their tears, and recovered their 
composure, before his lordship joined the assembled party. 

" I am happy, most happy," said his lordship, taking a 
hand of each, " to see you thus." Lady Hester's eye 
glanced to those of Miss Oldham ; but she gleaned little 
satisfaction from their expression an expression which 
ought, as a dutiful daughter, to have given her the greatest 
pleasure, but which, as an affectionate sister, she beheld 
with infinite pain. 

" My dear Lord Snowdon," said Lady Katharine, who 
was one of his lordship's horrors one of the necessary 
evils which his romantic attachment to her daughter had 
entailed upon him, but which he tolerated only until he had 
secured Elizabeth all to himself " my dear Lord Snow- 
don, we have had such a worry getting here ; the horses 
would not come over Hammersmith Bridge ; upon my 
word, I think it quite as handsome as the Menai, though 
the scenery, of course, is not so romantic. By the way, 
that puts me in mind, Lord Snowdon, of what you were 
once saying about Lady Lucy Longshanks, the tall girl, 
who afterwards married the great ironfounder, whose father 
came from Liverpool, where I first saw the Evanses. You 
n 4, 



248 THE MARQUESS. 

remember the Evanses, Elizabeth ? the old lady had 
been up to the top of Etna, with the famous traveller who 
was afterwards drowned, in the Phoebe sloop of war, which 
your dear cousin George commanded ; it was poor old 
Lord Tuzzle who got him the ship : and, by the way, I re- 
member so well the day that Sir Benjamin Summertop 
called on me, and " 

fl The horses, you said," interrupted Lord Snowdon, 
' < did not like the suspension bridge ; we will return by the 
other road." 

" To be sure," said Lady Katharine ; " that's the ad- 
vantage of having two ways to the same place. I recollect 
poor Admiral Twaddle telling me that they once caught a 
great green grampus at sea, near the place where Captain 
Cook was killed ; and by the way, what a striking incident 
that was." 

fc Very striking, indeed," said the marquess, who would 
not so long have endured the incoherences of this Aircastle 
in petticoats, if he had not perceived that his daughter and 
his future wife were, as he thought, renewing their former 
intimacy exactly as he wished ; Lady Hester forcing her- 
self, during her father's presence, into a sort of formality 
wholly unnatural to herself, and entirely inconsistent with 
her original feelings towards Elizabeth, but which, after 
the interchange of a few sentences, seemed to grow more 
natural. 

te But what amused me so much," continued Lady Ka- 
tharine, " was the history of their killing the grampus. I 
told it once to Colonel Buckskin, who, by the way, was the 
let me see, he has been dead now eighteen years he 
married the widow of an officer who was killed in Spain, 
the year that Covent Garden playhouse was burnt down, 
and he compared it to the wonderful run of a stag that was 
started from a cart, somewhere in Windsor Forest, which 
ran all the way to Bagshot, from Bagshot across the coun- 
try to Odiham, and then back to Murrell Green, where they 
killed him." 

" Killed him did they ? " said the marquess. 

" Killed him !" repeated Lady Katharine triumphantly. 
I am glad of that," said his lordship. " Do you know, 



<c 



THE MARQUESS. 249 

Lady Katharine, I was afraid they might have run him 
another day. Elizabeth Hester I must break in 
upon your tete-a-tete, because we that is, Miss Oldham 
and I are under an engagement to our artist ; thence 
we shall return, and then be at your commands for Rich- 
mond." 

" How do you go, papa ?" said Lady Hester. 

"If Miss Oldham has no objection/' said the marquess, 
" I propose driving her en cabriolet" 

" Your wishes are commands/' said Miss Oldham, 
smiling sweetly, as the marquess thought odiously, as 
Lady Hester fancied. 

tf Then go your ways, dear," said Lady Katharine. 
" Now remember, Elizabeth, my condition for your sitting. 
I have told her, Lord Snowdon, exactly what poor dear 
Mr. Oldham said to me. He was painted by Sir Joshua 
when he was a little boy, (long before my time, of course,) 
with a Vandyke frill round his neck, and his hand upon his 
dog's head, and that dog lived for nearly twenty years 
after. By the way, one of the most curious things that 
ever happened befel that animal : coming down by White- 
hall, just by the corner house where that baron lived who 
screwed up our fireplaces, and " 

" My dear Lady Katharine," said the marquess, " tell 
Hester the story of the dog, for we must go: it will in- 
terest her, she is extremely fond of dogs. Come, Eliza- 
beth, we shall be back soon ; and remember, Hester 
dear, if Emsdale calls, present him to Lady Katharine, and 
communicate her kind invitation to Richmond." 

" I'll not forget," said Lady Hester, struck with amaze- 
ment at the altered and easy manner of her quondam friend, 
under the extraordinary alteration in her circumstances. 

" But, my dear, I was talking of the dog," continued 
Lady Katharine, the moment they were out of the room, 
" this dog came all the way from Vienna, where Mr. Old- 
ham's family were then living ; and I must tell you it is 
so very remarkable a Captain Eraser Eraser, I think, 
was the name, who lived down in Warwickshire, near 
Stratford-on-Avon by the way, what a man Shakspeare 
was (this, however, par parenthese,) this Captain Eraser 



250 THE MARQUESS. 

became acquainted, somehow or other, it don't the least 
matter how, with a Mrs. Wildman. I don't think she was 
any relation to the man who wrote upon bees by the 
way, what wonderful creatures bees are and this Mrs. 
Wildman had a son, who married a Miss Cazey, of Tip- 
perary, who, I recollect, was drowned crossing from Port- 
patrick to Donaghadee, which was considered a most re- 
markable circumstance. By the way, an old sea-officer 
told me " 

Hereabouts, when it was quite evident that Lady Katha- 
rine had irrecoverably lost her late husband's little dog, 
Lord Elmsdale was announced. Lady Hester did as she had 
been desired to do, and presented him to Lady Katharine, 
communicating, at the same time, her ladyship's invita- 
tion. 

" I am very sorry," said his lordship, " but I am en- 
gaged to-day." It may be here observed, that with the 
fewest possible exceptions, his lordship spoke in monosyl- 
lables, and hated volubility in others, as cautiously as he 
avoided it himself. 

fc Fine weather, my lord," said Lady Katharine, who 
felt that she must say something. 

" Hot," said his lordship. 

" It never can be too hot for me" said her ladyship. 
" By the way, I recollect being one night at the Opera 
before your time, dear Hester when Catalani was first 
here, and a magnificent singer she was her person was so 
fine ; that's what I was saying the other day to Sir Wil- 
loughby Wallingham (and he is really a judge of this sort 
of thing), he was our minister at Florence for a great many 
years, and married the daughter of the Duchess of Double- 
tie, who afterwards ran away with Sir Hector O' Flanagan, 
who, by the way, was shot in a duel with a brother of 
that late Miss Shangley, whom you have seen with Eliza- 
beth " 

Lord Elmsdale looked at Lady Katharine during this 
torrent, with his eyes and mouth open ; and when she 
paused for breath, said " Ah ! " 

" It is said," continued Lady Katharine, " not that I 
believe it entirely, that she might have married the Persian 



THE MARQUESS. 251 

ambassador. By the way, do you recollect what that dear 
Mumbledy Fum said one day ? Somebody said to him., 
f I am told, sir, you worship the sun in your country ? ' 
( Yes/ said his excellency, ' and so would you in yours, if 
you ever could see him.' He, he, he ! " 

" Good," said Lord Elmsdale. 

" Don't you think, Lady Katharine," said Lady Hester, 
" that we had better go to luncheon ? We shah 1 have the 
absentees return before we are ready to start." 

" With all my heart," said her voluble ladyship ; " as for 
myself I never eat any luncheon. I remember Doctor 
Boss oh! he was such a man I'm sure I never shall 
forget him impossible my dear, he cured Lady Roun- 
ceval and her seven daughters of the scarlet fever, after 
they had all been given over by the whole of the faculty. 
By the way, it's a curious fact, that family the 
eldest " 

This was too much ev*en for ice to bear. Lord Elms- 
dale did not attempt to stop the current of words, but 
dreading the biography of all the Rouncevals, none of 
whom he would have ever got rid of if her ladyship had 
wandered in her usual way, he rose from his seat, and 
opened the door which led to the dining-room, where the 
luncheon was laid. 

Further his lordship did not venture to proceed; but 
having seen the ladies seated, made his bow, and with it a 
sign to Lady Hester, that he could endure the noise of her 
visiter no longer. 

" Then we don't see you to-day, my lord ? " said Lady 
Katharine. 

" No not to-day." 

" I am extremely sorry I " 

"Thanks," said his lordship ; ef adieu: you come back 
when, Lady Hester ? " 



I" To-morrow, I believe." 



" Oh, dear no ! " said, or rather screamed, Lady Katha- 
rine ; " you must spare her till Friday, she will soon be 
your own entirely. As a cousin of mine, Charles Mus- 
grave, used to say, if you go more than ten miles to 



252 THE MARQUESS, 

dinner, you must sleep where you dine, and breakfast 
where you sleep. He was a " 

" I shall be here to-morrow," said his lordship. 

" Ah, it will be useless," said Lady Katharine, archly ; 
" we will keep her on purpose to vex you." 

" Good morning," was the answer ; and so his lordship, 
fairly driven out, retired from the Niagara-like rush of 
words which dashed in torrents from the vermillioned lips 
of his new old acquaintance, not much gratified by the 
reflection that she was speedily to become a near con- 
nexion. 

During this period, and a still longer one, in which her 
ladyship never gave Lady Hester the opportunity of edging 
in one syllable, the noble marquess was flourishing his 
beautiful bride elect through the streets in his cab. It was 
the deciding day the drive was the practical announce- 
ment of her acceptance of his hand, and he was in high 
spirits. Peculiar care had been bestowed upon his toilet, 
and he was admirably made up for the occasion. They 
reached the house of the artist. The servant was desired 
not to announce the marquess, whose cabriolet bore no 
distinctive marks of honour upon its panels, because, as 
his lordship told his Dulcinea, he liked to see professional 
men at their ease, to obtain their disinterested opinions, if 
possible, and hear their remarks, as applied generally to 
their art, without being either guided or restrained by the 
presence of persons to whom it must be naturally expected 
they looked up, and who might be supposed to influence 
their views and observations. 

The marquess and Miss Oldham were ushered into the 
gallery, where stood some admirable specimens of the art 
of portrait-painting ; the likenesses were excellent, and the 
tone and quality of the pictures eminently good. 

" This will do," said the marquess to Miss Oldham ; 
" see how beautifully this face is painted, and how graceful 
the figure is : it is almost as good as Lawrence " 

The gallery-door opened, and presented to the view of 
the visiters the artist in proprid persona ; his eye flashed 
a sort of recognition of the marquess as he advanced, and 



THE MARQUESS. 253 

when he had made his bow to Miss Oldham, the marquess 
whispered to her,, " he knows me." 

<l Pray, sir," said the marquess, not quite pleased with 
the sort of smiling good-nature which illuminated the 
painter's countenance, " what is your charge for a whole 
length ? " 

" That depends upon circumstances," said the Apelles. 
' ' I think I have the pleasure of recognising your counte- 
nance rather a familiar one to the public eye. I should 
say you'll excuse me a half length, or a small whole 
length, would suit your purpose best, if it's for a print, or 
any thing of that sort." 

C( I believe, sir," said the marquess, <l that I am the best 
judge of those particulars." 

" Oh ! to be sure," replied the painter, " he, he, he ! 
I really cannot help laughing when I look at you. I am 
sure you'll excuse me; but there is something so irre- 
sistibly comic he, he in the expression of your coun- 
tenance; I never can get you out of my head as the 
marquess in the Cabinet." 

" Sir, you are pleased to be extremely facetious," said 
Lord Snowdon ; " but as I have not yet had the honour of 
a seat there, I see no particular reason for your excessive 
mirth. I ask you a plain question, sir ; I expect a simple 
answer." 

ce I hope I have not offended you," said the painter ; 
" merit like yours begets popularity popularity produces 
notoriety, the tax that all men in your situation are doomed 
to pay. I do assure you that no person in the world would 
be less disposed to offer an affront to any gentleman in your 
profession than myself; but as I have just said, the name 
of Buggins is so intimately associated in my mind with fun 
and comicality, that even when I have the pleasure of see- 
ing you off the stage in my own house, and in your own 
character, I cannot divest myself of the belief that I am 
as well known to you as you are to me, and the rest of your 
numerous supporters in box, pit, and gallery." 

" Miss Oldham, this way," said the marquess. " Sir, 
I have not the honour to be the person with whom you 



254 THE MARQUESS. 

presume to fancy yourself so extraordinarily intimate. We 
have no further business here." 

" I really am quite ashamed," said the painter, whose 
countenance lengthened from the round and mirthful into 
the long and^ doleful, at the evident mistake he had made, 
and the still more evident anger of his visiter in conse- 
quence. 

" Can I ? " 

" No, sir," said Lord Snowdon, " my cabriolet is at the 
door. If you will permit me to ring the bell, I " 

et Allow me, sir/' said the artist ; " indeed I " 

" No matter, sir," said his lordship, handing Miss Old- 
ham down stairs ; <f our acquaintance has been short, and I 
fear unprofitable to you; but it may be of some use in 
making you aware for the future, sir, of the difference 
which in reality exists between the Marquess of Snowdon 
and a Covent Garden player. Come, Elizabeth." 

To say any thing was clearly useless. The artist was 
a sufficiently good judge of expression, to know that any 
attempt at palliation would make matters worse. He saw 
all the contents of Le Brun's portefeuille, darting at once 
over the irritated nobleman's countenance ; while Elizabeth, 
who with all her admiration for his lordship's rank and 
dignity, was sensitively alive to the violence of his rage if 
once excited, cast an importuning look at the unhappy 
painter, which fully confirmed him in his determination of 
wiping up what had happened, without saying any thing 
more, as he phrased it, " good, bad, or indifferent." 

" Contemptible quack!" said his lordship, when they 
were re-seated in the cabriolet ; ' ' daubs ! how any body 
can fancy that man a painter I cannot imagine. I am glad 
we went, Elizabeth, because now we can have no doubt 
but that his rival must be his superior ; the sign-painter at 
Shuttlework is more than his equal." 

Elizabeth said nothing but she heard, every now and 
then, in a sort of whisper which his lordship did not mean 
to be audible "impertinent puppy" " stupid beast," 
and other little words, which, like the faint flashes from a 
volcano, gave her to understand that the fiery strife was 
still raging within. 



THE MARQUESS. 255 

They speedily reached the rival's studio ; and there his 
lordship resolved not to expose himself to a chance of the 
degrading comparison to which he had just been subjected. 
He sent up his card, and was met on the stairs by a very 
different person from the rough, straight- for ward, ill-starred 
professor, whom he had quitted in disgust. 

" These, Elizabeth/' said his lordship, looking at the 
different pictures through the glass, which his friend 
Wiseman had pronounced utterly useless for his lordship's 
complaint, " these are very beautiful Ah I how very like 
Lady Brompton amazingly good and Sir David 
Dull mire admirable! You have been extremely suc- 
cessful, Mr. Mirrorton." 

" I am much flattered by your lordship's goodness," 
said the obsequious canvass-coverer. 

" 1 see," said his lordship, " a list of your terms here 
there can be no question about those. I think this young 
lady would not make a bad subject for a whole length from 
your pencil." 

" Oh ! my lord," said Mirrorton, performing the grand 
Koo Too, " if artists always had such subjects, they would 
stand much higher in the estimation of the world than 
they do." 

" Very pretty, indeed," said his lordship. " We are 
rather pressed for time, and therefore our sittings might 
begin as soon as you please." 

" Whenever your lordship chooses," said Mr. Mirrorton. 

" Friday we shall be in town on Friday, Elizabeth?" 
said the marquess. 

" Yes." 

" Why, then, Friday let it be," said his lordship. 

" At what hour shall we say, my lord ? " asked the 
painter. 

One Elizabeth, will one suit you ? " asked the " gal- 
lant gay Lothario." 

" Oh ! perfectly," replied the young lady. 

" I was going to venture a suggestion, my lord," said 
Mr. Mirrorton. " I have been very successful in grouping 
.the younger branches of families ; and I was thinking, my 
lord I have not the honour of knowing enough of your 



256 THE MARQUESS. 

lordship's family to speak with any confidence but if 
your lordship had another daughter of nearly the same 
age " 

<( Sir," said the marquess, " what do you mean ?" 

C( I presume this young lady is your lordship's daugh- 
ter ? " said, or rather faltered, the artist, who began to doubt 
whether he was on perfectly safe ground. 

" Sir, you do presume extremely," said the marquess. 
" Miss Oldham, we will talk this matter over I am not 
quite sure, sir, that the young lady can sit on Friday 
however, we will consult Lady Katharine, and let Mr. 
Mr. this gentleman know." 

" 1 am afraid, my lord," said Mr. Mirrorton, " that I 
have unintentionally offended your lordship ; but it was 
natural to think that " 

" The habit of thinking, sir," said the marquess, " is 
one which should be very cautiously indulged in, by persons 
of your condition. Good morning, sir." 

Saying which, the defeated nobleman descended the stair- 
case of his second persecutor, whose exquisite likenesses 
were immediately designated as things fit only to light fires ; 
and in a temper of mind not to be described, his lordship 
drove his half-trembling, half-laughing affianced Elizabeth, 
back to Grosvenor Square, in order to soothe himself with 
the interminable loquacity of her impracticable mother. 

During their absence upon their pictorial progress, Lady 
Hester had contrived to extract a grain or two of sense 
from the heap of chaff which had been winnowed through 
the lips of Lady Katharine. But in all she could collect, 
she could find nothing in the slightest degree indicative of 
those feelings on the part of Miss Oldham towards her 
brother, which she had so warmly, so earnestly, and so 
confidently expected. There seemed to be, at least as far 
as she could make out, something like an opposition on the 
part of Elizabeth to the match, on the score of the mar- 
quess's age ; but her conduct towards him, and the way in 
which Lady Katharine spoke of her feelings with respect 
to him, gave Lady Hester no idea that the attachment of 
her beloved Alfred had ever been seriously reciprocated. 

She resolved not to make up her mind too hastily, but 



THE MARQUESS. 257 

to wait till an opportunity might occur for a private con- 
versation with her former friend. There was, however, no 
time to be lost, because Lord Malvern's intended visit to 
England was now announced j and as his affirmative answer 
to his father's invitation to her marriage had been received, 
it was quite clear that the arrival of her brother might, if 
he wished it, succeed that event by not more than a day or 
two. At Richmond the opportunity for their tete-a-tete 
would no doubt occur ; and to Richmond the party, accord- 
ing to the original arrangement, proceeded in the afternoon, 
not one syllable having been mentioned by the marquess on 
the subject of the morning's excursion, except a little his- 
tory of their having visited the two leading artists of the 
day, and decided that neither of them were capable of satis- 
factorily transferring to canvass the beautiful features of the 
future Marchioness of Snowdon. 



CHAPTER VI. 

" Is it not odd, Charles," said Lord Malvern to Burford, 
as they were travelling towards Paris, " that Hester herself 
should not have written one line to me ? " 

" No," said Burford, " that does not strike me as odd : 
I conclude she knew that the marquess had written ; she 
had no information to add ; and knowing that she should 
so soon see you, I suppose she considered writing unneces- 
sary." 

" I have strange misgivings about her marrying that 
man," said his lordship. " To be sure, I know little of 
him, and it is extremely wrong to be prejudiced ; but I 
have a way of forming sudden likings and dislikings. I am 
exactly the reverse of my father in that respect : he is hard 
to be pleased, and slow to be won. I dare say he finds 
that Lord Elmsdale has great talents for silence ; and to 
s 



258 THE MARQUESS. 

a man like my excellent parent, that I believe to be a most 
agreeable recommendation." 

" I cannot exactly understand how Lady Hester can like 
him," said Burford ; " at least, judging by what I have 
heard her say of other people." 

" I dare say she does not care one straw about him/' 
said Lord Malvern ; " depend upon it the ' illustrious' has 
said ' fiat/ and there's an end. I should be too happy if 
it were not the case, because Hester is too good and too 
amiable to be thrown away upon a man who could not 
appreciate her." 

" Is there any man so dull, or so debased as that? " said 
Mr. Burford. 

" Upon my life, Charles," said Lord Malvern, " I shall 
begin to think you are in love with her yourself. I can 
tell you this, that if you were, and she reciprocated your 
affection, and I were her father, I would rather see her 
married to you with her own twenty thousand pounds and 
your income, than to Lord Elmsdale with his twenty thou- 
sand a year. This I know would be treason at Lionsden 
or in Grosvenor Square, but here it is plain honest truth." 

" I am truly grateful, my dear Malvern," said Burford, 
" for this ingenuous declaration of your good opinion, but 
let me entreat you never to mention the subject again. 
Thoughts once excited are with difficulty suppressed. The 
immeasurable distance between your father's station and 
mine would of itself render all such imaginings vain,' even 
to absurdity. Lady Hester's fate is now definitively sealed ; 
and therefore now, although never before, (and never again, 
must you recur to the subject, which is of vital, or rather 
deadly importance to me,) I admit, in the strong confidence 
of friendship which exists between us, that, although I have 
successfully struggled with feelings which have nearly 
broken my heart, and have, I trust, conquered a passion 
which it would have been worse than madness to cherish, 
my whole heart and soul were devoted to your sister. For 
Heaven's sake, Malvern, bear with this confession, which 
will relieve my mind of a most oppressive burden. J have 
been surprised into making it, but I do not regret it, be- 
cause you must be now satisfied of its unimportance as 



THE MARQUESS. 259 



lates to her, and of the anxiety I feel to escape the horror 
at awaits me in the proposition of uniting her to an- 
other." 

" Horror, indeed, Burford !" said Lord Malvern, throw- 
ing himself back in the carriage. ie Hang it, Charles, why 
didn't you make this confidence sooner? I see no such 
immeasurable space between my father and you. What 
my father is, I shall some day be, and 7 am conscious of 
no such distance. I believe Hester might have done any 
thing with the marquess: she is the only thing in the 
world of which I believe him to be fond. He has made 
this match for her, because he thinks it desirable for her ; 
and, no doubt, she has yielded, for fear of irritating him ; 
but " 

" At all events," said Burford, " any farther discussion 
is now useless. My duty dictated the course I had to 
pursue ; and until it was beyond a possibility that my pre- 
sumption could harm or annoy her, or any body else, I 
maintained a profound silence on the subject -Your father 
has increased my debt of gratitude by this last piece of 
preferment, which I can now conscientiously accept, for I 
have injured him not; on the contrary, my life should be 
freely devoted to the happiness of either of his children." 

" I wish to Heaven it had been devoted to that of one 
of them !" said Lord Malvern. "How dull I must have 
been ! Now I look back upon past days, I recollect a 
thousand little nothings which make something in the 
aggregate, and which might have opened my eyes, if I had 
not been as blind as a buzzard." 

" I rather think," said Burford, " your eyes were some- 
what too constantly fixed upon Miss Oldham, to see much 
else when she was present." 

* f Tell me, Chailes," said Lord Malvern, " now be candid 
I hate flattery I can't bear beating about the bush 
tell me honestly, do you think Hester was attached to you ? " 

" Never did there pass a word between us on the sub- 
ject," said the venerable tutor. 

" A word what need of words ? " replied the hopeful 
pupil. " Isn't it strange, Hester tells me every thing; and 
yet, now I come to think of it, she has not only never 



260 



THE MARQUESS. 



mentioned a syllable in her letters which could lead me to 
any thing like a suspicion that she cared for you, but has 
totally and studiously avoided ever mentioning your name. 
If I had not been fast asleep, I might thence have guessed 
that she had some reason for a silence, which, if you had 
been wholly indifferent to her, she, in all probability, would 
not have maintained." 

" Pray, talk no more of it," said Burford ; " I am in 
your hands. I have nothing to reproach myself with but 
poverty and obscurity, and these are not faults of my own 
commission. All I ask all I implore of you is, to 
rescue me from the performance of the ceremony !" 

" Be assured, Charles," said his lordship, extending his 
hand to his companion " would to Heaven I could do 
more ! that, however, at all events, I promise you. To 
make it certain, be ill, if you choose, at Paris ; I will run 
over without you. Why go at all ? Why, even, if you 
escape the actual performance of the ceremony, agitate 
yourself with the sight of preparations, the completion of 
which is to seal your disappointment ? " 

" That is sealed already," said Burford. I think I 
ought to go : I ought not to suffer my feelings to interfere 
with the expression of my thanks to the marquess for the 
living; and I " 

' c Would you see Hester, Charles ? " asked Lord 
Malvern. 

" I think I could," said Burford, " and bear it." 

" What did you say to wze, only three days since ? " said 
Lord Malvern. " ' I do not doubt your strength of mind, 
but I suspect the justness of your estimate of the power 
with which you will have to contend : ' no take my 
advice stay on this side pf the Channel." 

" We'll see," said Burford, who, firm as he was of pur- 
pose, rigidly faithful as he had been to his duty, and per- 
fectly convinced as he was of the utter hopelessness of his 
case, could scarcely command sufficient courage to take the 
deciding measure of abandoning his once beloved for ever, 
without one parting word, one parting look. 

It will be easily gathered from this conversation that 
Lord Malvern, although destined to succeed to his father's 




THE MARQUESS. 



261 



ui 

$ 

m: 



es and estates, inherited none of those qualities for which 
noble parent was so pre-eminently distinguished. It is 
generally admitted and very frequently proved., that virtue 
and genius, and all the natural good qualities which men 
possess, are derived from their mothers. No family 
afforded a stronger illustration of this doctrine than that of 
Lord Snowdon : both his children were as unlike himself 
in character and disposition as light is to dark ; and, 
although the praise which it is impossible to withhold from 
their generosity, affability, and total want of affectation or 
pretension, may not upon this principle sound complimen- 
tary to their surviving parent, it is but a just tribute to the 
admirable parent who was gone, and who, as the calumnious 
world said, had sunk under a tyranny which she was not 
constitutionally strong enough to endure. 

Burford was the oldest and earliest acquaintance Lord 
Malvern possessed: at the university, and since he had 
quitted it, they had been constant companions. Where- 
ever they travelled, into whatever society they went, Bur- 
ford's reception and popularity were of themselves sufficient 
proofs of his merits and qualifications. The young noble- 
man felt how much benefit he had derived from the asso- 
ciation ; and while his tutor's social qualities and general 
accomplishments had rendered him essential as a companion, 
his higher attributes had secured for him the affection of a 
friend. 

It was natural in the ardour of youth, replete with the 
feelings which such a connexion was likely to inspire, 
that the generous Lord Malvern should readily receive an 
impression of the superior advantages of a match for his 
sister with the object of her choice, over a union with a 
man for whom, judging by their usual sympathy in taste, 
he felt quite convinced she could not ever care His 
intimacy with his Mentor had to his eye smoothed off all 
the angles which to a stranger would appear unconquerable 
bstacles to his fitting into the family circle of Lionsden ; 

d all the regret he experienced at the communication just 

ade to him was, that it had not been made earlier, and 
before the conclusion of a treaty which waited only his 
arrival for its final ratification, 
s 3 



262 THE MARQUESS. 

Little did Lady Hester, who, in her own sphere, and 
amidst all her own doubts and difficulties, was labouring to 
ascertain the real state of Miss Oldham's inclinations for 
heart she soon discovered she had none little did she 
think how far the discussion of a subject had been carried 
by her affectionate brother, to which she never permitted 
herself to recur, and upon which she had spoken to no one, 
except to ' - dear Anne." All her efforts, as far as the 
dreaded subject was concerned, were directed to strength- 
ening her mind to the endurance of the last blow in the 
pronunciation of the final blessing upon her marriage, by 
the being who alone could have insured her earthly happi- 
ness. A hope still gleamed in the distance " He never 
could have the heart to do it : " she knew his feelings 
she had seen the struggles he had overcome had witnessed 
the pain his silence cost him she felt almost assured that 
no circumstance could induce him to sanctify their eternal 
separation, or bless her in the possession of another. It 
was upon this belief of a knowledge of his real sentiments, 
and in the hope of his pity and tenderness now to be 
shown to her in no other way that she yet existed. 
How far she judged him rightly we have already seen. 

(< Dear Lady Hester," said Lady Katharine, bursting 
into the room, ' ( are you here alone ? where is Elizabeth ? 

I thought she was here too I suppose with the mar- 
quess, walking in the shrubbery. My poor dear uncle, the 
bishop, used to say to me you remember his picture, 
my love, over the library fire-place at Horsedon ; it was 
painted by Sir Joshua one of his best not faded in the 
least ; by the way, I remember, many years ago, seeing 
Hogarth's picture at the Foundling Hospital which, in 
my poor judgment, is at best a most equivocal institution, 

all the colours gone pale as a primrose ." 

" "What shall we do after luncheon, to-day, Lady 
Katharine ? " said Lady Hester, who was used to her com- 
panion, and never attempted to regain the lost thread of her 
conversation. 

" Whatever you please, my dear,'* replied her ladyship. 
" You know we have all sorts of pleasant drives about us ; 
go to Hampton Court, perhaps. By the way, what a man 



THE MARQUESS. 



263 



that Cardinal Wolsey was ! as I was once saying to Sir , 

dear me, what's the man's name, with the narrow-rimmed 
hat ? he married a daughter of the famous geologist, who 
went afterwards into Spain or Germany, or somewhere ; 
he was a friend of our friend young Richardson." 

" And pray," said Lady Hester, <e who is Mr. Richard- 
son ? " 

" Oh, he's a great favourite of ours," said Lady Ka- 
tharine ; e ' his mother was aunt to Lord Dolbe'y's cousin, 
an Irish commodore, and he is so agreeable ; and, by the 
way, is quartered at Hampton Court just now." 

" He seems to be quite aware of his popularity here, I 
think, Lady Katharine," said Lady Hester; 

" Oh, my dear, remember," said Lady Katharine, 
" there's nothing can blind a man to his own popularity ; 
Richardson sings sweetly you must hear his guitar. I 
think, with the exception of poor dear Mr. Birtwhistle, 
who married a second cousin of my Mr. Oldham's, and 
who died eight or ten years ago, I never heard any thing 
so beautiful in all my life. You have heard Elizabeth 
attempt the thing hers is not a failure. I give you my 
word she had no master but Frederick Richardson." 

ff Why," said Lady Hester, smiling, " an agreeable 
master generally makes an apt pupil." 

" I believe that," said Lady Katharine, "and that is 
what your father thinks has been so serviceable to your 
brother in his connection with Mr. Burford. He has the 
highest possible opinion of Mr. Burford. I remember ob- 
serving to Miss Everingham one day, that I thought Mr. 
Burford one of the best-mannered men I ever saw in society. 
I knew something of an aunt of his a Mrs. Howard a 
very charming woman ; she went to Cheltenham for the 
benefit of her health, and, as Dr. Slipsby of Bath used 
always to add died in consequence." 

Lady Hester, who believed Lady Katharine, notwith- 
standing the flightiness of her manner, and the uncon- 
nected absurdity of her conversation, to be a shrewd 
woman, was by no means pleased with the observation 
which she had made upon Mr. Burford's good qualities, in 
the way of a reply, or rather of an illustration of her axiom, 
s 4 



264 



THE MARQUESS. 



as to the influence of an "agreeable master to an apt 
pupil." 

" Mr. Richardson/' continued Lady Katharine, " is full 
of talent, and so handsome, Lady Hester ; it is not 
always that personal attractions are supported by mental 
acquirements. I remember Lady Bustle, whose husband, 
poor dear old man, died of three slices of venison at a cor- 
poration dinner in his own borough it is wonderful 
how some people eat, to be sure ; for my part, as I was 
saying one tday to Elizabeth, I cannot understand the dif- 
ference of disposition and constitution in the same species. 
By the way, poor old Lady Bustle lost the use of her 
limbs by going to a fete in a foggy night ; supped in a 
tent and sat on the damp grass ; poor thing, never 
was able to move afterwards, and is now pulled about in 
one of those chairs which in my time were called Mer- 
lin's chairs and a very curious exhibition that man 
Merlin had : there was a large Turk swallowed stones ; 
close by the concert-rooms in Hanover Square, where the 
bazar is to be. By the way, have you made any thing 
for the poor Poles ? Poor dear things, I am so distressed 
about them, you can't think. I don't exactly understand 
what it is they want ; but when one hears of all those in- 
teresting Skoes and Skies without a home, or bread, or 
money, and all that sort of thing, it really does go to one's 
heart. By the way, Mr. Corpsicum, dear little man, calls 
them the bare Poles." 

" I have never yet ventured to make my appearance in 
the character of boutiquiere," said Lady Hester. 

" Elizabeth has sometimes," said Lady Katharine. 
" I assure you she was extremely successful at our fair at 
Horsedon. Mr. Richardson acted as her cavalier ; and he 
got us the band of his regiment, and Elizabeth and he 
made a whole troop of little lancers ; you can't think how 
ingenious Mr. Richardson is in that way. Don't you 
now, do tell me, dear Lady Hester don't you find Eliza- 
beth very much improved since you last met ?" 

1 ' Very much," said Lady Hester ; " she is suprisingly 
altered in manner." 

" Oh, you know, poor dear thing," said Lady Katharine, 



THE MARQUESS. 265 

" she was but a child last year ; as her uncle, Sir George, 
said, she was then a rosehud and to be sure he could not 
say a sweeter thing for to me, fond of flowers as I am, 
the rose, after all, is the sweetest ; but she is improved." 

" Her spirits," said Lady Hester, " are better than I 
ever remembered them." 

" Why, my dear," said Lady Katharine, " she has 
every thing before her, as Frederick Richardson says. 
What an alliance she is about to make ! consider your 
father's position in the world. I do assure you, Hester, 
my love, when I first heard of it, I told her to decide for 
herself never threaten never press never influence 
in marrying that is my method. I am sure when I 
see such people as poor Lady Greystoke tacked to that 
mummy of a man that she married, because her mother 
beat her into it, I see enough to set me against compulsion. 
No : she has made her choice ; and I see no reason why 
she should not be the happiest of her sex." 

" Does your friend, Mr. Richardson, think her happi- 
ness so certain ? " said Lady Hester, with an emphasis not 
usual in her conversation. 

"Oh, poor dear fellow/' said Lady Katharine, "of 
course, at his time of life, he sees every thing couleur de 
rose my favourite tint he is very much interested 
about her ; so is every body who knows her. By the way, 
Major Sandiford, whose sister married my first cousin's 
third son they are in Jamaica now his regiment is 
there ; and do you know, he got his promotion in a very 
extraordinary manner his brother was married to a niece 
of General Flamborough, who lost his arm in the battle 
\vhere your papa's nephew-in-law, as I call him, was 
wounded, and was cured, absolutely cured, by Mr. O'Do- 
herty, the surgeon. The way they came to know Mr. 
O'Doherty was, that his mother was a grand-daughter of 
the Archbishop of " 

Of what we are not destined to know ; for the 

marquess and his betrothed arrived from their paradisiacal 
stroll in the grounds exactly at the moment when the see 
was to have been declared ; and in an instant the voluble 
Lady Katharine glanced off from her point to an exclama- 



266 THE MARQUESS. 

tion of surprise at beholding the interesting couple before 
her. 

<f Lord Snowdon," said, or rather continued her lady- 
ship, " we are going to drive over to Hampton Court 
after luncheon." 

" Oh ! do, do," said Miss Oldham ; "and we'll make 
Frederick Richardson order the band to play for us, 
and " 

" I don't think," said the marquess, " that I shall be 
able to go with you ; I must go into town for an hour or 
two." 

" Well, then," said Lady Katharine, " we'll put it off 
till to-morrow." 

te No, mamma," said Miss Oldham, " we may just as 
well go to Hampton Court as any where else, if Lord 
Snowdon is going into town." 

" Ah, so we can, Elizabeth," said Lady Katharine, 
" because perhaps Frederick Richardson will come back and 
dine with us. You have no objection, Lord Snowdon ? " 

" I ! Lady Katharine," said the marquess, " I can have 
no objection to any friend of yours. Is Elmsdale coming 
here to-day, Lady Hester ? " 

4f I think not, sir," said Lady Hester, " he made no 
promise." 

f ' If he should feel inclined to do so/' said the marquess, 
" perhaps Lady Katharine would permit me to bring him 
down." 

fe I can have no objection to any friend of yours, Lord 
Snowdon," said Lady Katharine, repeating his lordship's 
words in a similar tone to that in which he had addressed 
them to her. 

(f Your ladyship is an excellent mimic," said the mar- 
quess, turning from her with a look of the most unqualified 
contempt. 

" You'll have some luncheon with us, dear Lord Snow- 
don," said Elizabeth. 

" None," said his lordship, " I never eat luncheon. 
You dine at seven, Lady Katharine ? " 

'' Punctual, Lord Snowdon," said Lady Katharine. 

The marquess then withdrew, and Elizabeth having, it 



THE MARQUESS. 



267 



seemed, received some sign from his lordship's eye, known, 
it is imagined, only to those highly graduated in the free- 
masonry of love, followed him. Lady Katharine and 
Lady Hester proceeded to the dining-room to refresh them- 
selves, where they were joined by Miss Oldham, after she 
had bidden an affectionate adieu to her future husband. 

The visit at Richmond, which lasted another day, was 
to Lady Hester most unpleasant and most unsatisfactory. 
It was impossible for her not to feel that a surprising dif- 
ference existed between her late friend, Miss Elizabeth Old- 
ham, and her future mother-in-law, the intended Marchioness 
of Snowdoii. There was an evident shyness on the part of 
the young lady of any reference to their former intimacy, 
or the subjects which they then found the most interesting 
topics of conversation ; her kindness was forced, and her 
manner had assumed a style of constrained civility : she 
had made no allusion whatever to Lord Malvern, except 
once mentioning his name cursorily and carelessly in some 
ordinary discussion ; and so remarkable had been her anxiety 
to avoid any particular communication with Lady Hester, 
and so perfect her address in carrying her point, that no 
opportunity for a tete-a-tete occurred during the whole of 
the time she remained at Lady Katharine's house. 

Poor Lady Hester returned to town even more dispirited 
than she was when she left it. That Miss Oldham had 
entirely overcome if she ever entertained any all affec- 
tion for Lord Malvern, was evident ; and this gave pain to 
Lady Hester, because she was convinced of her brother's 
fidelity and constancy, and because she had hoped to find 
the proposed alliance with her father disagreeable to her 
friend, whom she then might have encouraged to avow her 
real feelings, and so eventually have secured her brother's 
happiness. Now her sorrow was greatly increased ; for 
although she saw that Elizabeth cared nothing for Lord 
Malvern, she also saw that she cared very little more for 
her father. She seemed to live a life of continual excite- 
ment ; all the former naturalness of her character appeared 
to have faded, and given place to an affected gaiety, and an 
assumed tone of superiority, which, let her adopt it in her 
intercourse with others as she might, was extremely ill- 



268 



THE MARQUESS. 



placed, while associating with the daughter of the man 
from whose weakness alone she could derive any possible 
right to give herself such exceedingly unbecoming airs. 

" My grief is by no means alleviated," said Lady Hester 
to Miss Everingham, on her arrival at home, " by what I 
have seen at Richmond.' True it is that I must have been 
deceived in my belief of Elizabeth Oldham's affection for 
Alfred. But this will not, I fear, cure him of his attach- 
ment to her ; in short, I believe that I have hitherto been 
deceived in her manner altogether, for if I did not know 
the contrary to be the case, I should now be convinced at 
least as much convinced as I was in the case of Alfred 
that she is at this moment desperately in love with a Mr. 
Frederick Richardson, a cornet of lancers, who seems almost 
domesticated with them." 

' ' Do you really believe that ? " said Miss Everingham 
the ." hope that springs eternal in the human breast," sud- 
denly giving a jump in hers " do you think that she 
prefers him ? but how can she, my dear ? She has ac- 
cepted the marquess, and the marriage is settled." 

" It is possible," said Lady Hester, " for such affairs to 
go to a very considerable length, and yet. the affections of 
the parties not keep pace with the preparations. I admit 
that I have been once deceived in Miss Oldham : I may 
be so now ; and after all, what I misconstrued into feeling 
and affection may be nothing more than manner a sort 
of empressement a display of interest and attention 
of devotion almost, to one object, while her heart, yet un- 
concerned, is devoted to another." 

" It is not natural," said Miss Everingham, " for young 
females to possess this sort of duplicity ; I can scarcely 
imagine any circumstance which would induce a girl to 
permit matters to go to the extreme length of accepting a 
man, and even settling the wedding day, while a feeling 
of devotion as you call it to another object existed in her 
heart." 

" Oh, Anne," said Lady Hester, lc it is possible pos- 
sible, too, without degradation or debasement to the victim 
of such a struggle." 

" Why," said Miss Everingham, " would you I put 



THE MARQUESS. 269 

it to yourself would you submit to marrying Lord Elms- 
dale, if " 

" There, there, my dear Anne," interrupted poor Lady 
Hester, " suppose no cases ; imagine no possibilities ; and, 
least of all, do not bring me forward as an example by 
which the conduct of others is to be regulated. Let my 
affections, my hopes, my happiness rest where they may, 
my father's commands are to me imperative ; my case has 
no analogy to any other. That I love my father as a child 
ought to love, I know ; but I feel that I fear him more 
than any child should : yet to see him in anger, to hear 
him, perhaps, curse me, I could not survive j and I know 
what would happen if I thwarted his intentions with regard 
to this marriage." 

" That may be all very true," said Miss Everingham, in 
whose mind the overthrow of the marquess's union with 
Miss Oldham was an object of first-rate impontance ; " but 
I do think, Lady Hester, there is another duty which you 
also owe your father. If you can imagine that Miss Old- 
ham is really the heartless coquet which she seems to be, 
and that she is hurrying into a splendid alliance, merely 
because it is splendid, it is an obligation and an imperious 
one on your part, to open your father's eyes to " 

" My dear friend," interrupted Lady Hester, " do you 
know so little of my father as to imagine that any living 
being dare venture to hint that he has been deceived 
that he is the victim of treachery and duplicity ? I would 
not attempt such a thing ; besides in me it would have the 
appearance of anxiety to prevent his following his own in- 
clinations, because his doing so might, in a domestic point 
of view, be unpleasant, and in a worldly point of view, 
disadvantageous to me. No : depend upon it I have no 
power to interfere. I may yet entertain a hope that nature 
will, some day, prevail over Elizabeth Oldham's art ; and 
that if the case be as I suspect, my father will himself see 
through what I cannot but believe to be a heartless delu- 
sion." 

All this was extremely filial and dutiful ; but the blind- 
ness of love is always most complete when the disorder 
attacks the patient late in life. To Lord Snowdon, Eliza- 



270 THE MARQUESS. 

beth Oldham was perfection ; all the little playfulnesses in 
which she occasionally indulged with the pet cornet of the 
family were so many evidences of ingenuousness and "na- 
turalness," or as the poets call it, " single-mindedness, 
viridity of intellect, and freshness of character." Indeed 
(such is the force of sympathy upon some occasions), if the 
marquess entertained any suspicions about young Richard- 
son (as his lordship was pleased to call him), it took quite 
a different direction from that of his intended wife. He 
fancied that Lady Katharine herself had some faint idea 
floating in what she called her mind, of the advantages of 
repairing the loss of her amiable daughter by the assump- 
tion of a young husband, in which project, supposing it to 
be in embryo, the marquess, under existing circumstances, 
was not so likely to see so much absurdity as he would have 
been the first to perceive under any others. 

As for the marquess himself, occupations seemed to 
multiply upon his hands ; for while he was maturing the 
arrangements for his own marriage much of which, be 
it remembered, depended upon his son's agreement to cer- 
tain propositions which he had to make he was taking 
measures for the celebration of that of his daughter. Effect 
was again to be studied ; and although the metropolis was 
but thinly peopled, he was laying plans to collect a sufficient 
number of his family connections to give eclat to the nuptial 
ceremony, which, as has already been hinted, was to be per- 
formed at that fashionable shrine of Hymen St. George's, 
Hanover Square. 

But this was not all. His lordship had been three or 
four times down to the bottom of Downing Street ; he began 
to speak temperately of government measures; he dined 
with the Premier, arid the next day, at breakfast, was loud 
in his praise. As an individual he was delightful ; and so 
moderate in his politics, that it required but very little to 
make him follow such a man ; if he could but be assured 
that the ministry would not refuse this ; and if he might 
but be convinced that they would deny that two points, 
in fact, only of secondary importance he should feel very 
much inclined to support them ; for, after all, a man's 
individual opinions ought to bend to the majority, and to 



THE MARQUESS. 271 

circumstances ; and, as he was affectionately devoted to the 
king, it seemed to him really that it became a duty to 
uphold a government which the monarch sanctioned and 
maintained ; and he did not know Heaven was witness 
that he had no motive, other than a conscientious feeling 
hut it did not seem to him that when the state was agitated 
by a third party, more violent than either of the other two, 
the designs and principles of which were notoriously sub- 
versive of every thing like order, and the ancient institutions 
of the country, there could be very little question whether 
a man in his position should or should not add his influ- 
ence, of whatever value it might be, to that party of the 
three to which the king gave his confidence. 

This is the sort of language he used after dinner, at his 
own table, his countenance beaming with a look of candour 
and sincerity which nobody who did not know him 
could for a moment have doubted ; and so he went on ex- 
patiating upon his honour and his feelings, his conviction 
and his independence, seeing before him more plainly and 
distinctly than the mighty murderer saw the " air-drawn 
dagger," the glittering musnud of the governor-general, 
surrounded by a crowd of royal victims, of rajahs, and 
residents, courtiers, and counsellors, crawling and cringing 
at his feet, while he, high amidst the motley group, stood 
noble and erect, the envied riband crossing his breast, 
giving new lustre to the glittering star it partly hid, which 
covered his ambitious heart. His bargain seemed to be 
in a fair way to its conclusion : five seats in one house, 
and an influence over seven votes in the other, were 
something and just at such a time. And then his 
bride! What a splendid specimen of European beauty ! 
and what an amiable recipient for presents from the 
sensitive and good-natured natives, which he himself durst 
not accept. 

In his mind's eye, he saw a trembling prince imploring 
his excellency so to direct the march of an army that his 
particular territory might be spared the devastation which 
its course across it might produce. " You must make in- 
terest with the marchioness," said his lordship, in his 
musings ; " she has more influence with the commander of 



272 THE MARQUESS. 

the forces than I." The prince, a much too well accus- 
tomed pupil of the school to doubt its meaning, would take 
the hint ; the marchioness would be gratified with a small 
white handful of large diamonds, and the soldiers, instead 
of being sent through the fertile province of Munney- 
stumpum, would be ordered to traverse the arid district of 
Pinchapatam. 

These dreams of his were very likely, indeed, to come 
true: his foot was already in the stirrup; it required 
but a helping hand to lift him to the seat ; the reins 
at his command, what a magnificent course he would 
run ! splendour unparalleled, beauty unmatched, magnifi- 
cence yet unknown, were all to grace his oriental reign. 
Not a word had passed his lips ; no human creature knew 
how far the compact had proceeded ; and he lived in a 
state of constant agitation till the hour should arrive when 
all his honours should come thick upon him. 

It was on the day succeding that in which the marquess 
had so far succeeded in his great speculations in public 
matters, that he received letters from his son, announcing 
his departure from Tours for Paris, and suggesting his 
probable arrival in London in ten days from the date of 
his letter. 

" Hester, dear," said his lordship, f< Elmsdale's arrange- 
ments are now completed, and Malvern will be here about 
the middle of next week. I have particular reasons, per- 
sonal to myself, and not necessary to be mentioned at this 
moment, which induce me to accelerate our proceedings ; 
therefore, if you please, let us fix this day fortnight for 
your marriage." 

Lady Hester bowed her head, assentingly., but in silence. 

" I have made out a list of those persons whom I should 
like to be present. The Salfords, the Havershams, and the 
Warringtons, have promised to come to town expres ; 
Elmsdale's family have done the same ; and I think we 
shall muster altogether about forty at breakfast. I had 
intended, you know, to have had the marriage solemnised 
here, in the drawing-room, but I think a better effect is 
produced by a church marriage : it seems more important, 
and brings the circumstance itself better before the world ; 



THE MARQUESS. 



daughter of an English marquess a thing to be ashamed of? 
an affair to be huddled up, and hurried over ? Hester, 
you are like your brother : you never will have a proper 
estimate of your place in society, or of the duties which 
the importance of your station in the world necessarily 
imposes upon you." 

" At all events, sir," said Lady Hester, cowering before 
the contemptuous look which her magnificent parent had 
cast upon her, " I have no desire that Miss Oldham should 
inconvenience herself, or displease you, by fulfilling an 
office, which I agree with you in thinking incompatible 
with her present position in our family/' 

" I am afraid, Lady Hester," said the marquess, " that 
Miss Oldham's present position in my family does not 
exactly please you. I have for years deprived myself of 
the comforts of a married life for your sake ; I have devoted 
myself to your interests sacrificed my own happiness to 
insure yours. I have completed the task which I set 
myself: I have succeeded in establishing you most honour- 
ably and happily ; and now, madam, because I have made 
a selection from amongst our acquaintance of a young lady 
hitherto one of your greatest favourites and most intimate 
friends, you entirely change your manner and conduct 
towards her, and even sneer at what you are pleased to 
call that lady's present position in our family our family, 
Lady Hester ! " 



274 THE MARQUESS. 

" Indeed, indeed, you mistake me ! " said Lady Hester ; 
" I do assure you, 1 " 

" There is no need of professions or protestations/' said 
the marquess ; ei Miss Oldhara is equally conscious with 
myself of this change j she feels it deeply, and complains 
to me of it bitterly." 

fe I am not conscious of it ! " said Lady Hester, bursting 
into tears. " Believe me, my beloved father, that no thought 
but of anxiety for your happiness has ever crossed my mind 
since you announced your intention upon the subject of 
your marriage. If Miss Oldham's heart is free to give, to 
no one more worthy can she give it than to you; if " 

' If ! " echoed the marquess ; ' ' why start these doubts ? 
Do you imagine that Lady Katharine has found it necessary 
to force her daughter's inclinations, Lady Hester ? " 

" No, sir, no ! Spare me spare me more ! Be 
assured that I have no object but that which I profess ; 
that I am unconscious of any change in my conduct to 
Miss Oldham which is not justified by hers. Recollect, 
sir, when we last met, we met as friends of the same age, 
in habits of intimacy, and of unmixed confidence so we 
parted ; she returns, as I have already said, but with no 
wrong meaning, my dear father, in a different position : 
the very circumstance of our former unreserved intimacy 
renders our present intercourse the more constrained. Of 
this difference, I confess myself conscious, but it arises from 
no change of mine." 

" I repeat what I at first said," replied Lord Snowdon : 
" I have made your happiness, and I do expect that you 
will not interrupt mine by any disrespectful conduct towards 
my future wife, whose importance and dignity I am deter- 
mined most strictly and rigidly to uphold." 

Lady Hester was on the point of renewing her declar- 
ation of a totally opposite feeling, when the door opened, 
and Lord Elmsdale was announced. Any interruption to 
such a dialogue was a relief the present one, to be sure, 
was to Lady Hester the least agreeable which could have 
occurred ; and this single fact will serve to prove the happy 
state to which the noble hero of our tale had already 
reduced his family. 



I 



THE MARQUESS. 275 



It was in the course of the conversation which ensued 
that the wedding-day was finally fixed. The necessary 
arrangements were immediately entered upon ; letters were 
despatched to the distant uncles and cousins, and invitations 
circulated to those whose presence was desired at the 
dejeuner. The marquess quitted the interesting conference 
to visit Downing Street ; Lord Elmsdale mounted his horse, 
and took a canter through the parks ; and Hester Plin- 
limmon shut herself into her dressing-room to think, to 
weep, and to pray. 



CHAPTER VII. 

THE journey of Lord Malvern and his tutor if such he 
might still be considered from Tours to Paris, was ren- 
dered more interesting than agreeable, by the circumstances 
which had occurred at its commencement. Burford felt 
his mind greatly relieved by the confidence which he had 
so unexpectedly been induced to make, and his companion 
was proportionally depressed, under the belief that Lady 
Hester had reciprocated his affection, and was now forced 
into a marriage which he felt assured she could not in her 
heart approve, and which yet he was proceeding to adorn 
and sanction by his presence. 

It was late in the afternoon when the travellers reached 
that vast menagerie of monkeys and tigers, the French 
metropolis. They found their rooms prepared for their 
reception ; and after refreshing themselves with a dinner 
admirably calculated for a restaurant, Burford expressed 
his intention of paying a visit to his mother and sister, who 
had been for some time residing in a small but extremely 
agreeable residence in the Alice des Veuves,, leading out 
of the Champs Elysees. 

" Shall I be de trop ?" said Lord Malvern ; " I have not 
seen either Mrs. Burford or Maria now for three years. I 
will go with you, if you like ; if not, say so, and I will 
T 2 



THE MARQUESS. 

dispose of myself in some of the five hundred theatres of 
this most frivolous town, till your return. In a city like 
this, which, after all, is more like an overgrown watering- 
place than the metropolis of a great country, a man who 
has nothing to do is, as an Irishman would say, sure to 
find plenty of employment." 

" I shall be too happy if you will go with me," said 
Burford ; " and they will, I am sure, be delighted to re- 
ceive you." 

" I am your man, then," said the young lord ; " attons!" 

And away they went across the Place Vendome, along 
the Rue Rivoli, over the Place Louis Quinze, and so to the 
Champs Elysees. The night being bright and clear, they 
ordered- no carriage for their return, and walked off, inde- 
pendent pedestrians. 

They reached the peaceful residence of the amiable 
Mrs. Burford a gentlewoman, at least in the second 
degree, as admitted even by Lord Snowdon; and there 
they found her and her daughter following the extremely 
unfrenchified fashion the one of reading, and the other 
of working. The meeting between Mrs. Burford and her 
son was in the highest degree gratifying, and the affection- 
ate kiss of the gentle Maria brought to Lord Malvern's 
mind his beloved sister, and the reception which he hoped 
so shortly to meet with in Grosvenor Square. 

Maria, by the way (as Lady Katharine Oldham would 
have said), had grown into the bloom and grace of woman- 
hood, since Lord Malvern had last seen her. She was not 
beautiful had no pretensions to beauty but there were 
a soul-fraught intellectual expression in her countenance, 
and a winning softness in her manner, which far outstrip 
the dazzling blaze of the diamonds and pearls, and roses 
and lilies, which dazzle and confound, and take the heart 
by storm. Maria Burford was charming for her gentle- 
ness ; but it was clear that time alone could develope, to 
their full extent, the attractions of her mind, and the 
powers of her understanding. 

The little flurry of a new arrival the genuine pleasure 
of a meeting with her brother the natural agitation at 
the appearance of one so long a stranger a lord too 



THE MARQUESS. 277 

and the lord to whom that brother was so much attach ed, 
from whom he had received such kindness, and to 
whom, as she felt most of all, his intimacy had been so 
beneficial these flushed a cheek by nature pale, and pal- 
pitated a bosom pure and at rest from every fiercer passion, 
and gave animation to the placid countenance of the affec- 
tionate sister and the dutiful daughter, and almost brought 
a tear into the eyes of the young nobleman, whose heart 
ached for such comforts and such a home, as Lionsden did 
not in fact afford. 

Burford had apprised his mother of their intended arrival 
at Paris, so that the surprise consisted only in the appear- 
ance "of Lord Malvern, who apologised for the intrusion; 
the necessity of doing which struck him forcibly, when he 
sensibly felt that, although Burford had scouted the idea 
of his not accompanying him, his presence did seem to 
put a restraint upon the intercourse between the family 
party. 

" Mrs. Burford," said Lord Malvern, f( I was so anxious 
to pay my respects to you this evening, that I have broken 
in upon your charming retirement, when I am quite sure 
you could have best spared me. To-morrow you shall 
have Burford all to yourselves ; if he will trust me, I will 
find myself in recreation through the day and evening, and 
you shall enjoy at least twelve hours of unreserved cause." 

" You are very, very good," said Mrs. Burford ; " indeed, 
Lord Malvern, the kindness of Lord Snowdon to my son 
has been so noble, so unbounded, that really I have no 
words adequate to express my feelings upon the subject. 
I did at one time intend to write to him myself, but as I 
conclude his whole time is occupied in matrimonial affairs, 
I felt that I should be worrying and intruding, and so I 
have abandoned the design." 

" Yes," said Lord Malvern, recollecting where he was 
the plain, quiet comfort that he saw the unruffled affec- 
tion which seemed to exist between the different branches 
of the family with which he was at the moment domesti- 
cated ; and recollecting, too, what were the feelings, the 
hopes blighted, it is true of his exemplary friend 
T 3 



278 THE MARQUESS. 

" yes, and I sincerely wish that my father were not so 
engaged." 

' ' I am sure/' said Mrs. Burford, " my prayers "will be 
most sincerely offered up for a happy result ; but I confess 
that in such unequal matches,, I always have my doubts 
and fears." 

' f There is not so much inequality/' said Lord Malvern. 

" Do you think not, my lord ? " asked the lady. " A 
bride of nineteen or twenty, and a husband of nearly 
sixty ? " 

" Sixty ! " exclaimed Lord Malvern, ' ' Lord Elmsdale 
is not more than thirty." 

" No," said Mrs. Burford, " I am sure he is not ; but 
I am not speaking of Lady Hester's marriage I mean 
Lord Snowdon's marriage." 

" Ah ! " said Lord Malvern, " his marriage would be 
indeed a strange affair." 

" Strange ! " said Mrs. Burford ; " why, my lord, 'of 
course have I said any thing odd ? you both look so 
wildly of course why you are going t<^ London to 
attend it!" 

" What, my dear mother ! " said Burford. 

f< Lord Snowdon's marriage ! " said Maria, laying down 
the work upon which she was notably employed. 

" My father's marriage ! " exclaimed Lord Malvern. 
" My dear madam, are you in earnest ? " 

" Positively !" said Mrs. Burford; " there is no doubt 
whatever about it : it is announced in all the London papers 
as a thing to happen immediately." 

"And who," faltered Lord Malvern, "is the lady ?" 

te Miss Oldham/' said Mrs. Burford, " the only daughter 
of Lady Katharine Oldham." 

The effect of this answer was awful. Lord Malvern 
uttered a faint stifled shriek, and fell as if shot through the 
heart, to all appearance dead, from his chair. 

" My dearest mother," said Burford, " what have you 
done ? what is it ? is it so ? are you sure it is ? " 

' f Positive," said Maria ; " we had a letter only two days 
ago, detailing the whole thing." 

Burford shook his head, as indicative of his fear of con- 



THE MARQUESS. 279 

sequences, and lifted poor Lord Malvern to the sofa, who 
still remained senseless. A servant was immediately des- 
patched for a physician, and in the mean time, Burford 
used all the means immediately within reach, to restore the 
distressed patient. 

French physicians are, if possible, worse guessers than 
English ones for, after all, guess-work it is and the 
excellent gentleman who arrived, having in his mind an 
extremely strong prejudice in favour of gentle remedies, 
such as tisane and other matters little used in British 
practice, was extremely puzzled by the appearance of his 
patient. Upon one point he was very suddenly resolved, 
and that for a reason evident to the meanest capacity 
milord must not be moved ; every inch he went towards 
his own hotel, he would go further away from his doctor. 
A bed must be procured for him on the spot the doctor 
must attend him all night ; and when the learned person 
was informed that the fit, or whatever it was, had been 
caused by the abrupt communication of a piece of unex- 
pected intelligence, he gravely pronounced it as his opinion, 
that mind had a great deal to do with it, and that nothing 
should be done calculated in the slightest degree to agitate 
or irritate his lordship. 

In such a dilemma there was no alternative, and a bed 
was immediately prepared in Mrs. Burford's " quiet resi- 
dence," to which poor Lord Malvern, already fatigued by 
his journey, excited by the wine he had drank, and acted 
upon forcibly enough by the calm and happy appearance of 
Burford's family, and now laid prostrate by a double blow 
of fate, was carried by his tutor and the doctor, a messenger 
having been despatched to the hotel for his servant, and 
with an announcement that neither his lordship nor Mr. 
Burford would return that night. 

Lord Malvern remained for some time silent, and appa- 
rently unconscious of any thing that was passing around 
him. The reader may easily appreciate the state of poor 
Mrs. Burford's mind, conscious as she was of having been 
the innocent cause of an attack which, in its appearance 
and character, was of a very frightful nature. 
T 4 



280 THE MARQUESS. 

" Burford," said the patient, after more than two hours' 
silence, ' ' are you near me ? " 

" Yes, my dear friend, at your side," said Burford. 

" Is all this a dream ? what has happened ? did I 
fall down ? was I asleep ? where am I ? did I hear 
aright ? my father to be married to he married to 
Elizabeth Oldham is that it ? is it true ? is it all real ? " 

"You must not talk," said Burford; "calm yourself 
to-night, dear Malvern ; you are in my mother's house 

I hope you will rest in the morning we can speak 
more of these matters." 

" Morning ! " said Lord Malvern, ' e what is it o'clock 
now ? late ? I hope so I hope very late I want 
to write to my father. I'll not go, Burford he may sell 
my sister, whom I love he may buy my Elizabeth, 
whom I adore ; but I'll not be there I'll have no hand 
in the bargains nor shall you, Burford promise me ? " 

(( Be calm," said Burford, " I will do nothing but what 
you wish me to do ; you shall not go to London at all 
events you must rest." 

' ( Here here," said Lord Malvern ; " this is indeed a 
place of rest ; here there are quiet, and contentment, and 
love, and duty, and affection but not for me no 
Burford, my fate is decided 1 am doomed my father 
may marry but to marry her oh ! I cannot believe it." 

" It may be a false report," said Burford. 

* f It must be," said Lord Malvern, " it must be she 
did love me, and can she marry with my father ? impos- 
sible ! But, Burford, my dear fellow, hear me all this 
must be wretchedly annoying and inconvenient to your 
excellent mother and sister. I am well enough to go home 

let me dress I can return to the hotel." 

"My dear Malvern," said Burford, "my mother is here 
herself to tell you that you neither worry nor inconvenience 
her, except as your illness naturally pains her." 

" My dear madam," said Lord Malvern, sitting up in bed 
and eagerly catching her hand, " tell me are you sure 

quite sure I now recollect all I have got my senses 

I know what I talk of, and of what you were talking 
before I fell 1 know I fell yes, I recollect that tell 



THE MARQUESS. 281 

me, dearest Mrs. Burford, are you quite sure that my 
father's intended wife is Elizabeth Oldham ? " 

Burford shook his head, as a sign to his mother not to 
confirm the report by any unquestionable authority, think- 
ing it better to leave something like hope for his friend to 
exist upon. 

" Ah ! Burford," said his lordship, seeing the signal, 
ie I am aware it is so ; it is vain to try to buoy me up. 
Well ! That he should marry is not much, but that he 
should marry her, is very much indeed. No, no England 
for us, Burford. Poor Hester, what can I say to her ? 
What can we, any of us, say to her ? Mrs. Burford, you 
know my sister my excellent, good, kind sister ? You 
have heard Charles speak of her ? " 

te I have seen her ladyship," said Mrs. Burford ; "don't 
you recollect, my lord, when we were staying at Lionsden ? " 

** To be sure, to be sure," answered Lord Malvern ; " I 
am dreaming still would it were all a dream. I hate 
that Elmsdale he will make my sister wretched she 
does not love him no, no she does not." 

" Pray, pray, be calm," said Burford, who dreaded some 
exclamation on the part of the suffering young man, which 
might disclose to his mother the extent of his own presump- 
tion, in daring to permit his heart to admit a preference, 
which it was impossible for it to exclude. 

" I will," said Lord Malvern. " I must write to my 
father to-morrow. Shall I sleep ? can I rest ? give 
me something to quiet me j and yet if I sleep, I shall dream 
of it all again." 

The physician had anticipated Lord Malvern's wishes ; 
and although by no means desirous of ' f exhibiting " opiates 
in a case of such a physical appearance, he had prepared a 
soothing draught, which Lord Malvern swallowed, and 
shortly after the arrival of his servant from the hotel (to 
whom the adjoining room was appropriated) the unhappy 
heir of thousands sank into a calm and gentle slumber. 

When Burford quitted the room, he gave strict injunc- 
tions to the valet to come to him the moment his lord 
waked, and directed him, if he found himself, as it was 
natural he might after a long day's journey, desirous of 



282 THE MARQUESS. 

sleep, to call him, in order that he might take his place in 
watching the couch of the unfortunate young nobleman ; 
for, much as Burford was attached to him for his own good 
qualities, his kindness, his talents, and for the affection of 
friendship, which always is reciprocated, the fact that he 
was Lady Hester's brother, nay, even that there was a 
similarity in their manners sufficient always to recall her to 
his mind, when he was present, made the accidental inmate 
of his mother's house an object of the deepest interest in 
his eyes. 

He slept well through the night : youth, fatigue, and a 
fine constitution, operated against the mental oppression ; 
and when his friend went to him in the morning, he found 
him very much better, and, to his delight, perfectly calm, 
although perfectly determined on the course which he should 
pursue. 

" The storm is over," said Lord Malvern : " it has passed 
away ; but the wrecks remain in evidence of its ravages. 
I have resolved upon the line I shall take, open to your 
opinion and advice. To my father I owe every thing 
duty, respect, obedience. I have not a word to say in 
opposition to his marriage. I will combine with him in 
the arrangements which I know will be necessary upon the 
occasion. I will do my duty, Burford, rigidly, faithfully, 
and filially ; but I will not, because I cannot, witness the 
blight of my own hopes of happiness, and therefore I will 
not go to England." 

" Upon matters of feeling, my dear lord," said Burford, 
ff I am the last man in the world to interfere with you. I 
have never found it necessary to do so, because Providence 
has gifted you with a mind and heart that need no human 
correction. You are quite justified in the course you 
propose." 

" It would be hypocrisy, my dear Burford," said Lord 
Malvern, " if I were to profane the church by my presence 
at such a ceremony ; and it is clear to me, that if I go to 
poor Hester's marriage, I must remain for the other. I 
will see neither. I shall write to her when I write to my 
father that must be done to-day my head is clear, my 
pulse quiet, and I am equal to the task. If I did not fear 



I 



THE MARQUESS. 283 



that I should inconvenience your kind mother, I would give 
the world to remain here so long as we stay in Paris, or if 
not here actually, in some house close by depend upon 
it, Burford, there is in the domestic character of an English- 
woman a charm, a riveting charm, for which no foreign 
flippancy can compensate. Upon the face of the earth, 
there exists no such being as the well-educated, well- 
regulated woman of our native land. The brief hour 
which I passed here yesterday evening before my f exhi- 
bition/ had in it, to me, something so soothing, so de- 
lightful, that I want words to describe it. I feel at home 
I feel my heart at home, Burford ; and if I may stay 
amongst you, on this day of shipwrecked expectations, I 
am sure I shall recover my peace of mind sooner than by" 
any violent effort at change or movement." 

" My mother will be too happy," said Burford. 

" Did not you think," continued Lord Malvern, " that 
Elizabeth Oldham was attached to me ? how gentle, how 
kind, how amiable, how playful, and ingenuous she was." 

"1 admit," said Burford, "that I did think so; but 
you see she has deceived us, for she is going to be married 
to another, and that other, one, whom if she ever did re- 
ciprocate your feelings, would be the last man on earth with 
whom she would unite herself." 

" The wisest thing, I suppose," said Lord Malvern, " is 
to reconcile myself to the loss of her with the best possible 
grace." 

" Indeed I think so," said Burford : te a young lady, who 
gives so very unequivocal a sign of forgetfulness as that of 
marrying another man, does not, as it appears to me, deserve 
any particular sorrow for her loss." 

" Hester," said Lord Malvern, " is going to marry Lord 
Elmsdale." 

" Yes ! " said Burford, 

" May not she be forced into that marriage ? " asked 
Lord Malvern. 

" Forgive me, Malvern," said Burford ; " on that sub- 
ject, let me implore you, never speak ! " 

" Will you go now," said Lord Malvern, " and be the 
bearer of my letter to my father, and marry her to Elmsdale? " 



284 THE MARQUESS. 

" Do you wish it ? " 

"Not I not I!" replied the young lord; "no! I 
merely wished to test your theory by practice. I dare not 
tell her what you have confided to me, because I fear it is 
now too late ; else, what tie have I to my father ? Nature 
demands my duty he shall have it ! I will be all obe- 
dience where his personal happiness is concerned ; I will 
sacrifice any thing every thing ! But, as for myself or 
my sister, he has himself broken the ties which bound us 
to him ; and, as I feel that it is not in my nature to dis- 
semble, so I shall at once declare open war, and refuse to 
sanction either marriage, by any thing like a participation 
in its ceremonial." 

" I have already said, Lord Malvern," said Burford, 
" that, with matters of feeling, I am quite sure 1 have no 
right to interfere. The obligations under which Lord 
Snowdon has laid me are great, and the gratitude they de- 
mand commensurate ; but, in this instance, I certainly so 
far agree with you, that if a question should arise upon the 
point, I should have no hesitation in resigning the prefer- 
ment to which his lordship has just appointed me, together 
with the charge which he has confided to me in your 
person." 

" There is one thing," said Lord Malvern, " which you 
cannot resign, and which he never can take from you ; and 
that is the honorary office if so it may be considered 
of my friend : that, you must remain, so long as we live, 
unless I have a permanent return of my last night's com- 
plaint." 

{f You are too kind, Malvern," replied Burford. 

" I only wish to my very heart I wish it ! more 
how than ever ! " said almost sobbed Lord Malvern, 
" that we were connected by a nearer tie ! My poor sister 
has fortune enough of her own to have made you both 
happy; and if that had not been sufficient, I but no 
matter I wish I had known all this before ! My first 
business must be to write to my father : perhaps the report 
is not true ; however, upon that head, I shall soon be 
satisfied. I will write to Hester yes, to both ! and 
yet, what can I say to her, poor girl ? perhaps she, like 



THE MARQUESS. 285 

her friend, is altered changed in her nature and charac- 
ter ! No I am sure she never could like Elmsdale, 
under any circumstances ! " 

" I think," said Burford, " that an immediate appeal to 
Lord Snowdon is the straight course ; ascertain from 
himself the accuracy of the rumour. As you say, in days 
when men get money by spreading falsehoods one day, in 
order that they may get more by contradicting them the 
next, it is impossible to calculate with any certainty upon 
the undoubted authority quoted for such histories." 

" Your counsel shall be obeyed/' said Lord Malvern ; 
f{ and while I am writing I feel equal to the task 
do you endeavour to make some arrangement so as not 
to inconvenience your mother and sister, that may place 
us here, or hereabouts, for some time to come. I repeat 
to you, that I am sure nothing is so likely to restore my 
health, bodily and mental, as the repose which the society 
of a quie' ^English family will afford me." 

te Forgive me, Malvern," said Burford, " and, above all, 
acquit me of any intention of thwarting your most reasonable 
inclinations, upon the score of inconvenience to my mother 
and sister ; but, is it not best to consider, in the first in- 
stance, whether Lord Snowdon might approve of such a 
change in your intentions ? " 

" Lord Snowdon," said Lord Malvern, ee as I have al- 
ready declared, has a right to my obedience, where his 
personal happiness is concerned : I have said so I feel 
so but where it is not, and where the exertion of my 
will cannot interfere with his movements, I consider my- 
self at liberty to consult my own feelings. I am now past 
four-and-twenty years of age, with every right to be master 

of my own actions, and " 

" And, therefore, capable of directing your course 
through the world, my lord," said Burford, " without my 
guidance." 

' ' So I may be," replied Lord Malvern, " but not with- 
out your society. I repeat, you may cease to be my tutor ; 
but the moment you choose to disavow that character, I 
claim you for my friend. You will not refuse me the 
boon I request ? " 



286 THE MARQUESS. 

" I am too proud of such a testimonial of your good opi- 
nion/' said Burford ; " all I meant to ask was would 
not your rest and residence here with me and my family 
give an appearance to Lord Snowdon that we had leagued 
together in a hostile alliance against him ? " 

" If you think that possible," said Lord Malvern, tc and 
believe that such an appearance would be injurious to your- 
self, I will relinquish my plan ; but I am certain that 
active movements and extended excursions are at pre- 
sent ill suited to my health or spirits. I should prefer 
remaining where I am, to moving ; and as far as the most 
distinct declaration to my father of my purpose, unin- 
fluenced by you, and indeed adopted in opposition to your 
wishes, may serve to set your mind at rest upon that 
point, it shall be made in the letter which I am about to 
write to him. At all events I must remain here for some 
time, in order to be within reach of his man of business, 
with whom it will be necessary I should have a personal 
communication previous to the final adjustment of his 
marriage." 

".I can have no objection, my dear lord," said Bur- 
ford, " to the arrangement you suggest ; for to me the 
additional society of my mother and sister must naturally 
be most agreeable. Assure yourself that my motives 
were " 

ff The best, my dear Burford, I know," interrupted 
his lordship ; " but you must allow me again to re- 
mind you, that I am of an age to judge for myself; and 
that, however anxious I may now and ever shall be to avail 
myself of your opinions and suggestions, I must act in the 
way which I consider most conducive to my happiness, if 
happiness yet remain in store for me. My father has set 
me the example ; he has formed a new connexion, and 
begins life again ; mine is indeed a first start, but I feel I 
have now nobody's inclination to consult but my own j and 
so, my dear fellow, as I am resolved to stay quietly where 
I am, all I have to inquire is, whether your excellent 
mother will permit me to remain her visiter during my 
sejour, or whether it will be more agreeable that I should 
iecure a separate residence ? " 



THE MARQUESS. 287 

" I have no doubt of my mother's answer," said Burford ; 
" although I think your becoming an inmate of our house 
at the moment of a declared hostility with the marquess 
will strike her at first, as it struck me, as rather imprudent 
on your part, and extremely indelicate on ours." 

" I repeat, Burford/' said Lord Malvern, " that I will 
explain all that to Lord Snowdon, and in such a manner 
that not a shadow of doubt shall be cast upon your honour 
and candour, or upon those of any part of your family. 
Have I not been staying in your mother's house in Eng- 
land ? Have I not been accustomed to visit her periodi- 
cally during the whole of our acquaintance ? Nothing can 
be more simple or natural From the circumstances to 
which my exhibition of last night so painfully attracted 
your attention, I have been your guest for the last fourteen 
or fifteen hours, malgre moi ; let me continue so, for as 
many days, or weeks, if you please, with my own concur- 
rence." 

" I can say nothing more, my lord," replied Burford. 
" Let Lord Snowdon think what he may, I am conscious 
that I have done nothing which ought to incur displeasure 
on his part, or evince ingratitude on mine. It is true I 
am bound to him by favours and obligations conferred on 
me : but to you I am equally bound by even stronger ties. 
I will go to my mother, and discuss the point with her." 

Mrs. Burford, the mother of our friend, the ci-devant 
tutor, was an extremely clever, well-informed woman. 
Her view of the case which her son submitted to her per- 
fectly coincided with his : she anticipated, in a moment, 
not only what Lord Snowdon might think of such an ar- 
rangement, but what the world would say of it ; she went 
even farther in her speculations than her son had gone, 
and looked to ultimate results at which his thoughts had 
never glanced. 

< ' My dear son," said Mrs. Burford, ' ' I think it would 
be ruinous to us all. The world would naturally say that 
we had taken advantage of a difference between the father 
and son, to secure the latter to ourselves ; and this is, in 
my mind, an objection which ought to be fatal to such a 
scheme. Lord Malvern has received a shock which is cal- 



288 THE MARQUESS. 

culated to drive him into some act of indiscretion, by which 
he may fancy he shall revenge the inconstancy and heart- 
lessness of Miss Oldham. Now don't imagine that I 
speak fondly or foolishly in what I am going to say 
Maria is, even to others' eyes, beside those of her parent, a 
most prepossessing person. She is accomplished and clever. 
If Lord Malvern continue here, he will have hourly oppor- 
tunities of seeing her in the fulfilment of all her duties, 
adding, by her talents and conversation, much to the stock 
of our general comfort and happiness. I know enough of 
the world to know with what readiness the wounded heart 
reposes itself in fancied security. Lord Malvern speaks 
highly of our little home ; he tells you that he feels happy 
and comfortable in the participation with ourselves in the 
quiet amusements of an humble family. This very admis- 
sion is one of my strongest reasons for opposing the plan. 
Habitual association renders the objects constantly with us 
at length positively necessary to our existence. Suppose 
this should occur ? imagine that Lord Malvern were to feel 
thus, with regard to your poor sister ; is it not more than 
probable that she would, without reflecting upon the differ- 
ence of their stations in life never thought of in such 
communings reciprocate the feelings which he might 
inspire ? See, Charles, what mischief we should be pre- 
paring for ourselves. If such were to be the case, and 
Lord Malvern, acting under the impulse of mingled love 
and revenge, were to marry my child, what would the 
world say, but that we had contrived the scheme had 
laid the snare, and had succeeded in carrying our point ? " 

" I see all this/' said Burford ; " you have made out a 
strong case but Maria " 

" 1 am not vain enough of her," said Mrs. Burford, 
et to attribute a power of conquest to her qualities, either 
personal or mental; but in considering her happiness, I 
see a double danger in the affair. Look on the other side 
of the picture. Lord Malvern is all that is amiable, agree- 
able, and attractive. Might not she, poor girl, fall a victim 
to feelings that never might be requited ? I am satisfied 
that she has sufficient good sense to know that a marriage 
between a child of mine and a child of Lord Snowdon's 



I 



THE MARQUESS. 289 






would be, without the violation of every tie that binds his 
family together, impossible; and her well-regulated mind 
would keep in check any feeling that " 

" My dear mother," said Burford, " you must not trust 
to that ; let us talk of something else. I see the propriety 
of your objections. Say no more. The difficulty I find, 
is in the nature of the excuse which I can make to Malvern, 
who has so completely fixed his heart upon his new plan, 
that I fear the consequences of its sudden overthrow." 

" If that is your feeling," said Mrs. Burford, " I have a 
proposition which, I think, will answer our purpose. Tell 
him that I am delighted to receive him, that I am proud 
of his preference, and that we will do all we can to make 
him comfortable. Let the arrangement continue for a few 
days. I have no tie to Paris. At the end of whatever 
period we may fix, I will receive a letter from England requir- 
ing my immediate presence in London. Maria and I will 
then take our departure, and so conclude the affair in one 
of two satisfactory ways. We shall leave him free and un- 
fettered; and if he remain with you here, my duty to him and 
my child will have been done ; and if, after our departure, 
he choose to quit Paris, you will resume your tour without 
an imputation of having aided or abetted in what nothing 
would persuade the world was not the plan ' of a worldly, 
designing parent.' " 

This female stratagem met with Burford's approval. It 
saved him from the refusal, which would have had a strange 
appearance, and might have excited some suspicions of its 
real cause in Lord Malvern's mind, while it maintained the 
honour and independence of his relations. The only part 
of the conversation with his parent which had wounded 
him, was her reference to the utter impossibility of an 
union between a child of hers, and one of Lord Snowdon's. 
Upon that point he already knew Lord Malvern's opinion, 
which in fact made the case more difficult and delicate, 
the moment his mother had drawn his attention to a point 
which had never before come under his consideration. 

The plan proposed was speedily put into execution ; and 
Burford, "doing a great right " by "doing a little wrong," 
turned to his expectant friend with his mother's message, 
u 



290 THE MARQUESS. 

which his lordship received with the most unequivocal 
expressions of gratitude and pleasure. He was still weak 
and faint, and had evidently exhausted himself by writing 
the promised letters to his father and sister. They were 
concluded: that to Lady Hester was sealed; that to Lord 
Snowdon he read to Burford, having written it in the hope 
that his proposition to his mother would be favourably re- 
ceived^ and having, in explaining his resolution to remain 
where he was, distinctly and clearly stated the determina- 
tion to have been his own, formed and persisted in, without 
the suggestion, in the first instance, and in opposition, in 
the second, to the wishes of his " friend " Burford the 
word friend being underscored, in order practically to an- 
nounce to Lord Snowdon the change which he had made 
in the relation existing between himself and his ci-devant 
tutor. 

These letters, when completed, were despatched for 
England; and with them went a third, written by the care- 
ful mother of the " friend," in which was contained the 
necessary directions for carrying on the plot of removing 
herself and her daughter from the very delicate position in 
which they had been placed by the self-invitation of her 
noble guest. 

It is necessary the reader should be taken to London 
before these letters reach it, for sundry reasons, the which 
he will be permitted to know in the course of the next 
chapter. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 



THE MARQUESS. 



291 



VOLUME THE THIRD. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

IN Grosvenor Square, things were rapidly drawing to a 
crisis. Madame Maradan Carsan had already sent home a 
great portion of the trousseau. Already had " the four 
dozen of every thing," the prescribed twelve morning 
dresses, the ordained six evening dresses, and the well- 
stored sachet, made their appearance. Acceptances of 
their invitations had been received from all the guests ; the 
"elegant travelling carriage," of which the town was soon 
to read in the Morning Post, had received the last finishing 
touch ; and the marquess himself had inspected the many- 
quartered shield, which Hobson's best of artists had painted 
and emblazoned with the greatest skill and the nicest accu- 
racy. 

Lord Snowdon had received a brief and hasty answer 
from Lord Malvern to the letter, which, as we know, 
caught him at Tours j in which the obedient son announced 
his intention of being in London as soon as possible, giving 
that as the very strongest reason for saying little else in 
writing. The days were calculated by the marquess with 
an astrological carefulness, so that his son might arrive 
just at the moment when he was surrounded by his new 
connexions; and the Oldhams, and Lord Elmsdale, to- 
gether with one or two cousins of the family, were invited 
to dinner on the particular Tuesday on which his dear 
" Malvern " was to reach home ; and then there was, of 
course, to be a scene, a little " effect." And if it had all 
happened as his lordship intended, and Lord Malvern had 
on a sudden been introduced to Elizabeth as his future 
mother-in-law, it is extremely probable that the " effect " 



292 THE MARQUESS. 

would have been much more striking than even the mar- 
quess himself anticipitated. 

This great design, however, was destined, like most of 
the noble marquess's contrivances, to fail ; for on the 
morning of this " to have been " auspicious day, arrived 
the two letters from Paris, at the sealing and despatching 
of which the reader has been present. 

To attempt a description of the consternation and rage 
of Lord Snowdon would be vain to paint the wretched- 
ness of Lady Hester equally so upon the receipt of these 
missives. Lord Malvern's address to his father was mo- 
derate and temperate, but firm and determined. He ex- 
pressed to him the same sentiments as those which he had 
avowed to Burford, announced his perfect readiness to enter 
into every arrangement calculated to secure his father's 
happiness, at the same time venturing a doubt of its attain- 
ment by the particular measure he proposed to adopt ; 
leaving the real cause of his apprehension, the previous 
attachment of Miss Oldham to himself, of course wholly 
out of sight. This part of the communication, however, 
puzzled his noble parent more than any other. His son, 
although he did not object generally to the principle of his 
second marriage, seemed to dwell with great emphasis upon 
the unfortuate circumstance of his choice of that particular 
person. 

This was a mystery to the. marquess : he could not com- 
prehend Avhy the grand- daughter of an earl, and of one of 
the most ancient families, amiable, handsome, and accom- 
plished, could be any thing but a desirable match, if the 
principle of his marrying again were once admitted. Lord 
Malvern's refusal to participate in any of the proceedings 
connected with the affair made him furious; but more 
furious was he, if possible, at his refusal to be present at 
his sister's nuptials : it would infallibly proclaim to the 
world that a difference existed in the family, that the 
Plinlimmons were subject to the frailties of humanity, and 
that their domestic felicity was not perfect. Besides, what 
had the one event to do with the other ? or why, with the 
readiness which he expressed to meet his views in every 
other way, should his son take that step, which, most of 



THE MARQUESS. 

all, must mark to society a pointed and personal dislike 
and disrespect for the particular individual of his father's 
choice ? 

Of Lord Malvern's opinion of Lord Elmsdale, Lord 
Snowdon was previously aware. He knew that he did not 
particularly like him : but nobody could dislike him suffi- 
ciently to put an indignity upon him, or treat him with 
neglect, and even contempt ; all of which the marquess 
considered his son to do by declining to sanction his union 
with his sister, and by neglecting, after having come to 
such a determination, even to write an ordinarily civil and 
congratulatory letter to him upon the occasion of his be- 
coming so nearly connected with the family. But most of 
all was the marquess angry, for that all these circumstances 
combined produced the entire discomfiture of his designs 
for the " effect " of the day, and reduced him to the pain- 
ful necessity of announcing to his connections in full divan 
the resolution*of his dutiful and obedient son (the most ex- 
emplary child upon earth except his sister) not to obey his 
father's wishes, or grace with his countenance and presence 
the consummation of the family felicity. 

Lady Hester read her brother's letter hastily and trem- 
blingly, for she dreaded the sudden appearance of her noble 
sire, and perhaps his command to show him the epistle. 
His inquiries about Elizabeth were many and minute. His 
indignation at all the circumstances connected with the 
affair was expressed in no gentle terms. He implored 
Lady Hester to write to him, and tell him all she could 
collect of Miss Oldham's real feelings and views, and her 
own genuine opinion with regard to herself and the po- 
sition in which she was placed. He entreated her to be 
candid, expressed an implied disinclination towards Lord 
Elmsdale, and requested her, if she felt as he apprehended 
she did, even at the late period which had arrived, to re- 
sist the completion of the arrangement, using to her the 
same justification for rebellion against their father as he 
had adopted in his conversation with Burford, and avowing 
it as a principle which he would vindicate and maintain at 
all hazards, that the forcing of hearts into worldly mar- 

kriages was a crime worse in its character than murder, 
u 3 



294 THE MARQUESS. 

He wrote, as may be imagined, under highly excited 
feelings ; and, irritated out of his prudence, gave utterance 
to ultra-violent sentiments, which startled the agonised 
Lady Hester, who, while she dreaded the intemperance 
which characterised his letter, felt what deadly truth his 
words conveyed. All that could console her in her hapless 
case was the fact that Burford was not to perform the ce- 
remony ; and this announcement Lord Malvern made to 
his sister in language which filled her with fear and wonder 
it was all too late for hope. 

" By my determination," wrote Lord Malvern, " my 
friend, my excellent friend, Burford, escapes the task of 
uniting you to Lord Elmsdale. With his feelings for all 
of us, a,nd with a conviction of the results of this match 
entirely agreeing with mine, what a duty it would have 
been for him to perform. If I know any thing of your 
real feelings, the circumstance would have been equally 
painful to you. As far as I am concerned, I should have 
rejoiced if that worthy, honourable fellow had occupied a 
very different position, relatively to my sister, in such a 
ceremonial. What a misfortune it is that nature is so 
seldom permitted to assert her claims ! Do not think, 
dearest Hester, that I mean to reproach you with want of 
moral courage or firmness in a just cause ; but if I under- 
stand your heart, and can judge with any fairness of your 
inclinations, you ought peremptorily to have refused the 
offer of your intended husband. This is my own unbiassed 
opinion ; for you may be sure that upon this particular 
subject I could not ask Burford's opinion, nor could he 
give one, with the hope of my allowing him any credit for 
impartiality." 

This part of her brother's letter Lady Hester read and 
re-read it seemed to her full of danger, full of mystery 
yet it sounded sweetly to her ears. Was it possible that 
Lord Malvern really was aware of her affection for Bur- 
ford ? " She had never told her love." Did he mean to 
say, that if she had refused Lord Elmsdale and succeeded 
in frustrating the match, that he would have espoused her 
cause ? or did he go the length of encouraging her to hope 
that, if she had been sufficiently resolute in that particular, 



THE MARQUESS. 2Q5 

he would have justified and protected her in marrying the 
last man on earth with whom his father would have sanc- 
tioned her union ? 

That he was aware of the circumstances in which she 
was placed seemed certain ; and yet, where was the use, 
where the advantage of speculating upon such visionary 
fancies ? In a few days more, she would be Lady Elms- 
dale. Yes, before it was possible for Alfred to receive her 
letter, and return an answer. Why had he touched upon 
the subject then ? Why had he not alluded to it earlier ? 
We know why he had not, because we know the period at 
which he first became acquainted with Burford's senti- 
ments. She, poor soul,, did not. And it is scarcely pos- 
sible to describe the state of mind into which she was 
thrown, by what almost appeared the cruelty of her devoted 
brother. 

Lady Hester felt, however, that she had a duty to per- 
form which must be done immediately. She resolved, 
therefore, to exclude all visiters, until she had answered 
the letter which had so dreadfully excited and so seriously 
agitated her. This answer shall presently be submitted to 
the reader, as conveying an accurate and authentic state 
of the family circle on the eve of the two events, which 
were destined to increase its sphere and shake it to its 
centre. 

Meanwhile, Lord Snowdon, after considering and cogi- 
tating, for a long time, as to the best method of concealing 
his anger and disappointment, decided upon the course he 
should pursue. It so happened, that he never inquired 
whether Lady Hester had received any letter from her 
brother, and that it never struck him as probable that she 
had. The junior branches of his house as the under- 
bred misses of the suburban boarding-schools are taught 
never to speak till they are spoken to, or permitted to ask 
for what they want till they are asked to have it were 
trained to silent obedience : so that as it did not occur to 
Lord Snowdon that his son had written to any body except 
himself, he made no inquiry ; and upon the principle of 
the establishment, when Lady Hester met her father, she, 
of course, did not mention the circumstance to him, gladly 
u 4 



296 THE MARQUESS. 

availing herself of his silence to keep to herself a commu- 
nication, which, if he had desired to see it, she could not 
have refused to show him, and which, if he had seen it, 
would have set the smouldering embers of his passion into 
a blaze. 

As it was, Lady Hester's surprise and pleasure if 
pleasure she could just then feel at any thing were by 
no means small, when she perceived her magnificent parent 
stalk into the drawing-room, with an air of graceful tran- 
quillity and unruffled dignity. No mark of anger or dis- 
appointment was on his brow. All seemed smooth and 
calm. She yet dreaded that the appearance might be de- 
ceitful if it were so, the plating was extremely thick, for 
he entered into general conversation about the nothings of 
the day with his daughter and Miss Everingham, and con- 
cluded the interview, by a simple inquiry at what time 
Lady Hester had ordered the carriage. 

It was after this to Lady Hester astonishing scene, 
that she concluded and despatched her letter to Paris. Lord 
Snowdon had written also. But he had a friend in the 
Foreign Office, and as he did not at all dislike being seen 
in the neighbourhood of that admirably conducted depart- 
ment, he ordered his carriage, drove to the door, visited 
his friend, a " convenient" subordinate, and remained to 
waste at least half an hour of the public time, in a com- 
mon-place dialogue with the highly honoured functionary, 
merely for the chance of having it announced by the Court 
Newsman in the next day's paper, that " yesterday the 
Marquess of Snowdon transacted business at the Foreign 
Office." Half the official visits so recorded have their 
origin in matters of about as much importance. 

Lady Hester's despatch went by the ordinary post, arid 
was thus written : 

" Grosvenor Square, 

" DEAREST MALVERN, 

IC What I am to say in answer to your long and 
deeply-interesting letter, I know not I have so much 
to tell you, and so little time or space for explana- 
tions. I can entirely enter into your feelings about 



THE MARQUESS. 297 

Elizabeth. Your astonishment at the intelligence I can 
easily imagine it is altogether a dreadful affair, and I am 
sure, and so is Anne, must end ill. I speak now really 
and truly without any of that prejudice, which you may 
very naturally suppose I might have against such a mar- 
riage. But I must tell you, that the very cause of our 
apprehensions for my father's happiness ought to relieve 
you of those regrets, which the sudden disappointment 
of your hopes about Elizabeth might otherwise have caused 
you. 

e ' I have had several conversations with her if con- 
versations they may be called in which, not by her con- 
fessions, not even by her words, but by her manner, and 
the general tenor of her conduct, I have convinced myself, 
that the pleasure she appeared to feel in your society was 
all assumed. She was then too young to play a part 
without entering into something like its real feeling, but 
the last few months have strongly and strangely developed 
her character and matured her principles, if principles 
they may be called. 

" To her advancement in life, or to mine, I must attri- 
bute the entire alteration of my views and opinions con- 
cerning her: either she was too young then to be so 
heartless as she is now, or I was too young to perceive her 
faults. I have spoken to her of you a somewhat delicate 
subject as I felt it ; but her replies convinced me that I had 
nothing to fear in alluding to the subject, and that she 
either never felt that regard for you, which her apparently 
artless and affectionate manner induced us to think she 
did, or that something has occurred to obliterate the recol- 
lection of those days, and induce her voluntarily to enter 
our house in a very different position from that which she 
had, at that period, assigned her. 

" She has lived latterly much with foreigners : her air 
and manner are bold and forward; she talks fast and 
loudly, even to my father, whom she has begun to call 
1 Dear.' Of her influence over him and its extent, you 
will best judge by knowing that he not only endures 
this gentle familiarity, but evidently is pleased with it. It 
must be a very powerful feeling of devotion on his part, 



298 THE MARQUESS. 

which could induce him to bear so rapid a stride towards 
equality in the daughter, combined with the incessant non- 
sensical jargon of the mother, who, to me, is of all odious 
people in the world the most detestable. 

" They have in their family a pet man a Mr. Frederick 
Richardson, whom they think perfection. He is constantly 
deferred to, upon every occasion ; and being quartered at 
Hampton Court, finds their house at Richmond an agree- 
able sejour when he is not engaged by duty. I think papa 
hates him. He began by being extremely courteous to 
him ; but Mr. Richardson mistook his condescension for 
good fellowship, and begins now to play with the lion ; I 
am quite sure that some day he will get a pat which he 
will remember for the rest of his life. He is extremely 
forward, and I think vulgar ; he calls Elizabeth by her 
Christian name, and pooh poohs Lady Katharine with the 
most unqualified impudence. In fact, I see nothing but 
misery for my poor father in the connection ; but, as far 
as you are concerned, I see and since the misery must be 
inflicted malgre nous, it is a great consolation that your 
happiness with such a girl as she has become would have 
been equally problematical ; therefore, dear Malvern, accept 
the only balm I can afford, if it be balm to a heart that 
once has loved, to find it had been betrayed. 

" You will expect me to say something of myself. Had 
you been in England I might have ventured upon the re- 
fusal you now too late advise ; and yet, to have lived under 
the ban of a father's curse and it would inevitably have 
fallen on me I could not endure. I dare not at this 
period permit myself to answer that part of your letter 
which relates to Lord Elmsdale. In a few days he will be 
my husband ; and, by the blessing of that Providence upon 
which I have from my earliest youth implicitly relied, 1 
will be the obedient, dutiful, and affectionate wife, that I 
shall solemnly pledge myself to be. I must seem an un- 
grateful girl even in making this profession ; for when I 
examine my heart, I can find no fault with Elmsdale : 
every body speaks well of him ; he is amiable, and, as far 
as I know, good would that he had made choice of some 
one who could better appreciate his estimable qualities. I 



THE MARQUESS. 299 

certainly hoped, in marriage, for something more congenial 
with my own disposition but, dearest Malvern, trust 
your devoted sister she will fulfil her duty faithfully, and 
time may ripen esteem and gratitude into a warmer 
feeling. 

" You speak of Mr. Burford's escape from the perform- 
ance of the marriage ceremony as very agreeable to him ; 
to me the substitution of any other clergyman is a most 
important relief, because he is associated in my mind with 
yourself so intimately connected in my recollection with 
all those scenes, which, least of all, I should wish to be re- 
called to my memory at the awful moment which must 
now so shortly arrive ; that it would indeed have added, 
painfully and considerably, to the difficulty of my position, 
in a degree that I cannot describe even to you. Make my 
best, my kindest remembrances to him, as your friend. I 
noticed the emphasis, and rejoiced to see it. As your friend, 
he must always be dear to me ; and although, after a few 
short days have passed, I may not honourably avow an 
interest for any, but one, I am yet free to assure him of 
my constant regard, and a recollection, through life, of the 
kindness and attention I have ever received from him, and 
of that care and friendship for you, which I so thankfully 
feel and you so justly appreciate. 

" I was waiting to close this, until I had seen my father, 
and heard his opinion and determination upon your letter. 
He has been in the drawing-room with Anne and myself, 
has talked on ordinary subjects, but never uttered one syl- 
lable either about you or your communication. How he 
means to act of course I cannot imagine. A great family 
party is invited here, to-day, to meet and receive you, and 
I am most anxious to know what he will do. It has been 
a great relief to me that he never inquired whether I had 
heard from you ; nor do I know whether you wrote to 
Elmsdale he expected that you would have done so : I 
cannot say I did if I can write before the day I will. 

" You of course have heard of the failure of our fete at 
Lionsden it was a signal discomfiture. But it is very 
curious I hear that my father has been a good deal en- 
gaged in politics since our return to town of course not 



300 THE MARQUESS. 

a word from himself ; but Lady Ticehurst one of the 
cleverest and most agreeable women I ever met with, and 
who knows more of what is going on than any body in 
London tells me, that he has actually got the promise of 
the governor-generalship of India. Do not for the world 
allude to this in any way it may not be true ; but he 
has dined with the minister since our arrival in London, 
and I have seen two or three official men at dinner here, 
whose faces I never saw in our house before. If it should 
be so, Elizabeth will become an oriental queen ; which I 
think is as likely to turn such a head as hers, as any thing 
one can well imagine. 

" Think of me, pray for me, dearest Malvern : to have 
had you here would have been a great comfort and yet 

no I am sure it is best as it is. I am able to mo- 
derate my feelings of disinclination to this marriage, by the 
recollection of what is so soon to succeed it, in the family 
arrangements ; to have Elizabeth, Oldham as she is, Mar- 
chioness of Snowdon, would be unbearable. Poor Anne 
Everingham is more wretched than any body else at her 
approaching elevation. Anne never, till the present mo- 
ment, entirely relinquished the idea that she had a powerful 
interest with the marquess, and sometimes, as I fancy, 
entertained a distant idea of becoming my mother-in-law 
herself. She knows no bounds in declaiming against the 
intended marchioness, and denounces her as the most in- 
veterate flirt, and detestable coquet ; and to see the expres- 
sion of her countenance when Elizabeth calls papa ' Dear/ 
would make any body even more wretched than myself 
smile through her grief. 

" Once more, adieu, dear Malvern ; remember I write 
in great haste in great fear in great grief and in 
the strictest confidence. Let me know of your speedy re- 
covery let me at least hear that you are well and happy ; 

cast away all thought of the heartless conqueror of your 
young heart, and seek for some object worthy of you : if 
you doubt, be guided by Mr. Burford's taste and judgment, 
and you cannot do wrong. Farewell farewell. 

" Affectionately yours, 

" HESTER PLINLIMMON." 



THE MARQUESS. 301 

This letter, sealed, addressed, and despatched, the fair 
writer felt her mind greatly relieved. She dare not read 
what she had written. The part which referred to Bur- 
ford terrified her ; she could not bear to pass over his 
much-loved name in utter silence she could not endure 
eternally to sever the tie which bound her to him, without 
one word of ' ' adieu : " and yet she feared that she had 
permitted herself to express her feelings more warmly than 
was consistent with her present character. Should she re- 
read it ? should she re-write it ? No let it go it 
was the genuine outpouring of a warm and affectionate 
heart, whose impulses she could safely trust, while under 
the control of a pious and well-regulated mind : it was all 
over the pang was ended, and Burford was no longer 
any thing to her.j 

It was not until dinner-time that Lady Hester again 
saw the marquess. Lord Elmsdale had been smiling 
gently, and whispering pretty platitudes for an hour before 
dinner ; and had even gone the length of trying a pair of 
bracelets on Lady Hester's arms, which she had chosen 
from a brilliant recueil placed before her by the jeweller. 
The ring too was selected that ring, which was to bind 
her to her lord and master through life : it seemed all 
like a dreadful dream ; but it continued, and Lady Hester 
awakened not from it. 

The party assembled the dinner proceeded, and still 
the marquess said not a word about his son, until the ladies 
were on the point of retiring. The conversation had con- 
tinued with its wonted restraint, and no mention had been 
made of Lord Malvern, much to the astonishment of Lady 
Hester, who began to think that her father had not received 
the letter which her brother told her he had sent. The 
truth is, that the marquess had determined to treat his son's 
absence as a matter of no importance ; and although he 
knew it would be necessary, because it would seem natural, 
to touch upon the subject before the party separated, it re- 
quired time, wine, and preparation, to work him up, or 
perhaps down, into a placidity which he considered it right 
to assume, in speaking of a point on which he had received 
so sharp and deep a wound at length the effort was made. 



302 THE MARQUESS. 

" I am sorry, Elmsdale," said the marquess, that poor 
Malvern is unable to come to us." 

" Indeed ! " said his lordship ; " ill ? " 

C( Exactly so," said Lord Snowdon ; " he has had some 
attack at Paris on his way hither from Tours, and his 
medical people positively interdict his moving." 

Lady Hester looked at her father as he told this decided 
untruth, and thought she never beheld his high-mightiness 
look so exceedingly small. 

" I did not like to mention this before dinner/' con- 
tinued the marquess : ' ' his illness, he writes me word, is not 
serious ; but from what his doctor says, I should not think 
he will recover sufficiently to travel for some time." 

As his lordship was " in for it," he fancied he might as 
well increase the imaginary sickness of his son to a sufficient 
degree, to render his absence from the second marriage in 
the family no more remarkable to the " world," than his 
non-appearance at the first. 

" It is a sad blow upon you, Hester, dear, I know," said 
the marquess ; " he desires his affectionate love to you 
his best regards to you, Lord Elmsdale ; and many of the 
same sort of remembrances he sends to you, Lady Katha- 
rine, and to you Elizabeth." 

Lady Hester was astounded ; she could not help ex- 
changing a look with Anne, which, if it had been detected 
by the " illustrious," would have betrayed to his keen and 
acute mind that he had been " found out" by his fa- 
vourite child and her favourite friend ; luckily, however, 
the last part of his speech was addressed to his intended 
wife, who sat on his right hand, and he did not see the 
telegraphing which was going on at the other end of the 
table. 

" Dear, dear," said Lady Katharine, " I hope nothing 
serious is the matter with him I have no great faith in 
French doctors : the only one I ever knew personally was 
a Doctor Laballe, he was a cousin of one of the Mont- 
morencis, a very great creature in his time. By the way, 
that Miss Dancer, who afterwards married the man who did 
something particular in Ireland I recollect her father was 
a banker ; he was in parliament once and was poor dear 



THE MARQUESS. 



SOS 



[r. Oldham's colleague : they were returned together in 
position to Lord Drumbuggle's interest, which interest, 
>y the way, he secured, by marrying Miss Polsden, who 
was the " 

" Hester, dear " said the marquess, having, for a 

minute at least, endeavoured to catch her eye. 

The words, and the tone in which they were uttered, 
announced to Lady Hester that her hour was come, and 
that she must go ; for Lady Katharine's tirades had now 
become unbearable to Lord Showdon ; and with all his 
grace and dignity he did not consider it necessary to con- 
ceal how much they " bored" him by any thing like atten- 
tion to them ; on the contrary, if it were possible, he took 
the most decisive steps for either cutting them short, or 
avoiding them altogether. 

As Lady Katharine upon the present occasion was not 
first in rank, and the hint of Lord Snowdon to his daughter 
was overheard by the lady who actually was placed in that 
position, the party was abruptly dissolved, just as the 
pedigree of the Polsdens was commenced. Lady Katha- 
rine, however, was not to be beaten so easily ; and as the 
ladies passed away from the dinner-room, she might have 
been heard explaining why French physicians were not 
to be trusted, until her breath was exhausted, and her his- 
tory terminated just at the drawing-room door by an eulogy 
upon Taglioni's dancing, and her ladyship's wonderment at 
the construction of the Thames Tunnel. 

" One change," said Lord Snowdon to Lord Elmsdale 
after the ladies were gone, ff must be made in our pro- 
ceedings in consequence of poor Malvern's illness : we are 
deprived of my chaplain's services he cannot spare him. 
Mr. Burford is a good creature, and has made himself so 
useful and essential to my son, that at such a period it 
would be cruel, to deprive him of his society. It is a sad 
thing upon that person himself, for of course it would have 
been a most agreeable and gratifying thing to him, to have 
had so important a share in securing Hester's happiness ; 
however, I would not hear of it; and I have written to 
the Bishop of Dorchester, who had previously volunteered 



304 THE MARQUESS. 

his services, and who is an old friend of Hester's, and will, 
of course, as I have written to him, officiate." 

" Good/' said Lord Elmsdale, and sipped his wine. 

" I think, upon the whole, it may look better," said the 
marquess, " having a bishop." 

" Yes," answered the son-in-law, who three days before 
had said yes to exactly the opposite proposition. 

" I have desired them," continued the marquess, " to 
order horses for you down the road, and I trust you will 
find every thing comfortable at the castle." 

" Umph," said Lord Elmsdale, looking very much 
obliged. 

Lord Elsmdale said nothing more ; and the other two 
guests who had whispered a little conversation to each 
other, looked sufficiently uncomfortable to justify the mar- 
quess in proposing to go to coffee, and the party forthwith 
measured their course towards the ladies, none of whom 
appeared in better spirits, nor more inclined to sociability 
than the new arrivals from below had been before. Lady 
Hester felt herself degraded by the detection of her father's 
evident disregard for truth, and worried at the concealment 
of the real cause of Lord Malvern's absence. She watched 
the countenance of Miss Oldham when his name was men- 
tioned, and saw no symptom of the slightest care or recol- 
lection of him. In the then temper of her mind, it was 
impossible for her to associate with her future mother-in- 
law without restraint; while Lady Katharine, attributing 
the evident coldness of Lady Hester to a feeling of dislike 
of the intended connexion, took every opportunity of set- 
ting her own dear Elizabeth up as the standard of perfec- 
tion, corroborating all her highest flights of praise, by citing 
Mr. Frederick Richardson as an unquestionable authority in 
favour of her daughter's excellence. 

This, which had something of the bathos in it, and 
seemed not very dissimilar to the needless absurdity which 
the infallible pope commits by confessing his own sins to 
his own little dirty-faced, ragged-tailed fallible priest 
having the omnipotent power of universal forgiveness in 
his own hands more provoked Lady Hester than any 
thing else in the whole affair. That a dandy of the fourth 






THE MARQUESS. 305 



class, at the highest, should be perpetually brought forward 
and held up as the arbiter upon all discussable points in the 
family, seemed not only so foolish but so indelicate, that if 
her own sorrows had not almost entirely occupied her mind, 
it would have required the full exertion of all her gentleness 
and philosophy, to keep her from expressing her opinion 
of a line of conduct upon which two opinions could not in 
fact exist. 

From the evening now alluded to, till the wedding-day, 
a very short period would intervene ; still, near as the 
event was, it seemed to Lady Hester's mind impossible 
that it should occur : it seemed impossible that in a very 
few days more, she should be united for life to the man 
whom she saw standing listening to her father's declama- 
tion upon politics, apparently neither feeling nor under- 
standing the point or object of his eloquence, taking no 
share in the discussion, nor indeed interest in any thing ; 
that for the rest of her natural life she was to be his com- 
panion in sickness and in health, to love, honour, and obey 
him. It seemed as if it were all an imposition, a deceit, a 
vision. When she retired to her dressing-room, and 
found there the splendid evidence of preparation for the 
ceremony, which was so soon to unite them eternally, a 
pang struck to her heart she sickened at the sight, and 
when, after grasping in her trembling hands the ornaments 
destined to adorn her person on the fatal morning of her 
wretched marriage, she threw them from her her eyes 
filled with tears, and she sank upon her couch in an agony 
of grief. 

The culprit destined to die feels how swiftly those 
hours fly which precede his execution ; his courage ex- 
erted, his nerves braced, and his mind made up, he meets 
the blow with fortitude, and ends the horrid night by 
dying. But she who lingers through the same space of 
time, and hears at length the merry peal of mirth sum- 
moning her to church, instead of the tolling bell announc- 
ing the approach of death, has no such termination to her 
pangs in view. She commences a new life after the death- 
blow of her hopes has fallen ; years of prospective misery 
r before her of misery heightened by the sad reflec- 



306 THE MARQUESS. 

tion of what she has lost and she kneels before her 
Maker, and registers an oath to fulfil all the most import- 
ant duties of her existence, in acknowledged opposition to 
the strongest passions and the warmest feelings of her 
nature. 

This was the prospect before poor Lady Hester, to this 
was she driven by the fear of a father, who loved her as 
much as he could love any thing beside himself; a fear 
founded on the knowledge of his imperious disposition, 
his unmidgable pride, and his personal vanity, which she 
too well knew would induce him to denounce irrevocably 
any human being, who might act either as principal or 
accessory, in any measure calculated to unsettle what he 
had previously arranged, or alter or qualify what he had 
before decided upon. 

If Lord Snowdon could have believed that his daughter 
was destined to be unhappy for life, because she married 
Lord Elmsdale, the chances were considerably in favour of 
his not forcing her inclinations; but his vanity of an 
imaginary superiority of intellect always led him to believe 
that he, of himself, knew better what was calculated to 
make the happiness of others than they themselves. His 
view of the case was, that Lady Hester, even at her time 
of life and under her circumstances, however superior to 
every body else of her age, or standing in society, was 
incapable of judging what was necessary to secure her 
comfort through life. He knew the excellence of Lord 
Elmsdale's character, the extent of his fortune, the value 
of his influence, and the importance of his connexions. 
As for the man the individual man, so long as he had 
the necessary number of legs and arms, and eyes and ears, 
to pass muster with his fellow-creatures, his lordship did 
not pause to inquire whether he, the man of himself, was 
personally agreeable to his daughter. And certainly, if he 
had been much interested in that part of the subject, he 
would have had plenty of opportunities of forming the 
opinion that he was not. He believed he had secured her 
happiness ; and having so made up his mind, all the rest 
was to be left to fate, and his will and pleasure were to be 
executed without either question or discussion. 



THE MARQUESS. 307 

The train of evils which a refusal of this cc suitable 
offer" would have brought with it had therefore driven 
the unfortunate bride into her present position. She was 
sure, as she had all along felt, that resistance to her father's 
command would produce a rigid examination by him of 
the actual state of her heart. Her acknowledgment would 
have been the double ruin of her happiness,, and of that of 
the real object of her affections. In his anger, Lord 
Snowdon would have set no limits to his revenge for the 
indignity offered to his house and family, by the subor- 
dinate acceptor of his kindness, the smooth-tongued crea- 
ture of his bounty; and the result would have been, that 
instead of one broken heart there would have been two, 
and poor Lady Hester would have lingered in the world, 
conscious of having rendered miserable for life the being 
for whom, of all created beings, she felt the tenderest 
regard. 

The whole of the next two or three days the marquess 
was occupied in arranging the proceedings of the wedding. 
Town was still, empty it would look extremely well to 
have a good attendance. At length, puzzled how to put 
the affair as it ought to be, he went the length of writing, 
with his own proper hand, a prospective account of the 
proceedings. Strange as it may seem, his elastic mind, 
like the trunk of the elephant, could break down oaks or 
pick up pins ; and accordingly, before dinner on the 
Sunday, he had concocted the following history, which, 
not choosing to trust any body in his establishment with 
the fact of his authorship, he copied four several times ; 
and having enclosed those copies in covers, addressed them 
to the Morning Post, the Times, the Chronicle, and the 
Herald, slipped them, unseen by mortal eye, into the box 
of the two-penny post-office at the corner of Albemarle 
Street, as he condescendingly walked home from Brookes's, 
on the night preceding the ceremonial so minutely detailed. 

The literary trifle, which entitles his lordship to a place 
amongst our ," noble authors," ran as follows : 

" MARRIAGE IN HIGH LIFE. 

" Yesterday morning was married at St. George's, Han- 
x 2 



308 THE MARQUESS. 

over Square, by special licence, the Right Hon. the Earl of 
Elmsdale, to the Right Hon. Lady Hester Plinlimmon., 
the lovely daughter of the Most Noble the Marquess of 
Snowdon. 

" The ceremony was performed by the Lord Bishop of 
Dorchester, who arrived in town from his episcopal palace 
for the purpose. 

(C There were present the Duke and Duchess of StLeo- 
nard's, and Lady Anne Pennyfather; the Earl and Countess 
of Hungerford ; the Earl and Countess of Haversham ; 
Lord and Lady Warrington ; Lord Sillyman : Lord and 
Lady Roughshod, and the Hon. Miss Clapper; Lady 
Katharine, and Miss Oldham ; Sir George and Lady 
Chimneypot; Colonel and Lady Elizabeth Windmill; Sir 
Francis Macgrizzle, Mr. Toadman, Mr. Frederick Rich- 
ardson, Mr. Dancer; Count Cockadolgey, Baron Von 
Snuffenburg, and several others of the foreign ministers. 

" Immediately after the marriage, the party proceeded 
to Grosvenor Square, where numerous other guests were 
waiting its arrival, and the company sat down at one 
o'clock, to a dejeune-a-la-fourchette, comprising all the 
delicacies of the season, the whole of which was served 
upon the magnificent service of gold plate, used on the 
occasion of the late royal visit to Lionsden Castle. 

" The bride, who appeared in excellent health and 
spirits, was dressed in magnificent Valenciennes lace, and 
looked extremely handsome. At about two, the new 
married couple, having previously changed their costume, 
left town for Lionsden, in a new and elegant travelling- 
carriage, drawn by four horses belonging to the celebrated 
stud of the noble bridegroom. 

<f The company, amounting to upwards of forty, then 
separated." 

The realisation of all this programme was now indeed 
near at hand ; and on Sunday, after a day as unlike in all 
its circumstances to that which the " day before the 
wedding" might be supposed to be, poor Lady Hester 
retired to her room to seek her pillow, as Moore says, 

*' The last time she e'er was to press it alone." 



THE MARQUESS. 309 

Miss Everingliam wished to stay with her, and talk 
over the embarrassing peculiarities of her situation ; but 
Lady Hester declined her society much as she valued it : 
she had made up her mind all discussion was useless 
all resistance now would be out of the question and like 
one devoted, she preferred to pass the waking hours of the 
night in prayer and preparation, for what the world was to 
believe the happy ceremony of the following morning. 

The day dawned and grew, and Lady Hester's maid 
came to her, and the ordinary routine of the toilet began. 
Miss Everingham visited her unhappy friend before she 
had finished dressing, and a brief conversation ensued, 
which, whatever the details might have been, was ill-cal- 
culated to assuage or fortify the feelings of the reluctant 
bride. The increasing noise and hurry amongst the esta- 
blishment proclaimed the already begun arrivals of some 
of the invited guests ; and in a few minutes, the marquess 
himself was at the door of her dressing-room, to know if 
he could speak to her. 

Hester admitted him, and he kissed the cold forehead of 
his miserable daughter. 

" My dear child," said his lordship, " 1 could not per- 
mit you to see our friends, until I had begged you to 
accept, as a mark of a father's affection and esteem, this 
little cadeau," placing in her hand a beautiful set of 
pearls. " Elmsdale had the first claim to present you 
with marriage gifts ; it is reserved for me to entreat you 
sometimes to wear these, and think of a parent, whose hap- 
piness is so deeply involved in that of his child." 

Lady Hester could make no reply. To think that the 
father who expressed and sincerely too such feelings 
towards his daughter, should in the very hour of his utter- 
ing them, expect her to consummate the act, which eter- 
nally and irrevocably insured her misery: it seemed 
almost as if she were compromising her dignity, and con- 
firming her own hypocrisy, in accepting the trinkets j and 
she was on the point of seizing that last opportunity of 
throwing herself at her father's feet, and confessing the 
whole truth; when the habitual fear which was predo- 
inant in all her serious intercourse with the marquess 
x 3 



310 THE 3IARQUESS. 

triumphed she accepted the pearls, and promised to be 
punctual to the time appointed for the movement of the 
procession to church. 

From this period to that at which she left the house of 
her father, Lady Hester moved and acted as if she were in 
a trance : her forehead burned, her hands were icy cold, 
an aching pain seemed fixed in her heart, and all she did, 
she did mechanically and almost unconsciously. She was 
told that all was ready her father came to lead her down 
stairs the crowd had gathered in the street the car- 
riages were drawn up to the door. Eleven equipages in 
line at that period of the year created a very considerable 
sensation ; and as the marquess stepped into Lord Elms- 
dale's town chariot, he felt greatly pleased at perceiving 
amongst the assembled throng many of his own tradesmen 
and their families, gaily dressed, looking anxiously at the 
proceedings, and joining in the murmur of approbation 
which gave evidence of their opinion of the beauty and 
elegance of the wretched heroine of the day. 

They reached the church, and entered it by the Maddox 
Street door, and the assembled party were placed in their 
proper positions within the sacred building ; but there ap- 
peared no clergyman to perform the ceremony. The mar- 
quess had announced that the Bishop of Dorchester would 
officiate, but his lordship had not arrived : a message was 
despatched to his town-house ; the servants there had 
heard nothing of his lordship. Something it was necessary 
to do to obviate the consequence of this painful and un- 
looked-for disappointment ; and, after three quarters of an 
hour, a young gentleman, who had just taken orders (and 
who was luckily caught by the clerk), proceeded to make 
his debut in the clerical character, by performing the cere- 
mony. 

The said poor young gentleman, under the tuition of 
the said clerk, after having started by reading the be- 
ginning of the ceremony for ' c the baptism of those of riper 
years," (a mistake, which tended very much to divest the 
solemnity of its solemn character, and to cause sundry 
smiles to play over the countenances of all the company, 
except those of the marquess and his daughter,) commenced 



THE MARQUESS. 311 

the office of matrimony. As for his lordship, the failure 
of the bishop was too serious a calamity, as far as effect 
went, for him to recover from very soon; and this de- 
fection was made more painful, by the striking contrast to 
the dignity of the prelate, which the inexperience of the 
curate so ludicrously exhibited. However, the ceremony 
went on in earnest. Lady Hester trembled like a leaf 
her sobs interrupted the diffident minister, and excited the 
most serious apprehensions on the part of Miss Evering- 
ham, who was near her. She bore up, however, against the 
torrent of feeling which nearly overwhelmed her, until the 
question was put to her, " whether she would have that 
man to be her wedded husband ? " 

It seemed as if the reply would have choked her she 
struggled to pronounce it the convulsive effort failed 
her and, uttering a piercing shriek, which made the 
vaulted roof reverberate, she sank, apparently dead, on the 
floor of the church. 

The consternation caused by this extraordinary event 
may be more easily imagined than described ; the young 
clergyman, who, as we know, had never before officiated 
upon a similar occasion, seemed doubtful whether, in good 
society, such a scene was considered an essential part of the 
exhibition. Those who had themselves submitted to the 
operation, knew better ; and in an instant the senseless girl 
was lifted from the earth and borne to the vestry-room, 
where the usual restoratives were administered, but without 
producing the desired effect. What was to be done ? they 
were in the midst of medical advice ; assistance was called 
in ; but all hope of her being competent to conclude 'the 
ceremony at that time was very 'speedily abandoned. At one 
moment she had so far recovered as to be conscious where 
she was ; but, to the horror of the whole party, and of the 
awkwardly situated bridegroom in particular, the moment 
he approached to offer a little of his harmless consolation, 
she repeated the shriek she had before given, and hiding her 
face with her hands, relapsed into utter insensibility. 

The marquess was now " fooled to the top of his bent." 
The extent of his agony and vexation, first at the unex- 
pected frustration of all his hopes at the serious effect 
x 4 



312 THE MARQUESS. 

produced upon his child at the painful dilemma in which 
Lord Elmsdale was placed but most of all at the absurd 
appearance the whole affair would have with the town, is 
as indescribable as it was incalculable. 

The earliest alarm of the catastrophe was given to the 
mob, by the hurried rush out of the beadle to fetch a phy- 
sician. The cause was soon known ; and this practical 
announcement of the failure in the first instance of com- 
pleting the union of the parties was very shortly after 
confirmed with the additional certainty that they would 
not be married that day, by the sudden exit of the young 
curate from the vestry-room door, who, seeing no proba- 
bility of ultimate success in the then present proceedings, 
set off as hard as he could to fulfil an engagement which 
he had entered into, to make his first appearance that day 
in the funeral line, by burying a baby at Bayswater at 
half after one. 

Lady Hester did not rally sufficiently to be removed for 
nearly an hour. She was then placed in the carriage be- 
tween Miss Everingham and the Duchess of St. Leonard's, 
and conveyed slowly to Grosvenor Square, all the visiters 
present at the intended marriage, except the Oldhams and 
Cornet Richardson, betaking themselves to their respective 
homes, to the right and to the left : Lord Snowdon and his 
intended son-in-law proceeding in his carriage to the home 
of his beloved. 

In the drawing-room were assembled those who had been 
invited to the dejeuner, and not to the wedding. Happy, 
hungry souls, they had been waiting an hour longer than 
they had calculated upon, and were prepared to congratu- 
late and feast in the most unsparing manner. This Lord 
Snowdon did not so much care for : there they were, and 
they might go or stay, exactly as they chose ; but he did 
turn nearly sick, when he saw the new and elegant travelling 
carriage, which was to have been drawn by " four beautiful 
horses belonging to the celebrated stud of Lord Elmsdale," 
standing at the door of his mansion with four posters 
sent by mistake from the stables by Lord Elmsdale's ser- 
vants and a crowd of people admiring and wondering at 
the beauty and neatness of the vehicle, destined, as his 



THE MARQUESS. 



313 



lordship knew, to be drawn back to the coach-house empty 
and unoccupied. 

Poor Lady Hester was conveyed to her room, and 
eventually placed in bed, when it was pronounced, not only 
by the physician whom the beadle had selected, but by Sir 
Henry himself, who had been immediately afterwards sent 
for, that the case was one of extreme delicacy ; both joining 
in a conviction of the absolute necessity of perfect quietude. 
Miss Everingham, whose affection for her friend was now 
proved by the earnestness of her assiduities and the entirety 
of her devotion, took charge of her, and received the warm- 
est acknowledgments from the marquess, whose state of 
mind did not permit him to decide upon the course he 
should ultimately pursue, but who was satisfied on one 
point, that his ill-fated daughter was not married as he had 
intended her to be a failure in his design, rendered the 
more uncomfortable by the recollection of the little histo- 
riettes of the proceedings which he had so anxiously fur- 
nished for the daily newspapers, not one of which he could 
either recover or explain away, without betraying himself 
to the gentlemen of the press, in having volunteered his 
labours as an amateur court newsman ; every circumstance 
detailed in his authentic communications having been so 
totally unlike the events which had actually occurred, that 
if his account should be inserted, public attention would, 
of course, be specially directed to the real facts, by the ab- 
solute necessity which the veracious editors would be under, 
of contradicting what turned out, by a succession of mis- 
haps, to be neither more nor less a than a tissue of false- 
hoods. 

Most of the party took leave the moment the extremely 
disagreeable disappointment was explained to them. The 
marquess was glad to be rid of them, as of course was Lord 
Elmsdale, who remained behind to be managed and soothed 
by his noble father-in-law ; yet, in the heart of the illus- 
trious master of the mansion, there rankled some regrets, 
that all the magnificent preparations for the banquet had 
been made in vain, and that the splendid gold service, 
" used on the occasion of the royal visit to Lionsden," had 
not been seen ; nor was his serenity of mind much better 



314 THE MARQUESS. 

secured, when, on pushing open the door of the dinner- 
room where the dejeuner was laid, in order to cast one 
lingering, longing look at the taste and elegance of its 
arrangement, he beheld, although every other individual 
except Lord Elmsdale, who was up stairs, had departed, 
Lady Katharine and Miss Elizabeth Oldham exhibiting 
countenances expressive of neither pain nor sorrow, seated 
at the upper end of the table, demolishing, with the most 
healthful appetites the delicacies spread before them, in 
which pursuit they were zealously assisted by Mr. Frede- 
rick Richardson, and a Mr. Losh, a friend of his, whom he 
had " taken the liberty" of bringing with him to the wed- 
ding banquet. 

The marquess looked in, saw the group, and hastily 
closing the door, proceeded to the library, in order to have, 
what he had no doubt must be a very important convers- 
ation with the disappointed Lord Elmsdale. 



CHAPTER IX. 

WE must now recur to France The letter of poor Lady 

Hester, which she had intended to soothe the feelings of 
her brother, and heal the wounds which she perhaps might 
be conscious she had inflicted on the heart of his com- 
panion, did, as it unfortunately turned out, produce a per- 
fectly contrary effect. In all that she had said to Lord 
Malvern, she had satisfied him that she went with sorrow 
and reluctance to the altar ; and what she had said with 
respect to his companion, convinced him that he was the 
object upon whom her affections were fixed. 

In health, Lord Malvern was by no means strong or 
well. The shock he had received from the suddenness of 
the intelligence of his father's marriage had seriously 
affected him; and the enlightenment which he had ob- 
tained from Lady Hester as to the alteration is Miss Old- 
ham's manner, and even character,'however much it might 
reconcile him mentally to the circumstance, did not succeed 



THE MARQUESS. 315 

in removing the bodily ills which the surprise had in the 
first instance produced. 

In the state of listless indolence to which Lord Malvern 
had been so suddenly reduced, it grieved Burford very 
much to see that the apprehensions of his talented mother, 
with respect to the possibility of his being caught by her 
daughter, were not so entirely groundless as he had at first 
imagined them to be. Of course he could make no re- 
mark to his sister, no observation to his parent ; but it 
was impossible not to notice that Lord Malvern felt happier 
and more at ease when Miss Burford was present. She 
sang to him, as she had done earlier in life ; but her sweet 
voice was sweeter now than then, and her improvement in 
the art had neither brought with it forwardness nor affect- 
ation : she sang from the heart, to the heart, and seemed 
to feel the force of the words which she uttered so melo- 
diously, and to which the expression of a charming, intel- 
ligent, and intellectual countenance gave additional strength 
and power. 

It was not, however, the mere superficiality of every-day 
accomplishments that riveted Lord Malvern's attention to 
this amiable girl. The soft gentleness of her manner, the 
quality of her mind, and the graceful readiness and sim- 
plicity with which she conducted herself as a daughter 
towards her exemplary and revered parent, were to him 
new and beautiful to see. He had lost his own mother 
before he was of an age to know her, or appreciate her 
tenderness. He and his sister had been brought up un- 
conscious of the best and kindliest feelings of our nature. 
The young lord had proceeded through the different forms 
of a public school, and then through the routine of the 
university: he had visited his paternal homes at stated 
seasons, and enjoyed the society of his sister, but not in 
the calm and quiet sense of the word enjoyment : large 
parties, large rooms, large establishments, noble banquets, 
glittering parties, and vast assemblies, were the attributes 
of Lionsden and Grosvenor Square. He had never known 
the sweet attraction of maternal affection, and never had 
received the unquestionable advantages of a mother's care 
and solicitude. Of that sort of calm and unostentatious 



31 6 THE MARQUESS. 

comfort which springs from filial duty and maternal love, 
lie had no notion. To be at home, with him, was to be 
mixing in one continued round of gaiety and dissipation. 
Succeeding to this came his protracted tour, agreeable in 
an eminent degree, but characterised by a restless activity 
and constant change. To him, then, we say, the intellec- 
tual character of his intercourse with the happy family in 
which he had thought proper to domesticate himself, was, 
upon every account, winning and attractive. 

In the intervals of Maria's singing, Burford read to 
them, and then the gentle Maria 1 worked, as did her 
mother. What they did in that way Lord Malvern never 
could exactly ascertain. The same long strips, hemmed 
and cut, and shut up in boxes at the end of the evening, 
seemed always to be the objects of their care ; but it was 
employment, and had but one drawback in his lordship's 
opinion it kept the soft blue eyes of the gentle girl fixed 
downwards. Upon what his lordship's eyes were generally 
riveted, Mrs. Burford, who occasionally lifted hers (cased 
too in glasses) from her muslin strips, and her son, who 
now and then glanced from his book, very soon ascertained. 
However, the nearly approaching execution of the old 
lady's plan satisfied her that it " made no great difference 
for a day or two ; " and so the poor young lord lay be- 
calmed, as it were, in this little haven of peace and affec- 
tion ; and charmed as he was with its sweet serenity, felt 
that he had never been at home before. 

Nothing is more dangerous to the heart than this sort of 
quiet enjoyment : the constant association with a lovely 
girl, whose conduct in her own circle gives earnest of her 
excellence in a more extended sphere, renders her, to a 
man of genuine feeling, an object of intense interest. The 
unaffected kindness and unrestrained attention which Lord 
Malvern experienced from Maria Burford, during the 
period when he was really suffering from the illness pro- 
duced by the sudden shock which he had received, excited 
his gratitude, and commanded his esteem. Situated as he 
was, these were ominous symptoms of a much more serious 
complaint ; and, although, as we have already seen, neither 
Mrs. Burford nor her son could say a word to Maria upon 



THE MARQUESS. 317 

the subject, which might, if they had done so, be con- 
strued by her into a reproach for forwardness, or a sus- 
picion that she was endeavouring to gain an influence over 
their self-invited guest, the circumstances only confirmed 
the watchful parent in the expediency of the plan she had 
organised, but which, so long as she felt herself mistaken 
in her anticipation of results, she did not mean to put into 
execution. 

The change in Lord Malvern's manner kept pace with 
the improvement of his health. He was no longer restless 
and feverish ; he was calm and gentle, and sought no re- 
laxation or amusement beyond the threshold of the house. 
To be read to by Burford, sung to by his sister, talked to 
by his mother, and attended to by all three of them, 
seemed to him the height of human enjoyment ; and when 
he could be prevailed upon to take an airing, it was inva- 
riably in a carriage sufficiently capacious to carry " four in- 
sides." In short, ten or twelve days' residence had so 
completely domesticated him, that the old lady felt con- 
vinced the time had already arrived when it was her duty 
to announce the departure of herself and daughter. 

It is impossible not to appreciate the delicacy and tender- 
ness of this exemplary parent. In her way, she was as 
proud as Lord Snowdon ; and would rather have seen her 
daughter a beggar, than the despised and neglected adjunct 
of the aristocracy, her connexion with which the world, 
and one who was greater than all the rest of the world put 
together, the marquess himself, would not fail to attribute 
to her cunning and adroitness. 

It was resolved that Burford should announce to Lord 
Malvern the arrival of the summons of his mother to Eng- 
land. And as it had been deemed expedient to keep Maria 
entirely in the dark as to the reality of the invitation, the 
announcement was to be made to her at the same time, in 
order that the surprise which she would naturally exhibit 
might obviate any suspicion in his lordship's mind that the 
proposed journey was a stroke of policy, or a matter of 
family arrangement. 

To some mothers it may appear that Mrs. Burford acted 
indiscreetly, if not ungenerously, and cruelly, if not incau- 



318 THE MARQUESS. 

tiously, in permitting the intimacy between the young lord 
and her daughter to continue even so long as it did ; and 
those of the Snowdon faction will, no doubt, discover that 
no surer mode of catching a heart can be pursued than per- 
mitting a social intercourse between two people of conge- 
nial habits, assimilitating tastes, and sympathising feelings, 
up to a certain point, and then suddenly terminating it j 
they will, however, do Mrs. Burford a great injustice. It 
is true she anticipated the possibility of such an effect being 
produced as she had mentioned to her son, and the result 
too soon convinced her of the correctness of her supposi- 
tion ; but, as a matter of common civility, having per- 
mitted the domestication of Lord Malvern, she could not 
sooner have framed an excuse for quitting him, more par- 
ticularly after the expression of his happiness at possessing 
such a home, and such resources, at a moment when his 
heart and mind were so torn and harassed. 

On the morning of the intended communication of their 
departure, Lord Malvern received his sister's long and in- 
teresting letter. It came at a curious crisis. As the reader 
knows, it announced the almost incomprehensible change 
in Elizabeth Oldham's manners and feelings, and the cer- 
tainty of her unqualified defection and heartlessness. The 
knowledge of this wonderful alteration in all the circum- 
stances of his " case " naturally threw the young noble- 
man's thoughts into an entirely new channel. His father 
could no longer be considered the tyrant oppressing inno- 
cence, or the conspirator with Lady Katharine, in pur- 
chasing the happiness of Miss Oldham with his offer of 
rank and fortune. It appeared she was the willing and 
consenting acceptor of his proposal ; a proposal which, it 
is hardly necessary to observe, was made without the 
slightest knowledge, on the marquess's part, of any sup- 
posed prior attachment of the young lady to any body 
else, much less to his own son. 

This enlightenment, while it very much moderated the 
asperity of his feelings towards his father, very considerably 
decreased his lordship's regret and solicitude about his 
future mother-in-law. Amongst a thousand excellent 
women it is but fair to expect one Elizabeth Oldham ; and 






THE MARQUESS. 319 

although his sorrow now assumed the character of anger, 
and his late despair and commiseration of her fate turned 
to something very like hatred and contempt, the new feel- 
ing that was generated was of infinitely more importance to 
the family circle in the Alice des Veuves than any which 
the intelligence he had just received had induced him to 
discard. He had been slighted deceived forgotten 
jilted. To this he could not quietly submit ; he instantly 
contrasted in his mind the flippant gaiety and superficial 
accomplishments of Elizabeth Oldham with the gentle man- 
ners and sterling qualities of Maria Burford. 

Decidedly unequal marriages never answer. Both parties 
are placed in false positions ; and a married life between 
such persons in general consists of a constant struggle be- 
tween the jarring inclinations, and riot unfrequently the 
clashing connexions of either party. It is true that we 
have seen most amiable persons raised to high rank and 
station by marriage, who have done honour to that rank 
and station ; but the experiment is a hazardous one, and 
one which Lord Malvern, young as he was, was wise 
enough not to think of trying ; but for it seems his views 
and considerations had, in eight short days, taken that 
turn the difference in station between Miss Elizabeth 
Oldham and Miss Maria Burford was very trifling indeed. 
The grandmother of Miss Burford had been the daughter 
of a baron, whose daughter had married a clergyman ; the 
mother of Miss Oldham was the daughter of an earl who 
had married a merchant in the city : so that taking an 
average (as that respectable gentleman himself, now no 
more, would have said) of the pretensions of both, it 
seemed as if the division of honours would turn out to be 
pretty equal. This comparison, however, was not ju- 
diciously made by Lord Malvern : it was not between 
Miss Burford and Miss Oldham it should have been insti- 
tuted, but between Miss Burford and the young lady of 
exalted rank and unbounded wealth, whom Lord Snowdon 
had decided upon as Lord Malvern's future wife. Lord 
Snowdon might marry Miss Oldham, because his race was 
nearly run ; but his son had to increase the fame and 



320 THE MARQUESS. 

fortune of the family, and therefore, he must make a more 
noble and wealthy alliance. 

Upon this calculation, erroneous as it was, throwing into 
the scale the intimate friendship which existed between 
Lord Malvern and Burford, and making a comparison be- 
tween the exemplary and agreeable mother of the young 
lady, and the old painted cockatoo, whose incessant gabble 
was calculated to drive any man mad in a week; and> 
above all, adding to these the fact that he had been slighted 
and forgotten by the one, and assiduously and kindly 
attended to by the other, it is not surprising that the com- 
plaint with which Mr. Burford began to suspect Lord 
Malvern had really begun to be attacked should receive a 
Very violent accession during the following day. 

It was not, however, to Lord Malvern alone that Lady 
Hester's letter was so deeply interesting. That part which 
referred to Burford convinced the young lord that his 
suspicions were correct, and that to Burford's modesty and 
delicacy alone were attributable his opinion at least his 
declared opinion of Lady Hester's sentiments as regarded 
him. There was in the caution with which she touched 
the subject ample proof of its importance to her. She 
trod lightly and loitered not on the ground which she knew 
to be undermined ; and in the studious avoidance of any 
thing which might be considered particular in the way of 
remembrance, her brother beheld the ratification of all his 
suspicions of the real nature and character of her friendship 
for his companion. 

" Well, Charles," said his lordship, after he had re 
Lady Hester's letter, "what think you now?" al 
women are not faultless. I suppose it was my vanity, but 
I certainly thought Elizabeth Oldham, at one time, devoted 
to me ; and it was that feeling which first drew my atten- 
tion most particularly to her. Vanity took the place of 
judgment ; I was flattered by what I fancied her prefer- 
ence, and mistook the gratitude of a dupe for the devotion 
of a lover. Now, that my eyes are opened, shall I grieve, 
shall I pine and wear the willow ? No, Charles, for me 
there are yet hopes of happiness. Ah !" added he thought- 
fully, " but for my poor sister all is misery. I will not 



THE MARQUESS. 321 

ask you for an opinion upon that passage of her letter 
where she speaks of you, but content myself with reproach- 
ing you for not reposing a confidence in me, upon a sub- 
ject so nearly connected with the happiness of the two 
beings to whom I am most attached on earth ; or if there 

be a third, Charles " 

" My dear Mai vern,"* interrupted Burford, who was 
alarmed at the earnestness of Lord Malvern's manner, and 
trembled lest the already complicated affairs of the Plin- 
limmons should get another twist by an untoward confes- 
sion; " spare me I am content, and bow to my fate ; duty 
and reason bade me stifle a feeling which I ought never to 
have permitted to exist. All that man could do I did I 
withdrew from your society while you were constantly at 
home, and withdrew you from home before I ventured to 
enjoy it." 

" But why so ? " said Lord Malvern. 
" I saw ruin and destruction to all of us, in my con- 
tinuance at Lionsden," replied Burford. 

" I was aware of my father's views for Hester," said 
Lord Malvern, " but you see by her letter how perfectly 
justified I am in my suspicions of what would be the result 
of his efforts to realise them. Would I not or ought he 
not rather to have rejoiced in the union of his child with 

a man worthy of her a man " 

" My dear Malvern," interrupted Burford, " / cannot, 
from my station in life, and you cannot, from the ingenu- 
ousness of your character and inexperience in the world, pro- 
perly appreciate the feelings which actuate a man of your 
father's principles and pretensions. All I have to implore 
of you is never to recur to the subject^ all is now over 
your sister in a few days will be the wife of an amiable 
and honourable man, of suitable rank and fortune ; and 
nothing is left for me but to pray for her happiness, in a 
sphere of life to which nothing but madness could ever 
have lifted my thoughts or feelings as connected with her." 
" Perhaps," said Lord Malvern, " I shall, at no very 
great distance of time, convince you that the approximation 
of our spheres is not a matter of so much doubt or difficulty 
as you may imagine. There is " 



322 THE MARQUESS. 

" My dear Malvern/' said Burford, who truly enough 
anticipated the turn which the conversation was about to 
take, and was resolutely determined to check it in the 
outset, " the carriage has been at the door nearly an hour." 

" Has it ? " said Lord Malvern, smiling with a sort of 
consciousness of having made up his mind to some measure 
which he felt sure would surprise his friend and companion ; 
C( when will your mother and sister be ready ? " 

" 1 think they are not going out to-day/' said Burford. 

" See/' said Lord Malvern, " because if they are not in- 
clined for a drive, I am for home : we can enjoy our own 
society here, as well as in the Bois de Boulogne." 

' ' But the air and exercise," said Burford ; <e recollect 
the doctor." 

" I need no doctors now, Charles," answered Lord 
Malvern ; " my cure has been effected by my sister's letter: 
there is, I assure you, infinitely greater danger in a new 
complaint than a relapse. Go see about the ladies : I shall 
not go if they do not j so either they drive, or we remain 
chez nous. I have promised Maria to give her her revanche 
at chess ; and if we do not make an excursion, we will 
play our game before dinner, and so have more time for 
music in the evening." 

" Still harping upon my daughter," says Polonius. 
Burford felt very much like the old chamberlain with re- 
gard to his sister ; and began to calculate since this was 
to be the last day of their social intercourse which was 
the more prudent measure chess at home, or the drive 
abroad. He decided for the latter. There is a sort of 
intimate connexion between the hostile parties at chess, 
when they happen to be of different sexes, which sometimes 
converts their scientific opposition into an artless agreement: 
the player becomes the only queen the lover wishes to 
check-mate, and when he ends his game finds his own 
heart the last pawn. 

As the whole of this final day was one of fever and 
worry, Mrs. Burford, who had established a complete un- 
derstanding with her son as to the mode of managing mat- 
ters so as to avoid a crisis, took the hint which he gave her 
to rescind the resolution she had, under his advice, formed 



THE MARQUESS. 323 



324 THE MARQUESS. 

ciety. Still, however, a few hours would terminate the 
affair, and she should have the satisfaction of knowing that 
she had done her duty. 

The drive concluded, and the party returned, not much 
time elapsed before dinner the dinner after which the 
scheme of emigration was to he broached. The heretofore 
social meal passed in a sort of fitful silence, and had been 
concluded for more than half an hour before the matron 
felt herself adequate to the announcement of her design. 

At length she mustered up courage to begin. 

f( I am going/' said Mrs. Burford, e( I think, to surprise 
you, Lord Malvern I am sure I shall surprise my daugh- 
ter my son is aware of my proceedings Maria and I are 
going to London immediately." 

" Me ! " exclaimed Maria. 

11 Maria ! " exclaimed Lord Malvern ; " to London ! for 
what ? " 

" I have received a letter/' said Mrs. Burford, " which 
requires my presence there at the beginning of next week ; 
it is law business, and must be attended to, and my pre- 
sence and that of my daughter are indispensable." 

" Impossible ! my dear Mrs. Burford," said Lord 
Malvern : " you are telling us this to make us implore and 
entreat you to stay ; in short, teaching us properly to 
appreciate your society, by threatening to rob us of it." 

" Indeed, no," said Mrs. Burford ; rf nothing can be 
more disagreeable than the journey and all its concomitants, 
but I have a duty to perform, and I must do it." 

" When did you get this letter ? " said Miss Burford, 
in a tone which was satisfactory only to Lord Malvern, 
who playfully took up the question in a similar tone, and 
repeated it verbatim. 

ff This morning, Maria," said the matron ; " it concerns 
you very nearly, and therefore I thought I would not tell 
you of it before it was necessary." 

" Me ! " said Miss Burford, wonderingly. 

ee I think you are joking," said Lord Malvern. 
. " No/' said Burford, " my mother is in earnest ; she 
has consulted me upon the possibility of her avoiding the 
journey, but I see no alternative." 



THE MARQUESS. 325 

ff When do you propose to return ? " said his lordship. 

" That/' replied the lady, " is very uncertain indeed. 
I should say in all probability, never." 

c< Then," said Lord Malvern, with an unusually thought- 
ful expression in his countenance, " I am the cause of 
your going. I have intruded myself I have deranged 
your establishment I am a burden to you, and have 
driven you from your charming retirement." 

1 ' No, indeed/' said Mrs. Burford ; ' ' nothing has ever 
given me more pleasure than receiving your lordship here, 
and most happy should I have been to continue your 
hostess ; but I think Charles has too frequently inculcated 
upon your mind the importance of fulfilling our duties, to 
render it necessary for me to say more than that duty 
calls me away, and I cannot resist the appeal." 

" And," said Lord Malvern, " is Maria so deeply in- 
terested in the affair, and yet ignorant of the measure till 
now ? " 

" Till now ! " said Maria, with a smile not quite un- 
qualified by regret and surprise: " 1 am as ignorant of the 
meaning of it now as ever." 

" I am sure," said Mrs. Burford, " you may rely im- 
plicitly on my judgment in the affair." 

" It is not," said Lord Malvern, " to force her into a 
marriage against her inclinations ? if it is, Maria, resist 
that is my doctrine, dutiful or undutiful. This week is 
to be marked in the kalends of my life, and in the annals 
of my family, as one in which an amiable, kind-hearted 
girl is sacrificed. I trust it is not to be distinguished in 
my recollection, by the horrors of a double sacrifice." 

" I assure you, Lord Malvern," said Mrs. Burford, 
smiling, " I have 'not the slightest intention of exerting 
my authority in that way." 

Now of all turns that the conversation could possibly 
have taken, this was the one of all others most desirable to 
be avoided. Burford felt his ears tingle ; his mother ex- 
changed looks with him, expressive of the misdirection of 
the debate ; and Maria, scarcely knowing why, blushed 
deeply. 

" Well, now then," said his lordship, " tell me why 
Y 3 



326 THE MARQUESS. 

do you go ? and Burford, why did you not tell me this 
before to-day ? " 

" Why" said Burford, " I honestly confess the subject 
was a painful one, and I thought it best to let my mother 
open it herself." 

" Are you pleased/' said Lord Malvern, to Maria, 
<( with the idea of going off to England, and so suddenly ? " 

Here was a question what would she say ? 

f< I am not accustomed," said Miss Burford, ' f to such 
sudden determinations ; I confess it has taken me a good 
deal by surprise/' 

" When do you purpose starting ? " said Lord Malvern. 

" Either to-morrow or the next day at farthest," said 
Mrs. Burford. 

" Oh, not to-morrow !" said Lord Malvern ; " one 
day's reprieve." 

" We cannot well go to-morrow, mamma," said Maria, 
chiming in discordantly, to her mother's ears, with his 
lordship. 

" We shall see, dear," answered Mrs. Burford. 

" How do you travel ? Where do you mean to sleep 
on the road? What servants do you take?" said Lord 
Malvern. 

" Why, my lord," said Mrs. Burford, " we travel very 
humbly. I think the Diligence will have the ' honour ' of 
conveying us to Calais." 

" No, no," said Lord Malvern ; " if you are really 
obliged to go, and seriously mean to go, you go with me. 
I have no tie to Paris, when your establishment is broken 
up. Charles and I can sit ourselves down wherever we 
please. I fixed myself here because I found myself 
happy ; as for the place itself, I detest it at least I do 
now. I shall be just as comfortable travelling as staying 
still ; and therefore we will make a ' tour ' as far as the 
coast cross I shall not. But as it turns out, it will be 
exceedingly convenient for the arrangement of my father's 
business ; for, as Charles knows, his lawyer must see me 
before the settlements for his new marriage can be com- 
pleted, and I had mentioned Paris as the place of rendez- 
vous. Calais will be of course infinitely more agreeable to 



THE MARQUESS. 327 

the man of business a mere ten hours' affair from London 
and there I can do all that is necessary ; and if you like 
to take Charles on to town with you, I can wait and pass 
my time very agreeably either at Calais or Boulogne till 
his return." 

This was an unexpected coup. The only person of the 
party whose eyes brightened at the proposition was 
Maria's ; who, as the affair was to be undertaken, why, 
she could not yet guess, was well enough pleased at con- 
verting a tedious journey in a heavy day-and-night-going- 
diligence, into an agreeable excursion in agreeable society. 

Burford said nothing, because he could not see any very 
tenable objection to the scheme. Mrs. Burford, like her 
son, was at fault. 

" If you don't agree to this proposition, Mrs. Burford," 
continued Lord Malvern, "it will perfectly convince me 
that I am right in my suspicions, and that you are actually 
flying from your home to escape my worrying and boring 
society. If that be really the case, tell me so, and I will 
spare you all the trouble and inconvenience of moving. It 
would cost me a double pang first, to think that I had 
already annoyed you so long, and, secondly, to think I 
should have made myself so odious." 

" Oh ! Lord Malvern," said Maria, in the naturalness 
of her heart, and really believing that her mother was 
behaving very rudely, ' ' how can you think that ? " 

Mrs. Burford's blood tingled ; another demonstration 
how could it be helped ? well what was to be done ? 

<( I think," said Burford, " our tour ought to be pur- 
sued in another direction " 

" My dear fellow," said Lord Malvern, " you know as 
well as I, that it cannot be pursued in any direction, till I 
hear from Lord Snowdon's man of business. Common 
sense, common reason tell you, that I shall save him and 
my father a vast deal of trouble and expense, by meeting 
him more than half way. And if we are to travel for 
health and recreation, surely we may mingle worldly con- 
venience in our pursuits; and although the road from 
Paris to Calais presents no great novelty, we shall ourselves 
make the novelty of converting a double journey of neces- 
Y 4 



328 THE MARQUESS. 

sity, into a double journey of enjoyment and economy. 
Was there ever such a union of advantages produced ? It 
is so seldom that reason and pleasure post the same road, 
that I hail the combination with delight." 

" My dear lord," said Mrs. Burford, " I must entreat 
you to banish from your mind any idea of your having 
gened or inconvenienced us. I think, perhaps we shall 
worry and inconvenience you by adopting your plan." 

" How ? " interrupted Lord Malvern, " not in the least 
it cannot ; on the contrary so now not another word, 
I will hear no more the arrangement rests with me 
on the morning after to-morrow, my carriage shall be here 
at the door ready for packing." 

" Indeed ! I " said Mrs. Burford. 

(c No, neither deed nor word," said Lord Malvern : 
" I only appeal to Maria, whether my proposal is not per- 
fectly rational, and unless you have decided that I am 
unbearable for three or four days longer, the most advan- 
tageous to all parties. '\ 

" Maria is no judge of the importance of the business 
which calls us away," said Mrs. Burford, who, caught in 
her own trap, was now forced to England, whither in point 
of fact she did not mean to go ; her only object being to 
break up the party, and perhaps establish herself at Abbe- 
ville, or at one of the sea-ports. 

cc I confess I see no objection to Lord Malvern's pro- 
posal," said Burford, to his mother's infinite astonishment ; 
an astonishment which, however, afterwards, when they 
were alone, he explained away. The fact was, that he 
saw the impossibility of further contesting the question 
without actually affronting his friend ; and, if that were 
not the alternative, the choice of evils was confined to 
making the question one of importance, which it naturally 
was not, and which it must have derived from some cir- 
cumstance connected with it, into a discussion of which, it 
was of course impossible to enter. It was, therefore, Bur- 
ford's policy to accede to the proposition, as being un- 
questionably the safest, best, and most expeditious mode of 
carrying his mother's judicious scheme into effect. The 
circumstance of the journey insured them from the dan- 



THE MARQUESS. 329 

gerous consequences of a chance tete-a-tete between Maria 
and the dreaded lover, while the varying scenery and sub- 
jects which would come under their observation during the 
journey would furnish plenty of materials for convers- 
ation, and the hurry and bustle of the whole expedition 
would divert the mind of the young lord from the object 
upon which even Burford himself began seriously to ap- 
prehend it had fixed itself. 

Mrs. Burford did not stop to argue with her son, nor 
could she enlarge upon the subject, or question his motives 
for so readily agreeing to the excursion ; it was sufficient 
for her to know that he had his reasons, which were pro- 
bably founded upon a more intimate knowledge than she 
could be supposed to possess of the character and disposi- 
tion of his friend and pupil. 

" I find," said she, " that I am left in a glorious mi- 
nority of one upon this question, and therefore I shall not 
trouble the house with any farther division/' 

" That's right, my dear lady," said Lord Malvern. " I 
feel myself now in authority I am the leader of a party ; 
and that is what my illustrious father, with all his anxiety 
to be so, never yet has been. You are all pledged to me : 
I have the regulation of every thing ; and even if in some 
things I may appear to err in judgment, it is one of the 
established principles of partisanship, that the followers 
should sacrifice their own opinions upon minor points, even 
if they do not at the instant see their object or bearing, 
believing them, in the implicitness of their confidence in 
their leader, to be, if he thinks so, the wisest and most 
favourable as conducive to the ulterior objects in view." 

" I am sure," said Mrs. Burford, " with what you sug- 
gest, and Charles agrees in, I ought to be satisfied." 

" ' What Cato did, and Addison approv'd, 
Cannot be wrong ! ' " 



th 

. 



exclaimed Lord Malvern ; ce so said Eustace Budgell, when, 
according to his biographers, he committed a double mur- 
der; for they write in his life, or rather of his death, 
that having taken a wherry at Somerset House, he ordered 
e waterman to shoot London Bridge, and while the man 



330 THE MARQUESS. 

was obeying his orders,, he jumped into the river and 
drowned himself." 

" Poor Budgell," said Burford, " like many other wiser 
and better men he is not answerable for the absurdities of 
his biographers ; however, as far as my vote goes in the 
present question, Lord Malvern has it." 

<( Has it," said Lord Malvern, (t to be sure he has ; and 
henceforth be mine all the charge and care of every thing 
connected with the expedition. Excepting to afford us her 
countenance, Mrs. Burford shall have no share in the pro- 
ceedings ; and as for Maria and her brother, their duty 
shall be thus divided, wherever we dine ; he shall say a 
grace, and she shall look on ; for be it known I travel 
slowly. I shall be anxious to hear about Hester's mar- 
riage, and whither they are gone ; for Charles," said his 
lordship, " by the time we reach Calais, they will have 
departed from London to spend the honeymoon." 

The tone in which this was spoken, the manner in 
which it was addressed to Burford, and the expression of 
the young lord's countenance, startled Mrs. Burford, and 
brought the blood into her son's cheeks. The old lady 
had heard Charles speak in terms of the highest admiration 
of Lady Hester, but admiration unmixed with any more 
tender feeling; and it struck her as peculiarly odd, that 
Lord Malvern, in referring to her marriage, should seem to 
associate Burford with his sister in a recollection of what 
was so soon to occur, which ought not, and could not, as 
she naturally supposed, affect him in any way, but as an 
event happening in his patron's family at which he ought 
to rejoice. 

" As to the happiness of the new married couple," said 
Lord Malvern, " I don't intend to discuss it, for I hate to 
express a hope which I despair of seeing realised ; and as 
for you, I am sure I wo'n't ask you to give an opinion on 
the subject." 

" Lord Malvern," said Burford, really overcome by the 
attack so little expected, and which seemed to have ori- 
ginated in the abandon which Lord Malvern had given to 
his spirits, at being appointed captain of the caravan to 



THE MARQUESS. 331 

Calais, " whatever may conduce to Lady Hester's happi- 
ness or " 

" There, there," said his lordship, " do not preach, 
Charles it is all hypocrisy. My dear Mrs. Burford," 
continued he, " this son of yours is a most extraordinary 
person : all I wish is, that he had been a little more can- 
did, and a little less diffident, and I " 

t( My dear Malvern," said Burford, " pray consider." 

" Consider ! I do," said his lordship, " and the more I 
consider the more I regret. However, as that is past 
praying for, so is it past preaching about ; and let us oc- 
cupy or rather let me for you no none of ye, are 
to interfere my thoughts in arranging my plan ; when 
must you be in London, Mrs. Burford?" 

This was an unlucky question, for as she had no busi- 
ness whatever in that city, it was difficult at the moment 
to settle upon what day it was absolutely necessary she 
should do nothing: she looked at her son for having 
once conceded to his views upon the subject of the ex- 
pedition, she thought it best to leave the settlement of the 
time which it was to occupy equally to his judgment. 

" Why" said Burford, as much puzzled as his respect- 
able parent, " I should think about " 

" Well, well, said Lord Malvern, " I want no secrets ; 
any time in the course of next week will do, I suppose. As 
for Maria and I, we seem to be entirely excluded from 
the sanhedrin ; however, we know our duty, and will 
do it." 

There was something so entirely new in Lord Malvern's 
manner a gaiety almost amounting to wildness, mixed 
with an occasional tenderness, when Maria spoke, or when 
she was named, and an ease and readiness in the way in 
which he spoke to her and of her as " Maria," which par- 
ticularly struck Burford and his mother. Yet what could 
they do? He asked " Maria" to sing could they hinder 
her ? He challenged her to her revanche at chess, as he 
had promised could they prevent her accepting it? And 
now that they had done all they could to break off the in- 
timacy, could they, with any thing like decency or feeling, 
refuse to agree in the plan he had proposed for maintaining 



332 THE MARQUESS. 

it for three or four days longer ? These were the perplex- 
ities in which they were involved; and. as has already 
been observed, it would have been distressing and indeli- 
cate, in the highest degree, to have done what perhaps a 
mother with a baser mind might have been induced to do 
put Maria upon her guard against encouraging a passion 
which might be hopeless, because the very caution pre- 
supposed a disposition which probably did not exist, and 
which the poor young lady could only have fancied had 
evinced itself by her manner towards their guest. 

Another of those lumps of sugar in the shape of happy 
quiet evenings, in such a circle, had melted, and Lord 
Malvern retired, if not to bed; at least to his room, to 
concert with his valet a most active and intelligent ser- 
vant all the measures necessary for the agreeable under- 
taking which he was now fully empowered to organise and 
direct. Maria remained with her mother and brother, and, 
to her surprise, though clearly to her conviction, placed a 
restraint upon their conversation, such as she had never 
been conscious of before. Her mother gazed on her with 
a peculiar sort of solicitude ; and Burford, conscious what 
had attracted this particular attention, was on the point of 
breaking the silence which affection and propriety had 
hitherto imposed. The same cause operated upon both 
mother and son, for they had both seen, in their lynx-like 
watchfulness, a look of Lord Malvern's, during the game 
of chess, which convinced them that the unconscious girl 
was an object of the tenderest interest to him. What 
cruelty would it have been to enlighten her upon this point, 
and how imperiously their duty commanded them to se- 
parate them. It was the discussion of this point, and the 
consideration of the wisdom and prudence of the line they 
had now actually adopted, upon which they wished to 
enter ; but while the dear object of their anxiety was pre- 
sent, it was impossible to debate the question in which she 
was so vitally concerned. 

When the opportunity at length arrived, and Maria 
retired to rest, Mrs. Burford and her son agreed that no 
other course could be pursued with a better chance of 
successful results than that which they had determined to 






THE MARQUESS. 333 

adopt ; and, accordingly,, they agreed to direct their atten- 
tion during the journey to three points. One, the acce- 
leration of their movements ; the second, the avoidance of 
any conversation which could lead to the point most sedu- 
lously to be shunned ; and the third, the prevention of any 
tete-a-tete between the principal parties implicated. With 
a careful eye to all these prudential precautions, the guar- 
dians of youthful happiness resolved that the journey might 
as indeed now it must be undertaken without any 
fear of consequences. 

In the morning, Lord Malvern appeared an altered 
being : his eyes beamed brightly ; his countenance looked 
cheerful; and he seemed to have forgotten all his own 
sorrows, in the effort to make his friends comfortable on 
the journey, from which as, in fact, it was to lead to 
his separation from the object in which he was now so 
deeply interested he appeared to anticipate some results 
not clearly definable to either of his " guardians," and 
which, let it be what it might, thanks to their scrupulous 
attention to what was going on, were not in the least 
degree likely to occur. 

The morning, however, brought a letter, which added a 
new reason for Burford's making the journey, not only to 
Calais, but further. It was a letter from some official 
authority in England, requiring him forthwith to take 
possession of the living of Silgrove, to which he had been 
preferred, and to make the necessary arrangements for 
occupying the parsonage attached to it, and performing 
sundry other duties, the fulfilment of which, it was quite 
clear, was essential not only to his perfect establishment in 
his right, but to the profit of the person who made the 
communication. 

te Nothing can be more convenient," said Lord Malvern ; 
(C the fates for once conspire favourably. You must show 
your mother the parsonage. I know it well, and have, 
when a boy, passed many a happy hour under its roof. 
Charles is not a marrying man, I think," added his lord- 
ship, " and I should not be surprised to find you, Mrs. 
Burford, established there." 

" I am not quite so selfish, Lord Malvern," said Mrs. 



334} THE MARQUESS. 

Burford, ec as to wish to usurp the place which may be 
destined for another." 

" No, but till that other is found ? " said Lord Malvern. 
" Which will be some time, depend upon it," rejoined 
Burford. 

" I remember the parsonage at Silgrove," said Miss 
Burford ; " I dined there once, several years ago, when I 
was staying at Lionsden with Lady Hester. I never saw 
a more desirable residence." 

" You were, then, at Lionsden, Maria," said Lord Mal- 
vern ; c( which, now, for comfort, should you prefer the 
palace or the parsonage ? " 

" To my mind, and with my means," said Maria, " I 
prefer the latter. I can feel and understand the happiness 
which may be rationally enjoyed in such a house, but my 
mind is not sufficiently exalted to appreciate all the delights 
of the other." 

' ' Then Lionsden would have no charms for you ? " said 
his lordship. " Suppose my father, instead of fixing his 
attentions upon the gay and flippant Miss Oldham, had 
been attracted to the milder radiance of the gentle, un- 
affected Maria Burford, what " 

' ' Ah, Lord Malvern," said Mrs. Burford, " how can 
you put such a case to the poor child ? " 

" It iff foolish," replied his lordship ; " if she said ' yes/ 
I should regret it ; if she said ' no/ I suppose I ought to 
be offended for my illustrious parent's sake. For my part, 
I think the union of the castle and the cottage might have 
been a very advantageous one." 

Burford corrected the tone which Lord Malvern's con- 
versation was assuming, by a look expressive of his promise 
not to revert to that subject again. 

" Well, Mrs. Burford," said his lordship, " I would 
advise you, when this young lady is married, to betake 
yourself to Silgrove : you will be near us we shall be 
near you ; and I cannot imagine a happier relief from all 
the glare of grandeur, the blaze of lights, and the turmoil 
of company, than a repetition of our calm and quiet even- 
ings of the Alice des Veuves." 

This speech was so curiously worded, implied so very 



THE MARQUESS. 335 

much, and, probably, meant so very little, that Mrs. Bur- 
ford thought it better to let it pass off without an observ- 
ation. If she expressed any incredulity as to her daughter's 
marriage, it would lead to something, perhaps, serious in 
the way of protestation ; if she declared that there was no 
prospect of such an event, it would look as if she sought 
for an opportunity to declare that her daughter was free 
and uninfluenced, and ready to receive the addresses of the 
m whose affections she was most anxious she should not 
gain. 

It was a great relief to Mrs. Burford when she could 
escape from this conversation, and carry off her daughter, 
who hitherto wholly unaccustomed to constraint, and in the 
habit of being left to her own amusements and employments, 
could not conceive why she was now never permitted beyond 
the length of her mother's apron-string; and, to say truth, it 
was little less disagreeable than inexplicable : for, without 
a thought or wish beyond the simple gratification which a 
well-educated, highly-gifted young woman naturally enjoys 
in the society of men like her brother and their guest, she 
felt that she should be much more happy and better 
amused if permitted to remain, as she had ever before 
been wont to do, to participate in the amusements of the 
morning, but which, for the last two or three days, she 
had been, as if accidentally, hindered from doing, and 
which, on this last day of their stay in Paris, was wholly 
put a stop to by the preparations for their departure on the 
following morning. 

Lord Malvern was delighted that Burford was obliged 
to cross the Channel by his own business. He had begun 
to feel that he could not endure to think of Maria being 
set adrift in a steam-packet, with no other protector than 
her mother. It was impossible to calculate upon the sort 
of passengers who might go over with them ; and men 
might be rude and uncivil to her, which would be ter- 
rible ; or they might be extremely kind and civil to her, 
which he thought would be a great deal worse. Her 
brother would be so proper a guardian and so safe too ; 
and then Burford would see his noble father, and could 
bring him news of his much-loved sister ; and, in short, it 



336 THE MARQUESS. 

really appeared as if the fates were inclined to compensate 
him for all his past misfortunes, if, as he said, an escape 
from a flirt and a coquet, like Elizabeth Oldham, might 
be called a misfortune. 

His lordship occupied a considerable part of the morning 
in making arrangements and purchases in Paris, and re- 
turned, for the last time, to the house which his fancy had 
magnified into a palace or rather a paradise. His even- 
ing, however, was destined to be less agreeable than usual, 
for poor Maria, who felt no ill, either bodily or mental, 
was forced to bed at nine o'clock, on the plea, not of hav- 
ing fatigued herself during that day, but because she would 
have a great deal of fatigue to undergo on the following 
one. 

The reason for her retiring, if Mrs. Burford had known 
the whole programme of the expedition, was just as good, 
as regarded the present day, as it was likely to be efficient 
with respect to the toils of the next ; for Lord Malvern, 
who had despatched his courier en avant to secure beds 
and accommodations on the road, had declared himself 
incapable of a long journey, and divided the trajet so as to 
make their arrival at Calais the termination of the third 
day. 

Whether Mrs. Burford or her son would have entered 
any very serious protest against this moderated rate of pro- 
ceeding, had they been made aware of his lordship's inten- 
tion, it is impossible to say, but so it was. Nor were they 
permitted even to discuss the subject until after they had, 
for some hours, lost sight of the Allee des Veuves, and the 
golden dome of the Invalids, and were, to their infinite 
surprise, safely housed for the night at the Ecu de France, 
in the ancient town of Beauvais. 



THE MARQUESS. 337 



CHAPTER X. 

AGREEABLE as the dilatormess of the travellers may be, at 
least to one of the party, the reader must not linger upon 
the road ; he must be hurried on in advance, in order to 
catch a glimpse of the appearance of affairs in Grosvenor 
Square on the day of the intended wedding. 

The paternal solicitude of Lord Snowdon was consider- 
ably relieved by the opinion of the physicians ; but it must 
be confessed, that his parental anger was very much in- 
creased by the same cause. Both the doctors, eminent in 
their line, had pronounced the disorder mental. They 
could perceive no bodily ill, which was not of a temporary 
nature, and evidently resulting from an affection of the 
mind. To have seen his daughter die would have wounded 
the marquess's proud heart, but to believe, to be convinced 
that she had suffered her affections to be won without his 
consent, or that the struggle she had ineffectually made to 
obey his wishes and marry the man of his choice, was 
caused by a conflict in her bosom between love and duty, 
was more acutely cutting to his feelings. 

It was not so much the loss of Lord Elmsdale, which 
he now looked upon as certain although that was some- 
thing it was not the probable interference of the events 
of the day with his own approaching marriage it was 
not the disclosure to himself of his daughter's conceal- 
ment of some former attachment no one of these was 
it that wrung him to the heart and stung him to the 
quick. No ; as the surgeons tell us, the sense of bodily 
pain lies in the epidermis, so did the sensitiveness of 
Lord Snowdon inhabit the surface : the deep wound he 
felt not, it was when the skin was scratched that he 
winced ; and neither the total change which the event 
might produce in his arrangements, nor the agony his 
daughter suffered, nor the disappointment that her lover 
might endure, hurt him half so much as the certainty 
that the " town " would know all the particulars ; that 
the newspapers, instead of proclaiming the eclat of the 



338 THE MARQUESS. 

ft wedding," would have to declare its lamentable dis- 
comfiture ; that Rumour, with her hundred tongues, would 
be busy in discovering causes, and ascribing reasons for 
the overthrow of his hopes and expectations; and that like 
those of the Lionsden fete, the proceedings of the day had 
turned out a failure of the most ridiculous and unusual, if 
not unprecedented character. 

And then he recollected the accounts (by anticipation) 
which he had himself written for publication in the news- 
papers : if they appeared, they would only be inserted to 
provoke a general contradiction. No bishop graced the 
half-performed ceremony, which broke down in the hands 
of a tyro curate. No dejeuner was served on the gold 
plate ; there was no bride to change her costume ; no 
horses were brought from Lord Elmsdale's celebrated stud 
to draw the new and elegant travelling chariot, which, 
instead of conveying the happy couple to spend the honey- 
moon, left the disunited lovers behind, and was dragged 
back to the stables whence it came. 

Swift says, " pride or ambition often puts men upon 
doing the meanest things ; so climbing is performed in the 
same posture as creeping." Lord Snowdon, now that his 
scheme of self-puffing (much more common in his lord- 
ship's sphere than common people imagine) had met with 
so signal a defeat, looked back with shame and regret upon 
his performances in that way. To stop the publication of 
his own reports would be to betray their author ; for if he 
claimed them from the journals to which they had been 
addressed, he must, of course, support the claim in his own 
character. This worried him ; for although it seemed 
pretty clear that the truth would naturally find circulation 
through the press, even before the next morning, he anti- 
cipated seeing the account of what had been intended, 
published side by side with the detail of what had actually 
occurred, illustrated, no doubt, by the piquant remarks of 
the editor. 

Lady Hester, according to the advice of the medical 
men, continued in bed, and Miss Everingham remained by 
her side. She spoke little, and appeared to find relief only 
in tears, which she shed abundantly. Her father periodi- 



THE MARQUESS. 



339 



cally inquired after her, but, at the suggestion of the phy- 
sicians, made no effort to see her. Lady Katharine and 
Miss Oldham, after a short and very unsatisfactory inter- 
view with the marquess, who took less pains than usual to 
conceal his displeasure at their extremely thoughtless con- 
duct to call it by no harsher name quitted town for 
Richmond, attended by Cornet Richardson, and his friend 
Mr. Losh, an estimate of whose character and qualifications 
may be pretty fairly made from the knowledge of the fact, 
that he was the toady and "double" of the cornet the 
monkey of the ape the shadow of the shade. 

There was one person of the party, one actor in the 
play, whose situation appeared by far more painful than 
that of any other Lord Elmsdale himself; he was 
left in the most awkward possible position. Lord Snowdon 
had begged him not to quit the house : he had not courage 
to meet him he hoped to hear something of Lady Hester 
that he might communicate to him something conso- 
latory. But what consolation could he offer ? he had been 
told authoritatively, that his daughter's disease was in the 
mind ; he had seen the shuddering repulse which she had 
given to Lord Elmsdale's attentions. How was he to tem- 
porise, what was he to do ? 

At length he summoned sufficient resolution to see the 
unfortunate peer, who appeared almost stupified by the 
embarrassing nature of his situation. The marquess la- 
mented deeply the unfortunate circumstance of his daugh- 
ter's illness the physicians assured him that it was but a 
temporary affection a few days, he trusted, would set all 
to rights; indeed, he hoped, that in the course of the 
evening, she might be sufficiently well to admit of their 
seeing her. That he had himself abstained from visiting 
her, lest she might be too much agitated. That he thought 
as the sad interruption to the ceremony would, no doubt, 
be the subject of general conversation and remark, it would 
be well if the earl and he were to show themselves in the 
streets together : it would have the " effect" of contradict- 
ing any absurd rumours, and show the town, that the 
contretemps of the morning had only delayed for a short 
z 2 






340 THE MARQUESS. 

time the event from which they all hoped to derive so much 
happiness. 

. Lord Elmsdale, who was as shy as his intended father- 
in-law was proud, deceived as he was in the early part of 
the conversation, by the account which his lordship gave of 
the nature and character of Lady Hester's illness, felt 
pleased at the proposition which the marquess made, not 
only as it was likely to produce the anticipated effect, but 
as giving him some support and countenance in a very 
awkward position. He did not like the idea of even leaving 
the house alone, after so extraordinary a repulse; and 
coinciding as he did, in the general view which the mar- 
quess took, readily acceded to the proposal of walking down 
to Downing Street, where the marquess said he had merely 
to say three words to a certain person, but while he was 
there, he would take the opportunity of explaining the 
affair of the morning, in order to put it on a right footing 
in a high quarter, where it might otherwise have a bad 
"effect." 

By this scheme, Lord Snowdon thought entirely to stop 
the idle babblers of the pave, and establish, in the bow 
window of White's, the fact, that although something had 
happened, every thing was en train, and going on smoothly. 

Contrast this effective promenade, and all its studied 
frivolity, with the torture of poor Lady Hester's mind ; 
compare the dignified stride of her noble father along the 
trottoir of St. James's Street, with^the agonised writhings of 
his miserable daughter on her couch of sorrow. She, who 
cared nothing for effect, remembered with dread and terror 
the sensations which overcame her when she sank lifeless 
on the earth, and when the triumph of her feelings over 
the artificial customs of society had made her the subject 
of general conversation and remark. She, who shrank from 
the public gaze, and sought in the privacy of retirement 
that peace of mind which it seemed destined she was never 
to enjoy, felt all the misery of her situation pressing upon 
her with a weight which she thought herself scarcely able 
to Tesist. 

To the solicitude of Miss Everingham she was indebted 
for all the support and consolation she had received. That 



THE MARQUESS. 341 

her father had not visited her, she knew was by order of 
the physicians. Miss Oldham and Lady Katharine had 
been excluded under the same veto ; " they would come to 
her when she was better." Better ! of what ? she suf- 
fered no ill that time or medicine could cure. At her age, 
and with her general health, a few days, a few hours, might 
restore her bodily strength; but to what was she to be 
restored? a renewal of Lord Elmsdale's suit a repetition 
of the yet unfinished ceremonial. 

(f Better," said she to Miss Everingham, " better I. 
should die. If I live, I live to eternal wretchedness, or I 
provoke my father's anger, and incur his curse. Never, 
never, shall I forget the horrors of this morning. I felt so 
resolved, so firm, so determined to overcome all selfish 
feelings, to conquer feelings for others, which my poor heart 
tells me are not selfish; and to do my duty, my first 
earthly duty, to my father. Why was it I failed ? it all 
seemed like a dream, like a vision ; I only awoke to the 
reality, when I was asked that question upon which my fate 
depended. I felt my heart throb, my throat swell, a sudden 
darkness came over my eyes, and all I recollect is, finding 
myself in your arms, and in the care of a physician. Do 
you think, Anne," continued she, raising herself in bed, 
' ' will they force me to go through that again ? " 

" Compose yourself, dear child/' said Miss Everingham; 
"no no it cannot be]: you have evinced so strong a 
feeling, that if Lord Elmsdale have any feeling himself, he 
will not think of persisting in his suit." 

" Ay, Anne," said Lady Hester, " but my father 
what will he say ? how will he determine ? It is not what 
Lord Elmsdale wishes ; if my father continues fixed in his 
determination, he will insist upon the fulfilment of Lord 
Elmsdale's engagement. I know him, and I know his 
spirit he will not endure what he might conceive an 
indignity. Oh ! Anne, perhaps there may be blood shed 
for me perhaps my father's blood ! Save me from this, 
spare me, tell me only that there is a chance or risk of his 
safety, and I will to-morrow kneel again, and pledge my- 
self to all the duties of a wife." 

" My dear Lady Hester," said Miss Everingham, " you 
z 3 



34-2 THE MARQUESS. 

are conjuring up ills which never are likely to occur; 

your father and Lord Elmsdale are together they are 
gone out together he dines here." 

" True, true, Anne/' said Lady Hester, " but this is all 
in the supposition that I am yet to be his wife ; there is 
the condition upon which tranquillity will be established. 
Would to Heaven Alfred were here ! in him I should have 
a friend, an advocate and yet, if he came ah there 
it is there it is how foolish how wicked I have 
been. I have sinned deeply, for I have deceived my 
father yes, Anne, I have spoken falsely to him, else 
this would not have happened ; and yet, when I said 
my heart was free, I meant to conquer every feeling by 
which it was actuated. I have struggled hard indeed 

indeed I have; I thought I had triumphed over our 
worst of enemies self ; I have failed in the effort 
the ordeal proved me, and showed me my own infirmity." 

" This violence of grief must not be indulged in," said 
Miss Everingham ; ft you have nothing with which to re- 
proach yourself the denial of an attachment which you 
had resolved to conquer was no falsehood ; you conceived 
it past, and at all events, knowing the violence of Lord 
Snowdon's disposition, you gave him the strongest earnest 
of your sincerity, by agreeing to his proposal for Lord Elms- 
dale. There is nothing in this to occasion regret or re- 
morse. It will be seen how he will act now. If the op- 
portunity occurs, I shall not hesitate to impress upon his 
mind my view of the course a man ought to pursue in such 
a case, if, indeed, after what has passed, a suggestion can 
be necessary." 

But then " 

" I must insist upon your keeping quiet," said Miss 
Everingham ; " the only condition on which I will re- 
main here is, that you will neither speak nor agitate 
yourself." 

" Speak ! " said Lady Hester, " can I command my 
thoughts ? " 

" No, but the expression of your feelings wears and 
harasses you/' said Miss Everingham. " Collect yourself 

it will be perhaps expected that I should dine at table 



THE MARQUESS. 343 

to-clay : if I do, I will give you a full report of what 
occurs ; and above all, I am anxious to be there, in order 
to postpone your father's visit to you till to-morrow." 

te I could not bear his reproaches to-night," said Lady 
Hester. 

" It is better to let his feelings moderate/' said Miss 
Everingham, (< although, if I know him, he appears at 
present more mortified than angry he thinks the delay 
in the marriage inconvenient, but " 

" Delay," said Lady Hester, " there it is that word 
delay speaks volumes." 

" He thinks it so," replied Miss Everingham, f( but I 
should be much surprised, if Lord Elmsdale can consider it 
in any other light than a termination to the affair." 

The conversation was here interrupted by a message from 
Lord Snowdon, who had returned from his excursion, and 
begged to see Miss Everingham. Of her he made the most 
anxious inquiries about Lady Hester ; and Miss Evering- 
ham, extremely anxious that the case should appear as little 
severe as possible, pronounced her opinion, that perfect 
quiet was all that was necessary to restore her, that the 
shock her feelings had encountered was a severe one,, but 
that she hoped by the morning she would be able, as she 
was most anxious, to see the marquess. 

Lord Snowdon knew, as well as Miss Everingham, the 
cause of his daughter's illness, and of the exhibition in the 
morning. Of the object of her choice he had not the 
slightest notion it was not his policy to attempt to find 
out it was not his design to affect to doubt her speedy 
convalescence : hence his calm and placid demeanour, 
hence the tender message to his child. He found that 
Lord Elmsdale had fallen into the belief in which he de- 
sired to fix him that her indisposition was temporary, 
and wholly unconnected with the ceremony, farther than 
that, perhaps, the awfulness and importance of the obliga- 
tion which it imposed, and the consequences resulting from 
the answer she was required to give, might have affected 
her, more especially when the trepidation of the " duncish 
curate," as his lordship called him, in putting the question, 
z 4 






344 THE MARQUESS. 

naturally infected the innocent girl who was to reply to it 
with a corresponding timidity. 

Lord Elmsdale, who considered the fulfilment of the 
engagement a matter of duty rather than inclination, agreed 
to all the marquess's suggestions, and the more readily, be- 
cause, although not a devoted studier of effect, like the 
marquess, he could not help feeling that he should look 
very ridiculous, if the affair finally terminated as it now 
had " re infecta" Thus it was that, to the infinite satis- 
faction of the marquess, the <( gentle automaton" performed 
his part in the domestic drama with the most imperturb- 
able placidity. 

Fire may be produced from ice, and it certainly appeared 
that Miss Everingham had resolved that it should not be 
her fault if the " dish of skimmed milk " was not curdled. 
Seizing an opportunity, of which the marquess, who, al- 
though he dreaded her influence over his daughter, did not 
imagine she would avail herself, she sought the much 
damaged bridegroom in the drawing-room, where she 
found him sitting by himself, waiting the completion of 
the marquess's somewhat elaborated toilet, for his re- 
appearance before dinner. 

It would be uselessly occupying the time of the reader 
to detail the conversation which occurred between his lord- 
ship and the matured virgin, if conversation that may be 
called, in which one party only spoke and the other as- 
sented. She had made up her mind, without consulting 
Lady Hester, upon the course she would pursue, and in 
fulfilment of her resolution, stated all the real circumstances 
of the case the dread that Lady Hester had of giving 
him pain, her grateful acknowledgment for the preference 
which he had shown her, her entire esteem for him, her 
anxiety for his friendship, and the utter impossibility of her 
returning his love. 

" But why," said his lordship, in his peculiar lisping 
whisper, inaudible at two yards' distance, " why not have 
told me so herself?" 

" She dreaded the anger of her father," said Miss Ever- 
ingham. 

" Ah, well ! " said his lordship, " do you know, that is 



I 







THE MARQUESS. 345 

the very thing about which I am so apprehensive even 
now." 

" I trust entirely to your honour, Lord Elmsdale," said 
Miss Everingham, " not to betray her even at this junc- 
ture ; if it were possible for the marquess to believe, 
that her disinclination not to your lordship, but to mar- 
riage,, arose from her affection for another, the consequences 
would be most serious." 

" Do I know the person to whom she is attached ? " said 
Lord Elmsdale,, with such infinite na'ivete, as completely to 
astonish Miss Everingham. 

" I cannot say," said Miss Everingham, " I most cer- 
tainly do not. I admit that I have my suspicions yet 
I have never Jieard her name him. But now recollect, 
Lord Elmsdale, how entirely I trust you : I am sure it is 
better to be explicit ; but a word tending to excite the 
marquess's suspicions " 

" Oh, dear no," said his lordship, " of course I shall 
take care of that ; but I think I may venture as far as ex- 
pressing my own : because if I don't give some sort of 
reason he will, of course, expect me to conclude my engage- 
ment when Lady Hester recovers ; and, I I'm sure I 
admire her very much, and she is very charming ; and I 
appreciate her, and all that : but I certainly would not 
inconvenience her that is, I mean, I would not make her 
unhappy by forcing her into a marriage against her inclin- 
ations for all the world that, you know, would be the 
height of folly." 

" I am glad to find you so ready to enter into my 
views," said Miss Everingham, who saw, in every moment 
she conversed with him, and heard, in every word he 
uttered, fresh justifications of Lady Hester's dislike. 

" It will be so awkward," continued the sapient earl, 
whose merits never really appeared, until drawn out by 
important business, " about the carriages and the plate 
and all the things the preparations and then I shall 
look so very ridiculous to all my people and connexions 
that's what I " 

r tf Any thing is better, surely," said Miss Everingham, 
'' than beginning a long life of continual unhappiness ? " 



34-6 THE MARQUESS. 

te To be sure, yes," replied his lordship, " only I think, 
perhaps if Lady Hester now that everything is settled 

if she could but make up her mind I don't see why 
we might not be very happy ; my place in the north is 
very retired and quiet and I however, if you think 

I am sure you have known her longer than I have, and 
are better able to judge " 

C( I am quite decided in my opinion," said Miss Ever- 
ingham. 

<f Ah, then," said^ his lordship, ff of course it is of no 
use arguing" as if he ever did argue " I must, of 
course, make the best of it. I suppose I had better come 
to an understanding with the marquess this evening ? " 

fe If you agree with me, certainly," said Miss Evering- 
ham. 

" Oh, I do perfectly agree with you," said his lordship ; 
" nothing can be clearer only I wish I had known it 
before that's all. When I have made up my mind 
to any thing, I hate to be disappointed, if it is ever so 
trifling." 

Miss Everingham looked at him, but he did not see the 
expression of her face, for he was looking at his own in 
the glass over the fire-place, and settling the arrangement of 
his stock. 

" I hope," added the eloquent pleader, " that I have 
made you understand dear Lady Hester's feelings?" 

<e Oh, perfectly," said Lord Elmsdale. 

(f I mean," continued Miss Everingham, " I have, I 
hope, taught you to appreciate the delicacy of her position, 
and her sensitive apprehension lest she should offend you 
by " 

" Oh, dear no," said Lord Elmsdale, " I think she is 
quite right. Nothing could be more foolish, as you say 
no only I 1 must see about it. I had better, per- 
haps, leave town and write to the marquess. I am not a 
very good hand at a letter but I have a friend who, I 
think, would help me ; but then then it would look so 
odd going out of town to spend the honeymoon without 
one's bride wouldn't it?" 

No, I would speak to Lord Snowdon," said Miss 



e: 



THE MARQUESS. 34<7 

Everingham, " and I am sure if you do, the point will be 
settled." 

" I am sure of that too/' said Lord Elmsdale, " but 
then I am not quite so sure how ; if I knew that I 
at all events, Lady Hester shall not be annoyed on my 
account." 

sc She will bless you a thousand times, Lord Elmsdale, 
when I tell her this/' said Miss Everingham, quite de- 
lighted with having worked her companion into an expres- 
sion of something like feeling. 

ff I'm sure she's very kind/' said his lordship, with a 
coldness and calmness that would rather have suited the 
acknowledgment of a bow than a benediction. 

" I shall tell her all you say/' said the kind friend, 
" and she will sleep the better." 

" I'm very glad you think so," said the phlegmatic 
peer. 

Miss Everingham timed her attack with great judgment, 
for she had scarcely carried her point with the noble, lord, 
when the marquess arrived in the drawing-room. He 
appeared calm, but looked pale, and was evidently suffer- 
ing much annoyance. He was vexed that the Oldhams 
had not staid in town to dinner ; he had read a long 
account of the failure of the marriage in the evening 
papers, headed " Extraordinary circumstance ; " he had 
received a note from Downing Street ; and a letter from 
the Bishop of Dorchester, excusing himself for not being 
able to perform the marriage ceremony, and explaining, 
that the marquess's letter had not reached him at his 
palace, he having been absent on a tour of confirmations : 
the epistle concluded with a pious anticipation of Lady 
Hester's happiness, an eulogium upon her merits and 
virtues, and a prospective view of the domestic felicity of 
Lord and Lady Elmsdale. All these things were mingled 
in his mind ; and although he inquired after his daughter, 
his solicitude was not marked with the tenderness which, 
to her alone of all his connexions, he usually adopted. 

Dinner was announced and any thing more melancholy 
than the meal was, perhaps, never seen. It was quite im- 
sible that any one of the three persons at table could 



" 



348 THE MARQUESS. 

rally. The marquess felt that he could have almost en- 
dured the senseless rattle of that invaluable addition to a 
cherry-tree in the fruit season, Lady Katharine Oldham, in 
preference to the gloomy silence which pervaded the din- 
ner-room. The attending servants felt it part of their 
duty to look grave, and many a funeral " baked meat" 
feast has shone more gaily than this select banquet on the 
occasion of Lord Elmsdale's half-finished marriage. 

Lord Elmsdale himself appeared dumb, and almost mo- 
tionless, during the repast. He felt himself an object of 
ridicule even in the eyes of the marquess's menials ; and, 
moreover, anticipated the task he had undertaken of 
coming to a decision in the course of the evening ; con- 
vinced, as probably the reader also is, that the marquess 
would hold him to his bargain, and force his daughter 
into the performance of her part of the compact; his 
anxiety for its completion being greatly sharpened by the 
consciousness of a declaration made first to himself, and 
then to her, that he would not marry until ."she was esta- 
blished in the world. This rested in his heart and in his 
mind " the Plinlimmons never broke a promise, made 
even to themselves." 

Miss Everingham, very soon after the dessert was put 
down, excused herself on the plea of anxiety to see dear 
Lady Hester, and departed forthwith, not without re- 
ceiving a most piteous look from the earl, as if imploring 
her to stay a little longer, and a request from the marquess 
to let him have an account of his dear Hester as speedily 
as possible. 

<( I wonder," said his lordship, e( when she will be suffi- 
ciently recovered to bring this matter to a termination. It 
is a very curious thing to see how women are affected. 
Our family have no complaints I mean no constitutional 
complaints; we die, like other people that's true but 
to all the common diseases of the world, in general, it 
seems we are not obnoxious." 

" That is very curious," said Lord Elmsdale. 

" Peculiar," said the marquess. " Not that these natural 
privileges are altogether confined to our blood ; the Stuarts, 
certainly, had the inherent prerogative of curing disorders 



THE MARQUESS. 34Q 

by the touch ; and we as far as I can read have never 
suffered from any ordinary malady. My great-uncle's 
grandfather's first cousin's sister died in the early part of 
George the First's reign of consumption ; but then it was 
a very rare disorder very few people, if any, had suffered 
by it ; its subsequent prevalence is attributed by some to 
the general use of tea. I recollect hearing that King James 
the First once said to an ancestor of mine, the thirteenth 
Baron Malvern, that tobacco was an invention of the devil 
himself ; but, for my part, I think the introduction of tea 
as injurious to the health as the other is unpleasant to the 
senses." 

This brief disquisition was intended to establish in that, 
which the gentle automaton was pleased to consider his 
mind, that the indisposition of Lady Hester was altogether 
bodily. 

" I don't dislike a cigar, myself," said his lordship, a 
saying which was received with a look of ineffable con- 
tempt from his exalted companion. 

" I think it must have been the chilliness of the air in 
the church," said Lord Snowdon, " immediately after the 
hurry and excitement of our progress, that affected my 
poor child." 

" I dare say it was," said Lord Elmsdale. 
" And yet the weather is not very cold yet." 
" No, certainly not," said the earl. 
A servant entered the room, and said that Miss Ever- 
ingham had sent down word that Lady Hester seemed 
much better. 

" If Sir Henry calls," said the marquess, "beg him to 
come to me after he has seen her ladyship. I am glad to 
hear that." 

" So am I," said Lord Elmsdale. 

" It has been a sad blow upon us, Elmsdale," continued 
the marquess, <f a very sad blow a disappointment one 
could not have calculated upon. The evening papers give 
a very fair account of it ; they make a sort of joke of the 
young parson's running away, and the old doctor's taking 
his place, which is low and vulgar, and might have been 
spared ; but, for my part, I care nothing for what appears 






350 THE MARQUESS. 

in the newspapers. I suppose the people who write them 
get their accounts of weddings, and dinners, and halls, 
from our servants or their own spies. It can, however, 
make no difference to people in our sphere, and so I never 
interfere one way or another it is quite beneath us." 

" Oh, quite," said Lord Elmsdale, whose fashionable 
notoriety had not yet become at all troublesome to him. 

" Well," said the marquess, " if wine can banish sorrow 
we have need of some help yourself. I think it would be 
well, Elmsdale, to fix a day for the marriage, as soon as 
we can ascertain about Hester's health ; the more speedily 
public gossip not that I care for it in the slightest degree 
is stopped, the better. We will hear what our excel- 
lent doctor says, if he comes, and regulate our proceedings 
accordingly." 

<c Yes, that will be the best way," said Lord Elmsdale, 
" or perhaps I was thinking of going out of town 



" Out of town, my dear fellow ! " exclaimed the mar- 
quess, in a tone of familiarity quite surprising to his timid 
guest, ' ' what on earth should you go out of town for ? " 

" To wait for Lady Hester's recovery," said the earl. 

" Why, I trust, she will be quite well almost as soon as 
you could order horses to your carriage," said the mar- 
quess. 

' * I don't know I think probably not/' said Lord 
Elmsdale. 

" Have you seen the physicians ? " 

" Oh, dear no no," said his lordship ; ," only I think 
it will require more time than perhaps you imagine to in- 
duce her to submit I mean consent agree in short 
I - " 

<f My dear Elmsdale," said Lord Snowdon, fe why you 
are dreaming ; a lady may have a fainting fit on a Mon- 
day morning, and yet be at a ball on Monday evening. 
I don't go to see her, because they advise her being kept 
quiet ; but three days will restore her, and I am anxious, 
because the St. Leonard's family are staying in town ex- 
pres." 



THE MARQUESS. 351 

" I really think," said the earl, looking serious, pale, 
and frightened, " that we ought not to hurry on the affair." 

" What an extraordinary cautiousness on your part," 
said the marquess. 

" I doubt," said the earl, " very much doubt, from what 
I have heard, whether Lady Hester will ever sufficiently 
recover to complete our marriage." 

" Complete ! " cried the marquess, " what do you mean 
by complete ? it is complete perfectly complete in 
every particular save one its termination." 

ft Yes, but that is a very important particular," said the 
earl. " I dare say it may be cold or it may be heat 
or it may be fever or it may be alarm but it's very 
curious to me, that the attack should have reached its crisis 
just when the young lady was asked the leading question, 
upon which the whole gist of the ceremony turned." 

" Do you imagine, Lord Elmsdale," said the marquess, 
" that the scene we witnessed this morning proceeded from 
any disinclination on the part of my daughter to accept 
you as her husband ? " 

te Why, now, to tell you the truth, my lord, I do," said 
the earl, in a sort of candid, conciliatory tone, which it is 
quite impossible to convey to the reader, but which seemed 
to imply, " There, now you have my opinion, and if you 
break my head for my ingenuousness I cannot help it." ( 

" You astonish me ! " said the marquess. " Can you 
believe so ill of a daughter of mine of a daughter of my 
house, as to imagine she would carry matters so far, so 
disingenuously ? " 

" I do not accuse her of disingenuousness," said Lord 
Elmsdale ; " on the contrary, I think she has never evinced 
the slightest affection for me that I must say." 

" Then might I ask, Lord Elmsdale," said the mar- 
quess, " what might have been your inducement to con- 
tinue your attentions, and carry them to the extreme 
point?" 

" I admire Lady Hester very much indeed," said Lord 
Elmsdale, who had never said so much in his life before, 
" and I felt, convinced I could be happy with her ; indeed 



352 THE MARQUESS. 

I think I could make myself very comfortable with any 
woman who was kind to me, if she felt so disposed and 
so I went on ; and seeing that you had entirely set your 
heart upon the match and I " 

' ' Me ! Lord Elmsdale," exclaimed the marquess, cc how 
do you mean that I had set my heart upon the match ? " 

" It struck me that you wished it particularly." 

" For my daughter's sake I wished it," said the mar- 
quess ; " that is, if she wished it too." 

<( Ah ! that is exactly the point/' replied Lord Elms- 
dale ; " I am convinced she does not wish it. And I am 
quite sure I speak from what I have seen in other 
cases far as the matter has proceeded, I am sure if it 
were practicable, it would be a wise thing, even now, to 
break it off." 

" Indeed ! that is your opinion, my lord ? " said the 
marquess ; " and pray, sir, what hinders its being broken 
off?" 

" That you must decide," said Lord Elmsdale ; " as far 
as I am concerned, I repeat I think it would be wise to 
do so ; but if it could be considered in any way casting a 
reflection upon your family " 

" Upon my family, Lord Elmsdale ! " cried the mar- 
quess : " how should your violation of a compact, sir, pos- 
sibly injure my family?" 

" I am not going to violate a compact," replied the 
earl, " on the contrary, I am ready to fulfil it ; but I re- 
peat, if it could be avoided, I am, sure we should be con- 
sulting Lady Hester's happiness by adopting that course 
I know it is too late now " 

ef My lord, it is by no means too late," said the mar- 
quess. " Do you imagine that I shall suffer my daughter 
to be taken from me, by a person expressing the sentiments 
you have just now broached ? What grounds have you for 
supposing yourself disagreeable to her ? " 

1 e I have already said the public have already seen," 
said the earl. " I imagine I cut a very ridiculous figure 
this morning ! and I tell you, Lord Snowdon, in perfect 
sincerity of heart, that if the attempt to unite us was to- 
be renewed, the scene of to-day would be repeated. She 



THE MARQUESS. 353 

dislikes me she has convinced me of it and although 
I have the highest regard and affection for her, I think it 
my duty to her and to myself, to you, and to all of us, to 
declare my opinion upon that point most clearly and un- 
equivocally." 

Lord Snowdon entirely agreed with Lord Elmsdale in 
his view of this part of the subject : he could not blame 
his child's taste, but the thing that puzzled his lordship 
was, how the gentle automaton had found out the fact. 
Who had been enlightening him ? he had not been out of 
his sight above half an hour in the day, and that half 
hour he was in his own drawing-room it struck him at 
last. 

" You were in conversation with Miss Everingham, 
when I came into the drawing-room before dinner, Lord 
Elmsdale ? " said the marquess. 

" I was." 

" I conclude that you gleaned from her the ideas which 
you have now adopted as your own ? " said Lord Snowdon. 

" I gleaned them from my own observation," said the 
earl ; " and however much gratified and flattered I must 
be by having such a wife, if I could avert the evil, I would 
avoid the possession of her, if it were to make her miser- 
able, which I am sure it would." 

" You undervalue yourself," said the marquess : <e Hester 
speaks of you with kindness and esteem." 

" Ah ! " said Lord Elmsdale, ' ' the whole affair is an 
error, from beginning to end. I repeat I am ready to fulfil 
my engagement, and the more ready, because I see no 
chance of withdrawing without an eclat, which to me would 
be very disagreeable." 

" The public eclat, I think you as much overrate," said 
the marquess, " as you underrate your own private qualities 
and merits." 

" I see nothing like happiness in the prospect," an- 
swered the earl ; "and if I am satisfied indeed I am 
already of Lady Hester's indifference if a course could 
be pointed out by which I could retire without injuring 
her " 

" Sir," said Lord Snowdon, flying into the most furious 

A A 



354 THE MARQUESS. 

rage, " you have already talked of injuring my daughter 
by your withdrawal. You tell me she has publicly ex- 
hibited her indifference her dislike is not that sufficient 
reason for your withdrawal ? I am not the man to hear 
your desire to withdraw from my family expressed as a 
threat. If such be your feeling, there can be no difficulty 
in gratifying it, at your earliest convenience." 

" What should I do, Lord Snowdon ? " said the earl, 
who found that he had fired the train. 

" Do, my Lord Elmsdale ! " said the marquess, " take 
your hat and go ; and if Lady Hester does not give herself 
the trouble of inquiring after you, I shall not trouble her 
by mentioning your lordship's name again to her. My son 
has not the advantage of your acquaintance, and has declined 
even the honour of being present at your marriage. No- 
body will question your decision at least nobody on my 
part or in my behalf whatever arrangements may be ne- 
cessary to conclude this separation of our interests, can be 
made by our respective men of business." 

" 1 hope, Lord Snowdon " said Lord Elmsdale. 

t( Our hopes, my lord, are at an end," said the mar- 
quess ; saying which, his lordship rang the bell the 
servant entered. 

" Lord Elmsdale's carriage," said the marquess. 

The servant saw that a storm had been raging, and pro- 
ceeded to find the chariot, which, if the marquess had not 
either resolved to sacrifice every thing to effect, or had not 
in reality lost his recollection in his rage, he must have 
known could not at that early hour have arrived. 

Lord Elmsdale did not, as indeed he well could not, 
hesitate as to his next move : but making a slight, and 
what he meant to be a particularly dignified bow to the 
marquess, quitted the room, and in a few minutes after- 
wards the house. 

Thus had the Marquess of Snowdon, in a moment of 
irritated pride, kicked down the fabric which he had for 
months been constructing with infinite pains and labour ; 
and thus had Lord Elmsdale, by a simple appeal simple 
enough to nature and truth, achieved for poor Lady 
Hester, what nothing else in the world could have accom- 



THE MARQUESS. 355 

plished. The idea of condescension or consideration from 
the second Earl of Elmsdale, whose grandfather had been 
a sugar-baker, was to the Marquess of Snowdon unbear- 
able ; and without at the moment reflecting upon the 
" effect," which the result of the affair would have upon 
the world, or upon what was almost as dear to him as the 
world's opinion, his union with Elizabeth Oldham, he 
spurned with indignation the alliance, which two days 
before he lauded to the skies, as the most admirable con- 
nexion that could be found for his daughter. 

To see Lady Hester then would be in the highest degree 
imprudent ; imbued as he was with the belief of Miss 
Everingham's active agency in the whole affair, he dare 
not trust himself with an interview with her. It was early, 
but he could not bear to be alone he ordered his carriage 
immediately, and drove to Brookes's, having of late gone 
there rarely, and having been put up at White's the week 
before ; there he remained till about twelve, and thence 
proceeded to Crockford's, when, finding nobody, he re- 
turned to Grosvenor Square, and having heard that Lady 
Hester was going on favourably, retired to bed, but not to 
sleep. 

In the mean time Lord Elmsdale, who, although quiet as 
a lamb, felt there was something due to his character and 
station, proceeded to the Travellers, where he found 
that which, they say, is so difficult to find upon any other 
occasion a friend ; to whom he detailed the occurrences 
of the evening, subsequently consulting him upon the pro- 
priety, or rather the necessity, of sending the marquess a 
message. As the incivilities of the Illustrious were exhi- 
bited in a tete-a-tete; and no personal rudeness had been 
displayed which could justify such a proceeding ; and as 
Lord Elmsdale told the story, which nobody but the mar- 
quess himself could contradict (and he was the last man in 
the world to admit himself to have been in a passion), the 
" friend at the Travellers" scouted the idea of calling him 
out; and the seceding earl retired peacefully to his re- 
sidence at half-past eleven o'clock, and before one was as 
sound asleep as if he had not been half-married in the 
morning. 

A A 2 



356 



THE MARQUESS. 



CHAPTER XI. 

WHEN the marquess awoke after a restless night, he felt a 
confused recollection of having taken a very decisive mea- 
sure the preceding evening, with regard to his daughter's 
marriage; and, in that brief moment of mystification, 
when, between sleeping and waking, the imaginary and 
the real are so curiously blended, the impression upon his 
mind was, that he had acted not only rudely but rashly. 
In a few moments, however, he was (< himself again/' and 
resolved, that having taken this course, nothing should 
divert him from it, or induce him to seek a reconciliation 
with Lord Elmsdale, in whose opinions of his daughter's 
feelings and sentiments his lordship could not help per- 
fectly agreeing. 

His first inquiry was after Lady Hester, in reply to 
which a message from Miss Everingham informed him that 
she had slept during the night, and was much more calm, 
and less feverish, than she had been on the preceding even- 
ing. The marquess resolved to see her after breakfast, 
and then, having attended an appointment in Downing 
Street the most fruitful in events of any he had ever 
made he should proceed to Richmond to dine with his 
affianced one, and communicate the entire ee break off" be- 
tween the earl and Lady Hester. 

While he was at breakfast, Miss Everingham made her 
appearance, and, in a moment afterwards, was perfectly 
sensible that something had occurred to ruffle the serenity 
of the Magnifico. His lordship's answer to the common- 
place inquiry after his health bespoke the " temper of his 
mind." 

" I am as well, ma'am/' said his lordship, " as you 
could expect to find me." 

" I am sure "Miss Everingham was going to say. 

ff I am serious, Miss Everingham Lord Elmsdale is 
gone, ma'am gone from this house for ever You may 
tell my daughter that, after your own fashion. Lord 
Elmsdale thinks she will be glad to hear it so do you 
so do I ; but the departure of Lord Elmsdale is conse- 






THE MARQUESS. 357 

quent neither upon my daughter's conduct nor upon mine, 
but upon some idle gossip of yours, ma'am. 

Nobody who had not heard the sonorous <e ma'am," 
with which the marquess's angry addresses to ladies in- 
variably terminated, can imagine the harsh and tremendous 
twang with which the word came from his lordship's lips. 

" Mine, Lord Snowdon ! " 

" Yes, ma'am, yours," said the marquess. " You had 
some conversation with his lordship before dinner yester- 
day ; from that whatever its points might have been 
he gathered the idea if not the certainty that Lady 
Hester's illness at church arose from disinclination to him, 
which disinclination to him has its origin in an affection 
for somebody else." 

" My lord, I " 

" Ay, ma'am, J dare say there is no truth in this," in- 
terrupted the marquess. " I think a daughter of mine 
would scarcely permit her feelings to overcome her duty, 
and that this prepossession of hers is all imaginary ; but 
the earl does not think so ; he is a weak empty person, and 
his mind is soon imbued with the most absurd notions ; so 
it is he is convinced that her heart is engaged and so 
are you, ma'am." 

" Indeed," said Miss Everingham, trembling from head 
to foot, I " 

" I want no discussions," said Lord Snowdon, " nor 
shall I, at the present moment, press her upon the subject. 
I have taken a line, and adopted a course which must be 
followed and acted upon. Tell Hester, in the first in- 
stance, to have the jewels and trinkets with which Lord 
Elmsdale presented her properly packed up, and sent down 
to me, in order that they may be returned." 

" My lord," said Miss Everingham, " how shall I be 
able to break this important intelligence to her in her pre- 
sent state of mind ? " 

" What ! ma'am," said the marquess, " you think the 
joy will kill her ? No ; you may tell her in safety ; the 
Plinlimmons, thank Heaven, have strength of mind to bear 
surprises." 

A A 3 



358 THE MARQUESS. 

<f Her mind has been sufficiently tried during the last 
four-and-twenty hours," said Miss Everingham. 

" Well, ma'am/' said Lord Snowdon, fl all / con- 
sider at the moment are the proprieties and decencies of 
society ; it would have an exceedingly bad f effect ' if she 
were to retain these jewels an hour after the final rejec- 
tion of her lover ; for recollect,, ma'am, it was / who sent 
away Lord Elmsdale ; and recollect that, in telling this 
story, as you necessarily must, the point is, that the final 
separation took place at my desire it is no defection on 
the part of Lord Elmsdale, ma'am remember that but 
an expulsion on mine." 

" Would you not see Lady Hester yourself, Lord Snow- 
don ? " said Miss Everingham, whose alarm at the re- 
sponsibility which was imposed upon her by being made 
the channel of such a communication was strangely com- 
bined with excessive pleasure excited by the circum- 
stance itself, and who was in such a state of agitation, 
that she almost unconsciously suggested the thing which 
of all others would have been most dreadful to Lady 
Hester. 

" No, ma'am," said the marquess, " you have been the 
principal cause of this eclat reap the only advantage 
you are likely to obtain from it, in the gratification of 
communicating the success of your manoeuvres to your 
protegee." 

" Indeed, Lord Snowdon," said Miss Everingham, who 
had forgotten the extent of her communicativeness to Lord 
Elmsdale the day before, " I have never " 

" I tell you ma'am, I desire no discussion," replied his 
lordship ; " for the short time which we shall continue in- 
mates of the same house, let there be peace between us. I 
have observed, of late, a disposition on your part, and on that 
of my daughter, to rebel against my decisions, and oppose 
my desires. That she should be in some degree discom- 
posed by my intentions with respect to my second mar- 
riage is natural, and pardonable, and I forgive her ; but I 
regret that any influence should have been used to destroy 
all my arrangements about her union with Lord Elmsdale, 
which, for all our sakes, was most desirable, and the frus- 



THE MARQUESS. 3.59 

tration of which places her in a most awkward and delicate 
position." 

This was the first " notice to quit " that Miss Evering- 
ham had received. Her mind was satisfied upon that 
point her sailing orders had arrived, and the question 
which she had long been debating in her mind was com- 
pletely set at rest. Till now, she had imagined that 
perhaps she might continue to hold on after the marriage 
of the new Lady Snowdon, and so, between the family in 
Grosvenor Square and that of the Elmsdale's in the coun- 
try, make out a year as usual. 

if No, ma'am," continued the marquess, " do you tell my 
daughter what has happened. I am going out on im- 
portant business, but shall return at two ; then, knowing 
as she will, the great outline of the affair, she may, perhaps, 
bear a visit from me. That I am mortified, I admit, and 
deeply ; but I can scarcely blame her dislike of Lord Elms- 
dale he is a silly person ; and, in short, I consider the 
result, however unlucky in appearance, as an escape, in 
fact. You will let every body understand, Miss Evering- 
ham, that I am exceedingly gratified at having been able, 
with honour and propriety, to back out ; that is the tone 

and the right feeling upon the subject. So now, ma'am, 
I must wish you a good morning for the present ; remem- 
ber to have all the trinkets ready for me when I return, 
and tell Hester to expect me at two ; and tell her, ma'arn, 
that I do not believe a word about any prior attachment 
on her part, and that I forgive her for her share in this 
business." 

To all this Miss Everingham bowed assent, and so they 
parted ; she, however, not believing one syllable his lord- 
ship said, with regard either to his feelings or forgiveness, 
but, on the contrary, being convinced that he was acting a 
part in what, from all she knew of his character and tem- 
per, promised to turn out a domestic tragedy. 

To different scenes the actors immediately repaired ; 

Miss Everingham to communicate what had occurred 
to Lady Hester, Lord Snowdon to hear what the premier 
had to communicate. 

The difficulty which Miss Everingham experienced 



360 THE MARQUESS. 

arose, as the marquess had truly said, from the certainty she 
felt of the powerful effect which her intelligence would pro- 
duce upon Lady Hester's mind. This difficulty, however, 
was most curiously and considerably diminished by the cir- 
cumstance of Lady Hester's preparation for the intelligence 
by her maid, who was in possession of the whole history of 
the " break off" long before the marquess thought proper 
to make the communication to Miss Everingham. Lord 
Elmsdale's valet had made his call at Lord Snowdon's 
early in the day, and detailed the arrangements made by 
his lord for his immediate departure to the Continent; 
the travelling carriage having been sent to the coach- 
maker's, in order that the united arms of Plinlimmon and 
Mudge (the family name of Lord Elmsdale was Mudge !) 
might be painted out ; all the servants hired for the in- 
creased establishment being to be paid off in the course of 
the afternoon. 

" Putting all these little circumstances together, Mrs. 
Simmons," said Lord Elmsdale's man to Lady Hester's 
woman, " it satisfies me that there is a screw loose some- 
where ; what it is, in course, I don't pretend to know as 
how should I ? but, as far as the marriage between our 
houses is concerned, rely upon it, it's N. G. no go." 

Fired by this intelligence, so eloquently conveyed, was it 
possible for Mrs. Simmons to conceal her knowledge or 
restrain her curiosity ? Knowing so much, she must know 
more ; and knowing that her lady certainly did not know 
so much as she did, could she " hide her candle under a 
bushel ? " could she seem ignorant of what must be 
generally known in a few hours, and what was then a 
secret ? Of what use is a secret if one mayn't tell it ? 
thought Mrs. Simmons ; and thus it was that Lady Hester, 
although unable clearly to understand what had actually 
happened, was, in a great degree, prepared for the details 
which were to justify the extraordinary intelligence of her 
intelligent servant. 

It is impossible to describe the relief which the poor 
young lady felt, the weight which seemed to be lifted from 
her heart, when she became fully sensible of what had 
really occurred. She, like Miss Everingham, dreaded the 



THE MARQUESS. 36l 

calmness of her father a vindictive man when calm is a 
tremendous object ; but let his anger take what shape it 
might, any thing was better than the marriage with Lord 
Elmsdale, whose bad qualities, she was convinced, would 
now be magnified by her father, whose course, in affecting 
to consider the frustration of the match he so earnestly 
desired on the previous day a most happy event, she had 
anticipated even before her kind friend told her, what 
" tone " was to be given to the affair, in order to produce 
the " effect " the marquess intended. 

At the premier's, much more decisive results were ob- 
tained. Lord Snowdon's propositions had received the 
most marked attention, and at the crisis, into the details of 
which it would be quite superfluous here to enter, his aid 
and support was of such importance, as to be supposed 
capable of turning the nicely-balanced scale of parties. 
The dissolution of parliament was still delayed ; and an 
idea appeared to prevail, that ministers would meet the 
House of Commons as it was then constituted : in this 
case a difficulty arose about Lord Snowdon's zeal, for it 
was hardly to be hoped that the five Whigs whom he had 
returned would all immediately turn right round at his 
lordship's suggestion. Upon minor points, and indeed 
upon many points, these independent patriots would not 
have hesitated to put their helms hard up, and go about, as 
the breath of their patron filled the sails ; but they had 
characters to lose, and therefore it was only in the event of 
a dissolution that Lord Snowdon could be of material 
service, for if the parliament met, and his five declined 
ratting this, however, was supposing an extreme case 
he could only get them out by so far wounding their 
politics as to induce them to take the Chiltern Hundreds, 
and make room for other men of better politics ; but this 
could not be done in time to secure their votes apon the 
first important divisions of the session. Nevertheless, 
there they were, bound hand and foot, and delivered over 
to their enemies, it depending entirely upon their own 
strength and spirit, whether they would break their bonds 
and save their honour by a speedy flight. 

As to the marquess's influence in the upper house, it 



362 THE MARQUESS 

had certainly received a blow in the difference between 
him and Lord Elmsdale. One vote gone but this was a 
matter upon which he did not dwell, and his power was 
still important ; the bargain too was already made ; and 
this,, with a few conditions annexed to the office itself, 
formed the leading features of his negotiation for the de- 
sired governor-generalship. On this important morning, 
those conditions were accepted, the agreement was ratified, 
and the marquess congratulated by the premier upon his 
appointment to the Indian vice-royalty. It was not 
desirable that it should be publicly mentioned just yet 
but it was his. 

Many people have seen the vast Gog and Magog high 
aloft in the Guildhall of the City of London, and from 
below, marvelled at their stupendous size. They were 
Boralowskis to the million, compared with Lord Snowdon 
in his own estimation, as he walked along Whitehall on 
his return towards Grosvenor Square. His eye seemed to 
reproach the sentinels on duty for not saluting him, and he 
appeared even disappointed that the king's guard itself did 
not turn out as he approached. 

All great benefits have their drawbacks the sun hath 
its spots ; and the corresponding evil of the marquess's 
great good was, that he was bound not to mention it 
publicly. Every body he met bowed and spoke as usual ; 
his rank and station as it was commanded the respect he 
received ; but, if they had only known that he was the 
real, sole, and original Bahauder, governor-general of un- 
countable millions but, no matter, the day would soon 
come when it must be known ; and in the mean while, to 
no ear but one would he confide it to his Elizabeth's 
she was an exception to any general rule of silence, she was 
his own, and moreover destined to share with him the 
glittering musnud, and protect the suffering people of 
Munneystumpum. 

He had now to perform a different duty : he had to 
descend from his oriental stilts, slide down from his lofty 
howdah, fixed on his tallest elephant, and betake himself 
to his suffering daughter's bedside ; to be sure, the cer- 
tainty of his elevation to the long-desired honour had 



THE MARQUESS. 363 

sweetened his lordship's temper it made him think of 
the broken marriage as something of secondary consider- 
ation, which would scarcely have troubled his mind, if it 
had not overset his arrangements for the establishment of 
Lady Hester previous to his departure. 

Had she married, all difficulty about her, during his 
absence, would have been obviated she would have been 
settled, and there an end ; but now, he was puzzled how 
he should act : of course she could not remain living with 
Miss Everingham in his town and country houses ; it 
would be necessary that she should reside with her aunt, 
an aunt who was the aversion of the marquess, because she 
never had forgiven him his conduct to her late sister during 
her lifetime, and because she never humoured his pride or 
encouraged his vanity, and above all, because she believed 
in his resemblance to the facetious and versatile Mr. Bug- 
gins, of the T.R.C.G. 

About his son, the marquess had made up his mind not 
to think at all. He had written him a brief but severe 
answer to his letter, of which he had never spoken truly to 
Lady Hester. He reproached him with ungraciousness 
and ingratitude, and supposed the case of his refusing to 
join him in making the necessary provision for the future 
marchioness. To this last part of his letter he had as yet 
received no answer he expected it daily ; his hope of 
compliance rested rather upon the influence of Burford 
over Lord Malvern, than his son's own feelings : he had, 
he felt convinced, secured Burford's most strenuous exer- 
tions in his favour, and insured his co-operation in render- 
ing Malvern eventually reconciled to the marriage. How 
far his lordship had succeeded, we, who know something of 
<f both sides," may perhaps be better able to judge than his 
lordship. 

Incidents began to thicken : just as the marquess turned 
the corner of Pall Mall, he met his excellent friend the 
Duke of St. Leonard's, to whom he was himself going, to 
relieve him and the duchess from any farther delay in 
town, in the expectation of completing the match between 
Lady Hester and Lord Elmsdale. The duke, however, 
had heard of the separation, and spared Lord Snow don 



364 THE MARQUESS. 

any lengthened explanation of the circumstances. The 
duchess had called, he said, in Grosvenor Square, to inquire 
after Lady Hester, and as circumstances had occurred, they 
had prepared to leave London the next day. 

" You have heard the news ? " said the duke. 

" No what ? " said Lord Snowdon. 

" Poor Lord Wansborough is dead." 

" Lord Wansborough ! " said the marquess. 

tc Yes/' said the duke ; (t there are a regiment, a go- 
vernment, and a blue riband, at the disposal of ministers 
what lucky dogs ! " 

The duke was a whig he thought the marquess one 
they had not talked politics together" for the last six 
weeks. The words ' f lucky dogs," which were used by 
his grace in a sneering and reproachful sense, sounded like 
music to the marquess's ears; the desired, promised 
riband vacant poor dear Lord Wansborough ex- 
cellent, amiable man all talent and virtue gone to 
heaven, if ever man went there, and, better than all, had 
left his George and garter behind him. 

" Which way are you walking, duke ? " said Lord 
Snowdon. 

Cf I am going to the Travellers," was the reply. 

C( I'll walk there with you," said his lordship. 

And so he did, but he did not stay there. Like Home 
Tooke, the duke stopped at Brentford the marquess 
went farther ; insatiable rat as he was, he returned forth- 
with to Downing Street, and communicated the intelligence 
he had just received of Lord Wansborough's death to the 
premier. 

" Yes, we knew that last night," was the answer ; which 
puzzled him, because he certainly had been promised the 
first blue riband, and it might at least have been men- 
tioned to him when he was there before ; as it had not, he 
entered his claim, got no specific reply, and walked back 
again to Grosvenor Square. 

The agitation, the aching anxiety, that sort of feverish 
doubt which hangs over a man, promised a thing and not 
quite certain that he is to have it ; a dread of hearing even 
the surmises of his own acquaintance, who, ignorant that it 



THE MARQUESS. 365 

is the object of his ambition, appropriate it to half a dozen 
different people all this, mixed up with his family 
worries, preyed upon the marquess, and sent him to Lady 
Hester's room absolutely calm, and even indifferent upon 
the point of which she so much dreaded the discussion. 

" How do you feel yourself, Hester dear," said his 
lordship, seating himself at the bedside, and taking one of 
her feverish hands in his. 

" Better, sir," said Lady Hester. 

(i You were surprised, 1 conclude," said the marquess, 
" at the abrupt termination of our connexion with Lord 
Elmsdale." 

Lady Hester could answer only by tears. 

" You must not flurry yourself, dear child," said the 
marquess ; " I believe you are indebted to Miss Evering- 
ham for the denouement." 

" Me ! my lord ? " said Miss Everingham, who was 
sitting at a table at the other end of the room. 

(C I think so," said Lord Snowdon ; " however, my 
maxim is, never let the world see that a family is agitated 
by domestic conflicts it has the worst possible effect. 
Nothing could be more injurious to you, my dear child, 
than the idea that Lord Elmsdale had been driven away, by 
reports of your having conceived some prior attachment, 
which 1 am convinced Miss Everingham's conversation 
with him led him to believe. This induced him to use 
expressions to me, conveying an idea, that if I proposed to 
force him into the marriage, he was ready to submit ; but 
that he felt it right to do so, only lest you should suffer in 
the estimation of the world by his declining it. This I 
could not endure: the idea that the grandson of Mr. 
Mudge, the sugar-baker, of Pudding Lane, fancied himself 
condescending to preserve the respectability of a daughter 
of mine, was too ridiculous to be borne for a moment. I 
confess I lost my temper, and behaved even rudely ; but I 
was angry, and am ready to answer for it if called upon." 

" Oh ! my dear father," said Lady Hester, the remark 
so sadly coinciding with her previously expressed appre- 
hension of some personal quarrel, in which the marquess 
might be consequently involved. 



366 THE MARQUKSS. 

" Do not alarm yourself, Hester," said the marquess ; 
' ' these mongrels never fight they snap and snarl, and 
run away ; however, had he been a man of my own 
pretensions I could not have endured the notion of being 
patronised and supported. No I declare if it had been 
the oldest duke of the empire, who had been on the point of 
marriage with you, under the same circumstances, I should 
have acted similarly, even if there were no chance of your 
ever having another offer. I would rather than submit to 
such an indignity, see you married to my steward or 
Malvern's tutor or any body." 

This was an accidental wound, but it was a sharp one. 
Luckily, in the energy of declamation, the marquess had 
let go his daughter's hand, or he would have felt the effect 
of the shock he had inflicted. What did he mean ? 
that was Lady Hester's first thought when she recovered 
from the blow did he suspect did he fancy had 
Miss Everingham, in her zeal and anxiety to produce the 
effect which she had so successfully brought about, and 
which now filled them with so much terror, either by 
accident or design, glanced at the individual who had 
gained Lady Hester's heart ? 

ft My mind," continued Lord Snowdon, (i is at present 
too deeply occupied with matters of first-rate importance 
public matters in which I am likely soon to be more 
deeply engaged " (never did man so long to tell the whole 
history of the governor-generalship and the garter) " to 
enter into a discussion upon the arrangements which it will 
be necessary to make upon my marriage, now that yours 
is at an end. I shall probably leave England for some 
time ; and I think it might be advisable to inquire of your 
aunt, Lady Ospringe, whether she would be inclined to 
afford you a home during my absence. " I need not," 
continued he, " I am sure, refer to the fancy conjured up 
in Lord Elmsdale's head brains he has none about 
your having formed an attachment for some other per- 
son." 

" Rely upon it, sir," said Lady Hester, " you shall never 
have occasion to reproach me upon that point." 

" That is somewhat evasive, Hester," said the mar- 



THE MARQUESS. 



36? 



quess ; et the tone and manner of the answer are not 
marked with your usual frankness and candour." 

" Consider, Lord Snowdon," said Miss Everingham, 
" Lady Hester has had much upon her mind within the 
last few hours." 

" Not too much upon her mind, ma'am, to answer me, 
when I ask a question," said his lordship. 

" I mean to say," said Lady Hester, sobbing, " that 
Lord Elmsdale's retirement can have no connexion with 
such a subject I cannot speak trust me, my father 
trust me you shall never have a cause of complaint." 

" This is trifling ! This, ma'am," said his lordship, 
addressing Miss Everingham, " this is a corroboration of 
your tattle this authenticates your gossip ! Who is the 
man ? tell me this instant." 

Father, dear father ! " said Lady Hester. 

' ' 1 insist upon knowing ! Who is it ? " cried the 
marquess. 

" Mr. Burford, my lord," said a voice, soft and gentle, to 
the infinite astonishment of Lady Hester and Miss Ever- 
ingham. 

" Who's there ? " exclaimed the marquess ; " what is 
this ? " 

" Me, my lord," said Mrs. Simmons, turning as pale as 
death at the marquess's question, put with all the vehe- 
mence of anger. 

" What is it you say ?" said Lord Snowdon. 

" Hall has sent up word, my lord, that Mr. Burford is 
in the library," replied she. 

" Burford ! What, the tutor ? " asked the marquess. 

" Yes, my lord, from France, I believe he said," 
answered the wretched hair curler. 

" Say I am coming." 

" For this relief much thanks," thought Mrs. Simmons, 
who lost no time in absconding, and sending down the 
answer by the footman, who had brought the message up 
stairs . 

" I am in despair," said Lord Snowdon ; " there is 
more in this affair than I yet know but I will unravel 
it. I love you dearer than my life ; but if I find that you 



368 THE MARQUESS, 

have been playing a game with me deceiving me 
tricking me laughing at me there is no power that 
shall prevent me from casting you off, and thrusting you 
from me, loaded with my bitterest curses. It is not, Lady 
Hester, for your own disgrace I shall punish you j it is 
for the disgrace you must bring upon your family. Re- 
collect what you owe to your station ! Remember your 
ancestors, and do not hope that the annals of our house, 
pure, honourable, and noble as they are, shall be stained in 
my lifetime by the daughter of my love. No deceit 
and treachery I abhor. I yet must hope you innocent 
but if that hope is fallacious not even the desire I feel of 
seeing happiness in my family will hinder me from dis- 
tinctly marking to the world my view of the degradation 
you have entailed upon your name." 

Saying which, his lordship quitted the room, as nearly 
mad as any rational creature well could be, who had no 
grounds whatever for believing that which was, in fact, 
really true. Lady Hester might have been in love with a 
duke or a dancing-master, a marquess or a mountebank ; 
he could not tell who might be the object of her affections, 
even supposing they were pre-engaged but the thing was 
fixed. He convinced himself first, that she was attached 
to somebody ; and then, from her backwardness to confess 
the fact, he flew to the conclusion that the object of her 
affection was somebody so much beneath herself, as to make 
her certain that the mention of his name would incur his 
most violent denunciation. 

That he was right, unfortunately right, poor Lady 
Hester and Miss Everingham felt ; and their miseries and 
agonies were not in a little degree heightened, first, by his 
lordship's extreme hypothesis concerning the ultra disgrace 
of his daughter's marrying Burford, and, secondly, by the 
extraordinarily opportune or rather inopportune men- 
tion of his name in the way of announcement by the 
trembling Simmons. 

" Only conceive," said Lady Hester, " Mr. Burford is 
here ! he brings news, no doubt, from Malvern. Will he 
stay ? in all probability he will dine here, Anne. You will 
see him inquire, inquire every thing about my brother ; 



THE MARQUESS. 369 

to him, and him alone, who loves me, must I look for aid 
and advice. I cannot expect my father to delay his mar- 
riage, nor does he intend it. It is I who have broken the 
engagement into which he entered, not to bring home a 
new wife to my mother's house till I was gone." 

" If Mr. Burford dines here," said Miss Everingham, 
" I will manage " 

ff Take care, take care, my dear Anne," said Lady Hester ; 
"be cautious lest my father should suspect and, oh, to 
what a wretched state am I reduced, to wish to elude his 
vigilance. I am guilty, guilty, guilty ! and yet this care- 
fulness is not for myself; it would bring ruin upon Mr. 
Burford. My father has been beyond measure kind to 
him the thought what we have heard just now decides 
that the idea that I oh ! Anne, I must not trust my- 
self to think." 

" Be at rest, dear Lady Hester," said Miss Everingham, 
" all will go well. You heard your father say that he is to 
quit this country for some years after his marriage. Rely 
upon it, he is appointed ambassador at some foreign court. 
You will be left under the care of Lady Ospringe. No 
offer will be forced upon you. Lady Ospringe will be a 
powerful friend in time of need ; she is your own aunt, 
the sister of your excellent mother. If Lord Snowdon con- 
tinues in that determination, nothing more advantageous to 
your peace of mind could happen." 

"Ah !" said Lady Hester, " I believe that I could find 
no better or more agreeable home than my aunt's ; but my 
life is destined to be a blank to me. I have sinned, and 
deserve to be punished repentance is the lot marked out 
for me." 

The conversation was here interrupted by the entrance 
of Simmons, who was the bearer of a letter from Lord 
Malvern to his sister. The address was a convincing proof 
that the intelligence of the overthrow of the marriage had 
not reached him it was directed to the countess of Elms- 
dale. The expression of Mrs. Simmons's countenance 
when she delivered the packet formed a striking and agree- 
able contrast to the tear-bedewed faces of the ladies. 

Burford's arrival was to himself most inopportune. He 

B B 



370 THE MARQUESS. 

had so timed his visit to his patron, that he should arrive 
the day after the wedding, when the bride should have left 
the house, and all the outward signs of nuptial gaiety have 
been removed. He, with his mother and sister, reached 
town from Dover about half past five ; and without stopping, 
even to change his dress anxious, if possible, to leave 
London the next morning for Silgrove, hurried up to 
Grosvenor Square, and found himself tete-a-tete with the 
marquess, doomed to hear all the details of the misadven- 
tures of the preceding day, and to listen to the heart-rend- 
ing intelligence that Lady Hester was seriously ill, still 
unmarried, and under the same roof with himself. 

That he must dine with the marquess he found inevitable; 
he had no possible excuse to offer for declining his invita- 
tion, or, as his lordship felt, " command." He accord- 
ingly (f obtained leave" to return to the hotel at which he 
had deposited his mother and sister ; and having apprised 
them of the extraordinary event which had occurred, and 
made himself fit to appear in Grosvenor Square, returned 
to the mansion of the marquess. 

Although we have safely landed the Burfords in London, 
the reader may, perhaps, not be displeased to know in what 
manner the progress of the party was continued after their 
arrival at Beauvais, where we left them quietly established 
on the first night after their departure from Paris. 

In the morning there did not appear any very strong 
disposition on the part of any of the travellers to hurry 
their preparations for departure ; it seemed and it is a 
feeling that must have occurred, at one time or another of 
every man's life, and woman's too as if they were all 
perfectly happy and contented where they were, but that, 
at the same time, it was all too pleasant not to be a little 
wrong. Burford was pleased to see his kind friend in such 
good spirits, considering all that had so recently occurred, 
and Mrs. Burford was pleased because her son was pleased ; 
that Maria was pleased she took no great pains to conceal, 
for in truth it was the happiest week of her life, and the 
young lord was pleased because he saw every body else 
was pleased. 

Still there hung over them all a sort of reserve a kind 



THE MARQUESS. 3?1 

of restraint, unaccountable as it was natural. Lord Mal- 
vern selected Maria for his companion; and as she leant 
upon his arm, and listened to his agreeable conversation, 
she felt a regret, which she could yet scarcely characterise, 
to think that in two days more they were to part and 
part for ever. The quiet, domesticated Lord Malvern, of 
Beauvais, attending with reverence to the history of Jeanne 
Hachette, related to the party by a woman who looked old 
enough to have been her contemporary, and then sauntering 
about into the manufactories, and cheapening tapestries, 
and bargaining for silks, merely to make conversation, was a 
different being to Lord Malvern, in his proper sphere of 
action, where, amongst his peers and contemporaries, his 
society would be courted, his goodness flattered, and his 
greatness deferred to. The arm on which she leant was 
destined for the noblest and the fairest of her sex ; the 
hand that kindly pressed hers when they met or parted, 
would be sought by the mighty and designing ; and all this 
passed through her gentle mind, and produced no feeling, 
save one it was a womanly feeling: she felt no regret 
that she could not always share the fate and fortunes of 
Lord Malvern ; all she lamented was, that he with whom 
she could have been so happy was so much her superior. 

This sentiment, moderated as it was by delicacy of 
feeling, dignity of character, purity of heart, and piety of 
mind, was more, infinitely more dangerous to Maria's hap- 
piness, than she at the moment fancied. The attentions 
which Lord Malvern paid her were marked, and now 
characterised by a constant deference to her opinion, and 
a frequent appeal to her taste and judgment. Her mother 
watched her during these " three glorious days," as Mal- 
vern thought them, with the tenderest anxiety. Still, 
what could she do, how act ? She could not, like an i]l 
bred boor, call her child away from the society of their 
best and warmest friend : she could not force herself upon 
Lord Malvern's attention, or seize his arm to exclude her 
child. The excellent parent had been over cautious, and, 
as will happen sometimes, had been caught in her own 
trap. The young lord delighted in Maria's society ; and, 
although he did not go the length of suspecting that she 



372 THE MARQUESS. 

was hurried away from Paris to secure her from his ad- 
vances, he resolved, by assuming the arrangement of the 
journey, to keep her near him to the latest possible mo- 
ment. 

At Beauvais they attended mass in the cathedral that 
was unlucky. To hearts that sympathise, full of undeclared 
and untold love,, nothing is more congenial than the solemn 
strains of church music : the swelling organ, the uplifted 
voice, the holy feeling which the sacred place itself in- 
spires, excite in minds, disposed as those of Malvern and 
Maria were at the moment, a combination of feelings more 
powerful than words can express. As the chant of the 
priests and choristers reverberated amidst the traceries of 
the roof, Maria felt a chilly coldness run through her 
limbs, succeeded by [a glowing flush which suffused her 
cheeks, and when the elevated Host was presented to the 
prostrate people, she lost the recollection of every thing 
around her, and bursting into tears leant for support upon 
her kind companion. 

Brighter in Ms eyes than diamonds were those tears of 
genuine sensibility ; dearer to him that artless burst of 
feeling than all the studied phrases of society, and all the 
cant of morbid sentimentality. 

After this incident, the manner of Lord Malvern to 
Maria was evidently changed. He could no longer talk 
fluently upon indifferent subjects ; he no longer seemed to 
take an interest in passing objects : he walked silently and 
slowly homewards, the conversation being confined to his 
inquiries how she felt, and her answers which, it must 
be confessed, partook, in a great degree, of the character of 
the questions. 

They left Beauvais soon after noon ; but not until Maria 
was perfec tly recovered. Restoratives were assiduously ad- 
ministered by the attentive nobleman ; and his anxiety in 
watching the effect they produced upon the young lady's 
headache was infinitely greater than any he had expressed 
upon any other subject since his sister's letter had cured 
him of all solicitude about his once loved heartless Elizabeth 
or, as he was wont in other days to caliber his Eliza. 
The weather was fine and favourable ; but Burford soon 



THE MARQUESS. 3?3 

perceived for Lord Malvern kept his schemes entirely to 
himself that they were destined to pass another night 
upon the road. Nobody could complain ; but it was not 
until the beginning of this day's journey that Maria herself 
felt nervous and uneasy in any serious degree : she sat 
opposite to Lord Malvern in the carriage, and was sure by 
his altered manner that she must have done something to 
effect the sudden change she observed ; the frank openness 
of his conduct had given place to a gentle, yet more soli- 
citous, care about her, wholly different in its character, and 
particularly painful to her, because it seemed that he was 
devoting a care and attention to her of which she ought 
not to be the object. The moment this feeling was ex- 
cited, it was clear that all Mrs. Burford's precautions had 
been useless. 

The journey proceeded much as usual. On the road 
from Beauvais to Abbeville, where his lordship proposed to 
halt for the night, there is nothing worthy of remark : a 
wide open country, almost undotted by houses and un- 
enlivened by villages, is all that greets the eye ; it seems 
marvellous how the corn which covers the vast space on 
every side is sown or reaped, human beings appear so 
scarce ; in fact, Picardy is extremely well described by the 
riddle of a map, in which there are rivers without water, 
towns without streets, and houses without inhabitants. 

After a tiresome trajet, the party, less happy, and more 
uneasy than they had yet felt themselves, reached Abbeville, 
where Lord Malvern's courier had prepared every thing 
for their reception. After dinner, Maria complained of 
headache, and retired for the evening ; the conversation 
was flat ; the day of Lady Hester's marriage was fast ap- 
proaching ; in forty-eight hours she would have become 
the wife of Lord Elmsdale. This depressed Burford ; his 
depression lowered the spirits of his mother, who was the 
more anxious about his evident unhappiness from her 
ignorance of its real cause ; and Lord Malvern was more 
dull than either of them, because Maria, who was the un- 
happiest of the party, had left them. 

To be sure the next day might bring some thin g brighter; 

BBS 



374 THE MARQUESS. 

and, at all events, there was another church and a very 
fine one too to visit at Abbeville. 

The morning came, and with it a promenade, but the 
ease and frankness of the previous day were wanting. 
Whenever Lord Malvern appealed to Maria upon any sub- 
ject, she referred to her mother, who, with Burford, was 
walking behind them. She seemed conscious of the diffi- 
culty of her situation ; and what, four-and-twenty hours 
before, was an apprehension that she was too happy, had 
become a certainty that in four-and-twenty hours more she 
should be miserable. 

At Abbeville they visited the cathedral, admired the 
colossal statues of its fa9ade, and its Gothic towers (luckily 
they were not there during the hours of service), and 
having perambulated its streets, returned to the inn, and 
resumed their journey. 

They reached Calais on the eve of Lady Hester's mar- 
riage, and they also appeared to have reached the acme of 
melancholy. Lord Malvern and Burford were engaged in 
long and thoughtful conversations, and Maria's depression 
was unmitigated by any liveliness on the part of her mother. 

It was in the afternoon of the wedding day that the 
Burfords took leave of the Continent and Lord Malvern ; 
his lordship having charged Burford with the communi- 
cation to his father, which he felt had better be made ver- 
bally, as the opportunity offered, than by letter, respecting 
his readiness to accommodate himself to his wishes as re- 
garded the settlements, announcing that he should stay at 
Calais until the return of Burford, in readiness to receive 
his father's solicitor, and execute any necessary " act and 
deed" for the arrangement of the affair. 

The parting of the party was painful in the extreme. 
Lord Malvern offered his arm to Maria; she looked as 
though she ought to give precedence to her mother. This 
ceremonious feeling was new and artificial, and very suspi- 
cious. His lordship overruled her scruples, and walked 
along the pier. 

Neither spoke. At length Lord Malvern, in a subdued 
tone, and evidently struggling with strong feeling, said, 

' ' Shall you remain entirely in England ? " 



* 



THE MARQUESS. 375 

Ci I believe so," replied Maria, with an air of affected 
gaiety and indifference, and knowing nothing of her fate or 
her mother's intentions. 

" Where at Silgrove?" said Lord Malvern. 

" That must depend upon Charles's hospitality," replied 
the young lady. 

" I shall hear of you from him," said Lord Malvern. 
" Do you correspond with him ? " 

" Not very regularly," said Maria. 

" I wish you would," said his lordship. 

Maria did not answer. 

" It will be my greatest pleasure in my self-imposed 
exile to hear of you, Maria," said Lord Malvern. 

" My mother is beckoning me," said Maria; "we are 
going wrong, Lord Malvern." 

" Are we ? " said his lordship. 

" I am sure we are," said Maria and she thought 
so too. 

" Why go at all ? " added he ; his throat seemed parched 
his hands were cold. Why had he delayed declaring 
his feelings? it was now too late yet he would have 
given the world to speak ; all he could say was ' ' Maria, 
I believe I am mad." 

This was spoken in an under tone, and Maria did not 
hear it that is, she would not. What a, situation for 
such a couple to be placed in ! Look at all the connexions 
and intricacies, all the "wheels within wheels," which 
were at work in the world ; consider the confusions and 
irritations, and all the evils which must evidently result 
from any serious termination of such an affair, and then 
do justice to the solicitude and anxiety of Mrs. Burford, 
in using every practicable means to prevent what, had she 
been as mean and mercenary as Lady Katharine Oldham, 
it would have been her most anxious desire to secure and 
conclude. 

Burford was completely broken down. He could not 
but recollect that the day of parting from his friend was 
the day on which all that he held dear in the world was 
to be taken from him eternally ; and Malvern, when he 

rvently pressed Maria's hand, felt angry with himself 
BB 4 



376 THE MARQUESS. 

that he had suffered any feeling connected with any other 
subject to have kept him from accompanying them. His 
leave-taking of Mrs. Burford was full of that grateful con- 
sideration which a noble heart can feel for disinterested 
kindness. The word was given, and the steamer went her 
way ; and Malvern watched her, marked as she was by 
"her pendant of smoke," till the distance and the dark- 
ness of evening hid her from his sight. He returned to 
Quillacq's, to pass the first of a series of very agreeable 
evenings. 

This is the brief history of the journey and voyage ; and 
Burford having devoted the time which has been occupied 
in the narrative of their career to Calais, to making himself 
fe amiable," finished his operations exactly in time for us 
to find him at dinner at Lord Snowdon's in Grosvenor 
Square. 

The dinner was dull enough. Before Miss Everingham, 
the marquess did not choose to exhibit any symptoms of 
interest about his son, although in his earlier interview 
Burford had explained Lord Malvern's readiness and 
anxiety to meet his wishes, and convinced the marquess 
that he had no feeling with regard to his marriage which 
might not be overcome ; not daring, however, to enlighten 
his lordship as to the original cause of his absolute detest- 
ation of it. 

Miss Everingham, finding that Lord Snowdon kept the 
conversation upon every topic except the one to which she 
was most anxious to lead it, very soon retired, and left the 
marquess and the rector of Silgrove tete-a-tete. 

" Burford," said his lordship, ef I have been a good deal 
puzzled, and a good deal surprised to-day, at a circum- 
stance to which I at first paid very little attention, but 
which at present strikes me as important, and upon which 
you, from your intimacy with Malvern, and his unlimited 
confidence in you, perhaps can enlighten me. Lady 
Hester's fainting in church, which I have detailed to you, 
I attributed to some physical cause, however indisposed to 
such weaknesses our family may be ; but Lord Elmsdale 
you see I talk to you as confidentially as Malvern does 
Lord Elmsdale imagined it to proceed from some personal 



THE MARQUESS. 377 

dislike to himself, and thence concluded that she had 
formed some other and earlier attachment." 

" Yes, sir/' said Burford, just able to speak. 

" Of this I thought nothing, because I know the defer- 
ence she pays to my opinions, the readiness she has always 
evinced to follow my suggestions ; and indeed because I 
know, above all, that it had so happened, that no persons 
for whom she could possibly entertain any regard of that 
nature have been about the house, except merely as casual 
visiters, and therefore I scouted the idea altogether ; but 
this afternoon I had been down to Downing Street twice, 
and when I came in, I had a conversation with her, in 
which, to my surprise, I found, for the first time in my 
life, her answers to my questions on that particular point 
were evasive and by no means satisfactory." 

" Indeed ! " said Burford. 

" Now, what I was going to ask," said Lord Snowdon, 
" is, that as Malvern and his sister have always been per- 
fect friends, and almost constant companions, whether you 

I don't desire any breach of confidence of course not 

it is not in my nature to do it but, I mean, did you, 
in the course of ordinary conversation, ever hear Malvern 
say any thing which could lead you to believe that she had 
formed any sort of attachment for any body ? " 

" No, my lord," said Burford. " I certainly never 
heard I Lord Malvern has expressed an opinion to 
me, that her ladyship could not, as he imagined, knowing 
her taste and disposition, admire Lord Elmsdale." 

" Lord Elmsdale ! " said the marquess " my dear Bur- 
ford, Lord Elmsdale is an ass a perfect simpleton. I 
don't talk of him he is gone. If he had belonged to us, 
I should, of course, as the best possible policy, have upheld 
him, and put him forward ; but he is gone. I don't know 
such a person I am speaking of any former attach- 
ment." 

" I never heard Lord Malvern mention any thing of the 
sort," said Burford. 

<f Well, now, I'll tell you what you must do for me," 
said the marquess ; " whether you go down to Silgrove to- 
morrow or the next day cannot make much difference 



378 THE MARQUESS. 

stay in town till Thursday ; do me the kindness to bring 
Mrs. Burford and your sister to dinner here to-morrow, 
and we'll get them a box at some play it will amuse 
them j and come early. I know that Lady Hester has a 
very high opinion of you, independently of the feeling she 
naturally entertains towards so great a favourite of her 
brother. There is something like awe in the character of a 
father ; and although no man has less to frighten any body, 
about him, than myself, I can easily conceive, upon such 
a point, that sort of diffidence which is generated by ap- 
prehension. Now really I have no object in the world but 
to ascertain the fact. If it should be so, and the man is 
a gentleman, and of talent and accomplishments, and of 
that sort of fortune which is consistent with her prospects, 
1 declare I care not the least whether he is titled or un- 
titled, or what his politics, or any thing of that sort. Now, 
having that feeling, I think that you if you will do me 
the favour might, in an interview to-morrow they 
tell me she will be in her boudoir visible to friends 
might talk to her and, in the course of conversation, 
discover whether Lord Elmsdale's suspicions are correct ; 
for I ought to tell you, that our cousin Anne seems to in- 
dulge in the same fancy." 

" I fear, my lord," said Burford, " that I must go to 
Silgrove to-morrow, or " 

" Really," said the marquess, " I almost wish that 
I had given Silgrove to somebody else, if its possession is 
to rob me of your society, and deprive me of your services 
in so justifiable a cause." 

" My lord," said Burford, " forgive me " 

if Forgive !" said Lord Snowdon, " my dear Mr. 
Burford, there is nothing to forgive. I have no claim upon 
you ; so far from it, I consider that you have a claim on 
me for much more than I can ever bestow, for the great 
and essential services you have rendered Malvern : indeed, 
to speak the truth, I attribute the change in his opinions 
upon the subject of my marriage entirely to your kind- 
ness." 

" No, Lord Snowdon," said Burford, " you wrong your 
son : from his own heart sprung the right and proper 



THE MARQUESS. 379 

feeling, which I have been happy enough to communicate. 
The sudden surprise, acting upon a warm aud sensitive 
mind, caused the letter, of which your lordship perhaps 
reasonably complains." 

" But, Mr. Burford/' said the marquess, ft the objec- 
tions are the same the same lady is the object the 
same events will be the result." 

" True, my lord," said Burford ; " but I of 
course, as I told Lord Malvern, on points of feeling, I felt 
1 had no right to interfere. He wrote hastily, perhaps 
wrongly, in the first instance ; but subsequently " 

" Upon your counsel," said the marquess, " he amended 
his conduct I know it. I only wish I had a deanery 
for you ; and then, perhaps, I might induce you to assist 
me in finding out the alleged penchant of Lady Hester." 

There sealed his fate with Burford, the most noble the 
Marquess of Snowdon. That he believed the living of 
Silgrove would purchase his dependent's influence with his 
son in favour of his marriage, we know ; that it had done 
so, he fancied ; and he suffered his belief upon that point 
to escape him. This Burford manfully repelled ; but 
when his lordship followed up the blow by the supposition 
that an increased promotion would produce a decreased in- 
dependence, and seeing Mr. Burford little knowing the 
cause shrink from the interference with Lady Hester, 
suggested a deanery as enough to make him quite subser- 
vient to his patron's views, he effectually fired the train. 

To ask Burford to extort a confession from his daughter, 
which confession would make her his own, was something, 
and not a little ; and Burford was prepared to resign all 
his offices connected with the Snowdon patronage, rather 
than attempt a duty which he could not, in the common 
course of nature, fulfil. The last insolent observation of 
the proud man terminated all his doubts as to the course 
he should pursue. 

It grew late; the conversation flagged; Burford pre- 
pared to go ; the marquess repeated his invitation to his 
mother and sister, and urged his calling at {t about twelve." 
To all these propositions, Charles returned civil but incon- 
clusive answers. He certainly had not anticipated the oc- 



380 

currences of the day ; and least of all did he imagine, 
that he should have been called upon to perform a duty 
even more tremendous to him than that which he had so 
studiously and skilfully avoided. He took his leave, and 
promised that the marquess should either see or hear from 
him before noon. 

The marquess shook him by both hands, congratulated 
him on his good looks, went forth even from the door of 
the dining-room (for they had not gone up-stairs) three 
feet into the hall, inquired the state of the weather, and 
did all the little good-naturisms of a third-rate twaddler, 
in order to please his chaplain, and, above all, to give the 
" tone" to the establishment. 

Burford hurried to his hotel ; the marquess stalked to 
his bed-room ; and as he passed through the passages 
which led to it, with all the dignity of a governor-general^ 
he might have been seen rubbing, with the palm of his 
hand, the place on his coat which was so soon to be occu- 
pied by the promised star of the illustrious order of the 
Garter ! 



CHAPTER XII. 

IN the morning, Lord Snowdon arose full of the anticipa- 
tion of seeing his dear Elizabeth. He proposed, after 
Burford's interview with Lady Hester, and after he had 
possessed himself of the secrets of the confessional, to pro- 
ceed to Richmond, where he intended to dine and stay the 
night ; his lordship having, since the conclusion of his en- 
gagement with Miss Oldham, caused rooms to be secured 
for him at the Star and Garter, where he slept and break- 
fasted, upon the occasions of his not returning to town in 
the evening. 

On his breakfast- table his lordship found several letters ; 
amongst which, the first that caught his eye was one from 
the premier ; it was brief these were its contents : 

\ " Downing Street, 

" MY DEAR MARQUESS, 
" I am going to Windsor to-day. ' I am in great hopes 



THE MARQUESS. 381 

of being able to carry our point : you must not, however, 
be too sanguine. 1 hear that a personal promise from 
head-quarters stands in our way under the circum- 
stances I think this may be got over. The king comes to 
town to-morrow, and you shall hear the moment I get 
free. " Yours faithfully." 

This did not exactly please him. He felt assured that 
if he had had to deal with a Whig ministry, personal pro- 
mises, or personal wishes, would very soon be got rid of, 
not by being overcome, but by not being attended to ; but 
as it was, he apprehended that the minister might concede 
to his master, and that he should lose his object, almost 
the dearest object of his life, and which he had, as he con- 
sidered, actually been promised. As for the idea of making 
an extra knight of that select and illustrious order to which 
he aspired, the idea never suggested itself. 

The next letter his lordship opened was from Burford 
the reader must have a perusal of it. 

" Hotel. 

" MY LORD, 

" It is with considerable difficulty, and under feelings 
of a most painful nature, that I address your lordship on 
the subject of a conversation which I had the honour of 
holding with your lordship last night. 

" It will be unnecessary for me to enter at length into 
the reasons which suggest themselves to my mind, in op- 
position to your lordship's wish, that I should become the 
medium through which your lordship might ascertain the 
real state of Lady Hester's feelings upon subjects of the 
most delicate nature, into the discussion of which, as I last 
night stated, I consider myself neither officially nor per- 
sonally justified in entering with her ladyship. 

" 1 trust that my conduct for the many years through 
which I have had the honour of being connected with your 
lordship's family will be a sufficient evidence of my 
anxiety to do my duty rigidly and faithfully ; indeed the 
very flattering manner in which your lordship has been 
pleased to evince your sense of my humble yet zealous 
services is a sufficient testimonial of the good opinion I 



382 THE MARQUESS. 

have constantly laboured to secure and maintain. It is 
with this conviction, that I have to entreat that your lord- 
ship will not attribute my positive refusal to converse with 
Lady Hester upon the topics to which your lordship last 
night referred to any indisposition to attend to your lord- 
ship's wishes whenever my duty may be justly required, 
but to a consciousness on my part of unfitness for the task 
which your lordship would assign me, and of the impro- 
priety of which I should be guilty in assuming a character 
in your lordship's family which it forms no part of my 
functions to maintain. 

" It is, however, impossible, particularly after an observ- 
ation made by your lordship last night, that I should not 
be fully sensible of the favours with which your lordship 
has been pleased to honour me, nor can I, with that con- 
sciousness upon my mind, believe that I ought to continue 
to enjoy the benefits you have conferred upon me, enter- 
taining, as I do, an opinion so widely different from that 
of your lordship, upon the character of the obligations 
which those favours impose. I, therefore, most respect- 
fully and thankfully, beg leave to resign into your lord- 
ship's hands the presentation to the living of Silgrove ; and 
I have by this post written to Lord Malvern, to announce 
to him that my character of tutor to his lordship terminates 
with this day. 

" It is, I assure your lordship, not without the greatest 
pain that I have come to this decision. I part from Lord 
Malvern with a regret founded upon the warmest esteem 
and affection for the qualities of his head and heart; con- 
vinced that his later life will fully justify the^ expectations 
which his early career has naturally excited. I trust, that 
in what I have offered in justification of the conduct I 
have felt it due to my character to adopt, I shall not have 
had the misfortune to offend your lordship, than which, I 
beg to assure you, nothing is farther from my thoughts or 
wishes. " I have the honour to be, 

" My lord, 
" Your lordship's faithful servant, 

'' CHARLES BUHFORD. 

" The Marquess of Snowdon, <Sfc. Sfc. <SfC." 



THE MARQUESS. 383 

" Capital ! " said his lordship, as he hegan to re-read 
the letter by the aid of a pocket pair of spectacles, which 
he always used when alone, and for the quiet enjoyment of 
which he invariably breakfasted in his own room, except 
when he had visiters in the house ; and for which reason, 
he also always breakfasted at the inn, when on his Phi- 
landering excursions to Richmond " Capital ! This is, 
indeed, the march of intellect, or of impudence ! The 
schoolmaster is abroad now, or the deuce is in it ! Resign 
a living and a tutorship, because his patron asks him to 
have half an hour's serious conversation with his daughter 
impertinent upstart ! " 

Saying which, his lordship indignantly threw the letter 
on the table, and then began to think that the " imper- 
tinent upstart" had the best of the discussion. The 
living, however, might be of use in forwarding his public 
views ; it was not much for a minister, but he would, at 
all events, put it at his disposal immediately upon his 
return from Windsor ; but, then, what was he to do 
about his son ? Malvern would be left alone, and a thou- 
sand to one would form some unfortunate connexion ; and, 
perhaps, disgrace his house, and lose the heiress that was 
bringing up for him, by a marriage beneath himself. 

It was extremely embarrassing. He had declined 
coming over ; yet clearly, as the marquess believed, under 
Burford's influence, had behaved most handsomely in 
worldly matters. He was at Calais the solicitor was to 
meet him there and he was to go to him the third day 
from the present one. That arrangement had been made 
under the idea that Lord Malvern was at Paris. Lord 
Snowdon resolved on making his homme d'affaires the ne- 
gotiator of a peace between them, and instruct him, if 
possible, to induce his lordship to come back with him ; a 
course he was led to adopt, by having discovered, from 
Burford's conversation, that the asperity of his feelings with 
respect to the marriage was considerably moderated. 

All these things, however, were to be put by for the day. 
All were secondary to the duties of the lover, which the 
noble marquess was that morning going to pay. He for a 
moment doubled whether in his visit to Lady Hester 



384 THE MARQUESS. 

before his departure he should mention Burford's letter 
and resignation ; but he speedily decided to say nothing 
about it, and the reason for his silence was a cogent one. 
If he mentioned the resignation, he must naturally mention 
the circumstances which had led to it ; and hence his 
daughter would discover the design he had of ensnaring 
her into a confession of her prepossession in favour of some- 
body, by the instrumentality of the man whom he thought 
he had bribed sufficiently to induce him to commit a mean- 
ness, and undertake a commission, which, even if it had not 
been wholly out of the question as he was personally si- 
tuated, would have been wholly unworthy of the character 
he had hitherto supported, or the profession which he had 
adopted. 

His lordship's visit to Lady Hester was brief, cold, and 
uninteresting. She was in her boudoir, looking ill and un- 
happy ; indeed the strange notoriety in which the cir- 
cumstance of the incomplete marriage had involved her, 
and the consciousness she felt of being obnoxious to public 
remark and observation, had a serious effect upon her 
mind, while the knowledge that Charles Burford and her 
father had been closeted for nearly five hours the preceding 
day and evening, kept her, during her stay in her room, in 
a constant flutter lest he should begin to speak of him, or 
quote his opinion, or perhaps announce a visit from him in 
the course of the morning, than which nothing could have 
been more natural. But, no her nervousness was un- 
called for ; the marquess never mentioned him never 
alluded to him nor did a syllable escape him with refer- 
ence to any thing connected with him, except inquiring 
of Lady Hester, what Lord Malvern had said in his 
letter. 

ec There were not half a dozen lines in the note," said 
Lady Hester : " he imagined I should have left town, 
and " 

Here her utterance was stopped by tears the marquess 
took her hand in his and pressed it. 

" There, there, Hester dear," said his lordship, " do not 
worry yourself never mind I have no wish to know 
any thing about the letter be calm I will leave you 



THE MARQUESS. 385 

talking is too much for you I shall not return till to- 
morrow let me find you better when I come back." 

His lordship kissed her cheek, and making a cold 
and ceremonious bow to Miss Everingham, quitted the 
apartment. 

To what a different scene did his lordship forthwith 
transport himself ! In less than an hour he was in the 
billiard-room at Lady Katharine's villa, which, as he 
approached it, was ringing with mirth and laughter. 
Luncheon was just over,, and Elizabeth Oldham and a 
Miss Macaw, a neighbour, were playing billiards, Frederick 
Richardson was marking, Lady Katharine and Mr. Losh 
were playing battledore and shuttlecock in the hall, and 
Miss Cammomile, the ci-devant governess, now on the 
half-pay of the family, was performing waltzes on the 
piano- forte in the drawing-room. Several little dogs were 
barking in different directions, and Lady Katharine, while 
she took her exercise, was talking in a tone of voice, louder 
and shriller than any thing else, either vocal or instru- 
mental, in the house. 

" Why, how gay you are, Lady Katharine," said the mar- 
quess, standing amazed. In a momentary lull his lord- 
ship's voice had been heard down went the billiard maces 
out of one of the windows hurried Frederick Richardson 
and Miss Macaw away went the shuttlecocks and bat- 
tledores off scampered Miss Cammomile, and in came 
Miss Oldham looking beautiful. She ran to the marquess 
with an air of affectionate playfulness, and his lordship re- 
ceived her with a condescension at once gratifying and sur- 
prising. 

" My dear marquess," said Lady Katharine, " we 
thought you were lost ; poor Elizabeth has been crying 
her eyes out as I tell her, she will cry herself blind. 
Upon my word, I do recollect a circumstance it was in 

Hampshire an old gentleman " 

" Come, Elizabeth, said the marquess, " let us take a 
stroll I have a great deal to tell you, and a great deal to 
hear ;" saying which, he led her out of the range of Lady 
Katharine's fire, which her ladyship immediately turned 
upon Mr. Losh, who, devoted as he was only to her lady- 
c c 



386 THE MARQUESS. 

ship's " feeds/' as he elegantly called them, would gladly 
have spared her ladyship the exertion which she volun- 
teered. 

Her ladyship, however, felt it incumbent upon her to 
pursue Lord Snowdon, in order to inquire after Lady 
Hester's health, and to condole with him upon the disap- 
pointment, which she had heen prevented doing on the 
morning it occurred, by a more interesting engagement at 
the else deserted breakfast-table. 

" Elizabeth," said the marquess, when they were alone, 
<f were you ever trusted with a state secret ?" 

" No, dear," said Miss Oldham. She always called him 
dear. 

" Do you think you could keep one, if you were ?" 

" To be sure," said Miss Oldham, " try me." 

" It is more important to you than many state secrets 
would be," said the marquess, " for you are very intimately 
concerned with it." 

(( Indeed ! " said Miss Oldham, " how I should be con- 
cerned in a state secret I cannot imagine." 

" Of course you will remember that I am pledged to 
silence," said the marquess, "and not even Lady Katharine 
must know what I am going to trust you with I am 
appointed governor-general of India." 

" Of India ! " said Elizabeth, her face lengthening in- 
stead of lighting up " dear me !" 

" Do you not rejoice ? " said Lord Snowdon ; " are you 
not aware of the splendour, the magnificence, the power, 
the authority, the dignity of the office, all of which are 
reflected upon the lady of the governor-general ? " 

" Oh ! it is very fine," said Miss Oldham, " but then it 
is India after all ; and consider what a distance Bengal is 
from Hyde Park Corner." 

" Yes, but, Elizabeth," said the marquess, disappointed 
in the highest or rather deepest degree, u there is a king in 
England, and no subject may lawfully expect to fill the 
throne ; but in India, I shall be king emperor and 
you, Elizabeth, will be my queen." 

" That sounds very grand," said Miss Oldham, " but 
I'm sure, when one looks at the people who come back 



THE MARQUESS. 387 

from your future empire, and see their poor dear little yel- 
low faces, and bald heads,, and white lips, and black teeth, 
it is no great temptation to go." 

" Oh," said the marquess, " those people have been 
living there for half centuries, and, as you say, come back 
dried up, living mummies ; but our residence will not ex- 
tend over five or six years, and I am determined to main- 
tain the character with a magnificence yet unknown even 
in that magnificent country." 

" But then there is the voyage, dear," said Elizabeth ; 
" that horrid ship we shall be, how long ?" 

" Four months, perhaps," said the marquess ; " but, we 
shall be together." 

" Yes," said the lady, " that will be very agreeable ; 
but yes dear me, only think, four months at sea. Is 
one sick all the time ?" 

" I trust not," said the marquess. " However, Eliza- 
beth, I have another bit of news for you this, however, 
is not quite settled I am to have the blue riband.'" 

" Indeed ! " said Miss Oldham ; " why, dear, how 
smart you will look." 

" It is not so much for effect," said Lord Snowdon, who 
lived and would have died for effect alone, " as it is for the 
honour of belonging to an institution so illustrious, that I 
value it." 

" But I thought, dear," said Miss Oldham, whose pert- 
ness partook so much of na'tvete, and whose manner of 
delivering impertinences with an air of naturalness was so 
extremely puzzling as to leave the hearer in doubt whether 
she was the most impudent or the most innocent of her 
sex "I thought you were in opposition to the government, 
how comes it that they have given you these fine 
things ?" 

" Why, Elizabeth," said the marquess, who felt himself 
more puzzled by the young lady than he had been for 
some time by any body, fi I that is the circumstances 
of the country seem to me to have so far changed their 
appearance, that I" considered it a matter of duty to tender 

my support to the government, and " 

c c 2 



388 THE MARQUESS. 

" Oh I" said Elizabeth, bursting out into a loud laugh, 
' ' why then, dear, you are in fact what they call a rat ! " 

" No, my love," said the marquess, " you are wrong 
there you confound terms : I am glad of it I hate a 
female politician ; but the word rat is never applied as you 
have just now applied it if a Tory becomes a Whig, he 
is called a rat ; but, if a Whig has the good sense to be- 
come a Tory, he is never designated by that extremely 
coarse term." 

" AU I know is," said Miss Oldham, " that Lord " 

" Never mind, my dear girl," said the marquess, " you 
need not illustrate your position by, examples ; all I wish 
you to believe is, that I have been actuated in my change 
of sentiments by nothing but a desire to do my duty to 
the country." 

" You are a dear good creature," said Miss Oldham. 

I am afraid," said Lord Snowdon, " that this elevation 
to vice-royalty for we must call it nothing more will 
turn your little head." 

" Oh, no," said Miss Oldham ; " I would much rather 
you had stuck to your old politics, and we had remained at 
Old Lionsderu." 

<f I see," said the marquess, " it is the voyage that 
alarms you ; but remember, we shall have a man of war 
to convey us I am promised the Royal Tiger, an eighty 
gun line-of-battle ship, so that we shall have plenty of 
suitable accommodation. And then consider the patronage, 
secretaryships, and aides-du-campships, and all sorts of 
things ; and I shall have my chamberlain, and my master 
of the horse, and my steward, and my comptroller of the 
household, all with white staves, and a household uniform ; 
and then my body-guard, besides havildars, and subadars, 
and jemidars, and kitmagars, and half a hundred other 
officers, all in attendance upon the marchioness 
Elizabeth ! " 

Saying which, his lordship tenderly pressed her delicate 
hand, and snatched a kiss from her rosy lips. 

" Who are going to be your aides-du-camp, dear ? " said 
Miss Oldham. 

" Why," said the marquess, " I have not made any 



THE MARQUESS. 389 

certain arrangements ; indeed, I am pledged to take one 
or two gentlemen upon Downing Street recommendations." 

(< I should think it would be a good thing for Frederick 
Richardson, dear," said Miss Oldham ; " he has no for- 
tune, and he is remarkably clever and agreeable he 
would be quite an acquisition out there." 

" We'll see about it," said the marquess : " he never 
occurred to me. Perhaps he would not like to quit his 
regiment ? " 

" Oh, I am sure he'd go, and be delighted," said Miss 
Oldham ; " shall I ask him ? " 

" My dear girl," said his Lordship, " have not I told 
you that the whole affair is at present a secret, a state 
secret? " 

" I'm sure you may trust him," said Miss Oldham : fi he 
is the least likely person in the world to tell any thing." 

" We must not try him yet," said Lord Snowdon ; " but 
I will not forget him : your wishes, Elizabeth, are com- 
mands." 

" What an important personage I am," said Elizabeth, 
" to command the great governor-general of all the In- 
dians ! " 

" You are a dear good girl," said the marquess, repeating 
the little affectionate playfulness which we before noticed. 

It would have been quite impossible had there unluckily 
been any witnesses to this scene in Richmond's bowers, not 
to have recalled some pathetic lines which occur in a fa- 
cetious song, once rendered extremely popular by the talent 
of Mathews, which contains the lamentations of Samson 
for the loss of his hair, while looking at, and listening to, 
the proudest peer of the realm, in the hands and under 
the control of our modern Delilah : her triumph, however, 
was as yet but half complete. 

At dinner the marquess was all smiles and amiability ; 
Lady Katherine as voluble as ever; Miss Macaw, seated 
between Mr. Richardson and his friend Losh, seemed to 
occupy Frederick ; while the governor-general was de- 
voting himself to Elizabeth, and Mr. Losh was behaving 
with great civility to Miss Cammomile, who dined at table, 
cc 3 



390 THE MARQUESS. 

and would have given one of her old eyes to have been 
any where else. 

Things were going on very smoothly so smoothly, 
that they are hardly worth recording until, about the 
middle of dinner, Frederick Richardson, the pet of the 
family, called out in a distinct and audible voice, 

" Lord Snowdon a glass of wine ? " 

Lord Snowdon returned no answer the question was 
repeated. 

" When the Marquess of Snowdon," said his lordship, 
" wishes to drink wine with Cornet Richardson, he will let 
him know it." 

" Here broke out the Burrah Saab Bahauder here 
came the pat of the lion which poor Lady Hester had so 
long anticipated. Mr. Richardson felt a momentary doubt 
what he should do, which of two courses to pursue 
whether he should laugh it off, or take the missile nearest 
his hand, and, having flung it at his lordship's head, quit 
the house, and wait the consequences : the latter seemed 
the most natural and justifiable line to adopt; but as 
Cornet Richardson had been told by Miss Elizabeth Old- 
ham, half an hour before dinner, the whole of the history 
of the marquess's appointment as governor-general, and 
her own scheme of making him one of the aides-du-camp, 
he resolved to take the pacific tone, in order not to quarrel 
with his excellency, but, on the contrary, to give him an 
idea of his passive qualifications for the situation in his 
household which he intended to fill. 

The explosion threw an additional damp upon the party ; 
but Lady Katharine was unquenchable, and the flow of 
her conversation continued in one unimpeded course. 

In the evening, Lady Katharine, her daughter, and the 
marquess, seated themselves on a sofa in the drawing- 
room, while the cornet and his friend, and Miss Macaw, 
chaperoned by Miss Cammomile, retired to the billiard- 
room " out of the way " of the Illustrious, who was evi- 
dently in a bad humour. 

His lordship, having communicated the history of his 
accession to office to his intended, felt it right to admit her 
mother into their confidence, convinced that the infirmity 



THE MARQUESS. 391 

of human nature would not suffer the daughter to conceal 
so important an event from her parent. Lady Katharine, 
who had but a very faint and confused idea of oriental 
geography, expressed a hope that there was no danger of 
yellow fever, and recounted several histories, none of which, 
of course, in the slightest degree related to the subject, 
and ended by an allusion to Mr. Burford, the tutor, as she 
always called him. 

" Mr. Burford," said the marquess, " was in town yes- 
terday, and dined with me." 

" Did Lady Hester see him ? " said Miss Oldham. 

(C No," replied Lord Snowdon, " she did not ; but why 
do you ask ? " 

<c Oh, nothing, dear !" said the young lady. 

"It is a curious enough question," said the marquess, 
" for I have parted with Mr. Burford finally, because he 
refused to see her." 

" Parted ! " said Lady Katharine " how ? " 

" He has resigned the living which I gave him," said 
his lordship, " and has ceased to be my son's tutor." 

" Dear me," said Lady Katharine, ' ' how sudden ! and 
for what did you say ? " 

(e I wished him," said Lord Snowdon, " to see Hester : 
she has a high opinion of him, and a respect derived from 
the affection which her brother bears him ; and I thought, 
perhaps, I might ascertain the real current of her feelings, 
and whether she has formed any attachment which, in 
point of fact, caused the separation between us and Lord 
Elmsdale." 

" And Mr. Burford would not undertake the task ? " 
said Miss Oldham. 

" No : he declined it," said the marquess. 

" I think I could guess why," said Elizabeth. 

ff And so could I," said Lady Katharine. 

" He puts it upon a general feeling of his not being 
justified," said Lord Snowdon : "he writes in a very high 
strain, and, I think, rather mistakes his position." 

" He may put it upon what he pleases," said Elizabeth, 
" but I know what I know only, we never tell tales out 
of school do we, mamma ? " 
cc 4 



392 THE MARQUESS. 

fe No," said Lady Katharine. (( I remember once 
I was brought up at a great school and Mr. Oglander, 
whose daughter ' 

" My dear Lady Katharine/' interrupted the marquess, 
ie I beg you a thousand pardons, but what is the circum- 
stance connected with Mr. Burford that " 

" You tell, mamma," said Elizabeth. 

" Oh, I don't know that there is much to tell," said 
Lady Katharine : " I remember noticing particularly, 
Elizabeth don't you recollect ? it was the day after 
we had been to the fancy ball at Horseden by the way, 
that reminds me of what I heard yesterday from Chelten- 
ham, where the Limpetts have been staying old Mr. 
Limpett is the man who " 

" But, Lady Katharine Mr. Burford ? " said the 
marquess. 

" Oh, I'll tell you, dear," said Elizabeth ; " mamma 
has such a roundabout way of telling things : all we know 
at least, all I know is, that when I used to be so 
much with Hester, and Lord Malvern and Mr. Burford 
were going about with us, I used to notice how fond 
Hester seemed of him ; and I remember saying to mamma 
that I thought some day we should hear of Hester's run- 
ning away with him that's all." 

" All !" said the marquess, ct all ! do you call it all ? 
It is indeed all for what more could be wanting to 
drive me mad ? How blind, how foolishly blind, I must 
have been ! Now I see the whole thing now it opens 
upon me at once. Burford persuaded Malvern to stay 
away from the marriage because I proposed to him to per- 
form the ceremony. Now I can account for the girl's 
agitation when his name was mentioned ; now I can un- 
derstand the affectionate intercourse between him and my 
son. Fool that I was ! I had actually begun a letter in- 
sisting upon the impertinent coxcomb's retaining the 
living humbling myself to the viper whom I have 
cherished to sting me in the tenderest part." 

" Dear me, Lord Snowdon," said Lady Katharine, " I 
wish we had not mentioned it ; for, after all, as I re- 
member saying to old Mrs. Dando, when we were playing 



THE MARQUESS. 39$ 

whist at the Dowager Lady Slyman's who, by the way, 
has]|sold her cottage in Sussex to Captain Smithson, the 
man who is going to be married to a niece of Lord Barn- 
ford's, by his second wife for my part, I never say any 
thing " 

" Madam," said the marquess, " you have said enough 
to drive me mad ! But why, Elizabeth, why did not you 
you, who, situated as we are, ought to have no secrets 
from me why did you not put me on my guard ? " 

" Why should I, dear ? " said Miss Oldham ; " I saw 
Lady Hester was going to be married to Lord Elmsdale 
I concluded she had forgotten all about the tutor ; and as I 
found her seemingly well pleased with the new match, I 
made a point of never alluding, in the slightest degree, to 
any thing that had occurred during the period of our 
greatest intimacy, when mamma and I were staying at 
Lionsden." 

" True, dear, true," said the marquess : " what should 
you judge from but appearances ? and she never men- 
tioned the man's name to you ? " 

lf Never, in the remotest degree, alluded to him," said 
Elizabeth. 

" It is strange, too, how she could have avoided it," 
said the marquess, " for I suppose she spoke constantly of 
her brother." 

" Why," said Miss Oldham, colouring crimson for 
she had not yet quite overcome the amiable weakness of 
blushing " no she did not talk much of him to me." 

" That is singular," said Lord Snowdon, " and con- 
vinces me that her avoidance of the subject was a matter of 
gn ; she felt she was treading upon tender ground." 
I dare say she did," said Miss Oldham. 

" However, Lord Snowdon," said Lady Katharine, " you 
must not fancy that we have any very strong grounds for 
this belief I always think of what Mrs. Crawford used 
to say she afterwards married Sir Simon Spoonbill, the 
methodistical baronet, who was thrown out of his phaeton, 
near Croydon, close by Purley, where Home Tooke wrote 
his book. By the way, Home Tooke " 

" Has been in heaven these twenty years," said the 



vine 

" 



94 THE MARQUESS. 

marquess, " where I sincerely wish Mr. Burford had been 
before him. However, to-morrow shall end all doubts 
upon this point ; Lady Hester is sufficiently recovered to 
bear the scrutiny to which I am resolved myself to subject 
her ; and " 

" Perhaps/' said Miss Oldham, " Mr. Burford may not 
object to converse with Lady Hester upon any other topic. 
Is he likely to call in Grosvenor Square to-day ?" 

This mischievous inuendo for Elizabeth hated Lady 
Hester, because she knew Elizabeth's falseness failed of 
effect. Lord Snowdon knew enough of Burford, however 
deeply he might be implicated in the love part of the affair, 
to be quite certain, that after having written the letter 
which he had that morning received, he would make no 
clandestine or covert approaches to his house. On his 
lips there were bitter words affecting Burford ; but in his 
mind, although he was too proud to own it, a high opinion 
of the tutor's honour and integrity. 

C( No, Elizabeth," said the marquess, tf I have no ap- 
prehensions of such a visit. Mr. Burford would not, 
under the circumstances, call on my daughter, and if he 
did, I think I know my daughter too well to believe that 
she would receive him." 

The marquess had, however, received a blow an un- 
expected blow and prejudiced as he now was, and disap- 
pointed as he had been because Burford could not be 
brought to consider the preferment which he had bestowed 
upon him as a retainer for services, inconsistent with his 
character and incompatible with his feelings, he now felt 
convinced that the show of honourable indignation which 
he made in his letter was a mere pretence to get rid of the 
obligations under which he felt himself ; while the affec- 
tion which he professed for Lord Malvern was, in fact, the 
adulation of a flatterer, fawning upon the heir of the house, 
and securing, by the most undignified concessions to his 
will and wishes, his interest in promoting his ruinous con- 
nection with his sister. 

Perhaps Miss Oldham had no seriously evil intentions in 
making these disclosures of her belief in Lady Hester's at- 
tachment to Burford ; but malicious people might fancy 



THE MARQUESS. 395 

that the dislike of her present proceedings, which Lady 
Hester made no effort to conceal, and her consciousness 
that Lady Hester knew a secret which she dare not even 
whisper to her father, might have led her so to enrage the 
marquess against his child, that she might be induced, 
nay compelled, to keep silence upon the point concerning 
which Elizabeth most dreaded her. Miss Oldham little 
knew the awe in which Lady Hester stood of her father, 
and by the manner in which she managed him herself, 
could ill appreciate the timidity and caution with which 
others who had not the power of fascination like hers 
approached him. 

Intentional or .not, the deed was done the fate of 
Lady Hester was sealed; and such was the eagerness, 
as well as violence of the marquess's fury, that he felt in- 
clined to cry because so many hours must necessarily 
elapse before his rage could burst upon her a rage in- 
creased in a tenfold degree from its justifiable force by the 
unpardonable circumstance of his having been himself 
blind to the circumstance, and the dupe, as he considered 
it, of his own child ; never calculating that he himself had 
placed his children at an immeasurable distance from him, 
and that his constant efforts appeared to be directed to 
checking their advances and chilling their affections. 

The marquess retired about eleven to the Star and 
Garter^; and in about half an hour after his lordship's de- 
parture, the remaining members of the party huddled 
closely round a small table, where cold chickens, and fruit, 
and an agreeable sort of potation, compounded by Lady 
Katharine's butler, after an old family recipe, held them in 
gentle converse till considerably past one o'clock, when 
the cornet and his friend started for Hampton Court, and 
the ladies repaired to their respective apartments. 

The difficulties which had, previously, so much occu- 
pied Lord Snowdon's mind with regard to Lady Hester, 
were now incalculably multiplied. To his eyes her mar- 
riage with Burford was ruin and degradation so deep and 
bitter, that the very idea was deadly. The more he con- 
sidered her conduct, the more he was convinced of the 



39 THE MARQUESS. 

justness of Miss Oldham's view of the attachment and 
what was he now about to do ? 

Burford had declared war he had relinquished every 
thing which bound him to the family and he, the head 
of that family, was about not only to cement a new connec- 
tion, which would naturally alienate him from the care of 
his daughter, even if he staid in England, but was on the 
eve of quitting the country for several years, leaving her 
although under the care of her aunt at the mercy of her 
own affections, and the importunities of her lover. 

This could not be. In the course of his sleepless night, 
he resolved that Lady Hester should accompany them to 
India. Insensible to the feelings of real attachment 
versed perhaps in the ways of the world, but ignorant cer- 
tainly of sentiments such as occupied poor Lady Hester's 
mind, he imagined that by taking her with him he should 
divert her thoughts from the object upon which they were 
so unfortunately placed ; and even if he failed in achieving 
that end, he at least should have her within his reach, safe 
from the advances of the last man in the kingdom whom he 
would that she should marry. 

That the future marchioness might object to this ar- 
rangement he did not doubt ; but he thought that by con- 
ceding to her all the little points which she had made, he 
might secure this, to him, most important one. In fact, 
the affair of the frustrated wedding had made so much 
noise, that he felt it would not be a disagreeable retreat for 
his daughter from London society ; and that when they 
returned it would be so far forgotten as to afford no serious 
ground for uneasiness, or any valid objection to other men 
of rank and fortune who might wish to come forward as 
her suitor. 

In order to carry his point, he resolved to nominate, 
according to Miss Oldham's desire, Mr. Frederick Richard- 
son one of his personal staff. He felt that this young man 
had behaved extremely well on the preceding evening, and 
had borne his gentle rebuke with great propriety. Upon 
him there could be little difficulty in prevailing to eat long- 
kept eggs and the drumsticks of turkeys ; and he was an 
amusing person ; and the marchioness liked him ; and so 



THE MARQUESS. 397 

Cornet Richardson was already, as far as his excellency's 
intentions went, gazetted in the Bengal Hukaro, A. D. C. 
to his excellency the governor-general. 

It was not until daylight that sleep closed the noble 
marquess's eyes ; and when he awoke and rose from his 
bed, he felt little refreshed by the fitful slumber which 
during the early part of the morning had fallen upon him. 
He was restless dissatisfied angry and what to him 
was worse than all, humiliated by the circumstances which 
had come to his knowledge. 

One person most specially had incurred his anger 
poor Anne Everingham his own cousin too ; to be sure 
it was a cousinship far removed ; but that she, one of his 
house, to whom the honour of the family ought to have 
been naturally and inherently dear ; that she should have 
connived at the grovelling attachment was most annoying 
that she did connive at it he was sure, from the anxiety 
of Lady Hester to have her always with her ; from the 
nature of the conversation in which she had engaged with 
Lord Elmsdale in the afternoon of the wedding-day ; and 
from the soft and considerate manner in which she treated 
Burford at dinner on the following evening. Her, he 
should forthwith expel another night should not pass 
over her head in Grosvenor Square he could not endure 
a further association with her he would not suffer his 
child to be longer exposed to the contamination of her 
society. 

He breakfasted : the day was gloomy well suited to 
his feelings. He walked to Lady Katharine's, and ordered 
his cabriolet to be there at half past one ; he was welcomed 
as usual with the smiles of Elizabeth, and greeted by the 
shrill tones of her mamma. 

The conversation had been general for some time, and 
the marquess had determined not to touch upon his plan of 
taking Lady Hester with him to India till the last moment, 
and when, as he hoped, he should have secured the grati- 
tude of Elizabeth by his attention to all her wishes, so that 
she might not interpose any objection to his project at 
length he said, 

" Elizabeth, I have determined about your friend Mr. 






398 THE MARQUESS. 

Richardson : of course nothing is to be said of it yet ; but 
the moment my appointment is announced, you may an- 
nounce to him that he is one of my aides-du-camp." 

" Now that is a dear," said Miss Oldham : " is not he, 
mamma ? " 

" I am only too happy, Elizabeth," said the marquess, 
" to show you how anxious I am to please you." 

" Now, mamma," said Elizabeth, " I don't think I can 
do what we were talking of." 

" What is that, Lady Katharine," said the marquess. 

" Why," said Lady Katharine, " I really don't know 
that I ought to say any thing about it. It was one of dear Mr. 
Oldman's maxims, which he learned from his grandfather, 
whose daughter " 

ff Yes, ma'am, I know, said the marquess, " but you 
have something to say." 

" It is about Mr. Richardson," said Miss Oldham. 

" Oh !" said the marquess ; " well, let me hear." 

" Why," said Lady Katharine, " Mr. Richardson is one 
of five sons : his grandmother was the cousin of the old 
bishop of that place where the Waterperries lived, who 
afterwards went to Berkshire ; and old Mr. Waterperry, I 
remember, died of a fever, which he caught by attending 
the trials at Newbury, where, by the way " 

" 1 beg your pardon," said the marquess, " but my 
cabriolet is at the door, and I must be in town by a little 
after two." 

" Well, what I have to say is," continued Lady Katha- 
rine, ie the eldest son of old Mr. Richardson is married to a 
cousin " 

" Yes, mamma," said Elizabeth, c( but ' dear ' is in a 
hurry, so I will tell him. It is the third son we want to 
speak to you about : he is in the church, without the least 
possible chance of preferment ; he has two curacies nine 
miles apart, and not a hope of getting any thing more. We 
were thinking, after you were gone last night, as you told 
us that Mr. Burford had resigned the living of what is 
the place ? " 

" Silgrove," said the marquess, watching the beautiful 



THE MARQUESS. 399 

animation of Elizabeth's countenance as she was expatiating 
in favour of a second Mr. Richardson. 

" Ah, Silgrove/' said Elizabeth ; " and we were saying, 
that if you had nobody particular to give it to, it would be 
such a kindness to let poor dear Mr. Richardson's brother 
have it." 

" I did intend to offer it to the minister/' said the mar- 
quess. 

" Oh, but you need not give him any thing more/' said 
the naive Elizabeth. 

" No," said Lady Katharine : " I remember once, in the 
time of Mr. Pitt, I was staying down at Broadstairs that 
year, and Lord " 

" Yes, ma'am," said the marquess ; " but about the 
living I will see about it I will not say no." 

{( And so, dear, you wo'n't say yes ? " said Miss Oldham, 
placing the fairest hand that ever was seen upon the 
marquess's shoulder a prettier epaulette could not be 
imagined. 

" I will say yes, if you really wish it," said the mar- 
quess. 

" Indeed, indeed I do ! " said the charming girl, with 
increased animation. 

" Well, then, let it be so," said the marquess ; " but of 
this let me entreat you to say nothing, not even to Mr. 
Richardson, till you hear from me ; because, if there should 
be a point made about it, I must postpone your friend's 
preferment to some other opportunity. And now, till to- 
morrow, adieu." 

" Good-by, dear," said Miss Oldham, rewarding her 
intended for all his kindnesses, in the warmest and most 
gracious manner possible. 

" Oh ! what a horrid day," exclaimed Lady Katharine, 
who had looked out of the window during the last farewell 
of her daughter and her future son-in-law. " Lord Snow- 
don, had not you better have a close carriage ? It pours, 
absolutely pours, with rain." 

" No, thank you," said Lord Snowdon ; " I prefer the 
cab. Adieu ! to-morrow I dine with you, and I dare say 
I shall have some news for you." 



400 THE MARQUESS. 

" Take care, and don't catch cold/' said Lady Katha- 
rine ; " I remember Dr. Buckskin telling me the man 
who cured the pope of the sciatica, got the golden spur, 
and was afterwards knighted by the king for " 

In the midst of this speech the marquess escaped, and 
jumped into his cabriolet with all the grace and agility of 
a youth. The impatient horse, tired of pawing the ground, 
sprang forward, and in a moment the Illustrious was out of 
sight. 

In society, half the pride of Lord Snowdon melted down 
by the natural warmth of association, and the gilding 
rubbed off by collision with his equals, or those who, at 
least in the same houses and same rooms with him, con- 
sidered themselves so ; but when he was out in the streets 
and the roads, his dignity became as stiff and important as 
ever. His air and manner, the sovereign contempt with 
which he deigned to look at the people whom he passed, 
and the entire satisfaction which possessed him as he drove 
the finest horses London could produce, and the best 
turned-out equipage that rattled through its streets, were 
beyond imitation, as they were without precedent. 

In this mood of mightiness, his lordship was driving at 
a slapping pace across Barnes Common, when his horse 
shied at a donkey, who was very wisely, and by no means 
like a jackass, standing up out of the rain under a hedge. 
The suddenness of the shock snapped the shaft of the 
cabriolet, and the career of his Excellency the Governor 
General Bahauder, K.G., was suddenly stopped, with no 
other damage than two or three kicks against the floor of 
the cab, from the heels of the proud and spirited animal 
that was drawing it. The rain was coming down in tor- 
rents. 

" Shaft broken, my lord," said the tiger. 

tc What the deuce is to be done ? " said the marquess ; 
" not a house near no umbrella ? " 

" No, my lord," said the boy. " It's the worst place, 
too, as it could have happened in, my lord," said the man, 
" for there's no house near." 

" To be sure. What's this thing coming ? " said his 
lordship. 



THE MARQUESS. 



401 



' It's the Richmond hondibus, my lord." 

f Oh ! mercy on us is there any body in it ? " said 
marquess ; who began to feel that rain is no respecter 

persons. 

" Town, sir, town ! " said the fellow on the step of the 
door ; " plenty of room." 

" My lord, I think you had better get in," said the 
tiger. 

" Well I here, open the door," said the marquess, 
who certainly never had before seen the inside of an omni- 
bus, and never expected to have been driven to such an 
expedient. However, it saved him from the rain, from 
cold, rheumatism, and all the ff ills that flesh (even that of 
the Plinlimmons) is heir to," and might be immortalised 
in history, as having been graced with the presence of the 
greatest governor-general that ever was destined to govern 
India. 

The marquess stepped in, and the conductor gave the 
word " All right ; " but this was done so soon after the ad- 
mission of his lordship into the vehicle, and he was so 
long picking out a clean place to sit down upon, that the 
jerk of the hearse threw his lordship forward into the lap 
of the fattest woman that ever was seen out on a caravan 
at a fair, who, unfortunately, was carrying a jar of pickled 
onions on her knee, which was upset by the marquess's 
tumble, and in its fall, saturated the front of his lordship's 
waistcoat and stock with its fragrant juice. 

The marquess made a thousand well-bred apologies, and 
was got up upon his legs by the exertions of the fat woman, 
whose struggles to rescue herself from the imposing weight 
of nobility materially assisted the efforts of a good-natured 
dirty little man in the corner, and a thin spare woman, 
who was carrying a bantum-cock and three hens in a basket 
to London, having upon her other hand a large-faced child, 
with great blue eyes, and a cold in its head. It wore a 
brown skin cap, with a gold band round it, while a green 
and white net comforter was twisted round its chin and 
body ; its dress, generally, bearing very strong evidence 
that the dear little thing was an extremely bad traveller. 

tNear the door, and over whose shins the marquess first 
DD 



402 THE MARQUESS. 

tumbled upon getting in, was placed a stout, blue-aproned 
market-gardener ; and opposite to him, a smartish looking 
man, with a Mosaic gold chain round his neck, and a bunch 
of oily curls coming out from under his hat just over his 
ear he was the dandy of the party. 

Off went the omnibus rattle went all the windows 
slap went the weather boards bang went the axle trees; 
and away went the whole concern, at a rate and with a 
noise, of which the marquess, till that moment, had but a 
very faint conception. 

The dirty dandy in the corner, as soon as he saw the in- 
voluntary contortions of poor Lord Snowdon's countenance, 
as the huge thing bumped up and down, and twisted first 
one way and then another, began to affect a similar distaste 
for the conveyance ; and to mark his sympathy with the 
new arrival, forthwith bumped himself up close to him. 
He looked at the Governor-General Bahauder for a moment 
or two, and then pulling out a sort of whitey-brown paper 
funnel, which did duty for a snuff-box, offered it to the 
marquess. 

" Do you snuff, sir ? " said the dandy. 
tc No, I am obliged to you," replied the marquess. 
" Have you been down at Richmond, starring ? " asked 
the dandy. 

" Sir ! " said Lord Snowdon. 

<f l mean," said the man, f 'have you been acting a 
few ? " 

< f I don't exactly understand you," said the marquess. 
" Oh ! come, governor, none of your nonsense no 
tricks upon travellers ! " said the dandy. 

" Governor ! " thought the marquess ; " what the deuce 
can he mean ? " 

" I think," continued the stranger, " I have smoked a 
a pipe or two before now along with you in the Coal 
Hole." 

" Sir ! " said the marquess, " I never smoked a pipe, or 
was in a coal-hole, in the whole course of my existence." 

" I say, governor, now you are coming it strong," said 
the monster ; ' f you think I don't know you, eh ; O. P. and 
P. S. ? I say, what was you a-doing with Mrs. Linnegar 



THK MARQUESS. 



403 



the Greenwich coach last Thursday week ? eh ! I 
don't know whether you ever smokes I smoked you." 

" I think, sir, you are mistaken,'' said the marquess. 

"What! mistaken in the cut of your jib?" said the 
dirty dandy ; ' ' no, governor, that's no go there can't be 
two sich as you." 

" I fancy you will find that you are in error, sir," said 
Lord Snowdon, beginning to boil. 

" What ! my Solomon Lob," said the exhilarated fiend 
" you don't mean to deny yourself to me ! No, no 
whether you have smoked pipes and been in the Coal Hole, 
I wo'n't argue ; but I know this, I have paid many a shil- 
ling to see you, and never grudged a penny of them." 

" Sir," said the marquess, " I repeat you are mistaken." 

And what made these dignified replies of his lordship more 
ridiculous, was the fact, that in consequence of the noise o~ 
the carriage, he was obliged to bawl them out at a pitch 
of his voice, which, upon no other occasion, he ever con- 
descended to adopt; whilst, by the irregular bumpings and 
thumpings of the vehicle, his lordship's graceful attitudes 
were reduded to something very like the uncontrollable 
antics of a stuffed Punch in a puppet show. 

" I tell you once for all," said the dandy, ' ' it's no man- 
ner of use your trying to gammon me, Buggins is Buggins 
all the world over on the stage, or in it." 

" Sir," said the marquess, " I am not Mr. Buggins, and 
I never saw that person in the whole course of my 
existence." 

" Then if you never did," said the facetious passenger, 
" I'd advise you to look at your own sweet countenance in 
the looking-glass, the moment you get to your lodgings, 
and you may save your two shillings for paying to go to 
see him in the play." 

The horrid monster having here worked up the con- 
versation to a climax, Lord Snowdon hoped he might 
remain at rest. But no it had scarcely ceased when the 
woman on his other side, believing him (f quite the gentle- 
man," said, " Pray, sir, are you a judge of cocks and 
hens ? " 

" Ma'am ! " said the marquess. 

D D 2 



404 THE MARQUESS. 

' ' Because I knows nothing of them myself, and I'm afraid 
perhaps this basket is too small for 'm," said the woman, 
" they keeps a-pecking and a-digging at one another so." 

" Ma'am,," replied his lordship, " I know nothing about 
fowls." 

Here a truce seemed to have been agreed upon. The 
omnibus stopped at the Red Lion, Putney, and the sudden 
silence of its sonorous machinery which ensued, induced a 
corresponding quiet in the passengers the surrounding 
noise having hitherto encouraged noise in the passengers. 
All that happened during the check was, that the dirty 
dandy resumed his seat near the door, and took the opinion 
of the man on the steps as to their fellow-passenger being 
Buggins or not. 

After a short delay, during which several aristocratic 
carriages rolled by at which periods the marquess adopted 
the celebrated system of ostrichism, and hid his head the 
omnibus rattled on towards town. At Walham Green, 
two tall scraggy girls from a boarding school, 

" Sickly, smiling, gay, young, and awkward," 

were poked in. A gentleman with very red mustachios 
was picked up at the Queen's Elm gate ; and a poulterer's 
boy, with a couple of skinned rabbits in a tray, was added 
to the party at the corner of Sloane Street, the said rabbits 
being on their way back to a poulterer's in Duke Street, 
St. James's, because they were not fresh. 

Ah ! thought Lord Snowdon, if my old friend Noah had 
had such company as this in the ark, I am sure he would 
have preferred death to security in such society, and have 
jumped into the flood. Away they went, up the hill in 
the outward of St. George's, Hanover Square, upon which 
thousands of pounds have been spent, each thousand 
making it worse than it was before, tossing and tumbling 
up hillocks and down hollows, equalled only in effect by 
that produced by the unbreaking billows of the Bay of 
Biscay upon the bows and quarters of a crank craft. 

At the top of St. James's Street the caravan stopped. 
The day had cleared up ; the pavement was dry. The 
king was in town ; there were many people about. Lord 



THE MARQUESS. 405 

Snowdon just peeped through the windows, and saw groups 
collected men he knew. Here it was clear he could 
not get out whither should he go ? how far what 
place was safe ? At length he resolved upon going the 
whole journey to the Bank, so that he might emerge in the 
city, and then enveloping himself in a hackney coach, reach 
the habitable part of town, without fear of discovery. 

" Any body for White Oss Cellar ? " said the man on 
the steps. Out went the dirty dandy, the man with the 
apron, and the boy with the rabbits. But their places were 
instantly supplied by a portly gentleman, lugging in a 
small-sized green garden-engine with a fan spout, and three 
fishing-rods, which he had just bought at the corner of 
Albemarle Street, and a fond mother, who had provided 
herself with a heap of toys for her six children. 

Still, the marquess kept peering out of his prison 
nobody saw him and it was pleasant to peep through 
the loop-holes thus unobserved. In a few minutes all was 
right, but the pavement in Piccadilly was up ; it was 
necessary, therefore, that the huge machine should go down 
St. James's Street ; and so it did ; but short was its pro- 
gress in that line of march all the bumpings and thump- 
ings which its rapid course in the earlier part of its journey 
had excited now were to be compensated for. The driver 
smacked his whip, the horses obeyed the sound, when bang 
went something, and in an instant the whole fabric came 
down with a crash like thunder, exactly in front of White's. 

The shrieks of the women, the cries of the men, the 
noise of the fall, all combined to attract a thousand spec- 
tators. Fifty heads were out of Crockford's coffee-room ; 
all the guardsmen rushed into the balcony ; and in the 
bow-window of White's itself, which was instantly thrown 
up, were heard the well-known voices of the leaders of the 
clique, in a sort of war-whoop, which, like the whistle of 
Rhoderick Dhu, roused the whole clan to observe the 
dreadful denouement. 

In detail were the passengers extricated. The dear little 
boarding-school girls jumped out first ; the fat man with 
his garden-engine stuck in the door-way, and was only 
ejected by the ponderosity of the still fatter woman with 

D D 3 



406 -IHM MARQUESS. 

what she called her " inion jar " clasped like a lovely baby 
to her bosom ; the lady with the toys was trampled under 
foot ; the sick child was jammed under the dirty man in 
the corner, and the thin woman, who took care of it, getting 
anxious about its fate, unwillingly abandoned the poultry ; 
and when the Most Noble the Marquess of Snowdon, K.G. 
and governor-general of India, emerged, amidst the cries 
of " Take care of the old gentleman," he came out without 
his hat, with a fine bantam cock perched upon his head, and 
a couple of fuzzy-legged hens roosting upon his shoulders. 

A shout of laughter rent the ' sky the little boys 
laughed, the old women laughed, and the fat man with the 
garden engine stood and laughed himself nearly into a fit. 

The instant Lord Snowdon was seen thus "roosted 
upon," half a dozen men ran out of White's to rescue and 
shelter him ; but this made bad worse : and though having 
housed him, as a matter of hospitality, he was yet, po- 
litically speaking, upon the tenderest ground, and did not 
yet belong to them. His gratitude was, in his opinion, as 
painful as any thing could be, until a hoarse demand from 
the conductor of the omnibus, for his two shittins, made in 
a tone, which implied a desire upon his lordship's part to 
get off without paying, convinced him that there are still 
lower depths of misery than the lowest. 

" The colonel's " green carriage was at the door of 
White's, which, with his usual kindness, he offered to the 
suffering marquess, who, availing himself of the favourable 
opportunity, threw himself into it, and anathematising 
every thing upon the face of the earth, which had contri- 
buted to this most signal discomfiture, hastened home to 
Grosvenor Square, to begin a performance of a much more 
serious nature. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

IT may easily be conceived that the combination of cir- 
cumstances, and " untoward events" which had occurred 
to the ^aoble marquess, subsequently to his acquisition of 



THE MARQUESS. 407 

the important intelligence which he had received from 
Miss Oldham, with respect to the hitherto hidden pre- 
possession or affection (as he feared it might be), which 
his daughter felt for his son's tutor, had not rendered him 
a particularly agreeable companion any where. 

He was too much of an adept in looks and manners, 
and infinitely too sensitive upon such points, not to per- 
ceive that the interest which the men at White's had 
affected to take in his rescue from the wreck of the pon- 
derous caravan partook infinitely more of the ridiculous 
than the sympathetic, and that not one of the whole party 
present felt any thing really and truly, but the most ma- 
licious gratification at an expose, which, however lightly 
other men of equal rank and pretensions might have been 
disposed to consider it, they were well assured, would be to 
him a subject of constant and continued mortification. 

While he was with them, he felt his only policy was to 
appear deceived by their civilities and gratified by their 
attentions ; but all this forced suavity curdled as he pro- 
ceeded homewards : and fraught as he was with serious 
anger, combining in its character grief immeasurable, and 
vexation incalculable, he worked himself up into a state of 
fury and desperation, such as, with all his extraordinary 
vindictiveness of pride and violence of temper, he seldom 
permitted himself to be seen in. 

Arrived at home, he hastily opened and read his letters, 
one of which was, as he expected, from Downing Street, 
begging him to call there at six o'clock, after the return of 
the ministers from St. James's. This gratified him for 
the moment : he anticipated the communication which he 
was to receive, and felt, at least, that however much his 
private affairs, and the politics of his domestic circle, 
might be disarranged and entangled, in the more exalted 
course of public life he might be enabled to compensate, 
in his own person and character, for the degradation and 
debasement which his unfortunate daughter had incurred 
by her attachment to a person, who, however respectable 
in his way, he felt to be nothing more than a menial of his 
household, somewhat higher in rank than his house steward 
or his confidential valet. 

D D 4 



408 THE MARQUESS. 

Little did poor Lady Hester anticipate the storm that 
was so soon to hurst upon her devoted head ! little did 
Miss Everingham, who was sitting reading to her, when 
the marquess arrived, imagine that her own history, as con- 
nected with his lordship, would be terminated before she 
had completed the volume upon which she was engaged ! 
and least of all did either of them foresee the magnitude 
of the change which one short hour was to work in all the 
prospects of their future lives. 

After inquiring for Lady Hester, the illustrious man 
proceeded to the boudoir, where the victims of his ire were 
seated. He entered the room pale as death, his lips quiver- 
ing with rage ; he_ closed the door, cast a withering look 
upon them both, but spoke not. 

" My dearest father," said Lady Hester, " what on earth 
is the matter ? are you ill ? " 

' * Mad ! " said his lordship ; " stand from me touch 
me not my hatred may drive me to some tremendous 
crime." 

" For Heaven's sake ! " said Miss Everingham, throwing 
down her book, ' ' what " 

" Let me hear no talk of heaven from your polluted 
lips," said Lord Snowdon ; "lips that have lent their aid to 
the ruin, the absolute ruin, of this wretched and unhappy 
girl." 

" Why call your child wretched and unhappy?" said 
Lady Hester. 

" Child !" exclaimed the marquess, " I disown you 
I cast you from me ! I repeat to you my injunction not to 
come near me. I will not curse you if I can command 
myself; but no endearments, no palliation, no tears no, 
none of these can avail you ! we are parted, madam, for 
ever ay, for ever ! " 

"At least, my father," said Lady Hester, " let me know 
my crime." 

" Father !" said the marquess, sneeringly, " I disbelieve 
it I cannot be the father of so base and mean a being. 
I am aware of the influence of a confidante a female 
friend friend ! what a profanation ! I know that a 
mean sycophant, a poor dependent, may, for her own in- 



THE MARQUESS. 409 

terest, be led to encourage hopes, and tamper with feelings, 
which she herself in all probability has first excited ; but, 
by heavens, the thing is ended here ! What future course 
to pursue, I do not clearly see but for the present it is 
done I am decided." 

" Lord Snowdon," said Miss Everingham, bursting into 
tears, " I cannot misunderstand your coarse allusions : how 
have I deserved this outrage ? " 

" Ask that wretch whom I once believed my daughter ! " 
said the marquess ; <e she knows the secret confidence which 
exists between you ; she knows, as I well thought she did, 
the 'tone and character of the conversation which, with a 
fiend-like zeal, you undertook to hold with Lord Elmsdale 
on the wedding-day. Wedding, did I say ! upon that day 
when I, and all that are mine, were held up to the sneer- 
ing ridicule of the vulgar, and made the common town 
talk of the mob ! Yes, ma'am, you it was, who taught that 
whining, puling mushroom of the peerage, to believe his 
declared bride engaged in heart to some other object ! 
Ma'am, do not presume to contradict me I will not be 
opposed ! I know what I say ; and although I now an- 
nounce to you that this day is the last of your residence 
in my house, and your association with that degraded girl, 
I wish that our eternal separation should not be marked 
by any scene which, in the public eye, might give increased 
effect to what has already occurred." 

" Indeed," said Lady Hester, " you wrong her. If there 
is blame, I alone am culpable ; and yet I know not what 
I have done. Have I ever disobeyed your wishes ? Did 
I refuse Lord Elmsdale ? Did 1 dismiss him ? " 

" What, Hester," said Lord Snowdon, " do you dare to 
bandy words with me ? Do you presume, even by impli- 
cation, to charge me with having driven the man away ? 
Why did I, because, knowing the fact of your disgraceful 
love for another, he felt himself preparing to do me a 
favour in rescuing your character from obloquy and shame 
by completing a contract to which he knew you were an 
unwilling party." 

" Father/' said Lady Hester, falling on her knees, and 
catching his hand, " do not treat me thus ! I have not 



410 THE MARQUESS. 

sinned against you : I am ready now to fulfil your wishes. 
Spare me spare me ! I would die for you, if you required 
it." 

cc Your death/' said the marquess, " would be more de- 
sirable to me than to see you live disgraced as you must be 
eternally." 

" For shame, Lord Snowdon ! " said Miss Everingham. 
te I am a weak and humble woman ; but I protest, in the 
name of the God that made me,, against such language. 
She is your child devoted to you without a thought 
beyond obedience to your will ; who, by no act, no word, 
no thought, has evinced rebellion to your wishes ; and, as 
a Christian woman, I will not let her stay to hear your 
curses." 

" Miss Everingham," said the marquess, fe how dare 
you venture to use this language here to me in my 
own house ? Have I not a right to correct my child ? 
Have I not a right to speak my feelings and express my 
anger ? I ask you you, ma'am I even condescend to 
ask you, what would your feelings be if you can imagine 
such a circumstance were you in my place, after having 
trained up a daughter in the course which the child of 
such a person ought to run in life, if you found all your 
hopes blighted, your expectations thwarted, and your 
labour for her advantage brought to nought, by her en- 
couragement secret encouragement yes, Miss Evering- 
ham deceitful, secret encouragement of a grovelling 
passion for a menial in her father's house ?" 

" Menial ! " said Lady Hester. 

"Yes, menial! the hireling tutor of your brother!" 
said the marquess. " Affect no shame, feign no surprise, 
I know it all. Hence the fine feeling which prompted 
the fellow to resign his preferment and starve as, please 
God, if T can influence his career in life, he shall rather 
than soothe away the difficulties which interposed between 
your feelings and your duty; hence the refusal" of your 
brother, under his influence, to honour your marriage with 
his presence ; hence all the evils which have fallen upon 
me, and which now it is mine to revenge !" 

" Oh ! " said Lady Hester, " if I could but reach your 



THE MARQUESS. 411 

heart if I could but tell you how deceived you are in 
hoth of us ! " 

" Both of ye !" said, or rather screamed, the marquess, 
" both of you ! What ! are you coupled, even in thought, 

paired, even in imagination? Both of ye! What! 
Lady Hester Plinlimmon, the daughter of the Marquess of 
Snowdon, the daughter of a house, whose line of noble 
ancestry is registered unbroken for ages, coupled with Mr. 
Charles Burford, the son of a country curate, hired and 
paid wages to teach her brother Latin! Is it come to 
this?" 

" In justice/' said Lady Hester, who seemed to rally 
from her wretchedness, " tell me, sir, to whom are you 
indebted for this base, this cruel falsehood ? " 

" Falsehood !" said Lord Snowdon " what ! do you 
attempt to deny it ? Do you wish to deceive me to ca- 
jole me?" 

" Did I not prove," said Lady Hester, <e the falsehood 
of such a story by consenting to marry Lord Elmsdale ?" 

" Your consent," replied her father, (C rendered all that 
preceded it the more atrocious. Yes ! you did consent ; 
and unless your bodily weakness had not made evident the 
wicked concealment of your mind, you would have ven- 
tured to give your hand to one, while your heart was de- 
voted to another." 

" If it were so," said Lady Hester, f< and I had, in 
obedience to a parent's command, become the wife of Lord 
Elmsdale, assure yourself that I should have done so 
honestly and conscientiously. I have not, sir, been so ill 
brought up, nor have I profited so little from the counsels 
of those to whom you have consigned me, as not to know, 
and knowing it, to do my duty. If I had formed an affec- 
tion improvident as you describe it religion would have 
taught me that I was to sacrifice it to my filial obedience 

I should have done so." 

" This is too clear ! " said the marquess. " Wretched 
girl, you have confessed " 

" I do confess ! " said Lady Hester. " I am ready to 
die, if you wish it ; but I will not conceal that in which I 
saw no shame. What you have heard, sir, may be true j 



412 THE MARQUESS. 

but as I tell you, and as Anne can tell you she whom so 
much you have traduced it was conquered and over- 
come." 

' ' Anne traduced ! " said his lordship ; " no, Hester, she 
is not traduced. I know the line she has pursued that 
has been told me too : she has acted the part consistent, 
perhaps, with her dependent and expectant state of 
go-between confederate letter-carrier conveyer of 
messages : I know it." 

" My lord," said Miss Everingham, " it is false false 
as the fiend who thus has poisoned your mind against your 
child." 

" Fiend ! " said the marquess, " who dares pronounce 
that word ? She who told me this knows not the meaning 
of a falsehood. Shocked and disgusted as she has been at 
what she saw passing in my house when she was here, she 
felt it a duty to undeceive the man who is so soon to be 
her husband." 

" Elizabeth Oldham !" exclaimed Lady Hester. tf Can 
she have said all this ? Oh ! be still, my heart be still, 
my tongue ! Did she not tell you more ? Did she not 
say that when I betrayed such feelings as you charge me 
with, she herself " 

" Be silent, I command you," said the marquess. tc On 
the peril of my curse be silent. Dare but to utter one 
syllable derogatory to the character, the heart, the mind, of 
your future mother-in-law, and the heaviest malediction 
that a father can pronounce shall fall upon your devoted 
head ! It is to the aversion of your heartless brother that 
I am indebted for your marked hatred of her who once was 
your friend. It was to rescue you from the privations 
which you must undergo when a mistress of the house 
assumes her dominion, that I so particularly urged your 
previous marriage this you have frustrated. The fellow 
upon whom you have fixed your affections is now a beggar : 
pride mean, paltry pride and what is more contempt- 
ible ? has induced him to throw up a piece of prefer- 
ment, of which, having given it him, I could not myself 
have deprived him he has quitted your brother, and he 



THE MARQUESS. 413 

is a beggar. Now, madam, hear me : in this house you 
cannot and shall not remain after my marriage." 

Lady Hester burst into a flood of tears, and dropped her 
head upon Miss Everingham's shoulder. 

" Ay ! faint weep die, if you will," said Lord 
Snowdon, in a tone of fiend-like malignity ; " I cast you 
off ; I utterly abandon you ! Some asylum must be found 
for you ; but not in the society of that dear friend ! And 
where shall that asylum be ? who, when I have cast you 
off, will shelter or protect you ? who will be your champion 
then ? " 

" I WILL!" said a voice of thunder; te I, sir her 
brother her devoted brother, who, thanks to Heaven, is 
here to shield and save her." 

" Malvern ! my son !" exclaimed Lord Snowdon. 

" Not your son, my lord," said Malvern, " unless Hes- 
ter is your daughter. I came to England the moment I 
heard of the failure of her marriage, because I thought 
Lord Elmsdale might have acted unfairly, and that it would 
have been my duty to call him to account. I have been 
satisfied on that point before I came here. I came to 
England to vindicate my sister against dishonour : thank 
Heaven, I am here, my lord, to protect her from tyranny." 

<e What ! " said Lord Snowdon, pausing even in his 
rage until he had closed the door, in order that the violence 
of the discussion might not produce an effect upon the 
establishment, " do you mean to uphold my child in her 
rebellion against me ? " 

" I mean, sir," said Lord Malvern, ec to do no such 
thing ; far be it from me to uphold in her a disposition 
which I trust you have never discovered in any conduct of 
mine. Hester has not rebelled ; she has sacrificed all to 
duty and obedience. Unwillingly, I have heard the greater 
part of the discussion which has passed between you ; and 
I pronounce, from all I know not, sir, from hearsay 
evidence, but from my own knowledge that her conduct 
has been exemplary ; but I also know, that after what has 
transpired within the last ten minutes, that however fit 
Miss Oldham may be for the wife of Lord Snowdon, she 






414 THE MARQUESS. 

is the last person in the world who may be trusted as the 
mother of his children." 

fe Ah ! there again," said the marquess, " Miss Oldham 
is to be dragged forward in the discussion." 

" Not so," said Lord Malvern. " Miss Oldham has 
volunteered her services., and therefore rendered herself ob- 
noxious to our remarks ; she is safe as far as I am con- 
cerned, although my duty is at odds with my honour : my 
sister, sir, must never be subject to her control." 

" She will not be under her control, sir," replied the 
marquess ; " of that I will take especial care." 

" My lord," said Lord Malvern, " this is the most 
painful moment of my existence : I am forced into conduct 
which I feel that nothing but the extremest case could jus- 
tify. I have heard the denunciation of Hester from your 
own lips : she is blameless faultless. The time is past 
when she may trust to your kindness, or expect your pro- 
tection ; your heart is alienated from her. I " 

" Sir," said the marquess, in a voice of thunder, " do 
you recollect that you are my son ? " 

" I do," said Lord Malvern, but I also recollect that 
she is my sister ; and by the sacred memory of our mother 
lost to us before we could duly appreciate her virtues 
and her merits I will protect her to the death ! Father, 
thus I appeal to you : the page of history is not a blank 
the deeds of other days are there recorded the request 
my dying mother made with respect to Hester I will see 
fulfilled ; and the first step to its accomplishment is her re- 
moval from this house." 

" What, sir," said the marquess, " do you presume to 
say that you will drag your sister from under my protec- 
tion ? " 

" No, sir," said Lord Malvern ; " but if she feels as I 
do, she will voluntarily leave a house which must so shortly 
cease to be her home." 

" Oh, Malvern," said Lady Hester, " what course on 
earth can I pursue ? " 

" Obey your father, madam ! " said the marquess. 

" She will obey you, sir," said Lord Malvern, " in 
quitting your roof. You have threatened her with expul- 



THE MARQUESS. 415 

sion : this she must not at any rate endure; but to. en- 
dure it, in order that she may give place to Miss Oldham, 
is more than I can suffer." 

" Stay here she shall ! " said the marquess. 

" If she please she shall/' said Lord Malvern ; et she is 
of age to judge for herself; her fortune is, I believe, at her 
own disposal, and her own command." 

" Indeed!" said the marquess, who was particularly 
sensitive on this particular point. 

if And if she feel disposed to relieve herself from the 
state of thraldom in which she is at this moment, I will 
protect and vindicate her, as I have done before." 

" And present her as a wife, perhaps, to your tutor ! " 
said Lord Snowdon. 

" Mr. Burford," replied Lord Malvern, " is not my 
tutor he is my friend an independent friend his 
disinterestedness is proved his honour is established. 
Upon that point Hester may act as she pleases. Whatever 
else may happen, I repeat, the memory of her mother shall 
not be disgraced in her person." 

" Do you imagine," said Lord Snowdon, " that the de- 
cencies and decorum of society would be best consulted by 
your withdrawing your sister from her father's house, un- 
attended, unaccompanied by any body but her brother ? " 

" Miss Everingham, sir," said Lord Malvern," has re- 
ceived the same unqualified announcement of your deter- 
mination that this day shall be the last of her residence 
here : she who has been for so many years the companion 
' and protectress selected by yourself for Hester, will, I doubt 
not, continue that protection arid association. I am con- 
vinced that the course I propose will be the best for all 
parties : the future marchioness and Hester never can meet 
again. For myself, I most distinctly decline any com- 
munication with her ; therefore let it be as I suggest, and 
let us remove from a scene in which our presence cannot be 
desirable." 

" Malvern," said Lord Snowdon, whose rage had sub- 
sided into something like mortification, at having gone too 
far in his violence, <c I admit your dislike to this second 
marriage to be natural." 






416 THE MARQUESS. 

" On that subject, sir/' said Lord Malvern, " not a 
word you are free to choose, and free to act upon that 
choice ; and Heaven send you happy. And remem- 
ber, sir, I am pledged to contribute my share to the 
favourable completion of all the necessary arrangements of 
the marriage : all I feel justified in insisting upon, is the 
security of my sister from a repetition of the scene which 
has just been acted, and that point I unequivocally make 
the condition of my implicit acquiescence in every other 
particular connected with the affair." 

Cf 1 must terminate this discussion/' said his lordship; 
fc I have other affairs which command my immediate atten- 
tion. I have been ruffled agitated acted upon by a 
thousand contending influences to-morrow I will en- 
deavour " 

" To-morrow ! " said Lord Malvern ; tc if I am not 
mistaken in what I have heard, Lady Katharine Oldham 
and her daughter are coming hither to-morrow ; besides, 
to-morrow will not " 

" Malvern," said the marquess, " take your own course. 
I am in your hands, sir, and you know it. I leave you 
act as you please ; for, by my hopes of mercy, I will not 
retract a syllable of what I have said. If we are to part, 
let it be so. You can scarcely imagine that any sacrifice 
on your part would compensate to me for humbling my- 
self before my children. On another point I am inflexibly 
determined : Miss Everingham and I meet no more to 
her I attribute all the evils that have fallen on my house. 
I need add nothing. I shall return by seven o'clock, and 
I leave the conduct of the intervening period to yourselves. 
But, remember, whatever may be the result of your de- 
liberations, I am resolved, at all hazards, to maintain the 
dignity, and sustain the character of the lady, who is so 
shortly to be my wife." 

Saying which, the marquess quitted the room to fulfil 
his engagement in Downing Street, believing, that let what 
might be the result of all that had occurred, the safest way 
of maintaining his importance was to leave the assembled 
party, so that the onus of acting in the emergency should 
rest upon them. 



THE MARQUESS. 417 

The course which they were to pursue, or, rather, the 
choice they were to make, was a difficult one ; the responsi- 
bility Lord Malvern was ready to'incur, tremendous. Yet 
it was quite evident that war was already openly pro- 
claimed between the insidious heartless Elizabeth and her 
suffering former friend and future daughter-in-law,, Their 
continued association was out of the question. 

Lady Hester explained to her brother, now more than 
ever endeared to her by his zealous exertions in her behalf, 
how bitterly she felt the abruptness of Miss Oldham, and 
the unfeeling observations of her loquacious parent. It 
was evident that the next day must bring them into colli- 
sion ; and, after the past storm and its consequences, their 
meeting seemed to be impossible. In fact, it was evident 
that the separation of the family, an event which would 
naturally have occurred in a few days, had actually taken 
place. Indeed, Lord Malvern's exhortations to his sister 
no longer to endure the cruelty of her father, excited and 
called into action by his future wife, were successfully 
seconded by Miss Everingham, who declared that, let Lady 
Hester stay or not, no person on earth should induce her, 
after the coarse language and unfeeling conduct of Lord 
Snowdon, to remain another hour in his house. 

What proceedings resulted from the debate which en- 
sued, the reader will discover presently. It is not our 
business to listen to all the arguments which were adduced 
on either side by the different parties. All we want to 
ascertain is, the effect produced by those arguments, and 
the consequences which ensued. While this discussion is 
in progress, we must follow the marquess on his ministerial 
visit. 

It would be extremely difficult to describe, and, perhaps, 
equally so to appreciate, the state of Lord Snowdon's mind 
and feelings as he paced the pavement towards West- 
minster. His indignation at the manner in which his 
daughter had misplaced her affections was not in the 
slightest degree modified by the dutiful obedience with 
which she had conquered her inclinations. Nor was his 
anger against his son at all qualified by the sneering tone 
E E 



418 THE MARQUESS. 

in which, as it appeared to him, he refrained from re- 
taliating upon Miss Oldham for her communication of 
Lady Hester's early partiality for Mr. Burford ; but, least 
of all, was his detestation of Miss Everingharn moderated 
by the resolute tone and determined manner in which she 
had " dared " to express her feelings. 

At any other moment of his life the scene in Grosvenor 
Square would, in all probability, have produced a catas- 
trophe infinitely more serious than his departure from it ; 
but just at this crisis the very day on which all his 
hopes of controul and domination upon the great scale were 
to be realised, he could not afford to waste so much of his 
energies upon his private affairs, however important and 
interesting, as he might have spared from the public upon 
any other occasion. Of his governor-generalship he was 
certain ; so far he might have set his mind at rest had it 
not been for the doubt thrown over the acquisition of the 
garter the personal promise, which the minister had to 
overcome that kept him in a state of frightful suspense ; 
for, in point of fact, of the two, if he had to abandon one 
of his objects, the personal decoration, derived from so 
illustrious a source, would have been the favourite. 

In a turmoil of contending worries he reached Downing 
Street, where, to his infinite disappointment, his noble 
friend was not ; he had left St. James's, and the king had 
left town ; but as the premier was in cabinet, and as no 
time could be specified for the duration of its sitting, the 
marquess left word that he would call in the morning, and 
retraced his steps. 

In going up again, he met most of the few presentable 
people in town j and having bowed stiffly to one, smiled 
graciously upon another, and nodded to a third, he fixed 
upon the most gay and graceful of all our dandies to walk 
up St. James's Street homewards. Their conversation was 
scarcely of sufficient interest to be repeated; nor would the 
walk itself be worth our notice, had not the gratification 
the marquess felt in having under his protection one of the 
most popular, highly-born, and highly-bred earls in Lodge's 
list, at a season when peers were scarce, been somewhat 
damped by no less than two of those minor incidents by 






THE MARQUESS. 419 

which his lordship, as we have seen, was, above all men, 
peculiarly annoyed. 

They reached the corner of Albemarle Street in safety, 
all the surrounding scenery, and its adjuncts and accesso- 
ries, bringing strongly to the marquess's mind his wretched 
misadventure of the morning, when the crowd of coach- 
men and fellows plying for passengers who block up the 
trottoir as effectually as their lumbering carriages choke up 
the middle of the street becoming extremely inconvenient 
and disagreeable to Lord Massingberg, the marquess's com- 
panion, he began a short but vehement attack upon the 
odious nuisance by which they were really seriously incon- 
venienced. 

" Upon my life," said his lordship, " these fellows seem 
to fancy that nobody except themselves has a right to the 
pavement ; in consequence of which, we, who have nothing 
to do with their infernal hearses and coaches, are absolutely 
stopped on the king's highway, and put in bodily fear, 
without any chance of punishing the offenders." 

" Monsters ! " said Lord Snowdon. 

" Exceeded only," said Lord Massingberg, " by those 
who get into their horrid caravans." 

l( Down the road ! down the road ! Fulham Fulham 
Fulham ! Richmond Brentford Kew Turnham 
Green just going off ! Richmond Richmond Rich- 
mond !" said a dozen voices in a dozen different tones. 

" Down the road this afternoon, my lord ?" said one of 
the most resolute, coming up to the marquess, who endea- 
voured to escape him. 

" What an infernal bore ! " said Lord Massingberg. 

" Horrid ! " said the marquess. 

i( Wery sorry for the accident this morning, my lord," 
said the man, pertinaciously following up the governor 
general of .India ; " wery sorry, indeed, for the accident 
this morning, my lord ; hope you didn't damage yourself 
gitting out no fault of the horses it vos the haxle- 
tree vot snapped." 

" Get away, sir ! " said the marquess. 

" Get avay!" answered the man; <( it vos you; you 
vanted to get avay when the ondibus broke down, vithout 



420 THE MARQUESS. 

forking out your fare there's a lord for you J my eye, 
there he goes ! " 

fe What does the scoundrel mean ? " said Lord Massing- 
berg, to whom, of all the birds in the air, or lords of the 
creation, Lord Snowdon would least have desired the in- 
cident of the earlier part of the day to be known. 

" Oh, nothing nothing/' said the marquess; "it is 
one of those unfortunate mistakes I so frequently suffer by, 
from being mistaken for Mister Somebody a player at 
Covent Garden." 

<e But he called you c my lord,' " said the earl. 

" Ah, then," said the marquess, " if he did, I conclude 
that in the morning he mistook the player for me, it 
comes to the same point." 

The Earl of Massingberg was not to be so deceived. He 
was a wit amongst lords, and a lord amongst wits ; like 
the parrot in the fable, he said nothing, but he thought the 
more. The results were particularly disagreeable to his 
excellency the governor general, as we may, perhaps, find 
out hereafter. 

There is a proverbial, not very recherche, phrase, about 
ff getting out of the frying-pan into the fire." Never was 
it better illustrated than at the moment when the unlucky 
recognition of the marquess by the omnibus driver had 
been overcome. The friends had passed across Dover 
Street, when a scream, or, rather, shout, was heard from 
the top of a Bath and Bristol coach, which, borne on the 
breeze, seemed like a call upon ' ( Lord Snowdon." He 
heard, but heeded it not ; he was too surely conscious that 
he could not be deceived in the sound ; he hurried on, and 
almost dragged his friend along with him ; but the south- 
east corner of Devonshire House wall had scarcely been 
achieved, before he was plucked by the sleeve. 

ef How d'ye do, my lord ? " was the first salutation of a 
plump rosy-cheeked man, enveloped in a white bear skin 
coat, with his head well tied up in a silk handkerchief, 
over which he wore an oil-skin covered hat everything 
bespeaking preparation for a journey. 

" Another mistake," said Lord Massingberg. 

II " 



THE MARQUESS. 421 

" Oh, my lord," said the traveller, " you don't know me 
in this gear. My missus and I are off outside's the 
best this weather, and cheapest in all weathers ; but I was 
determined, as I did chance to see you, to ask you if what 
we heard down at Shuttlework is true ? " 

" Oh, said his lordship, " Mr. Wiseman I see. The 
mayor of my town," added the marquess to Lord Massing- 
berg. 

<f Ah," said Mr. Wiseman for Wiseman it was 
" that's just it that's where it is ! We have heard down 
at Shuttlework, that your lordship wants to sell us. Now 
I tell you just what it is we won't be sold; and they 
say that the price of our independence is to be the go- 
vernorship of the West Hingees, or some such place, for 
you." 

Cf Mr. Wiseman," said the marquess, te you have dined, 
I presume ? ' 



422 THE MARQUESS. 

e( Who is your friend Bill Richardson ? " whispered Lord 
Massingberg. 

" Heaven knows !" said the marquess. 

" I don't think Heaven has much to do with it, my 
lord," said Wiseman ; " Bill Richardson told me this very 
morning that you had promised him the living of Silgrove, 
and that he had got a letter by the twopenny post from his 
brother,, which is a soldier officer quartered somewheres 
near town, and he told him that you were to be governor 
general of something what, I didn't rightly understand 

and that you had changed sides in consequence thereof." 
" And pray/' said the marquess, who began to be seri- 
ously annoyed at the vraisemblance of the history, " who 
may Bill Richardson be ? " 

" Why as good for nothing a chap as ever lived," said 
"Wiseman, " though I say it, as am his friend. His father 
was a regular gentleman, with no money, but all right else 

had a large family the soldier officer has got on un- 
common well there are four or five more on 'em; but 
Bill is in the clergy line ; and, somehow, did something 
not quite straight and even, and so he has been rather down 
in the world ; however, your lordship has put him up, and 
great thanks to you, but I " 

Here the orator was checked by the imperious call of the 
guard of the coach by which the mayor was about to 
transport himself to the country. 

" I can't stop, my lord," said Wiseman ; f( I thought 
I'd tell you what we have heard my missus is at top of 
the coach, I must not keep her waiting but I dare say 
Bill Richardson will do at Silgrove, and so I can't stop 
a minute. You'll come down amongst us and contradict 
the report about " 

Here he was hurried away by the coach people, and 
Lord Snowdon was left overwhelmed. He affected to treat 
it as the joke of a drunken vulgar fellow ; but two things 
were evident to himself one, that he had been persuaded 
to disgrace his patronage by the promise of Silgrove to the 
black sheep of the Richardsons ; and the other, that the 
secret which he had so cautiously confided to the Oldhams 
had been blabbed. These two discoveries struck deep into 



THE MARQUESS. 423 

his heart, and he resolved that the very first step of the 
following morning should be, that of rescinding his pro- 
mise to one of the Richardsons, and insisting upon the 
exclusion of the other. Whether he might eventually 
fulfil the pledge he had given of putting the lancer upon 
his staff, depended upon circumstances ; but the communi- 
cation of his half tipsy master, the mayor of Shuttlework, 
had by no means tended to restore his tranquillity. 

At the corner of Grosvenor Street the companions parted, 
and the marquess returned to his house. He had been 
absent rather more than two hours ; and during that 
period had so far relented in his violence that he rather 
feared than condemned the counteracting violence of his 
son a violence which nothing could have justified but 
the tone which he had himself heard adopted towards his 
sister, and the certainty that she and her outraged friend, 
Miss Everingham, would, if they remained where they 
were, be constantly subjected to the society and imperti- 
nences of Lady Katharine Oldham and her daughter. 

Lord Snowdon saw the delicacy and difficulty of this 
last part of the proceeding, and had despatched a servant, 
whom he had ordered down to Brookes' s (into which he 
went ' merely to write a letter,' for he had of late carefully 
abstained from the menagerie,) to Richmond, to inform 
Lady Katharine, that circumstances had occurred which 
would render it more agreeable for him to go to her than 
for her to come to town to him. This left him a fair field 
in the morning, and if he could not reconcile matters after 
dinner, he thought he should have the early part of the 
following day to bring his family matters to a favourable 
conclusion, delighted as he was sure all its members would 
be at the announcement which he should have to make to 
them of his magnificent appointment, certainly, and of the 
ttainment of the blue riband in all probability. 
It was here that he deeply felt and bitterly lamented the 
ttreme difference which existed between his own character 
id that of his son ; indeed, he was almost apprehensive, 
rith his views and principles, that he would not feel suffi- 
cient gratification at his father's sudden and, to him, of 
mrse, unexpected aggrandisement, to overcome the filial 
E E 4 



THE MARQUESS. 

indignation which he had so very unreservedly expressed. 
However, the satisfaction which, of course, Lord Malvern 
must feel at the acquisition to his family of new honours 
and new dignities, the rays of which would descend upon 
himself, might, perhaps, do something in the way of 
quelling the asperities which at the moment existed ; and 
if he found the ordinary manifestation of his personal and 
paternal authority failed to pacify the contending elements 
in the evening, the influence of his private domination 
might, perhaps, be more readily submitted to at a moment 
when his public importance was so very much increased. 

He knocked at the door of his house with his usual 
confidence and dignity : he entered the hall and passed 
onwards to the library ; a servant lighted the candles that 
were on the table. 

" Let Lady Hester know," said the marquess,, " that 
I am come in, and wish to speak to her and Lord Mal- 
vern/' 

" Lady Hester is not within, my lord," said the servant. 

" Where is she ?" 

fe I don't know, my lord," said the servant. 

" Where is Lord Malvern ?" 

" Not here, my lord," was the answer. 

" Take my compliments to Miss Everingham, and beg 
her to come to me," said the marquess. 

" Miss Everingham is not here, my lord," said the 
servant. 

" Send Lady Hester's maid to me, sir," said Lord 
Snowdon. 

" Her ladyship took her maid with her, my lord," 
replied the servant. " Mr. Hall, my lord, I believe has a 
letter for your lordship." 

" Send him here instantly," said the marquess. 

These announcements startled the marquess. Had he 
carried his lofty authority over his children a little too far ? 
Had the cord been so tightly strained that it had snapped ? 
Had his son dared to realise his intentions, and act up to 
his threats ? 

" If he have," said the marquess to himself, " he is a 
mean, unworthy scion of our house. He knows that 



THE MARQUESS. 125 

without his accordance I cannot make a settlement on 
Elizabeth, and he dares me to exert not my power over his 
sister for power I have none but my influence,, be- 
cause, if I controul her most derogatory passion, he is 
able to impede and thwart my happiness." 

His lordship had scarcely concluded this brief soliloquy^ 
when Hall entered the library. 

" You have a letter for me, Hall ? " said the marquess. 

" Yes, my lord/' said Hall. 

ce From whom ? " 

" Lord Malvern, my lord." 

" Where is Lady Hester ? " asked the marquess. 

ff I do not know, my lord," answered the servant. 

" How did she go hence ? " 

" In Lord Malvern's carriage, my lord," said Hall. 

Here the colloquy ended. Hall left the room, and the 
marquess proceeded to read the letter which his son had 
addressed to him. These were its contents : 

" MY LORD, 

" After a mature consideration of the circumstances 
which occurred, and the conversation which took place 
before your departure from Grosvenor Square, I have come 
to the conclusion that the removal of my sister from under 
your roof is the best and wisest measure I could adopt 
for her sake for yours, and, indeed, for the sake of 
all of us. 

(f Neither her health nor spirits are sufficiently strong 
to bear up against the effect of scenes similar to that of 
which I so strangely became a witness. The difficulties 
which she would have to encounter by a protracted stay in 
Grosvenor Square, and the discussions in which she would 
be engaged during the time preceding your marriage, 
would, in my opinion, be greatly augmented and seriously 
embittered by the arrival and residence there of your future 
marchioness and her mother. 

" Your right to act in whatever way you may deem 
most agreeable or advantageous to your own prospects, 
neither she nor I venture in the slightest degree to im- 
pugn j but we feel that in the position in which we are 



426 



THE MARQUESS. 



placed Hester more particularly that it is most desir- 
able to avoid the possibility of a recurrence of incidents 
similar to that to which we have been exposed, and that it 
would be more candid on our parts,, and more respectable 
in the eyes of the world, to withdraw ourselves, to make 
way for the new mistress of your house, and maintained, 
when we could do so, without effort or dissimulation, a 
respectful intercourse with a father, to whom we feel our- 
selves bound by every tie of duty consistent with the 
dignity and integrity of our characters, and the principles 
which he himself has through our lives laboured to im- 
plant in our minds. 

t( It must be evident, that with the knowledge of the 
line Miss Oldham has chosen to adopt towards my sister, 
in her conversations with you, it is wholly impossible that 
they could meet cordially and ingenuously as friends. 
Surely it is better that they should not meet at all ; at 
least not until Miss Oldham has assumed that title and 
character which, for your sake, we shall feel bound to re- 
cognise and respect. 

fe My beloved sister is not formed for hypocrisy or de- 
ception ; and an interview between them so shortly after 
the knowledge of the young lady's expressions concerning 
her, would produce nothing but open hostility. This was 
my reason for so hastily putting my plan of withdrawing 
Hester from your protection into execution. I am sure 
that I am right. 

" I ought, however, to say, that I firmly believe that I 
should have had more difficulty in persuading Hester to 
accede to my proposition for her change of residence, had 
not Miss Everingham positively declared, that no power 
should induce her to remain another night another 
hour under your roof. The dread of being deserted by 
her oldest, dearest, I may almost say, only female friend, 
overcame the apprehensions which she naturally felt in 
taking so decided a step. I am the responsible person for 
her conduct. I am ready to vindicate and justify it to the 
world, if called upon to do so ; and I repeat, that I am 
perfectly convinced I have best consulted the respectability 
of our family, by avoiding an eclat, of which we have 



; 



THE MARQUESS. 427 

already been sufficiently made the victims,, and which must 
inevitably follow an open declaration of hostilities. 

" As it is, Lady Hester has done what no human being 
has a right to question., or any reason to marvel at. In the 
society of her brother and her dearest friend, she has left 
London for the residence of her aunt, Lady Ospringe, 
where she purposes remaining on a visit for some time. 
This announcement will neither startle nor surprise its 
hearers ; and as you yourself have already expressed an 
opinion, that her presence at your marriage would not be 
desirable, what better mode of disposing of her for the 
present could have been hit upon than that which I have 
ventured to adopt ; but which, had we waited to consult 
you upon it, could not have been arranged in a sufficiently 
short space of time to prevent the meeting to-morrow, 
which we so little desired to take place, and which, per- 
haps,, might have met with a serious opposition from you ? 

ef As the common report is, that ministers have ap- 
pointed you to the governor-generalship of India my 

authority is an officer of the lancers, who heard it 

direct from a Mr. Richardson, whom, as he says, you have 
appointed one of your aids-du-camp and as Hester, of 
course, would not accompany you to the East, it is but a 
brief anticipation of the ' break-up,' which must then 
take place. Let me therefore hope, that the measure 
which I originated, and have enforced by every possible 
argument, and which Hester has, under my counsel, 
adopted, may appear less rash and more advisable, than at 
the first blush you might be disposed to consider it." 

" Ungrateful son ! " said the marquess, throwing down 
the letter, of which he had not yet finished the reading ; 
' little did I think a child of mine could act upon so mean 

principle as Malvern here exhibits. He comes to the 
house of his father, excites his sister to rebellion against 
him, persuades her to quit his protection, and 'seek that of 
a relation whom he knows that father hates ; and having 
one so, triumphs in the outrage, because he also knows 
at circumstances place that father in his power, and 

able him to make his terms for a reconciliation, and 
name as conditions for rescuing his parent from pecuniary 



428 THE MARQUESS. 

difficulties, the pardon of his ungrateful and undutiful 
children. Well ; God help me ! " saying which, the 
marquess resumed his perusal of the epistle. 

" I have already stated that I am the author of the 
measure. I also admit that I seriously apprehended your 
anger, which I now endeavour to deprecate. But lest it 
should be within the scale of possibility that you should 
imagine rne capable of presuming upon the embarrassments 
which you have represented to me, and which it is in my 
power to obviate, to take such a step, I considered it just 
and proper, and 1 hope you will consider it as an earnest 
of the feelings of a heart naturally devoted to you, to re- 
lieve you from all such suspicions or apprehensions. I 
had a duty, as I believe, to do and perform by my sister 
I had a duty to perform by you ; which had the pre- 
cedence, if you really know me, I think you will not 
doubt. 

" Before I quitted town with Hester and Miss Ever- 
ingham, I called on your solicitor, whom I found literally 
on the point of starting for Calais to meet me with the deeds 
and papers necessary for my signature. In order to put 
you entirely at your ease with regard to the settlements, I 
have signed all that was necessary ; and he tells me that 
thirty-five thousand pounds will on Monday be placed at 
your immediate disposal. Having relieved my mind of 
this, I felt comparatively happy, and doubly strengthened 
in my persuasions to Hester. 

" If either of us may hope to hear from you, your 
letter to either or both of us, will reach us, of course, at 
Lady Ospringe's, where we hope to arrive, either late this 
evening, or, should Hester's health require a stop on the 
road, early to-morrow. Believe me, I have acted for the 
best, and I trust we shall meet with that favour at your 
hands, which, until the present moment, we have never 
hazarded. 

" MALVERN." 

These last paragraphs overcame the austerity even of 
Lord Snowdon feelings alien to his bosom filled his 
heart tears, strangers to his eyes, bedewed his manly 



THE MARQUESS. 429 

cheek it was a dreadful conflict passions and feel- 
ings, all of different characters, were at strife within., while 
he himself was struggling against all ! 

It lasted but a short time indeed he could not long 
have endured it an effect, however, was to be produced, 
and when he rang the bell for his valet to come to dress 
him, there was no evidence of the dreadful contest left ! 



CHAPTER XIV. 

THIS struggle for effect, cost the marquess much, but it 
succeeded; and during the four hours which were sub- 
sequently consumed in dining with Sir Harry Winscott, 
(whom the reader may remember as having been too late 
for dinner at Lionsden,) and in the social intercourse, more 
brief than ever in these days of moderation, which took 
place subsequently, he appeared the same high and mighty, 
graciously condescending being as usual. It was when he 
returned to his home, his now solitary home, that he 
began to feel the effect of what had occurred within the 
last four and twenty hours. 

Hester, his once loved child, was gone and how gone ? 
driven from his house by harshness, and the dreadful anti- 
cipation of greater evils yet to come. His son, too, was 
absent, under the influence of similar feelings ! And 
although the liberal and dignified manner in which he had 
conducted the whole of his plan, of rescuing his sister 
from the ills and inconveniences with which she was 
assailed and threatened, demanded, as it deserved, the ad- 
miration of his father, yet the evidence which her de- 
parture from under his roof afforded of the impotency of 
his authority, wounded him to the very heart. 

With these thoughts in his mind, it was impossible that 
he should avoid the consideration of what had reduced him 
to a situation which he felt to be so uncomfortable. At 
the suggestion, or rather upon the information, flippantly 
given by the former play-fellow, and future mother-in-law 
of his child, he had been betrayed into coarseness and 



430 THE MARQUESS. 

harshness, of which he himself felt ashamed. In his 
anger he had outraged and affronted the being, who for 
twelve or fourteen years had been the faithful protectress 
and friend of his daughter, and rendered it impossible for 
her longer to remain an inmate of his family : this had 
been the work of one short hour a work, too, to which 
his son had been a witness. 

Well ! it could not be recalled ; apology or retractation 
were out of the question. He bitterly regretted what had 
happened ; but, if his heart had been laid open at the mo- 
ment, it seems probable that the severest remorse he endured 
upon the subject, arose from a conviction, or at least an 
apprehension, that he had compromised his dignity by his 
violence, and exhibited those infirmities of his character, 
which through life he had been labouring to conceal. 

He turned to another part of the family picture, and 
felt no very great reason to be pleased with the general 
appearance of things in that quarter. It was clear that 
Elizabeth and her mother had betrayed his confidence with 
regard to the governor-generalship ; it made no difference, 
to be sure, because the point was settled, and in eight and 
forty hours his nomination would be publicly announced : 
still he had made a point which they had disregarded ; 
and the mention of the aids-du-campship, which he had 
requested them not to speak of, was another breach of 
confidence which annoyed him ; but most of all was he 
annoyed, that they had prevailed upon him to bestow his 
valuable piece of preferment upon a person, who, if the 
right worshipful the mayor of Shuttlework could be de- 
pended upon, was wholly and specially unworthy of the 
station in which he was to place him. All this irritated 
the marquess, but made no alteration in his feelings or 
opinions as regarded his future wife : to the garrulous ab- 
surdity of her mother, and her disposition to exhibit her 
general knowledge of all subjects, he attributed these dis- 
agreeable circumstances ; and resolved, the moment he saw 
her, to let her ladyship feel the force of his indignation, 
and, above all things, determined to rescue the living of 
Silgrove from the grasp of the ragamuffin " Bill Richard- 
son." 



THE MARQUESS. 431 

The part of the transaction which puzzled him most was 
that upon which it had been impossible to afford him any 
information : he could not imagine whence arose the 
pointed and decided opposition to his marriage with Miss 
Oldham. Miss Everingham was on the very point of 
enlightening him at the moment when he so grossly 
affronted her ; what the result of her communication would 
have been it is impossible to surmise. Her feeling cer- 
tainly was, that as he had now severed the tie which bound 
her to his family, there was no longer any necessity for 
keeping terms with him, and she felt convinced that as 
Miss Oldham had betrayed to him the attachment of Lady 
Hester to Mr. Burford, she might, upon a fair principle of 
retaliation, show up Miss Oldham for her former desperate 
flirtation with Lord Malvern. 

One consideration checked her ; she was conscious that 
she had herself entertained hopes of filling the place in the 
family which Elizabeth Oldham was destined so soon to 
occupy, and fancied the possibility of a supposition that 
she had been urged to this denouement by that most un- 
gentle and unfeminine of all our passions, jealousy. This 
kept her silent, and left the marquess in the dark upon 
that chapter of the family history, which, as we have 
already seen, puzzled him the most. 

In the course of worldly events, there arise, at times, 
some most curious coincidences. Generally, these are 
matters of accident ; sometimes they are aided in a slight 
degree by the management of individuals interested in their 
results. Now there is nothing very remarkable in the fact 
that Lady Ospringe should have taken a house for several 
months at Brighton, because Brighton, from October till 
March, is healthy, agreeable, full of company, and brilliant 
in sea and sunshine even in the coldest weather. As Lady 
Ospringe had a house at Brighton, nothing could be more 
natural or more convenient than that Lord Malvern, 
having made up his mind to the measure which we know 
he put in execution, should carry his injured sister and 
her outraged friend thither, as the most suitable and 
proper place for their residence under existing circum- 
stances, and till some permanent arrangements might be 
made for Lady Hester's establishment ; but it certainly was 



432 THE MARQUESS. 

a curious coincidence that the Burfords, without knowing 
any of these circumstances, not aware either of Lady Os- 
pringe's residence at Brighton, or of Lord Malvern's design 
to carry his rescued victims to that place, and put them 
under her ladyship's protection, actually removed them- 
selves thither on the very day succeeding their arrival in 
town, and immediately after Charles Burford had dis- 
patched his letter to Lord Snowdon resigning the living of 
Silgrove. 

This was a curious coincidence, but a purely accidental 
one ; the only help given to its occurrence being afforded 
in a suggestion of Lord Malvern to Burford, that if, as he 
understood, his mother intended to visit the coast after her 
London business was concluded, he considered Brighton as 
the most agreeable and convenient place for the purpose ; 
for it should be understood that during the journey from 
Paris to Calais, Maria and his lordship had formed a sort 
of innocent league against her mother and brother, and 
that in those snatches of conversation which, by occasion- 
ally detaching her from their surveillance during their 
walks and explorations he contrived to enjoy, she had ex- 
pressed to him, not only her surprise at her mother's 
hurried departure from Paris, but her utter disbelief in the 
existence of any real cause for her journey to London. 

This artless and ingenuous confession of Maria's only 
confirmed him in his suspicion of the real motive by which 
the conscientious and careful parent had been actuated in 
breaking up her Parisian establishment. The very caution 
she had observed convinced him that he had suffered his 
real feelings of admiration for her daughter to betray them- 
selves. This conviction served as the strongest possible 
incentive in his mind to pursue the object which had been 
thus carefully withdrawn from him, and so difficult is it 
to know how to manage hearts the very plan which she 
had laid to prevent the formation of an attachment on the 
part of either of the young folks, had produced a diametri- 
cally opposite effect upon both. 

When Lord Malvern arrived in London, and found the 
Burfords gone, the truth came home to his mind. Maria 
was right in her suspicions that no cause, such as her 
mother spoke of, existed for this journey? and therefore^ of 



THE MARQUESS. 

course, be was right in his surmises ahout her real reasons 
for naving undertaken it. The Burfords had no idea of 
Lord Malvern's coming to England. They did not anti- 
cipate that he, jealous of his sister's honour, and resolved, 
at all hazards, to maintain her character, and support her 
respectability, would start for London the moment he had 
heard of the failure of her marriage, to obtain an explana- 
tion of Lord Elmsdale's conduct ; and, therefore, as they 
literally had no business in London, they immediately ex- 
changed the dusty smoky apartments of their metropolitan 
hotel for the bright sunshine and bracing air of the free 
and independent borough of Brighthelmstone, little dream- 
ing that their much -loved, much-dreaded friend, would so 
soon become an inhabitant of it also. 

The artificial part of the coincidence, then, amounts to 
this, the fact that the Burfords were gone to Brighton, 
strengthened Lord Malvern in his opinion that the best 
Dlace to which he could possibly take his sister would be 
her aunt's residence in that watering place ; and by this 
wise and salutary decision, it turned out that before twenty- 
four hours had elapsed, Lady Hester Plinlimmon, while 
taking the air on the esplanade in front of Brunswick 
Terrace, was encountered by her friend Mr. Charles Bur- 
ford, brought thither for the express purpose, but without 
his own privity or consent, by her noble brother, the Right 
Hon. Alfred Viscount Malvern. 

If the Marquess of Snowdon, when he wrote a cold and 
dignified acknowledgment of his son's letter, thanked him 
for his conduct with regard to the settlements, and declined 
saying one syllable upon the subject of his daughter's re- 
moval from Grosvenor Square, had known all these addi- 
tional circumstances connected with that incident, he would, 
perhaps, have been even more outrageous than he was, 
when, upon taking up the newspaper at breakfast on the 
very same day, he perused the following 

JEU D'ESPRIT, 

Upon the Richmond Omnibus breaking down when the Marquess of Snowdon 
was a passenger. 

The Omnibus has broken down 

With SNOWOON'S Marquess great, 
It could not carry through the town 

A man of so much weight. 
F F 



434 THE MARQUESS. 

" Ridiculous impertinence ! " said his lordship, crump- 
ling the paper in his hand, and dashing it upon the tahle 
" this is too bad I wish I had the fellow in Bengal ! " 

It was with difficulty he could prevail upon himself to 
read another line of the journal ; he did, however, get the 
length of the immediately succeeding paragraph, which he 
found thus framed : 

f 'A cabinet council was held at the Foreign Office 
yesterday, immediately after the king's departure for Wind- 
sor. The council broke up at seven o'clock ; and at half- 
past ten, the ministers assembled again at the house of the 
Lord Privy Seal, where they remained in deliberation until 
nearly two o'clock this morning. We have heard several 
rumours as to the results of this protracted consultation, 
but for the present we decline giving them publicity." 

te I have no doubt," said the marquess to himself, " that 
the difficulty about my blue riband is greater than it at 
first appeared ; of course, if they are hard pressed, I shall 
not insist at least I can wait, and a pledge for the next 
ought, I think, to satisfy me. Besides, it is always well 
to have a little grievance to hark back to ; so, upon the 
whole, perhaps the delay may not be so disadvantageous." 

Pleased with the opportunity of exhibiting at once his 
power and his forbearance, the noble marquess continued 
eating his breakfast, and reading the news. His eye, how- 
ever, constantly recurring to the odious bit of doggrel, 
which, absurd and contemptible as it was in itself, almost 
counterbalanced the self-satisfaction he enjoyed in the 
prospect of his public proceedings with the premier. 

His lordship had arranged to dine with Lady Katharine 
and his intended at Richmond, having, as the reader will, 
perhaps, recollect, prevented their visit to town, under the 
impression that their meeting with Lord Malvern and Lady 
Hester might produce some unpleasant results ; he little 
anticipating, at the time when he did so, that his son and 
daughter would, of themselves, relieve him from any chance 
of such consequences. This arrangement he still proposed 
to put into execution ; but was most anxious to know, be- 
fore he left town, the event of the previous night's discus- 
sion in cabinet, which it has been seen, with the natural 



THE MARQUESS. 4*35 

yanity of man generally, and of the marquess particularly, 
he attributed solely to the accumulating difficulties relating 
to an arrangement personal and peculiar to himself. 

This last and greatest anxiety was destined soon to be 
terminated. While he was yet ruminating upon the past 
occurrences, and putting his ideas en train for the inter- 
view in Downing Street, a noise so loud and shrill, that 
even the aristocratic walls of Grosvenor Square reverberated 
with the sound, struck his ears ; the uproar was continued 
horns blew, and newsmen bellowed. What could have 
happened ? " Second edition " was all he heard ; and re- 
collecting that in times of excitement, some of the news- 
papers were in the habit of publishing a second edition,, 
which merely announced the intention of the editors sub- 
sequently to publish a third, he little heeded the cry. But 
his attentive servants anticipated the wishes which he was 
too dignified to express, and the "second edition" was 
laid upon his table. He took it up, and read : 

" We publish a second edition to announce to our 
readers the important fact of the resignation of ministers. 
In the cabinet which we stated to have been held yester- 
day afternoon, and at the subsequent meeting in the even- 
ing, which we also announced, it was determined that it 
was no longer possible for the present ministers to carry 
on the government. In consequence of this decision, the 
premier and the lord chancellor left town at an early hour 
this morning, and tendered their resignations, which his 
majesty has been pleased to accept ; and we understand 
that Lord Salford has been sent for to take the king's 
commands on forming a new administration." 

This seemed to be the coup de grace. Could it be ? 
What ! go out of office without completing his appoint- 
ment without securing him his blue riband ! What a 
game had he been playing ! sacrificing his principles 
and consistency, abandoning his friends and his party, 
just sufficiently to be disappointed of the two great objects 
of his life, and that too at the moment when his friend 
and relation was sent for by the king to make a ministry, 
in which, if he had only been consistent and patient, he 
might have filled any office he had chosen to select, and 

F F 2 



436 



THE MARQUESS. 



have under their domination obtained an extra blue 
riband by a dispensation of the statutes, if he could not 
have got one in the ordinary course by the dispensations of 
Providence. 

This history the marquess in his heart believed to be 
" a weak invention of the enemy;" it could not be pos- 
sible that his dear friend the premier could have resigned 
without either first consulting him who had made such 
sacrifices, or, at all events, securing the objects of his am- 
bition from his successors; besides, of course he must 
have heard of it from better authority than a common 
newspaper. Psha ! it was ridiculous ! 

His incredulity, however, was not sufficiently well 
grounded to overcome his anxiety, and he hastened forth 
upon an early walk in order to glean the news from the 
best quarters, or perhaps draw it from the fountain head. 
If anything could have been wanting to complete his 
worries and embarrassments, this last blow was it; and 
when he sallied out of Grosvenor Square he was in a state 
of excitement comical enough to those who were wholly 
independent of him, but terrible indeed to those who hap- 
pened to be within the sphere of his influence, or under 
the power of his controul. 

More tranquilly and peaceably passed the morning at 
Brighton ; but perhaps the events which occurred during 
the next twenty-four hours on the margin of the sea, taken 
as affecting the interests of the Plinlimmons, were not 
less important than those which had turned up in the me- 
tropolis. 

Lady Ospringe, who always treated the Marquess of 
Snowdon exactly as he disliked being treated, had a long 
conversation with her niece, Lady Hester, after her return 
from the walk in which, to her utter astonishment, she had 
been joined by her brother and Mr. Burford. Lady Hes- 
ter, unused to the mild and gentle treatment which she 
experienced from her aunt upon this occasion her lady- 
ship having been previously apprised of the real state of 
Lady Hester's heart by Lord Malvern confided to her 
the real truth, and admitted the existence, in all its earliest 
strength, of an attachment to Burford ; at the same time 



THE MARQUESS. 43? 

confessing the difficulty in which she unexpectedly found 
herself placed by his accidental visit to Brighton, at the 
moment which Lord Malvern had fixed upon for his re- 
treat thither from Grosvenor Square. 

" My dear Hester/' said Lady Ospringe, " in this 
world there are no accidents so frequent as those which 
happen on purpose. Set your heart at rest about the deli- 
cacy and difficulty of your situation. Your brother knows 
your real feelings ; he is determined that you shall marry 
the object of your choice ; and I, who consider your 
father's conduct through life in a very different manner 
from that in which you estimate it, am quite satisfied that 
Malvern is right. He has obtained for himself, as we 
hear, high rank and great honours, and he has chosen to 
unite himself with a girl younger than his daughter, with- 
out consulting her views or " 

" Oh, no, Lady Ospringe," said Lady Hester, " it is I 
who have marred all his prospects and overturned his 
arrangements : he never would have married until after 
I had been married, but for this untoward circum- 
stance " 

fe Now, dear Hester," said the warm-hearted Lady 
Ospringe, ec will you tell me the truth will you answer 
mo^two questions ? I only ask two/' 

" Yes, aunt," said Lady Hester, " I promise you I 
will." 

" Well, then, first," said Lady Ospringe, " you do not 
love Lord Elmsdale ? " 

" No/' said Lady Hester, with an emphasis the most 
unequivocal. 

" You do love Charles Burford ? What ! no answer ? 
Come, let me give you some encouragement to speak/' 
said Lady Ospringe ; " if you do, I can only tell you 
this : I am rich enough to make a daughter more than 
happy in marriage with the man to whom she is attached. 
Hester, dear, it was so / married. I know what the 
blessings of domestic happiness are, and I have seen abun- 
dance of instances of the misery of ill-assorted matches. That 
your marriage with Mr. Burford can be so considered, I do 
not see ; for it is not probable that such a man as your 
F F 3 



438 THE MARQUESS. 

father and my brother-in-law would have selected an in- 
dividual to direct the future career of his son through life 
without having a high opinion of his merits and character. 
I have no daughter no child, Hester, and it has always 
been my intention to make you my heir. How much 
more agreeable will it be to me to see you happy before I 
die, than to die in the hope only that you may be so after- 
wards. Your own fortune would be ample for all com- 
fort in this marriage; but, in the first instance, I will 
double it only however upon one condition, that when 
you are Lady Hester Burford you will make this your 
home, and trust to the affections of your mother's sister, 
rather than to those of the flighty second wife of your lofty 
father/' 

" My dear aunt," said Lady Hester, " you are opening 
a prospect to me so very different " 

ff And so very agreeable," said Lady Ospringe. "Come, 
speak the truth, dearest you have promised ; when I 
tell you that my mind is fixed upon the completion of this 
affair, and that you will secure my happiness by accepting 
my offer, perhaps I may encourage you to make a de- 
claration." 

" I cannot speak," said Lady Hester, who, unused to 
kindness, and overcome by her feelings, threw her arms 
round her aunt's neck and burst into tears. 

As far as poor Lord Snowdon's views for fe Hester 
dear " went, it seems tolerably evident that they were con- 
siderably damaged. But it is necessary for us to look at 
another part of Brighton during this same morning, where 
a scene of equally vital interest, but of a totally different 
character, was enacting, but which as deeply involved some 
of the personages of the same drama. 

The delight of Lady Ospringe, who, with all her rank 
and wealth and influence, felt that she could secure her 
beloved niece from the ill effects of her father's frowns, 
and satisfied that she should secure her happiness by event- 
ually uniting her to the man she loved, was weak in com- 
parison with the pain and affliction of the amiable Mrs. 
Burford, who found herself, and her daughter, and her 
son, brought unconsciously and without the slightest pre- 



THE MARQUESS. 439 

Vious intention, or concert, or agreement, into immediate 
contact and connexion with the persons of all others whom 
she was most anxious to avoid. 

Some there are, no doubt, who will deny the credit of 
such a feeling as that which Mrs. Burford is here repre- 
sented to entertain, and think that the anxiety she evinced 
to be rid of the association with Lord Malveru was merely 
affected, because it would seem that the union of her 
daughter with a man so placed in the world would be most 
desirable : but they are wrong ; a father, a calculating 
man, might have felt this desire and concealed it ; and that 
there are mothers as witness Lady Katharine Oldham, 
who, with all the professions of allowing their daughters 
to choose for themselves of course under certain limita- 
tions proceed not only to the fair 'measure of preaching 
them into marrying for interest against their will, but the 
whole length of manual correction to enforce their decrees, 
is not to be denied ; but really and truly Mrs. Burford was 
not one of these. 

To say that her daughter's being Marchioness of Snow- 
don would be disagreeable to her, would be to say that 
which is not true. What she desired to avoid was exposing 
her child a girl full of feeling, of admiration for the 
sort of talent and accomplishments which Lord Malvern 
possessed, to the possibility of forming an attachment, a 
happy result to which their relative positions in society 
rendered nearly impossible ; and as we have seen, besides 
her affection for her daughter, she possessed a dignity of 
character and independence of spirit, which led her of all 
things most studiously to avoid anything which might pos- 
sibly be construed into the assumption of an undue in- 
fluence over the mind of a young nobleman, violently 
excited at the moment against his father, and not less 
against his future mother-in-law, by the most extraordinary 
combination of circumstances. 

These were the feelings which actuated this exemplary 
woman ; but what were her sensations when she discovered, 
for the first time, that beyond her influence and without 
her knowledge, an engagement in a precisely similar degree 
to that which she so much dreaded, absolutely existed be- 
JT F 4 



440 THE MARQUESS. 

tween her son and Lord Malvern's sister. It was the first 
time that she had heard of it, and it was disclosed to her 
by Lord Malvern himself in the ahsence of Burford, who, 
after the return of Lady Hester to her aunt's, had, at the 
express desire of his mother, taken his sister out for a 
'' long walk " on the cliff. 

Mrs. Burford's object in planning this excursion was to 
have the opportunity of speaking to Lord Malvern on the 
subject of his to her extraordinary conduct in con- 
triving (which he had evidently done) a meeting at 
Brighton between her son and his sister. The conversation 
in which she at last succeeded in engaging his lordship 
took place, singularly enough, at the same time at which 
Lady Ospringe and Lady Hester were occupied in that 
dialogue of a somewhat similar nature which has just been 
recorded. 

" Lord Malvern," said Mrs. Burford, " I am sure you 
will give me credit for being an affectionate parent ; it is 
an anxious attachment for my child which emboldens me 
to speak to you to-day, and the very decided part you have 
taken renders it necessary I should speak out." 

" My dear Mrs. Burford, say what you please," said 
Lord Malvern ; " I am ready to vindicate the course I 
have pursued, and in which I am much strengthened by 
the countenance of my warm-hearted aunt, with whom, by 
the way, I am instructed to invite you and Maria to dine." 

" Lord Malvern/! said Mrs. Burford, " you must first 
hear me. Charles is, I am sure, worthy and honourable, 
and excellent in conduct and principles ; but, indeed, Lord 
Malvern, you are incurring a heavy responsibility in en- 
couraging the idea of his becoming a connexion of your 
family. Your father " 

" Upon that point," said Lord Malvern, Cf my mind is 
made up. Hester and I have, through the medium of 
Lady Ospringe, received such incontrovertible evidence of 
my father's lamentable blindness with regard to the con- 
nexion he is forming, and at the same time such decided 
proofs of his unalterable resolution to fulfil his engagement, 
that we are totally cast off to seek our own fortunes. I 
have no desire to flatter you, nor to overrate Charles ; but 



THE MARQUESS. 441 

I know him to the very heart's core, and a more noble- 
minded, high-spirited gentleman does not exist on the face 
of the earth. My sister loves him ; she was ready to 
sacrifice her affection to obedience, but nature prevailed, 
and she sank under the effort. My father, tutored by those 
who hate us, and seek to gain all possible influence over 
him, has widened the breach between us past all hope of a 
re-union. I therefore become the guardian of my sister's 
honour and happiness); and she has confided enough to me 
to make me know how the one is to be maintained and the 
other secured ; therefore will I not hear a word more about 
it. I am not going to press the affair, or hurry it on ; nor 
would it be right or proper that she should, for some time, 
enter into any such [engagement as marriage until all the 
eclat of Lord Elmsdale's affair has blown over ; but, sanc- 
tioned as my views are by the sister of her mother, Lady 
Hester, please God, shall be the wife of your son." 

ff You speak strongly, Lord Malvern," said Mrs. Bur- 
ford, " and I really know not what to oppose to your pro- 
position upon any ground but one. Your father, let him 
act as he may, is still your father ; and only consider what 
his feelings will be when he knows that my son is the 
husband of his daughter." 

" His feelings ! " said Lord Malvern, " those we know 
already, because that heartless traitor in love and friendship, 
Miss Elizabeth Oldham, has put him in possession of the 
truth, as far as Hester's feelings go ; and, as my father 
knows, when once the heart and mind of a woman are won, 
all the rest is but a secondary consideration in the ' book 
of fate/ " 

" I admit that," said Mrs. Burford, " he may know 
what her feelings are, but I should anticipate much more 
serious results, if he found her ladyship married to the son 
of a poor clergyman, that son having previously been the 
object of his bounty and patronage." 

" Do you know," said Lord Malvern, with a half comic, 
half malicious smile on his lip, <e I have thought of that ; 
but I have also hit upon a remedy for the evil it struck 
me that the marquess might think it, in his phraseology, 
beneath^ Lady Hester Plinlimmon to marry the son of 



442 THE MARQUESS. 

Mrs. Burford. What do you think I have done, in order 
to check this disposition to run my friend Charles down ? " 

ff I cannot imagine," said the old lady. 

" Why, I have resolved," said his lordship, " to make 
it sound better, by contriving, with your permission and 
that of one other person, yet to be obtained, that Lady 
Hester, instead of marrying the son of the late Reverend 
Thomas Burford, shall unite herself to Charles Burford, 
the brother of the Right Honourable Viscountess Malvern." 

" I don't comprehend you," said Mrs. Burford. 

Cf You will, perhaps, understand it all this evening at 
my aunt's," said Lord Malvern. " My dear Mrs. Burford, 
I am resolved. I flatter myself that Maria will not object 
to this plan ; and if she approve of it, I shall be made the 
happiest of men ! " 

" My lord," said Mrs. Burford, bursting into tears, fc as 
Heaven is my witness, this is the event I most dreaded 
this " 

" Oh ! yes," said Lord Malvern, " this is the event 
which conjured up a law-suit in London, was to carry you 
off by the diligence, and did actually put you in the metro- 
polis, out of which you were in so great a hurry to get, 
that I discovered the whole scheme. You are an excellent 
mother, and will make me an excellent mother-in-law 
provided always that Maria " 

What a coincidence ! at this word the charming girl 
and her brother entered the room. 

" Here she is," continued Lord Malvern, " to speak for 
herself." 

" My mother in tears ! " said Maria ; " what has hap- 
pened ? " 

<f Maria," said Lord Malvern, te she cannot bear the 
thoughts of parting from you." 

if I hope," said Miss Burford, " there is no chance of 
her being tried upon that point." 

1 f It is one," said Lord Malvern, e< upon which I have 
no intention of trying her at this particular moment. I 
now content myself, my dear girl, with conveying an in- 
vitation to you from my aunt to dine with her. Oh ! " 
said he, seeing that she looked towards her mother 
" mamma and all she has already accepted and you, 



THE MARQUESS. 443 

Charles, with whom, if you please, I will now take a 
stroll, allowing that dear sister of yours to 'hear from her 
exemplary mother's lips the determination that I have^ex- 
pressed, and which no power on earth, if she consent, will 
prevent my fulfilling. Rememher, ladies, at seven my 
carriage shall call for you/' 

Saying which, Lord Malvern walked out of the room 
with his future brother-in-law, leaving the mother to com- 
municate the conversation that had passed to her daughter, 
in which interesting tete-a-tete we must leave them for the 
present, just to^see how matters are going on in London. 

" All true, by Jove ! all true ! " said Lord Massingberg 
to the marquess, whom he met at the corner of Bruton 
Street; "out all out! the thing's done must be a 
dissolution how do you stand eh ? " 

The question was a most awkward one. The marquess 
had made every disposition for fulfilling all the conditions 
of his ratting. All his old principles were changed, all 
his new political arrangements had been made, and having, 
after five-and-twenty years' adherence to a losing party, 
quitted them just as they were coming into power, he had 
the satisfaction of finding himself deprived of the reward 
for his apostacy, and so fettered by circumstances, as to be 
obliged to continue his opposition to his friends at the 
approaching election, with the certainty of getting nothing 
on earth from their enemies. 

It was all too clear dirty- faced fellows, who neither 
shaved nor wore clean shirts diurnally, were to be seen 
smirking and junketting about the streets. Octogenarians, 
laid on the shelf half a century before, were to be found 
tottering and toddling down to Westminster; while the 
carriages of the aspirants to high office were rolling about 
at the tails of the unpaid-for job horses, which had, for 
many a-year before, done nothing but drag them down to 
Brookes's, or lug them over the heavy western road, as far 
as that suburban relic of antiquity which has been so 
graphically described by the late Lord Byron. 

This seemed to be the acme of the marquess's misery 
and discomfiture. His governor-generalship was gone 
his friends, like a suddenly-retiring army, had left their 
heavy baggage behind them they had secured nothing 



444 THE MARQUESS. 

it was an unconditional surrender and as to the blue 
riband, that was lost in company with the oriental vice- 
royalty. 

There was no hope for him of that, he was certain. 
What effect would this extraordinary disappointment have 
upon his dear Elizabeth ? To be sure he had no controul 
over events ; all he had said to her of his appointment, he 
was justified in saying; and besides, as it was, there was 
some consolation even in his defeat. Elizabeth had ex- 
pressed a dislike for India, and avowed her preference of 
' e dear old Lionsden," to the more gaudy and distinguished 
splendour of Calcutta ; that was something, and besides, 
there was another something, which, if possible, was yet 
more highly gratifying to him he should get rid of the 
association of Mr. Frederick Richardson, the self-pro- 
claimed aid-du-camp. 

The mind, even such a mind as Lord Snowdon's, is 
charmingly elastic ; he was stung to the quick by the over- 
throw of his hopes and expectations, and by the remorse 
which his venal and useless tergiversation could not fail to 
excite ; but still, there were domestic life and quiet enjoy- 
ment before him. What were golden thrones and fawning 
slaves to the quiet bowers of Lionsden, and the fascinating 
society of his beloved Elizabeth ? One thing was above 
all others certain, that having now secured from his son's 
liberality the financial part of his credentials, and being 
ready to conclude the settlement upon his future wife, 
(having severed every tie between himself and his family,) 
the sooner he married the better. 

Previous, therefore, to his departure for Richmond, he 
proceeded to his solicitor, and gave him instructions for the 
immediate arrangement of all the necessary documents; 
and having concluded some other affairs of business, threw 
himself into his travelling carriage, and started for the 
home of his beloved, in whose society alone he now felt 
that he could forget the annoyances by which in every 
other sphere he could not fail to be haunted. 

It was an annoyance, the just reward, it is true, of the 
fast and loose principle upon which he had been acting, 
and the undecided, shilly-shally game which he had been 
playing ; but still his situation was one of peculiar bard- 






THE MARQUESS. 445 

ship. Another week, perhaps another day, and he would 
have been all that he had ever wished to be. Now, he 
returned to the mansion of his betrothed, shorn of the 
honours which he had assumed, deprived of the patronage 
of which he had boasted, convinced, too, that as he must 
per force annul the appointment of Mr. Frederick Richard- 
son to the aid-du-campship, it would be perfectly impos- 
sible for him to rescind his promise of the living of Sil- 
grove, to his reverend and disreputable brother " Bill." 

Away went the horses, and away went the marquess, 
laid back in his carriage and hidden from the public gaze, 
which, by the way, was not directed towards him. No 
object attracted his attention during the whole trajet, 
except indeed the spot never to be forgotten by him on 
Barnes Common, where he had ventured into that dreadful 
receptacle for the living from which he had been so pain- 
fully ejected in St. James's Street. 

Richmond achieved, the hill partly mounted, the mar- 
quess was at the door of Lady Katharine's extremely pretty 
villa : the carriage was opened, and out sprang (with an 
effort, it must be confessed) the matured yet expectant 
lover. 

He entered the house all seemed silent Elizabeth 
was not singing the dogs were not barking the grim 
grey governess was not playing waltzes, nor, strangest of 
all, was Lady Katharine talking ; one or two servants 
whom his lordship encountered slunk out of the way ; and 
Miss Oldham's maid, who was looking over the ballusters 
of the gallery into the hall, rushed into one of the bed- 
rooms which opened into it, the moment she caught Lord 
Snowdon's eye. 

The marquess proceeded to the drawing-room, nobody 
was there in the boudoir nobody in the billiard- 
room, nobody. " Happy circumstance," thought his Lord- 
ship, " Mr. Frederick Richardson is absent to-day at least; 
and besides getting rid of his frivolity and impertinence, I 
shall escape the horror of being obliged to explain to /wra, 
why I cannot fulfil my promise of putting him on my 
staff." 

His lordship promenaded the rooms looked at him- 
self in every glass, even in a small round one in a green 



446 



TIIE MARQUESS. 



morocco case, which lay upon one of the three hundred 
and sixty-five well covered tables, which were scattered 
about the apartments. 

A servant entered the boudoir, and mentioned that Lady 
Katharine would be down as soon as possible. 

" Is Miss Oldham at home?" said the marquess. 

"I don't know, I am sure, my Lord," said the man, 
with an expression of countenance which clearly indicated 
that he did. 

The marquess sauntered to a sofa, and took up a news- 
paper ; there it was again ! the same infernal "jeu d' esprit" 
upon his tumble in the omnibus. He seized the journal 
and stuffed it into his pocket, hoping by this magnanimous 
act to check the circulation of his disgrace through the 
servants' hall and housekeeper's room, as if all the under- 
lings of the household did not make a point of reading the 
newspapers long before they permitted Lady Katharine to 
see them. 

After a considerable delay, for which he could not 
account, Lady Katharine's maid appeared, with her eyes 
very red indeed, and begged his Lordship to come up to 
her lady's room. 

" What, is Lady Katharine ill ? " said his lordship. 

" 111, my Lord ? " said the maid ; " nothing can be worse. 
You got my lady's letter, my lord ? " 

" Letter ! no what letter ? " said the marquess. 

"My lady will tell you all herself oh, dear! oh, 
dear ! " said the unhappy soubrette, " what shall we do ? " 

The marquess, considerably mystified by all these ap- 
pearances, and thinking, by Elizabeth's non-appearance, 
that her mother was seriously ill, followed the " lovely 
Thais" who "led the way" in considerable anxiety; not 
that he would have cared in the slightest degree if Lady 
Katharine had been gathered to her fathers or mothers that 
very day, except inasmuch as such an event as her death 
would naturally postpone that, for the immediate occurrence 
of which he was now so anxious. He entered the apart- 
ment redolent with Eau a Bruler, Eau de Cologne, and all 
the "perfumes of Arabia." 

" Lady Katharine," said the marquess, approaching the 






THE MARQUESS. 447 

bed upon which her ladyship lay extended, ee this is a sorry 
sight : I trust you are not seriously ill ? " 

" Oh, my dear lord ! " said Lady Katharine ; ' f leave 
the room, Hobkirk shut the door go away! What 
am I to do ? what am I to say ? I remember well enough 

I was very young at the time, when my poor grand- 
mother, Lady Manningtree she was the sister, you know, 
my lord, of the famous Sir Tilbury Todd that man who 

oh, dear me, what shall I do ? / don't know as 
poor dear Doctor Simpson used to tell me yet what can 
I say ? " 

" What is the matter ? " said the marquess, knowing that 
he must wait for the unravelment of the history in her own 
fashion. 

" Matter ! " continued Lady Katharine, <e oh, that girl ! 

well Elizabeth, to be sure, I never could have thought 
it ! though I do recollect old Mrs. Bamfoozle, of Dragel- 
thorp the place her husband bought of my poor uncle 
George she afterwards married Lees, the great wine 
merchant. By the way, he failed for four hundred thou- 
sand pounds, and paid sixteen and nineperice in the pound 

she used to say to me oh, dear me what shall I 
do?" 

" But, dear Lady Katharine, what is it ? " said Lord 
Snowdon, " where is Elizabeth ? " 

ef Elizabeth ! " screamed Lady Katharine, in a voice 
emulative of the largest and boldest peacock that ever an- 
nounced bad weather, " oh ! that's it ! oh, that girl ! 
dear Lord Snowdon, what can I do ? she's gone, gone ! " 

" Gone whither ? " said the marquess. 

" Oh ! I never thought it ! " sobbed her ladyship ; ' c I'm 
sure that Frederick Richardson oh ! I believe it was all 
that Mr. Losh ! and only to think, his great aunt was 
maid of honour to Queen Charlotte ! oh ! yes, and his 
father an eminent merchant in Liverpool. By the way, 
that railroad but I must not think of that now twenty 
miles an hour but " 

" Yes ! but what of Elizabeth ? " repeated his lordship. 

" Oh ! then," said Lady Katharine, " you didn't get my 
letter ? dear me ! I sent it by Robert the groom that 
man never failed me before I had him from Colonel 



448 THE MARQUESS. 

Windmill, your friend, Lord Snowdori with a very good 
character. By the way, his wife told me but never 
mind Elizabeth is gone, my dear lord ! " 

tf Gone where, I ask ? " repeated the marquess. 

" Oh ! Heaven knows," said her mother; " you killed 
her with talking about India. By the way, if you never 
had got that appointment, you would not have lost her : 
she could not bear the tigers, and the ships, and the hyenas, 
and the nabobs, and all that. Mr. Anderson, of Cockel- 
ford, told her such a story of a kangaroo " 

(f Lost Elizabeth ! " said the marquess, " how lost her ? ''" 

' ( She's gone, my dear lord ! ruined past redemption ! " 

said Lady Katharine, " run away with Frederick Rich- 
ardson last night by the way, what a night it was for 
them rained so hard I " 

" What, eloped ! " 

" Exactly," replied Lady Katharine ; " gone for good 

how or which way, Heaven knows ! She left me a 
note it is enclosed in my letter to you describing her 
horror at the match. I ought to have known it would not 
answer, Frederick and she were such friends. To be sure, 
as Mr. Losh said but the " 

" Madam ! " said the marquess, " am I to understand 

for I can understand very little you say that your 
daughter, my intended wife, has eloped with Mr. Frederick 
Richardson ? " 

" That's it," said Lady Katharine ; " what a deal of 
trouble you have saved me ; yes that's the whole of 
it as Shakspeare says, ' brevity is the soul of wit,' 
and " 

" Wit ! madam," said the marquess, " what do you 
mean by wit ? are you in your senses, and venture to trifle 
with me under such circumstances ? " 

" Trifle ! " said Lady Katharine, " I have no desire to 
trifle ; I tell you the truth and that, my poor dear mother 
used to say by the way, she was one of the first women 
who left off wearing powder she used to say " 

" I have not the slightest inclination to hear what she 
used to say, madam," said the marquess ; " it seems that 
I have no farther business here at any rate. I conclude I 
shall find your letter in Grosvenor Square when I return. 



THE MARQUESS. 449 

That I am surprised at such a gross and glaring want of 
taste in your daughter, I admit ; but do not suffer yourself 
to believe, ma'am, that I am in the slightest degree morti- 
fied." 

" Oh ! I dare say not/' said Lady Katharine ; " the 
truth is, as my uncle George used to say he, poor dear 
man, lost his leg at Walcheren by the way, what a 
lamentable affair that was " 

" Madam ! I cannot any longer listen to this gib- 
berish," said the marquess ; " your daughter must be 
mad." 

" So all girls are when they are in love," said her Lady- 
ship ; te she cares about nothing but pleasing herself, as 
Miss Everingham told her dear good soul she is that 
when Lord Malvern was himself so desperately in love with 
her " 

" Malvern in love with whom, ma'am ? " said the mar- 
quess. 

" Elizabeth ! " said Lady Katharine. 

" My son ! ma'am," said Lord Snowdon, " is it pos- 
sible that I have only now discovered and that at the 
moment in which I least expected it the cause of the 
apparently groundless hostility of Malvern to my marriage 
with your daughter ? is it possible that human nature can 
be so depraved ? that you, conscious as you must have been, 
by the confession you have this instant made, of the ex- 
istence of such a feeling on the part of Alfred, should have 
sanctioned the negociations which have been going on for 
the bestowal of her hand upon me, and which are only now, 
providentially I must say, broken off, by her own repug- 
nance to so unnatural an union ? " 

" Oh, dear ! " said Lady Katharine, ' ' you are quite 

mistaken : she never cared for Malvern never a bit 

but she was desperately in love with Frederick Richardson ; 
and so " 

" Frederick, ma'am," said the marquess, repeating the 
word in a tone precisely similar to that in which she 
uttered it, and wholly unconscious in his rage of either 
what he spoke or acted, " it is clear that I have been 
made a dupe, and you, my Lady Katharine, have been 



450 THE MARQUESS. 

an accessory to the fraud ! Console yourself with the re- 
flection, that while you have successfully marred the hap- 
piness of myself and my family, you have ruined the pros- 
pects of your own. I hope never to hear more of you so 
long as I live ; for upon earth there are no two characters 
more despicable in themselves, or more hateful to me, 
than those of a heartless young woman, and a frivolous old 
one!" 

Saying which, his lordship bounced out of the room, 
and hurrying down stairs, strode across the hall out of the 
door, out of the gates, out of the grounds, and away to the 
Star and Garter, (a sign under which, although destined 
temporarily to live there, it did not appear he had been 
born,) where his horses and carriage had been put up, 
and whence, in a few minutes, he took his departure for 
London. 

Upon his arrival in Grosvenor Square, he found the 
letter from Lady Katharine, to which she had alluded, 
enclosing the note which Miss Oldham had left upon a 
table in her dressing-room. Lady Katharine's epistle was 
brief, blotted, unconnected, and nearly illegible. Eliza- 
beth's was written with no appearance of trepidation, but 
was all as soft, shining, and sweet-smelling as ever ; it was 
concise, but to the purpose : 

" MY DEAREST MAMMA, 

" You will be surprised at the step I have taken. Be- 
fore this reaches you I shall be far on my way to become 
the wife of Frederick Richardson. His pride was wounded, 
and his feelings were strongly excited by the abrupt, and, I 
must say, coarse manner in which ' Old Snow ' snapped 
him up at dinner the other day it disgusted me ; and 
when I found that I was to be transported to India, of 
which I have such a horror, I took Feederick's opinion, 
and we resolved to moderate our expectations, and be happy 
in mutual affection. We shall make it out, I have no 
doubt, and I feel myself quite fit to be a soldier's wife. 
You must soften the marquess's rage. Frederick has got 
six weeks' leave of absence, and you must not expect to 
see me until that period is expired, by which time the go- 
vernor-general will be gone to his empire. 






TIIE MARQUESS. 451 

<e You, ray dearest mamma, will, I am convinced, for- 
give me, and assure yourself that what I have done, how- 
ever imprudent it may at first appear, is the best and wisest 
step I could have taken. Adieu ! you shall hear the mo- 
ment I am married, for I shall want a million of things, 
which, of course, I had neither time nor opportunity to 
bring away with me. (f Yours, affectionately, 

E. 0." 

This note, so characteristic of the flippant writer, and 
so clearly explanatory of the nature of her feelings towards 
Lord Snowdon, somewhat, as it appeared, incautiously 
forwarded to his lordship, consummated the violence of 
his rage ; and while it did so, must exhibit to the reader 
the providential ill success of such heartless trickery. Had 
Elizabeth Oldham been what Lord Malvern once thought 
her, she would have become the wife of a man who loved 
her, and whom she seemed to love, and have been Mar- 
chioness of Snowdon into the bargain. As it was, she had 
recorded herself a heartless coquette in the first instance, 
and a mercenary hypocrite in the second ; winding up her 
base career by becoming the wife of a needy coxcomb, 
who, in less than three years from their marriage, had dis- 
sipated his small fortune on the turf and at the gaming- 
table, and had gone upon half-pay, receiving the difference, 
which half-pay he eventually commuted at a price com- 
mensurate with his embarrassments rather than the real 
value of the income it produced. 

Lord Snowdon threw down the letter and, defeated in 
his public career, baffled in private life, at once the victim 
and dupe of his passion and pretensions, felt a misery of 
which he had never before been conscious. Whither was 
he to turn for succour or for consolation ? For the sake of 
this worthless girl at one time the pretender to his son's 
affections he had broken up his establishment and scat- 
tered his family. The very circumstances which had been 
communicated to him by Lady Katharine, in a great mea- 
sure justified Malvern's hostility to the match, which, 
before he had been apprised of them, he could neither 
comprehend nor forgive. 

To Lady Hester, as we have seen, the marquess was 



452 THE MARQUESS. 

decidedly attached ; he was proud of her, as well indeed 
he might be ; and although his heart relented not in her 
favour,, because she had rejected Lord Elmsdale, or, at 
least,, had induced his abdication by the violent expression 
of her feelings, yet he could not but repent of the harsh 
and cutting language which he had used to her, at the 
suggestion of, and upon information furnished him, by her 
who once had been her dearest friend, but who was now 
one of her bitterest enemies. 

That he must do something, was absolutely necessary : 
he availed himself of the favourable moment when his 
feelings had the mastery of his passion for in fact he 
had but one and resolved to proceed to Brighton ; his 
anger towards his son being greatly subdued, and his re- 
sentment against his daughter very much moderated. That 
plan he put into execution, and reached Lady Ospringe's 
residence in the evening of the day on which the party 
invited, as the reader knows, was assembled round her 
hospitable board. 

It is not permitted to us to know the results of this 
meeting;" but after what has already been communicated 
to the reader, he may feel pretty certain that the arrange- 
ments made by the young people were eventually concluded 
as they had originally proposed. Nothing seems wanting 
to complete the triumph which nature and truth had 
achieved over the vanities of the world, and the deceptions 
of the heartless and unprincipled, but the eventual mar- 
riage of Lord Snowdon to the ill-used Anne Everingham. 
That such an event did actually take place, we cannot 
positively say ; but this we know, that all the events of 
our little history tend most instructively to prove the value 
of the warning which Massinger gives in these admonitory 
lines : 

" Take heed of Pride, and cautiously consider 
How brittle the foundation is, on which 
You labour to advance it." 



THE END. 



LONDON : 

Printed by A. SPOTTISWOODE, 
New-Street-Square. 
