THE 

ANGLO-IRISH 

OF 

THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 
VOL. II. 



LONDON : 
PRINTED BV S. AND R. UENTLEY, 

Dorset Street, Fleet Stteei. 



THE 



ANGLO-IRISH 



OF 



THE NINETEENTH CENTURY. 



A NOVEL. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 



VOL. 11. 



LONDON : 

HENRY COLBURN, NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 

1828. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER I. 

" Now that you have the sense to be well, 
good Blount," said Flood to our hero, as, more 
than a month after Gerald received the intelli- 
gence detailed in the last chapter, they saun- 
tered through the solitudes of Pere la Chaise — 
" now that you have the sense to be well, good 
Blount, let me, in the first instance, very de- 
licately intimate that I am rather disposed to 
acknowledge myself amazingly tired of the 
whole affair." 

*' Indeed, Flood, I do not wonder. The 
kind and constant attentions you paid me 
during that wretched relapse — " 

*' Neither kind nor constant," interrupted 
Flood : " kindness, as it vaguely appears to 

VOL. II. B 



2060836 



2 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

me, having little to do with the description of 
necessity I was under to perform what I have 
performed ; and constancy to your bed-side, 
most especially during the period of your very 
preposterous loquacity, having just as little 
meaning, when I sum up the diversified pas- 
sages of life by your humble friend experi- 
enced in the company of such specimens of the 
gentler sex, as this land of the Gaul doth sup- 
ply for the arousing of a slight interest in the 
bosom of man." 

" And how do you like them. Flood .''" 
*'Like.? worthy Blount, people of sense 
never * like.' 'Tis a word insufferably strong. 
Yet, in some degree to afford the indulgence 
of an answer to your philosophic inquiries, I 
permit myself to intimate that, of a French 
woman's face, there is nothing pretty but the 
eyes ; of her figure, nothing so potent as the 
corset, with its appendages; and yet is her 
step, her walk, her manner of motion, supreme- 
ly worthy of womankind." 

" More so than, as you term it, the manner 
of motion of our own majestic beauties, entering 
a saloon in one of our squares, or sailing statelily 
up Bond-street, under the surveillance of the 
male duenna — the gold-headed stick .?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 3 

" Frightful 1 Enormous to a degree ! 'Tis 
military striding, not walking, under a flounce.'" 

" Very grand and awful, though." 

" Yes, very. But people don't want that 
from them. People don't want a fine woman to 
be always ' keeping the step.' Yet our su- 
perb women icill try to pace with one, no 
matter how one's boots and spurs, belts and 
sabre, to say nothing of Vair militairey compel 
one to stamp and clank, at slow march, by their 
side. Now the peculiar eulogy of a French 
girl is, that she leaves your legs and feet to take 
care of themselves, and pursues her own little 
graceful pitter-patter, just as if you were a 
mile oiF, though all the time her finger-tips 
touch your arm, and she is firing up, from 
under her bonnet, straight into your face. If 
the war break out again, and that one slightly 
fancies a feminine companion, for the march, 
let her country be England ; but in times of 
peace, at least, if the lady be required, partly 
for the purposes of entering and leaving a 
room, like a woman, allow the suggestion that 
she may be French, in preference." 

" Apropos to war, Flood, have you heard 
some strange rumours this morning .''" 
B 2 



4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Something I have heard, possibly ; but 'tis 
so long ago, ever since before breakfast, spare 
me the considerable pain of an unnecessary- 
effort to recollect and combine, good fellow." 

" Well ; the French women are like to make 
you turn traitor, Flood."" 

" Egregious ! One must have been, some 
time or other, the subject of some one power or 
other, in order to be liable to the commission of 
treason towards any second power of the earth." 

" And you have never yet declared yourself 
the sworn subject of beauty, in our land of 
beauty, — of beauty in its excellence — England ?" 

" The thought is old enough to cause a loss 
of a considerable portion of self-estimation and 
esteem. I must cut you, fellow-student, or 
your overpowering notions will prove the disso- 
lution of your friend. Barbarous. We do not 
dress, and get three tailors to superintend dif- 
ferent parts of one suit — we do not live for that." 

" But they pique you more than the brilliant 
creatures at home ?" 

*' Too astounding again. I tell you, old 
school-mate, nothing piques, or pleases, or in 

any way quite interests us. Get rid of all 

that downright way of speaking, and of those in- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 5 

earnest notions that absolutely amount to a con- 
ception, and, I repeat, overwhelm and agitate. 
Yet, still to flatter that fever-worn frame, and 
pallid countenance, apprehend, very remotely, 
that, since we came to Paris, your faithful ad- 
mirer has had something like a glimpse of an 
individual, whose English perfection of feature, 
and French manner of motion, saying nothing of 
a style of discourse, and of a vivacity and a 
smile peculiarly her own — " 

" She has piqued you," interrupted Gerald ; 
" and she is real French ?" 

" By her tongue, at least : but, now, do not 
insist on your particularities, excellent Blount." 

"Have you met her often?" 

" Twice, or once, as it may prove to be. 
Still you hem me in. Change we the topic, 
' oh thou particular fellow.' In some measure, 
I may say, I have a new matter to indicate. 
You get able to protect yourself in good time, 
for I have a notion my admirable father wishes 
me to meet him in London in a few days, on 
what need I do not dare to conjecture, and you, 
it strikes me, will not so soon return to England." 

" Oh, Flood, do not glance at such a thing : 
it shakes me to the centre." 



6 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" If I have agitated you, good Blount, learn, 
from your own sensations, to spare others the 
agony your words every moment inflict." 

" But your allusion reminds me, however, of 
a question it is quite necessary I should ask. 
A serious question, Flood."" 

" Ever the same. Never to be taught : give 
me breath, however, and go on." 

" My poor young antagonist ?" 

" A man of your tenacious habits of mind 
ought to recollect, that his surgeon pronounced 
him mortally hit, on the ground." 

" The surgeon might have erred." 

" Very impossible. Or even so, he would make 
his own words good to save his credit after- 
wards; so that, in any case, the chivalrous 
youth is extinct." 

" My first illness here came on too soon after 
our arrival to allow me to consult the English 
papers : but what said they .^" 

"I apprehend the little affair was judiciously 
hushed up by your good friends in them ; yet, 
in a provincial English print, as it slightly pre- 
sents itself to my mind, I have read or glanced 
over a few lines that intimated his demise, some 
hours after we parted from him." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 7 

Gerald was silent, but he shuddered. Flood 
pretended not to notice him, but turned away 
his head, and lispingly hummed a French air. 
In a few moments, Gerald resumed. 

" It must be so. Yet I had hopes, vague 
hopes, that, mixed up with the horrors of my 
fever, used to bring a relief. My brother's 
letters, too, were completely silent on the sub- 
ject ; and if he could have imparted good news, 
I should have had it. Flood, I am amazed 
you never wrote to London to make inquiries." 

" Be not therefore amazed, fellow-student ; I 
did take the incalculable trouble of writing to 
London for that especial purpose ; but from the 
fact of your opponent having been only a few 
weeks in town, and, more important still, un- 
known in our set, by self or friend, I might as 
well have written to the North Pole. No civi- 
lized person of my acquaintance or yours could 
possibly be aware of his existence or demise, 
life or death ; or whither they carried him, or 
where they interred him." 

" I am, then, the murderer of a fellow-crea- 
ture," muttered Gerald. 

" Preposterous, good school-mate. Ah !" in- 
terrupting himself, and looking down one of 



8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the shady walks at the top of which they stood ; 
" that bonnet can be worn so only by one 
head in the spacious world ! — those twinkling 
feet can prop but one enormously engaging per- 
son ! — stand for yourself a moment, too prosing 
Monsieur Melancholy, I will perchance return ;" 
and, in a pace as gallant as his usual half- stride, 
half-glide, would permit. Flood clanked off' to 
join a group of ladies, who just then turned 
out of view into another walk. 

At this period, France had, for the first time 
during many years, been thrown open to the 
observation, the criticism, nay, the hypercriti- 
cism of England. We had been living to our- 
selves so long, that, beyond ourselves, nothing 
was good, fair, or " in taste." Doctor Prim- 
rose, with a depth of philosophy of which he 
does not suspect himself, declares, that, at his 
own fireside, among his own family, every man 
is a greater man than his neighbour : what is 
true of an individual is true of a nation ; and 
Englishmen isolated from the rest of the world, 
had, indeed, been such a considerable time 
cooped up, at their own fireside, too, that, 
singly and collectively, they illustrated the 
good divine's proposition. We crossed the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 9 

Straits, in fact, to convince ourselves of our 
own preeminence ; and, in this humour, every 
novelty was an innovation, every difference an 
inferiority ; and French manners, French streets, 
French ragouts, French posting, French affec- 
tation, and French sentiment, indiscriminately, 
formed the themes of our self-flattering animad- 
version. 

Gerald wished to be, if he was not, quite 
English ; and while from his peculiar national 
relations, Ireland, as has been seen, was perhaps 
peculiarly undervalued by him, he shared, with 
the bulk of the country he fain would claim as 
his own, no small portion of this English indiffe- 
rence to every thing French also. At the head of 
offences against " good taste," was French sen- 
timent, of course ; and in no instance did it 
appear more glaring, or cause more annoyance 
to his proprieties, than in the arrangement and 
observances of P^re la Chaise, the place where 
he now stood. 

I speak of Gerald's former feelings, when, at 
a first visit, he wandered through the shady 
cemetery. Then, he had turned with offended 
sensibilities from the tomb-slab, of which one 
half-showed an inscription written by a widow 
B 5 



10 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to her departed spouse, rather than upon the 
event of his death, and ending in an avowal 
that she had caused the other half to remain 
blank, in order to keep a place for her own 
epitaph. The ostentatious fidelity of this wi- 
dow, reminding him of an anecdote of Voltaire, 
sent Gerald twirling off on his heel ; although, 
had he paused a moment longer, he might, 
perhaps, have seen that very woman, coming, 
after the lapse of ten years — the inscription on 
the slab marked the interval — still dressed in 
her weeds, upon that anniversary-day at least, 
to hang a fresh garland over the grave, and, 
kneeling or sitting down within its little enclo- 
sure, to drop a fresh tear, read or say a prayer, 
or meditate upon the happy days she had 
passed by her husband's side, or the still 
happier time when she hoped to meet him 
again. 

At one glance, every thing he saw about 
him suggested to Gerald an elegant affectation 
of natural feeling ; an overstrained attention to 
the unheeding dead. Garlands, and kneeii..g 
mourners, and all — it was French. This day 
he had sauntered to Pere la Chaise full of the 
same prejudice : and at the moment of Flood's 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 11 

departure, he still found in his heart to censure 

whatever he looked upon. Similiarities to the 
widow's slab occurred, and he cried, " pshaw V 
Even the simple little inscription over a little 
grave—*' Adieu, Julie ! adieu mon enfant !" in 
which a father might naturally be supposed to 
speak, did not touch him, until, as he passed 
the lowly gate that led into poor Julie's last 
abode, a sob struck on his ear, and glancing 
round, he saw a respectable-looking man of 
middle age, sitting on a rustic chair at the 
head of the grave of her who had been, perhaps, 
his sole earthly care, pride, and solace. 

Suddenly touched, Gerald felt as much 
ashamed as if he had openly sported with the 
sorrows of a fellow-creature. His pale cheek 
flushed with the apprehension that his careless 
or contemning air might have been observed ; 
and he walked on rapidly, under the impulse, to 
avoid a humiliation. In a short time, it struck 
him that he would walk back, watch the father 
going away, and ascertain how long he had 
been a sincere mourner : and when, with every 
facility for his purpose, Gerald did return and 
examine the date of Julie's death, her little 
grave-stone informed him, that he had indeed 



T^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

made light of regrets sanctified and ennobled 
by the lapse of many years. 

" After all,"" he thought, " there may be 
much true feeling amid all this painful display 
of it. Besides, what is display to us may not 
be so to them. While we see these people all 
in parade, they may have no notion of giving us 
the impression ; they may be sincere, when we 
suppose them ostentatious." 

His thoughts thus turned into a more liberal 
course, he allowed them to lead him on. He 
admitted the great propriety of the views in 
which the cemetery had been formed, and the 
decency, at least, of the observances with which 
it was characterised. The funeral processions 
that caught his eye, crossing or winding down 
some of the numerous alleys of the extensive 
grounds, seemed more natural, more real, than 
the funerals he had seen " performed," as the 
undertaker candidly admits, in London. And 
that each grave, the humblest of the thousands 
around, should have its little enclosure, its 
seat for the surviving visitor, its inscription 
out of the hackneyed form supplied, time imme- 
morial, by the English stone-cutter, its little 
urn, or its memento, no matter how frittered 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 13' 

or fantastic, according to the taste (only) of 
the mourner, did not now seem to Gerald ne- 
cessary to imply, in the people of Paris, a total 
absence of those sensibilities common to the 
heart of man all over the world. He called to 
mind a churchyard in the vicinity of his own 
metropolis ; and, in the piling of coffin over 
coffin, of strange bones over strange bones ; in 
the squabbling about the price of graves, and 
their depth, to feet and inches ; in the unseem- 
ly dispatch of an interment of one of the humbler 
classes upon a Sabbath, when funerals crowd 
after each other to the same burying-place ; 
in all this there was a contrast to the advan- 
tage of the scene amid which he stood. He 
remembered to have once seen a group of little 
boys left to finish the raising of a shallow, grass- 
less, dusty grave, when the regular " goodman 
delver," was called away to attend to a new 
arrival ; and the sportive rivalry of the un- 
thinking youngsters, as they flourished and 
clattered their shovels, suggested a want of 
habitual decorousness of feeling, that, at least, 
was as disagreeable as its redundancy amid the 
umbrageous solitudes of Pere la Chaise. 

" And again," said Gerald, " even those who 



14 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

only play a part here, cannot be injured by 
their cold conformance to observances which, 
in the first instance, must have been prompted 
by all that is good and tender in the human 
bosom. ' The fool who came to laugh re- 
mained to pray,"* after the good man's sermon ; 
and surely, in the impressive loneliness of this 
sumptuous public cemetery, coldness itself may 
be warmed, and the hardest heart made gentler 
than it was. ' Affect a virtue if you have it 
not,' is a farther argument against my na- 
tional prejudices." 

He sauntered through alley after alley ; as- 
cended and descended the many inequalities 
of the place of graves ; examined the broad 
ways upon each side of which were ranged the 
spacious and costly mausoleums of the rich 
and great ; lost himself in the green and bushy 
intricacies of the narrower paths that ran 
amongst the last houses of the humbler dead ; 
perused the printed placards that prescribed, 
in a good spirit of serious feeling, fit conduct 
and demeanour to those who should curiously 
visit the sacred solitude ; and all he saw and all 
he pondered on, now affected Gerald in a very 
different way from his former prepossessions. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 15 

" It is meet," he continued ; his own recent 
sensations (for he had been contemplating 
death) assisting, perhaps, his rapid change of 
opinion — "it is meet, it is honourable to hu- 
man nature, even though it be over-done. 
Delicate attention to the departed friend, en- 
nobles a prince or a lord ; why should it not 
be creditable as the habit of a whole people ? 

" The shadowed extent of the place creates 
awe," continued Gerald, ascending its utmost 
heights : " as I walk over these intersecting 
paths, the mansions of the dead so thickly 
piled at either hand, and they alone the dwellers 
here, can my feelings be those of indifference ? 
It is their possession — their city — the city 
of the dead — and dense though noiseless is the 
population ! — Yes !" as at a break through seome 
trees,^ Paris confronted him, seemingly upon 
another elevation, spread out in all the beauty 
of her domes and spires — " yes ! yonder is the 
city of the living ; here is the city of the dead. 
Living, busy Paris ; and dead, breathless Paris ; 
for the crowds that slumber here, once toiled 
and sweated there ; as the crowd that now sup- 
plies their place, jostling and clamouring, and 
humming, along the streets, and quays, and 



16 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

bridges of yonder concatenation of life, will 
soon lie down by the sides of their predecessors 
in vain effort and useless existence. Ay ! in 
less than ninety years, not a soul of that un- 
thinking multitude shall possess the proud capi- 
tal they imagine to be exclusively their own : 
and yet another multitude succeeds; and ano- 
ther still ; — the torrent ever similar, though no 
drop that forms it is the same. Well, here is 
room for all : men give way to each other in 
the grave as well as in the world ; and here, 
too, can all ranks be accumulated ; grandes 
rues for the great and rich ; cross alleys for the 
humble and the poor ; 'twill be all the same, 
or they will think it so." 

Gerald's moralizing was interrupted by catch- 
ing, round the angle of tl\e green alley at the 
end of which he stood, a glimpse of a vision 
that speedily put to flight his sombre thoughts, 
and presented human existence in its most fas- 
cinating form. At only a few steps from him, 
a tall and finely shaped young lady, dressed in 
the perfection, though not in the extreme, of 
French fashion, leaned over the palings of a 
grave very simply adorned, and gazed sted- 
fastly on the brief inscription of its little mo- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 17 

nument. Youth and loveliness never appeared 
more luxuriantly expressed than in the lines of 
her figure. As one foot stood at rest, Gerald's 
eye fixed on an instep that conveyed to his 
mind a promise of all he had fancied of the 
united symmetry and elegance which ought to 
distinguish polished beauty. The face appeared 
only in profile, yet showed a high, fair fore- 
head, a long, and slightly aquiline nose, small, 
red, parted lips, and a round, glowing cheek, 
such as formed a singular and delightful ex- 
ception to the general cast of French features. 
It was, or should have been, English beauty of 
the first order ; and, indeed, Gerald puzzled 
himself for a moment with the question — 
" Where can I have seen her before ?" The 
eye he did not at all catch ; it was quite drooped 
over the little grave : but the golden locks 
which, lightly as summer clouds at sunset, 
thronged over it and round it, farther assured 
him that this lovely lady was a daughter of old 
Ocean's first and proudest Island. 

He looked more studiously, without motion ; 
still hoping to convince himself of his right to 
address her upon the grounds of former ac- 
quaintance ; but the more he riveted his gaze, 



18 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the less familiar to his mind did her features 
become, until at last they seemed to assume a 
perfectly strange, though not less charming cha- 
racter, like the fleecy vapour in the sky gra- 
dually, at the impulse of the light breeze, 
changing from one phantasy to another; and 
Gerald finally felt assured that he had been 
only beguiled into his first impression by the 
sister-likeness that beauty of a certain stamp 
wears, or makes us think it wears, through all 
its diversities. 

He advanced a step, treading softly on the 
greensward that edged his path, and so did not 
disturb the lady. As his eye continued fixed 
on her cheek, he saw tears burst from under 
the long silken fringe of her rosy lids. He 
stopped ; her emotion increased ; she sobbed 
and hid her face in her hands. He glanced at 
the inscription over the grave, and read, " Ma 
jeune et belle epouse, Justine ! age de 18 ans.'''' 

As a tear glistened in his own eye, Gerald 
thought — " she is French, after all. This grief 
must flow from her connexion with the poor 
Justine ; perhaps they have been sisters." 

He again moved, and the lady started ; un- 
covered her face ; flashed upon him, while they 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 19 

Still floated in tears, the most beautiful blue 
eyes in the world; as suddenly withdrew them; 
and, turning away, rapidly applied her handker- 
chief to her cheeks. 

" I have intruded without intending it. Ma- 
dam," said Gerald, a little confused ; while 
the recent touch of pathos he had experi- 
enced, agitated his voice, *• and I am much 
distressed, — I exceedingly regret — " and he 
stopped. 

She answered in French- — " I am not Eng- 
lish, Sir; and pray do not speak English, if 
you please; perhaps you enquire the way to 
the entrance .'' I will tell you with pleasure ; 
that way." 

During this speech she had gravely turned 
round, her looks cast down; but the play of 
her lips, and the vivacity of her action, as she 
pointed out the way, was, along with her pure 
accent and quick utterance, abundantly French 
to Gerald's eye and ear. He had not yet quite 
regained his self-possession ; but, irresistibly, he 
uncovered his head, bowed, and held his hat in 
his hand, as she spoke. When she had ended, 
he found that, from his slight agitation, he 
could not fully collect her meaning. He under- 



20 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

stood enough, however, to answer, that when 
he had addressed her in English, he only meant 
to apologize for intruding upon her private 
meditations at the grave of a friend. 

She laughed slightly, and, still speaking 
French, said, " Your apology need not be so 
empresse, then, for no friend of mine lies here : 
la jemie et belle Justine I never before heard 
of: only, in passing, a little fatigued, in my 
search after some acquaintances who accom- 
panied me hither, and whom, out of a frolic, 
I foolishly ran away from, just now — (in fact. 
Sir, it was to avoid other company,) — the railings 
of poor Justine's inclosure happened to be the 
first I leaned over to rest myself; and so I have 
given you cause to suppose me a more afflicted 
lady than I would pretendvto be." 

All traces of her tears had now faded away ; 
her face was unclouded sunshine, her eyes again 
played around Gerald with all their dangerous 
power, and, joined to their beams, the dimpling 
smile of her perfect mouth was the most lovely 
thing in nature. 

" She is French, indeed," he thought ; " that 
manner, that frankness, a little too liberal in the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 21 

first interview with a stranger ; that fascination, 
a little too evident in its effort to conquer, — ay, 
and those ready tears at an unknown grave, 
provoked by a few words of blazoned senti- 
ment — "(his antipathies were returning) — "and 
shed in the very climax of, as she confesses, a 
frolic, — all is French about her, except — " and 
Gerald was stopped by his own sigh — " except 
her personal charms, and those are radian; 
enough for a heaven." 

But this piece of Gerald's habitual criticism 
did not, in the thinking, occupy a tenth part 
the time spent in noticing it ; nor did he seem 
to have been guilty of any want of attention, 
when, after a second's pause, he replied to the 
lady's last words, by hoping that she might 
easily and soon discover her friends. 

" It does not trouble me much," she resumed ; 
*' I am too precious in their eyes to be left to 
spend the night with Justine here. — But are you 
well acquainted with the intricacies of this 
strange and beautiful place ? Though, just 
now, I superfluously pointed out your way to the 
entrance-gate, the knowledge I was then able to 
impart contains the sum of all I know about it ; 



a» THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and where, or in what direction I must turn to 
regain my friends, is, indeed, a mystery for the 
present." 

Gerald was very sorry he could not have the 
honour and pleasure of assisting the lady out of 
her embarrassment : and, at the same time, he 
took the liberty of requesting that she would 
have the goodness to speak a little slower, in 
order to allow him the great pleasure of com- 
prehending every single word she did him the 
favour of addressing to his ear. 

"A little slower!" she repeated, laughing; 
" well, with all my heart ; but you will excuse 
my laugh when 1 tell you that your request is 
so precisely the same preferred by all your 
countrymen, on their first appearance here, I 
could not help enjoying it, — ' a little slower if 
you please, a little slower;' toujours slower; 
toujours V and she resumed her laugh : " you 
are quite English, of course, Sir ?" 

*' Not quite," answered Gerald. 

" Ecossois, then .f*" 

"No; not at all Scotch." 

*' But you cannot be German, nor High or 
Low Dutch, for the manner of your own which 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 23 

you have is beyond them — nor Italian, for you 
dress too well, and don't look picturesque — nor 
Spanish, for you don't look like Talma acting 
the grand ; let me see — you are Irlandois ?" 

*' Nor quite Irish, either," replied Gerald, a 
little annoyed at this unceremonious cross-ex- 
amination, and disposed to question the lady's 
claim to be very well-bred, even making every 
allowance for her Frenchism. 

" What ! neither Dutch, German, Italian, 
Spanish, Scotch, nor yet English-quite, nor 
Irish-quite ? Have you a country at all. Sir ?" 
— Gerald suspected that a tone of irony ran 
through this speech — " or is your country so 
unworthy that you grow ashamed of it, as a 
youngster might of a humble parent ? or, per- 
haps, since you are not English-^weVe, nor Irish- 
quite — " her repetitions were marked with such 
emphasis, that, added to the effects of her last 
words, Gerald's cheeks flamed — " perhaps we 
must call you by that doubtful title which peo- 
ple who have a country laugh at — you are 
English-Irish, Sir ?" 

Gerald bowed low, and, with much cold dig- 
nity, assured the lady that she had, no matter 



24 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

how people might be amused at it, bestowed 
on him the very title which, in this case, he 
preferred. 

" If you have true friends, Sir, they must 
regret your preference. The title gives you no 
claim to one country or the other; and every 
man ought to claim one country to stand by 
against all the world — every young man, at 
least, — as he would stand by one true mistress, 
one mother, one rule of conduct, one belief in 
God. It is expected from him ; men expect 
it, and women too. A young man who cannot 
name his country, and name it with love and 
sorrow, if not with pride and boasting, is like 
the unfortunate who blushes at his mother's 
name, or the worse than unfortunate who can- 
not assert and show his hope in a Creator and 
in Heaven. Considering nations as but different 
branches of one great family, he stands un- 
connected in interests, in importance, with his 
kind— ^' 

" Madam," interrupted Gerald, smiling at 
the French female-oratory to which he stood 
so strangely exposed, " although I cannot en- 
gage to conduct you to your friends, may I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 25 

crave the honour of accompanying you in quest 
of them ?" 

" And think you, Sir," the beautiful lady- 
continued, not noticing his attempt to change 
the subject — ^" think you that, while the coun- 
try which such a person gives up, indignantly 
resents his apostasy, the country he would fain 
adopt, or rather, which he would crave to 
adopt him, honours or respects his trifling pre- 
ference ?" 

" Or, Madam," again interrupted Gerald, 
now very briskly, " shall I singly endeavour to 
find your friends, and direct them to this spot 
to meet you ?" 

He was bowing himself away. 

" Tarry a moment, Sir," resumed his strange 
lecturer, as she relaxed into her smiles, and 
her former playfulness of manner ; " I have 
frightened you, scarecrow that I am"" — her 
laughing eyes met his, and, without the slight- 
est want of female dignity of expression, con- 
veyed a glance that was meant to impart her 
own unaffected belief that she was not what her 
words said she was — " I have frightened you ; 
and now you look and act more like an English- 

VOL. II. c 



Xb THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

man than like any one else, with your superb 
manner, and your keeping up your consequence; 
— but I wish you to remain to hear me tell 
you — first, that you must be no Englishman ; 
that, in fact, you must be an Irishman ; 
what your birth and your social relations have 
made you ; what, in spite of yourself, you are ; 
and what a certain future event, — a melancholy 
one, indeed, — by increasing and strengthening 
your natural connexions with that country, 
ought to give you a proper ambition to be." 

She paused an instant, as if to note the sur- 
prise in which Gerald heard the last allusion, 
that, although vague, and not at all understood 
by him, seemed to argue, on the part of the 
lady, some knowledge of who he was. 

" A certain future e^ent. Madam !" he re- 
peated, in great interest, while he again ad- 
vanced ; " if you now speak seriously — and I 
cannot, must not, doubt it — what can you pos- 
sibly mean ?" 

" The second reason for which I commanded 
your stay. Sir," she answered, *' was to give 
you some little proof, that in at all entering into 
conversation with you, under such peculiar cir- 
cumstances, I did not follow the mere impulse 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 27 

of a light head, or act unworthy of my station 
and social habits, but rather because I had a 
reasonable motive, arising out of some anxiety 
for your interests.*" 

** And some knowledge of them, too, Ma- 
dam ?'' 

" It would so appear." 

" I have the honour of being known to you, 
then ?" with much eagerness of manner, as he 
recollected his impression at a first view of 
the lady. 

" Many persons are known by me, who know 
nothing of me," she answered, mysteriously, or 
in affected mystery, while a slight tendency to 
smile lurked, however, in the dimples round her 
mouth. 

" But surely no person can be aware of hav- 
ing the honour and happiness of being known 
hy you, without also wishing and soliciting to 
know something of you," he resumed, his good- 
humour now restored, and his interest raised 
to the utmost. 

" How can you tell ?" she asked, with a so- 
lemnity well assumed, if it was not real ; " how 
can you tell — how can you guess the feelings 
with which you would receive the intimation of 
c 2 



»8 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

who and what I am ? You find me in this 
ominous solitude ; alone and unprotected, raised 
up before your eyes under the shadow of the cy- 
press-tree, and watching the grave of one who, 
young and fair like myself, died before her 
time: are you certain that a true account of 
my coming here, and of my connexions and na- 
ture, would not startle you ? I told you I had 
just parted from my friends in a frolic — will 
you venture to decide what kind of friends they 
were ? I also said I had done so to shun dis- 
agreeable company — can you assure yourself 
what company I meant ?" 

" Admirable, Madam !" laughed Gerald, now 
beginning to suspect that the lady, brilliant and 
graceful as she was, might be no paragon of 
female respectability, and only anxious to as- 
certain if she really knew any thing certain 
about him ; " but I ivill venture even the dis- 
covery of some German diablerie to ascertain — " 

" It is in vain. Sir," she went on : " for the 
present, you shall not hear my name or quality ; 
enough, that / am sure of you ; at least I think 
I am ; let me determine ; extend your right 
hand and lay it on that paling i" Gerald ex- 
tended his right hand, indeed ; but it was with 



The ANGLO-IRISH. 29 

an obvious motion towards laying it on hers — 
she stepped back, reddened, frowned slightly, 
and added, in tones of real command ; " Sir ! 
no freedom of that kind, or we part at the in- 
stant ; put down your hand as I have bid you, 
or keep it at your side." 

He at last obeyed, and, peering upon his 
hand at some distance, she resumed, " Yes, I 
am right ; the lines are here ; a recent devotion 
at a forbidden shrine, at the very moment you 
seemed to kneel to Heaven ; then a duel and a 
death — Start not, Sir !'' he did not merely 
start, he trembled — " a death .'* ay, two ; and 
then a more recent evil — sickness, I believe ; 
but here winds the future — does death run in it 
also .'* — yes, death, grinning under a coronet." 

" Gracious powers !'' exclaimed Gerald, not 
able to repress his sudden and various feelings ; 
" beautiful and surprising creature, you have 
indeed spelled my recent fortunes ; but what 
terrible prophecy do you make .'' Come, lady, 
come," he continued, smiling, after an instant's 
thought, as he got ashamed of his own ecstasy ; 
" I will give full credit to your skill on what 
has gone by, because, by some means I cannot 
guess, you know all about me ; and since I am. 



30 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

as well known to you, I swear we do not part 
till—" 

" Keep your ground, Sir," she exclaimed 
again, in a voice and manner that would not be 
denied ; " or," changing into her other kind of 
seriousness, when she saw he stood checked, — 
" or, recollect where we are — this," pointing 
down to it, " this is the grave of lajeune et belle 
Justine y and perhaps I am nearer to my friends 
than you think of." 

" Well, well. Madam ; or, if I choose, I may 
now imagine that shrewd conjecture has helped 
you by chance to your hints of my past life." 

*' I know it better than yourself," she said, 
nodding impressively towards him. 

" Ml/ name, then, you can at least disclose ?" 

*' For the present, I call you by no name ; 
I only ask you, instead, to peruse this;" she 
handed a paper folded like a letter, blank on 
the outside, and as he took and glanced at it, 
added, " but, at our next meeting, I may, per- 
haps, call you Lord Clangore"" — and when Ge- 
rald raised up his eyes in surprised and confused 
inquiry, he only saw her flounce whisking 
round the corner of the alley where they had 
stood so long together. He hastened after her. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. SI 

She was not visible. He ran up and down se- 
veral of the green and silent avenues of the 
cemetery. They showed no objects but the urns 
and monuments of the dead. At last, exhausted 
with efforts beyond his present state of health, 
he sat down on some steps that led from the 
high grounds towards the first little valley of 
the picturesque as well as most awful soli- 
tude. 

And here his immediate impulse was to ex- 
amine the paper that had been placed in his 
hands. Taking off the blank envelope, he ar- 
rived at a curiously folded letter, partly com- 
posed of coarse, bluish paper, secured with two 
large wafers, and directed, in a bold, though un- 
practised hand, to himself. He opened it, and 
read as follows : 

" To his honor, the Right Hon. Gerald 

Blount, Esq. London, England. 

" Pleas your honor, 

" I am a tenant to your honor's brother, the 

young Lord, lately living on his estate in Ireland, 

but had the little holding from Mr. Bignell, 

his Lordship's Stewart, a bad and a hard man as 

ever a poor boy — and I am no more, pleas your 



32 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

honor, than a boy, though the young wife and 
a child is depending on me — but what I make 
bold to ask of your honor is to speak to the 
young Lord to speak to Mr. Bignell to give me 
a little time for the last gale, and the one that 's 
rising, and let us back into the decent cabin that 
the father before me had many a long day's 
work to build, when the ground, that was a 
desert of a place the time he got it, began to be 
fit for a Christian to live on ; I 'd write this to 
the young Lord himself, only I wrote twice 
before, and got no answer ; and Mr. Bignell, 
that knew I wrote the last time, is more hard 
than ever against us. God soften his heart ! — for 
he 's nothing but a cruel man to us, and every 
one around him, as I said before ; and he 
threatens to let the place taa crony of his, and a 
stranger to us, your honor; and if I 'm served in 
this way, banished from the old house entirely, 
and the young wife and the child on my back, 
and the wide world before me, what can I do but 
come to no good in the long run ? I often was in 
arrear as much as I am now, and cleared it, and 
would this time, only for the bad season ; but 
will, pleas God and your honor, by next winter 
again. And so, as the word goes here, that your 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 39 

honor has the kind heart and the just mind, 
towards all the people you know, at least, if 
not towards us in Ireland, the Lord in Heaven 
will give you a reward for helping the misfor- 
tunate, that 's left in the hands of a hard man, 
and the blessings and prayers of the young 
family will be in store for you, and maybe 
you '11 save from an ill turn the man that makes 
bold to send you this, and is your honor's 
brother's tenant and well-wisher to death, 

" Michael Farrell." 



c 5 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER II. 

The letter Gerald read did not at all interest 
him on its own account. Lord Clangore had often 
told him of such applications from many of his 
humbler tenantry, which, while they seemed to 
breathe the very spirit of sincerity, and a wish 
to act honestly and punctually, were, as his 
Lordship was well advised by Mr. Bignell, his 
land-steward, or else by his agent, nothing more 
than shameless efforts to create continued oppor- 
tunity for living indolently upon spots of ground 
they would scarcely culture, and of which they 
never intended to pay a gale's rent. Indeed, 
Gerald thought, that the name " Michael Far- 
rell," signed to the petition now in his hand, 
had before come under his observation ; when, 
perhaps, after receiving the former letters allud- 
ed to by the writer, Lord Clangore had wished 
him to mark how adroitly an Irish knave could 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 35 

represent himself as the injured party, at the 
very moment he was cajoling and injuring 
others. The pitiful story of the " young wife 
and child," had, thei-efore, no effect upon Gerald's 
sympathy; and he at once dismissed from his 
mind the ingenious Mr. Michael Farrell, and all 
that concerned him. It was a question of much 
greater interest to ask how such a document 
came into the hands of the strange and lovely 
person by whom it had been presented. What 
connexion could exist between a fashionable 
Parisian lady, and a small farmer in the wilds 
of Ireland, seemed suiRciently surprising; as 
much so, indeed, as did every thing else Gerald 
recollected of his new acquaintance; as her 
knowledge of him, and of his recent adventures, 
and, above all, the prophecy contained in her 
words at parting. 

Was his brother. Lord Clangore, really ill ? 
and had this lady learned the fact, while it was 
studiously concealed, out of motives of delicacy, 
perhaps, to his own state of health, from 
Gerald's ears ? and was his Lordship indisposed 
to the serious extent upon which she seemed to 
build her augury ? 

In good time, his friend Flood ascended. 



86 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

from the lower grounds of the cemetery to 
the place where he sat. The military cox- 
comb toiled slowly up the height, with an 
unelastic step and half bent back, as if he suf- 
fered from fatigue of mind and body. At a 
nearer approach it was, indeed, easy to perceive 
that his limbs were weary, and his temper as 
much discomposed as his affected indifference to 
agitation of any kind would allow to become 
visible. 

" Diavolo, old schoolfellow !"*' he began, as 
soon as he was able to reach the last of the steps 
upon which Gerald rested, at the same time 
drawing out a thin cambric handkerchief, sur- 
charged with an essence that sent perfume 
among the dwellings of the sleepers around, 
and then, after many deHcate efforts, seating 
himself, his back turned to his friend — " Dia- 
volo, good Blount ! and that is one of the un- 
nameable words disguised in a foreign tongue, 
else had mine never uttered it; but, Diavolo, 
and Diable, and Der Deyvil — the same, thrice 
disguised — may it be remotely demanded or 
solicited, why you did not keep your post 
till I came back on the relief.'' Let me be 
dissolved in an exceedingly subtile preparation 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 87 

of aromatic fluid, if I do not incline to be ha- 
rassed, at the present moment, with the mon- 
strously unusual forced march of trying to 
make you out, among this very absurd accumu- 
lation of labyrinths, and all the while encumber- 
ed with boots, the shade of a delicate thought 
too tight ; spurs, such as one must wear ; an in- 
verted cone for a cap ; and belts, sash, swinging 
sabre, and cossacks." 

" How did you bear the long marches in the 
Peninsula, Flood ?" asked Gerald, amused for a 
moment out of his serious mood, and intended 
serious question. 

*' We never bore them." 

" Who then .?'' 

" Mules, mules always — them and us toge- 
ther. But pray, now, too well-esteemed Blount, 
shatter me not with questions, after permitting 
me to approach the utmost verge of exhaustion, 
very superfluously, in your service." 

" All in mi/ service, Flood ^ but no matter,^' 
curbing his slight inclination to smile ; " of that 
presently, if circumstances, or rather the infor- 
mation I expect from you, permit our recur- 
rence to a playful subject." 

" He continues — " interrupted Flood — " he 



38 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

puts to death, slowly — I will not listen, very 
positively — " raising his hands to his ears. 

" Flood," controlling his action, and seiz- 
ing his arm, " you do not suspect my question 
— my brother has been ill .?" 

*' And who gave you that intimation ?" asked 
Flood, surprised out of his languor. 

" Perhaps I may tell you ; but first " 

** When did you receive it ?" 

" To-day ; within half an hour." 

" Since we parted .'' In this French place ?" 

" In this cemetery, since we parted," 

Flood looked posed; then interested, as if 
with a new thought; then suspicious; and at 
length resumed. 

" The kind of informant ?'' 

" You break, or rather reject, the covenant I 
would impose ; I am not to answer you, if at all, 
until you answer me." 

" By an incalculably remote possibility, good 
Blount, and in vague recollection of the manner 
in which Winyard happened to get his intima- 
tion, the informant may have been— this is so pe- 
culiarly the place for it — may have been — your 
brother himself.?"" 

" What !" cried Gerald, remembering the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 3& 

extraordinary, if not fearful anecdote ; *' has 
Lord Clangore been indeed so indisposed as to 
warrant your allusion ? — and to that extent, in- 
deed, have I been instructed." 

" It may be insinuated, then, that yours was, 
in a degree, a 'juggling fiend,' fellow-student, 
inasmuch as Lord Clangore — (I have a notion, 
but all this is so egregiously tiresome) — though 
an invalid, during, I venture to say, the very 
period of your absurd relapse, now enjoys, or 
progresses towards the enjoyment of exceedingly 
robust health." 

Flood languidly, and, owing to the braced 
condition of his body and limbs, with much 
difficulty, conveyed his hand into his pocket and 
produced a letter, of which the superscription, 
directed to Gerald, was in the handwriting of 
Lord Clangore ; and he carelessly added that, 
having received it that morning, he forbore 
giving it to his friend, until, after prescribed lo- 
comotion in the open air, Gerald should attain a 
sufficient strength of nerve to receive, like a 
person of his usual good sense, a little historical 
intimation of the whole matter. 

The letter contained assurances from Lord 
Clangore that his late attack had almost wholly 



40 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

subsided ; it was dated but three days back ; the 
lady-prophetess, unless, indeed, she obtained her 
knowledge of events by some of the means to 
which she had pretended, could not have re- 
ceived later advices from London ; consequently 
her augury was only founded upon his Lord- 
ship's first indisposition, and, to Gerald's great 
relief, went for nothing. 

" And, well," he resumed, " this enables me 
to gratify you. Flood, as to the kind of fami- 
liar who anticipated your tardy post-delivery. 
She " 

" It was a she ?" questioned Flood, staring 
up into Gerald's face. 

" Ay, and one of the divinest she's." 
. " Long on the list of your acquaintances ?" 

" Not there yet : for tho\igh she knows every 
thing about me, I am to this moment ignorant 
of her name." 

" But you have passingly regarded her be- 
fore ?" 

" Never, before." 

" Indicate her appearance, excellent Blount." 

" Young, lovely, blooming, tall, graceful, 
French " 

" Originate, rather, some faint notion of her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 41 

costume; that's the touchstone of female iden- 
tity." 

" I really never took notice." 
" Very like you, fellow-student. Suffer your 
tired friend to attempt a sketch. Chapeau a la 
casque; robe, couleur de rose; flounces en re- 
viere ; in hand a parasol, sea-green ; fringe much 
darker, and lined with French white ; on neck 
a double gold chain ; gloves, carnation ; stock- 
ings, open- wrought ; shoes, crimson — (an over- 
sight — only weigh the robe) — and pendants — ^" 
" Enough. That's my Ariel." 
" It is, is it ? Then it 's mine, too." 
" Indeed ! perhaps the lady you spoke of, 
before we parted to-day ?" 

" Convincingly the same. And the same who 
remotely caused us to part." 

" Did you, immediately after, meet her ?" 
" Not very immediately. Not, I have a 
notion, even contingently. To approach posi- 
tive statement — not at all. You may, it seems 
to me, call to mind, that three ladies stood at 
the top of the path, as your admirer and well- 
wisher left your side. Of those three, she was 
one. When, about the middle of my progress 
up the path, I stooped my head to assist my 



42 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

hand in disengaging, as I fancy, my sabre point 
from my spurs, and raised it up again, all were 
in rather precipitate motion onward. I may as- 
sert, that I proportionately quickened my pace ; 
but before I gained the point where the alley 
branched off in two or three directions, her 
friends took one way, and herself another ; and 
she, I am rather confident, might be said to 
have tripped off, very fleetly, and slightly laugh- 
ing as she did so. Notwithstanding the laugh, 
or, as it may be translated, titter, I ventured to 
flatter myself that I had received a vastly pretty 
invitation to pursue and overtake her alone. 
Accordingly, I summed up the utmost speed of 
man, along the path it did seem to me she had 
adopted. You know the rather mortifying and 
inconvenient result ; for "though, from that mo- 
ment to the present one, I might be permitted 
safely to suppose, that I have twice traversed 
every nook of this rather unseemly scene for 
gentle or sportive exercise, it is insufferably 
true, I might as well have been taking my ease 
(I do wish for my raeershaum) upon the very 
obdurate surface of these steps." 

" So, Flood, so much for your hard cam- 
paigning in my service ; but let that pass : — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 43 

I shall only observe, that while you were vainly 
seeking her, I was conversing with her." 

" A passing word, in which, by some very 
unhallowed agency, we venture to conclude, 
she merely tiinted the late indisposition of your 
brother ?" 

" A volume, from which I learned much 
more than that." 

" For how long a period of my absence, wor- 
thy fellow, did you in reality hold her in dis- 
course ?"" 

" During the whole of it, at least to within a 
minute of your re-appearance here." 

"In good earnest .'' Diavolo. How near to 
her all the time .P" 

" Generally speaking, we stood side by side.*" 

*' ' I prithee do not mock me, fellow-student.'" 

" Ay ; and once she insisted on my extending 
my hand." 

« Der deyvil." 

" And when at last she was compelled to 
part, left me a letter directed to myself to con- 
sole me in her absence." 

" Touching what ?'"' 

*' Excuse me." 

" Worthy person, I esteem you well; for 



44 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

your veracious habits of speech, as well as for 
many other qualities, do I esteem you : =».but, 
oldest friend, that interesting individual is rather 
exclusively my property, at least in reversion, 
hope, and prospects ; I saw her first ; I con- 
descend to allow her some merit first ; she was 
even my theme to yourself before your very 
astounding interview with her; therefore, be- 
ware. Reflect and reason, thou soul of honour : 
wrong not your Damon, your Orestes, your 
Nisus, your Jonathan ; touch him not in the 
rather tender point of this passing fancy ; tempt 
him not ; wrath him not ; else will it rather 
undoubtedly come to pass, that he must engage 
in the taking away of your precious and, partly 
by his ministry, lately preserved life." 

Gerald laughed, as it was intended he should ; 
but still indulged himself in keeping up the 
rare occurrence of curiosity and piqued inter- 
est in his amusing rival; indeed, were it but 
for the sake of exercise to his natural feelings, 
and the good it was like to do them, Gerald 
thought he ought not to abate the excitement ; 
and supposing him even to give pain, why, 
after all, it was only breaking the butterfly on 
the wheel. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 45 

He would therefore enter into no detail of 
his conversation with the object of their mutual 
iiterest, beyond what he had already supplied ; 
namely, her knowledge of who and what he 
was; her allusion — (for Gerald suppressed her 
prophecy) — to Lord Clangore's illness ; and her 
delivery of the latter at parting. 

Yet, economical as Gerald was in communicat- 
ing information to his friend, it became equally 
his policy to get from that friend as much as 
he could upon a certain point. Nothing con- 
nected with the whole adventure seemed of 
such importance as to ascertain the name and 
connexions of the lovely lady; and on these 
matters, Flood must, of course, be enlightened. 
Some tact was required to secure Gerald suc- 
cess. The strange compound of coxcombry, 
good-nature, and good-sense, was as shrewd as 
he was laughable ; and if he suspected Gerald's 
anxiety, or was presented with it in but one 
little word, would undoubtedly take revenge, 
by repaying caution for caution, or, perhaps, 
even not hesitate to puzzle him by a fanciful 
representation. 

Watching his opportunity, however, and, 
indeed, partly forming it, Gerald did succeed 



46 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

in obtaining all that Flood could say on this 
head; and he was not a little surprised that 
that *' all" just amounted to nothing. In fact, 
the hero had never been presented to the lady ; 
had never met her in society ; did not know 
any one that knew her ; and, much inferior in 
experience to his rival, had never even heard 
the sound of her voice, unless in the laugh or 
titter with which he had an hour before been 
honoured. 

" What, then ?'' Gerald asked, in much ad- 
miration. 

" Naught : except that at St. Cloud, upon 
one of those tiresome fete days, while the 
very stupid water-works were spouting and 
splashing about, he had, if he distinctly re- 
collected, originally seen the individual, in a 
great crowd, and a great way off; and then, 
for that time, lost sight of her. Her next 
revelation of her person to his eyes might 
have taken place amid the very vulgar throngs 
of Le Jardin des Plantes, when, supposing 
his memory still to bear him out, he encoun- 
tered her, in a somewhat agitated condition, 
stepping back from a previously-unseen-too- 
close-proximity to one of the unmeaning wild 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 47 

beasts the people cage up there, and went to 
the trouble of offering his hand, and saying, 
* permit me,' with a view of conducting her 
to a less disagreeable and more retired portion 
of the gardens ; but she stepped back on the 
Avild beast from him, looking scarlet and angry, 
and seemed to join some friends, and, after 
she and they had surveyed him all over, and, 
as he was about to saunter away, very tired of 
the whole thing, she smiled. And his third 
and, until the re-encounter of to-day, last view 
of her, was in the church of St. Roch, into 
which he had sauntered, of a Sunday, as if to 
look for some of the balls Buonaparte had shot 
at it from the Pont Neuf ; and there she ap- 
peared, near the grand altar, and caught his eye, 
and whispered aside to her perpetual friends, 
the moment he came in ; and when an exceed- 
ingly officious person, habited somewhat like 
an English Sunday beadle, walked up to him, 
and intimated a desire that he would be unco- 
vered, " dans la Maison de Dieu" he could 
perceive her smile again, and her good-humour 
was especially visible, when, in consequence of 
his very sensible inattention to the beadle's 
impertinence, he was rather compelled, by that 



48 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

foolish person, and others, to withdraw from 
the church. Then he watched at the entrance 
till the people came out; but the amazingly 
interesting young woman escaped him." 

And, from the downright sincerity of manner 
with which Flood spoke, Gerald became con- 
vinced that he could yield no farther infor- 
mation. 

They left P^re la Chaise. 



THB ANGLO-IRISH. 49 



CHAPTER III. 

Upon their return into Paris, the friends 
found that the rumours, to which Gerald had 
in the morning alluded, were now more ge- 
nerally afloat ; and though people did not speak 
openly or loudly, their countenances told their 
wonder and anxiety. 

Flood took leave of Gerald next day, to meet 
his father. Sir Robert, in London. He could 
with difficulty obtain a place in a public con- 
veyance for Calais or Boulogne; so ardent, al- 
ready, were the more sensitive English, in run- 
ning from the threatened danger. Gerald, now 
almost alone, soon left Paris, too ; but it was 
merely in an impulse for change of place, 
and in the hope of diverting his continued 
melancholy. 

As he passed the Place du Carousel for the 
last time, part of the expected event occurred. 

VOL. II. D 



60 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Royal carriages dashed out of the Thuilleries, 
and in one of them he caught a glance of the 
features of Louis, relaxed and livid with agi- 
tation. His eyes fell upon the two sentinels at 
cither side of the great archway. He had al- 
ways thought that there was some bad arrange- 
ment in mounting together, upon all the posts 
of Royal guard, a red and a blue jacket : it seem- 
ed to augur doubt as well as gratitude, on the 
part of the restored race; and neither of the 
sentinels could recollect much, Gerald thought, 
to make him friendly with his comrade. Now, 
as, after their " present arms," he observed the 
Swiss and the Frenchman, he believed that the 
one looked dubious and alarmed, and the other 
excited and threatening. 

Continuing his route, Gerald, to hold himself 
in readiness for an expected result, proceeded 
southward, along the Coast, and arrived at Brest. 
But few days elapsed till it was known that the 
Eagle of Elba had, indeed, winged his unob- 
structed way back again to his metropolitan 
eyrie, and once more perched upon his pillar in 
the Place Vendome. It became necessary for 
all the English in France to return to their own 
country; and, with crowds of others, Gerald 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 51 

engaged his passage in a merchantman at Brest, 
intending to make Bristol from that port. 

Amid the confusion and rejoicings that reign- 
ed around him, before his embarlcation, a mat- 
ter of a different kind interested Gerald. A 
procession, displaying the tri-color, passed 
through the streets, attended by bands of mu- 
sic. The windows were crowded with ladies, 
waving their handkerchiefs, and decorated with 
the revived badge of the chieftain Emperor. 
In one window, a group of fair enthusiasts were 
particularly vivacious in evincing their good 
will ; and Gerald started to recognize among 
them his strange acquaintance of Pere la 
Chaise. As his eyes fixed on her face, from a 
point almost under her, she looked down, and in 
turn recognized him. He ventured to bow ; 
she returned his salutation, smiled archly, and 
unpinning a Napoleon knot from her shoulder, 
dropped it upon his head. The crowd pushed 
him aside ; he was obliged to change his place, 
and when he next looked towards the window, it 
was closed, and none of its former occupants to 
be seen. 

He had received notice that the merchantman 
would leave Brest at an early hour next morn- 
D 2 



52 tHE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ing. Gerald overslept himself, as also did his 
valet, and both arrived at the water''s edge only 
to witness the vessel on her way, in full sail, 
about a mile and a half out. Boatmen offered 
to row him to her side ; he accepted the pro- 
posal ; his luggage was tumbled into a six-oared 
boat, and in less than half an hour he was within 
talking distance of the merchantman. But she 
would not, or could not abate one knot for him, 
nor furl an inch of canvass ; he might clamber 
up the gangway if he was able, and that was all. 
Mortified and vexed, and a little put out of 
countenance at finding himself an evident object 
of merriment to the deck full of passengers, 
Gerald stood a moment silent and inactive, and 
his men rested on their^oars. The packet was 
again ploughing away, ere the boat made a re- 
newed effort to get alongside of her. At last, 
however, his six stout rowers accomplished their 
task, as well as they were able, for it blew very 
fresh, and the waves were high and quick, and 
they durst not, for some time, shoot under the 
gangway. But by the aid of a rope flung to 
them, they finally were so situated as to com- 
mence throwing Gerald's luggage on board. 
He paid them, and tried to ascend himself. 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 53 

Not being much inured to exertions of the kind, 
he was awkward, perhaps timid. The hands on 
the deck of the merchantman spoke roughly to 
him ; his own rowers exhorted in no gentler 
voice and manner ; the passengers smiled, nay, 
some laughed ; he lost his presence of mind, a 
high swell took hig boat, he let go the rope 
from the gangway; there was a titter even 
among the ladies, and one of the ladies Gerald 
thought he knew ; he fell back ; that lady's 
smile changed into a shriek of terror; his head, 
coming against the side of the boat, lost, for a 
moment, its powers for farther observation ; and 
when he fully regained his senses, he was on his 
way to shore, the ship gone off beyond present 
hope, and part of his luggage with it. 

Not quite tranquillized from the effects of this 
petty annoyance, Gerald really embarked for 
England the next day, in another vessel, that 
also proposed to make Bristol. 

Though compelled to return to English 
ground, it was not Gerald's intention to proceed 
to London. He rather planned to penetrate 
into the magnificent solitudes of North Wales, 
and there, still separated from all former scenes 
and associates, wear out, gradually and natu- 



S4 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

rally, the terrible impressions both were calcu- 
lated to keep up. He had thought of Ireland, 
as, from its remoteness, even better suited to his 
design, but he could not bring his mind to con- 
template a visit to that country. His early 
prejudices to such a step remained in all their 
force, and recent events added to them. The 
reader has seen him attribute to Lady Cox*s 
Irish feeling and education, much of her first 
vehemence; and although, since the miserable 
results of that vehemence, he had not as directly 
scrutinized her conduct, he irresistibly assured 
himself, now and then, that if her Irish relation, 
young Captain Stanhope, and her Irish hus- 
band. Sir Richard, had only been a little less 
national, the one in his precipitancy, and the 
other in his monstrous notions of vengeance, the 
whole of the tragedy in which he had acted a 
part never to be forgotten, might have been 
spared to him and to the world. 

He shrunk, therefore, even from the English- 
Irish, who, living in Ireland, could present such 
untameable characteristics. Nor would he run 
the risk of meeting, in that country, any of 
the unfortunate lady's friends. And there 
were other reasons still to confirm his objections. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 55 

Within the last few days, he had received a 
letter from Lord Clangore, which advised him, 
that the whole district of Ireland in which lay 
their different estates, was in a flame of Rockite 
insurrection, marked by the most ferocious out- 
rage. If Gerald went to Ireland at all, he 
must visit his estate, or at least become closely 
and disagreeably connected with the occui'rences 
that took place upon it ; and in some personal 
misgiving, as well as in utter disgust, this he 
would not venture to do. Indeed, it did not 
seem probable, particularly after the neglect 
shown by his noble brother and himself to the 
idle applications of their humbler tenantry, — 
now, he concluded, swelling the ranks of Cap- 
tain Hock, — that his person could be safe in 
such an experiment. 

To Wales, then, since he could not stay in 
France, Gerald determined to repair. 

The little vessel in which he had embarked 
began her voyage under a fair wind for cutting 
across the mouth of the Channel towards the 
Land's End. Though a fair wind, it was how- 
ever, like that experienced by the merchantman 
of the day before, a high one. And after coming 
in sight of the English shore, and when her 



56 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tack was now to double the Land's End, and 
then coast along to the Bristol Channel, the 
breeze proved less favourable, of course, though 
still holding steady in its point. 

In a few hours it began to blow a gale, and 
from the most contrary quarter too. They 
made little way, against a surfy tide, just as 
they strove to double the promontory, and night 
fell, to increase the difficulty and probable dan- 
ger of their situation. The gale grew furious, 
but now, fortunately as the seamen deemed, 
blew them out from the Cornish coast, and up 
the Channel, In the pitch darkness of such a 
night, the captain would not think of running 
into shore, and his only or best hope was to 
trust to as much open sea as he could find. It 
soon became a question, however, if his vessel 
could live out the night. Masts were cut away, 
and the hold lightened. Gerald, so lately 
escaped from death, in more than one shape, 
and in more than one kind of situation, again 
contemplated the grim despot, in perhaps his 
most horrible approach. Holding by the re- 
mains of cordage on deck, while female passen- 
gers screamed aloud, and the bravest men wept, 
thinking of their homes ; and while the rain 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 57 

drenched him, and the gale seemed to tug at his 
grasp on the cordage, as if to hurl him over- 
board ; and while dreary glimpses of the lights 
from either shore, as the almost helpless hulk 
was now driven leagues in one direction, now 
in another, mocked the eyes and hopes of the 
agonized passengers ; thus standing, Gerald felt 
that death in the field, or on the raving bed, or 
by any hap which, so far as he knew or recol- 
lected, poor " flesh is heir to," would be mercy 
to the bleak and desolate destruction which a^ 
last seemed his doom. 

Many were swept into the raging sea; his 
valet, among the number, from Gerald's side. 
His own desperate impulse to plunge headlong 
after, and so lessen the period of, he concluded, 
useless suffering, was checked by a superior 
horror. A score of tongues roared out, " A 
light, ahead !" and the cry had scarcely escaped, 
to be smothered by the gale, when the vessel 
struck against another. Voice and breath were 
now held in, for an instant, to enable the crew 
and passengers to note the result. From the tre- 
mendous burst of shriek and groan that was heard 
under their prow, then the as tremendous si- 
lence, and then the strange motion of their hulk, 
d5 



58 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

as the annihilated vessel passed grating under 
the bottom of her destroyer, with all her souls, 
into the depths of the sea ; from all these sounds, 
it was quickly known that one cargo of human 
beings had escaped immediate death only by 
causing the destruction of another — from these 
sounds, I say ; for nothing but a glimpse of the 
light ahead had been seen ; no ship, no mast, 
not a human being. Within the little space of 
half a minute the whole appalling event had oc- 
curred, and passed away, from darkness and 
tempest, into mystery, silence, and eternity. 

Gerald and his companions had not time to 
know whether they should most indulge a self- 
ish joy at such a hair-breadth escape, or a more 
magnanimous commiseration for the wretches 
they had unconsciously destroyed, when it was 
ascertained that their own keel had not escaped 
injury from the accident. In fact, the cabins ra- 
pidly filled with water, and the few females, whom 
terror or force had compelled to remain below, 
ran up to deck, wringing their hands, and utter- 
ing the most heart-rending prayers and lamenta- 
tions. The horror of that blackened and despair- 
ing deck grew too great and confused for observa- 
tion. Yet, in this climax of danger, Gerald was 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 89 

awake, more than at any former period of his peril, 
to the hope for hfe, and to the efforts suggested 
by it. The seamen let down a boat, without 
advising the passengers of their proceeding. He 
watched them, however, and as it tossed, over- 
loaded, under the spot where he stood, Gerald, 
grasping a pistol in his hand, the better to en- 
force his claim, jumped in amongst them. In 
a few minutes afterwards, the wreck he had left 
disappeared, with another blood-curdling cry 
from its deck, into the dark and cold depths of 
the ocean. 

The men amongst whom he found himself 
pulled for life and death ; though, as was evi- 
dent from their few and hurried words, they 
did not know in what direction. Many a sea 
went over them, to diminish their still des- 
pairing numbers ; but the good little boat 
lived on for more than an hour amid unabated 
tempest. Then the gale began to sink ; the 
■waves to grow less; the clouds to break, and 
the white stars to peep out between their 
racking masses. In another hour, the water 
promised to grow comparatively calm, and 
the moon rose over a distant inequality of line, 
that the seamen knew must be land. 



60 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald, asked what land ? they could not 
positively inform him, but some part of the 
Welsh coast it must be; and they resolved 
not to make for it till broad dayhght. In 
fact, none of the crew, whose duty and habits 
should have enabled them more certainly to 
determine the question, had escaped in the 
boat ; and though aware of this, and also 
aware that their terror and confusion had de- 
prived them of all ordinary power of calcula- 
tion, Gerald was obliged to content himself 
with the vague and even hesitating informa- 
tion supplied by his companions. 

Almost a perfect calm succeeded to the 
horrors of the night, and he urged them to 
give up their former resojution, and pull to- 
wards the distant shore; but having ascertained 
that a strong tide would accompany them, the 
men continued positive in not taking their 
chance, perhaps among the breakers of a rocky 
coast, where, even without much wind, their 
little craft might be dashed to pieces. So, 
while the moon now shone out gloriously on 
the broad stilled sea, they would do no more 
than keep the land in view, rowing up and 
down, with slackened oars, and at length 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 61 

finding breath and heart to converse freely 
upon the perils they had escaped, and that so 
many others had perished in. 

But, alas ! what appearance or promise of 
human safety is most to be trusted to ? There 
sometimes lurks in the calm moonshine as 
much of doom, as roars and blusters through 
a hurricane sky. While their conversation 
went on, Gerald saw something white, straight 
ahead ; and when the men more firmly grasped 
their oars to avoid what obviously to them 
was a rock, with breakers bounding over it, 
they found that, for some time, the strong tide 
had been urging them in that very direction, 
and that they had now to contend, not only 
with the tide, but with a kind of whirlpool- 
influence, which this partial agitation of the 
sea created, and which was also tempting them 
to their fate. They strained and tugged ; one 
oar, out of four, snapped across, and its man, 
propelled by the sudden reaction, fell among 
the first of the surf. The remainder, after 
some useless repetitions of strength — they could 
exert little skill, for their rudder had been 
lost — stripped, and prepared to swim. Gerald, 
as good a swimmer as any among them, follow- 



OB THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ed their example. But he had but half pro- 
ceeded in his task, when the whirling boat 
approached the very point of danger, and he 
unconsciously held fast by its sides, and kept in 
his breath to await the issue. It struck once, 
and, jumping out of the water, receded from 
the rock. It spun round again, struck a 
second time, and Gerald was buffeting the 
breakers. He retained, in a degree, his pre- 
sence of mind, and, keeping his eye fixed on 
land, swam, though not full of hopes, towards it. 
He feared the distance ; or that, from his 
late illness, if from no other cause, he must be- 
come exhausted and sink, ere he could feel a 
strand under his feet. But the distance was 
less than he thought ; the indistinctness of the 
land, produced by night, even though the moon 
shone clear, deceived his inexperienced eye ; 
and he was not yet sufficiently aware what 
efforts for preservation nature will make in the 
heart and through the nerves of a drowning 
man, even supposing that man not to enjoy his 
wonted vigour. Gerald swam more than two 
miles, sometimes relieving himself, as good 
swimmers can do, by floating idly on his back, 
ere he felt any, or much relaxation of muscle. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 63 

Then, however, when he reckoned that he had 
at least as far again to struggle, he began, with 
some reason, to doubt and fear in good earnest. 
Yet he held on, still relieving himself as be- 
fore ; and another mile might have been mas- 
tered, when he felt his heart tell him that he 
was unequal to the remaining exertion, and 
must sink. He shouted loud, in the hope that 
some one might by chance hear him from the 
shore. He thought that, after a pause, shrill 
voices answered him. He summed up a last 
attempt. It was just spent, when some planks 
of the boat drifted past him. He was able to 
throw his breast upon them, and grasp them 
hard. The tide now stood his friend. By 
little and little he neared the land ; the shrill 
ci'ies became more distinct, still in reply to his 
hoarse ones. At length he thought he could 
discern a group of persons on a shingly beach : 
but at this moment a swell bore him rapidly 
forv/ard ; his head struck smartly against a 
stone that pushed out of the water ; he allowed 
his feet to drop, and felt ground ; and joy, and 
another little buffet, deprived him of percep- 
tion. 

He recovered his senses at the edge of the 



^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sea, upon the shingles he had before observed, 
among a crowd of women, one of whom knelt 
and supported his head on her knee, while two 
or three bent over him, and the rest stood 
around, conversing in whispers, which seemed 
breathed in a frightened cadence. To the 
latest hour of his life, Gerald never forgot the 
impression made by his wild and peculiar situa- 
tion at that moment : the mighty sea before 
him, from which he had just been rescued, the 
spreading shore, the silent moonlight, and those 
strange women. 

Great exhaustion succeeded to his recent ex- 
traordinary efforts for life, and a minute elapsed, 
ere he could stir even his head to look up into 
the faces that watched bim. The moment his 
eye fixed on the nearest to its vision, Gerald 
started throughout his whole languid frame, 
and the sudden agitation overpowered him. 
When he again could make an observation, 
female features still appeared, indeed, in the 
same proximity to his, but now produced no 
astonishment. In fact, they were not the same 
features ; or, if they were, his enfeebled eye 
had shaped them, in the first instance, into a 
likeness to those which, during the last fayr 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 65 

days, possessed his thoughts with an interest at 
once pleasurable and irritating. 

He peered closer into the attentive face, 
then looked all around, and became assured 
that he must have been mistaken. Even when 
he imagined that the genius of Pere la Chaise 
had been bending over him, the vision wore 
the same ample-hooded, scarlet cloak as that 
worn by the other females of the group ; and as 
(although it was a mode of costume quite new 
to Gerald's eye) this diess appeared to denote 
vulgar or common rank in the wearers, he 
could not, for an instant, suppose that the fa- 
shionably-attired lady, of whom he had been 
raving, would, under any circumstances, adopt it. 

His quick reasonings on the subject having 
been concluded, Gerald next demanded, in a 
feeble tone, of one of his seemingly anxious 
nurses, upon what part of the Welsh coast he 
then was.-^ 

Two or three voices sounded as if in answer, 
but of the language spoken Gerald did not com- 
prehend a word. From all he had previously 
heard, however, it was Welsh : and at all 
events, though abounding in gutturals, its ca- 
dences fell kindly on his ear. 



66 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Does no person about me understand Eng- 
lish ?'* again demanded Gerald. 

And again more than one of the women re- 
plied in their unknown tongue ; and then they 
all conversed fluently with each other, while 
the female who supported his head on her knee, 
and the two nearest to her, wrapped more care- 
fully around him the large scarlet mantle in 
which, it would seem, he had regained his con- 
sciousness among them, and which must have 
been supplied by one of their party. 

Weak and overpowered as he was, he could 
not help wondering what all this was to end in. 
But he was not long permitted to wonder in 
inaction. Of the whole group of females, all 
seemed tall or robust. Four of the strongest 
approached him, preparing for some feat of 
bodily exertion by winding, so as to leave them 
bare and at freedom, the skirts of their flowing 
cloaks round their arms. Then, amid continued 
loud talking, that — (as if at liberty to do so, 
when he seemed out of danger) — now sounded 
rather mirthfully, they proceeded to support him 
to his feet, and, finally, crossing each other'sarms, 
and clasping each other's hands, two at a side, 
formed a kind of litter, palanquin, or arm-chair, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 67 

into which their companions lifted him ; and 
thus, not unpleasantly, though so curiously seat- 
ed, while his own feeble arms were carefully ad- 
justed round the young and soft necks of two of 
his zealous porters, Gerald soon found himself 
in motion from the shingly beach, surrounded 
by all his new friends, one excepted, who, dur- 
ing the entire previous scene, had stood aside, 
and now, at some distance in the moonshine, 
seemed to lead the way, in whatever direction it 
had been agreed should be taken. 

A very humble and lonely cottage appeared 
in view, into which this female entered, making 
a signal at the threshold to those behind: and 
Gerald, still borne by his robust maidens, found 
himself, in a few minutes, beneath an unceiled, 
smoky roof, which overhung a broken earthen 
floor, and was supported by bare and rude 
walls, against which, or along which, few arti- 
cles of the commonest domestic furniture could 
be discovered. A fire seemed to have just been 
kindled on the bleak though ample hearth, and 
a single rushlight, literally a rush greased over, 
added its tributary ray to illuminate the apart- 
ment. Looking closer by the walls, Gerald saw 
two lowly couches, made up on the floor, from 



68 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

beneath the rugs of which peeped the eyes and 
noses of four or five children, of different ages, 
and one or two grown girls. A middle-aged 
woman, another girl of about eighteen, and an 
old grandame, were up to receive him, the 
female who had led the party to the hovel, not 
now appearing, however ; and this surprised 
Gerald. 

But he was most surprised to recollect and 
observe that, from the moment he regained his 
senses on the shingles, no male person had met 
his view, either there, or on the path to this 
place of shelter, or now, even under its roof. 
Perhaps, however, the men of the establishment 
might be asleep in a kind of inner-room, formed 
by a wicker-work partition, cutting off part of 
this one, and leaving, for'ingress, an open space, 
in lieu of door. He was soon enabled to de- 
cide : for his porters scarcely paused an instant 
to exchange a few words, still in their strange 
language, with the woman of the house, when 
they conveyed him into that same confined 
nook, and placing him upon a bed, also stretched 
upon the bare floor, left him to the care of the 
old grandame, and, with many sly glances and 
titters, disappeared. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 69 

Still he vainly looked round him in the hope 
of discovering a person of his own sex. He 
had read, in a fanciful story, of an island or 
country possessed and governed exclusively by 
women, and now he seemed to be the hero of a 
sequel to that curious romance. 

The old crone who had been left with him 
motioned that he should divest himself of the 
few drenched articles of dress with which he 
had escaped from the sea. He hesitated, per- 
haps not half understanding her. She advanced 
to his lowly couch, and carefully covering him 
with its coarse blue rug, proceeded to possess 
herself of those matters with her own hands. 
Then she gave him a dry mantle, of the same 
description as that in which he had been borne 
from the beach, and again intimating, by signs, 
that he should wrap himself closely in it, with- 
drew. 

While endeavouring to obey her commands, 
Gerald's exhaustion, hitherto diverted in an 
effort to observe the persons and occurrences by 
which he found himself surrounded, once more 
overcame him, and he sank, senseless, on his 
straw pallet. 

When again able to recollect himself, he saw 



70 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

his arbitrary old nurse by his side, holding a 
bottle and a glass, and the not disagreeable sen- 
sations of his body told him that some strong 
stimulant had been administered, in order to 
call him back to life. Again she filled the 
glass, and offered it to him. He took it, and at 
a glance ascertaining that it was red wine, did 
not hesitate to pledge her. How such wretch- 
ed people could, in a district so seemingly lone- 
ly, comm.and, for his use, the good beverage, 
appeared surprising ; but Gerald did not long 
allow the thought to embarrass his mind. A 
stronger sentiment absorbed it. 

In fact, he felt very hungry, and by the sim- 
ple gesticulation of pointing his finger to his 
mouth, gave the old wpman to understand as 
much. She quitted him, and soon returned 
with an ample supply of food, such, it again 
seemed, as the circumstances of the people of 
the house could not have warranted him to ex- 
pect. But Gerald proved no more curious on 
this point than he had upon the question of the 
good glass of old port a few minutes before ; 
he only made a hearty supper, helped himself 
to one or two additional bumpers from the mys- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 71 

terious bottle, and then, feeling comfortably 
drowsy, prepared to fall asleep. 

His nurse over-ruled him, and called into the 
outer room. The woman of the house entered; 
both raised him, well wrapped in his cloak ; 
walked him to the kitchen hearth ; placed him, 
sitting upon a low stool, at a blazing wood-fire ; 
retired into his chamber ; after some time re- 
appeared ; helped him back again ; and Gerald 
now found his straw covered with good white 
blankets, to which were added white sheets, 
also of a fine texture ; and when, after many 
curtsies, and, he supposed, hearty prayers, in 
their unknown language, for his good repose, 
and good health in the morning, the two grooms 
of the chamber seemed finally to bid him adieu 
for the short remainder of the night — Gerald, to 
his increased surprise, found a respectable suit 
of clothes, including boots, a hat, and even 
gloves, deposited upon an old chair, by his bed- 
side ; and an under garment, still of a texture 
and cut such as a gentleman might wear, spread 
out, ready for his adoption, on the bolster. 

" Generous, though despotic, and most un- 
accountable women !" thought Gerald, as he 



72 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

prepared to habit himself comfortably for re- 
pose, but his curiosity and surprise were yet to 
be fully aroused. 

As he touched the article of dress which lay 
at the head of his couch, a sealed note fell from 
it on the ground. Gerald, first hastening to lie 
down, brought the note with him, and by the 
glimmer of his rushlight read as follows : — 

** You have friends near you ; though, if you 
imprudently discover your name, perhaps none 
among the poor people, who, for the present, 
immediately surround you. Therefore you are 
called upon to act prudently. Let no one know 
you are the Honourable Gerald Blount. During 
the night you will stand little chance of being 
questioned ; the write^ of this billet can influ- 
ence all who now are near you ; but new 
faces may appear in the morning, and then you 
have to hold your own. It will, however, only 
be necessary to disguise your name and quality, 
and speak civilly to every one, and you can be 
in no danger. Meantime, whatever you may 
suspect, do not stir from your present retreat 
before three ©""clock to-morrow, or rather three 
o'clock this day, for the winter morning will 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 73 

soon break, and by that hour a sincere friend 
may appear." 

This note was written in a kind of hand that 
left in doubt the rank of the writer. It was 
elaborately penned, every letter fully shaped, 
and the down-strokes long and almost perpen- 
dicular. One can generally decide whether a 
billet comes from a man or a woman, a gentle- 
man or a lady ; but, in the present instance, 
Gerald was farther at a loss to determine this 
important question. 

In very natural astonishment, and some mis- 
givings, he resolved, however, literally to follow 
the advice of the unknown writer. After the 
warning received, he certainly would be in no 
hurry to trumpet out his own name and quality ; 
and, as a first precaution against discovery, he 
tore the note into little bits, and burned them 
separately at the feeble flame of his rushlight. 

What were "the new faces that might appear 
in the morning ?" Conjecture ran wild. Gerald, 
at all events, would be on the watch for them. 
Much as he wanted repose, he would not close 
his eyes, and for some time he succeeded in 
keeping this resolution ; but the grateful glow 

VOL. II. E 



74 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

sent through his frame by the active and com- 
bined operation of all his late accession of com- 
forts, aided the cravings of still exhausted na- 
ture, in taking him by surprise, and, in less than 
half an hour, he slept profoundly . 

A brisk wintry sunbeam, darting through a 
small open hole, in one side of his bed-chamber, 
straight upon his closed lids, suddenly awoke 
him, at he could not tell what hour ; but 
the short, quick steps of women in the outer 
room, and the crying of children, told him it 
must be far advanced in the morning. 

He started, on his straw-couch, as a glancing 
combination of mind informed him of a crowd 
of late and terrible events, and of his present 
strange situation. Next, he remembered the 
note he had read before he fell asleep. The 
promised " new faces" again occurred ; his eye 
involuntarily strayed round in quest of them, 
and, somewhat to Gerald's consternation, it did 
not stray round in vain. 

At the end of the nook in which he lay, ex- 
actly opposite his bed ,was a very large chest, 
rudely constructed, even when it had been new, 
and now showing chinks and other marks of de- 
cay; its Hd measured, at least, six feet in length. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 75 

and three in breadth ; and upon this lid, seem- 
ingly in deep sleep, were stretched two men, 
one about fifty-five, the other a youth about 
twenty ; but his exact years could not be so 
accurately guessed at by Gerald, for the follow- 
ing reasons: — 

While the elderly man lay, almost crushed, 
against the rough wall, at the far verge of the 
chest-lid, his features fully visible, the junior 
faced him, of course with his back to Gerald — so 
that, except his roundish and smooth cheek, no 
part of his visage could be studied. And while 
they thus slept on, face to face, Gerald observed 
that the arms of the former encircled the body 
of the latter, perhaps in a precaution, before 
they sunk into sleep, to keep him from rolling 
off the chest upon the floor. Nay, even their 
nether limbs intertwined, as if for the same 
purpose. 

Gerald fixed his regards on the countenance 
perfectly exposed to his criticism. It was spare, 
strongly-marked, care-worn, haggard. The 
bushy brows were bent, the greyish hair in dis- 
order, the chin unshorn, and he thought that 
it seemed to have subsided into repose, at an 
imlawful hour, freshly agitated with effort and 
E 2 



76 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

passion. This idea became strengthened when 
he saw that the rude peasant clothes of both 
sleepers, and particularly their stockings and 
shoes, were covered with, it would seem, the 
wet soil of the fields, not yet allowed time to 
dry and harden. 

As he continued, in breathless interest, to 
make his observations, two new discoveries 
brought conviction on the point. From the 
bosom of the elderly man peeped the brass- 
mounted handle of a large pistol ; and Gerald 
had not recovered from the start its appearance 
occasioned, ere he saw that one of the arms of 
the younger peasant hung, disengaged from the 
loose coat that covered the rest of his person, 
drooping over the chest ; that it was bandaged ; 
and that the bandage, as well as the shirt-sleeve, 
still oozed blood. 

" And here," thought Gerald, " are speci- 
mens of the new faces I was so anxious about ;" 
nor did he fail to remember his other anxiety to 
see one of his own sex near him, the night be- 
fore, nor to conclude that, after all, he might 
have contented himself with his gentler pro- 
tectors, and given such solicitude to the winds. 
It was plain, he argued, that he had fallen 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 77 

under the care of the females of part of a band 
of plunderers — smugglers, perhaps^-during the 
absence of the principals from home upon busi- 
ness of their vocation. The readiness with 
which he had received, at the hands of the wo- 
men of the house, costly refreshments, much 
beyond their visible means to procure, now 
seemed explained. And having formerly un- 
derstood that, on smuggling coasts, upon occa- 
sions when a contraband cargo is, as the phrase 
goes, to be " worked," the women of the dis- 
trict crowd down to bear a hand, Gerald readily 
accounted for the appearance of his preservers 
on the shingly beach. As to the note, his dis- 
tress had interested, no doubt, some female of 
consideration among them ; and she, calculating 
the circumstances that the morning must pro- 
duce, had written it to put him on his guard. 

He would most certainly persevere in his re- 
solution to observe the first caution it contained ; 
additional good reasons for such a course staring 
him in the face. But, regarding the second 
admonition, Gerald hesitated. Provided he 
would tarry where he was till three o'clock, the 
writer promised that " a sincere friend"" should 
appear before him. What friend ? — in a place 



78 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and situation where he must be totally unknown 
and unconnected, this sounded foolishly; and 
prudence forbade him to waive, in hopes of the 
occurrence of a great improbability, any fair 
chance of removing himself to a safer or more 
congenial asylum, which, between the present 
time and three o'clock, might fortunately occur. 
And yet here he started and wavered once 
again. Was he " totally unknown" in his pre- 
sent neighbourhood, whatever it might be ? — 
no ; not " totally ;" the writer of the note knew 
him well : and how could he say but others were 
in the secret, no matter how it had been ob- 
tained ? And how had even the writer obtain- 
ed it ? This was a question that, at the mo- 
ment he perused the billet, certainly occurred 
to Gerald, but he had allowed it to become ab- 
sorbed in others of greater interest. Now, how- 
ever, it re-produced itself, as the most interest- 
ing one he could agitate. What ! was the face 
that, at the moment of his resuscitation on the 
sliingles, had floated before his eyes or his fancy, 
no vision, after all ? — Was the writer, and the 
prophetess of Pfere la Chaise, one and the same 
individual.'' — Impossible: he was again but sport- 
ing with the difficult realities of his situation ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 79 

and, in order to enable himself rationally to 
meet whatever awaited him, he would dismiss 
the illusion from his mind. 

So sound and unbroken was the sleep of 
his two fearful and unconscious companions 
on the chest, that, during more than the lapse 
of half an hour, Gerald had full time to con- 
nect, after the subsiding of his first agitation, 
the reasonings here attributed to him. 

But, as he continued to gaze on them, while 
his thoughts still went busily on, the youth 
groaned, moved his wounded arm, and again 
groaned louder; and, roused by the sounds, 
the elder got into such motion as betokened 
that he would quickly awake. At this Gerald 
closed his eyes, prepared to be watchful, and 
fully on his guard. 

The continued motions of the elder peasa^^t 
came intelligibly to his ear. The man seemed 
to sit up, cautiously, as if disinclined to waken 
him, or perhaps, to disturb the repose of his 
wounded comrade. In a few seconds Gerald 
heard him call, in a low, husky whisper, upon 
some one in the next apartment, pronouncing 
a christian-name that sounded strangely and 
wildly to our listener. In as low a tone he 



80 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

was answered ; then steps that entered seemed 
intended to be stealthy, though the ponderous 
foot-gear of the new-comer scarce allowed him to 
tread as cautiously as he might propose to do. 

Gerald durst not open his eyes, but he soon 
became assured that the two men were now 
present in his chamber. They began to con- 
verse, still in whispers ; he grew less interest- 
ed, because he brought to mind the unin- 
telligible language of all the women he had 
met, and concluded that their male connexions 
would interchange their thoughts through the 
same medium : and the commencement of 
their dialogue bore him out in his inference ; 
yet, after three or four sentences, either his 
ear deceived him, or a half- understood phrase 
did reach Gerald. He breathed short ; stretch- 
ed his sense of hearing to its utmost ; and now 
became certain that the men spoke, indeed, in 
alternate snatches of what Gerald believed to 
be Welsh, and of a rude patois of the English 
language. 

The armed marauder on the chest had been 
answering, at some length, in his unknown 
tongue, a question proposed to him, when the 
first words that Gerald indistinctly caught, con- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 81 

sisted of a question from his morning visitor, to 
the effect — " Are you sure of it ?" 

The other replied that " he was quite sure ; 
for he had watched him" (Gerald) " some time 
before he ventured to call into the next apart- 
ment, and a top couldn't sleep sounder." 

" It was likely," his friend observed, " taking 
into account the hardship the young man" (still 
meaning Gerald) " had suffered before he lay 
down." 

" Who do you think he is ?" was the next 
inquiry; and the answer changed into their 
strange tongue, and for some time their dis- 
course fell unintelligibly on Gerald's ear. 

" We 're sorry you hadn't a better rest after 
the night," was the next remark uttered by the 
visitor; — " the children could not be turned out 
of bed, late as it was," he continued ; " and he 
must himself have gone to repose with the 
poor mother of them." 

" So,"*' concluded Gerald, " my gentlemen on 
the chest have, like myself, been but the guests 
of the present speaker." 

" He did not care on his own account," ob- 
served the person to whom the apology had 

been made ; " but it was too bad that poor " 

E 5 



82 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

(a name was uttered which Gerald could not 
catch) — " with his hurt arm, should be obliged 
to sleep on a hard board, to give room to a 
stranger to them all/' 

Again Gerald recognized an allusion to him- 
self; but though its evident disposition to hos- 
tility might, in a degree, have alarmed him, he 
derived superior comfort from the admission 
contained in the last sentence ; the admission 
that he was " a stranger to them all." 

*' Even that could not be helped, when com- 
mands had been given on the subject," was the 
purport of the answer of the host. And, con- 
tinuing in English patois, he proceeded to hint 
that, to guard against Gerald's observation, 
should he suddenly awake, they had better at 
once remove the wounded youth out of the 
chamber. 

Gerald now seemed to sleep sounder than 
ever, and with as little noise as was possible 
they bore off the groaning lad. He listened to 
hear him deposited in one of the beds abroad ; 
but it seemed that his friends conveyed him quite 
out of the house ; and then, the steps of the 
good woman, hurrying about her kitchen, and 
her voice, scolding her children, and the gab- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 8B 

bling or crying of the children themselves, mix- 
ed with the humming of the old grandame, as, 
perhaps, she tried to lull one of them asleep, 
were the only sounds he could catch. 

After remaining some time in solitude, he 
agreed to vote himself awake, and call out for 
an attendant. His ancient nurse tottered in : 
he made signs for his own pair of trowsers, 
which had been taken away before he slept, 
and, he argued, must now be dried, and ready 
for putting on again ; and it was not quite 
for the sake of the article of dress that Gerald 
proposed his request. 

The crone re-entered with it, and again left 
him alone. He put his hand into one pocket, 
and found his purse, undiminished, as well as 
he could calculate, since he had last used it. 
His valuable watch also remained in its proper 
fob. But on examining the second pocket for 
the small pistol with which he had armed him- 
self, when about to spring into the boat from the 
sinking vessel, and which he distinctly recollected 
to have afterwards buttoned up where he now 
sought it, no such article was forth-coming. 

This was strange : the desperate men amongst 
whom he found himself would seem, then, to 



84 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

prize more the weapons for outrage, than the 
most desirable result outrage could seek to 
attain. He thought, over and over, what de- 
scription of desperadoes they might be ; but, 
notwithstanding his former smuggling theory, 
Gerald could not make them out. 

He rose and dressed ; appropriating his own 
trowsers, but necessarily obliged to avail him- 
self of the coat, stockings, vest, hat, and boots, 
which lay by his bedside. They fitted him 
very well, and were fashionably cut. 

His toilet was not quite completed when the 
two women came in with a substantial break- 
fast, of which he heartily partook. He passed 
into the kitchen, and with words and signs of 
much gratitude for all their attention, offered 
them money. They refused it, not sulkily, 
though firmly. 

" Now am I at liberty to go about ?" 
thought Gerald. He paced to the door; they 
did not interrupt him: he walked from it, 
along a neglected path, on each side of which 
lay neglected land, with an idle spade, and 
other implements of husbandry, buried in it. 
The path led him into a wild bridle road. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. BS 

Still he was not molested; and no one ap- 
peared in view but two shy children of the 
house, lurking about some near hedges, or 
rather rude fences, as if to get a wondering 
look at him. At a turn in the bridle road, the 
sea burst on his view, about a mile distant. He 
looked observantly around him. The hovel he 
had just left struck him as the most wretched 
human habitation he had ever seen. Others, 
as wretched, appeared scattered around : some, 
by the nets hung out before them, evidently 
the abodes of fishers ; some, as evidently in- 
habited by the more regular agricultural pea- 
santry of the wild district. No trees caught 
Gerald's eye ; no well-fenced fields ; no com- 
fortable houses of the middle class. 

" Where am I ?" thought Gerald, with cer- 
tain misgivings, from which, during the last 
few hours he had not been free. 

A groan reached him. He listened. It was 
repeated, from the other side of the bridle-road 
fence at which he stood. He passed over ; and 
upon a couch of fresh straw lay the wounded 
peasant-lad, who had been his chamber com- 
panion for a part of the morning. 



86 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Both stared at each other, the moment Ge- 
rald jumped from the fence; the youth evi- 
dently in much alarm. 

"Who is your honor?" he questioned, in 
continued agitation. Gerald remained silent. 

" Does your honor want to have any thing 
to say to me, Sir V 

Still Gerald gave no answer. 

" Murther !" cried the conscience-smitten 
young brigand, rising, with difficulty, on his 
unhurt elbow. '' Paudge ! — Father ! where are 
ye ? to be going and laving me here, when it 's 
your company I want more than the victuals ! 
an' a sthrange magistrate come here upon me, 
and going to whip me off with him ! — Father ! — 
Paudge !" 

Gerald's blood absolutely curdled at the cer- 
tainty which the peculiar tone and cadence of 
the speaker brought to his mind. He was able, 
however, to say, 

" Hush, man, hush ! — I am no magistrate, 
and mean you no harm. But, tell me, where am 
I .?— this is not Wales ?" 

" Wales ? what Wales .? to the devil with 
Wales, taffies, and innions and all ! what do you 
mean by that sort of talk.? — Keep oiF!" as 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 87 

Gerald unconsciously stepped closer. "It's want- 
ing to coax yourself on me you'd be. Keep off, 
I say ! or, maybe, the bould boy you fear most 
is nearer than you think — Arragh, Daddy ! — 
Gossip ! where are ye, I say ?" 

" So," thought Gerald — " so; — I am in the 
Emerald Isle, after all ; and, if I rightly trans- 
late the elegant turn, ' bould boy,' one of my 
first chamber-mates may turn out to be no 
other than Captain Rock himself." 



"jSl THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER IV. 

While Gerald made the last reflections, he 
was in rapid motion from the young peasant. 
The cries of the lad had succeeded in bringing 
in view, about two fields off, his gruff fellow 
slumberer on the chest, and the man, Gerald 
concluded, whose hospitality they had expe- 
rienced. One carried a platter of food, the 
other a bottle, for which, it would seem, they 
had momentarily left their young associate. 

Gerald became visible to them as soon as he 
hastily re-crossed the fence into the wild bridle- 
road. They instantly laid down their hos- 
pitable burdens, and quickened into a run the 
pace that the youth's cries had previously made 
brisk enough. My hero also ran, pursuing the 
course of the bridle-road. It conducted him to 
a high-road. Steps sounded in his rear. He 
gazed around, undecided, for an instant, which 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 89 

way to take, to the right hand or to the left. 
About forty yards, in the former-mentioned di- 
rection, appeared a stage-coach, standing still. 
The driver had dismounted to help in a respect- 
able-looking passenger. Notwithstanding all 
he had heard of the badly-appointed condition 
of Irish stages, Gerald gained the man's side 
just as his office was got through; demanded 
to be admitted in, also ; was desired to observe 
that no " inside" was vacant ; and finally mount- 
ed to a seat beside the driver. 

As they whirled on, two men appeared stand- 
ing at a gap in the side of the road. Gerald 
knew them well : nor were they slow in ac- 
knowledging their recognition of him. With 
faces of baffled anger, and eyes that shot no 
good intent, they seemed to take advantage of 
a moment, when no one but he glanced at them, 
to clench and raise their hands, and mutter in- 
distinct threats. 

" Are those people peasants or fishers of the 
district ?''"' asked Gerald of his present compa- 
nion, coachee, as he turned his regards away. 

" Neither one nor the other. Sir," answered 
coachee, after a short glance, which, for a mo- 
ment, betokened a lively interest : " but stop, 



90 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

one of 'em may be ; the other, the elder of the 
two, is a stranger, come one or two counties off; 
I know it by the colour of his wrap-rascal, waist- 
coat, and stockings — and more of his kind, I 'm 
afeard, is near him, this morning — divvle"'s luck 
to their visit to this quiet part of the world ! 
^Go home, daddy !" continued coachee, good- 
humouredly, as he flourishingly whipped by the 
men, addressing himself to the individual of 
whom he had last spoken — " go home, and mind 
your ould thrade among your own nate hills an' 
bogs, an' lave honest people here, on the say- 
side, to fry their own fish without you lighting 
the fire for 'em." 

" Whoo !" shouted both the men, prancing 
upward, where they stood, in full return of good 
humour to coachee's remonstrance, and without 
a trait of their late ferocity of expression to- 
wards Gerald. " And," continued the person 
particularly concerned in the address, " just 
whip your lane cattle, for the pinny the mile, 
my chap, from Dublin town, and make your 
scrape to the genteels for the same, when you 
get it." 

" Come here," requested coachee, half pull- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 91 

ing up, ^* come here, I tell you ; now that I 
think of it, I want you." 

The man ran, laughingly, inside the road 
fence, until he again came abreast with the 
coach. 

" An' well," he resumed, " what 's the thrick 
you think you can put on a poor countryman, 
now.?" 

" Are you a judge of a swellin'.?" demanded 
coachee, staffing out his cheek with his tongue. 

" No ; but you are, maybe," replied the 
man, puffing out both his cheeks ; and immedi- 
ately there was a shout of gleeish triumph for 
him from the friend he had left behind, as well 
as from others who had just joined that person. 

Gerald not comprehending this specimen of 
Irish roadside humour, only felt much astonish- 
ment at the ease with which an armed marauder, 
evidently hardened in his courses, could sud- 
denly change from the alarming savageness of 
temper in which he had, a moment before, held 
up his clenched hand, and set his teeth, into 
a seemingly light-hearted mood, capable of giv- 
ing and taking, in his own way, any joke that 
might turn up for the instant. Indeed the 



9» THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

maii''s years, if nothing else, made this vivacity 
appear out of usual character. 

"May I ask what you meant, just now,'" re- 
sumed Gerald, again addressing the driver, as 
at last they got out of view of the disagreeable 
jesters, " when you seemed to intimate that this 
part of the country would be nothing the better 
of the visit of that stranger ?" 

His companion quickly turned upon him an 
observant look, though not an impertinent one, 
and then drawing a round cut at his off-leader, 
answered, in a way Irish enough, " You 're a 
stranger yourself. Sir, in these parts o"* the 
world, or you needn't be putting that ques- 
tion." 

" I am quite a stranger in Ireland." 

*' So I thought by ybur tongue. Sir, from 
the first. — Get out o' that, lazy horse!" continued 
the man of whipcord, gently flogging his near 
wheeler ; " get out o' that, an' I told you so 
before ;" but no farther notice was taken of 
Gerald's question. 

" He pulls well, though," remarked Gerald, 
*' or else you have a knack of coaxing him ;" 
willing to pave his way to the increased con- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 93 

fidence of coachee, by administering to his pro- 
fessional vanity. 

" Kindly enough, Sir ; he 's not a bad horse 
in good hands, though I know some people 
that would unharness him, and lave him by the 
roadside, sooner than put their mind to it, and 
try to get him on. I 'd rather him than the 
grey, the near-leader, as willing as he is, if ray 
poor DanelJy (the horse's name) had a good 
sieve, before starting, and rasonable time to 
ate it." 

" All your horses seem good ones, indeed," 
continued Gerald, admitting to himself, as he 
made the remark, that, after much he had 
heard, and read too, in newspaper communica- 
tions, the whole concern with which, as a pas- 
senger, he was now identified, might nearly 
stand a comparison with one of the same kind in 
his adopted country. 

" Just as well as poor Ireland can afford. 
Sir ; I ""m glad they plaize you. What do you 
think of the harness, Sir ?"" 

" Why," answered Gerald, surveying it in 
detail, quite seriously, and quite unconscious 
that he was quizzed — '* as far as I can see, it 



9^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

only wants to shine a little more in the brass 
parts, to be perfect in its way." 

** God be praised !" continued coachee. "But, 
Sir, here's myself now ; I don't look much like 
one of your English whips, do I, Sir ?" 

" You certainly understand your business as 
well as any of them ; but, then, your attire is 
not so gay ; you ought to have on a new super- 
fine hat, smart neckcloth, as good clothes, in 
fact, as any of your company, and a nosegay 
stuck in your bosom." 

" And the nosegay, and all, this time of the 
year. Sir ?" seemingly with much respect and 
interest : " bud, no wonder ! ye have the green 
pays at Christmas in England, we hear, an' the 
strawberries after 'em, when the cloth is gone." 

Gerald now began to suspect. 

" It's a shame for you, ma'am," resumed 
coachee, addressing a poor soldier's wife who 
trudged by the roadside patiently after her 
husband ; " bid her walk before you. Sir," he 
continued to the soldier; " she's putting out her 
tongue at you :" no such occurrence had taken 
place, and Gerald's comprehension of his com- 
panion still improved. 

" What good roads these are !" he said, anx- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 95 

ious to make the man serious by continuing to 
compliment, sincerely, his national pride. 

" Ah, then, and arn't they, Sir, considering 
the poor country ? — and sure the wonder is that 
there is a load of stones or gravel in it, to make 
any kind of a road at all." 

" You change horses yonder, do you not ?" 
again tried Gerald, observing that horses, har- 
nessed and attended, stood a little way on. 

" If you plaize, Sir ; only I 'm afeai'd you '11 
think it so long to be kept waiting." 

*' Why, what time does the matter usually 
occupy ?" now caught tripping. 

" Glory to me, Sir, if I know to the minute; 
but, sometimes ten o' them, sometimes the thir- 
teen ; more or less ; I' 11 not say sartain." 

*' Ten of them ? ten of what ?" 

" The minutes, Sir, sure." 

" Indeed ! ten or thirteen minutes to change 
horses ! Well,"' continued Gerald, meditating- 
ly, '* that's worse than I have even heard on 
the subject." 

" Cuckoo !" cried coachee, imitating the 
voice of the bird, as he drove up and pulled 
in his steaming horses at the appointed spot. 
And Gerald curiously drew out his watch ; and 



96 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

SO, also nimbly jumping down, did young 
coachee ; and, to Gerald's annoyance, a second 
beyond the time allowed in England to the 
operation of changing horses did not elapse, 
when he was again throned on his box, and 
the fresh cattle spanking away. 

Now, quite assured that he had been very 
impertinently hoaxed, Gerald, with a lowered 
brow, and a curled lip, sat silent. Indeed, 
could he have conveniently made his election, 
he would have descended from the vehicle. 
But no town was in view where he might ex- 
pect to procure a post-chaise ; and so, his pre- 
sent mode of self-assertion was the only one he 
had it in his power to adopt. 

Coachee, noticing, perhaps, the mood of his 
passenger, spoke in Irish whip-slang to his 
horses, or to men and women he met, or 
overtook upon the road, but did not address 
a word to Gerald. Many miles were trotted 
over in silence between them. At length, after 
a few quick side glances, he faced fully round, 
and — "By the powers! you're sick. Sir," said 
coachee. 

There was real interest in the remark, and 
the manner of the remark, which went a step 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 97 

towards extenuating, to Gerald, the young man's 
former levity. 

" A little ill, — it will pass away; — though I 
have, within the last twelve hours, suffered 
much.'' 

" T'under-an'-'ounds, Sir, it's very sick you are, 
not to talk of a little !" — and, while Gerald cer- 
tainly evinced every symptom of the faintness, 
shivering, and throbbing head that preface fe- 
verish indisposition, the young man pulled up 
his horses, and continued : — 

" The last twelve hours. Sir ! and the hard- 
ship ! murther. Sir, maybe it was the wrack of 
last night.?" 

" Hush, " cried Gerald, " I wish to remain 
quite unobserved in Ireland, until I gain 
Dublin, whither, as I perceive by the letters 
on its side, your coach travels; and, the 
better to effect my purpose, it is necessary to 
disguise — what you have guessed — the unfortu- 
nate way in which, against my intention, I ar- 
rived in the country." 

" To be sure — honour bright — murther, again ! 
and I making fun o' you. Sir, when, my soul 
from the divvle ! if I thought, or knew, or 
could guess how it was with you, I 'd sooner 

VOL. II. F 



98 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

jump down under the wheels than say a word o' 
the kind. Will you taste any thing, Sir ?" 

*' No, I think I grow better ; and you must 
not break in on your time, for me ; let us go 
on. I suppose I can reach Dublin, by your 
side, as quickly as by taking a post-chaise." 

" We '11 bate the best of 'em, three hours," 
promised coachee. 

" Start, then ; the air will do me good.'"* 

And on the coach rolled at the reasonable rate 
of nine English miles an hour. 

" Lord save us. Sir," resumed coachee, as, 
with increased zeal, he exhorted his horses to 
the road, " and you so young, and all by your- 
self, too ; there 's no friend o' yours in it, we 
hope ?" 

" Not exactly a friend of mine," answered 
Gerald, yet with a sigh for the fate of his 
faithful valet. 

" You swum your way out, bouldly, I '11 en- 
gage. Sir ?" coachee's curiosity now began to go 
hand in hand with his good-nature. 

" I swam to shore, as well as I could." 

" And fellow me better, when here you are, 
by the side 6' me, and, the Lord knows how 
many poor souls that couldn't keep at i/our side, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 99 

sarved up, for breakfast, to the young sharks, 
by this time. By the powers. Sir, 'twas a great 
thing, for a boy, like you, Englishman and all ; 
but musha, Sir," a smile, as with his rising re- 
spect for Gerald — recent misfortune is almost 
always respected — came a qualm of conscience at 
lavishing his feelings upon claims that were not 
strictly national ; " maybe. Sir, you keep in 
your own joke for me, this time ; maybe you 're 
not an Irish boy, every inch o' you ? one o' the 
Trinity lads, from poor ould Dublin, God bless 
her face, every shining morning, that took a 
scamper across the water, and had this done to 
you for your neighbourly intentions, when you 
thought of coming back to us all again ?"" 

" You mistake ; I have never before been 
upon Irish ground." 

" Well ; and that 's a pity ; and if there 's 
more o"" your sort in the place you come from, 
salvation to my soul but I could find it in my 
heart to like them a bit better than they '11 let 
me do." 

" How, let you?" 

" You see. Sir, it's not the best o' you, I'lii 
thinking, ye send over here to us, for samples, 
to agent us, and steward us, and lawyer us, and 
F 2 



100 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

then make little of us, after making nothing at 
all of us." 

" Excuse me again ; I do not understand."" 
" Running us down, you persave, Sir, all 
the time they're thrashing us into chaff, and 
grinding us into powder — ay, and when it's all 
over too, and maybe then more than ever ; 
and axing ye^ Sir, — the Englishmen that never 
come here, I mane, — to believe us the divvies 
entirely, in regard o' good manners and good 
behavor, and not knowing how to mind our 
own business. Sure that's the rason, when we 
meet one o' your country on the road, we takes 
the whip-hand of him, in one o** the ways we're 
your equals, at laste. Sir — by the gift o' gab. Sir, 
and the gibe and the fun that often hides our 
hearts, and the little cran we have, — Lord be 
praised, that laves us any thing, these times, — of 
keeping our minds to ourselves now and then." 
" You are not a country-born man, are you ?" 
asked Gerald, tiring of coachee's Irish egotism, 
and willing to change the topic. But he only 
involved himself farther in it. 

" Ay, your honor, country-born, and coun- 
try-bred, too ; and the father before me, and 
my father's son himself, until of late, used to 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 101 

better than whipping these horses up and down 
the road, in all sorts o' weathers. Sure that 
has something to do with what you and I were 
spaking of, Sir. My father took a waste of three 
hundred acres, or thereaway, from the Irish lord, 
— he was Irish then, — that owned 'em ; and by 
dint of hard work and careful looking- after, 
made 'em a good farum at the end o*" twenty-five 
or thirty years. By course, he got 'em at a low 
rent ; but at a short lase too; and he knew that 
when the lase would drop, he wasn't to expect 
a new one, on the same terms. And to be sure, 
he was ready and willing to offer any terms in 
rason, considering that himself made the ground 
what it turned out to be, and that he looked to 
it as a manes o' living for them that would stay 
in this ugly world after him ; maning me, your 
honor. Well, the day came to make the trial 
any how, and he went up to the lord's house, 
to talk to the agent, — for, you see. Sir, the 
lord himself wasn't to the fore, but spending 
his days in your honor's country, England, ever 
since ye took our own parliament from us, and 
sent it across the water, — and no one lived in the 
fine ould place only him, a bit of a counsellor, 
from Lonon, that put a Scotch steward over us. 



102 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

one that was mighty fond o' bidding, under the 
rose, a trifle more than the ould tenant, and by 
that manes, many's the comfortable man he 
made poor. Well, Sir. We waited for my 
father to come back from the agent, my mother 
and the young wife, and I — for, you see, Sir, 
I got married on the strength o' the thing, and 

poor Moya's hanful o' money, Sir whut, 

whut, lazy horse ! go along out o' that, or I'll 
make you !" Coachee's digression was not per- 
haps quite necessary, for Gerald heard his voice 
change, and detected his eye glistening. 

*' Her hanful o' money. Sir, it helped our 
stock ; and, as I tould you, she, and I, and my 
mother — God rest the poor woman's soul — we 
were waiting for my father to come back to us 
with the good news we had no fears o' hearing, 
and the pleasant face on him that would tell it 
to us, before he opened his lips. But the 
divvle a pleasant face he had when he crossed 
the thrashold, Sir. His honor, the agent, 
asked just as much rent for the new take as we 
all knew wouldn't lave us a good mouthful o* 
praties after paying it, supposing a body able to 
do that same, a thing that seemed mighty un- 
likely. We made a poor mouth to him; but 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 103 

sorrow a use in talking ; the Scotch steward bid 
the money, because, you see. Sir, it was his 
plan to split the farum into little takes, and re- 
let it, to twenty or thirty poor divvies, at an- 
other rack-rent. Then, what were we to do ? 
We wrote to the ould lord, but he took it into 
his head, Christ save us, to die before the letter 
overtook him ; and then we wrote to the young 
lord, over and over again, and never got an 
answer, only maybe, of an odd turn, the agent 
resaved word to see about the matter ; and faith, 
that was little comfort when, to our sorrow, it 
was himself that saw too much into it already. 
What were we to do, your honor.'' Nothing, 
only make our endeavour to keep the poor ould 
ground from Sawny, and try if we could get a 
bit and a sup out of it, or no — ^no matter at 
what a rent. So we run the venture of a seven 
years' lase, at the rack-rent. 

" My father didn't live to see the trial out ; in 
troth, if I said the disappointment broke his 
heart, it's no lie I'd tell. And to spake the 
honest truth, if Moya, and my ould mother, 
and the childer, and myself, didn't stop a long 
while after him, little would be our loss in the 
end. For, to make a long story short, Sir, du- 



104 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ring the whole seven years, I was never able, 
work, and pinch, and turn as 1 could, to pay 
my rent regular; and little law did our good 
steward give me, when I was behindhand ; until 
of late years, things grew worse and worse ; the 
stock went to make up what the crop wouldn't 
give ; and at last, within a few months o' the 
dropping o' my second lase, I owed nigh-hand 
a year and a half's rent, and the steward threat- 
ened to turn us out if it was not paid up to the 
farthing. Well, Sir. And what were we to do 
again ? Why, write again to the young lord, 
and get no ansv/er, to be sure ; and then, when 
we heard that his brother had the character of 
having a little more Irish blood in his heart 
than it plaised God to put into his, we wrote to 
him too "" ^' 

" And even he did not answer you better ?" 
asked Gerald, apprehending a denouement. 

" Musha, Sir, not he — who'd expect it.'' 
Bad cess to the bit. Very well, Sir. The day 
came. Sir, and so did Mr. Steward, Sir ; and 
turn out was the word. ' Oh, with all my 
heart, Sir,' says I ; ' only if your honor will 
Jave us in this one night, till my ould mother 
gets a little better, I '11 thank your honor. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 105 

She 's in bed, in the next room to us, not over 
well, as the doctor tells us.' * Where ?' says 
he, opening the dour, and going into her. She 
just saw his face, and heard Moya and the 
weenachs crying abroad, and she didn't give 
any of us much more trouble — the one look at 
him — killed her," continued coachee, his tones 
trembling, as he stooped to wind a long and 
gentle lash at one of his leaders ; " but I ask 
pardon ; there was the wake, and a merry wake 
it was," laughing ; " and early in the morning 
after it, our good steward came again, and staid 
to lock the house dour with his own hand, and 
then he wished us good by — the young wife, 
and her three childer, and another coming, 
and myself, as we stood in the bosheen, — the 
ould bosheen, Sir, that led up from the road to 
my father's house," 

"You have indeed been hardly treated," said- 
Gerald. 

" Does your honor think so?" again laughed 
coachee. 

" Certainly I do, but most by this steward. 
May I ask you the name of so cruel a man .''" 

•' Bignell," answered coachee quietly. Ge- 
rald recognized the name of Lord Clangore's 
F 5 



106 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

land steward, and now entertained no doubt 
that he sat beside an old correspondent. 

What immediately followed brought certainly 
on the point. 

*' Bignell," repeated coachee, in a tone less 
composed ; " ay, Bignell — " he continued, his 
voice growing vehement, while his features 
worked, and his hands trembled, and he wound 
his whip to make, as if unconsciously, a fierce 
cut at his horses, " Bignell, the cursed-above- 
ground villain !"" 

The lash violently smote the ofF-leader, who 
pranced high. The other horses got fright- 
ened, and all set off at a gallop. An old 
woman who had been picking fire-wood in the 
fields, came, crab-like, down a steep bank- 
through a gap in a fence at one side of the 
road. The scared and excited animals could 
make nothing of a figure presenting itself in 
such a questionable shape : observing her, at a 
distance, they suddenly swerved aside in their 
furious career ; the coach as suddenly upset, 
and Gerald was flung off, and momentarily de- 
prived of his senses. 

*' Here we lay last, your honor," said the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 107 

voice of Michael Farrell, close at Gerald's ear, 
as he regained his power of hearing. He turned 
his head and saw coachee stretched beside him 
on the clay floor of what seemed a very poor 
cabin. The young man's face was ghastly, 
though his words were light, and the dragging 
down of the corners of his mouth bespoke 
bodily pain. Gerald also lay at his length, and 
felt an acute pang in his arm. He motioned 
to rise. 

" Don't stir, Sir,— don't, and I'll be thankful 
to you. Your arum is hurted, and it's the best 
way not to flurry it till the doctor puts his two 
eyes on it for you." 

" 'Tis broken, indeed," said Gerald, obeying 
this command ; " you are hurt too, are you 
not.?" 

" The right thigh o' me is smashed. Sir ; I 
feel something like the bits o' bone sticking 
out." 

"And what's to be done for us both.? is 
there a surgeon at hand ? are we near a town ? 
why do the people leave us here alone ?" 

" We were the first lifted in, off o' the road, 
Sir, and then every body ran out to see after 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the rest o' the passengers, and to hurry for the 
doctor and po-chaises, and he'll soon be with 
us, Sir." 

" Then we are not the only sufferers ?" 

" Poor Jem Doyle, that used to mind the 
drag for me, he's dead, Sir." 

" Good Heavens !" 

" And three outsides more, I believe, only 
bruised and scratched a little. I wonder was it 
my fault, your honor ? Faith, I'm afeard it 
was, and that they'll turn me off, the laste 
they'll do. Well; the Lord be praised. Or 
sure, if they don't, here 's this brittle, good-for- 
nothing thigh o' mine that won't be able to 
mount a box this half-year." 

" And, meantime, what can you do with 
yourself ?"** 

*' Get some good bodies to take me home to 
the wife. Sir, and the childer, first and fore- 
most ; and a nate load they'll have, laid down 
before them, in the poor cabin, instead o* getting 
a letter with my week's earning inside of it ; and 
then, faith, we must all do just as well as we can." 

'* Have you been long practising your new 
trade? 'Twas a singular change from your old 
pursuits." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 109 

" Ah, then, and wasn't it, Sir ? — Sorrow 
a more curious change could be, and little I 
ever expected it. But, you persave, Sir, after 
losing the ould farum, maybe I didn't behave 
myself all out like a boy that would be in his 
right rason, and careful o' the good word o' 
some of his neighbours ; and, to tell the blessed 
truth, I beUeve I was getting myself into more 
and more trouble in the country ; and a friend 
whispered me that I might as well go take my 
pleasure in Dublin, for a start ; and so I did, 
Sir ; and it was there I larned the use o' the 
whip from a gossip o' my own that I met by 
good luck on the streets ; a comfortable man ; 
well liked on the road, for his civil word, 
and his joke, and his stories, with all the out- 
sides, high and low, to say nothing of his know- 
ing his business, and minding it." 

" We ought to be friends," resumed Gerald ; 
" fellow-sufferers generally become so, and in- 
deed, for other reasons, I wish you well. Per- 
haps, then, you will allow me to ask you a ques- 
tion. What was the nature of the * trouble' 
which made your visit to Dublin necessary ?" 

" I 'm beholden to you, Sir, for your kind 
word — ^but, to tell the truth, this thigh is losing 



110 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

its senses entirely — murther ! and cross o' Christ 
about us ! but that was a pain in earnest." 

It might be that coachee would have evaded 
Gerald's question, by feigning the agony he now 
complained of ; but his companion saw that he 
really suffered much. His face grew more pal- 
lid than it had been before, his features worked, 
and perspiration stood on his forehead. Faint- 
ness ensued, for he closed his eyes with a deep 
groan. 

Gerald called out, and some people entered 
in a hurried manner with a glass and jug. 
Coachee re-opened his eyes, and extended his 
hand. 

" If 'tis spirits, he must not touch it," said 
Gerald. 

" But I 'm burning with the drooth, your 
honor, and the heart is wake," remonstrated 
coachee. 

" Give him a glass of water then, and let me' 
have anotlier." Gerald's own pain was scarcely 
to be endured. 

" Water, your honor ?" asked his fellow- 
sufferer, in much amazement — " water, to rise 
the heart.?" 

" No other drink that we can at present get 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. Ill 

is fit for either of us, if we mean to take a 
chance for our lives ; but do as you wish.'' 

" Divvie have me, then, if I do ; give us 
that could comfort, in the name of God," he 
added, in a tone of such mournful resignation, 
that Gerald half smiled, notwithstanding his 
own pangs. 

But the poor fellow's torture increased, 
and, in the hope of procuring some opium for 
him, Gerald asked how near they were to an 
apothecary's shop. The people answered, that 
the nearest establishment of the kind was in the 
village to which they had sent for " the doctor," 
and that " the doctor himself" presided over 
it. This was bad news, for two reasons : first, 
because it doomed coachee to unmitigated suffer- 
ing for some hours ; next, because, from the inti- 
mation it gave of the professional rank of the ex- 
pected surgeon, Gerald felt doubts of the pro- 
priety of submitting coachee's thigh or his own 
arm to his skill. Venturing to inquire of the 
people around them as to the popular estima- 
tion in which their doctor was held, he became 
assured, however, that *' Mr. Gallaghan was 
the best bone-setter on Ireland's ground. — See 
here, your honor," continued the proprietor of 



112 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the cabin, " here 's my own son's leg, that he 
bruck, lepping, last pattern-day, and, by the 
life, 'tis amost as good as ever, now, out of Mr, 
Gallaghan's hands. Walk across the floor, 
Mickle, and let his honor make sure with his 
own eyes.'' 

Mickle, a sheep-faced, lumpish lad of nine- 
teen, accordingly put himself in motion, and 
displayed to Gerald a confirmed halt, and a right 
leg that bowed out like a bent bar of iron. 

** Well ; I'll never run down Mr. Gallaghan," 
said a neighbour ; " that leg is a good job, sure 
enough ; only he hadn't the same luck with the 
leg he set for a crature of mine ; poor Sheela 
died the same night." 

" Your daughter?" asked Gerald. 

" No, your honor ; buV Sheela was as good a 
watch-dog as ever barked in a haggart." 

" How far are we from Dublin ?" was Gerald's 
next question. 

" Only fourteen miles, and a tilly," answered 
coachec ; " the fourteen mile stone is at the 
bottom o' the rise where we upset." 

" Then, I wish some of you would hasten the 
arrival of the post-chaise, and never mind the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 113 

doctor for me ; I will reward whoever follows 
the first messenger, and arrives first with it." 

They all disappeared. 

" You're afeard o' Mr. Gallaghan, Sir ?"" asked 
coachee. 

" I certainly prefer postponing the operation 
of getting my arm set till I shall have reached 
Dublin, and I wish you could safely accompany 
me in a post-chaise ; but that is impossible ; you 
should sit, and you cannot — must not : even 
though this apothecary may not be a very emi- 
nent practitioner, your only chance is waiting 
for him, then staying some time where you are, 
and then travelling home in a reclining pos- 
ture." 

"Murther," ejaculated coachee, with an almost 
despairing groan. 

" If you can conveniently use either of 
your hands, put one of them into the pocket of 
my trowsers, next to you, and take out my 
purse ; I cannot stir the arm that should do that 
office for me." 

Coachee contrived to draw forth the pursci 
Gerald continued : — 

" Hold it a moment. It contains, I believe. 



114 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

forty sovereigns ; take out about half of them, 
and put them in your own pocket if you can ; 
they may assist you to get through this untoward 
business ; and when I receive remittances from 
England, perhaps I may find you out, and have 
the gratification of affording you a little more 
help." 

Coachee, who could not divine Gerald's se- 
cret motive, though not his only one, for this 
liberality, stared at him with his red and glassy 
eyes, and holding the purse in his hand, remain- 
ed perfectly silent. Gerald renewed his instruc- 
tions. 

" And you 're in earnest, Sir ?"" 

" Pho, man, don't ask such a question. I 
shall be obliged by your doing as I bid you.*" 

« Obliged ? 1/ou '11 be obliged. Sir ? Well :" 
he counted from one hand to another, five so- 
vereigns, and stopt. 

" Go on," said Gerald, " they must be 
twenty." 

" Well," resumed coachee, as with a lip qui- 
vering now more from his moral than his physi- 
cal emotions, he proceeded in his task, — " well. 
Sir, I have them now ; twenty yellow boys, all in 
a lump ; the biggest handful o' money — that I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 115 

could call my own — I ever had together, since 
my ould father died. Here, Sir ; I'm putting 
the purse into your pocket again ; and I '11 say 
nothing ; only — " his voice failed him, " the 
blessings o' the young father and the young 
husband — " He covered his face with his 
hands, and as if from a union of many feelings, 
as also from his weakened state of frame, wept 
convulsively. 

"You do a very foolish thing now," said 
Gerald, just able to controul his own gratified 
and sympathizing feelings : " in your present 
state, you should keep yourself as quiet as 
possible ; and if you wish really to please me, 
you will have done with all this." 

" I will Sir ; I will. Bad cess to the day I 
ever thought a hard thought about the place 
your honor comes from ; musha, if 'twas your 
likes we had in our own great people, and if 
they 'd only stay at home with us, I wouldn't 
be lying stretched here, this blessed day. And 
you were axing me what kind 'o trouble it was 
that sent me to hide, for a while, in Dublin 
town, Sir? Why, then, I wouldn't like you'd 
think worse o' me than I desarve, though maybe 
that 's bad enough ; but it was neither robbing 



116 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

nor staling, nor a thing o' that sort, let alone 
harming a fellow-creature ; only something that 
was thought as much of by some people, and I 
won't say it wasn't wrong, my own self ; how- 
somever, Sir, I had a sore heart, you persave, 
Sir, after being turned out of our ould home ; 
and no friend in the world wide to back us; 
and no notice taken of our complaints to the 
young lord and his young brother, and all ; 
and, faith, Sir, I was fool enough to have a 
hand in some o' the night-work, and the hill- 
law, that was going on in the place ; and when 
my enemies began to suspect me, sure that's 
what sent me out o"" harum's way, for a start." 

" I think I understand you, and I hope you 
regret your imprudence," said Gerald. 

" Maybe your honor will think it's to blind 
you, or to impose on you I 'm going to say 
what I '11 say ; but, may I never rise out o' my 
present misfortune, if I didn't get sorry for 
joining 'em amost as soon as it happened. 
Many an ignorant poor crature was among us, 
not half so well able to think of what he was 
about as myself was ; for the ould father of 
me. Sir, he was a dacent man, ay, and a quiet 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. ll? 

paceable man, too, Sir, by rason he had little 
to trouble him, his life long, till just before 
he left us ; and along with all that, you persave. 
Sir, he gave me a dacent boy's share of the 
schooling ; so that I had a right to have more 
sense than the poor divvies of turf-cutters that 
were in the same foolish business, by my side ; 
and no thanks to me not to like some o' their 
doings, or some o' what they wanted to do, for 
the like rason ; but though they looked up to me, 
and let me head 'em, after a manner, I couldn't 
stop 'em from running into more mischief 
than they ought ; and there 's why I grew sorry 
for joining 'em, your honor." 

Shortly after this explanation, coachee be- 
came again faint from pain. Gerald, too, lay 
exhausted ; and both were unable to restrain 
their groans. In about an hour, the woman 
of the cabin, who had been at work in the 
fields, entered in an anxious and alarmed 
bustle, eager to afford any assistance in her 
power. Gerald requested a linen bandage ; she 
procured it : with her assistance, he arose, 
wrapt it tightly, twice or thrice, round his 
right arm, which was the fractured one ; then 



118 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

contrived a sling with his pocket handkerchief; 
and sat in a chair, to await as patiently as he 
could the arrival of the post-chaise. 

In about another hour he heard several 
carriages rattle to the door of the cabin. 
People ran in to apprize him that his " Po- 
shay" was in readiness. He paid the messen- 
gers; offered money to the woman of the 
house, who refused it; spoke a parting word 
of consolation to coachee, who continued 
really unable to utter any sound save the low- 
cries that involuntarily escaped him ; and, as 
Mr. Gallaghan entered to take the poor fellow's 
limb in hand, Gerald, assisted by many anxious 
persons, at last sat in the chaise. 

He was about to desire the postboy to drive 
as fast as he could, and to get four horses at 
the next stage, when a deep hoarse voice bel- 
lowed forth, in a kind of frenzy, some little 
distance behind — " Mickle Farrell ! — Mickle 
Farrell, my darling ! where are you ! murther, 
where are you !" and Gerald, glancing out of 
the window of the chaise, saw running, or 
rather galloping, into the cabin, the elder of 
the dangerous persons who had shared his 
chamber that morning. In instinctive avoid- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 119 

ance of this man, he rapidly gave the word for 
starting, and the next instant was in motion 
towards Dublin. 

When he had time to reflect, Gerald called 
to mind that the re-appearance of the armed 
marauder, joined to the words he had spoken, 
argued but little in favour of the ingenuousness 
of the person he came in such a hurry to con- 
dole with. Upon his box, a few hours before, 
coachee had disclaimed all knowledge of such 
an acquaintance ; yet now it appeared evident 
that they were intimate friends. No doubt, 
before Gerald and Michael Farrell began to 
understand each other, it was fair that the 
disguised Rockite should keep his own secret ; 
that seemed a matter he could scarce be blamed 
for. But there was another point : the ten- 
dency of the half-confession that Michael had 
just made on the floor of the cabin, went to 
impress Gerald with a belief of his contrite 
self-divorcement long ago, from his former 
turbulent associates. If such were really the 
ease, would not they, one and all, have so far 
at least resented his secession as by this time to 
hold themselves estranged from him, and in- 
difflerent to his fortunes, whatever might befal 



laO THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

him ? and how did this agree with the violent 
anxiety now displayed by, as was evident, one 
of the most ferocious of the band? Had 
master coachee dealt sincerely with Gerald, 
even in his last declarations? Was he a 
reclaimed character, or still an insurgent 
outlaw captain, countenancing and abetting 
outrage, if not occasionally heading it? Ge- 
rald's interest in the man began to abate, 
in the suspicion of his duplicity. He en- 
tered Dublin, and was assisted into his hotel, 
before he suddenly felt a novel interest towards 
Michael Farrell. " That strange letter I re- 
ceived from him in Pere la Chaise !" thought 
Gerald — " how could I have forgotten to ques- 
tion him about it !" And after an eminent 
surgeon had set his arm, seen him put to bed, 
and commanded him to keep quiet, this re- 
flection, and the associations it produced, 
helped, as much as the pain he still suffered, 
to keep Gerald restless and waking. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 121 



CHAPTER V. 



Gerald had apprehended that all his late 
hardships, together with the irritation of his 
arm, would perhaps throw him into an illness 
as protracted, if not as dangerous, as that which 
he had suffered in France. But he awoke, next 
morning, with few symptoms of fever, and even 
the pain of the fracture little inconvenienced 
him. He indulged visions of getting up, indeed, 
so unexpectedly recruited did he find himself; 
but this his watchful surgeon at an early visit 
forbade, dooming him to many more days of 
perfect quiet in bed. 

Again left alone, Gerald began to think of 
the necessity of writing to London for a remit- 
tance. His liberality (thrown away, he feared) 
to his fellow-sufferer, made such a measure par- 
ticularly necessary. He had ordered the post* 
boy, the preceding day, to drive him to the best 

VOL. II. G 



122 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

hotel in Dublin ; and really expecting, from the 
low scale of every thing Irish in his mind, to 
find that *' best hotel " only a tolerable place, 
after all, it was with much surprise he entered 
Morrysson's establishment. Now he gave way to 
another foreboding. Doubtless, in proportion 
to what Gerald supposed the rarity of such 
accommodation in Ireland, his very magnificent 
landlord would make out his bill; and here 
again was a pressing necessity for despatching a 
letter to London. He wanted a wardrobe too, 
— wanted it, indeed, so urgently and literally, 
that the thought brought a smile to his lips. 
Heaven only knew how the clothes in which he 
entered Dublin had been procured. Perhaps 
they were plundered property ; and it was not 
out of the limits of possibility that his personal 
safety might be endangered by appearing abroad 
in them. 

Most anxious, therefore, Gerald was to write 
a line to his banker. But this could not be 
effected with his own hand, at least; for, as has 
been mentioned, it was his right arm which was 
broken. Nor would he call upon any other 
person near him to write from his dictation. 
He had landed in Ireland without his know- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



m 



ledge, and he continued in it against his will. 
None of his former objections to the country 
had abated; nay, since his foot touched its 
shore, he had experienced little that was not 
calculated to strengthen them. His interest 
towards Michael Farrell might, indeed, have at 
first told the other way ; nay, receiving the 
man^s story as true, Gerald's conscience, as well 
as his sense of justice, might have suggested a 
short residence in whatever part of Ireland (and 
he really scarce knew in what part) his own 
estate was situated ; but the strong doubt of 
Michael's ingenuousness in which they parted, 
made questionable all he had related of his suf- 
ferings, and of the cruelty of Lord Clangore's 
land-steward, and the insufficiency of the agent ; 
coachee had either much exaggerated, or was a 
person of such bad character as to deserve severe 
treatment ; if upon Gerald's own estate similar 
complaints were to be heard, they could, doubt- 
less, be similarl}' accounted for : and hence he 
only wished to return to England as fast as 
possible. But making himself known in his 
present situation might entail upon him endless 
remonstrances from his and Lord Clangore's 
tenantry, and visits from agents, and perhaps 
g2 



124 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

congratulatory calls from some of the great 
folk of Dublin, and contact with some friends 
of the unfortunate Lady Cox ; and all this 
would detain him in Ireland ; and he would 
not employ to write a letter to which must be 
subscribed his real signature, his landlord or 
his surgeon, the only individuals available for 
such a purpose ; because to do so without an 
injunction of secrecy were but trumpeting 
about who and what he was ; and to make a 
mystery of himself to either, were to run a 
chance of being suspected as a disreputable 
person, instead of being at once acknowledged 
as the Honourable Gerald Blount. 

He thought of endeavouring to scrawl a line 
or two with his left hand, and asked for pen 
and ink and paper. But his failure was posi- 
tive; the letters would face the wrong way, 
notwithstanding all his care, and run diago- 
nally in the page, so as to appear quite illegible 
even to his own eye ; and wondering why he 
could not effect what he had seen others do, 
when a boy, and what Dean Swift asserted he 
often did, in his facetious epistles to Dr. Sheri-. 
dai\, Gerald gave up the task in despair, flut-. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. l^S 

tered, and even fevered, by the petty agitation 
it had caused. 

What was to be done? funds he absolutely 
required. A happy reminiscence occurred. 
There was Mr. Gore, who, notwithstanding 
some promises to the contrary, still did him the 
honour of owing him three hundred and fifty 
pounds ; and as his official duties necessarily 
kept that gentleman in Dublin, a messenger 
would at once find him, and speedily bring 
back the needful answer to a direct request. 

But that direct request must reveal Gerald's 
arrival in Dublin as effectually as any other 
proceeding. He would not therefore make 
it. But he took a middle course. 

At his desire the head-waiter appeared. He 
caused the man to sit down and write as follows. 

" A friend of the Honourable Gerald Blount 
presents his compliments to Mr. Gore, and 
being confined by indisposition to his hotel, 
requests the honour of a call from Mr. Gore,- 
at Mr. G.'s earliest convenience." 

" Did the waiter know the private residence 
of Mr. Gore ?" 

The man knew it very well ; it was in Ste- 



126 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

phen's green : and a noble mansion Mr. Gore's 
was. The note was addressed and dispatched. 

Half an hour brought back the messenger 
with an answer, directed in a lady's hand. 

" Mrs. Gore presents her compliments to the 
Honourable Gerald Blount's friend, and in- 
forms him that Mr. Gore is absent from town, 
but Mrs. Gore entertains no doubt will call at 
Morrysson's hotel upon his return, the time of 
which is however uncertain, though it may be 
speedy." 

Gerald had intended to receive Mr. Gore 
when he should have repaired to the hotel, 
and while he told him the late circumstances 
which rendered necessary a replenished purse, 
communicate his wish to remain incognito in 
Dublin. This reply to his billet was pro- 
voking ; but in hopes that Mr. Gore would, 
as his lady seemed to promise, return speedily 
to town, and in the certainty that all his pre- 
sent wants would thereupon be met, Gerald 
took counsel with his impatience, and resolved 
to wait. 

His mind, now dismissing the question of 
pecuniary calculation, turned to a more poeti- 
cal subject. Once again he chided his own 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. IStt 

forgetfulness that could permit him to part 
from Michael Farrell without demanding an 
explanation of the letter, purporting to bear 
his signature, which Gerald had so unaccount- 
ably received in Paris. Not the most remote 
conjecture could he yet form of the manner in 
which it had come into the hands that present- 
ed it to him : or how its beautiful bearer had 
acquired a knowledge of his person, nay of his 
affairs. The vague prophecy, too — but that, 
Gerald continued to be assured, was empty 
nonsense. He had certainly seen her again in 
the window of the street through which passed 
the tri-colour procession ; and again on board 
the merchantman in which he thought to 
embark for Wales.'' he was not so sure: and 
again on the shingles ? — no ; that must have 
been mere delusion. 

Who could be the secret friend who wrote 
him the warning note, while he was in the sea- 
coast cabin, and, it was strongly presumable, 
provided him with his good cheer, and his 
tolerable couch, and his (perhaps) plundered 
suit of clothes .'' Gerald had before dismissed 
all idea of connecting this considerate person 
with the fascinating individual we have just 



128 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

found him thinking about ; but now that he 
lay somewhat at ease in bed, inert and mentally 
idle, and that the last gentle opiate prescribed 
by his surgeon began to mount imperceptibly 
into his brain, he seemed willing to deliver 
himself up to the most romantic visions on the 
subject. So subduing, indeed, became his fan- 
cies, that he sighed, in a kind of love-lorn way, 
ere the entrancing medicine fairly lulled him 
asleep, to complete under its delicious influence 
the dreams that, even with his eyes open, it 
had helped to inspire. 

He slumbered till towards evening, indis- 
tinctly conscious, now and then, that an at- 
tendant had entered the room. When he quite 
awoke, the head-waiter appeared to say that 
two gentlemen waited on him. 

*^ The surgeon one of them ?" 

" No, they were both strangers ; an elderly 
and a young gentleman." 

•* To wait on me !"" said Gerald, remember- 
ing that he had yet given no name in the 
hotel, " for whom do they inquire ?^ 

"For the friend of the Honourable Gerald 
Blount, Lord Clangore's brother." 

"Oh," thought Gerald; "Mr. Gore come 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 129 

back to town sooner than his lady would pro^ 
mise for. Admit them : stay ; my compliments 
and I beg to be excused from seeing, at present, 
any person along with Mr. Gore." 

The man bowed in the dignity of his place, 
and withdrew. Gerald felt much relieved as to 
his pecuniary difficulty. The waiter re-entered 
with a card, sealed in a blank and undirected 
envelope. 

" Mr. Knightly and his eldest son to pay 
their respects to the Honourable Gerald Blount."" 

" Unaccountable and very provoking again !"* 
thought Gerald : — " how have they found me 
out .'' Why every body does so ;— is ray name 
written between my shoulders.'* and what is my 
business with these gentlemen ? or theirs with 
me 'i Let Augusta indulge her fancies, but 
certainly one of the very last intimacies I wish 
to form in Ireland is with ' Mr. Knightly and 
his eldest son.' His eldest son ! — some great 
red- cheeked, yellow-haired giant, I suppose, 
half farmer, half fox-hunter. There is some 
forwardness too in this uncouth country-squire 
originating the renewal of an acquaintance, un- 
sought on my part, and limited to one meeting 
G 5 



130 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

on business when I was a boy of fourteen 
years of age. Why, I am sure I should not 
recollect the gentleman's person ; unless, in- 
deed, I saw him at breakfast after a walk to 
Highgate. — -Pray," addressing the waiter, "give 
my compliments, and I have not the honour of 
knowing Mr. Knightly and his son ; so there 
must be some mistake." 

Gerald remained in terror lest even this suffi- 
ciently explicit message should not be under- 
stood. Such were his notions of Mr. Knightly's 
very Irish character, that he expected every 
moment, after the waiter's second departure, to 
see the chamber-door pushed open by his un- 
welcome visitors, and to feel both plunging 
upon his broken arm, to shake it by the hand. 
He had not forgotten Knightly's unceremonious 
and energetic salutation at their first memorable 
meeting in the minister's library. 

But he seemed to have overrated the clown- 
ishness even of Mr. Knightly. The chamber- 
door did not again open until the surgeon came 
to make his evening call. Gerald was then pro- 
nounced not to be getting on quite as well as he 
should have done since morning, and it was con- 
jectured that he had engaged himself in some 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 131 

business which he ought to have avoided, and 
injunctions were repeated to remain perfectly 
still. The patient, who began to get on good 
speaking terms with his surgeon, obviously a 
man of superior intellect, and, allowing for na- 
tionalities, of engaging manners also, preferred 
a request to be obliged with the loan of some 
books that might help to wile away his solitary 
confinement, and was promised a parcel next 
morning, but of such a class only as would in- 
terest his mind at intervals, without exciting or 
continuously engaging it. Another opiate was 
then taken, and, after the adieus of his surgeon, 
Gerald soon fell asleep. 

When he looked round him, in the morning, 
the books lay convenient to his unhurt arm, 
and he was proceeding to possess himself of 
one, when an attendant entered with a letter. 
" Does the messenger wait ?" 
" No ; it was a general post letter." 
" The deuce it is !" cried Gerald, after the 
waiter went down ; " and Irish it must be ; for 
there has been no time to have it English — yes, 
and stamped with the post-mark of the town 
nearest to my estate ! — and a woman's hand on 
the cover ! What ! Augusta's ? — ay, hers. 



132 THE ANGLO-IRISH^ 

indeed, — and in the name of the miraculous, 
how has she^ too, got the information that, al- 
most before I could have entered Dublin, ena- 
bles her to direct — ' To the Honourable Ge- 
rald Blount, Morrysson's Hotel, Dublin ? — ' but 
hold — her direction has been to * Gervis Gore'sj 
Esq., Stephen''s Green — ' So, she reckoned on 
my calling there, and Mrs. Gore has re-directed 
the letter. The deuce again ! that lady will 
then begin to suspect that the Honourable Ge- 
rald Blount's friend is the best friend he has in 
the world — himself." 

And, considerably embarrassed by the nu- 
merous and inexplicable petty annoyances of 
his situation, Gerald perused his sister's letter, 
parts of which still more mystified him. 

"Lower Court, Clangore, Feb. 10, 18 — 

" My dearest Gerald, 
*' Here I am, you see, dating this letter from 
one of Clangore's old seats, in the wilds of 
Ireland. In the letter I wrote to you, after 
you took your seat in the House of Commons, 
you might have detected my intention of re- 
siding in this country. Since then the intention 
has become a resolve, and the resolve an act. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 133 

Before our dear brother's late illness, I re- 
quested his permission to make Lower Court 
habitable, truly giving as my reason a wish to 
live amongst the poor and friendless people 
who starve, and idle, and go almost unclad, 
upon this fine portion of his Irish property, in 
order that I might lend, under Providence's 
will, my humble efforts to better their con- 
dition, their habits, and their minds. Already 
some of my own fortune has been expended in 
this view ; and you cannot think, dear Gerald, 
how happy and gratified I am, watching the 
first fruits of my little exertions. Some re- 
spectable ladies, ay, and gentlemen, too, thou 
renegade, give much assistance ; and you will 
at once conclude that my old friends, the 
Knightlies are the most zealous of them all. 
Khoda Knightly, indeed, whom you will re- 
member to have seen when a child, is by my 
side, every thing I do, and every step I take ; 
and, moreover, shares my maiden sovereignty 
over the little empire of Lower Court ; in fact, 
has been good and kind enough (and when was 
she other than good and kind ?) to come and 
live with me — " 

"How very obliging," sneered Gerald, "ay: 



13i THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

these clever Irish people know what they are 
about ; one of the numerous family may well 
afford the condescension that places her at the 
side of a young lady who holds under her own 
command a fortune of sixty thousand pounds. 
Well ; let me hear more of Augusta ; poor 
Augusta ! how they have fascinated her — " 

" And," continued the letter, " the foster- 
sister of our dear father, who had been in his 
establishment before he left Ireland, but who 
since then experienced much distress, is our 
household prime minister ; and Clangore's own 
foster-sister, a healthy, good-humoured girl, 
called Jinny Malone, is my body-woman, and 
we are trying to discipline her youngest brother 
into the duties of a footman ; and Mr. Knightly 
has supplied us with a ready-made butler, and 
all our subjects of lesser degree are the sons or 
daughters of such of your or Lord Clangore's 
poor tenantry as we found mbst immediately in 
want of food, clothes, shelter, and, worst of all, 
employment. We do not reckon a coachman 
amongst our lieges, as I only exhibit a four- 
wheeled pony-carriage, which Rhoda is teach- 
ing me to drive with, she says, reasonable hopes 
of success. But our poor old gardener, lame 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 135 

Denny Larissy ! he is a great person amongst 
us, and one of the very happiest. Many years 
ago, when Lower Court was depopulated, after 
the sale of its furniture, and left in the exclu- 
sive keeping of a follower of Clangore's land- 
steward, Bignell,' — (now residing with his patron 
and Mr. Ambrose, the agent, at Upper Court), 
Denny received his discharge, amongst the rest, 
and, in humbled fortunes, went to live, alone, in 
a miserable cabin, where he immediately fell ill 
of rheumatism, ("'twas a hard winter,) and be- 
came so crippled as to lose all chance of future 
employment in his former mode of life. Ever 
since then, want, and feebleness, and misery, 
had been encroaching on him, until the joyful 
day when Rhoda and I drove up (as near 
as we could) to the door of his wretched habi- 
tation, and gave him instructions to repair the 
next morning to Lower Court, as head-gar- 
dener, and superintendent, in the first instance, 
of our efforts to clear the lawn, and re-define 
and re-establish its ancient fences and bounds, 
and trim it, and, in fact, make it a lawn again. 
We left him what we called an advance of 
salary, which the old man received in silent, 
almost stupid emotion, as he had received, 



136 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

indeed, our previous instructions. But if you 
could have seen him next morning ! Rhoda 
and I arrived on the ground of operation at an 
early hour. He had been there hours before 
us, decently clad for the first time during 
many years, and we found him surrounded by 
a host of more youthful and more efficient 
helpers, whom he had levied, en massey on 
his way to the Court, all engaged, under his 
supreme authority, in the prescribed work of 
' clearing the lawn.' One detachment erected 
rustic palings around the fine groups of beech 
and of chesnuts ; another were levelling a space 
before the hall-door, to prepare it for sand and 
the rolling-stone; for, long grass and weeds 
had intruded to the very steps, and indeed 
the whole ground from their edges was one 
waste, covered with brushwood, or strewed 
with sticks, straw, and stones, and grubbed by 
the pigs, and trampled by xows and horses ; 
a third party, regular stone masons, were, to 
the number of a dozen, building up the breach- 
es in the side- walls ; a fourth were levelling 
and smoothing far and wide, and obliteratintr 
the pigs' rootings, and the marks of cloven feet 
and horse-shoes ; and by far the most nume- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. l37 

rous force, chiefly composed of boys and girls, 
were zealously employed in repelling the ha- 
bitual incursions of the animals, who, year 
after year, had made the trespass I speak of, 
and whom it was difficult at last to teach that 
they must henceforth seek elsewhere for beech- 
nuts, and scanty patches of daggled grass. 

" We were descried in our approach, and 
old Denny, giving to his band the word ' Stop ! 
stop all o' ye !' took off his hat, shouted 
feebly, and waved it round his head. Those 
who had hats, like him, followed his example ; 
but all had lungs, ay, and hearts, Gerald; 
and do not smile if I assure you that the 
cheer of those grateful, and simple, and neg- 
lected beings, went through my heart with a 
thrill of the supremest pleasure I have yet 
felt. Into the middle of the lawn Rhoda drove 
her ponies. The general shout was redoubled ; 
but we could perceive that old Denny's con- 
tribution to it now grew scarce audible, and 
that, still waving his hat, he tottered from 
weakness. At last, coming very near him, we 
found that the old man had dropped sitting 
upon the root of a tree, his elbows resting on 
his knees, and his hands covering his face. 



138 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" In a short time, he attended us into what 
had been the garden — his old domain and 
kingdom : and his feelings, upon witnessing its 
state of utter devastation, must have resem- 
bled those of a real monarch restored to his 
crown after a season of rude expulsion from it, 
and taking a first glance at the breaches of all 
law and order, and the outrages committed 
upon fair establishments, during his deposi- 
tion. Often did Denny raise his hands and eyes, 
and groan, during our difficult progress through 
the impeded paths. But having gained a par- 
ticular spot, his countenance brightened. ' I 
wonder are they here .''' he soliloquised as we 
approached this corner — ' I wonder did they 
leave us even them ? — yes,' he continued, 
standing stiil ; * there they are. That 
shrub was for the young lord, the day he 
was born ; and that, so near it, was for the 
Honourable Masther Geraid, as soon as I 
heard he was born, too, in England ; and this 
purty creeper, that I trained to stretch out 
its arums to them both — my last morning's work 
in the garden — this was for your ladyship's 
own self; God be praised that I see them 
again !' 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 139 

" We continued our survey, and Denny re- 
ceived instructions, and suggested his own plans, 
and, I repeat, from that day to this, is the hap- 
piest creature in Lower Court. A few weeks 
got us all pretty well in order, upholsterer and 
all ; and upon the evening of our first day''s re- 
gular residence in the old house, there were 
such bonfires, Gerald, and such capering, and 
laughing, and enjoyment all around us ! 

" But you must not imagine that it was mere- 
ly to give a few hours' employment to a good 
many, and permanent comfort to some, and to 
get myself shouted at, and fire-worshipped, 
that I took it into my head to come here. Hea- 
ven forbid I should be so vain or unthinking ! 
No, my dear Gerald ; it is for our little schools, 
and for our little industrious establishments 
amongst the grown people, that I hope to ob- 
tain some of your approbation. Do not too 
readily listen to those who would tell you that 
your poor tenantry prefer indolence to honest 
exertion, or personal and household dirt to per- 
sonal and household cleanliness ; or, worst of 
all, ignorance to rational education. In truth, 
Gerald, I fear such a charge is often made 
against them by individuals who have caused 



140 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the appearances that seem to give ground for - 
it. But the published reports of the Ladies' 
Hibernian Improvement Society state, from ex- 
perience, the very contrary : and allow me to 
add, that my own experience strengthens those 
reports. Already our schools are filled, and the 
poor little things tolerably punctual in their at- 
tendance ; and already, by merely showing their 
mothers and sisters how to clothe themselves, 
by their own industry, and to make a shiUing 
besides, many an idle and ragged woman has 
become active and neatly attired, and many a 
wretched cabin transformed into a cheery though 
still humble cottage. 

" I wish you would come to see us, Gerald, 
and judge for yourself. It was not, indeed, my 
intention to have invited you so soon. I had 
planned to wait until our measures should have 
effected results that would indeed lay claims to 
your praise, and perhaps patronage. But having 
learned that, under some strange circumstances, 
yet unexplained to me, you were lately seen on 
our Irish shores, not a very great distance from 
Lower Court ; and presuming that you will stay 
in Dublin a few days at least, and call on 5^our 
friends the Gores, I cannot be so inhospitable 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 141 

as to withhold this present gracious summons to 
attend our sovereign pleasure. Nor must you, 
in your answer, unless it be a personal one, 
ask me how I became aware that you are in 
Ireland. Come, and you shall hear. Go back 
to England, and remain ignorant. But I am 
sure you cannot refuse to gratify yourself and 
me together ; and so I expect you. 

" Perhaps before you receive this, Mr. Knight- 
ly will make you out in Dublin. He has sud- 
den business there, and will be accompanied by 
an individual whom I 'm sure you will be grati- 
fied to take by the hand — his eldest son. I need 
say no more, except that you cannot desire a 
friendly meeting more anxiously and cordially 
than he does. He and his father are much in- 
terested in the fate of some poor sufferers who, 
upon the very night when you were seen amongst 
us, (at least, as I before said, not very far from 
us,) were wrecked near the place of your extra- 
ordinary concealment ; you, no doubt, have heard 
of the sad occurrence. The Knightlies called 
upon me for a letter to you ; but, as I fore- 
saw it would be a desperately long one, and 
as they could not wait hours till it was finish- 
ed, you now get my epistle by post. 



14S THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" My dearest brother, I could not bring my- 
self to write to you during your late visit to 
France. I am convinced you understood my 
silence. But had I been made acquainted with 
your voyage to that country, in time to sit by 
your bed-side, you would have found me nurs- 
ing you. My kind friends, however, anxious 
about its probable effects on my flimsy good 
health, did not communicate your sufferings 
till you were out of danger, and then very 
slowly and gradually. Now I can but thank 
Providence for your safety, and also for leaving 
you the consoling reflection, that in the most me- 
lancholy cause for that unhappy meeting you 
were not criminal, (as by this time every one 
knows,) and acted, allowing for your first invo- 
luntary error, like the brother I am proud of. 
But oh, Gerald ! is there not a higher, a more 
providential comfort? I need not, I will not, 
search your feelings by more openly alluding to 
it ; — but is there not ? are you not bound to be 
grateful to a good God for ever ? — my tears flow 
in answer. 

" I shall long to know how you like all the 
Gores. We have but one favourite amongst 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 143 

them. They spent a little time near us, here, 
under the roof that I exchanged for Mrs. 
Knightly 's, before I made up my present inde- 
pendent establishment : and we thought Miss 
Gore, since married to the rich brewer, coldly 
haughty; Miss Selina, who is about to make 
nearly as good a match with old Sir John Lumley, 
fiercely haughty ; but dear Maria, the youngest, 
so gentle, and so unlike her sisters in every 
thing but beauty, — she won our hearts. We 
spirited her in amongst us, for a few weeks, 
though much against the wishes of her family, 
who call us Mere Irish, and do not like us, and 
she proved a charming addition to our circle. 
Tell her how much we all love her, as indeed 
every body does, and must do. But beware, 
Gerald, and do not you go to follow every body's 
example. There is a reason against it — and 
that reason, as well as many other amusing 
things, you shall learn when you come to attend 
our maiden state in Lower Court, and to ac- 
count for your very strange appearance, so 
lately, upon our royal line of coast — a matter 
that, I promise you, I am curious to hear ration- 
ally explained. But as my secret spies add that 



1^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

you were observed in good health and spirits, 
curiosity, thank God, is my strongest feeling on 
the subject. 

" Farewell, dear Gerald. I hope you will 
come down with the Knightlies. Adieu ! — But 
no — I will not leave something I have to add 
for a postscript ; 'tis a stale affectation ever 
since St. Pierre first (I believe) built an apho- 
rism about it out of poor Virginia's letter to her 
unhappy Paul. And now you already begin to 
suspect and to enjoy my unaffected confusion. 
*Tis so, Gerald, or I believe it is. Some day, 
not far off — I fear, at least, to be questioned or 
importuned on the matter, and I am not pre- 
pared honestly to say a downright — no. And, 
fatherless and motherless as I am, must I not 
(though my own mistress, which weighs nothing 
in the case,) seek the advice and approval of the 
brother I love.? Clangore will smile applause 
at your opinion, or we will compel him to do so, 
and therefore I confess only to you. Perhaps, 
in the first instance, he might question the pre- 
tensions of my conqueror ; and so, indeed, 
though not in such a lord-like or Anti-Irish 
way, may you, Gerald. Hitherto, I have not 
been able to get you to love the Knightlies as 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 145 

well as they deserve ; and — (murder will out) — 
and yet it is — a Knightly. But, my brother, 
a Knightly whom you will be more gratified to 
call 7/OU7' brother, than if he were a throned 
king of the earth ! A Knightly, whose almost 
mere appearance will give you unspeakable joy, 
in thinking that through him — him, above all 
living men, your rooted prejudices to this family, 
and your particular cause of abhorrence of them, 
are all to melt away in thrice-cemented kindliness 
and affection ! 

*' You divine what I mean. If not, see and 
know this wonder-working person, and be con- 
vinced that I do not rave. As I have already 
said, he will visit you, in all likelihood, before 
ray letter comes into your hands. So that, at 
all events, you now understand 

" Your most affectionate sister, 

" Augusta Blount." 

" Do I ?" soliloquized Gerald — " do I, sister 
Augusta ? Let the next thing I understand be 
the Pythagorean problem, if I do. What can 
she mean ? — Indeed, what does the greater 
part of the letter mean ? — What is the par- 
ticular cause for my abhorrence of these inex- 

VOL. II. H 



146 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

haustible Knightlies ? None that I know of. 
All along, I only thought little of them ; and 
such, without the trouble of ' abhorrence,' is 
my present feeling, and nothing more. And in 
what way was this ' eldest son' to turn my in- 
difference towards the whole numerous family, 
root and branch, into unbounded interest and 
affection .'' — Was he to have given me love- 
powders ; or does he cateh hearts wherever he 
goes, as the royal rat-catchers charm all the 
vermin they live by ? — Pho ! they have filled 
Augusta's mind, enfeebled, as I fear it is, by 
early and continued illness of body, with some 
absurd romance or other, which, under their 
tutelage, and for their ends, she thus vents upon 
me. Ay ; that close-mouthed, elderly Irish 
squire, and that Miss Rhoda — (a fine, inde- 
pendent, masculine character, with her beauty 
and forwardness to eke it out, she must have 
grown into by this time) — they well know how 
to manage poor Augusta ; playing off her 
schools and her associations upon her, to hide 
their real views. The * eldest son' is one of 
the 'gentlemen' who assist her benevolence, I 
suppose : yes, yes ; first secretary, at least. I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 147 

am well rid of him and his father. I am glad 
they intruded last night, otherwise this letter 
might have thrown me off my guard. As a 
younger brother, it is not immediately my part 
to interfere ; but, the moment I reach London, 
Ciangore shall. And what is this folly about 
my having appeared stealthily or mysteriously 
on the coast ? Is Augusta really ignorant of 
the circumstances under which I visited Ire- 
land ? — She must be. She speaks of the ship- 
wreck, yet separates me from it ; and either the 
Knightlies themselves are also unaware that I 
shared that misfortune, or they will not tell 
Augusta what they know, till she is sure I am 
out of danger. Well ; that, at least, is consi- 
derate. But no doubt they have a deep interest 
in shielding her from any thing that could injure 
her health : oh, no doubt of that ! To be sure 
they must have heard I was wrecked ; old 
Knightly had it from the female crew of half- 
smugglers, half-Rockites, that so kindly con- 
veyed me to the cabin ; perhaps from the lips of 
the very disconsolate damsel, to whose personal 
admiration I hold myself indebted so much : he 
may be an old smuggler himself, on a grand 
h2 



148 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

scale : I have heard that Irish gentlemen dab- 
bled in such speculations before now ; hence 
their boasted claret. Again, I cannot make 
out Augusta's eloquence, when — alluding to that 
unhappy duel, — she mysteriously insists on my 
being so especially bound to thank God for the 
issue of the transaction^-or, at least, for the 
result of the whole matter. I suppose she re- 
joices in my not having been the individual de- 
tected in his wife''s company by poor Cox. But 
let it pass, along with a good deal more, that 
she has wrapt up in such ambiguous foldings. 
Women are ever strange correspondents, or even 
conversers ; they never can bring themselves to 
speak out. No matter. — Go down to her ? 
face all the * Knightlies, and embroil myself 
particularly with the 'eldest son.'" No, Au- 
gusta; your letter cannot even be answered at 
present, supposing me able to answer it, with 
my own hand. No. Imagine it has missed 
me until I reach London, and then your elder 
brother shall notice it. Some portions of it 
were interesting to me, indeed ; those about her 
corps of new Irish servants, and that old lame 
gardener, and his shrubs and creeper ; but the 
* eldest son' mars all. And now it is more than 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 149 

ever my duty to get funds as soon as possible, 
and the moment this unlucky arm is better, 
embark for England. — Will Mr. Gore return 
to Dubhn in time, though ?" 



150 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER VI. 

" Will Mr. Gore return to Dublin in time, 
though ?" — It was a question Gerald often re- 
peated, not only during that day, but during 
many ensuing ones. He grew well enough to 
get up, and, his arm still in a sling, to exchange 
the confined solitude of his chamber for the 
range of two spacious apartments, contiguous 
to it ; but his good friend did not yet seem able 
to keep the conditional appointment his lady 
had made for him. 

Gerald became very uneasy and impatient. 
His situation was most embarrassing. For many 
important reasons he should long ago have been 
in England ; and now his arm was well enough 
to allow him to travel (though not to write) and 
he could not stir. His purse contained little 
more than would make a suitable return for the 
able and kind attentions of his surgeon ; and 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. ISl 

funds he must have for Mr. Morrysson, and for 
tailors, boot-makers, and haberdashers, yet un- 
known, and for travelling expenses to England ; 
and supposing Mr. Gore still to remain out of 
Dublin, how were those funds to be got ? Again, 
he thought of asking the proprietor of the hotel, 
or his surgeon, to write to London in his name ; 
but again his former difficulties occurred ; nay, 
a new objection started, — ^his bankers would not 
attend to an order not in his hand, though pro- 
fessing: to come from him. Augusta would 
instantly assist him ; but if he opened a corre- 
spondence with her, he must answer her letter ; 
and that was altogether inexpedient, so long as 
he remained in Ireland. Gerald, then, at this 
renewed deliberation, could see no chance of 
relief but that upon which he had first calcu- 
lated, namely, the providential appearance of 
Mr. Gore; unless, indeed, he postponed his 
hopes of escape out of Ireland to the period at 
which he could safely take a pen in his own 
fingers. 

Endeavouring once more to make up his mind 
" to wait," he desired, upon this day, to be ac- 
commodated with apartments at the side of the 
hotel which faced the street, in order that he 



162 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

might relieve his solitude by looking out at his 
fellow-creatures as they passed up and down 
before his windows. His wishes were promptly 
attended to; and, the moment he entered his 
new lodgings, Gerald, excited by the rattling 
of carriages and carts, and the rest of the or- 
dinary noise of a street, hastened to avail himself 
of his opportunity once more to gaze at new 
faces. He could have made striking likenesses 
from memory of all the waiters who had attend- 
ed him during his more strict confinement, so 
minutely were the particulars of their features 
impressed on his mind, if indeed his weariness 
of the men would have permitted his engaging 
in the task. 

It was a street of considerable bustle he look- 
ed out upon. More fashionable equipages than 
he supposed Dublin contained passed under his 
review, and a respectable stream of pedestrians 
kept ipouring along the flag-ways. 

*' About this hour in the morning, Sir," said 
the head-waiter, " a stranger in Dublin might 
be amused by having pointed out to him dif- 
ferent remarkable gentlemen who pass this hotel 
going to the Four-Courts." 

" Then stand by ray side, and catch a few of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 153^ 

those great people for me, if you can :"" the man 
bowed, and repaired to the window. *' Are you 
an Englishman ?" continued Gerald, hoping 
that he might find in his decorous attendant a 
man who had acquired respectable habits and 
demeanour out of Ireland, though much resi- 
dence in Dublin, of late, would account for his 
accent. 

" My native place is Knockballochery, in 
the County Kerry, Sir;" — Gerald wondered. 

" Well ; can you see any body, yet .?"" 

" I think I can, Sir : please to look at that 
tall, lusty gentleman, with the Oxford-grey 
surtout, buttoned below, but wide open at the 
breast, and with the quaker-like hat, and the 
healthy, good-humoured face, and his eyes 
cast down, thinking, and the umbrella lying 
along his arm : he that walks so firm and 
stout." 

** I have him — he may be some famous 
priest." 

" A friend to them. Sir. That 's Counsellor 
Dan." 

" Indeed ! and now going to some of the 
law-courts ?" 

" Yes, Sir ; to the Four-Courts. See how 
H 5 



154 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

all the people turn to look after him, Sir, and 
then smile at each other as they pass : they 
like to see him walking so bravely along, with 
his broad shoulders and his full breast; and 
'tis thought he likes to be seen by them, step- 
ping out over the flags of Dublin, through 
thick and thin, friends and foes ; for he could 
go in his carriage to the Four-Courts every day 
if he thought fit, Sir ; — look. Sir ! here it comes, 
close after him." 

" The green one, with the green coachman, 
and green harness-ribbons ?" 

" Yes, Sir ; and he 'd have the horses green, 
if he could.'' 

*' Pray assist me, again ; — I have my eye, 
I think, upon some other popular character, 
for the people turn to look after him, too; 
though he is so different a figure from Mr. 
O'Connell : I mean the low, slight, little gentle- 
man, who walks so rapidly, jerking his arms, 
and pushing out his under-lip so often, and 
whose complexion is so bilious, and whose nose 
is rather short and cocked, and — now that he 
happens to look up — whose eyes are so dark, 
and fine, and expressive ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 155 

" You 're right, Sir ; that 's Mr. Shiel." 

" Ay ! — he is overtaken, now, by a very 
large person, who carries his head very high, 
and wears his clothes very loose, and has great 
whiskers, and a profusion of shirt-collar, and 
bears a huge stick or club on his shoulder — is 
he any one of note ?" 

" Indeed, and he is, Sir ! Counsellor O'Gor- 
man, the Secretary, no less." 

" The secretary.? — what secretary.?" 

" Of the Catholic boord, Sir." 

" Well, and that other gigantic gentleman 
who now meets him and Mr. Shiel — who is 
he.?" 

** It*s a lucky morning for you. Sir; sure he 
is Mr. Eneas M'Donnell, that hunts the Bibli- 
cals over the whole country, and gives them no 
rest or pace : when he 's on his legs, it would be 
no asy thing to make him sit down, Sir, against 
his liking, as you may persave, and he knows 
that well." 

" See ! the three gentlemen are passed by an- 
other, who, by the expression of his brow to 
them, does not seem a friend." 

" Do you mean the gentleman with the 



156 THE ANGLO-lklSH. 

broad red face, Sir, black coat and waistcoat, 
yellow leather breeches, top-boots, spurs, and a 
heavy whip in his hand ?" 

" The same." 

" Then you're right again, Sir; it's the Rev. 
Sir Harcourt Lees, that calls himself com- 
mander-in-chief of all the Orangemen, and 
offered himself yesterday, in the papers, as 
hangman to the same gentlemen you're after 
seeing pass by." 

" A precious set altogether !" thought Gerald : 
" what a state of society ! what people ! what a 
baronet ! what a clergyman !" 

" But no one minds poor little Sir Harcourt, 
Sir : he 's only cracked a little, and hasn't a bit of 
harm in him, after all. Now, Sir, here 's one 
worth looking at ; the purple-faced old gentle- 
man that gets such a shaking on the back of 
that little rough-coated horse, bending forward, 
and dropping his jaw so much, and followed by 
a servant. If ever you heard of the pleasantest 
judge in the Four-Courts, there he is, Sir-— old, 
old Lord Norbury." 

" Pray, glance the other way, after Sir Har- 
court Lees — he stops at the corner of a street a 
good way off, to shake hands with a gentleman — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 157 

quick, and tell me if you know his friend; 
— tut ! they both turn up that cross street, 
now." 

Gerald believed he had caught a glimpse of a 
person who interested him much more than all 
the famous Irish characters in Dubhn — Mr. 
Gore. Something very like that gentleman's bland 
and seducing mode of address certainly met his 
eye ; and the side face, too, though but remotely 
viewed, almost placed three hundred and fifty 
pounds in his pocket. He flattered himself that 
his fascinating debtor might absolutely have 
been on his way to Morrysson's, after just ar- 
riving in town ; and that he only stepped back 
with the clerical Baronet, to discuss some passing 
topic, and would soon re-appear, coming down 
the street to the door of the hotel. 

Full of this pleasing hope, Gerald dismissed 
the waiter, and sat watching at the window ; — 
but he watched in vain. Either he had been 
deceived, and had not seen Mr. Gore, or that 
gentleman was in town, and intentionally neg- 
lected him. The latter supposition could not 
rest on Gerald's mind ; and, still after days of 
disappointment, he ultimately adopted the 
former. 



158 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" I must wait a little longer," was Gerald's 
only consolation ; " the surgeon promises that I 
may wield a pen in a day or two ; and if my 
obliging friend does not come in the mean time, 
then, at least, I shall assist myself." 

Simultaneously he formed another sensible 
resolution, which was, to divert as cheerfully 
as he could the continued tedium of his soli- 
tude. For the twentieth time, he turned to 
one of the books his surgeon had sent him, 
a " Guide through Dublin." The descriptions 
it contained of the public buildings aroused his 
interest, even while they offended his taste, as 
too pompous and exaggerated. He had often 
heard Irishmen boast of the beauty of their 
metropolis, until the fervour of their praises 
sounded absurd. To compare Dublin with 
London, was, at a glance, to betray overweening 
nationality ; but absolutely to rank, upon any 
account, a city containing albout two hundred 
and forty thousand inhabitants, above one con- 
taining more than a million above the Queen 
city, the Babylon of the modern world — this 
had always seemed to Gerald the very extreme 
of Irish vanity. And now, the puffs in the 
" Guide " had the same effect on his mind. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

Yet he felt anxious to see with his own eyes, 
and form a settled opinion by their agency. 
Why should he not glide out, next morning, 
at the earliest light, and stroll through the 
streets ? He need not fear observation. No 
one in Dublin knew his person, except Mr. 
Gore, and a meeting with him would be rather 
pleasing than disagreeable ; besides, early in the 
morning, he could not be exposed to the chance 
of any less wished-for, though barely possible 
rencounter ; while it was the very best hour at 
which to get a satisfactory view of a strange city, 
ere its various crowds of humble and fashionable, 
of bustling men of business and of bustling 
beauty, should be in the way to call off his 
attention from what must then dwindle into the 
inanimate accompaniments of a living, breathing 
picture. 

He would go forth at seven o'clock the next 
morning. This resolution once taken, Gerald 
grew very restless and fidgetty of his confine- 
ment in the mean time. He once more turned 
over the leaves of the " Guide ;" it irritated him, 
and he twirled it down the table. There was 
a newspaper at hand, which he had conned over 
and over, all but the advertisements. The an- 



160 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

nouncement of a Catholic Meeting at "D'Arcy's 
Globe Tavern, Essex-street," fixed him. He 
should very much like to see Mr. O'Connell and 
Mr. Shiel in debate. Of the waiter, who just 
entered, he inquired if the matter to be discuss- 
ed at the notified meeting was likely to prove 
interesting. 

The man answered, highly so. " Mr. O'Con- 
nell," he continued, " was for not trusting the 
great petition to Mr. Plunket, without instruc- 
tions as to the kind of securities the Catholics 
would be willing to give in exchange for eman- 
cipation : Mr. Shiel was for sending it to him 
just as it was, and leaving every thing to Mr. 
Plunket'^s own wisdom ; and all the old vetoists, 
and a good many that were not vetoists, would 
make a great stand with Mr. Shiel against Mr. 
O'Connell ; and it was thought, for once in his 
life. Counsellor Dan would lose the day;" 
and, in fact, Gerald comprehended, that if ever 
he wished to hear a real Catholic discussion, he 
ought not to lose this one. 

He took his resolve suddenly. A fashioner, 
as the waiter called him, soon appeared with a 
variety of ready-manufactured suits ; a boot- 
maker, a hatter, a haberdasher, nay, even a 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 161 

glover, followed in his train ; and, just in time 
for the meeting, Gerald, after nearly emptying 
his inconsiderable purse, got into a hackney- 
coach, and was driven to D'Arcy's. 

The Catholic parliament were not then so 
well accommodated with a place for debate, as 
at present they are understood to be. Gerald 
entered a second or third-rate tavern, and made 
his way up a narrow staircase into an ordinary- 
sized room, communicating with another by 
folding-doors, now flung open. Both apart- 
ments were beginning to be rapidly filled, but 
as the greater part of the people had not yet 
come in, the crowd was not too dense to forbid 
Gerald's approach, even with his lame arm, to 
the table arranged for the debaters. His place 
was scarce secured, however, when a great bustle 
occurred ; and first, Mr. O'Gorman, the Secre- 
tary, walked sturdily into the room, carrying his 
great shillelagh on his right shoulder, which he 
laid down on the table v/ith an important air, 
as if it had been the great seal, or the Speaker's 
mace ; and then followed Mr. O'Connell, towing 
Mr. Eneas M'Donnell, and pursued by a throng 
that quickly stuffed the two apartments to the 
walls. A little person, wearing an unfashion- 



162 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

ably shaped blue-frock, who had been previously 
turned from the table, looking over some manu- 
script, now quickly faced round, and Gerald 
recognized the pale-coloured, peculiar, but high- 
ly intellectual features of Mr. Shiel. His hat 
was off, and a superfluity of black hair, divided, 
with some affectation, like a woman's, or an old 
statue's, upon his forehead, gave his head a pe- 
culiar character. Mr. O'Connell also appeared 
uncovered, exhibiting a plain unromantic brown 
wig, that whimsically turned up behind, so as to 
leave visible part of the back of his neck. He 
took off his Oxford-grey surtout, fully unbut- 
toned his under-coat, half unbuttoned his waist- 
coat, touched his profuse muslin frill, pulled 
down, until it hung at almost its full length out 
of his fob, a massive gold chain, to which fitly 
appended a ponderous bunch of seals, took the 
chain in his right-hand, and began whirling the 
seals about ; thrust his left-hand into his breast ; 
got into a slight rocking motion, half-earnest, 
half-swaggering ; and looking exceedingly se- 
rious, seemed as if collecting his thoughts from 
some score of law cases that day gone through, 
to fix them on the new business in hand. He 
had taken up his position close to Mr. Shiel ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 168 

and as that young gentleman, turning side- 
ways to the chair, folded his arms hard, com- 
pressed his small well-cut lips, or sometimes 
pushed out the under one, and, growing paler, 
and glancing upwards, as he was obliged to do, 
fixed his glittering black eyes upon the very 
Irish, but not otherwise remarkable face of his 
vast antagonist, no contrast (in their situation) 
could be more remarkable than that which ap- 
peared between both. 

In a few seconds, a judicious friend of Mr. 
O'Connell moved his brother into the chair, and 
the great " agitator" immediately " set-to." 
Gerald remembered that the question for dis- 
cussion, namely, whether Mr. Plunket should 
receive the Catholic petition with or without in- 
structions, was one upon which these gentlemen 
had also differed, to their loss, with Mr. Grat- 
tan. Mr. O'Connell's brogue, and his long 
drawling way of speaking, — his see-saw motion, 
his continued twirling of his chain and seals, 
the awkward sweep of his disengaged arm, 
and his bending low, whenever he sought to be 
emphatic ; all this did not please Gerald in the 
first instance. It was inveterately and broadly 
Irish. But as he listened, and got used to the 



164 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

novelty, the orator's fluent diction, and close 
reasoning, made a more favourable impression. 
Mr. O'Connell argued that Mr. Plunket should 
not be chosen as their parliamentary advocate, 
without solemnly declaring against the veto. 
He assumed, as the necessity for this measure, 
he ambiguity of some written pledge sent in by 
the College member to their Secretary. He read 
resolutions of synods of their bishops, passed 
against the veto many years before ; and he 
urged the assembly to attach these ecclesiastical 
dicta to the official note accompanying their pe- 
tition, and to add their determination to abide 
by them. Gerald could recognize little of the 
demagogue in Mr. O'Connell's opening speech. 
" The counsellor" stood before him as a man 
deeply in earnest, or seeming to be so ; well 
informed in his subject ; inflexible in his con- 
scientious scruples ; calm, serious, and with more 
of appeal and entreaty than of bluster in his 
manner ; — and, from all he had previously heard, 
this surprised Gerald ; and, indeed, it seemed 
equally to surprise those around him. " Dan 
is very quiet to-day," they said. On more than 
one occasion, when Mr. Shiel's friends inter- 
rupted him with cries of " question !" Gerald 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 165 

only remarked a studied pause in the speaker, 
and then a ready and adroit plea for patience. 
The continued whispers of the gentlemen near 
to Gerald explained this mystery. As had 
been premised by the waiter at Morrysson's, half 
the assembly was composed of predetermined 
voters against their old idol, and it behoved him 
to break ground very cautiously. These critics 
did not add, what Gerald ultimately discovered, 
that it was also Mr. O'Connell's plan to make as 
long a speech as he possibly could. 

At length, however, he had left himself no 
pretext to continue longer on his legs ; and Mr. 
Shiel, whose deep and almost startling look 
scarce turned till that moment from his oppo- 
nent's face, jerked round to answer him. " The 
ear-piercing fife" was hardly shriller than the 
" Sir !" with which, addressing the chair, the 
young politician began, as he stepped back from 
the table, closed one hand on his breast, and 
protruded the other, clenched also. Gerald was 
within one or two of Mr. Shiel, and alniost 
started. Sentence after sentence rang out, in the 
same key, modified, now and then, by a some- 
what theatrical but melodious under-tone. This 
energy, at starting, must soon have defeated it- 



166 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

self, if it could not progress to a climax really 
vehement. But so it did. 

It was Mr. Shiel's plan to shake the authori- 
ty and weight of Mr. O'ConnelPs opinion, in the 
present instance, by stamping with inconsistency, 
and satirizing bitterly many previous opinions of 
the veteran agitator, upon the same, or upon simi- 
lar questions. He read manuscript-extracts from 
newspapers, pui*porting to bear Mr. O'Connell's 
signature, all at variance with his present pro- 
position, or with each other. Taking up Mr. 
Plunket's written pledge to the Secretary, he 
made it bear a construction very different from 
that given to it by Mr. O'Connell ; and he pro- 
ceeded to an eulogium, ardently eloquent, upon 
the talents and political character of Mr. Plun- 
ket, calling him the only man alive fit, in every 
way " to bear their mighty cause upon his 
Atlantean shoulders." In> the first part of his 
address, Mr. Shiel was loudly applauded, and 
Mr. 0''Connell much laughed at, and evident- 
ly losing ground. But now Gerald began to 
discover the tact and mannerism of the Catho- 
lic colossus, and, at the same time, to witness 
the excessive vivacity of his antagonist. It was 
by no means Mr. O'Connell's policy to allow his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 167 

young and learned friend uninterruptedly to 
accumulate evidence and sentiments which, 
pressing upon the understanding of the meeting, 
might prove too much even for his own pre- 
scriptive popularity, and for his time and mate- 
rials for reply. He did not, therefore, hesitate 
to interrupt Mr, Shiel, almost at every sentence. 
He flatly denied the connexion of the extracts 
that had given him such a blow, and demanded, 
what he knew could not be immediately pro- 
duced, the newspaper-file itself. He called to 
order every two minutes, " merely to correct a 
fact." When Mr. Plunket's name was rever- 
ently mentioned, he hinted, under his breath, 
as it were, that just then, Mr. Plunket had at 
his disposal " some very snug commissioner- 
ships of bankruptcy for rising young vetoist 
lawyers." With well-feigned solemnity he 
squibbed off sundry personal sarcasms, and 
cross-fired, and hedge-fired, at the battle-array 
of his opponent, and at the powers of compre- 
hension, of patience, and of abstinence of the 
close-packed rooms, imtil his contemplated 
result was amply produced. Mr. Shiel's clarion 
voice became a scream ; his visage grew ghast- 
ly ; his lips blue ; his eyes roimded and flash- 



1^ THE AMGLO-IRISH. 

ed ; he jumped back, and he jumped forward; 
he smote the table ; he raised his clenched 
hands to his head, — reminding Gerald of 
Kean, in the mad tragedy of Bertram, about 
to strew the halls of Aldobrand with his 
raven hair — he foamed ; he grinned ; and, (if 
it seem a bathos in narration, it was also one 
in the reality,) he began to repeat the same 
eloquent things over and over again, and there- 
by tire his own friends. For it was now past 
six o'clock ; dinners were overdone at home ; 
guests were met without hosts; wives were 
" nursing their wrath, to keep it warm ;" and 
still the indignant orator would reply to every 
one of Mr. O'Connell's interruptions ; and then 
go back to the subject, arguing after convinc- 
ing, and, above all, evidently bent upon a grand 
peroration. His warmest adherents obstrepe- 
rously expostulated with\him, requesting to 
be " let home to their dinners." He turn- 
ed upon them, eloquently and poetically de- 
manding, " if the great and sublime interests 
of their freedom and their religion were to be 
sacrificed because their domestic viands lay 
smoking on the board ?" They remonstrated 
again ; Mr. O'Connell still poked at him ; he 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 169 

would not have done ; he would not sit down ; 
and many thereupon deserted, for their " beef 
and cabbage, and a hot tumbler," (Mr. Shiel had 
said " viands,") the famishing post of patriotism. 

" Wretches hang, that jurymen may dine." 

But for reasons, Mr. O'Connell had not so 
tired his liege men. From various '* asides" 
Gerald understood that many of them were to 
dine with himself; the rest remained, because 
they felt almost personally engaged in a contest 
which, for the first time, threatened to end in a 
majority against their worshipped leader. He 
knew this ; and, waiting for the politician's mo- 
ment, magnanimously sacrificed his right to a 
reply, and, raising himself the cry of " question, 
question !" organized a division while Mr. Shiel 
yet stood screaming to the chair. 

Gerald continued observant. The greater 
orator's voters stood their ground ; their oppo- 
nents went up-stairs. Tellers were appointed ; 
and counting heads after them, the two an- 
tagonists stood at the outer-door, side by side. 
Mr. O'Conneirs votes were first ascertained. 
They amounted to eighty-five. Now came the 
tug. It was a hard-fought, doubtful battle ; 

VOL. II. I 



170 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and, as Gerald studied the countenances of the 
political commanders, he saw that neither had 
yet arrived at any anticipation of the issue. 

" Come down, gentlemen !" cried Mr. Shiel, 
at the stairfoot, and his friends descended like a 
cataract. " Eighty !" he shouted, turning in 
his eightieth man. "O'Connelll what's that 
you say you are ?" 

" Eighty-five !" shouted his learned friend. 

" Eighty-one — two — three !" continued the 
author of Evadne: — "Come down, if you please, 
gentlemen ! — eighty-four ! — for God's sake, come 
down ! what keeps you up there 'f 

" There's no one else to send down to you, Mr. 
Shiel, Huzza !" exclaimed one of Mr. O'Connell's 
tellers, who had run up to see : and " Huzza ! 
huzza !" shouted Mr. O'Connell, rushing back 
into the room, throwing off his broad-brimmed 
hat, and jumping perpendicularly upward, while 
all his seals rattled — " We have it, boys ! we 
have it ! — No veto ! no vetoists ! Huzza !" a 
great shout followed. 

Gerald stept out to the door and looked at 
Mr. Shiel. He continued to stand at the stair- 
foot, his hand resting on the balustrade, his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 171 

head drooped, his lips firmly shut, the paleness 
of exhaustion and disappointment now succeed- 
ing to that of excitement and vehemence, and 
his large kiminous eyes half-closed in fatigue. 
A heavy step descended the stairs : he started 
and looked up. An old man, some super- 
annuated servant of the house, came down; Mr. 
Shiel clutched him with both hands. *' And 
whom do you vote for ?" he screamed into his 
ear. 

" The Lord bless you ! Sir," answered the old 
man, much startled, " I don't know how to vote 
at all — I'm not used to it." 

" And what brings you here, then .''■" twisting 
the poor old fellow round, and violently turning 
him down the second flight of stairs. 

" 'Twas very exciting," ruminated Gerald, 
on his way home ; " Irish, to be sure ; — but am 
I to leave them nothing Irish ? I certainly 
witnessed much knowledore of the matter in de- 
bate, much cleverness and tact in its discussion; 
and from Shiel, eloquence, absolute eloquence, 
which time will perfect, and render more plea- 
sant to an English ear. No. These men are 
not to be considered as many would wish us to 
consider them. Very different, indeed, are they 
I 2 



172 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and their audience from any thing of the kind 
in England ; but are they so inferior as is said ? 
To be sure, they lack the decorum and the pro- 
priety of our speakers ; and the meeting, for its 
rank, showed less steadiness of demeanour than 
one might see at the Crown-and- Anchor in the 
Strand ; yet I have beheld this day, in this real 
Irish Catholic debate, an earnestness, a reality, 
a downright energy, which, every thing consi- 
dered, I like." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. ITS 



CHAPTER VII. 

Pursuant to his plan, Gerald issued forth, 
next morning, in the first glow of such a Fe- 
bruary sun as is sometimes witnessed in England, 
but oftener in Ireland. He did not propose to 
learn the names of streets and squares, or to 
acquire a geographical knowledge of a city 
which he must leave so soon, and most probably 
never revisit ; and he went, therefore, unprovided 
with a map, and without much previous refe- 
rence to the " Guide." 

Turning to his left, from the steps of his hotel, 
he walked up a street of some aristocratic im- 
portance, as was evident from the fact of its 
being composed exclusively of private-houses. 
It led him into a square containing as many 
noble-looking mansions as any square in Lon- 
don, and nearly twice as spacious as any. Keep- 
ing to his left, he rambled into another, of less 
dimensions, but elegant proportion. He paced 



174 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

round to it, and then down a street which led 
him again to his hotel. Delivered from this, he 
pushed across the street which ran at right an- 
gles with it, and down another opposite to him. 
Now he began to despair of Dublin, and to think 
he had already viewed its best quarter, for the 
houses gradually became mean, and the way not 
cleanly. He involved himself in a maze of 
alleys and mews, and was losing his patience as 
well as his way. Suddenly he emerged into a 
fine broad street of shops. Close at his left 
hand, arose, obviously, a " public building." 
" Come," said Gerald. The edifice seemed a 
square of about one hundred feet, with three 
fronts, and crowned by a dome. Gerald ad- 
mitted it to be a graceful and fine structure. 
He faced round, as its chief front faced, and 
looked down a spacious street, also of business; 
straight forward over a handsome bridge ; 
and on still, in a straight line, until the avenue 
became indistinct in the distance. 

" Good," said Gerald ; — " I am near the 
river ; let me see their vaunted quays." He 
gained the bridge, and, standing over its middle 
arch, glanced up and down ; and, up and down, 
farther than his eye could distinctly reach, there 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 175 

appeared, indeed, quays that, after all, he al- 
lowed had not been overpraised. And to his 
right, as he continued to look towards the 
river's source, a building of peculiar beauty 
arrested his attention. It consisted of a cen- 
tre supporting a dome, and of squares at 
each side, separated from the quay by arcade 
screens, surmounted by stone balustrades, and 
having open archways into court- yards. The 
front of the centre pushed a portico of Corin- 
thian pillars with pilasters to the quay, sup- 
porting a pediment, ornamented with statues. 
Above arose a circular lantern, divided by 
pillars, an entablature, and then the dome. 
The quay-wall in front of the whole building 
was surmounted by a massive balustrade, which 
running, at either hand, to the distance of about 
a hundred feet, joined the balustrades of the 
bridge upon which Gerald stood, and also that 
of another in the contrary direction, and thus 
formed a finished and splendid foreground to 
the whole pile. " I wish, after all, I knew 
the names of these two buildings,'" said Gerald ; 
glancing alternately from that before him to 
the first he had viewed, and of which the prin- 
cipal front now terminated the street leading 



176 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to his present stand. Of a man who came by, 
crying " Freestone-ne-ne-whoo !" in a very 
startling manner, he made his inquiries ; and, 
after the stentorian fellow allowed him to wait 
till he had ended the last cadence of his savage 
song, was answered — " Why, you're a stran- 
ger in Dublin entirely, Sir, not to know the 
ould Royal Exchange, and the Four-Coorts, 
long life to 'em !" 

Gerald crossed the bridge, and proceeded up 
the long line of street running from it. Here 
he encountered nothing remarkable but the 
extent of a city, indicated by the streets that 
branched to his right and to his left, as well as 
by the length of that one which he traversed. 
It struck him, however, that as his hotel and 
the squares in its vicinity, with the Royal 
Exchange, lay at one side of the river, and 
the quarter he now explored, including the 
Four-Courts, at the other, I^ublin seemed to be 
equally divided by its quays : a much more 
interesting as well as convenient arrangement 
for a city, than that of London, running in 
parallels, to such a tiring extent, along one 
bank only of the unseen Thames. 

" This must almost concentrate," said Ge- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 177 

raid, " the different haunts of business and of 
pleasure, and permit one to come upon either, 
from the outskirts, at any side, in a comforta- 
bly short time ; instead of being compelled to 
travel four miles to one's banker's from Port- 
man-square, or three miles to the theatre from 
about the same point." 

The long street, or rather succession of 
streets, at last ended ; and continuing to walk 
forward through a fashionable outlet, Gerald 
stood upon a broad road, having good resi- 
dences at its either side. With his right hand 
to the way he had come, he looked over an ex- 
tensive clustering of the city, which, he con- 
cluded, he yet knew nothing of ; its spires and 
domes, its blue roofs and red-chimney tops 
appearing vividly against a back-ground of the 
sea, of which the sun-tipt waters were alive 
with vessels, outbound and inbound, while 
snatches of picturesque sweeps of land, some 
blue and lonely, some showing villages or 
villas, farther beautified the scene. Gerald 
paused in pleasure. It was to him a peculiar 
and very interesting view. The city and the 
sea; artificial bustle and nature's solitudes ; the 
works of man and the works of God ; all so 
I 5 



178 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

immediately in contrast ; — " Very beautiful, 
Dublin," quoth Gerald ; " very beautiful, I 
admit." And he was pleased to reflect how well 
situated for the purpose of traffic Dublin was ; 
a bay thus running, as it were, .ilmost into her 
arms. 

He moved from his agreeable position, and 
bent his steps to explore some of the yet 
strange quarter over which he had been look- 
ing into the blue waves. Abandoning the 
road, he made way through fashionable pri- 
vate streets to a square, nearly as good as the 
second one he had discovered at the other side 
of the river. He pushed on, sure that every 
step brought him into the midst of the quarter 
he wished to observe. But, by the common 
mistake of traversing streets that seemed run- 
ning straight to his point, but that really, 
though gradually, diverged, from it, Gerald, 
after a good deal of twining and turning, was 
ushered almost upon the bridge which he had 
crossed from the Exchange. Despairing of 
doing better, he recrossed it ; again stood be- 
fore the Royal Exchange ; and, after a second 
glance at the building, looked down the broad 
street which ran to his left. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 179 

As before-mentioned, this was a street of 
shops and offices, with, about half-way, a pub- 
lic building incorporated with it : another, of 
much greater importance, seemed to terminate 
it. " Indeed?" said Gerald ; " I thought, from 
the monotony of my last ramble, that I had 
seen all of these worth seeing." He quickened 
his steps down the street, and, after passing 
an equestrian statue, stopped short, not before 
one, but between two structures, which, whe- 
ther from their relieving and enhancing one 
another, or that their separate merits claimed 
the eulogy, he thought produced a richer effect 
of architectural beauty than he had seen in 
London or in Paris. The first swept across 
the end of the street ; the second partly occu- 
pied its termination, at the left hand, and 
partly curved round another that took it up at 
right angles. The front of the former was of 
a grave yet chaste character, running about 
three hundred feet; its stones were weather- 
stained to a dark tint, and here and there spotted 
with white; the order of its architecture was 
the Corinthian. The centre of the other was 
a magnificent colonnade of the Ionic order, 
forming three sides of a rectangular court-yafd^ 



180 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

supporting an entablature, based on a flight of 
steps, and continuing round, at either hand, to 
meet two almost equally splendid fronts : the 
colour of its stone was light, as was itself, 
tliough so extensive a structure ; and to com- 
plete its contrast with its adjacent rival, the 
morning sun played through its clusters of 
pillars, through its receding spaces, and par- 
tially over its summit, while the other impres- 
sive mass of building remained in shadow. 

Again Gerald condescended to ask of a 
humble passer-by the name of " those public 
buildings." The man was one of many news- 
venders, who, to his annoyance, had for some 
time been hurrying up and down this end 
of the street, vociferating, in a vile Dublin 
brogue, (the vilest of any in Ireland, for it 
is slang-brogue) — " Dubhl Evelil Post !" 
—"Weekly Registher !" — "Freemal!" — 
" Sauldhers !"" — and so forth ; and, at Gerald's 
question, the ill-clad fellow glanced at him from 
head to foot, with an expression half-waggish, 
half impudent, as he replied, in his own national 
way, " Them public buildils. Sir .?" The ap- 
pearance of groups of young men in academic 
gowns and caps, issuing, at this moment. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 181 

through the gateway of the edifice which ter- 
minated the street, informed Gerald, without 
farther assistance from the news- vender, that to 
his right was the Alma-Mater of Congreve, 
Swift, Goldsmith, Berkley, Burke, Grattan, 
Curran ; he therefore confined his renewed 
questions to the other structure. 

** Maybe, you lever hard o' the Parliamelt 
House that we used to hab il Dublil, Sir ?" 
" Yes ; thank you ;^' Gerald was turning off. 
" Al you dol't know youVe il ould College- 
Greel this morlil, Sir.? lor who the little mal 
sittil ol the horse, there, like al uldacent high- 
lalder, is, Sir ?" 

" No ; but you will tell me." 
*' That's King Willy, Sir, that we sticks ovel 
with ribbols, twice a-year. Sir." 

*' Thank you, again. Pray, are there any 
more public buildings, or any continuation of 
the town worth seeing, in that direction ?" point- 
ing down the street which ran at right angles 
with College-green. 

" Lot wol. Sir ; lot a bit : — where would 
we get them ? — Freemal tuppels ! Sauldhers 
thruppels !" and the man ran screaming away. 
Gerald, approaching the College-front, so as 



182 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

to command the street in question, found that 
the ragged news-vender had jeered him. It 
ended at a bridge, more spacious and beautiful 
than that upon which he formerly stood, and 
beyond seemed an extent of city superior to 
what he had yet seen. Having gained the end 
of this street, and set his foot on the bridge, he 
stopped short,and looked before him, behind him, 
and to either hand. Before him ran a street, 
much wider than Portland-place, to about the 
extent of three-quarters of a mile, all its houses 
good, and many of them fine : about mid-way 
shot up a pillar, surmounted by a colossal sta- 
tue, to the height of more than one hundred 
feet, doric fluted ; and fronting it, at the left- 
hand side, projected a portico of Ionic columns, 
also fluted, attached to a building of consider- 
able extent: indistinct in the distance, at the 
end of the street, appeared part of a round, 
unique-looking edifice ; and the view was crown- 
ed by the light and graceful spire of a church, 
still more remote, and peering over an expanse 
of houses. Behind him, in a continued line, 
was the street he had last traversed, closed by 
the confronting University and former Parlia- 
ment House. To his left-hand stretched the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH, 188^ 

*' vaunted quays," connected at either side of 
the river by bridge after bridge, one appearing 
through the arches of another, and another 
through the arches of that again, until the last 
grew almost visionary ; and still more to the 
left, ancient steeples and spires, overtopping 
dark masses of building, suggested an extensive 
and populous portion of Dublin, which he had 
not yet approached. And to his right-hand, 
over a forest of masts, and beautifully finishing 
the quay that ran to it, towered, what Gerald 
concluded to be, the Custom-house ; a building 
not unlike that on the banks of the Thames, 
but handsomer, he thought, or at least more fa- 
vourably situated and seen. 

" Yes," said Gerald, " and better brought 
out, by its forming a feature of this whole pic- 
ture. Indeed, I now understand how Dublin 
and her public buildings, though so inferior to 
London and her's, seem superior, or at least 
more interesting. They group together, and 
make pictures together. In London they stand 
widely separated, or hide themselves amid mazy 
streets and dusky houses. Here, all you want 
to see challenges your eye almost at once; there, 
you must go hunting out, one by one, all you 



184 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

want to see. Nay, very often, when you come 
suddenly upon a public building, you cannot see 
it at all ; that is, not the whole of it ; — of St. 
Paul's, equal to these Dublin buildings in a lump, 
one absolutely does not see a tenth part from 
the Church- Yard. One can only walk round it, 
and look up at a single front, and then the 
dome vanishes. A mile or two away, the dome 
appears, but you lose the rest. If it stood at 
the end of such a street as I see before me, and 
if the other great and splendid edifices of Lon- 
don stood in different parts of such a city pano- 
rama as this is ! — but until they do, or until the 
immense and crammed Babylon allows of such 
four openings, to my front, to my back, to my 
right hand, and to my left — until then, I must 
admit that I now stand in the centre of per- 
haps the most beautiful city-picture in the 
world. 

" And is there any more of it ?" resumed Ge- 
raid, after a pause of admiration, when his at- 
tention was diverted by the clattering approach 
of a troop of the — th dragoons, whom he much 
wondered to see in Dublin. An officer headed 
them, sitting very stately and warlike in his 
saddle, although his smooth, boyish face seemed. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 1^ 

at a distance, not to look the warrior. At a 
closer approach that inoffensive face, however, 
startled Gerald. It was Flood's. 

" Why, when I parted from him in Paris, he 
was in the — th," thought Gerald : " shall I 
avoid him ?" 

The question came too late ; for with a quiet 
"Ah, old and excellent fellow-student," Flood 
halted close by his side. 

" Few words, now, by your love for me," 
he continued, " I am compelled to conclude, 
by the very primitive workings of your fea- 
tures, good Blount, that you are in one of 
your old fits of agitation at seeing me here : 
credit me, I also experience the indication of a 
faint surprise at the vision of Gerald Blount 
on CarHsle-bridge. Six little words, however, 
will elucidate my case : at the pressing and 
tiring recommendations of my gallant parent, 
I exchanged, and was incontinently sent to Dub- 
lin with my new comeradoes ; what has placed 
you before my longing eyes I cannot tarry to 
learn. Stem duties are in hand: you behold 
a man — once more much sacrificed in the service 
of his paternal country — who, since twilight 
yester-evening, has scarce been out of his sad- 



186 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

die, such was his zeal in reconnoitring the 
harbour of the Grand-canal, situate beyond the 
purheus of the Broad Stone, and Stony-Batter, 
expectant of an invasion of this good city of 
Dublin by a fleet of turf-boats, bearing as 
many armed Rockites or llibbonmen, as ' sods 
of turf,' from various bog-holes in the heart of 
wild Ireland, who, it is ascertained, propose to 
themselves the amiable achievement of cutting 
the throat of each man, woman, and child, that 
sprinkleth not the forehead with holy-water." 

" What ! Flood ?" 

" I retreat at that inconveniencing expres- 
sion of interest," continued Flood, spurring his 
fine charger, so as to make him prance ; " or no, 
— one single word in very compassion for you. 
As yet, ' you, and I, and all of us,' are safe ; no 
fleet appeareth ; in an hour, follow to my post 
of guard at the Castle, or, as Mr. Gore pro- 
nounces that word of power, ' the cawstle ;' then 
shall I be relieved from my rigid and perilous 
duties, and then shall we more abundantly con- 
verse; the faint resemblance of breakfast ap- 
pearing between us during our colloquy. Now, 
be thou very happy, and bear a poor friend 
in mind." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 187 

Flood trotted off at the head of his company, 
leaving Gerald much interested, if not alarmed, 
at his account of the threatened invasion of 
Dublin by Captain Rock. Now, at all events, 
the sooner he escaped from such a disturbed 
and disagreeable state of society, the better. 
Doubtless his old schoolfellow had, according 
to his manner of relating every thing, made a 
mockery of the circumstance, and perhaps ex- 
aggerated its importance, even while he sneered 
at it : but Gerald was at least certain that 
Flood spoke of real facts, however he might 
have coloured them, because his practical jest- 
ing never went so far as to be indebted to pure 
invention for the exercise of its talent. 

" And Flood himself shall get me off," con- 
tinued Gerald ; " ay, this very day, too." 

" I request you to understand me to assert, 
excellent Blount," said Flood, when, according 
to his invitation they met at breakfast — " that 
real, positive, and very afflicting, (to themselves 
and to each other,) were the fears of the King's 
most loyal subjects of Dublin yester-even and 
last night ; and still more afflicting will be their 
condition this coming evening. We were not, 
till a few hours ago, quite convinced of the night 



188 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of this imminent slaughter that is to be ; hence 
our late watchfulness; — but, even since 1 part- 
ed from you on Carlisle bridge, very certain and 
detailed information has reached us. This, — 
pre-doomed Blount! this approaching night must 
prove to be the very one upon which you, 
among thousands of other guileless victims, are 
to fall beneath the rusty fowling-pieces, pistols, 
pikes, prongs, sickles, scythes, long knives, or 
haply, alpeens of the primitive Irish, reinforced 
by one hundred thousand half-clad and whole- 
starved mechanics of the liberties of Dublin. 
Fly, while thou canst. The soldier's stern 
duty binds thy friend to his post ; but, be it in 
Pigeon-house packet, or in Pigeon-pie-dish, in 
merchantman, collier, oysterer, skiff, or open- 
boat, fly, thou inestimable Blount, and pre- 
serve in a happier land the exceedingly precious 
life which, by such caution, may yet serve man- 
kind, and, it is distantly probable, indite an 
elegy to the untimely and very unmerited fall of 
him who loved thee well." 

Flood covered his eyes with one hand, and 
extended the other. 

" Your ridicule of this business leads me to 
hope there will be little danger in staying where 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 189 

I am, Flood," replied Gerald, laughing. " You 
surely know it to be an absurd, false alarm ?" 

" Be not tempted to found any pleasing and 
perhaps perilous delusion upon the playful man- 
ner of thy friend," answered Flood. " I am 
what I am : Nature bounteously endowed me 
with a soul enormously inclined to amiable 
pleasantry even, I venture to anticipate, at the 
rather interesting moment when the indecent 
spectre. Death, shall beckon me away from the 
flowery paths, and smooth flagged-ways of this 
tolerable world ; — therefore, construct no stu- 
pendous syllogism upon my present gentle hu- 
mour ; rather go forth, and enter beneath the 
roofs of the unhappy Protestants of this belea- 
guered and proscribed city ; view the pallid 
faces of fathers and mothers as they tearfully 
glance towards their children ; or the bolder 
front of other householders who collect many 
stand of arms in a comer of the room, and, with 
the domestic lead torn off the gutters of their 
houses, and then melted in a kitchen-pot, cast 
bullets in little bullet-moulds to prepare for 
the coming night; or haply your mind may 
receive conviction from the frequent appearance 
of very reputable ladies of fifty and upwards, 



IW THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

kneeling at chairs and sofas, their faces turned 
from the windows, and piously stipulating 
before high Heaven for safety to themselves and 
their families : — go forth, I say, and believe." 

" Nay, Flood ; 'tis not such proofs can shake 
my scepticism, when I see you so amusingly 
indifferent ; I will flatter you, for once in my 
life, by saying, that if there were real danger, you 
are brave enough, and, after all, sensible enough, 
to be more serious. No. Not on this account 
do I accept your advice to fly immediately to 
England. Yet I have most important reasons 
to hasten my departure. And without your 
aid I cannot stir. Listen to my explanation ; 
listen to the circumstances that wafted me to 
Ireland : listen to a great deal, in fact." 

And Gerald related his shipwreck ; the break- 
ing of his arm, his consequent want of funds, and 
his great anxiety to possess some immediately ; 
not even, if possible, would he wait for an an- 
swer to the letter Flood might now write to 
London in his name. 

" Somewhat interesting, I half admit," said 
Flood, sitting upright, as Gerald began his 
story : " nay, positively interested I insinuate 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 191 

myself to be," he resumed, as the narrative went 
on — " Alarming !" he continued: then, at inter- 
vals, till Gerald had done, while his old friend 
often caught his eyes seriously and manfully 
bent on him, " And very romantically-real, 
too !" — " but so agitating, again ;" — " so ridicu- 
lously frightful," — " andone compelled to believe 
its reality, all along, or else engage in single 
combat with a man-of-the-sea and a Rockite. 
Monstrous ! an absolute arm fractured ? 
Blount, though occasionally worthy, you are a 
desperately incommodious acquaintance ; you 
go through more than a score of plain, sensible, 
people, just to put one out of one's way, and 
make one nearly do so vulgar a thing as to 
feel. I protest against it : it will very certain- 
ly deprive your friend of life ; — he is not inex- 
haustible.'"' 

During the latter part of his speech, Flood 
had been ringing the bell, asking for writing 
materials, and penning a draught on his Dublin 
banker ; now it was completed, and he handed 
it to his servant, who withdrew. 

" Thanks," said Gerald, inclining his head 
towards the door, " though, indeed, I need not 



192 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

have thus trespassed upon you, had I had the 
good fortune to have seen Mr. Gore since my 
arrival in Dubhn." 

" Say you so ?" asked Flood, turning upon 
Gerald one of the shrewd, worldly-wise glances 
that occasionally escaped through all the affec- 
tation of his drooped lids and dulled eyes : 
" May there be the very most delicate approach 

to a question tantamount to what do you 

mean, fellow-student ?" 

" I mean that, in the case I supposed, Mr. 
Gore would have immediately supplied me." 

" You are exceedingly confident ?" 

" Quite so.'' 

" That is — if again be permitted a slight hint 
of a meaning — that is, it would have been no 
immeasurably vast flattery if Mr. Gore ' of the 
cawstle,' had done, as you poetically imagine 
he would have done, primitive Blount ?^ 

" Such is my meaning.'* 

" Ah, worthy soul !" 

" Why your equivocal panegyric. Flood ? 
Mr. Gore is surely a gentleman of punctual 
habits in these ordinary matters ?" 

*' Long live he so !" 

« With all my heart." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 193 

*' And long live you to think so. But, now, 
force me into no predicament, no realities over 
again ; suffer, rather, you who cause others so 
much suffering, the infliction of many discon- 
nected and unfatiguing questions. Why did 
you not, (mark how you infect me with your 
downright habits of speech,) why did you not 
see Mr. Gore when you came to Dublin ?'''' 

Gerald related the circumstances of his hav- 
ing written a note, and of Mrs. Gore having 
answered it in the manner already known to the 
reader. 

" Ay .?"" resumed Flood ; '* let me desperately 
inconvenience myself by a retrospect of dates 
and facts. Yes ; about that day, Mr. Gore cer- 
tainly was from home ; and yet, upon that day, 
I apprehend I saw him within the limits of this 
ancient city of Dublin." 

" What.'' you insinuate a horrid thing, and 
an enigmatical thing, Flood. First, you thought 
it necessary to compare dates and facts, in order 
to decide if a lady's assertion was credible ; 
next you would have me believe that Mr. Gore 
reached home the evening of the day I received 
that lady's note, and yet came not near me, 
then or since ; is it so .''" 

VOL. II. K 



194 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" He would cramp me round about still," 
replied Flood. " Particular and minute Blount, 
I admit not that he returned into the soft bo- 
som of his home that evening/' 

" But you saw him in Dublin?"" 

" Yea, and well and anxiously attended by 
those who, for a bribe of many hundred pounds, 
would not consent to his absence." 

" At the house of a mutual friend ?" 

" Of an old acquaintance of Mr. Gore, and, 
haply, once before known even to me : in fact, 
excellent fellow, it was in a house which the 
vulgar call," continued Flood, settling himself 
in a usual position of consummate indifference 
to every thing — "a spunging-house, good 
Blount." 

" My three-huudred-and-fifty, adieu !" me- 
ditated Gerald. 

" But you have not seen him since ?" ques- 
tioned Flood languidly. 

" No ; have you ?" 

The servant, re-appearing with a bundle of 
bank-notes, interrupted Flood's answer, if in- 
deed he would have given one ; and the man at 
the same time announced a gentleman to wait 
on Captain Flood — Mr. Gore. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 19! 



CHAPTER VIII. 

The eyes of the friends met expressively as 
Flood desired Mr. Gore to be shown in ; and 
ere he appeared, the warlike dandy carelessly 
presented Gerald with the roll of bank-notes, 
lisping out — " To some men be as a brother, to 
some as a stone- wall ; to some men appear as 
liberal as you are, to others as a Jew ; to one, 
admit " the good the gods provide thee," to 
Mr. Gore — (put up the pretty rags by our com- 
mon love) — to Mr. Gore always be even as a 
parish pauper.'' 

" Ah, my dear Captain Flood !" cried the 
honey-tongued Mr. Gore, catching Flood's two 
hands, as he turned to meet him at the door, 
" how delighted to see you once again this 
morning ; we all passed a wretched night, but 
your situation was peculiarly perilous ; and be 
assured your friends in Stephen's-green were not 
k2 



196 THE ANGLO-IRISH- 

forgetful of it — still we see you safe, thank 
God !" another pressure of the hands, which 
made Flood slightly writhe. " But what is this 
I hear ? The dreadful night not over, after 
all ? This night to be our night of trouble in- 
deed ? Have you been whispered as much ? 
You know you are one of us, and people would 
give you a hint ; I suppose they did, my dear 
Flood?" 

" Very sincerely do I regret confirming your 
melancholy tidings," lisped Flood. 

*' Gracious heavens ! and only to think, 
amongst other things, that upon this very even- 
ing I give my first dinner to dear Angelina, 
after her return with her husband, that rich 
rascal, Blake, to Dublin ! and you to join us, 
and all ! Good God !'' 

" Desperately distressing : but I have a no- 
tion we overlook a kind of mutual acquaintance 
all this time," said Flood, glancing over Mr. 
Gore's shoulder at Gerald, to whom the visitor''s 
back was turned, and whom he had not closely 
observed when he entered the apartment. 

" Who .f"' asked Mr. Gore, earnestly, and in 
a low voice, as, again grasping Flood's hands. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 197 

he looked into his face, and did not alter his po- 
sition — " any friend of yours, my dear Captain 
Flood ! — but who ?" 

" Mr. Gore, how d"* you do 1"" said Gerald, 
advancing, tired of the scene. 

" Ah, heavens ! my dear, excellent young 
friend, Mr. Blount !" quick as thought, Mr. 
Gore wheeled round, and relinquished Flood's 
hand to seize on Gerald's, not a jot of any thing 
but the liveliest and most graceful pleasure now 
visible in his handsome face ; — " What good for- 
tune ! what a delightful coincidence with all our 
very last thoughts at breakfast, in Stephen's- 
gi-een ! you cannot tell how happy we shall all 
be to see you ! Why, my dear Blount, there 
was a friend of yours, some little time ago, in 
town, at Morrysson's, I think, and I unfortu- 
nately in the country ; and Mrs. Gore, I under- 
stand, acted so inhospitably (though it is not 
her habit, I assure you, as you shall and must 
bear witness) as not to invite the gentleman to 
call at Stephen 's-green ; and then, when I got 
home, I had really so very much to do, I could 
not immediately go look for him ; — but, would 
you believe it ? this very morning I had entered 



108 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

down a call at Morrysson's in my pocket-book. 
Good gracious ! I hope the gentleman is yet in 
Dublin ?" 

" He is, Mr. Gore, and much at your dis- 
posal." 

" How fortunate! — what pleasure it gives 
me ! — Come, my dear Blount, you shall do me 
the honour of a personal introduction, and that 
will be so much the better. My dear Captain, 
good morning — you hear what duties take me 
away, but I must call back to consult you 
about this horrid night ; though I, for one, do 
not despair ; hot work it may prove to be, yet 
surely our fine garrison can protect us : God 
gi'ant it ! Good morning. Come, my dear Blount, 
first to Morrysson's, and then to Stephen's-green, 
if you please, where you must allow me the 
happiness of presenting you to Mrs. Gore, and 
the Misses Gore ; only two of them now, since 
I had the pleasure of seeing you in London, and 
—excuse a secret — one of the two not likely to 
bear her present good name long, ha, ha, ha ! — 
Come." 

" Flood, good b'ye," said Gerald, extending 
his hand, as Mr. Gore hurried him through the 
door. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 199 

" Nay, no leave-taking for a parting that must 
be very short," resumed Mr. Gore; " for sure- 
ly, my dear Mr. Blount, you already submit 
yourself to join my dinner-party to-day, though, 
God knows how we are to get through the even- 
ing ! — all, good reason you had, that delightful 
day I met you at the Secretary's, across the 
water, to call this a miserable country ! — And 
Flood is to be with you, you know.'"* 

" I fear, Mr. Gore, I must not so surely 
reckon upon all the pleasure you promise me,'' 
said Gerald, shaking Flood's hand, (who lisped — 
" Enormous inconvenience, this very ancient cus- 
tom of pumping each other's bodies by the 
handles ;") " for," continued Gerald, " it is my 
plan to leave Dublin this very day." 

" Good heavens! can you mean us so un- 
kindly ? But no, no, no ; first to your hotel, 
however, and then — " continued Mr. Gore, ob- 
viously abandoning much of the vehement kind- 
liness of his tone and manner, — " why, then we 
shall see." 

Gerald allowed him to bustle him on into 
the street, because he wished to arrive at some- 
thing like an explanation with Mr. Gore. 

" Gracious heavens f resumed that gentle- 



200 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

man, as they walked along in the direction of 
Morrysson's, " to have missed your good friend 
so longT' 

** You have not missed him absolutely so 
long as you think : in plain English, my good 
friend is my good self; only, that for particular 
reasons, I wished to conceal the fact of my 
being in Dublin, when I wrote the note to 
your house, from every one but yourself, Mr. 
Gore." 

" Good God ! why it is a very sad and unfor- 
tunate case, after all, then. — What ill-chance 
drove me into the country just at that time ! I 
hope, my dear Mr. Blount, that you got — along 
with my most sincere regrets for detaining it so 
long — (a provoking matter which, I hope, I can 
explain to your satisfaction) — the three hundred 
and fifty you so very kindly obliged me with in 
London ?" 

Gerald, pleased, as well as surprised, said 
he had not yet had the honour of such a commu- 
nication from Mr. Gore ; mentally concluding 
that his sudden and late changes of place must 
have left him ignorant of his unsuspected good 
fortune, and that, in all likelihood, the enclo- 
sure awaited him in London. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 201 

" That is very, very strange," said Mr. Gore, 
thoughtfully, and as if a little alarmed. 

" You remitted by post. Sir ?" asked Gerald. 

" No — but — as I thought — by a much safer 
conveyance: a friend, a highly reputable friend, 
was just going to England, and thence to India, 
and I handed him the three hundred and fifty 
to join to his own deposit in a house here, who 
would advise their London correspondents of so 
much — his own funds and that — placed to his 
credit ; and then, when he reached your great 
city, he was to hand to you, after calling at the 
London bankers." 

" Oh, then, all will be found perfectly corr 
rect, Mr. Gore : your friend, not hearing of me 
in London, must have either enclosed the sum, 
and left it for me, or perhaps allowed it to rest 
at the banker's, dropping a line to my address."* 

** Of course ! I am sure it must be so — I 
hope it is : and yet, if all was indeed safe, why 
should not my friend have advised me, by a 
letter from London, that he could not find 
you ?" 

" And you have not since heard of him?" 

" No, indeed. Can it be possible, that in some 
untoward hurry, or forgetful fit, he has sailed 
k5 



202 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

for India without discharging my commission ? 
Indeed, I hope not ; for," — Mr. Gore sighed, — 
" in the present position of my family, enor- 
mous claims are made upon me, and, though 
not a poor man, Mr. Blount, I really could 
scarce afford the loss." 

A respectable-looking person interrupted 
Mr. Gore, by standing before him in the street, 
and bowing to him, half deferentially, half 
sulkily. 

" Ah, M'Farlane ! how d' do .? how is your 
good wife and the fine little ones .'^" 

Mr. M'Farlane replied in a mumble and 
a smile, pleased and flattered ; and then pro- 
ceeded in a lower tone, which sounded like 
serious remonstrance, as he drew from his 
pocket what Gerald unintentionally saw at a 
glance was a protested bill. 

" I know, I know, my dear M'Farlane," 
cried Mr. Gore, interrupting him, and with — 
" beg your ten thousand pardons," to Gerald, 
drawing him aside : and then, although Gerald 
took little notice, there ensued a very energetic 
parley on Mr. Gore's part, mingled with sweet 
smiles; until at last M'Farlane walked away, 
bowing much more graciously than when he 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 208 

had come up, and evidently a man of more 
hopes. 

" Yes," — Gerald caught Mr. Gore's last 
words — " yes, M'Farlane, the very moment 
I am released from this last bustling though 
happy event in my family, depend on me for 
the two matters together." 

He again took Gerald's arm, and was re- 
newing his discourse upon their own affairs, 
when Mr. M'Farlane a second time gained 
their side. 

" I beg your pardon, Mr. Gore ; but I don't 
think I require any more time to decide that 
the situation in the Post-office would suit my 
boy William better than one in the Custom- 
house." 

"Very well, M'Farlane; very well ; I can 
manage one just as well as the other for you ; 
make your own choice — you and William be- 
tween you — all the same to me." 

With a bow and a smile of unqualified 
content, Mr. M'Farlane finally departed. 

" You will excuse me, my dear Blount," 
resumed Mr. Gore; "these are some of the 
little annoyances resulting from holding a con- 
siderable place under our good King — God 



204 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

bless him ! People of all kinds will come to me 
and ask clerkships and secretaryships for their 
sons or themselves : 'tis rather boring, though, 
heaven knows ! I would willingly do every thing 
in my power for every body ; and indeed I try 
to do a good deal for a good many : and as to 
M'Farlane, he's a very honest fellow, and 
a capital merchant-tailor: let us walk quick, 
if you please." Mr. Gore cast a side-long 
glance towards the door of a mercer's which 
they were approaching — " I beg your pardon, 
but this must be a very busy day with me ; — 
what a dashing turn-out that is !'' looking 
straight to the end of the street. It would 
not do. The proprietor of the shop stood pal- 
pably, at his door, and, as Mr. Gore shot by, 
requested one word with him. 

" Ah, Thompson ! how d' do ? — To be sure ; 
only I am in a great hurry, and can step in but 
for a second — see, this gentleman, my friend, 
will be kept waiting: my dear Blount, do for- 
give, once again — ^just an instant." 

Mr. Gore entered the shop, and, from it, a 
little back-parlour. His stay far exceeded the 
time for which he had stipulated. At length 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 20^ 

Gerald, who was not uninterested in studying 
Mr. Gore, saw him re-appear through the par- 
lour-door, his countenance very animated as he 
said, " Full of promise, indeed ; upon my life, 
a boy of no common natural genius, for his 
years ; you really must allow me to prevail on 
you to send him to college, Thompson, and, as 
I said, perhaps I can make some friends for 
him there. — My dear Mr. Blount, step in a 
moment, if you please — " Gerald complied — *' I 
wish to show you an instance of our very 
abundant Irish talent, forcing its way through 
every obstacle ; this way, this way, — and mind 
the step." 

Followed by Mr. Thompson, Gerald found 
himself in the little half-lighted parlour, in the 
presence of Mrs. Thompson, who received him 
with a great show of gratified pride and flat- 
tered feelings, and in that of a pale-faced boy 
of about thirteen, who stood at a table, holding 
a roll of scribbled paper in both his hands, and 
looking half- frightened. 

" Now, my good little friend," continued 
Mr. Gore, "will you just allow this gentleman 
to look over some of the lines you have read 



206 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

for me ? Suppose the beginning of the blank- 
verse poem, on the Last Day, that is to run to 
twenty-four books." 

" Only twelve, Sir, like Paradise Lost," said 
the juvenile bard falteringly. 

" Oh, very well : all the better ; but let us 
see it/' 

" I 'm afeard no one can read it but myself, 
Sir," answered the boy. 

"James's thoughts come so quick to him, he 
doesn't wait to pen them down in a good shop- 
hand, though he has brought home the best 
Christmas-pieces wrote in the school, since he 
was six years old," said Mrs. Thompson. 

" I '11 be bound he has, Mrs. Thompson : no 
matter; he can just oblige us by reading the 
lines himself." 

And accordingly, poor James, growing paler, 
unfolded his inspired roll ; and after many 
efforts to keep it from curling back into its 
former obscure state, by spreading it out on 
one knee, Gerald heard him read, in a broad, 
Dublin brogue, a page of the most utter non- 
sense ever inflicted on him, even by " uncom- 
mon geniuses" of James's own age. It was 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 207 

with difficulty he kept his countenance, as he 
observed the mantling pleasure and triumph 
of Mrs. Thompson over fustian which she had 
so often before heard ; or the more sedate 
delight of her husband, who, resting his back 
against the wall, looked modestly though smil- 
ingly on the floor. But the acting of Mr. 
Gore was inimitable, and still more amusing 
than their sincerity. He stood near the poor 
boy, laying his hand on his shoulder, and with 
noddings of the head, and glances of approba- 
tion, and smiles of patronage from the father to 
the mother, and then to Gerald, displayed how 
exceedingly he relished the balderdash. 

" If you really think James would make his 
way better by going to College, Mr. Gore, 
than by attending to some business or other, 
I 'd certainly try and squeeze a point to send 
him," said the father as they regained the shop 
door. 

" If I really think, my dear Thompson! to be 
sure I do. You don t know — you can't say, 
what such talent, properly cultivated, may 
end in." 

" Well, Mr. Gore ; I 'm obliged to you, and 



208 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

I '11 think of it, Sir ; but sometimes the Latin 
and Greek books don't stand a lad's friend 
like the account-books." 

" And do you, indeed, see any thing in the 
lines we have heard/' asked Gerald, as he and 
his friend emerged into the street, " beyond 
what a half-educated boy, who has half-spelled 
his way through a half of Paradise Lost, 
might jumble together, in mere mechanical 
imitation ?" 

" Why, to deal candidly, my dear fellow, 
I suppose I praised the poor little boy's 
scribble rather more than it strictly merited ; 
but we must afford a few kind words to the 
natural feeling of parents;" — Gerald feared 
there had been another motive, — " and, I pro- 
test, after all, I do think, upon my honour, 
that there 's something uncommon in the son 
of a shopkeeper writing blank- verse at thirteen: 
it may be nonsense, to be sure ; still it is quite 
uncommon. But again — once again — I have 
to beg your pardon. One of my blundering 
servants forgot this morning to call at the 
wine-shop opposite — may I trespass upon you, 
while I correct his error ?" 

They crossed the street, and Mr. Gore 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 209 

quickly entered the shop, or office, leaving 
Gerald some paces behind. His friend, con- 
tinuing his walk by the door, heard a man 
within say, " Very sorry, indeed, Sir ; but, as 
Mr. Burke is from home, we cannot at- 
tempt to break his last orders on the sub- 
ject ; which were, that, until the former ac- 
count " 

" Oh, very well, very well," interrupted 
Mr. Gore, catching a glance of Gerald passing 
by — " you may depend on me : any thing in 
my power, for your master or you — good 
morning, Mr. Garon !" and thus trying to 
change into business of patronage, and of 
doing the wine-merchant a favour, what Ge- 
rald, in much astonishment, suspected to have 
been an effort to cater for his decanters for 
that day's dinner, Mr. Gore hurried my hero 
along the street. 

" Stay," said he, after they had walked ra- 
pidly some distance, as he stopped, evidently 
in a puzzle — "What are we about to do.'' — 
oh ; ay ; — you, my dear Blount, are coming 
with me to Stephen's-green, to allow me the 
pleasure and honour of presenting you to my 
family — (and only that^ you most unkind 



JEIO THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

friend) — before you get under weigh for Eng- 
land, this evening."" 

Gerald wondered at this rather unceremo- 
nious tying him to his own first arrangement ; 
in contrast, at least, with Mr. Gore's former 
redundant politeness, it was enigmatical; and 
Gerald half resolved not to get under weigh 
that evening, merely to take himself out of the 
dictation of Mr. Gore — " And, indeed," con- 
tinued that gentleman, " now that I think of 
it, the packet sails at three o'clock, to-day. 
But come, my excellent young friend ; I hope 
we shall catch my idlers at home ; they were 
to be out early, in the carriage, shopping; 
perhaps we had better wait till we think they 
have got domesticated again ; meantime, if you 
have no objection to accompany me a little way 
farther, I will feel so obliged to you ! for I 
suppose you can have no schemes for filling up 
the afternoon on your own account .f^" 

Simply declaring his willingness to attend 
Mr. Gore, Gerald took a step onward. 

" A thousand thanks ! — Stay, again — I have 
really so many things to think of;" he once 
more became stationary, looking down, and 
absorbed in thought — " Yes ! — that first — just 
turn in here, my dear fellow."" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 211 

They went into a shop where stc'mps were 
sold. Mr. Gore purchased one, and withdraw- 
ing to the far end of the counter, asked for 
pen and ink, filled it up, folded it, and put it 
into his pocket. 

" I forgot, my dear Blount, that I was to 
meet a person with a modicum of rent from 
my country property to-day, and came out 
unprovided with a stamp receipt ; here, how- 
ever, I have secured one ; and, in your kind 
company, I will now seek a meeting with the 
rather interesting individual I have mentioned." 

" I fear the lad has made some mistake. Sir," 
said the owner of the shop, who had come be- 
hind the counter after Mr. Gore procured his 
receipt ; " I believe you asked a stamp for a 
bill at nine months for a hundred pounds ?" 

" No, no ; a stamp for a receipt, you mean : 
all is quite right," answered Mr. Gore, as, in 
some confusion, he retreated, with Gerald, from 
the presence of the inquisitorial shopkeeper, 
who now more strongly looked his fears that 
some mistake had been committed. 

" Very stupid these tradespeople sometimes 
are," said Mr. Gore, still hurrying on: — "I will 
give you a few late instances;" and thereupon 
he went through recitals, which, notwithstanding 



M^ THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

his fluent, plausible, and graceful style, Gerald 
half-feared entitled Mr. Gore only to be called 
an excellent Irish improvisatore — in more homely 
English, they all seemed like cock-and-bull sto- 
ries, or rigmarole. 

By the time he had ended his last illustration 
of the obtuseness of shopkeepers, in calling 
things out of their proper names, and in con- 
founding one thing with another, Mr. Gore had 
wound his way into a very humble street, and 
there stopped beforeavery humble-looking house. 
Hb knock was answered by a pale young woman, 
on whom the visitor immediately smiled in a 
charming way, and began — 

" Ah, my most interesting young friend ! Is 
your worthy father at home ? Having had to 
walk this way, Mrs. Gore wished me to assure 
you that there is little doubt of placing you in a 
family of very high respectability and connexions, 
where your talents and accomplishments will be 
fitly estimated." The modest and pensive girl 
curtsied low, and blushed in obvious pleasure. 
"Is he at home.?" pursued Mr. Gore; "ah, 
yes, here he comes." A mean-looking little old 
man, whose features and manner betokened, 
however, more of the lowliness of the miser 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 213 

than of the pauper, steaUhiJy issued through a 
door in the narrow hall. *•" Peter, my friend, 
how d" do ? — you have heard, I presume, the 
communication I had the pleasure to make to my 
sweet little friend, Ann, here ; but I just wish to 
speak another word with you ; and, perhaps, 
your agreeable Ann will oblige this gentleman 
by a specimen of her great skill and taste on the 
harp, while you and I chat a second together ?''"' 
Gerald forthwith followed the young wo- 
man into a room, where he heard her perform 
very pleasingly some harp-music. In about 
a quarter of an hour, Mr. Gore joined him, 
his countenance now lighted up with unaffected 
vivacity, and his right hand earnestly thrust 
into the pocket of his trowsers, as if it held 
tight therein something that it was pleasant to 
grasp. After calling on Gerald to admit the 
many merits of Mrs. Gore's young protegee, 
and repeating his own eulogies to herself, he 
took his friend's arm, and with a buoyant step 
approached the hall-door, whispering, " 1 've 
detained you shamefully long, but it is so 
difficult to extract my country-rents from the 
clutches of this strange town-agent of two of 
my more considerable tenants." 



814 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

The little old man here sneaked a second 
time into the passage, and addressed Mr. Gore. 

*' 'Tis a long date, Sir" — Mr. Gore coughed, 
hemmed, and hastened to unlatch the door ; 
the latch was restive, and though he pulled 
with all his might, he could not effect an escape 
until the usurer had continued — " a long date, 
Sir, notwithstanding the little premium ; nine 
long months." 

*' Curse this latch ! open the door, Peter !" 
interrupted Mr. Gore, in such a change from 
his milk-and-honey manner and tone, that by 
dint of contrast, it might be called ferocious : 
the old fellow slowly advanced to obey, but 
still went on — " And I trust all to your honour, 
Mr. Gore, not to let this one come back — And, 
as to poor Ann — " 

" Good morning, Peter, good morning," — he 
at last got Gerald into the street — " and, yes, 
yes, tell Ann not to fear but Mrs. Gore and I 
will do every thing in our power — every earthly 
thing — Good morning." 

The last words had somewhat restored him 
to his common blandness of accent, look, and 
manner; and he extricated Gerald from the 
mean maze of streets into which he had beguiled 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 215 

him, eloquently sounding Ann''s claims to en- 
couragement, and Mrs. Gore's settled determi- 
nation to do something for so deserving a young 
person. 

He was )'et talking, Gerald exceedingly en- 
tertained, when his auditor, pointing to an open 
carriage which stood at a fur-shop in a respect- 
able quarter of the town, requested Mr. Gore to 
inform him, if he could, who was the very beau- 
tiful and interesting young creature, one of three 
ladies who sat in it ? 

" Where, my dear Blount ? what carriage ? 
which way ?" said Mr. Gore, anxiously looking 
in a contrary direction, and still bustling Gerald 
along with him. His young friend peremptorily 
stopped, however, and plainly pointed out the 
object of his curiosity. 

" Why there are three or four carriages near 
that door," answered his inefficient cicerone, 
with, perhaps, in his face, more affected than 
real perplexity, and yet with much of the latter 
too. 

" I mean the yellow open carriage, containing 
three ladies, one elderly, but a fine woman, the 
other younger, and a blaze of charms, and the 
third, my goddess, Mr. Gore, still younger and 



216 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

more charming, if not more beautiful — you 
cannot mistake — a shopman stands at the step, 
and seems to receive the commands of his visi- 
tors with a very dubious countenance." 

" I protest, my dear young friend," began 
Mr. Gore, " I hardly can say, at this distance: 
my eyes, though they look good eyes, are half- 
blind. But, bless me !" — the younger beauty, 
suddenly turning her head, kissed hand to Mr. 
Gore — " what have I been raving about ! why, 
it is my own carriage ! they are my own wife 
and daughters ! Come, my dear Blount," at once 
changing into the utmost cordiality and earnest- 
ness, — " come ! here we have them, by Jupiter ! 
— come, allow me this great pleasure i Well ! not 
to know my own wife ! ha, ha ! It has, indeed, 
been surmised as difficult to know one's own 
children sometimes, Blount, eh? but not to 
know one's wife ! ha, ha, ha !" 

The three ladies now turned their regards on 
Mr. Gore and his companion ; and Gerald was 
presented in the most kindly way to Mrs. Gore, 
Miss Gore, and Miss Maria Gore. At the first 
sound of his name, the latter-mentioned lady 
started, and looked at Gerald with a singular 
expression of interest. He would not permit 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 217 

himself to be quite so vain as to set down Miss 
Maria Gore's stare to the account of his per- 
sonal merits, considerable as they were ; and 
yet otherwise he knew not how to explain such 
flattering attention. A sudden thought oc- 
curred. He glanced, in return, attentively at 
her. She smiled, whether at his answering ear- 
nestness, or from some other cause, and turned 
to say a word to her mamma, who had now 
relinquished the fur-merchant to the oratory of 
her accomplished husband. After his scrutiny, 
and particularly at the smile, Gerald stood 
fixed. It was somewhat like the smile of the pro- 
phetess of Pere la Chaise. The beautiful eyes, 
too, which had so curiously regarded him a 
moment before, were blue ; and the damask- 
rose cheek he now gazed upon, and the sunny 
locks, and the classic line of the nose, all re- 
minded him of that perplexing individual. But 
did they make him sure.? He longed to see 
Miss Maria Gore, walking or standing, that he 
might receive the whole impression of her face 
and figure. 

" I will not get under weigh this evening," 
resolved Gerald. 

But while he so resolved, and while previously 
VOL. II. L 



218 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

he had been so occupied with his observations 
and thoughts, he had remained at the carriage- 
side without speaking, after the first common- 
place questions and answers that passed between 
him and Mrs. Gore and her beautiful daughters. 
This was not as it should be. For although 
Mrs. Gore and Miss Gore, having sweetly 
craved pardon, engaged themselves with, per- 
haps, surmises of the probable result of Mr. 
Gore''s oratory upon the shopkeeper, and al- 
though the object of his study and conjectures 
had also turned to whisper one word to them, 
as has been noticed, still, for many minutes after, 
she remained perfectly disengaged, and at li- 
berty to attend to any thing he might choose 
to say. But he said nothing at all. In fact, 
he was embarrassed, if not a little awkward. 
It has before been hinted that Gerald was much 
more forward in mental acquirements and ma- 
turity, than at the side of a beautiful woman. 
And, at last, the young lady, herself, seemed 
to think it would be well to relieve him. 

" Have you been long in Dublin, Mr. Blount?" 
she asked, again fixing her eyes on him, and 
again smiling, Gerald thought, expressively. 
Her manner of uttering the words also seemed 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 219 

to have a meaning in it ; and he slightly started 
at the sound of her voice, which, allowing for 
some difference, probably occasioned by her not 
speaking in French, as the lady of Pere la Chaise 
had done, he was disposed to be very sure he 
had heard before. 

He answered, guardedly, that he had been 
but a very short time indeed in Dublin. 

" And you came direct from France, I be- 
lieve ?" she resumed, still in a provoking manner. 

" Yes ; but not so direct from Paris : and I 
regretted being obliged to leave that interesting 
city; indeed, its neighbourhoods are as interest- 
ing as itself ; — Pere la Chaise, for instance,"" he 
continued, now hazarding a shade of expression 
on his own part — " don't you think so?" 

" Certainly, from all I have heard," replied 
Miss Maria Gore, very quietly, while her fea- 
tures lost their former remarkable point, and 
her answer sounded the most natural thing in 
the world. 

Gerald was about to make a more positive 
experiment, by asking — " Have you never been 
there ?" when Mr. Gore, radiant with triumph 
over the shopkeeper, who now had ordered out 
all his assistants, laden with furs, for the inspec- 
L 2 



*28l& THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

tion of Mrs. Gore, regained his side, again 
shook his hand, and interrupted his half-formed 
words. 

" Not to know one's own wife, my dear Blount ! 
— ha, ha ! — and you praising one of my own 
daughters to my face, and pointing her out, and 
I not recognizing her either ! I assure you, Ma- 
ria, my love, it was exactly so when you made 
us out and kissed hand ! — My dear fellow ! " 
aside to Gerald, " how flattering ! how delight- 
ful to a fond father's feelings, was your uncon- 
scious eulogy just now ! — such opinions from a 
man of your cast of mind and highly-cultivated 
eye— exceedingly gratifying 1 Pardon the father 
again, my dear Mr. Blount," — Mr. Gore's eyes 
moistened — " if I say I have reason to believe my 
youngest girl, and my favourite, is as good, as 
you do her the honour of thinking her personally 
interesting — the heart, the heart, my young 
friend — the heart is her best vaunt. But, tut ! 
what bad taste all this is ; Maria, my sweetest, 
make room for Mr. Blount, he is tired with walk- 
ing — indeed, / have unmercifully tired him ; 
and, after taking him about a little, you must drop 
him at Morrysson's ; but not bid him good-bye 
there, for he will, he will accept my repeated 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 22l' 

requests to join us at dinner,"" continued Mr. 
Gore, pressing Gerald's arm as he assisted him 
up the carriage- step, the footman having dis- 
mounted to open the door. 

" Oh, he will, he must !" urged Mrs. Gore, 
her purchases now made. The lady spoke in a 
universal bloom of smiles over her whole hand- 
some face, which went near to eclipse even the 
fascinations of her sweet lord, all the time keep- 
ing her lips wide apart — (the teeth were certainly 
beautiful) — and catching her breath between 
every word, in a pretty, affected fashion, some- 
times observed in England, but then almost uni- 
versal among the female beau monde (such as it 
was) of the English-Irish in Ireland. 

Miss Gore, who, as Gerald recollected from 
his sister's letter, had, until the late marriage 
of the eldest beauty " to the rich brewer,'^ been 
Miss Selina Gore, employed herself, during her 
mamma's little speech, in eye-glassing Gerald, 
her head inclined to one side, till the clustering 
black curls hid one of her blacker and much 
brighter orbs, — her splendid features unrelaxed, 
and something like a habitual curl on her Juno 
lip, and a little contraction on her brow. 

" Do, Mr. Blount,'' tingled the voice of her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

more charming though perhaps not so striking 
sister at Gerald's ear, " do come to us ; indeed 
all the chivalrous persons of even our slightest 
acquaintance ought to come to us this evening, 
considering what we have to expect from the 
turf-boats." 

** And that is true, Maria," rejoined Mrs. 
Gore, " and an unanswerable argument to Mr. 
Blount." 

" True, indeed," observed Miss Gore, not 
in an exquisitely musical tone — " although 
Maria seems to think so little of our danger 
from these savages. Mamma, while every other 
human being around her thinks a good deal of 
it, — and although she alludes to it in such an 
incredulous and would-be-wise way." 

Miss Maria certainly had conveyed to Gerald's 
mind the notion of a slight sneer at the expense 
of the fleet of turf-boats. She had also conveyed 
something else. Still her accents, in English, 
or rather in the best Irish-English, were like 
some he had heard in French, and her peculiar 
self-possession, and her tendency to quiet satire, 
especially exemplified in her last words, almost 
confirmed him in believing her to be the bearer 
of Michael Farrell's letter to his hand. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 223 

" Come, our excellent young friend consents 
to give us the happiness of his company," re- 
urged Mr. Gore. 

f Gerald had consented long ago ; almost 
before he and Mr. Gore came up with the 
carriage, and that, thereby, he had acquired a 
new and cogent reason for consenting. His 
compliance now was therefore no great victory 
for the united smiling-forces of Mr. Gore and 
his lady to attain. They mutually expressed, 
however, as much joy and exultation as if it 
was ; and his host-elect, once more shaking his 
hand, and bidding fond adieus to his " sweet 
loves," turned from the carriage-side " to dis- 
patch a host of business yet to be gone through 
on that busy day." 

As Gerald and his new and charming friends 
rolled off through a bustling and lively street, 
his arm became an object of Mrs. Gore's ten- 
derest compassion. He was called on to account 
for its being in " that sad sling." Taking ad- 
vantage of the opportunity to acquire some ideas 
upon a matter that much more deeply interested 
him, he mentioned its having been fractured by 
a fall from a stage-coach : " And," he continued, 
catching Miss Maria's eye, " the poor fellow who 



224 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

drove the stage came worse off; I felt greatly 
for him ; he was the only support of a large 
family ; and his trade as a coachman his sole 
means of supporting them ; although, at his 
outset, he and they had been comfortably in pos- 
session of a farm, of which they were deprived 
by an intriguing land-steward, or perhaps, I 
should say, by the neglect of an absentee land- 
lord." Miss Maria listened and looked atten- 
tive. " I believe I learned and can remember 
the unfortunate coachman's name, so much did 
he interest me." Gerald went on, retaining her 
glance — " It is, I think, a pure Irish one — Mi- 
chael Farrell." Miss Maria showed not the 
slightest consciousness of having heard it before. 
But the allusions to the circumstance of his 
fall from the coach caused Gerald to reflect that, 
having now arranged to stay " perhaps some 
little time" in Ireland, he was bound to advise 
his sister Augusta of his present safety, although 
he would not more amply reply to her epistle, 
but rather ask her permission to waive that duty 
till he should see Lord Clangore in London ; 
and to Lord Clangore himself a line was also 
necessary, lest his Lordship might have heard of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the wreck of the vessel in which he left France, 
and be uneasy on his account. 

It seemed farther advisable that Gerald should 
dispatch both his letters that very day ; and as 
he could not do so unless he repaired imme- 
diately to his hotel, instead of spending the brief 
remainder of the afternoon riding about the 
streets, he proposed, with many regrets, to take 
leave of his fair company for the present ; and, 
amid the more numerous regrets of Mrs. Gore, 
was set down at Morrysson's, while Miss Gore 
peered about her, at every body, through her 
€ye-glass, and returned his parting bow, and, 
no more ; and Miss Maria remained also silent, 
affording him, however, a smile, and an ex- 
pressive one still. 

As Gerald entered the hotel, he heartily 
wished he had not felt himself compelled to give 
up, so soon, his place at this young lady's side ; 
but he consoled himself with the reflection that, 
in the course of the evening, he would enjoy 
sufficient opportunity for determining if he really 
had ever seen her before. 



L 5 



226 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER IX. 

" And why can I not decide at once?" ru- 
minated Gerald, on his way to Stephen's-green : 
" 'Tis very singular that I cannot. The ques- 
tion is a simple one enough ; namely, is she 
a person I have previously seen, and con- 
versed with for about half an hour? My 
first notions say she is; her manner and pe- 
culiarities, so far as I have since remarked 
them, support the case; and yet something 
keeps me wavering. What something? Define 
it. I don't know how. Perhaps, as I before 
thought, it lies in her not speaking French, at 
this, our renewed acquaintance. I '11 ascertain 
if she can speak French, and then I'll get her 
to speak it, and that ends my doubts one way 
or the other. I '11 ask her, bluntly, about the 
main fact ! I will ; 'tis the shortest course. She 
cannot possibly equivocate ; — why should she ? 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 2S7 

But has she not done so already ? Pere la 
Chaise was a charming place, " from all she had 
heard ;" and when I pronounced Michael Far- 
rell's name, it did not move her. This, however, 
is nothing. It was not downright disavowal; 
and while there is certainty that a lady will not 
utter the language of untruth, there is equal 
certainty that women of every class know how 
to mistify the truth. 

" I will propose the matter to Miss Maria 
Gore plainly, and at once. I '11 secure her arm 
to the eating-room, if I can. I '11 secure a chair 
by her side at dinner. She will not evade me 
then, for she cannot run away, nor pretend to 
play with my question : she must answer it. 

" Still, how very strange that I should re- 
quire to go to all this trouble on such a point ; 
one of mere identity. Why, we know a build- 
ing again at a glance, though we have but seen 
it once before, or a mountain, or a street ; nay, 
I have been sure of a dog upon a Monday, that 
I but casually patted on the head upon the pre- 
vious Monday ; and yet, here is an individual 
of Nature's cunningest handiwork, and I am 
not sure of her. She is not one in my mind ; 
my brain puzzles itself about two individualities. 



228 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

when I would get her before me. 'Tis like the 
Athanasian creed. 

" And pray, Gerald, my good friend, why 
do you fret yourself so much about the 
double lady ? What is it to you if she is her- 
self and another, or another still, supposing it 
must be so ? Is it the metaphysical difficulty of 
the question that exclusively engages you — that 
has broken up your wise resolve to get under 
weigh this evening.?" 

" A fig for your reverie," said a well-known 
voice close at Gerald's ear, as he slowly ascend- 
ed the steps of Mr. Gore's hall-door, and, to his 
great surprise, he saw Mr. Gunning about to lay 
his hand on the knocker. 

" You in Dublin, Mr. Gunning !" 

" Yeg, and you too." 

*' And coming to enact a dinner at Mr. Gore's 
table, Sir.?" 

"^ I can't help it. There was no escaping 
him. The first man I met, after landing in his 
country, about an hour ago, was'almost he ; and 
he so plunged on me, and so harangued about 
his dinnering " precisely at six," and so shook 
me, and smiled at me, that, to get rid of him, 
I said yes; just as the woman said yes to her 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 229 

teazing adorer. I wonder what it will all be 
like. Let us begin to see." 

Mr. Gunning applied himself to the knocker, 
and he and Gerald soon entered Mr. Gore's 
drawing-room. 

After undergoing, just at the door, the lus- 
cious greetings of their happy, their very happy 
and delighted host, which Gunning bore badly, 
as, offering two fingers, he just grumbled a 
word, and looked critically around him, both 
gentlemen were led to Mrs. Gore, who, splen- 
didly arrayed, and enthroned amid a pile of 
cushions, in the middle of a sofa, rose, and ad- 
vanced her step, and did her bend, sparkling all 
over with smiles, like the sky with its countless 
stars (indeed her very instep and the toe of her 
slipper might be said to smile, as another lady's 
body has been said to think), and catching her 
breath so prettily, between every honied word, 
and altogether playing her part with the perfect 
ease and grace of a lady — (acting). 

Gunning soon hobbled away from her, on his 
stick ; but Gerald had not, like him, the heart 
to cut Mrs. Gore short in the midst of her very 
kind and sweet speeches. He therefore stood 
still until his queen-like hostess requested his 



236 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

attendance to the other end of the room, where 
Mrs. Blake, late Miss Gore, occupied a second 
sofa, wearing, newfangled with matronly cos- 
tume, a rich turban, beneath which was one 
of the most beautiful faces that sculptor ever 
modelled, but much less expressive and alive, 
eyes and all, than many productions of the 
studio. Beside her sat Lady Offally, almost as 
inane, yet talking in a low and slow way to the 
new-married beauty, who, her regards vacantly 
fixed on the confronting sofa her mamma had 
just quitted, seemed not to mind a word. 

After a stately, and, Gerald thought, repre- 
hensive recognition, upon a certain account, 
from Lady Offally, he was presented to Mrs. 
Blake; and while her intense stare just trans- 
ferred itself from nothing to him, and her warm 
rich lips mumbled some very cold words, and 
her neck just curved down, and not the faintest 
reflection of her mother's smiles lighted her 
faultless features, he fancied, that if the shade 
of any positive expression toned with the dead 
loveliness he gazed upon, it was, as Augusta's 
letter hinted, icy hauteur. 

A very young officer of Flood's regiment 
leaned gracefully upon a corner of her sofa, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 231 

silently admiring, with the mixed affectation of 
a boy and of a boy-soldier, Mrs. Blake's pas- 
sive charms. And, indeed, his mute worship 
could hardly be found fault with ; for there 
those charms were, obviously for no other pur- 
pose than to be so contemplated. "As to 
talking with her," concluded Gerald, when he 
gladly turned off, after the few cold words, and 
the colder pause, " one would as soon think 
of entering into conversation with the marble 
Venus." 

" The great Sir 's son,'' whispered 

Mrs. Gore, when they had passed the young 
officer. 

Gerald was much interested. Meeting the 
son of a celebrated author is almost like meet- 
ing himself; and Gerald resolved to obtain some 
opportunity of making up to the young gentle- 
man who, along with the splendour of his uni- 
form, thus shone in the reflected light of his 
illustrious father's fame. 

Upon yet another sofa, at one side of the apart- 
ment, half reclined Miss Selina Gore, not a dead- 
preserve beauty, like her elder sister, and yet 
looking alive only to a sense of her own transcen- 
dency. Her eye gleamed brilliantly in proud 



232 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

consciousness, and her out-turned lips seemed 
(though, after all, they said nothing) as if they 
were just about to utter some fierce sentence 
to old Sir John Lumley, who sat on a chair at 
the end of her sofa, and bent his head — (a good 
study for a specimen of gone-by Irish aris- 
tocracy, made up of powder, ruddy though 
sunken cheeks, weak blue eyes, thin, dry lips, 
and a prominent chin,) — and smiled earnestly, 
yet humbly and cravingly, and talked his best, 
at the unflattered ear of the object of his re- 
suscitated admiration. 

After his bow, Gerald, feeling that he had 
no business, as well as no inclination, to tres- 
pass on these ill-assorted lovers, passed on and 
joined a group of gentlemen with whom Mr. 
Gore stood conversing, and amongst whom 
were Lord Offally, old Lord Harmer, and Mr. 
Priestly. But after listening a moment to 
their discourse, and finding it a digression from 
the expected massacre of the approaching night, 
to the conversion of all Ireland out of the gloom 
of popery, he still moved farther on. Another 
group of younger gentlemen occupied a win- 
dow, and to them Gerald was led by Mrs. 
Gore, who a second time abandoned her regal 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 233 

state, in order to introduce him to her son, Mr. 
Frederick Augustus Gore, the nucleus of the 
circle. 

The young gentleman came forward with 
much of his father's blandness, modified by the 
portion of aristocratic precision he had learned 
at Oxford, and with all his mother's pretty 
trick of catching his breath between every 
word. Gerald joined him and his friends, en- 
couraged by seeing Mr. Gunning near them. 

Here the conversation was kept up, almost 
exclusively, between Mr. Gore junior and the 
son of a Four-Court judge, who had also been 
at Oxford ; and it consisted of the fashionable 
slang about Tom Crib, and Dan Donelly, and 
" fibbing," and " coming up to the scratch," 
and watermen's gibberish, and " good whips," 
and " gentlemanly" coachees, and so forth, all 
of which was an emulation by the young Irish 
students, of the knowledge and accomplish- 
ments of their English disiinguh. 

The Judge's son was obviously less at home 
in these matters than Mr. Frederic Augustus. 
He had not been so long at Oxford; had not 
so often sat on the boxes of the different stages 
that run up and down between that learned 



234 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

University and Bangor-Ferry ; nor so often 
taken lessons, at high bribes, from the cele- 
brated coachees of each. Hence he deferred 
to the superior acquirements of his young friend, 
and appeared more vain-glorious in exhibiting 
the full extent of his own knowledge, such as 
it was. Of the silent, admiring, and envious 
audience who surrounded both, a square shoul- 
dered, full-breasted, lusty young militia lieu- 
tenant, seemed the most sincerely respectful. 
He had never before heard a discourse so much 
above his humble technicals of the road and of 
fox-hunting, acquired previous to his getting his 

commission, through the interest of Lord . 

Besides, he had never been out of Ireland ; and 
the names of the various places at which the 
stages changed horses, and the notions of the 
important characters of the English coachees^ 
vaguely impressed on his mind by the allusions 
of the gifted speakers, filled him with a kind of 
awe, and a due consciousness of his own defi^ 
ciencies. A second listener appeared to bear 
the superior pretensions of Mr. Gore, junior, 
and the Judge's son, with less deference. This 
was Lord Friar, a person of middle age, sal- 
low-cheeked, sunken-eyed, black -bearded, horn- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 235 

mouthed, spindle-legged, and, notwithstanding 
his title, stamped in face and person, in look, 
expression, motion, as one whom nature had 
intended to be not only ugly but vulgar. Upon 
mere Irish roads he was a very distinguished 
whip. In imitation of his brother nobles in 
England, he often paid a high price to the 
coachmen to be allowed to drive them and their 
passengers fifty or sixty miles a-day ; and more 
than once he had been offered his shilling by a 
homely " outside," for very proper conduct. 
With all the crabbed language of Irish whips, 
therefore, he might be deemed acquainted ; but 
the newly-imported slang was a flight beyond 
him ; and after one or two unsuccessful attempts 
to chime in, he stood listening to his young 
superiors in evident chagrin and jealousy. Some- 
thing similar appeared to be the feelings of a 
young Dublin College graduate. He also had 
vainly tried to pass off the few ideas acquired 
from native men of whipcord, during his perio- 
dical journeys from town to his friends in the 
country, and back again : and the high aristo- 
cratic allusions of the Oxonians to every thing 
belonging to their English University ; to the 
studs, for instance, and to the " turns-out " of 



2S6 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

their academic acquaintances, farther oppressed 
him with a sense of Irish discrepancy, which 
his attempts to speak fashionably thick, as he 
affectedly winked his eyes, and smacked his lips, 
and sometimes turned oflP a pace or two, throw- 
ing out his limbs stiff from the knee, stamping 
on his heels, and then scraping the carpet with 
his toe, could not quite disguise. 

The learned phrases which most deservedly 
raised the characters of the young English-Irish 
whips were such as — " Down that hill I gave it 
to them like fun ;" or, " off with the drag, and 
then we go it, bang;" or, " their sixteen trotters 
going like little pigs f or, in allusion to a leader 
getting restive, "he tried it, but 't wouldn't fit.' 
But a portion of the dialogue which much edi- 
fied Gerald, is worth transcribing at length. 

** Ah, Sir, a man may drive all his life, but 
that will make him no whip. 'Tis not driving 
alone. Sir ; nothing like it ; ^tis good bringing 
up." 

" I 'm quite sure of that. Do you know Taylor 
of the Oxonian ? a deuced good whip is Taylor ; 
but a little too hard; don't laike that;" (the 
Judge's son had been learning, amongst his 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Other studies, pure English pronunciation upon 
the tops of coaches) ; " have seen him whop his 
horses, and they standing still ; though hitting 
hard is a good thing, too ; can hit hard myself,— 
strong arm : can hit my near wheeler hard ; as 
hard as any one." 

" Can you ? but can you hit your off leader 
hard?" 

" Yes, pretty well." 

" And the near leader .'^" 

" Don't know that." 

" If you can hit him at all. Sir, 'tis doing 
very well ; a nice thing to do. If you hear a 
youngster talk of hitting, just say to him, ' Sir, 
be good enough to hit that near leader for me.' 
That ni try him." 

*' Ah, I know it is a pretty stroke. Very 
pretty. Will practise it next time I run up 
from Bangor to Oxford, if I can get Taylor to 
give me the rein, a thing he '11 not always stand. 
How do you do it ? This way ? over your near 
wheeler's head — so.?" 

" No, over both my wheelers, so ; then send- 
ing it forward, so — that fits. Yes, I know 
Taylor won't always pass one the rein. Mr. 



238 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

Taylor I should say ; we call him Mr. and the 
others by their names, he's such a gentlemanly 
person."" 

" Yes, quite above his situation. Talk him, 
when he is talky, and he '11 speak to you of the 
whip like any gentleman ; a very nice fellow. 
But I wish he would oftener oblige one. He re- 
fused my friend Lord Lash three times in the 
same day. How do you like Popkins, of the 
Tallyho.?" 

" A very respectable whip, indeed ; but 
makes bad hands. There's Sir Richard Jervis 
he brought up ; now, he will never be clever 
the longest day he lives." 

" How old is he r 

" Let me see ; about your own age." 

" Then don't you think, if he changed tutors, 
a better education might do something for him, 
yet.^" 

" Possibly ; but I doubt it much." 

" Come here," said Gunning to Gerald, as he 
motioned him to a corner, after he had caught 
his eye. Both turned away from the group, 
to the orators of which Gunning as well as his 
young friend had been attentively listening. 

" Sit down here, and let me give you an 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 239 

idea, and ask one in return," continued the 
cynic : " What do you think of all this ?" 

" A great deal, and yet very little," answered 
Gerald, smiling at the mannerism of Gunning. 

" Why, I '11 tell you," resumed his Mentor : 
" First, I listened to the women, that is, to such 
of them as can or will speak, and they talked of 
nothing but having their throats cut this even- 
ing ; then I hovered round the knot of seniors 
yonder, and heard only vile declamation about 
making God''s children of the people of this 
country, and about their vices, and ignorance, 
and savageness, just as a lot of our Indian 
planters might discuss the merits of their slaves; 
and as to the last specimen of eloquence you 
and I have witnessed, why, its original, in Eng- 
land, is bad enough, but this meagre Irish, or 
English-Irish copy of that original, is the devil, 
out and out, I take it." 

" I am of your opinion," said Gerald. 

" What are we to do ?"" 

" How do you mean ?"" 

" To be sure, you are, yourself, rather 
English- Irish, and yet, from your unadulterated 
education and training amongst us, at the other 
side of the Channel, how the deuce will you 



240 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

be able to stand this English-Irish evening? 
Have you ever been among such a set? As 
for me, I should be off, but that I am just 
enough curious to see what kind of a thing the 
eating-room is to be. What brought us here ? 
What kind of people are these ? Do they live 
in Ireland, as a part of its population, or 
what ?" 

" Oh, Mr. Blount, you poor fellow !" broke 
in Miss Flint, running up to them. 

" I 'm done," said Gunning, slowly rising, 
and cruizing into a back drawing-room. 

" Think of this !" resumed Miss Fhnt ; " you 
in Dublin with us, after all ! my gracious good- 
ness! — and on such a day as this is! a day 
that is to have such a night ! But you are a 
capital reinforcement to all our other protec- 
tors. Have you provided yourself with arms ? 
No ! — that's bad. I must see and borrow some 
for you ; any of the gentlemen here can oblige 
me; for they all carry little pistols, and little 
daggers, though they won't frighten us by 
showing them : I'm sure they do ; I know they 
do; — but, dear me! how did you hurt your 
arm ? 'Tis a trifling hurt ? think of that ! I 'm 
so glad! — apropos — you have not paid your 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 241 

advance-subscription to our Hibernian Im- 
provement Society ; but you can now, you 
know ; here *s a receipt, ready filled and signed, 
only to put in your name : I knew I should 
meet some arrears in this house to-day — (a 
word in your ear — tis a capital house for ar- 
rears — he, he !) — and so I brought out a lot in 
my reticule — think of that ! — Stop a moment — 
My dear Mrs. Gore, any kind of a pen, and a 
drop of ink, in the persuasive name of charity, 
there's a dear, good creature ! You don't see 
it near ? Well, no matter ; I can go and hunt 
it out ; 'tis my duty, you know : — Mrs. Blake, 
love, have you an inkstand near you ?" Mrs. 
Blake opened her eyes wider. " No ? — Selina, 
my dearest — " 

" No, no. Miss Flint, I know nothing about 
it ; try Maria :" and Miss Gore haughtily 
averted her head. 

" Thank you, how good you are ! where is 
she ? — not present, I protest ; think of that ! 
Oh, I remember ; drawing caricatures, she and 
Captain Flood, in here, with the very thing I 
want — dear me ! Come, Mr. Blount, follow 
close, and you shall soon have 30ur receipt." 

Miss Flint led into the back-drawing-room, 

VOL. II. M 



242 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

whither Gunning had just retreated; and Ge- 
rald, who had hitherto felt disappointed at not 
seeing Miss Maria Gore, now gladly obeyed 
the official command to " follow close.'*'' 

The first person that here attracted his notice 
was Gunning, sitting in the midst of a nume- 
rous circle of ladies, old, young, and middle- 
aged, and hearkening to their strongly ex- 
pressed terrors, as Gerald learned by a few 
words, of the expected massacre of the coming 
night. The old humourist also seemed, from 
the expression of his angular features, to be 
maliciously engaged in heightening the fears 
of his new friends. 

At a table in the corner of the apartment, 
shaded, and almost concealed by the half-open 
door, was Flood, scratching grotesque outlines 
of human faces, with, indeed, the pen Miss 
Flint wanted ; and standing over him — and now 
exhibiting to Gerald the very height and pro- 
portions of the figure he had seen in Pere la 
Chaise — appeared Miss Maria Gore, laughing 
heartily at his graphic wit. 

Gerald felt more interested than ever, but 
he also felt uncomfortable. Here was his good 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 243 

friend Flood on the best terms in the world with, 
he had now little doubt, the individual lady 
towards whom the gallant dandy once expressed 
so much (for him) admiration in another coun- 
try. Gerald half-hated his old schoolfellow. 

When, at Miss Flint's urgent request, Flood 
relinquished his pen, the friends exchanged a 
glance of mutual consciousness. But the mar- 
tial fop, with one of his usual silly salutations, 
soon recovered his ordinary manner ; while Ge- 
rald, not so adroit in self-management, allowed 
his brow to continue blank. 

Miss Maria Gore received her new acquaint- 
ance gracefully and charmingly, and still with, 
he believed, a meaning. Flood slid out of the 
room. Miss Flint handed him his receipt, and 
put up, in great glee, his liberal subscription. 
The object of his now lively solicitude sat down 
to admire Flood's caricatures once more. The 
zealous secretary beckoned him aside. 

" So, wonders will never cease, Mr. Blount." 
" I suppose not ; but why, in particular .?" 
" Because it is to be a match, after all, be- 
tween your sister. Lady Augusta, and him-— 
think of that!" 

M 2 



244 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

"Him?— who?" 

** My goodness gracious ! you, of all men 
alive in the world, to ask !" 

*' And yet I am under the necessity of asking 
again." 

*' Though I hear you are not expected to ap- 
prove : and now, that, to me, is really the very 
strangest thing under the sun : because, letting 
alone other reasons, he is not so bad a match ; 
the property he got from his old aunt, that 
died the other day, only for just changing his 
name — ^ 

" I assure you, Miss Flint, you speak re- 
buses and charades to me," interrupted Gerald 
impatiently ; " and I must once more implore 
you to inform me, who is he ?" 
■ " Now, for shame, Mr. Blount ! This is quite 
too bad ! We all thought you had more heart ! 
And though we don't much like that set, we be- 
lieved you would act generously ! And now to 
pretend not even to understand the he I speak 
of ! — think of that ! Why, you do know, as 
well as I, and all the world besides, that he is 
the he— yoMr he — Knightly's eldest son !" 

" Pho," said Gerald, turning off. 

«Pho!— think of that!" cried Miss Flint, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 245 

looking very much surprised at Gerald, ere she 
pattered out to torment Mrs. Gore. 

" Mr. Blount, I pray a word with you," 
said Miss Maria Gore, raising her head from 
the caricatures. He bowed, and sat down at 
the table with her. 

" We are not very, very old friends," con- 
tinued the young lady, " and yet it falls to my 
lot, this day, to ask you a question, which may 
seem an intrusion on your private sentiments, 
only I am commanded by fit and competent au- 
thority to ask it." 

" Something about my taking no notice of 
Michael FarrelFs remonstrance," thought Ge- 
rald, " and so I make out my case of identity 
without a shadow of doubt — though," gazing 
on her downcast face, " I never saw her look 
so unlike before." 

To Miss Maria he expressed his great readi- 
ness to attend to any question she would do him 
the honour to propose. 

" Thank you — in the name of another, how- 
ever. And tell me, plainly, if you comfortably 
can, now; — Why did you hurtfuUy decline, the 
other day, the well-meant visit of — Mr. Knightly 
and his eldest son ?" 4. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Gerald started, ere he demanded in turn — 
" And, for Heaven's sake I Miss Maria Gore, 
how was I bound to accept their visit ?" 

** Sir !" said the lady, glancing up in surprise, 
and perhaps some displeasure — " you really re- 
quire to know ?" 

" I most certainly do, Madam.'" 

" Then, pardon me, Mr. Blount, if, on such 
an occasion, I excuse myself from becoming 
your instructress:*" and Miss Maria Gore, 
with a very sweet but appalling inclination of 
her beautiful person, also left the room. 

"Curse 'Knightly and his eldest son!'" 
muttered Gerald ; " curse them very particu- 
larly, I say ; no matter upon what account I am 
thus annoyed by them." 

" Where are you, my dear Blount ?" asked 
Mr. Gore, entering the back-drawing-room : 
** Come, be ready to offer Maria your arm ; 
dinner will soon be announced — and, indeed, it 
is time ; — they have kept us shamefully long"" — 
(and so Gerald thought, to say nothing of his 
friend Gunning) — " but beforehand, I just 
have time to request your permission to whisper 
One word — I hope you have been gratified 
by meeting since — "" — Mr. Gore laid a peculiar 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 247 

emphasis upon the word, and spoke it with a 
peculiar smile — " by meeting, since — Knightly's 
eldest son?" 

" The devil!" said Gerald to himself. 
" Since when, Mr. Gore? what do you mean?" 

*' Ah, I beg your pardon, my excellent young 
friend," affectionately tapping his shoulder ; " I 
see it agitates you ; and no wonder ; any person 
of your heart must feel exactly so; excuse me, 
I was wrong, 'tis a very delicate matter ; but 
forget it ; for this day, do not let it deprive us 
of the happiness of your unclouded counte- 
nance. And come, now, I hear dinner an- 
nounced ; where is Maria? — Maria, my love !" 
Mr. Gore walked quickly out to seek her. 

" This will make some amends for my vex- 
ations, and my most vexatious wonderings about 
these screech-owl Knightlies," ruminated Ge- 
rald, following him. 

" Stop," cried Gunning, dragging him back, 
and clutching his arm; " you and I for it 
together ; you shall lead me down, and nobody 
else; by your side alone can I face this Irish 
dinner-table: stand quiet, and let the mob pass." 

" I am really sorry," Gerald began, when 
Mr. Gore returned with Lady Offally to say, in 



248 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a great hurry, that he could not make out 
Maria, but left her to Gerald's talent for dis- 
covery ; and smiling graciously, he led the way, 
followed by Lord Offally and Mrs. Gore. 

" You hear, Sir," continued Gerald to Gun- 
ning. 

" No matter for that, you are my own," 
answered his pertinacious admirer. 

" I shall get rid of you, though, if I can 
execute Mr. Gore's commission," thought Ge- 
rald. 

They gained the outskirts of the numerous 
party in the other room, the greater portion of 
whom stood still, while the rest were getting 
through the door. Gerald anxiously gazed 
around. Miss Maria Gore was not near him. But 
looking over the little throng before him, he saw 
her, holding Flood's arm, close by the wall, and 
just Avithin the door-way^ as if she and her 
companion were awaiting a favourable moment 
to pass out. His gorge rose still higher against 
the gallant dandy. While he looked, the young 
lady's eye met his, and without any expression 
of its former interest and meaning, or even 
kindness, was quickly averted. The next in- 
stant, Flood led her down. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 249 

" Take care of me, man," exhorted Gun- 
ning, in a cross snarling tone, as Gerald soon 
after hurried him to the dining-room ; " do you 
suppose me a voltigeur, that I can with impu- 
nity make a somerset from the top to the bottom 
of these vile Irish stairs ?"" 

" I beg your pardon," answered Gerald ; 
" hold by the bannister ; — break your neck if 
you like," he added, between his teeth ; and in 
such a pleasant humour he finally seated him- 
self beside Gunning at dinner. 



M 5 



260 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER X. 

Gerald would not own to himself that his 
cofitinued spleen arose chiefly from being de- 
prived of the honour of occupying a chair at 
Miss Maria Gore's right-hand. He rather 
accounted for his silent and grave face, amid 
the clatter of (except his companion, Gunning) 
every one around him, while all arranged them- 
selves at table, by dwelling upon the repeated 
oflFences offered to his private sentiments, as to 
the pretensions of " Knightly's eldest son" to an 
alliance with his family. ^ It was very officious, 
and strange, and Irish, in Gerald's mind. Miss 
Flint he scarcely condescended to be angry 
with ; flippancy and impertinence were in the 
way of her vocation. But Mr. Gore could 
not so readily be passed by. Upon what 
grounds was a gentleman, so very slightly ac- 
quainted with Gerald, at liberty to question 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. S51 

him concerning a matter of such peculiar 
delicacy ? Granted, these Knightlies, particu- 
larly the old lady, had rendered important ser- 
vices to Augusta and her brothers, by nursing 
her through very doubtful symptoms of a very 
dangerous complaint ; but could their sense of 
obligation conferred, stop at nothing short of 
the appropriation of the high-born individual 
they had thus merely nursed, and of her con- 
siderable fortune, into the bargain? And 
must Lord Clangore and the Honourable Ge- 
raid Blount, be compelled to evince their grati- 
tude of obligation received, by assenting to a 
remuneration so unsuitable and extortionate, 
and by no other means ? Who were the best 
judges of the question ? They themselves, or 
Miss Flint, and such as she, with her com- 
ments upon Gerald's want of heart ; and Mr. 
Gore, and such as he, with his most unwarrant- 
able freedoms ? As to Miss Maria Gore, and 
her pretty indignation at, no doubt, his lack of 
generosity and common feeling in not agreeing 
with her and her sentimental correspondent, 
Augusta, upon the propriety of his sister " pay- 
ing" the Knightlies, "with herself" and hef 
sixty thousand pounds, (thus Gerald account^ 



252 THB ANGLO-IRISH. 

ed for the little scene between him and the 
young lady,) why, he could find in his heart, 
(bad as she was pleased to think it,) to excuse 
her^ upon the score of exalted notions of things, 
and of heroic friendship for, of course, her 
much-wronged Augusta. 

These thoughts passed rapidly through Ge- 
rald's mind, as he seated himself by his agree- 
able friend Gunning, and were now interrupted 
by a young clergyman pronouncing grace, to 
which there was appended an impromptu prayer, 
as follows : — " And shield and interpose to save 
us, O Lord, ever, and now, and most especially 
this coming night, from the blind hatred and 
fury of our cruel enemies !" 

The faces which an instant before had been 
cheerful, darkened, and were cast down, while 
the young cleric sonorously and slowly uttered 
these words; the festive clatter of more than 
twenty tongues subsided in deep silence ; and 
when he had ended, an impressive " amen !'" 
arose from all,— three of the party only except- 
ed. One was Gerald, who, in consequence of 
Flood's badinage about the fleet of turf-boats 
during the day, sti'ongly inclined to treat the 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 253 

whole matter lightly, and would not therefore 
lightly " worry Heaven with prayers ;" another 
was Gunning, who, his napkin seriously adjust- 
ed, had been glancing, half-critically, half- 
hungrily, at the soup, and now cried " stuff!'' 
instead of " amen," (" amen stuck in his 
throat,") loud enough to be heard beyond Ge- 
rald's ear, into which the expressive monosylla- 
ble had, by a quick turn of his head, been 
directed ; and the third was Miss Maria Gore, 
who just demurely held her tongue, until an 
ostentatious " amen !" from the gallant officer 
at her side, caused her to exchange a glance 
with him, and then she distinctly smiled. 

" Maria ?" remonstrated Miss Gore severely, 
though in an undertone, as she fixed her almost 
flashing eyes on her sister. 

" Well, Selina ?" responded Maria quietly. 
It was evident to Gerald that the sisters might 
love each other better. But the independent, 
though, as has been said, quiet look of the one, 
was a match for the dictatorial regard of the 
other; and with a shrug on the part of Miss 
Gore, the matter ended. 

Sighing, from the effects of the termination 



254 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of the grace, and, for the first time since Gerald 
had known them, their smiles faded, if not quite 
withered, Mr. and Mrs. Gore began to do the 
honours of their table. 

Gunning, having been at last helped to soup, 
just tasted it, and then abruptly took leave of 
his spoon. 

" Don't touch it," he said to Gerald, " it 
will freeze you ; they have iced it, and it will 
poison you with bay-salt and cayenne." 

Gerald had, however, already entitled himself 
to form his own opinion ; and he now thought 
Gunning's censure too harsh, and told him so. 

" Nonsense ! you're as bad as they ; the thing 
is as plain as my stick : it might have been 
tolerable vermicelli, if it had not been left to 
grow cold in their mismanaged Irish kitchen ; 
and then they tried to make it hot with season- 
ing instead of fire, (the fire was boiling or roast- 
ing some of the great joints we are yet to see,) 
and they succeeded." 

So, Mr. Gunning, all but groaning with im- 
patience, would for the present only chew a 
morsel of crust, and along with it " the cud of 
sweet and bitter fancy." 

By and by, however, he ventured on fish, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 255 

which, excepting that he called it also " cold 
and spoiled," seemed to please him better. 

He proposed a glass of Madeira with Gerald, 
and had scarce raised it to his lips, when, not 
going to the trouble of hiding a horrid grimace, 
he put it down again. Mr. Gore caught both the 
grimace, the action, and also the glance, but with 
a conscious dropping of his eye, took no notice. 
Gerald sipped the wine, and observed it in his 
glass, and felt, indeed, assured, that, whatever 
might have been its original merit, it was now 
out of order, — hot, and discoloured from recent 
shaking. Nor, recollecting Mr. Gore's futile 
visit, a few hours before, to the office of the 
disobliging wine-merchant, did he see much 
difficulty in assigning a reason why. 

Gerald, really feeling for his old friend, thus 
disappointed of the pleasant stimulant reckoned 
upon by palate and stomach, advised him to try 
the Sherry. Gunning did, and pronounced it 
worse than the Madeira. The Moselle, and the 
light French wines, he would not touch : he 
hated them — hated every French potation ex- 
cept La Fitte, and that — even could one hope 
for it under the name of Claret hej'e^ — he must 
not expect to see till the dessert appeared. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

As a desperate resource he called for beer. 
The servant handed it, and he sent it back to 
the side-board, in the hearing of the identical 
brewer, Mr. Blake, whose manufacture it was, 
and who sat almost opposite to him ; — malt 
liquor is certainly not found as good in Dublin 
as in London. He asked for soda-water. There 
was none : but ginger-beer was at his service. 

*' No. Whoever liked that stuff," he mut- 
tered to Gerald, " might go seek it, in a rural 
visit to the heights of Primrose-hill, of a sunny 
Sunday." 

Meantime, dinner went on, through its re- 
moves and courses, each abundant, and, it might 
generally be admitted, well-cooked and nicely 
arranged, if not neatly served. But Mr. Gun- 
ning, though he condescended to offer substan- 
tial proofs of his good opinion of a saddle of 
mutton, of different kinds of wild-fowl, and of 
the pastry, still contended, in his asides to Ge- 
rald, that he had never got through so uncom- 
fortable a dinner. 

" It quite agrees," he continued, " with all I 
have heard of every thing in Ireland, where 
every thing just comes near to what it ought 
to be — manner, mind, dress, house, furniture. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 257 

equipage, dinner — and yet always wants a cer- 
tain something to make it as perfect as we have 
it at home." 

But Gerald, from his slight insight into the 
hurry and doubt which had presided over the 
first needful arrangements for this particular 
dinner, argued that Mr. Gunning was not quite 
at liberty to take it as a fair specimen of all the 
other dinners given by individuals of wealth, 
as well as of fashion, throughout the Emerald 
Island. 

** Champagne ?" queried Mr. Gunning, in 
mixed satisfaction, doubt, and surprise, as an 
attendant proffered it, while he devoured some 
preserved-fruit pie — " Well !" he turned round 
to be ready for the glass, saying to Gerald, 
" in the fuss this makes, one can swallow it, 
whatever it is like:" and when he had caused 
the foaming liquor to disappear — " Gooseberry," 
he added ; " but good gooseberry, however ;" 
and he seemed slightly conciliated. 

" Mr. Blount, my esteemed young friend, 
you will agree with us, poor English-Irish, that 
our lot is a sad one, in this wretched country," 
began Mr. Gore, adverting to a conversation 
which for some time had been going on between 



258 THE ANGLO.IRISH. 

almost all the guests except Gunning and Ge- 
rald, who did not even attend to it ; " and so 
will your excellent friend at your right." 

" I don't know that," said Gunning. 

" But, my worthy Mr. Gunning," resumed 
Mr. Gore, in almost the full re-bloom of his 
smiles, which reminded Gerald of an old air of 
his country, * a rose tree in full bearing:' — 
" Before we accept your dissent, you will 
allow us to remind you upon what grounds we 
have all agreed to reckon on the great pleasure 
of your vote : you surely are aware in what 
a situation we are this evening placed ; scarce 
able to enjoy the happiness of each other's so- 
ciety ; scarce able to celebrate, convivially, the 
domestic event that brings us together." 

" I certainly was not aware that you were all 
placed in any such situation," answered Gunning. 

" Indeed ! — not that we sit here expecting, in 
the course of a few hours, an attempt to de- 
stroy us, and every person of our religious and 
political opinions in Dublin ?''"' 

" No. What kind of an attempt ? by whom ? 
— what the deuce does he mean ?" turning to 
Gerald. 

" By the Popish Rockites, my dear friend, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 259 

who rush up from their native wilds for the 
purpose, and who are to be joined by the old 
Popish rebels of the liberty, my dear Sir — the 
discontented weavers." 

" With their shuttles, positively," lisped 
Flood. Gunning looked hard from Mr. Gore to 
him ; and after a moment's scrutiny, seemed to 
comprehend. 

" How has this been found out ?" he inquired 
dubiously. 

" We are not, perhaps, precisely in posses- 
sion of the information necessary lo answer your 
question, my good Sir; or, perhaps,' — assuming 
official mystery — " it would not be considered 
prudent at the Cawstle if we did answer it ; but 
found out the thing has been." 

" And you are so positive that it must hap- 
pen .?" 

" Providence — who, since the first planting 
of English interests in this miserable country, 
has wonderfully upheld those interests, against 
an immense numerical odds of the Papist 
people — may, indeed, be pleased to avert our 
danger. But so nearly positive are we of what 
we have to encounter, that, before twilight, the 
guards were doubled at the Cawstle, and at 



260 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

every other point through Dublin; our gar- 
rison, of many thousand men, received orders 
to be in readiness for instant action ; horse- 
police, (the great Duke's excellent institution 
when he was Secretary at the Cawstle,) as- 
sisted by squadrons of the — th dragoons, began 
to patrol our streets, — hush ! there some of them 
go by ; — and you could not find one loyal 
Protestant house, in our whole city, unbarri- 
caded, this moment, or the male inmates of one 
unprepared to defend to the last, their hearths, 
their families, their religion, and all that is dear 
to them." 

" Then, I suppose, I sit in a fortified hold ?" 

" Indeed, my dear friend, you do. I took 
every precaution, to be sure, against unneces- 
sarily alarming, by my measures, such of our 
guests as the affair might prove new to, or 
might jar too much;" bowing, and now sadly 
smiling from one lady to another round the 
table. 

" But we knew we could depend on you, 
Mr. Gore ; indeed, we did," said Miss Flint. 

" Thank you, my dear Miss Flint ; I hope 
still to be found worthy of your good opi- 
nion. But, my dear Mr. Gunning, I trust I 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 261 

was not, therefore, deficient in energy and fore- 
sight, in arranging every means of defence ; 
and so well secured are our doors and win- 
dows, so watchful my servants, and so well 
armed too, together with many who hear me, 
that, even supposing our patrols surprised 
abroad in the city, it will require a large and 
determined body of rebels to overpower us." 

" Oh, we need have little fear, after all," 
resumed Miss Flint ; " the savages will get 
what they deserve — only I don't know what 
in the living world I shall do with myself 
when I hear the shots, and hear them roaring 
for us !" It seemed that Miss Flint enjoyed 
her panic in a strange kind of way, and antici- 
pated the commotion in as much glee as anxiety. 

" Then, from all you tell me, Mr. Gore, 
you must excuse my saying — notwithstanding 
your excellent soups, wines, and every thing 
else — that I wish I was safe at home, in No. 13, 

street, Grosvenor-square, instead of sitting 

here, this night." 

" Ah, my kind friend, well may you be 
excused ; Ireland is, indeed, the country to 
wish to get out of." 

" Well ; and 'tis also the country to get out 



262 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

of, if we survive this bloody night ; — and there's 
my comfort ; and yours, too, should you only 
be inclined to follow my example." 

" But how? when — to live — we cannot y my 
dear friend; — when here, fortune has cast our 
lot, for good or ill— -you surely will not at last 
decline to admit that lot to be, as I have said, 
a very sad one." 

" Yes, indeed, since you cannot enjoy your- 
selves, in your houses, after dinner, in the me- 
tropolis of Ireland, watched over by your gar- 
rison of so many thousand men, without ex- 
pecting to have yourselves put to death in cold 
blood. But to me, an Englishman, it seems 
rather strange that you cannot. Is there no- 
thing to be done to get you and the people of 
the country to live better friends ?" 

" Nothing, my dear Mr. Gunning. They 
are a half-savage race who hate us, our reli- 
gion, our superior station, and our English 
descent, just as the Caffers and Hottentots 
hate the members and subjects of our pa- 
ternal Colonial Government at the Cape, 
and " 

" If you give them the same cause for ha- 
tred, as that Colonial Government, which you 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 263 

call paternal, gives to the CafFers and Hotten- 
tots, I love them for hating you with all their 
hearts and souls," interrupted Gunning. 

•' And I," said Gerald. 

" But of course you do not ?''' continued 
this plain-speaker, half- willing to relieve the 
profound blank of countenance his comment 
had produced. 

" Indeed we do not. On the contrary, we 
strain every nerve to benefit them, and they 
won't let us." 

" How, twice over ?" 

" In the first place, we establish schools for 
them, all over the country, at great expense, 
our funds derived from individual donations 
and subscriptions, and from parliamentary 
grants ; and into these schools they will not 
send their wild little children, merely because 
their bigoted priests object to our Bible with- 
out note or comment." 

" Nay," said Mr. Priestly, " we open that 
Bible to them, and on the authority of its Word, 
we prove to them that their priests are the 
teachers of an idolatrous and blasphemous su- 
perstition, in the mire of which they and their 
children wallow, and " 



264 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" They won't believe you, I suppose ?" asked 
Gunning. 

*' Before the rescinding, within the last forty 
years, of the principal penal statutes, they were 
inclined to be quieter, though they never could 
have grown to like us," said the Judge's son, 
who was " going to the bar"" — a great " go," (as 
he would himself have said,) amongst all classes 
of young English-Irish, from the tradesman's 
son to the Earl's ; — " Since, then, however, ac- 
cording as Papist-attornies, and barristers, and 
merchants, and farmers, have sprung up, and 
have been permitted to brawl their way on, in the 
Four-Courts, and to make demagogue speeches 
at taverns, and to engage in all kinds of traffic, 
and to take, nay, to become absolute proprietors 
of land, — while nothing can be more injurious to 
English ascendancy in this country, than their 
thus engrossing much professional and social in- 
fluence, which ought to "be limited to the King's 
loyal subjects, the sturdiness, and the presump- 
tion, generated, at the same time, amongst the 
lower orders of their countrymen, in consequence 
of their petty elevation, is intolerable, Mr, Gun- 
ning, and may be said to be the chief cause of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 265 

our uncomfortable situation in Mr. Gore's house, 
Sir, this very night."" 

" If they spare us, this very night, I have no 
quarrel with them about the ' sturdiness' how- 
ever," said Gunning; " I hope they'll grow as 
sturdy as they can, it will be all the better for 
them — the peasants of my country are sturdy 
rascals, and I think well of them for it — I am 
sturdy myself, and I like myself because I am. 
But, concerning the presumption .'*'" 

" Perhaps Mr. Gunning will allow me to ex- 
plain that," said old Sir John Lumley, bowing 
graciously ; '* I ought to know something of it ; 

I have been dealing with those people these 

that is, since I came of age ; and about the time 
mentioned by my learned young friend oppo- 
site to me — or rather some years afterwards — 
I found them tractable, and respectful, and 
obedient, almost to the extept one could expect 
from beings of their caste ; but, as my learned 
young friend also has said, ever since persons of 
their religion, and sprung almost from their 
own class, began to figure away as counsellors, 
forsooth, and demagogues, and gentlemen far- 
mers, ay, and landed gentlemen too, and rich 
merchants — " 

VOL. IL N 



266 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And would-be bank-directors — I beg your 
pardon, Sir John, but my hint may add to the 
information you are conveying to our English 
friend," said the brewer of the beer Mr. Gun- 
ning had sent back to the sideboard, who, by 
the way, loas a bank-director. 

" Yes, Mr. — a — a — Blake — thank you ; — yes, 
Mr. Gunning, some of those mushroom, purse- 
proud Papists, thought to foist themselves in 
also amongst the respectable persons who manage 
the important concerns of our national bank ; 
but they met the repulse they merited. And to 
continue — ever since the common people of this 
country saw their fellow-papists making way in 
the different pursuits I have described, nothing 
can equal the remarkable change that has taken 
place in their demeanour towards the Protestant 
noblemen and gentry, who, generally speaking, 
are, thank God ! yet their landlords." 

" For instance, Sir Jbhn .?" 

" Why, my good Sir, these fellows absolutely 
begin to threaten you, upon the slightest provo- 
cation, with summoning you, and processing 
you, and going to law with you." 

" The deuce they do," sneered Gunning. 

« Think of that !" cried Miss Flint. 

" Yes, Sir,'' resumed Sir John ; " I assure 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 267 

you, Mr. Gunning — I assure you, Mr. Blount 
— that the son of a fellow whom, thirty or forty 
years ago, you might have paid with a horse- 
whipping, or with setting your dogs at his heels, 
if he presumed to teaze you with a complaint 
of high rent, or a complaint against your land- 
steward, or for breaking his fence, or for tread- 
ing down a few of his potatoe- stalks, or a few 
blades of his corn, or what not, out hunting — 
the son of that same fellow will now threaten to 
indict you for a common assault at the quarter- 
sessions, when you only lay your whip across 
his shoulders, upon any such annoying occa- 
sion." 

" The slave ! Does he not knock you clean 
down .''" asked Gunning, suddenly thumping the 
table, as he gave way to the indignation of a 
man born, and, almost to the present moment, 
living amongst a free and independent people. 

The ladies started. The gentlemen looked 
at each other. During a short pause — " This 
is quite too bad," said he to Gerald ; " come 
away." 

" Stay, for Heaven's sake !" said Gerald, as he 
prepared to rise upon his stick : " I share your 
feelings ; but let us recollect ourselves, — our fair 
friends ; see, they are frightened." 
N 2 



268 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" Are they ? I beg your pardon, Mrs. Gore," 
grunted Gunning, quietly re-seating himself. 

*' Besides," added Gerald, " you know we 
cannot well force our way out of this fortified 
house ; and even if we did, it were but to face 
the Rockites and disaffected weavers." 

" Stuff ! — if there really were such a mob in 
the streets, I could find in my heart to go out 
and head them in upon these people." 

" But the main question," said Mr. Gore, 
softening over the late little explosion with a 
muster of all his best graces, " and, indeed, the 
most useful one, is, how are we to take millions 
of wretched and ferocious peasantry of Ireland, 
out of the hands of those who so inflame them 
against us, in order, as you so properly have 
remarked, my dear Mr. Gunning, to live at 
peace with them, and to guard against the re- 
currence of such nights as we now sit exposed 
to ?" 

" Educate them," said Lady Offally. 

" Your Ladyship knows they won't be edu- 
cated on our plan."** 

" Couldn't noblemen and gentlemen get a law 
passed to take their children from them by 
force, and send them to school .''" asked Miss 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 269 

Gore regally, with a slight glance upon Sir 
John. 

" If indeed, by any good and lawful means, 
we could get the poor infants under our care, 
at the very earliest age, and allow them to 
develope the * determination which God has 
given to their nature,' and ' the germ of his 
everlasting Word, by which the whole universe 
was created, and upon which all existence, 
spiritual as well as material, depends,' " resumed 
Lady OfFally, quoting from a mystic little book, 
" then, indeed, we might hope to see the natives 
of this country improved in the rising generation. 
A few of such infant schools, on the principle of 
Pestalozzi, established by myself, I have great 
hopes of, as you know. Miss Flint." 

" Ah, no wonder !" assented Miss Flint ; 
" those your Ladyship showed me, last month, 
in the country ! Lots of the poor little dears, 
Mrs Gore, sitting on mats, to keep the damp 
of the clay floor from their poor little — bodies,*^ 
hesitating, " and none of them more than three 
or four years old ; and they so comfortable there, 
the day long, out of harm's way, and fretted 
with nothing in the world wide, but just allowed 
to ' develope the consciousness of the divine 



270 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

germ within their own hearts !' Think of that ! 
So, educate them after dear, delightful Pestalozzi, 
I say too.'" 

" Educate them, but not so vaguely," ob- 
served Mr. Priestly : " educate them in the 
letter as well as in the spirit of the Word : that, 
and that only, will allow you to be friends with 
them, and avert recurrences of such a night as 
this." 

" That is, convert them,'^ said Lord Harmer. 

" Keep them down,'' recommended Sir John 
Lumley. 

*' And begin with the demagogues," added 
the Judge's son, " and the 'counsellors,'" with 
a sneer. 

" Make them tidy," exhorted Miss Flint ; 
" support our society, teach them to go neat, 
and to turn small loans, and to whitewash." 

At the last word Mr. Gore slightly started. 

" Set them to drain all the bogs," said Lord 
OfFally. 

" And to improve the fisheries," hinted Lord 
Friar. 

*' Thin them," advised a young Fellow of 
Dublin College. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 271 

" That 's the way," agreed the Militia lieu- 
tenant. 

" Yes, ship them off, in fleets, to our colonies," 
recommended Mr. Blake. 

"And afterwards, — indeed, immediately, — 
make marriage amongst those who stay at home, 
except under prescribed circumstances, and at a 
certain age, penal," said the young clergyman 
who had pronounced grace, a deep student in 
Malthus. 

" Think of that !" cried Miss Flint, looking 
very much pleased at him, (though astonished 
and puzzled,) in gratitude for his confining 
matrimony to " a certain age." 

" Mine is a shorter way," resumed the young 
Fellow of College ; " they and their demagogues 
threaten us with their numbers — let them 
rebel." 

" Ay, and thin them then," echoed the 
lieutenant. 

" What say you, Mr. Gunning .?" asked Mr. 
Gore. 

" Oh, nothing like leather," answered the 
cynic. 

Mrs. Gore arose to lead her fair battalion to 



272 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the drawing-room, ere Mr. Gunning gave his 
reply; as if, indeed, she and they were not to 
sit and listen to the opinions of so uncouth a 
person. 

The moment they had retired, Lord Friar 
raised his glass, and while his common, vacant, 
and disagreeable features betrayed a peculiar 
excitement — " Come, Gore," he said boiste- 
rously, " you shall have my remedy in my old 
toast at the ' Beef-steak,' and here it is — 
' The Pope in the pillory, the pillory in h — 11, 
pelted with priests by the d 1 !' " 

Amid the cheer which followed. Gunning 
arose, and said, " I decline that toast."" 

" And so do I," said Gerald, standing by 
his side, and offering him his unhurt arm. 

Glances were interchanged round the table, 
and Lord Friar began to swell. A shout in 
the street, as if in answer to the cheer that had 
just been given, diverted the rising storm. 
Every face now looked more seriously occupied ; 
the next instant, while the shouts abroad con- 
tinued, a kind of clashing was heard. The 
next, screams echoed from the drawing-room ; 
a rush of light and small feet came down-stairs ; 
two servants, pale and agitated, stumbled into 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 273 

the dining-room, both faltering — " Oh, Sir ! — 
Oh, gentlemen 1" and as Mrs. Gore and all of 
her fair party, Miss Maria Gore excepted, 
rushed in, still more pale and frightened, some 
yet shrieking, (Miss Flint the loudest,) and 
some prepared to swoon in the first pair of 
strong arms they could encounter — " Up, 
gentlemen, and arm ! — Spike ! throw open the 
lockers of that sideboard ! It is the blood- 
thirsty yell of the Papists, by Heavens !" cried 
Mr. Gore. 



N 5 



274 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 



CHAPTER XI. 



The servants quickly executed their master's 
orders, and flinging wide some little cupboards 
in the article of furniture he spoke of, displayed 
a goodly depot of pistols, great and small, with 
one or two blunderbusses. This accession to 
the secret arms, which, as Miss Flint hinted, 
most of the gentlemen assembled had carried 
about them, and which they now quickly dis- 
played, soon transformed the festive circle into 
a gallant band, prepared to resist to the last. 
Even Gerald allowed a \^eapon of death to be 
thrust into his single available hand, and Mr. 
Gore called loudly on Mr. Gunning to arm 
himself also. At first the old gentleman did 
not appear amongst his friends, nor answer to 
his name ; but when the challenge was repeated, 
he spoke from the chimney-corner, where, re- 
mote from the whole group, who had clustered 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 275 

in the middle of the apartment, he appeared, 
bent towards the fire, propping himself with 
one hand upon his stick, and with the other 
making the poker hot. 

" A pistol, my excellent friend !" cried Mr. 
Gore. 

" No, thank you," replied Gunning. 

" Then a blunderbuss, if you prefer it !" 

" Nor that, neither : don't mind me ; I en- 
gage to defend myself with this;" he spoke 
either in the most imperturbable coolness and 
bravery, or else in a downright sneer : Mr. 
Gore and his friends could not tell which ; 
but Gerald thought the latter, because, pre- 
vious to his retreat upon the fire, he had seen 
Mr. Gunning exchange a few significant words 
apart with Captain Flood. And yet Gerald 
could now really see no cause for sneering at 
the matter, notwithstanding that Flood might 
still choose to amuse himself with real danger, 
and the fears of others. 

"The rest of the servants guard all the 
lower doors .?" demanded Mr. Gore of the two 
trembling attendants who had entered, and who 
also were now strongly armed. They answered 
in the affirmative. 



276 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You both, then, remain to watch the 
windows of this room : — dear ladies, you will 
be under the necessity of withdrawing to the 
cellars below, — they will be our citadel — them 
we will defend to the last drop of our blood ! — 
Mrs. Blake — Angelina, my heart ! do not sit 
there, looking so very helplessly frightened." 
Mrs. Blake did not look frightened to any 
great degree, but rather much surprised at 
being put out of her way. — " Mrs. Gore, I 
thank you, love, for your heroism ;" the lady 
was supporting Miss Fhnt through the perform- 
ance of a faint ; or, as in her own double- 
refined English she called it, a feint, — " now 
lead down your dear friends, and our dear 
charge — some gentlemen will assist you to the 
cellar-door with poor Miss Flint. Mrs. Hunt, 
my respectable old friend, do not kneel in that 
corner : where are Miss Chip, and her younger 
sister, Mrs. Stone ?" Mrs. Gore pointed to 
one of the close-drawn crimson curtains of the 
apartment; and when it was dragged aside the 
old ladies appeared, indeed, behind it, kneel- 
ing with their faces to the floor, in the recess 
of the window. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 277 

" To the cellars, dear ladies !" continued 
Mr. Gore, as, ere he had quite completed his 
muster of those who were to be incarcerated in 
them, the shouts which for the last few minutes 
had been growing faint at a distance, now rose 
shrilly abroad, and seemed rapidly approach- 
ing to the hall-door. " Yet, stop ! the villains 
come on so quick, it may be better not to trust 
our precious charge out of our sight. — Hark ! 
the clashing of pikes and other rude weapons 
increases ! — what do you advise, Captain 
Flood .?" 

" Permit the suggestion that you ask Lord 
Friar ; his Lordship has served in former cam- 
paigns against these wild enemies," said Flood, 
pointing to the noble person he spoke of, who, 
his back against the wall behind the door, the 
arm which held his pistol dropped at his side, 
his sunken eyes staring, and his disagreeable 
features cadaverously pale, seemed the indi- 
vidual of all the band least capable of guiding 
the counsel of war. 

" His Lordship ought, indeed, to assist us, 
in every way, for his own sake," said Gunning, 
still watching his poker, with his back bent 



278 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and turned ; " for, if I don't greatly mistake, 
they were listening to his toast down the 
chimney." 

*' I leave every thing to you and Captain 
Flood, Mr. Gore," faltered Lord Friar ; " and 
as to the unlucky toast, I hope to be able to 
explain it." 

" Then speak at once, Flood !" exhorted Mr. 
Gore, as the shrill shouts seemed to arise ex- 
actly before the house; " Shall we lock the 
ladies into this parlour, and defend them in the 
hall, rather than trust them to a sudden sur- 
prise on their passage to the cellars ?''"' 

" Very positively, I tend to think so," answer- 
ed Captain Flood ; " and first, before we leave 
them here, remotely allow, valiant host, the hint 
of a little stratagem, or ruse de guerre, to inspire 
doubt, if not terror, in the assailants." 

" Any thing you please, my dear fellow !" 

" Then, amiable ladies, fall back ; all divisions 
of our band of defenders, advance, and form in 
line here^ — good. My Lord Friar, fall in ; now, 
eyes forward to the fire-place, and, when I give 
the word, salute it with a volley." 

" What 's that ?" asked Gunning, suddenly 
hobbling aside, and abandoning his poker, while 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 279 

renewed screams arose amongst the ladies, and 
Miss Flint, Miss Chip, Mrs. Stone, and others, 
turned their faces to the wall, and stopped their 
ears. 

'•' Ready, present, fire — " commanded Flood ; 
and there ensued, indeed, a stunning volley, 
rendered ten times more harsh than it would 
have proved in the open air, by the limited 
space to which the explosion was confined. 
One of the blunderbusses scattered slugs wide of 
the mark, and did wild work amongst the glass 
on the sideboard, which considerably added to 
the noise ; the coals jumped out of the grate, and 
rattled against the fender; the fire-irons were 
knocked down, and clashed against each other; 
many panes in the windows burst to shivers ; 
Lord Friar's ball erred aside and shot a lap-dog, 
whose dying yelps frightfully joined the general 
din ; but the climax of the uproar were the 
frantic shrieks of Miss Flint and her middle- 
aged friends, as, unable to control their impul- 
sive terror, they fell flat on the carpet, kicking it 
with their toes, and scratching it with their nails. 

" Nice shooting, good practice," applauded 
Flood : " recover arms, prime and load, and 
reserve the next volley for the enemy, if, indeed, 



280 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

this manifestation of our force and resolution 
does not cause them remotely to contemplate a 
retreat; — and hush ! are they not already silenced 
and in motion past our position ?" 

It was even so. The shouts abroad instantly 
subsided upon the discharge of the fire-arms, 
and the noise of a running crowd grew every 
moment more distant. 

" Yes, my dear Captain, you are right ! 'twas 
an excellent thought!" cried Mr. Gore; "but 
do you account us quite safe ? — may they not 
have run back merely to obtain a reinforcement 
from their main body ?" 

" It is exceedingly probable," said Flood. 

" Now, then, is our moment to escort our 
dearest friends to the cellars," continued Mr. 
Gore ; and, under the protection of some of the 
armed party, to the cellars the ladies according- 
ly withdrew : Miss Flint and her contempora- 
ries borne in the gentlemen's arms, while they 
loudly bewailed themselves; Mrs. Blake looking 
at last alive, and coldly muttering, " How very 
odd !" and Miss Gore, looking frowning and 
fierce, and tossing out of the parlour with a — 
" desperately provoking !" 

They were scarcely gone, when a body of 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 281 

horse trotted hard by the house, and were soon 
out of hearing, down the square. 

" There go our friends !" exclaimed Mr. 
Gore joyously, " in time to cut off the rebels 
in a second advance — still let us stand prepared. 
What's the matter, my dear Offally ?" as his 
Lordship spoke loud in the hall — " Indeed !"" — 
having gained the parlour-door — " gentlemen, 
friends, here's domestic treachery !" he conti- 
nued — " some one of my household, in the confi- 
dence of the rebels, has extinguished the lamps 
in the hall, and on the stairs, and in the pas- 
sages ! Come in, Lord Offally — come in, gen- 
tlemen — ^let us secure the door, and investigate 
this." 

With a grave look, Mr. Gore turned the key 
in the lock, and went on in a low voice. 

" I think I can fathom it at once. Notwith- 
standing all my efforts to procure loyal Pro- 
testant servants exclusively, by public adver- 
tisements as well as by private inquiries, I 
have not been able to complete the number 
necessary for my establishment, without inclu- 
ding one Papist footman, Regan O'Regan by 
name ; and that he, this Papist, Regan O'Regan, 
has, according to agreement with the rebels, now 



28S THE ANGLO.IRISH. 

put out the lamps, in order to create confusion 
amongst our little garrison, and so facilitate the 
attempt of our sworn murderers, I, for one, do 
not entertain a doubt." 

Many of Mr. Gore's friends agreed with him. 

" Then, should we not secure him ? — Spike !" 
to one of the servants who had first entered the 
room, and who, according to orders, remained 
to guard its windows — " in what part of the 
house is this fellow to be found ?" 

" He stands guard with Tomlin, and Mr. 
White, at the back-door. Sir — but '' 

" Arrest and disarm him instantly ! and con- 
duct him hither." 

*' Meantime, the duty be mine to reconnoitre 
the principal enemy from some window above 
stairs," said Flood, and withdrew. 

" Why do you hesitate, sirrah .?" demanded 
Mr. Gore to the servant, who had been earnestly 
speaking to his companion. 

" James Day, here. Sir, thinks it his duty to 
set you right about O'Regan and the lamps, 
though he is sure you will be angry with him- 
self." 

" What, villain !" cried Mr. Gore to Day — 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 283 

"yow — you ! and not this Papist, are the traitor ? 
you confess it, do you ?"" 

" He confesses a great neglect of his business, 
Sir, though no treason. In the hurry of the 
house, this morning, preparing for dinner and 
the mass-sacker together, — he forgot to put fresh 
oil in the lamps." 

" The mouse is born," whispered Gunning 
to Gerald, *' but 'tis only mouse the first ; the 
mountain will have twins this time." 

" You careless scoundrel !" cried Mr. Gore, 
more angry at his own failure in sagacity than at 
poor James Day's neglect — " prepare to leave 
my service to-morrow morning, — you and that 
Papist together." 

" As soon as you pay me my wages. Sir, I am 
ready to go," grumbled Day. 

" Leave the room, you dog !" Gerald observed 
with surprise a ferocious change in Mr. Gore's 
manner, much more positive than he had wit- 
nessed in the morning, while walking with him 
through Dublin ; " put down your pistol, and 
leave the room !" 

" Though, if I stay till your honour does pay 
me, we '11 be apt to be a long time together, I 'm 



284 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

thinking," rejoined the man, as he obeyed the 
first of these commands. 

" Begone, without another word !" bellowed 
Mr. Gore, stamping at him. Gerald now 
thought his bland host — savage. The servant, 
unlocking the door, doggedly withdrew. 

The open door admitted sounds from the 
drawing-room, which made every one start and 
listen, and particularly Mr. Gore. 

" Hush !" he said, " surely there has been 
one of our ladies forgotten above stairs, and 
something now happens to throw her into that 
appalling hysteric laugh ; some of you follow me, 
gentlemen, for Heaven's sake !" 

Gerald, the first to attend to his host's re- 
quest, ascended the stairs by his side. Mr. 
Gore gave the word to advance cautiously, and 
all stole upon tiptoe. The stifled laughing still 
rang on their ears, with scarce an interval of 
cessation. In certain misgivings, Gerald got 
several paces before Mr. Gore, and stopped alone 
at the open drawing-room door to listen. The 
voice of Flood reached him, recounting, in a 
low key, but in the very best specimen of his 
ridiculous style of exaggeration, the scene of 
firing a volley at the grate in the room below ; 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 285 

and his portraiture of the valour of the gentle- 
men, and of the terror of some of the ladies, was 
really so mirth-moving, that his auditor might al- 
most be forgiven her enjoyment of it. Mr. Gore's 
hasty approach now arrested, however. Miss 
Maria Gore's laughter, and Gerald heard the 
hoaxing dandy move towards a window. 

"Good God! Maria! — Maria, my love!" 
ejaculated Mr. Gore, as accompanied by Gerald, 
and followed by his party, he entered the draw- 
ing-room, " What has happened to j^ou V 

" Nothing, Sir," answered the young lady 
demurely. 

" Collect yourself, my dearest child ! See — 
your friends are with you — how wild she looks ! 
Answer me, for Heaven's sake ! who has so ter- 
rified you ? Some of the villains that have been 
spirited into the house, I am convinced, gentle- 
men. Ha ! that window open ! and a man behind 
that curtain !" 

" And your poor friend, ever," said Flood, 
advancing, " very diligently stationed here to 
reconnoitre." 

" Has my dear child explained the cause of 
her fit to you .?" Mr. Gore joined him. 

" Excuse the ignorance of an exceedingly 



286 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Steady soldier, attentive to nothing but the 
duties of his post," answered Flood. 

" Maria, my love !" — Mr. Gore turned to 
address her again, but Miss Maria had left the 
room. " This is very strange !" said her fa- 
ther, when the renewed clatter of horsemen 
aroused a new interest. In a moment a patrole 
of the — th halted before the house. 

" Flood !" cried the officer ; " 'tis Flood ?" 
"Rather positively, good Morton," replied 
his friend. 

" In the name of wonder, what have you all 
been doing in this house ? or what has been 
doing to you all ? We have ascertained that 
under Mr. Gore's roof was the discharge of fire- 
arms, which reached us half a mile off, and ter- 
rified all your neighbours to death, and fright- 
ened all Dublin — is it so .?*' 

*' There was a volley, positively," agreed 
Flood. 

" At whom ? for what .?" 

" While the rebels came up to assault our 

doors, Captain Morton," answered Mr. Gore, 

presenting himself at the window, " and it had 

the desired effect of scaring them away, just 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 287 

before you pushed by to profit by their retreat ; 
— ^you came up with them, did you ?" 

" Pho ! Mr. Gore ; if that be all, your powder 
and ball are wasted, and your neighbours startled 
to little purpose. I came up only with a ragged 
crowd of boys and lads, who, in mockery, I 
suppose, of the terrors of people who ought to 
be wiser than they, were amusing themselves 
very laughably about the streets." 

" But we heard the clash of some kind of 
rude weapons. Captain Morton !" 

" You heard the clash of a bundle of tin can- 
nisters and old kettles tied to a dog's tail, upon 
whose back was strapped a cat, habited in mi- 
litary uniform, and whom the young rascals 
were hunting up and down the square, Mr. 
Gore." 

" Mouse the second," said Gunning, " and a 
much finer mouse than his twin-brother. I love 
those ragged little villains, and their cannisters, 
in my heart of hearts." 

'' Good God! is it possible!" cried Mr, 
Gore, after expending a good many other eja- 
culations; "and up to this hour — let me see, 
near ten o'clock, — up to this hour we are all 
really safe, Captain Morton ?" 



288 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" You are, Mr. Gore ; and I think I may 
warrant your safety till morning, provided you 
let each other alone, and avoid the chances of 
stray bullets from another speculative volley. 
Good-night, Mr. Gore ; my compliments and 
assurances to your amiable ladies — Good-night, 
Flood ; I see we may thank you for this — ^you 
are, what you ever have been, a sad dog." 

" Good-night, too confident comrade," said 
Flood. 

With faces expressive of a doubt that they had 
rather made fools of themselves, many of the 
gentlemen, now abandoning or concealing their 
arms, proceeded, led by Mr. Gore, to relieve their 
fair friends from imprisonment. And in a short 
time the ladies re-appeared in the drawing- 
room, their brows yet anxious and their cheeks 
pale, their head-dresses ornamented with cob- 
webs, and their slippers and flounces not the 
better for having swept the floors of the cellars. 
Miss Maria Gore joined them ; the only lady of 
the party who still exhibited her usual smiles 
and roses, as well as her usual good order of 
attire. 

" What luck you had to be left behind !" 
said Miss Flint to her : " and, think of this ! 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 289 

nothing but cannisters at a- dog's tail, after all ! 
and we so safe, out of the way, and every thing 
in the world ! Dear me !" 

" Gentlemen should take time to reflect before 
they subject us to such homd inconvenience,'* 
observed Miss Gore, glancing hostilely at Sir 
John Lumley. 

" I 'm very cold, I believe," murmured Mrs. 
Blake, giving a little yawn and a shudder. 

Tea and coffee, a replenished fire, and shut- 
ting the drawing-room doors, somewhat re- 
established the comforts of the party. Gunning, 
after whispering, as he passed Gerald, " all 
this is being in Ireland," drew a chair close to 
the fender, and set himself to contemplate the 
phantasmagoria of the red coals in the gi'ate. 

Gerald remained wholly occupied with another 
kind of phantasmagoria. His friend Flood and 
Miss Maria seemed still better acquainted than 
his growing interest towards that young lady 
allowed him to relish. Finding them together 
in the drawing-room, confidentially amused with 
the mortal terror of the whole house besides, 
was worse than their fine-arts studies and their 
relative positions at dinner. And he felt very 
anxious to ascertain Flood's sentiments, at least, 

VOL. II, o 



290 THE ANGLO-IRISH, 

on the subject, which he proposed to do by con- 
versing with himself. But he would not put 
any abrupt question. 

He would imperceptibly lead to such a one 
as must serve his purpose. 

Flood soon gave him the opportunity of ask- 
ing any question. Since the return of the ladies 
from their subterraneous dungeons, he and Miss 
Maria had not noticed each other. Gerald 
looked round for her, previous to his approach 
to him, at the other side of the room, (where he 
was assisting Miss Flint to extract the scraps of 
cobwebs from her cap and her front,) and saw 
the young lady seated by Mr. Gunning at the 
fire, holding his stick while he sipped his coflPee, 
and chatting merrily with him, while the rough 
old man absolutely seemed, from the expression 
of his face, to be aroused into something like a 
human sympathy. 

" I am your suitor folr an opinion, Flood, in 
a case of extreme difficulty," said Gerald, after 
he had stood over his friend and Miss Flint, 
until her cap and curls (the latter, as has already 
been insinuated, only called hers) were pro- 
nounced cobweb free. 

" Friend of my early days, I attend you.'" 
They found out an unoccupied corner. 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 291 

** You have already assisted me to get at our 
good host, Mr. Gore ; help me again." 

" Positively, no." 

" Why so .?" 

" Even because, worthy fellow, Heaven hath 
endowed you with eyes, ears, and observation 
of your own." 

'* But supposing me ever so gifted, I require 
time and multiplied opportunities to arrive at my 
point ; and, if I cannot aflbrd the time, and so 
miss the opportunities, and if my interests. Flood, 
require, notwithstanding, that — ^ 

" Ah, hear him ! Very certainly he holds me 
bound to be as a guide and a light to him, in 
every imaginable way ; and since such is the lot, 
as well as the slight inclination of your constant 
friend, estimable Blount, — speak." 

" Well. Mr. Gore has, long ago, while I was 
in France, given three hundred and fifty pounds 
in trust for me to a friend of his who was going 
out to India, via London, and the money awaits 
me either at Lord Clangore's, or at my banker's." 

" If, very unhappily, Mr. Gore's friend may 
not have taken it, through the merest shade of 
a mistake, out to India ? Goes it not rather so.?" 

*' Yes ; rather so, indeed."" 



i&St THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

" And you incontestably do not comprehend?"^ 

" I art very unwilling to comprehend as you 
seem to wish I should." 

" Which, I venture to hint, is being as verdant 
as you are accomplished and virtuous, magna- 
nimous Blount. — But what was ' magnanimous 
Goldsmith ' at ' Scarron's of old ?' " 

" A gooseberry fool," answered Gerald. 

" Thou hast said it, and not thy faithful and 
respectful admirer, old class-mate : — wherefore 
spare me." 

" You are pardoned. But listen. You saw 
how anxious Mr. Gore was, in your presence, 
this morning, to get me here to dinner. Well, 
his hospitable zeal wonderfully cooled as we 
walked along the streets, and he even wanted 
to see me under weigh, this evening, out of his 
country, until by chance we met his excellent 
lady, and Miss, and Mias Maria Gore, in their 
carriage, and then he grew irresistibly warm, 
and good, and pressing again, all of a sudden — 
read me that." 

" First, primitive being, vouchsafe a very few 
admissions. You laboured under one of your 
constitutional agitations, at sight of Miss Maria 
Gore, I am bold enough to pronounce." 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 293 

*' Yes, indeed, and even raved of her to her 
father's face, before I knew who she was." 

" Doubtless. Hearken, then, to the words 
of thy poor oracle. The original warmth of the 
morning, was English- Irish accomplishment ; 
while the heart beneath hoped and prayed to 
its gods for the identical refusal you accorded." 

" Why, what could be the motive for hating 
my company, at such a rate ?" 

" The simple vision of that noble countenance, 
which, though redolent of high aspirings and 
deep benignity to all the world besides, Avas 
unto thy excellent host, even as would have 
been the features of ugliness, enmity, yea, and 
threat." 

" You must go on." 

" Horrid remembrancer ! — a leaf of a trades- 
folk's ledger it was — a protested bill — an at- 
torney's letter — a summons — a process — a lati- 
tat — a forehead marked with the mark of The 
Beast." 

" Oh, now I accompany you. Well, But 
his sudden change into affection, when he pre- 
sented me at the carriage-door ?" 

" To that thy oracle answereth in pithy 
aphorisms, i/ou slightly continuing to recollect 
o 3 



294 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

the eloquent praises of a certain lady pronounced 
by your lips ere the memorable presentation. 
Often blessed is a father, over head and ears 
in debt, in the beauty of his daughter. Sweet 
as the promise of a receipt in full from a credi- 
tor, is the smile of that creditor upon her come- 
liness.'" 

" Well, Flood, and I own that Miss Maria 
Gore desperately fascinated me." 

" As why should the very brilliant person 
not .?" 

" Shall I allow her to keep doing so .''" 

" In this respect, content your susceptible 
heart according to its yearnings. The flower 
of her garden she may be suggested to be, al- 
ways taking into account her sympathetic power 
over bosoms such as thine, easily fascinated 
Blount. But allow to thy still watchful friend 
the shadow of yet another warning. For all 
your present gentle feelings, and for all your 
future sweet communings with the present lady 
of your love, hand not to her pleasing parent 
many more little drafts on your London 
banker. Her, win and wear, unto death, if you 
can ; — him wed not along with her." 

" I shall remember your friendly hint. But 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 295 

do you know, Flood, my interest for the lady 
has chiefly been aroused by her strongly re- 
minding me of a charming person we met a few 
weeks ago in Pere la Chaise ?" 

" And, indubitably, your constant friend was, 
by the first vision of Miss Maria Gore, also in- 
clined to be startled, as if at a re-appearance of 
that evasive individual."" 

" Is she not the very same ?" 

" I will even positively put myself in gentle 
motion, and ask her for you." 

" That's very obliging — pray do ; she glided 
this moment into the whist-tables in the other 
room." 

" Venture to account the service undertaken;'" 
and Flood accordingly slid off. 

Gerald looked round for Gunning, anxious, 
till his friend's return, to get an idea from him of 
the kind of chat that had for some time gone on 
between the cynic and Miss Maria. He did not 
appear, however, at the fire. Miss Flint pat- 
tered up to Gerald's corner. 

" We want your opinion, this very moment, 
Mr. Blount, of — Which is the very best, and 
most delightful, and most striking of the novels 
that all the world is reading and raving about ? 



296 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

And, come here. Captain ," calling to the 

mute young admirer of Mrs. Blake — " we want 
yours too, above all things in the world wide l"' 
she repeated her question. 

The young gentleman drawled out that, " Po- 
sitively, he could not venture to say ; he had not 
happened to have read any of them." 

"No!— think of that!" cried Miss Flint, 
looking more a meaning than she should have 
done. 

" No, positively, he never read at all — the 
— th never read.'' 

** Then maybe you write ?" 

" Certainly not ; — never, on any account." 

" And you the son of such a very great 
writer .''" 

" Yes : his father, he believed — wrote :"" and 
he coursed after Mrs. Blake. 

" Think of that !— well, upon my word !" and 
without insisting on her answer from Gerald, 
she suddenly changed the topic. 

" I ni tell you a secret, Mr. Blount. Thaty" 
nodding her head to Sir John Lumley and Miss 
Gore, ** that will be a match a great deal sooner 
than most people think. I Ve made it out since 
I came here to-day ; ay, and the reason why 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 297 

long before. You must not think I listen to 
what others wish to say amongst themselves, 
but not a great many hours ago, I overheard, 
by chance, and in spite of me, Mr. Gore and 
Mrs. Gore laying their particular commands on 
poor Selina to let Sir John have his way in 
naming the earliest day he liked — to-morrow, if 
it came into his head — think of that !" 

" Well, perhaps Sir John has been very ur- 
gent with Mr. and Mrs. Gore, Miss Flint.'" 

" Oh, no doubt in the living world of that, 
poor doting old man, and who can look at dear 
Selina and blame him, gone by as he is. But 
that's not the whole reason. Things cannot go 
on in this house another week, take my word for 
it. Indeed, the wonder of the world wide is, 
how they have gone on for the last week, ay, 
and the last year, along with it, and the last ten 
years, on the back of that again, if you knew 
but all. I have a sister married to one of the 
first solicitors in Dublin, and she assures me, 
that since he was eighteen years old poor Mr. 
Gore has been going in debt, going in debt, day 
after day, year after year, down to the present 
blessed moment, and never paying a shilling to 



298 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a single human being — think of that ! there 's 
for you !" 

" But your sister may have been misinformed, 
Miss Flint, the thing seems so very impossible ; 
why, Mr. Gore is now about fifty, I should 
think, and you suppose him living for thirty 
years in such a way. " 

" Well, and it 's not so impossible, after all, 
in Ireland. You only think it is because you 
have been brought up in England. I '11 tell you. 
As long as a mortgage could be laid on the 
estate, creditors had patience, and something was 
raised for bare living. Something else came in 
by giving, now and then, a bill for a hundred 
pounds to some greedy tradesman, and getting 
fifty from him, the other fifty paying an old 
debt, and a premium into the bargain : and 
something else came in by begging and bor- 
rowing from friends and^relations. But all was 
jtt nearly over with the poor Gores, when that 
place you and your brother got for him in the 
Castle, (a good friend you and yours have been 
to them,) and Mr. Gore's sweet promises, and 
speeches, and engaging to procure situations for 
their sons or their brothers, and praising and 
patronizing some of their children, that the 



THE ANGLO IRISH. 299 

poor fathers and mothers thought were uncom- 
mon geniuses," — (Gerald remembered,) — " why, 
by dint of all this, they consented to fifth or 
sixth renewals of their protested bills, and to 
wait a little longer, in God''s name. Then came 
this fine house, and fine furniture, and the new 
carriage, and who dashed like the Gores ? — and 
the people grumbled again. But he went round 
to them, in confidence, giving hints about poor 
Angelina and the rich brewer — (there's for you ! 
that was a good hit, the first few months! that 
was making hay while the sun shone !) — and 
from his candied speeches, the poor tradespeople 
thought that Blake was to give the means of pay- 
ing every thing, to the last shilling. But they 
found a mare's nest. The brewer would do no- 
thing but brew and bake for himself, and ima- 
gined it was quite enough to take a fine-lady 
wife without a sixpence ; and so, not a farthing 
would he settle on her, not to talk of taking 
her father out of difficulty. Think of that ! — 
a close fellow, and my blessing on him for it. 
So, into the sheriff"'s clutches poor Mr. Gore 
went, about ten days ago, and then there was 
such working heaven and earth to get him out 
before other creditors laid detainers on him. 



300 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

Every one was worried, Captain Flood amongst 
the rest. Gore thought he was caught by Ma- 
ria ; but he doesn't care a pin for her ; and it 
was a very old affair, and no one stepped for- 
ward, not even Blake — why should he? Until, 
as good luck would have it, up comes poor old 
Sir John from the country, where Selina had 
contrived to brow-beat him into a fit of dang- 
ling after her, and he did the business in a mo- 
ment, and got us our poor Mr. Gore back again, 
before the rest of the creditors knew what hap- 
pened. Ay, and more than that ; Selina is to 
have a draft on the Bank of Ireland, and a 
rent-charge on Sir John's estate, making toge- 
ther a round sum of thousands on thousands ; 
and she engages to give her poor father as much 
out of it as will help to set him on his legs again 
—think of that!" 

" I am very sorry for my friend Gore and his 
charming family," said Gerald ; " and it is on 
this latter account, as well as to comply with 
Sir John's urgency, that your friends here 
wish Miss Gore to be so amiable when her ad- 
mirer shall next speak of the day .?" 

"' Just so ; only there happen to be more par- 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 301 

ticular little reasons ; — whisper — the creditors 
have resolved to make sure, this time, one way 
or the other ; if Mr. Gore's promises on the 
strength of this second marriage do not hold 
good, they ""11 have him, poor man, and every shil- 
ling's worth in this house, as sure as day — whis- 
per again — they have him and them already ! — 
think of that !" 

" How do you mean '?" 

" My sister's husband saw thirteen execu- 
tions sent in, last week and this, and the thir- 
teen ugly-looking fellows that served them are 
this moment under the same roof with you ! 
And did you notice a mean-faced, though very 
smartly-dressed little man that sat at the lower 
end of the table at dinner, saying nothing to 
nobody, and nobody saying any thing to him, 
and that now sits near Mr. Gore, beyond — look ! 
as silent as ever ; he is taking care of Mr. Gore 
himself, at a great bribe, every day, not to force 
him to the SherifiTs prison ; he arrested his man 
coming home this very evening." 

" A bailiff!" whispered Gerald in conster- 
nation. 

" Yes, nice as his clothes are — got for the 
occasion, to hide things as well as possible — 

VOL. II. P 



302 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

a common catchpole — think of that !" — and 
Miss Flint, obeying a call from Mrs. Gore, hur- 
ried off, answering, " Yes, yes, dear love !" 

Gerald had not recovered from the effects of 
this astounding intelligence, when Flood re- 
appeared. 

" According to the amazingly ingenious me- 
thod of accomplished Avomankind, excellent 
fellow, the lady rather unequivocally demurs to 
answer any question of yours till you answer a 
new one of hers." 

** Propose it, if you know it." 

" Yes ; I have a faint notion that I come so 
instructed. Wherefore attend. Resolve Miss 
Maria Gore, in the name of a friend of hers, 
why you did not think fit to honour with a 
reply a letter sent to you in France, and in- 
dited in common by — Mr. Knightly and his 
eldest son ?"" 

" Again !" cried Gerald, much provoked : 
" pray. Flood, inform Miss Maria Gore, what- 
ever may be her reasons for asking, that I 
received no such letter in France, and, in fact, 
know nothing about it." 

" No ?" questioned Flood, looking interested. 

** No ; and to yourself I will add that I am, 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

and have been much amazed by people teaz- 
ing me with this Knightly and his eldest son, 
of which persons I know just as little as of their 
letter, having seen but one of them, the father, 
once in my whole life, and then without wish- 
ing to see him again." 

"And his eldest son, never, positively?" 
continued Flood, his interest increasing. 

" Confound his eldest son ! no, never ; do 
they say I have.'' What do they all mean.'* 
Why, you, yourself, you mean something this 
moment r 

" Me .? I, mean ? overpowering ! you err, 
enormously to my discredit, fallible Blount. 
Your friend's sole business and idea is incon- 
tinently to bear back your answer to the other 
power, between whom and your eminent self 
he has the very great felicity of accounting 
himself diplomatist." 

" Too much of that, perhaps," thought Ge- 
rald, as Flood a second time entered the back- 
drawing-room. After a short pause, during 
which his friend might be supposed to have 
conveyed his instructions, Gerald's ear caught 
a suppressed laugh, which he reddened to think 
came from Miss Maria Gore. " She amuses 



304 THE ANGLO-IRISH. 

herself with me," was his thought ; and acting 
upon an impulse given by it, he followed 
Flood into the apartment. 

The dandy and the young lady stood to- 
gether at the fire, their backs to Gerald as he 
came in, so that they did not observe him. 
And Miss Maria still laughed through her 
parted fingers, as, at intervals, Gerald caught 
these words, " Excellent ! oh, what a letter for 
my dear Augusta to-morrow ! And what 
visions of delightful things, woven out of it 
and him, and the other puzzle, rise before my 
sight !" 

" Indeed ?" queried Gerald, as he softly 
stepped back; and, determined that neither Miss 
Maria Gore nor his wilful and indecorous sis- 
ter, her * dear Augusta,' should weave any 
thing out of him, whatever might be the puz- 
zles devised by both for tormenting him in 
consequence of his indifference to their Knight- 
lies, he looked round the outer drawing-room 
for Gunning, in order, with him, to leave the 
house that moment. 

" You want me," said the old gentleman's 
voice at his back. .., 

"Yes, Mr. Gunning; are you tired ?" 



THE ANGLO-IRISH. 305 

" I 'ra tired of being tired, I began so long 
ago." 

" Come, then." 

" But the danger of the night is not yet 
over, gentlemen, and you venture into the 
streets, alone !" remonstrated Mrs. and Mr. 
Gore, as both proposed to take leave. Arm-in- 
arm, however, Gunning and his promising pu- 
pil soon made way along the fine square of 
Stephen's-green. 



END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 
