HOWARD CASTLE

A ROMANCE

Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-Street, London.HOWARD CASTLE;

OR A 

ROMANCE

FROM THE MOUNTAINS.


IN FIVE VOLUMES.


By A NORTH BRITON.




What is vain life? an idle flight of days,
A still-elusive round of fickly joys,
A scene of little cares and trifling passions,
If not ennobled by some deeds of virtue.   THOMSON.



VOL. V.


London:
Printed at the Minerva Press for
A.K.NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENTIALL-STREET.

1817.              HOWARD CASTLE.

                CHAPTER I.

     "I COULD not find an opportunity, my dear Clementia," said lady Augusta, as she closed the room-door after Mary, who her mistress had dismissed until the tête-à-tête was over, " to tell you I want your advice on a most important subject. I will be brief in my history, and you must give me your opinion ; it is no love story I am going to narrate, although it is upon the subject of marriage. the duke of Bridge-north has made it known he wishes an alliance with our family, and humbly solicits me to be his wife before many days expire ; perhaps to-morrow I may be called upon to give my final answer : my father,
     VOL. V.             B 2              HOWARD CASTLE.

mother, and brother, I can see, are all in his favour; but not a word of persuasion will they use.  Would her grace only say, I wish you to marry the duke, or it would give your father and I pleasure if we saw you so disposed of, I would reply at once.  I am happy it is in my power to render you so.  They are resolved it shall be an act of my own; now I wish you to give the casting vote; it would relieve me from a world of difficulty, and I will do what you would, were you in my situation, which is, as near as I can describe, a state of indifference.  I am confident I am not in love; but I never saw a man I like better, although he is eighteen years older than I am.  I admire good sense, which he certainly possesses, and a through knowledge of the world.  I shall never tremble when he is to give his opinion, but listen with pleasure, satisfied those who hear him will gain information; his heart, I believe, is not a bad one, and his temper such as a prudent woman may live happily with; his fortune is immense, and his rank in life beyond my expectation.  I dare say he is sincere in his expressions of regard, and that        HOWARD CASTLE.       3

he will study to make me happy. Sum
up all this, and tell me, will it be a merce-
nary marriage, should I venture to give
my hand, whilst my heart is in this cool,
composed state; no flutter at his approach
--no anxiety at his absence--no particular
pleasure when he says a civil thing to me
--no indication of love? I am convinced I
esteem him, respect him, and admire his ta-
lents, and that I have no dislike to him."

  "Esteem, respect, and admiration," said
Clementina, as soon as lady August
paused, "seem to be the principal requi-
sites towards love; if marriage in general
had such a good foundation, there would
be more happy couples than there are.
Perfect esteem and affection are nearly al-
lied, and are more lasting perhaps than the
romantic love you have described. You
believe his regard for you is unbounded;
what can you do better to shew your
gratitude, accept his proffered friendship,
and study to make him happy, which I am
sure you will do, if you become his wife?
If you hesitate in giving him an answer,
you shew him you have had a struggle
4               HOWARD CASTLE.

with yourself, and you will give him rea-
son to think it is a mercenary step, which
must be a mortifying discovery."

  "But a true one, I am afraid,"replied
lady Augusta. "Would you marry with-
out considering and reconsidering the affair,
if your heart had as little to do with it as
mine has? there is no love in the case."

  "How do you know?" said Clementina;
"when you declare you never felt a pre-
ference for any other person, you may
have none in your nature to bestow."

  "Then I should have been satisfied, and
given him my hand, and perhaps find out
too late it was all he possessed."

  "I cannot suppose a married woman
ever making the discovery,"said Clemen-
tina,"or ever allowing her thoughts to
wander from her husband. After the ce-
remony is performed, banish every idea
but that you are a wife. Your destiny is
fixed--upon your conduct depends your
own happiness, and all the comfort of a
man, who has paid you the highest com-
pliment in the world; his honour he has
entrusted to your care--his fortune is at
your disposal--his heart is in your keep-ing; cherish the trust, and manage them
all with prudence and economy--return
the gift as far as lies in your power--make
him your friend, your confidant, and your
guide--bind him with the silken bonds of
affection, and never let difference of opi-
nions disunite you; little disputes increase
unawares, and often end fatally; and above
all things, guard against separate interests
--think aloud to him, and in every way
act by his advice."

"You may be on the verge of mar-
riage, my dear Clementia," said Lady Au-
gusta, "otherwise you could not have all
these rules laid down so distinctly. I ap-
prove highly of your advice, and I shall
go to sleep with more composure than I
have done for several nights. I wanted
a friend to advise me to marry the man,
and I am convinced it will be in my own
power to be happy; if you will only be-
come Lady Howard, I will immediately
accept of the duke, and will conduct my-
self exactly as you do; I am sure we shall
be patterns for all married people. Think
of my request, and oblige me by doing it."
Saying these words, and thanking her6          HOWARD CASTLE.

again for the ease she had given her mind,
she wished her good-night.

   Clementina was not surprised at what
she had just heard, as she had suspected
lady Augusta's good-humoured vivacity
had made an impression upon the duke of
Bridgenorth's heart; she was pleased her
friend had such a prospect of happiness, in
spite of her account of her feelings; she
firmly believed it would have been a mor-
tification, had she not been permitted to
marry him. Her thoughts reverted to the 
masquerade--what she should do without
a proper dress; but she knew lord How-
ard possessed such never-failing attention,
he would not neglect her; he probably
had a plan in some way to surprise her--
it created no uneasiness; her thoughts were
now as free from the sable colouring as
possible.

   Next morning, a party was proposed to
visit the temple, which was famed for an
extensive prospect; and those who were
fond of fishing were to try their success
in angling. Lord Howard had ordered
carriages to be ready as soon as breakfast
was finished; but the day was so delight-          HOWARD CASTLE.      7

ful, walking was preferred by the younger
part of the company. Lady Almeria's
strength had returned in a wonderful man-
ner, as, with the assistance of lord How-
ard's arm, she found the fatigue bearable.
Mr Montague escorted Clementina, who
felt at perfect ease with him, as she was
convinced neither his heart or hers run
any risk of being injured. He still be-
lieved her destined for his brother, and she
was determined to say no more on the 
subject. She found he was extremely
quick in his observations; if she unde-
ceived him, he might susupect her engage-
ment with lord Howard. There was lit-
tle passed between them; yet such a scru-
tinizing observer as Mr. Montague was,
might discover what she wished to con-
ceal.

   When they reached the temple, they
found a most sumptuous collation set out,
the greatest variety of fine fruits, and ices of
every different kind. Barges were prepar-
ed for those who chose to go on the water,
decked in their gayest colours, which were
likewise floating on the fort. From it a
salute was fired. As the party arrived, a8 HOWARD CASTLE.

band of music was placed in a shrubbery, 
which hid the performers from the eye; 
but their instruments had a good effect:
the scene, upon the whole, was enchanting.
Lady Almeria evidently thought herself 
the goddess of the lake, and levelled all the
artillery of her charms for the destruction
of lord Howard's heart. He was teazed
with her attention, as hardly for a moment
would she permit him to quit her; if he
spoke to Clementina, his presence was in-
dispenably necessary; she either had laid
a bet which he must decide, or she durst
not venture to move without his protect-
ing arm.

The carriages soon arrived with those
who were afraid of the length of the walk;
and to the surprise of some of the party,
the duke of Bridgenorth handed Mrs.
Conway from her sociable. Clementina
looked at lady Augusta, whose counte-
nance betrayed the pleasure she felt; she
gave her a nod of approbation, and smiled
at the flutter she was in, which prognosti-
cated well for the duke. Soon after she
got near enough to whisper-"How lucky
it is our conversation took lace last night,HOWARD CASTLE. 9

and that I have my answer ready!" She
was off before Clementina could give a re-
ply.

Their plans were soon arranged, so many
were inclined for the aquatic excursion.
Clementina chose to remain on shore; the
barges appeared sufficiently full. The
one in which lord Howard was, lady Al-
meria of course was placed, lady Caroline 
Seymour and lord Villyers, lady Elenora,
the marquis, lady Harriet, lady Julia and
Isabella. Lord Howard earnestly entreat-
ed Clementina to be of the party; but she
withstood all his solicitations, and joined
Mrs. Conway, who was shewing the va-
rious walks and beautiful views to the 
duchess, lady Radnor, and a large party.
Insensibly she again separated from the
rest with Mr. Montague, who likewise de-
clined going on the water. Lady Au-
gusta and the duke of Bridgenorth enjoyed
an interesting tête-à-tête, with which he
seemed perfectly satisfied.

Clementina and Mr. Montague had sat
down on a bench, watching the barges,
when they saw a phaeton driving briskly
10                HOWARD CASTLE. 

along the road--"There comes a fresh
supply of beaux," exclaimed Mr. Monta-
guel; "this gay scene will surely attract
their attention, and draw them towards us."
He was right in his conjecture.  The
phaeton turned, and the gentlemen were
seen ascending the bank where they were 
seated, and discovered them to be lord
Stanhope and his brother--" Oh," said 
Mr. Montague, "what a relief to lord
Howard!  There comes a silly buzzing
thing, who will just suit lady Almeria,
and take the heavy burthen of entertain-
ing her off his hands; he could not sustain
the weight long, I am convinced.  I 
would not go in one of the barges.  With
lord Howard is lady Almeria; in an-
other is Miss Celina Pembroke; in the
third is Miss Osborn and sir Charles Pem-
broke."

  Clementina said--" Are they all unfor-
tunately disagreeable to you?"

  "They are," replied he, " and of the
same stamp, except sir Charles, who is the
only one has the least genuine nature about
him, and it is of so bearish a kind, it is un
pleasant to be in his company; but I dis- 
           HOWARD CASTLE.             11

covered last night he had more sensibility
in his composition than I gave him credit
for. He was in raptures with your sing-
ing, and declared you exceeded Jowler in
sweetness of notes, and matchless in shapes.
I really believe the compliment was the
highest he could pay, and that it was sin-
cere."

  " You are answering for a great deal,"
said Clementina.

  " And do you not think every one is
sincere who admires you ?"

  " If one is so," she replied, " it is all I
wish for."

  " I believe he does love you most ar-
dently," was his answer. " I did not wit-
ness the growth of his passion, but I did
the effects of it; now that I know the
object, 1 cannot wonder at his attachment,
and I trust it is mutual"

  Clementina made 110 reply. She rose
from her seat,, and walked towards the
temple, where lord Stanhope and his bro-
ther had joined the ladies. The former
expressed much pleasure at seeing Clemen-
tina, aud introduced captain Stanhope, who,
she soon perceived, was a complete petit12          HOWARD CASTLE.

maitre, on the most perfect good terms with himself; lord Stanhope's extreme good humour always pleased her on their first meeting; but it soon grew insipid. He told her how tired he was of Paris, after they had left it; how tired he was for his brother's arrival; when they got to London, it was intolerably stupid, and insufferably hot; there was not a soul in town they knew--"Indeed," added he, "how should there, as lord Howard has collect all the world?"

  "All the world to your lordship, perhaps, " said Mr. Montague, "as you will see a great assemblage of the graces, and there may be one who constitutes everything to you."

  "I may perhaps at this moment see her," said he, with unusual quickness.

 "Bravo!" cried captain Stanhope; "I vow, brother, you come on; you will do me credit at last." He at the same time pulled a beautiful snuff-box from his pocket, which, after gently tapping on the lid, he opened,and smelt at, not to soil his delicate fingers by vulgarly taking a pinch of snuff.

               HOWARD CASTLE           13

" Is not the angelic lady Almeria Vill-
yers here, Montague?"

"She is in the barge with the awning
over it."

" Ah! I might have supposed there was
something superior to the common race of
mortals in the protected boat.  She is di-
vinely  handsome, upon my honour."

" I will wave for the barge to approach
the shore," said Mr. Montague; "you may
join the party; I am sure your patience
will never cadure their angling at such a
distance.  How pretty it will be for you
to draw the line, when lady Almeria has
hooked the fish! it will be delightful; her
feelings will be so called forth when she
sees a perch dangling in your hand; and
when the hook is pulled from its tender
jaws, how she will describe her sensations
at witnessing such barbarity! then a worm
must be stuck on, and thrown, writhing
in seeming agony, into the water, that she
may have another opportunity to display
her amiable compassion."

" A very lively representation, upon
my veracity!"  exclaimed captain Stan-
hope.  " Who would not wish to be the14      HOWARD CASTLE.

perch so caught? or who would not glory
in the wound, if inflicted by such delicate
and enchanting sensibility? I wish ex-
ceedingly I was in the boat, since I could
be of such use to her ladyship."

  "Oh, I have it," exclaimed Mr. Mon-
tague. "There is a little skiff near the
shore--I will pledge myself to convey you
safe to the wished-for employment; as
they are at anchor, they will not be so will-
ing to come for you. I will row you to
them in five minutes."

  "I accept your offer," replied he, "upon
condition you do not drown me."

  "Oh," replied Mr. Montague, "if we
should be overset, lady Almeria will fish
for you, and perhaps catch you by the
jaw; but I fear you will be so keen of
swallowing her bait, you will gorge."

  "Come along," cried he; "if you can
carry me safe in this little vehicle, I will
accompany you; I know you are like a
cork in the water--there is no possibility
of your sinking--I shall pop to the bottom
like lead, if we are overset, never to rise
again."

  Clementina thought it was all a joke,            HOWARD CASTLE
but to her surprise she saw them get into 
so small a boat, she could hardly believe it 
was possible to steady it. Captain Stanhope 
sat perfectly quiet, and Mr. Montague 
rowed him swiftly along. They hailed the 
barge in which the magnet was. Captain 
Stanhope rose, that he might be ready to 
spring on board, which Mr. Montague did 
not observe, as he was busily employed 
bringing the boat alongside. It struck sud
-denly against the barge, and captain Stan-
hope went headlong into the water. Hap-
pily an anchor was snspended from the ves-
sel, which caught his coat, and prevented 
his sinking; but he hung in a most uncom
fortable situation, his body completeley im-
mersed in water; the females believed he 
had sunk, never more to appear.

Lady Almeria fainted, and the other 
ladies expressed their-terror in shrieks; they 
did not perceive that he was perfectly safe, 
but in a very awkward predicament. The 
gentlemen flow to his assistance, and he 
soon after scrambled into the barge, amidst acclamations of joy.  In the agony of the 
moment, the tender epithet of "dear cap-
tain Stanhope" had more than once been16 HOWARD CASTLE.

given him, and those who could express
their feelings flattered him in the highest
degree. Lady Julia and Isabella were
busy pouring water on lady Almeria's
hands; her face they durst not bathe.

Captain Stanhope's voice had the desired
effect, as it recalled her ladyship to anima-
tion. She opened her languid eyes, as the
woe-begone hero approached her. Lord
Howard immediately ordered they should
get under weigh and stand for the shore,
where lord Stanhope and the whole party
were in a pitiable situation, as they were
afraid a fatal accident had happened. They
could not refrain from smiling when they
saw the altered appearance of the spruce
and gay captain Stanhope, who had left
them so very short a time, all neatness and
elegance, now so much the reverse; drip-
ping wet, and with a most rueful counte-
nance, he was obliged to make his retreat
to the castle as soon as possible.

Mr. Montague, with much politeness,
handed lady Almeria from the boat, who
was in such a very nervous state, it was
with difficulty she could make the least 
exertion. She declared the shock she hadHOWARD CASTLE. 17

received was so dreadful, she should not 
recover it for an age.

Mr. Montague assured her the accident 
had been occasioned by captain Stanhope's 
extreme anxiety to see her ladyship.—
"He had been wishing," added he, "to 
be a perch, hooked by you, which was the 
only reason could be assigned for his going 
overboard. You must reward him for his 
gallantry by forgiving him."

"Oh," replied lady Almeria, "he must 
be punished for alarming me so dreadfully, 
—I had got such courage on the water, 
from lord Howard's extreme care and at-
tention, I was quite comfortable till that 
horrid fright, which has completely un-
hinged me." She looked for lord Howard's 
assistance, but looked in vain; pleased with 
the prospect of escape, he had consigned 
her completely to Mr. Montague's protec-
tion, whilst his lordship welcomed the 
duke of Bridgenorth with the most hearty 
cordiality.

Mr. Montague's countenance betrayed 
the misery of his situation, when he found 
himself involved in endless trouble by 
lady Almeria Villyers, whose character he
18 HOWARD CASTLE.

disliked, and whose manners disgusted
him.

Fortunately captain Stanhope was soon
able to release him from the most fatiguing
attention he had ever paid. He was re-
joiced when he saw him approach, and
lady Almeria was no less delighted. Her
plan of punishment was forgotten before
he reached her, and they were soon whis-
pering their pleasure at meeting under
happier circumstances.

Mr. Montague evidently shewed that
he had remained with the languid beauty
only until another beau, more fit to be her
escort, appeared; he immediately joined
Clementina The account he gave of the
adventures he met with during the very
short time he had been separated from her
amused her.

The morning was far spent before the
party left the temple. The delightful
walks and scenery made the hour of din-
ner almost forgotten; they returned only
in time to attend to the task of the toilet.
The evening was again dedicated to mu-
sic. Lord Howard had pride and pleasure
in shewing off Clementina's unrivalled                HOWARD CASTLE.             19

powers; his admiration was evidently hers,
but none of the company suspected any
attachment subsisted between them. The
general opinion was, she was destined to
be lady Montague. His brother appeared
to be a very sedulous guard, as he seldom
was a moment from his duty.

   When Clementina retired to her apart-
ment, her maid informed her a large box had
arrived from London. Lord Howard had
sent one of the grooms for it, from a village
near where the coach had orders to leave
it. "It is opened, and now stands in the
dressing-room; may I bring it here?"

   "It is my masquerade habit," said Cle-
mentina; "you may unpack it, and let
me see what they have sent me." She was
delighted with this mark of lord Howard's
attention, which completely removed all
her anxiety. She went to hold a candle
for Mary, but the truth was, her curiosity
was raised, and she wished to see the con-
tents of the box. Upon the top was laid
elegant Turkish turban, which made
her conjecture she was to be a sultana; but
she saw no sable ornaments. She feared
lord Howard was determined she should20          HOWARD CASTLE.

go out of mourning, at least for that even-
ing, as the beautiful pearl bands and tas-
sels, and a most superb ornament in the
front of the head-dress, bespoke much fi-
nery, but no semblance of woe.

   When the dress was displayed, Mary
exclaimed--"What a sum will this cost!"
It was composed of the thinnest white taf-
feta, looped into the most elegant drapery,
with cords and chains of pearls, and finish-
ed with large pearl tassels.

   Her attendant, who was delighted with
any piece of dress calculated to shew off
her mistress's fine figure, entreated she
would try if it fitted her, as there might
be some alteration necessary to be made
before it could be worn.

   Clementina thought it was not at all
unlikely, as there could be no pattern for
it to be made by; she therefore indulged
her maid. The dress was well adapted to
shew the exact symmetry of her shape, and
fitted her with the utmost niceness. The
sleeves were looped up, and elegant em-
broidered bands shewed much of her finely
turned arms. Her throat and neck, which
were particularly beautiful, were exposed,
               HOWARD CASTLE.          21

as only the taffeta, fringed with pearl,
shaded part of the latter, and was clasped
in the front with a gem, corresponding to
the one on the turban; her hair was bound
with a band, embroidered to correspond
with a band, embroidered to correspond
with those on her sleeves, and the superb
turban was fixed a little to one side. There
were directions in the box how all were to
be put on.
   Clementia, satisfied that there was no
alteration necessary, got rid of the finery,
which was far superior to any thing she
had ever been possessed of, and retired to
bed, satisfied she had not been forgotten
by lord Howard. She wished exceedingly
to have an opportunity of thanking him
for his attention, and quitted her apart-
ment earlier than she usually did. She
was not disappointed, as in crossing the
gallery she met with the object of her
thoughts; he was coming out of his dress-
ing room; when he saw her, he flew to-
wards her, expressing by his looks and
words the pleasure he felt at thus meeting
with her. He petitioned for her company
in the library, for the short time before
breakfast would be announced; he opened
22             HOWARD CASTLE.

the room-door, and gently drew her to-
wards it.—" This insufferable restraint,"
said lie, " which you have inflicted, is ab-
solutely more than I can support. Why
should we feign, what I trust we do not
feel, indifferent to each other ? Why not
suffer me to convince the world I am the
happiest of human beings, and allow me
to enjoy your conversation unrestrained
as all our actions should be ? Why do you
wish to hide from the party you are the
beloved of my heart, and that I am an ob-
ject of envy in being possessed of your af-
fections? Am I not soon to claim this
hand?" which he pressed with fervour to
his lips; " have you not, my Clementina,
flattered me by the most generous, une-
quivocal assurance, that I am favoured—
highly favoured by your love? then, oh,
do not pursue this plan of coldness!"

   " We are, or may be, perfectly satisfied
that our present behaviour is assumed,"
was her answer; " we know and may be
quite contented in the assurance we are
dear to each other, without giving marks
of it in company. I would not have con-
sented to have remained in this house, hadHOWARD CASTLE. 23

you shown a preference for me; we have 
not created suspicion ; and I hope the party 
will separate without an idea being formed 
of the honour which awaits me."

"You speak of our being contented," re-
plied he, " and your being honoured by 
my love; those are cold, formal expressions, 
which suit not the warmth of my feelings. 
We are not now acting a part; I trust we 
are actuated by the same impulse, real love 
and affection, and that, on both sides, it 
is pure and genuine."

"I hope it is, my lord," said Clementina, 
who felt confused with the energetic and 
marked manner he uttered these words in; 
" we have said as much on this subject as 

we can do, and I trust our opinion of each 
other is so fixed, it requires no fresh assur-
ance of reciprocal affection."

"The subject," said he, " is so very 
pleasing to me, I could repeat it over and 
over, and never tire; and you know not 
the peculiar delight it gives me, when I 
can lead you to make use of a kind expres-
sion. I listen to it with rapture, and the 
pleasing impression remains when the
24           HOWARD CASTLE.

sound of your voice no longer vibrates on
my ear."

   "We must soon separate," said she;
"the day after to-morrow, when your
party leaves you, I mean to go to Roach-
wood, as I before mentioned to you. Lady
Augusta has pressed me to visit them, but
I have positively declined it. The day
after to-morrow, Howard Castle will be
deserted, as I know Mrs. Conway and you
will go with the multitude."

   "You are mistaken," replied he; "we
are invited, and so is Mr. Waldegrave and
Isabella; and we accepted the invitation,
from the hope you would accompany us.
The marquis and you seem upon tolerable
terms--quite as good as I should wish you
to be on; and lady Augusta and you are
intimate friends. I hope you will not ad-
here to your plan of running away to
Roachwood; if you will not go to Carns-
worth, I beseech you to remain here. How
delightful to spend our time in the same 
way we did the charming week we had to
ourselves! I am tired of this bustle, and
long for quietness, when I may enjoy my         HOWARD CASTLE.     25


Clememtina's society. Do not leave us;
my mother will be rejoiced to stay at
home."

  "I must go," was her answer; "my ser-
vants are apprized of my intention, all 
my plans are fixed."

  "Then," said he smiling,"they are im-
moveable."

  "Upon this occasion," she replied,
"they are. Mrs. Conway has promised
me a visit; I shall expect the whole party."
A bell ringing, as a signal for breakfast, in-
terrupted their conversation. Clementina 
was resolved they should not seperate,
without her mentioning her with.

  "I was resolved,"said he, "to know 
you; I therefore kept my plan a profound
secret, and I have got such a description 
of your grab as will identify your person,
although I believe you could not have
been so disguised but I should have
known you."

  "You should not, my lord, have order-
ed so sumptuous a habit; plain black
would have been more suitable to my si-
tuation than gay ornaments."
26          HOWARD CASTLE.

   "No," replied he, "at a masquerade
you may appear in what you please.
I think your dress ought not to be so
gloomy; I earnestly wish this mourning
was laid aside, not to be put on again; and
then perhaps you might lend a favourable
ear to my solicitations. I wished, above all
things, to see you in colours, or rather in
virgin white, and in no other way could I
accomplish it, than the one I have put in
practice."

   When they entered the breakfast-room,
they found a numerous party assembled;
all seemed animated and gay. Mr. Mon-
tague was leaning in a window near the
door, watching for Clementina's entrance.
She smiled good humour itself, as she gave
him her hand, assuring him she was no
worse for her exertions the evening before.
He followed her to the table, and seated
himself by her.

   Lady Almeria and captain Stanhope
were whispering in a corner of the room,
seemingly unconscious there was either
company or breakfast to attend to, till
Mrs. Conway reminded them there was
such a thing as eating. 
           HOWARD CASTLE.              27

  Lady Almeria rose, declaring captain
Stanhope was so monstrous droll, that she
could think of nothing when he was with
her but his wit.

   "What a well-matched pair!" said Mr.
Montague, in a low tone of voice; "I trust
they will never be separated."

  Numerous inquiries were made, if cap-
tain Stanhope had got cold by his oblation,
as a black patch on his upper lip was an
indication of it.-"Or did lady Almeria's
hook make the wound?" asked Mr. Mon-
tague, " as a wound there must be where
there is a plaster."

  " She certainly has inflicted one,"
whispered captain Stanhope, " but not
visible."

  " It will come out at the mouth, I make
no doubt," replied Mr. Montague.

  Lady Almeria smiled, and her beau re-
plied-" When it can no longer be con-
cealed, I will consult you."

  " I am ready to give my advice without 
either fee or reward," cried Mr. Montague;
"if you choose a private consultation after
breakfast, I will tell you exactly what to
do to obtain a cure."

28           HOWARD CASTLE.

   "I never have a physician," said he,
"until I am in danger. I shall reserve
your advice; at present I have hopes."

   "You are happy," said Mr. Montague,
"as what keeps man alive so much as 
hope?" 

   "Fear," replied Clementina.

   "Hope and fear are so nearly allied,"
answered Mr.Montague, "on most occa-
sions they go hand-in-hand; I hope you
will go out an airing to-day, but I fear you
will not choose me as your escort, which
will at once put an end to my pleasure."

   "What, is this a dissertation on plea-
sure?" said lord Howard, as he approached
the breakfast-table.

   "No, my lord,"said captain Stanhope,
"Mr. Montague is describing his hopes
and fears, which seem to centre in Miss
Bouverie."

    "Who has such power to awaken hopes
and fears," retorted Mr. Montague," as
she has? we may hope, but with a certain
ty of disappointment."

    Clementina wished the subject might
be dropped. She looked at lord Howard,
and gained courage from his countenance              HOWARD CASTLE.     29
A placid smile indicated internal peace;
that he was the one who precluded hope.

  After breakfast was finished, lord How-
ard watched an opportunity, when all were
engaged, to whisper to her--"Will you
permit me to drive you out in my open
carriage?--a party is formed to visit the
ruins of Beechstoke Abbey."

  "It will give me pleasure," was all she
could say, and he disappeared.

  Mr.Montague, who did not hear what
had passed, approached her with a grave
look.--"They are laying their plans how
each beau is to drive his favourite fair in
curricles, phaetons, and gigs. Alas! I 
have no conveyance to solicit your compa-
ny in, but I have a most charming horse--
beautiful, easy, and tractable; if he was
worthy of bearing such a burthen, how va-
luable would he ever after appear in my
eyes!"

  "Your horse, I dare say, is the very
best of his race, and my riding him might
perhaps give you pleasure, but I have just
promised to accompany lord Howard."

  "Then will you permit me to-be one
of your guards? It is not to every couple30 HOWARD CASTLE.

who are going out on airing this morning
that I should venture to make such a pro-
posal, as a third person might not be
agreeable."

Clementina smiled, which he took for a
token of assent, and quitted the room, to
order his horses to be prepared. She re-
gretted his attendance, as she believed lord
Howard would be disappointed; but she
was satisfied, from the speech he had made,
that he did not suspect their attachment.

Two sociables and a barouche contained
the elder part of the company; the rest of
the party were conveyed, perfectly to their
minds, in various kinds of vehicles. Cap-
tain Stanhope drove lady Almeria in his
brother's carriage, and lord Stanhope good-
humouredly mounted his servant's horse.

The picturesque situation of one of the
finest remains of architecture in England
surprised and charmed the party. After
winding with a very circuitous road,
they came on the verge of a steep bank,
from which the Abbey was distinctly seen,
embosomed in venerable woods. It was, 
as all the remains of religious houses are,
placed in the bottom of a rich and beauti-        HOWARD CASTLE.      31

ful valley, sheltered on every side from
the rude blast, and from the idle curiosity
of man, as it was sequestered and lonely;
no one, excepting those who went on pur-
pose to admire its beauties, had any call
to disturb the deep repose which surround-
ed it. Blocks of fine freestone, of which
the Abbey had been built, seemed to lend
their aid in protecting it from the boiste-
rous winds of winter. A clear a lively
river, which had been useful to the monks,
in supplying them with fish, literally
washed one side of the walls: its murmur,
from being impeded in it course by stones
and moss-covered rocks, was pleasing be-
yond measure.

  Some of the party were satisfied with a
distant view, and preferred going to see
the splendid house of Mr. ----, which is
situated near, and in whose grounds the
beautiful ruin is placed. Magnificent fur-
niture was the magnet which drew many
from the rugged descent to the Abbey.
Lord Howard did not ask the question, as
he was convinced his companion would be
charmed with the romantic scenery.

  Mr. Montague, who had been deprived32                HOWARD CASTLE

of the pleasure he had expected from the
intolerable dust of the roads, now hoped
for a little gratification.  He thought it
would be very delightful to wander with
Clementina amidst the noble clustered
pillars and fine arches which still remain-
ed, and to hear her remarks; lord Howard
felt the same wish, but not to have a third
person to listen to them.  He would ra-
ther have enjoyed her company free from
all restraint.  He had so far succeeded in
their drive as to obtain her consent to be
his, as soon as the lawyers could be ready,
and the other necessary preparations made,
He was intoxicated with joy, as the few
minutes he had conversed with her in the
library, he had fancied her manner was
constrained, and he had suffered his
thoughts to teaze him with a thousand
fears, which were completely done away
by their interesting and delightful tête-ù-
tête.  He wished to have the same subject
continued, whilst they were rambling
amidst the retired and delightful walks to 
which they were descending; but he feared
Mr. Montague would entirely frustrate
his scheme, which he believed would have                   HOWARD CASTLE.                33

been a pleasing one to Clementina. He ventured to hint his fears to her,and to lament the prospect of their conversation being interrupted. 

     "Do you think," replied she, "if we had wandered alone, our attention would not have been occupied? we might have missed some of the beauties, which we are not likely to do, with Mr. Montague of the party.  We came here on purpose to admire the ruin and the situation;  we cannot return without having minutely examined the whole, as we must give an account of what we have seen to those who are gone to the house."

     "They do not deserve it," replied lord Howard: "their tastes must be vitiated who could prefer any thing to this enchanting scene."

     As he spoke, they came to an abrupt opening in the wood, which shewed the ruin in a beautiful point of view--the rocks half-clothed with ivy and other plants--a fall of water--and a distant view of a rustic wooden bridge. The little landscape was so tempting that Clemen-
               Howard Castle.      94

tina betrayed a wish to use her pencil, which she had, with her sketch-book. privately conveyed into the carriage, not meaning to be seen when she took an outline of the ruin.  Lord Howard chose the spot.  
They quitted the carriage, resolved to ramble to the Abbey, through a wild and narrow path.  They saw Mr. Montague also dismounted, and gave his horse to his servant to follow the carriages, which were nearly at the bottom of the descent.

Clementina was born busily employed, and in the course of a short produced a correct representation of what the gentleman were admiring.  They were surprised with the celerity of her drawing, and the accurate and very nicely done sketch which she offered for their inspection.  They were both critics, but found nothing to criticise.

Clementina was in safe hands; had her drawing not been near so good as it was, still they would have been unwilling to find out an error.  They were her very sincere admirers, and firmly believed her powers were so great, she could not fail in any         HOWARD CASTLE.      35

thing she attempted. They were nearly
right, as she never professed to do what
she could not execute in a masterly style.

  When they reached the bottom of the
rugged and picturesque bank, through
which they had scrambled, sometimes in
thick underwood, at others winding round
projecting rocks, which impeded their
progress, they found innumerable groups
dispersed in all directions.

  Lord Howard could not help laughing
at the pairs who had separated from each
other.--"There are four couples," said he,
"who are not intently gazing on the
Abbey, or admiring those venerable woods
or romantic scenery." Several of them had
turned their backs on what they came pro-
fessedly to look at, and appeared not to be
conscious where they were.

  "And should we not do the same," said
Mr. Montague, "were either of us in the
same happy situation as the marquis, lord
Villyers, or any of the favoured lovers?
We should forget to look at the ruin, if
Miss Bouverie would permit us to look at
her with hope; the view before us would
appear very uninteresting, in comparison36       HOWARD CASTLE.

to laying plans for future happiness, and
perhaps hearing an avowal of reciprocal
affection; all the ruins in England would
sink in the comparison."

 "Certainly every other consideration
would give way," was lord Howard's reply.
"unless the tranquil feeling of certainty
had possession of one of us, as one only can
hope."

 "As there can be no hope for either,"
answered Mr. Montague, "we must en-
joy the lady's company without any plan
but present gratification." 

 Clementina pursued her way without
seeming to attend to their conversation,
but she listened with the utmost anxiety.
She was thankful lord Howard gave no
answer, and the subject was dropped.

 Mr. Montague seemed so determined
that she was to be his sister, she feared he
would give more than hints, and explain
what he fancied he knew of her engage-
ment with lord Montague.

 They at last reached the valley, and
found, to their surprise, the whole party
assembled. Those who had gone to the
house were informed there was an exceed-HOWARD CASTLE. 37

ing good carriage-road to the Abbey; they
immediately proceeded, and were ready to
receive their friends.

Clementina was delighted to see Mrs.
Conway. As she found there could be no
tête-à-tête with her son, she was determin-
ed to enjoy her company, and offered her
arm, which was accepted with rather a de-
gree of surprise.

"Do you mean to attach yourself to one
of your sex?" said she, smiling.

"I do," was her reply; "I will not add
one to the number who have paired them-
selves. If I am with you, I can converse
with any one who may choose to join us."

"Mr. Montague," replied Mrs. Conway,
"is your shadow; my son has no chance
of conversing with you, you are so guarded
by your relation."

"General conversation," said Clemen-
tina, "is sufficient with so large a party;
lord Howard's attention must be occupied;
when plans are fixed, there requires little
consultation."

"Are they fixed," said Mrs. Conway,
"to lord Howard's satisfaction?"38          HOWARD CASTLE.

  "They ought to be," was her answer,
"as he has got all his own way."

  These words gave unspeakable pleasure
to her friend, who hoped her son's proba-
tion was shortened, and that she should
soon press to her heart a daughter whom 
she truly loved.

  After exploring every beauty in and
surrounding the Abbey, and visiting the
splendid mansion (which looked insignifi-
cant after Howard Castle), they returned
to dinner, exceedingly delighted with the
excursion. It had been previously agreed
they should dine in their morning-dresses;
every one seemed to lay aside stiffness and
formality; all were gay and cheerful; even
the duchess of Beauclaire relaxed with the
general hilarity of the part. 

  Lord Howard was in the greatest spirits;
he had obtained an important point with
Clementina, who was seated by him, and
was more animated than he had ever seen
her.

  Mr. Montague was unusually lively, 
and captain Stanhope, in lady Ahneria's
idea, was agreeable beyond measure; he                HOWARD CASTLE.                 59

nearly occupied all her attention, as she found lord Howard's car was turned towards Miss Bouverie more than was perfectly pleasing;but lady Almeria was one of those beings who could not feel more than wounded pride;she was filled with malice, envy, and ill-nature, against the superior charms of Clementina, who certainly had attracted more admiration than she was entitled to: she was infringing on her prerogative, and she should enjoy seeing her humbled.


                  CHAPTER II.


The arduous task of the toilet made the ladies retire earlier from the eating-room than common;many had to inspect their dresses, which had arrived during their morning's excursion.

Clementina,satisfied that hers would require neither time nor trouble in putting on, and lady Elenora Montague, knowing that half an hour would equip her, pro-
40 HOWARD CASTLE.

posed that they should retire to the music-
room, where they might enjoy a little con-
versation.

Clementina very readily agreed, as she
had not had an opportunity, except the few
moments the first day she arrived, to speak
to her. She found lady Elenora was anx-
ious to inquire if she had seen lord Mon-
tague during her short stay abroad-"I
concluded," added she, "he would meet you
in Paris, and that you would have return-
ed my sister: you are come back apparent-
ly as you went; my brother still remains
in Switzerland, and still corresponds with
you; will you, my dear Clementina, clear
up the mystery?"

"A mystery it must remain, Elenora,
till lord Montague himself develops it to
you and his family; I never can be nearer
allied to you than I am at this moment."

Lady Elenora looked at her with evi-
dent surprise. "Never be my sister! did 
I hear you say so?"

"It is so, I assure you," replied Clemen-
tina; "lord Montague does not wish to
be nearer connected to me than as an affec-
tionate cousin."HOWARD CASTLE. 41

"That Frederic loved you, I know to
be the case," said lady Elenora. "I wit-
nessed the melancholy state he was reduced
to, before he went abroad; I knew the
cause, but I fancied you had refused to
listen to his suit, as you rejected a more
splendid offer; when I found you corre-
sponded, I was perfectly convinced my
fears were groundless, and that you had en-
gaged ourself to be his, when there could
be no obstacle in the way; I fully expected 
soon to have congratulated my brother
upon what I knew, at one period, would
have been the happiest event could have
happened to him, your being his wife."

"I own to you," replied Clementina,
"we were once more tenderly attached
than our relationship sanctioned; the time
is past; all love is totally obliterated; none
but friendship remains: lord Montague
is happy, and so am I, in having an affec-
tionate relation to whom I can confide
every thought, and whose advice I should
wish implicity to follow."

"The enigma grows stronger," said lady
Elenora; "you were once attached; it is
42       HOWARD CASTLE

now over, and still you are interested in
each other."
  "Deeply so," exclaimed Clementia;
"but further I am not at liberty to explain.
I am in honour bound to keep a secret which
one day you will know; he would
not for the world involve you in any per-
plexity; solieitude for your peace of mind
has kept you a stranger to his very pecu-
liar situation."
   Lady Elenora was visibly agitated by
the information which she heard; she fear-ed her darling brother had been guilty of
imprudence, and by it had lost a prize of
high value.  As soon as her mind recover-
ed in some degree its composure, alarm for
her brother William took possession of
her; she dreaded his discovering no en-
gagement subsisted between lord Monta-
gue and Clementia, as it might lead him
to aspire to what he would never obtain.
Her surprise returned at her refusal of lord
Clemaire, as the only reason she could
assign for so extraordinary a sacrifice was
a prior engagement to her brother.  If no
such engagement existed, she could not        HOWARD CASTLE.      43

account for why so splendid an offer should
have been refused, as a personal dislike
to lord Clemaire could not be the reason.
It was fortunate for lady Elenora that their
sentiments were not the same.

  Clementina never for a moment repent-
ed the firm negative she had given to the
marquis, the transfer of whose attentions to
lady Elenora gave her the liveliest satisfac-
tion. She was convinced it would be pro-
ductive of the greatest happiness to both
sides. The friends separated to dress, but
not with the same composure of feelings
as when they entered the music-room;
lady Elenora was astonished with the ex-
planation she had heard, and her mind was
racked by accounting, in a hundred differ-
ent ways, for the strange information she
had recieved. She repeated over and over
to herself-"We were once attached to each
other; but the time is past; alas, my bro-
ther! what fatal step has blasted your
bright prospects?" she feared the very
event which had for ever deprived him of
being the husband of Clementina, and
dreaded the consequence of such a diclo-
sure upon the very irritable nerves and44          HOWARD CASTLE.

temper of her mother, as she feared the
connexion he had formed would plunge
his family into poignant sorrow.

  Clementina found her maid in a great
degree of impatience at her protracted
stay; she had heard all the ladies retire to
their apartments, but no tidings of her
mistress; her dress was indeed ready, but
they might find some difficulty attending
it. Clementina assured her there was
abundance of time, as half-past eight was
the hour fixed for the masks to assemble in
the great galley; if she was ready by nine,
she should be satisfied. The beauty of her
head-dress struck herself as beyond any
thing she had ever seen; there were writ-
ten directions pinned to the turban, to de-
sire no hair might appear, which Mary
adhered strictly to; it shewed the beautiful
turn of her face and throat to full advantage;
the whiteness of her skin vied with the
large pearl tassels, and the elegant chains
which adorned her neck; there were even
elegant embroidered sandals for her feet,
and a superb mantle to cover the whole.
How she should require such a piece of
dress in a fine evening in August surpris-            HOWARD CASTLE.      45

ed her.  When she was completely ready,
and her mask properly fixed, her attendant
opened the door of the apartment, exclaim-
ing, as she passed—"Surely there never
was a mortal so beautiful!"

  Clementina smiled, as the admiration
must be excited by the dress, her face be-
ing invisible. She met several ladies in
the passages, all bending their steps to-
wards the festive scene; but who they were,
she could not discover. She found the
Castle was a _____ of light; and when
she entered the gallery, she felt nearly
overpowered with surprise. The variety
of characters and ridiculous figures which
she saw, the buz of tongues, the unnatural
voices, as all attempted to disguise their
own, and the strange masks, which pre-
sented themselves to her view, astonished,
and somewhat alarmed her; it struck her
as a good representation of bedlam. Why
people should be so silly as to transform
themselves into such various shapes, puz-
zled her; she saw decrepid old men and
women, hardly able to hobble along—
others representing deformity in the most
painful forms—hump-backed, lame, and dis-46   HOWARD CASTLE.

abled--some infants, six feet high, squall-
ing, in spite of their attendants rattling
their bells at the corals, which were sus-
pended as part of their infantine equip-
ment. She paused at the entrance, irreso-
lute whether to proceed or retreat. She 
hoped some one would accost her in a na-
tural voice, but her hopes were vain; each
was bent on supporting the character as-
sumed.

Lord Howard, who was in a plain do-
mino, advanced, and took her hand; she
felt delighted when he addressed her, and
cheerfully advanced with him.

"Here," said he, "there is no distinc-
tion of persons; a mask levels all rank. I
long watched for your entrance, and saw
the timid step with which the elegant sul-
tana, who ought to command the whole
seraglio, advanced. You must assume cou-
rage, and display the powers you possess;
I will lead you to Mrs. Conway, who is in
a black domino; as I see strangers enter-
ing, I must quit you very unwillingly;
but I will not lose sight of you, if I can
help it, during the evening." He whisper-
ed to Mrs. Conway who the graceful fi-
       HOWARD CASTLE.          47

gure was, and quickly mixing in the
crowd, disappeared.

  " You are creating general curiosity,
my dear Clementina," said her friend;
your dress is superb, and shews your
form to the greatest advantage. I knew
my Howard," continued Mrs. Conway,
ht and suspected, before you reached me,
who he was so carefully guarding from the
throng."

  As long as Clementina remained near
her friend, she felt comfortable, but masks
continued to pour in so fast, and so many
crowded to the upper end of the room, she
was glad to make way for the great influx,
which appeared, in her eyes, like an over-
whelming torrent, against which there was
no resistance. Terror at last wore off, and
she became reconciled to the silly question
—" Do you know me?" or " I cannot guess
who you are," either squeaked or grum-
bled out, in disagreeable tones. She had
perceived, upon her first entering the room,
a very particular figure, who seemed to
watch her with a steady fixed attention,
which appeared wholly occupied by her
person, as he had not attempted to speak48      HOWARD CASTLE.

to her; he was disguised as an old witch,
and carried a white wand in his hand, as
an insignia  of his magical power; his form
was wrapt in a long black cloak, which
completely concealed his person; wherever
Clementina moved, there he was likewise;
as his size and motions proved he was not
what he represented, an old woman, a mo-
ther Shipton's hat half-covered a hideous
wrinkled countenance, which conveyed in
idea these words--

        "This night I'll spend
        Into a dismal, fatal end;
    Great business must be wrought ere noon,
    Upon the corner of the moon."

  At last she heard a mumbling voice,
which sounded in her alarmed imagination
hollow and sepulchral, call to her, as she
was moving, to avoid, if possible, the horrid
figure--"Fly not, fair and lovely sulta-
na! I would not harm thee, for all this
world could offer, not even terrify thy
gentle mind."

  The voice, in spite of being disguised,
was familiar to her ear. Could it be Mr.
Montague, who had so frightfully concealed            HOWARD CASTLE.       49

himself? the person now very near her was
certainly considerably taller. The dress
brought Mr. Stopford to her remembrance, 
but his stature did not at all accord with
the tall form which now impeded her pro-
gress.--" If you will listen to me, I will
disclose to you some events of your past
life, and I can likewise foretell some of
those which are the come. Young as you
are, and artless and innocent as young, 
you have undergone some severe trials. 
Your short life has been marked in the 
book of fate by some distressing events."

  "True," sighed Clementina; "there
you speak truth." She forgot her feigned
voice, and spoke in that which nature had 
given her. 

  The fortuneteller seemed agitated, and 
unable to proceed.

  Lord Howard at that moment joined 
her, and her unknown attendant disap-
peared.--" Who is that strange-looking
mask you have been conversing with? I
saw him in the room before you entered,
watching each as they came in. At last
you figure seemed to strike him in a won-

   VOL. V.
50 HOWARD CASTLE.

derful manner. I was not surprised; but
he has never for a moment quitted you."

"I am perfectly ignorant," was her re-
ply, "unless it is Mr. Montague; I felt
afraid when he first spoke to me."

"Did your fear wear off," said lord
Howard, "from the idea it was your rela-
tion? he is likewise in pursuit of you; he
has got a wrong scent, as he has attached
himself to a lady who personates deaf and
dumb, so her voice cannot undeceive him;
I will not, as I am convinced he would
entirely dedicate the evening to you, and
I should hardly have an opportunity of
speaking to you."

"Then who can the fortuneteller be?
his figure is not unlike Mr. Strafford's."

"He is," replied lord Howard, "an ex-
cellent mask, but not the one who watches
you with sedulous care."

A mad Tom, rattling his chains, sud-
denly approached them.-"Oh," cried he,
"celestial beauty, why are you come
to set the world on fire? why have you
turned poor Tom's brain to a cinder? re-
turn to thy seraglio, and no more eclipse
the virgins of this country: they fade in             HOWARD CASTLE             51

the comparison, as the stars of heaven fade
and vanish before the lustre of the sun."
-He again rattles his chains and disap-
peared.

     "How strange," said Clementina, "that
the greatest calamity nature can inflict
should be introduced into such a scene as
this is! how dreadful, was the presumptu-
ous imitator really to be seized with fren-
zy!"

     "True," said lord Howard, "you see
almost every natural defect which the hu-
man frame is subject to represented at a
masquerade: were all to remain as they
at this moment appear, what a melancholy
assemblage there would be! You would
shrink from your unknown fiend, was he
really an old haggard witch; but" added
he, "we must have done with moraliz-
ing; the company are off, and we
must follow. have you no shawl to
throw round you? we are going out of
doors, and my scheme to amuse you must
not endanger your health."

     "A most superb mantle was sent with
this dress." said she.
52 HOWARD CASTLE

Lord Howard flew, and sent to her
maid for it, and himself carefully wrapt
her in it. The company had left the
gallery. He purposely detained his fair
charge until he thought they had all
quitted the house; then, offering his arm,
he guided her steps in a different direc-
tion to what she expected, pleased that
his scheme of secrecy had succeded, as
she expressed much surprise when she
found they were to leave the castle. He
hurried her forward with a degree of swift-
ness which astonished her. She felt as if
her feet hardly pressed the grass as they
crossed it. She had no time for expressing
the wonder she felt, when it was increased
tenfold by the brilliant scenc which broke
at once upon her view.

Lord Howard had conducted her by a
different path from the one the masks had
entered by. He chose a more circuitous
route, which competely concealed both
the company and the sparkling lamps from
her sight. She stood rooted to the spot
with admiration and amazement, and
could not at first find words to express
the strange sensation which took possessionHOWARD CASTLE. 53

of her upon the first view she had of the
wood, which was filled with masks. In
the middle was an amphitheatre, covered
with an awning, from which hung innu-
merable coloured lights, and in the mid-
dle were suspended immense chandeliers,
which threw a glow of light upon every
object. The canvas was fixed so high,
that many avenues, which were cut in the
wood, and brilliantly lighted with coloured
lamps, were not in the smallest degree
hid from the company. An elegant or-
chestra was raised, where a band of mu-
sicians from London was placed. The
whole of the space was covered with In-
dian matting, to prevent the ladies' feet
touching the grass. The air was perfum-
ed by exotics, which had been purposely
prepared in the stoves. All had the ap-
pearance of magic.

Clementina expressed what she really
felt, gratified beyond measure.

Lord Howard was charmed with her
approbation. They entered the wood,
mutually pleased with each other, and all
around them. Never was there a more
gay or exhilarating scene. The music
54               HOWARD CASTLE.

sounded beautifully in the open air, which
was mild and favourable; not a leaf was
agitated, or a lamp extinguished. Nature
favoured the evening's amusement, as no-
thing could be more delightful than the
atmosphere.

     "I have heard of fairy land," said Cle-
mentina, as they approached the throng,
"but the effect of enchantment, and those
strange figures who are flitting about, cer-
tainly do not look like inhabitants of this
nether sphere."

    "Nor would there be such a heteroge-
neous assemblage permitted in a land of
spirits," said lord Howard. "You are the
only one who could transport my senses
into a belief I was in the company of ce-
lestial beings. Yes, my Clementina, if it
is enchantment, you are the enchantress
who guides the whole." As he said these
words, he observed the fortuneteller slowly
wandering near the principal entrance
from the house- "There is your myste-
rious friend again watching for your ap-
proach; express you will enter by the
same way the other masks did. Let us
            HOWARD CASTLE.            55

watch him for a few seconds, and you will
observe he takes no notice of ant one.
You are the object alone who appears to
interest him."

   "He perhaps mistakes me for some
other lady," said Clementina; "there is
no one I know who can be so anxious to
converse with me."

   "Is there not a person," said lord How-
ard, in an incredulous voice, " besides my-
self, who would wish to monopolize your
company? Many me the treasure I possess,
and I know we have left (shall I use the
singular number) at least one individual
abroad, who would give all his dearest pos-
sessions for what that witch seems deter-
mined to enjoy this evening."

   "His possessions would be ill bestowed."
was her reply; "whoever he is, he can
have no interest for me." She was con-
vinced lord Howard's thoughts had stray-
ed to Geneva, and that lord Montague
was the person he meant, when he asked
if he should keep to the singular number.
Poor sir Theodosius was very unlikely to
seek society which was painful to him;
 

56     HOWARD CASTLE

and lord Montague, she was thoroughly
convinced, could not be in Great Britain;
and if he was, why should he single her
out in the very remarkable manner which
the fortuneteller had done? and why 
should he have concealed from her his
intention of visiting England?

  Lord Howard found her thoughts had
wandered perhaps from his remark to a 
considerable distance.  He had no appre-
hension, as he believed her as free from 
deceit of every kind as possible; and he 
was convinced she was the most perfect of 
human beings.  The ardent love which
he felt for her was such.  that he could not
harbor the slightest suspicions.  He was 
resolved not even to watch her.  but to 
prove to her what he believed really was
the case-that he had the most perfect
confidence in her prudence, and in her af-
fection; they proceeded towards the or-
chestra where the celebrated singer Miss
-, from Vauxhall, was warbling the 
sweetest notes.
  Clementina had often regretted she had
never been in those delightful gardens.
Lord Howard had formed the plan of re-            HOWARD CASTLE.       57

presenting them to her at Howard Castle
before he left London, and had made all
the arrangements for the evening's amuse-
ment.  He recollected the old-fashioned 
wood.  which had in former days been cut
into labyrinths and avenues, for têtes of 
the same kind he meant to have in it: and
he succeeded beyond his most sanguine
wish, as it looked beautiful, and all the
company was gay and happy.

   A pert fruit-girl had often accosted them
and seemed particularly bent on teazing 
Clementina, who was an object of general
attention.  Lord Howard was obliged to
leaver her, but not before he saw her join a
party of minstrels, which music had ceased
during the song.  She discovered lady
Elenora Montague to be one of them, and
she strongly suspected she knew others of
the group.  On old blind ballad-singer
arrested her attention; the figure was re-
markably well dressed, in a tattered regi-
mental coat, and all the costume of a worn-
out military hero:  he was led by a pretty 
little spaniel, and sung the interesting and
beautiful poem of Belisarius, with the ut-
58          HOWARD CASTLE. 

most taste and feeling, and with the most
mellow and musical voice. Crowds fol-
lowed him, and many a copy of his song
he distributed from a little basked he car-
ried on his arm.

  Clementina was with her friend the min-
strel, listening with delight to the ballad-
singer, when a gentle touch on her arm
made her look round-it was the fortune-
teller-" For the love of charity listen to
me; if you will quit this trhong, I will
convince you, in three words, I am one
you would not shun." A tremor seized
her; he took her hand-she withdrew it
with quickness. "Ah," said he, "shrink
not at the touch of a friend-a sincere
friend! and few of those are to be met with
in this tlacng. Be not alarmed, I entreat
of you; put confidence in me, and trust
yourself with me to that rustic bench, 
where I will unfold a tale will surprise you."

  "I dare not indeed," replied Clemen-
tina," unless you will tell me who you 
are."

  "I cannot in this crowd."

  "No!" replied she;" it is strange you               HOWARD CASTLE.        59

are so afraid of discovery.  Are you Mr.
Montague?"

   "No," was his answer. " I think he is
a quaker."

   "Are you the marquis of Clemaire?"

   "He is the grand Turk."

   Her curiosity was raised exceedingly;
she looked round, to see if lord Howard
was near.

   "Lord Howard," said the fortuneteller,
"is not now watching you; and I assure
you, if he was, he would not disapprove of
your conversing with me. You may ex-
plain to him thi evening, when I am
gone, who I am, but not till then, and re-
member it must be divulged to no one but
lord Howard."

   "It is strange," thought Clementina,
"all this care and caution should be neces-
sary." It raised her curiosity, and made
her more willing to comply with his re-
quest. At last she said--" If you will
speak in your natural voice, I will con-
verse with you, but not otherwise."

   "If that," said he, "is the only condi-
tion on which I can enjoy a few minutes
 60             HOWARD CASTLE.

of your company, I must submit to my
hard fate, as so encircled, I cannot disco-
ver myself." After a moment's pause, he
said—" Is your little spaniel still alive, or
have you forgot his master, and neglected
him?"

     "Do you know his master?"
     
     "Should I render myself more agree-
able to you, by saying I do, or do not?"

     "By telling me the truth," was her re-
ply.

      "Then," said he, " if you will go to
the seat, I will give you tidings of him."

      She wished to yield, but felt afraid of
lord Howard seeing her conversing with a
person whom he seemed to watch with a
suspicious eye.

     " Will you disclose to me who you are?"
     
     "Before I part with you this night,"
was his answer.

     She felt uncomfortable; there was some-
thing solemn in his manner. lie turned
round, and was bending his steps towards
the bench, which was at some distance.
She followed him a few yards; but her
courage again failed her, and she stopped"You may now," she cried, "tell me
 who you are, with out fear of being over-
 heard.

"Not unless you will accompany me to
 the seat I have already pointed out.

Clementina's curiosity got the better of
her prudence and she followed him, at the
same time her eyes were wandering in
search of lord Howard. When they were
seated, the mas gravely said "The last
year of your life has been embittered by 
many woes, but the future looks bright.
You have inspired a pure and sincere love
in the most honorable bosom; cherish lord
Howard's affection-you are worth of 
each other"

"I came not here," said Clementina,
with rather a degree of impatience in her
voice, " to have my fortune told, but to
be informed who you are. You seem to 
know all my concerns in a wonderful man-
ner."

"The maquis of Clemaire," resumed
 he, "has transferred his attention, which
you so slighted, to your cousin, whose gen-
tle temper will, I hope, render him happy."
The fruit-girl approached them- "It is 



62           HOWARD CASTLE.

a mighty long and serious fortune you
have told to this beauteous sultana. I
will alarm the seraglio, as I suspect you
are a most dangerous person, unless you
will divine the very best fortune to me
that is possible."

  " I waste not words without a reeom-
pence."

  " So I have suspected." was her reply.

  " Oh." cried he, " I know my import-
ance too well, not to expect a gratuity."

  " Here," said she, " are the nicest ap-
ples in the world."

  " But I am afraid, my pretty maid, your
are wishing to lead me into temptation.
Are they not forbidden fruit ?"

  " Follow the footsteps of our forefather
Adam," briskly answered she.

  " But, alas! should I not be turned out
of paradise? If I am no longer permit-
ted to keep company with angels, what
will become of me ?"

  " One," cried she. " I am convinced, is
ready to accompany you in your flight."

  " Thank you for so generous an offer;
I will certainly reward you for the idea,
by giving the best specimen of my art.           HOWARD CASTLE.      63

You see I am engaged at present; when
I am at liberty. I will beckon to you."

  "Ah!" said she," you are caught in 
toils, never again to enjoy freedom."

  "She mistakes me." said the mask, "for 
lord Howard; but we are now happily rid 
of her."

  "She still continaes rear," said Clemen-
tina. "Do you know who she is?"

  "An enemy of yours'" answered he;
"she created much uneasiness in your
gentle bosom at Carnsworth Castle, where
you first saw her."

  "Ah!" exclaimed Clementina,"is it Miss
Osburn?"

  "Is is that fiend in human form. The
constructions she put on your flying into
lord Montague's dressing-room confirmed
her character, in my opinion, as diabolical."

  "You appear to know every occurrence
of my life." said Clementina, with sur-
prise. "You torment me with this sus-
pense."

  The mask appeared not to attend to what
she said. He continued-" Your cousin
is far more tranquil and happy than he ever expected to be, when you an he64              HOWARD CASTLE.

parted in the library at Carnsworth Cas-
tle."

  "Heavens!" exclaimed Clementina, "you
are lord Montague!"

  "Hush! Miss Bouverie, I fear Miss
Osburn has heard you name me. She is
hovering near, as a shark watches for its
prey. I am the individual Montague;
but pray be cautions, both for your sake
and mine, how you discover who I am. I
came here on purpose to converse with
you, but not to alarm you."

  "Ah," said she, "how strange it is any
disguise of dress could have concealed you
from me! Why did you not tell me, in
your last letter, you intended visiting Eng-
land? When did you leave Switzerland?
Are you accompanied by lady Montague
and your son?"

  "One question at a time, if you please,:
said lord Montague. "The first of your
interrogations, why I did not inform you
of my projected trip to England? I can
easily answer.--I was not aware of it un-
til nearly the hour of my departure; busi-
ness brought me to London, and the plea-
sure of seeing you brought me here.  I re-        HOWARD CASTLE.      65

solved, until I could remain in this coun-
try, not to let my family know of my be-
ing in it, it would create so much wonder
my again returning to Switzerland; my
remaining there has almost ceased to asto-
nish them; my being discovered here
would undo all my plans, in which you are
to be a principal actor. When you are
the wife of my friend, who shall introduce
my Louisa and my darling boy to my pa-
rents, as who has such powers to appease
wrath as yourself? From you I have
learnt to be happy--by your advice I have
acted, and have tasted the sweets of do-
mestic comfort. Your generous conduct,
in forgiving my behaviour, which was cri-
minal in the highest degree, gave me such
an opinion of your compassionate nature,
that I almost revered you. Your letters
have, by the most gradual means, recon-
ciled me to myself; although far separated,
you introduced me to my amiable compa-
nion--you pointed out the means by which
I might obtain tranquility, and in the end
happiness; your prognostications are all
realized, and I would not at this moment
change situations with-----Let me pause a66           HOWARD CASTLE.

moment and consider—yes. and I can end
the sentence with truth, not with lord How-
ard. I love my Louisa with the tenderest
regard, and she is the mother of my trea-
sure. One day you will know those be-
ings who have been saved from misery
by your interference. I will own every
thing; before I received your letter, I had
formed a horrid plan, never again to see
my wife, or to press my infant to my bo-
som; I felt a repugnance to meet with the
woman who had separated me from you,
and I was resolved never to behold her
more. Your first letter soothed me, and
opened a prospect to my view; you re-
commended me to exertion, and to all I
have done; I have implicitly followed your
counsels, and they have led me to propriety
of conduct, to internal peace, and, I may
now add, to perfect happiness. My Louisa
loves you as I do, as the source of all our
comfort; my boy lisps your name, as the
being, next to his Maker, who he is to ve-
nerate. I mean that we shall still be de-
pendent upon you for an introduction to
my proud family; you alone can reconcile
them to the step I have taken. WhenHOWARD CASTLE. 67

you are lady Howard, you must visit our
Swiss abode, and take my timid Louisa
under your guidance and protection."

  Clementina expressed the unfeigned
pleasure she felt at the account lord Mon-
tague gave of his own situation and feel-
ings- "But how," asked she, "have you
got such a knowledge of my affairs?"

  "From a source," he replied, "you do
not suspect. Poor Stopford is deeply in-
terested in your concerns; he entertains no
hopes for himself, but he seems to know
all that has befallen you. Since our meet-
ing at Carnsworth Castle, I have heard
very frequently from him, and received
more intelligence from that source than
from any other."

  "How could Mr. Stopford," said Cle-
mentina, "know my affairs?"

  "Because," replied lord Montague, "he
is one of your warmest admirers; and if
he will persevere, and take the trouble of
investgating any thing with attention,
there is hardly a possibility of escaping his
penetration. He knew every particular
of sir Theodosius Sydney's meeting with
68               HOWARD CASTLE.

you in Paris; he wrote to me of the ball
at the count de Brille's, and of lord How-
ard's evident admiration. I never for a
moment doubted his discovering your per-
fections; to see you, he must admire you;
and to know you, love must follow. He is
worthy of you." added lord Montague,
with much feeling, " and I cannot find
words in the English language to express
more strongly the high sense I have of his
merit. Stepford discovered me in Lon-
don, to my sorrow at the moment; but I
believe he is to be confided in; although
and eccentric mortal, he has good princi-
ples; he now knows my peculiar situa-
tion; I found it was necessary to account
for my fear of being known to my family,
by telling him the truth, which he will
not abuse. We came together to the mas-
querade, and it was by his assistance I am
so deeply and strangely disguised."

  Clementina had not recovered the sur-
prise which this conversation had thrown
he into, when she saw lord Howard ap-
proaching. She quickly rose from her
seat, without giving herself a moment for        HOWARD CASTLE.                       69       

consideration. All she had time to say
was-"Follow me not". and darted amongst
a crowd of masks.
   Lord Howard was amazed with this
strange fight. He eyed lord Montague
with a scrutinizing look, but passed on,
in pursuit of Clementina, who he found
was with Mrs. Conway and a large party.
The minstrels were singing a beautiful bal-
lad and the company were apparently lis-
tening to them-" Your flying from me,"
He whispered. as soon as he was near
enough to be heard, " astonished me: had
you not flattered me that you would have
flown to me for protection, if any thing
alarmed you. I should not have sar-
prised."
   "Nothing alarmed me, my lord." re-
plied she, with an embarrassed air.
   "Then my appearing drove you from a
situation where you had long sat. seem-
ingly perfectly contented, until you ob-
served me. You vanished so suddenly,
that I had nearly made an attack upon
your companion from the idea he had by
some means frightened you. Have you
seen," continued he, " the elegant Diana
70             HOWARD CASTLE.

and her nymphs, who are so much admired?
they have only lately appeared, and are
universally followed."

    Clementina answered in the negative.
   
    Lord Howard offered her his arm, and led
her, with his wonted good humour, to-
wards the group. All seemed forgot by 
him, but that Clementina was with him;
her presence banished every painful idea
which had for a moment taken possession
 of him. That she could wish to avoid
him upon second thoughts, he deemed
impossible, as hypoerisy could not find a 
place in a disposition so amiable, as he was
thoroughly convined her was; he be-
lieved himself beloved, and the conviction
restored peace to his mind, which her
strange flight had for a moment disturbed.

         
              CHAPTER III.

THE figure of Diana was very justly ad-
mired, as nothing could be more elegant,
or more beautifully dressed, to shew off        HOWARD CASTLE.      71

the form of a very fine woman. She leaned
on her bow, in a graceful attitude, as if
fatigued with the chase, and her dogs had
laid themselves at her feet, as if they had
studied the positions in which they were
placed. Her delicate ancles, which were
exposed to view, where laced in buff san-
dals, which were of the same hue as her
stockings; her hair was braided in the most
beautiful and becoming form, and fastened
on the forehead with a diamond crescent;
her dress, which was of pale green, was
fitted with evident care to her slender
form, which was symmetry itself; the
nymphs in her train completed a group
which would have done credit to the pen-
cil of an artist.

  Lord Howard expressed a strong desire
to know who they were, but no one could
tell him. Clementina perceived the for-
tuneteller again hovering near, and the
fruit-girl following him. Lord Howard
said not a word, but she observed his eyes
frequently fixed on lord Montague. Upon
considering the matter maturely, she be-
lieved she had no reason to be alarmed, as
she was thoroughly convinced a few words72         HOWARD CASTLE.

of explanation from her would remove
every feeling of uneasiness from lord How-
ard's bosom, even if it should be whis-
pered in his car who the mask was.  She was
resolved to adhere to lord Montague's wish,
not to divulge who he was until his de-
parture.  Probably she should not have
an opportunity that night; but the firsr
favourable moment she resolved to explain
every thing,as she was now at full liberty
to be as explicit to him as possible; her
mind felt more at ease, from the idea that
she was no longer obliged to have any con-
cealment from the man who she was sen-
sible deserved the most perfect confidence
and candour.
  The minstrels again approached; Harle-
quins and Columbines innumerable haunt-
ed them, some playing off monkey tricks,
by way of life and spirit, in which neither
were displayed; quack-doctors, sailors, and 
hair-dresses, were witty and troublesome;
some impertinently familiar, others in-
sufferably dull and stupid.  Clementina
felt fatigued, and almost wished the hurry-
ing scene was over.  She perceived the
quaker, for the first time, still closely pin-                   HOWARD CASTLE.               73

ned to the side of the lady,who he fancied was herself.A don Quixote, and his squire Sancho mounted on Dapple, were two excellent figures.They approached lord Howard and Clementina--"Most beautiful and magnanimous sultana,what corner of the wide world has hitherto concealed such a lovely and pure jem from the eyes of man? Exalted lady, allow the humblest of thy slaves thus to prostrate himself at they feet." He laid his hand on his breast, and kneeling, almost touched the ground with his helmet.

"Most courteous knight." replied Clementina,"rise from that ignominious posture;it suits not a person of your high degree."

"It is well said, star of the world," said he,slowly recovering his erect position."Allow me to contemplate thy transcendant charms at a distance;they fall little short of those of Dulcinea del Toboso".

"Aye,master," said Sancho,"scald not your lips with another man's pottage;they who cannot as they will,must will as they can"

VOL. V

74          HOWARD CASTLE.

  They marched off to Diana and her
nymphs, who seemed much amused with
the knight and his squire. A lady of the
last century now approached them, whose
large hoop and wide-spreading petticoats
required no small space to move in. Her
dress was well suited to her character, and
very opposite to Diana's, whose display of
figure seemed to shock her virgin modesty,
and made her large fan of peculiar use.

  Clementina had separated from lord How-
ard, and was walking with lady Elenora,
who was the only person she hau discover-
ed, when the fortune-teller was again at her
elbow—" You must perceive," whispered
he, " what a strict eye lord Howard keeps
upon you. I may not have another op-
portunity of entreating your hand in dan-
cing, so be not shy to a white domino, who
will solicit the honour of your being his
partner for the first set; my servant has a
change of dress in the carriage for me."

  Clementina promised him her hand.
The moment he had joined her, lady Ele-
nora had left her; she found herself again
alone with lord Montague—" You tempt
me to do what I think is wrong," said she ;"I have conversed too much with you al-
ready; and there is that dangerous woman 
watching us; what may she not attempt 
to do?  
  "She can do nothing to injure you," 
said lord Montague.
  "Oh!" exclaimed she, with visible agi-
tation of manner, "I wish you would make
yourself known at supper, when the masks 
are to be taken off." 
  "I must be then many miles on my way 
to London," replied, lord Montague; "and 
how very strange it would appear to my 
family, that I had been in their company 
all the evening, and delayed to the last 
moment."
  "We have all been deceiving each other,"
interrupted she; "had there been no mas-
querade, your disguise would have asto-
nished every one.  You have only been
supporting a character, not purposely de-
ceiving your family."
  He shook his head-"I cannot," was his 
answer, "lay myself open to such an in-
vestigation as must ensue; an explanation 
would of course take place, and I am not

76        HOWARD CASTLE.

prepared for it.  I am Confident no harm
can result from my being here with you; I
have already given you leave to explain to
my friend every thing; if you have pre-
served my little incoherent story and my
letters, put them into lord Howard's hands;
but he will never require such an explan-
tion; he never can, for a single moment,
doubt you, who are pure as innocence it-
self."
   "Conscious rectitude," said Clementina,
" cannot screen me from malevolence,
such a I am convinced Miss Osburn feels
towards me."
  "And who would believe Miss Osburn,"
cried lord Montague, with warmth,"when
Miss Bouverie was implicated by her?"
  They separated, and she bent her steps
towards the amphitheatre, where she hoped
to find Mrs. Conway, as she was resolved
to remain quietly with her friend, till their
return to the house.
   As she was making her way through
the crowd, she was accosted by the quaker
__" Yea, verily, young maiden, where
art thou going in such haste?"
 Clemntina did not wish to be recog-        HOWARD CASTLE.                77

nized by him; she feared her voice would
betray her; she shook her head in silence.

 "This seemeth to me the strangest
night I ever spent," continued he, in the
slowest accents, twisting his thumbs, as he
drawled out his words. " Thou art the 
second female I have accosted, and cannot
obtain an answer; thy sex is not, in gene-
ral, prone to silence-in general too much
the contrary; but verily, I believe thou
couldst speak, if thou wouldst. Hast thou,
maiden, the power? or dost thou not un-
derstand what thy friend meaneth?"

 She again shook her head, and left him.
A loud crack of a whip, and a still louder
tallyho! made Clementina move quickly
forward, in hopes she should find Mrs.
Conway, seated with the duchess, where
she had seen them some time before;
but the sportsman impeded her course-
"Where are you flying to, my little an-
gel? exclaimed he; and roughly seizing
her arm, "I have had a long chace, as I
got scent of you from different people, I
made sure of my game, I will not easily
let you escape again. The only sport of
78          HOWARD CASTLE.

these masquerades is, that we may talk to
whom we please, and how we please. By
Jove, you are the triggest girl I have seen
to-night; and I have had no fun yet—dull
work sauntering here; but I will not part
with you, till you tell me who you are, or
I see your face, if it is as good as your
shape."

  Clementina tried all she could to disen-
gage herself from his grasp, as, from the
first word he littered, she knew him to be
sir Charles Pembroke.

  " What," said he, " would you go so
soon, my pretty dear? Faith, I cannot
part with you yet awhile."

  Don Quixote at that moment came up,
in a threatening attitude, with his helmet
down, and couching his lance—" A vaunt,
miscreant, and tremble for thy life! know
that don Quixote de la Maneha challenges
thee to single combat! Where is thy
squire?—where is thy spes"?"

  Sir Charles, who did not understand the
address, was alarmed by the fierce figure
and attitude of his enemy, which lie did
not admire, and instantly quitted his hold of
Clementina.             HOWARD CASTLE.      79

  She quickly turned her steps towards the house, where she was resolved to go, and compose herself in her own apartment, before dancing commenced; she felt fatigued, as she had hardly sat down, except the few minutes she had spent with lord Montague.  Refreshments had been constantly handed about; but she had not partaken of them; she felt completely worn out in both mind and body.  The sound of tallyho, at no great distance, again alarmed her, and made her quicken her pace.  She hoped to escape unperceived, as all seemed busily employed, when she was seen by lord Montague.  He flew towards here - "Are you alarmed?" cried he; "you appear to be flying from pursuit."

  "I wish to avoid sir Charles Pembroke," was her reply; "he is rough and disagreeable; and I am fatigued.  I am on my way to the castle; the lights from the windows will soon guide my steps."

  "Allow me to accompany you; I will see you safe, and return immediately to this gay scene."

  She had little time for consideration, as the crack of a whip made her instantly ac-80           HOWARD CASTLE.

Cept of lord Montague's offered arm, and
they walked quickly away.  The hurry
and confusion she was in made her take
the first turn they came to, never doubting
it led to the house.  Her attendant sup-
posing she was well acquainted with the
road, made no comment upon its being
much darker than the way by which he
had entered.  The avenue they followed
had been intended by lord Howard to re-
present one of the dark walks at Vauxhall;
still they advanced, without discovering
their mistake.  At last Clementina said---
"I think we shall never see the lights of
the castle."
  " This is certainly not the way," said
lord Montague, "by which I entered the
wood; we had better return."
  "No," replied Clementina, who felt un-
willing again to join the company; "it
may lead us right, if we continue."  They
proceeded, until the walk became almost
totally dark.  She stopped--" We must
be wrong," she exclaimed, in a voice which 
conveyed strong alarm; "this way termi-
nates in total darkness; whatever is the 
consequence, we must return.  What a              HOWARD CASTLE.     81

strange appearance, should lord Howard
see us!"

   " For Heaven's sake, compose yourself,"
said lord Montague, who saw the increas-
ing agitation of clementina.

   They heard voices approaching; but the
light was so faint, it was with difficulty
they could distinguish the figures. At
last they recognized Miss Osburn and two
other masks posting after them. This
discovery did not add to Clementina's com-
posure; she became seriously alarmed, and
her trembling limbs almost refused their
office.

   Lord Montague dreaded her sinking
upon the ground---"What cause can there
be for this strange fear in Miss Bouverie?
Do you suppose Miss Osburn's malevo-
lence can reach you? or either injure you
in the opinion of lord Howard or the
world? If lord Howard is capable of
thinking ill of you, or of listening for one
moment to Miss Osburn's calumny, he is
not worthy of possessing such a treasure."

   "Ah, pretty innocent," said Miss Os-
burn, who was now close to them, "the
                 E382           Howard Castle.

confinement of a seraglio would never do 
for you; the old adage, variety is charm-
ing; but I fear our coming is mal-apropos.
You was bending your steps to the tem-
ple, was you? a very sombre retreat, with
such an attendant; but appearances must
not always be mind."

  Clementina could not speak; but lord
Montague mumbled out-" Remember 
my art-I can unfold wonderful things.
Clarendon is not wrapped in impenetrable
secrecy; so be aware of slander, where none
with truth can be affixed; I will tell a tale,
if you do, which will astonish the world."
Saying these words in a most determined
and strange voice, he turned to Clemen-
tina-"You hear this not the way to
the house, which we supposed it was; let
us then return, and find out the right path."

  They walked on, and Miss Osburn and
her companions pursued their way.

  "What," said Clementina, as soon as 
her composure permitted her to speak,
"what did you mean by your threat to 
Miss Osburne?"

  "An even of her life," replied he,
"which I believe she thought was known             HOWARD CASTLE.                   83

to no one but herself. Clarendon is dead, which  I suppose eased her mind a load. He imparted her misconduct to me,when he heard I was going to marry her. Her levity,to give it the mildest term, was such, that no virtuous woman ought to keep company with her. I was not acquainted with this secret when I was at Carnsworth Castle, otherwise, believe me, I should never have had patience with her".

They were soon surrounded by masks;and Clementia hoped they joined the crowd without being observed. She immediately separated from lord Montague, and resolved not again to attempt going to the house, until she moved with the multitude. She looked for lord Howard, whom a last she got sight of, conversing with Diana, who had beaux innumerable around her. At last lord Howard proposed returning to the castle:great was the bustle---all seemed in as great a hurry to leave the wood as they had been to enter it.

A quack-doctor, who had acted his part with the greatest humour, and who had highly amused all who had heard of him, ac-
84               HOWARD CASTLE.

costed Clementina; and she very quickly
discovered him to be Mr. Stepford. As
soon as she recognised him, she expressed
the pleasure she really felt at meeting with
the eccentric genius, whose friendship,
which lord Montegue had dewscribed to her,
and the kind interest he took in her con-
cerns, filled her with gratitude.

  The truth was, Mr. Stepford was vio-
lently smitten with her charms; but he was
sensible his situation precluded hope; as he
was at the time existing on a slender pittance
his father allowed him, which was barely
sufficient to keep soul and body together.
The misfortune with him was, if he was
possessed of riches, they made themselves
wings and flew away. His extravagance
was beyond bounds; and he had more than
once been confined for debts, contracted in
the most foolish manner. His conduct,
from the time he had first met with Cle-
mentina, had been remarkably correct, and
he was regaining the confidence of his fa-
mily; but with so small a chance of success,
that he determined not to put her to the
painful task of refusing to listen to hisHOWARD CASTLE.    85

suit, or himself the mortification of listen-
ing to a refusal.  He now beheld her in
the light of lord Howard's betrothed wife;
as, without being informed by it by either
of the parties, he was thoroughly convinced
was the case.  He was resolved to attend 
the masquerade in characters which would
make it impossible for him to occupy her
time, as he knew lord Montague wished to
converse with her.  It was his harmonious
voice which had charmed her so exceed-
ingly, as he sung the poem of Belisarius to
music of his won composing; and it was 
his unrivalled wit which had created such
mirth, in selling his various nostrums for
all diseases.  He now ventured to approach
her, and was highly gratified by her recep-
tion; but he found it was too dangerous
an experiment, and that his heart was not
sufficiently prepared for again seeing her;
he therefore resolved to accompany lord
Montague when he quitted the ball-room,
and to avoid her conversation whilst he re-
mained.  The joy she evidently shewed at
meeting with him was more than he was
prepared for.


Diana still continued to occupy lord
86              HOWARD CASTLE.
Howard's attention; and clementina strong-
ly suspected lady Almeria Villyers was
the goddess, who was creating so much
emulation amongst the beaux, as all seem-
ed inclined to assist her. She was stand-
ing in the most elegant attitude, till her
dogs were secured, and put under the (arc
of one of her attendants; they were such
favourites, she would not have them hurt.
for the world.
Captain Stanhope, who displayed his fine
person as an Indian, and whose light copper-
coloured dress had alarmed the delicacy of
the lady of the last century us much as
Diana`s had, was most assiduous in as-
sisting the goddess ; and after much pretty
trifling, she allowed lord Howard to hand
her along, leaving her nymphs to the cure
of her numerous admirers. Clementina
suspected lady Caroline seymour, her sis-
ter, and lady Julia Villyers, made part of
her train; and as she had not recognized
Isabella Waldegrave in any of the charac-
ters, she concluded she was one of the num-
ber.
Clementina, who was moving slowly
along, with Mr. Stopford as her escort,
HOWARD CASTLE                87

and whose attention had been somewhat
occupied by the scene they had just seen
acted, was joined by a Turk, who solicited
her hand for the first dance.
  
 "She was engaged"
  "I hope not to an old conjuror I have
seen you with to-night; he, surely, is not
to be your partner?"

"Ah!" said don Quixote, who was pass-
ing at the moment, peerless and beauti-
ful lady, wilt not thou reserve the honour
of this hand," taking at the same time hold
of hers, "for one who has stood forth this
evening in the defence of the most lovely 
of her sex? Reward me, I say, courteous
lady, by allowing me the supreme felicity
of creating envy in the bosoms of all my
own sex, and dance the second with me,
as I understand you are engaged for the 
first."

 "Most exalted knight," replied Clemen-
tina," could I suppose that you could de-
rive any pleasure in being my partner, I
should be overwhelmed with grief at my 
inability to comply with your request, as I
am unfortunately engaged for both dances."

 He bowed to the ground-"Was there

 
88             HOWARD CASTLE.

ever so unlucky and miserable a man! at 
no time do my good stars preside!"

   " Ah, master," said Sancho, who was
closely treading upon the heels of the
knight, " what can't be cured must be en-
dured."

  " Hush, fool," cried the disappointed
don, "and not add to the weight of my
woe by thy nonsense."

  Clementina walked on with Mr. Stop-
ford, and followed the crowd, who were 
moving towards the castle.  The great
state drawing-room was prepared for the
ball, and was decorated in the most bril-
liant manner.  She observed lord Howard
was still occupied by the beutifal Diana,
who understood the art of keeping up at-
tention.  He however left her, when he 
saw Clementina, saying, as he approached
her--"I hope the fortune-teller is not to
be introduced into the ball-room; he has
occupied so much of your conversation this
evening, that I have almost envied him the
tête-à-têtes he has enjoyed."

    " A masquerade, my lord, is no place for
conversation--too much nonsense abounds
for any serious topic."
                      Howard Castle.        89

  "Have you," cried he, with gravity,
"kept strictly to that Idea?  you appeared
very much interested with the nonsense
the fortune-teller spoke."

  "You are surely not jealous, my lord,
of such a rival?"

  "Jealousy was never a failing of my 
temper, but I never before had such a 
treasure to guard.  I fear I shall be too
deeply interested for my own happiness.
I claim this hand as my reward: I hope I 
have a presumptive right to it."  At the
same time gaily pressing it as he spoke.

  Clementina felt confused, and appeared
so.- "For the first set, my lord, it is not
mine to bestow, but for the second I re-
served it, in case you should honor me
by being my partner."

  "It was kind of you to think at all of 
me; but can I bear to be a secondary ob-
ject with Miss Bouverie?"

  "My first partner," replied she, "is a
married man, and I could not refuse what
he asked; particularly as I did not know
you would dance with me.  I supposed
you would begin the ball with the person 
of most consequence.90                  HOWARD CASTLE.

  "And who is of half the consequence to
me that you are? No one, believe me, Cle-
mentina: as for rank, all here are on an
equal footing."

  She secretly lamented her engagement
with lord Montague, and she dreaded his
being discovered to be the same person
who attended her in the wood.

  Lord Howard continued with her till the
first set was forming. At that moment
she discovered the white domino in pur-
suit of her; the elegance of his figure at-
tracted observation. She felt agitated and
uneasy as he approached her; he silently
took her hand, and led her to her place,
leaving lord Howard standing along; she
was absent, and inattentive; blundering
the figure, and forgetting the music was
to direct her steps. Lord Howard walked
about, and seldom appeared to have his
eyes off her, which added to her embarrass-
ment.

  At last, lord Montague, fatigued with 
calling her wandering thoughts to what
she was about, said--"I was selfish in en-
gaging you for my partner; I thought not              HOWARD CASTLE.            91
of the change in our situations since I last 
danced with you."
     
     "Accuse me not," cried she, "of being
dissatisfied with you; it is myself I am at 
war with; I have behaved in so foolish a 
manner this evening, as will deservedly
lose me the esteem of Mrs. Conway: I have
given Miss Osburn room to injure me in 
the eyes of those I most value."

     "It is Mrs. Conway's son," replied lord
Montague, "you are the most afraid of; but you know not lord Howard's heart, 
it' you suspect him of jealousy."

     When the dance was over, she intreated
lord Montague to leave her. She joined
Mrs. Conway, who put off her mask;
many had followed her example, and Cle-
mentina discovered several of the charac-
ters to be her friends, whom she had not
suspected. Lady Augusta Sydney had 
represented the lady of the last century,
which she had supported uncommonly
well. Diana's mask being taken off, expos-
ed, as Clementina expected, the beautiful
face of lady Almeria, which never appeared
to so much advantage; her nymphs, and                  HOWARD CASTLE

great part of the company, remained
masked.

   When the second set was standing up,
lord Howard reminded his fair partner of
her promise; she with the greatest plea-
sure, accompanied him; delighted with his
manner, being to her the same as ever,
kind and attentive, she recovered her ani-
mation, and danced with her usual grace.

   Lord Howard was in tolerable spirits,
but again mentioned the fortune-teller. If
he had appeared in the ball-room, he be-
lieved he should have been tempted to
have pulled his mask from his face.

   "You would have been greatly surpris-
ed, if you had," said Clementina, " as it
is one you are well acquainted with".

   "You could not have been so cruel," re-
plied he, "as to have dedicated so much
of your time and attention to sir Theodosi-
us Sydney, if he had chose to keep him-
self disguised from me?"

    "No," was her answer; "you know he is
in Italy, and that he avoids my society."

    "That certainly was not the case with
the fortune-teller," cried lord Howard  
                HOWARD CASTLE.     93

  Dancing put a period to his interroga-
tions; she however fancied he was not in
his usual spirits. In spite of his attempt
at gaiety, she thought his manner more
constrained than usual. It was the rule
to change partners every dance, and as
most of the ladies had taken off their masks,
being hot and uncomfortable for dancing,
Clementina laid hers aside.

  Don Quixote, as soon as he was convin-
ced who she was, advanced towards her,
and solicited her hand, in his own voice,
which proved to be Mr. Montague.

  "I am surprised," said she, as she com-
plied with his request, "in finding you in 
this disguise. I was informed you was
the quaker."

  :No," replied Mr.Montague, "I had
fixed on the character of don Quixote be-
fore I came here, and a little fat Sancho-
like college-companinon acted the part of 
my squire. Had I known you sooner, 
I should have been tempted to have taken
the disguise of a fortune-teller, when I 
could have spent my time quietley in a cor-
ner with you. Since I have seen the love-
ly face of the elegant sultana, I envy the94                             HOWARD CASTLE.

wizard the tête-à-tête he enjoyed. I was
obliged always to be on the alert, seeking
adventures."

"Who was the quaker?" asked she.

"A stranger to me," was his answer;
"he seemed an admirer of Miss Celina
Pembroke's form. She personated deaf
and dumb; perhaps, had she spoke, the
charm would have vanished."

"It was an easy character to support,"
said Clementina.

"I am not of your opinion," he replied;
"I should think taciturnity would be more
difficult for such as Miss Celina Pembroke
to persevere in than any task you could
have given her. She proved her wisdom
in her choice, as nature has decked her
outside prettily enough; and she has prov-
ed she can hold her tongue. There was
another mask, equally wise, and very
splendid, who of course you observed, but
as your attention certainly was very much
occupied, she may have escaped your ob-
servation. She represented a star-light
night."
"Her dress was black?" said Clementina;
"I saw her, but I was so stupid I did notHOWARD CASTLE. 95

know what she meant by her appear-
ance."

"You may still see her, as I dare say
she will be in the supper-room," said Mr.
Montague; "her sable dress is spangled
with diamonds to represent the heavenly
luminaries, and her head-dress, which is of
the same black composition, has all the
constellations sparkling upon it. I make
no doubt but it might throw a new light
upon astronomy, was any one in the room
equal to studying it in a scientific manner.
I should think that Charles's heart and
Sobieski's shield hold their proper places;
whilst Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and all the
planets, encompass the whole as a band,
and the moon shines bright upon her fore-
head, as lighting the whole."

"And so it ought," said Clementina.

"Certainly," was his reply; "but I be-
lieve the luminary is entirely visible to the
naked eye. Nothing is left unseen for the
wise to discover."

Clementina was amused with Mr. Mon-
tague's remarks, but she very willingly
accompanied lady Elenora to the music-
room, as the heat was extreme, from the96     HOWARD CASTLE.

crowd of company, and the innumerable
lamps which illuminated the ball-room,
and they were both fatigued with dan-
cing and the exertions of the evening.

       CHAPTER IV.

Clementina was so worn out, both in
body and mind, that she wished, above
all things, she might have retired to her
own apartment, instead of again joining
the gay throng. She was not accustomed
to such scenes. Instead of her spirits
being elated, she felt depressing beyond
measure. The truth was, her mind was 
harassed with fears. The pleasure of see-
ing lord Montague well and happy, at any
other time, would have been very great;
but in the present case, there were so many
circumstances attending their meeting of
an unpleasant nature, that she was filled 
with alarm; that evening might for ever
blast her prospect of happiness; yet she
could not suppose either Mrs. Conway or              HOWARD CASTLE.      97

her son would be deaf to her explanation;
but an explanation being necessary to de-
fend he conduct, was humbling in the
highest degree. Once create suspicion, it
might be difficult wholly to eradicate it;
although she was conscious she was as free
from guilt, in thought, word, or deed, as
any human being could be, yet she was
miserable that lord Howard should for a
moment think she had even conducted
herself foolishly. The uneasiness of her
feelings made her resolve, if she became
his wife, no inducement should make her
have a concealment of any kind from him.
From the moment she had revealed lord
Montague's history to him, she should
confide every thought to him, and im-
plicitly follow his advice and judgment.
She felt somewhat relieved by this deter-
mination.

  Lady Elenora saw evidently the tummult
Clementina's mind was in. The moment
she had entered the apartment, she had
thrown herself upon a couch, and seemed
to give herself up to reflection. Her
friend at last said--"We have been here98          HOWARD CASTLE.

longer than you are aware of; I believe
we ought to return to the company."

   "Perhaps we should," said Clementina,
at the same time rising from her scat;
"the quietness of this room is particularly
agreeable."

   "It may be to you," said lady Elenora,
smiling, "who have so many adventures 
to occupy your busy fancy. I have no-
thing to think of but the simple songs
that I sung in my very simple character
of minstrel."

   Clementina sighed, and taking hold of lady Elenora's offered arm, accompanied
her without speaking a word.

   When they cutered the ball-room, they
found supper had been announced, which
Clementina supposed would be the signal
for the white domino's departure. She
looked for him, but nowhere was he to 
be seen. She concluded he was gone.

   Lord Howard was standing with his
back towards the door, with lady Almeria
and her party, listening to lady Julia, who
was recounting some of the adventures of
the evening. She was extolling the ele-                HOWARD CASTLE                 99

gance of the white domino, who had
danced with her.

    Clementina could not help hearing the 
remarks which were made.  The crowd
was so great, as many were waiting near
the door until the last dance was finished,
that lady Elenora and she could not ad-
vance farther into the room than where
the group most interesting to her were
standing.  She heard lady Julia say-
"Oh, my lord, he is the most charming
creature! so elegant-so graceful! dances
so divinely! and upon the whole is so
completely agreeable, that I would give
the world to find out who he is."

    " I wonder he did not discover himself
to you," said lord Howard, "as he must
have found he had made a deep impress-
sion."

    "No," replied she; "I took care he
should not find that out; but I assure you
I admired him exceedingly, and tried all
I could to make him speak in his natural
voice, or to take off the nasty mask, which
I am sure concealed the handsomest face
in the world."

                   F 2
    



100            HOWARD CASTLE.

  " Shew me," cried lord Howard, " tins
fascinating hero: perhaps I know him."

  " I wish I could, my lord," answered
she; " he wiis sitting by me when some
malicious person spoke of supper, and of all
unmasking, when he abruptly left me and
disappeared. I long watched for his re-
turn, but he is gone for ever."

  " And seems to have taken your heart
with him," said lady Almeria.

  Lady Elenora heard lady Julia's com-
mendations.—" I am nearly as anxious,"
said she, turning to Clementina, " to know
who the white domino is; he danced with
me, and almost won my heart, he remind-
ed me so much of my brother Montague,
though I thought him more animated and
agreeable. His figure is like his, and
what he said, although in a different voice,
brought l'rederic to my recollection."

  Clementina spoke not a word, as she
was anxious to hear the rest of the conver-
sation. Her own name being mentioned,
arrested all her attention. Lady Elenora's
remark had prevented her hearing the be-
ginning of the sentence, but the end for-
cibly struck her—" Miss Bouverie knows 
            HOWARD CASTLE.         101

who he is, I am sure, as she conversed a
great deal with him. When she was
dancing with you, my lord, he seemed to
forget I was his partner; and when he
thought no one observed him, lie whisper-
ed something in her ear which made her
blush; you were turning me round, but
in spite .of thai I watched them."

   " Upon my word," said lady Almeria,
 " you are quite ridiculous."
   " Pray do not interrupt her," said lord
Howard; " I feel anxious to hear more of
this elegant stranger."

  " It was whispered by many people in
the room," again said lady Julia, " that he
was the same who appeared in the wood
as a fortuneteller. I cannot conceive his
elegant figure could be so disguised; but
Miss Osburn says she knows perfectly well
who he is; she is certain he is the same
person, only he changed his dress."

  Clementina felt ready to sink. She saw,
or thought she saw, lord Howard change
colour. lie spoke no more, but quitted
the parry, and she did not again see him
till he was handing the duchess along to
102	    HOWARD CASTLE.

the supper-room. His countenance was
grave, and Clementina believed gloomy.
  
  At that moment the marquis of Cle-
maire and Mr. Montague approached lady
Elenora and Clementina, whom they led
towards the banquet, which was as superb
as possible; but nothing appeared in the
jaundiced eyes of Clementina to be either
beautiful or interesting.

  Mr. Montague's remarks were as bril-
liant and amusing its ever, but he soon
found there was a material change on his
auditor. She seemed to listen, but he was
convinced nothing he said made any im-
pression upon her. At last he ventured to
inquire if she was well.

  The question roused her. She smiled
as she said—" I do not wonder at your
doubting it: I am not accustomed to such
a tumult as we have been in this evening.
I am exceedingly fatigued, and my head
requires quiet and repose. I have been
hardly conscious you were speaking; par-
don me for my inattention." 

  She saw lord Howard was striving all
in his power to be gay and lively as usual,but it evidently was a struggle in which
he failed. Lady Julia had inflicted a deep
wound: the last sentence she uttered, that
the white domino and the fortuneteller
were the same person, had struck him like
an electrical stroke. He rallied his spirits
as much as the time and place would ad-
mit; he felt, if he gave way to his feelings,
he should be unable to support the neces-
sary attention to his guests. If the asser-
tion was true, he should think it strange
indeed. How extraordinary were the cir-
cumstances! The confusion of manner she
evidently had shewn at different times
when he approached her—the evident plea-
sure she had felt in conversing with the
stranger—proved she must have been on
terms of intimacy with him. She had no
near relation to sanction such serious con-
versation, nor had she ever disclosed to
him any particular friendship which sub-
sisted between her and one of his sex.
When he was speaking to her, previous
to the commencement of dancing, he ob-
served her eyes wandering round the room,
as if in pursuit of some one: was it his
rival she was in search of? but had she not104         HOWARD CASTLE.

solemnly engaged to be his? had she not
owned her affections were wholly his?
could he doubt her sincerity? At one
moment he reprobated himself for suffering
an idea, derogatory to Clementina's inno-
cence, to take possession of him--the next
he was filled with despair. Although she
saw it made him uneasy, yet she could not
refrain from listening to the stranger, and
he entered the ball-room in a fresh disguise,
dancing the first set with her; she was evi-
dently the object of his marked attention;
even when she was his partner, the white
domino found an opportunity to whisper
in her ear; and cause an agitation which
was obvious to every one. Thus did lord
Howard's busy fancy torment him, till the
green-eyed monster jealously took full pos-
session of him. He was miserable, and
wished a hundred times, in the agony of
his soul, that he had never seen her. He
strove against thought, but it would in-
trude; even at the supper-table torment-
ing ideas haunted him; he rejoiced, when
he heard the carriages ordered, that he
should soon have free scope to indulge his
melancholy reflections.        HOWARD CASTLE.               105

Clementina enjoyed the quiet of her own
apartment. She entered it with very dif-
ferent feelings from what she had quitted
it with; at the same time, she flattered her-
self she could very easily remove lord
Howard's uneasiness, as, the first opportu-
nity, she should tell him every circum-
stance. She unluckily had not lord Mon-
tague's story with her; she had left it at
Roachwood, with all the letters she had re-
ceived from him previous to her quitting
England, otherwise she would have put
the whole packet into his hands, which
would at once clear up every thing. They
had separated without his taking the least
notice of her: it might be accidental, but it
was unusual. She had not even sat at the
same table where he was-she was no
judge if his manner was changed; fatigue
got the better of her anxiety; and she
awoke on the following day, refreshed by
sleep, and animated with hope.
When she entered the breakfast-room,
she found a large assemblage of company,
but no lord Howard. Lady Almeria was
expatiating on the fatigue she had under-

                   F3106           HOWARD CASTLE.

gone, and how completely her nervous
system was worn out.  Captain Stanhope
was condoling with her, and pressing her,
in the most tender manner, to drink a cup
of chocolate.
  Mr. Montague looked with an eye of
regret as he saw Clementina seat herself
next to Miss Waldegrave, who presided
at the table she directed her steps to.
She wished for some employment, as she
fet unable to partake of the variety before
her.  She believed the effects of the even-
ing's amusement was more severe upon
her than upon lady Almeria, but she did
not wish to attract attention, as her lady-
ship evidently did.  She observed her lan-
guid eyes, watching each time the room
door was opened.
  Clementina supposed she was looking
for lord Howard.  At last he entered, and
making a general bow, seated himself at
the same table where Clementina was,
without speaking to any one.  She saw,
from his manner and appearance, that his
mind was disturbed and uneasy. The idea
she was the cause of creating him a mo-
ment's inquietude threw her into a tre-HOWARD CASTLE. 107

mor not to be described. She wished
she had taken no active part, but that she
had kept herself in a situation where she
might have escaped observation.
Lord Howard drank one cup of tea with-
out seeming to notice any one, except con-
versing with some of the gentlemen; and
when the company had finished their meal,
he walked about the room, making civil
inquiries after the health of the ladies, hop-
ing no one was the worse for her evening's 
exertion

Lady Almeria, who had thrown herself
upon one of the couches, declared she was
almost killed, and that she should be good
for nothing the whole day, she felt so
languid, and so intolerably nervous.

Lord Howard declared the sorrow he
felt: she might, from his countenance, have
believed him sincere, as it was the picture
of melancholy.

Clementina was standing near enough
to overhear the conversation, in spite of
lord Stanhope's elaborate recital of what
had happened to him after they had left
Paris, and of the trouble he had in pro-
curing the miniature pictures: two he had108     HOWARD CASTLE.

wrapt up separately for lord Howard. The
resemblance of Mrs. conway he presented
to her. She took it with a mechanical
motion, but knew not a word of what he
had taken infinite pains to explain. Her
attention was occupied by hearing lord
Howard's profuse compliments to lady Al-
meria, upon the life and spirit with which
she had supported her character the even-
ing before; and assuring her the admira-
tion she excited was general.

  Gratified by such pleasing intelligence,
and delighted with again drawing lord
Howard's attention, lady almeria could
hardly conceal her joy: the appearance
of fatigue and delicate languor she had
thrown into her manner, her actions, and,
above all, her fine eyes, which were turned
on lord Howard, she believed were irresist-
ible; he had uttered the most charming
words, and she flattered herself she had
fixed irrevocably his admiration. She still
threatened forming a most barbarous vow 
against dancing, which always unhinged
her frame in a cruel manner.

  "What a pity," said he, "that nature
shoudl have endowed you with such grace
         HOWARD CASTLE.     109

and action, without giving a sufficient
share of strength, to support the exertion!"
Her hand, white as alabaster, and her fin-
gers formed in the most delicate mould,
was hung accidentally over the arm of the
Grecian couch on which she reclined.

Lord Howard declared himself skilful
in the knowledge of a pulse; he counted
the pulsations with seeming profound at-
tention, and declared an airing in an open
carriage would be of wonderful service
to her.  She smiled assent; he replaced
her arm into the position he found it in,
and immediately quitted the room, to give
his orders.  He returned no more, until a
whole train of carriages were brought to
the door, as innumerable parties were
formed.

Clementina resisted every solicitation to
accompany them.  She retired to her
own appartment before the apparently gay
throng quitted the house.  All were
seemingly in spirits but herself.  When
she got to her room, she threw herself up-
on a seat, completely overcome with the
tormenting ideas which filled her bosom.
Jealousy had no share of the uneasiness110      HOWARD CASTLE.

which she felt, as lord Howard's manner
to lady Almeria was totally different from 
what he ever shewed to ner; and she was 
thoroughly convinced it was a dreadful
burthen on him to support it. She was
the only toy at liberty for him to play
with. His mind was not in a state to en-
ter into conversation. Trifling nonsense, 
such as he could talk to lady Almeria, 
was all lie was equal to. Clementina
easily saw through the farce, but she was 
grieved to the heart that any fault of hers 
should occasion him such misery as she
knew he felt. She feared she should have
no opportunity of speaking to him, as 
he studiously avoided addressing her on 
any topic. She still was sanguine in her 
expectation, that a few words would com-
pletely do away all uneasiness. At the 
same time, she felt hurt that he should so 
readily condemn her, in so serious a man-
ner, without suffering her to justify her-
self. Why should he believe reports, 
when he was at full liberty to ask for an 
explanation?

  There is no perfection in human nature.
Lord Howard had a warm temper, which 

              HOWARD CASTLE.           111

did not at all times way to his su-
perior judgement. He had been on the
point of being angry at the attention the
fortuneteller had paid her in the wood,
and more than once he thought his com-
pany appeared an intrusion. His mind
was perfectly prepared to take alarm,
which it did in the highest degree by lady
Julia's information. All became at once
a dark prospect in his idea; and he felt, in
consequence, as miserable as his greatest
enemy could wish him to be. His love
for Clementia was beyond all bounds;
the thought that it was possible it was not
reciprocal, filled him with the bitterest an-
guish. The More he revolved the cir-
cumstances in his thoughts, the more he
was tormented, as many little incidents
had combined to put her behaviour, during
the evening, in a very strange point of
view.
   Clementine durst not indulge the me-
lancholy mood she was in. If she did,
she was convinced she could not appear
at dinner without betraying how she had
spent the time during the absense of the
party, which would be a very humiliating
112                  HOWARD CASTLE

discovery: she roused herself to exertion,
and banished, as much as she possibly
could, thinking on her apparently way-
ward fate. She gave orders to her maid
to pack her clothes, and busied herself in
arranging her books, that all might be
ready for her departure next morning,
when Mrs.Conway entered the room.

  Her penetrating eyes had quickly dis-
covered the change in lord Howard's man-
ner; the cause she could not assign, and
she found Clementina apparently so cheer-
ful, that she durst not touch on the sub-
ject she had come purposely to investigate.
She hoped would be of short duration.

  Clementina agreed with her in all she
said. She regretted the necessity there
was for her going, but she should expect
soon to see her at Roachwood.

 "Yes, my love,"replied Mrs.Conway:
"I trust Howard's probation will be short,
and that you will soon be what I most
earnestly long for--his wife."

Mary, who had gone to the library to
fetch a book of Clementina's returned as
Mrs.Conway said these words, much to          HOWARD CASTLE.      113

her mistress's relief, who was afraid her
friend would observe the agitation, she was
in. She soon after left her, very little
satisfied with Clementina's manner, which
plainly evinced her mind was not at rest,
but which precluded all inquiry. She saw
from her window the party return from
their airing. Lord Howard had an ad-
dition in his curricle, as lady Caroline Sey-
mour was in it, as well as lady Almeria,
and lord Villyers was attending them on
horseback. She supposed an accident had
happened to one of the carriages--she saw
lord Howard was apparently safe, which
removed all alarm from her bosom.

   As soon as she was dressed, she went
to the drawing-room, but found no one in
it. She took up a volume of Shakespeare,
and seated herself in a window. Her
thoughts were in too great a tumult to
permit her to attend to reading. She was
intently gazing on the park, unconscious
what the prospect offered for her amuse-
ment, when the entrance of some one
roused her form her reverie: she heard a
deep sigh before she perceived it was lord
Howard; he threw himself upon a couch114               HOWARD CASTLE.

on the opposite side of the room, but in-
stantly started up when he saw Clemen-
tina. "Miss Bouverie," exclaimed he, "I
beg you ten thousand pardons."
  
   "For what?" answered she, glad to say
something, to hide, if possible, the embar-
rassment she was in, as his eyes were rivet-
ted on her blushing countenance.
  
   "You ask me for what I apologize?"
said he; "for intruding on you; have I
reason to suppose my company can be
agreeable to you ?"
 
   Now, thought she, comes an explana-
tion; she continued silent a few moments,
in hopes he would pursue the subject;
and would give her an opportunity of vin-
dicating herself. as she found a silence
was likely to ensue, and as it would not at
all suit her purpose, as she wisked to lead
him to the subject which occupied both
their thoughts, she asked if they had a
pleasant airing?

   The question seemed to rouse him; he
raised his eyes, and steadily looking at
her, replied---"Very pleasant."
  
   "Did no accident happen to lord Vil-
lyer's carriage?"  

                      HOWARD CASTLE.            115

       " It was overturned."
       She found his answers were so laconic
that she despaired of forcing conversation.
--" Was any one hurt?" again she asked.

       A negative was all he gave,
       " You are so concise, my lord!" said she,
smiling.

       "What can you expect," cried he, with
evident emotion, " from a person whose
bosom is torn as mine is, by a thousand
doubts--a thousand fears?"

       Clementima's pride rose at these words:
" Is it of me," my lord, "that you entertain
suspicion? can you suppose I would act to
you with duplicity?  You have mistaken
my character if you do, and I have yours."
All wish to explain herself further vanish-
ed.

       " What," said lord Howard, " have I
suffered since the masquerade? indescrib-
able tortue!"

       Clementina's countenance betrayed the
extreme agitation she was in.

       Lord Howard rose from his seat, and
came towards her, but he had no opportu-
nity to say a word, as lady Almeria, lady
Charlotte, and Miss Waldegrave, entered








116           HOWARD CASTLE.

the room. Lord Howard darted past
them with the utmost velocity, and vanish-
ed from their sight. Lady Almeria was 
all astonishment, and declared it was bar-
barous in him to try her nerves in so
shocking a manner, as she was convinced
he did such strange things, on purpose to
alarm her. "You cannot conceive how odd-
ly he behaved when we were out: I ex-
pected the utmost pleasure, and that I 
should be quite restored by the drive, but
I am really ten times worse than I was:
the horrid accident which happened nearly
annihilated my existence."

     Clementina again inquired what had
alarmed them?

     Lady Almeria was too much worn out
to give her any account of it: she had sunk
down on a sofa, nearly fainting from the 
bare idea of what she had gone through;
but there was no beau to sympathize in
her tender sensibility.

     The ladies present took no notice of her
feelings, but Miss Waldegrave very com-
posedly gave an account of the disaster
which had terrified the party. - "Lady
Caroline Seymour had accompanied lordHOWARD CASTLE 117

Villyers in a high-hung gig: something
had frightened the horse, which run off,
past the other carriages, at full speed-"

  "And I made lord Howard almost sa-
vage," whispered lady almeria: "I scream-
ed so violently, my throat has not recover-
ed the exertion, or lord Howard his good-
humour."

  "Lady Caroline," continued Miss Walde-
grave, "threw herself from the carriage,
and was a good deal hurt; and, in attempt-
ing to save her, lord Villyers cut his fore-
head, and sprained his arm; the carriage
was dashed to pieces, and the horse lamed
for life."

  "A very disastrous history!" said Cle-
mentina.

  "Oh, melancholy!" exclaimed lady Al-
meria; "the very recital of it almost over-
comes my senses. Pray do not say another
word on the horrid subject! I had got
nearly composed before I left my own
apartment, but lord Howard's strage look,
as he hurried past me, has again reduced
me to the most nervous state possible."

  Clementina found lady Almeria was
willing to attribute lord Howard's extraor-
118         HOWARD CASTLE.

dinary flight to herself.  She was pleased
that she did so, as she hoped it would take
off all suspicion that she created his unea-
siness.

   It had not that effect on Isabella, who
was too much interested in the happiness
of both lord Howard and Clementina, not
to perceive that a quarel had taken place,
and that the were as miserable as possible.

She did not suppose it would last long, as 
she knew they were both so very amiable
that it must merely be a misunderstanding,
such as lovers often have; but in the mean-
time she was sorry to see they suffered
great uneasiness of mind.

   Not till after the party were assembled
did lord Howard enter the drawing-room.
At last he appeared, apparently composed.
He immediately joined the group, where
lady Almeria was still expatiating upon
her feelings.

   Clementina was seated where he had
left her, and her faithful attendant, Mr.
Montague, making every exertion to
amuse her.  He was perfectly convinced
something unusual agitated her mind;
that lord Howard caused her uneasiness he        HOWARD CASTLE.     119

had not the slightest suspicion, but he
strongly suspected the fortuneteller occu-
pied her thoughts.  He found he had ap-
peared in a different dress at the ball; and
that it was her engagement to him had
prevented her being his partner.  The
combination convinced Mr. Montague of
what all the party suspected, that her visi-
ble change of spirits was occasioned by the
stranger, whose name no one could disco-
ver, as Miss Osburn cautiosly concealed
it.  Her journey to Roachwood was men-
tioned, which seemed to astonish Mr.
Montague.  He hoped she was to be of
the party at Carnsworth Castle?

Clementina shook her head.

"Do you fo to Roachwood alone?"

"I do," was her answer.

"I wish," said he smiling, "that you
would suffer me to accompany you, and
anticipate my being your brother, as I
really think a guard is necessary."

"Why should I have a guard?" asked
she.

"Because I think you will be in dan-
ger."

"From whom?"120        HOWARD CASTLE.

  "From the magic spells of an old witch.
Will the fortuneteller, or rather the white
domino, when he appeared in a more cap-
tivating form, not follow you into your
retirement?"

  "Ah!" exclaimed she, "how careful, how
suspicious, how meanly cautious, would
the world make one, weighing and consi-
dering every action! If it is in the power
of possibility to put a bad construction, the
world will do it."

  "Do not accuse me," exclaimed he, "of
thinking you wrong in thought, word, or
deed; the fortuneteller was so much envied
for the happy privilege he enjoyed in
conversing with you, that he certainly has
been a subject of conversation. All wish
to find out who was disguised with so
much care, and who is possessed of the
happy art of interesting you. He not only
monopolized your company last night, but
he has completely engrossed your thoughts
this day. From the moment of his depar-
ture, your manner changed; nothing I
could say last night could for a moment
arrest your attention. This day you have
been equally absent and unaccountable.HOWARD CASTLE. 121

Clementina I should have
hoped so insignificant a being as I am 
would have passed unheeded."

"What a field of animadversion does 
that humble speech lead to !" said Mr. 
Montague : " No subject could animate 
my powers of oratory so much as the one 
you have opened to me."

"Spare me," said she, " from a compli-
mentary strain: I am not in good-humour 
with myself; therefore any thing in the 
form of flattery will be horrid."

"Were I to declare my sentiments, with-
out the slightest varnish," cried he, " you 
would accuse me of overstrained compli-
ments. Could I suppose the fortuneteller 
was a delegate from my brother, I,should 
have expressed no surprise; but, situated as 
I am led to think you are, I could not 
suppose any one, excepting Montague, 
could interest you so much."

Clementina was unwilling to enter into 
any discussion or explanation with Mr. 
Montague; her spirits were not equal to 
the exertion, and she dreaded the conse-
quence, as she believed, from hints which

VOL. V. G
122           HOWARD CASTLE.

dropped form him, and from the very
great attention he paid her, that he might
wish to be what he taken believed his bro-
ther was, her lover: she therefore carefully
avoided even contradicting the idea which
he entertained, that she was engaged to
marry lord Montague. She found her
conduct had been strictly watched by more
than lord Howard, and that it had been
foolish in the highest degree. She felt
more alarmed by the remarks which Mr.
Montague had made upon her behaviour
than she had even been by lord Howard's
strange manner. She flattered herself a
few words would do away his uneasiness,
as conscious innocence had completely pre
cluded fear that his anger could be deeply
rooted. If Mr. Montague thought his
 brother's rights infringed on by the stran-
ger, what might lord Howard's very strong
feelings and warm temper lead to, if he
viewed her conduct in the same light! She
had every thing to dread from the male-
volence and hatred, which she was con-
vinced filled Miss Osburn's breast: she
knew she was in her power; as the unfor-
tunate mistake she had made would have
     HOWARD CASTLE.     123

the most horrible constructions put upon 
it, and all either had been, or would be,
conveyed to lord Howard, with deep art
and great exaggeration.

  Mr. Montague found his conversation
had not the power of animating or amus-
ing Clementina, whose spirits appeared 
more depressed, and her thoughts more ab-
stracted. She believed Miss Osburn eyed
her with exunlation, which she did, as she
found the poison she had infused into lord
Howard's cup was taking effect. She sus-
pected his admiration was fixed on Cle-
mentina, who had given her the most glo-
rious opportunity of injuring her in his
opinion, by dark hints of what she knew 
to be matter of fact, and which she could 
prove. Her art was such, that she whispered
her diabolical information to those who 
she knew would repeat them with all the
force she could wish; and she flattered her-
self the information had sunk deep, where 
she most wished it to do.

              124            HOWARD CASTLE.




                 CHAPTER V.

                   ------


THE day passed in the most uncomfort-
able way to Clementina: her journey was
mentioned in terms of regret by the 
Carnsworth family, and lady Augusta
even tried to persuade her to alter her
plan and move with the multitude; but
no temptation could induce her to consent.
She felt that the quiet retirement of
Roachwood would suit the state of her
feelings better than a tumult of company.
To be subject to lord Howard's neglect
she could not bear.  She was mistaken in 
the idea, as a stimulus to exertion was ab-
solutely necessary--as long as she was in 
society, pride made her endeavour to look
cheerful.

  Miss Waldegrave proposed to accom-
pany her, and even urged it exceedingly.

  Clementina assured her she had business
to transact which would occupy her time.

  Mrs. Conway, with maternal kindness,HOWARD CASTLE. 125

lamented the necessity there was for her
leaving them, and described, in flattering
terms, the blank they should feel.

Mr. Waldegrave echoed her words, but
lord Howard said not a syllable. He was
adjusting a beautiful nosegay for lady Al-
meria with seeming gaiety, and appeared
not to hear what was passing; every word
however sunk deep in his heart; and whilst
he was paying unmeaning compliments to
lady Almeria, his thoughts were complete-
ly engrossed with the painful idea of Cle-
mentina leaving them with the uncom-
fortable feelings he was convinced agitated
her bosom; as, whatever her motives were
for her conduct, he plainly perceived her
feelings were as miserable as his own. He
could not part with her so: he, would
write to her after he retired to his apart-
ment, and order a servant to deliver the let-
ter to her in the morning; he would paint
to her what he had suffered, and would
humbly petition, what he really wished,
that she would permit him to follow her to
Roachwood. He was most anxious that
the day was ended, as he was worn out
with the unmeaning nonsense he was
forced to keep up, Lady Almeria's beauty
he certainly admired-but there lay all
which could arrest the attention of a ra-
tional being.  Nature had bestowed innu-
merable charms on her outside; and had
justice been done to her in her education,
her interior was not defective; but the love
of admiration, which had never in any way
been checked, had overcome every other
idea in lady Almeria. She fluttered gaily
amongst the male sex, never flirting long
enough with any one to endanger her peace
of mind. The more dying swains she had
in her train, the greater victory to her
charms-her heart never was in the least
danger of being injured. Lord Howard,
she thought, would be a good serious spe-
culation: she therefore resolved to follow
up the conquest which she was thoroughly
convinced she had made. She believed the
masquerade had completed the impression,
and she resolved, in her own breast, to be-
come lady Howard.--Towards the close of
the eveing, lord Howard's spirits evident-
ly drooped; he was worn out with the ex-
ertion he had made; be left the company
to amuse themselves, and retired to his li-

           HOWARD CASTLE.           127

brary, where he would have given the
world for an hour's conversation with Cle-
mentina. He attempted to write to her,
but failed in every expression: nothing
pleased him but the idea of telling her his
misery; of all the dark hints, surmises, and
suspicions, which had been artfully thrown
out to him, he could not express half his
feelings by letter: a conference with her
was what he must obtain before peace
could be re-established in his bosom. Re-
flection restored in some degree his reason,
fie was conscious that passion had taken
full possession of him, and he lamented
the folly of his behaviour. What reasons
to give to the woman he was solemnly en-
gaged to marry!—he was jealous of her! he
suspected her of dissimulation and hypo-
crisy ! Would she not decline being
united to a man capable of such horrid
suspicions, and who had given such proof
of being possessed of a bad temper, and of
complete want of confidence in her affec-
tion, and in her prudence? What apology
could he offer? He had evidently shewn
that his opinion of her could be easily
shaken. He could not solicit, without a128     HOWARD CASTLE.

personal interview, what he feared she
would not grant. He was confident he
had offended her by the few words he had
spoken to her before dinner: the expres-
sion he had foolishly used seemed to sting
her to the quick. Would Miss Bouverie
marry any man who could for a moment
doubt her sincerity, or have a fear that she
could not conduct herself with propriety?
It was a bad precedent of what might fol-
low, was she his wife.

  After two hours of melancholy consi-
deration, he returned to the drawing-room,
resolved to petition for an interview in his
mother's dressing-room, after the company
had separated for the night. He found
the party busily employed in various ways:
the object of his pursuit was deeply en-
gaged at a vingt-un table; on one side of
her was placed lord Stanhope, and on the
other Mr. Montague; so that lord Howard
was completely precluded from making his
request.

  Lady Almeria would not engage herself
in any occupation--she was resolved to
be at liberty when his lordship should re-
turn. He could not, without appearing       HOWARD CASTLE.       129

capricious (which he believed was really
the case), pass her without renewing what
bad so much fatigued him before he had
sought refuge in flight-he leant upon
the back of the couch where her delicate
figure reclined, and asked her why she had
not joined the card-players?

  "The exertion was too much," she re-
plied: "Who could bear the trouble of
counting twenty-one, and of continually
paying or receiving money? A steward
was absolutely necessary to take the trou-
ble of transacting the business."

  "I will willingly be your steward," said
lord Howard, who wished to play at the
same table with Clementina; "suffer me,"
taking lady Almeria's passive hand, "to
lead you to a seat."

  She could not refuse, as lord Howard
had made the request. She acquiesced,
and they were placed exactly opposite to
Clementina, who was the dealer. A glow
of colour spread itself over her counte-
nance, as she asked lord Howard if he
chose a card?

  It was the first time their eyes had met
130                 HOWARD CASTLE.

since the morning's rencontre. He re-
plied, he was not content, although the
number of his cards amounted to eighteen.

  She, to his very great surprise, threw
him a trois.

  He smilingly said -”You are kinder to
me than I deserve.“  He entirely forgot
his promise to lady Almeria-every sense
was engrossed with the object before him.
It was impossible such an angelic face
could belong to a character fraught with
evil.  She smiled as she presented Mr.
Montague with a high card, and held her
hand with playfulness to receive his mo-
ney.

  Lord Howard sighed with envy, as he
saw Mr. Montague put his forfeit into the
extended hand, which closed immediately
upon the treasure, and he was convinced
had received a pressure.  Lord Howard
asked himself-”  Is what throbs at my
heart a sting of jealousy?  No! forbid it,
Heaven!  I only lament I dare not do the
same.“  A remark was made he had been
unreasonable to draw at eighteen.

  ”I was determined,“ was his reply, ”to
receive my destiny from Miss Bouverie in
  



              HOWARD CASTLE. 131

either having the highest place, or having hope completely extinguished--I dislike 
medioerity."

  Clementina made no remark, but ap-
pointed Mr.Montague to pay the rewards,
and receive the forfeits. Lord Howard
was disappointed: he began to suspect she
meant to retaliate upon him, and that she 
would play the same game with Mr. Mon-
tague which he had done with lady Al-
meria. Clementina felt mischievous: she
had been vexed by the few words he had
spoken to her; the sound of doubts and
fears still vibrated in her recollection; and
made her seize the opportunity, which she
thought now offered, of teazing him. She
did not entirely give Mr. Montague her
attentions--she feared it might be attended
by dangerous consequences; but lord Stan-
hope was the very person for her purpose;
his good nature made him always ready
to be civil, where he met with it in others;
and his indolence was such, that she was
convinced he would trouble himself no
further about her, even he should think
her manner flattering. She forced herself
to be extremely lively, more so than was
132         HOWARD CASTLE.

usual to her; and she forced lord Stanhope
to be gayer than any of the party had ever
seen him before.

  Lord Howard was surprised, but sus-
pected the cause, and busied himself in
managing lady Almeria's cards, and her
money. Her affairs had gone on extreme-
ly ill whilst lord Howard's mind was occu-
pied. She had wished herself again and
again reclining on the sofa, as calculations
were not at all suited to her plan of life.
Lady Almeria was puzzled with a combi-
nation of numbers, and declared, in de-
fence of her arithmetic, that she had not
been educated for a shopkeeper.

  The party broke up at an earlier hour
than common : the fatigues of the preced-
ing night made all anxious to retire early
to their respective apartments.
  
  Clementina was moving with particular
celerity towards the door, when the fringe
of her dress caught the buckle of lord
Howard's shoe. Surprised by being sud-
denly stopped in her career, and seemingly
by his lordship, she turned quickly round.
Lord Howard stooped, as if he meant to
disengage hor gown; but raising himselfHOWARD CASTLE. 133

almost instantly into an erect posture, he
exclaimed-"I was about committing a
very great impropriety: Stanhope, as you
seem the lord in waiting, pray release Miss
Bouverie; I am afraid I am not worthy to 
touch the hem of her garment."

Clementina was confused by the acci-
dent, and provoked at lord Howard's 
speech: she found she was an object of ge-
neral attention. She pulled her gown
with more strength than she was aware of,
and left the fringe where it had attached
itself, at the same time saying-"I should
be sorry to give your lordship any trouble."

Mr. Montague, who was at no great dis-
tance, had flown to offer his help; lord
Stanhope had likewise made a great exer-
tion to get in time, but to no purpose; the
quickness of her motions completely pre-
cluded their assistance.

Clementina passed not the most com-
fortable night, though she strove all she
could to support her spirits, whilst she was
an inmate in lord Howard's house. A tear
would steal down her cheek, as she was 
preparing to leave it, perhaps for ever.134         HOWARD CASTLE.

She rose very early, and waited anxiously
for her carriage. Chocolate was brought,
but remained untouched. She wiped her
eyes, and hurried down stairs, the moment
she was informed that every thing was
ready for her departure. Mrs. Conway's
maid followed her, and begged she would
go for a few minutes to her mistress's room,
as she was anxious to bid her farewell.
Clementina felt very unwilling to comply,
as she feared, if her friend should ask her
any questions, she probably would betray
her feelings: she could make no excuse,
only resolving to stay as short a time with
her as possible. Mrs. Conway folded her
in her arms, and expressed the sorrow she
felt at her quitting Howard Castle. The
manner in which her son had parted with
her the night before had completely driven
repose from her pillow; she wished, above
all things, to see Clementina, and to hear, 
if possible, what could be the reason of
such a sudden change; but again the com-
posure of her looks silenced her--the dark-
ness of the room made the traces of tears,
which were very visible on Clementina'scheeks, not perceived by Mrs. Conway,
and they parted without her gaining any
information.
  Clementina was exceedingly surprised
to see lord Howard standing by the side
of the carriage. He advanced to meet her,
and attempted taking her hand. The foot-
man had the steps down, and Mary was
already seated, waiting for her mistress.
She glided past lord Howard, merely say-
ing, "good-morning," and springing into
the chaise, desired the servants to proceed.
It was the impulse of the moment-she
had no time to give reason fair play ; she
was hurt and piqued at his behaviour the
preceding evening, and in this manner
shewed her feelings.
  Lord Howard stood for a moment after
she drove off, as if thunderstruck; he
meant to have petitioned for a quarter of an
hour's conversation in the library, and to
have apologized for his foolish behaviour;
but the rapidity of her motions even pre-
cluded his speaker to her. He returned
to his apartment, disappointed and cha-
grined.
  Clementina travelled with all the swift-
136       HOWARD CASTLE.
ness that most excellent roads and four
post-horses would permit; she left her
own at the first stage, as trifling on the
road did not suit the agitation of `her spi-
rits; she wished to get to Roachwood;
and when she arrived there, she almost
repented having been in so violent a bus-
tle to reach it. The pride which had sup-
ported her at Howard Castle gave way,
when she got to her own melancholy man-
sion: the hurrying change of scene, as she
drove rapidly from stage to stage, had sup-
ported her spirits; but when all exertion was
at an end, and she had no inducement to
strive against her feelings, they completely
overcame her. The silent melancholy of
every room she entered, shocked her; the
only living thing, except her servants, who
seemed to rejoice in her return, was her
little faithful dog: all appeared so still and
dismal, she almost started at the noise her
own feet made, in walking from one apart-
ment to the other-she had never before
been alone. The convent was monotonous;
but there she had enjoyed the pleasure of
society—she had innumerable companions
of her own age.
           HOWARD CASTLE.      137

   The short time she had spent at Roach-
wood, with her father, was marked in her
mind as almost the happiest moments of
her life. A beloved object hung with rap-
ture on all her actions and on all her words;
no jealousy interrupted the quiet rational
hours she had spent with him : in losing
her parent, she seemed to have lost her all.
In Mrs. Conway's friendship, she had en-
joyed the liveliest gratifications, which had
in some degree made up for the dismal
blank the death of her father had occasion-
ed in her mind; that, probably, was near
a close, as, of course, she would imbibe the
sentiments of her son, whose opinions al-
most guided hers.

   Clementina felt she was a being alone
in the world, for whom no one had any
particular interest. The truth was, lord
Howard constituted the world to her--
without his love, all was a blank, and she
was wretched. She sat down in the bow
window, and contemplated the ruins: a
bright moon shone upon the turrets--
"There lie the remains of my beloved
parents!" exclaimed she, her eyes stream-
ing with tears; " they are unconscious of138 HOWARD CASTLE.

the load which oppresses their child; un-
protected is she thrown upon the world-
the sport of caprice, and the victim of mis-
fortune!"

An agony of grief followed these reflec-
tions, which were interrupted by Mrs.
Moore's entering. She apologized for her
intrusion, saying-" She was afraid some
misfortune had happened to her, she
seemed in such deep affliction. The draw-
ing-room," said the worthy housekeeper,
"is ready for you; candles are lighted,
and I have ordered a little supper to be
prepared."

Clementina could not bear the kindness
even of her servant; it made her more
deeply feel the solitary and forlorn condi-
tion she was in. Sobs were all the answer
she gave.

"A glass of wine," said the good wo-
man," will, Iam convinced, be of service
to you." She left the room, and was soon
back with what she recommended.

Clementina complied with her request,
and drank a little of the wine, at the same
time desiring her maid might attend her,
as she felt unwell, and wished to go to
           HOWARD CASTLE.       139

bed. She thanked Mrs. Moore for her
kind solicitude; her nerves, she said, had
been affected by parting with her friends,
and by the solitary feci of lloachwood—
" I never was here alune before." A fresh
burst of grief, at the melancholy train of
ideas which this remark brought with it,
almost convulsed her frame.

  " I did expect," said the housekeep-
er, " that your first visit to this bouse
would not have been made alone. Al-
though you did not order mc, I had the
chintz room prepared, as I hoped some one
of your friends would have accompanied
you. This is too great a trial upon your
spirits; you will make yourself quite ill
with tliis severe agitation." She left her,
and sent Mary to try to persuade her to eat
a little of what was placed ready for her
in the dining-room.

  Clementina could not even make the
attempt, and retired to bed; but not to
rest; her mind, tormented as it was, pre-
cluded all repose, and completely deranged
her whole frame. In the morning, she
was worse than she had been the preceding
evening ; her head ached violently—shewas hot, restless, and feverish. Mrs. 
Moore, alarmed with her keeping her bed,
entredated permission to send for medical
assistance; but Clementina positively for-
bade her, and only begged she might be
left alone. She was not sorry for an ex-
cuse to confine herself to her apartment, 
as in bed she could indulge her sorrow, 
without being seen by her servants.

Mary suspected all was not right with
her lady, her parting was so very odd
with lord Howard; but she had no encou-
ragement to disclose her suspicions, as 
Clementia seldo spoke when she enter-
ed the room. Mary dropped not a hint 
to her mother of hwat she feared was the
cae; she had formed a resolution, and ad-
hered strictly to it, that her mistress's affairs
should never be told by her to any one. 
If all abigails were to pursue the same
plan, it would be fortunate for society.

The day passed heavily along: Clemen-
tina got out of bed in the afternoon; but
her head was so bad, and she felt upon the
whole so unwell, that she was glad to re-
turn to it. The next day she did not at-
tempt to rise.  Her domestics were alarm-
               HOWARD CASTLE.

ed-they entreated permission to acquaint
Mrs. Conway with the situation she was 
in. Her answer was, that Mrs. Conway
was from home, and that nobody could be
of service to her-she had got a severe
cold, which she hoped would soon be well.

   The third day she felt rather more com-
posed in her mind; of course, her health
was better, and she could bear to sit up a
little. A letter was delivered to her; it
caused a sensation which astonished her,
as she could not suppose her strength was
so much impaired by her illness, or her
nerves so deranged by the agitation she
had suffered. She saw it was from Mrs. 
Conway: she inquired if a messenger had
brought it?

   "No," was the answer, "it came by the
post."

   She opened it with trembling hands:
she could hardly see to read it. to her
surprise, it was dated from Howard Castle.
"They had not been at Carnsworth Castle,
nor did they mean to go. Lord Howard
was ill, and they were obliged to give up
their engagement."

   "Ill!" exclaimed Clementina, as her'


142            HOWARD CASTLE.

hands dropped with the letter upon her
knee; " does he feel this separation as 
keenly as I do?"

   She again took up the paper, and read
-" He looks most miserably ill-has no
appetite, and completely shuns society. If
he is not soon better," added Mrs. Conway,
" you must either come to enliven him, or
you must permit us to pay you a visit
sooner than you invited us."

   That lord Howard felt unhappy miti-
gated in some degree her own sufferings, 
as she flattered herself she was still dear
to him, and that an explanation might yet 
set all to right. Those doubts and fears
again rose in her recollection, and torment-
ed her. The struggle he perhaps felt
might be in driving her from his heart. as
unworthy of so enviable a place. If that
was the case, she might never hear more
from him, and Mrs. Conway of course
would drop all correspondence with her.
The letter, which she still held, breathed
affection and kindness; but it might be
the last she might ever receive filled with
such soothing expressions. She formed a 
thousand different plans, which were al-

           HOWARD CASTLE.      143

most immediately discarded as they arose
in her mind. One only seemed to afford
her any prospect of consolation, which was
to write to lord Howard--to enclose in her
letter lord Montague's story, and a full ex-
planation of every circumstance attending
their early intimacy, and the whole pro-
gress of their attachment; but her pride, 
which illness had not totally subdued, pre-
vented her. It would prove to him what
she had suffered by their separation; she
might as well say in plain terms--"I am
miserable! pray, my lord, forgive me, and
take me again into your favour." Her
spirits revived at this humble confession,
and she rejected the idea as absurd. Time
must do every thing--either restore her
to happiness, or submit with resignation
and fortitude to her fate. Her health con-
tinued slowly to mend; she became per-
fectly calm, but a settled melancholy prey-
ed upon her.

   A week passed, and no occurence took
place to arrest her attention. She durst
not trust herself to answer Mrs. Conway's
letter, as she feared betraying the state she
was in. She was seated in her dressing-144     HOWARD CASTLE.

room (for she had not ventured down stairs,
as she dreaded seeing objects which she
knew would agitate her spirits), reading the
letters of her friend the abbess, which she
had carefully preserved; she was indul-
ging her tears over them, and lamenting
the loss of a friend, how was capable of
giving her such instruction as they con-
tained: she had got the last she had re-
ceived from her, written on the death of
her father, in her hand--the melancholy
subject, the beautiful language, and the
kind expressions it contained, quite over-
came her--She gave way to the grief which
oppressed her heart, at the idea that those
papers were all that remained of such a 
valuable friend; her letters, and those of
her father, were now her dearest posses-
sions.

She had thrown herself upon a couch,
perfectly worn out with the poignancy of
her sufferings, when Mrs. Moore entered
the room, and informed her a gentleman
was below.

Clementina started at the intelligence,
and eagerly inquired if she knew who it
was?             HOWARD CASTLE.         145

   "I do not know," replied her house-
keeper; "but James says it is Mr. Mon-
tague."

   Clementina would not allow herself to
think; she was disappointed--but her
thoughts, ever fixing upon lord Howard,
had for a moment flattered her it might
be him. She desired Mrs. Moore would
acquaint Mr. Montague she would attend
him immediately. She supposed he was
come to inform her of their return to Coln-
brook, and to fix a day for her visiting
them, which she was perfectly unable to
do in the present state of her health and
spirits.

   As she intended dining below stairs,
(the first time she had quitted her own
apartments) she did not hesitate to obey
the summons to her cousin. As she, in a
slight degree, adjusted her dress, she was
surprised with her pale, haggard counte-
nance--her eyes were red from weeping,
and her face evidently betrayed how very
ill she had been; she was surprised on feel-
ing her limbs tremble; as she descended
the stairs, she was forced to support herself
   VOL. V.           H
146    HOWARD CASTLE.

upon the banisters, to prevent her falling.
At last she got to the drawing-room door,
fatigued with the exertion she had made;
but how was she astonished, upon eneter-
ing, to behold, instead of the expected Mr.
Montague, lord Howard, thrown upon one 
of the sofas, his head reclining upon the
arm of it!

He looked up, upon hearing a person
enter, and was struck with horror at the pale, trembling figure of Clementina, who
prevented herself from sinking on the floor,
by leaning against the wall. He started
from his seat, and folding his hands toge-
ther, exlaimed --"Heavens! is it thus I
see her? Oh, my Clementina, suffer your 
wretched Howard to support you! you are
faint--you are ill!"

She felt very ill, and was unable to 
speak. Her pale face, and emaciated
figure, gave her more the appearance of a
corpse, than the once-blooming, lovely
Clementina. Shee deeply sighed as he sup-
ported her to a seat; and kneeling by her,
anxiously watched for the colour return-
ing into her pallid cheeks: her hands he
grasped in his almost convulsed fingers:
           HOWARD CASTLE.          147

she at last burst into a flood of tears: lean-
ing her head unconsciously on his shoul-
der, he, almost bereft of reason, pressed her
to his distracted bosom, praying her, in the
most piteous terms, to relieve him from
the dreadful state of suspense he suffered;
but an hysterical sob was all the answer he
received. He wished to ring for assist-
ance ; but his arm supported her, and his
shoulder was her pillow: his situation was
most wretched—to see her, on whom his
fondest affections were fixed, reduced to
the state she was in, by his cruel conduct—
every thing vanished from his recollection,
but that he was alone to blame.

  " Monster that I am! I have murdered
the woman I adore! Speak to me, belov-
ed of my heart! open those eyes, which,
until I blasted my own happiness, were
frequently directed to your grateful How-
ard, beaming with happiness!"

  As he said these words, Clementina's
senses returned. She raised her head—" I
have alarmed your lordship; but I am
weak." She was unable to proceed.

  He fervently thanked Heaven, that he

                H 2148     HOWARD CASTLE. 

had again heard the sound of her voice;
and as he was perfectly released from sup-
porting her, lie rung the bell, and ordered
her maid to attend her, and to bring her a
glass of hartshorn and water, which he in-
sisted upon her taking. She felt so lan-
guid, that, to avoid his solicitations, she 
drank it-rose from her sea, and leaning
upon Mary, walked towards the door. 
He flew to assist her, as he saw the tot-
tering, unequal steps with which she slowly
moved. She faintly said, as he offered her 
his arm-" No, my lord, I will give you
no further trouble; I regret what my 
weakness has already occasioned you."
She proceeded, leaving him incapable of 
making any effort to stop her. 

As the room-door was shut, and he no
longer saw her, his heart seemed ready to
burst with contending emotions: he threw
himself upon the couch,and even shed tears
of sorrow, accusing himself of having de-
stroyed her, and of having for ever render-
ed himself miserable. He traversed the 
room with hasty steps, without being able
to form any plan; all that he could think
of was, her altered figure. For an hour,
          HOWARD CASTLE.           149

he remained in indescribable agony; be
feared she would refuse to sec him, or listen
to bis defence. It was a strange one to
offer, that be was jealous of her—but it was
the truth. Fiends had laid hold of him;
in a moment of frenzy he had listened to
them, and he had believed them. An
anonymous letter convinced him that there
was a plan laid to separate them: it had
brought him to an immediate determina-
tion to break in upon her solitude, shew
her the letter, and solicit her forgiveness.
Alas! what a termination to his plans—to
find her thus sinking under the cruelty of
his conduct, as the extreme agitation the
sight of him had thrown her into awaken-
ed the most tender conviction that he was
dear to her. The letter, which had been de-
livered to him only a few hours before he
set off for Roachwood, contained the fol-
lowing words:—

           " Suppose not, my lord, from the
writer of this letter choosing to conceal her
name, that she dreads your scrutinizing
into the truth of her assertions. I might150             HOWARD CASTLE.

perhaps be accused of envy or malice by
the world, were I to acknowledge this
epistle to be mine, or were it in your
power to give me for your author--that
idea alone prompts me to concealment.
Believe me, I am your sincere friend, and
that no interested motive can bias me in
my conduct; I can reap no advantage by
dissolving a connexion you are, I under-
stand, upon the eve of forming. I warn
you against a marriage, which will inevi-
tably ruin your future peace; I have had
frequent opportunities of gaining an entire
knowledge of the character of what you
suppose to be the innocent, amiable Miss
Bougerie: how are you mistaken! Her
love, you fondly hope, centers in you--there
you labour under an egregious error: she re-
ceived your addresses, with the idea that a
marriage would be a convenient screen
from the calumny of the world. I watch-
ed the progress of her connexion with lord
Montague, and dived deeper into her feel-
ings than she suspected. You will shrink
with horror when I tell you, that at Carns-
worth Castle she was seen to enter lord
Montague's apartment,where she knew       HOWARD CASTLE.     151

he was; the door was locked after her, and
not for a considerable time did she return
to the company—her dress in evident dis-
order. You will naturally say, why did
he not marry her?—there lies the enigma.
His violent passions brought him nearly
to the grave—watching in the dead of the
night at him room-door threw her into a
severe illness, which confined her many
days to her apartment. The truth of
these assertions will be attested by the vi-
sitors who were then in the house. They
have kept up a regular correspondence
ever since, as he immediately left the
country, and went to Switzerland. Her
ready acceptance of Mrs. Conway's propo-
sal of going abroad, was in the pleasing hope
of paying him a visit.

  " A favourite spaniel of his lordship's
is her companion at Roachwood—she che-
rishes in him her love from his master. The
last information I have to give you, you
were an eye-witness of. Lord Montague
was at the masquerade, unknown to his
father, mother, or any of his near relations,
and to every friend but Miss Bonverie.
With her alone he conversed; she was152            HOWARD CASTLE.

heard to name him repeatedly when off
her guard, and they were followed wan-
dering down the dark walk together,
which led to the temple. She stopped
upon finding they were watched, and, with
guilty confusion, declared they had mis-
taken the way to the house. He changed
his dress, and appeared in the ball-room in
a white domino, where you could not fail
to observe the attention he paid her. I
leave it to your penetration, my lord, and
knowledge of some of the above circum-
stances, to draw the inference which must
be attached to such a conduct. It has been
the subject of animadversion and conversa-
tion. I am, my lord, your well-wisher,
&c. &c.

   "P. S. Miss Waldegrave offered to ac-
company Miss Bouverie to Roachwood;
but a companion, at least a female friend,
was not what was wished for--the offer
was not accepted

   Immediately upon perusing this epistle,
lord Howard's mind was relieved of the
load which oppressed it, and as he be-                 HOWARD CASTLE.            153

lieved there had been a plan formed to separate him from Clementina, he resolved to see her, and sue for pardon for his unaccountable infatuation in listening to the wicked and malicious insinuations, which had been the source of misery to him. 

     Upon his entering the drwaing-room at Roachwood, he observed a dog lying upon one of the sofas.  He regarded him not, as the circumstance in the letter never occurred to him.  Frolic, however, would not permit him to be quiet, as he insisted on being noticed.  As he stroked his head, his thoughts completely occupied by his approaching meeting with Clementina, the letters upon the dog's collar attracted his observation.  He felt surprised when he saw lord Montague's name engraven upon it.  That this was the little favourite mentioned by the anonymous writer remained no longer doubtful - he had supposed it was equally false with the other accusations.  He concluded she had accidentally got possession of the sspaniel, with probably the intention of returning 


                       H3154         HOWARD CASTLE.

him to his master, whose name being kept
upon his collar proved he was not her pro-
perty.

   His thoughts did not long dwell upon
this circumstance. When he beheld Cle-
mentina, every idea vanished from his
mind but his ardent love for her, and ago-
ny at seeing her in such a melancholy
situation. Dinner was carried off un-
touched. Immediately after, he sent a
message by Mary, requesting her mistress
would admit him to her dressing-room,
and that she would listen to him for five
minutes.

   The answer he received was, that Miss
Bouverie was too ill to see company.
Clementina was so worn out with the agi-
tation she had been in, that she was in
bed when his request was delivered; but
her mind was easier than it had been since
she quitted Howard Castle: she now hop-
ed all would speedily be explained, to their
mutual satisfaction. She was convinced
she was beloved, and the conviction gave
peace to her harassed mind. Her weak
frame could bear little exertion: the sur-
           HOWARD CASTLE.            155

prise, although a joyful one, had complete-
ly overcome her nerves.

  Pretty far advanced in the evening,
Mary delivered her a letter from lord
Howard, containing every circumstance
which he thought could soften her in his
favour, and inclosing the letter, which he
hoped he need not assure her he gave no
credit to. She was astonished at the con-
struction which had been put upon her
conduct, which, the reader knows, from
different accidents, exactly corresponded
with the account the anonymous writer
had given.—"Ah!" thought she, "with
what caution should a young woman con-
duct herself!" The shocking insinuations
filled her with horror, and made her re-
solve never again to give room for malevo-
lence. That she had bitter enemies to
contend with she now was thoroughly
convinced; but if the sunshine of prospe-
rity again illumined her path, and if she
became the wife of her beloved lord How-
ard, she should earnestly pray against the
machinations of such fiends, who were
always on the watch to do mischief. She
should so far guard her own conduct, and
156             HOWARD CASTLE.

never have a secret or concealment from
her husband, who should be her friend,
her guide, and her protector. At the same
time, she was not willing to come at once
into lord Howard's terms: she blamed his
behaviour as well as her own; he had not
been biassed by the letter, as it was dated
after she left Howard Castle. She sealed
the paper in an envelope, with merely
these words written in it—" The writer of
the inclosed has been mistaken in most of
her suppositions; but in some of her accu-
sations she is perfectly correct."

  That lord Howard had a tincture of
jealousy in his temper she was perfectly
convinced of, and she was likewise re-
solved to profit by the discovery, and to
prevent his ever feeling the painful sensa-
tion, if they should be united—she had
suffered severely, and she believed so had
he. It might prove most beneficial to
both, as it would make her guarded in her
conduct, and probably might have the
happy effect of preventing any future suf-
ferings of the same kind. Miss Osburn,
she was confident, was the writer of the
letter: she hoped she would be punished
            HOWARD CASTLE         157

in the most severe manner possible, by
seeing that her vile attempts to render
them miserable were completely unavail-
ing.
   All those reflections passed after she had
sent her laconic answer to lord Howard.
She had suffered a degree of petulance in
her temper to get the better of her, and was
sorry she ahd given him so short a reply.
She had seen too plainly how deeply he
was affected by her changed appearance,
for a moment to doubt the sincerity of his
affection; and she had given him such
ample proof of her sensibility that he could
not suppose she was indifferent.  She soon
received another slip of paper, containing
these words:


       "Can it be Miss Bouverie who
thus trifles with my feelings? your an-
swer to my supplication was cruel in the
extreme, as you seem to turn my petition
into ridicule. I asked you not as to the
facts which were contained in that horrid
letter---I only asked permission to see you
for five minutes.   If your heart no longer158           HOWARD CASTLE.

owns me, if you have utterly abandoned
me to despair, and if you wish to see me
an exile to my friends and country, con-
tinue to refuse this request, which is the
last you shall ever receive from
                            "HOWARD."

                   ------

  The vehemence which every word of
this note breathed startled Clementina.
She was puzzled how to act--she wished
not to appear frightened into a compliance,
which really was the case.  To start an-
other obstacle was too dangerous an expe-
riment.  Should she at once declare her-
self a coward, and receive his visit, in con-
sequence of his threats?  Her pride re-
volted at the idea.  Love at last came to 
her aid, and compromised the matter.  She
flattered herself it would be consistent
with her dignity to send a verbal message,
that Miss Bouverie was determined not
to see any company that evening, as she
was extremely ill; but if lord Howard
chose to remain all night, she should, if
able, see him in the morning.  She re-
called Mary, and made her repeat the mes-sage, fearful of any part of it sounding too
harsh or too humble.  She waited with
the utmost impatience for her return.  At
last she received another billet:

             ---------------

      "Your message has afflicted me
beyond expression.  You are ill--very ill,
and I am the cause;  my capricious, fool-
ish behaviour has injured your peace of
mind, and has worked the change on you
I with horror saw this morning.  Oh! ad-
mit me into your presence this evening, if
possible.  I will not detain you long--only
on my knees sue for pardon, and for the
return of that love I was once blest with.
I am wretched whilst I labour under your
displeasure.  Oh! my Clemintina, pity
and pardon your
                             "HOWARD."

                  ---------
  She was by the writing what a degree
of agitation he was in.  Secretly pleased
with this note,  Which sounded more calm
than others had done, she still resolved160   HOWARD CASTLE.

to adhere to her first determination, and
again repeated her message.

Mary assured him her lady was not able
to bear any exertion, and she was sure
she had not strength to support the fa-
tigue of company. He detained her, ask-
ing her a thousand questions in regard to
her mistress's illness, which was dated 
from the time of her leaving Howard Cas-
tle. This threw him into the most vio-
lent agitation. His feeling however were
relieved by the conference, as he was con-
vinced her heart had never for a moment 
wandered, and all idea of a rival was driv-
en from his thoughts. What passed was
repeated to Clementina, whose mind be-
came tranquil. They both enjoyed more
sound repose than they had done since the
memorable night of the masquerade.           CHAPTER   VI.

Mary entered her mistress's apartment
an hour earlier that usual, but not before
she was awake, with a message from lord
Howard, anxiously inquiring after her
health, and intreating admission to her
presence as soon as possible. The answer
was, she was better, and should join his
lordshiop at the breakfast-table, which she
ordered to be prepared at the usual hour;
but long before it arrived, she was ready.

Lord Howard has paced backwards and
forwards in the room, impatient for her 
coming, a full hour before the time ap-
pointed. At last, with trembling limbs,
she descended the staircase, fearful the agi-
tation she was in would overcome her
strength, and that she should not behave
with becoming dignity of manner. She
entered the room - lord Howard flew to-
wards her, soliciting by his looks what he
162               HOWARD CASTLE.

could not articulate--he took her passive
hand, which he pressed to his lips and to
his heart, alternately, without uttering a
single word; but the silent eloquence of
his eyes was not lost on Clementina, who
felt ready to sink with emotion; she with
difficulty reached a chair--tears, in spite of
her resolution, stealing down her cheeks.

  "Oh say, my beloved Clementina," ex-
claimed lord Howard, "that you pardon
me, and that you will again admit me to
have hope!  I humbly implore your for-
giveness for my harbouring a thought in-
consistent with your ingenuous charac-
ter!  My passion for you led me into an 
error, which believe me, I have bitterly
repented; I wish for no explanation--only
say you forgive me, and that you will 
again admit me as your allianced hus-
band."

  Clementina looked at him steadily--
"All jealousy, my lord, must forever be
annihilated before we can hope for happi-
ness: my expectations were too sanguine--
I knew the innocence of my own heart,
and I had too firm a reliance on your good              HOWARD CASTLE.          163

opinion for me to put a proper guard upon
my conduct, as my regard for you never
wavered." 

  "You have said enough," exclaimed
lord Howard, in an ecstasy of joy,"to make
me completely happy; your love was all I
was afraid of--possessed of it, I am pos-
sessed of supreme felicity."

  "But, my lord," continued Clementina,
who had quite recovered her composure,
"let this be a lesson to us, to put perfect
confidence in each other. You told me 
you had doubts and fears--were they of
me?  Did you suspect me capable of en-
gaging myself, with the most solemn pro-
mise, to marry you, and to be attached to
another?  It was a suspicion unworthy of
your breast, and degrading in the highest
degree to me."

  "I confess it," said lord Howard, "and
never again shall my Clementina have to
accuse me of jealousy."

  "I have certainly suffered a great deal,"
resumed she, "but at the same time I was
thankful that it was not a wife you were
jealous of; that you were still free--as the
misery of such a feeling in the married 164            HOWARD CASTLE.

state, I have always supposed, and I am
now convinced, must be dreadful.  Miss
Osburn, who I am confident is the writer
of the letter, has given you a great deal of
information."

  "And I never wish any explanation,"
exclaimed lord Howard.

  "Pardon me," replied Clementina;
"every circumstance of my life shall be
laid before you; you shall be acquainted
with every event which the anonymous
correspondent has in some degree antici-
pated."

  "Do not suppose," replied he, with
warmth, "that I require any proof that
your conduct has been as correct as possi-
ble."

  "I require it," answered she; " there
shall be no doubts or fears remaining,
which are in my power to remove."

  "And never shall I have a doubt or
fear." cried he, "when I can call you my
own," at the same time pressing her to his
heart; "only let the roses have their
wonted place in those pale cheeks, and let
the sparkling lustre return into those lan-
guid eyes."
           HOWARD CASTLE.          165

  " Peace of mind will soon restore both,"
answered she; " I am much better to-day,
and my health and spirits will soon be as
good as ever."

  The servants entering with breakfast
put a stop to their conversation. After it
was over, she persevered in her intention
of acquainting him with every circum-
stance of her life—it was comprised in a
very short time, and did not require long-
to recite. In spite of his earnest solicita-
tions to the contrary, he was forced to lis-
ten to her—he wished to arrange plans for
happiness which he now hoped was in
store for him, but she was fully determined,
before any other subject was discussed, to
narrate every circumstance.

  Lord Howard was surprised to hear of
lord Montague's marriage, and pitied the
struggle he must have had in conquering
his passion fov Clementina, whose charac-
ter rose, if possible, higher in his esteem, as
he found with what strength of mind and
propriety she had acted in every situation.
She would not permit him to remain at
Roachwood longer than merely to hear her
little history, and to peruse lord Monta-166             HOWARD CASTLE.

gue's story, and the letters which she had
received from him. He was reluctantly
obliged to leave her before dinner; but not
before she had given him permission to
return with Mrs. Conway, Isabella, and
Mr. Waldegrave, who were to be her visi-
tors the following week.

  Lord Howard left her with regret, but
happy in the prospect of so soon meeting:
he meant to go immediately to London,
to hurry all the necessary preparations for
their union, to which he trusted no obstacle
would now arise: his mind was at perfect
ease, and he left Clementina apparently
happy. Her health rapidly returned—again
cheerfulness animated her countenance;
her mind was more comfortable than it
had ever been, as she had now no conceal-
ment. Lord Howard knew all: she had
laboured under the painful task of myste-
rious secrecy, but never again would she
undergo what she had done. From the
first moment of her knowing him, she was
afraid of her correspondence with lord
Montague being discovered. Now she
was resolved that openness and candour
should be her guides through life.            HOWARD CASTLE.        107

  On the fourth day after lord Howard's
departure, Clementina was agreeably sur-
prised with the arrival of Mrs. Conway,
her brother, and niece. "You see," ex-
claimed her friend, "we have come sooner
than you expected us. My son charged
us not to set off until the day he appointed,
when he should, if possible, get his busi-
ness transacted in London, and accompany
us here: we were all impatient to see you,
and as Howard will not trifle on the road,
I expect he will join the party in a day or
two."
   Clementina expressed the pleasure which
was very evidently painted in her coun-
tenance: she felt delighted with the sight
of her beloved friend, and welcomed Mr.
Waldegrave and Isabella to her house
with unfeigned joy; never was there a
happier group--it wanted only lord How-
ard's presence to complete it.
    Next morning Mr. Waldegrave, accrod-
ing to his general custom, mounted a fa-
vourite pony, which lord Howard had 
given him, and rode out soon after break-
fast, as he said, to view Miss Bouverie's
domain. The three ladies seated them-


168       HOWARD CASTLE.

selves in the library, busily employed in
their various occupations. Mrs. Conway
was completely happy, but could not re-
frain from touching upon her recent feel-
ings, which were very different from what
she now felt: she described, without any
exaggeration, all she had suffered. The
little narration, simply told, affected Cle-
mentina, whose nerves had not entirely
recovered the shock they had sustained.
" Could you have seen," said Mrs. Con-
way, who observed her emotion, " the
misery of my son—his thoughts distracted
and wandering; his manner, when lie did
appear, absent and melancholy; his fine
handsome form visibly sinking from the
despondency of his mind; and his health
injured from harassing thoughts, want of
sustenance, and want of sleep—you would
have been shocked. I watched the change
with anguish, as I feared it originated in
a rupture with you. I wrote to you, and
mentioned that he was ill—no answer
came from you; I hoped you would write,
and express some anxiety for the poor suf-
ferer. 1 meant to have shewn him the let-
ter, had it contained a sentence from which
        HOWARD CASTLE.         169

he could derive any comfort, but no let-
ter came. He set off without apprizing
me of his intention—he returned cheerful
and happy. What the cause is of all the
wonderful changes I have lately witnessed,
I know not, but I think I can now have
them explained."

  Clementina wiped her eyes, which had
given proof slie sympathized in lord How-
ard's sufferings: she considered a moment,
if she might give the same detail to Mrs.
Conway, before Isabella, that she had done
to lord Howard—she believed she might
confide lord Montague's history safely to
them; as she was at liberty to divulge the
secret to lord Howard, she would ven-
ture to extend the intelligence to his mo-
ther, whose opinion of her she was nearly
as anxious should be favourable, as that
her son should think well of lier. She
prefaced the explanation by desiring it
might never be again mentioned, as the
little history involved others besides her-
self.

  Mrs. Conway and Isabella both promis-
ed due attention to her injunctions, and

    VOL. V.              I170           HOWARD CASTLE.

she proceeded to give it to them, in nearly
the same words as she had narrated it to
lord Howard.  Both she and Mrs. Conway
observed with surprise the greatest emo-
tion in Isabella during the recital; tears
dropped on her work, in spite of every en-
deavour to hide them.  At last she ex-
claimed-" Oh! Miss Bouverie, your love
for lord Montague was transient, but that
for lord Howard is woven in your very
existence.  Had the malicious, base wo-
man succeeded in separating you for ever,
could you have survived it?"

   "I have been wonderfully supported in
many severe trials," replied she; "could
I have attached no blame to my be-
haviour, I could have borne it better, but
I was sunk in my own estimation; I
thought I had acted foolishly, and so for-
feited lord Howard's love and Mrs. Con-
way's protection."

    "No, my Clementina, daughter of my
heart!" exclaimed Mrs. Conway, "there
was no chance of that; I could never have
supposed you to blame.  When I watched
my son's behavior to you, before you
left Howard Castle, my fears were dreadful,             HOWARD CASTLE                  171
but I never suspected that you had given
him cause for uneasiness. I saw him pay
lady Almeria Villyers the attention I 
though was your due, and was shocked
at his manner. Upon your quitting the
drawing-room, I wished to know what 
you thought, which made me request to
see you before you left the house, but you
appeared so calm and composed, that I 
durst not hint my alarm; but, thank God!
it is happily ended, and may it be the last
jealousy which ever subsists between 
you!"

      "So far," said Clementina, "I have to 
rejoice in what we have both suffered;
jealousy after marriage is not so easily re-
moved; once create suspicion, and there 
is no end to it. This is fully explained, 
and will make me more guarded in future, 
not entirely to trust to innocence, but like-
wise to study the appearance of it, and to
think aloud to my husband."

     "Keep to that determination, my love,"
said Mrs. Conway, "and you secure both
your own happiness and that of my son;
have one interest one heart, one mind; and

     


172          HOWARD CASTLE.

oh! let me only live to witness such feli-
city as must be the lot of two beloved ob-
jects!"  Mrs. Conway's feelings completely
overpowered her.

  Clementina earnestly joined in the little
prayer,as on the life of her friend and mo-
ther would depend much of her enjoyment.
She wished exceedingly to change the sub-
ject,as it seemed to agitate the whole par-
ty--" I have entrusted you," said she,
"with the principal events of my life-may
I now propose, Isabella, having yours in 
return?"

   " It is what I have wished to hear," said
Mrs. Conway, " ever since I have known 
you to be my niece, but I was determined
we three should be together. Never was 
there a more favourable opportunity than
the present."

  Isabella blushed-" If I should forfeit
the esteem of my most valued friends,
by complying with your request, what
would become of me?"

  " You are very safe," replied Mrs. Con-
way; " I am not in a humour to quarrel
with any one; so pray proceed in your nar-
rative without any further preface."
               HOWARD CASTLE.         173

" Then," said Isabella, " I will lay my 
heart open to you-only keep in remem-
branc its youth, and parden th follies I
expose to your view, and attribute them
to the real cause, innocence and ignorance. 
I should have had time to have formed the
events of my life into a story; they are 
impressed upon my mind, but they may
not be arranged in the most methodical
order."

" Pray make no further preface," said 
Clementina; "if the language should not
be in the style of a novelist, we will ex-
cuse; you as it is the plain unvarnished 
events of your life we wish to hear-no
ornamented tale."

Isabella, without any further comment,
began-" My father has already told you
the struggle he felt at parting with me at
so early a period of my life as nine years
old; but my being without an opportunity
of gaining instruction in India determined
him to sacrifice his own pleasure and 
amusement, as he instructed me in lan-
guages, and all the knowledge tha he could
give me. Still there were female accom-
plishments necessary to finish me, for the
174            HOWARD CASTLE.

Style he flattered himself he should live to
see me move in. Had I remained in the
happy situation I spent my infant days in,
I should have indeed been ignorant of fri-
volous acquirements, but I should have
had useful knowledge, and escaped many
sorrows: would to heaven I had never en-
tered into such a school as I did! there I
learnt very little knowledge, but of the de-
pravity of the human heart. My father,
after he had apprized a sister of my mo-
ther's, who lived in London, with his in-
tention of sending me to her care, com-
mitted me to the charge of a lady, who
willingly undertook to deliver me to my
aunt. Perhaps you will wonder," turning
to Clementina, " that I had not the hap-
py fortune of having Mrs. Conway's pro-
tection. My father, since his return, has
explained to me,. that he obeyed the dic-
tates of love more than of prudence, in his
marriage with my mother, whose beauty
and goodness were all she had to boast of.
She was a citizen's daughter in London, of
the name ef Clifford;, of course, my father's
family thought themselves degraded by
the imprudent step of their son. He leftthem, preferring a burning clime, and un-
certain fortune, with his Isabella, to all the
magnificence and luxury they could offer
him without her."

  "He took it for granted," said Mrs.
Conway,"that my father would not give
his consent, as he never hinted his inten-
tion to his family. The first thing we
heard of him was, that he was married, and
embarked with his wife for India."

  "I believe," said Miss Waldegrave,
"that he never after corresponded with his
family, who he supposed would wish to
drop all connexion with him. He soon,
from his own abilities, and from the inter-
est of an uncle of my mother's, who was
one of the directors of the India-House, got
into a very lucrative situation. I have of-
ten heard him say, that for two years his
happiness was beyound any thing he had
ever imagined--and imagination generally
exaggerates every idea of happiness in a
lover's breast, where the beloved object
is to share it; but alas! my birth blasted his
felicity, and deprived him of his wife, and
me of my parent, whose excellence I only
knew to regret I never was blest by her176     HOWARD CASTLE.

care. Upon my coming to this country,
my father resolved I should take the name
of my mother. He gave me no reason for
it, as he carefully avoided mentioning his
relations before me. It did not strike me
with wonder at the time, but often since
it has afforded me ample subject for
thought. I found a melancholy change in
my situation, when I had only lived a
week in the house of my aunt: accustomed
to the tender indulgence of a fond parent,
whose greatest enjoyment was in seeing
me happy, and in anticipating every wish
I could form, you may suppose the misery
I endured, when deprived of that kind-
ness. My aunt had married, some years
before my mother, a merchant in the city,
whose only recommendation was riches,
which he had acquired by the greatest at-
tention to business; his whole ideas being
centered in the extensive commerce he
carried on, and the accumulation of wealth,
which had increased in a very rapid man-
ner; and with as great rapidity as had Mrs.
Mattocks' vanity and purse-proud superi-
ority risen. She now looked upon herself
as one of the greatest women at the city
        HOWARD CASTLE.            177

assemblies, except to lady of tlie Lord
Mayor, in which capacity she expected
to see her husband shine, when she should
shew the world what true style and ele-
gance was at the Mansion-house. I was
received into the family as a kind of de-
pendant, in spite of my father's paying, in
the most liberal manner, for my board;
but he knew not the people he had to
deal with; he suspected not the cruel
temper of my aunt, or the narrow mind of
her husband, who, from the love of gain,
admitted me into his house; and the sums
which were charged to my father for my
education, I do verily believe, were appro-
priated to their own use, as the instruction
I received was chiefly from the governess
of their daughter, who was two years older
than myself She was brought up with
all the purse-proud ideas of her mother,
and the mean tricks of her father: she was
vain, arrogant, and supercilious; ostenta-
tious of her finery, but penuriously saving
of her money. I soon found, when we
advanced farther in years, that I was to
act the part of a humble companion to my
                      
HOWARD CASTLE

eousin, and never to interfere with her in 
dress or admiration.  I own they appeared
of little consequence to me, as the many
mortifications. I met with completely
humbled my pride.
"The only pleasant hours i spent were
 with Mrs Herbert, the lady I came to
England with. She lived in a retired, but
genteel style, at Kensington: her society
was extremely limited, as she only associated 
with colonet Herbert's relations and
her own: bad health had obliged her to
quit a beloved husband, whose affairs 
would not admit of his returning to his
native country with her.  At her house 
along, I met with refined sense, elegant
manners and instructive conversation: I
heard frequently from my father, whose
lettres, and the friendship of Mrs Herbert,
constituted my whole happiness. I care-fully 
avoided hinting to either my un-pleasant 
situations, as I knew Mrs.Herbert 
would not interfere, and that my father
was at such a distance he could not
"Miss Mattocks completed her eighteenth
 year, and as the phrase is, came out
 as the reputed heiress to her father's im-
       HOWARD CASTLE.               179

mense fortune. Her appearance was in
her favour; but there was an air of bold-
ness which called attention, but not admi-
ration: she demanded respect. I very
seldom was of their parties; I found my
absence was not regretted, and I spent my
time more agreeably in the society of Mrs.
Herbert, where I often remained all night.
Miss Mattocks very frequently repeated
to me the names of those who had been
with them the evening before; one of the
number, who I always observed was the 
first on the list, was the honourable George
Delwin; his name was so frequently men-
tioned, and in so familiar a style, that I
supposed he was a favoured lover. One
day there was to be a numerous party to
dinner, and all were to attend a ball given
by Mr. Delwin. Miss Mattocks was in 
very uncommon good humour, when she 
told me how the day was to be spent, add-
ing-'It is extremely stupid in you
visiting so often that tiresome woman,
Mrs. Herbert. Pray, stay and see the an-
gelic Delwin; it will amuse you more than
going to Kensington, and I am to be most
superbly dressed.' I consented to the pro-180             HOWARD CASTLE.

posal, without at all expecting entertain-
ment in seeing Mr. Delwin, or Miss Mat-
tocks in her gay attire; but she appeared
more earnest than I had ever seen her, and
I was afraid it might look like ill-natured
indifference if I refused.

     "When the company began to assem-
ble, I very soon selected one, who I sup-
posed was Mr. Delwin. He appeared 
young and handsome, but so perfectly sa-
tisfied with himself, that I felt no inclina-
tion to look at him a second time. I was
seated in a window, amusing myself with
my own remarks, being too young and
too plainly dressed to obtain much notice
from the ladies, and the gentlemen flat-
tered to the intrinsic worth of Miss Molly's
thousands. I was suffered, without inter-
ruption, to amuse myself with my obser-
vations, as I was highly entertained with 
the homage Miss Mattocks received, and
wonered not that her little silly brain
was turned; if she smiled, she spread uni-
versal pleasure; her words were echoed as
charming, her taste extolled as the crite-
rion; in short, I no longer wondered at her
being such a little bundle of conceit. My
           HOWARD CASTLE.        181

attention had been so much engaged
watching Miss Mattocks, the joy which
animated her countenance made me turn
my eyes in the direction hers had taken,
when they fixed upon a most elegant figure
who was advancing towards the magnet;
as he passed me, he cast his eyes upon me;
1 looked up at the moment—I thought I
never had beheld so mild, so fine a coun-
tenance.

  " At dinner, Mr. Delwin, for it was he
whose appearance had struck me so much;
sat bv Miss Mattocks; I was placed exactly
opposite to them, but I could perceive no.
partiality of behaviour upon his side; he
was silent, and seemed reserved in his man-
ner. A very communicative gentleman,
who was seated by me, appeared acquaint-
ed with the private concerns of the whole
party: he was obliged to whisper in a very
low voice, that it was expected a match)
would soon take place between Miss Mat-
tocks and her right-hand neighbour; her
fortune and his rank would make a happy
combination, as she wished to be a woman
of rank, and he a man of fortune. 'Gaming;'
he whispered, in so low a voice I could182         HOWARD CASTLE.
with difficulty understand him, 'had been 
his favourite amusement, till frequent 
losses at play had obliged him to apply to 
his father for money, who would only ad-
vance him what he wanted upon to con-
ditions-to give up for ever his amusement,
and that he would immediately pay his 
addresses to Miss Mattocks, who is re-
puted one of the richest heiresses in the 
city. I believe,' added my informant, 
'that he adheres strictly to his promise. 
You see he is well received here; so we 
look for a marriage speedily.'
      "when we retired to the drawing-room, 
the ball was the subject of converstion. 
I felt a slight degree of regret, which I 
never before experienced. I wished I had 
been going, but that was impossible; and 
pride made me strive not to skew my
 disappointment. Miss Mattocks was in 
high spirits, and seemed completely intoxi-
cated with the adulation she met with-but 
if I dwell on every trifle I never shall have 
done."
     "We have plenty of time," cried both 
the ladies.
     "And I declare," said Mrs. Conway.HOWARD CASTLE. 183

"my dear Isabella, you narrate your his-
tory in a most excellent style; you make
it quite an interesting story, so do not
shorten it, I desire."

Isabella smiled. "I fear you will not
continue to think quite so well of your
historian: I almost blush to go on."

"Proceed," said Clementina, "without
farther apology, as I am sure you robbed
Miss Mattocks of her lover, and your con-
science smites you for doing so."

"I often wished myself at Mrs. Her-
bert's," resumed Miss Waldegrave, "where
I should not have bestowed a thought on
the ball. Mr. Delwin appeared gayer
when he joined us at tea; but never ad-
dressed himself to me, or regretted I was
not to be of his party, which was of the
greatest service to me. Had he made me
a pretty speech, and lamented my not
having had an invitation, I should certain-
ly have given way to the sorrow I felt,
and shewed him I was disapointed. I saw
the whole party set off, gay and cheerful,
and I as much the reverse as possible, 
wishing myself anywhere but where I
was. In short, I was peevish, and could184      HOWARD CASTLE.

have quarrelled with a straw. My com-
posure was quite restored in the morning, 
when I listened to the recital from Miss
Mattocks with perfect good humour. Del-
win was the hero of the tale, and she in-
sinnuated that she was the heroine. I was
obliged to hear many of the fine things
which had been said to her, and the very 
witty retorts she made, till, fatigued to 
death, I resolved to spend the remainder 
of the day in rational society, and retired
immediately after breakfast, which was a 
very late one, owing to the ball, to pre-
pare for going to Mrs. Herbert's. Just as
I was going to quit the house, Mr. Mat-
tocks stopped me, with an air of conse-
quence, telling me he had a piece of good
news to impart to me. As nothing
could give me so much pleasure as a letter
from my father, I believe I coloured, and 
joy sparkled in my eyes, as I inquired if
he had got a letter for me?

  "He looked astonished, and with a grave 
tone of voice informed me, it was a more
agreeable office he was entrusted with
that the delivering a letter, which was ra-
ther to trivial a circumstance for him to                HOWARD CASTLE.   185

employ his thoughts or time about. he was solicited, as a particular favour, by a very deserving friend of his, Mr. Sawyer, to offer me his hand and fortune. My surprise you many easily conceive at this abrupt attack, made in so serious a manner. I of course did not hesitate a moment in giving my answer, which was, that I looked upon myself as a great deal too young to enter into such an engagement, and that, even if he were a person I could marry, I would not without my father's approbation.

   'Your father,' replied Mr. Mattocks, 'has appointed me your guardian in this country; of course, I have the power of deciding who is a power connexion for you. If my friend was a gay young officer, would you wait until a letter reached India, and till an answer could return? No. believe me-all that great respect for your parent would be laid aside, and I am doubtful whether you would even consult me who am at your elbow.'

  "I replied, I had no such temptation for erring; but if I had, I hoped I should186                   HOWARD CASTLE.

act with propriety.I added,that I never would marry Mr.Sawyer.--Only conceive a girl of seventeen married to an old snuffy bachelor, near his grand climacteric, who had lived all his life in a small dirty house, in an obscure street in the city! He had, from the most penurious habits, acquired a prodigious fortune, which he never could find in his heart to share with any one, till he fixed his fancy upon me.After I had given Mr.Mattocks my final answer, I left him in the utmost astonishment.

"I was happy to find Mrs.Herbert approved of what I had done.She gave me strict injunctions to keep steady in my determination.

"When I returned to my aunt's, I found a change upon the whole family:they were grave, distant, and reserved, to me.The morning following, my aunt desired I would follow her to dressing-room.I attended, well knowing the subject I was to be lectured upon, but perfectly resolved to adhere steadily in my refusal of this strange husband.Above an hour she wasted her eloquence uponme: she represented the match in all the
glowing colours gold could assume--a
hundred and fifty thousand pounds.  I
shook my head, and said--'I was perfectly
indifferent if he were possessed of all the
money in London.'
  "He offers any settlements Mr. Mat-
tocks chuses to fix on, and you may soon
be left a young widow, with a great join-
ture, and then, perhaps, you may marry a
lord.'
  "I looked at her, I believe with con-
tempt, at this inducement, and said--'Can
you indeed be serious in your advice, for
me to unite myself to man I have an
aversion to, in the hopes of his dying?
You shock me with the idea!  If it is pos-
sible you could wish me to be so wicked,
I must inform you my principles are such,
that I never will marry until I can give
my whole heart, confidence, and esteem, to
my husband, and whose death would be the
greatest calamity that could happen to me.
A lord! and I believe I said it with a con-
temptuous tone of voice; 'do you think
my marrying a lord would add, in the 
smallest degree, to my happiness?  If Mr.188                 HOWARD CASTLE.

Sawyer was a duke, I would not be his duch ss.'
  "My annt put on her most dignified air, and bid me recollect who I was talking to.
  'I do,' I replied; 'I know that you are my nearest relation, and ought to guard me from such a connexion, if I were even mercenary enough to consent to such a marriage. I was sent to your care for my education, not to unite me to one of your city acquaintance.'
  "My aunt could bear it no longer-she rose from her seat, boiling with indignation, and loaded me with a thousand opprobrious terms-'City acquaintance, indeed! impertinent girl! how dare you throw any reflections upon our situation? If we live in the opulent part of London, believe me, who might leave is tomorrow, if we chose it, and outshine your great relations at the west end of the town, who will not own you or your father, they are so puffed up with their family pride.' It was the first time I knew I had any other relatives but themselves."
  "I wish we had been then known toeach other," said Mrs. Conway; "you should not have remained long amongst such people; but go on"
"She told me, if it had not been for her, I might have remained in India amongst the savages, untutored-'You would not have had such an offer, had we not educated you, and made you what you are expecting your impertinence.' She told me in her wrath, that she believed the woman who brought me to this country, and who was as proud as Lucifer, and as poor as a church mouse, perverted my ideas, and taught me to look with contempt on those relations who had taken such care of me, and educated me as their own child-'But remember,' and she looked at me with such a threatening countenance, 'I discharge you from going to visit Mrs. Herbert. As long as you are under my care, I will chuse those you are to keep company with, and amongst our city acquaintances you may certainly find as good as yourself.' I was sorry that our conference had ended in this manner, as it was debarring me of my great pleasure, the society of Mrs. Herbert; she had al-190 HOWARD CASTLE.

ways been kind to me, but had carefully
avoided all advances from the Mattocks's,
whom she disliked from the first moment
she saw them, and never returned their
visit. The affront had long disturbed
them, but it had been smothered by pride,
as they would not for the world let me
suppose they had ever thought of such an 
insignificant person, who lived so retired,
and in so small a house, and with so few
servants, and so plain a carriage: she was
quite below their notice. I was happily
not prevented writing to her, and explain-
ing why she saw me so seldom, as I was
determined to steal her as soon as an
opportunity offered. In a few days, we
went on in our usual manner-my aunt
regained her civil manner to me, Mr. Saw-
yer visited at the house more frequently,
and even one day brought me a silver
toothpick-case, which he had, I dare say,
bought at the price of old silver."

"Perhaps," said Clementina, laughing,
"it was only plated."

"Whatever it was," said Isabella, "I 
refused it with much dignity, and Miss
Mattocks accepted the gift with pleasure.         HOWARD CASTLE.               191

Mr.Delwin frequented the house more 
than ever, and increased in favor with 
Mrs. Mattocks and her daughter, as he
was in deep mourning for his elder bro-
ther, and there was now no impediment
to his having the title of lord Rosston,-
For two months he continued to frequent
the house. At last his intimacy increased
to such a degree, that seldom a day passed 
without his spending part of it with us-
still no declaration to Miss Mattocks.
I was too much interested in Mr. Delwin
not to suspect she was a secondary object
with him: his looks, his manner to me, 
convinced me I was dear to him, but he
was so guarded in his conduct, that, with
all the Argus eyes of the family, they were
puzzled. The recent death of his brother,
they supposed, prevented him urging the
marriage to take place immediately.

"Mrs.Mattocks often repented her for-
bidding my visits to Mrs. Herber: I
made one at all their parties, and was al-
ways at home when Mr.Delwin called-
At last she said-she thought better
of my behaviour than she had done; and
she did not suppose that Mrs. Herbert192       HOWARD CASTLE.

would give me bad advice; therefore I
might visit her as usual. I coldly replied,
I was obliged to her for her intended in-
dulgence, but that my friend was in a re-
mote part of Cumberland, visiting a sister
of colonel Herbert's. She looked surpris-
ed and disappointed. Mr. Delwin came
in soon after, but I retired to my own
apartment, as I was afraid she was alarmed
by his behaviour, in spite of his paying
constant attention to Miss Mattocks, and
being, at times, negligent to me.


            CHAPTER VII.
             ..........

"Next day was set aside for an excursion
to Clapham, to visit a bosom-friend of Mrs.
Mattocks; I was teazed to be of the party,
but I continued obstinate-I had letters to 
write, both to my father and Mrs. Her-
bert, was my excuse: they set off most 
unwillingly without me at an early hour,
as they were to spent a long day. I im-
mediately sat down in a back parlour,
          HOWARD CASTLE              193

where they generally spent the mornings,
with my writing materials; but I had not 
written three lines, when the door was
opened, and Mr.Delwin entered.
  " As I suspected", said Clementina,
archly.

 "I declare," replied Miss Waldegrave,
"I had not the least expectation of seeing
him; if I had known that they had men-
tioned their plan before him, I should have
accompanied them; it was a most unfor-
tunate tête-à-téte, and what I shall repent
as long as I live. He staid two hours
with me, which appeared the shortest I
ever spent: it was with difficulty I pre-
vailed upon him to go. He told me he
was resolved to run any risk in having an
interview with me. Miss Mattocks had
informed him that I was on the point of
becoming Mrs.Sawyer; he was wretched
until he had an explanation from myself;
and at no moment could he exchange words
with me in private, he was so watched
by the family, and he was afraid of being
discharged entirely from coming to the
house. I assured him the information was

       VOL.V. 
194                HOWARD CASTLE.

false; and, before we parted, I convinced
him of my sincerity, by our mutually
pledging our vows to be united: I will
hold mine sacred, although Delwin has
broken his." Isabella stopped--her voice
faltered--she was too much agitated to
proceed.

  "If you are tired," said Mrs.Conway,
"we will give you a respite; and when
your father takes his afternoon's nap, we
will entreat for the remainder of your in-
teresting history."

  "If I have not fatigued my hearers,"
said Isabella, "I would rather finish it now."

  They both assured her th y were anx-
ious for her to continue, if it was not too
great an exertion.

  "After Delwin left me, I repented of
what I had done. Had I not solemnly en-
gaged myself to marry without my father's
consent? but could be disapprove of Mr.
Delwin for me? it was impossible; but was
I not acting a treacherous part to Miss
Mattocks, who I really believe was attach-
ed to him? I teazed myself with a thou-
sand fancies; but the terror of his being
discovered having visited me in their ab-            HOWARD CASTLE           195

sense wore off. We continued to go on
a month longer, without our creating sus-
pieion. Mrs. Mattocks saw deeper than 
her daughter did, who was blinded by self-
conceit and confidence, in being possessed 
of Mr. Delwin's heart. At last Mrs. Mat-
tocks became seriously alarmed, and in-
sisted on her husband discharging him the
house, unless he immediately declared what
his intentions were. One of the last days
he was in it, and when he suspected his 
visits were near a close, he contrived to slip
a paper into my hand; it was urging a pri-
vate marriage, and entreating that I would
meet him at a relation's house, where the
ceremony should be performed; that he
would immediately go abroad, where he
would only remain until his peeuniary mat-
ters were arranged, when he would return,
and proudly introduce me to his family:
there were many declarations of love and 
affection; but I was startled by his propo-
sal. I wrote with my pencil - 'Never
again make such a request.' He looked 
mortified.

"All this passed as Miss Mattocks bent

                K  2196               HOWARD CASTLE.

over her harp, delighted with the melodi-
ous sound of her own voice. Mrs. Mat-
tocks's entrance put a stop to our corre-
spondence, and Delwin left the house evi-
dently disconcerted. Next day I received
a letter from him, entreating in the most
earnest manner that I would meet him at
any place I would appoint, as he wished
to converse with me for a quarter of an
hour. My affection for him got the bet-
ter of my prudence; I promised to be at a
milliner's near, precisely at ten o'clock in
the morning following.

  "Mr. Mattocks kept very early hours,
as no consideration would make him neg-
lect his business; and he would never sit
down to a meal without his family round
him: we breakfasted regularly at nine
o'clock. As soon as I thought my retiring
from the room would not be observed. I
hurried to the place appointed, and there
found Mr. Delwin impatiently waiting.
The mistress of the house was a very re-
spectable woman, and generally let lodg-
ings: she had then her front parlour at li-
berty, which we took possession of, and
there bewildered ourselves with plans, none             HOWARD CASTLE.       197

of them at all likely to succeed. Delwin
again urged a private marriage; but I, in
the most resolute manner, resisted all his
persuasions; nothing in the world could
have made me so happy, but I was re-
solved not to involve the man I loved in
difficulties. We parted, with the promise
of meeting again at the same place."

   Mrs. Conway shook her head.

   "You cannot, my dear madam," said
Isabella, "disapprove more than I have
done of my conduct with Mr. Delwin, or
the constructions I was sensible might be
put upon our meetings. I was innocence
itself; but I promised to lay all before you."


   "You," replied Mrs. Conway, " were
very young: I blame Mr. Delwin, as he
ought not to have misled you."

   "Alas!" replied she, " he was the one
misled. We continued an almost daily in-
tercourse, he coming seldomer to Mr.
Mattocks's; at last he was discharged from
the house, which he had expected several
weeks before it happened; but Miss Mat-
tocks would flatter herself she was beloved
by him: ali her gay plans fell to the ground;
her love for Delwin, and her disappointed198        HOWARD CASTLE:

ambition, weighed heavily upon her; she
fell sick, and I really sympathized with
her.

   "My aunt had long suspected that I
had robbed her daughter of Delwin's heart,
and she likewise suspected that we kept
up a secret correspondence: all the ser-
vants were interrogated-no intelligence
could she gain, but that Miss Clifford went
out every day: she was convinced we met,
but where, she was a length of time in dis-
covering. At last she found us out, and I
was ordered into her presence; she did not
go about the bush-she plumply asked me
the question-' Where do you meet him?' I
told her at once. The truth did not dis-
arm her rage-she was absolutely choked
with passion, and, for a moment or two,
I feared she would be in a fit. At
last she got articulation.-I had robbed
her daughter of her lover-of a man she
doted upon-the peace of her family was
ruined, and disgrace brought upon it by
me. In short, I need not rave like her;
the storm lasted for a considerable time;
                  HOWARD CASTLE         199

the finale was, that I was ordered into
close confinement, and have never seen or
heard from Mr. Delwin since.

" I remained in ignorance of all their
proceedings for a week. I wrote to Mrs.
Herbert; but my letters, I dare say, were
never sent to the post-office. The first 
time Mrs. Mattocks deigned to speak to
me, she came to my room, where I was
kept under lock and key, and informed
me I was to set off the following morning
to France, where I should be in a more se-
cure place than their house was. My
blood run cold in my veins. What place
of confinement can they mean to put me
in? thought I. In the evening, my aunt
returned to my apartment with a more 
complcent air than common. After hav-
ing placed herself upon a chair, she in-
formed me I might remain in England, 
upon one condition. I begged to know
what she meant - I strongly suspected 
what the proposal was. Mr. Sawyer, she
said, had generously offered to take me,
stigmatized as I was. This gave me spi-
rit to answer - If I never again was to see
the light of day, I would not accept of his
200              HOWARD CASTLE.

hand, and that I was ready to set off when
she pleased; at the same time adding, that
I hoped my father would justify all my
wrongs.  She tossed from me with a
prodigious air, saying--'If she had known
my disposition, nobody should have pre-
vailed upon her to have taken me into her
family, where I had proved a viper, which
had wounded them in the tenderest part
--her dear child's happiness was ruined
by her doing a charitable action.'  I re-
terted again--'That I believed she had
been amply paid for my board; there-
fore I could not deem it charity where
there was a remuneration.' She left me,
and I heard her lock the room-door after
her.

  "In the morning, I set off at an early
hour for France.  We passed the house
where I had seen Delwin for the last time;
my spirits sunk still lower than ever--I
felt wretched, and leaned back in a corner
of the chaise, overpowered with contend-
ing emotions.  I cared very little where
they were carrying me to; the only idea
which harassed me was, that I had seen
Delwin for the last time. A lively French
HOWARD CASTLE. 201

woman, who had been a governess in Eng-
land, and who was returning to her na-
tive country, was my escort; she sung,
laughed, and talked: I was provoked at her
being in such spirits, when I felt so melan-
choly. She soon informed me that she
was to deliver me to the abbess of the con-
vent de-in Paris, who had received a
letter apprizing her of my coming. I ask-
ed her some questions, and soon found by
her answers, that it was one of the most
severe-conducted convents in France-
'No liberty for poor mademoiselle!' said
she, shaking her head; 'poor thing, no
seeing your lover there!' I found there
was more irony than pity in her manner,
and forbore stating my unhappy case to
her: I found the woman had no heart-I
silently sat by her, till at last she told me
I was extremely stupid.

"I should wear out your patience, were
I to detail the hardships and miseries I en-
dured in the horrid convent, where I re-
mained two tedious months, suffering every
penance that could be inflicted, in the most
horrid dungeon you can conceive: I was
K3202          HOWARD CASTLE.

wild with despair-I wrote letters; but I
am convinced none were sent off. I had
fortunately secreted a sum of money, as
my fathers' agent paid me a certain allow-
ance for my pocket, which I had no oppor-
tunity of spending. It was Mrs. Her-
bert's advice to be careful of the overplus,
as I might at some time want it; how good
and kind was her consideration for me! I
believe I should not have now been in ex-
istence, but for the powerful influence of
gold-by it I found myself on the outside
of the convent walls, dressed in the mean-
est garb you can suppose. I flew from the
spot, terrified lest I should be discovered;
chance directed my steps, as I knew not
where I was, nor where I meant to go. The
part of the town where the convent is si-
tuated is very retired-the streets through
which I wandered, I never was in after-
wards, and know not one of their names-
I had got a kind of introduction from the
servant, whose clothes I wore, to a hair-
dresser's wife, who was related to her-she
lived near the barrier St. Jaques-I re-
collected the name, from repeatedly asking
the way to it.

           HOWARD CASTLE.           203

  "I was walking along, wondering what
was to be my fate, when I heard the Eng-
lish tongue spoken fluently. Rejoiced at
the sound, I looked up as the party, con-
sisting of three gentlemen, passed me. One
of them stopped, and declared he had not
seen so pretty a girl; he roughly seized
my hand, and spoke a sentence or two to
me in French, asking who I was, and
where I was going? At last I was able to
speak, for I was exceedingly alarmed with
his freedom,and told him I was a stranger
in Paris, and was going to the barrier St.
Jacques. He, laughing, said I was so
charming a creature, he would accompany
me. I was completely worn out with
fatigue and apprehension; I burst into
tears, and attempted to release my hand.
My guardian angel, in the pleasing form of
lord Howard, desired captain Stanhope to
desist, at the same time turning to me,
said—‘I will shew you the place you wish
to find, and I will protect you from far-·
ther insult.’ He spoke in so commanding
a manner, my hand was immediately re·
leased. His gay companions laughed at
his taking so ordinary a dressed girl under204               HOWARD CASTLE.

his care; the wished him good morning,
and a proper recompence for his trouble.

  "We proceeded; but not long silent.
Lord Howard asked me-'If my friends
lived near the barrier St. Jacques?' I said
-'Yes.' I knew not what to say-I was
confused beyond measure. He told me it
was at a considerable distance; but that he
would see me safe there. He knew not
then what a poor, forlorn, friendless crea-
ture he had with him : we walked so quick-
ly along, that there was no time for con-
versation. We at last reached the place,
and, after much trouble and inquiry, found
the hair-dresser, or rather barber's shop,
as it was a mean, shabby-looking house.
I entered, and saw only a little boy, who
did not answer my inquiries. Lord How-
ard advanced, and asked-' If madame
was at home?' His answer was-' She
was in the country.'-'Was his master
at home?'-' No, he was with madame,
and they had the key of the house with
them,'-'When were they expected back?'
-'Not till evening-perhaps not till next
day,'

  "I sunk upon a bench, which was placed          HOWARD CASTLE.          205

near the door, almost distracted with my
wretched situation. My attendant, for I
knew not his title, used every means to
sooth my distress; but it baffled all conso-
lation. I meant to have boarded with the
hair-dresser's wife, until I had written to
Mrs. Herbert. To return to the convent
was impossible-I would rather die upon
the spot; I could not go to England, un-
til I knew my friend was there to receive
me. Lord Howard pitied the agony I 
was in; he saw I was an object of wonder,
as my tears attracted the attention of those
who were passing in the street. He took
my hand, saying-' You must call again
when madame returns,' and led me into
the street.

  "We turned into a less bustling place, 
to try, if possible, to form a plan for my
safety. Of course I told lord Howard that
I was English, and had escaped from a con-
vent, disguised in one of the servant's
clothes; he told me, in as few words as he 
could, who he was, and promised me all
the assistance in his power; but where to
find an asylum for me puzzled him ex-
ceedingly, after much mature deliberation206      HOWARD CASTLE.

on the part of lord Howard, and much dis-
tress and misery on mine. to be thrown
upon a lord for protection seemed as if I
could hardly escape from destruction, as I
was impressed with the idea, they were
more dissipated than commoners, but far
more fascinating: I had never seen, one
excepted, any man so pleasing as lord
Howard; his fine features (I need not tell
you, Miss Bouverie, he is tolerably hand-
some) were beaming with compassion, as
he listened to my little tale; sympathy
animated him, and brightened his express-
ive countenance, as he exclaimed with
rapture--'I can evince my wish to serve
you--I have this instant thought of a si-
tuation, where you will be safe and happy,
until you can hear from your friends in 
England.' I felt a gleam of joy steal over
me, as he said these words--' There is a
person of my acquaintance, to whom I can
confide you, and whose protection I can
solicit for you.' He said no more; but
desired me to wait where I was till he
could procure a carriage. He returned,
and we were soon driving rapidly along.

'Now,' said he, 'I will explain to whom                  HOWARD CASTLE.      207

I am taking you.  She is an Englishwo-
man, whose amiable disposition I know
will rejoice in doing a good action.  Mrs.
Biddulpph is the widow of a gentleman
who died in Paris a few years ago; he left
his affairs in great confusion; but now she
is comfortable, and in easy circumstances;
her heart is the best in the world, and she
is never so happy as when she is doing
good; I am convinced she will receive you
under her maternal care, until your own
relations can fly to your relief.'-'Alas!'
was my answer, ' I have no one in Eng-
land, tied to me by blood, who will care if
I am never heard of again; I may be a
burden upon you and your friend much
longer than you may expect.'-' We will
stipulate for no certain time with Mrs.
Biddulph,' replied he; ' she will receive
you, from my recommendation, with kind-
ness; and I think I can answer for it, if
you had no other pleader than your sweet
countenance and pleasing manner, you
would not want a home, whilst she had one
to offer."

  " My lord made you some fine speeches,
said Mrs. Conway; " I think he was too208             HOWARD CASTLE.

profuse in his compliments to so great a 
stranger."

   "It was goodness of heart," replied Isa-
bella; "he wished to cheer my drooping
spirits as much as he possibly could- his
kindness had no other effect; my affec-
tions were fixed on Delwin, and never can
change. I revered lord Howard as some-
thing more than mortal; but love never
entered into either of our thoughts. Mrs
Biddulph received me with all the kind-
ness he expected: from the moment I en-
tered under the roof of that benevolent
woman, I experienced every comfort my
situation of mind would admit of; I had
sufficient money to clothe myself properly,
which you may be sure I lost no time in
doing. I wrote to Mrs. Horbert, beseech-
ing her I might either board in a safe place
in Cumberland, or that she would admit
me into her family until my father's re-
turn, as it was about the time he talked of
coming back to his native country. I had
not heard of him for above a year, which
had filled me with the greatest alarm.

    "Three days after I had been with Mrs.
Biddulph, I found an England newspaper 

                HOWARD CASTLE.   209

laid on a table; I took it up, and was
amusing myself with it, although it was of
an old date, whilst she was making break-
fast; a paragraph struck me, when I was
upon the point of laying it aside, which
occupied all my attention; I saw what
acted upon my nerves like an electrical
stroke-I had hardly sight to read these
words:-'The honourable Mr. Delwin
was yesterday presented to his mahesty,
upon his marriage, by his father lord Ross-
ton.'. Mrs. Biddniph asked me three times
to come to breakfast, before I was sensible
she had spoken; I sat in a kind of torpor;
my mind incapable of thinking-horror
and surprise had seized every faculty. At
last I got utterance, and told her I had
seen a piece of news which had shocked
me. My amiable friend participated in
my feelings, and no longer teazed me to
join her; I drank a cup of tea, in the
greatest agitation, and retired to the draw-
ing-room, where ?I searched for the other
papers; I soon found what a deep-laid plot
there had been formed against me. My
marriage with Mr. Sawyer was announced;
this at once explained to me the cause of210        HOWARD CASTLE.

Mr. Delwin's precipitate match; the agony
of my mind brought on a severe illness, in
which Mrs. Biddulph nursed me with all
the tender. care of a mother, and lord
Howard behaved with the feeling atten-
tion of a brother: he found insinuations
not consistent with the purity of my cha-
racter were whispered amongst his com-
panions, As soon as 1 was restored to
health, he insisted on my appearing in
public, under the protection of a woman
of high respectability and fltshion, who is
a relation of Mrs. Biddulph's : the first
time I, saw you, Miss Bouverie, was that
night."

"I. remember it well," said Clementina.

"Lord Howard pointed you out to me,"
continued Miss Waldegrave; "I then 
thought, by his manner, be admired you;
but the idea had little interest for me: the
sound of lord Howard's quitting Paris
which I heard for the first time that even-
ing, awakened all my fears. Whilst he
remained, my staying with Mrs. Biddulph
might not appear extraordinary—no letter
came from Mrs. Herbert, who certainly
had not returned to London: every thing         HOWARD CASTLE.                214

seemed to combine to make me uncomfort-
able, and to render me troublesome to lord
Howard. I had not seen him for two days,
and fearful of his quitting Paris, I deter-
mined to write a note to him, and request
to see him, that I might arrange some plan
for my leaving France. He obeyed my
summons, and came to Mrs. Biddulph's:
he confirmed the unwelcome intelligence,
that he was on the eve of returning to
England; he read in my countenance
what was passing in my mind, and with-
out my speaking, he said--'You cannot
with any degree of propriety leave Paris,
until you have Mrs. Herbert's directions.
how you are to proceed--wait till you have
her instructions. Mrs. Conway,' he con-
tinned, 'is a very good woman, but very
different from Mrs. Biddulph; I durst not
solicit her protection for you.' At last it
was finally settled, to my great distress,
that he would endeavour to persuade you
ladies to remain a few hours longer than
you intended, in hopes the next post might
bring me intelligence; if he could not pre-
vail with you, he promised to remain.
was there ever before such goodness in a212             HOWARD CASTLE.

human breast? You set off, and he per-
formed his promise, completely sacrificing,
his own happiness. At last two letters ar-
rived, and I was thoroughly happy: the
first I opened was from my friend, Mrs.
Herbert, dated Kensington, in which she
desired me not to lose a moment in quit-
ting france; she had just got home, and
found my various packets. The other let-
ter was dated the same day, and inclosed
one from my father, who had just reached
her house: he lamented, in strong terms,
the impossibility for him to attend me to
England; but desired I would come with
lord Howard, as from his behaviour to me,
he was convinced I should be safe with
him than any other person: he inclosed
me an ample supply of money, desiring
me to reward very handsomely all those
who had been attentive to me--he pro-
mised he should send an elegant present to
Mrs. Biddulph, to shew the high sense he
had of her behaviour to me; and I should
select what I chose of his Indian posses-
sions, to testify to her, in a small degree,
my gratitude: he hoped he should soon
thank lord Howard in person. I seemed,              HOWARD CASTLE.           213

in the joy of the moment, to forget I ever
had experienced sorrow; even Delwin was
forgot--I was completely happy. I quickly
dispatched a messenger to lord Howard, to
inform him of the happy change in my
affairs; he was waiting my summons, and
soon expressed,in person, what he really
felt--great pleasure, both on my account
and his own. Mrs. Biddulph had engaged
an English woman-servant to attend me;
she was rather surprised at my father's ap-
pointing so young a man as my escort;
she thought a person of my own sex would
take off, in some degree, the awkwardness
of our situation. I believe lord Howard
was as much astonished at a stranger's de-
pating him to be the protector of his
daughter; and I felt ashmed of the liber-
ty of the request. His goodness prevent-
ed his shewing any surprise, and we set off
on our journey. The remainder you are
well acquainted with, and of my now en-
viable situation--a father, an aunt, a cou-
sin, a friend, all exerting themselves to
render me happy: have I not reason to
bless Providence for the mercies I have
met with?"
214         HOWARD CASTLE.

Mrs. Conway and Clementina both thanked Miss Waldegrave for her interesting story, which she had told in a very pleasing manner-"I am not, in spite of your giving us so good a detail, quite satisfied," said Clementina; "what did you hear of Mr. Delwin, upon your return to London? Pardon me for renewing painful recollections-he is an object of pity."

"I will tell you all I know," replied Miss Waldegrave; "but after your curiosity is satisfied, I entreat his name may never be again mentioned; he is the husband of an amiable woman, whose happiness I sincerely wish may be uninterrupted."

Clementina promised obedience to her commands; and Isabella gave her the following account:-"The first day I spent with Mrs. Herbert, I desired she would give me every information she could respecting his marriage, resolved, after I heard all, I never would name him again. She told me, my misfortunes had arisen from her being in the north when my marriage was inserted in the newspapers, as she could easily have confuted the lie. The     HOWARD CASTLE.     215

family she was with lived in a very remote
part of Cumberland--and it was only by acci-
dental messengers they got their letters,
or saw a country newspaper; a London
one she had never perused whilst she was
there. The first account she heard was
by a correspondent of hers, who had seen
me at her house; she expressed her sur-
prise, in a slight manner, supposing Mrs.
Herbert was in the secret; she merely
said, she had been much astonished, and
had heard a great deal expressed, at the
strange husband so young a girl as Miss
Clifford had chosen. 'It appears' she
added, 'that the is more captivated with
wealth, than either exterior or interior qua-
lifications. Mr. Delwin is much mortified
at being give up for such a lover; 'he was
yesterday married to the great heiress,
Miss Barstow; matters were rapidly con-
cluded between them, as he never paid
her any attention until he became her hus-
band.' Mrs. Herbert instantly wrote to
her friend, entreating an explanation, as
she was totally ignorant of the whole af-
fair: she begged the name of my husband,
and every particular--she had written to
216 HOWARD CASTLE.

me repeatedly, but, of course, those letters 
were never delivered. An answer arrived, 
inclosing a bit of the newspaper, contain-
ing an account of my marriage with Saw-
yer. Mrs. Herbert found there could be
no mistake, and resolved to return imme-
diately to London, as she believed there
was a deep scheme to injure me: she com-
menced her journey, although her health
was in a very precarious state. Her impa-
tience to proceed rapidly was more than
her strength could bear-she was laid up
for a week, in a crowded inn: at last, after
a most tedious journey, she reached Lon-
don, where she found my letters, dated
from Paris, and one from my father, an-
nouncing his arrival in England, in which
he hoped to be there, in the course of the
day: he was punctual to his word, and ar-
rived an hour after she got home. The
Mattocks family were at Southampton, as
my father's first inquire after me was at
their house; his rage, when found how
they had treated me, was beyond descrip-
tion, and he vows revenge. I durst not
give him all the particulars: if I had, I be-
lieve he would have followed them, andHOWARD CASTLE. 217

committed a thousand extravagancies. His
joy at finding it was the son of his sister
who had saved his child took his atten-
tion, in some degree, from those who are
wholly unworthy of his notice. I believe,
he hoped a more tender sentiment than
mere pity might steal into lord Howard's
bosom. But the admiration he feels for
you," turning to Clementina, "has quite
reconciled him to my being as I am: he
has never mentioned Mr. Delwin to me,
and I most sincerely hope he never will,
as I shall endeavour to forget him as my
lover, but I never shall form any other en-
gagement."

Mrs. Conway held that idea in ridicule,
as she thought her niece too young to 
form any kind of determination as to her
future destiny. When Clementina was
at the toilet, a letter was delivered from
lord Howard, informing her, all the ar-
rangements were so near concluded, it only
required a lawyer's presence for every thing
to be settled, in which her signature was
necessary-he should quit London imme-
diately, and join the happy group at

VOL. V
218             HOWARD CASTLE.

Roachwood; he apologized for a liberty he
was taking, by giving an invitation to a
gentleman to accompany him.

   Lord Montague, who had left London
the day before, had introduced his friend
in so very particular a manner, that he
could not avoid asking him to Howard
Castle; and as he should be at Roachwood
in his way, he meant to introduce the
stranger to her. The sheet was filled
with what is not at all necessary to repeat.
Clementina was plcased with every word,
and read the cpistle more than once over:
the prospect of so soon seeing lord How-
ard was unexpected--therefore doubly de-
lightful. She communicated the agreeable
intelligence to the party at dinner.

   "Who is to accompany my nephew?"
said Mr. Waldegrave, in a very serious
tone of voice; " I ought to know if he is
a rational being, as the burden of enter-
taining him will fall entirely to my share."

   Clementina, smiling, said they should
all bear a part.

   Mr. Waldegrave shook his head--
"You," said he, "will be occupied; and
what is worse, you will occupy the atten-HOWARD CASTLE. 219

tion of others. Does Howard not even
give you the name of this visitor?"

She read aloud the part of the letter in
which he was mentioned.

"What a terrible thing is love?" said
Mr. Waldegrave; "if it once gets into the
head, every other thing is driven out: had
he given us his name, we might have got
it by heart before he arrived."

Next day, when Clementina entered the
drawing-room, elegantly dressed, Mr.
a charming thing it is to expect a lover!
Upon my word, I have not seen you shine
so much for this age; you will dazzle his
lordship with your charms: and you, my
little fairy," turning to Isabella, "wish to
have your share of admiration; you are
very gay and smart; were you not in com-
pany with Miss Bouverie, you would cut
a very good figure, and might, perhaps,
captivate his lordship's nameless compa-
nion."

They both smiled; Isabella half sup-
pressed a sigh. Dinner passed, and no ar-
rival; eight o'clock struck, and still no
L2sound of lord Howard.  Clementina wan-
dered out of doors: as the evening was mild
and delightful, Miss Waldegrave joined 
her. They slowly walked towards the ri-
ver: a distant hollow made them instantly
turn round; no one was in sight, but the 
well-known voice of lord Howard had
reached Clementina's ear; he almost im-
mediately came in view, accompanied by 
the stranger. Miss Waldegrave's strength
was not equal to the quick pace with which
her friend had advanced--she was not in
sight when the gentlemen came up.

Lord Howard flew toward Clementina, 
and fervently kissed her extended hand;
at the same time introducing the stranger, 
but in so hurried and confused a manner,
she could not distinctly hear his name.
The saw Isabella coming towards them; 
lord Howard advanced to meet her, and
after kindly inquiring after her health,
turned round and introduced his compa-
nion.

Clementina now heard him distinctly 
pronounce--"Mr. Delwin Miss Walde- 
grave." The stranger appeared mute with
astonishment, as his eyes were rivetted on
        HOWARD CASTLE.          221

Isabella, whose pale countenance at once
convinced Clementina be was the identi-
cal Mr. Delwin, for whom she had been so
much interested, in Isabella's narrative.
The agitation he was in surprised lord
Howard—he saw him strike bis breast,
and heard him exclaim—" Why am I thus
persecuted? I cannot bear the sight of
her!" At the same time, he flew from
them, and darted into the wood.

  Isabella was now the object of attention,
fainting in the arms of lord Howard, who
was petrified with astonishment—" What
can all this mean?" said he, turning to
Clementina, with the most anxious inquiry,
in bis countenance.
 
  " I cannot now explain it," said she;

  " carry Miss Waldegrave, if possible, to
the house; do not let her sink upon the
wet grass."

  He raised her in his arms, in silent asto-
nishment, and proceeded with her, pale
and insensible, her head reclining on his
shoulder: when they reached the house,
she was laid upon a bed, and every means
used to restore her to life: long their efforts
were in vain. At last she opened her eyes;222           HOWARD CASTLE.

looking wildly round her, she exclaimed
--"Why is he so soon gone? did his wife
recall him before he spoke one word to me?"

   Clementina perceived her spirits were
in such a state of agitation, that the utmost
caution was necessary to preserve her wan-
dering senses. She explained to Mr.
Waldegrave and Mrs. Conway what had
happened, and of the violent effect the
very unexpected meeting had on both.

   Lord Howard, as soon as he heard Isa-
bella was restored to animation, went in
pursuit of Mr. Delwin, whom he found
reclining against a tree, lost in thought.
The appearance of lord Howard roused
him from the reverie he had indulged in;
he was resolved not to enter the house, but
to return to the nearest inn, where he
would remain all night, and proceed to
London in the morning.  Lord Howard,
more and more surprised, begged he would
explain the meaning of the strange events
which had just taken place.

   "Do they appear strange to you, my
lord? Have I not been brought here on
purpose to meet with a woman who wan-
           HOWARD CASTLE.           223

tonly sported with my happiness? I had,
in a great measure, recovered my peace of
mind, but this meeting will destroy it for
ever."

  " Is it my relation, Miss Waldegrave,"
said lord Howard, " who has done all this
mischief? She appears to mc to have so
much meekness, and milk of human kind-
ness in her nature, that I can hardly credit
your accusations against her."

  " Did you not see, my lord," replied
Mr. Del win, in a mournful tone of voice,
" that she was afiectcd by seeing ine? she
could not bear to witness the agony of a man
who had the truest, teuderest love for her
—has she not given her vows to another,
which she had sworn should be mine?"

  " There must be a mistake in this af-
fair," said lord Howard; " Isabella lias not
plighted her faith to any one; she is inca-
pable of acting in the manner you de-
scribe."

  " I cannot now, my lord, give you the
particulars of my first acquaintance with
Mrs. Sawyer-"

  " Mr. Delwin," interrupted lord How-
ard, " the young lady you saw just now224          HOWARD CASTLE.

is Miss Waldegrave, my very near rela-
tion."

  "Pardon me," replied Mr. Delwin; "I
cannot be mistaken, her image is engraven
on my heart; the instant I saw her, I re-
cognised her to be Miss Clifford, who gave
me encouragement to hope she loved me:
at the very moment I had gained my pa-
rent's consent to marry her, I received the
most cruel horrid letter that ever was writ-
ten, entirely giving me up, after renoun-
cing all her promises; she finished by tell-
ing me, she was to be married the following
week to Mr.Sawyer. I went to a Mr. Mat-
tocks, where she lived; but I was denied
admittance—the servant said, particularly
by Miss Clifford's orders. I flew from
thence to her friend, Mrs. Herbert's, but
her house was deserted—she was gone into
the north of England. Almost bereft of
reason; I returned home, and wrote to her,
but my letters were returned with the
seals unbroken. The newspaper soon after
confirmed the information she had given,
that she was really the wife of Sawyer: I
had then no reason to doubt—all my hopes
of happiness were completely gone. In a       HOWARD CASTLE            225

fortnight after, I became the husband of
Miss Barstow- I was miserable in Eng-
land- I proposed going abroad; my wife
readily complied with every request of
mine; but a short period deprived me of
my amiable companion- she lived only a
few months, and left me sincerely to de-
plore her death. As a proof that she was
happy, she bequeathed to me the whole of
her very large fortune: I returned to my
native country; the joy I felt in seeing my
near relations tempted me to remain; but
as soon as possible will I return to my
Switzerland retreat, and never more run
the risk of suffering what I have done this
night by meeting with a woman I still
adore."

 Mr. Delwin ceased speaking.

 " Now that you have finished your sto-
ry," said lord Howard, "suffer me to tell
mine, which is by far the best of the two.
I have never heard Miss Waldegrave men-
tion your name; but I have been con-
vinced a secret sorrow preyed upon her
mind; frequent sighs escape her, and I have
even found her in tears; she has every
     

226        HOWARD CASTLE.

reason to be happy with a fond father, who
anticipates her wishes, and she is in the
midst of affectionate friends: you are, I
believe, the cause of the depression I have
watched- she will explain every thing to
you."

   Mr. Delwin shook his head.

    " I cannot," said lord Howard, "as I am
not further acquainted with the young la-
dy's history. She was Miss Clifford-is
now Miss Waldegrave- and will be, I
make no doubt, Mrs. Delwin, if all matters
are properly explained."

    "Can you be trifling with y feelings?"
cried Mr. Delwin, with visible emotion.

    "I am myself a lover, said lord How-
ard, "and have too perfect an idea of the
misery of being deceived by the woman I
adore, for me to sport with your feelings
upon so serious a subject."

    "Oh!" replied he, clasping his hands to-
gether, in an ecstasy of joy, " may I still
hope for happiness? If Isabella is free, can
she pardon me for believing her capable of
falsity and deceit?"

   "I will take the explanation of all that
upon myself," said lord Howard; " and


                 HOWARD CASTLE.         227

I will venture to assure you, the whole af-
fair will be made up in the space of half-
an-hour.“
  
  Mr. Delwin consented to return to the
house with lord Howard; he immediately
went in search of Clementina, to whom he
imparted the intelligence; she was rejoiced
at the idea of two such affectionate beings
having all obstacles removed to their hap-
piness; she gave a short history to lord
Howard of the conduct of the Mattocks's,
who had been the means of separating
them.  She entreated the subject might
not be mentioned to Isabella, who was not
in a state to bear such joy, until her spirits
were recovered.

  Mr. Delwin was prevailed upon to join
the party in the drawing-room; his hopes
were completely raised to the highest
pitch, and he gave way to anticipations of
the most pleasing nature. 228 HOWARD CASTLE.

After the party separated for the night, Clementina went to Miss Waldegrave's apartment, who had become perfectly calm and composed; after conversing with her, upon the surprise of seeing Mr. Delwin, she ventured to say-" What would you do, Isabella, if his wife were dead, and if he were to offer himself to you, after explaining the reason of his behaviour in a satistactory manner?"

" Long may Mrs. Delwin enjoy the felicity it is in her husband's power to bestow!" was her reply.

" If," said Clementina, "he were to prove at liberty to renew his addresses to you, and he were as much attached to you as ever he was, would you not willingly give him your hand?"

" Certainly I would," was her answer, " as I believe we were separated by the most artful woman in existence. I hope     HOWARD CASTLE.     299

Mr. Delwin has left the house; until he
has, I shall confine myself to my own
apartment-I shall not willingly suffer
again as much as I have done, by this un-
lucky meeting."

  "Pardon me, Isabella, if I choose to en-
tertain Mr. Delwin as my guest; he at
this moment occupies the very next apart-
ment to this, and I hope he will continue
here for some time."

  "You certainly are at liberty to choose
your company," said Isabella, "as I am
mine; to-morrow morning I hope my fa-
ther will go with me to town."

  "Why will you, Isabella, deprive me of
my beau?  If you leave me, all charms for
Mr. Delwin are fled, and I shall be deserted
by him; but be composed, and sum up all
your fortitude to listen to what will sur-
prise you, and fill you with much pleasure
-Mr. Delwin is again a single man, and
as much attached to you as ever.  I come
as an ambassador from him-he entreats
permission to see you- I have promised
him an interview with you in the morn-
ing, as he has much to say in exculpation
of his conduct.  I have so far explained
230    HOWARD CASTLE.
yours, that he is convinced all will end to
your mutual satisfaction."

  Isabella's feelings were in a tumult du-
ring this history; she would not interrupt
Clementina for the world-every word
she uttered gave her joy, and opened a
prospect of happiness so had feared was
for ever closed-"Is Delwin indeed free?"
exclaimed she, with evident transport;
"and does he still love me?"
  
  "He intrusted me," said Clementina,
"with the forged letter he received, which
drove him, amongst other aggravating cir-
cumstances, to the violent step he took."

  Isabella was anxious to examine the 
writing; it had a strong resemblance to
her own, but in many words she could
easily trace Miss Mattock's hand; at the
same time, she did not at all wonder at 
Delwin's being deceived by it. She pro-
nounced, with the utmost agitation, that 
her vile cousin had by her machinations
separated them.

  "Then let me, my dear Isabella, be the
happy means of bringing you together."

  She did not find much difficulty in 
gaining her consent to receive Mr. Del-
              HOWARD CASTLE.         231

win as formerly, and left her, not to enjoy
much sleep, but the greatest felicity.

   Clementina rose at an earlier hour than
common; her spirits were much elated with
the occurrences of the preceding evening,
and she longed to impart the pleasure she
knew her information would give. She
found lord Howard and Mr. Delwin to-
gether; anxiety had driven sleep from the
pillow of the latter, who was in a tumult
of expectation.

   The animated countenance of Clemen-
tina inspired Mr. Delsin with hope--
"The happy expression of Miss Bouve-
rie's face," said he, as he approached her,
"I prognosticate is the harbinger of peace;
you bring me good news from my Isa-
bella?"

   "You are a good physiognomist," was
her answer; "Isabella's heart is un-
changed, and she will receive you as for-
merly--only you ought to apprize Mr.
Waldegrave of what is passing."

   "And what is likely to pass," said lord
Howard, archly.

   Mr. Delwin, who was all alacrity, agreed
in the opinion; and as he had seen Mr.
232              HOWARD CASTLE.

Waldegrave, not a minate before, walking
in the , he would not lose a moment
in disclosing to him his happy prospect,
and to solicit his permission to address his
daughter as(what he had long been) her
lover.

Lord Howard and Clementina were left
alone, for the first time since his arrival;
during the half-hour which they had to
themselves before breakfast was ready, he
gained her consent that their marriage
should take place the following month,
when six months from her father's death
would be expired: she knew it was the
period prescribed by modern custom for 
her mourning to be put off; and she firm-
ly believed it was a change would have
given her beloved parent the greatest sa-
tisfaction -- yet she felt it was a very sud-
den one, from a dress which had been ac-
companied by such poignant sorrow, to
that of a bridal garment; there was no 
time for her to appear in coloured clothes,
it must therefore be a very quick transi-
tion.

  Lord Howard entreated, with such ear-
nest solicitude, she could not withstand         HOWARD CASTLE.      233

doing what her own heart whispered her
would be the happiest event of her life.
Isabella did not appear at breakfast; she
received Mr. Delwin in the library, where
all their griefs were forgot in the joy of
again meeting.

   The party left Roachwood the following
day, except Clementina, who kept stea-
dily to her plan of visiting her aunt, lady
Radnor, where she meant to remain till
near the time fixed for her marriage taking
place. Lord Howard had managed mat-
ters so cautiously, that few suspected their
engagement.

   Clementina remained a fortnight at
Colnbrook, without betraying the secret;
she was, however, resolved to inform her
aunt, before she left the house, as she
meant to solicit her company and lord Rad-
nor's to witness the ceremony: he being
her nearest relation, she hoped would act
as a parent, and give her hand to lord
Howard. She likewise intended to petition
lady Elenora's being her bridemaid, and 
hoped she would promise to accompany
her to London, if she was still lade Eleno-
ra; but the marquis's attentions were be-234           HOWARD CASTLE.

come so pointed, she suspected her cousin
would not long be her own mistress. One
week only remained before she was to be
united to the man whom she sincerely
loved to the man whom she sincerely
loved--she felt perfectly tranquil, and
perfectly happy. When she named the
day she must quit her friends at Calnbrook,
they all endeavoured to urge her stay;
she could have no inducement to return to
her home, which must be solitary and
dismal.

   "Why not, my dear Clementina," said
lady Radnor, kindly taking her hand,
"spend as much of your time here as your
engagements to your friends will permit?
You have paid Mrs. Conway a long visit;
you are not surely going again to Howard
Castle? Your society enlivens us, and this
place cannot be so dull as Roachwood."

   Clementina was resolved not to impart
her information, which she was convinced
would surprise them, until the moment of
her departure: she parried her aunt's kind
invitation, assuring her she was happy in their
society, but she was forced to leave them.
Lady Elenora and Mr. Montague teazed
her to comply; the latter had given proofs
     HOWARD CASTLE.             235

to Clementina, his heart was not uninte-
rested in the request. She had been guard-
ed in her behaviour to him; still she feared
he cherished hopes, which would soon be
crushed; she hinted her engagement to
him—no hint would do; at last she was
obliged to tell him, the day was fixed for
her marriage with lord Howard.

  He appeared thunderstruck with the
information, and was for a few moments
silent; at last he said—" I at one time
suspected lord Howard was attached to
you—your parting at Howard Castle con-
vinced me I was mistake) i, for long I be-
lieved you were the destined wife of my
brother: you so solemnly assured me to
the contrary, that I believed you, and
thought you free; still I struggled to sup-
press a passion, which I feared would never
meet with a return—I have forborne visit-
ing you—I have avoided your society;
but your coming to Colnbrook undid every
resolution; I again enjoyed the pleasure
of conversing with you, of walking with
you, of attending you wherever you went;
you treated me with friendship and dis-
tinction; I could not discriminate, but
286          HOWARD CASTLE.  

suffered myself to be filled with intoxica-
ting hope."

  " Let the attachment you have formed,"
said Clementina, " be converted into a
brotherly affection; feel for me as you do
for Elenora, and let me share as a sister
your regard."

  She gave him her hand, which he press-
ed to his lips with fervour; the agitation
he was in rendered him incapable of
speaking; she hoped his good sense would
conquer, and that she should enjoy the
esteem and friendship of a man for whom
she entertained the highest regard. She
could not, with all the persuasion she was
mistress of, prevail upon him to accompany
the family to Roachwood. He promised
to pay her a visit at Howard Castle, but
he could not witness the ceremony. He
handed her into her carriage, with seeming
composure, retaining her hand after she
wrs seated, and pressing it with fervour to
his lips, before he could part with it for
ever.

  Clementina felt sorry for her amiable re-
lation, whose love she wished had been
fixed where he might have met with a re-
        HOWARD CASTLE.            237

turn. She had much to occupy her
thoughts and time during the short space
she was to be at Roachwood alone. Lord
Howard expressed, by frequent letters, the
anxiety he felt tor their again meeting; she
had so strictly forbidden his coming until
the day appointed (which was the one pre-
vious to the ceremony being performed,
when the party were to meet), that he was
forced to comply: her steady resolution,
that she would receive no company, kept
every one at a distance.

  Early in the morning of the day when
her prohibition had expired, she saw a very
splendid carriage approaching at a quick
rate; she instantly suspected who was in
it, and watched, without surprise, lord
Howard descend from it—"You cannot
be angry," said he, as he flew towards her,
" that I have seized the first opportunity I
was permitted to approach you. I spent
the night at a little inn near you, and set
off as soon as I thought my company
might be admitted—never, never more to
leave Miss Bouveric. My mother (how
soon will that word my be annihilated, and
pleasing ours be substituted!), my uncle,238.        HOWARD CASTLE.     

Isabella, and Delwin, will be here to din-
ner - I could not resist having an hour or
two of your company before they arrived;
I stole off yesterday without imparting 
my plan to any one."

  Clementina neither felt, nor pretended to
be, angry; she received him as he could 
wish, and they spent a delightful morning
together: he presented her with a most 
magnificent set of jewels, adding, that 
Mr. Waldegrave was determined to eclipse 
his present, as he had got some of the finest diamonds he ever saw, elegantly set, which 
he meant to offer as a marriage-gift. 
Clementina expressed her admiration of 
those he had brought, which she thought 
could not be surpassed in beauty.

  Before five o'clock, Clementina was sur-
rounded by her friends, and the day passed
more agreeably than she expected. 
Mr. Waldegrave would have his joke, but in 
so moderate a manner, that he did not, in 
the smallest degree, discompose her feelings.

  At ten o'clock the following morn-
ing, lord Radnor gave Clementina's hand 
to lord Howard, who received the gift 
with transport, and cherished it with ten-            HOWARD CASTLE.        239

derness as long as he lived, being fully sen-
sible of the inestimable treasure he possess-
ed. After the ceremony was performed,
the whole party set off for Howard Castle;
where, to lady Howard's surprise, the first
person who presented himself was Mr.
Montague; he handed her from the car-
riage, with a flush upon his cheek--he sa-
luted her, wishing her joy--and, with seem-
ing sincerity, shook lord Howard cordially
by the hand, and expressed pleasure at the
connexion between the two families. Lord
Howard accepted his congratulations with
much seeming complacency, asking him,
at the same time, why he had not treated
him as a relation, and been present at the
ceremony?

   "No," replied Mr. Montague; "I can,
with much composure, salute my cousin
as lady Howard, and with sincerity of
heart wish her every happiness which the
married state can enjoy, when I could not,
with any degree of comfort, see her be-
stowed even on you, my lord; and I think
you are worthy of her, which is the high-
est compliment words can convey."240     HOWARD CASTLE.

  "It is a compliment," said lord How-
ard, "and as such I thank you."

  Mr. Montague was in much better spi-
rits than lady Howard expected to see
him, after their late conference at Coln-
brook: his so soon joining them after their
marriage gave her pleasure; if he had de-
layed his visit, it would have made their
meeting more formidable. A week passed
in the calm enjoyment of domestic happi-
ness; the Colnbrook family left them,
after remaining two days at Howard Cas-
tle, lady Elenora promising to be lady
Howard's guest in London during the
gay months: she owned the attachment of
the marquis of Clemaire, but their mar-
riage was not likely to take place for some
time: she proved mistaken, as, soon after
Christmas, she became the marchioness of
Clemaire, and lady Augusta Sydney the
duchess of Bridgenorth. Isabella would
con consent to change her name until Mr.
Delwin had mourned a proper time for his
amiable wife, by whom he was possessed
of a fine fortune. His family paid Miss
Waldegrave every attention, and antici-Howard Castle.     241

pated the pleasure they should have in the
connexion.

Lady Howard left the country, with re-
gret, for the gaieties of London. Mrs.
Conway was completely happy; she had
not a wish ungratified--her beloved son
married to her dearest friend--her brother 
resolved to spend the remainder of his life
 in her society==and her niece, restored to
health and happiness, on the point of form-
ing a desirable connexion with an amia-
ble young man.

 Mr. Waldegrave took an elegant house 
near Howard Castle, where he proposed
Mrs. Conway and he should live together.
Lord and lady Howard started many ob-
jections to their ever separating. Lady 
Howard, with tears in her eyes, urged her
mother, her beloved friend, not to leave
M; but Mr. Waldegrave's heart was so 
set upon the arrangement, she was forces
to yield, but with the mutual promise they
should seldom be separated. Mr. Walde-
grave declined the hurry and bustle of
London, and retired to their new habita-
tion, taking with him Delwin and Isabel-

   VOL. V.
242           HOWARD CASTLE.

ia, who likewise preferred a quiet life to
the gaiety of Pall-Mall.

   Mrs. Conway accompanied her son and
daughter to their town risidence, where
lady Howard was soon involved in public
amusements and private parties: she was
again followed with eyes of admiration.
Lord Howard, with pride, saw her beauty
unrivalled, and her society sought with
avidity: no jealous sting now rankled in
his bosom, in spite of her being the object
of general attention; he had perfect confi-
dence in her affection, as he knew he pos-
sessed her whole heart.

   Miss Osburn was ready to expire with
envy, when she beheld lady Howard, sur-
rounded with splendor, and encircled with
admirers: she found her machinations to
destroy her fair fame had been totally
without effect--she shrunk from eh pre-
sence of both lord and lady Howard; their
total neglect of her proved they knew she
had endeavoured to ruin their happiness;
conscience smote her to the quick, but all
her feeling of regret was, that she had so
completely failed.

   Mrs. Conway, with anxiety, inquired        HOWARD CASTLE.     243

after the Mattocks's; who, after a two
months' stay at Southampton, had return-
ed to the city in despair, as their daugh-
ter had decamped wiht an Irish fortune-
hunter, who had lost at play all the fortune
she had independent of her father.  He
introduced himself to Mr. Mattocks, by
demanding the sum of ten thousand
pounds, which he had of his; it was be-
come his property, in consequence of his
being the husband of Miss Mattocks.
Thus fell to the ground the gay plans
which Mrs. Mattocks had formed, of ri-
ding in her daughter's coronet coach.

  Lady Almeria Villyers was still flutter-
ing in the beau monde, and flirting with
a;; the sprigs of fashion.  She exerted her-
self to pay her compliments to lady How-
ard, who being the matron of high ton,
made it necessary to renew the acquaint-
ance, which otherwise she certainly would
have dropped.  Having it in her power to
say she had been at the Opera with her
friend lady Howard, or that she was en-
gaged to be of lady Howard's party at the
theatre, was as much as lady Almeria
wished.244             HOWARD CASTLE.
A letter arrived from lord Montague,
congratulating lord Howard on his mar-
riage; and one to lady Howard, reminding
her of the scheme he had imparted to her
at Howard Castle, when she was the wife
of his friend (which he rejoiced she now
was): they were to visit the beauties of Na-
ture, guided by him; his Louisa should
return to England under her protection-
she should introduce her to his family, us
her eloquence could accomplish what he
durst not attempt--and she would recon-
cile his parents to his wife, and to his love-
ly boy.: he ended by saying, “ I still claim
happiness at your hands.”
The receipt of' those letters determined
lord Howard on taking his beloved Cle-
mentina to Switzerland; what could he
half so delightful as wandering amidst the
finest scenery in the world, with- such n
companion? when they were in France
together, there was a restraint in her man-
ner, which now, of course, was completely
gone: he then thought her the most beau-
tiful. woman he had ever seen, and her
manners particularly pleasing. Every day
since she had been his wife, he discovered,
HOWARD CASTLE.    245

that, added to her personal charms, she had
every endowment to render her the most 
delightful companion in the world--a fund
of sense, and a flow of spirits.

He wrote to lord Montague, very rea-
dily complying with his request, and fix-
ing after the birthday was over, they
should quit the metropolis of England, and
repair to Geneva, where he hoped they
should meet with him.

Early in June, Isabella was united to
her beloved Delwin, and was presented by
lady Howard at court. Mrs. Conway had
long wished to see the famed beauties of
Switzerland; she and Mr. Waldegrave re-
solved to accompany the party. Mr. Del-
win and his Isabella were delighted with
the expedition; Mr. Delwin's house was
ready for their reception, as he neither
would part with his servants, nor rob it of
its furniture, until he found if his spirits
would permit him to remain in his native
land. All gloom was dispersed from his
bosom; he should rejoice to visit his sweet
retreat, where he could enjoy and admire
the many beauties it possessed.

Never did a happier group set off on an246          HOWARD CASTLE.

expedition; the weather favoured them,
and nature seemed decked in its gayest at-
tire; they travelled slow--they were so
pleased with the part of England through
which they passed, that they stopped to
see the various beautiful places which were
continually presenting themselves.

   Clementina was enthusiastic in her ad-
miration of fine scenery; she was charmed
with the bold face nature put on as they
advanced into the mountainous regions
which form a barrier to the country they
were going to visit. Mrs. Conway, whose
fears upon the sea had been wonderfully
less than when she had crossed it with
Clementina, was somewhat roused by the
rugged and steep ascents they had often to
scramble over; the sensation of terror gave
way, in most instances, to the pleasure she
enjoyed in coming unexpectedly to the
most romantic valley, or bold cataract, with
which all hilly countries abound. Cle-
mentina's pencil was often successfully
used in sketching the most beautiful land-
scapes, which invite the artist by their
beauty and variety of interesting objects.
Lord Howard never before saw half the            HOWARD CASTLE.       247

charms which he now did--he was delighted
with the office of guide, and had the highest
gratification in leading them to the most
celebrated scenes, where he watched the
faithful representation which lady Howard
took; he was delighted with her taste, and 
the correctness of her eye.

   Lord Montague was too impatient to
meet with the party to wait for their arri-
val at Geneva: to their surprise and plea-
sure, he joined them on the borders of
Switzerland, and, with unfeigned joy, he
saluted lady Howard, and sincerely con-
gratulated lord Howard: he felt no pang
in beholding her the wife of his friend,
but was perfectly happy in possessing her
esteem and regard. Every day his lover
for his amiable Louisa became stronger.
They trifled off their time in the most
agreeable manner, striking off the road to
every famed point of view; the gentlemen
were all intimately acquainted with the
scenery, except Mr. Waldegrave, but
none of them had ever admired it so much
before.

   Lady Montague's absence was often re-
gretted, but her darling William kept her248         HOWARD CASTLE

at home. Lady Howard heard lord Mon-
tague profuse in their praise, and with a
father's fondness describe the charms of his
son.

  They at last arrived at Geneva, from
whence, after staying one night, the party
separated. Lord and lady Howard, ac-
companied by lord Montague, set out for
his cottage; the rest for Mr. Delwin's.
Lady Montague was not apprized of their
coming; her lord knew the pleasure she
would feel in the presence of lady How-
ard, and meant to give her an agreeable
surprise. The beauty of the country
around Geneva struck lady Howard with 
its rich and peculiar beauties; she recol-
lected the letter of lord Montague, in
which he had given her a description of the
situation of his house; she found he had
not painted the rich scenery in too glow-
ing colours, as it was a continued success-
sion of every thing which could constitute
the finest landscape in the world.

  Lord Montague stopped the carriage at 
a distance from the house, as he wished
lady Montague might have no previous
notice of their approach; he had concealedfrom her his motive for going to Geneva,
or how long he should be absent. Cle-
mentina saw with pleasure the animation
which sparkled in his eye, as he hurried along,
eager to meet his wife and his son, and to
introduce them both to his beloved friend.
  Lord Howard wished lady Montague
might be apprized of their visit, but he in-
sisted upon their accompanying him; at
the same time drawing lady Howard's arm
within his, as they had to ascend a steep
bank, which was beautifully shaded with 
sweet-scented shrubs: at last the white
walls of the cottage appeared, and lord
Mantague's agitation increased--"In that
calm and retired retreat," said he, "I have
spent some hours of bitter sorrow; and
there I have enjoyed returning peace; I
there mourned over what I believed had
for ever ruined my happiness--there I ex-
erted my reason, perused your letters, and
followed your injunctions, which secured
my domestic enjoyments.  You made me
study Louisa's temper--it was the most
amiable in the world; you bade me
cultivate her understanding-I did so, with
the utmost care. and she has rewarded.250              HOWARD CASTLE.

my labours by proving a companion who
ean amuse me in my solitude; by slow de-
grees she has won my heart, and fixed it
irrevocably hers."

    Lord Howard, with pleasure, heard this
little soliloquy, which seemed not to be
addressed to any one, but merely the effu-
sions of an affectionate heart on the point
of meeting with a beloved object: they
reached the gates, which opened into a lit-
tle lawn where the house was placed.

    Lord Montague's plan of secrecy was
completely frustrated by a French dog;
who was disturbed by their entrance; he
came grumbling and barking towards
them; his joy at finding his master made
him still more noisy.  The uproar his fa-
vourite made drew William to the spot;
he advanced with a whip in his hand,
meaning to correct him, but when he saw
two people he had never seen before, and
in his mamma's garden, he stood for a
moment irresolute what to do, his whip
still held up in a threatening attitude.  His
appearance struck lord and lady Howard;
he was the loveliest boy they had ever
seen- his beautiful chestnut hair curled to



           HOWARD CASTLE.        251
the crown of his head, and shaded part of
his open and expressive countenance,
which bore a strong resemblance to lord
Montague; his eyes were large and dark,
his brown skin evidently tinged by the 
sun, his red checks and stout figure be-
spoke health and strength, whilst his no-
ble independent air proved he was not the 
child of plebeian parents.
   Lord Montague stood a moment to con-
template his darling boy; then looking
towards his friends, with eyes of exulta-
tion, caught him in his arms, and pressed 
him with ardour to his fond proud heart,
at the same time almost smothering him
with kisses. William returned his affec-
tionate embrace, rejoicing at again seeing 
him; but still he eyed the strangers with 
a mixture of fear and suspicion.
   Lord Montague eagerly inquired where 
his mamma was, as he looked with disap-
pointment into an elegant little library
which opened to the lawn, where she
usually sat. An attendant appearing with
William's hat, informed her master, that 
lady Montague was in the garden, and left
orders for master Montague to go to her,252             HOWARD CASTLE.

when he had got his dinner. Lord Mon-
tague dismissed the servant,and proceeded
with his little prattling guide, who never
ceased talking to his delighted father.
   Lord and lady Howard followed, enjoy-
ing the delightful scene ; every beauty sur-
rounded them-it appeared as if they had
got into paradise, and were conducted by 
a little cherb. He led then through a
wilderness, which seemed so intricate as
to render fear of intrusion unnecessary ;
sometimes descending by steps cat in the
rock, which arched over their heads, and
from which were suspended beautiful plants, hanging in all the wild luxuriance
of nature ; a little rapid stream rushing by
them with incredible fury, dashing from
rock to rock. Lord Montague took his
son in his arms, as he wished to proceed
rather quicker than his infant steps were qual to.
   Lord Howard expressed the surprise he
felt at the beautiful pleasure-ground,which
appeared very extensive.
   "It os of very little value," replied lord
Montague, " as there is hardly any soil-
the rocks(I can hardly call it ground) I
             HOWARD CASTLE.          253

purchased in a very rude state; Louisa
and I have made it what you see; Nature
seconded our wishes, as the flowers we
have planted have grown in a wonderful
manner; it was clothed with trees, or ra-
ther brushwood of various kinds, when we
began our labours."

  A bold projection of a rock had hid a 
snug little garden from their view--" Ah!"
exclaimed lord Montague, who led the
way, " I see my Louisa busily employed."

  Her back was towards them; they ad-
vanced without her perceiving any one
was near; lord Montague, unwilling to
alarm her, desired William to go to her;
but he screamed " mamma," as soon as he
thought his little voice could reach her.
She looked up; her basket of matting was
soon thrown aside, when she saw the
group who were approaching; she instant-
ly recognised lord Montague, and flew to
meet him with extended arms.

  Lord and lady Howard were at Liberty 
to enjoy the scene, which gave them the 
utmost pleasure; they saw in lady Mon-
tague the most engaging picture; her
254            HOWARD CASTLE.

lovely countenance beaming with every
expression of affection and joy, as she was
folded to the bosom of her beloved lord;
her son pulling her by the arm, to listen
to his account how lie had met with lord
Montague, and two men with him, and
that he had shewn them the way to her.
His father smiled at the account; lie had
never before seen a lady in a riding-habit,
which lady Howard wore.

  Lady Montague gracefully advanced to-
wards them, tears of pleasure trembling in
her eyes. Lady Howard thought she had
never seen a more interesting female; her
elegant figure, expressive countenance, and
the simple but graceful manner with which
she approached them, and welcomed them
to her peaceful dwelling, charmed them—
" Ah!" exclaimed she, " this day will be
marked, in my memory, as one of the hap-
piest I ever spent; it has restored my be-
loved lord to me, and introduced to our
humble abode the most amiable of her
sex."

  " Lord Montague," said lady Howard,
as she hastened to meet lady Montague,        HOWARD CASTLE.     255

"was so happy in seeing you and his son,
that he entirely forgot we were strangers to
you, and required an introduction."

  She answered--"Although my lord
never flattered me with the hopes of seeing
you here, yet i was certain there could not
be two such women in the world as Cle-
mentina and yourself."

  Lord Montague at that moment joined
them, and presented lade Montague to
lord Howard, who had been a silent spec-
tator, but not an indifferent one, of what
was passing; he was charmed with the ro-
mantic habitation of his friend, and with
the lovely inhabitants.

  "You," said lord Montague, turning to
Clementina, "were acquainted with my
Louisa before you saw her; and she knew 
you, from hearing me minutely describe
you. And oh!" said he, joining their
hands together, "let me anticipate happi-
ness to come; and allow me to hope you
will be sisters in affection; and that we
shall spend the remainder of our days in
mutual friendship, and mutual confidence,
is my sincere wish. Can I pay my Louisa256              HOWARD CASTLE.

a higher compliment than by saying I be-
lieve her worthy of lady Howard's love and
protection?"

  "And I trust it will be mutual," said
lady Howard, retaining Louisa's hand in
hers; and that we shall profit by the
friendship of each other."

  Lady Montague fervently pressed lady
Howard's hand to her lips, and exclaimed,
with energy-"It will always be my study
to deserve the affection of one I so highly
value, and whose good opinion I shall ever
study to merit."

  Lady Howard expressed a wish to ex-
tend her walk a little farther, and proceed-
ed into the garden, part of which she
found was dedicated to botanieal research-
es. There was a summer -house near, in
which, lady Montague said, they had their
books on botany, and lore Montague,
who was particularly fond of the study,
gave her lessons on it, and on astronomy
-"And I now," added she," can amuse
myself with my studies when he is absent,
which is very seldom; but during his visit
to England, I made a considcrable addition

 to our collection of plants, and he seemed pleased when he returned, that I had not neglected our favourite pursuit."

The gentlemen had walked to some distance, where there was a remarkable fine view; but as there was a great deal of scrambling to the summit of a rock, from which there was an extensive prospect of the Alps, &c. lady Howard preferred wandering whit lady Montague, and little William, who became more reconciled to the pretty gentlemen, which was the name he called her by. 

Lady Montague described in the most artless simple language, the happiness of their retired life, and the feeling of regret which she had, when lord Montague hinted a wish for her being introduced to his family-" In this section," said she, "I have tasted the most perfect felicity human nature is capable of enjoying; my days have glided smoothly on, marked only by the increasing affection and attention of my beloved husband ; the only cause for a moment's measiness is, the ida that connexion he has formed with me has separated him from his family. 258         HOWARD CASTLE.

Alas! lady Howard, had I not been the
wife of your cousin, might they not have
been honoured by your being nearer allied
to them than you now are?"

   Clementina coloured at these words,
which were said in so artless a manner
that she could not be displeased with them
--"No," replied lady Howard; "lord and
lady Radnor never wished lord Montague
to marry me; they had fixed upon a lady
with a very large fortune, whom they cer-
tainly intended their son to be united to;
and happy is it for him that he had formed
an engagement with you, as she is a wo-
man who would have rendered him
wretched. No, my dear lady Montague,
they will witness his felicity, when they
see him your husband, happy in an affec-
tionate good-tempered wife, and blessed
with such a son as this little fellow is."

   William was displaying his rising ge-
nius for botany, as he was bringing speci-
mens of the various flowers, and lisping
their names to lady Howard. They en-
tered the temple, which was of rude work-
manship, as it had been entirely formed
by lord Montague and their Swiss ser-                    HOWARD CASTLE.        259

vant, who was gardener, footman, and ar-
chitect; the inside displayed the more de-
licate work of lady Montague, who had
ornamented it with fossils and various
kinds of moss, the produce of the neigh-
bouring mountains. A large book was 
laid upon a table, which stood in the mid-
dle of this delightful retreat; it contained
a curious collection of dried plants, and a
history annexed to each, written in lord
Montague's hand-"This," said lady Mont-
ague, "is a joint work; my part is the
care of expanding the leaves, and shewing
the flowers to the best advantage; my lord
gives a botanical account of each, which 
improves my knowledge: perhaps you
will be surprised when I tell you, we have
had specimens of most of the plants which
are arrranged in this book, in our garden.
Those globes," said she, "have been a
 kind of great amusement to me; the ter-
restrial has given me a knowledge of the
world, which raises the ingenuity of man
high in my estimation; but the sublime
study of the celestial raises my feelings
above mortality: in a clear star-light even-
ing, when our little William is gone to260         Howard Castle.

bed, we often retire to this place, and con-
template the heavenly bodies, which are so
wonderfully correctly represented on this
ball. How I revere the abilities of your 
countryman, sir Isaac Newton! and how
I envy the knowledge of the great astro-
nomers! This glass," continued she, point-
ing to a large case, "is one my lord bought 
some time ago; and which is of infinite
service in contemplating the heavenly
sphere."

  Lady Howard declared her incapacity
to converse with her on such a subject, and 
owned she should like such rational stu-
dies far beyond superficial accomplish-
ments.

  Lady Montague smiled, and taking her
hand, said-"I know what talents you
possess; nature has been bountiful to you
in every way, and nature has been culti-
vated with the greatest care: have you not
the voice of a siren? have you not every 
accomplishment which can grace a female?
Ah! lady Howard, I know your poweres of
pleasing too well to call your acquirements
superficial."

  "They are, indeed," replied Clementina;           HOWARD CASTLE.         261

"have I not found you, in the bosom of
retirement- a botanist- an astronomer?"

   "It is in retirement alone," answered
she, with quickness, " that those pursuits
can be attended to: you know our history
-you know that from lord Montague I
have gained all the knowledge I have: he
spent a year in my father's house at Berne;
there he instructed me in the language of
his country- he taught me to read and
speak English; and he there taught me to
love. I was an apt scholar- each word he
uttered was engraven on my heart; he
was surprised with the progress I made.
You know he there married me; can I say
I was happy, when I saw my beloved lord
the reverse? No! I often bitterly repented
the sacrifice I had suffered him to make;
for above a year after we parted at Gene-
va, I never saw him; I nursed my little
William in the mountains of Savoy, and
there traced, in his infant features, the
image of his father, from whom I received
letters from time to time, but they
breathed not the energy of love which I
felt for him; many an agonizing tear have
I shed over my lovely boy. A long si-
  262    HOWARD CASTLE.     

dence at last ensued—it was during his ill-
ness at Carnsworth Castle—Oh! what were
my sufferings! many were the tedious
weeks I spent in vain expectation and
constant disappointment; but at last all
was repaid by his arrival: I had returned
to Berne, where I had a greater chance of
hearing of him; judge of my feelings
when he appeared—he in whom all my
happiness centered, and who I believed I
should never have again seen!  He was
melancholy, and his figure was altered;
but the animation of his countenance,
when I presented my boy to him, cheered
my heart.  He folded him in his arms—he
gazed on his sweet face, and even shed
tears of parental fondness over him: he
purchased this place, and conducted me to
it—it appeared to me a paradise, and one I
have found it; as, since I have entered its peaceful walls, my happiness has daily in-
creased.  Lord Montague's spirits return-
ed; he taught me to love you—he read
your letters to me, and each that arrived
increased my admiration: we watched
with solicitude the growth and improve-
ment of our son; he could lisp my name            HOWARD CASTLE.            263

when his father first saw him; and I have
strove all I cold to teach him to say pa-
pa, but I never could; and to this hour he
names him after me, Montague, and no
other appellation will he give him.  Our
studies became, next to William, interest-
ing; and I now have the happiness of
being thoroughly convinced I possess my
husband's whole affections."

   "You are worthy of them," said lady
Howard, and who was charmed with the nai-
veté with which lady Montague had given
her this little narrative.

   William at that moment entered the
temple, with a butterfly he had caught, and
which he presented to lady Howard.

   "Whom," said his mother, drawing him
towards her, "do you love, next to Mon-
tague and me?"

   "Clementina," said he, struggling to
get from her.

   Lady Howard, who was surprised to hear
her own name so distinctly pronounced,
took hold of his hand, which he had ex-
tended towards her--"I am Clementina,
come to see you."

   "You are a man," replied he, with much264          HOWARD CASTLE.

firmness; "Clementina is like mamma; you are like Montague, but prettier."

As he said these words, the gentleman entered the temple, and were amused with William's discriminating powers. They returned to the elegant little mansion to prepare for dinner.


           CHAPTER IX.

WHEN lady Howard entered the library, she found lady Montague and William alone; lord Howard had hurried over the task of the toilet, and had again walked out with lord Montague. William shrunk towards his mother, when he saw a stranger entered: lady Howard desired he would come and she hoe well the nosegay he had presented her with looked in her turban, where she had pinned it.

"No," said he, "I gave it to the pretty gentleman, not to you."

"I am Clementina, come from England to see you."       HOWARD CASTLE       265
he looked with an incredulous eye; and
not till lady Montague had assured him it
was so, would he approch lady Howard,
and seemed disappointed he should not see
his friend again, whom he admired so much
uin the garden. Much to his joy, next
morning , at breakfast, lady Howard ap-
pared in her riding-habit, and convinced
him it was the dress, not the person, who
changed.
  The time slipped imperceptibly away at
lord Montague's cottage. Mrs.Conway,
Mr.Waldegrave, and the Delwins, joined
in all the excursions they formed. Lord
and lady Montage were delighted to see
theirmelancholy neighbourmetamorphosed
into one of the happiest of human beings.
Louisa and Isabella became mutually fond
of each other-the same gentle nature
seemed to fill the bosoms of each; whilst
the animation of lady Howard kept the
party alive, and rendered all their intricate
adventures amusing and delightful.
  The scenes which Rousseau has no mi-
nutely described did not pass without strict
examination. the dark rocks of Mellerie,
   VOL. V.       N  266                HOWARD CASTLE.

and the gloomy coast of Chablais, did not
escape observation; St. Peter's island, in
the wildly romantic lake of Biennne, the last
residence on Switzerland of that extraor-
dinary character, was a scene of much in-
terest to the party. There he was allowed
to remain only two months, during which
time he employed himself in botanical re-
searches; he neither read, studied, nor wrote,
but gave himself up to the enthusiastic ad-
miration of nature. Every plant was in-
teresting to lady Howard, as it perhaps
had been admired by Rousseau; she culled
the most beautiful of them, and gathered
seed of different species, which she intend-
ed to sow in England. They climbed the
Jalimint, famed for the beauty of its pro-
spects-they admired, as it deserved, the
sublime and grand outline Nature had, in
a sportive mood, formed.

  Mr. Waldegrave was much astonished
with the fantastic shape of the mountains,
and sullen grandeur of the huge and tre-
mendous masses of rock, which seemed
piled one upon another by a great convul-
sion of nature. He had lived long in so
different a country, that he had formed no          HOWARD CASTLE.          267
idea of any thing so wild. The Alps, with 
their snow-clad tops, reaching almost be-
yond human sight-the rich cultivation
and luxuriant green in the lower regions,
forming a striking contrast-the fine
smooth body of water of the lake of Ge-
neva, its beautiful margin, and the castle
of Chillon,with its massive walls and square
towers,built on a rock in the lake,enchant-
ed him; the long ridge of the variegated 
Jura, and the different views of mount
Blane, threw him into raptures. He al-
most resolved to posses one of the cot-
tages, which would so soon be deserted;
but how should he enjoy those scenes,
when he had no companion to point out
the varied and admired prospect to, or to 
describe the sensation of the pleasure they 
gave him? Society of those he loved, he
believed, would be preferable to all the pic-
turesque views in the world; but he made 
a proposal, which was readily assented to,
that the cottages would be kept ready for
their reception, and that the summer fol-
lowing the same party should visit them.
    
    After they had spent many weeks in ex-
           
        N2
ploring the wonder which surronded
them, the yellow tints of the leaves, and
the cold winds which began to blow from
the snow-clad mountains, reminded them
of their return to their native island, which,
though it had not such wild nature to
boast of, had more comforts; and they de-
termined to quit Switzerland before the 
weather began to make travelling unplea-
sant.
  Lady Montaque had entered into plan,
which lady Howard proposed, of intro-
ducing her to lord Mantague's family as a 
Swiss lady, who had accompanied them on
a visit to England, and her little son as her
nephew.  She felt exceedingly low-spirited
at the thoughts of quitting her sweet habi-
tation, where she had enjoyed such perfect
happiness.  Lady Howard she thought the
most agreeable man, next to her adored
Montaque, she had ever see; Mr. Wal-
degrave amused her, and Mrs. Conway
pleased her; Mrs. Delwin's manners were
peculiarly charming-she admired all; but
still she dreaded quitting her native coun-
try.        HOWARD CASTLE.     269

  The morning before their departure,
lady Howard followed her to the garden,
where she suspected she should find her
indulging her melancholy; she perceived
her slowly wandering amongst her favour-
ite plants; she strove to conceal the marks
of sorrow, which lady Howard quickly
perceived--"I come," said she, "not to
upbraid you for thus giving way to your
feelings, but to argue with you upon the
grief you express at quitting this retire-
ment, where your charms have bloomed,
but must not wither."

  "Ah," replied Louisa, "does not Mon-
tague constitute the world to me?--have
we not spent the most traquil days in this
retreat?--have I not received the most
perfect proofs of his love, confidence, and
happiness?  True, I was all to him, com-
panion--friend--confident; in this seclu-
sion we hung on each other for our amuse-
ments; if he walked, I was with him--if
he worked in the garden, I was his assist-
ant; in botany, in astronomy, his pursuits
were to give me knowledge; when he
read, it was aloud to me, and he was grati-
fied with my remarks on the different au-
270                HOWARD CASTLE.

thos. The pleasing task of instructing
our little boy was mutual--no one action
was independent of each other. Can I ex-
pect in this manner to occupy his attention
in his own country?--will not the nume-
rous friends and relations he will meet with
divide his affections?--shall I not appear,
when surrounded by the gay and beautiful
females, of whom I have had such a spe-
cimen, awkward, and different in his eyes
from what I do here? My little studies
will no longer amuse him--they will appear
trivial and insignificant, when compared
to the accomplished Englishwomen, their
sprightly conversation, their elegant ease,
their beautiful forms."

   "Oh," exclaimed lady Howard, "you
are, my dear Louisa, too humble as to
your own merits, and you are wounding
lord Montague in a most terrible manner;
his affections centre in you; and in the
grand Turk's seraglio, where the most
lovely women in existence are, you would
be the object of his attention; fear not his
seeing you in the first circles; he will ne-
ver make a comparison, which can in any
way tend to lessen you in his estimation:HOWARD CASTLE. 271

when you are surrounded with society,
you may not enjoy so much of his com-
pany as in this solitude, where there was
not one for a moment to occupy his atten-
tion from you and your child; but you
will enjoy the same affection, the same
confidence and esteem, as you do at this
moment-you would wish him to asso-
ciate with his friends, and not to hang on
you for all his amusements. Lord How-
ard, who I may with truth say, shews me
every mark of affection, which I believe is
sincere, has many amusements independ-
ent of me, and you must lay your account
with lord Montague's being far less with
you when in England than in Switzer-
land; but still that he loves you quite as
well, never for a moment doubt-never
suspect there can be the slightest dinninu-
tion in his affection."

"No," said Louisa, with firmness, "I
shall never give way to jealousy; you mis-
take me, if you think that ever entered in-
to my head; but still, shall I be as happy
as when I had so much of his company-
when I imparted every thought to him,
and he was my only companion-he, who272        HOWARD CASTLE.

has taught me the value of existence, and
the use of time?"

   "If you were to continue dead to all the
world," replied lady Howard, "and wan-
der on in this pleasing dream of happiness,
and lord Montague were to be taken from
you, or your little boy to die, what would
become of you?"

   "What would become of me in Eng-
land?" cried Louisa, with quickness; "who
could mitigate my sorrow, bereft of my
husband? I would fly from the world,
and in this retirement cherish in idea the
days of felicity I have spent. This tem-
ple, reared by his hand, should be my fa-
vourite haunt--those flowers, planted by
him, should be watered by my tears--every
rock, every view, that was admired by him,
would I daily visit, and daily put up my
prayers to the Almighty, to shorten my
probation in this world, and supplicate,
with all the ardour in my power, to be
permitted to join my beloved husband in
the regions above."

   Lady Howard looked with admiration
on the beautiful countenance of her ami-
able companion, as her dark intelligent eyes            HOWARD CASTLE           273

were raised to Heaven, streaming with
tears, and her hands fervently clasped to-
gether.

    "Before I saw you," said she as soon as
she could compose her voice, " I meant to
petition your protection for our beloved
child, if it should please God to take us
from him: I would put him into yours
and lord Howard's protecting arms, if
aught should ail his father, as I should be
incapable of doing my duty towards him."

    "And would you," said lady Howard,
"trust your treasure to us? No, believe
me, Louisa, if you lost your husband,
your ties to William and the world would
be doubled-you would wish to live to see
him reach manhood-then to be settled in
life-still some tender claim would remain
upon your affections, to make you unwill-
ing to leave him; and would affectionate
friends surrounding you not be preferable
to solitude?-would my soothing powers
be so thrown away on you as not to make
you feel thankful you were within the reach
of friendship?"

    "Yes," replied Louisa, : I should be

274          HOWARD CASTLE.

thankful, but incapable of receiving conso-
lation ; nothing could reconcile me to life,
if bereft of my beloved lord."

  " There is a passage in an elegant Eng-
lish author," said lady Howard—' The
Lord tempers the wind to the shorn lamb."

  " And shorn should I be to the quick,"
said lady Montague; " but I trust the Lord
will hear the prayer which I daily put up,
that I may be removed out of this world
first."

  " Then waste not your sorrow," said lady
Howard, " on leaving this retirement; you
quit it with all those who are dear to you
accompanying you in health, and arc going
to a country where you will soon be be-
loved ; the marchioness of Clemaire will
be the friend of your heart—she will prove
a sister in every way worthy of your affec-
tionate regard; the scheme I have adjust-
ed will, 1 am convinced, succeed, and you
will be received into lord Radnor's family
with kindness. Lord Montague has fixed
on a beautiful small house near Howard
Castle, where you are to live, and there
we will carry on our studies together—
you shall instruct me in your knowledge,              HOWARD CASTLE.        275


and I will you, in the little I know of 
which you are ignorant; our lords shall
pursue their amusements, and we will
study to make their homes happy when
they return to us; let us always anticipate
pleasure, and let us be thankful for the
mercies we enjoy."

  Lady Montague pressed the hand of
lady Howard with fervor--" Your pre-
cepts are good; I will follow them and
your example as much as I possibly can,
thankful that I have such a friend and
monitress."  Her composure was perfectly
re-established, and they spent the last day
at the cottage with seeming tranquillity.

  In the morning lady Howard perceived
the traces of sorrow on Louisa's cheek, as
she returned from a solitary walk before
breakfast.  She took no notice of it, as she
saw she was striving to conquer her feel-
ings : she accompanied her to take a last
farewell of her favourite haunts.  The time
approached for their departure : lord Mon-
tague and William followed them; lady
Montague had entered the temple, and
had there sunk upon her knees, praying
that she might return to it, with a heart
276        HOWARD CASTLE.  

as free from sorrow, except in quitting her
native counry, as she had left it with.
Lady Howard had walked to a little dis-
tance. Lord Montague joined her--
"Where," said he, "is my amiable Lou-
isa? I see her distress, with grief, at leav-
ing this habitation; but oh, lady Howard,
I will guard so sensitive a plant form every
rude touch, and it shall be the study of my
life to shield her, as far as a human being
can do, from mother's haughty spirit--she will
spurn her from her, before she can know
her virtues; she has powers sufficient to 
soften the most obdurate heart, but harsh
treatment I know will render her powers
abortive--my timid Louisa will shrink
from the scrutiny of lady Radnor's eyes,
and she will sink if a harsh word is spoken
to her."

  "I am not afraid," replied lady How-
ard, "of her reception; lady Radnor will
quickly discover her merit, and she will
cherish the source form whence she will
see your happiness flows."

"From you, my valued friend," cried
lord Montague, : I have received my hap-
 

              HOWARD CASTLE.        277

piness. You bade me polish the gem I was
possessed of, I should then discover its in-
trinsic value—I did so, and your predic-
tion has been verified. You again cheer
my spirits with the hopes my parents will
pardon me—that they will discover the
treasure I possess, and will receive my wife
and child; oh! should you, my dear Cle-
mentina, be again a true prophetess, I shall
almost believe you possess supernatural
powers, and that you are my guardian an-
gel, who has the care of averting danger
from me."

      William had walked very quietly by
lord Montague's side, till, worn out with his
anxiety to ride in the carriage, which was
prepared for their journey, he impatiently
exclaimed—" I thought we -were to go,
mamma, you, and me?"

      " And are lord Howard and I to be left
here?" asked lady Howard.

      " No," was his answer; " we go with
you to your country."

      They approached the temple. Lady
Montague saw them, and immediately
joined them. Wiping the tears from her278              HOWARD CASTLE.

eyes, she said, with a steady voice-" I am
eady to attend you- I suppose every
hing is ready for our departure."

   "We wait for you," said lord Mon-
ague, at the same time taking her hand;
'and this little gentleman is impatient to
get off. Grietzar promises to take the
greatest care of this garden, and of your
plants; I hope we shall find all in the
game good order, when we return next
summer, and that we shall enjoy a few as
happy months in this retreat as we have
lone."

   He led her from the scene of past de-
lights; she looked not back, but ascended
he steps, and the rock, already mention-
ed, closed the scene from her view.

   Lady Howard saw and pitied the feel-
ings which distressed her. They entered
he house, where lord Howard was wait-
ing to hand the ladies to the carriages.
She bid Grietzar a kind adicu, charging
aim to remember all her injunctions and
urried into the chaise, afraid to trust her
yes to stray again over her favourite dwell-
ing. The party at Mr. Delwin's were
        HOWARD CASTLE.     279

ready to join them; and they proceeded
towards England, all charmed with their
delightful excursion.

  Lady Montague's spirits were soon
cheered by the endeavours of her kind
friends, who strove to amuse her mind,
and to anticipate happiness to come; but
the dread of her introduction could no be
conquered; and when she found herself
on English ground, her fears redoubled,
as the approaching meeting with lord Mon-
tague's family could be at no great dis-
tance. The fine cultivated country through
which they passed struck her with admi-
ration--it was totally different from any
thing she had ever seen before; but her
eyes were tired of the flat; she looked in
vain for relief--no mountain presented it-
self to remind her of her native land.
Howard Castle surprised her exceedingly
--"Ah!" said she, turning to lady How-
ard, "I have heard of such palaces, but I
knew not you possessed one."

  "This," replied lady Howard, "is my
lord's family seat; my house is upon a
smaller scale; we will visit it as soon as we
have recovered the fatigue of our journey;
280             HOWARD CASTLE.

it is near Colnbrook Abbey: when lord
and lady Radnor hear of our return, they
will wait upon us, and then the introduc-
tion of our Swiss friend, and her little ne-
phew, will take place—all will go swim-
ingly on."

  " I tremble at the very thoughts of it,"
said Louisa; " I am afraid I shall involve
my poor Montague in difficulty and dis-
tress : oh! how I shall hate myself, if I am
the cause of sorrow to him!"


  " You will impart joy to the whole
group," said lady Howard; " if the mar-
chioness is there, you will love her at first
sight, and the more you know of lier will
strengthen your admiration: she is ami-
able, mild, and gentle, and adores her bro-
ther with such enthusiastic affection, that
were you not, what you are, capable of
rendering him completely happy, she
would reconcile her family to you, if she
possibly could: she is now independent,
and can give her opinion to her parents
more freely than if she had been lady
Elenora Montague; and she will exert
every power to render your reception
what lord Montague would wish it to be.                 HOWARD CASTLE.                 281

Keep np your spirits, and shew not to
your husband that you dread his realations
so terribly."

Next morning,lord Howard proposed
their visiting some improvements which
had been made in their absence. The
whole party sallied forth,and enjoyed,
though far inferior to the wild beauties
they had so lately seen, the rich and or-
namented grounds surrounding Howard
Castle. The new-made walk ended in an
elegant hothouse for exoties, and on each
side an extensive greenhouse. "This",
said he, "is dedicated to you, my cle-
mentina, who was leaning upon his arm;
"those plants have been selected by the 
gardener; you must discard those you dis-
approve of, and add your favourites. Be-
yond is a botanical garden, which was 
planned before we saw lady montague's:
I will steal a hint, and have a building
erected in it for you to study in; but I
am afraid I cannot instruct you as lord
Montague has his Luoisa."

"No," replied lady Howard; "if you 
could, I am sure you would not have so 
apt a scholar."282    HOWARD CASTLE.

 "I am no great botanist," replied lord
Howard, "but we must have a course of
lectures, and lord Montague must instruct
us."

 Lady Howard gratified her lord by the
most unbounded commendation of what 
had been done. She was charmed with
the delightful retreat, which she should
have entirely to herself, free from the in-
trusion of the gardeners.

 "One," said lord Howard, "shall be
kept solely for your plants, who under-
stands the different tribes."

 The buildings were not completed, but
she saw the extensive scale they were
upon, and admired the light and elegant
architecture. She pointed out the situa-
tion for the temple of study, which she
anticipated with much pleasure, as she
was determined to make botany her
amusement.

 Next day lady Montague and her little
William, and lord and lady Howard, set
off for Roachwood. At the same time
the rest of the party took a different route,
as they bent their course towards the seat
of lord Rosston, where they had promised              HOWARD CASTLE.      283

to go immediately upon their return from
their excursion.

   Lord montague had spent only one day
at Howard Castle. He proceeded to Coln-
brook, and inquired, before he left them,
what name he was to give Louisa?

   "Mademoiselle de Rovania," cried lady
Howard, "and pray bring the whole house
of Radnor to see her. We shall expect
you, and we shall be ready to act our
parts with eclat." He rode off, promising
to obey.

   Lord Montague kept to his word, as,
very soon after breakfast, the morning
after their arrival, lord Howard entered the
library--- "It proves how eager the old
carl is to see the lovely Swiss. Come, ma-
demoiselle, are you ready to receive your
illustrious relations, as they must have set
off almost by daylight to see you?"
  
   "What do you mean?" exclaimed lady
Montague.

   Lady Howard had run to the window
---"My lord is correct in his account:
there are two carriages approaching."
   
   "Oh let me fly!" cried lady Montague,284          Howard Castle.

"I must compose myself before I see
them."

  "No," said Clementina, "I must en-
treat you to remain; they have a great
deal to say to me, before you, who are an
insignificant mademoiselle, can be noticed.
I have to receive them, and shall inquire
particularly after the health of each, before
I shall introduce you; in the meantime,
you must compose your feelings as well as
you possibly can. When I name you,
you have no part to act but to look pretty,
curtsey, hold your tongue, and be seated
as soon as you can. How could you enter
the room, when all are composed and rea-
dy to stare at you?"

  "The task you assign me," said lady
Montague, "seems perfectly easy; yet I
feel frightened to death, and I fear I shall
sink with confusion."

  "Then you will disconcert all our
schemes," said Lady Howard.

  There was time for no more conver-
sation, as lord Howard handed lady Rad-
nor into the room. Much joy was ex-
pressed at seeing her dear niece returned:
the marchioness folder her to her heart
            HOWARD CASTLE.     285

the marquis, who accompanied them, ex-
pressed, what he really felt, the utmost
pleasure. All seemed in such good hu-
mour and good spirits that lady Howard
felt delighted, and hoped it would inspire
lady Montague with courage. The natu-
ral beautiful colour which tinged her
cheeks was heightened to a brilliant pink;
her fine dark eyes were cast down with an
expression of timid modesty. When she
was presented to each, lady Howard ad-
mired her appearance more at that moment
that she had ever done before. The
graceful dignity of her air, with the en-
gaging simplicity of her manner, seemed
to strike them with admiration. Her fine
countenance was turned to lord Radnor,
who had seated himself in a window by
her, with the sweetest smile, and answer-
ed the questions he put with composure
and perfect recollection.

  Lord Montague saw with rapture that
his father was visibly charmed with his
Louisa, and he ventured to anticipate hap-
piness to come.

  A little time after the party had taken
their seats, and lady Howard was giving

286           HOWARD CASTLE.

an account of their delightful tour, Wil-
liam entered the room. He stopped when
he saw so many people he had never seen
before. His lovely appearance created ge-
neral admiration. The marchioness, who
was placed near the door, attempted to
take his hand, but he withdrew it with
quickness, and appeared irresolute whether
to proceed or retire. He was soon deter-
mined, by lady Howard calling to him
that lord Montague was returned. He
ran towards him, and springing upon his
knee, seated himself perfectly to his mind,
telling him, in French, how glad he was
to see him.

  "What a charming boy!" exclaimed
lady Radnor; " I think you told me he is
this lady's nephew."

  " I did," replied lord Montague, with
rather a degree of hesitation in his man-
ner, at the same time whispering him to
go to his mamma. lie felt awkward and
embarrassed whilst he was with him, as lie
attracted the attention of every one.

  William had been confused with the
appearance of so many strangers: lie had
not recognized lady Montague—he ex-                   HOWARD CASTLE.            287

pressed much joy at seeing her, and made
the best of his way to her--"My papa sent
me," exclaimed he, as he reached her
knee.

     Louisa blushed the deepest scarlet--
"Your papa sent you!" repeated the mar-
quis, who was standing near the window,
and who looked immediately at lord Mon-
tague, whose evident confusion convinced
him the interesting foreigner was no other 
than his wife, and the lovely child their
son. Their history had made a deep im-
pression on his mind.  He had carefully
concealed it from every one but lady How-
ard, and only the agony of the moment
could have induced him to have betrayed
the secret of his friend.  He resolved he
would not frustrate their scheme, and that
he would not even give the marchioness
a hint how nearly connected she was to
the beautiful Swiss: he saw and pitied the 
confusion the address of her son had 
thrown lady Montague into: she took the
child on her knee; his very strong resem-
blance to his father corroborated the mar-
quis's opinion, but he believed no one had
heard him name lord Montague with the


288              HOWARD CASTLE.

tender appellation of papa but himself, as 
it undoubtedly would have created an in-
vestigation which would have discovered
all, probably before the plot was ripe.
     Lord Radnor was in raptures with
William, and pronounced him the finest
fellow he had ever seen--" He really is
very like what you were, Frederic, at his
age," said the earl:"only he has got a pair
of the most mischievous eyes, as like his
aunt's as possible.  Is he a little de Rova-
nia?" turning a lady Montague, "or is he
a sister's son?"
     "He bears my name," replied the trem-
bling Louisa, almost sinking at this scru-
tiny.
     " Come then, master de Rovania, shake
hands with me, and promise to come and
pay me a visit."
     William did not perfectly understant
this address, but the first part he did--"I
am not called master--I am William."
     Lousia was thankful he had not added 
Montague, which she fully expected he 
would do. He would make no rash pro-
mise, but did as his mamma bade him,and
shook hands with his grandfather, who               HOWARD CASTLE.        289

again urged a visit:  "If your aunt ac-
companies you, will you not come and see
us?"

  "Who is my aunt?" asked William.

  "This lady, mademoiselle de Rovania,"
replied lord Radnor.

  "That is my mamma; I have no aunt."

  "You have indeed," whispered the
marquis, "and one who will adore you."

  Louisa felt surprised at those words,
and was afraid the deception was near be-
ing discovered, as she had no idea he knew
her story--"He has always called me
mamma," said she, turning to lord Radnor,
who she saw expected an explanation.

  "Probably you have had the care of
him for some time--is it long since his pa-
rents died?"

  "They are not dead," replied she.

  "I understood," again said lord Radnor,
"that he was an orphan?"

  "He is not," was her answer; "I
brought him up--he never knew any fe-
male relation but myself."

  "He appears to speak the English lan-
guage very well; did you instruct him--or

  VOL. V.290             HOWARD CASTLE.

how have you acquired it so perfectly?
were you educated abroad?"

  "I was, but I spent much of my time
with an English friend, who took delight
in instructing me; I admire the language,
and strove to learn it."

  "And you have succeeded wonderfully
well, as I hever heard any one, who was
born abroad, speak it near so correctly, or
with so little of a foreigh accent. Your
friend must have taken great pains with 
you, and you must have been a very apt
scholar."

  Soon after, they took their leave, lady
Radnor expressing a strong wish to see
lord and lady Howard with their Swiss
friend at Colnbrook. William was not
forgotten in the invitation. The marchio-
ness, who seemed to anticipate the near 
connexion between them, came up to
Louisa, and taking her hand, said--"I
hope I shall profit by my mother's invita-
tion, and that we shall have a visit during
my stay at Colnbrook?"

  "Do you leave it soon?" asked lady
Montague.

  "The marquis is engaged to be at
                  HOWARD CASTLE.       291

Carnsworth Castle next week; from thence
we go to our own habitation, Thorp Ab-
bey, where we shall expect a visit from
lord and lady Howard, and where we shall
hope to see mademoiselle de Rovania and
this little gentleman," taking William's
hand.

  "We certainly,"  said lady Howard,
"shall be at Colnbrook during your stay."

  "Then fix your time,"  cried lord Rad-
nor, who had stood by Louisa during this
address of his daughter's:  "come to us to-
morrow; we have no engagement."  He
called to lady Radnor, who was leaving
the room.  She very willingly returned,
and fixed that the party from Roachwood
should dine with them the following day,
and remain for a few nights.

  The marquis pressed Louisa's hand as
he left them, and whispered--" Can lord
Montague leave his lovely Swiss?"

  She looked with quickness at him, as 
he pronounced these words, but instantly
withdrew her eyes, as his were fixed upon
her; she felt the utmost confusion.

  He perceived it, and added--" Be not
                   O 2292        HOWARD CASTLE.

alarmed; your reception will be flattering
as you deserve." He left her, astonished
at this address.

Lord Montague remained some minutes
after them, and explained in few words
how the marquis had discovered who ma-
demoiselle de Rovania was. He gaily
said, as he took her hand—" You have
nothing to fear from the marquis, and my
father seems captivated witli you. Your
powers, my Louisa, will subdue the whole
family, and you will be received by them
as you deserve." He pressed her to his
heart, and. kissed his darling boy, who
could not understand hi3 again leaving
them, and mounting his horse, was out of
sight in a minute.

The impression lady Montague received
of the party was much more favourable
than she expected.

Lady Radnor was in uncommon good
spirits—the marriage of lady Elenora had
given her the highest gratification; she
was elated with her sou William's having
obtained an honouraEe and lucrative em-
ployment under government, where his
taleats were likely to be displayed with 

           HOWARD CASTLE        293

advantage. Lord Montague had returned
in good health and apparent happiness,
which was not the case when he was last
at Colnbrook. All Combined to render
her mind serene, and her temper placid,
and to make her bear the severe stroke
with fortitude, which was awaiting her.
  The following day was again to bring
them together, and again to renew the ad-
miration for Louisa and her son.   They
found the party in eager expectation of
their arrival. Lord Montague flew to
welcome his beloved wife to the seat of his
ancestors, where he hoped she would be
properly acknowledged,  and where he
trusted she should spend many happy
days. He pressed his boy with rapture
to his heart, as he took him from the car-
riage.
   Lady Montague's sensations were not
the most comfortable in the world: to be
under the necessity of being introduced
into her husband's family by strantagem
hurt her.  Lord Montague's affection was her only support; his manner cheered her
drooping spirits, which, in spite of the ex-
ertions of lord and lady Howard, had sunk294           HOWARD CASTLE.

extremely low during their drive from Roachwood. She entered the house, supported by her kind friend, lady Howard, who pitied her from the bottom of her heart, as she must have a trying scene to go through, in whatever way the family received her.

  Lord and lady Radnor gave her a cordial welcome. William was soon at home, used great liberties with the whole party before the day was concluded, which passed much agreeably than Louisa expected.

   The following morning, lady Montague observed that William was frequently absent, and that he attended the marquis wherever he went, who seemed to be a particular favourite. During most of the forenoon they were both out of the room, and lord Radnor complained that his little companion had quite forsaken him. At last he entered, and running up to lady Radnor, said-" You are my grandmamma-pray give me a kiss." He held up his little cherry lips, inviting a salute.

She seemed surprised with his manner-" You are a very fine boy, and I cer-
        HOWARD CASTLE        290
tainly will kiss you, though I am not your
grandmamma."

  "But you are indeed," said William,
"and he is my grandpapa," pointing to
lord Radnor; "and she is my aunt," turn-
ing to the marchioness.

  Lord Montague looked a Louisa, who
appeared in the greatest agitation; he sus-
pected the marquis had given their boy
his lesson, and meant, by his means, to
bring about an explanation.

  Lady Montague left the room, to hide
the embarrassment she felt increasing every
instant, as William persevered in his asser-
tion that he was surrounded by his near
relations.

  Lord Radnor declared aloud, that he
wished he was his grandchild, as there
never was a finer fellow born. He at-
tempted to take him upon his knee, but he
was too busy to admit of such restraint:
he skipped about the room, repeating-
"Grandpapa, grandmamma, and aunt."

  "And have you not an uncle?" said the
marchioness, who had silently watched the
confusion of her brother, and observed
Louisa's sudden flight.
296                HOWARD CASTLE.

"No," he replied, "but I have a papa and mamma too; there is my papa!" He smiled the very image of lord Montague, as he looked at the marchioness, and pointed to her brother.

"Who has learnt you this lesson?" said lord Montague.

"I am not to tell that," at the same time putting his finger on his lip, and looking very arch.

"Some of the servants, I supposed?" said lady Radnor.

"No," replied William, "but I won't tell you who."

Lord Howard entered the room at that moment, and William ran towards him with his information-"Go," said lord Howard, "and ask lady Radnor if she does not wish it were true."

He quickly obeyed, and asked the question in so pleasing a manner that she answered-"Ye, my dear little fellow, I do wish you were my grandchild."

"Then," said lord Howard, "allow me to make you happy, by telling you he is lord Montague's son. This mode of introducing him and his mother was planned                HOWARD CASTLE.                297

by lady Howard: the amiable mademoiselle de Rovania is no other than lady Montague, worthy, in a high degree, of your paternal love.Suffer me to present a daughter to you,formed to grace society, and to make you completely happy;she is the wife of your son, and beloved by him as the source from whence all his felicity flows.Receive her then as she deserves,and suffer me to be the happy means of restoring peace to a friend, whose only cause for uneasiness is having taken a step which he fears many inour your displeasure.He cannot enjoy domestic comfort whilst he is separated from his parents, whom he tenderly loves."

Lady Radnor's countenance underwent many changes during lord Howards's address.

Lord Radnor exclaimed--"Let us dispense pleasure, and receive our daughter as ought to do.What though she may not have noble blood in her veins,she may have a noble heart, and may be one of the props of our declining years.Tell her," said he, turning to the mar-298             HOWARD CASTLE.

chioness, whose streaming eyes shewed 
how much she was interested in this con-
ference, "tell her to come and receive our
pardon for stealing the heart of our boy,
and for giving us this little cherub."

William had crept softly to lady Rad-
nor, whom he was surprised to see in tears.
-"Why does grandmamma cry?" said 
he, looking earnestly in her face.

"My little love," said she, "you will
gain your father's pardon, and your mother
a good reception, sooner than any body.
Go, Elenora, and desire our son and 
daughter will come to us."

The marchioness gladly obeyed, and 
flew to the library, where lord Howard
told her they were. She entered with ex-
tended arms - " Where is my Louisa, My
beloved sister? let me express the plea-
sure I feel in thus folding to my heart the
wife of my dearest brother." They em-
braced, both shedding tears.

Lady Montague was unable to speak;
she was quite overcome with the affection-
ate manner of the marchioness, who trun-
ed to lord Montague - " It was not kind 
in you, Frederic, to conceal form me your            HOWARD CASTLE.      299

marriage. Was it treating me as a friend,
such as I hoped you always considered
me? You knew little of my feelings, if
you thought I could abuse your confi-
dence: No, it would have been my ut-
most endeavour to have removed every
prejudice our parents might have felt at
your making a foreign alliance; but now, 
thank God! I am the happy messenger of 
peace. I am sent by lord and lady Rad-
nor, to request the presence of their son
and daughter; William has prepared a
flattering reception for you, and we shall,
I trust, be all united in the bonds of af-
fection."

   The agitation which lord Montague had
been in, during his sister's address, pre-
cluded his utterance. At last he exclaim-
ed--"My beloved Elenora, believe me, I
have always regarded you as my best
friend; I have a tender recollection of
the dear companion of my infant days,
and of the affection which has always sub-
sisted between us. I knew too well your
dutiful behaviour to your parents for me
to make you acquainted with the clandes-
300            HOWARD CASTLE.

tine step I had taken. Honour and Iovo
towards me would have made you keep a
secret which duty would have prompted
you to reveal."

  " I believe," said the marchioness, " you
judged properly, oncl that you studied my
happiness in keeping me ignorant of your
marriage. I am impatient to introduce
my sister to her lather and mother, who
are in expectation of our joining them. I
see lord Howard and Clemaire have left
them, as tlicy «re walking in the park, and
William is their only companion."

  " Compose yourself, my Lousia," said
lord Montane; " I cannot accompany
yon—my feeiings are in a tumult, which
must be conquered before I can appear."

  Lady Montague rose, and with trem-
bling limbs left the room with the mar-
chioness, who supported and cncouraged
her as much as she possibly could.

  Lady Howard felt delighted with the
train every tiling was in. She joined lord
Montague, who was pacing backwards and
forwards in the library, bis thoughts
iu the greatest agitation; she extended
            HOWARD CASTLE.             301

her hand to him, wishing him joy of the
happy termination of all their difficulties.

  " From you, my beloved cousin " cried
he, with the greatest emotion, "flows the
whole; you have pointed out the road
which has led to ali my comfort; your
plan has been followed in the introduction
of Louisa, and you see how it succeeds."

  " Your son," replied lady Howard, " has
been the principal actor in this scene; he
real/if has brought about so speedy a re-
conciliation ; lady Montague's many qua-
lifications will soon be discovered, and I
hope to see you as happy with your fami-
ly as you are with your amiable and pleas-
ing wife."

  It proved as lady Howard predicted;
Louisa became such a favourite at Coln-
brook, that they unwillingly submitted to
their having a house of their own; but as
she soon after presented her beloved lord
with a little Frederic, William became
nearly a constant guest at Colnbrook.

  Lady Howard continued a pattern for
all married women: a cheerful pleasant
companion, ever alive to the amusements
and pursuits of her husband; a steady302            Howard Castle.

friend, to whom he imparted every
thought, and in whom he had the most
perfect confidence; a tender mother to a
numerous family of fine children, and a
benevolent protector of the poor. What
could be the result? - as perfect happiness
as this world could bestow.








               THE END.










 Printed by J. Darling, Leadenhall-street, London.