MISS FEERIEE'S NOVELS 



DESTINY 

OR 

THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTER 

BY THE AUTHOR OF 

' MARRIAGE ' and ' THE INHERITANCE ' 

' What's in a name ? '— Shakspeare 

Gliinburslj (SSttion 




IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOLUME IL 



LONDON 
RICHARD BENTLEY & SOi\ 

^ublisljcts in ©rtjinarg to p,|n: iHnjcsto tf}c €^ucm 
1882 



Printed by R. & R. Clakk, Edinburgh. 



DESTINY. 



CHAPTER I. 

The next day was Sunday — day of rest to the poor 
and the toil-worn, of weariness to the rich and the 
idle. Ah ! little do they enter into the feelings of 
many who look forward to this day, as the day when 
even the " wicked cease from troubling, and the weary 
are at rest," as the day blessed and hallowed to those 
on whom rests, in its full force, the primeval command, 
"Six days shalt thou labour;" and which makes the 
Sabbath lovely in the sight 

" Of blessed angels, pitying human cares ;" 

as the day when heavenly truths are proclaimed alike 
to all, from the prince to the beggar ; from the man 
of gray hairs standing on the threshold of the grave, 
to the young who have lately entered the arena of 
this life — there, in the house of God, " the rich and 
the poor meet together ;" and there they are reminded 
of those impressive truths, so humbling to the haughty, 
so elevating to the lowly, " that the Lord is the maker 
of them all," and that one day they shall stand before 

VOL. II. B D. 



A DESTINY. 

His judgment -seat, without resjiect of persons, to 
"receive the reward of the deeds done in the body." 
On that day how many a sorrowing heart can more 
freely pour forth its griefs to that gracious ear which 
is ever open to the cry of the afflicted ! 

" on every sea, 



Which Europe's navies plough — yes, in all lands 
From pole to pole, or civilised, or rude. 
People there are to whom the Sabbath morn 
Dawns, shedding dews into their drooping hearts." 

The religious observances at Glenroy were entirely 
of a negative character ; there was neither music nor 
billiards on Sunday. Such of the family as chose 
went to church, and such as chose remained at home. 
Mrs. Macauley, except Avhen Glenroy prevented her, 
was a regular attender of church, as she said even 
Mr. M'Dow's preaching was better than none; and 
Edith generally went to the afternoon service, which 
was performed in what Mr. M'Dow called English, 
the morning service being in Gaelic, for the benefit 
of the aborigines of the country. On this morning, 
the party having lingered over a late breakfast, were 
now severally settled at their occupations. Lady 
Elizabeth and Dr. Price were playing at sjnlichins ; 
Lady Waldegrave was drawing ; Madame Latour was 
sitting by her, alternately stringing small pearls, and 
laughing over a French play; Edith was reading 
Milton ; Sir Reginald held a newspaper in his hand. 
Such was the position of the party, when Captain and 
Mrs. Malcolm of Inch Orran and their daughter were 



DESTINY. 3 

announced. Edith hastened to meet them with her 
usual simple kindness of manner, heightened by the 
affection she ever retained for them, and then intro- 
duced them to her guests. Lady Elizabeth eyed them 
as if she had been short-sighted, and, having bowed 
an acknowledgment, resumed her game. Florinda's 
manners were what is called charming (in a superficial 
way) when she chose to show off; and she was all 
grace, ease, and suavity. Madame Latour loved com- 
pany of any kind, and she closed her book, and went 
on stringing her pearls. There was something in the 
calmness and mildness of Mrs. Malcolm's manner 
peculiarly dignified and unaffected. She ajipeared 
wholly forgetful of self, and strong in the native 
elegant simplicity of a mind, which diffused itself over 
her whole bearing and deportment, — 

" Qui etoit de tout temps et de toutcs modes." 

Of all the modifications of manner which are to be 
met Avith in society, perhaps the most generally pleas- 
ing is simplicity, even as that water is the purest 
which has no taste, that air the freshest which has no 
odour. Such was the impression which Mrs. Malcolm's 
manner generally produced on all whose hearts Avere 
still alive to the charms of nature, as even the most 
sophisticated unconsciously feel subdued beneath the 
bland influence of native goodness. Since the loss of 
her son, Mrs. Malcolm's manner had ever retained a 
still more pensive, chastened cast, than had formerly 
characterised it; and her pale broAv, "tender and 



4: DESTINY. 

gravely sweet," still wore " a look of days gone by." 
This was the first time she had seen Sir Eeginald since 
his return, and for a moment the tide of sad recollec- 
tion rushed over her heart as she thought, " Such as 
he is, might my Ronald now have been ! " But soon 
the emotion died away beneath the habitual resigna- 
tion of her soul; the cloud passed from her mild 
brow and pale cheek, as she regained her usual 
serenity. 

Mrs. Malcolm was neither a bigot nor a zealot, but 
she could not avoid seeing how the day, so sacred in 
her estimation, was disregarded and degraded by 
those whom she was now among ; and her eye rested 
more in sorrow than in anger on the frivolous occupa- 
tions they were engaged in. 

" It is so long since I have seen you, Mrs. Malcolm," 
said Edith, surveying her with looks of gladness, 
" that I scarcely know where to begin with my in- 
quiries." 

"It is indeed a long while since we have met," 
said Mrs. Malcolm ; " but though I seldom go from 
home now, yet, had I known of the arrival of Lad}' 
Elizabeth Malcolm and Lady Waldegrave, I should 
have taken an earlier opportunity of waiting upon 
them ; — not this day certainly, for I came for a differ- 
ent purpose ; I could not think of passing your door 
without asking you to accompany us to your church. 
There is no service in our own to-day ; and our good 
friend Mr. Stuart is to officiate in the absence of 
Mr. M'Dow." 



DESTINY. 5 

" I shall go with much pleasure," said Edith ; " and 
perhaps others in company may also join the party." 

"Certainly," said Lady Waldegrave, with one of 
her most winning looks ; " I shall be too happy to be 
allowed to accompany yon." 

" Going to church ! " cried Lady Elizabeth, who, 
being tired of spilickins, here joined the conversation ; 
" very proper — I approve of going to church ; I think 
it quite right, absolutely necessary, for the sake of 
example to the lower orders of the people." 

" If it is proper for the lower orders," said Mrs. 
Malcolm gently, "it must be equally so for the higher." 

"By no means," replied Lady Elizabeth warmly, 
" it is quite a diiferent thing ; it is very well kno^vn 
that in this country the common people do require to 
go to church ; it is different abroad, though even there 
they attend mass very regularly ; but then, you know, 
that is soon over, and they have a thousand innocent 
ways of amusing themselves and spending the day, 
which the people here have no idea of. They have 
operas and theatres and dancing, and all sorts of 
pretty, harmless amusements." 

" It is many years since I was on the Continent," 
said Mrs. Malcolm, in the same gentle manner, " and 
therefore I am perhaps scarcely entitled to speak of 
the customs that prevail there now ; but at that time, 
I confess, my feelings were hurt at witnessing what 
appeared to me the profanation of a day associated in 
my mind with all that is solemn and sacred." 

" Of course, on going from our own country, we 



6 DESTINY. 

carry our prejudices along with us," said Sir Eeginald, 
" and we are scandalised at seeing our neighbours 
with happy faces, on a day when we have always 
been accustomed to measure our piety by the length 
and solemnity of our own." 

"Ah, excellent! excellent!" exclaimed Madame 
Latour ; " que ce mot ' solemn' me fait frissonner !" 

" I — why, yes, I don't think it is a good thing to 
be too solemn," observed Lady Elizabeth, with the 
air of a Solon ; " it defeats the object — and — and — in 
short, I don't think it answers." 

"I am sorry I should have used a word which has 
so many unpleasing ideas attached to it," said Mrs. 
Malcolm sweetly ; " but, in my mind, solemnity is 
not necessarily associated Avith gloom or melancholy. 
There is a solemn stillness in the air of the Sabbath 
which conveys to me ideas of the most pleasurable 
kind. It seems to combine all the tranquillity and 
repose of the night with the light and gladness of the 
day." 

"Mais pourquoi you forbeed dans cette contr^e 
touts demonstration de joie?" inquired Madame 
Latour. 

"I know no demonstrations of rational joy that 
are forbidden," replied Mrs. Malcolm; "the mere 
excess of animal spirits certainly does not harmonise 
with the day given for nobler purposes. But there 
may be, and I am sure there is, much quiet, heartfelt, 
homefelt happiness on that day. I know no more 
pleasurable sight than that of our own poor people 



DESTINY. 7 

in their clean dresses, with cheerful though sedate 
faces, assembling together to hear the glad tidings, 
which tell them of peace and hope and love." 

"Mais la danse et la musique, par exemple, vous 
les regardez comma des peches mortels — chez nous, 
elles sont les demonstrations de notre joie ; de notre 
reconnoissance, de notre amour de Dieu," and Madame 
Latour raised her eyes in a pretented ecstasy of devo- 
tion. 

" Where such feelings are truly produced, and 
bring forth corresponding fruits, we should certainly 
be cautious how we condemn the means," replied 
Captain Malcolm; "as someone has well said, 'vir- 
tuous action is all the real worth of intelligent being;' 
but in this land Ave have no reason to expect that 
music and dancing should lead to the knowledge of 
God and the practice of piety. Even splendid rites 
have been found both useless and pernicious, in allur- 
ing the mind away from the doctrines and precepts 
of the Gospel, which are addressed to the heart and 
the understanding, not the senses." 

"Surely every one must allow nothing can be 
more effectual in kindling devotional feeling than 
fine music," said Sir Eeginald. 

"Undoubtedly," replied Captain Malcolm, "fine 
music is the very luxury of devotion ; but it is one 
that is far beyond the reach of the mass of the people. 
Where could our poor Highlanders procure fine music?" 

" You forget the bagpipe, and its accompaniment 
the whisky bottle," said Sir Reginald sarcastically. 



8 DESTINY. 

'•The fiddle and the un du pays maj- be more 
refined modes of enjoyment," said Caj^taiu Malcohii : 
" but refinement of taste does not necessarily imply 
corresponding improvement in morals. I have not, 
indeed, lived long enough in a Catholic country to be 
altogether a fair judge of the practical efi'ects of the 
Romish religion on the morals of the people ; but of 
one thing I am very sure, that the sincere followers 
of that religion enjoy much less liberty, spiritual and 
temporal, than we do. Were we to reckon up the 
number of holidays, saints' days, fasts, vigils, pen- 
ances, prayers, etc. etc., from one year's end to the 
other, I suspect it would be found that a much 
larger portion of time is devoted to religious observ- 
ances amongst Catholics than Protestants. Were we, 
therefore, to annul, or even curtail, our one day in 
seven, little or nothing would remain to remind us of 
the tie subsisting between God and His creatures." 

"That is very good," exclaimed Lady Elizabeth. 
" Penances are, to be sure, shocking things ; and we 
Protestants ought, as Mr. Malcolm says, to oppose 
them by every means in our power — and we ought also 
to set a good example to the lower orders. I shall 
go to church myself to-day " — with an air of dignified 
virtue — "and if you will allow me, I will take a seat 
in your carriage," to Captain Malcolm, whom she had 
just discovered to be a very fine-looldng, gentlemanly 
man; and being a great enthusiast in beauty, his 
looks were at once a passport to her good graces. 

Tlie offer was of course accepted. The first carriage 



DESTINE. 9 

drove off, while the other for Florinda and Edith was 
getting ready. Edith had been hurt at the slighting 
way in which Eeginald had spoken of the rehgious 
observances of their country; for although she herself 
entered but little into the true spirit of Christianity, 
she nevertheless possessed that reverence for its insti- 
tutions and S}Tnbols which, with many, passes for 
religion itself. 

^^^len the carriage drove up. Sir Reginald was on 
the hall-steps ready to hand Lady Waldegrave and 
Edith in. Madame Latour, being a Catholic, of course 
did not accompany them. 

" I flattered myself you would have escorted Flor- 
inda and me to church, Eeginald," said Edith re- 
proachfully. 

"You forget that I am half a Catholic," said he, 
smiling. 

Edith gave an unconscious look of affright from 
him to Madame Latour, who was standing also on 
the steps. Eeginald seemed to read what was passing 
in her mind, and the careless, scornful smile he gave 
in return at once reassured her; while he added, 
"That is according to the notions of Presbyterians. 
But, however, if you are not afraid, after what has 
passed, to admit such a reprobate within the walls of 
your kirk, I shall join you there, Edith. I shall take 
the cut across Benvarloch, and be there as soon as 
you." 

"Is it possible, then, to walk to church'?" inquired 
Lady Waldegrave. 



10 DESTINY. 

" Quite possible for Highlanders, such as Reginald 
and I," answered Edith; "but quite impossible, I 
should imagine, for you, Florinda." 

" What a stimulus that word ' impossible ' is," said 
Lady Waldegrave, " especially when one knows it is 
quite possible, as I am resolved to prove. How I 
love to overcome possible impossibilities ! Come, if 
I should fag by the way, some of your good Highland 
fairies will, I am sure, take pity on me, and bring me 
a pair of golden pattens, or some such aid as will 
enable me to climb with perfect ease to the very 
pinnacle of your mountain tops." And, in spite of 
all remonstrance, her Ladyship persisted in walking. 
The carriage was therefore dismissed empty, and the 
party set out. 

Sir Reginald, as a matter of course, offered an arm 
to each of his companions; but Lady Waldegrave 
coldly declined, and he did not repeat the offer. 
There was something so whimsical and capricious in 
Florinda's behaviour that Edith could not fathom it. 
She had volunteered, even insisted upon taking a 
long walk with a person from whom she yet would 
not accept the most common act of civility ! What 
could be the meaning of such mutual, unvarying cold- 
ness, and even dislike 1 

Lady Waldegrave might have read what was pass- 
ing in Edith's mind on her artless yet eloquent coun- 
tenance ; but Lady Waldegrave was one of those who 
are too much engrossed by self to pay much attention 
to the thoughts and feelings of others, unless when 



DESTINY. 11 

exacting a tribute of admiration or adulation. For a 
considerable part of the way the road lay through 
the beautiful and extensive pleasure-grounds, where 
ever-changing landscapes of wild alpine scenery, rocks 
and woods, knolls and dells, blue lake and gliding 
river, alternately mingled with the softer features of 
culture and ornament — 

" The pomp of groves, and garniture of fields," 

presenting a constant succession of grand and lively 
pictures. But soon, to the rich, picturesque, and 
ornamented scenery of the home domain, succeeded 
the purple moor with its gray stones, the dreary glen, 
the rugged mountain, and the rude torrent. The day 
was close and warm and sunless ; an unvarying gray 
atmosphere surrounded them, and seemed to shed a 
"browner horror" over the lone valley and the 
gloomy mountain. There were none of those magical 
effects of light and shade to enliven the dull bosom 
of the one, or irradiate the dark brow of the other ; 
and, as has been truly said, sunshine alone fills with 
beauty the land of mountains, and imparts to every 
feature a grandeur and a grace which sinks into 
insipidity the riches and the beauty of the fairest 
champaign. 

It seemed as if the gloom of nature had communi- 
cated itself to the spirits of those who now traversed 
the solitary scenes, themselves almost as silent. Lady 
Waldegrave was pensive and abstracted. Sir Regi- 
nald was almost wholly silent, as if absorbed in some 



12 DESTINY. 

strong, concentrated feeling. Editli was surprised 
and mortified at the indifference, and even inatten- 
tion, with which Florinda regarded the sublime 
scenery around them. As they climbed the steep 
side of the mountain, they sometimes stopped to re- 
cover breath; and on one occasion, as they looked 
down from the almost dizzy height on which they 
stood, to the dreary glen below, Edith, pointing to a 
wi'etched and almost imperceptible hovel, with its 
peat-stack and its potato patch, said, " Look there, 
Florinda, — that is a human dwelling; and, do you 
know, I am so piqued at the indifference with which 
you regard our magnificent Benvarloch, that I could 
almost wish you were a dweller there for a season, 
that you might learn to look up to it with proper re- 
spect and awe. But I daresay the bare idea of such 
a thing has answered my piu'pose, and made you 
tremble already ! " 

" By no means," replied Lady Waldegrave calmly ; 
"mournful and isolated as that dwelling appears, I. 
can conceive circumstances in wliich it might be the 
abode of happiness and delight." 

"Under what strange circumstances could that 
possibly be, Florinda'?" inquired Edith, smiling at 
the idea of the delicate, refined, luxurious, fastidious 
Lady Waldegrave deeming it possible to exist in such 
a place, under any circumstances. Lady Waldegrave 
smiled too, but it was with sometliing of scorn, as she 
answered in a low voice, but sufficiently loud for 
Eeginald (who stood a little apart) to hear — "Love 



DESTINY. 13 

might transform even that wretched hut into a bower 
of Paradise." 

" And transform the peats and heather into ama- 
ranths and roses'?" said Edith, laughing. 

"Yes; Love has wrought greater miracles than 
that," replied Flormda pensively. 

"Not true love," said Edith in a low voice, and 
blushing as she spoke; "there can be no illusion 
there." 

"It is evident you have never loved," returned 
Lady Waldegrave ; " if the love was pure and fervent 
and sincere — if, in short, it v:as love, there would be 
no illusion in the matter;" and she repeated, -tt-ith 
much grace and beauty, these lines from Garcilazo 
de la Vega : — 

" Por ti el silencio de la selva umbrosa, 
Por ti la esquividad y apartamiento 
Del solitario monte me agradaba." ^ 

She stopped, then said, "What follows is so 
beautiful, I must repeat it," and, with a sigh, she 
resumed : 

" Por ti la verde hierba el fresco viento 
El bianco lino, y colorada rosa 
Y dulce primavera descaba. 
Ay ! quanto me enganaba 1 
Ay quan diflFerente era 

" Througb thee, the silence of the shaded glen, 

Through thee, the horror of the lonely mountain, 
Pleased me no less than the resort of men, 

The breeze, the summer wood, and lucid fountain." 



1 4 DESTINY. 

Y quan de otra manera 

Lo que, eu tii falso peclio se escondicr!" ^ 

Edith's feelings were so delicate, and her manners 
so simple, that the impassioned, yet sophisticated 
style of Lady Waldegrave's sentiments, brought for- 
ward, too, so unnecessarily, struck her as something 
strange, and she thought to herself, "Surely she has 
never loved, or she could not thus proclaim it!" 
She stole a glance at Eeginald to see whether his 
feelings accorded with hers, but he had turned 
abruptly away, as she imagined, in scorn. 

After standing a few minutes in silence, Lady Walde- 
grave said, " I find I must rest before I can proceed. 
Here is a charming banc de gazon" as she seated her- 
self on one of the few green spots the mountain side, 
covered as it was with rock and heather, afforded. 

" We must not rest long, or else we shall be too 
late for church," said Edith. 

"Why, to own the truth," said Lady Waldegrave 
languidly, "I fear I must rehnquish the attempt of 
getting to church ; I am so fatigued, I feel quite un- 
able to proceed any farther; taunt me as you will, 
Edith, I am at your mercy." 

^ " The purple rose, white lily of the lake, 
AVere sweet for thy sweet sake ! 
For thee the fragrant primrose dropped with dew 
"Was wish'd when first it blew ! 
Ah, how completely was I in all this 
Myself deceiving ! Oh the different part 
That thou wert acting, 

The traitor in thy heart ! " 



DESTINY. 15 

"I Avoii't be so cruel as to exult over your defeat," 
said Edith, smiling; "but you must allow me just to 
remind you that I predicted what has come to pass, 
without even pretending to the second -sight. And 
now, what is to be done? — Come, Eeginald, let us 
hold a council of war." 

"I am a bad counsellor," said he coldly, and with- 
out lifting his eyes from the ground. 

" Then, if I am to be commander-in-chief, I think 
the best thing I can do is to despatch you for my pony, 
to take Florindahome." 

" Oh no, no — not for the world," cried Florinda ; " I 
should die of fright were I to attempt to descend this 
dreadful mountain on horseback." 

" But my pony is so safe and sure-footed, and, be- 
sides, Eeginald would lead it down the hill for you, 
as he has often done for me." 

"Pray, don't ask me to do anything so hazardous," 
said Lady Waldegrave pettishly. 

"Then we must all sit quietly here till you are 
sufficiently rested to return home," said Edith ; " at 
least my head can suggest no brighter expedient." 

"But it makes me quite Avi-etched to think that I 
should be the means of keeping you from church. I 
know you are very desirous of being there ; I heard 
you say so to Mrs. Malcolm." 

" I should certainly have hked very well to be at 
church," said Edith ; " but the disappointment is 
nothing ; don't think of it." 

"But indeed I must. I cannot bear that you 



16 DESTINY. 

should lose any pleasure upon my account; rather 
than detain you, I will try, if possible, to make it out, 
coute qui coiite." And she attempted to rise, but Edith 
would not allow it, and insisted that she should not 
stir till perfectly recovered. 

" But how shall I manage with mamma f resumed 
Lady Waldegrave. " She will be so miserable and so 
fluttered if I don't appear, that she Avill make quite a 
schne at church." 

" If Lady Waldegrave will honour me with her 
commands," said Sir Eeginald, in a constrained tone 
of civility, "I shall be happy to be the bearer of 
them." 

" Oh ! that will do," cried Edith. " Eeginald will 
go to church, and account for your absence to Lady 
Elizabeth ; and we can return at our leisure, when 
you feel disposed to move." 

" And leave us here in this frightful solitude, by 
ourselves !" exclaimed Florinda. "Surely, Edith, you 
cannot be serious ! " 

" I am indeed," said Edith, laughing. " Unless the 
mountains were to fall upon us, I see no other danger 
to apprehend, I should not mind being here quite 
alone." 

"Oh, shocking!" exclaimed Florinda, shuddering; 
" then what a coward you must think me ! " 

" Then, what is to be done V said Edith. " There 
is no human being near us, to send in either direction." 

"I must try to make it out myself, then, it seems," 
said Florinda, Avith a languid, oppressed air ; and then 



DESTINY. 17 

she attempted to rise, but sank back, as if quite un- 
able ; and, in a faint voice, " Indeed, I feel it impos- 
sible, without a long rest ; and yet I cannot rest, when 
I think of the state of nervous excitement mamma 
will be thrown into, when she misses me." 

"There is another proposal I would make," said 
Edith, in a hesitating tone. " But " 

"But whatf inquired Lady Waldegrave. 

Edith still hesitated, as she thought of the mutual 
coldness, and even aversion, her companions mani- 
fested towards each other ; then, in a low voice, and 
with a little confusion, she said, " I Avould offer to go 
to church myself, only I thought, perhaps, you would 
dislike being left "s%'ith only Reginald." 

Lady "Waldegrave coloured, and a gleam of pleasure 
shot from her eyes as she cast them do"\vn. " Dear 
Edith, since you are so kind, so venj kind," said she, 
pressing her hand with animation, then relapsing into 
her former languid tone — " This is no time for cere- 
mony, and I shall not much mind it. To be sure, if 
it could have been otherwise arranged, it would have 
been better ; but I believe that is the only practicable 
scheme. Even the presence of an enemy I should feel 
a protection in this region of horror." 

•' An enemy, Florinda ! Ah, for shame. You surely 
do not consider Eeginald as such?" asked Edith in a 
low voice. 

Lady Waldegrave made no reply. 

"How I wish I saw you friends — such friends," 
added Edith, blusliing, turning her cheek to whisper 
^ VOL. II. C D. 



18 DESTINY. 

in Florinda's ear — "as a sister ought to be with — a 
brother." 

The caress which accompanied this avowal was not 
returned; but Edith's own confusion rendered her 
unconscious of Florinda's, and, hastily rising, she 
called, "Sir Reginald, I am going to walk to church, 
and Lady Waldegrave trusts herself to your protection 
— you will see her safe home." 

She had expected a remonstrance from her lover as 
to her undertaking the walk alone — no opposition, 
however, was made, but an expression of deep emotion 
crossed his features as he stammered out a few inau- 
dible Avords of acquiescence. A vague, undefinable 
sensation passed through Edith's heart ; the feeling 
had neither name nor substance — it was a mere shape- 
less shadow that fell upon her imagination, and she 
hastened to dispel it. Yet she lingered, she knew 
not why, ere she took her departure, perhaps in the 
hope that Reginald would yet interfere to prevent her. 
But he did not ; he followed her a few steps, as if he 
would have recalled her ; then turned abruptly round, 
and leaning against a piece of projecting rock, with 
his head resting on his arm, remained in deep though 
silent agitation. 



CHAPTER IL 

" Florinda ! " at length he exclaimed, in a voice of 
emotion ; but Lady Waldegrave made no reply. 

"Florinda!" he re^ieated, in a tone of deeper 
agitation; but still Lady Waldegrave remained im- 
movable. 

" Florinda !" he cried, still more passionately, " will 
you not hear me ? answer me 1" 

For a few moments Lady Waldegrave seemed as if 
struggling with her feelings, then said, " There was a 
time when I would have answered, when I did answer, 
to that call from you — that time is past." 

"And you now hate — despise mel" cried he. 
Florinda was silent. 

"You think me false — faithless!" he exclaimed, 
with increasing vehemence; "I know — I know you 
do." 

Lady Waldegrave made no answer, and there was 
another pause. 

" Tell me, only tell me, that you acquit me of cold- 
blooded perfidy ; that you do not think me the base, 
heartless villain " his agitation choked his utter- 
ance. 



20 DESTINY. 

"I know not what to think," said Lady Walde- 
grave haughtily ; " but I feel I degrade myself in 
thus allowing you an opportunity of uttering such 
language ; nor would I have done so, but that it was 
necessary, ere I leave this, I should see you alone. 
You have refused the explanation I sought by Madame 
Latour, with regard to the picture I committed to 
your charge ; you will not, you dare not as a gentle- 
man, refuse to restore it to me when I demand it 
myself." 

Sir Eeginald replied by opening his collar, and 
discovering the picture suspended round his neck. 
"Never while I live will I part from it," he cried; 
"it is my all of happiness !" 

"This is too humiliating!" said Florinda indig- 
nantly, and rising as if to move away ; but he seized 
her hand, and caused her to be seated. 

"Wretched and undone as I am," he cried, "hate- 
ful as I am to myself, still, to be odious in your eyes 
is misery greater than I can bear. Oh, Florinda, could 
you but know the struggles of my heart — the sicken- 
ing mixture of hopelessness and hope ! Could you 
conceive the thousandth part of the anguish I haA^e 
endured, that I still endure, and for you ! " 

A slight wave of the head, and a curl of the lip, 
indicated Lady Waldegrave's incredulity. 

" You do not — you dare not doubt my truth, Flor- 
inda ! " cried he, starting from the ground, where he 
had cast himself. 

"Have I not cause?" 



DESTINY. 21 

" No, no ; I have deceived myself — I have deceived 
another — but I have never deceived yoiL Nay, hear 
me, Florinda, hear me ! " 

" To what purjiose 1 We are now mere acquaint- 
ances; henceforth let us be still less — let us be 
strangers." 

" Yet you once loved me — at least you suffered me 
to indulge that hope ; but 'tis better that it should 
not be so. Tell me, only tell me, that you never 
loved me ; say, then, Florinda, oh, in mercy say that 
you love me no longer! that you hate, abhor me!" 
and he gasped as he spoke ; his brow was contracted 
as in agonj', and his eyes seemed as if they would start 
from their sockets. 

A faint blush rose to Lady Waldegrave's cheek as 
she replied, "You judge of my feelings by your own, 
it seems. Mine change not so easily," 

" Oh, Florinda, dearest, most beloved ! " and he 
pressed her hand to his lips, to his heart, and both 
were silent for some moments ; when, suddenly drop- 
ping it, he wildly exclaimed, "Why do you suffer 
me to touch that hand, Florinda? it never can be 
mine now — never! Florinda" — and he spoke in a 
tone of deep, but suppressed agony — "Florinda, I 
will not conceal it, you are dearer to me than life 
itself. I never did love, I never can love, another as 
I love you — to madness, to distraction ; and yet — 
and yet" — and the cold drops hung round his brow — 
"I am on the eve of marriage with another !" 

Utter'ing an exclamation. Lady Waldegravc would 



22 DESTINY. 

have risen from her seat, but, starting up, he with- 
held her. 

"Xot till you have heard all. Hear me, in mercy 
hear me, Florinda — by Heaven you shall ! I will not 
suffer you to believe me a monster of perfidy ! " — 
Then softening — "Florinda, on my knees I implore 
you to hear me ! Erring — guilty as I may be, you 
shall acquit me at least of premeditated deception. 
I have acted rashly, wildly, madly, but not basely ! " 

Lady Waldegrave's only reply was tiu'ning her 
head haughtily away. 

"Do you then refuse to hear me ?" asked Eeginald, 
in a voice of forced composure. 

"To what purpose should I hear you? I have 
already heard too much — I have heard myself in- 
sulted." 

"Insulted! — oh, Florinda, you whom I adore, 
worship " 

" And have deceived" interrupted Lady Waldegrave 
emphatically. 

"Florinda, you must, you sliall hear me!" cried 
he firmly, seizing both her hands in his. " You shall 
hear all, and then condemn me if you will. A thou- 
sand times I have attempted to write to you — to lay 
open my whole heart to you — to throw myseK on 
your pity — to implore you to fly from me — to forget 
me — but in vain ; where could I find words to express 
the agonies of my soul % agonies which have made it 
easier for me to feign hatred than to assume indif- 
ference towards you." He paused, as if to regain 



DESTINY. 23 

composure, but, in a hurried, agitated manner, re- 
sumed : 

"I need not tell you that from the first moment 
I beheld you at Naples I loved you — that you well 
know. From that time I lived but in your sight — I 
saw only you, heard only you ; for weeks I lived in a 
dream — a delirium ; everything was forgotten, or, if 
remembered, remembered only with indifference or 
disgust. And yet, at that very time, when my whole 
soul was yours, I confess — with shame and misery 
unspeakable I confess — my faith Avas plighted to 
another ! Bear with me, Florinda, but for a few 
short minutes, and you shall hear all. It was done 
in the Aveakness and ignorance of boyhood. I had 
mistaken friendship, relationship, affection, for love. 
There was my misfortune — my crime, if you will." 

"No," cried Florinda, while her cheek glowed with 
a deeper carnation — "that was not your offence. 
Had you stopped there — but " 

"To dare to love you — to tell you that I loved 
you — yes, I allow that was presumption — frenzy — 
fettered as I was ; but at least you will do me the 
justice to acknowledge that the avowal of my love 
was forced from me by circumstances — and that even 
then, when I poured out the feelings of my heart 
before 3-ou, I did not conceal from you that an 
obstacle then stood in the way of my happiness ; I 
could not bear to name it to you ; but it was one I 
flattered myself I should be able to remove. I trusted 
that time and absence would have wrought the same 



24 DESTINY. 

change in her that had taken place in me, and that 
the task would be an easy one to break the ties we 
so prematurely formed. It has not proved so ; she 
loves me still — still ! Ah ! do not scorn her affection, 
Florinda ; it is, I am sure, such as she is herself, tender 
and sincere. But even had it been less so, even were 
it far otherwise, from the situation in which I am now 
placed, to retreat on my part would be infamy. By 
the death of her brother, I am now unhappily heir to 
the princely inheritance of her father. All that he 
has must be mine. I owe him much — he has been a 
father to me through life. To renounce this alliance 
would be worse than death to liim — it would be 
eternal disgrace to me ! that is the only price I cannot 
— Will not — pay for you. I would have sacrificed ray- 
self a thousand times rather than have met you again 
as we have now met — and then to part for ever ! " 

" And she for whom you make this sacrifice accepts 
it. She values it, perhaps, the more for what it costs," 
said Florinda coldly. 

" No — oh no ; she is ignorant of all." 

" So blind ! yet you think she loves you ?" 

"I am mire she does." 

Lady Waldegrave moved her head incredulously, 
and a slight smile of scorn wreathed her lip. 

"You doubt, Florinda!" exclaimed Eeginald, 
anxiously regarding her. She was silent. 

"Tell me," cried he, still more earnestly, "have 
you anj'' reason to believe — to suspect — that Edith 
" He stopped in extreme perturbation. 



DESTINY. 25 

"Loves you as a brother, a friend, as a companion, 
a pla}^ellow, a cousin ; in all these relations I do 
believe you are loved." 

For a moment, whether from vanity or surprise. 
Sir Eegiuald looked almost displeased ; but in another 
instant his eyes sparkled with renewed fire. 

"If it should be so!" he exclaimed eagerly. 
"And yet — and yet — from her own lips I had the 
avowal — timid and sensitive as she is, she gave me 
the spontaneous assurance of her love. Ah, Florinda, 
even she dared to say more than ever you have said ! " 

"Unjust! ungenerous!" said Lady Waldegrave, 
crimsoning, as she cast her eyes on the ground. 

" Florinda, dearest, forgive me ! But were it as 
you suppose, you might yet be mine !" And again 
he pressed her hand to his lips, and a long silence 
ensued ; each seemed as though they feared to break 
the spell which blinded their hearts and senses to the 
self-delusions which all imregulated minds and selfish 
spirits so passionately love to indulge. 

Suddenly a dark shadow fell upon them, and look- 
ing up they perceived (with what feelings may be 
imagined) the huge person of Mr. M'Dow actually 
bending over them, with outstretched neck, and eyes 
and mouth open to their utmost extent, Amailye 
hanging by the bridle on his arm. Sir Eeginald's 
eyes flashed fire, and he cast a glance at the intruder, 
Avhich, for a moment, caused even his obtuse nature 
to cpiail, and he instinctively retreated a few steps, 
while he said, affecting great delicacy of speech, " I 



26 DESTINY. 

hope I have not been guilty of any intrusion ; if I 
hadn't met Miss Edith, who told me what has hap- 
pened, I ^yould really have taken this for a courting- 
scene — hoch, hoch, ho ! " Then, losing his bodily fears, 
he advanced, and seating himself almost close to Ladj* 
Waldegrave, he took off his hat, pulled his pocket- 
handkerchief out of it, and began to wipe his fore- 
head, while Amailye cropped the sweet mountain 
herbage. 

Florinda instantly rose, and ^^dth her cheeks in a 
glow, said — "I am now sufficiently rested, Sir Regi- 
nald, to be able to return ; " and with a slight bend 
of the head to IVIr. M'Dow, she walked away. 

Reginald, conscience-stricken and embarrassed, not 
daring to offer her his arm, accompanied her in silence. 
But they had not proceeded many steps before jVIr. 
M'DoAv was thundering after them, and pushing 
forward, said, as he extended one of his great elbows 
(Amailye hanging on the other), "WiU your Lady- 
ship do me the favour to take my arm 1" 

In an instant Reginald came round from the other 
side, with looks of lightning, and placing himself 
between Florinda and the enormous elbow, drew her 
arm within his, and in a voice of stifled inry, said, 
" We shall only impede your progress, sir ; had you 
not better mount your horse, and proceed?" 

"I thank you, sir," returned the impregnable 
M'Dow; "but I'm in no particular hiu-ry." 

"I beg pardon, sk; but I should have supposed 
you were," said Sir Reginald, still rising in his boiling 



DESTINY. 27 

indignation. "It is rather unusual, is it not, for 
clergjonen in tliis country to be travelling during 
church serviced" 

"It is so, certainly," returned Mr. jM'Dow, with 
perfect composure ; " you are quite right, it is certainly 
not cjuite orthodox. But thei'e are circumstances in 
my case which I think would satisfy even the Presby- 
ter)^, if the worst should come to the worst, and I 
should be brought before it at your instance. Sir 
Eeginald — hoch, hoch, ho! But the fact is, that, 
although at this moment I can't say I'm in no par- 
ticular hurry (as I go but a short distance to-day), 
yet I must confess I'm nevertheless in haste ; for, 
since the truth must be told, I'm in no less than 
wedding haste. My fair lady has done me the honour 
to fix Wednesday, the 29th, for the happy day, which 
is rather sooner than was originally proposed, in con- 
sequence of the arrival of Mr. Eeddie of Manchester, 
and his family, to the marriage. ]\Ir. Eeddie is the 
lady's maternal uncle, and is to officiate as her f awther 
upon the occasion, so it would be a terrible business 
if all was ready but the bridegroom — hoch, ho, ho ! I 
was to have taken the steamboat to-morrow morning, 
but hearing last night that the boiler of the Aberdeen 
boat had burst, and very near killed a passenger, I 
began to think that they Avere not very chancy, and 
that I would be better on the back of my powney 
than in the boiler of a steamboat — hoch, hoch, ho ! 
So I just kept incog, at the manse, and slipped away 
at a time when I thousrht there was little chance of 



28 DESTINY. 

meeting anybody. I merely go as far as my friend 
Auchnahashnish's tliis afternoon, and there I'll catch 
the coach as it passes to-morrow, Avliich Avill take me 
to Glasgow the same evening. And now I hope 
you'll allow, Sir Keginald, that this is an extreme case. 
Only conceive, if any mischance had come over the 
boat, and I in it, what a dreadful situation for the 
lady — what an awful predicament for a person of feel- 
ing and refinement ! " 

To this dread anticipation no answer was re- 
turned, and the party proceeded ; Mr. M'Dow ex- 
patiating on the advantages and disadvantages of 
steamboats, their cheapness and facility, their dangers 
and disagreeableness, till Sir Eeginald impatiently 
interrupted him by sajdng, "This road, sir, is ill 
calculated for so many persons ; I would recommend 
you to move forward." 

"The road is a little narrow, to be sure," returned 
Mr. M'Dow, " but I can fall back a step or two, and 
at the same time enjoy the advantages of the good 
company I have been so fortunate as to fall in with ; 
besides it's rather steep for my beast, who's not just 
so sure-footed as she has been, and so I prefer walk- 
ing ; not that I'm just so encumbered as the poor 
Highland postman, who said he could not get on, 
because he was sair taigled with a horse ! — hoch, ho, 
ho ! " — but the hills only echoed Mr. M'Dow's laugh, as 
he met with no interruption from either of his com- 
panions. Sir Reginald was chafing in fiery silence, 
and Lady AValdegrave's bonnet concealed her face. 



DESTINY. 29 

But, still bent on making himself agreeable, he pushed 
close up to Lady Waldegrave, again offering his arm. 
" Your Ladyship appears much fatigued ; had you not 
better accept additional help ? " A cold and haughty 
bow was the only answer vouchsafed. Nothing 
daunted, Mr. M'Dow went on — " We have not here 
the conveniences that you have in foreign parts," he 
continued; "I'm told they carry the ladies over the 
mountains in sedan-chairs, and that puts me in mind 
of what happened to a countryman of ours, Sir Eegi- 
nald, when he first went to Edinburgh. He had been 
invited to a fine party, and he thought he would treat 
himself Avith a chair for gentility's sake. But, lo and 
behold ! the chair Avanted the bottom ; the chairmen 
were in a burr}-, and away they trotted, up one street 
and down another, the poor gentleman's body in the 
chair, and his feet racing aAvay through the dirt ; quo' 
he, ' An 'twerena for the honour o' the thing, 'troth I 
Avad ha'e preferred plain Avalking ' — hoch, hoch, ho ! " 
In this manner Mr. JM'Doav Avent on, beguiling, as he 
thought, the AA-eariness of the AA^ay to his companions, 
Avhose silence he attributed solely to fatigue. 

There AA^as no shaking off the minister. As there 
Avas a near cut to Auchnahashnish through Glenroy 
grounds, he kept in close contact till AAathin a short 
distance of the Castle, AA'hen, Avith many regrets and 
apologies at not being able to pay his respects to his 
AA'orthy paAA' tron, he made his parting speech : — " Well, 
Sir Reginald, I hope you Avill soon giA-e me an oppor- 
tunity of doing as I am going to be done by ; and no 



30 DESTINY. 

doubt, my Lady, I shall have the pleasure of seeing 
you officiating as best maid on the occasion." Then 
mounting his Amailye, he rode off. 

Intolerable as his presence had been, his absence 
was scarcely less supportable in the present state of 
the parties, and his departure was followed by a 
silence. It was not till they had almost reached the 
house that Reginald was impelled to break it, when, 
in an agitated voice and manner, he said, "Florinda, 
I have still much to say — you must hear me — you 
must do me justice — I cannot live under the sense of 
your displeasure — of your contempt," he added, as 
she withdrew her arm from his, saying coldly, "Ex- 
cuse me ; I am too much fatigued to resume a subject 
which had perhaps better never have been revived." 

"I am sick of life!" he exclaimed passionately. 
" Do not, then, drive me to desperation ! Promise 
me, at least, that you will again hear me ! " 

"Perhaps — another time — not now," said Lady 
Waldegrave, as they entered the house; and she 
hastily quitted him, aware that she had left him in a 
state of mind which would not allow him to rest till 
he was again at her feet. 



CHAPTER III. 

Lady Elizabeth's natural anxieties might possibly 
have been suppressed at the opera, but Avere not to 
be restrained at church. And after having for some 
time disturbed the devotions of the congregation by 
her fidgeting and whispering, she at length left the 
church, accompanied by Edith, who was obliged to 
order the carriage and return home with her. On 
arriving there, they learnt that the object of all this 
solicitude had gone to her own apartment much 
fatigued, and thither her Ladyship repaired, while 
Edith obeyed a summons to her father. She found 
the Chief seated in his gouty chair, with no very be- 
nign aspect; Benbowie slumbering Ijcside him; and 
Mrs. Macauley fronting them with a serious-looking 
book in her hand. 

"This is a pretty way I'm treated,'' was his saluta- 
tion to Edith. " I've sent at least ten times this last 
hour for Reginald or you, and it seems it's only now 
you think it worth wliile to come ! I don't believe 
there's one of my own hounds that's neglected in the 
manner I am. Where's your cousin 1 Where's Regi- 
nald? I ask, where is he?" Edith (who had seen 



32 DESTINY. 

her father just before going to church) hastened to ex- 
plain matters, but the explanation was received with 
high disdain. 

" You've been all very ill employed in wandering 
after preachers, and leaving me here with no other 
company than these two creatures," pointing to Ben- 
Ijowie and Mrs. Macauley ; " the one squirting tobacco 
in my face all day, the other deaving me with her 
impertinent trash of sermons." 

" Oh now, Cxlenroy ! how can you speak that way, 
when you know the only sermon I've read to you to- 
day is that beautiful discourse on meekness by" 

"And what the plague have I to do with dis- 
courses on meekness?" stamping with his crutch as 
he spoke. 

"That's true — very true, on my conscience," said 
Benbowie, roused by the stroke of the crutch. 

"Meekness!" rejoined Glenroy; "hah, a pretty- 
like thing, to be sure, for a Highland Chief; he 
Avould cut a pretty figure with meekness indeed ! 
Meekness — meekness? — meanness !" 

"Ah, Glenroy, for all that, I wish I saw you 
clothed in meekness ! " sighed Mrs. Macauley. 

" Clothed in meekness ! pretty-like clothing, indeed, 
for a Highland Chief ! " cried Glenroy furiously. 

"'Deed, then, Glenroy, I'm thinking, after all. 
Highland Chiefs are but human craaturs," said Mrs. 
Macauley, looking as if the idea had for the first time 
entered her mind. 

"You really — there's no bearing this! I desire, 



DESTINY. 33 

Molly Macauley, you'll take that methodistical-looking 
book out of my sight this moment, and never let me 
see or hear of it again. These puritanical books are 
enough to drive a man out of his senses. I hate 
meekness ! by Jove, if I had not the patience of 
Job, I would not submit to this ! Benbowie, ring the 
bell — ring it louder. It's very hard that I can't get 
a word of my own nephew in my own house." 

Benbowie, now roused from his slumber, followed 
Mrs. Macauley and her volume of sermons out of the 
room, as Reginald entered. Edith was struck ■with 
the paleness and dejection of his countenance, on 
which the recent traces of agitation were still visible ; 
and a wild, nameless fear agaui darted through her 
mind. 

"Come away, Eeginald," cried Glenroy, extending 
his hand to him, " come away, it's long since I've seen 
you ; but, I know, it's not your fault, it's these foolish 
women that take you up — but you should not mind 
them, Reginald. And when's that English set going 
away, Edith — what's keeping them here all this time 1 
If they expect to see any more of me, they're much 
mistaken, I can tell them. My foot shall not cross 
my own room door till I've seen their backs turned ; 
but let them go or stay, don't you trouble your head 
about them, Reginald. I see you're quite done out, 
dancing attendance on them ; but I must put a stop 
to that, and the best way to do it is to get you 
married to Edith, and then you can give all your 
time and attention to me. Where arc you going, 

VOL. II. D D. 



34 DESTINY. 

Edith ? Come iDack this moment — going away at the 
very time I'm settling yom^ marriage, you silly 
thing!" 

Edith, with her face in a glow, stopped irresolute ; 
but, in her confusion, saw not the increasing paleness 
and look of agony which stole over Reginald's 
features. 

"You know I'm to have the woods thinned for 
her portion, and I'll ride there some day with you 
myself, Eeginald, and you shall have out the black 
mare. It w^as a good one that Loi'd what-do-you-call- 
him having the impudence to ask me to part with 
that mare. Norman's mare ! he would have had 
Edith too ; but I never would give her to any man 
living but yourself, Reginald. But this is the 2oth 
of the month — is it nof? Well, let it be in the 
course of the next month, and that gives time enough 
to get all her trumpery, and to in\dte the county to 
it. The sooner the better — and then, Reginald, we'll 
part no more," — with a fervent shake of the hand. 
Much more of the same sort.followed, while Sir Regi- 
nald, with a sick and an aching heart, articulated 
some indistinct words, Avhich, however, passed very 
well with Glcnroy. At length he was liberated by 
the sound of the dressing-bell. 

Late and tardily the party assembled in the draw- 
ing-room. Edith naturally shunned the possibility of 
a tete-a-tete with her lover, after what had passed in 
her hearing about the marriage ; and he, as may be 
supposed, was not more desirous of meeting with 



DESTINY. 35 

one the very sight of whom spoke daggers to his 
conscience. 

Dinner had been announced some time before 
Lady Elizabeth made her appearance, which she at 
last did in her morning dress, and -with visible marks 
of business and bustle in her deportment, 

"Excuse me, my dear child," said she to Edith, 
" for coming to dinner en deshabille ; but since I saw 
you, I have been so hurried I really scarcely know 
Avhat I am about. Florinda — (who, by-the-bye, begs 
that 3'ou will excuse her appearing at dinner, as she 
still feels rather ahattu, from the WTetched walk she 
had ; but Dr. Price assures me a little rest is all that 
is necessary) — has had an express from the Duchess 
of Porchester, who, it seems, is come with the Duke to 
his shooting-box, entreating us to go to her imme- 
diately. Florinda begged I would show her note to 
you, that you may see how impossible it is to refuse. 
There are no secrets in it ; I shall read it aloud : — 

"'My dear Lady Waldegrave — I have this 
instant learnt you are at Glenroy, consequently not 
more than thirty-six miles from us, which, according 
to Highland geography, is about the same distance as 
between Piccadilly and St. James's. Judge, then, of 
my impatience to have you here. Do oblige me, and 
come immediately ; I have a very particular reason for 
Avishing you to be here before the 27th. I cannot 
express how much you will gratify me by coming. 
We have a perfect host of your adorers here, and 



36 DESTINE". 

now that they are tired of shooting grouse, I fear 
they will take to shooting themselves, unless you 
come to us ; and then, perhaps, they will only shoot 
one another. I hioiv you will come, dearest dear 
Lady Waldegrave, and oblige your affectionate friend, 
" ' Charlotte Porchester. 

" ' As horses are not quite so plenty as heather in 
this charming country, the Duke begs me to say he 
will send his to meet you at the (I can't spell the 
word) ferry opposite Gknroy, Avind and weather 
serving, to-morrow, as they surely will, to oblige you 
and me and half-a-dozen dying swains and desperate 
inamoratas. This will save you about a thousand 
miles, more or less. Of course when I say you, I in- 
clude Lady Elizabeth and Madame Latour, and all 
near and dear to you. I enclose a billet to Sir Eegi- 
nald, although, I suppose, if reports speak truth, I 
need scarcely hope he will leave his fiancee — but why 
should not she come tool Tell Miss Malcolm this, 
with all sorts of proper speeches on the occasion.' " 

" Ah ha. Sir Reginald ! thereby hangs a tale which 
we must have some day," cried Lady Elizabeth, for- 
getting, in the exhilaration of her spirits, all previous 
antipathies felt and expressed. "That's just as it 
should be," glancing from him to Edith; "but I 
understand," nodding her head, "I shall keep your 
secret, though you scarcely deserve it, for having kept 
it so well yourselves — ha, ha, lia ! But in the mean- 



DESTINY. 37 

time, it is very sad," addressing Edith with an air of 
childish delight quite at variance with her words, "to 
be obliged to leave you so soon, when we were all so 
happy and comfortable ; but those things are unavoid- 
able. Florinda really never has been in spirits since 
we came here, and my own health sufiered a good 
deal. In short, I think we shall all be the better of 
a change. At the same time, I think I did right in 
coming here. I feel more comfortable at having seen 
poor Glenroy, and I flatter myself I have done him a 
little good. I said all I could to raise his spirits, poor 
man, and I think I succeeded ; and, hp-opos, I believe 
I must endeavour to see him again before I go, just 
to bid him good-bye. We must hope, however, to 
meet in town by-and-by. I think I have half per- 
suaded Glenroy to bring you there next winter; indeed 
I am sure he will ; but perhaps you will go with us to 
Kinmore — why should not you, my dear ? You will 
be much the better of a little. gaiety — you are too 
much moped here. Apropos, Sir Eeginald, I hope 
Florinda sent you the note that came enclosed for 
you from the Duchess 1" 

Sir Eeginald merely bent his head in acknowledg- 
ment, as he advanced, and offered his arm to conduct 
her Ladyship to dinner, while she continued chattering 
all the way along. 

They were seated before IMadame Latour joined 
them, and when she did, her spirits seemed no less 
excited tlian Lady Elizabeth's, at the prospect of ex- 
changing Glenroy for Kinmore; and both were so 



38 DESTINY. 

talkative duiing dinner, that the silence of the rest 
of the company was as much a matter of necessity as 
of choice. Lady Elizabeth talked of the anticijDated 
pleasures of Kinmore, of the charming Duchess, and 
her brother, Lord Errington, who was dying for love 
of Florinda, and for whom she thought Florinda had 
a sort of a nuance of preference ; and she appealed to 
Sir Reginald, who sat pale and frowning, as if scarcely 
able to endure the nonsense she uttered. 

" I'm sure, Miss Edith, you may be thankful you 
are not a great heiress," said the simple-minded Mi-s. 
Macauley ; " for you may be sure you will be married 
for true love, and for nothing else." 

"Oh! unquestionably," cried Lady Elizabeth; "my 
daughter's rank and fortune, together with her beauty 
and talents, render her, beyond comparison, the most 
rechercM person in the world. She will be sadly 
teased, poor love ! amongst such a crowd of adorers, 
as the Duchess calls them." Sir Eeginald here rose 
and rang the bell violently ; then, when the summons 
was answered, seemed at a loss what to ask for. 
Edith gazed on him with surprise and fear, and again 
a strange wild suspicion flashed upon her as she 
encountered the mahgnant smile of Madame Latom-. 
" And now let us arrange something about our journey 
to-morrow. We must start early — by twelve, if pos- 
sible. That won't be too early for me, Dr. Price? 
You will arrange everything for me, as usual, you 
know. And, Sir Eeginald, I hope Ave shall have your 
company ; or, if you would prefer it, perhaps Florinda 



DESTINY. 39 

Avill give you a seat in licr carriage ; don't you think 
so, Madame Latour?" 

But Sir Eeginald had caught Edith's eye fixed upon 
him with an expression of the most intense anxiety ; 
and before Madame Latour could reply, he made a 
strong effort at regaining his composure ; and, with 
the tone and manner of suppressed agitation, he hastily 
said — " I regret I cannot have that honour ; I am 
otherwise engaged." And as he spoke he became 
very pale. 

"Ah, engaged !" cried her Ladyship, who, when in 
good humour, was always in high spirits. " That is 
a very significant word, and we must find out the 
meaning of it. Come, my dear," taking Edith's arm, 
" you can perhaps tell me the nature of Sir Reginald's 
engagement? — What a very pretty blush," she whis- 
pered, as they were leaving the room. " Madame La- 
tour, don't you think Edith blushes uncommonly well?" 

"Mais oui," replied Madame Latour ; " je voudrois 
que Miss Malcomb, put donner un peu de ses belles 
couleurs au pauvre Sir Reginaal, il est si pale ! II a 
Fair, vat you call unapee." 

"By-the-bye, now that you mention it, I think he 
does look a little paler and thinner, and more gi-ave 
than he used to do," said Lady Elizabeth; "but I 
have observed that some men do look rather grave 
when they are going to be married." 

" Sir Eeginaal marrie !" exclaimed Madame Latour, 
in real or aff'ected astonishment — "c'est ne pas pos- 
sible ! II me semble mourant — mourant de chagrin 



40 DESTINE'. 

— de desespoir — de non — non ! je ne le crois pas, 

Meess Malcomb ; assur^ment ce n'est pas vrai — vous 
ne le croyez pas ?" And Madame Latour fixed her 
eyes on Edith, who, trembling as she was with emo- 
tion, despised her too much to betray it. 

"Come, come," cried Lady Elizabeth, "we have 
said quite enough on that subject;" then putting her 
arm within Edith's, and drawing her a little aside — 
" Yes, 'tis as I hinted before, she certainly had a de- 
sign in that quarter — how very absurd, poor woman, 
that she cannot conceal her disappointment ! How 
any one can admire her eyes ! and do you observe 
liow frightfully her head is dressed to-day^ And 
now, my dear, come to my dressing-room, and let me 
hear all about this marriage of yours, that you have 
kept such a profound secret." 

On entering the dressing-room, such a tumultuous 
greeting took place between the dogs and their mis- 
tress that Edith was spared the embarrassment of a 
reply. 

" We shall be quiet here," continued Lady Eliza- 
beth, throwing herself into a chaise longne, while the 
dogs continued to bark and cough out their welcome ; 
" quiet is absolutely necessary to me in my dehcate 
state of health. You will find a seat somewhere, my 
dear," casting her eyes around on the various chairs, 
^v'hich were covered with dresses, hats, and caps. 
"Rosalie," she called to her maid in the inner apart- 
ment, " Otez ces berets at ce manteau, et avancez une 
chaise pour mademoiselle. Now, my dear, never 



DESTINY. 41 

mind her, she don't understand a word of English ; 
but, apropos (ring the bell first, I must speak to Rous- 
seau about putting new strings to my guitar before we 
go) — well, and so you were telling me — I forget how it 
was you and Sir Reginald first became acquainted — 
is not that a knock at the door 1 How tiresome ! See 
Avho it is, my dear, — Oh, Dr. Price, is that you? 
come in. — I must beg you will see the housekeeper 
yourself about the refreshments we shall require in 
the carriage ; you know how little I eat, but I find 
variety absolutely necessary for me ; in fact, my dear, 
the stomach requires to be amused as well as the 
mind" — turning to Edith — "and that is a secret 
worth knowing." But the secret was lost on Edith, 
who had taken the opportunity of Doctor Price's 
entrance to make her exit 



CHAPTER IV. 

Without a general knowledge of human nature, the 
particular study of an individual is of little use in 
enabling us to draw accurate conclusions as to the 
effect events may produce on the mind ; for, as some 
one has truly said, there is nothing so inconsistent as 
consistency. Edith thought she knew her father 
sufficiently to be certain he would rejoice at hearing 
of the approaching departure of his lady, and she 
therefore hastened to his apartment to communicate 
the pleasing intelligence ; but, to her utter surprise, 
it was received with every symptom of dissatisfaction 
and displeasui'e. 

"Going away to-morrow!" he repeated, at least 
half-a-dozen times ; " that is the most extraordinary 
thing I ever met with in the whole course of my life ! 
I can scarcely say I have seen her, the mother, yet ; 
and the other one, the daughter, I've never once set 
eyes upon ; and I don't so much as know yet what 
brought them here at all What's taking them away 
in such a hurry 1 The duchess of nonsense ! what 
do I care for the Duchess of Porchester^ they did not 



DESTINY. 43 

come here to visit her, but to see me ; and it's quite 
inconceivable to me what's taking them away. I 
can't make it out ; there's something I don't under- 
stand in it — there's something not right — ^there's some- 
thing quite wrong ! They must have been ill used 
since they came to the house, or they would not be 
leaving it so soon. How has that simpleton Molly 
Macauley been behaving herseK 1 that creatm^e really 
has not the sense of a sparrow — to go away, too, at 
the very time of your marriage. Ring the bell. I 
shall have this cleared up ; they shall not leave this 
house till I know the reason of such behaviour. 
What's keeping that fellow Duncan? ring again. I 
Avant him to help me to dress, for I'm coming to the 
drawing-room. I must know the meaning of this. 
So go away now, and don't let mo hear any of your 
nonsense. I shall go," stamping his crutch, " if I 
should go on the crown of my head." 

And Edith, knowing how vain expostulation was, 
withdrew, trembling at the thoughts of another scene 
between the Chief and his lady, and anticipating an 
abrupt disclosure of her approaching marriage. She 
next sought Florinda ; but she was denied admittance 
to her, on the plea of her Ladyship's headache bemg 
so bad she was unable to see any one, save Madame 
Latour, who was as usual closeted with her. She 
then repaired to Lady Elizabeth, to acquaint her with 
what had passed with her father, and to try, if 
possible, to prevail upon her to gratify him, if he 
should be very pressing Anth them to remain a little 



44 DESTINY. 

longer at Glenroy, But her Ladyship was busy direct- 
ing and superintending the movements of her attend- 
ants, in packing the variety of litter which still lay 
scattered around, such as dresses, jewels, music, writ- 
ing and drawing implements, French novels, drugs, 
etc. etc. She therefore scarcely listened to her, and 
only answered the invitation she gave in her father's 
name for a longer stay, by a quick and peremptory 
refusal, or a slight acquiescence as to meeting him in 
the drawing-room. Vexed and j)erplexed, poor Edith 
knew not where to turn ; there was no one near to 
Avhom she could speak of the untoward aspect of 
affairs, still less to whom she could apply for advice 
and assistance. To Eeginald, who had once used to 
be her confidant and counsellor, she now felt an 
unaccountable reluctance to have recourse ; an in- 
visible but impassable barrier seemed to have been 
raised between them; but by whom she could not 
tell ; it was something she felt, but could neither 
describe nor comprehend. Such was the tenor of her 
thoughts as she sat alone in the drawing-room, her 
head resting on her hand, and the tears uncon- 
sciously dropping from her eyes, when the door 
opened, and the object of her meditations entered, 
with an air of dejection and gloom. He gazed on 
her for some moments, but said nothing. Edith 
could not speak, but her tears fell faster. Eeginald 
sighed, but it was a sigh that breathed more of dis- 
content and displeasure than of sympathy or sorrow. 
He remained for some time as if struggling with his 



DESTINY. 45 

emotion ; then, in an agitated voice, he said, " Edith, 
you appear to be unhappy'?" 

Edith struggled against her feehngs, and with a 
melancholy smile replied, "Only sorrowful." 

"And why sorrowful 1" demanded Sir Reginald. 
" After what has passed, I did not expect — I flattered 
myself — I — if there is any cause " 

Edith sighed, and, in spite of her efforts to restrain 
them, tears continued to drop from her eyes. 

" For Heaven's sake, Edith, tell me, I conjure yon, 
as you value my peace, as you value your own — tell 
me the cause of your tears, of your sorrow'?" 

"I cannot tell," said Edith, with emotion; "I 
scarcely know myself ; but strange, vague, undefined, 
but very painful feelings, take possession of me." 

"You did not use to be fanciful or vapourish," 
said Reginald, looking earnestly at her. 

" Nor am I now," said Edith, more firmly ; 

" but " she stopped, and her voice quivered, 

"we speak a strange language to each other now, 
Reginald — it was not thus we were wont to talk in 
former times." 

"And whoso fault is that, Edith'?" he asked 
abruptly, as he stooped to caress his dog to hide 
his confusion. 

" Not mine," replied she faintly. 

Sir Reginald raised his head, but his eyes were 
still fixed on his dog, while he said, in a quick, hurried 
manner, "Yet after what passed to-day, a few hours 
ago, in your father's presence, it seems somewhat 



46 DESTINY. 

strange that I should find you thus apparently 
wretched." 

" Ah, Eeginald ! you did not use to speak thus 
hardly to me," said Edith reproachfully, as she strove 
to dispel her tears. 

"I did not use to see you look as if you were 
going to be sacrificed," he rephed, with increasing 
harshness of manner. 

"You hnow it is not so," said Edith tenderlj^, and 
she blushed as she said it. 

Eeginald made no reply. Edith gathered courage, 
and Avent on — "But were I to judge thus of you, 
what might I not think ? what ought I not to think f 

Reginald's colour rose, and for a few seconds he 
seemed as if at a loss how to reply; he then said, 
"Of course, I might have expected that accusation 
would be answered by recrimination; had I com- 
plained of your spirits being too high, you would 
to a certainty have replied that 'twas because mine 
were so boisterous; 'tis the way, not with all, but 
with a gTeat part of yo.ur sex, Edith." 

Edith's heart swelled at this taunt, but she made 
an effort to repress her feelings, and with toleral^le 
calmness said, "If I am the foolish, unreasonable 

creature you represent me to be, you cannot wish " 

her voice failed her, but she added, in a faltering 
accent, "We had better part." 

This was the very point to which her faithless 
lover had, unconsciously to himself, been aiming to 
bring her, that the odium of the quarrel might rest 



DESTINY. 47 

upon her ; but, though blinded by selfish passion, he 
was not so lost to every generous feeling as not to be 
smitten with a sense of his own injustice and cruelty. 
Passion and conscience struggled in his breast, and, 
averse to yield entirely to either, he sought to com- 
promise betv/eeu them. 

"Edith," he said with emotion, "your happiness 
is dear to me as my own ; if it is to be attained by 
my relinquishing my right to your affections — Edith, 
is it sol — Speak to me, I implore you." And he 
grasped her hand, and gazed intensely on her face, on 
which deep l^lushes and deathly paleness alternately 
succeeded each other. 

"Tell me," cried Eeginald, Math increasing vehe- 
mence, " what it is you wish — what you would have 
me do 1 and you shall be gratified, even at the expense 
of my own happiness; more I cannot say." And he 
dropped the hand he held. 

"I have no wish, Eeginald," said Edith faintly, 
" but to see you such as you were in former happy 
days." 

" That can never be," interrupted he impatiently. 
" I have told you I am changed. I have kno"\Aai suffer- 
ing, and anguish — and 1 can never be as I have 

been. If that is a crime in your ejxs, then I ain most 
culpable." 

" No, Eeginald, you Avrong me," cried Edith, in 
tender emotion. " Perhaps I wrong you ; yet strange 
doubts will arise in spite of all — misgivings of — I 
know not what, Eeginald ; I would fain tell you what 



48 DESTINY. 

I sometimes think — what I fear — but the dread of 

hurting you " 

She stopped in extreme agitation, without daring 
to raise her eyes to Eeginald, who remained silent, 
and evidently not less embarrassed than herself. The 
wished -for yet dreaded idairdssement seemed now 
on the point of taking place, and he feared alike to 
aid or impede it. Edith alone should be the destroyer 
of her own happiness. She might wrest from him 
the secret of his heart ; she might tear aside the veil 
in which he had sought to shroud the image he 
adored ; she might rush into the sanctuary of his in- 
most thoughts, after he had warned her that there 
was a point at which she must stop. But never — 
no, never — should his lips breathe that name to her. 
Never should his be the hand to rend away her de- 
lusion. Where, then, was the injustice he should be 
guilty of? Who, then, could dare to say he had 
wronged her? Such was the sophistry with which 
the slave of passion strove to silence the small still 
voice of conscience, while he hung in agonising sus- 
pense on the word that should next issue from Edith's 
lips, as that which was to seal both their dooms ; but 
the stroke was yet averted. Both were roused from 
this state of mute but high-wrought feeling by the 
bustle which invariably attended Glenroy's approach, 
and presently the Chief entered, leaning on his servant, 
and shuffling along with great difficulty, attended by 
Mrs. Macauley and Benbowie. In the agitation of 
her spirits, Edith felt unable to stand the scrutiny 



DESTINY. 49 

even of such common observers as these, and she was 
hastily retreating, when recalled, in an authoritative 
voice, by Glenroy, who never could bear to see any- 
body leave the room while he was in it. 

"What's the meaning of this?" cried he in his 
loudest key; "going out of the room just at the 
moment I'm coming into it? Is that a proper be- 
haviour? I really think you ought to be ashamed of 
yourself, Edith. Is that the way you welcome your 
old father to the use of his feet ?" 

"Oh, papa!" said Edith, taking his hand, "how 
can you doubt " 

"How can I doubt? What am I to doubt?" in- 
terrupted Glenroy peevishly. " I'm for none of your 
doubts — I hate doubts. I desire I may never see or 
hear of doubts, for I despise them. / never doubt — 
I never did doubt — and never will doubt, for I hate 
all doubtful characters. So come you here, Eeginald, 
and sit by me, for I know there's nothing doubtful 
about you — all's open and above-board with you. 
Now, Mrs. Macauley, I desire you to hold your tongue 
for the rest of this evening ; haven't I been deaved 
with it the whole of this day, and do you think I'm 
going to submit to be preached to by you any longer ? 
I'll do no such thing," stamping his stick. 

"Well, but, Glenroy, as sure as death I'm not 
speaking." 

" Not speaking ! you never give over speaking — 
your tongue never lies ! but I'm for no speaking at 
present; so hold your tongue, and order the coffee, 

V^OL. II. E ». 



50 DESTINY. 

and go and see what's keei^ing Lady Elizabeth and 
the rest of them — I'm waiting for them — I don't 
nnderstand it. I must know what's the meaning of 
this ; for I'll not suffer either my oa^ti character or 
the character of my house to be aspersed ; however, 
I shall have it all cleared up before this night is over, 
and unless they choose to stay to your marriage " 

"I beg — I — I entreat, Glenroy — I," stammered 
Reginald, violently agitated. 

"Ay, ay, I understand what you would say," in- 
ternipted Glenroy, "and you shall have everything 
your own way, Reginald ; you know you're as much 
master here as I am, and more too, for I'm grown a 
perfect cipher in my o-\vn house now. I've no more 
authority than if it didn't belong to me. But there's 
one thing I'm determined upon, and that is, that there 
shall be no more of this shilly-shallying by these silly 
women, but that you shall have your own way, Regi- 
nald, and be married before you're a month older, so 
don't say another word about it — there has been a 
great deal too much talking already. I never knew 
any good come of talking — I daresay it's just that 
creature Molly Macauley's long tongue that has put 
everything wrong — she really ought to have her mouth 
stitched up !" 



CHAPTER V. 

Meanwhile JNIrs. IMacauley, anxious to do her part, 
was labouring away to keep the peace between Gleu- 
roy and his lady. As the first object in her hfe was 
the favour of the Chief, so she could not conceive 
that it was a thing to be lightly esteemed by anybodj^ 
else, much less by his own wedded wife. She there- 
fore gladly availed herself of the errand she had been 
despatched upon, to apprise Lady Elizabeth, at the 
same time, how greatly Glenroy was distressed at the 
thoughts of her departure. A piece of information 
Avhich she had no doubt would at once annihilate the 
whole scheme, and settle her at Glenroy for as long a 
time as it should be her lord's pleasure that she should 
remain. But all Mrs. Macauley's eloquence failed in 
producing any efiect on her Ladyship's feelings. 

" Oh, my Lady ! " said she, " you must not speak 
to Glenroy of going away, for 'deed he's so hospitable, 
and so used to be humoured, and to get everything 
liis own way (and that's no more than what he ought 
to get), that if he's crossed by your Ladyship, he'U be 
neither to hold nor to bind, good man that he is ! " 

" You don't mean to say I am in the power of a 



52 DESTINY. 

madman, and that I can't get away 1 " said her Lady- 
ship, in some alarm. 

" Oh no ! no at all ; there will nothing happen 
to you if you'll just be so good as let Glenroy take 
his own way, and be discreet to him ; and if he shall 
say black's white, if your Ladyship would just please 
to say the same ; and then, maybe, if you would be so 
good as to offer to stay to please him, he Avould then 
be ready to let you go." 

" It is excessively troublesome," said her Ladyship ; 
"really quite childish in Glenroy." 

" 'Deed, and it's a very odd fancy that's come on 
him," said the simple Mrs. Macauley; "and maybe 
he is now and then just a little of what you would 
call not just so clever and sensible as he used to be ; 
but then, you know, that makes it all the easier for 
your Ladyship to agree with him." 

" Certainly," said her Ladyship, " when a man is 
fairly in his dotage, he must be treated like a child ; 
and I shall make a point of seeing him, and doing all 
I possibly can to soothe and gratify him, without 
giving way to his whims." And with this laudable 
purpose in view, her Ladyship at length descended to 
the drawing-room. 

But in the interval Glenroy had got a new light 
on the subject; for Eeginald, upon being made 
acquainted with the cause of his disturbance, had 
given a decided opinion in favour of the ladies being 
allowed to take their departure ; and the point Avas 
settled by his saying — and he tried to say it coolly 



DESTINY. 53 

and steadily — that if they remained, he should take 
the opportunity of Glenroy having such agreeable 
company A\dth him to pass a few days at Dunshiera. 

"Well then, let them go," cried the Chief, and at 
that moment his lady entered, fully prepared to be 
pressed to stay. They met "uath mutual embarrass- 
ment, for the fear of losing Eeginald by anj'- indiscreet 
word restrained Glenroy from what he called speaking 
his mind ; and his lady, somewhat intimidated by Mrs. 
Macauley's representations, was no less guarded on 
her part. The salutations were therefore very well 
performed on both sides; and there was even con- 
siderable politeness evinced in the passing but guarded 
remarks that were made by each. Glenroy inquired 
after Lady Waldegrave, and received in reply a very 
rational and moderate apology for her non-appear- 
ance, on the plea of being over -fatigued by going to 
church — an excuse admirably adapted to conciliate 
the Chiefs favour. 

"But I hope, now you are so much recovered, 
Glenroy, I shall have an opportunity of presenting 
my daughter to you some day very soon," said her 
Ladyship, bent on conciliating him at the tnfllng ex- 
pense of truth ; nothing in reality being further from 
her wishes and intentions than that any such oppor- 
tunity should be aftbrded. 

"AMiy, I thought — didn't somebody tell me you 
were going to leave us?" said Glenroy, with some 
embarrassment. 

" Why, we ivere talking about it," replied the lady, 



54 DESTINY. 

^vith the ease of one accustomed to tell ivhite lies; 
" but since you are un^villing to part with us " 

" Oh no ! not at all," intennii^ted Glenroy con- 
fusedly ; " that's to say, I think people should always 
take their own way. I never interfere with any- 
body's plans — never, I let everybody do as they like." 

"On my conscience, I never knew that before!" 
said Benbowie, with a look of stupefied amazement ; 
" but it's very true — very true." 

"You are very kind, Glenroy," said his lady; 
"you know, the only plan I had in view by coming 
here was to have the pleasure of seeing you, and 
spending some time Avith you ; and I assure you, this 
visit has been a very great gratification to me. I am 
quite charmed to see you look so well, and to find 
you so comfortable." 

" You've seen much of my looks and comfort, or 
else not," muttered Glenroy, the pent-up storm ready 
to take any direction. 

" Not so much, to be sure, as I could have wished," 
said the lady in a tender tone ; " but quite enough 
to satisfy me that you are well and happy, Glenroy." 

""Well and happy !" repeated the Chief indig- 
nantly, " do you tell me I am well, when I can hardly 
put my foot to the ground with gout ? — and happj^, 
when I've lost the finest young man that ever was 
bom? Well and happy! — Avell and happy, to be 
sure ! " 

"Ah, to be sure, these arc things that can't be 
helped, Glenroy, and so we must bear them as well 



DESTINY. 55 

as we can ! But you have a charming house ; this is 
a noble ai^artment, and I do assure you I have been 
very comfortable, and I think my appetite, upon the 
whole, has improved while I have been here. Dr. 
Price thinks so too." 

" I know nothing about Dr. Price ; I don't desire 
to know anji-hing about any of your doctors ; I 
know I have no appetite — my appetite's completely 
gone ! " 

" Ah ! iDut it will return again, Glenroy. You 
ought to amuse yom" stomach ; in fact, the stomach 
requires to be amused as well as the mind. I hope 
you will enjoy your o^vn good dinners as much as 
some of your guests have done, I do assure yon, you 
keep an excellent table." 

" To be sure I do," said Glenroy scornfully. 

" The soups and fish ai-e excellent, which is not 
always the case in Scotland," continued the lady. 

"Everything is excellent at my table," said the 
Chief proudly. 

"Excuse me there, Glenroy, I cannot go quite so 
far ; for to own the truth, I do not think the vol au 
vents at all the thing. " 

" Vol au vents /" exclaimed Glenroy; "do you think 
I trouble my head about such trash 1" 

"Excuse me," said her Ladyship, with an air of 
offended dignity, "but I consider everything relating 
to a table as of consequence, and vol an vents are by 
no means so insignificant as " 

" They're so insignificant that I don't care if the 



56 DESTINY. 

whole race were swept into the sea. Vol au vents ! 
Let me hear no raore of such trumpery on my table, 
Edith, remember that ; I'm for none of your beggarly 
French, or your pock-pudding English dishes, made 
of nobody knows what. Vol au vents / the very scum 
of the earth!" 

" Oh, my Lady, if you please, you must just humour 
him," whispered Mrs. Macauley; and her Ladyship 
contented herself with a shrug of her shoulders, and 
a look of contempt. 

Madame Latour here entered the room, and was 
presented to Glenroy by his lady ; and no sooner was 
that introduction over than Dr. Price made his appear- 
ance, and the same ceremony had to be performed 
with him. This gave time for Glenroy's blaze to go 
down; and scarcely were the ordinary salutations 
over, when, forgetting the restraint laid upon him, he 
turned to his lady, and said — " If you choose to stay 
a little longer, I shall show you what a true Highland 
feast is, on their wedding-day," pointing to Reginald 
and Edith ; " of course you all know that my nephew 
and successor. Sir Ecginald, is to be married to my 
daughter Edith immediately." 

" Ah ! so I have just discovered," cried her Lady- 
ship gail)-. 

"Just discovered!" repeated Glenroy contemptu- 
ously ; "where were your eyes that you did not see 
it long ago 1 But, Edith, Avhat's the meaning of this 1 
and why have you been making a mystery of your 
marriage 1 It's most extraordinary — I don't under- 



DESTINY. 57 

stand it, for my part — a marriage that you've both 
reason to be proud of ! " 

Edith's confusion was too great to allow her to 
notice the anguish depicted on Eeginald's features, as 
the piercing gaze of Madame Latour was fixed upon 
him. 

"A very suitable match," said Lady Elizabeth; 
" very suitable indeed ; but I think Florinda will be 
a good deal surprised — don't you think so, Madame 
Latour f' 

With marked emphasis, Madame Latour replied, 
" Vraiment oui ! " 

"Surprised!" repeated Glenroy; "what is there 
to surprise anybody in that 1 I tliink it would have 
been very extraordinary if it had been anything else. 
Surprised — hem ! they must be easily surprised ! " 

" Why, you must own, Glenroy, it is surprising the 
secret should have been so well kept, that none of us 
suspected it before to-day." 

"Not suspect what's been known to every man, 
woman, and child about the place for these ten years at 
least 1 They've been sweethearts ever since they were 
the height of that table. Wasn't it on that account 
she refused that English lord — what do you call him? — 
with his thirty thousand a year, and that wanted his 
black mare 1 How long is it since your courtship 
began, Eeginald? — the very first day, I believe, that 
Edith and you were brought together, was it not?" 

"No, no, Glenroy," said his lady, attempting to be 
facetious ; "you forget that Florinda was his first love 



58 DESTKY. 

— was it not so, Sir Eeginald 1 But she was coy, or 
cruel, or — how was it?" 

Eegiuald attempted to laugh, hut it was a ghastly 
smile. 

"Well," resumed the lady, "we shall not talk of 
these things. I am sure Florinda will be delighted 
when she hears of what is to happen. Edith and I 
had a long confab in my dressing-room on the subject, 
and now I am quite au fait of the whole business ; but 
it's a pity we had not known it sooner — -we might have 
managed to have been present at the celebration — pos- 
sibly Florinda might even have officiated as brides- 
maid ; but it is too late now." 

"What's too late?" demanded Glenroy. 

" Oh ! nothing, nothing, papa," cried Edith hastily. 
What makes it too late ?" said the Chief, address- 
ing his lady ; " it's the most sensible proposal I ever 
heard you make — just stay where you are till the 
marriage is over, and it will be a fine ploy for your 
daughter ; she may never have another opj)ortunity of 
seeing a Highland wedding again, unless she can get 
a Highlandman for herself ; but she must let herself 
be seen if she expects to get a husband in this country.'" 

Lady Elizabeth trembled with indignation, and a 
little hysterical laugh rattled in her throat as she 
repeated, " Lady Waldegrave exjjed to get a husband 
in the wilds of Scotland — he, he, he !" 

"And why not?" demanded Glenroy, 

" Good heavens, Glenroy ! how can you talk so 1 
she who has the very fiower of England at her feet ! " 



DESTINY, 59 

" Flowers of England ! bah !~pretty-like floAvers, 
or else not— trash — weeds — that a Highland Chief 
would tramp beloAV his feet." And Glenroy stamped 
with his stick, thus fitting as far as he could the action 
to the word. 

" It is time — more than time — we were gone," said 
the lady, rising with an air of outraged dignity. 

" Eeginald, Edith," cried Glenroy, no less incensed, 
and throwing off all restraint, "hold both of your 
tongues ! — I'm fit to speak for myself, and Tivill say 
this is the most extraordinary behaviour ever I met 
with in the course of my life ! I wish to know the 
meaning of it. I wish to know what people mean by 
coming to my house, and then leaving it as if they 
weren't pleased with the treatment they had met 
with ; if there has been any offence given or taken, I 
can only say I am ignorant of it. It has not been 
with my knoAvledge, and I desire to know what 
brought you here, and what's taking you away?" 

"I have only to request, Glenroy," said his lady, 
still vibrating with anger, "that when you speak of 
Lady Waldegrave, it may be in more respectful terms 
than those you have just used." 

" Respectful terms ! " thundered Glenroy ; " I'll 
speak of nobody in respectful terms ! Respectful terms ! 
I don't know the meaning of the phrase ! I respect 
no man nor woman either, if she was lady fifty times 
over. It's very likely that I should respect your 
daughter, when I never did, and never will, respect 
my own, though she's going to be the wife of the man 



60 DESTINY. 

on earth that's the most entitled to respect ! But I 
sni)pose you're disappointed that you've not got him 
for your daughter. I susj^ect that's what's taking you 
away in such a hurry — it looks very like it." 

" This is not to be endured ! " cried Eeginald, 
starting up ; " allow me, Lady Elizabeth, to protect 
3^ou from further insult." And taking her arm within 
his, he led her from the room, his cheek flushed, and 
his whole air and deportment expressive of the utmost 
agitation. At sight of this manifestation of Reginald's 
displeasure, Glenroy was instantly subdued, and Edith 
was desjmtched to try to bring them back ; but Lady 
Ehzabeth had retired to her own apartment, and 
refused to listen to any overtures of peace or reconcilia- 
tion. Florinda and her friend remained invisible, and 
Eeginald was nowhere to be foimd. Finding all her 
efforts to reunite the jarring elements of the party 
were vain, Edith at last sought the privacy of her 
chamber to ponder over the events of the day, which 
weighed heavily on her spirits. 



CHAPTER VI. 

The following morning all was bustle and preparation, 
and nothing was to be seen but booted lackeys and 
bonneted abigails liurrpng to and fro, tlieir hands 
and arms filled with the thousand forget-me-nots per- 
taining to travellers of distinction. Lady Elizabeth 
(like many wiser people) had a great dislike to ferries, 
and at another time would have been almost frantic 
at the thought of ventm-ing so precious an argosy as 
the heiress of Waldegrave even on the smooth surface 
of a summer sea, for half an hour ; and indeed she 
did at fu'st vow and protest she never would hear of 
such a thing. However, she at length yielded, upon 
finding there was no other way in A^'hich the journey 
could be accomplished so rapidly, as even Glenroy's 
stables could not furnish the requisite number of horses, 
and there was no time to procure them from the nearest 
post-house. To allay her maternal solicitude, she 
made Reginald and Edith severally promise that they 
would accompany Florinda across the ferry, she her- 
self travelling to that point by land, where they were 
to meet, and proceed together to their destination. 
In the hurry and bustle of preparation, her Ladyship 



62 DESTINY. 

appeared to have forgot the fracas of the preceding 
evening, and it seemed to have had rather a salutary 
effect on Glenroy, as he declared to Mrs. Macauley, 
while she poured out his coffee for him, that he felt 
better than he had done for a long time, and that, if 
once the house were rid of them, he should be quite 
well. Lady Waldegrave did not appear at breakfast, 
and Edith in vain sought to find her alone, for the 
purpose of explaining to her, as far as she could, the 
situation in Avhich she stood with Sir Reginald. 
After what had passed — after she had been thus 
publicly proclaimed by her father as on the eve of 
her marriage — she thought she owed it to herself to 
say a few words to her on the subject, before they 
parted, perhaps for ever. It was also possible, too — 
but her heart trembled at the suggestion — that in so 
doing, she might discover whether there was any 
ground for the vague, nameless, shapeless fears which 
haunted her imagination. But Lady Waldegrave 
seemed carefully to shun all approaches to confidence, 
by taking care to keep either Madame Latour or her 
maid in constant attendance upon her to the very 
moment of her departure. Edith thought — but it 
might be fancy — that she looked disconcerted when 
she declared her intention of accorapanjdng her across 
the ferry ; but before there was time for anything to 
be said, she was suddenly called away by an impera- 
tive message from Glenroy. Upon hastening to him, 
she found the whole of his anxiety was to know when 
these people were going away, that he might have a 



DESTINY. 63 

quiet house, and that Reginald and slie might be at 
leisure to make out their marriage. As soon as she 
could extricate herself from her father, Edith went to 
rejoin Florinda, who was walking slowly down to the 
beach, leaning on Madame Latour, and followed by 
her attendants. Sir Reginald walked by them, but 
her head was averted from him, and he had an air of 
haughty mortification, as though his attentions had 
been rejected. 

" I hope, dear Edith, you won't think it necessary 
to take this voyage with me ])ar complaisance" said 
Florinda, in answer to a remark of Edith's that she 
feared an approaching shower. 

" You don't suppose I mind a shower on my own 
account?" said Edith. "It was only on yours, for 
you are not used to such buffetings of wind and 
weather as I am." 

" There is no occasion for your running any risks, 
however," said Reginald hastily. " I shall see Lady 
Waldegrave safe to Kinmore." 

"I beg I may not interfere with either Sir Re- 
ginald Malcolm's duties or pleasm'cs," said Ladj^ 
Waldegrave coldl3\ 

Edith was confounded ; her heart swelled as she 
thought — "He leaves me after all, and at Avhat a 
time ! " But she walked on in silence till tliey reached 
the boat. 

" I have ordered my horses to meet me at the ferry," 
said Reginald, addressing her in the same hurried 
manner; "and I shall probably return to-morrow." 



64 DESTINY. 

Edith's cheek flushed, to crimson ; but she caught 
Madame Latour's malicious eyes directed to her with 
a sort of triumphant sndle ; and making a \aolent 
effort to retain her composure, she said, "Having 
froni'ised Lady Elizabeth that I should make a point 
of accompanying Lady Waldegrave across the ferry, 
I feel bound to perform my promise." 

" But you "vvill have no one to return with you," 
said Reginald, evidently dissatisfied at this arrange- 
ment. Edith made no reply, for she could not speak; 
but she stepped into the boat, while Sir Reginald, 
having handed in Lady Waldegrave and Madame 
Latoui', leaped in and placed himself betwxen them. 

It was one of those bright breezy mornings, when 
the sun, careering amid an ocean of white flickering 
clouds, seems to smile as he beholds them driven 
hither and thither on the wings of the wind, now 
casting their broad shadows on the mountain side, 
now vieAving their own fair fantastic shapes in the 
depths of the clear waters. For a while the boat 
skimmed rapidly along; but the clouds seemed to 
hiu-ry still faster and faster, their soft fleecy forms 
gradually tiurning to one dense expanse of livid gray. 
The sea-fowl were seen fluttering before the impending 
storm. At length the distant roar of the thunder was 
heard reverberating amongst the mountains, while 
the wind, which had suddenly fallen, as suddenly 
rose to stormy gusts, accompanied mth driving sheets 
of rain. 

"You will get wet, I fear," said Sir Reginald, as 



DESTINY. 65 

he drew a boat -cloak round Lady Waldegrave, and 
wrapped her in it, with the manner of one whom anxiety 
rendered careless of common forms, Edith felt a 
pang at this action, trifling as it was ; but Reginald 
seemed unconscious alike of her presence or of Madame 
Latour's hysterical screams, for as the blast now raved 
Avith the fury of a mountain storm, that lady's cries 
for self-preservation increased in proportion. To those 
unaccustomed to the sudden and violent squalls which 
SAveep over the mountain firths, and give to them all 
the subHmity of power and danger, this was an appal- 
ling storm. The darkness of night hung around, but 
the raging waters were white Avith foam, and the little 
boat, now tossed to the clouds on the crest of some 
foaming billow, was as quickly precipitated into the 
yawning gulf, which seemed opening to receive it, 
Edith had witnessed similar scenes, and was too well 
accustomed to the capricious nature of inland naviga- 
tion to be as much alarmed as her more inexperienced 
companions. Still there was enough of the perilous 
to excite feelings of awe, which would have raised her 
heart in prayer to Him who rules the tempest, and 
stills the wave. But, alas ! one was there who stood 
even between her and heaven. Her eyes were fixed 
on Reginald, but Reginald's sought not hers — they 
were bent on Lady Waldegrave, with an expression 
of the most intense anxiety, and as she sat pale and 
trembling, uttering broken exclamations of alarm, he 
strove to soothe her by vehement assurances of safety 
and protection. But at length, as if overcome with 

VOL. TI. F D 



66 DESTINY. 

terror, she closed her eyes, and sank back, to all 
appearance lifeless. Then the long -repressed feel- 
ings of her lover's heart burst forth ; and, forgetting 
everything but that his adored Florinda lay dying 
— dead — before him, he threw his arms around her, 
called wildly upon her in broken accents of the most 
impassioned tenderness to revive, and be his — his life 
— his love ! and he placed her head on his shoulder, 
and hung over her as though his own life were at 
issue — again and again reiterating his vows of love, 
his fond entreaties. 

And where was the neglected, the forgotten Edith? 
As if transfixed with agony, she remained calm and 
motionless — her eyes distended, her pale lips apart; 
«he sat horror-stricken — speechless — and beheld each 
fond care that ought to have been hers lavished upon 
another. A thousand racks could not have inflicted 
the tortures she endured. A whole life of suffering 
had been concentrated into one moment, but that 
moment would cast a blight over her Avhole existence ! 

In a short time, however, the wind subsided, the 
rain ceased, the roar of the angry waters died away, 
and the sun once more began to struggle through the 
mass of black clouds which still encompassed him. 
The boat had been driven from its course towards 
the point of Inch Orran, and the crew, anticipating 
another squall, deemed it advisable to land. The 
progress of the little vessel had been anxiously 
watched from the house, and its hospitable inmates 
had hastened to the beach to welcome and assist the 



DESTINY. 67 

dripping passengers. Reginald, still reckless of all 
but his ovm selfish, soul -absorbing interests, bore 
Florinda iu his arms to shore ; but it was in silence, 
for his feelings were now suppressed when too late. 

When Edith was consigned by Captain Malcolm 
to the cordial embrace of his wife, she folded a mere 
living statue to her bosom ; no sound passed her Hps, 
no expression spoke in her eye — all was the silence 
and vacancy of palsied feelings — of stupefaction of 
heart. When conveyed to an apartment, Mrs. Mal- 
colm in vain had recourse to the usual remedies, or 
sought gently to soothe her scared spirits to the salu- 
tary relief of tears. Edith seemed like a bird which 
had escaped some deadly peril, only to sink down 
stunned and exhausted, to pant its life away. 



CHAPTER VIL 

It was not until he had seen Lady Waldegrave 
restored to consciousness, that Reginald awoke from 
the delirium into which his selfish, headstrong passion 
had thro"vvn him. He started as from a dream ; but 
at the same time he was conscious that it was a dream 
in which he had laid bare the inmost recesses of his 
heart — that he had given to the winds that secret 
which he had sworn should never pass his lips — and 
that in the very ear of plighted love he had pro- 
claimed the apostasy of his affection. His cheek 
burned with remorse and shame, even while — slave 
to passion !— his heart bounded with delight as one 
who had flung his fetters far from him. The barrier 
was now broken down which had separated him from 
his idol ; accident had now discovered to Edith that 
he loved another ; he never would have told her so — 
he never would have renounced her, but she might — 
she would — now renounce him — she might be happy 
too; and a tumult of \Adld contradictory feelings 
swelled in his heart as conscience and passion strug- 
gled for mastery. He waited with the most intense 
interest to hear how Edith bore the shock he well 



DESTINY, 69 

knew she must have sustained by this abrupt dis- 
closure of his infidelity ; and not even the witchery of 
Florinda's charms, as she appeared in renovated 
beauty, could so wholly engross him, but that both 
eye and ear were frequently turned from her to catch 
some tidings of Edith — dear Edith ! What would he 
not give to be assm-ed she was happy — as hapj^y as 
he should be when satisfied that he had not been the 
destroyer of her happiness ! Unable any longer to 
endure the workings of his own mind, he sent to re- 
quest that IVIrs. Malcolm would see him, if but for a 
single moment. 

Meanwhile, Mrs. Malcolm was keeping watch, by 
the couch of poor Edith. In the bustle that had pre- 
vailed at the landing of the little party, Eeginald's 
behaviour had passed unnoticed; and thus Edith's 
state of mind was inexplicable to one who had known 
her long, and had seen her, in circumstances of at 
least equal danger, evince the utmost strength of mind 
and self-possession. She had seen Lady Waldegrave 
for a few minutes, and had ex^iressed to her her sur- 
prise and alarm at Edith's abberration of mind ; but 
though she appeared shocked, she had hastily waived 
the subject, saying she herself had been wholly in- 
sensible to what had passed. As for Madame Latour, 
she was still too hysterical to be spoken mth ; nor, 
indeed, had it been otherwise, could she have thrown 
any light upon the subject beyond her own conjectures, 
as she and the attendants had all been too much agi- 
tated and absorbed in personal alarms to have eyes 



70 DESTINY. 

or ears for anything but their own danger. Aware 
of the impetuosity of Sir Reginald's feelings, Mrs. 
Malcolm was unwilling to excite them by a hasty 
disclosure of Edith's alarming condition. She had 
therefore quietly despatched a message for the nearest 
medical assistance, trusting that, in the meantime, 
silence and repose would gradually restore her mind 
to its right tone. But her gentle cares had hitherto 
been vain ; her hapless charge continued in the same 
state of mute, rigid suffering ; her breast heaving as 
if with some forbidden woe ; her eyes fearfully open, 
as though they gazed on some vision of affright. 

On receiving Sir Reginald's message, however, 
Mrs. Malcolm thought it best to comply with his re- 
quest. She found him in an adjoining apartment, 
pacing to and fro, in all the restlessness of excitement 
and suspense. It was so completely a part of that 
lady's character to speak the truth at all times, and 
in all circumstances, that it never occurred to her to 
dissemble, or give it any false glosses to serve a 
temporary purpose ; but she always spoke it with a 
sympathy and tenderness which usually disarmed it 
of its bitterest sting. But it was not from the fiery 
unregulated mind of Sir Reginald, that any truth, 
however gently told, which reproached his conscience 
and opposed his wishes, could meet with a submissive 
reception. Cautious and considerate as Mrs. Malcolm 
had been in her communications, he was stung to the 
soul by self-reproach, and gave way to the most vehe- 
ment expressions of anguish and despair. He had 



DESTINY. 71 

been, he said, the destroyer of one who was dear to 
him as his own life. He called Heaven to witness 
there was no sacrifice he was not ready to make for 
her happiness ; he had suffered much for her sake ; 
he would suffer all — anything — everything, to see her 
restored — he would see her himself — he would explain, 
everything. His happiness was in her hands — he 
never could know peace until he saw her well and 
happy — and, for the moment, he was sincere. But 
Mrs. Malcolm feared little for the passionate over- 
flows of that grief, excessive as it was, which could 
thus vent itself in outward manifestations. It was 
the silence of poor Edith's overcharged heart which 
alarmed her; but she strove, by mild and gentle 
words, to soothe Sir Reginald into composure, and at 
last succeeded in restoring him to a comparative degree 
of calmness. 

The surgeon soon after arrived, but as he possessed 
no more than common penetration, and in the course 
of his practice was little accustomed to minister to 
minds diseased, he saw nothing more than a mere 
nervous panic in the case. Having, therefore, admin- 
istered an opiate, and remained till it took effect, he 
recommended the patient to be kept perfectly quiet, 
and said he had no doubt but that he should find all 
well when he returned the following day. This was 
a load off Reginald's heart, and his buoyant spirit 
soon rose in proportion to its previous depression. 
Edith, he was sure, would soon surmount the shock 
she had sustained by his abrupt disclosure ; her 



72 DESTINY. 

sentiments would change, and all would yet be well. 
On hearing so favourable a report, Lady Waldegrave 
prepared for setting off to join her mother; for, 
although messengers had been despatched both to her 
and Glenroy, to acquaint them with the safety of the 
party, it was not to be supposed she would rest satis- 
fied with that, or that any other assurance, short of 
actually seeing her daughter, would quiet her natural 
fears. 

Florinda said she would have preferred remaining 
where she was, but that she knew Lady Elizabeth 
would not proceed Avithout her, and that she could 
not bear the thought of bringing so large a party, at 
such a time, to a house where quiet was enjoined. 
This seemed only what was considerate and reason- 
able, and Mr. and Mrs. Malcolm forbore to urge the 
invitation which their hospitality, rather than their 
inclination, had led them to make. They therefore 
followed that admirable precept — "Welcome the 
coming, speed the parting guest," and ordered their 
horses to be got ready to carry the travellers forward 
on their journey. 

" Althougli it is only a few miles from this to the 
ferry," said Captain IMalcolm, addi'essing Lady Walde- 
grave ; " yet as the road in some places borders rather 
too much on the sublime, I hope you "will allow me, 
faute de mieux, to escort you so far, that I may consign 
you into Lady Elizabeth's hands, past all peril by land 
as well as by water, I trust." 

Before Florinda could reply, Eeginald hastily inter- 



DESTINY. 73 

posed, and said, " Pardon me. Captain Malcolm ; but 
I undertook the office of conducting Lady Waldegrave 
to her friends, and therefore consider myself bound 
to see her safe under Lady Elizabeth's care." 

"It was an important trust that was committed to 
you, I admit ; but may you not delegate your authority 
to another, and appoint me your proxy V said Captain 
Malcolm, who supposed Sir Eeginald must be doing 
the greatest violence to his feelings in quitting Edith 
at such a time, even for a few hours. "What do 
you say Lady Waldegrave ? don't you think a staid 
old Highlander may be as safe an escort as a hot- 
brained young lover, who " 

"I have already said," cried Reginald, with a 
heightened colour, and in great embarrassment, "that 
I must see Lady WaldegTave to the ferry myself. 
The distance is short, and I shall find my own horses 
there, or most likely I shall take the boat in returning. 
At all events I shall be back here certainly within a 

few hours; and in that time " He stopped, in 

emotion. 

" And in that time," said Captain Malcolm kindly, 
"our dear charge will, I trust, have a refreshing 
sleep ; and that on yoiu' return you will find her per- 
fectly restored. I give you credit, Sir Eeginald, in 
thus sacrificing your own feelings to your sense of 
duty." 

Reginald turned hastily away. Florinda slightly 
blushed, while slic answered that she hoped Sir 
Reginald would not think it necessary to make any 



74 DESTINY. 

sacrifice on her account ; and she pronounced the 
word with emphasis. 

At that moment the carriage was announced, and 
Madame Latour, having composed her spirits, changed 
her dress, repaired her charms, and partaken plenti- 
fully of some refreshments, now made her appearance. 
Mrs. Malcolm, who had been with Edith, also entered 
to receive the adieus of the guests. She was struck at 
first with hearing of Sir Eeginald's intention of accom- 
panying the party so far on their way ; but, like her 
husband, she gave him credit for his sense of duty 
thus prevailing over his dearer interests, especially 
when she read the struggle of his mind depicted on 
his countenance. Nor did this evince any want of 
common penetration. Who can look back upon events 
in their own life without acknowledging that there 
were times when they could not discern those things 
face to face, which, viewed retrospectively, showed 
clear as noon-day 1 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Edith slept, but her sleep was short, and she awoke 
from it slowly and heavily ; her head confused ; her 
heart oppressed with a dreamy sense of ills too dread- 
ful to be endured ; a stunning sense of misery, occa- 
sionally roused to anguish, as long-cherished thoughts 
of happiness struggled with new and agonising feelings 
of misery. At length she put aside the curtain and 
gazed around with a bewildered and inquiring look. 
Mrs. Malcolm, who had been sitting anxiously watch- 
ing her, now approached, and in a tender yet cheerful 
tone accosted her ; but Edith at first only replied by 
a look of alarm and amazement, then, in a hurried 
manner, asked, "Where am 11" 

" With me, my love ; and you have been asleep." 

" Then I have dreamt ! " she cried quickly ; then, 
wildly clasping her hands, " And, oh ! Avhat a dream 
it was ! I would not tell it to any one — no, not for 
worlds !" 

"Try not to think of it either," said Mrs. Malcolm 
soothingly; "but close your eyes, and pray to CTod, 
Edith, love." 

"And yet, if it was a dream," interrupted Edith, 
"why am I hcrel and where is " and her eyes 



76 DESTINY. 

wandered round the room, then, sinking back on her 
pillow, she sighed, and said, "But it does not signify, 
since you say it was only a dream." 

She remained silent for some minutes, and Mrs. 
Malcolm hoped she had again fallen asleep; but quickly 
raising herself in bed, she said, in a hurried tone, 
" I must get up — that dream haunts me here — it is 
upon my pillow — it is in my head — it is upon my 
heart — I must get away from it." 

" Dearest Edith, you shall do as you please," said 
her kind, considerate friend ; "but will you not oblige 
me by remaining in bed for a little longer, and I will 
sit by you?" 

"But if it were a dream, why — why do I see 
nobody else — where are they?" she demanded, in a 
tone of forced, unnatural calmness. 

"Those you love best are all safe and well." 

"/love !" exclaimed she, "how should you knowl 
No one knows how /love — he knows it not himself." 
And her breast heaved with strong emotion. 

"Yes, dear Edith, there is one who knows you 
love him, but perhaps you know not how much he 
loves you, and how wretched he is about you." 

" About me ./" shrieked Edith ; " oh, no — no — not 
about me" and her whole frame shook convulsively. 

"Yes, dearest, even about you, and about no one 
else ; but there is some misunderstanding " 

"Do you tliink me mad?" cried Edith, quickly 
interrupting her; "if you do, you are much, very 
much mistaken." Then shaking her head mournfully, 



I 



DESTINY. 77 

"But if you knew what I know — if you had seen 
what I saw — if you felt what I feel — but nobody 
shall ever know, it shall all be buried with me, and 
there will be an end of it." 

Mrs, Malcolm saw that her feelings had sustained 
some rude shock, somehow connected Avith Eeginald, 
and she feared to name him in the present excited 
state of her mind ; she therefore tried another chord 
— a chord which, rightly touched, can never fail to 
vibrate in the feeling heart. 

" Yes, my love, when it is God's will we shall all 
die and be buried, and there Avill indeed be an end 
of our earthly sorrows; but, I trust, He will spare 
you to us yet a while; for what would become of 
your father, your old gray-haired father, Edith, if he 
should lose you, his only child f 

Edith's heart heaved high, and for a few moments 
she struggled violently with her feelings ; at last 
nature prevailed ; she burst into a passionate flood of 
tears, and throwing her arms round her friend's neck, 
wept long in silent anguish. 

Mrs. Malcolm made no attempt to check the genial 
current of feeling ; for she knew that the grief which 
can feel even despair is never so dangerous as that 
which benumbs the spirits, and bereaves it even of the 
sense of feeling ; and fragile as is the mould of the 
human heart, 'tis one which may be bruised, but is 
rarely broken by the first rude shock it sustains. Oh, 
the depth of that agony which some may feel and 
live ! Oh, the world of woe which may lie in the 



78 DESTINY. 

small compass of one solitary heart ! AVho can declare 
"all which may be borne and never told "? 

It was not by confiding the secret of her sorrow 
that Edith felt she could lessen the burden of it. No 
human voice could speak comfort to her soul ; no 
human hand could wipe away her tears ; no human 
thought could fathom the depth of her anguish ; no 
word of hers, therefore, should ever declare the wrongs 
she had endured. All she wished was to die ; and as 
she laid her head on her pillow, it was with the look 
of one who desired never to raise it again. 

Although the sense of this suffering lay deeper 
than she could discern, Mrs. Malcolm deemed it 
unwise to endeavour too hastily to penetrate to it, 
and she rather sought gradually to lead Edith to the 
disclosure of it herself. A long interval passed, 
during which Edith remained wholly absorbed in the 
anguish of her own spirit. 

" Is there no way in which a fond and faithful friend 
can help you, dearest Edith?" said her friend gently. 

"None !" answered Edith, in a voice so sad and a 
tone so deep as seemed to bar all attempts at gaining 
her confidence. 

"Not even by sharing your sorrow, my love?" 

"You cannot!" returned Edith in the same 
despairing accent. 

"But there is one Avdio may — one to whom you 
are still dear — one who has suff"ered much on your 

account " She stopped, for she saw Edith's pale 

features convulsed with agony. 



DESTINY. 79 

"Edith, dearest! is there nothing I can do for 
you ?" cried her friend, as her own tears fell on the 
cold trembling hand she held in hers. 

"Nothing !" said Edith, in the deep tone of ho^De- 
less miser}^, as she turned away. 

"Yet, dearest, together we may thank God that 
yoiu- senses are restored to you; together we may 
pray that He will lighten this load of anguish from 
your heart ; together we may ask of Him that His 
peace may calm your troubled spirit." 

"It cannot be," murmured Edith in a low, suffo- 
cated voice. 

Mrs. Malcolm was shocked, but she said, in a 
soothing tone, "Strive against such unworthj^, such 
unholy thoughts, Edith; and though you Avill not 
confide your grief to me, remember it is known 
to Him, who, doubtless for some wise purpose, has 
appointed this trial, whatever it is. Believe, dear 
Edith, only believe, that you are in the hands of a 
tender Father, an Almighty Protector, who can turn 
even our sorrows into blessings. I do not ask you 
not to weep, but I pray you may not yield to despair." 
Edith made no reply, but she suffered her hand to 
be held in those of her friend, while they were raised 
in suppHcation for her; and gradually her features 
relaxed into a softer expression of anguish. The con- 
vulsive heavings of her breast subsided, her tears 
again flowed freely, and her judicious friend, tenderly 
embracing her, left her for a little, as she lioped, to 
the repose of exhausted nature. 



CHAPTER IX. 

It is a common remark, that few things exercise a 
more baneful and despotic influence on the mind and 
feelings than an irregular or misplaced attachment; 
and Sir Eeginald formed no exception to this general 
rule. Shrinking from the contemplation of the torture 
he had inflicted on the true and tender heart which 
had so long and devotedly been his, he sought to stifle 
the sense of her wrongs in the charms of Lady "Walde- 
grave's society. It would have been agony to his 
selfish, fiery spirit to have waited and watched the 
slow progress of her recovery from the wound his own 
hand had inflicted; for to "suffer and be still" is 
perhaps one of the hardest lessons the proud heart of 
man can stoop to learn. He therefore strove by more 
active exertion to banish the distracting thoughts that 
filled his mind, and sought a temj)orary refuge from 
the upbraidings of his conscience in the flattering 
unction that he was doing his duty, even while desert- 
ing the victim of his perfidy for the author of her 
ruin. All this may appear inconsistent with a nature 
hitherto represented as amiable and generous. But 
there is a \'irtue and a generosity whose roots are in 



DESTINY. 81 

selfishness, and which, when brought to the test, will 
ever bear its worthless fruits. Xeither can consistency 
dwell in that heart whose only law is impulse, whose 
only stimulant is self-gratification. 

The presence of Madame Latour was some restraint 
upon the passionate overflow of his feelings. Much 
as he longed to lay open his whole heart to Florinda, 
he naturally shrank from displaying it to any other eye 
than that of love. Enough, however, passed on both 
sides to satisfy themselves that they were mutually 
beloved, and for the present that consciousness suf- 
ficed. On reaching their destination, they found 
Lady Elizabeth in all the fidgetiness of anxiety and 
impatience, and a foolish scene of weeping, chiding, 
exclaiming, caressing, ensued. It required a strong 
effort for Sir Reginald to tear himself away at the 
very time when Florinda seemed more his ovm than 
ever she had been ; when his love for her burst the 
barrier that had hitherto suppressed it, and Avithout 
explanation all had been explained, for all was under- 
stood and forgiven. Fain would he have lingered, 
and fainer still would he have accompanied her on her 
way, and guarded her from the host of rivals that 
would soon surround her. But having consigned her 
to the care of her mother, and seen both depart under 
the guidance of the Duke's servants, he had no longer 
an excuse for lingering, and with reluctant, though 
anxious heart, he returned to Inch Orran. 

Glenroy's impatience all this while knew no 
bounds. Captain Malcolm had gone in person to 

VOL. II. G D. 



82 DESTINY. 

relieve his anxiety, and to inform him, without enter- 
ing into particulars, that as Edith had been so much 
alarmed, there "was a necessity for her remaining 
quietly Avhere she was for the present. The Chief 
acquiesced, when assured there was no danger to be 
now apprehended, at the same time expressing great 
contempt at such womanish weakness. It was, he 
said, enough to provoke any man of common sense to 
see a woman giving herself such airs for a pufF of 
wind ; but it was all the fault of that silly creature 
Molly Macauley, who had made a perfect fool of the 
girl; and then, as usual, his anger was wreaked on 
that innocent victim. Captain Malcolm then took 
leave, with reiterated messages to Keginald to come 
to him immediately, as he could not live without him. 
On his return he met Sir Eeginald, just landed, and 
communicated to him his uncle's wish — a mark of his 
affection he could well have dispensed with in the 
present situation of affairs — to go to Glenroy, as his 
future son-in-law, at the very time when he had 
virtually renounced his daughter, and to have his 
marriage made the perpetual theme, when he knew 
that, in all probability, that marriage never would 
take place. It was torture to think of it, and he in- 
voluntarily exclaimed — "Impossible ! I cannot move 
from this till I know" — then, recollecting himself, he 
stopped. 

Captain Malcolm perceived his embarrassment and 
dissatisfaction, which he imputed to a different cause, 
and he said, "This is indeed hard work for you. Sir 



DESTINY. 83 

Eeginald, to be again called upon to sacrifice your 
own ■wishes to a sense of duty, but you may now do 
it with an easier mind. Miss Malcolm, though very 
low, it seems is now restored to herself, and I trust 
will soon be to you. In the meantime, quiet is still 
necessary, and as you are not likely to promote that 
in the present state of your feelings, I must therefore 
be so disinterested as to recommend your returning 
to poor Glenroy." 

"I cannot," said Reginald impatiently. 

"It is no very pleasant task I have taken upon 
myself to press you to leave my house," said his 
friend good-humouredly ; "but I know I need not 
apologise to you for such a breach of hospitality." 

"I am sensible of your good intentions," said 
Reginald, in a quick, impatient manner; "but you 
will oblige me by allowing me to judge and act for 

myself on this occasion. I — in short " he stopped 

as if at a loss how to proceed, then added— "But if 
my remaining here occasions any inconvenience, I 
shall endeavour to find accommodation for the night 
elsewhere." 

There was no contesting the point any longer. 
He remained, and the night was passed in a state of 
gloomy restlessness by him — of sleepless anguish by 
Edith — griefs diff'ering in Icind as in degree ; for even 
amid the reproaches of conscience and the struggles 
of remorse, as gratitude, tenderness, and pity filled 
his heart, still the idol passion had erected main- 
tained its sway, and in his imagination shone forth 



84 DESTINY. 

fair and beauteous, even amid the wreck it had 
made. 

But with Edith all was dimness and desolation. 
No star shed its light in her path — in her existence 
there Avas no object which even hope could for an 
instant illume. Amid the darkness that brooded in 
her heart, heaven and earth, the present and the 
future, were alike an undistinguishable chaos, and 
only one dreary hope was hers — the hope of despair. 
She felt it Avas impossible she could long exist under 
such a weight of woe as had overwhelmed her ; soon, 
very soon, she should pass away and be at rest. But 
she knew not the capacity of the human heart for 
suiFering ; she knew not those depths profound, where 
sorrow, unseen, unsuspected, dwells through many a 
long life. "Nous ne connoissons I'infini que par la 
douleur ! " All the faith of her early days — all the 
cherished feelings of a lifetime — all the fond gather- 
ings up of woman's love and tenderness, which she 
had deemed were treasured in her lover's heart, had 
been rudely cast from him as slighted, priceless things ; 
and for an instant her pale cheek glowed at the in- 
dignity. But bitter as these feelings were, they were 
rendered still more so by the thoughts of the dis- 
appointment and sorrow that awaited her father. 
All his proud imaginations to be thus cast down ; his 
hopes laid in the dust, where his own gray head 
would soon be brought low by the hands which ought 
to have smoothed the pillow of his old age ! And 
yet it must be ! Nought remained for her but to 



DESTINY, 85 

sever the last feeble link of those ties which, entwined 
as they were with every feeling of her heart, hung 
only as a galling yoke on the breast of her false lover. 
With the courage of despair, she drew from her finger 
the ring of betrothment— that ring which his faithless 
hand had ]Aa,ced there, with the vow of eternal con- 
stancy, and which, like a taHsman, had ever guarded 
her heart against all fears and suspicions of his fidehty. 
Even this inanimate object, associated as it was with 
all the hopes and the joys of her life, it was anguish 
unspeakable to part with ; her heart recoiled from the 
deed, and again and again she relinquished the attempt. 
But then the thought that Eeginald might for an 
instant suppose she still retained her claim upon his 
hand, even w^hen convinced that his affections were 
given to another — that was not to be endured ! She 
hastily folded and sealed the ring in a small packet ; 
and when Mrs. Malcolm at an early hour entered her 
apartment, she put it into her hand, and, with forced 
composure, requested that she would convey it to its 
destination. 

Mrs. Malcolm was not deceived by this assumed 
fortitude — she saw it was the result of excitement, 
not of resignation ; it was easy to guess at the con- 
tents of the packet, and she said, "I will do anything 
—anything for you, my love, that can be for your 
good, but — must this be V 

"It must," replied Edith, still retaining her com- 
posure. 

" May there not be some mistake, which a mutual 



86 DESTINY. 

friend might assist you in clearing up 1 Dearest Edith, 
do not entirely cast away your own happiness, and 
that of others." 

Edith could not speak, and she buried her face in her 
hands, while her heart heaved with strong emotion. 

Mrs. Malcolm tenderly embraced her. " Edith," 
she said, " I have known and loved you from a child, 
both for your own sake, and that of our dear Ronald, 
to whom you were dearer, if possible, than his own 
sisters. I cannot, then, be silent and see you thus; if 
you will not confide to me the cause of your distress, 
will you allow me to hint to you what I fear has 
happened V 

Edith gasped for a few moments, as if for utterance, 
then, by a strong effort, said, " We are parted, and for 
ever/ Oh, do not ask me more — take that," pointing 
to the ring, "in mercy take it from my sight !" 

Mrs. Malcolm, too wise to persist where she saw 
such extreme agitation ensue, refrained from urging 
the topic any further ; but, shocked and distressed as 
she was, she strove to soothe Edith into greater com- 
posure, and then left her, to seek Sir Reginald, for 
the purpose of executing her commission. On view- 
ing the packet, he hastily tore it open, and at sight 
of the ring turned pale ; tears sprang from his eyes ; 
he struck his forehead Avith his hand, and at length, 
unable to control the emotion he was unwilling to 
avow, he rushed from the room. The sight of the 
ring had awakened a train of remembrances that had 
lona; slumbered in his heart. The fair image of Edith, 



DESTINY. 87 

tender, innocent, and true, rose to his mind's eye. 
That gentle, loving being— the playfellow of his 
childhood — the companion of his youth — his once 
beloved — his betrothed — oh, had he wronged her, 
and had she renounced him, without one word of re- 
proach ! 

There are moments when even the master-passion 
of the soul is overcome by stormy and sudden emotion. 
And so it was when this mute remembrancer of sweet 
and happy days reminded him, more eloquently than 
words could have done, of the vows he had broken, 
of the joys he had blighted. In the anguish of self- 
condemnation, it was a relief to him to give utterance 
to his feelings, by writing to Edith, and with his usual 
impetuosity, he poured them forth in a strain too 
agitated and contradictory to meet the eye of any but 
her to whom it was addressed. While he reviled and 
denounced himself in the bitterest terms, he, at the 
same time, sought to extenuate and vindicate his con- 
duct, and while he declared that her happiness was a 
thousand times more precious to him than his own, 
he pleaded the overwhelming force of his passion for 
another as the excuse for his apostasy from her. He 
returned her the ring ; he besought her to keep it, at 
least for the present; he could not, he would not, 
receive it from her now. A time might come when 
it might cost them both less to part : but now it must 
be with breaking hearts. 

Edith's emotion at reading the letter was not less 
than that with Avhich it had been written ; but her 



88 DESTINY. 

part was taken with the " courage of a wounded heart." 
She answered it. 

"The time has come when we must part — when 
we have parted, and for ever. No human power can 
ever again unite us — no separation can be more com- 
plete than that which has akeady taken place. You 
cannot recall the past — do not, then, I beseech you, 
by vain remonstrance, seek still more to embitter the 
present. Yet in one thing you can gratify me, and 
it will be my last request. Go to my poor father, 
bear ^\^th him, soothe him for my sake. From me 
he shall never learn what has passed — he need never 
hear it from any one else. And when I die — oh, 
Reginald — by the love you once bore me, do not de- 
sert my father in the hour of affliction ! be to him all, 
and more, than I could ever have been ! so shall my 
last prayer be for your happiness, E. M." 

How often, in the passionate longings of a blinded 
heart and a wayward fancy, had Reginald wished this 
time to come — the time when Edith, with her own 
hand, should set him free ! And now that it had 
come, what were its fruits but bitter tears of sorrow 
and remorse? What slavery could ever have been 
half so galling as freedom thus bestowed? And so 
it must ever be in the accomplishment of all unjust 
and unhallowed v.'ishes, unless when tlie heart is 
callous, and the conscience seared to all the soul's 
best attributes. Again he wrote under the influence 
of strongly-excited feelings. 



DESTINY. 89 

" Oh, Edith, how your generous forbearance wrings 
my heart ! You say I cannot recall the past — would 
to God I could, for I could bear all things but the 
thoughts of having brought sorrow upon you — you 
who are still dear to me as my own soul. Talk not 
of dying, dearest Edith, for I SAvear I will not sur- 
vive you ! With my own hands I will end my hateful 
existence, rather than live as your destroyer ! And 
there is one who will suffer little less than either of 
us, when she knows all. She is innocent — indeed 
she is — of all that has happened. The fault is mine ; 
ah, do not wrong her, then, even in thought ! Alas ! 
she knew not what a wretch she loved. I Avill obey 
you, cost what it may ; I will go to Glenroy, and for 
your sake I will even play the hj^ocrite before him ; 
only let me have the satisfaction of serving you, and 
there is no sacrifice I am not ready to make. Edith, 
dearest Edith, if we may not be to each other what we 
have been, at least let me hope that we may one day 
meet with other, perhaps better, because less mutable 
feelings than those we once cherished. Oh, let me 
conjure you, then, to regard yourself, if you would 
show pity towards one whose hfe and happiness are 
wrapped in yours. R. M." 

Edith made no reply, and Reginald retui'ned to 
Glenroy. 



CHAPTER X. 

The faithful Mrs. Macaulcy lost no time in hastening 
to her beloved charge ; but she was panic-struck with 
the change that had already taken place on those 
cherished features. Edith, indeed, looked a monu- 
ment of living woe. The overwhelming past already 
told its tale of misery, of a heart laid waste and deso- 
late, of "spirits broken, joys o'ercast," and eyes that 
seemed as though they never more might smile. 

Mrs. Macauley had seen in her day the effects of 
sickness and of sorrow ; but here was something 
differing from aught she had ever beheld; and she 
gazed with affright on the mournful indications of 
a breaking heart. At length she said, "Oh, my dear, 
and is not this very dreadful ! what has come over 
you'? for, my darling, I never saw anything in this 
world look like you. Oh ! what can it be ?" 

" You will soon know," said Edith in a hard, 
unnatural tone, and in her own mind alluding to 
her death. 

" Well, the sooner the better, my lamb, that we may 
know what to do ; for I declare I'm frightened to look 
at you — you're not like the same creature you was." 



DESTINY. 91 

" In the meantime, you will oblige me by taking 
no notice — by saying nothing about me, either to 
myself or to anybody else," said Edith, speaking 
slowly, and "vvith difficulty. 

" Oh ! my darling, how can I say nothing, when 

I see you looking like something I cannot put a 

name upon 1 For though yoiu: face is as white as a 
ghost's, it has not the peace and rest that's in a ghost's 
face." And poor Macky looked wistfully at her. 

"It ■svill soon have them, I hope," said Edith, with 
a smile of anguish. " I have been sick — ill — but it 
will soon be over." 

"But how Avill it be over, my dear?" looldng 
anxiously in Edith's face, with a bemldered air. 
Then, as the meaning flashed upon her, she burst 
into a violent flood of tears. " Oh ! my darling," 
she cried, when at last she was able to articulate, 
" 3'ou don't mean to say you are going to leave us for 
a better world, and you so young and so happy in 

this same evil world — and I, that am so old ! " 

And j)00T Macky's feelings again burst forth. While 
the tears rolled down her cheeks, she went on — " But 
I'm waiting my time patiently ; and ought not you 
to do it too 1 And well you may, with so much to 
make you pleased and contented." 

" I am contented," said Edith, with a faint, ghastly 
smile. "Do not, then, distress yourself on my 
account. " 

" Not distress myself on your account, my heart's 
jewel ! And how can I not distress myself 1 But 



92 DESTINY. 

what does it signify what becomes of me, though my 
old heart should break, what does that signify 1 But 
your poor papa, and your own true love — what will 
become of them?" 

"Do not!" gasped Edith faintly, and waving her 
hand. 

" Oh ! my dear, would it not do your heart good 
to hear how miserable he is about you ; so miserable, 
that he is shut up in his own room, and his very door 
locked, too ! except when he goes now and then to 
Glenroy ; and then he looks — 'deed he looks not very 
chancy, as if he was hardly himself. I'm frightened 
at you both." Then, with a sudden start of joy, she 
exclaimed, " But I think — I think I can guess what 
it is ! Have not you cast out, my dear, is not that 
ain Will you not 'gree again? Ay, that you will, 
or sorrow take me ! " 

It was some minutes before Edith could command 
herself sufficiently to speak ; at length she said, and 
her features were almost convulsed in her efforts to 
appear calm, " I know your kindness ; I feel it too ; 
but if you really love me — if you would serve me in 
the only way you can do it, you will not torture me 

by " Her voice sank, but she made an effort, and 

went on — "by mentioning those names. Do not — do 
not ask me questions ! I cannot — I tciU not answer." 

" My darling, and then am I not to know what it 
is that's the matter with you?" cried poor Mrs. 
Macauley, her eyes twinkling with astonishment 
through her tears. 



DESTINY. 93 

"Yon, nor no one else, can do me any good ; it is 
impossible. I want nothing, I wish nothing — but to be 
undisturbed." 

" Oh, my dearest ! If you did but see yourself in 
the glass, you would not venture to say that ; for not 
a bit of your face but tells another tale ; as sure as 
death, it's the face of a broken heart." And again a 
flood of tears burst forth. 

"And will you not tell me who and what it is 
that has done it," cried she, throwing her arms round 
Edith, "when you know I could give my own heart 
thankf ull)^, if it could bring joy to yours ? And will 
you not tell me, then, how I'm to do if?" 

Edith disengaged herself from her embrace, and 
with the paleness of death on her face, but with a 
calm and resolved air, said, " Yes, look upon me as 
one already dead — one whom no human power can 

restore to " happiness she would have said, but 

her voice failed, and her lips shrank from pronounc- 
ing the rest. " There is one way, and only one, in 
which you can serve me." And she laid her hand on 
Mrs. Macauley as she spoke. " Comfort my father — 
strive to reconcile him to " 

" To what, my darling 1 " cried Mrs, Macauley 
eagerly. 

"To the will of God!" said Edith, in a low, deep 
voice ; and Avringing the hand of her poor old friend, 
she entered her dressing-room and closed the door. 

There is a determined character of grief which 
carries a sacredness and an awe along with it, and 



94 DESTINY. 

which silences all attempts at consolation. Such was 
Edith's, and such the effect it produced on the mind 
of poor Mrs. ]\Iacauley, as slowly and reluctantly she 
relinquished the hope of gaining the confidence and 
removing the affliction of her beloved charge. She 
had too much innate delicacy to intrude further upon 
her privacy. She saw the wound was too deep for 
her unpractised hand to probe ; but she still hoped 
the one that had dealt the blow might likewise have 
the power to stanch the wound. She returned 
home to seek Sir Reginald, and prevailed upon him 
to see her alone for a few minutes, in order to repre- 
sent to liim the situation of his betrothed. But her 
courage almost failed her when she saw the towering, 
the overwhelming force of mingled grief and passion 
with which he received her sad and simple annuncia- 
tion ; and his vehement burst of sorrow was as inex- 
plicable to her as Edith's settled despair. 

" Oh, Sir Eeginald," she cried, laying her hand on 
his arm to detain him, " if you would not be affronted 
at me, I would just say what I think, and then you 
would tell me if I'm wrong, and then we would get 
everytliing put right again ; for 'deed, if it is not done 
soon, that sweet lamb will go her way to a better 
world. And oh, if you have only cast out in a common 
way, what for cannot you 'gree again 1 But somehow 
— I do not know how to say it, I think so much shame 
of evenin' you to such a thing ! But I've taken it 
into my head that — 'deed, I never liked that French- 
woman — I tliought she had a vcrj^ curious look with 



DESTINY. 95 

her eye — I did not like it ; and I thought sometimes 
there was something, I could not tell what, going on : 
and to think how she used to take upon her to dis- 
parage Miss Edith, before your face too ! And now 
I may just as well tell you at once that I cannot help 
thinking it's she that has made all this mischief be- 
tween you and your own true love ! " 

Sir Reginald's only reply was to dash from him the 
hand which woidd have sought to detain him ; and, 
rushing from her in agony of excited feeling, he 
sought to stifle the upbraidings of his heart by again 
pouring it forth, with all its incoherencies and incon- 
sistencies, to Edith, and supplicating her again to 
forgive and forget the past, even while his every word 
proclaimed the struggle of his mind, as passion and 
pity alternately prevailed. He spoke of the tortures 
he endm-ed by remaining at Glenroy, where every 
object reminded him of his lost happiness, and of the 
baseness of submitting to practise a deception against 
which his soul recoiled. 

Edith felt all this as only an aggravation of her 
wretchedness. Worlds now would not have tempted 
her to become the ^vife of him she loved — for even in 
renouncing she still loved him. And there is perhaps 
no anguish more acute, no struggle more severe, than 
when called upon to despise and abjure the object of 
our once — of our still tender affection. Yet, to the 
youthful heart, there is a charm in extreme mental 
suffering — a luxmy of woe, which makes us reject 
with scorn all that could lessen or alleviate it. Were 



96 DESTINY. 

the burden less, we might strive even in our own 
strength to cast it from us ; but when the spirit seems 
fairly crushed beneath its overwhelming weight, it 
requires no effort to support it ; and, paradoxical as 
it may appear, we passively yield to what we at the 
same time feel to be insupportable. Such is the effect 
calamity produces on some minds, while others are 
stimulated to seek relief from the galling pressure, 
whose iron has entered their souls — alas ! as if only 
to fester and corrode them. So it was with Reginald 
— inaction was intolerable to him; in the feverish 
excitement of his mind he again wrote to Edith ; but 
his letter was not answered. He went to Inch Orran, 
and demanded to see her ; but she resisted his impor- 
tunities. In a transport of mingled passions, which 
it would not have been easy to analyse, he left the 
house, but instead of returning to Glenroy, he departed 
to Dunshiera. 



CHAPTER XL 

" Sorrow is a sacred thing," ]jut when carried to ex- 
cess, it is also a selfish thing. In the first excitement 
of feeling, Edith had felt for others as well as for 
herself ; and the thoughts of her father's disappoint- 
ment had added bitterness to her own. But now she 
heard he was ill — bed-rid — Avith comparatively little 
emotion ; for to violent sorrow had succeeded a sort 
of heartless stupefaction, and her mind had sunk into 
a state of melancholy, which seemed to render her 
either insensible or indifferent to everything. Hers 
was become 

" A gi'ief without a pang, void, dark, and drear, 
A stifled, drowsy, iinimpassion'd grief, 
Whicli finds no natural outlet or relief, 
In word, or sigh, or tear." 

Pride now seemed the only feeling alive in that 
heart where once had dwelt all the sweetest, softest 
emotions. And pride would sometimes give an indig- 
nant tlirolj, and light up her languid eye and suffuse 
her pale cheek, and she would struggle to cast oft' the 
load with which memory weighed her spirit down. 
But hers was not a proud nature, and the faint effort 

VOL. II. H D. 



98 DESTINY. 

was only succeeded by deeper dejection. The buoy- 
ancy of life and hope seemed fled ; yet there is in 
youth a tenacity of both, which rarely, if ever, re- 
linquishes its hold of either. Unnoticed and unsus- 
pected by its possessor, the mind, even in its darkest 
state, is still languishing for light, still putting forth 
new shoots, even though it mny not discern the object 
to which it may yet attach itself. 

Mrs. Malcolm knew enough of human nature to 
be aware of this. Though gentle and unobtrusive, 
she was judicious and unremitting in her efforts to 
call forth the latent energies of the soul, and direct 
them to higher and more permanent sources of happi- 
ness. But all who have ever striven to stem or turn 
the current of afflictions, whose channel is in the very 
depths of the heart, well know how laborious, and 
apparently hopeless, is the task when no other fount 
is open to receive them. 

Edith was naturally reserved in her disposition; 
and although, in the first anguish of her feelings, she 
had betrayed, rather than divulged, the secret of her 
heart to ]\Irs. Malcolm, to no one else had she, or 
would she, breathe even a sigh of regret. She rarely, 
indeed, ever alluded to the subject even to her friend ; 
still she felt it was soothing to her to be with one who 
knew what was passing in her mind, even when the 
mind itself was closed against all communication. 
The history of her whole life seemed as if all com- 
pressed into that single event ; and there was an in- 
dolent, melancholy pleasure in being with one who 



DESTINY. 99 

knew that history, and silently sympathised in it. 
But she wished no one else to share in that knowledge 
— particii^ate in those feelings ; she was jealous almost 
of the appearance of it. While, on the other hand, if 
the happy, light-hearted girls sought to win her to 
their occupations and amusements, the sight of their 
gaiety, contrasted with her own wretchedness, only 
served to estrange her from them the more. The only 
member of the family, besides Mrs. Malcolm, in whose 
society she seemed to take the slightest pleasure, was 
the youngest l)oy ; in his beauty, in the sweetness of 
his disposition, in his every look and expression, he 
reminded her of her favourite play-fellow, the warm- 
hearted, generous Eonald. She endured his presence 
when all others seemed distasteful ; and Mrs. Malcolm 
hoped that when the current of her affections should 
once more begin to flow, her young favourite might 
again become an object of interest to her. But she 
knew, for she had exi^erienced, that for the afilictions 
of life there exists but one genuine fountain of consola- 
tion — the assured belief that all our earthly sorrows 
and our transitory sufferings are ordained by unerring 
Wisdom and infinite Love. And where this belief 
exists, the darts of anguish, however they may pierce, 
will never fix and rankle in the soul. 

Edith had religious feeling, but she had not re- 
ligious principle ; and thus, what might have been the 
medicine to check and mitigate the fever of her heart, 
had served rather as the aliment to feed and pamper 
its sickly sensibilities. With all this pertinacity of 



100 DESTINY. 

suflfering, however, she refused nothing that was re- 
quired of her ; but her compliances seemed those of a 
body -without a soul — aU was calm, but all was joy- 
less and hopeless as the slumber of the dead. It was 
from this state of rigid melancholy that Mrs. Malcolm 
was anxious to recover Edith. It was possible the 
sight of her father might produce a strong impression ; 
but in her present state she feared the effect of any 
violent perturbation of the spirits, and was desirous 
that she should remain under her o^vn eye till her 
mind had regained somewhat of its natural tone. 

As a gentle mode of experiment, she one day pro- 
posed to her to accompany her on a visit to a poor 
couple who had lately lost a daughter, their only child ; 
and, from the character of the people, she was in 
hopes a salutary influence might be imparted, even 
from their lowly shed. Edith agreed to the pro- 
posal with the same vacant, preoccupied look with 
which she assented to everything that was suggested 
to her — a look which told more plainly than words 
could have done that all scenes, whether of pain or 
pleasure, were now alike to her. Their destination 
was to a cottage in a ^vild secluded glen, or rather a 
hollow of the Ijleak and sterile mountains which sm-- 
rounded it. Edith remembered it well. It was the 
same she had pointed out to Florinda on their way to 
church. But how diff'erent were her feelings then 
from what they were now ! Then there was delight 
in every breeze — joy in every sunbeam. Life needed 
no stimulants to give it a zest ; all was excitement — 



DESTINY. 101 

the excitement of youthful sensation — the glow of a 
happy heart. Now all was changed ; the sunbeam 
that had gUded the illusion was fled, and only the 
dark vapour remained ; now she was ready to exclaim, 
with her own mountain-bard, " The narrow house is 
pleasant to me, and the gray stone of the dead." 
As she gazed on the lonely cottage, Florinda's words 
recurred to her A\ath a bitter pang, "Love might 
transform even that wretched hut into a bower of 
paradise." " Could she love him more than I did?" 
thought she. " Oh no, no ! she might love him dif- 
ferently, but she could not love him more!" Rlrs. 
Malcolm marked with, satisfaction the glow of anima- 
tion, agonised as it was, which crossed her features 
as the whole scene came vividly to her mind. Any- 
thing was better than the state of lifeless melancholy 
in which she had so long been sunk, just as that pain 
is salutary which denotes returning animation. 

" You look -with affright on that dreary dwelling, 
I perceive," said Mrs. Malcolm. 

" Yes," said Edith aloud, as she continued to gaze 
mth a sad and abstracted air ; " she said true, to 

dwell there would be paradise, compared to " 

And she sighed, as though her heart was breaking. 

" Do you believe there is such a thing as paradise 
on earth, Edith ■? " said her friend gently, seeking to 
turn her thoughts from the direction she perceived 
they had taken. 

"Once I did," said Edith in the same thrilling 
tone of anguish. 



102 DESTINY. 

'•And even in that wretclied hutf 

"Ay, anywhere." 

"And you have discovered the fallacy of your 
expectations f Edith was silent. 

"You are not singular, my love," said her friend ; 
" we all set out in life with the hope of creating for 
ourselves a paradise on earth, and all, sooner or later, 
live to mourn the vain^^the unhallowed expectation." 

"Not all," said Edith bitterly. 

" All — all — be assured, it is so ordained ; and those 
who have gi'asped at happiness have found it either a 
shadow or a shroud. So it has ever been, and so it 
will ever be." 

"Are not you happy f inquired Edith, with more 
of interest than she had for a long wliile evinced. 

"Resigned — contented — grateful — these, I hope, 
I am," answered her friend; "but happy I am not, 
according to my ideas of felicity." 

"Yet you have everything, while I " she stopped, 

choked with emotion. 

"But everything here below is imperfect, and in 
its nature fraught with anxiety and sorrow. And- — 
shall I own my weakness — my sinfulness ? — Even in 
the midst of the many blessings with which you see 
me surrounded, still, still my heart yearns for my 
long-lost boy ! still a haunting mystery seems to 
me to hang over his fate. Still a false, delusive voice 
whispers to me at times, that perhaps he still lives — 
lives a captive or a slave ! Judge, then, whether I 
can be Avhat you would call happy." 



DESTINY. 103 

"But he was not yoiir all" said Edith, with 
agitation. 

" All, Edith, is there any of us whose all centres in 
one frail, perishable creature? Has God given us 
affections, and feelings, and capacities of enjoyment, 
to be all laiashed exclusively on one object — and that 
object not Himself?" 

"It may be sinful, but — but I cannot help it," said 
Edith in a despairing accent. 

"No, dearest, you cannot help it, but God will 
help yoa Only be assured He loves you with a love 
inconceivably beyond that which any creature ever 
has felt, or ever can feel for you — and your heart will 
no longer remain closed against the consolations He 
offers you. Ah ! Edith, it was when the doors were 
shut that He who came to succour and to save stood 
in the midst of His disciples ; and 'tis when the heart 
is closed against all earthly consolation that divine 
love still finds entrance." 

Edith's only answer was a sigh ; and Mrs. Mal- 
colm wisely forbore to press the subject further at 
present. They therefore proceeded in silence till 
they reached the lonely hut. It is rarely that any- 
thing of Avhat sentimentalists caU an interesting 
nature is to be met with amid the coarse avocations 
of humble life ; yet the elements of suffering and of 
feeling are the same in all ranks, and the short and 
simple annals of the poor sometimes contain much 
of Christian faith and moral beauty. They were met 
at the door of the cottage by a middle-aged man, 



104 DESTINY. 

with grizzled hair, and a countenance which bore the 
impress of deep and recent sorrow. Mrs. Malcolm 
accosted him in kindly accents, but a respectful bow 
was the only answer he at first seemed able to return. 
She next inquired for his wife ; and making a strong 
effort, as he drew his hand across his eyes, he said — 
and his voice seemed ready to fail him as he spoke : 
— " Nelly's no just as she should be, my leddy ; she's 
no just liersell yet." 

" You don't mean, Duncan, that her mind has been 
unsettled by her loss?" 

"Oh no — no, my leddy — God be praised — no so 
bad as that ! she aye knew the hand that was dealing 
wi' her; she never lost sight o' that — His name be 
praised ! but step in, my leddy, and you'll see her as 
she is, poor thing !" 

Mrs, Malcolm and Edith entered the lonely dwell- 
ing, where sat the childless mother, with a Bible on 
her knees. At sight of them she hastily rose, and 
turning away, covered her face with her hands and 
wept. 

" You'll excuse her, my leddy," said poor Duncan, 
Avith emotion. 

" I ought to ask Nelly to excuse me for disturbing 
her perhaps too soon," said Mrs. Malcolm gently. 

" Oh, my leddy !" was all Duncan could say. Nelly 
turned round, and while with one hand she strove to 
stem the tears as they flowed profusely over her face, 
with the other she wiped down the seats for her 
guests, then tried to speak, Itut only lier lips moved. 



DESTINY. 105 

Then, as if disappointed at the faihire, she again 
turned away, and gave free course to her sorrow. 

" It's just because she has not seen you, my leddy, 
since she was ta'cn frae us," said Duncan, struggling 
to master his own feelings, Avhile the worldngs of his 
features betrayed what it cost him. 

"But it's ower now," said Nelly, with a sigh. " It 
was just a heart -stound, my leddy, that's past and 
awa'." And she turned round vnih. a sad but com- 
posed air. There was not much of external beauty 
in the aspects of this poor couple to excite the feel- 
ings ; but simple sorrow is always touching, and even 
Edith felt interested as she looked on the desolate 
pair, bereft of their stay, and seemingly devoid of all 
those outward sources of consolation, which, though 
they in reality minister little or no relief to the lone 
mourner, yet seem as if they ought to mitigate the 
bitterness of affliction. But here were none of the 
appliances of artificial refinement, either within doors 
or without. The brown heath, the drear}^ mountain, 
and the wild streamlet, were the only objects that 
surrounded them. All else Avas silence and solitude. 

"Have you had a visit from the minister yef?" 
inquired Mrs. Malcolm. 

"You'll mean Mr. Stuart, my leddy'? — Ay, oh 
ay, 'deed we've had that, and muckle need we had o' 
him, for 'we were sorely unwilling — oh, 'deed were we 
— to give hrr back to Him that gave her to us," and 
Duncan's eyes moistened witli tears as he spoke. 

"That is a natural feeling, Duncan," said Mrs. 



106 DESTINY. 

Malcolm, " and mercifully it is not a foibiddeu one — 
we may mourn the loss of those we love, only ' not as 
those who have no hope.'" 

"Ay, that's just it, my leddy ; for as the blessed 
King David said in his distress, ' I shall go to him, 
but he shall not return to me.' That's a grand pro- 
mise, my leddy ; but oh, there's a sad thought too ! " 

"It is so ; but the hope set before us is so full of 
consolation that it must strengthen our hearts to hear 
the mournful truth which nature will proclaim to us 
in the time of our affliction." 

"Oh, is na that true, Nelly?" said Duncan, trpng 
to speak cheeringly to his wife. 

Nelly pointed to a tartan plaid or screen which 
hung against the wall, and had long belonged to her 
daughter ; and while tears trickled down her cheek, 
she bent her head, and said, " God's will be done !" 

"And His will is, Nelly," said Mrs. Malcohn, "that 
Ave should make Him the sure and steadfast anchor 
of our souls — that we should turn our thoughts as 
much as possible from the grave, which holds merely 
the perishable body of the spirit we loved, to Him 
who dwelleth in light and glory, and in whose jjresence 
that spirit, we may hope, is now enjoying perfect and 
endless felicity, I, like you, have known what it is 
to lose a child, and still, often — too often — the melan- 
choly thouglit will rise, 'He shall not return to me;' 
but God has said, 'I shall go to him.' We know that 
all things that befall us are ordained of God, and will 
work together for the j^ood of our immortal souls, and 



DESTINY. 107 

we cannot tell — perhaps it is the very separation we 
so much mourn, that may he the appointed means 
of reuniting us again, for ever, to the friend we loved 
— ^for Avhere our treasure is, there will our heart be 
also." 

"Do you hear that, Nelly?" inquired Duncan 
anxiouslj^ 

" 'Deed, it may be so, and it's a blessed thought, 
ony wise," said Nelly, brightening up a little. 

" Ay, many are the blessings we have to be thank- 
ful for, Nelly, though our ungrateful hearts refuse to 
own them, when a part's taken away from us," said 
Duncan. " AVe have His power above us and around 
us," added he reverently, " and His word before us, 
and His spirit within us ; and are na these great 
blessings for sinful creatures like us ? " 

*' They are indeed, Duncan," said Mrs. Malcolm ; 
"and you have well chosen that better part which 
shall not be taken away from you. But perhaps it 
might be of service to Nelly were you to leave your 
home for a while ; yours is a lonely dwelling ; you 
have no friends near to speak a word of comfort to 
you now and then, and the winter is approaching 
when you will feel still more desolate. Donald 
M'Int}Te's cottage is now empty, and you will find it 
more comfortable than your own ; besides, you will 
be nearer both to Inch Orran and your good minister, 
Mr. Stuart." 

" They would be great comforts, to be sure," said 
Duncan ; " but " he stopped, and his wife and he 



108 DESTINY. 

looked at each other ; but their looks betokened no 
gladness at the proposal, 

"Oh no — no, my leddy," said Nelly; " mony 
thanks to you, and mony blessings be upon you for a' 
you've done for us frae first to last ; but we couldna 
be better ; we wadna be sae weel onywhere as we're 
here ; we need nae company, my leddy ; we're the 
best company to ane anither, for we can speak o' our 
bairn, our bonny Jeanie, and we can see a'thing that 
she used to see, and the braid sun and the bonny 
moon shinin' upon us just as they used to do when 
she was here — oh, I dinna think they wad hae the 
same look to me onywhere else !" 

Mrs. Malcolm forbore to urge the proposal, as they 
both seemed to retain so strong a local attachment 
for the scenes, bleak and sterile as they were, which 
had once been gladdened by the presence of their 
child ; and the feeling is a natural one to such as have 
felt that " there is joy in grief, when peace dwells in 
the breast of the sad;" and where the heart has laid 
down what it most loved, there it is also desirous of 
laying itself down. 

" This is no bower of paradise, you perceive," said 
Mrs. Malcolm to Edith, as they quitted the cottage ; 
" but it is something better — it is the abode of Chris- 
tian faith and hope." 



CHAPTEK XII. 

Edith's feelings had been touched by the scene she 
had witnessed, and on the way home she conversed 
upon it more freely, and with greater interest than 
she had recently done upon any subject. 

When she returned to Inch Orrau she found the 
following letter had arrived in her absence : — 

" My Darling — I hope you will not be frightened, 
though 'deed I am not very easy myself, for we are 
such curious creatures that we cannot tell what may 
happen — and maybe it is better we should not, for 
'we know not what a day may bring forth.' Oh ! if 
it would bring a good hearty fit of the gout into his 
feet, what a mercy that woidd be ; for I do not like 
its wander, wandering this way up and down his 
whole body, and never resting in one place. I mean 
your own papa, my dear, for he is really not what he 
should be ; and what frightens me most of all, he is 
so remarkably good-natured and easily pleased, not 
but what he was always good and kind to me ; but it 
would melt a heart of stone to hear how gently he 
speaks now. 'Deed I could not help crying this 
morning when he held out his hand to me, and said, 



110 DESTINY. 

in such a soft voice, ']\Iolly,' saj's he, 'you are not a 
bad creatui'e, after alL' ' ^^^lat makes you think that 
Glenroyf said I; for you know we are all bad 
creatures, the best of us. 'Ay, you stick by me 
when tlie]i have deserted me,' says he. — Was not that 
good of him? But though I was so pleased, I was 
vexed too, that he should think anybody could desert 
him ; and so I took the liberty of saying, ' Oh, Glen- 
roy, you know I will stick to you with my dpng 
breath, and so will everybody that you please to have 
about you.' And then he shook his head, and said — 
'No, no, Molly, nobody thinks of pleasing me now — 
they're both gone and left me, and the sooner I go the 
better — and I've nobody now but you, Molly, and you'll 
be going off too some of these days.' And then he 
rambled and spoke, as if he thought I was going off 
— and poor Benbo"nae too ! I was really hurt at that, 
though I knew he did not intend it. When he 
wakens out of his sleep, he often calls for you, and 
another person too, and he thinks, good man, that 
you are gone away together; so how he will be 
pleased to see you by yourself, I cannot tell, for I do 
not know — but I knoAV it is children's duty to obey 
their parents, which you always did, I'm sure, and 
take care of them when they are sick, and be kind to 
them in their old age ; and maybe it would comfort 
you t<3 think that you had been a comfort to him. 
And even if you should vex him by coming, is not 
that better than to vex him by staying away 1 Surely, 
I tliink it is. I hope you understand this and that 



DESTINY. 1 1 1 

I have made myself plain to jou ; l)ut I cannot be 
very sure of what I am saying, for I am not just 
so heartsome as I used to be, and is not that extra- 
ordinary when there's nobody but Benbowie and me 
to divert Glenroy, and him in his bed, so dull, good 
man ! but who knows but if you please to come 
back, we Avill all come right again; for I pray he 
may be spared to us yet, and that I may get many a 
good scold from him, good and kind as he has always 
been to me ! I hope you will be pleased with my 
letter, and all that I have said, wliich is the truth, from, 
my darling, 

" Your old and true friend, 

"M. Macauley." 

Edith shed tears on reading this homely effusion, 
the first she had shed for many weeks, and Mrs. Mal- 
colm hailed them Avith pleasure, as the harbingers of 
renovated feelings which had too long lain dormant in 
her heart. It required an effort to resolve upon re- 
turning home to encounter the heartrending interro- 
gatories which she was aware must be awaiting her 
—which she felt it would be death to her father to 
answer trulj-, and Avhich she yet knew not how she 
should evade. It was a trial from which she shrank, 
but which she nevertheless now felt it her duty to 
undergo, and Mrs. Malcolm confirmed her in the re- 
solution. 

"It is assuredly your duty, my dear," said Mrs. 
Malcolm; "and when we are convinced of that, we 



112 DESTINY. 

have only to commit the event to God. The inotive 
only is ours — the consequences are His; and His 
command is, that you forsake not your father when 
he is old and gray-headed. Ah, Edith, account it a 
privilege and a blessing to be the comfort of your 
father's old age !" 

"That I can never be," said Edith. "I can never 
be otherwise in his eyes than the cause of sorrow and 
disappointment " She stopped in emotion. 

"But even that very sorrow and disappointment 
may be the means of producing a salutary influence 
on your father's mind. You may be the instrument 
in the hand of God to work a good work ; not, indeed, 
as we would work in om" Aveakness and ignorance, but 
according to His wisdom and love ; for you yourself I 
have no fears — j^ou are going to your duty, and will, 
I doubt not, be enabled to fulfil it. Go, then, dearest 
— do what you am, and leave it to God to do as He 

Mrs. Malcolm had too much sense not to know 
that when an exertion is to be made we can do it 
more effectually when left to ourselves, than when 
another is at hand to whom we have been accustomed 
to cling for support and assistance ; and that more 
minds are rendered helpless from tlie mistaken and 
injudicious tenderness of friends, than by being left 
to their own resources and exertions. She therefore 
wisely forbore to offer her assistance at this time. 

Edith was now anxious and impatient to be gone, 
even while her heart recoiled at the thoughts of her 



DESTINY. 113 

return. The preparation having been quickly made, 
she took an agitated farewell of Inch Orran and its 
affectionate inmates, and ere the tumult of her spirit 
had subsided, she found herself once more within the 
dear domain of Glenroy. But, ah ! how changed to 
her was now Glenroy ! Yet as its fondly -pictured 
scenes again met her eye, the visions of her early 
days also rose to view. For a brief moment, her 
heai"t cast off the burden of its woes ; and as memory 
gave back, in all their brightness, the happy days she 
had spent amid those very scenes, the past only seemed 
reality. 

But quickly the illusion vanished, and was succeeded 
by bitter recollections and humiliating thoughts. She 
had lately left that home the beloved, the betrothed 
of Reginald, and slie now returned to it the slighted, 
forsaken daughter of Glenroy. 

But even these feelings were suspended when the 
carriage drove up to the Castle, and she beheld dismay 
and alarm painted on the countenances of the servants 
as they hurried to and fro. 

"What has happened 1" she called faintly to the 
housekeeper, who was stationed to receive her. 

" Don't be frightened, ma'am ; but Glenroy has 
had, about an hour ago, a — a — a stroke jf the palsy, 
ma'am, and has lost " 

Edith waited to hear no more ; with a wild ex- 
clamation, she rushed forward, regardless of the voice 
of the servant, who sought to detain her, and in 
another minute was by the side of her father's coucli. 

VOL. II. I D. 



CHAPTEK XIII. 

There lay Glenroy, speechless, his features slightly 
distorted, but the expression calm and apparently 
tranquil ; and on one side sat Benliowie, with a face 
of dull, sorrowful amazement ; and on the other was 
poor Mrs. Macauley, tears flowing profusely over her 
face, while she stroked, with childish fondness, the 
powerless hand of her beloved Chief. 

" Oh, my dear, this is no a sight for you !" cried she 
to Edith ; " 'deed it's as much as my old, hard heart 
can do to stand it. But it's God's will, and a punish- 
ment for my sins, and so I do not complain;" and a 
torrent of tears gushed forth. 

Glenroy opened liis eyes, and at sight of Edith 
smiled complacently, then cast an inquiring look 
around, and vainly tried to articulate ; but his mean- 
ing was sufficiently apparent. 

" It's our own darling Miss Edith come back," said 
Mrs. Macauley, hastily brushing away her tears, and 
speaking fondly to him ; " and somebody else will 
come too, and then, please God, you'll be yourself 
again, Glenroy, and we'll all l^e as happy as ever." 
Then in a low voice to Edith, " Cheer up, my darling. 



DESTINY. 115 

and do not let your papa see your distress ; but try 
to put some heart in him, though I'm but a silly 
creature myself." As the tears again burst forth — 
" 'Deed I think Benbowie has more sense and discre- 
tion than any of ns, for he's just what he always was." 

"Why — oh, why was I not told of this sooner?" 
cried Edith, in an agony of self-reproach, as she bent 
over her father's almost lifeless form. 

" Oh, my dear, we could not tell you, for we did 
not know what was to happen ourselves ! Oh, what 
creatures we are ! We know not what a day may 
bring forth. I little thought yesterday, when I wi'ote 
my letter to you, of what was coming ; and when I 
sent it away this morning I thought him better, and 
more like himself than he had been for a long time, 
though, to be sure, I had a very extraordinary dream." 

" Then when did it happen 1 Have you sent for 
medical assistance ?" cried Edith distractedly. 

"Oh, compose yourself, my dear!" cried the poor 
weeping Macky. "Yes — yes, the doctor has been 
sent for, and so has — Ijut I'm so confused, I hardly 
know what I'm about. Did you ask Avhen it happened? 
When was it, Benbowie?" 

" It was just five-and-twenty minutes past two — 
just," replied Benbowie. 

"Ay — and he was jnst sitting there in his chair, 
and I was chatting to him, and trying to please him ; 
but I suppose I had said something that had not 
pleased him ; for he said in his own way, says he, 
'Molly Macauley, you are a stupid, old, ignorant' — 



116 DESTINY, 

and then he stopped; so I waited a little to hear 
what more was coming, but no more said he. So 
says I, 'Well, what else, Glenroy? for you may call 
me what you please — I know very well what you 
mean by it — so it's all tint that falls by,' but not a 
word. Well, I was winding a clue, and so I just went 
on, and I forgot myself so far as to be singing, and 
you know Glenroy never could bear my singing ; and 
so when I remembered that, I stopped and begged his 
pardon — but then when he did not begin to scold me, 
I began to feel very queer, somehow — and so I looked 
at him — as sure as death, there he was just as you 
see him now — and oh, not a word, good or bad, has 
he ever spoken since ! " then a fresh flood of tears 
concluded poor Molly's narrative. 

" My dear, dear papa ! what can I do for you 1 " 
cried Edith, throwing herself on her knees by the 
couch, and laying her face close to his, as though she 
strove to read his wishes there. Glenroy uttered 
some inarticulate somids, and again rolled his eyes as 
if in search of some one. 

Edith felt the appeal with agony. 

" Well, that's something," cried Mrs. Macauley 
joyfully; "and I know who he's looking for — a}', 
that I do ; and if he had but his will, I really think 
he would come all right. 'Deed, I would not wonder 
if all this has happened just because he has not got 
his own way — good man that he is ; ]:)ut I wager that 
he'll get it yet, and that I'll give him an agreeable 
surprise before it's long. So be as composed as you 



DESTINY. 117 

can, mj^ darling ; and now that you've seen your papa, 
if you would please to go and rest yourself, and take 
something, for oh, my dear lamb, you look very white 
and ill." 

The doctor came, and did what he could, but to 
little purpose. Glenroy remained much the same, and 
it was only at sight of Edith, or at the sound of her 
voice, that any difference was perceptible ; but then he 
always revived, and made an effort to express by words 
or signs a meaning which she but too well guessed. 

"Well, I really think an agreeable surprise will 
have a great effect on Glenroy," said Mrs. Macauley ; 
" I'm sure it always does me good ; but I doubt we 
cannot have it till to-morrow forenoon at the soonest, 
for that slow creature Benbowie has only sent aAvay 
his letter half-an-hour ago." 

The letter which Avas intended to produce this 
agreeable surprise was from Benbome to Sir Eeginald, 
and even with its omissions and blunders, was the most 
correct and intelligible Benbowie had ever penned. 

"Deae Sir — I have the misfortune to acquaint you 
that Glenroy has this morning had a stroke of the 
palsy, which deprived him of, and took place at 
twentj'-five minutes past two P.M., when sitting in his 
room. I think it my duty to acquaint you with this 
stroke, that you may do what you think proper ; no 
one here being authorised to act under this stroke for 
you. With much grief, I am, dear sir, faithfully yours, 

"Lach. Malcolm." 



118 DESTINY. 

It found Sir Reginald at Dunshiera, where he still 
remained, a prey to conflicting passions; — at one 
moment ready to fly to Floriuda, to claim her as his 
own, and, in so doing, ensure their mutual happiness, 
beyond the power of fortune ; at the next, yielding 
to pity for Edith and Glenroy ; — then fired by pride, 
as he thought how the world would say he had broken 
his vows, and deserted the poor, portionless Edith for 
her wealthy, titled rival Such was the state of his 
mind, when the intelligence (as he naturally concluded) 
of his uncle's death reached him, and for the moment 
overwhelmed him with feelings of the deepest sorrow 
and remorse. Having learned, however, from the 
servant, that Glenroy still lived, he lost no time in 
setting ofi", late as was the hour when the express 
reached him, and having travelled during the night, 
he arrived by sunrise the following morning. Anxious 
to avoid disturbing the family at so early an hoiu", he 
gained admittance as quietly as possible, and finding 
only one of the inferior servants yet stirring, from 
whom he could obtain little information, he went 
directly and softly to the sick chamber. 

Edith had taken some hours' rest, but had risen 
with the light of day to resume her station by her 
father's side, and to relieve the faithful Mrs. Macauley, 
who had watched there the live-long night, and who 
now with difficulty consented to retire to an adjoining 
apartment to take a little repose. She had dismissed 
the servants also, who had been in attendance, and 
remained alone by the sick-bed. A chink of an open 



DESTINY. 119 

shutter showed a scene without, in striking contrast 
mth that which was passing within the closed cur- 
tains. There, all nature was awaking into new exist- 
ence beneath the glories of the rising sun, — here life 
seemed passing away amid clouds and darkness. The 
natural train of mournful, but salutary reflections 
arose in her mind, as she gazed on the powerless form 
and pallid features of the proud lord of all the goodly 
scene which smiled in vain around him. The spirit 
which still lingered in the body — what was, what 
might be passing there ? Was it still grovelling amid 
scenes of low-born cares 1 Was it even now " steeped 
in forgetfulness "? Or was it already hovering on the 
confines of immortality, preparing to render up its 
accomit of the deeds done in the body 1 Oh, questions 
of deep and awful import ! At these thoughts she 
sank on her knees, and poured forth her supplications 
in all the fervour of a feeling and a sorrowful heart. 
In the intensity of her devotion, she heard not the 
low taps twice repeated of some one asking admit- 
tance at the door, nor was aware that it had been 
slowly and softly opened, and that some one was 
present, but shaded from view by the folds of the 
curtains, till, as she rose from her knees, she perceived 
that Reginald stood before her. At any other time, 
Edith would have been overpowered by so sudden 
and unexpected a meeting; but now her mind had 
been strengthened and calmed by the pious exercises 
in wliich she had been engaged, and the solemn 
circumstances under which they met by the death- 



120 DESTINY. 

bed, as she believed, of her father, banished all lesser 
and more selfish considerations. Her cheek, 'tis true, 
was very pale, and a slight tremor shook her whole 
frame ; yet she betrayed little emotion, and merely 
bent her head in return to Sir Reginald's salutation, 
while he, in extreme agitation, addressed a few almost 
inarticulate words of apology for the intrusion he had 
been guilty of. But at the first sound of his voice, 
Glenroy opened his eyes with an expression of 
pleasure, and the working of his features, and the 
heaving of his breast, for a few moments, denoted the 
efforts he was making to express the satisfaction he 
felt. At length, with one mighty gasp, he emphati- 
cally articulated " Reginald ! " " Thank heaven ! " 
Edith would have said, but her utterance failed her, 
A thousand emotions mingled in her heart at hearing 
this once cherished name, so long banished from her 
lips, from her ear, now suddenly operating as a spell 
to arouse her father from death to life ; she shuddered, 
— she became dizzy with conflicting feelings; after 
vainly struggling to master them, she fell senseless 
on the floor. Reginald called loudly for assistance, 
in his alarm for Edith entirely overlooking Glenroy, 
who continued gasping and struggling for further 
utterance. In an instant Mrs. Macauley was in the 
room, and, all aghast at the spectacle that presented 
itself, she for the first time in her life stood transfixed 
in silent amazement — Edith, the image of death, sup- 
jjorted in the arms of Reginald, and Glenroy writhing 
in all the agonies of impotent irritability. 



DESTINY. 121 

"Do come here," called Sir Reginald, beckoning 
to her to assist in bearing Edith to a sofa. 

" M—M— Molly," stuttered Glenroy. 

"Oh!" exclaimed she in rapture, "what a joyful 
sound ! " She stood for a moment suspended between 
the two. " I declare I do not know which hand of 
me to turn to, I'm so haj)py, and so sorry, and so — 
But oh, what a blessing to think Glenroy has got his 
tongue again ! Oh, what's this has come over her ? 
'Deed, it has been just this agreeable surprise. But 
see, she's coming to ; Sir Reginald, hold up her head 
on your arm — and — there's no fear but what all will 
come right yet;" and off trotted the Avell-meaning 
but mistaken Mrs. Macauley to the other end of tlie 
chamber, to the side of her beloved Chief. 

When Edith opened her eyes she found herself 
supported by Sir Reginald, and the sight of the pity 
and distress depicted on his countenance instantly 
recalled her to a sense of her situation. The blush 
of wounded pride quickly mantled her cheeks as she 
withdrew herself from his support. 

"You feel better now, do j-ou noti" inquired 
Reginald anxiously. Edith's heart thrilled, as the 
tenderness of the accent recalled the remembrance 
of former days. For a few minutes she remained 
silent, gradually regaining her self-possession, till at 
length she was able to say, "The sound of papa's 
voice had a strange eft'ect upon me, and I fear my 
weakness must have agitated him. Pray leave me ; 
I am now well." But Reoiinald still wavered. 



122 DESTINY. 

"Oh, Sir Reginald, will you come hereV called 
Mrs. Macauley, while Glenroy vaiuly strove to repel 
her officious cares and to recall his nephew. Glenroy's 
energies had been dormant but not extinguished, and 
the sight of Reginald had awakened them from the 
lethargy into which they had sunk. " Oh ! did not 
I tell you," cried she, all vibrating with joy, "what 
an effect an agreeable surprise would have upon poor 
Glenroy 1 'Deed, I think it was very clever in me to 
have found that out !" 



CHAPTER XIV. 

There was a new trial for Edith, and one she had 
httle anticipated. Glenroy, helpless, fatuous, and 
almost speechless, was more despotic than ever, and 
was never satisfied unless when Reginald and she 
were before him. Enough could be gathered from 
his broken and imperfect ex]i3ressions to know that 
the theme uppermost in his mind was their marriage, 
and thus the situation of both parties was one of the 
most painful embaiTassment. But for either of them 
to leave him was impossible, in the critical state he 
was then in, when the slightest opposition to his 
mshes would in all probability have been attended 
with the most fatal consequences. Although, in 
obedience to her father's commands, she gave him 
much of her company when Reginald was present, 
she carefully avoided all occasions of being alone 
■with the latter; and when they met at meals, she 
strove as much as possible to maintain the unvarying 
calm politeness of manner which was merely due 
towards her father's guest. But dearly was the 
struggle maintained, and many was the bitter tear 
shed in secret, when the chords of high-strained exer- 
tion were for a moment relaxed. 



124 DESTINY. 

So passed several clays, during which Glenroy made 
such progress towards recovery that he was now able 
to sit up, and even to converse, or rather talk, pretty 
much in his usual strain, only his mind was still weaker, 
his ideas more confused, and his temper more irritable 
than ever. His idolatry for his heir and his fondness 
for Edith had also increased, so that he could not endure 
either of them to be out of his sight ; fortunately he 
dozed and slept much during the day, when they, of 
course, were released from their thi-aldom, otherwise 
it woidd scarcely have been possible for them to have 
endured the torture of being associated together in 
Glenroy's company. It were endless to detail the 
absurdities and inconsistencies of a mind in its 
dotage. Sir Eeginald at first bore them with com- 
passionate forbearance and kindness of manner; but 
his patience became exhaaisted, and he now frequently 
testified his weariness and irritation in a manner which 
wounded Edith to the quick. 

One day, when Sir Eeginald and she were sitting 
by him, listening to, or at least hearing, old stories of 
the cutting of the woods, the black pony, etc. etc., a 
servant entered, to say that Mr. M'Dow and Mrs. 
M'Dow were in the drawing-room. Edith turned 
pale. Sir Eeginald uttered an exclamation of disgust, 
and Glenroy, catching the name, repeated "M'Dow — 
M'Dow. Ay, that's he, that's he— the — the what do 
you call it?— the that — Edith, you know very well 
what I mean — the man that marries you — the, the 
minister ! And what for should he not come and 



DESTINY. 125 

marry you and Reginald just now ? Tell Mr. 
M'Dow," he called to the servant, " to come here and 

bring the — the — the " But Edith heard no 

more, for she hastily rose and quitted the room. But 
feeling there would be no safety under the same 
roof with ]\Ir. M'Doav, she hurried out by a private 
door, which passed from her father's anteroom, upon 
the terrace. 

Instinctively she sought refuge in a part of the 
grounds, which, if not the most remote, was at least 
the most inaccessible, in the vicinity of the Castle. 
It was a httle, wild, rocky dell, which, from having 
been left pretty much in its natural state, had ever 
been the favourite resort of the children of the family. 
There was a Httle brook in which they might wade or 
angle, or sail their tiny boats, Avithout risk of drowning; 
and there were hazels for nutting, and mountain-ash 
for bows and arrows ; and there were brambles and 
sloes, and juniper-berries in abundance, and stones 
for tables; and, in short, everything to delight the 
heart of happy, unsophisticated childhood. Here 
many a joyous day Edith had passed Avith her young 
companions, Reginald and Norman and Ronald. In 
comphment to her predilection for this spot, Reginald, 
before he went abroad, had caused a rustic temple to 
be erected there, lined with various -coloured moss, 
and their initials entwined with such quaint devices, 
and in as skilful a manner as the nature of the 
materials permitted. Here, too, the evening before 
they parted, he had taken Edith to view this trophy 



126 DESTINY. 

of his love, and then they had each planted at the 
entrance a honeysuckle and a wild rose. Duly were 
these tended, and fondly were they watched by her 
during his long absence, and they had grown and 
flourished to their utmost luxuriance ; bnt the sweet- 
ness of both was past for the season, and they now 
only hung their long slender branches in mournful 
penury, while their seared and yellow leaves lay 
scattered around, and the gay summer brook, now 
swelled by autumnal rains into a turbid stream, 
murmured and gurgled hoarsely along. With sad 
and faltering steps Edith approached the spot fraught 
with so many overwhelming recollections — each bush, 
each stone, told its voiceless tale of perished life, of 
beauty turned to dust, of love and hope changed to 
gall and wormwood. The very silence that sur- 
rounded her spoke more eloquently than words could 
have done of the desolation of all things. She entered 
the mossy bower so long her favourite retreat, and 
gave way to the melancholy that oppressed her. 
Amid these scenes, it was almost a luxury to weep ; 
it seemed as though these mute witnesses of her early 
pleasures were now become the sympathetic deposi- 
taries of her maturer sorrows. Heedless of time, she 
remained sunk in mournful abstraction, till roused by 
a dog rushing in and bounding upon her, with all the 
ardour of attachment. It was a favourite pointer of 
Reginald's, which she had petted almost to spoiling 
in his absence, and the faithful creature never failed, 
when at liberty, to fly to her, and lavish his caresses 



DESTINY, 127 

on the gentle hand that had so often fed and fondled 
him. Soon after, Reginald's voice was heard calling 
loudly to the dog, and presently he entered with his 
gun in his hand, in pursuit, as it appeared, of the 
runaway. At sight of Edith he stopped, and colour- 
ing said, " I did not expect — I was not aAvare — I " 

then, as if to cover his confusion, he broke into ex- 
pressions of anger against his dog, and advanced as 
if to strike him; but the animal crouched close to 
Edith. 

"Pray do not hurt poor Bran," she said, stooping 
over him to hide the tears which still hung round her 
eyes. 

"He is become a mere useless, good-for-nothing 
cur," said Eeginald, giving him a shove with his foot, 
and evidently bent upon keeping up his ill-humour : 
" 'tis provoking to see a good dog so completely ruined 
— I shall certainly have him shot." 

Edith's heart swelled at the harsh, unfeeling manner 
in which Eeginald spoke ; but she tried to be calm, 
while she said, " I fear 'tis I who am in fault more 

than poor Bran — my fondness for him " she 

stopped. 

"Has been his ruin," said Reginald. 

There was something in the tone and manner in 
Avhich this was uttered, that struck Edith to the heart. 
She could not speak; but struggling A^dth her feelings, 
she rose to leave the place, when, as if smitten with a 
sense of his unkindness, Reginald caught her hand. 

"Forgive me," he said, "I did not mean to pain 



128 DESTINY. 

you — but there are times when I know not what I 
say — what I mean." 

Edith could not speak, but she motioned to be 
gone. Reginald's agitation seemed little less than her 
own; but he still held her hand, and several times 
attempted to speak, but emotion choked his utterance. 
At last he said, " Edith, this state of things is not to 
he endured — I would fain speak to you — tell you of 
what I have suffered since — No, Edith, you must 
hear me — dishonoured as I am in your eyes — cold 
and estranged as you are become — 'tis but justice you 
should hear me." 

" I have nothing to hear," said Edith faintly. 

" Yes — you have to hear me exculpate myself from 
the very suspicion of cold-blooded perfidy. My crime 
— if crime it was — was an involuntary one — so was 
the avowal of it. I would have died a thousand 
deaths rather than have wronged you, Edith. Would 
to heaven," he exclaimed wildly, "would I had died, 
rather than have lived to suffer as I do ! " 

" Why recur to what has passed — to what cannot 
be recalled?" said Edith with emotion. 

"Because I would yet recall much of what has 
passed. Edith, I would yet ask j^ou to forgive — to 
forget " (He stopped, and paused in extreme agita- 
tion, then proceeded) — " to sufler me to expiate, by a 
life devoted to you, the — involuntary error into which 
I have fallen." 

The pride of woman — the pride of Glenroy — for a 
moment mantled Edith's pale cheek with a deep glow 



DESTINY. 129 

at this proposal, and she remained silent ; but it was 
plain her silence was not that of doubt or timidity, 
but of deeply-wounded feeling. Reginald's colour also 
rose. " If there is more that you would have me do, 
and that I can do, speak, and it shall be done." 

" You might have spared me this, had you known 
me better," said Edith; "such professions must be 
painful to you — to me they are degrading." 

" Degrading ! — if to forgive is degrading " 

" I do forgive, with my whole heart," said Edith, 
with emotion. 

"And the proof 1" demanded Reginald bitterly. 

"That I wish you all happiness," said Edith in a 
faltering accent; and, unable to restrain her tears, 
she Avas again moving away. 

"Stay, Edith," cried Reginald; "we must not — 
we shall not part thus. 'Tis a mockery to talk of 
happiness to one so wretched as I. My happiness 
must ever be involved in yours — my suffering is, per- 
haps, still greater than yours. Edith, if you will yet 
confide in me, I again repeat — Heaven be my witness ! 
—your happiness shall be the study of my future 
life. Say, then, that " 

" Hear me, Reginald, once for all," said Edith, in 
the calmness of deep-felt emotion. "That my happi- 
ness was once in your hands, I freely acknowledge ; 
but that time is past, never to return. There are feel- 
ings which never can be renewed. We never can be 
to each other Avhat we have been. I never can — I 
never will be yours." 

VOL. II. K D. 



130 DESTINY. 

A strange mingled sensation shot through Ecgi- 
nald's veins at this declaration, delivered with a calm, 
solemn earnestness of manner, which admitted of no 
appeal With an air of pride, he bent his head, and 
said — " Since such is your irrevocable determination, 
it is better we should part ; for I will no longer play 
the hji^ocrite. I cannot continue to act the part of 
the favoured lover, after being thrice rejected" 

"And my father!" exclaimed Edith, in anguish. 
— " Ah ! Reginald, what will become of him if you 
forsake himf 

"I appeal to yourself, Edith, to your o%\Ta good 
sense, to your right feeling, if, after what has passed, 
it is to be expected that I should continue to drag 
out existence here ? B}^ Heaven, I would rather work 
as a galley-slave ! " 

"But you are all and everything to him," said 
Edith mournfully. 

"So at least I might have been — so I might be 
still ; but 3^ou have decreed otherwise," said Reginald, 
■with a sort of haughty humility. Edith felt the cruel 
taunt, but she made no reply, only turned away to 
hide the tears which rose to her eyes. Reginald's 
tone softened, and he sighed as he said — "Edith, 'tis 
best for both that we should part — at least for the 
present. Hearts once so dear — still so dear to each 
other — Editli, we are still too much, and yet not 
enough to each other — if the time should ever come 

" He stopped, for he would fain have added, 

"when we may be more;" but his lips refused to 



DESTINY. 131 

utter so false a supposition — " should the time ever 
come, Edith," he added, mth confusion, " when youi" 

present sentiments may change " Edith could not 

speak, but she "waved her head to repel such a sup- 
position — "At least you cannot prevent me from 
thinking it ])ossihh they may," said Reginald. 

Edith's pale cheek glowed, while she said — "No, 
Reginald — rest assured my sentiments are unchange- 
able." 

" And mine also," thought Reginald, as his heart 
throbbed at the bare idea that his love for Florinda 
could ever change — could ever be given to another, 
even though that other were Edith. He stood silent 
for a few minutes, then said hurriedly — "Then let 
us part ; I am now on my way to Dunshiera. But, 
should Glenroy become worse, you have only to send 
for me, and I shall return to you instantly. God 
bless you, Edith ! " 

A tear was in his ej'e as he held her hand in his, 
and looked anxiously, fondly, upon her, as though he 
waited her parting word. Edith's breast heaved — 
her lips moved — but no sound passed them. She 
felt her fortitude giving way, but she made a strong 
effort, and said, Avith the calmness of agony — "May 
you be happy !" 

He wrung her hand in silence ; and thus they 
parted — under what different circumstances again to 
meet ! 



CHAPTER XV. 

SoBiE time elapsed ere Edith could compose her spirits 
sufficiently to quit the spot, once the scene of so much 
youthful pleasure — now the silent witness of broken 
vows and departed joys. At length, though with sad 
and abstracted mind, she was slowly retracing her 
steps homewards, when her attention was roused by 
hearing the horrid accents of ]\Ir. IM'Dow calling loudly 
to some one to draw to a side — for any sake to draw 
to a side. Looking up, she perceived the cause of 
alarm was a wood-cart which obstructed the way, and 
arrested the progress of Mr. M'Dow's gig. Some 
trees lay felled by the side of the road, and increased 
the difficulty of advancing. The gig was evidently 
ill- driven and overloaded, containing his own bulky 
person, and those of two ladies of large dimensions — 
the hapless Amailye prefixed to the whole. Edith 
saw with dismay that escape was impossible, unless 
she had actually turned round and fled, which her 
native politeness would not permit her to do. The 
road was narrow, and whether from awkwardness on 
the part of Amailye or her master, the gig was in such 
a position, that for the cart to pass without upsetting 
it was impossible. 



DESTINY. 133 

Mr, M'Dow was evidently in great agitation at the 
alarming predicament in "wliicli he had placed himself. 
"This dri\dng is really a most ticklish business," said 
he, with a very red face, " and my beast has not been 
much used to it — and where there's ladies in the case, 
it's reallj' — hem — I think my best plan is to get out, 
Mrs. M'Dow, and lead Amailye past the cart — just 
take the reins for a moment, my dear," to his lady — 
" just sit still ; there will be no danger for j'ou, once 
I'm out." 

And thereupon Mr. M'Dow descended, and taking 
Amailye by the hair of the head, he dragged her past 
the cart ; and "with the sense of safety his courage and 
spirits rose to their usual pitch. 

" Your most obedient. Miss Malcolm ; I really did 
not recognise you just at first — this might have been 
a serious rancounter, for this is an awkward turn of 
road — but as it is, it has turned out verj^ well — this is 
a most pleasant meeting. Allow me to introduce Mrs. 
]\I'Dow to you. Colina, my dear, this is Miss Malcolm 
of Glenroy, whom you've often heard me mention." 
Mutual bows were of course exchanged. " And this 
is Miss Violet Muckle, my wife's youngest sister ; we 
are but just come off our marriage ioiver, which was a 
most delightful one ! We were most fortunate in 
weather — scarcely a drop of rain the whole time. We 
spent some days in Edinburgh — it's really a most 
shiqjcrh city ! jN'Ii'S. M'Dow was much pleased Avith 
it ; but I regretted that I hadn't thought of procuring 
letters to some of the principal literary characters 



134 DESTINY. 

there. Mrs. M'Dow has rather a turn that way, and 
Miss Violet, we allege, is half a blue-stocking. The 
Edinburgh ladies, it is said, are all rather blue." Then, 
in a tone of vulgar sympathy, protruding his face as 
near to Edith as possible, he was beginning, " I Avas 
much amazed and concerned to hear " 

"VMien shrinking back, she said, "Excuse me; I fear 
I am rather late ;" and she attempted to pass on. 

" Oh, I don't think it can be late; but Mrs. M'Dow's 
my regulator now — hoch, ho ! " 

Mrs. M'Dow here displayed a highly -ornamented 
watch and seals which hung at her side, and pro- 
claimed the hour. 

"Ay, we've come on very well considering — only 
considering though, Mrs. M'Dow ; for I don't travel 
just so briskly now as I used to do in my bachelor 
days — now that I'm taigled with a vnie — hoch, ho, 
ho!" 

" You must always have your joke, ]Mi\ M'Dow," 
said the lady, with a laugh, and a toss of the head. 

]Mr. M'Dow, having now taken a safe position, 
went on. "I was desu'ous of taking the earliest 
opportunity of waiting upon my excellent pa^vtron. 
I considered it a proper mark of respect both to him 
and myself, considering the many years we have lived 
upon such pleasant, friendly terms ; and I was like- 
wise anxious to make Mrs. M'Dow and you known to 
each other, Miss Malcolm, as I flatter myself it will 
be a mutual advantage. You must often find yourself 
lonesome enough at Glenroy ; it's a great comfort for 



DESTINY. 135 

a lady of taste and refinement to have a shdtahle com- 
panion of her own sex at hand." 

Edith tried to articulate sometliing, but in vain ; 
she could only bow in silence. 

j\Ii\ M'Dow proceeded : " I was vastly happy to 
find my excellent friend Glenroy so well and hearty. 
I had a long chat with him ; and I was amazingly re- 
Heved to hear from him that there was no truth in 
certain evil reports that some ill-disposed Avretches 
had been spreading on a very delicate subject. It's 
really most shameful," in a louder key ; " I only wish 
I could find out who it was — I Avould not spare them !" 

Edith shuddered, and attempted to pass, but in 
vain. 

" I sat a long time with Glenroy, honest man ; he 
seemed really happy to see me ! ' But,' says he, ' Mr. 
M'Dow, I wish you had come half-an-hour ago, when 
I had Reginald and Edith here, just waiting for you ; 
they've been kept waiting all this time for you to come 
and marry them.' And then, poor man, he gave me 
a good down-set for having stayed away. ' Why,' says 
I, ' I must plead guilty so far, that we extended our 
tower to a much greater length than we had thoughts 
of at first starting ; but you must wait till you've seen 
my apology, Glenroy ; I think you'll admit it's a fair 
one — hoch, ho, ho!'" 

" You needn't put the blame upon me, Mr. M'Dow," 
said his lady. 

" Well, I confess I had no great objections to play 
the truant for a while — it's an umazino; relief for a 



136 DESTINY. 

man to get awaj from the duties of a laborious call- 
ing, such as mine ; and I found a good deal to see in 
Edinburgh, though the ladies Avould not allow it Avas 
equal to Glasgow." 

" Oh ! the streets and shops are very well," said 
Mrs. M'Dow ; " but I'm sure their Castle is not to be 
compared to our Green !" 

" The worst of it is," said Miss Violet, with a sweet 
solemnity, "it is so much in the way in the Princes 
Street Gardens." 

" And as for their Joint-Stock Dairy we heard so 
much about," cried IVIrs. M'Dow vehemently, " I'm 
sure it's not to be spoken of in comparison of ours." 

"Well, I admit they must draw in their horns 
there," said Mr. M'Dow, with one of his loudest laughs. 

"You must always have your pun, minister," said 
Mrs. ]\I'Dow, with a giggle of delight. 

"I inquired for Sir Reginald," said Mr. M'Dow, 
again addressing Edith, Avho stood the image of de- 
spair ; " but when I heard you and he were both 
missing, I could not helj) saying, 'I wish they may 
not have gone to steal a march upon us, Glenroy ; it 
will be a pretty business if they've given us the slip, 
after all — hoch, hoch, ho ! ' " 

"Pray, suffer me to pass," said Edith, sick at heart. 

"Oh, certainly," said Mr. M'Dow, but without 
moving a joint of either himself or his Amailye. " I 
was afraid we should have had a shower; but m}^ 
A\nfe is more weather-wise than me, it seems, for she 
and Miss Violet there umild put on their best bonnets 



DESTINY. 137 

to wait upon you, I told them that was really putting 
the best foot foremost, and that they ought to have 

kept them for the kirk on Sunday, but Will you 

stand still, Amailye !" 

The two bonnets were of salmon-coloured silk, with 
pink and green ribbons, and bunches of roses and 
sweet pea. The faces were large, flat, broad, red and 
white, assured-looking faces, such as are to be seen in 
scores on every market-day. 

" It looks very like a change, minister — I wish we 
majTi't have a shower," said Mrs, M'Dow, looking up 
in alarm, as a passing cloud for a moment obscured 
the sun, 

"Ay, that's one word for me, and two for yourself, 
I suspect, mj'' lady fair. Oh, iheu bonnets ! — Stand 
still, Amailj'e ! — I allege my \nie thinks more of her 
new bonnet than she does of me; — is that true, 
Colina'?" with a look of triumphant love beaming in 
his face. 

" Oh, Mr, M'Dow, you're really too bad !" rephed 
the lady in a tone of rej^roachful tenderness. 

" Bad as I am, you've taken me for better or worse 
— remember you that, my dear — hoch, hoch, ho ! " 

"I really don't think I could have ventured to 
take you at all if I had seen you as daft as you are 
to-day, minister," said the lady in a tone of mawkish 
affectation, 

" If you think you've got a bad pennyworth. Colly, 
you'U not easily get me off your hands, I can tell 
you," cried the delighted Mr. M'Dow, "for I'm not 



138 DESTINY. 

disposed to part Avith my bargain, I assure you ; but I 
flatter myself j^ou and I will be able to put up together. 
What say you, Miss Violet % " 

A burst of laughter was Miss Violet's reply. 

"Don't you believe her, Miss Malcolm, but take 
my adA-ice, and follow our example as fast as you 
can. That was really a most scandalous report I was 
alluding to ! " 

Edith's blood ran cold. " I entreat you will suffer 
me to pass, Mr. M'Dow," she cried in a tone, and 
Avith a look that might have moved a stone, but 
which had no effect on the obtuse organs of ]\Ir. 
M'Dow. 

" We'll get a shower, minister ! " cried IVIrs. M'Dow 
in a flurried manner, as she again cast an agitated 
look at the impending cloud. 

" There it is ! there's the bonnet again, Mrs. 
M'Dow; but perhaps there's a Utile thought of the 
giideman too, for I can tell you my wife's a famous 
nurse ; she's been doctoring my throat for me, for I 
had a little of a hoarseness lately, and I alleged she 
was very anxious that I should make a great show-off 
in the pulpit on Sunday, being my first matrimonial 
discourse; but we can't agree about the text, I " 

*' Oh, Mr. M'Dow, it's really getting very black in 
the west !" and Mrs. M'Dow, getting desperate at the 
thoughts of her undone salmon-coloured silk bonnet, 
gave a jerk to the reins, and a chirrup to Amailye. 

" Hoot toot, Mrs. M'Dow, tliis will never do ; what 
will my people say if they see that my wife has got 



DESTINY. 139 

the whip-hand of me abeady— hoch, hoch, ho ! But 
I think," addressing Edith, " the Sjniod itself would 
be satisfied that I could not be in better hands, if it 
once knew Mrs. M'Dow." Here Amailye backed a 
little. "And if she should be the occasion of any 
backslidings, I think I may ventiu-e to say they have 
only to look in her face and they'll forgive them all." 
And with this flourish Mr. M'Dow resumed his seat 
in the gig, and -R-ith a " Hap, hap," to Amailj'e, was 
once more in motion ; but his voice was heard 
resounding through the woods, as he turned round his 
head, and called to the utmost extent of his lungs, 
" I hope, Miss Malcolm, you will soon have some work 
for the minister ! " 



CHAPTER XVL 

It would be a vain attempt to depict the state of 
Glenroy's mind on the defection of his nephew. Not 
that he was at all aware of the nature or extent of 
the evil, for it would have been alike cruel and need- 
less to have acquainted him with the truth. His 
mind was now incapable of receiving, or at least of 
retaining, aught but the ever -recurring images and 
ideas which seemed indigenous to the soil. As these 
followed not in regular succession, but came confusedly 
crowding together, pell mell, so did their kindred 
emotions of pride, sorrow, auger, impatience, and 
despondency, commingle in strange disorder, till his 
iDenighted mind, still groping for happiness, would at 
length lapse into fatuity or forgetfulness. 

Dupe, not of to-morrow, but of to-day, he still lived 
in the momentary expectation of Eeginald's return ; 
and as his notions of time were as indistinct as of 
everything else, he thus remained in comparatively 
happy ignorance that days, weeks, and months were, 
like the brook, flo^ving on, " for ever changing, unper- 
ceived the change." The present only was his calen- 
dar, and deeply sunk is that mind where only the 
present finds place ! 



DESTINY. 141 

It was Edith's province to sit hour after hour 
striving to beguile the old man's childish impatience, 
or soothe his querulous disappointments, for Edith was 
now all in all to him. Independent of the feeling of 
natural affection which, even unknown to himself, 
still lingered in his heart, her image was indissolubly 
united in his mind with that of Eeginald, the heir of 
his glory; while she was near him, he seemed to think 
Eeginald could not be far off, or else he viewed her as 
a sort of hostage that ensui-ed his speedy return. 

It was a heavy burden that Edith had to bear, 
and a mere selfish, worldly spirit could not have sus- 
tained it as she did. But a sacred and interesting 
duty lay before her, and to that she devoted herself. 

In most cases the offices of filial obedience and 
affection may be considered as privileges, rather than 
as duties; for happy may they account themselves 
whom God permits to reflect back upon the hoary 
head 'tis their delight to cherish even a feeble portion 
of that love and gladness which, from the first dawn 
of life, had showered blessings on their own daily 
path ! 

But Edith could not be supposed to feel the full 
influence of fihal love, for there was nothing in the 
character of her father to fill the deep places of the 
heart. Mere natural affection is indeed a powerful 
sentiment in every breast — but how is it heightened 
and refined when the virtues of the parent claim aHke 
the love and reverence of the child ! They only can 
tell who have most deeply venerated Avhcre they most 



142 DESTINY. 

fondly loved ! Still she loved him as the author of 
her being ; and the infinnities of his mind and body 
seemed to endear him to her still more. As the 
proud, turbulent, overbearing Chief, he had been the 
object of her fear— as the helpless, infirm, imbecile 
old man, broken down by grief, and with a dreamy 
sense of disappointment corroding his latter days, he 
possessed stronger claims on her tenderness and sym- 
pathy than ever he could have had in his high and 
palmy state. 

So passed the Avinter, uncheered by aught save 
many a kind vnsit from IMrs. Malcolm and her family. 
Glenroy's situation was a sufficient excuse for his 
daughter decHning to receive company, even that of 
Mr.'^M'Dow, although he made many attempts to 
intrude upon her privacy. 

She learnt accidentally that Sir Reginald still re- 
mained at Dunshiera in no less strict seclusion ; and, 
spite of herself, a vague and sickly hope would occa- 
sionally spring up in her heart, that a change might 
yet take place-that Reginald might yet awake from 
the dehrium of passion, and retui-n to the hallowed 
affection of his early days. But the hope had no root 
in itself, and often as it might spring up it soon 
gathered away, for Edith's better judgment and loftier 
feeling refused to cherish the flattering chimera. And 
well for her peace that it was so. At the end of some 
months she received a letter from Reginald; it was 
written in the language of complaint and reproach. 
He dwelt on the wretchedness he had endured on her 



DESTINY. 143 

account ; he declared that Hfc was insufferable to him 
— a burden more than he could bear ; that, bereft of 
her regard, and banished from Glenroy, nothing re- 
mained for him but a life of exile and sorrow ; that 
he was therefore on the point of bidding a long adieu 
to Scotland — that he knew not, he cared not, where 
he should go ; but wherever he went, he should ever 
fervently pray a better and happier lot might be hers ; 
and concluded by again protesting that the only alle- 
viation to his misery would be the assurance of her 
happiness. 

Edith was deeply affected by this letter. The 
thoughts of Reginald an exile from his father's halls, 
from his own fair domain, from the land of his birth, 
and she the cause — even the innocent cause — added 
new anguish to her feelings. The illusion of love 
was not yet wholly dispelled from her heart, else she 
would have viewed the matter in a different light. 
She would have seen that what appeared to her as 
sensibility was in reality mere worldly selfishness, 
coloured over ^^n.ih. the sickly hue of a better feeling. 

Eeginald despised the society of the country. He 
was wretched in solitude, and he had none of that 
benevolence of feeling, or even manly patriotism, 
which would have prompted him to seek a refuge 
from his own misery in alleviating the distresses, or 
improving the condition, of his people and property. 
When he therefore bewailed the necessity he was 
under of leaving his native country, he was sincere in 
believing what he said, for he was unconscious that 



;^44 DESTINY. 

in reaUty he was naerely going to seek amusement 
elsewhere. A long and dreary interval succeeded his 
departiire, during which Edith remained ignorant of 
the fate of the heartbroken exile, whom fancy often 
painted to her as sometimes saHing over the boundless 
ocean, seeking in another hemisphere to lose the keen 
remembrance of home, or wandering sad and sohtary 
amid burning plains or pathless forests, reckless of 
life, or rather courting death. Alas! what broken 
reeds will not woman's love cling to, ere it can finaUy 
part with all its fond imaginations ! Poor Edith had 
yet to learn another chapter of the deceitfulness and 
the inconsistency of the human heart ! In Httle more 
than three months from the date of his mournfu 
farewell, the newspapers announced, m the usual 
pompous style, the magnificent ceremomal of the 
marriage of Sir Eeginald Malcolm, Baronet, to ilor- 
mda, Baroness ^Yaldeg^ave ! 



CHAPTER XYII. 

And now Editli felt as though her destiny -svere sealed. 

Never more, did it seem, could her heart awaken to 

the love of aught that life could bestow. The idol 

her imagination had fashioned had fallen ; hut even 

Avhile it lay in shivers at her feet, still her fond, 

credulous heart had unconsciously hovered amid the 

broken fragments, in the vain hope that the image it 

had so adored might again rise, to receive the homage 

of a still enslaved soul. But now it had turned to 

very dust and ashes in her sight, — now the illusion 

was dispelled, and the selfish, hollow character of her 

lover appeared in its true colours. It was then a 

purer light dawned upon the darkness of her spirit. 

She now discerned that the image of the creature had 

held that place in her heart, and exercised that swaj' 

over her mind, which belonged only to the Creator. 

The enchantment of life was then indeed dissolved, 

but what heir of immortality would wish to remain 

the dupe of this world's enchantments 1 Vain labour, 

" when souls of highest birth 

Waste their impassion'd might on dreams of earth !" 

"I never was happy," says Adams, "till I knew I 
could not be happy in this world." 

VOL. IL L ». 



^.Q DESTINY. 

To a mind so excited as hers had been it was not 
the d^ly outine of common duties and petty oares 
hat could fill that aching void. "— » 
hear, .vhich, of all ^^-^ ^^^ ^thl d^-t 
r "Tchdmts 'Thelove of the .ovld cannot 
language « Cbdm rs ^„^^,,,,ti„, „f the world's 

be «i;"'>S»^^5'^;~t „„t be supplanted by the 
worthlessness. i3ut may i^ uu ri 

love of that which is more worthy than > seU The 
heart cannot be prevailed upon to 1"^ -* ^^^ 
world by a simple act of resignation But may not 
The heartbe prevaUed upon to admit mto its pr - 
"another, who shall subordinate he work 
.Tbring it down from its wonted ascendency! I 
the Tone wliich is placed there must have a, 
TTnd the tyrant that now reigns has occupied 
r' tfnUv he n ay uot leave a bosom which would 

inS hirLn be left in desolation But 
,athei detain h ^^^^^^^ ^^^^^^.^_^_ 

r^ h elerrch- that can secure his willing ad- 
Xt. and'tahiug unto himseH his g-* J-- ^ 

-ri^-'ift-:;rr::r-f^ 

t m the positl™ love of one great and ascendant 
Zet s to fasten it in positive love to ancrth 

are to be done away, and all things 



new." 



DESTINY. 147 

The mind of Edith gradually became braced and 
invigorated by this new and wholesome principle, 
which imparted to her soul that vivifying warmth 
without which virtue is but a name. She felt her 
trials, but she no longer felt them as the cruel mock- 
ings or Avapvard caprices of chance or fortune ; for 
now she believed that all human trials, painful as 
they may be in their endurance, transient and perish- 
able in their existence, are nevertheless designed by 
Divine wisdom to exercise a purifying and a perma- 
nent influence on the immortal soul, by bringing it to 
seek its happiness in Him, who alone is the fountain 
of happiness, and with whom it is destined for ever 
to dwell : — 

" Oh, sacred sorrow ! by ■whom hearts are tried, 
Sent not to punish mortals, but to guide ; 
If thou art mine (and who shall proudly dare 
To tell his Maker he has had his share ?) 
Still let me feel for what thy pangs are sent, 
And be my guide, and not my punishment." 

With this prayer at her heart, and in the discharge 
of the daily duties of life, thus passed the even tenor 
of three long years, during which Glenroy lingered on 
in increasing dotage and infirmities, unconscious of 
evil, unsusceptible of pleasure — 

" All relish of realities expired, 
All feeling of futurity benumb'd." 

And when at length the hour of his departure 
came, all that could be said of his death Avas, that 
he had merely ceased to breathe; but oh, the deep 



I 



j^8 DESTINY. 

mystery of that simple transition! oh, the dread 
ZPoi that silence, which mortal lips never can 

'Imi! felt as all must feel, more or less at Uje 
bieakins of so dear and sacred a tie Friendship 
and k^e. dear and holy affections as they may be 
a^e the affections we ourselves have formed and 
Tosen we can look back upon the time when as yet 
hev™4re not, and their existence was not linked 
I ZZ but from the first dawn of consciousness. 
Twr ^a^nfs love that beamed upon our hearts, 
T iL„^ ,11 their best and holiest sympathies, 
and awakened al thenb ^^^^^^^^ ^^^^^ 

Friends may meet as stran^eis, in , . ,,; 

„t love even wedded love, may be broken hut t s 
God Himself who has formed that one indissoW^e 
bond which neither human power nor human fiadty 
e r ;an dissolve. But now this occupation was gon 
and oh the sadness of that mormng Ig ^ wh h 
dawns upon us only to proclaim that it is indeed 

^°°The .rief of Benbowie and Mrs. Macauley showed 
iJ^rcording to their ^^^^^^^^^^T^^^ 
„,!»« of feehn<' The fomer said nothing, utterea 
Tet r i h n r'lamentation ; he only paced the floor 
':^^a heavier step, and looked -nd with a d^ta^ 
Id more stupefied gaze ; the latter, even m the midst 
7\Z afflictL, sincere as that was, stdl contrived o 
find some consolation in the preparation fo and in 
I ItTcipation of the magnificent ceremom^ wh h 
luld ell her beloved Chiefs mortal career. The 



DESTINY. 149 

last solemn rites Avere now all that remained to be 
paid to the Chief of Glenroy ; and after vainly waiting 
in hopes of the arrival of Sir Eeginald (who, Avith 
his lady, Avas abroad). Captain Malcolm, as nearest 
relative of the deceased, Avas obliged to take the lead 
upon the occasion. 

The burying of the dead is a simple operation ; 
but custom has varied and amplified the accompany- 
ing rites to a great variety of forms and observances. 
The sacred and impressive service of the Church of 
England, in which the many sublime and affecting 
texts of Scrij)ture that bear upon man's mortality are 
so forcibly brought before the mind, soothes the feel- 
ings, and elevates the soul of the mourner, when read 
over the remains of the righteous — one Avhose glorious 
immortality Ave feel assured is already begun ; and 
though Ave still feel that "in the midst of life Ave 
are in death," Ave feel also the salutary and consoling- 
truth expressed by the saddest but truest of poets — 

" This truth how certain, when this life is o'er, 
Man dies to live, and lives to die no moi"e." 

But to the thinking mind there are misgivings, 
and the Avhole seems little more than a solemn mock- 
ery when pronounced over the sad relics of Avorldly 
pride, unruly passion, and scornful unbelief. The 
extreme unction of the Catholics professes to bear 
along Avith it a saving efficacy; but the Church of 
England service, if read over the remains of the 
Avicked and the impenitent, can serve no purpose but 



150 DESTINY. 

to harroAv the feelings of the living, and rake up the 
ashes of the dead. In the plain Presbyterian form, 
as far as that goes, there is the power of adapting it 
to most cases and circumstances; and although it 
never attains to the sublime and finished excellence 
of the Episcopal service, still, in the hands of a good 
and conscientious man, a solemn and a useful lesson 
maybe learned from its simple and impressive truths. 
But the service on the present occasion, as per- 
formed by Mr. M'Dow, more resembled a clumsy 
heathen apotheosis than a simple Christian rite; 
though, to do him justice, he had laboured with all 
his might to show forth the merits of his respected 
patron, whose loss he, from various motives, sincerely 
and deeply regretted. A vast concourse assembled 
to pay the last honours to the mighty departed; and 
the Chief of Glenroy was consigned to the narrow 
house with all but royal pomp. 

And now Edith stood alone in the world, and a 
dreary prospect lay before her ; deprived of that rest- 
ing-place for the affections which the tender relation 
of a parent more or less affords, she by the same 
stroke found herself suddenly reduced from a state of 
wealth and consequence, the state in which she had 
been born and reared, to one of actual poverty and 
dependence. Glenroy's estate was strictly entailed 
on the male heirs, and his personal property was 
found not equal to the amount of his debts. His 
marriage had been made without the formality of 
settlements; and his natural indolence of mind in all 



DESTINY. 151 

that related to matters of business, together with his 
habits of reckless profusion and ostentation, had ever 
prevented him from taking any steps towards securing 
a provision for his daughter. The -worth or the 
affection of a parent is certainly not to be estimated 
by the amount of the wealth he may bequeath to his 
children, since, in the dear remembrance of a good 
hfe, a virtuous example, and an unsulhed name, a 
parent may leave a more precious inlieritauce to his 
posterity than all the boast of wealth or pride of 
ancestry : Avhile another may gather up accumulated 
riches, which turn to dust and ashes even in his own 
sordid grasp, or may transmit them to futiu-e genera- 
tions with a blighted name, a despised memory, and 
a character stamped with its own base ignoble features. 
But Glenroy did not belong to either of these classes ; 
he had led a life of mere worldly pride, vanity, osten- 
tation, and prodigality; he had sown the wind, 
leaving it to those who should come after him to 
" reap the whirlwind ; " he had had his good things 
in his own life, ]ea^^ng it to his child to eat the 
bitter fruits of poverty, humiliation, and dependence. 
In due time it was necessary that Edith should be 
apprised of her situation; and although that was 
done with all possible delicacy and precaution by her 
kind friends the Malcolms, still there was no way in 
which the truth could be told so as to blunt its 
severity. The fact itself could not be disguised, how- 
ever much friendship and tenderness miglit strive to 
soften it. She, the daughter of proud Glenroy, reared 



152 DESTINY. 

amidst the rude magiiificence of feudal state, and 
accustomed personally to habits of noble expenditure 
and costly refinement, to be all at once sunk to a 
condition of the most sordid })enury and abject 
dependence ! 

It is not those who have been born and bred in 
affluence who can all at once comprehend the nature 
of absolute poverty ; those who have been accustomed 
to wiU their every gratification can ill conceive the 
privations of want, the shifts and expedients of fallen 
fortime, the difficulty which the mind has to contract 
its desires, and the habits of self-indulgence and luxury 
which have to be overcome or annihilated ; in short, 
nothing difi'ers more than abstract and actual poverty. 

Edith was, as may be supposed, profoundly igno- 
rant of all those things in detail ; but the simple fact 
that she was destitute was sufficiently strange and 
appalling. In vain did Mrs. Malcolm, as she folded 
her to her heart, assure her she looked upon her as 
her own daughter, and besought her, in all the fer- 
vour of the fondest, warmest aflfection, to look upon 
Inch Orran as her future home. Edith assented to 
its affording her a temporary asylum ; but she could 
not bear to think of it as her permanent residence. 
The state of Glenroy's affairs had been communicated 
to Sir Eeginald by letter. A reply Avas received, 
requesting that Edith would continue to consider 
Glenroy as her own, and make him her banker, until 
proper arrangements could be made to secure her 
future comfort and independence. But to remain 



DESTINY. 153 

at Glenroy, or receive pecuniary aid from Eeginald, 
were both out of the question ; and she therefore 
prepared to bid a long, a last adieu to the home of 
her youth — to her father's house. Vain would be 
the attempt to depict the feelings with which that 
was done 

" Ye who have known what 'tis to dote upon 
A few dear objects, will in sadness feel 
Such partings break the heart ! " 



CHAPTEE XVIIL 

The invitation to Inch Orran had been no less kindly 
and cordially extended to jVIrs. Macauley, w'ho, indeed, 
like Dominie Sampson, had declared her resolution of 
sticking by her patron's daughter to the last gasp. 
Mrs. Macauley felt this as she felt every affliction, in 
her own peculiar way. Prone as she was to indulge 
the visionary belief that she beheld coming events 
casting " their shadows before," she was no less given 
to reverse the figure ; and no sooner did an evil befall 
than she was busy seeking for the blessing which she 
Avas certain was following close in its train. "Oh, 
what curious creatures we are !" exclaimed she to 
Benbowie, as the tears flowed down her cheeks ; " to 
think of Glenroy's daughter being brought to such 
straits ! Oh, if wq could but see to the back of this 
great cloud that's upon her, not a bit but we would 
be surprised at the grand things that are pro\dded for 
her, if not in this world, surely in that which is to 
come ; but we are such poor blind ignorant creatures 
that we can only do as good Job did, put om* hands 
upon our mouths and hold our tongues. Oh, surely 
if it had not been for some great purpose things 



DESTINY. 155 

would never have been permitted to take this turn. 
Such a good man as Gleuroy, and so proud of his 
own daughter, would never have got leave to forget 
to do what was right, if it had not been appointed for 
our good ; and after all we have great reason to be 
thankful. Oh ! I read such excellent words in a good 
book of Holy Living the t'other day, that 'deed I 
learnt them by heart, and I've often said them over 
to myself since ; but I never thought they were to be 
made suitable for Glenroy's dochter. Now hearken 
to me, Benbowie, and see if you can understand me. 
' Is that beast better that hath two or three mountains 
to graze on than a httle bee that feeds on dew or 
manna, and lives upon what falls every morning from 
the storehouses of heaven, clouds, and Providence 1 ' 
But one thing I'm sure of, Benbowie, that if I Avas 
you, like the great beast with his mountains to graze 
on, and saw Glenroy's dochter, like the httle bee that 
has to be fed from the storehouses of Providence, not 
a bit but I would think myself highly favoured if I 
was permitted to make her a present of maybe ten 
thousand pounds or so — that I would ! " 

Benbowie's eyes grew rounder and rounder. " Ten 
thousand pound is a gTeat deal of money, Mrs. Mac- 
auley — a very great deal of money. On my con- 
science, it's a great deal of money. I wish you good 
morning, IMi-s. Macauley!" And Benbowie ordered 
his chaise, and departed. 

Various were the communings which Mrs. Macauley 
held, as her mind revolved higli matters of expediency 



;156 DESTINY. 

and propriety as to where her beloved charge should 
or could reside with the greatest comfort to herselt 
and the dignity due to Glenroy's daughter. But with 
a true dehcacy of mind, which would have shamed 
many in afar superior station, Mrs. Macauley abstamed 
from all appearance of commiseration, nor even al- 
luded in the slightest degree, in presence of Edith 
herself, to her change of fortune. A httle tinge of 
additional respect was all the difference perceptible 

in her manner. 

The only person on Avhom Edith possessed any 
near claim of relationship was a half sister of her 
mother's, but in all other respects an utter stranger to 
her, or known only by the contemptuous manner m 
which she had heard her occasionally mentioned by 
Glenroy as a cit, a cockney, and so on. At the same 
time, as she was rich and childless, he did not disdam 
to conciliate her favourable opinion by occasionally 
ordering a box of game, or some such demonstration 
of regard and affinity, to be sent, as might, he thought, 
entitle him or his family to a good legacy m return 
But as yet Mrs. Ribley's testimonies of affection had 
consisted in sending, at three several times, to Edith 
a small Tunbridge ware work-box; a copy of i^w- 
dyce's Sermons to Young Women;" and last y 
"Letters to a Young Lady, on a variety of Useful 
and Interesting Subjects, calculated to improve the 
Heart, to form the Manners, and enlighten the 
Understanding. By the Rev. John fennet -in- 
scribed, From her affectionate aunt, Katherme Ribley. 



DESTINY. 157 

It was by the maternal side that Glenroy's lady 
and Mrs. Eibley had been related. The father of the 
former, a poor Highlander, had left a handsome 
widow and an only child to push their fortune as they 
liest could. The child had been taken by her father's 
relations, and became afterwards the wife of Gleuroy. 
The widow went as companion to an old lady in 
London, where she contrived to captivate a citizen of 
credit if not of reno-\vn. An only daughter Avas the 
offspring of this union : heiress of her father's wealth, 
at his death she bestowed it with her hand upon Mr. 
Peter Ribley, a sleeping partner in the old-established 
house of Eudge, Eibley, and Company. As there was 
no family to inherit the concentrated wealth of this 
pair, Glenroy had made it out as a clear case, in his 
own mind, that a portion of it would certainly descend 
to his children ; and indeed he seemed to think it 
would be a great honour for the old cockney's money 
to be permitted to flow into so noble a channel. 

Edith had received a letter of condolence from Mrs. 
Eibley on her father's death ; it was such a letter as 
anybody or everybody might write, — a neat, cleai-, 
plain, commonplace letter, containing the ordinary 
expressions of regret usual on those occasions, where 
little or nothing of the kind is or can be felt ; con- 
cluding with an invitation to spend a year Avith Mr. 
Eibley and her, when they should be hapi)y to assist 
her in arranging her plans for her future mode of life. 
Edith had answered this letter, declining the invita- 
tion for the present, but with a half promise of ac- 



158 DESTINY. 

cepting it at some future time, when her health and 
spirits might be more equal to the exertion. But 
months elapsed, and she still remained the cherished 
inmate of Inch Orran, secluded from all but the society 
of those dear friends, the salutary intercourse of their 
pious pastor, and visits of kindness to the neighbour- 
ing poor. Many who had experienced her father's 
hospitalities had sought to repay them to his daugh- 
ter, and she had received many kind and pressing 
invitations from some of those whom she had ever 
welcomed in the days of her prosperity. Some more 
sordid and selfish spirits, indeed, ceased to notice her 
whom they had formerly flattered and caressed when 
presiding over an almost princely estabHshment ; 
others of vulgar minds and inferior station seemed to 
think the mere lack of wealth had reduced the daugh- 
ter of Glenroy to a level with themselves. Amongst 
the number was Mr. M'Dow, who, fired with the noble 
ambition of patronising the daughter of the lordly 
Chief to whom he owed his preferment, wrote to her 
as follows : — 

"My dear Madam— As I have not had the good 
fortune to find you at home on my late visits to^ Inch 
Orran, and it is rather inconvenient for me to ride so 
far for a morning call, I take what I conceive the pre- 
ferable mode of communicating with you on a matter 
which Mrs. M'Dow and myself have much at heart. 
By the lamented death of my late excellent friend, 
yom- father, I am truly concerned to learn your cir- 



DESTINY. 159 

cumstances are not altogether such as might have been 
reasonably exiDected from the high station which your 
father occupied, and Avhich, consequently, j'ou had 
always been accustomed to enjoy. I beg to assure 
you this change in your circumstances will not in any 
shape affect the high opinion I have all along enter- 
tained of you. No doubt the bereavement, sore as it 
was, of so valuable a life as that of your good father's, 
has been pretty considerably augmented by the dis- 
tressing turn which affairs have taken, which have 
rendered this, I may say, a variegated calamity of no 
common complexion ; and since misfortunes will befall 
the best of us, it behoves us to make up our minds to 
them, for, as Solomon says, 'There is time for all 
things.' I therefore hojje that your own excellent 
sense, and the company of some cheerful and rationally 
religious friends, may go far to bring about a great 
improvement in your health and spirits ; and I will 
be extremely gratified if it should be through my in- 
strumentahty that it is so. For that purpose Mrs. 
IM'Dow and myself are of opinion that a change might 
prove highly beneficial to you, and it will give us both 
great pleasure to have your company at the manse for 
a few weeks. We are hopefid you will favour us by 
naming an early day, as we can promise you more 
amusement at present than it may be in oiu' power 
to procure for you hereafter. Mrs. M'Dow's sister, 
Miss Violet Muckle, is upon a visit to us just now, as 
like^vise my nephew, Mr. Andrew M'Fie (who is 
breeding a surgeon with his fatlier) ; my friend, Mr. 



160 DESTINY. 

Dugald M'Dow, is expected to join us in a few days ; 
so you will find us, I flatter myself, a pretty agreeable 
party. And as my wife and myself are of opinion 
there is nothing so enlivening as the stir of a young 
family, we are hopeful you will experience much re- 
freshment from the mirth and vivacity of our young 
folks, who are nowise shy, but, on the contrary, 
amaz'ingly taken with strangers, so we can promise 
you many a good game of romps with them, poor 
lambies ! Our eldest daughter, who has nearly at- 
tained her third year, is a fine sonsie lass, with a will 
of her own already. My second girl is an extremely 
forward, smart child (more of a Muckle than a M'Dow), 
fast treading on her sister's heels, and can already 
keep her own with her. My son (who is quite a 
young giant) has just begun to be weaned (in fact 
that has been the hindrance to his mother's waiting 
upon you, which she would othenvise have done), 
and has, I am happy to say, stood his trials in that 
way hitherto as well as we could possibly expect; 
indeed his mother had begun him with his porridge 
three months ago, and it's amazing to see how he sups 
them ! We are hopeful you will find him a great re- 
source once the first speaning brash is fairly over with 
him, poor man !— Mrs. M'Dow unites with me in kind 
reo-a'rds. And I am, dear madam, faithfully yours, 
° " Duncan M'Dow. 

c(p_5' In case you should not be able to secure 

the accommodation of the Inch Orran carriage, I will 



DESTINY. 161 

have mucli pleasure in taking a ride over for you any 
day in my gig, as my wife and myself are anxious 
you should not incur any expense by your visit to us." 

Even Mrs. IMacauley reddened as she read this 
letter. "Did ever onybody hear the like of that?" 
cried she; "to think of Gleuroy's daughter going 
dadden about the country in a gig with Mr. M'Dow ! 
'Deed he's no blate ! I hope I'm not proud; for 
pride was not made for man, far less for woman, 
helpless creatures that we are ! But 'deed I never 
would have dreamt of such a thing as that! — Her 
that's been used all her days to travel like any 
princess, to think of her going about in that tcaff' 
way; as sure as death, I'm very ill pleased at Mr. 
M'Dow for taking such a liberty with Glenroy's 
daughter, now that she's not so rich as she should 
be! And to think that the skirlin' of his weans 
could be any comfort to her in her distress !" 

There is no situation so humble in which demon- 
strations of regard and respect, or even affection, may 
not be rendered acceptable and even gratifying to 
those in the most exalted station ; and when indica- 
tive of a right feeling, they cannot fail to be accepted 
in the same spirit, and duly appreciated by all whose 
esteem is worth conciliating. Probably ]\Ir. ]\rDow 
meant to act kindly ; but his was the kindness of a 
coarse, vulgar, sordid mind, incapable of acting with 
delicacy under any circumstances ; and of course his 
attentions could only wound and revolt the feelings 
VOL. ir. M 1,. 



162 DESTINY. 

of those whom he intended to benefit. It is almost 
nnnecessary to add that his invitation was dechned, 
to his great surprise and mortification. 

The next letter which Edith received was from 
her stepmother. 

" My deau Edith— I have been extremely shocked 
by the intelligence that has just reached me of your 
poor dear father's death. I assure you I was not m 
the least prepared for it, so you may easily imagine 
how sadly I was overcome. I am now, thank Heaven, 
more composed, and was able to take an airmg 
^vhich has done me good. But Dr. Belloni is of 
opinion it will be some time before my nerves are 
restored to their natural tone. My spirits are, you 
may believe, much indisposed by this shocking event, 
and I am sure you .vill feel it also. It was particu- 
larly severe upon me at this time, as I had scarcely 
recovered from the shock of losing my darling Amo- 
retta Her illness was very Hngering— but this is 
too sad a subject to pursue. It is, however, a great 
comfort to me now that I did go to Scotland to see 
your poor father, as I am sure it gratified him, though 
it certainly was too much for me, and I must always 
think that the severity of the climate was the cause 
of Amoretta's dechne. But that was a sad expedition 
altogether ! You may remember also how near I was 
to losing dearest Elorinda in crossing your frighttul 
lake- and had it not been for Sir Keginald, I was 
assured she certainly would have been drowned. 



DESTINY. 163 

The consequence was, you know, she thought herself 
obliged, poor love, to marry him in return ! I assui'e 
you I did all I could to prevent her from thromng 
herself away ; but she was so enticMe with him that 
it was peine perdue. Between ourselves, I believe she 
now wishes she had taken my advice, for, to tell the 
truth (but this all entre nous), I think she is far from 
being so happy as she ought to be, although she is 
prodigiously admired wherever she goes. She Avas 
at a ball at the ambassador's lately, dressed li la Eeine 
Henriette, and covered with diamonds; never any- 
thing was seen so perfect. It made me almost cry, 
I do assure you, when I thought so charming a crea- 
tm^e should have sacrificed herseK from a mistaken 
sense of gratitude to a man so perfectly unworthy of 
her in every respect, as Prince Camarascha and le 
Due de Chappinelle both said to me. It is very well 
known that he games, keeps race -horses, and does 
everything that is foolish and expensive. As to 
Florinda, her house, dress, and equipage are quite 
unrivalled, and her taste is perfect. She gives quite 
the tone in everything. I have got a very pretty 
house of my own, as there was no accommodation for 
me and my suite in Lady Waldegrave's palazza. But 
I make a point of going wherever she goes, as, with a 
husband whom it is impossible she can love, and so 
excessively admired as she is, I think it absolutely 
necessary that she should still be under my protection. 
At the same time, I find it ruinous to my slender 
income to keep up with her. I am happy to say I 



164 DESTINY. 

nm in excellent health at present, and indeed it is likely 
to continue, as Dr. Belloni is a most skilful man, 
and understands my constitution perfectly. It had 
been sadly injured by the mistaken system of Dr. 
Price, who was a good creature, but certainly the 
most stupid, ignorant, and selfish man in the world. 
Belloni says it is quite a miracle that I am alive after 
such treatment. How very shocking to think of such 
a thing ! I think it would do you good to take a little 
trip to the Continent, my dear Edith ; it would amuse 
you. I should be very happy to introduce you into 
society. Do think of it. Apropos, it is possible we 
may return to England by-and-by. Sir Reginald has 
taken it into his head that the climate does not agree 
with their little boy, which Dr. Belloni assures me is 
nonsense. 

"Tliis is a very long letter; but I thought it 
would amuse you to hear all about those dear friends, 
who, I assure you, have not forgot you. Florinda 
sends her love and sincere condolence, and has long 
intended writing to you, but will certainly carry it 
into effect soon. ]\Ieantime she says she will be 
delighted to receive a letter from you. 

"Believe me, dear Edith, ever afFectionatelj'' yours, 

"E. Malcolm. 

"Of course you have heard of JMadame Latour's 
shameful behaviour, in having married a man twenty 
years younger than herself, after having got Florinda 
to settle £500 a year upon her for life ! " 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Mrs. Malcolm perceived ^vith deep regret that it 
Avas not at Inch Orran Edith was likely to regain her 
cheerfulness and animation. The occupation of the 
heart and affections Avas gone. There was no lover 
now to watch her coming steps, no father to weary 
for the voice of his child. And yet the scenes of her 
past happiness lay spread out before her eyes as fair 
and smiling as in those bright and prosperous days. 
There, wherever she turned, stood the gray towers 
of Glenroy, but now silent and deserted, the appear- 
ance of desolation and neglect gradually steahng over 
its once cherished domain, — the only sound that now 
echoed from its shores, that of the axe ringing amongst 
its green woods and reverberating amid its mountain 
solitudes, as its leafy honoui's were brought low. 

In her long and dreary attendance on her father's 
deathbed her spirits had been sustained by the influ- 
ence of those divine truths Avhich still breathed peace 
into her heart. But the natural elasticity of her mind 
had been depressed, and a character of stillness and 
seclusion was gradually stealing over it, which it 
would require a strong effort to counteract. The 



X66 DESTINY. 

closest ties of relationship had one by one been severed 
from her heart, and she now felt as if standing alone 
in the world. It is perhaps only the two extremes of 
human nature— the selfish or the sphitual-minded— 
to whom the solitude of even worldly affections is not 
the saddest of all desolations. Her tender friends 
were mlUng to make every sacrifice in their power 
for the recovery of one so dear to them ; but it^ wa? 
difficult for them to arrange any plan which was hkely 
to accompHsh this purpose. It was in the midst of 
this perplexity that a second letter arrived from Mrs. 
Eibley, renewing her invitation to Edith. Thus a 
new vista was opened in the prospect ; and even 
if it were not very aUuring, it possessed at least the 
recommendation of novelty. The letter was as 
follows : — 

"My dear Niece— I had the pleasure of receiving 
your letter of the 24th February, and it afforded Mr. 
Ribley and me much satisfaction to see that you were 
resigned to the will of Providence, which it is at all 
times our duty to be. The books which I would par- 
ticularly recommend to your serious consideration at 
this time are those valuable w rks which, on former 
occasions, I had the pleasure of sending you, and from 
which, I trust, you have already derived much im- 
provement ; but they cannot be read too often ! I 
allude to Fordyce's 'Sermons to Young Women,' and 
Bennet's 'Letters to a Young Lady on a variety of 
useful and interesting subjects, calculated (beyond 



DESTINY. 167 

any book I am acquainted with) to improve the heart, 
to form the manners, and enlighten the understand- 
ing.' You have certainly much cause for thankful- 
ness in being so fortunate as to possess such worthy 
and respectable friends as Mr. and Mrs. Malcolm of 
Inch Orran. Mr. Eibley and I trust that the state 
of your health and spirits is now such as will enable 
you to make out your promised \asit to us. And we 
hope you may find your stay with us both pleasant 
and advantageous. As the communication between 
England and Scotland is now very frequent, j^ou will 
no doubt be able to hear of a modest and respectable 
opportunity', and you have only to favour me with a 
line when the time is fixed for setting out, and also 
one when you can calculate upon the precise time of 
your arriving here. 

"Mr. Eibley unites with me in oftering best 
respects to J\Ir, and Mrs. Malcolm ; and acknowledg- 
ments for the kind attention they have paid you ; and 
^\^th good Avishes, I remain, my dear niece, your 
affectionate aunt, Kath. Eibley." 

It was evident from this letter that IVIrs. Eibley 
was at least fifty j^ears behind the rest of the world 
in her ideas, and there certainly was nothing very 
alluring in the manner in which this invitation Avas 
couched. Yet it is well known there are persons of 
warm and generous' feelings who are devoid of the 
power of expressing them, and who, conscious of their 
own inability, frequently fly to the \ery opposite 



168 DESTINY. 

extreme of coldness and reserve, — even as there are 
others whose hollow hearts are for ever reverberating 
unmeaning civilities and empty professions, to which 
their whole life gives the lie. It was evident Mrs. 
Eibley did not belong to the latter and more odious 
class, and it was just possible she might be of the 
former. ]\Irs. Malcolm, whose judgments were always 
lenient and charitable, strove to encourage this idea. 
She saw it was of the utmost importance to Edith's 
future wellbeing that her mind should be roused to 
exertion, even though that exertion should be of a 
painful nature, — that her thoughts should be forced 
into another channel, even although that channel 
might abound in rough and stony places. In the 
circumstances in which Edith was placed, she had but 
a choice of evils — either to remain as a member of a 
family on whom her claims of relationship were shglit, 
or to avail herself of the protection of those Avhom 
Providence had appointed as her natural guardians. 
The struggle of her mind was great ; but a sense of 
duty prevailed, and she accepted the invitation, though 
with repugnance. Neither on the letter, nor on the 
deliberations that ensued, did Mrs. Macauley offer a 
single comment, contrary to her usual practice, which 
was that of being always ready to think aloud on 
every subject that was presented to her. 

Mrs. Macauley had all that instinctive feeling 
which it is said belongs to her sex, even when most 
deficient in habits of reflection ; and her instinct made 
her thus commune Avith herself : 



DESTINY. 169 

" 'Deed, and I'm not fond of that letter at all ; it's 
but a hard, dry morsel ; ' but they that would eat the 
kernel must crack the nut.' It has been so ordained 
that Glenroy's daughter cannot pick and choose for 
herself, as she might once have done ; and so I would 
not be the one to put her from taking what He that's 
wiser than us all has been pleased to set before her. 
And though it's true we must leave fatherland and 
motherland, yet did not faithful Abraham do the 
very same thing before us, good luck to him and us 
both!" * * * * 

" Dear Macky, you do not tell me what j'ou think 
of this proposal of my aunt's," said Edith to her, as, 
with a sigh, she took up her pen to answer Mrs. 
Ribley's letter in the affirmative. 

"Oh 'deed, my dear, my thoughts are not just 
what they used to be ; they've had a great deal to 
vex them, you know,— not but what it's all for our 
good ; no doubt we'll be all the wiser and better for 
our afPiiction, if not in this world, at any rate in 
another." 

"You say true, dear Macky; but ," and a tear 

dropped from Edith'seyeson the paper — "butit grieves 
me to think I must part from you if I go to England." 

"Part from me, my dear!" exclaimed Mrs. Mac- 
auley, in astonishment ; " what could put that in your 
head 1 Did not I tell you that nothing but death, or 
maybe marriage (if so be your husband did not like 
me), should ever part us in this world?" 



170 DESTINY. 

"Then I must not think of going amongst these 
near relations," said Edith, laying down her pen, "for 
I AAdll not forsake you, my dear old friend ; and I fear 
I may not hope they— Ah, dear Macky, I fear, from 

this letter of my aunt's" 

"My darling, oh do not vex yourself at all about 
that, for I have my own little plans ready cut and dry, 
and I need not be a burden upon anybody that's not 
a drop's blood to me ; I have my own small means, 
such as they are, thanks to that good man, your papa; 
and I have a nephew of Mr. Macauley's that's a 
working jeweller and watchmaker, and a wise, well- 
doing respectable creature, and married to a decent 
woman, and they live in the City of London ; I have 
their direction in my drawer; they've invited me, 
before now, to pay them a visit, and so, my dear, 
when you go to your friends, I'll go to mine ; and I'll 
never have my eye off you, for, 'deed, we cannot 
always be quite sure that our relations will be what 
they should be ; but what signifies that in comparison 
when I am at your hand (not that I would be so 
foolish and conceited as to think the help was in me), 
to see that nobody dares so much as meddle with 
your little finger without my knowing it ; not a bit 
but that's a comfort I would not part with to be made 
queen of all England !" 

It was a comfort to Edith also to find she was not 
to be wholly severed from all she had ever known and 
loved ; and she fondly embraced the dear and faithful 
friend who, at the age of threescore years and ten, 



DESTINY. 171 

was ready to follow her fallen fortunes with all the 
alacrity of youth. Nor was aught wanting on the 
part of Mr. and Mrs. Malcolm to testify the tenderness 
and sincerity of their affection. Inch Orran was to 
conduct his beloved charge himseK to London, and con- 
sign her from his own hands into those of her natural 
guardians, Edith would have resisted this proof of 
attachment, but all her objections were overruled by 
her generous and disinterested friends; and Mrs. 
Macauley was comforted by thinking that though 
Glenroy's daughter was to travel in "a modest, respect- 
able manner," it would also be in a genteel, ladylike 
style. 

The hour of departure came, and with it poor 
Edith's last trial ; for fairer and dearer than ever 
seemed each long -cherished object when about to 
tear herself from them. In the silence of anguish she 
parted from all; but even in sorrow, though cast 
down, she felt she was not forsaken ; and Faith and 
Hope still gilded the path, joyless as it was, which 
duty led her to tread. 



CHAPTER XX. 

It was the month of May when the travellers entered 
England — meny England, — with all its broad meadows 
and blooming orchards, each set in its own verdant 
frame; its lordly towers, vrith their fair demesnes 
and far -spreading woods ; its baronial halls and 
ancient manors, Avith all their pride and privileges ; 
its anticj^ue churches, with their sweetly chiming bells; 
its smiling villages, its peaceful hamlets; and, more 
than all, its lowly cottages, their rustic casements 
brightly glancing through a "shower of shadowing 
roses," and their garden plats, as if proud to display 
their gaudy neatness to each passer-by. All who 
have perceptions must be aware there is a difference 
between England and Scotland, and that all the 
powers of steam and locomotion have not yet brought 
them to assimilate. ^Yealth, the progressive wealth 
of bygone ages, \nth all its power and its experience, 
its confidence and its consistency, is there everywhere 
apparent ; while in Scotland the marks of iron-handed 
necessity are still visible, even through the beauteous 
covering which genius and romance have cast over 
her. And what though it be so ? and why should 



DESTINY, 173 

Scotland blush to acknowledge a somewhat harder lot 
than that of its richer, fairer sister 1 What though 
its soil be more sterile, its skies more stormy 1 Are 
not these defects more than atoned for in the ever- 
varjdng beauties of its winding shores, its rocky 
streams, its lofty mountains, its romantic glens ■? 
And the eye accustomed to these will feel, even amid 
England's fairest scenes, — 

" England, thy beauties are tame and domestic, 
To one who has roam'd on the mountains afar." 

And Scotland, with all its wants, will ever be to its 
own children the " land of our love, our fathers' home." 

On approaching the metropolis the indications of 
wealth become still more striking. 

To villas, embowered in woods and commons, with 
their patrician villages, succeed the suburban cities, 
which radiate from the mighty centre in all directions, 
with their streets, and squares, and crescents, and 
terraces, — 

" A mighty maze, but not without a plan." 

It were vain to attempt depicting the sensations 
which fill the mind on first entering London. There 
is so much to astonish, to delight, and to disappoint, 
to bewilder and to excite, on a first survey, that all 
becomes "confusion worse confounded " in the attempt 
to investigate the nature of our feehngs. It was a 
lovely evening when the little party entered the city, 
and began to thread the intricacies of its narrow 
streets, swarming as they ever are vnih coaches, omni- 



174 DESTINY. 

buses, drays, waggons, vans, cars, cabriolets, and 
vehicles of unknown names, and of every and no 
description; while, on either hand, the busy multi- 
tude flows ceaselessly along, meeting and mingling 
in one vast tide of human life. It is not always 
that novelty charms by its own power ; and to Edith 
and Mrs, Macauley the scene was more strange than 
pleasing. The simple dwellers in a remote and thinly- 
peopled country, where each individual, with all his 
little history of joys and sorrows, was known and 
sympathised with, they looked almost with affright 
on the busy crowd that everywhere surrounded them, 
and beheld -with, amazement the bustle, the activity, 
the energy, that everywhere pervaded this living 
mass; while, in the midst of seeming anarchy, each 
and all moved in his own sphere, one of myriads, yet 
as much apart from all fellowship or cognisance of 
those around him as though he stood alone in the 
universe. 

" Oh, will not that stupid man stop and ask what is 
the meaning of this great mob?" cried Mrs. Macauley, 
as they entered on a still more dense and stirring 
scene. "Surely something extraordinary has hap- 
pened ; maybe there's a house on fire, or they're try- 
ing to catch a thief, or somebody has been killed, or 
— but — but oh, not a bit ! if it is not the King him- 
self ! " as she caught a glimpse of one of the sheriffs' 
gaudy equipages. " Oh, if we could but get a sight 
of his own royal person ! " 

Captain Malcolm smiled at her simplicity, and 



DESTINY. 175 

strove to tranquillise and enlighten her mind a little 
as to the actual state of things. But jDoor Mrs. 
Macauley was too busy with, her eyes to receive any 
information by her ears. For the present, therefore, 
"knowledge was at one entrance quite shut out," and 
she went on soliloquising. 

" Oh, if that silly man would but stop till all this 
hubbleshow's past! Where can the people all come 
from, and where can they be going to 1 And to see 
what heartless, unfeeling creatures they are to one 
another ! Not one of them shakes hands or stops, or 
so much as looks at his neighbour, as if he had ever 
seen him before, or as if he were anything more to him 
than the stones of the streets. And to see how we are 
jammed in and compassed on every side ! And the 
shops, they are more than can be numbered, and yet I 
have not seen Johnnie Macauley's name amongst them 
all ! Oh, this is a fearful place, and now that we're 
in, I wish we may ever be able to find our way out." 

And so Mrs. Macauley went on, as the carriage 
slowly proceeded through the crowded mazes of the 
city, till at length it turned into a quiet but still 
narrower street, Avhich conducted to their destination. 
This was a small dingy court, surrounded on three 
sides with dark red brick houses, the windoAvs faced 
with white, and most of them decorated with pots of 
London-pride and wallflower. In the middle of the 
court was a bunch (for it had not the dignity of a 
clump) of poplars, enclosed in an elaborate iron rail- 
ing. The fourth side displayed the back front of a 



176 DESTINY. 

mean-looking chm-cli, its yellow gravelled path bor- 
dered with thrift or sea-pink. All looked gloomy 
and aii'less, yet all bore an appearance of the most 
scrupulous neatness and cleanliness, even in the midst 
of London smoke. The court itself was in the shade 
of evening; but the upper windows Avere glittering 
in the rays of the setting sun, and Edith sighed as she 
thought how its glories were now resting on her own 
Highland hills ! 

"And is this the place for Glenroy's dochter?" ex- 
claimed Mrs. Macauley, in blank amazement. " 'Deed, 
then, it's but a poor hole we've brought her to ;" and 
poor Molly's Highland pride swelled up to her very 
eyes, 

"You must not judge by appearances here," said 
Captain Malcolm, Avith a smile. " There is perhaps 
more wealth concentrated in this little spot than 
would buy Glenroy and Inch Orran ten times over." 

" Well, well, but they cannot buy our good Hielaud 
blood, that's one mercy," cried Mrs. Macauley. "But 
they may be very daacent people for all that ; and, at 
any rate, pride was not made for man. So it is our 
duty to be satisfied, whatever befalls us ! " 

The carriage stopped at Mr. Eibley's door, which 
was opened by a respectable-looking livery servant, 
who ushered the strangers into an old-fashioned hall, 
where Mr. Eibley was stationed to receive his guests. 
He was a little, round, good-humoured-looking man, 
with small features, ilorid comjilexion, light-blue eyes, 
a flaxen wig, and a shambling gait. 



DESTINY. 177 

" How d'ye do — how d'ye do 1 — hajjpy to see you 
— expected you sooner — long past dinner hoiu', but 
you shall have something," cried he, in a quick, shrill 
key ; " so come along — follow me. Here, Kitt}^, my 
dear," leading the way to a parlour, " here are Mr. 
and Mrs. and Miss your niece, and all of them. Can 
give them a rump-steak — can't you, Kitty, my dear?" 

Mrs. Eibley, to whom this was addressed, was 
seated in a small, dull, tidy, old-fashioned parlour, 
hdove a little work-table, with a large ominous-look- 
ing bag attached to it. She was, in outward appear- 
ance, a complete contrast to her husband. She was 
a tall, and rather stately-looking person, well made, 
well clothed, and very upright. She had a gray com- 
plexion, large Roman nose, eyes such as Wordsworth 
describes, — 

" Two eyes, not dim, but of .a healthy stare, 
"Wide, sluggish, blank, and ignorant and ytrange, 
Proclaiming boldly that they never drew 
A look or motion of intelligence." 

Altogether she was of a grave and imposing aspect. She 
welcomed the party with formal politeness, and saluted 
Edith with what was meant for aftectionate kindness, 
but lacked its genial warmth, which, however, Edith's 
oAvn emotion, Mr, Eibley's flurried movements, and 
the usual bustle of arrival, rendered less observable. 

"Kitty, my dear, sure Miss your niece, and her 
friends, must be hungry. Can't you let them have a 
rump-steak — London rump -steak"? — a great delicacy 
to Scotch people ! " 
VOL. ir. :v n 



178 DESTINY. 

"Certainly, Mr. Eibley, if you think proper, and 
our friends do not object." 

But here, with one voice, the offer was declined 
by the whole party. 

" Not have a nice rump-steak ! " exclaimed Mr. 
Ribley in astonishment ; " why, it's quite a restora- 
tive after a journey. Perhaps you prefer tea and 
toast? — tea and toast very good," repeated he, as he 
ambled up and down the room. "Kitty, my dear, 
a'n't it our tea-time V 

"It will be in a quarter of an hour, Mr. Ribley," 
rejtlied Mrs. Eibley, looking at her watch; "and in 
the meantime " 

" Ah ! in the meantime," interrupted Mr. Eibley, 
"shan't we order a sandwich — nice ham sandwich 1 
Westphalia ham in the house at this moment — beau- 
tiful ham ! — bought it myself ! — the flesh as red as a 
rose, fat as white as a lily ! — quite a nosegay ! — A'n't it, 
Kitty, my dear f 

" A very fine ham indeed, Mr. Eibley," responded 
Mrs. Eibley. But here another protest was entered 
against the sandwiches, and, as the carriage was still 
waiting to convey Captain Malcolm and Mrs. Macauley 
to their respective destinations, they declined Avaiting 
even for the tea and toast, but took leave, promising 
to return to dinner the following day. Poor Mrs. 
Macauley could not trust herself to speak to Edith, 
but, struggling to repress her feelings, after a long 
embrace the affectionate creature tore herself away, 
and Edith Avas left to the combined wretchedness of 
loneliness and consti-aint. 



CHAPTER XXL 

Me. and Mrs. Eiljley were, in their own way, a very 
respectable, comfortable i^air ; but it was comfort and 
respectability from which minds of a higher cast would 
have turned away. And indeed there was little to 
love or admire in either. I\Ir. Eibley was what he at 
first sight appeared to be— a mere gossiping, good- 
natured bodj^ Avith a silly admiration of, and respect 
for, his own wife, and a constant habit of referring to 
her opinion on every and on no occasion. ]\Irs. Eibley's 
character was best described by negatives. She was 
neither a weak nor an unamiable woman; she belonged 
not to the class of cither lamenting women, nor advis- 
ing women, nor bustling women, nor imprudent 
women. Neither was she an ordinary or an extraor- 
dinary woman ; but she was a phlegmatic, conscien- 
tious woman, without taste, feeling, or fancy, who did 
what she conceived her duty in all cases, and was 
quite satisfied that she had done so. No generous 
impulse ever led her beyond the strict line of duty ; 
no compunctious visitings ever caused her to mourn 
that she had fallen short of it. She was a woman of 
dull proprieties and minute observances. She was at 



180 DESTINY. 

least forty years behind the rest of the world in her 
ideas ; and a dunce of other times is perhaps still 
worse than a dunce of our own. They were religious, 
as far as mere outward observances went, which, in- 
deed, A\dth them as \\dth many others, were mistaken 
for religion itself ; they were regular attenders of 
church, repeated the responses most audiblj", were 
punctual observers of all feasts, fasts, and festivals, 
because they had been so trained, and, li'vdng under 
the Christian dispensation, their morals necessarily 
partook in some degree of its benign influence ; but 
to the sublimity and the beauty of its di'S'ine nature 
they were u-tter strangers, for they were mere religious 
animals on Sundays and church-days. In short, they 
were dull plodders through life, without any other 
purpose than that of fulfilling small duties, and con- 
tributing to their own selfish comforts. 

Such was the pair with whom Edith was henceforth 
to be associated, and already her heart sickened at the 
dreary anticipations which imagination placed before 
her. For the first time the misery of dependence was 
felt by her in all its bitterness, and all the bright and 
lovely visions of her early days rose before her, as if 
to mock the joyless realities of her present condition. 
Oh, could her father have foreseen that such was to 
be the destiny of the last of his mighty Hne ! — that 
she, the child of wealth and state, and high-born pride, 
was to sink into the humble dependant of the sordid 
and obscure relation, whom, in the days of prosperity, he 
scarcely deigned to acknowledge ! Such wei*e Edith's 



DESTINY. 181 

last mournful reflections ere she sank to sleep, the 
tears still wet on her eyelids. 

" True as the dial to the sun," 
the following morning brought the faithful Mrs. IMac- 
auley to the bedside of her beloved charge; and when 
Edith opened her eyes, the first object that presented 
itself Avas the round, happy face of her old friend 
beaming upon her with looks of love and gladness, as 
she sat by the bed, with a nosegay in her hand. 

"Good morning to you, my darhng," cried she, in 
her usual blithe tone. " You don't know how sweet 
j^ou look in your sleep ! — as sweet as this bunch of 
new-blown roses that I bought as I came along, and 
only smell how sweet they are ! I'm sure you must 
have had good and pleasant dreams — have not you, 
my dearf 

"At least my dreams were less sad than m}' 
thoughts," said Edith, with a sigh, "for they were of 
past times ! " 

"Well, my dear, that's a good sign to dream of 
the past, and something to be thankful for ; and this 
is a very neat, comfortable room, and Mr, Eibley looks a 
fine, hospitable, good-natured body ; and 'deed I think 
Mrs. Eibley seems a very decent, perjink woman, 
and everything is really very creditable -like about 
them. And so you must do your best to be as well 
pleased as you can." 

" I hope, dear Macky, you have reason to be 
pleased with your relations, and that you find your- 
self comfortable 1" said Edith. 



182 DESTINY. 

"And 'deed I have great reason to be thankful. 
Johnnie and his "s^^ife made me very welcome, and are 
very kind to me, and I have a very neat, little light 
bed - closet to myself, "wliich holds a bed very well, 
and I'll soon get used to the noise of the street, and 
I do not mind the children above my head, though 
it really made mj- heart sore to hear that poor baby 
ciying the whole night through on account of its teeth, 
poor lamb ! When I heard it screeching like to end, 
I thought to myself how thankful I ought to be that 
never had the stound of a toothache that I remember 
of, for as old as I am." 

" Dear Mackj', when shall I learn to view the evils 
of life as you do V cried EditL 

" My dear, it cannot be expected that you should 
be so easily pleased as me ; for have not I a great 
deal more given to me than I deserve, and did not I 
owe a great deal, under Providence, to your good 
papa 1 And was not he the person to give Johnnie 
Macauley no less than twenty guineas in a present, to 
rigg him out when he came up a bare Hieland lad to 
London ? 'Deed and Johnnie has not forgot it, and 
I'm sure never will." 

"Papa was always generous," said Edith. 

" He was that, and he meant to be very just too ; 
but sometimes that is not so much some people's 
naature. I have promised Johnnie that perhaps 
some day you "svill let him get a sight of you, just for 
your good papa's sake." 

" I shall be happy in this land of strangers to see 



DESTIXY. 183 

any one who will value me for papa's sake," said 
Edith mournfully. 

"Oh, but Johnnie will be very proud of being- 
introduced to Glenroy's dochter; but maybe you'll 
not think just so much of Johnnie as he will think of 
you. I thought he would have been taller ; but he 
is thick and stout, which is better for the father of a 
family of seven childer, who has his bread to make, 
'Deed I think he has been a lucky lad, considering ; 
for, though his wife is not a beauty, she is a well- 
behaved, discreet woman, and he got well on to three 
thousand pound with her, forbye the good-will of the 
shop, and a thriving family; and though some of 
them have got his cast of the eye, Avhat a mercy it is 
there's not one of them pockmarked like him ! And 
now, my dear, that I have seen you, I'll just go back 
to my breakfast, for it is but a step between us ; and 
Johnnie Avas so good as to Avalk with me himself, and 
he's just talcing a turn till I come oiit to him ; and 
maybe it will not be so discreet in me to come so 
often the first day, so I will not see you again till 
dinner-time ; but keep up your heart, my dear, and 
see what a fine sunny morning there is." 

"Ah, Macky, what are its beauties here!" ex- 
claimed Edith, with a sigh, as she thought of all that 
the genial ray of morning was gilding at Glenroy. 

" Oh, my dear, do not speak that way ; but think 
what a good thing it is to be able to rise up and to 
see the sun shine, and to behold even that bit of 
bonny blue sky that wo see here, and the A'cry bits of 



184 DESTINY. 

trees, though they are but stiff pookit things, j'et they 
look as green and as cheerful as if they were growing 
in their own happy land ; and there, at a window 
over the way, is a gray lintie, singing as blithely as if 
it were among the sweet gold blossoms of a whinbush ; 
and if it can be so merry in its prison, poor sense- 
less thing, ought not we, who have good understand- 
ings, and the Word given to us, to be contented and 
thankful for our mercies 1" And with an affectionate 
embrace, Mrs. Macauley took leave of her beloved 
p'otegde, and toddled away. 



CHAPTER XXII. 

There was something in tlie hilarity of ]\Irs. ]\Iac- 
aiiley that always left a glow behind it, and Edith 
joined her relations at breakfast with less depression 
than she had hitherto felt ; but, alas ! it was only to 
experience a renewal of her disappointment, for the 
morning disclosed no charms in Mr. and Mrs. Riblej- 
which had been overlooked the preceding evening. 
They were both exactly what they had appeared at 
first sight. The only difference Avas, that he was, if 
possible, still more fidgety and talkative, she more 
staid and serious. 

"Come away, Miss — come away," cried he to 
Edith, as she entered ; " sure you. must have slept 
weU — so beautifully quiet here — might hear a pin fall 
in the court — ^might fancy yourself in the Highlands, 
if it was not for the Avatchman and the neighbouring 
clocks — no clocks and watchmen there ! And then 
by day you'll hear such Ijeautiful bells — a beautiful 
chime has our church — ha'n't it, Kitty, my dear 1 And 
then, when you've a mind to be gay, and see all that's 
going on, can be in Cheapside in four minutes and a 
half, and at the Bank, the India House, and Lloyd's 



186 DESTINY. 

iu no time. Charming situation is our square — must 
show Miss your niece all these things — shan't we, 
Kitty, my dear ? Now here comes the muffin — must 
take it while it's hot ; sure you never tasted such a 
muffin — from the very first muffin-maker in the world 
— Mogg's muffins celebrated all over London, Now 
only think how lucky it is j'ou came to us before we 
left town — couldn't have given you Mogg's muffins 
in the country — hot rolls there — hot rolls more rural 
than muffins — a'n't they, Kitty, my dear'? Onlj- 
think, made three hundred thousand pounds by his 
muffins ; white as snow, soft as down, are Mogg's 
muffins ; a'n't they, Kitty, my dear V 

" They are extremely delicate indeed, Mr. Eibley ; 
but with your leave, I would now propose we should 
arrange our plans for the day." 

*' Surely, surely, my dear ; Miss your niece and her 
friends dine with us, and Charles — fine young man, is 
my nephew, cousin to the great Sir Charles Penshurst, 
Bart., of Penshurst Hall, M.P. — has been at Oxford — 
is going abroad ; very fine gentleman is Charles Pens- 
hurst — a'n't he, Kitty, my dear?" 

"He is, indeed, Mr. Ribley, a fine young man at 
present." 

" Kitty, my dear, what will you give our friends 
for dinner to-day 1 Pray, Miss," to Edith, " did you 
ever taste Birch's turtle-soup?" 

Edith replied in the negative. 

"Never tasted Birch's turtle-soup !" exclaimed he, 
in astonishment; "why. Birch's turtle-soup goes all 



DESTINY. 187 

over the universe — East and West Indies, China, 
America; Scotland is sadly out of the way, to be 
sure. Why, if you never tasted Birch's turtle-soup, 
you have tasted nothing. Kitty, my dear, let us have 
Birch's turtle-soup to-day — three quarts for a party of 
six, eh?" 

" That is the propei quantity," said Mrs. Eibley ; 
" and as you observe, Mr. Ribley, Scotland is sadly 
out of the way." 

"Sure, my dear, we must show Miss your niece 
the Tower and the Eegalia and the Lions ; no lions 
in Scotland, eh 1 Lions won't eat porridge, eh 1 
And we'll get Charles to go too; must have him 
introduced to Miss Mogg — old Mogg given up busi- 
ness — bought a fine house on our common — Myrtle 
Grove — can see from our parlour window everybody 
that goes in and out ; beautiful creature is Miss Mogg 
— been educated at the first boarding-school in town 
— finished off at Paris — pays five hundred a year to 
the lady who lives with her, and is to bring her out ; 
suppose you haven't brought much money from Scot- 
land — not much comes from it — not much goes to it 
either; Kitty, my dear, you'll get everything that's 
proper for Miss your niece?" 

Edith assured him she required nothing, which 
assurance seemed to please Mrs. Eibley, who said, 
" You are very kind, Mr. Eibley ; and I shall certainly 
have pleasure in fulfilling your liberal intentions when 
necessary. Yoxmg people know little of the value of 
money, and are very liable to be imposed upon, unless 



188 DESTINY. 

Avlien thej' are guided by an experienced and judicious 
friend." 

" Sure, my dear, you are always right, and now I'll 
vralk as far as 'Change ; and, Ivitty, my dear, shall I 
call at the fishmonger's and order him to send you a 
nice piece of Thames salmon '? Sad tricks played with 
fish ; I remember the day Mr. Alderman Winkle dined 
with us— bought a beautiful piece of Thames salmon 
myself — paid seven shillings a pound for it — six 
pounds and a quarter; and what do you think — it 
was changed for Scotch salmon ! — changed for Scotch 
salmon ! " repeated he, in a still louder and shriller 
key. " jSTever was so ashamed in my life as when I 
saw Mr. Alderman Winkle helped to Scotch salmon 
— has been quite affronted — never asked me back ! 
And ]\Irs. Ribley didn't get a card to Mrs. Winkle's 
last party, and all because of the Scotch salmon." 

And with this pathetic exclamation, Mr. Eibley 
set off for 'Change, having pre\nously settled to return 
and escort his lady and Edith to the Tower. 

Edith would fain have had her good old friend 
Mi's. Macauley included in the party, knowing how 
much her fresh and unsophisticated mind enjoyed 
every exhibition, whether of nature or art; but it 
formed no part of Mrs. Eibley's system to do more 
than what she deemed her duty, in the strictest sense 
of the word ; and if she discerned Edith's wishes, it 
was only to make it apparent they could not be grati- 
fied. A handsome carriage was at the door at the 
hour appointed ; and, accompanied by Mr. and Mrs. 



DESTINY. 189 

Eibley, Edith set fortli, in the most Hteral meaning 
of the phrase, to see the Lions. Probably the same 
train of feelings and reflections fills the minds of such 
as are in the habit of feeling and reflecting at all, on 
approaching for the first time the Tower of London, — 
its grim walls and sullen moat, associated as they are 
^Yith so much that is dark and tragic in the page of 
English history. But these have been too often felt 
and exjDressed to be repeated on the present occasion, 
and, had Edith ventured to utter them, would have 
been little understood by her vulgar-minded, matter- 
of-fact companions. 

Mr. Eibley was in raptures at all he saw, though 
probably seen for the twentieth time ; and even turtle- 
soup and Thames salmon were for a time forgot in 
the nobler admiration of the lions and the crown. 
The judicious Mrs. Eibley, however, reminded him of 
the lapse of time by her watch, which, like herself, 
was always correct, and they returned home. At the 
dinner -hour Captain Malcolm and Mrs. Macauley 
arrived, and were received by Mrs. Eibley in a large, 
dull, stiff", respectable drawing-room, with its little 
serpentine sofas and formal circle of chairs ; its small 
elaborate mirrors, stuck half-way up the wall ; its high 
mantelpiece, decorated Avith branching girandoles and 
Dresden shepherds and shepherdesses ; its Brussels 
carpet, Avith festoons of roses; its small bare satin- 
wood tables; its tall twin fire-screens, embroidered 
forty years ago by IVIrs. Eibley's own hands ; not a 
\-estige of l)ook or work, or any such lumber, Avas to be 



190 DESTINY. 

seen in this room, appropriated solely to the purpose 
of sitting in bolt npright. Great impatience was now 
expressed for the arrival of Mr. Charles Penshurst, 
and the same rapid sketch of his history which had 
been given to Edith was now repeated to Captain 
Malcolm: — "A fine young man— been studying at 
Oxford — going abroad for a year — a very genteel 
man — cousin, as I said, to Sir Charles Penshurst, Bart, 
and M.P. — married my sister — spent all her money 
and broke her heart. Charles, my nephew, must make 
a rich marriage — will settle handsomely upon him if 
he does — wouldn't go into the counting-house — must 
take either to the law or the church;" and so on, till 
in a few minutes a cabriolet drove into the court, and 
in a second Mr. Penshurst was announced. Edith 
had certainly not thought much about Mr. Eibley's 
nephew, but it is scarcely possible to hear a person 
talked about without attaching some ideas to their 
name, and thus identifpng them in our own imagina- 
tion. In Mr. Charles Penshurst, the nephew of Mr. 
PJbley and the intended lover of IMiss Mogg, the 
muffin-maker's daughter, she had expected to behold 
oddity and vulgarity combined in no common degree ; 
her surprise was therefore great at the entrance of an 
elegant -looking j^oung man, with something even of 
aristocratic air and address ; but there was scarcely 
time for an introduction before the company were 
summoned to the dining-room, Avhcre stood a hand- 
some silver tureen of Birch's turtle -soup in solitary 
majesty. • 



DESTINY. 191 

"Now," exclaimed ]Mr. Eibley, "you shall taste 
nectar and ambrosia ! Just half-a-guinea a quart ! to 
think how cheap ! Now, do taste it. Did you ever 
taste anything so delicious 1" And he looked at Edith, 
as though he expected her to swoon with delight at 
the first spoonful, and seemed rather mortified at the 
calm manner in which she received her initiation in 
this ambrosial banquet. To do Mr. Eibley justice, he 
was as much of a benevolent as a selfish gourmand ; 
for although he enjoyed good things himself, he had 
no less pleasure in exciting the admiration of others 
at the super-excellence of his repasts ; he was likewise 
a gourmand of the true John Bull breed, and, with 
the single exception of Birch's turtle-soui^, ^iked 
nothing that was not plain, — no matter how costly the 
material, provided it were of genuine EngUsli produce 
and manufacture. The same thorough English stamp 
of solid comfort and consistency pervaded the whole 
establishment; all denoted unostentatious wealth, 
that had gone down from father to son ; there Avas 
nothing aimed at that was not accomphshed, and if 
that was not in the first style of elegance or fashion, 
it seemed as if the deficiency were not from lack of 
means, but of ambition or pretension. All this pro- 
ceeded from no superiority of thinking or acting in 
:Mr. or Mrs. Eibley, but was merely the effect of the 
habits in which they had both been trained,— those 
of wealthy London citizens, Avhose household gods 
were all united in one, and that one— comfort. With 
all Mr. Eibley's absurdity there was so much good- 



192 DESTINY. 

nature that even the most splenetic could scarcely 
have refrained from smiling at some of his sallies, 
which formed at least a relief to the dull monotony of 
the mistress of the house. Mr. Penshurst, indeed, 
was no inconsiderable acquisition to the party ; as if 
anxious to screen his uncle as much as possible from, 
observation, he took the lead in conversation, and 
carried it on with so much good sense and pleasantry, 
and was so perfectly well-bred, and possessed of the 
tone of good society, that he already stood fair in 
Captain Malcolm's estimation, and had almost capti- 
vated even Mrs. Macauley. Under these appear- 
ances Captain Malcolm felt tolerably satisfied at 
the prospect of leaving Edith for a time in her present 
situation. The good nature of Mr. Eibley, the quiet 
correctness of his wife, the pleasing manners and 
amiable appearance of the nephew, the air of respect- 
ability and comfort diffused over the domestic arrange- 
ments,— all these, though each taken singly could do 
little to excite her mind or promote her happiness, 
yet, taken altogether, seemed to form as inoffensive a 
home as ckcumstances had led him to expect. 

A few successive days passed on, during which the 
microcosm of London was gradually unfolded to 
Edith's wondering gaze. The august simphcity of St. 
Paul's, the hallowed perfections of Westminster Abbey; 
these, the two great landmarks of the grand and the 
beautiful, with the various spectacles and exhibitions, 
each replete with novelty and interest,— the ceaseless 
flow of living multitudes and splendid equipages, so 



DESTINY. 193 

different from the dull vacuity or vulgar bustle of 
other towns, — were a perpetual though unconscious 
stimulus to the attention of the novice, as they swept 
along in all the brilliancy and variety of wealth and 
fashion. In a short time Edith's good taste and right 
feeling would have led her to perceive the unsatisfac- 
tory nature of the empty pomp and senseless glitter 
that everywhere courted her eye. But who ever 
made such a discovery when for the first time seeing 
London? Yet the gay and the fashionable would 
have smiled in scorn at the objects that excited Edith's 
notice, and made even her City life, notwithstanding 
Mrs. Eibley's dehberate caution, appear a rapid whirl 
of novelty and variety. Mr, Penshurst was frequently 
of their parties, and by his general, if not very pro- 
found, knowledge of society, as well as of arts and 
literature, greatly added to the enjoyment by the 
information he contrived to impart. He also served 
to restrain the exuberance of Mr, Eibley's remarks, 
as it Avas evident his uncle regarded him with a 
degree of deference at least equal to that which he so 
lavishly bestowed upon his "Kitty, my dear;" and 
in public he formed a sort of barrier to the obstreper- 
ous vulgarity of Mi-. Ribley. He was ever ready to 
screen Edith from his attentions, and to interpose his 
arm, when she would otherwise have been obliged to 
accept Mr. Eibley's. These were trifling services, to 
be sure ; but " trifles make the sum of human things," 
and even the wisest must have sometimes felt their 
importance. 

VOL. IL O r> 



CHAPTER XXIIL 

One morning as Mr. Ribley, according to custom, 
gabbled the newspapers aloud, under the head of 
Fashionable Intelligence of the Day, he read as 
follows : "Lady Waldegrave has issued cards for her 
first ball, which will take place at Waldegrave House 
on the 29th, on a scale of unprecedented magnificence. 
Upon this occasion the whole suite of noble apart- 
ments, which have been recently fitted up, will be 
thrown open." And immediately followed: "We 
regret to state that Lady Elizabeth Malcolm's musical 
party, which was to have taken place at her residence 
in Brook Street, has been postponed on account of her 
ladyship's indisposition. " 

Till now Edith had not been aware of the return 
of her relations to England, the notice of their arrival 
amongst a host of other "fashionables," a few weeks 
before, having escaped Mr. Ribley's observation. And 
when, soon after her own arrival in London, she had 
been interrogated by Mrs. Rible}^ as to the state of 
her father's family, and the footing she was upon with 
his widow and heir, she had evaded the inquiries as 
much as she could by simply stating that, owing to 



DESTINY. 195 

their absence on the Continent, she had had little or 
no intercourse with them. But now it seemed they 
were inhabitants of the same city — how near, yet how 
widely asunder ! Geographical distance no longer 
separated them, but far stronger barriers were between. 
How closely allied by blood and connection, by the 
memory of childhood, and the love and affection and 
trust of former days ; but how disunited by injuries 
never to be repaired — by hopes, thoughts, feelings — 
by all those qualities of mind and heart which form 
the character, and which never again could amalga- 
mate together ! There was something humiliating, 
too, circumstanced as she now was, in courting their 
notice. In the days of her prosperity, how had her 
heart been wrung and her affections trampled upon 
by them ! And fallen, as she was, into poverty and 
obscurity and dependence, identified with the plebeian 
vulgar, to claim kindred with them now, — oh ! there 
was humiliation in the thought. Yet, without explain- 
ing to her inquisitive relations more than she chose 
to reveal (for, with the prying curiosity of little 
minds, no half communication would have satisfied 
them), how was she to refuse her assent to the decision 
they had already formed for her, that it was her duty 
to wait upon Lady Elizabeth, and that without delay. 
Harassed and perplexed, she retired to her own apart- 
ment, to " commune ^vith her own heart," and ask if 
it indeed could "be still," even when brought in con- 
tact with those who had so deeply injiu-ed her. 

In the midst of her doubts and perplexity Mrs. 



196 DESTINY. 

Macauley arrived, and Edith made known to her the 
cause of her disquiet. Mrs. Macauley was silent for 
a few minutes, and the tears sweUed in her eyes ; at 
last she said, " 'Deed, and your feehngs are quite 
natural, my darling, for this is but a poor hole for 
Glenroy's daughter to be seen dwelHn' in ; but smce 
it has pleased God to permit it for a time (for no fault 
of yours that we can see), I think we ought not to be 
ashamed to show ourselves." 

" You say true, dear Macky, but stHl " Edith 

stopped and sighed. 

"No doubt they're a bad pack, and deserve no 
favour at your hands, my darling; but, for all that, 
you know we are commanded to forgive even our very 

enemies." 

"I have forgiven long, long since." 
"'Deed, I do not doubt it, for you was always a 
gentle, forgiving creature ; but, for all that, you know 
we never can be sure we have forgiven, unless we are 
ready and willing to be reconciled." 

"I am ready to be reconciled," said Edith, "but 
surely it is not my part to court the reconciliation? 
Were they in my situation, and I in theirs, it would 
be otherwise." 

" Oh, I'm sure if they were reduced to straits, any 
one of them, you would be the very first to go and 
help them, and be kind and loving to them. But it's 
because they have more of this world's pelf, that we 
think shame to let them see that we are not so grand 
and so rich as we once were ; and we think that's our 



DESTINY 197 

humility, when maybe it's nothing but pride — ugly 
pride, as the childer's book calls it — working in our 
hearts." 

Edith mused for a little while, then said, "You are 
right, dear Macky, it is pride that struggles in my 
heart, and would prevent me from doing what I feel 
it is my duty to do — to wait upon my father's widow. 
If I could have power to confer anything upon her, 
any mere worldly gift, I should not hesitate for a single 
instant; there would be no self-sacrifice there; but 

to go poor, dependent, and friendless " tears burst 

from her eyes — then throwing her arms roimd her old 
friend's neck, "but not friendless," she cried, "while 
I have you to love and counsel me in the path of duty." 

The result was, that she should that very day wait 
upon Lady Elizabeth, as the next was that fixed for 
the Ribleys leaving town for the summer. 

Accordingly, at the early hour of two, Edith set 
out, accompanied by Mr, and Mrs. Eibley, who, in 
case of her finding access, were to drop her there, and 
proceed to take their " ride " in the Park, while she 
paid her visit. 

Upon sending up her card, she was admitted, and 
ushered into a small room, where a hot sun streamed 
through rose-coloured curtains, and a still hotter fire 
Ijlazed, as if for the benefit of three lap-dogs, who lay 
rolled up on cushions before it. Two paroquets were 
scolding at one side ; on the other, sunk in a fauteuil, 
and enveloped in shawls, sat her ladyship, with break- 
fast before her, and a bullfinch pecking sugar ; while 



198 DESTINY. 

chairs, tables, couches, cabinets, musical instruments, 
busts, screens, plants, flowers, and china, literally left 
scarcely room for the sole of the foot to tread its way 
through this labyrinth. Edith, however, succeeded 
in steering her course to the middle of the room, where 
she was assaulted by the three dogs. 

"Don't be afraid, my dear," caUed her ladyship, in 
a weak, tremulous voice, as she laid her cheek to 
Edith's ; " they are the sweetest loves !— they never 
do bite except in play. Amor, Biondina, Ch^ri, have 
done ! You remember my darhngs, Amoretta and 
Bijou V putting her handkerchief to her eyes. " But 
it is too sad ; we won't talk of such things. And 
dearest Amor is getting delicate !" with a deep sigh. 

"My darling Bully, don't make yourself sick! 

When did you come to town, my dear ? I assure you 
I am quite happy to see you ; and you look very well 
— very well indeed ! " 

This was said with a tone of chagrin, as she glanced 
from Edith's lovely, serene countenance, and finely- 
moulded form, to her own haggard, peevish face, and 
shrivelled, made-up shape, which not even the aid of 
an elegant dSshabilU could either adorn or disguise. 
In answer to Edith's inquiries she replied, "Speak 
louder, my dear. I have got a little cold, and am so 
^vrapped up I can't hear anything." The fact was, 
she was now very deaf, and somewhat bhnd— two 
disgraceful circumstances which she would fain have 
passed over. "Yes, I have got a cold, which would 
have prevented my singing to-night, so I thought it 



DESTINY. 199 

best to put off my party. You are more emhonpoint 
than yoa used to be ; you must beware of that. Are 
you fond of birds 1 These paroquets were a present 
from Florinda. She is in town — have you not met 
her yet ? Were you not at Lady Ellington's ball last 
night ? I have got a httle cold, and did not go, I 
am nursing myseK, in hopes I shall be able for the 
Duchess of St. Leger's party to-morrow. Perhaps 
you go 1 I would offer to call for you, but the fact is, 
Lady Moubray is to call for me in her carriage ; but 
another time I shall be quite happy to take you. And, 
by-the-bye, can I do anything for you 1 My milliner, 
Madame La Eoque, is perfect — rather expensive, to be 
sure ; but one must pay for pretty things, you know. 
I am sure Florinda will be delighted to do anything 
in the world for you, and will be happy to send you 
a card for her ball. Pray what is your address 1 — for 
I really could not make it out upon your card ; some- 
thing Court, is it not? — Where can that be, my dear?" 

Edith blushed as she replied that she was to leave 
town the following day ; then added, " I reside in the 
City with relations of my mother." 

"Shocking ! In the City ! why, that's too dreadful ! 
How could you think of going to such a place ? We 
must endeavour to get you out of it as soon as we can," 
said her Ladyship gravely. " I must consider what is 
to be done for you. I forget whether poor dear Glen- 
roy left much fortune — I'm afraid not ; that's a pity, 
but it can't be helped. Jprojoos, I have got such a 
pretty set of coral for you ! I must desire my maid to 



200 DESTINY, 

fetch them," and she rang the bell ; but before it was 
answered, she exclaimed, "Ah, by-the-bye, I forgot 
them in the hurry and the multitude of affairs, on 
leaving Naples. Never mind, I shall get something 
for you here ; we can do that any day. Now, before 
we part, my dear," continued she, "let me settle some- 
thing for you. You are with very good sort of people, 
of course ; but, you know, to be of any service to you 
while you live in the City is out of the question. And 
to have any success in the world, you must leave it 
immediately. I am sure Florinda would tell you the 
same thing. As for Sir Reginald," — here she shrugged 
her shoulders, then in a low tone whispered, " let me 
tell you, my dear, you had an escape from that man 
— most unfortunately for my poor dear Florinda ; in 
fact, it was quite a mesalliance for her. But she quite 
sacrificed herself to the romantic goodness of her heart. 
She thought it necessary to fall in love with him, be- 
cause he had saved her from being drowned ; but, as 
I said to her, why, if your footman had saved you from 
drowning, would you have thought it necessary to 
marry him ? But, however, we shall not talk of that 
at jDresent ; we must think of Avhat can be done to 
save you. My house, as you see, is very small, and I 
require a great deal of accommodation ; but perhaps 
I might — yes, I rather think I could manage to have 
a room for you during the few weeks I shall remain 

in town ; and then " 

Here Edith, with thanks, begged leave to decline 
the honour intended, assuring her that she was satis- 



DESTINY. 201 

fied to remain in her present situation ; that it was 
one she had vohmtarily chosen for a time ; and there- 
fore it would be using Mr, and Mrs. Eibley very iU 
were she to quit their house merely because their 
station in life was not sufficiently elevated. 

"Why, you ought never to have gone to such a 
place. Certainly my permission ought to have been 
asked before you involved yourself in a manner which 
may put it quite out of my power to bring you for- 
ward. How can I possibly be of any service to you, 
after you have spent six weeks in such society 1 How 
could I possibly introduce you with any eflfect 1 Scot- 
land and Scotch people, and Scotch books and scenery, 
and so forth, happen to be in fashion at present ; and 
I could present you perfectly well, as just arrived from 
Scotland. And as at present there is rather a want 
of anything very dist'mrjud amongst the debufanfes of 
the season (Florinda unhappily being out of the field), 
with your face and figure — both, I must say, astonish- 
ingly improved — I have no doubt you would cause a 
sensation, and get very well married before the end 
of the season. But if you remain where you are, I 
can positively do nothing for you." 

Here Mr. Eibley's carriage was announced, and 
Edith could only repeat what she had before said, as 
she hastened to take leave. 

" Well, I shall try what can be done, and whether 
Florinda can send you a card for her ball. But where 
in the world will it find you?" 

" I should be sorry that Lady Waldegrave took so 



202 DESTINY. 

unnecessary a trouble," replied Edith, " since I could 
not, even if I would, avail myself of it. I leave town 
to-morrow with Mr. and Mrs. Ribley." 

Her Ladysliip here began to remonstrate still 
more vehemently on the impropriety of her remaining 
where she was ; but Edith was firm in her resolution 
to remain where she had voluntarily placed herself ; 
and, indeed, the inducement held out by Lady Eliza- 
beth was sufficient in itself to make her recoil from her 
proposal, Edith was too ignorant of the little, mean, 
crooked ways of the world to discern aught but mere 
weak, mistaken kindness in her stepmother's anxiety 
to have her thus brought forward. But the fact was, 
her Ladyship had her own ends to answer in this 
" fair seeming show." She had fallen very much into 
the ''sear and yellow leaf" of fashionable notoriety; 
her parties were ill attended ; she was not invited to 
those she Mulshed most to be at ; and when she weut 
into public she found herseK slighted and neglected. 
In short, her life was one constant scene of petty 
mortifications and insignificant attempts to regain 
her place in society — a place long since filled up by 
others, who, in their turn, would be pushed aside, 
Avhen their little day was past. She had, however, 
enough of worldly craft to be aware that she might 
rise into consequence, if she could introduce anything 
to cause a sensation in the gay world. She had, 
indeed, a recent example before her eyes, in the 
wonderful success which had attended a declining 
dowager's introduction of a handsome niece ; and the 



DESTINY, 203 

first sight of Edith immediately suggested to her 
what great Mat she might attain by becoming the 
patroness of one young, beautiful, and a novelty— one 
whose birth would not disgrace her, and whose native 
grace and elegance Avould stand the scrutiny even of 
the ill-natured well-bred world. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

The time had now come when Edith was to part 
from her kind friend Captain Malcolm — she knew not 
for how long. He was to set out for Inch Orran the 
same day that she was to leave London. 

"Remember, Edith," said he, as he parted from 
her — " remember that Inch Orran is still your home, 
and that Ave shall never cease to consider you as one 
of om'selves ; a daughter's place is yours in our hearts, 
and at our board, while I live ; Avhen I die, a 
daughter's provision will be yours. Promise me, 
then, before we part, you will always, and in all 
circumstances, still be one of us ! " 

Edith's heart was too full to speak ; but she pressed 
the hand of her excellent friend in hers, for she felt as 
if she were again losing a father's protection, and was 
now in truth an orphan. 

Edith felt this parting the more that she was also 
to 1)0 separated, though but for a short time, from 
her faithful Mrs. Macauley. With the help of her 
nephew Johnnie, she said, she had procured a very 
comfortable and respectable lodging, within half-a- 
mile of Mr. Ribley's villa ; but it was undergoing 



DESTINY. 205 

some repairs, and would not be ready till the week 
following that in which her loved protccjcc was to leave 
town. 

Mi-s. Eibley, although aware of the faithful crea- 
ture's attachment, made no offer of accommodating her 
with an apartment at the Grove ; for IMrs. Kibley was 
Kttle given to consult feelings upon any occasion, and 
rather seemed to consider them as weaknesses, which 
ought not to be indulged. Edith had been accus- 
tomed to associate ideas of romantic seclusion ■with 
the very name of the country ; and soon weary and 
exhausted with wondering at the works of art, she 
had longed for the calm soothing influence of nature. 
But the nature of a gentlemanly English village, how 
different from the nature of a Highland chief's 
mountain solitudes ! 

Mr. Kibley's villa, the Grove (so called from a 
little patch of poplars and Portugal laurels at the 
back of the house), was in one of the many pretty 
villages with which the env-irons of London aboimd. 
It stood at the end and a little apart from a row of 
houses, in front of which was a broad gi'avel walk, 
garnished with a row of poplars, and dignified by the 
appellation of the Mall. Before this stretched a fine 
expanse of common, interspersed with other rows and 
crescents, as well as with detached and more rural 
dwellings ; some embowered in their own little grove 
or tiny park, and pleasure-ground ; others with their 
simple paddock and little walled garden ; while a stiU 
humbler class boasted only of a flower -plat and a 



206 DESTINY. 

single tree of stately growth, shading their thatched 
roof and latticed window. 

Mrs. Eibley had frequently alluded to the plan of 
life that was to be pursued when they should be 
settled in the country, as something that was to be no 
less edifying than delightful. And though Edith's 
expectations were certainly not sanguine as to the 
pleasure she was to experience from being associated 
in any way with her aunt, still she was not prepared 
for anything so intolerable as the mode of life she 
found chalked out for her,— to sit in the parlour all 
the morning Avith this inane pair, Mrs. Eibley hem- 
ming frills for Mr. Ribley's shirts, while he gabbled 
nonsense, or by his lady's desire read aloud some 
edifying and instructive work of her own selection. 
To do poor Mr. Ribley justice, he would have resisted 
the task if he had ever been in the way of resisting 
any of Kitty my dear's commands ; but all that he 
had energy for was to try every shift to avoid it. 
Then to play over on an indifferent instrument Mrs. 
Eibley's old sonatas, and sing her antiquated airs, to 
pay and receive visits, take an airing— thus was the 
morning consumed; while the evening was devoted 
to walking backwards and forwards on the Mall, 
chatting and gossiping ^Aath dull idlers like them- 
selves. The only relief to this life of monotony was, 
that Mr. Penshurst generally drove out to dinner, and 
contrived to secure Edith's arm for the evening walk. 
Mr. and Mrs. Ribley expressed their surprise to each 
other at the frequency and length of their nephew's 



DESTINY. 207 

visits ; but Mi'. Ribley always settled the point by 
summing up his animadversions with, "Ah, Charles 
knows what he's about — looking after the elegant and 
accomplished Miss Mogg. Tln^ee hundred thousand 
pound, and old Mogg in a dropsy ! " 

Nothing could be more methodical than Mrs. 
Eibley ; she had her days, her hours, her months, her 
minutes marked out, each and all for their own 
especial purpose, and these purposes the most dull 
and insiguiiicant imaginable. "'Twere greatly wise," 
says Young, "to talk with our past hours, and ask 
them what report they bear to Heaven." But meagre 
and unsatisfactory would have been the register of 
Mrs. Ribley's doings, even on earth. Hers were the 
doings of a dull, worldly mind, operating in the 
narrow sphere of earthly duties, and affixing undue 
importance to the most trivial affairs of life. And 
perhaps, of all the varieties of character, there are few 
more insupjiortable as a companion than a dull serious 
trifler. Even Mr. Eibley's silly, vulgar loquacity was 
less irksome than the " leaden reiteration " of his 
lady. 

It was Mr. Eibley's regular practice, every morning 
after breakfast, to take his station at the parlour 
window, to spy all tliat could be spied, and to com- 
municate the knowledge so acquired to Kitty my dear, 
as she sat at her work ; not that he confined himself 
to that particular time for taking his observations, for 
he was one of those restless, fidgety bodies, who never 
can be still, and his head was to be seen poking out at 



208 DESTINY. 

the window, or peering over the Venetian Winds, all 
the hours of the day ; but that Avas a favourite hour 
with him, as the one in which the various tradespeople 
were, with true English punctuality, making the 
rounds of the village to supply their customers with 
provisions for the day. This was a high treat to Mr. 
Ribley, and thus was he wont to impart his informa- 
tion to his lady : 

" Kitty, my dear, here's the butcher's boy with 
some lamb chops and a loin of very nice-looking veal, 
—is that right?" 

"Quite right, thank you, Mr. Eibley." 

" And a shoulder of mutton for the servants, eh?" 

"Perfectly, Mr. Eibley." 

" Kitty, my dear, I suspect the Moggs have taken 
possession of Myrtle Grove : I saw the butcher's boy 
hand in just now a very fine-looking fillet of veal." 

" Indeed ! that does look as if they had arrived, JVIi'. 
Eibley." 

" And, Kitty, my dear, there's a loin of pork, a calf's 
head, and a rump steak, gone to Mrs. Martha Budgell. 
What can she be doing with three meats 1 Single lady 
— bad health — only two servants ; very rich, to be siu-e 
— and three meats. Very odd, a'n't it, Kitty, my dear?" 

" 'Tis, indeed, Mr. Eibley ; there must be sad 
waste, I fear, Avith the servants." 

" There's a shin of beef and brisket of veal to the 
Blackets, and only a scrag of mutton for poor Miss 
Mudge ! Sad thing is a scrag of mutton, a'n't it, 
Kitty, my dear." 



DESTINY 209 

" 'Tis indeed sad to those who have known better, 
Mr. Ribley!" 

" There's such a noble sirloin going to our neigh- 
bour, Mr, Claridge — thirty pound weight, I'm sure ! 
Why, it does one's heart good to see such a sirloin ! 
Sure they must be going to have a party ! " 

"I think it very probable, Mr. Ribley." 

" But here's the poulterer. A pair of most beau- 
tiful plump ducklings for ourselves ; and now he has 
given in a green goose to Mr. Claridge ; and there — 
there, I declare, is a dehcate little turkey poult to Mr. 
Mogg ! Sure there must be some mistake there ! 
white meat, white fowl ! brown meat, brown fowl ! 
Now, you may depend upon it, the poulterer has made a 
mistake ; the turkey must have been for Mr. Claridge, 
the green goose for Mr. Mogg : then all would be 
right ; there's white meat, brown bird — brown meat, 
white bird ; but if they don't find out the mistake, 
only conceive how awkward it will be 1 Don't you 
think so, Kitty, my dear?" 

" Uncommonly so indeed, Mr. Ribley ; but perhaps 
something may depend upon the fish they are to 
have." 

" That's very true, Kitty, my dear, something may 
depend upon that. A very fine pullet and half-a- 
dozen plovers' eggs for Mrs. IMartha ; sure she must 
be picking up ! " 

"Charming air has our Common, Mr. Ribley !" 

" I can't think enough of the veal and the turkey 
poult having gone to them, and the beef and the 
VOL. II. p D. 



210 DESTINY. 

ducklings to the Claridges ! Sure we must find out 
whether there has been a mistake between the Moggs 
and the Claridges, and whether it was the fault of the 
butcher or the poulterer. Why, you know, Kitty, my 
dear, the very same might happen to ourselves !" 

"It might indeed, Mr. Eibley. But perhaps you 
will now favour us with a little improving reading?" 

" Good la ! come here, my dear, — only see ! Here's 
the fishmonger with a pair of mullets for us, stiff" as 
pokers, I declare ! and sure if he a'n't taking a pair of 
soles to the Moggs ! And let us see what he has got 
for the Claridges — a beautiful eel for Mrs, Martha; 
sure she must be quite well ! Now, now, let us see 
what — I declare if there a'n't a large piece of salmon 
and two lobsters for the Claridges ! — Salmon and 
lobsters! sirloin and green goose! — why, who ever 
heard of such a dinner 1 Well, sure that is the very 
strangest thing — a'n't it, Kitty, my dear?" 

'"Tis indeed a bad arrangement, Mr. Eibley." 

" And to think of the Moggs, with three hundred 
thousand pound, having white meat, white fish, white 
fowl ! I declare I shouldn't wonder if their soup was 
white too !" 

"Indeed I shouldn't Avonder, Mr. Eibley; some 
people are so wi'ij odd ! " 

Much more of the same colloquy went on, till the 
forms of the butcher, fishmonger, poulterer's boys, 
faded into the distance, or vanished abruptly from the 
view. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

As the mind commonly finds its own level in society, 
it may be inferred that Mr. and Mrs. Eibley's circle 
of acquaintances was composed of commonplace, 
vulgar- minded persons, like themselves, full of the 
paltry gossip and petty detail of the narrow sphere in 
which they moved. Cards had been exchanged with 
Miss Mogg, but no introduction had yet taken place ; 
occasional glimpses, however, had been caught of her 
by Mr. Ribley, as she walked, accompanied by the 
lady who lived -with her as her chaperon, or, as she 
was to be seen sometimes, driving out with "Old 
Mogg," in a very handsome carriage with richly- 
liveried attendants. 

Amongst the little coterie of the Mall and its 
neighbourhood there was a constant interchange of 
tea-drinkings, or, still worse, what they called evening 
parties, including cards, cake, music, lemonade, and 
ennui. It was at one of these that the " elegant and 
accomplished Miss Mogg " made her first appearance, 
and Edith was again surprised to behold, in the 
person of the muffin-maker's daughter, a very pretty, 
fashiona1)le-looking girl, who talked, laughed, played, 



212 DESTINY. 

and sang, in a very well -taught manner. In short, 
Miss Mogg was like thousands of other pretty girls 
who have been educated at fashionable boarding- 
schools, and acc|uired that external polish which is 
now the great aim and end of education to impart. 
Edith had not mixed much in general society, but she 
had been all her life accustomed to do the honours of 
her father's house to many a noble and distinguished 
guest, and to receive, in return, those marked and 
peculiar attentions due to the fair and youthful 
mistress of a noble establishment. But now, amidst 
this plebeian coterie, she found herself a person of no 
consequence whatever, compared to Miss Mogg, the 
muffin-maker's daughter — so relative a thing is 
personal importance ! She was slightlj^ and civilly, 
sometimes compassionately, spoken to, evidently as 
the poor dependent niece who lived wuth good Mrs. 
Ribley; but all Avas wonder and admiration and 
exclamation at the beauty, the ch-ess, the accomplish- 
ments of the charming Miss Mogg. Edith felt the 
diflference, but she had so little personal pride or 
vanity that she felt it without pain — except as it 
forced upon her the retrosiiect of changed days and 
fallen fortunes. Mr. Penshurst, who unexpectedly 
joined the party, was the only one who did not enter 
the charmed circle which surrounded Miss Mogg as 
she sat at the piano, but took his station by Edith, 
who sat a little apart. This fanx pas at the very 
outset would not have been passed over in silence by 
Mr. Ribley, had not he and his lady been both at 



DESTINY. 213 

cards in the back drawing-room, and ignorant of 
what was going on, while Edith, viewing him as the 
intended lover of Miss Mogg, gave him credit for the 
delicacy which kept him from jostling and elbowing 
with the crowd of her admirers. 

"How you must despise us mercenary English," 
said he to Edith, as he stood by her chair, and looked 
with something like scorn on the rest of the company, 
" when you see the homage we render to mere wealth." 

"Is it not the universal idol, under some form or 
other ? " replied she. 

"Yes, with the vulgar; even mere vulgar coin 
commands reverence ; but you, I am sure, would be 
no worshipper of wealth under any form." 

"Every country — nay, every heart, has perhaps 
its own false deity," said Edith. 

" It may be so, but surely there are none so vul- 
garising as the love of money. When I think of the 
mass of wealth which even this room contains, it 
almost sickens me at the thought of riches. Here it 
displays none of those charms which render it so 
fascinating in refined society ; and, I confess, the idol 
appears to me in all its native deformity." 

" I should imagine it was seldom seen to greater 
advantage than in the person of Miss Mogg," said 
Edith ; " she is very pretty." 

" Yes, she would look very well even at Almack's. 
She sings well, and, I have no doubt, waltzes well," 
replied he carelessly. "I see you are incredulous 
about the sincerity of my homage at a nobler shrine ; 



214 DESTINY. 

but you are right, Miss Mogg is a very 7iice girl, to 
use the favourite expression of the caste to which I 
partly belong ; not that I mean to affect any aristo- 
cratic airs," he added, smiling, "or to depreciate the 
excellence of a body of people so respectable as that 
of the commercial class of England ; in it there are 
many members who would do honour to the highest 
rank or station, just as there are patricians by birth 
who would disgrace the most plebeian extraction ; I 
only regret that you should have been made acquainted 
with so unfavourable a specimen of English taste and 
manners." 

"I flatter myself," said Edith, "I am more in the 
way of losing prejudices than of acquiring them. I 
have already got rid of a few since I came to England." 

"So have I, since you came to England. Come, 
let us compare notes. In Mrs. Eibley's niece, I ex- 
pected to behold — no, I really cannot bring myself to 
describe what I expected to find you — except that it 
was in everything the reverse of what you are." 

"That may or may not be a comj)liment," said 
Edith ; " but since you have set me such an example 
of candour, I can do no less than follow it, as I am 
sure Mr. Eibley's unseen nephew might have rivalled 
Mrs. Eibley's niece." 

Mr. Penshurst laughed while he said, " It is well 
the phantoms have destroyed each other ; let us hope 
they never again may revive even in imagination." 
Then, as the card parties in which Mr. and Mrs. 
Eibley had been engaged broke up, and they were 



DESTINY. 215 

entering the room, he exclaimed, "But I must be 
presented to Miss Mogg, if I would prevent my good 
uncle from exposing himself and me." He then 
hastened towards the spot where she was, in time to 
save appearances, and poor Mr. Ribley could scarcely 
restrain his transports when he beheld his nephew 
actually engaged in conversation with "the elegant 
and accomplished Miss Mogg." 

The entertainment was drawing to a close ; the 
company took leave ; and as the distance was short, 
and the evening fine, Mrs. Eibley walked home in her 
clogs and calash, leaning on Mr. Ribley, while Edith 
was as usual consigned to the care of Charles Pens- 
hurst. As they walked along, Mr. Ribley kept re- 
peating, " Sweet pretty creature is Miss Mogg, and so 
affable ! All the gentlemen are in love with her — a'n't 
they, Kitty, my dear 1 Hope she noticed you petick- 
larly, Charles? And you may depend upon it, old 
Mogg's in a dropsy, and she'll have three hundred 
thousand poimd ! Three hundred thousand pound, 
and old Mogg in a dropsy ! ! ! " 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

Edith had felt the want of her kind, merry-hearted 
Mrs. Macauley, and had many times walked to the 
cottage where her lodgings were taken for her, to 
watch, and, if possible, hasten the progress of the 
little alterations that were taking place, and which 
had been protracted from one week to nearly three. 
These were now completed, and she came, bUthe as a 
bee, to take possession of her apartments. The 
cottage belonged to a respectable, elderly pair, well 
skilled in all those little domestic comforts which 
make an English cottage a perfect epitome of simple 
enjoyment. It was an irregular, old-fashioned build- 
ing, with pointed gables and latticed windows, 
shrouded amongst honeysuckles and jasmine, and 
surrounded on three sides with a garden at least 
coeval with itself, which opened upon a wild secluded 
corner of the common, sprinkled with aged thorns, 
and gay with furze. From this diverged many a 
green and bosky lane, 

" Bower'd with wild roses and the clasping woodbine." 
It was a happy meeting between Edith and her 



DESTINY. 217 

old friend ; for although no companion for the culti- 
vated mind and refined taste of her ilhe, still, in the 
simple ovei^floAA^ngs of her love, and the hilarity of 
her temper, Edith found a charm which she would 
vainly have sought for even in the most poHshed 
intercourse of society. If, as Adam Smith says, "the 
greatest pleasure in life consists in being beloved," 
that pleasure assuredly was Edith's, and her own heart 
seemed to revive and expand beneath the brightening 
influence of another's joy. 

" Oh, my darling !" cried she, as the tears of delight 
rolled down her somewhat faded cheeks, " how happy 
I am to see you again ! — not but what I've seen you 
every night in my dreams since we parted ; and was 
not that a great comfort to me, think you, and one I 
ought to be very grateful for 1. 'Deed I think so, for 
it is not everybody that has so great a gift, if I may 
say so, vouchsafed to them. Oh, what would have be- 
come of me in the heart of that great dungeon, if I had 
never been blessed with a sight of your sweet face ! " 

" Dear Macky ! " said Edith, as she returned the 
fond embrace, " I trust you have been well, and toler- 
ably happy even in the heart of your dungeon, as you 
call London ?" 

" 'Deed, I ought to be very happy, for surely I am 
a surprising creature, to be so stout at my great age, 
and to have the sense granted me, too, to be sensible 
of the favour that has been shown me ; for some have 
the strength without the sense, and some have the 
sense, but are weak in the body ; but though your 



218 DESTINY. 

good papa was not pleased to think I had sense, yet I 
always thought I had my share, and that I would 
have to give an account of that, as well as of my 
great health, some day." 

" You have been very busy, then, doing good, as 
usual? Come, tell me what you have been about, 
dear Macky, since I left you." 

" Oh, 'deed, my doings have been but small, for 
they were all with Johnnie's people, poor things ! 
Two of them, Duncan and Nancy, took the nettle- 
rush, poor lambs, and that made them very crabbit 
and ill to manage, especially as their mother, poor 
body, is rather — is just maybe too good to them in 
the way of humouring them, — which, to be sure, is 
very naatral, considering what poor, pinging-like 
things they are ; and Archie, he was sent home from 
the boarding-school with the mumps, and his hand 
was never out of mischief ; but is it not very naatral, 
considering how strict they keep poor childer at they 
schools, that they should go like teegers when they 
get out of them? Then the baby had a sad towt 
with its teeth ; and the lass that takes care of the 
bairns, she burnt her hand, and was not able to part 
them when they fought wi' one another. I really 
thought Archie and Duncan would have ruggit the 
very heads off one another, poor things ; so it was a 
great mercy I chanced to be in the family at the time 
when I was able to help them in their straits ; and 
now they're all set to rights again ; — Archie away 
back to the school, and the baby has cut two great 



DESTINY. 219 

teeth, and the lass's hand is healed, and they're all to 
come down and take their dinner ^vi' me next Satur- 
day, and that will be a fine ploy, and they will be so 
pleased to see how comfortable I am. This is really 
a bit bonny spot and a neat house, and discreet, pur- 
pose-like bodies that keep it ; and so, my love, we 
ought to be thankful, even though we are in England, 
for we might have been in a worse place." 

Edith Avould gladly have exchanged the senseless, 
soulless life and luxurious board of the Kibleys for 
the heartfelt pleasures and simple fare she would 
have enjoyed Avith her old friend, but that might not 
be ; she resolved, however, to appropriate her morning 
hours to her, as also such other portions of the day 
as she could abstract from the claims of Mrs. Eibley. 
Frequent though formal invitations were also given to 
Mi's. Macauley to dine or drink tea at the Grove ; and 
thus several weeks passed away without any greater 
varieties than occasional parties, when Miss Mogg 
always shone forth as the star of the evening. 

Edith had all her life been accustomed to mix 
freely in gentlemen's society, and to receive a great 
deal of attention, without attaching to it any of those 
ideas of love and marriage, or even exclusive admira- 
tion, which young ladies are so apt to indulge, when 
they find themselves at all distinguished beyond the 
common forms of well-bred indifference. She there- 
fore conversed with gentlemen with the same absence 
of design, and consequent ease of deportment, as she 
would have done Anth companions of her outi aex : 



220 DESTINY, 

and there was a simple qiiiet refinement in her 
manner, equally remote from prudery as from 
coquetry. Something of this might also have been 
owing to her affections having been so exclusively en- 
grossed by one object. These affections had been 
deeply wounded ; and though the wound itself had 
long since closed, it had been succeeded by an in- 
sensibility which rendered her ahke unconscious of, 
and indifferent to, ordinary impressions. Not even 
Mrs. Eibley, wdth all her cold correctness, could find 
fault with the manners of her niece ; not that she 
admired them ; they lacked that formality which with 
her was the criterion of virtue, and made it difficult 
for her to comprehend how far there could be pui'ity 
of heart, and sincerity of mind, and dignity of be- 
haviour, without this her guardian angel to protect 
the whole. Although she could not say that Edith 
encouraged the attentions of Charles Penshurst, she 
began to suspect that Charles Penshurst was rather too 
particular and unremitting in his attentions to Edith. 
At length an Maircissement took place. One day, 
as the ladies sat in solemn silence at their work, Mr. 
Ribley came twaddling into the room, his wig all 
awry, his eyes goggling, his hands shaking, and his 
whole person indicative of great mental agitation. 
He looked for a minute or two, as if doubting the 
evidence of his o^vn senses ; then, with a sort of 
scream, burst forth, " Refused Miss Mogg ! refused 
Miss Mogg ! three hundred thousand pound, and old 
Mogg in a dropsy ! " And he wrung his hands, and 



DESTINY. 221 

ambled up and down the room, repeating the same 
thing at least a dozen times to himself. 

*' Pray be composed, Mr. Eibley," said his lady, as 
she calmly threaded her needle, and even made a 
knot at the end of her thread; "be composed, praj^, 
Mr. Eibley." 

" WTiy, Kitty, my dear, you don't know — why now 
what do you think 1 After all, such a fine education — 
been at Oxford — and — and would have settled fifty 
thousand pound upon him at once — to refuse Miss 
Mogg ! " Here his voice rose again to a treble shriek, 
" To refuse Miss Mogg ! three hundred thousand 
pound, and old Mogg, as sure as I'm alive, in a 
dropsy ! Seen him myself — legs as thick as three of 
mine; a'n't they, Kittj', my dear?" 

" Indeed ! the poor old gentleman ! — But I have 
not seen Mr. Mogg of a great while, Mr. Eibley." 

"Well, all over now," said he, in a calmer tone, 
and standing still ; " refuses to pay his addresses to 
Miss Mogg ! refuses Miss Mogg ! and after I had 
sounded old Mogg myself " 

Here Edith had risen to quit the room, that Mrs. 
Eibley might be more at liberty to receive the full 
disclosure she saw about to take place. But Mrs. 
Eibley, with compressed lips, glassy eyes, and an 
emphatic wave of the head, said, " You will oblige 
me by remaining Avhere you are, Edith, till we have 
finished these frills. It is of importance that the 
frills that are to be worn together should be hemmed 
toaiether." 



222 DESTINY. 

"Sounded old Mogg myself! — found him quite 
agreeable — told iiim what a fine young man my nephew 
is — cousin to Sir Charles Penshurst — only one between 
him and the title — settle fifty thousand pound upon 
him myself; and after all, to refuse to pay his addresses 
to Miss Mogg ! the elegant and accomplished JVIiss 
Mogg! thi'ee hundred thousand pound, and old Mogg 
in a dropsy ! " 

" 'Tis indeed very extraordinary, Mr. Eibley, that 
Charles should be so disobedient, when it's all for 
his own advantage too." And she cast a look of cold 
scrutiny at Edith, who sat quite unconscious either 
of it or of the suspicions which were now beginning 
to be bodied forth in Mrs. Eibley's dull brain. " Can 
you assign no probable motive, j\Iiss Malcolm," said she, 
"for this extraordinary beha\aour of Mr. Penshurst 1" 

Edith looked with such innocent surprise as might 
almost have sufl&ced to answer the question. "None," 
replied she, "except that he does not particularly 
admire IVIiss Mogg, I suppose." 

"Not admire Miss Mogg !" exclaimed Mr. Eibley; 
" not admire three hundred thousand pound ! Sure 
he can't be such a fool, eh, Kitty, my dear?" 

" I should be still more surprised if he is capable 
of disobeying such an uncle as you have been to him, 
Mr. Eibley." Then turning to Edith, "If you know 
Avho Mr. Penshurst does not admire, can you tell us 
whom he does admire?" And Mrs. Eibley fixed her 
large solemn eyes full upon her face, as she put the 
interrogation. 



DESTINY. 223 

The truth for the first time flashed upon Edith's 
mind. She saw she was suspected, and with the 
rapidity of hghtning various Httle circumstances, 
which at the time she had passed carelessly by, now 
darted into her mind, as if to bring conviction home 
to her. With a deepened colour she said, "I have 
never been honoured with Mr. Penshurst's confidence. 
I beg I may therefore be spared any fui-ther discussion 
on a subject in which I never can be interested, other- 
wise than as the friend of the parties." 

Then calmly laj'iug aside her work, she rose and 
left the room, Mr. Kibley's pathetic exclamations 
resounding in her ear as she closed the door. 

Desirous of avoiding being again called to a discus- 
sion which delicacy forbade that she should ever have 
been made acquainted with, she resolved to go and 
pass the day vnth Mrs. ]\Iacauley, and thus be out of 
the way of this impleasant family altercation. Leav- 
ing a message, therefore, with the servant, to say 
where she had gone, she set out on her Avalk alone, 
contrary to Mrs. Eibley's disapproval of young ladies 
walking by themselves. She had gone but a little 
way from the house, when she found herself over- 
taken and joined by the very person she most wished 
to avoid — Mr. Penshurst. He oflered her his arm as 
usual, which for the first time she hesitated to accept; 
and with some embarrassment added, that, as she 
was going to spend the day mth her friend, she 
begged she might not interfere with his arrange- 
ments. 



224 DESTINY. 

"Is there no other reason for your declining my 
attendance?" he inquired, looking earnestly at her. 

Edith was silent ; for truth forbade her to say 
there was not, and to acknowledge there was would 
have been to lead to an explanation she washed to 
avoid. 

But her companion seemed to penetrate her motive, 
for he said, " I see how it is ; you are aware of what 
has passed between my good uncle and me, and you 
are afraid to give countenance to the rebellious 
nephew." 

"I certainly wish to avoid doing anything that 
might be construed into disrespect of Mr. and Mrs. 
Eibley," replied Edith. 

"But I flatter myself you do not carry your respect 
for their prejudices beyond your Avishes for my happi- 
ness?" 

"I would hope that both might be combined," 
replied Edith. 

"Impossible in the present case ; and if I believed 
you sincere, or at least that you Avere aware of the 
nature of the hope you have just expressed, suffer me 
to say, it would give me incalculable pain." 

" The wish icas sincere," said Edith gently ; " the 
pain Avas unintentional." 

"You wish then," said Mr. Penshurst warmly, 
" that I should sacrifice myself for gold ; that I should 
join the mean herd who are paying court to the 
muffin -maker's daughter; that I should suffer my 
well-meaning, but misjudging uncle, to set about 



DESTINY. 225 

negotiating for my future happiness, just as he Avould 
for a transfer of his bank -stock. Is this what you 
wish? No. I am sure it cannot be." 

" I have certainly no wish to give even an opinion 
in a matter which, pardon me for saying, ought to be 
confined entirely to the parties themselves, Mr. Pens- 
hurst." 

" Pardon me ! I acknowledge I have taken a liberty 
in intruding myself and my concerns on your atten- 
tion; but I had flattered myself that neither were 
so entirely insignificant as to be wholly beneath your 
notice." 

" My notice can be of no value," said Edith, " for 
it can render you no service. I possess no influence 
whatever with either Mr. or Mrs. Eibley." 

"And if you did," interrupted he, "I trust it 
would not be used in such a cause; for it is too 
absurd a one to require serious interference ; and I 
certainly never should have even alluded to it, had I 
not already experienced the bad efi'ects of my uncle's 
imprudence in the distance of your manner towards 
me." 

He paused, and Edith made no reply, for in truth 
she knew not what to say. Mr. Penshurst resumed : 
" Your silence is a tacit acknowledgment that it is so, 
and I can easily conjecture what has occasioned the 
change ; but, however I may admire and respect the 
delicacy which prompts it, I cannot but deplore that 
anything should have occurred to interrupt the happy 
intercourse I have hitherto enjoyed with you." 
VOL. II. Q D. 



226 DESTINY. 

"^Yhen j'ou are reconciled to your uucle," said 
Edith gently, "the interruption "will cease, and every- 
thing Avill return to its former friendly footing." 

" No, that can never be ; it is only by mutually 
understanding each other that confidence can ever be 
restored. Forgive me, therefore, if I am led to ex- 
plain myself sooner than I should otherwise have 
ventured to do, in avowing that, even had no other 
obstacle existed, the sentiments I entertain for you 
would have formed an insuperable bar to my comply- 
ing with my uncle's wishes." 

Edith Avas not overwhelmed by this declaration, 
for her heart was untouched by it ; but, slightly 
colouring, after a moment's pause she said, " Gratify- 
ing as your preference might be to another, I can 
only regret that it should have been bestowed upon 
me. My esteem and friendship are yours, as I trusted 
yours had been mine ; but beyond these I can make 
no return." 

" But you will — suff"er me to hope you will — Avhen 
the obstacles which appear to stand in the way at 
present are removed, as I pledge myself they shall be 
in a very short time. My uncle loves me too much, 
and is too easy in his temper, to hold out against my 
resolution ; and even Mrs. Eibley, to do her justice, 
acts too much upon principle to render her influence 
dangerous. The provision allotted for me, even in 
my uncle's lifetime, is amply sufficient to enable me 
to take that station in society which my birth and 
family entitle me to claim. The consent of my 



DESTINY. 227 

uncle, and, if you will, your aunt, once obtained, 
I flatter myself , you will at least allow me to try 
the effects of time and perseverance in creating an 
interest for myself in your regards." 

"No, Mr. Penshurst," said Edith, moupnfully but 
firmly, " I will not for one instant deceive you. I 
am not insensible to the advantages you offer me ; I 
am not ungrateful for the preference you honour me 
with ; but believe me, I speak a language that never 
can alter, when I say I never can be more to you 
than I am at this moment — your friend and well- 
wisher. As such let us part for the present;" and 
she held out her hand to him, as they now came 
in sight of ]\Irs. Macauley's cottage. 

Mr. Penshurst seemed to struggle with his emotions, 
and mortified pride, no less than wounded feeling, 
showed itself in his countenance : "At least a few 
days, or even hours, might have been bestowed upon 
the consideration of my claims to your regard ; and 
still I would flatter myself that courtesy alone will 
incline you to grant them a more calm and dis- 
passionate consideration than you can possibly do 
now ; a week — a month — a year, if you will ; I am 
content to wait your final decision." 

Tears rose to Edith's eyes, while she answered : 
"Believe me, Mr. Penshurst, the measure would only 
be one of protracted pain to both of us ; my senti- 
ments cannot now waver ; what I say to-day I should 
only repeat a year hence. My best wishes are yours 
— may God bless you ! " They had now reached the 



228 DESTINY. 

garden gate, and Mrs. Macauley was seen joyfully 
hastening to meet them. 

Again Edith extended her hand to him. He took 
it in silence, then turned abruptly, and hastened away. 
Mrs. Macauley looked after him for a few minutes, 
then shook her head with a significant expression, as 
she regarded Edith : " He's a fine, genteel, weel- 
faur'd lad," thought she, half aloud, and as if com- 
muning with herself, "and many a one would be glad 
of him, though maybe he should not look just so 
high as Glenroy's dochter." 



CHAPTER XXVII 

On returning home, Edith found Mr. Eibley still 
vibrating to the sound of " Refused Miss Mogg, and 
old Mogg in a dropsy ! " If Mrs. Ribley's suspicions 
of her nephew's attachment to Edith had been 
excited, they now appeared to be completely dispelled 
by a note just received from him, declaring his inten- 
tion of setting out for the Continent in a day or two. 
This was quite conclusive, in her opinion, that she 
had been for once mistaken in her surmises, and she 
therefore took the first opportunity of assuring Edith 
that there appeared not the slightest ground for sup- 
posing that Mr. Penshurst had been at all influenced 
by any secret preference in refusing to pay his 
addresses to Miss Mogg, Mr, Ribley was too good- 
natured to retain his displeasure, which, indeed, 
scarcely ever amounted to anger, however strongly he 
might express his disappointment ; and he therefore 
hastened to town the following morning, to be recon- 
ciled to his somewhat spoiled nephew before he took 
his departure, Edith felt the loss she had sustained 
in an agreeable companion, and the dulness and 



230 DESTINY, 

vacuity that reigned in the family would have been 
at times almost too much for her spirit to sustain, 
had it sought support in outward things. But she 
had " that within which passeth show," even " the 
ornament of a meek and quiet spirit," seeking not its 
own in the things of this world, for of all those which 
had once been hers she was now bereft; the tenderest 
ties of nature and of love had been broken asunder ; 
her pride of ancestry had been abased ; habits of 
almost prodigal munificence had been exchanged for 
the galling yoke of poverty and dependence ; even 
the slight solace of pleasing social intercourse she had 
been obliged to surrender. A mere worldly mind 
would have flown from the contemplation of such 
disasters, — a superstitious one would have given way 
to gloom and dejection. But the Christian sees in all 
that befalls him, whether it be good, or whether it 
seem evil, only the manifestations of Divine love, as 
exercised in training and preparing the soul for its 
approach to that perfection which it is one day 
destined to realise. The value of this great and all- 
important truth daily pressed itself more strongly on 
Edith's conviction, and cast its hallowed radiance even 
across the weary path she was destined to tread. In 
constant communings with her dear friends at Inch 
Orran, she had always a source of pure, unmingled 
pleasure, which, with the fond and simple tokens 
of her dear old Macky's affection, seemed now the 
only fragments that remained to her of her former 
happiness; and these she did not sullenly reject, but 



DESTINY. 231 

rathei' clierislied with all the warmth of a still sus- 
ceptible heart. 

So passed the time — the only varieties such as Averc 
afforded by dull village parties, and occasional airings 
in the environs with Mr. and Mrs. Eibley, from which 
she sought to extract such amusement as could be 
afforded by the objects that met their view. Amongst 
the many closely-embowered villas which lay on every 
side, there chanced to be one which more particularly 
attracted Edith's attention, from the beautiful disjjosi- 
tion of the grounds, and the glimpse she caught of the 
house through the rich and A^aried foliage, which 
formed a leafy screen all around, as if, in the true 
spirit of English seclusion, to hide the home beauties 
of the scene from the vulgar eyes profane of the 
passer-by. She inquired of Mr. Ribley to whom it 
belonged. 

" Sure ! don't you knoAV 1 Why, that is Wood- 
lands ! — belongs to your relation, Lady Waldegrave— 
sweet pretty place, and such a fine house — never lives 
there, though ; suppose you were to get an order from 
her Ladyship to go and sec it; and we'll make a party, 
and ask the Claridges, and the Mudges, and Mr. and 
Mrs. Botkins, and Miss Mogg, and a few friends, and 
have a picnic in the pleasure-grounds. Sure, Kitty, 
my dear, that would be very pleasant f 

"And this," thought Edith, as she gazed upon it 
with mournful feelings, undefinable to herself, — "this 
is one of Florinda's many fair but neglected homes ! " 
The contrast of her own situation, homeless and de- 



232 DESTINY. 

pendent, swelled her heart with new and painful 
emotions ; but such feelings were alien to her noble, 
generous nature, and were quickly dispelled by better 
thoughts. She shook away the tear which had risen 
to her eye, and looked serenely on the lovely though 
deserted f spot. "And be it so," said she mentally; 
" all are the gifts of God, and oh ! may He grant that, 
wherever her home is, it may be a virtuous and a 
happy one ! " 

Mr. Eibley continued to talk of the projected pic- 
nic till they returned home; and Edith had some 
difficulty in evading his request that she w^ould make 
immediate application for an order to carry it into 
effect. But he seemed likely to be gratified sooner 
than he expected, for, on reaching home, she found 
the following note, which had been delivered in her 
absence : — 

"My dear Edith — I have just heard from 
mamma you are in town, and wish for a card to 
my ball. I have the greatest pleasure in sending 
you one, and assure you I shall be quite delighted 
to see you there, I wish very much I could see 
you before then, in a quiet, comfortable way; but, 
unfortunately, I have not a single day that is not 
crowded Avith engagements; but I trust by-and- 
by we shall have some pleasant meetings, as mamma 
tells me you are going to live with some re- 
lations at Woodly Common, which is in the neigh- 
bourhood of \Yoodlands, and I shall probably be 



DESTINY. 233 

there for a month or two this summer. In the 
meantime, I am going to send my little boy there for 
change of air, after the hooping-cough. I have such 
perfect confidence in the people who are about him, 
that I know he will be quite as safe as under my own 
eye, and I shall make a point of seeing him as often 
as I possibly can. But I should think it very kind, 
dearest Edith, if you would go and see him occasion- 
ally ; it would really be the greatest possible comfort 
to me, and do tell him some little stories, for he quite 
doats upon stories. It almost breaks my heart to 
part with him, even at so short a distance ! Tell 
me, if you don't think him an angel 1 Adieu, dearest, 
dear Edith. I do hope you %A'ill come to my ball. 
And believe me, ever and ever, j'our affectionate 
friend and sister, Florinda Waldegrave. 

" Waldegrave House, Sunday. 

"P.»S'. — If you do think of my ball, as I hope you 
■\\all, pray consult my milliner, Madame Duval. She 
is ruinous, but her taste is perfection. And, for 
Heaven's sake, beware of mamma's friend and coun- 
sellor, Madame la Eoque ! I enclose a general order 
for your admittance to "Woodlands, but I must be 
very exclusive against admitting the ^dllage folks, 
while Dudley remains there." 

A momentary flush burned on Edith's cheek at the 
heartless, unfeeling impertinence of this billet ; but it 
passed quickly away, and was followed by a sigh of 
regret at the thought how ill its selfish, unfeeling 



234 DESTINY. 

levity augured for herself and others. One thing 
particularly struck her — was it delicacy or indifference 
that withheld her from once mentioning her husband's 
name 1 It could scarcely be the former ; for of true 
delicacy of mind Lady Waldegrave had shown herself 
hitherto incapable ; and Edith shuddered to think it 
could be the latter : she attached so little credit to 
Lady Elizabeth's testimony, that her insinuations had 
produced no effect upon her mind. But this equivocal 
silence seemed but too much in accordance with them. 
Should it be so, she thought, how little are her out- 
ward circumstances to be envied ! Edith knew not 
yet half the selfish egotism of a fine lady. It cost her 
a struggle to write a r6})ly to the note. Her worldly 
feelings shrank from the task; but her better and 
more Christian principles prevailed. 



CHAPTER XXVIIL 

It may be supposed that Mrs. Macauley's artlessness, 
and, indeed, ignorant good-nature, exposed her in no 
common degree to the various arts of deception as 
practised in civilised communities, and which are 
commonly found to keep pace Avith the increasing 
refinement and luxury of society. "While in London 
she was a prey to every species of petty imposture 
with which its streets abound ; at least as far as her 
limited means admitted. Her large pockets were 
daily replenished with halfpence for the beggars ; her 
room was filled with trash bought as bargains from 
the worthless hawkers who beset the passengers ; 
all which, to her surprise and mortification, turned 
to naught in her hands ; and the authority of the 
wise Johnnie himself had been scarcely sufficient 
to restrain her from turning his house, small as it 
was, into a house of refuge for persons of no 
doubtful character. Her zeal was good, but it lacked 
knowledge. Even in her rambles on the Common, 
or its more secluded paths, few days passed without 
her meeting with some extraordinary claim upon her 
wonder, admiration, sympathy, or charity. Edith 



236 DESTINY. 

was therefore too much accustomed to interesting 
stories, and had seen too many proofs of the fallacy 
of her good friend's judgment, to feel any very lively 
interest in the objects of her generous but mistaken 
ardour. She was therefore but little moved when 
Mrs. Macauley entered her room one morning at a 
very early hour, and with even more than her wonted 
animation and intelligence beaming on her face. "I 
daresay you will wonder to see me so early, my dear," 
said she, seating herself, almost out of breath ; " but 
'deed I could not wait for your coming to me, for I 
have been scarcely able to sleep for thinking of what 
I met with last night." 

"Dear Macky ! that is too serious, if your adven- 
tures are to rob you of your rest as well as of your 
money," said Edith. 

" Oh, not a bit I grudge my sleep any more than 
the pickle siller, when I have it to give ; but it was 
my own fault that I did not sleep any last night ; but 
I could not get him out of my head, do as I would." 

" I hope you have not taken this same unknoAvn 
into your heart, for, large as that is, I think it can 
scarcely be capacious enough to contain all that you 
are inclined to open it to; besides, dear Macky," added 
she, smiling, "you must own I should sometimes find 
myself in such strange company ! " 

" Well, well, but you need not be feared this time, 
my dear, for I'll let nobody dwell there that is any 
ways disagreeable to you ; but I'm sure as I'm alive 
you would not object to him if you but saw him. 



DESTINY. 237 

However, I'm not going to say black or white about 
him, for I know very well that you rather misdoubt 
me now ; to be sure I have been sometimes mistaken 
as well as my neighbours, and I'll not say but what 
I have been a little unfortunate in my good opinions ; 
but for all that, I have my senses still, for which I am 
very thankful, even though I maybe do not turn them 
to so much good as some better and wiser people 
might do." 

For the first time in her hfe Mrs. Macauley spoke 
to Glenroy's daughter in a tone slightly indicative of 
pique. 

" Dearest Macky, forgive me," cried Edith, embrac- 
ing her, " and do not look so grave, if you would not 
have me dislike your new friend for ha-ving caused 
me to offend my own old and valued one." 

"My darling, it's not in the power of Glenroy's 
dochter to offend me : and the creature's not living 
that I would put into comparison with you for your 
own sake. I'm only a wee vexed that I cannot get 
you to beheve, that is, to understand, or — or to 
comprehend j but 'deed I do not know that I do 
it right myself." 

"No matter," said Edith, smiling, "only tell me 
what it is you wish me to know, and I Avill do my 
best to comprehend it ; but now, let us set out upon 
our ramble this lovely morning." And taking her 
old friend's arm within hers, Edith and she set out 
most lovingly to enjoy the pure air and balmy fra- 
grance of a dehghtful summer morning. 



238 DESTINY. 

" Well, then, my dear, this is what I was going to 
tell you. You know what a sweet evening it was 
when we parted last night ; so after I had got to my 
own door, I thought I would just go and ask after 
that poor ne'er-do-weel creature that I told you about. 
I went to his mother's, and I got very little satisfac- 
tion, but that cannot be helped ; so as I was coming 
home by the t'other side of the Common, which, you 
know, is very wild and lonesome, especially at night, 
'deed I began to think whether I was not rather fool- 
hardy to be walking there by myself at that time ; 
then I thought of how many stories of robberies 
and murders I had heard upon people no better 
or richer than myself, and what ugly pits and places 
there were among the whins ; no doubt it was very 
foolish in me to be thinking of such things in such 
a place, and no creature near me. Well, what do 
you think, but at that very moment I saw a person 
on a fine tall horse coming riding straight up as it 
were to me ; then if I was not frichtened ! and my 
heart began to beat hke anything. However, I 
thought I would put the best face I could upon it, 
and not let on that I thought any mischief of him ; 
so I pretended as if I had been just looking at the 
bonny young moon ; but I cast the tail of my ee at 
him for all that, and I tried to sing, but 'deed my voice 
was not very steady. Well, just at that moment he 
rode close up to me, and what does he do but jump 
off his horse, and grip both my hands in his ! Oh ! 
I really thought I was as good as robbed and mur- 



DESTINY. 239 

dered, and I gave such a skreegh ! With that he let 
me go, but he looked me in the face, and then I saw 
the tears in his eyes ; so I took heart at that, and 
says I, ' Sir, oh, I'm but a very poor person, but you 
shall be welcome to all that I have in my pocket, if 
you will please to do me no harm.' Still he did not 
speak, but he stood as if he had not heard me, and 1 
saw his lip quiver, and his heart heave as if he was 
in distress ; so then I got more courage, and thinks 
I, this is a poor young creature that has maybe an 
old mother, or a sick wife, or some starving children, 
that's driven him out to do this; so I took more 
heart, and said, 'I see, sir, you have not been used 
to this sinful life, and I hope you never will. I 
have nothing but a poor sixpence, a few bawbees, 
and a silver thimble, in my pocket (I quite forgot 
that I had my watch at my side), which, if they 
can do you any good, are at your service, and an 
old woman's blessing into the bargain.' Well, even 
wi' the tear in his ee, he gave such a sweet smile — 
I cannot forget it — and then he said, 'I beg your 
pardon for the alarm I have occasioned you, and for 
the liberty I took with you ; but I am not what you 
suppose— I am no robber.' 

""Deed then, you do not look Hke one,' says I, 
' and I hope, for the sake of the mother that bore you, 
as well as for your own, you never will be one ; but if 
you only Avanted to frichten me, I do not think it was 
very well done of you. ' 

" ' No, no,' said he, quite earnestly, ' that was far 



240 DESTINY. 

from my intention. I took you for an old friend- 
one who is associated in my mind with all that is dear 
to me;' and then he stopped, and I saw him just 
gulping down his very thoughts, as it were ; and then 
he said, ' Can you— will you forgive me V 

" ' 'Deed that I will, with all my heart,' says I ; 
'and I think all the better of you, too, for the fricht 
you gave me, now that I know the reason of it.' 

" ' Well, then,' says he, ' to show that you no longer 
mistrust me, you must allow me to see you safe home;' 
and before I knew where I was, there we were walk- 
ing arm-in-arm, chatting to one another as if we had 
been friends all our days. Now is not that very sur- 
prising?" 

"Why, it would certainly be something of an 
adventure with anybody but you ; but I think I have 
heard you relate still more marvellous incidents in 
your life," said Edith. 

" But wait till you hear the end of it, my dear. 
Well, we went on this way, him leading his horse with 
one hand, and me hanging on his t'other arm, and he 
told all how it was he happened to give me such a 
fright ; that he had been dining with a friend in this 
neighbourhood, and was riding back to town, but lost 
his way, or at least was not sure about it ; and so 
when he saw me coming, he thought he would just 
ride up to me, and ask me to direct him; and then 
the moment he set his eyes upon me, as I told you 
before, he was so struck with my likeness to an old 
friend that he had not seen from the time he was a 



DESTINY. 241 

l:»oy, that, as he said, he quite forgot liimself. Now, 
was not that very naatral 1" 

In the true Scotch style, to answer one question 
with another, "Have you still got your watch?" in- 
quired Edith, with a smile. Mrs. Macauley reddened. 

" Oh, not a bit of that question is like yourself, now. 
'Deed, and I wish that your heart, that was so inno- 
cent and unsuspicious, may not be getting corrupted 
and like the rest of the world, just with dwelling 
amongst such unclean creatures ! My watch ! 'deed, 
then, he was far more like to give me a watch, if I 
had wanted such a thing, than to have taken it from 
me ! Oh, my darling, beware of hasty judgments ; 
they ill become us, poor, ignorant, sinful creatures 
that we are." 

"Forgive me, dearest Macky ; but you know it is 
but a minute since you introduced your hero to me as 
a highwayman." 

" But did not I tell you, my dear, that was nothing 
but a foolish fancy of my own ? and one I've thought 
much shame of ever since ; for if I had not been quite 
stupefied with my own senseless fricht, I never could 
have seen his face and thought ill could come of it." 

" Yet 'tis but a few days since you declared yoii 
would never trust to appearances again after the " 

" Well, well, my dear, bub that was quite a different 
thing ; and no doubt there are many fair faces that 
hide foul hearts, just as there are many worthy, 
respectable, ill-faured people. My own good Mr. Mac- 
auley, many people thought, was notvery pretty , because 

VOL. II. R D. 



242 DESTIXY. 

of his being pock-marked ; but he was very fair to my 
sight, for there's no face like the face that loves us." 

"You say true," said Edith, with a sigh, as she 
thought how few were the faces that now looked on 
her with love and gladness. 

" Well, then, my dear, is not that one good reason 
for my being so well pleased with this young gentle- 
man that I was telling jou about 1 Not a bit but he 
says he is so fond of my face, for it puts him so much 
in mind of an old friend's ; and, 'deed, he looked at 
me with such sweet, earnest eyes, I could not but 
believe him." 

"And so you gave him j-our last guinea," said 
Edith, with a smile, 

" Oh, my dear, but it grieves me to think you should 
be grown so uncharitable in your words, when I'm 
sure it is not in your nature. 'Deed, I could almost 
find in my heart not to tell you any more." 

" Ah, pray let me hear the conclusion of your tale, 
or romance, or whatever it may be. Dear Macky, I 
am only sorry that so much goodness should so often 
meet such bad returns." 

"But you need not vex yourself about that this 
time, my dear, for there's nothing of the kind that 
will be likely to happen, as you shall hear. 'Well,' 
says I, ' it's very surprising that it seems to me as if I 
had known you too somewhere, but I cannot for the 
life of me say where.' 'Perhaps,' says he, 'in some 
former state of existence, and therefore let us look 
upon this as the renewal of old friendship, which is a 



DESTINY. 243 

much better thing than the beginning of a new one ; 
don't you think so?' ''Deed, and I do,' says I, 
' though I am not altogether sure about a former state, 
as we have no authority for it ; but maybe I have 
seen you at Glenroy Castle, for I used to see so many 
grand and genteel people there that I cannot remem- 
ber either the faces or the names of one-half of them.' 
But just then he stopped to sort the bridle of his 
horse, and did not attend to what I was saying. So, 
after he had put it to rights, he said, ' I beg your 
pardon; to whom does Glenroy Castle belong?' So 
I told him how it had belonged to your family for 
generations, and how it had pleased Providence to 
put it past your good papa's family; and then my 
heart was full, and so I told him more maybe than I 
should have done ; and so Ave went on cracking 
together till we came to the door of my cottage ; then 
I was going to wish him a good night, when he looked 
about him, and said, ' What a sweet little dwelling 
you have got here ; how I wish I could find just such 
another in this neighbourhood, for I want lodgings in 
the country,' So I told him it was not my OAvn, but 
belonged to a very decent couple, who let part of it 
for lodgings, and that I knew they had two rooms at 
the t'other end of it to let. Well, just as I was speak- 
ing, out came Mrs. Smith herself; and so the short 
and the long of it is, that he took her lodgings for 
three months, and is to enter upon them to-morrow. 
Now what do you think of that, my dear 1 Is that 
like a robber, think you ?" 



244 DESTINY. 

This went so far beyond Edith's worst anticipations 
that she actually turned pale with fear, as she 
thought of the evil consequences that might ensue to 
her poor old friend from having got thus involved (as 
she had no doubt) with some artful swindler; and 
she exclaimed, " How could Mrs, Smith be so 
imprudent as to take an utter stranger into her 
house f 

" Oh, 'deed Mrs. Smith's but a narrow-minded 
suspicious body ; for she hummed and hawed, and 
spoke about references aiid securities ; but I said she 
need not mind that, for I would be answerable for 
him." 

"Oh, Macky, this is really too much !" cried Edith, 
shocked at the imprudence of her good old guardian. 

" Well, my dear, but you should wait till 3^ou hear 
me out. So then Mrs. Smith said that was sufficient. 
'So then,' says I, 'if you please, I would take the 
hberty to ask your name. My own name is Macauley, 
now in my seventieth year.' Well, at that his face 
was overcast, and he hung his head for a minute or 
two with a very mournful look, and I saw his colour 
come and go ; and 'deed I was beginning to feel not 
quite so satisfied, when he lifted up his head, and 
looked at me with his full, clear, blue eyes. But 
when I saw his fine open face, I wondered at myself 
for my misgiving, and then he said, 'I am called 
Melcombe.' Well, then, I thought very naturally 
that he meant Malcolm (for you know the English 
have such a way of clipping everything away to 



DESTINY. 245 

nothing) ; so I could not but cry out, what a wonder- 
ful thing that was, for that surely he must be some 
relation of the family, though he did not know it. 
But he sighed and said, ' The names were different ; ' 
and then (what I thought was very well-bred) he said, 
' He would be very glad to change the one name for 
the other.' And was that like a robber, think joxil" 

Edith saw it was in vain to attempt to open the 
eyes of Mrs. Macauley's understanding as to the 
dangerous predicament she had brought herself into 
by introducing a person of so suspicious a character 
to the family with whom she lodged, and making her- 
self responsible for his conduct. This was the very 
climax of her Quixotism. Edith now felt the want 
of some friend and counsellor to whom she could 
apply for advice ; for dauntless as is the heart of 
woman on great and heroic occasions, still, in the 
coarser occurrences of this working-day world, she is 
ill qualified by nature or education for taking a part ; 
for truly has it been said, "Women are hopelessly 
and incurably unfitted for business." 

Edith experienced this, as she vainly tried to 
devise some means for extricating her old friend from 
this dilemma ; but she could do nothing herself, and 
there was no one to whom she could apply. She 
would not expose her to the Ribleys, for they were 
quite incapable of appreciating the excellence of her 
character, and comprehending the simplicity and 
purity of her motives and actions, and she shrank 
from the thoughts of subjecting either herself or her 



246 DESTINY. 

poor Macky to the cold inquisitorial scrutiny of Mrs. 
Eibley, or the senseless loquacious tattle of her hus- 
band. The only scheme that presented itself was to 
try to persuade Mrs. Macauley to write to her nephew, 
the wise Johnnie, acquainting him with what had 
passed, and requesting of him to endeavour to find 
out what description of person it was she had now 
involved herself with. Should that fail, she could 
only wait with patience the result of this strange, 
suspicious adventure. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

Accordingly, the following morning Edith set forth 
as usual for the cottage, and found the ever -active 
Macky chanting away to herself, — 

" What beauties does Flora disclose, 
How sweet are her smiles upon Tweed," 

as she was diligently culling a nosegay of the sweetest 
and the fairest for her beloved deve, while her Bible 
and her stocking lay near her on a rustic seat, canopied 
with honeysuckles. After the first affectionate saluta- 
tions and tender inquiries were made on both sides, 
and Edith, as was her custom, had read to her old 
friend a portion of that book whose Avords were as 
balm to them both, she began to suggest her scheme 
with as much delicacy and finesse as possible ; but she 
had not proceeded far before she was interrupted. 

" I beg your pardon, my dear, for interrupting you, 
which I know is not good breeding ; but I see very 
well how it is ; you are vexing yourself with the 
thought that maybe I will be put in prison for having 
been caution for that young man, Mr. Melcombe. Am 
I not right?" 



248 DESTINY. 

"Not quite so had as that, dear Macky," said 
Edith ; " your friends would never allow that to come 
to pass, I am sure." 

" Well, whatever it is, you may make yourself easy, 
for I can tell you he has paid the price of his lodgings 
in advance for three months before he entered upon 
them ; for he said he could not expect them to take 
the word of a stranger, and neither would he take ad- 
vantage of my generous confidence in him (or some- 
thing like that); now, I do not think that is very 
like a robber. Oh, my dear, should not this be a 
lesson to us to beware of forming such rash and 
hasty judgments of one another f 

Edith smiled to hear Mrs. Macauley's application 
of the terms rash and hasty, but she was in part re- 
lieved to find she was free from the responsibility she 
had so thoughtlessly incurred. Still she had some 
vague misgivings as to the character of the person 
with whom she had formed this sudden and somewhat 
suspicious intimacy. With all Mrs. Macauley's excel- 
lences, she certainly was not a person to captivate a 
young man at first sight. Neither could a stranger, 
who was ignorant of the qualities of her heart, be 
supposed to enter into the peculiarities of her manners 
and the simplicity of her conversation. Even allowing 
that her resemblance to an old friend had first at- 
tracted his notice, yet that resemblance must soon 
have disai)peared on a more intimate recognition ; for 
it was scarcely possible there could be two Mrs. Mac- 
auleys in the world. "Yet why, after all, should I be 



DESTINE'. 249 

SO uncharitable in my suspicions'?" she thought; "this 
poor stranger, whom I am so harshly condemning, 
may, like myself, be almost alone in the world ; and 
his heart may have j^earned, as my own would have 
done, towards even the fancied resemblance of one 
known and beloved in happier days." While thoughts 
like these were passing through her mind, Mrs. Mac- 
auley was doing the best she could to aid the more 
favourable change that was taking place in Edith's 
sentiments. 

"Oh, if you were to see him, my dear, I'm sure 
you would almost think shame of yourself for ever 
having evened him to anything that was bad ! But 
maybe you'll not see him at all ; for he says he wishes 
to live very retired, though he has some friends in the 
neighbourhood. I told him that I thought it would 
be very dull for him to live here without he had 
some other company than me ; for that 'deed my 
best days were tied, and I was not so merry as I had 
been." 

"'No more am I,' says he, Avith a sigh, 'so we 
shall suit very well in that respect ; and when I am 
here I do not desire any better company than your 
own.'" 

Again Edith's suspicions returned. "And does he 
assign no reason for the love of retirement beyond 
that of enjoying the pleasure of your company 1 " 

"Not yet; but I daresay he will tell me all about 
himself by-and-by; consider, my dear, how very short 
a time it is since we have been acquainted." 



250 DESTINY. 

"I do, dear Macky; and therefore I cannot but 
wonder that your friendship should have made such 
rapid progress in so short a time." 

"There's no accounting for these things, my dear," 
replied her friend gravely ; " and we ought to be 
very thankful when a blessing comes in our way, and 
not be too curious in examining into it, and taking it 
to pieces to see what's in it, just like the children 
with their toys. Oh, if we had but the spirit of 
truth and thankfulness, how many a pearl we might 
find in our daily paths, that now in our pride and un- 
belief we trample under om- feet ! But with regard 
to this young gentleman, his health is maybe one 
reason that he Anshes to be quiet ; for when I saw 
him in daylight yesterday he looked very pale, and 
he told me that he was but just recovering from an 
illness, so he Avould need somebody to take care of 
him, for he looks like one that could not take care of 
himself." 

"Well, dear jNIacky, I shall rejoice if you have 
found a real acquisition in your new friend — one who 
will cheer you in the many lonely hours you must 
pass while I am engaged with my aunt." 

" Speaking of that, my dear, I really think it 
would maybe be just as well to say nothing about this 
to Mr. and Mrs. Ribley for a little while, just till I 
know all about Mr. Melcombe, which I have no doubt 
will be very soon ; for though they are very good 
people, and very discreet to me, yet I think they are 
not just so — so " 



DESTINY. 251 

" So credulous as you are, dear Macky," said Edith, 
laughing, as she embraced her in taking leave ; " well, 
I shall keep your secret for you in the meantime, but 
don't tax my forbearance too long." 

Several days j^assed, and still no new disclosure 
was made, though Mrs. Macauley's infatuation for 
her new friend seemed daily to increase, in spite of 
the reserve he maintained. 

"I don't know how it is," said she, with a per- 
plexed air, one day, in answer to Edith's renewed 
remonstrances ; " for he is anything but reserved — 
quite the contrary ; for he tells me a great deal that 
I never knew before ; and he takes pleasure, too, in 
hearing me tell him all that I know, which, to be 
sure, is not much. But whenever I speak to him 
of his family the cloud comes over his open brow, 
and he changes the subject ; so I'm thinking they may 
be no great things, any of them; and it would be 
very ill done in me to distress him by seeking to pry 
into his private affairs." 

Edith again felt how vain was reason or argument, 
when opposed to prejudice or partiality, and wisely 
forbore to press the matter further. She resolved, 
however, to watch over the interests of her old friend 
as zealously as she could, and upon no account to 
suffer herself to be led into an acquaintance with one 
whom she could not yet consider as anything ])ut 
a mere adventurer. She had little doubt but that 
Mrs. Macauley, in the simplicity of her heart, had 
acquainted him with her suspicions ; and, either from 



2o2 DESTrNl'. 

delicacy or conscious deception, he seemed to be 
equally bent upon keeping his distance. Although 
his apartments had a separate entrance at the other 
end of the cottage, yet the window of his sitting- 
room opened upon the garden ; and from the small- 
ness of the cottage and its boundaries, Edith was 
comanced he must often be near them. It therefore 
required no common care in one of its inmates to 
preserve such strict seclusion. Mrs. Macauley, indeed, 
represented him as much occupied in study of some 
kind or another, and that the only relaxations he 
allowed himself were a ride on horseback and a 
friendly chat with her. But, with all these friendly 
chats, however, there came not that confidential com- 
munication which his friend daily looked for; but 
still she kept a stout heart even against "hope 
deferred." 



CHAPTER XXX. 

Edith went to visit Lady Waldegrave's child ; and 
though she looked upon him ^vith interest, it was 
interest free from all emotion — proof sufficient, had 
any been required, that the dreams of her early love 
had completely died away, never more to return. 
The boy was, indeed, a paragon of childish loveliness ; 
and already the delicate, yet majestic contour of his 
head and features, and the grace and elegance of his 
air and movements, indicated the child of high descent. 
Youth, beauty, and sweetness combined are sure to 
win their way to every heart, and Edith soon gained 
the good graces of her little relative — at least, as much 
as any one can ever gain upon the love of a very 
indulged and pampered child. He testified great 
repugnance towards Mr. and Mrs. Ribley, Avhose 
awkward overtures he rejected with disdain. From 
whatever cause he might suffer, it certainly, to all 
appearance, could not be from neglect, as he was most 
zealously attended by a French Bonne, his Italian 
nurse, and German footman, all of whom seemed 
sedulous to please and amuse the little idol committed 



254 DESTINY. 

to their charge. The Ribleys were too fond of seeing 
sights not to avail themselves of this opportunity of 
seeing all that wsxs to be seen ; and Edith, ever willing 
to gratify others, even at the expense of her own feel- 
ings, accepted the oflFer of viewing the house and 
grounds, and thus allowed herself to be associated 
with them in all the little, mean, prying ways in 
which vulgar people delight to go about a great house. 
There was much to admire. The house, of the purest 
style of Italian architecture, stood on a gentle emi- 
nence ; the velvet lawn was studded with beds of the 
richest and rarest flowers and shrubs, Avhile trees of 
stately growth were scattered here and there, till the 
ground gradually sloped to the noble river which 
formed its boundary. All that taste and wealth 
could do to embellish nature had been bestowed on 
this, as it seemed, cherished though now deserted 
abode. 

The interior of the house would have required 
taste more cultivated and refined than those of the 
Ribleys to appreciate. The entrance hall was filled 
with noble specimens of sculpture ; the apartments 
were adorned with some of the finest works of the 
Italian masters ; and in one, appropriated entirely to 
the works of modern artists, there were placed two of 
the happiest efforts of Sir Thomas's pencil, in full 
lengths of Sir Reginald and Lady Waldegrave. It 
was but a momentary throb of surprise with Edith 
when she came suddenly and unexpectedly i;pon the 
all but breathing form of her faithless lover, and 



DESTINY. 255 

when it passed awaj', she stood, and looked calmly, 
though sadly upon it, as upon the face of one Avho 
had injured her, but Avith whom she was now at peace. 
The servant pointed to a door which conducted, he 
said, to Lady ^Yaldegrave's private apartments ; but 
her Ladyship had given positive orders that they 
should upon no account be shown until they were 
put in order, for a first-rate artist and liis people 
were employed in unpacking the various articles 
purchased by Sir Reginald and her Ladyship when 
abroad. 

Mr. Ribley's curiosity, in the true spirit of cock- 
neyism, became very importunate on hearing of . the 
locked-up apartments; he seemed to think nothing 
of what he had seen, in comparison of what he had 
not seen, and he lingered behind, and even peeped 
through the key-hole, in hopes of spying something 
to make a wonder of ; but in vain — he could make 
nothing of it; and he was fain to return home, 
exclaiming, ever and anon, " Well, to be sure ! what 
can be in these apartments? — should just like to 
know — can't guess; can you, Kitty, my dear?" For 
some days Mr. Ribley could talk of nothing but what 
he had vot seen. Soon after her visit, Edith received 
the following billet from Lady Waldegrave : — 

"Dearest dear Edith — I am so much obliged to 
you for going to see my darling Dudley ; it was quite 
a comfort to me to hear you had been at Woodlands. 
And I hope they showed you everything, and gave 



256 DESTINY. 

you fruit and flowers 1 I have a letter every day from 
Mademoiselle Le Clerc, with a bulletin of my sweetest 
boy; but still I shall be glad if you will continue to 
visit him now and then. There is another thing, my 
dear Edith, which I must beg your good offices in, 
and I shall not tease you with apologies, as I know 
you too well to doubt your readiness to oblige. You 
must know that mamma has taken it into her head 
that she requires change of air, which, indeed, is very 
probable, as the weather is now so very hot. I wish 
her of all things to go to the sea-side, or at any rate 
to some distance from town. I have even offered her 
Waldegrave Abbey for the summer, as we shall not 
go there till very late in the season ; but she persists 
in wishing to take possession of Woodlands, which 
would be the most inconvenient thing in the world 
for me, as it is all in confusion at present with my 
foreign gear, and I cannot have it put to rights till I 
am on the spot myself; and to get anything done as 
it ought to be done while mamma is in the house, you 
must be aware, would be quite impossible ; besides 
there is not accommodation for us both. Now, what 
I wish you to do, dear Edith, is to take the trouble 
to find a furnished house which you think would be 
suitable for her, as near to where you are as possible. 
She is really fond of you ; and as she is of coiirse in 
the best society, it would also be an advantage to you 
to be with her. Now, I do hope you will be able to 
gratify me in this, and the sooner you can accomplish 
tt the better. You would see by the papers how 



DESTINY. 257 

illustrious and renotcned Sir Reginald has become 
upon the turf 1 

" Adieu, my dear, 
" Believe me ever, j'our affectionate, 

"F. Waldegrave. 

"Mamma does not require a large house, you 
know; only don't let it be vulgar — and citish." 

This commission, it may be supposed, was not of 
a nature for Edith to undertake, and she wrote Lady 
AValdegrave briefly and coldly, declining to execute 
the ungracious office. 

In a few days, however, she received a billet from 
Lady Elizabeth, apprising her of her arrival in the 
neighbourhood in a very indifferent state of health, 
and requesting to see her immediately, as she had 
much to communicate. As her Ladyship's carriage 
accompanied the summons, Edith had no excuse to 
offer for not complying with it ; and she accordingly 
set off, charged by Mr. Ribley to endeavour to find 
out what sort of things were in the locked-up rooms 
at Woodlands, and when he was likely to get a sight 
of them. 

She found Lady Elizabeth in a charming cottage 
ornt^e, within a beautiful park ; but the inmate of this 
little Elysium formed a sad contrast to the loveHness 
that bloomed around. She looked haggard and worn 
out, and was in one of her most peevish and irritable 
moods of mind. The day Avas sultry, yet she reclined, 
VOL. II. S D. 



258 DESTINY. 

with her dogs and parrots around her, by the side of 
a blazing fire, with curtains, as usual, ahnost close 
drawn. 

" You find me excessively unwell, my dear," said 
she, in answer to Edith's inquiries ; " and I impute 
much of my illness to the treatment I have received 
from that shocking man, your cousin, and from mj- 
own daughter. But pray ring the bell; this is the 
time when my dogs ought to have their walk. Go, 
darlings, go. Pray, Dawson, be careful of them, and 
carry Amor when he appears fatigued. There now, 
my sweets," kissing each severally as she dismissed 
them, to Edith's great relief. "Yes, I have been 
excessively ill-used, which, together with the inju- 
dicious treatment of that wretch Belloni, has almost 
killed me. Thank Heaven, I got rid of him, and I 
have got the best and most skilful man possible. 
Monsieur Lamotte — quite a treasure ! But the 
cruelty and ingratitude I have experienced — I — 

I Do ring quickly, for I must have my drops ! it 

makes me quite ill to think of it ! I am so faint ! " 

Monsieur Lamotte obe3'ed the summons. He was 
a grimacing, high-dressed, under-bred Frenchman ; 
but he knew his cue, and having cajoled his patient, 
and administered some drops, he was then allowed to 
depart; and her Ladyship was returning to the subject, 
when Edith besought her to refrain from it, since it 
was one which agitated her so much. But, like all 
weak people, she liked the excitement of her own 
paltry feelings, and went on ; 



DESTINY. 259 

"It is but too apparent that I have been very 
unwell ; however, it was merely a sort of nervous 
attack, that anybody might have, and which Lamotte 
assures me will entirely pass away, and that in a few 
weeks I shall be quite myself again. But I found it 
impossible to be quiet in town ; when one is so much 
rechercMe that is out of the question ; so, by the advice 
of the medical people, and indeed at Florinda's earnest 
entreaty, I resolved to ivj the effect of change of air, 
and proposed to go to Woodlands for a few weeks. 
Besides liking the place itself, I was sure it would 
amuse me to superintend the arrangements making 
there; the pictures, marbles, and all sorts of pretty 
things that my daughter purchased abroad ; and, in 
short, I told Florinda I should wish to go to her house 
for a short time. Only conceive her telling me that 
was impossible, for that Sir Reginald and she were 
going themselves very soon, and had invited more 
people than the house could hold to celebrate their 
child's birthday ! You may believe how excessively 
angry I was, and we had quite a schne. But she cried, 
poor dear, and said how it distressed her to refuse me, 
but that, in short, she dared not disobey her husband. 
'And so, because you have a bad husband, you must 
be an undutiful daughter !' said I ; and I told her that 
she ought not to pay the least regard to the wishes of 
such a person ; that she had done him already too much 
honour by marrying him; and I even hinted that, 
rather than submit to such t3Tanny, she ought to 
separate from him." 



260 DESTINY. 

Edith was shocked at this new proof of Florinda's 
dupKcity, in throwing the blame of her own selfish and 
undutiful behaviour on her husband, and thus setting 
at variance those she ought to have been most desirous 
of uniting in aflfection. She therefore strove by every 
means to soften the injury, and soothe the hritated 
feelings of the despised, yet still doting parent ; and 
there are few natures that are not benefited, in some 
degree, by the bland voice of sympathy. Lady EHza- 
beth's manner became less feverish and irascible as 
she proceeded: "Yes, it is all very well as it has 
turned out. This is a pretty tiny cottage, and my 
dogs are quite safe in the park, no thanks to my 
daughter, though, poor dear, it was no fault of hers 
either ; but my good cousin, Lady Arabella Conway, 
happened to call at the very time when Florinda and 
I were both a little agitated with what had passed, 
and so I told her exactly how it was ; and she— the 
best creature in the world— next day sent to off'er me 
this cottage, which had been built by Admiral Conway 
for his mother, and, in short, me void ; and though I 
am not particularly fond of a cottage, yet it suits me, 
Avith my very limited income, to have a house without 
paying for it." Thus she ran on, till the return of her 
doo-s from their walk, when Edith would fain have left 
her to the pleasures of their society; but her step- 
mother was not wilHng to part with her s.o easily, for 
even she could feel, though she could not properly 
appreciate, the harmonising influence of Edith's pres- 
eace,— that gentle forbearance, and total absence of all 



DESTINY. 261 

selfish egotism, which are charms in themselves of no 
negative description. On her part Edith compassion- 
ated the mother, such as she was, thus disregarded 
and cast off by her own, her only child. Weak and 
frivolous as she was, she trusted her mind might yet 
be turned to better things ; and that bad health and 
disappointment might lead her, as they had done 
many others, to rehnquish those vanities which only 
served to mock and cheat her hopes. With these 
benevolent views Edith consented to pass a week 
or two with her stepmother, pro^dded Mrs. Ribley 
would give up her prior claims upon her ; and having 
promised, at all events, to see her as often as she 
could, she at length departed. 

In her way home she stopped at Mrs. Macauley's 
humble abode, and, upon entering her httle parlour, 
found that worthy, with a face of deep deliberation, 
musing upon the contents of a letter she held in her 
hand. The letter was from the wise Johnnie, and the 
purport of it was to this effect — that Mrs. J. Macauley 
and he would take it very kind if their good aunt 
would return to them as soon as possible, Archie hav- 
ing just been sent home from school with the modified 
smallpox — the baby having got St. Anthony's fire — 
they had had to tui'n ofi" the nursery maid, etc. etc. etc. ; 
the whole concluding with a request that his good 
aunt would remain till after Mrs. Macauley's confine- 
ment. 

" This is certainly not an alluring invitation, dear 
Macky," said Edith, as she finished reading the letter. 



262 DESTINY. 

"Oh, my dear, as to that I do not mind, or rathei 
I ought to be very thankful that, in my seventieth 
3^ear, I can be of any use in the world, when many a 
one is just a burden and a reproach ; but what vexes 
me is the thoughts of leaving you." Here the tears 
rose to her eyes as she gazed fondly on her darling 
Mhe. 

" And I shall miss you, my own dear, kind friend," 
said Edith, equally affected ; " but that is not what is 
to be considered. At your age it is really too much 
to call upon j'ou to encounter so much fatigue and 
anxiety and discomfort." 

" My dear, at no age are we ever unable to sen^e 
God in some shape or other ; that is our destiny from 
beginning to end ; and how can I serve God so well 
as by serving His children and my fellow-creatures ^ 
and maybe I did not think of serving Him so much 
as I should have done in my younger days, and I 
ought to be very grateful in being permitted to do it 
in my old age ; so I will just put Tsxy foot in one of 
the coaches to-morrow morning." 

Edith knew the generous devotedness of the good 
old woman too well to attempt to turn her from' the 
path of her duty. The claims of Glenroy's daughter 
only would she have considered superior to those of 
Mr. Macaidey's nej^hew ; but as she did not stand in 
need of her services at that time, the claims of Johnnie 
Macauley were paramount to all others. Those only 
who love the country as much as Mrs. Macaulej'^ did 
can fully appreciate the sacrifice she made in quitting 



DESTINY. 263 

her sweet rural dAvelling, with its flowers and birds 
and busy bees, for the crowded city, the noise of a 
small inconvenient house, and the strife of sicldy, 
unruly children. 

" Another thing I am really sorry for," said she to 
Edith, " besides parting from you, is the leaving that 
fine interesting young man, IVIr. Melcombe, ^nthout 
getting his history, which I have no doubt I would 
have done if we had been to stay much longer to- 
gether ; and then I would have liked so well to have 
made you acquainted with each other ! I'm as sure as 
I'm alive you would have come to be very fond of one 
another, for I think there's a something, I cannot tell 
what — a sort of resemblance, as it were, in your ways 
of thinking, for he is every bit as good as you, my 
dear— in his sentiments I mean. As to one another's 
hearts, you know we cannot tell what's in them." 
And with many a tender embrace, hopes of meeting 
soon, and promises of writing often, Edith took leave 
of her dear old friend, who was to set off betimes the 
followino; morniDs:. 



CHAPTER XXXL 

From this time scarcely a clay passed in which Lady 
Elizabeth did not either come in person, or send her 
carriage with an in^atation amounting to a demand 
on Edith, till at length nothing could satisfy her but 
that she should take up her residence with her entirely 
for a few weeks. Edith would fain have excused 
herself ; not that it was worse to be with her than 
\iith. the Pableys, but that she shrank from the 
thought of being brought into intercourse with Sir 
Eeginald and Lady "Waldegrave, as she doubtless 
would be, if an inmate of her stepmother's family. 
But Lady Elizabeth disliked contradiction too much 
ever to submit to it when she coidd help it, and, bent 
upon carrying her point, she made a direct appeal to 
Mrs. Eibley, who, flattered by this condescension, at 
once decided upon the propriety of Edith's accepting 
her Ladyship's invitation. It also happened to suit 
her own plans particularly well, as Mr. Eibley and 
she were meditating their annual trip to Cheltenham 
Avith theu- good friend ]\Irs. Eose Popldn, who, for 
the last fifteen years, had been their travelling com- 
panion. And as Edith could not be taken with com- 



DESTINY. 265 

fort to them, nor left with propriety by herself, this 
mode of disposing of her was the very thing that 
seemed to suit all parties. Accordingly, Edith had 
to acquiesce "svith the best grace she could to take up 
her abode for the present at Oak Cottage. 

In one respect Edith was benefited by the change. 
Although the great proportion of Lady Elizabeth's 
visitors probably did not rank much higher in the 
moral and intellectual scale than Mrs. Eibley's, still 
their manners were more elegant, and their conversa- 
tion more refined. As intelligent beings, or rational 
companions, they were perhaps uo better; but as 
mere passing acquaintances they were certainly 
superior. Pre-eminent amongst them were the kind 
owners of her little demesne. Admiral and Lady 
Arabella Conway : the former a still handsome, 
though somewhat disabled-looking man, with open 
countenance, fine bald head, frank, bluff manners, 
and a sort of hasty, peremptory good nature. De- 
scended from noble ancestry, Lady Arabella inherited 
the dignity without the pride of birth, and possessed 
that inherent nobility of mind which sheds its o'wu 
native lustre upon the adventitious gifts of fortune. 
She was nearly related to Lady Elizabeth ; they had 
spent much of their childhood and youth together : 
and her goodness of heart led her still to feel an 
affection, and take an interest even in the vapid, 
frivolous being, -ndth whom there existed no other 
aflBnity. Edith had been charmed with the unaffected 
sweetness and dignified simplicity of Lady Arabella's 



266 DESTINY. 

manners, and expressed the prepossession she felt to- 
wards her to Lady Elizabeth, 

"Yes, my cousin is a very good woman, though 
un peu cUvote. You know, I suppose, that she was a 
daughter of the Duke of Derrington's, and you may 
still see she has been handsome ; but she and I made 
our dihut together, and somehow I — in short. Lady 
Arabella, though the best creature in the world, pro- 
duced no sensation whatever, while I" — here her 
Ladyshiji gave one of her little haggard smiles, and 
Edith smiled too as she contrasted the natural dignity 
and charming, serene countenance of Lady Arabella 
with the withered, shrivelled goblin at her side ; — 
" however, she might have made tin bon 2)arti, it was 
said; but she chose to make a love match, and 
married the Honourable Captain, now Admiral Con- 
way. However, after all, it has turned out well ; he 
has got a handsome fortune somehow, and she has 
been excessively lucky in disposing of her family; 
her daughters are both greatly married, one to Lord 
EUersley, eldest son of the Duke of Tadcaster, the 
other to Lord Beechley. Her sons have also made 
great alliances, and are in very good situations ; so 
that she may have a great deal of power and patron- 
age if she chooses. The Admiral has a charming 
house in this neighbourhood, where we shall go some 
day when I feel cjuite able ; but he is become very 
lame, and rather deaf, and it quite kills me to raise 
my voice ; indeed Dr. Lamotte is of opinion that my 
complaints are of an incipient jjulmonary nature, 



DESTINY. 267 

and recommends my going aloroad before -winter, 
which I shall certainly do, otherwise my voice will 
be completely ruined. Dr. Price allowed me to exert 
myself a great deal too much; and I ought not to 
have been permitted to see your poor, dear father 
when I was last in Scotland; in fact I lost three 
notes by being obliged to raise my voice to him ; if 
Dr. Price had not been a fool, he never would have 
allowed it. Then, you know, I had that odious 
German, who drank beer and smoked ! shocking and 
foolish ! but we won't talk of that. As for Belloni, 
he was the most mercenary creature in the world, 
and, I do assure you, thought much more of his own 
fortune than of my health ; however, I trust, by care, 
and the uncommon skill of Dr. Lamotte, I shall get 
round in time." 

In a far different strain was a letter from Mrs. 
Macauley, exulting in her own humble way at the 
various uses to which she was put, and very triumph- 
ant at a visit she had had from Mr. Melcombe, who 
had bought and paid for a handsome gold watch of 
Johnnie's own making; the communication ending 
with the usual interrogation, " Was that like a robber, 
my dear f 

The distance between Oakley House and the Cot- 
tage was so short that scarcely a day passed without 
. some intercourse taking place with the generous, kind- 
hearted pair, who possessed not less the vnW. than the 
power to promote the comfort of their neighbours. 
Edith's prepossession in favour of Lady Arabella daily 



268 DESTINY. 

ripened into a warmer sentiment of affection, and was 
met by corresponding feelings on the part of that 
lady. But as Lady Elizabeth had all the exclusive- 
ness of a little mind, she would have been quite 
jealous of this increasing intimacy had she imagined 
there was more in it than attention to her protegee. 
For the first time since she left Inch Orran Edith 
found herself in society congenial no less to her prin- 
ciples than to her taste and feelings. Lady Arabella 
reminded her much of her dear Mrs. Malcolm. There 
was in both the same benign spirit of Christianity, 
shedding its divine halo over the daily actions of life, 
not dwelling on their tongues, but reigning in their 
hearts, making their light to shine before men, but 
never using it to burn the conscience of those who 
differed from themselves. The same bland, genial 
spirit seemed to pervade her family ; her daughters, 
with aU the true refinement of birth and breeding, 
were free from the pitiful frivolities and paltry airs of 
fashion. They sought not in its "weak beggarly 
elements " either for happiness or distinction, but — 
young, beautiful, rich, and noble — they dared be "wise 
and good." Cheered and invigorated by this com- 
munion of mind and similarity of tastes and pursuits, 
Edith's spirits gradually rose to their own natural 
pitch, and her eyes beamed and her cheeks glowed 
with aU the animation and more than all the beauty 
of former days, for it was now beauty matured and 
embellished by expanded intellect and more exalted 
feelings. 



DESTINY. 269 

The time was thus passing pleasantly away, when 
Lady Waldegrave arrived to take possession of Wood- 
lands for the remainder of the summer. This event 
was no sooner known to Lady Elizabeth (for she did 
not even wait till it should be commimicated) than 
she was on the fidgets to go to her daughter, Avhether 
for the purpose of embracing or reproaching seemed 
uncertain — probably both. She accordingly ordered 
her carriage, without even consulting Dr. Lamotte, 
and, attended by her dogs, set out to spend the day 
where she had little reason to flatter herself she 
would be a welcome guest. 

Edith had declined accompanying her, and, having 
a general invitation to Oakley House, gladly availed 
herself of her liberty to go and spend the day -syith 
her friends there. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

Although the distance between Oakley House and 
the Cottage was in reality short, it was lengthened 
to a considerable space by the beautiful diversity of 
the ground which intervened, and to which the walks 
and drives had been judiciously adapted. Edith could 
not help contrasting in her own mind, as she walked 
along, the difference between the sylvan graces of an 
English home scene, such as this, and the more pic- 
turesque beauties of her own Highland domain. At 
the dear recollection of Glenroy her heart flew back 
to the loved haunts of its early days ; and the thoughts 
of the present were all suspended while again she lived 
over the past. The gay visions of her childhood rose 
to view ; but they who had formed her felicity then — 
where were they now 1 Ronald, Norman, Reginald ! 
For each and all of them how many were the bitter 
tears she had shed ! and what had she reaped from 
these fair blossoms of life's morning 1 Alas ! naught 
but regret, sorrow, and disapi^ointment ! 

From contemplations such as these she Avas roused 
by coming suddenly in contact with Admiral Conway, 
as he advanced from an adjacent walk, leaning on the 



DESTINY. 271 

arm of a gentleman, with whom he appeared to be in 
earnest conversation. Conscious that the traces of 
her emotion must be visible on her countenance, Edith 
scarcely ventured to raise her eyes, still swimming in 
tears, and having exchanged salutations would have 
passed on. But this the Admiral would not j)ermit. 

" Come, this is a fortunate encounter," cried he ; 
" Lady Ai-abella has half quarrelled with me this 
morning for depriving her of this gallant convoy," 
pointing to his friend, " with whom she had intended 
to figure off to the Cottage; but I shall make my 
peace handsomely if I return with such a fair prize. 
Miss Malcolm, allow me to introduce Mr. Melcombe." 

Edith looked up in amazement at the mention of 
this name, and beheld a young man of noble mien 
and features, but so pale, and with such visible emotion 
on his countenance, that she could scarcely refrain 
from uttering an exclamation of alarm. But the next 
moment she smiled, to think this must be the un- 
known friend of Mrs. Macauley, and she at once felt 
she had wronged him by her suspicions. All this was 
the conviction of a moment, Avhile the Admiral went 
on, — 

"The similarity of your names is so great that I 
know not how we are to distinguish them in England, 
where we don't give the vowels such fair play as you 
do in Scotland. You must teach me the true pro- 
nunciation of your name. Miss Malcolm, that I may 
not offend its Celtic antiquity b}' confounding it with 
our Saxon appellatives." 



272 DESTINY. 

" England has rid me of some of my Celtic pre- 
judices," said Edith, "and has taught me what I cer- 
tainly might have known before— that there is nothing 
in a name beyond the association of ideas we connect 

with it." 

" And the associations," replied he, " are rather in 
favour of your name, distinguished as it has been in 
ancient times, as well as in modern days. I am there- 
fore glad that England can lay claim to— to the pat- 
ronymic of my gallant friend here. Melcombe, what 
is the matter? are you ill?" 

The question brought back more than the glow of 
health to Mr. Melcombe's face, as he uttered hastily, 

"Yes — quite — but " 

"But you turn pale at the thoughts of hearing 
your panegjTic proclaimed in a fair lady's ear 1 Well, 
depend upon it the deeds of Captain Melcombe would 
have shone ten thousand times brighter in her eyes 
and sounded a thousand times sweeter in her ears had 
they been achieved by a Captain Mocome or Mak-kum 
— which is it?" 

"Neither," said Edith, smiling; "and you must 
not flatter yourself you will be able to pronounce a 
Highland name until you have first breathed our 
mountain air." 

" Well, I hope to do that some day before I die ; 
and that I shall take my first lesson from you on the 
top of some Highland Parnassus. What say you to 
joining me in that expedition, Melcombe? I suspect 
you would find it a more arduous task to haul me up 



DESTINY. 273 

to the top of Ben Lomond than it was even to hoist 
the Greek flag over the Turkish crescent?" 

" I trust I shall one day be allowed to make the 
attempt," said ]\Ii\ Melcombe. 

There was something in the tone of the voice, full, 
clear, and melodious as it was, which made Edith 
start, and unconsciously she looked with an inquiring- 
gaze at the speaker. Again the colour mounted 
almost to his brow as he met her look. An unaccount- 
able feeling of constraint seemed to take possession 
of him ; and although the Admiral continued to talk 
away ^^^thout noticing the embarrassment of his com- 
panion, he remained nearly silent during the rest of 
the walk, 

"Now, have I not made a good cruise of it?" said 
the Admiral to his lady, as he presented Edith, who 
was received, as usual, with open arms. " What more 
could you have done had you led the expedition your- 
self, my lady?" 

" I could at least have had a little more pleasure, 
even if I did not presume to claim any of the merit 
of it," said she, smiling. 

" I was sure of that," exclaimed the Admiral, with 
a triumphant air; "I was sure there would be a but, 
or an if, or an onl}', in the case ; women never are 
contented. When you marry, JMelcombe, take my 
advice and marry a real genuine discontented woman 
at once, and then you know what you are about ; but 
we never know what to do with these laughing hyenas," 
pointing to Lady Ai-abclla, whose smile was now turned 

VOL. II. T i>. 



274 DESTINY. 

into a laugL " They are really very trying to the 
temper, for there's no knowing when they're in good 
humour or in bad ; for my part, I'm kept, as you may 
see, in a constant state of alarm." 

" 'Conscience makes cowards of us all !' Is it not 
so, Ml*. Melcombe V said Lady Arabella, gaily. 

Again Edith naturally directed her look to the 
person addi'essed, and again she was struck with the 
changing colour and embarrassed expression of his 
countenance, as, with a forced smile, he was about to 
reply, when the Admiral interposed: "I see how it 
is," said he, kindly laying his hand on his shoulder ; 
" ' the native hue of resolution is sickhed o'er with 
the pale cast of thought ' at the discussion we were 
engaged in, and the best cure for that is, to have re- 
course to our charts and compasses to settle the point; 
so, come along to the library ;" and, taking his friend's 
arm, they left the room. 

Lady Arabella was silent and thoughtful for a few 
minutes, and then said, "Pray, may I ask Avhether 
you had any previous acquaintance "uath ]\Ir. Mel- 
combe?" 

"None," replied Edith ; "at least none that I am 
aware of, though 'tis like a dream to me having seen 
him before, but when or where I cannot telL" She 
then recounted to Lady Arabella Mrs. Macauley's 
adventure, and her own (as it now appeared) ground- 
less suspicion. 

Lady Arabella laughed heartity at the idea of his 
ever having been taken for a highwayman, and said he 



DESTINY. 275 

had probably been dining with them the evening of 
Mrs. Macauley's rencontre. 

"It must have been at Glenroy we met," said 
Edith, musingly ; " and I think I recollect something 
of his air and features, though I failed to recognise 
him." 

"That is scarcely possible," said Lady Arabella; 
"his is a countenance that, once seen, could not be 
soon forgotten." 

Edith sighed to think how slight and transient 
were the impressions the most noble and gifted had 
made upon her then, when there was but one object 
on which her thoughts cared to dwell. 

" This young man," said Lady Arabella, " is, as you 
may perceive, a prodigious favourite of the Admiral's, 
and I may also add, of mine. Besides having been 
the means of saving the life of my second son at the 
risk of his own, there is something so prepossessing 
both in his countenance and manners, — something so 
open and ingenuous in his whole bearing, — that a much 
slighter recommendation than Edward's would have 
inclined us to him. Hitherto we have found him a 
very delightful companion ; but his manner is much 
changed to-day, or it may be my fancy. Were you 
struck with anything peculiar?" 

" I certainly was," replied Edith, " even at the first 
moment we met ; and now I think I recollect, when a 
child, a Lady Melcombe spending some days at Glen- 
roy, and having two sons with her. Probably this 
may be one of them." 



276 DESTINY. 

" If it were so," said Lady Arabella, " his emotion, 
poor fellow, might be easily accounted for by the 
circumstance of his mother having been afterwards 
divorced." 

"Do you know nothing of his family?" inquired 
Edith. 

"Nothing. All that is kno'wn of him is, that 
he was serving on board a merchant ship at the time 
when it was chased and attacked by pirates. I wish 
the Admiral were here to explain the affair to you, 
for I cannot do it justice; but you would have to 
listen to so much nautical detail, which (like myself) 
you could not understand, that it is perhaps as well 
to give my round, unvarnished tale ; the substance of 
which is, that this yoimg man, by his skill, bravery, 
and resolution, not only was the means of saving the 
ship, but by his boldness and heroism succeeded in 
boarding and finally capturing the pirate, laden with 
rich booty, of which a considerable share was allotted 
to him. He afterwards fitted out a Greek armed 
vessel, of which he took the command, and has per- 
formed many gallant and even brilliant exj^loits in 
the cause ; but he was so severely wounded in one 
engagement that he was obliged to retire from service. 
His health, however, seems now nearly re-established; 
but what are his future plans the Admiral and he 
only know, as I am not of the council. And now I 
have told you all I can tell of our hero and your 
highwayman." 

And that little was sufficient to make Edith already 



DESTINY. 277 

feel an interest in one to whom, even in his bright 
career, some painful or melancholy history seemed 
attached. 

When the Admiral and his young friend returned 
to the dra\ying-room, the party had been increased by 
the arrival of Lord and Lady EUersley, and one or 
two chance guests. The conversation, both before 
and during dinner, became general; and Edith re- 
marked that ]VIi\ Melcombe bore his part in it with 
an ease and spirit very different from the constrained 
air and abrupt manner which had marked his first 
introduction to her. She could not avoid observins;. 
too, that he seemed carefully to shun all occasions of 
addressing her, or even of rendering those little 
ordinary attentions which become more marked in 
the breach than the observance ; yet more than once 
she had caught his eye fixed upon her with an expres- 
sion of deep undefinable meaning, which confirmed 
her in her surmises that somehow or other she was 
associated in his mind with recollections of painful 
import. Under this impression Edith felt no less 
distant and embarrassed in her demeanour towards 
him; and when they separated in the evening, it 
seemed as if they parted still greater strangers than 
when they had met, 

Edith failed not to make Mrs. Macauley acquainted 
with this favourable introduction to her friend ; and 
received a delighted and triumphant letter in return, 
interspersed with reflections in her usual style, and 
containing various particulars of Johnnie and his 



278 DESTINY. 

family, who were now in more comfortable circum- 
stances. Johnnie had got payment of a large account ; 
and the children were all better, and Mrs. Macauley, 
junior, keeping up wonderfully ; and so there was 
great reason to be contented and happy, especially 
since this fine young man had turned out so well. 



CHAPTER XXXIIL 

Lady Elizabeth returned from her visit in great good 
humour. Lady Waldegrave, she said, had been de- 
lighted to see her — had onty delayed informing her 
of her arrival till she had got everything arranged — 
and was to have driven over for her (that very day), 
had she not been anticipated by her arrival. To sum 
up the Avhole, Florinda had presented her with some 
of what she called perfect gems of art, but which 
were, in fact, the mere rubbish of her collection. 
She was so occupied in admiring and arranging her 
baubles that Edith learnt little more from her than 
that Sir Reginald was not at Woodlands ; that Flor- 
inda had appeared rather abattu, but had promised to 
take an early opportunity of calling. 

The following day, as Edith sat alone in the draw- 
ing-room (Lady Elizabeth always sjiending the morn- 
ings in her o'wn dressing-room), a carriage drove up, 
and presently Lady Waldegrave was announced. 
Edith started up, and for a moment stood aghast at 
finding herself thus suddenly confronted with her 
heartless, treacherous rival. Lady Waldegrave, how- 
ever, did not appear to notice her agitation ; but ad- 



280 DESTINY. 

vanced with the most perfect ease, and, embracing 
her, laid her cheek to hers ; and with her sweetl}^- 
modulated voice said, " How happy I am to meet you 
again, dear Edith ! " 

Edith could only bow in acknowledgment, and 
for some moments remained in silent agitation ; but 
making an effort to regain her composure, she rang 
the bell, and desired the servant to inform Lady Eliza- 
beth of Lady Waldegrave's arrival 

"I beg pardon, Edith love," said her Ladyshij), 
" but the visit is not to mamma, but to you. I was 
so sorry, love, we could not meet in town; but it 
really is impossible to do as one wishes there. And 
by-the-bye, how much better you look than when I 
saw you in Scotland. I don't think the Scotch air 
at all favourable to beauty, you must know ; but you 
have made a Avonderful escape from Scotch-ness of 
every kind." And she sighed as she said it, while she 
surveyed her with the patronising air of one so gifted 
in herself that she could afford to bestow approval on 
another. And certainly Lady Waldegrave's charms 
had suffered no diminution, for she looked, if possible, 
more beautiful and captivating than ever. 

" I came early, and alone, because I really mshed 
to see you by yourself, and to explain many things 
which I am aware must have appeared very strange 
and unaccountable to you, and which I fear have pre- 
judiced you sadly against me." 

"Excuse me," said Edith; "but I cannot now listen 
to any explanation ; the facts spoke for themselves at 



DESTINY. 281 

tlie time ; that time has been long since passed, and 
with it all resentment, all regret, on my part." 

" Then, you do forgive whatever may have appeared 
mysterious and inexpKcable in my conduct V 

" I forgive all who ever injured me," said Edith, 
mildly, but emphaticallj'', "as I hope to be forgiven." 

"Dear Edith! you were always kind and generous. 
But, if I injured you, Heaven knows it was uninten- 
tionally ; for, indeed, I ever loved you ; and, I do as- 
sure you, it has many times made me quite wretched 
to think of the cruel estrangement that took place be- 
tween us." And her Ladyship put her handkerchief 
to her eyes. " But for that artful, designing woman, 
Madame Latour, whom mamma foolishly committed 
me to, I am sure it never would have happened. In- 
deed, had I been at all aware that you had the slight- 
est tendresse for your cousin " 

" I must again repeat, Lady Waldegrave, that this 
retrospection is worse than useless — it is painful." 

" Well, then, dearest Edith, let all be forgotten ; 
and henceforth let us be as friends and sisters." 

"All is forgiven," said Edith, with emotion. " And 
in sincere, heartfelt wishes for your happiness, I am 
your friend — more I cannot say." 

"Then we are reconciled, and you will come and 
visit me ; indeed, if you are sincere in your wishes foi 
ray happiness, you will; for I cannot possibly be 
happy while this estrangement lasts. Say, then, you 
will come to AVoodlands — do, dearest love !" 

" I cannot promise at present," said Edith. 



282 DESTINT. 

" There is one thing I can assure you of," said Lady 
Waldegrave ; " if you have any dislike, any unpleasant 
feeling, at the thoughts of meeting another person, 
you need have no scruple on that account, as he is 
absent." 

Edith's cheeks glowed as she said, "I can have 
nothing to dread in meeting the husband of Lady 
Waldegrave, But do not urge me further at present." 
At that moment a message was brought from Lady 
Elizabeth, desiring to see Lady WaldegTave in her 
dressing-room. 

" Promise me, then, that you remain here till my 
return, for I have still something to say to you that 
nearly concerns my own happiness. Surely you will 
not refuse me that's" And Edith promised to await 
her return. 

Left to herself, she began to reflect more calmly 
on the part she had to perform. That Florinda 
should have wished to be reconciled to her, and have 
even sought to exculpate herself, Avas natural; but that 
she should have sought a renewal of intimacy with so 
much earnestness was more than she had anticipated. 
Selfish, heartless, and treacherous as she had hitherto 
appeared, surely this could only proceed from a good 
motive. For in what could she, poor and dependent 
as she now was, benefit the gay, prosperous Lady 
Waldegrave 1 Perhaps she was entitled to the allow- 
ance she claimed, from the weak and evil counsellors 
who had been the guides of her youth ; and if, even 
after all, she was not happy — as she feared she was 



DESTINY. 283 

not — might she not even yet prove of service to 
her, and should she allow any wayward feelings of 
her own to stand in the way of such a duty ? The 
result of Edith's deliberations was, that, in accord- 
ance with those divine precepts by which she pro- 
fessed to be guided, she would sacrifice her feelings 
even for those who had sacrificed her happiness to 
their own. 

Lady Waldegrave's visit to her mother was not 
of long duration, ^^^len she returned, she said, "I 
have just settled with mamma that she is to come 
and dine quietly at Woodlands to-morrow, and stay 
all night; now, let me beg, dearest Edith, that you 
will gratify me by accompanying her. It will be 
charity to me in every way, for I do assure you 
nothing can be more triste than I am at present. 
You won't meet a soul, but two very charming girls, 
Lady Harriet and Lady Maria Bingly, and I shall be 
better able to open my heart to you, and to ask your 
advice. But who is this?" cried she, as she cast a 
glance towards the window. Then suddenly starting 
up, she exclaimed, " Lady Ai-abella Conway ! the very 
best of good, dull women — I must make my escape. 
But who is it that accompanies her? What a very 
fine-looking man ! I surely have seen him somewhere 
in town." Edith named Mr. Melcombe, as she also 
caught a glimpse of Lady Arabella and him approach- 
ing. " He is very handsome, and ^vill be the greatest 
acquisition to my cor23S dramatique, for you must know 
I intend to have private theatricals ; but, pray, don't 



284 DESTINY. 

breathe a sjdlable of it to mamma, or she will want 
to take a part. Now, pray, present him to me." 

The entrance of Lady Arabella and her proUgi 
here stopped all farther comment. 

After the usual inquiries had been made, and Mr. 
Melcombe had been presented to Lady Waldegrave, 
she said, with all her fascinating but artificial sweet- 
ness, "I fear we are not entitled to rank Mr. Mel- 
combe in our wild clan ; fortunately for himself, he 
belongs to a more civilised community." 

Mr. Melcombe slightly bowed, and coloured as he 
replied, " I was not aware it was more fortunate to 
have been born an English than a Scotchman, since 
both are alike Britons. But," he added, with a still 
deepening hue, " the sea is the only country to which 
I lay claim." 

" What would Sir Eeginald say to that compli- 
ment of yours, Lady Waldegrave f inquired Lady 
Arabella. 

" Sir Eeginald is already aware of my sentiments 
on the subject," said Lady Waldegrave carelessly ; 
"he knows that I prefer England to Scotland in all 
things, and only love it less than France and Italy. 
How grave Edith looks at this declaration ! Do you 
remember how shocked you were at Glenroy, when I 
ventured to whisper that I preferred myrtle to heather? 
I am sure you expected some of your dark brown 
mountains to fall upon me — did you not?" 

" I hope I did not carry my amor patrice quite so 
far," said Edith. And she could not repress a sigh as 



DESTINY. 285 

she added, " But we are naturally hurt when we hear 
the objects of our affection lightly spoken of by 
others." 

" Especially, as you know 'tis said, the uglier the 
object the more intensely and unreasonably we love 
it," said Lady Waldegrave, laughing, 

"Mere beauty certainly does not long retain its 
influence on the affections," said Mr. Melcombe. 

" So it has been said, but I very much doubt the 
truth of the assertion," replied Lady Waldegrave, with 
a slight shade of disjDleasure on her countenance ; " at 
least I have never heard any good reason why it should 
not." And she surveyed herseK in an opposite mirror 
■with an air of haughty satisfaction. 

"I am no metaphysician," said Mr. Melcombe, "so 
I cannot pretend to enter into the subtleties of the 
question ; but it is easy to conceive that the influence 
of the mind must be much more permanent than that 
of the senses." 

" Constancy," said Lady Arabella, " is one of those 
good, old-fashioned, moral virtues which is no longer 
a la mode; we rarely hear of such a thing now-a- 
days." 

" It surely does not deserve the name of incon- 
stancy when we withdraw our affections from an 
undeserving object— does it, Edith?" said Lady 
Waldegrave. 

Edith Avas shocked at what she felt was implied in 
these words, and for a minute or two was unable to 
reply. When she raised her eyes she encountered 



286 DESTINY. 

those of Mr. ]\Ielcombe fixed upon her with an expres- 
sion of the deepest interest. But the serenity of her 
countenance returned, and she replied, "Everjrthing 
must depend upon circumstances ; in some cases it 
must be a duty to renounce a misplaced attachment 
— in others, to adhere to it." 

" I am not such a casuist as you," said Lady Walde- 
grave carelessly, "for I really cannot perceive the 
difference ; but how in the Avorld has a passing remark 
on the respective beauties of heath and mjTtle turned 
into a lackadaisical discussion on the duties of con- 
stancy' 1 I really must have something to sweeten 
my imagination after it. Pray, jMr. Melcombe, have 
the goodness to fetch me a bit of something very fra- 
grant from the conservatory." 

"You could scarcely find one worse qualified to 
execute your commands," said he ; "for my botanical 
lore is almost confined to sea-weed. I am so utterly 
ignorant, I fear I may commit some unpardonable 
solecism in good taste, if not in good breeding, by my 
selection."' 

""Well, to render your ofi'ence less glaring," said 
Lady Arabella, " you shall bring something for each 
and all of us." 

"WTiat! and so run the risk of ofi"ending thi'ee 
ladies instead of one 1 And am I to have no reward 
if I should succeed in pleasing all or any of youl" 

"Air. Melcombe is the very last person from whom 
I should have expected mercenary stipulations of any 
sort," said Lady Arabella ; " but it proves the old and 



DESTINY. 287 

homely saying to be a true one, that every man has 
his price. May I ask what yours is upon the present 
occasion 1" 

"My reward shall be discretionary," said he, with 
a smile, "and anything given with goodwill will be 
acceptable:" and he stepped into the conservatory. 

" That is rather an odd person," said Lady Walde- 
grave ; " his manner, though somewhat brusque, is 
piqiiant, and he certainly is very handsome, and I 
must say distinguished looking. My maid said to 
me yesterday she was sure my Ladyship would approve 
of my new groom of the chambers, for that he had 
Vair distingue ; after that I cannot think of bestowing 
it upon Mr. Melcombe." 

In a few minutes he returned with a handful of 
flowers. 

"I A\ash I were as versed in their various significa- 
tions as Ophelia was, that I might make my offerings 
appropriate. There is geranium for j-our Ladyship," 
said he to Lady Arabella ; " but of what it is emble- 
matic I must declare myself ignorant." 

' ' genteel geranium, 

"With a leaf for all that comes," 

said she, as she plucked one and gave it to him ; " that, 
and a thank you, is all I can bestow." 

]\Ir. Melcombe then presented some shps of myrtle 
to Lady Waldegrave, and said, " As your Ladyship has 
declared your preference, I have been spared a choice." 
And without waiting for an acknowledgment he 
turned to Edith, and offered her two sprigs of heath. 



288 DESTINY. 

" I wish they had been Highland heather instead of 
foreign heath," said he, "for then you would have 
prized them more." 

"But with all my national prejudice, I could not 
have admu'ed them so much," said she, as she took the 
brilliant exotics. 

" But you would perhaps have rewarded me better," 
said he, forcing a laugh to hide his embarrassment. 

" "What a reproach for my churlishness," said Edith, 
as she returned him one of the sprigs, but she coloured 
at the pleasure that beamed in his eyes as he received 
the trifling gift. Lady Waldegrave never could en- 
dure that another should engage attention while she 
was present. Unaccustomed to meet with neglect, on 
the present occasion she mistook it for shyness ; and 
self-love whispered to her that the handsome, un- 
known stranger was only dazzled by her charms and 
distinction into distance and reserve. She therefore, 
in her sweetest and most winning manner, called him 
to her on some frivolous pretext, and contrived to de- 
tain him in exclusive conversation till Lady Arabella 
rose to take leave. She then said, " I flatter myself. 
Lady Ai'abella, we shall meet very often while we are 
such near neighbours ; and that I shall also have the 
pleasure of seeing Admiral Conway and Mr. Melcombe 
at Woodlands." 

Mr. Melcombe acknowledged the compliment by a 
bow, and the visitors severally departed. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

It was not -without some violence to her feelings that 
.Edith went to testify her reconciliation with Lady 
Waldegrave, by visiting her in her o^vn house ; but 
she repressed these indications of feelings not yet 
wholly subdued, and calmly, meekly resigned herself 
to the duty required. If she had admired Woodlands 
on a first survey, it appeared to still greater advantage 
now, when nature and art seemed to have been taxed 
to their utmost to give the last finish to its charms ; 
and all around breathed only of the refinement of 
luxury and pleasure. To those who could believe in 
the happiness caused by external circumstances, tliis 
would have seemed a very paradise. 

Lady Waldegi'ave received her guests in the most 
kind, caressing manner ; and having provided a lively 
old French marquis as an escort for Lady Elizabeth, 
she consigned them to the care of each other; and 
thus happily rid of her, she dii-ected her whole atten- 
tion to Edith, whom she introduced to her friends. 
Ladies Harriet and Maria Bingly, as her dear and 
only sister; and she brought her child to kiss and 
welcome his pretty aunt to Woodlands. Then she 
must show Edith everything herself, and have her 

VOL. II. U D. 



290 DESTINY. 

opinion about many things ; and Edith was led from 
dramng-room to drawing-room, and from boudoirs to 
conservatories and aviaries ; and there was so much 
to look at, and praise and admire, that it was im- 
possible to enjoy. There were pictures and marbles, 
and china and cabinets, and tables and vases, each 
and any of which would have been a study for a day ; 
but which were yet too various and numerous to be 
duly appreciated on a first survey. Tradespeople 
were still employed in some of the rooms arranging 
the varied treasures of art, which were designed to 
form one exquisite and entire collection. 

" All this, you may suppose, has not been done for 
nothing," said Lady Waldegrave, as they ended the 
hurried and imperfect examination, and she threw 
herself on a couch in her dressing-room ; " and indeed 
I am almost frightened when I think how much it has 
cost. Then we were so cheated at first, and bought 
such rubbish at such enormous prices ; but that is the 
case with everybody at first. One must pay for a 
knowledge of the arts, as well as for knowledge of 
every kind ; and at any rate, it is surely better that 
money should be spent upon fine pictures and marbles 
than on the turf or at the gaming-table." Edith was 
hurt at this indirect attack upon her husband, and 
thought how dift'erent must be the perception even of 
taste in the material from what it was in the moral 
world, when a Avife could thus seek to excuse her own 
extravagance by proclaiming her husband's errors. 
Lady Waldegrave went on : " But the great work I 



DESTINY, 291 

have now in hand — for there is no living in the 
country without occupation — is a pretty little theatre. 
I have been remodelling — in fact I may say building ; 
it was originally a pavilion or a banqueting -room, or 
some of these stupid, senseless, antiquated things, 
which one's ancestors deformed their grounds with. 
I have had it turned into something both useful and 
ornamental; and I intend to open it on Dudley's 
birthday with a French play and ballet, in which 
you, dear Edith, will take a part. Don't say you 
won't, for you positively must. But although I have 
gone to work as economically as possible, and had 
plans and estimates, and all those sort of things, sent 
to me, yet it has grown into something expensive too ; 
not that I should grudge it at all, as it will be such a 
source of amusement to myself and friends, besides 
having given employment to poor people ; in short, it 
is a thing calculated (in my opinion) to do good. But 
in the meantime I am persecuted to death for money 
by the man who undertook the thing ; although he 
must know that of course he will be paid, yet he is 
for ever boring me with his bills." 

"But he only asks his own," said Edith; "poor 
people cannot work without wages. How are they to 
support themselves and their families ?" 

" Oh, there are a thousand ways of managing that ; 
and there is nobody so poor that cannot get credit 
somewhere." 

" But how ruinous for the poor to contract debt, if 
even they could." 



292 DESTINY. 

" As to that, it can be no worse for the poor than 
for the rich." 

"It is bad for both," said Edith; "but the poor 
are most to be pitied when their sufferings are 
occasioned hy the thoughtlessness and extravagance 
of the great." 

" Oh, certainly, it is very wrong in people not to 
pay their bills when they can do it." 

"Can do it!" exclaimed Edith; "why should 
people ever have bills that they cannot pay ? Surely 
that is robbery of the worst description." 

" Why, there are many things that people in a 
certain station must have ; and if they happen not to 
have the money just at the moment to pay them, 
where is the harm of having a bill V 

"None, if they are sure of having the money to 
discharge them; otherwise it is contracting debt." 

" Well, there is no harm in that, I hope 1 else you 
will think me very wicked ; for, to tell the truth, I 
am over head and ears in debt, and at this moment 
do not know where to get even a few guineas ! " This 
was said with affected levity, and Edith could only 
utter an exclamation of surprise and consternation. 

"The fact is," continued her Ladyship, speaking 
with great rapidity, "I have been very unfortunate. 
First of all, my fortune was not what it was said to 
be, by several thousands a year; then, when I 
married," — here she heaved a sigh — " I was quite 
ignorant of the value of money, and of course spent 
a great deal; then. Sir Reginald has never chosen 



DESTINY. 293 

to give himself any trouble in the management of 
our establishment, and I can't do it ; so we have had 
horrid people, who cheated us on all hands ; and you 
may imagine how that was, with three establishments 
to keep up — "Waldegrave Abbey, my town residence 
(both of which, by -the -bye, I greatly improved and 
entirely new furnished), and this ; besides those High- 
land places, which I am told are very expensive also. 
To complete the whole, at the time of my marriage I 
made an enormous settlement upon mamma, quite 
out of all proportion to my income ; you will scarcely 
believe that she actually draws very near three thou- 
sand a year from me ! It is much more, I do assure 
you, than I can afford, or she can have the slightest 
occasion for," 

" Surely there must be some mistake on one side 
or other," said Edith, " for Lady Elizabeth complains 
of being very much straitened in her circumstances." 

" Yes, she is always complaining," said Lady Walde- 
grave carelessly , "but I assiu-e you it is the case. 
With her jointure from the Glenroy estate, and what 
I allow her besides, she has above three thousand a 
year — a monstrous sum for her ! She certainly must 
either be saAdng money, or she is pillaged by the 
people about her in a scandalous manner. I ventured 
to hint that to her some time ago, but she was quite 
angry, so I have never entered on the subject again ; 
but if the thing was placed before her in a proper 
light (and I know no one who could do it so well 
as yourself, Edith, love), I am sure she would see 



294 DESTINY. 

the propriety of giving up at least one thousand a 
year." 

Edith was unable to articulate a word, so much 
was she struck by this extraordinary communication. 
Lady Waldegrave took no notice of her silence, but 
went on : " I should be ready to make any sacrifice 
myself consistent with what I owe to my rank and 
station, but I don't see how I ca7i do it. I might, to 
be sure, part with a few servants and horses, perhaps ; 
but that would make very little difference ; a few 
hundreds a year, more or less, is reaUy not worth 
breaking up one's establishment for." 

"But if you were to begin, it is more than probable 
Sir Reginald would follow your example." 

*' But it is not Anth me the retrenchment ought to 
begin." 

"Whether or not, you might at least make trial 
of it." 

"And, in other words, make myseK wretched 
and uncomfortable ; and give up my own innocent 
gratifications that he may have more money to 
squander in all sorts of horrid ways ; besides, I am 
certain I only spend what I have a right to." 

"And what does Sir Reginald sayl" inquired 
Edith fearfully. 

" Oh, as to Sir Reginald," replied Lady Waldegrave 
contemptuously, "he is the last person I should 
tliink of consulting; the man who spends his life 
between Crockford's and Newmarket, you may guess, 
is no veiy wise counsellor, and is not hkely to extri- 



DESTINY. 295 

cate me from my difficulties. But what is the matter 1 
are you ill ■? " 

" Oh, Florinda, how shocked I am at all you tell 
me ! " exclaimed Edith, bursting into tears, " How 
dreadful to be livino; in such a state ! wronscin^c the 
poor, decei^^ng and ruining your husband ! Seeking 
to deprive your mother of what is due to her — neglect- 
ful of Avhat God requires of you. Ah, Florinda ! how 
can you barter your happiness and the happiness of 
others for such toys as these 1 " 

" Really, Edith, you talk in a most extraordinary 
manner ! " said Lady Waldegrave, in great displeasure. 
" Any one who heard you would suppose I had com- 
mitted every crime under the sun ! Instead of which, 
the sole amount of my wickedness consists simply in 
being rather in want of a little money, that's all ; and 
as for Sir Eeginald, he must know how I am teased 
for money ; for we have several times been threatened 
with an execution in the house by some of those 
horrid people." 

" Oh, Florinda ! forgive me, if I have spoken too 
severely," said Edith, in deep emotion; "but " 

" Oh, I am very forgi\-ing," said Lady Waldegrave 
coldly, "and very charitable too, for I really don't 
believe you meant the cruel things you said ; and if 
they had been addressed to Sir Reginald, they would 
have been very apphcable ; the sums he has lost at 
play are enormous; I know that from the best 
authority ; and also that at the last Newmarket 
Meeting he threw away upwards of thirty thousand 



296 DESTINY, 

pounds upon foolish bets on a favourite horse i so I 
have little to reproach myself with in comparison of 
that ! Indeed, I only do as the rest of the world 
does ; but I am sure I have bored you to death with 
my annoyances, so come let us return to the drawing- 
room, and do try what you can do for me with 
mamma; I fear she will be quite angry at me for 
having monopohsed you so long — she is so fond of 
you ! I do think you have more to say with her, 
and could, if you chose, manage her better than any- 
body in the world; but there is the dressing-bell — 
will you have one of my maids to assist you? But 
you need not be very recherchS in your toilette, as I 
expect no company, and indeed I am not in spirits 
for company at present. Fanchon, show JVIiss Mal- 
colm to her ajiartment." 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

When Lady Waldegrave joined the party, the bril- 
Hancy of her appearance but little accorded with the 
account of her pecuniary difficulties ; and even Lady 
EKzabeth exclaimed, somewhat spitefully, "Why, 
Florinda, you dress in your country house as though 
you held a court ! " 

"You must scold Mademoiselle Fanchon then, 
mamma," said Lady Waldegrave carelessly, "as I 
submitted myself entirely to her discretion to-day. 
Dress, I assure you, was least in my thoughts." 

In spite of the flattering introduction of Edith to 
the Ladies Bingly, they seemed to regard even the 
dear and only sister of Lady Waldegrave Avitli some- 
what of suspicious distance ; for they were mere 
elegant automatons, fearful of committing themselves 
by anything approaching to familiarity with one who 
dressed indifi"erently, according to their estimation, 

and who had never been at D House, and who, 

of course, had none of the current phrases of the day. 
Edith Avas too meek and gentle to resent the sort of 
repressed ill -breeding (how different from native 
politeness !) of such manners ; she felt only pity for 
those whose minds had been thus cramped and 



298 DESTINY. 

fettered by the bondage of their own little sphere, 
falsely called the great world. 

The same magnificence pervaded every part of the 
establishment; everything was perfect in its style, 
and yet how Httle enjoyment there seemed in the 
midst of it all ! Lady Waldegrave wore an air of 
languor and discontent ; the two ladies lacked heaiix, 
and were dull and vapid ; Edith was depressed by 
Avhat she had heard, as contrasted with what she saAv; 
and the only two who seemed to enter into the 
pleasures of the table were Lady Elizabeth and the 
old. Marquis Dubocage, who ate like i^igeons, and 
chatted like magpies. 

Dinner was over, and the dessert had been placed 
on the table, when a carriage was heard driving 
round to the entrance; the dogs barked — the bell 
rang — voices were heard in the hall. 

""\A1io is that?" inquired Lady Waldegrave. 

"Sir Reginald and ]\Ir. Harris, my Lady," was the 
reply. 

" Sir Reginald ! " exclaimed she, with more of sur- 
prise than pleasure ; " and that odious Mr. Han-is ! 
Have they dined 1 " 

" Sir Reginald has ordered dinner in the library, 
my Lady." 

Lady Waldegrave coloured, but said, "We are 
obliged to him, at least, for sparing us a renewal 
of even Fricourt's ambrosial cates, Avhich certainly 
would not be improved by a seasoning of Newmarket 
dust, especially as it never is gold dust." 



DESTINY. 299 

To Editn the sensation was strange and painful ; 
but a few steps were between her and Eeginakl — 
Reginald, once the beloved, the betrothed of her 
heart, the arbiter of her destiny. Eeginald, the 
faithless, the forsworn, the husband of another ! 
And all the sad and solemn scenes that had passed 
between them rose to her view. She shuddered, and 
for a moment felt almost overpoAvered by the conflict 
of long dormant feelings, suddenly awoke to painful 
consciousness. 

"How I dislike these abrupt arrivals," said Lady 
Elizabeth, in an ill-natured tone; "they always do 
fl^urry one's nerves. I see it has the same eflfect upon 
you, my dear," to Edith. 

" If there is to be anything of a scene," said Lady 
Waldegrave sarcastically, " we had best return to the 
drawing-room ; we shall at least have the benefit of 
eau-de-Cologne and couches there." 

Edith felt the taunt, and the colour returned to her 
cheeks with a deepened glow. At that moment the 
Httle boy entered, and came running up to his mamma. 

"Do you know, mamma, that papa is come?" 

" Yes, love ; have you seen him 1 " 

"Yes, mamma ; but I don't love him to-day." 

" Why so, my darling 1" 

"Because he bade me go away, and not tease 
him." 

"What a kind good papa you have got, Dudley," 
said her Ladyship ; " is he not 1" 

"He is very good sometimes; for you know, 



300 DESTINY. 

mamma, he sent me such a pretty httle phaeton from 
town, and two ponies so small !" and he clasped his 
hands in admiration. 

" Don't lean upon me so, Dudley," cried her Lady- 
ship, in a tone of displeasure, " and see how you have 
dropped your grapes ! How tiresome children are ! 
Now, go, my love, 'tis very late — time you were in 
bed. We are going to have coffee. Good night, my 
sweetest ;" and with a kiss the child was dismissed, 
as the ladies and their old beau returned to the draw- 
ing-room. The evening passed hea\dly along. Lady 
Elizabeth and her Marquis played at karte. Lady 
Waldegrave and her friends played and sang, and 
talked of operas, and turned over new music, and 
Edith sat apart trying to read, but unable to turn her 
thoughts from the strange anomalous scenes that 
surrounded her. To the senses all was hght and 
beauty and fragrance and melody ; but oh, the evil 
passions, the moral degradation, which lay hid beneath 
the specious show ! Her train of reflections was 
suddenly broken by the entrance of Sir Reginald and 
his friend. He accosted Lady Waldegrave with a care- 
less "How do you do?" as he merely touched her 
hand, and bowed slightly to the rest of the company 
without observing Edith, whose head rested on her 
hand as she still bent over her book. 

"Pretty well," replied Lady Waldegrave, with 
a disdainful coolness. " Perhaps I ought to rise, 
and make my best curtsy for the kind inquiry, tard}- 
as it is." 



DESTINY. 301 

Sir Eeginald turned on his heel, and as he did so 
his eye fell on Edith. He started, and for a moment 
stood transfixed to the spot, then, darting forward, he 
exclaimed, " Edith ! " and seizing her hand, he held it 
in both of his, and gazed on her with looks exiDressive 
of surprise and dehght. But far different feelings 
were Edith's. Surprised indeed she was; but still 
more was she shocked at beholding the ravages a few 
short years had wrought on the person of Sir Eeginald. 
How different from the Eeginald she had once fondly 
loved ! Lit up as his countenance was -with the ex- 
pression of pleasure, its habitual cast had stamped its 
character on every feature. All were sharpened and 
contracted as by strong excitement and violent 
passions j and his flushed cheek, haggard eyes, and 
reckless air, told a tale from which Edith turned 
shuddering away. But Sii" Eeginald had evidently 
drunk enough of champagne to make him either in- 
sensible of, or indifferent to, the nicer shades of 
feeling. He seated himself by her, and continued to 
gaze upon her with looks of admiration. 

" How glad I am to see you, Edith," said he, taking 
her hand, " and to see you here ! I hadn't an idea 
you were even in England ! " 

Edith answered as calmly and briefly as she could 
that she had been residing for some time with her 
maternal aunt. 

" But you have left her now, I hope, and are come 
to us ?" 

"I at present reside with Lady Elizabeth." 



302 DESTINY. 

"With Lady Elizabeth!" repeated Reginald con- 
temptuously ; " that is no home for you, Edith. You 
must remain with us; you must indeed. But you 
look well and happy," said he, gazing intently upon 
her. " You have grown handsomer than ever you 
were. I should scarcely have known you ! " 

There was something in the manner as well as in 
the matter which oflfended Edith's feehngs. True, 
there was still a grace and refinement in the mien and 
air, remote from the coarse familiarity of vulgar life 
and manners. But how much of moral deformity may 
be veiled beneath the mask of worldly refinement ! 
Edith would have risen to join the rest of the party, 
but Sir Reginald would not permit her. 

"Why should you wish to leave me?" he said, 
again seizing her hand. "Surely, after so long a 
separation, cousins might have something to say to 
each other. It was not so we used to meet ! Ah, 
Edith ! surely you have not quite lost all interest in 
rael" He spoke with a kind of melancholy earnest- 
ness that affected Edith, and she looked upon him 
more in sorrow than in anger. 

"No," said she, "indeed I have not. I feel sin- 
cerely interested in all that concerns Lady Waldegrave 
and your little boy." 

Sir Reginald sighed. " You were always an angel, 

Edith; and I . Now don't go. I will talk to 

you of anything — of my boy. You say you take an 
interest in him ! There is something, then, we are 
both interested in — perhaps the only thing." 



DESTINY. 303 

At that moment Lady Waldegrave called, in a 
sarcastic tone, while she touched the harp, " As your 
success on the tiu'f is always a matter of certainty, 
Sir Eeginald, I am prepared to celebrate it with an 
lo Pcean, as soon as you think proper to announce 
your victories ; or, perhaps, Miss Malcolm is to come 
forward as chorus and proclaim your triumphs'?" 

Sir Eeginald's brow contracted, and his eyes 
flashed fire at this insulting speech. " Miss Malcolm 
knows enough of my history to know it is one which 
affords no matter of exultation," he said bitterly. 

Edith felt the taunt, and it raised a momentary 
glow on her cheek ; but she only answered it by look- 
ing calmly at Lady Waldegrave, whose eyes sank 
beneath the mild rebuke ; and, colouring with shame 
and resentment, she swept her fingers across the harp, 
and, calling to Lady Harriet to join her, they com- 
menced. 

Edith rose, and drew close to the table where Lad}- 
Elizabeth sat. Sir Eeginald, after standing for a few 
minutes with his arms folded, and his eyes fixed upon 
her, suddenly started from his reverie. "Come, 
Harris," he said, "let us have a game at billiards;" 
and quitting the apartment, JVIi-. Harris, who was 
lounging over a newspaper, rose and followed. 

Edith was glad Avhen the evening was ended, and 
only wished her visit was also brought to a termina- 
tion. Lady Waldegrave and she parted for the night 
with mutual coldness and constraint. 



CHAPTER XXXVI 

When the party met at a late breakfast the following 
morning, Sir Eeginald's bro^y wore a still deeper 
gloom, and Lady Waldegrave seemed inclined to be 
no less peevish and sarcastic than on the pi-eceding 
evening. The two ladies maintained their chilling 
reserve, and though Mr. Harris talked, his conversa- 
tion was addressed to Sir Reginald, and related solely 
to the turf. 

Edith felt the painfulness of her situation, for 
although Sir Reginald's manner was less envpresse than 
it had been at tlieir fii'st meeting, yet he still singled 
her out as the only person to whom he paid the 
slightest attention. Such w^as the state of the party, 
Avhen a servant entered to say that a ]V£i\ and Mrs. 
M'Dow begged leave to wait upon Sir Reginald and 
Lady Waldegrave. Sir Reginald repeated the name 
in surprise, and he looked at Edith as for an explana- 
tion, but she could give none. 

" Some of Sir Reginald's Highland friends," said 
Lady Waldegrave ; "I can have no acquaintance with 
them ; you had therefore better receive your own 
guests in another room." 



DESTINY. 305 

" Any one who comes from Glenroy is -welcome," 
said Sir Reginald, as if stung to contradict even his 
own feelings ; "show Mr. and Mrs. M'Dow in." 

Straightway, preceded by the gToom of the 
chambers, entered Mr. and Mrs. M'Dow, leading 
between them their eldest born, a great uncouth- 
looking child. Mr. M'Dow had evidently been in the 
hands of a London tailor, but to little purpose, for not 
all the leather and prunella of London could remodel 
Ml". M'Dow. No cost seemed to have been spared in 
the attiring of his lady, who was decked out in a most 
brilliant pelisse and bonnet in the extreme of the 
fashion. Miss M'Dow was arrayed in a similar costume, 
and, like her mother, was standing out with finery. 

"How do you do, Mr. M'Dow f' said Sir Reginald, 
rising and shaking hands Avith him heartily, as if 
determined to carry off matters boldly. "Mrs. M'Dow, 
Lady Waldegrave," waving his hand ; "pray sit do^vn. 
You are in very good time for breakfast." 

" You are extremely obliging, Sir Reginald," said 
Mr. M'Dow; "in fact this is our second meal, for we 
breakfasted before we set out. However, I daresay 
we are all pretty well appetised again. But is it pos- 
sible I see ]\Iiss ]\Ialcolra here ?" for the first time per- 
ceiving Edith. "I'm amazed and delighted to see 
you here," and stalking up to her he shook her vehe- 
mently by the hand ; " this is just as it should be ! 
and how amazingly well you look I " 

" Here is a chair for you, Mr. M'Dow," called Sir 
Reginald, pointing to one next himself. 

VOL. II. X D. 



306 DESTINY. 

"You are extremely polite, Sir Eeginakl." Then 
addressing Lady Waldegrave, "I need scarcely ask 
how your Ladyship has been since I had the honour 
of seeing you at Glenroy?" A slight haughty bend 
of the head was the only answer vouchsafed, and, 
nothing daunted, Mr. jNI'Dow resumed, in a still more 
insinuating manner, "I hope we have not taken too 
great a freedom in bringing our little Missy with us, 
but she can behave herself like a lady when she 
chooses, ]\Ii's. M'Dow, I think you had better take off 
her bonnet and pelisse ; she'll be cooler without them." 

Here Miss M'Dow was disencumbered of her 
pelisse and bonnet, and exhibited a coarse, blubber- 
lipped, sun-burnt \dsage, with staring sea-green eyes, 
a quantity of rough sandy hair, and mulatto neck, 
with merely a rim of white above the shoulders. 

" I think she would be better wanting her gloves 
too," said Mr. M'Dow, anxious to display as much as 
possible of the beauties of his offspring. The gloves 
were now taken off, and a pair of thick mulberry 
paws set at liberty. 

"Now you must not touch anything, Mysie," 
whispered ]\Irs. M'Dow, as Mysie prepared to lay 
hands on a Sevre cup and saucer. 

"You had better send her over to me," said Mr. 
M'Dow, "and I'll keep her in order." 

"She'll be very good with me, Mr. M'Dow," 
replied the lady, in a brisk provincial accent, and ■svith 
a strong arm hauling up Miss Mysie, planted her upon 
her knee. She then poured out tea from lier own cup 



DESTINY. 307 

for her, which was sucked in with an avidity that 
threatened to carry the saucer along with it. 

"She is very dry !" said ]\Irs. M'Dow, in a manner 
as if she thought it of importance. 

" She seems really very thirsty, poor wifey," said 
Mr. M'Dow, in a similar tone ; "but the day is uncom- 
monly warm, and we met a great deal of dust on the 
road ; it was an amazing rehef to enter your policy. 
This is a most beautiful place of yours, Sir Eeginald, 
and a most elegant and shooperb house ! You'll think 
little of Glenroy after tins'?" 

"A mere cit's box," said Sir Eeginald contemptu- 
ously. 

" A ceeis box. Sir Eeginald ! it's a perfect palace ; 
I don't know that ever I say anything so shooperb ! 
and there's so much taste in the grounds, and every- 
thing in such high order. Mrs. M'Dow was prodi- 
giously struck wath the grandeur of the flowers, and I 
was amazingly diverted \n.\h our little Missy's remark : 
' Fawther,' says she, ' this is a far finer gaarden than 
yours, but there's no berry-bushes in't' — hoch, hoch, 
ho ! Altogether it's really a perfect paradise ! " 

Edith's native politeness prevailed over her feel 
ings, and seeing ]\Irs. M'Dow had no chance of being 
noticed by the other ladies present, she addressed a 
few Avords to her, and received such answers as might 
be expected from a commonplace, vulgar Avouian, full 
of the egotism of her own concerns. 

"I hope we arc to be favoured with a sight of 
your young folks, Sir Eeginald," said Mr. M'Dow. 



308 DESTINY. 

" I have ouly one spoilt little fellow," replied he, 
"but you shall see him." And he ordered one of 
the servants to fetch him. 

" This is his walking hour," said Lady Waldegrave, 
with a look of displeasure. 

"Only one !" exclaimed Mr. M'Dow; "here am I 
with no less than four — two girls and two boys. But 
here comes your young gentleman. Come away, sir," 
in his most conciliating tone ; "will you shake hands 
with, me 1" But the child looked doubtfully at him. 
" Then will you go and speak to that lady 1" pointing 
to Mrs. M'Dow. 

"No; mamma does not choose me to speak to 
people I don't know." 

" Ay ! but would you not like to kiss that pretty 
little missy there 1" 

" Oh no, not at all ; mamma does not allow me to 
kiss anybody, and I would not kiss her, she is so 
ugly." 

Mr. and Mrs. M'Dow both turned very red at this 
insult to the charms of their daughter, while Lady 
Waldegrave, with a smile, called, " You may now go 
to your walk, love; you have done very well." 

But Sir Reginald, catching him up in his arms, 
said, with affected anger, " You are a saucy little dog, 
and I must send you to Scotland to make a Highland 
laird of you." 

Lady Waldegrave shuddered, and in a low voice 
exclaimed, " Heaven forbid ! " 

But I won't be a Scotch laird," replied the young 



DESTINY. 309 

master; "for my mamma says I am to be a British 
Peer, and that is much better." 

"Ay!" exclaimed Mr. M'Dow, "you are really 
very nice ; you'll not be a good Highland laird, and 
you'll not shake hands with me, and you'll not speak 
to my wife, and you'll not kiss my daughter ! Will 
you tell me your name, then?" 

"Oh yes; papa calls me Eeginald, mamma calls 
me Dudley; but my real name is Eeginald Dudley 
Waldegrave Malcolm." 

" That's a very grand name ! I have a little 
boy of my own, who has a good long name ; but it's 
nothing like yours." 

"What is your little boy called?" inquired Master 
Reginald Dudley. 

"Donald M'Craw M'Dow is his name." 

"And is she called Donald M'Craw, too?" demanded 
Master Dudley, pointing to Miss M'Dow, as she 
stood gazing at him in vulgar amazement, her clumsy 
shapeless figure and broad plebeian face contrasting 
themselves with the elegant graceful form and high 
dehcate features of the young patrician. 

" No, no — Donald's not a lady's name. She's 
called Marjory Muckle M'Dow. But if you beat my 
boy in a name, I think he would have the best of it 
in a fight ; he would make two of you, I can tell you. 
Don't you think so, my dear?" to his lady, 

" Oh yes ; our Donald's much stouter ; I think 
Sandy is more of his make. But Patsy's the smallest 
of our children." 



310 DESTINY. 

" She's very sjiirity, though ! " said Mr, M'Dow in 
a tone of admiration. 

"Yes, yes — she'll keep her oAvn," responded his 
lady. "Does not Patsy sometimes get the better of 
Donald and you, Mysie V 

Here Miss M'Dow, who had been playing with 
one of the beautiful Shre plates, let it fall, and it was 
broken to pieces. 

"I hope she hasn't cut herself?" cried Mr. M'Dow 
in a voice of tender alarm. 

Lady Waldegrave hastily rose, and the rest of the 
ladies were following her example, when Mr. M'Dow 
said, "I'm extremely anxious. Miss Malcolm, if it's 
not asking too great a favour, that you would remain 
a httle with Mrs. M'Dow and me, while I communicate 
with Sir Keginald on the business that has brought me 
up at this time. It will soon be no secret, so it's just 
as well to speak out at once ; and I always like to 
have the ladies on my side." 

"But even if I were to be on your side, Mr. M'Dow, 
I am very sure I can be of no service to you," said 
Edith, moving away, while Mrs. M'Dow sat like a 
rock. 

" At all events, I would take it extremely kind if 
you do me the favour to hear me tell my own story, 
as there will no doubt be many false statements made 
on the occasion ; indeed, it has excited a great deal 
of animadversion already, I understand." 

" Many people think I have influenced Mr. M'Dow," 
said Mrs. M'Dow, with great warmth and importance 



DESTINY. 311 

of manner. " But I am sure that was not the case, 
for, with Mr. M'Dow's abilities, he needs nobody to 
direct him, I am sure." This was uttered in the 
peremptory manner of one who was well accustomed 
to lay down the law at home. 

"Yes — yes; Mrs. M'Dow has come in for her 
share of what has been going; but, luckily, she's 
above minding those sort of clashes. No doubt some 
of them have found their way to London by this 
time?" 

"I am quite ignorant to what you allude, Mr. 
M'Dow," said Sir Eeginald, noAv heartily sick of his 
guests. "If it is any matter of business, I beg you 
will apply to my law -agents — they understand these 
things much better than I do. Besides, I am sorry a 
particular engagement calls me to town this morning." 
Mr. M'Dow looked very blank at this information. 

" So, you're going up to London this forenoon 1 I 
understood you had been settled here for the summer. 
But, however, I shall not detain you many minutes, 
Sir Reginald ; a very few words will let you into the 
whole mystery." Then taking a long pinch of snuff 
and clearing his throat, he began, — 

"As you. Sir Eeginald and Miss Malcolm, have 
both had opportunities of judging for yourselves of 
my ministry, I shall not detain you by offering any 
exjilanatiou of my views on that head. All I shall 
say is this : that I have acted throughout most con- 
scientiouslj^, and no man can do more." 

Mr. M'Dow paused, as if expecting a burst of 



312 DESTINY. 

applause to follow, but Sir Reginald was chafing with 
impatience ; and Edith could only sigh to hear a man 
boast of his conscience while it was yet in such a 
darkened state. 

"It would be well if everybody's conscience was 
like yours, Mr, M'Dow," said his lady warmly. 

" It would be well if every one's conscience were 
enlightened by the Word of God," said Edith mildly. 

"I am sure that's true !" said Mrs. M'Dow, taking 
the remark as a compliment. 

" I can only impute the ill-will with which I have 
been visited as proceeding almost entirely from igno- 
rance," said Mr. M'Dow, with affected meekness. 

"There's more than that, Mr. M'Dow," said his 
lady, with a toss of her head. 

" Well, well, my dear," said Mr. M'Dow, in a by- 
way of soothing manner, " whatever it is, I bear them 
no ill-will, I'm sure." Sir Reginald here pulled out 
his watch. " But not to detain you, Sir Reginald, I 
shall come to the point at once. The short and the 
long of the matter is this : I find my situation by no 
means so pleasant as it ought to be. The neighbour- 
hood is sadly fallen off"; since the death of my re- 
spected friend Glcuroy it has never been the same 
place to me. — (Mrs. M'Dow, will you take Missy's 
hands out of the jeellie f) — Then a mischievous spirit 
has got in amongst the people ; they are not satisfied 
with my ministry ; they cry out that I don't preach 
the gospel, and a great deal of nonsense of that kind ; 
insomuch that the very last time I preached there 



DESTINY. 313 

were just seven people in the church, besides my own 
family and the precentor ! " 

" It's very true," said Mrs. M'Dow, with inflamed 
cheeks ; " but a great deal of the mischief is owing to 
Mrs. M'Taig ; for JVIiss M'Tavish told me " 

" Whisht — whisht, Colly, my dear ; it's not worth 
our Avhile to mind what she said; the woman's a 
perfect enthusiast; but indeed they are all tarred 
with the same stick. — (Oh, my lamb, you mustn't drink 
out of the cream jug.) — However, as I was saying, 
Sir Reginald, it's not pleasant for a minister to be on 
such terms with his people, especially situated as we 
are at such a distance from genteel society ; and I feel 
that even more upon Mrs. M'Dow's account than my 
own, for she has always been used to a good deal of 
genteel company; and it's what she had a title to 
expect when she married me ; for, like yourself, Sir 
Reginald, I was so fortunate as to be honoured by 
being the choice of a lady with a pretty considerable 
independence of her own, and of course she is entitled 
to more at my hands than if she had brought nothing 
along with her." 

Sir Reginald here rose, and rang the bell violently. 
"Why is my cai'riage not ready?" 

"I don't know, sir." 

" Then inquire, and desire it to be l^rought 
immediately." 

" Well, Sir Reginald, since you're in a hurry I'll 
not detain you many minutes. You understand how 
matters ai'c situated between me and my people, 



314 DESTINY. 

and you may conceive how little satisfaction I can 
consequently have in the exercise of my ministry- 
that, together with the consideration due to Mrs. 
M'Dow and my family, have made me entertain 
serious thoughts of throwing up my situation alto- 
gether." 

" That's just what they want ! I know Mrs. 
M'Taig said to Mrs. M'Kaig, before Miss M'Tavish, 
that she hoped to skail the dooket yet — for that's 
what they call the manse — that set!" and Mrs. 
M'Dow waxed hotter and hotter. 

" Oh, she's a vulgar, ill-tongued woman, my dear, 
and we should be above minding her," said Mr. 
M'Dow, with much majesty. " Now, as I was stat- 
ing to you. Sir Reginald — my dear, will you take care 
that Mysie does no mischief," as the coarse paws were 
seen perambulating over the table as far as the thick 
blue arms would extend — " my wish is to withdraw 
myself from my present situation altogether. (Our 
little Missy's really taking a good look of you. Sir 
Reginald. Will you go to that gentleman's knee, my 
lambiel Oh, you're for jx^jotc's. Then come away.) 
At the same time, although the stipend is small, it is 
always something, and I should not like to throw it 
up unless I had something else secured to me. Now, 
I have lately learnt that there is a prospect of two 
professorships becoming vacant at no very remote 
period, either of which would suit me extremely well, 
and I think I'm fully qualified to discharge the duties 
of either: the one is the Humanity Class, the other is 



DESTINY. 315 

that of Ehetoric and Belles Lettres. If you would 
favour me with your interest on the occasion, I have 
little doubt but that, together with my testimonials 
and recommendations from other quarters, would 
ensure my appointment to one or other of these 
chairs." 

"And I thought you was to speak about being 
made chaplain to the king too, Mr. M'Dow," said his 
lady briskly. 

" Why, that's not so material a point at present, 
as I don't find there's any immediate prospect of a 
vacancy there. At the same time, I should be very 
well pleased that you could also have that in view, 
Sir Eeginald." 

" Sir, you have nothing to expect from my interest," 
said Sir Reginald sternly; and, rising as he spoke, 
while the servant announced the carriage, "I must 
wish you good morning." Then with a slight bow he 
quitted the room, but turned back, and taking Edith's 
hand, said, " I hope I shall find you here when I re- 
turn." Edith merely bowed, and in another instant 
he was gone. 

"Sir Reginald is very much altered," said j\Ir. 
M'Dow, after a long and rather solemn pause. " He's 
not like the same person. I doubt he leads a hard 
life; and it's said he's over head and ears in debt 
already. In fact, if it had not been for your friend 
Captain Malcolm, who bought some of the finest 
wood at Glenroy, I believe there would not have been 
a stick standina;." 



316 DESTINY. 

"But the poor people !" exclaimed Edith mourn- 
fully; "what will become of themi" 

"Indeed, they're going to the mischief as fast 
as they can," said Mr. M'Dow. "What with wild 
doctrines, absentees, and whisky, there's no dealing 
with them." 

" Yet I hear good accounts of Mr. Stuart's people 
from Inch Orran," said Edith; "that they are sober, 
peaceful, and industrious." 

" There was outcry enough about the improvements 
there, I can tell you, when they were first set agoing," 
said Mr. M'Dow, evasively; "but, however, Mr. 
Stuart makes himself a perfect slave amongst his 
people. I wouldn't lead the life he does for three 
times the money." 

"Surely, Mr. M'Dow," said Edith earnestly, "it 
is incumbent upon every clergyman to labour dili- 
gently in his calling. If the poor ask nothing from 
you but the words of eternal life, and you disregard 
their cry ! " 

" Oh, these were different times from the present," 
said Mr. M'Dow coolly. 

" I'm surprised to hear anybody speak in that way 
to Mr. M'Dow," interrupted his lady warmly ; " his 
sermons would stand the printing any day ! but he's 
just thrown away where he is!" and Mrs. M'Dow 
rose with a very angry face. 

" It's a sore trial to one's patience," said Mr. 
M'Dow, "to be preaching to a set of wretches that 
will not take the pains so much as to come and listen 



DESTINY. 317 

to what's said to them. How can you make any im- 
pression when that's the case V 

" By going to their houses," said Edith ; " the visit 
of a clergyman is always gratifying even to the worst 
of his flock" 

"I don't think it's for a minister, Avith a young 
family of his own, to be going much amongst sick 
people," said Mrs. M'Dow. 

" Was not he a faithful pastor who said, ' I am as 
much in God's keeping in the sick man's chamber as 
my own?'" said Edith. 

" Ay, ay, it's easy speaking," replied Mr. M'Dow ; 
" but the truth of the matter is, I really don't like to 
go to their houses ; they're a dirty set, and I have an 
extremely delicate stomach." 

Edith turned aAvay in disgust. 

" Stand still till I fasten your pelisse," said Mrs. 
M'Dow, giving Mysie a shake ; " and you must not 
take away that," trying to wrest from the reluctant 
grasp of IVIiss Mysie a cup which she had appropriated 
to herself, and which she set up a great roar at being 
forced to relinquish. 

" Whisht, dear Mysie," cried the fond father; "you 
know you must not take away that ; and it's not like 
a lady in a fine new pehsse to be crying that way. 
Such a grand pelisse too, and you've been so good till 
now ! You know I'll not bring you back again, my 
dawtie, if you greet that way ; the fact is, I believe 
she's wearied, poor bit wifey ! So, perhaps, we had 
as AveU be moving." 



318 DESTINY. 

Edith was too much shocked and disgusted to ask 
them to prolong their \asit ; she sighed iu bitterness 
of heart as she thought of the -wdde-spreading evil of 
even one worldly-minded and remiss clerg}Tiian, and 
of the awful responsibility those incur who appoint 
such to be the ministers of God ! 

" You'll make our apologies to her Ladyship," said 
Mr. M'Dow ; " and I shall write my views more at 
large to Sir Reginald; it was unfortunate that he 
should happen to have been engaged, as the fact is, 
Mrs. M'Dow and I had made up our minds to spend 
the day here ; but I've no doubt he'll think better on 
the subject when he gives it a fair consideration." 

Edith felt reKeved when she saw the party drive 
ofif in a very gay carriage hii-ed for the occasion. 



CHAPTER XXX"\aL 

The day was now advanced, and Edith expected that 
when Lady EHzabeth should emerge from her apart- 
ment, it would be to take her departure ; but instead 
of that she received a message requesting her to wait 
upon her Ladyship in her dressing-room. Thither she 
repaired, and found her in her usual little, frivolous 
bustle. 

"I sent for you, my dear, to say that as I don't 
feel quite well this morning, I think I shall remain 
where I am ; and I have just been writing a note to 
Monsieur Lamotte to desire him to come hither. I 
must say it was very cross in Florinda to prevent my 
bringing him; and my poor, dear loves of dogs, it 
makes me wretched to think how they must be pining 
in my absence ; but I really think the air of this place 
suits me better than that of the cottage. To tell you 
the truth, I never liked a cottage ; 'tis always unbe- 
coming, and it was a mere matter of convenience my 
going there at aU ; but "svith my poor pittance, what 
could I do ? However, I am now resolved to come to 
an understanding with my daughter, as I think it quite 
shameful that I should be starving on a miserable two 



320 DESTINY. 

thousand a year, while she is living en princesse. I 
have seen a good deal, but I have never seen anything 
to surpass the style of living here, and the extrava- 
gance of the whole establishment my maid tells me is 
excessive. Did you ever see such a house, such a 
table, such dress, such equipage — all perfect, to be sure 
— but the very perfection of extravagance?" 

" I fear Lady Waldegrave will indeed bring her- 
self into great difficulties," said Edith, "unless some- 
thing can be done." 

" Something mtist be done," said Lady Elizabeth 
sharply. "It is absolutely impossible I can live in 
this country upon the wretched sum allowed me ; as 
it is, I have been obliged to contract debt which I 
must look to her for discharging, and then let there 
be a proper allowance settled upon me. I mention 
all this to you, my dear, because I think you are the 
person to manage matters between Florinda and me; 
I have too much delicacy to enter on the subject 
myself, either with my daughter or her husband." 

Edith almost sickened at this new development 
of folly and misconduct ; she saw the evils were far 
beyond her reach, and that all her attempts to stem 
the torrent which was advancing would be in vain. 

" You must excuse me, Lady Elizabeth," she said 
mildly, "from undertaking the office of adjusting 
your difference with Lady Waldegrave; if I could 
render you any service, I would most willingly do it ; 
but I have reason to believe Lady Waldegrave is not 
in a condition to better your circumstances at present." 



DESTINY. 321 

" The fact is, child, you know nothing at all about 
it," said her Lad3'shii3 angrily ; " and I must find some 
one else who does ; so I shall remain here for some 
daj's at least ; during that time I shall endeavour to 
come to some arrangement with my daughter. In 
the meantime, I must send the carriage for my physi- 
cian." And she rang the bell to give her orders. 

The thought of a prolonged stay in such a house, 
and under such circumstances, was most painful and 
embarrassing to Edith, and only one way appeared 
by which she could extricate herself from it. Lady 
Arabella Conwaj^ had repeatedly invited her to spend 
some time with her ; and she had promised that if 
she could leave Lady Elizabeth before the Eibleys' 
return, she would do so. At any time the perform- 
ance of this promise would have been a pleasure to 
her, but doubly so on the present occasion. She 
therefore immediately made known her intentions to 
Lady Elizabeth, who, seeing she was not likely to be 
of use to her at present, gave her assent to the pro- 
posal. 

Lady Waldegrave heard of her mother's extended 
visit and Edith's proposed departure with surprise 
and displeasure. "If mamma really has a cold, and 
will keep cpnetly in her room, it will be all very well," 
said she; "but in a few days, when those tiresome 
tradespeople will have made an end of their work, I 
expect my whole corps dramatiquc, and if her Ladyship 

attempts to join it " Here she gave a groan and a 

shrug. "And then it is so cruel in you, Edith, to 

VOL. II. Y D. 



322 DESTINY. 

desert me at such a time, when you might be useful 
to me in a thousand ways. In the first place, I am 
quite certain you could, if you would take the trouble, 
get mamma to assist me in my present difficulties. 
Indeed, if she does not, I do not know what I shall 
do — I am so pestered for money." 

"And 3^ou are going to have a houseful of com- 
pany?" 

"Certainly; I must have company, and I must 
have amusement. I am already dying of ennui." 

"And yet you have everything the world can 
bestow — rank, wealth, youth, beauty — the husband 
of your choice— a lovely boy. Ah, Florinda, since 
you find all these insufficient for your happiness, will 
you not seek it in still higher, better things 1" 

" Oh, for Heaven's sake, don't begin to preach ! 
or if you will, pray reserve your sermon for Sir 
Reginald, who requires it much more than I do. In 
truth, Edith, you know nothing of the world ; and I 
assure you, you greatly overrate my advantages. In 
the first place, my rank is next to nothing, and but 
for other accompaniments, I certainly should never 
have attained the consequence in society Avhich I have 
done. Then as to my fortune, that is not half suffi- 
cient to enable me to keep pace with the people I 
live among. As for the ' husband of my choice,' you 
saw the humour he came home in last night. No — 
by-the-bye yoit did not see it, as it was all reserved 
for me. But I shall not enter upon that subject at 
present. What I wish to say is, that before you leave 



DESTINY. 323 

me, I do wish you would sound mamma a little on 
money matters. If she would assist me with a thou- 
sand pounds or two, it would, I assure you, be a relief 
to me at present." Edith now ventured to hint to 
her the real state of the case with regard to Lady 
Elizabeth's finances ; but Lady Waldegrave heard it 
with^an incredulous smile. 

" All that only tends to confirm me in my belief 
that she is actually hoarding money," said she ; "and 
indeed, it is scarcely possible it can be otherwise ; for 
although she is for ever buying trumpery of some sort, 
yet the things she buys are such trumpery that 'tis 
impossible she can spend her fortune in that Avay." 

" So far from hoarding money, Lady Ehzabeth as- 
sures me she is actually in want of it," said Edith. 

"Pshaw, that must be absolute nonsense," said 
Lady Waldegrave impatiently. " However, I see you 
don't know mamma, so you are no hand to deal with 
her, since you take for gospel all she says. I must 
get my steward to speak to her, though these sort of 
people are all so stupid and tiresome, I hate to have 
anything to do with them. I hope you will prove a 
better actress than you are an agent, for I see you are 
really not au fait in that department. If you are re- 
solved to go to-day, do pray return soon, as I wish to 
begin the rehearsals; and, apropos, do secure that 
handsome Mr. Melcombe for me. I shall invite him 
as soon as the house is ready. Pray tell him all this, 

and " 

But here the entrance of visitors interrupted her 



324 DESTINY. 

Ladyship before Edith could reply. The party con- 
sisted of some fashionable, and of course favourite, 
young men from town, and were hailed with delight 
by Lady Waldegrave, who Avas again all animation 
and seeming happiness. The Ladies Bingly made 
their appearance, and for the first time showed signs 
of animation. 

In a little while Lady Arabella Conway was an- 
nounced. She had received Edith's note, as she was 
stepping into her carriage, and had immediately driven 
to Woodlands, as she said, to carry off her prize. 
Edith was too sincere to attempt to return in kind 
the expressions of regret Lady Waldegrave then 
thought proper to utter at losing her, and she almost 
recoiled from the tender embrace that was bestowed 
upon her at pai-ting. It was not till she found herself 
within the precincts of Oakley House that her spirits 
revived, and she felt that she breathed a purer, better 
atmosphere. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Admiral Conway and Mr. Melcombe Avere walking 
before the house, and a groom was in attendance with 
a led horse. 

"So, you have left all the gaieties of Woodlands, 
to come and rusticate with us?" said the Admiral, as 
he welcomed Edith with all a sailor's cordiality. 
"After that, I forbid any man, woman, child, or 
animal, to quit my dominions while Miss Malcolm 
remains ; we must all make common cause, to show 
om- sense of the compliment she has paid us. Parker" 
— (to the groom) — "Mr. Melcombe's horse may be 
turned out to grass, for he won't require it for six 
weeks at least." 

"There is no disputing such commands," said Mr. 
Melcombe, with a smile; "so," addressing the servant, 
" I shall not want my horse to-day." 

"No, nor to-morrow neither," said the Admiral. 
Then turning to Edith — "Here have I been urginsr 
this gentleman to remain a week or two Avith us 
quietly here to no purpose ; but no sooner does a fair 
lady appear than he knocks under at once. You see 
your influence, so make a good use of it ; it Avill ba 



326 DESTINY. 

all the stronger for being exercised, as my Arabella 
knows," said he, patting his lady on the shoulder with 
an air of good-humoured raillery. 

" My influence must be so very small," said Edith, 
" that I suspect it can only serve as a sort of cat's-paw 
for your own power," 

" What an invidious insinuation ! " exclaimed the 
Admiral. " I appeal to you, Melcombe, if such is the 
case?" 

"Not on the present occasion," said Mr. Mel- 
combe ; and he coloured as he said it, as though he 
meant more than he expressed. 

"That is spoken like an honest man," said the 
Admiral; "but, indeed, let women say as they will, 
we are, upon the whole, much more open and avowed 
in all our proceedings than they are. Don't you agree 
with me, Melcombe?" 

Mr. Melcombe was silent for a few moments, as if 
struggling with his emotion ; then, in an agitated 
voice, replied, "Not in my own case;" then, as if 
he had said too much, he turned abruptly round and 
walked away. 

A pause ensued, Avhich Lady Arabella was the 
first to break : " Much as I admire both Mr. Mel- 
combe's character and manners," said she, "I confess 
there is a mystery about him, that (to say the least 
of it) is not pleasant." 

"There is no mystery about his character," said 
the Admiral ; " that is well known, and I'll venture 
to say a braver and a better man does not exist. 



DESTINY. 327 

There are only two things I wish respecting him : 
the one is, that he belonged to the British navy ; 
the other, that I had a spare daughter to bestow 
upon him." 

" There is something so open, so noble, I may say, 
in his countenance and air that seems quite incon- 
sistent with concealment ; and yet he sedulously shuns 
all allusion not only to his family, but even to his 
birthplace, or connections of any kind," said Ladj'- 
Arabella. 

" In short, yon have just the besetting sin of your 
sex, Bell ; not satisfied with all you have heard, from 
good authority, of this young man's character and 
conduct, you must have the history of his parents — 
his mother's maiden name, of course, with a certificate 
of his birth and baptism. What the plague does it 
signify in what parish such a man was born?" 

" I have never been able to discover even to what 
country he belongs," continued Lady Arabella. " His 
name is English, but his accent and pronunciation, 
though good, are not perfectly English. In short, 
Miss Malcolm," said she, smiling, "take an old 
woman's advice, and don't fall in love with him till 
you know more about him." 

"I shall certainly follow your advice," replied 
Edith in the same tone. 

" And if I were a bonnie lass," said the Admiral, 
" and such a noble fellow came to court me, I should 
at once give him my hand, and say, if I could not 
sing, — 



328 DESTINY. 

' Oil, yes, I will follow, I will sail the world over, 
Kor think of my home, when I look at my lover.' ' 

Lady Arabella and Edith laughed at the Admiral's 
romantic ardour in his friend's cause. 

"But I can tell you what," said the Admiral, 
"you need not trouble your heads about Mr. Mel- 
combe's heart ; for, on my rallying him on that point 
to-day, he acknowledged to me that his affections 
were engaged to one whom he had loved from child- 
hood — there's constancy for you ! " 

Edith felt a little piqued at the Admiral's sup- 
posing the state of Mr. Melcombe's affections could 
be of any consequence to her ; and after a little more 
chat they separated to dress for dinner. The dinner 
party was increased by the arrival of some chance 
visitors, but Mr. Melcombe contrived to place himself 
beside Edith at table, and, in spite of all her resolutions, 
her reserve gave way, and she found herself insensibly 
talking to him of Mrs. Macauley, Glenroy, and Inch 
Orran, as she would have done to an old friend. In 
reply to a question of Edith's he acknowledged having 
been in the Highlands when a boy ; but he evinced 
so much emotion at the interrogation that she was 
sorry she had put it, and immediately changed the 
conversation. 

" Certainly some painful mystery attaches to this 
young man," she thought. " I wish I knew what it 
is, for he seems very amiable, and at times looks very 
melancholy." 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

There is no surer mark of a selfish character than 
that of shrinking from the truth. Even in its gentlest, 
mildest form, it comes an abhorred ajiparition to those 
who, sunk in their own silken dreams, would keep 
their eyes closed against all the conviction of uupleas- 
ing reality. So it was with those whom Edith had 
tenderly sought to awaken to the knowledge of the 
simplest and most obvious of even worldly truths. 
Each disliked even the little she had done, although 
they were too much disunited to agree even on that 
point, or indeed to be aware of what had passed on 
either side. Edith was, however, no sufferer by the 
disgrace into which she had fallen, as she was allowed 
to remain for some days in uninterrupted tranquillity, 
and seldom did days pass away more pleasantly. Each 
brought its round of religious duties, of benevolent 
actions, of tranquil pleasures, and rational enjoyments. 
When there was no company Mr. Melcombe com- 
monly read for an hour or two in the morning ; and 
he possessed all the requisites for that most rare of all 
accomplishments, having a fine voice, a correct ear, 
quick perceptions, good taste, and perfect simplicity. 



330 DESTINY. 

A discussion one day arose as to the choice of a book 
from among those which lay scattered on the library 
table. Lady Ai-abella proposed the Life of Howard 
the Philanthropist ; the Admiral wished to hear the 
Memoirs of Pepys — " For," said he, " the one will send 
us all to prison ; the other will take us to court and 
the Admiralty, where we shall surely find ourselves 
in better company. "WTiat say you. Miss Malcolm?" 

" I am rather inclined to go to prison with Howard 
than to court with Pepys," replied Edith. 

"Let us try both, and see whether the philan- 
thropist or the courtier has the best of it," said ^Mr. 
IMelcombe ; and he read a few passages from each 
alternately. 

Extracts from the Diary of ^. Pepys, and from the 
Journal of Howard the PhUanthrojjisf. 

Pepys. 
" This morning I put on my best black cloth suit, 
trimmed with scarlet ribbon, very neat, Avith my 
cloak lined "vvith velvet, and a new beaver, which 
altogether is very noble." 

Howard. 
" Let it be my earnest enquiry, how I shall best 
serve God in the station which he has assigned me." 

Pepys. 
" Thus I liave ended this month with the greatest 
joy that ever I did any in my life, because I have 



DESTINY. 331 

spent the greatest part of it with abundance of joj' 
and honour, and pleasant journeys, and brave enter- 
tainments, and without cost of money. Thus we end 
this month as I said, after the greatest glut of content 
that ever I had ; only under some difficulty, because 
of the plague Avhich grows mighty upon us — the last 
week being about 1700 or 1800 dead of the plague." 

HOWAED. 

"Ease, affluence, and honours, are temptations 
which the world holds out; but, remember, the fashion 
of this world passeth away. On the other hand, 
fatigue, poverty, suffering, and dangers, with an ap- 
proving conscience — God ! my heart is fixed 
trusting on Thee ! My God ! Oh, glorious words ! 
there is a treasure, in comparison of which all things 
in this world are as dross." 

Pepys. 
" Lord's Day. Up : and put on my coloured silk 
suit — very fine — and my new periwig, bought a good 
while since, but durst not wear, because the plague 
was in "Westminster when I bought it; and it is a 
wonder what will be the fashion after the plague is 
done as to periwigs, for nobody will dare to buy any 
hair, for fear of the infection, that it had been cut 
out off the heads of people dead of the plague." 

HoWAED. 

"I would look to the moral source from 

Avhence all evil and sufFerini;- have been derived, and 



332 DESTOT. 

should, at least, endeavour to diminish their bitter- 
ness. And, oh, how should I bless God, if such a 
worm is made the instrument of alleviating the 
miseries of my fellow-creatures, and to connect more 
strongly the social bond by mutual exertions for 
mutual relief!" 

Pepys. 

"To church, and heard a good sermon upon, — 
'Seek ye first the kingdom of heaven, and its righteous- 
ness, and all things shall be added to you;' a very 
excellent and persuasive, good and moral sermon. 
He showed, like a wise man, that righteousness is a 
surer way of being rich than sin and villainy." 

Howard. 

"Sunday Evening. — Very desirous of returning 
with a right spirit, not only wiser, but better — a 
cheerful humility, a more general love and benevo- 
lence to my fellow-creatures — watchful of my thoughts, 
my words, my actions — resigned to the will of God, 
that I may walk with God, and lead a more useful 
and honourable life in this world." 

Pepys. 

" Abroad with my wife, the first time that ever 
I rode in my own coach, which do make my heart 
rejoice, and praise God ; and pray Him to bless it to 
me, and continue it." 



DESTINY. 333 

Howard. 

"Look forward, my soul ! — how low, how mean, 
how little is everything but what has a view to the 
glorious world of light, hfe, and love ! The prepara- 
tion of the heart is of God. Prepare the heart, O 
God ! of thy unworthy creature ; and unto Thee be 
all glory, through the boundless ages of eternity." 

"What important lessons may be learned from 
reading these passages," said Lady Arabella. "Who 
could recognise in these characters the creation of the 
same divine mind?" 

"Oh!" exclaimed Edith, with fervour, "who but 
must feel the contrast which they exliibit between the 
love of duty and the love of self 1 between the pure 
and exalted aspirations of Christian piety and bene- 
volence, and the grovelling sentiments of mere worldly 
interest?" 

"Why, surely no one will pretend to say these 
varieties of human nature are fair specimens of any 
two distinct classes in the world?" said the Admiral, 
who loved a little argument for its o^vn sake. " At 
least if there be occasionally a Howard, who in all the 
emergencies of life can raise his mind to the first great 
Cause, surely we have few or no Pepys' in these days 
of mental cultivation." 

"That there are few Howards may be granted," 
said Melcombe; "but Pepys's character I fear is 
neither an antiquated nor an overcharged picture ; 
his dialect may be out of fashion, as his dresses would 



334 DESTINY. 

now be, hut his sentiments are those felt by all vain 
and vulgar minds to this day ; and it must be the 
very truth and universality of their application which 
gives his Diary its chief interest." 

"Ay, to be sure," said the Admiral, "I had forgot 
the breed of modern dandies, male and female, whose 
Sabbath-day thoughts, were they put in black and 
white, like poor Pepys's, would not be — ' Wherewithal 
shall I come before the Lord?' but. How shall I most 
becomingly trick out and adorn my body, so as to 
excite the admiration and envy of my fellow-creatures'? 

' Himself so much the source of his delight, 
His Maker has no bearrty in his sight,' 

as your favourite Cowper says." 

"And the mind of Cowper, awfully and mysteri- 
ously as it was occasionally eclijjsed, still shone with 
a divine hght, Avhich has awakened and exalted the 
hearts of thousands of his fellow -creatures," said 
Melcombe. 

"But," said the Admiral, "if we could make a free 
choice and form our own characters, could we hesitate, 
think you, in preferring the mind of a Howard to 
that of a Pepysf 

" That is entirely a supposititious question," replied 
Melcombe, " since we know that of the many milHons 
of spirits called into this state of existence there are 
none whose natural bias is not to evil. But He who 
gave to Howard the power of becoming a ministering 
spirit to all who required his sympathy and aid, and 



DESTINY. 335 

enlightened his mind with that divine love wliich 
communicates itself to all around — He too jilaced 
Pepys in this visible -n-oiid, and surrounded him with 
like means of improvement ; yet how strange and sad 
to read the transcript of his heart in his Diary, filled 
as it is with disgusting frivolity and unfeehng levity ! 
His ideas of God are scarcely worthy of a savage. Of 
moral beauty he seems to have formed no conception ; 
the sufferings of others he appears to have \'iewed 
•vvith perfect indifference, and even with pleasure, if he 
were likely to gain any advantage by them. Surely, 
had his ' one talent,' such as it Avas, been well applied, 
he would have handed down to posterity a very differ- 
ent account of his stewardship from that which now 
stains his memory." 

" I hope you don't mean to say it is requisite we 
should all be Howards?" said the Admiral, somewhat 
testily. 

"By no means," replied Melcombe; "at least not 
to the same extent or in the same way ; but I think 
each may be, and many doubtless are, Howards in 
their own sphere of action. Were it otherwise, some 
of our noblest faculties would have been given in vain, 
and must lie useless and unemployed." 

"But how do you account for Pepys's constant 
flow of cheerfulness and contentment?" demanded the 
Admiral ; " to all appearance he Avas a happier man 
than Howard." 

" I cannot dignify Pepys's inane selfish complacency 
with the name of happiness," replied Melcombe ; " at 



336 DESTINY. 

least it must have been merely the happiness of an 
animal or an idiot, Avhile Howard's must have been 
that of an angel or superior being. His tranquillity- 
rested on principles which time would only confirm 
and enlarge, while the enjoyment of the other de- 
pended on mean, trivial circumstances, which could 
yield no rational satisfaction, and which consequently 
must have been as perishable in its nature as it was 
worthless in its results." 

"Believe me, my good friend," said the Admiral, 
"your standard is too high; were all hearts laid as 
open as poor Pepys's, we should find thousands and 
tens of thousands of respectable, well-behaved people 
every whit as bad, many much worse, and all believing 
themselves on the high road to heaven." 

"That may be," said Melcombe; "for the scale of 
humanity rises by innumerable steps, from the lowest 
to the highest state ; but surely the more our moral 
and intellectual powers are enlarged and improved in 
this stage of our existence, the higher will be our 
destiny hereafter ; for we can scarcely doubt that 
time and eternitj' are but different periods of the same 
state, requiring the same dispositions and faculties; 
and if so, who would not have lived and died a Howard 
rather than a Pepysl" 

" I like the notion of our retaining oiu* identity," 
said Lady Arabella ; " and to think that that many- 
coloured web called experience, which we weave 
here mingled with so many bitter tears, is to serve 
some pui-pose hereafter. I have always loved those 



DESTINY. 337 

verses of Gambold's, where this idea is rmdy ex- 
panded." And she rose, took down the volume, and 
read 

THE MYSTERY OF LIFE. 

" So many years I've seen the sun, 

And call'd these eyes and hands my own ; 

A thousand little acts I've done, 

And childhood have, and manhood known ; 

what is life ! and this dull round 

To tread, why was a spirit bound ? 

" So many airy draughts and lines. 
And warm excursions of the mind. 

Have fiU'd my soul with great designs. 
While practice grovell'd far behind : 

what is thought ! and where withdraw 

The glories which my fancy saw ? 

" So many tender joys and woes 

Have on my ([uivering soul had power ; 
Plain life with heighteiiing passions rose, 

The boast or burden of their hour : 
what is all we feel ! why fled 
Those pains and pleasures o'er my liead '< 

" So many human souls divine, 

So at one interview displayed, 
Some oft and freely mix'd with mine. 

In lasting bonds my heart have laid : 
what is friendship ! why imprest 
On my weak, wretched, dying breast ? 

" So many wondrous gleams of light. 
And gentle ardours from above, 
Have made me sit, like seraph bright. 
Some moment on a throne of love : 
O what is virtue ! why had I, 
Who am so low, a taste so high ! 
VOL. II. Z D, 



338 DESTINY. 

" Ere long, when sovereign wi.sdora wills, 
My soul an unknown path shall tread, 

And strangely leave, who strangely fills 
This frame, and waft me to the dead. 

what is death ! 'Tis life's last shore, 

Where vanities are vain no more ; 

Where all pursuits their goal obtain, 

And life is all retoueh'd again ; 

Where in their bright result shall rise 

Thoughts, virtues, friendships, griefs, and joys.' 

" That is a very pleasing creed, and more especially 
at our time of day, Arabella," said the Admiral; 
"for I should be sorry to think that after having 
weathered it together these fort}' years, we should 
lose sight of each other for evermore when once we 
parted company. — Come now, lay aside your books 
and work, and get your cloaks and Ijonnets." 



CHAPTER XL. 

On the return of the little party from their walk, 
they found that Lady Waldegrave and Sir Reginald 
had been calling; at least so it was to be inferred 
from cards which had been left for each individual of 
the family. There was also a note to Edith, request- 
ing of her to return to Woodlands the following day, 
as arrangements Avere now making for the theatricals, 
in which she was expected to bear a part. A P.S. 
exjjressed a hope that Mr. Melcombe would likewise 
join the party, adding that a choice of two principal 
characters should be reserved for him as a mark of 
especial favour, ^^^len she had read the note, Edith 
presented it to Mr. Melcombe. " I have no right to 
withhold an invitation," said she ; " but I certainly 
wish Lady Waldegrave had conveyed this one through 
some other medium." 

" Through no other medium could it have been so 
acceptable," he replied, as he took the note. "But 
even through it the invitation is not a gratifying one. 
I am sure I need scarcely ask what is your intention ; 
but may I beg that since Lady Waldegrave has 



340 DESTINY. 

done me the honour to insert my name in your in- 
vitation, you will oblige me by including me in your 
refusal?" 

"You shall ride there with me to-morrow and 
make your own excuse," said the Admiral ; " we have 
been rather remiss in our duties in that quarter," 

" I must beg to be excused from that also," said 
Mr. Melcombe. 

" Why so f inquired the Admiral ; "Sir Eeginald 
left a card for you, and his lady invites you to the 
house in any character you choose. What more 
would you have V 

" Sir Eeginald could not intend to call upon me," 
said Mr. Melcombe, with peculiar emphasis, and colour- 
ing deeply ; " but at any rate it is not for me to return 
the visit at present ; the time will come, I trust, when 

" He stopped, and seemed to repress the words 

which were already on his lips. 

"When what?" asked the Admiral bluntly. 

Mr. Melcombe's eyes were cast down, as if in medi- 
tation, while his varying expression testified that it 
was of no tranquil kind ; but the momentary cloud 
passed from his brow, and, looking up, he said, "When 
Sir Reginald and I may meet upon more equal terms 
than we can do at present." 

"I begin to think you are really a strange fellow, 
Melcombe," said the Admiral gravely. 

" In other words, a suspicious character," said Mel- 
combe, forcing a smile. 

" No, no ; there arc no suspicions as to either your 



DESTINY. 341 

character or circumstances; both are open as noon-day ; 
but still I don't know what to make of you." 

Mr. Melcombe was silent for a few seconds; he 
then said, in a calm but melancholy tone, " Think of 
me as one whom a single rash, imprudent, but I may 
add, guiltless act, has divested of home, friends, and 
country ; but, beheve me when I say, the time is not 
far distant Avhen I may again claim them all." 

"And all, I doubt not, will be ready to claim you, 
my dear fellow," said the kind old Admiral, shaking 
liis friend's hand most heartily ; " so do as you like ; 
only I can't allow you such latitude as Lady Walde- 
grave does, for I can only wish you to remain with us 
in one character, and that one your own." 

"I Imow not how it is," said Lady Arabella to 
Edith, as they passed into the adjoining room, " but 
of late Mr. Melcombe has shown a degree of sensitive- 
ness as to his situation which I never observed before. 
Since we have been acquainted with him he never 
dropped the slightest hint that could lead us to suppose 
he was other than what he seems." 

Edith could not solve the mysterj', but she felt 
more and more interested in one whose whole bearing 
and deportment raised him far above suspicion. It 
was impossible for her not to be aware that Mr. JMel- 
combe regarded her with no ordinary degree of inter- 
est ; and she could therefore only retain her original 
supposition that they had previously met, but some- 
how connected Avith circumstances too painful to l^e 
even adverted to. 



342 DESTINY. 

In sj)ite of the Admiral's remonstrances, Mr. Mel- 
combe persisted in going to town the following day, 
but under promise of a speedy return ; and the ladies, 
with their veteran, set ofi" to Woodlands. 

They must have been nice observers who could have 
detected anything amiss beneath the smiling surface 
that there met their Yiew. AU around, within and 
-without, breathed only of pleasure — pleasure in its 
fairest, most seductive form; the young, the noble, 
the beautiful, seemingly happy in themselves and each 
other, and amidst all the charms of nature and the re- 
finements of art No unpleasing thought or corrod- 
ing care was visible in Lady Waldegrave's counte- 
nance, which was all gaiety and delight ;'but it was the 
gaiety and delight of a mind under the influence of 
excitement, and closed for the time against con\'iction 
or feeling. She was suiTounded by a little band of 
admirers, who seemed to vie with each other in paying 
homage, and oflFering up incense at her shrine. 

"I am delighted to see you, dear Lady Arabella," 
said she, in her sweetest of false manners, "and thank 
you for having brought back our runaway," embracing 
Edith as she spoke. 

" You are giving me credit I do not deserve," said 
Lady Arabella, " as I assure you I have no design of 
parting with her ; and even if you had my consent, 
you would find it no easy matter to obtain Admiral 
Conway's." 

" Oh, apropos, Sir Eeginald will of course be in the 
billiard-room, I must let him know Admiral Conway 



DESTINY. 343 

is here," said Lady Waldegrave. Then, turning to 
Edith, she inquired, in a low but significant tone, 
" Has a certain Mr. Melcombe nothing to answer for 
in detaining you from us 1" 

Edith coloured as she replied, "There was no occa- 
sion for any one to give advice on a subject on Avhich 
my OAvn mind was made up from the first." 

"It was only for the ballet you were required," said 
Lady Waldegrave carelessly ; " but if you look upon 
dancing as one of the seven deadly sins, I should be 
sorry you committed it to oblige me;" and she turned 
contemptuously aAvay. 

When people are disposed to ridicule, 'tis in vain 
to attempt to enter into any explanation with them ; 
Edith therefore sufl'ered the sarcasm to pass without 
contradiction. 

Lady Elizabeth now entered from an adjoining 
apartment, and, having Avelcomed the Admiral and 
Lady Arabella, and conversed for a little Avith them, 
she next fastened, as usual, upon Edith. 

"I hope you are come to remain with us, my dear," 
said she, "for I have much to say to you." 

"I have engaged to remain with Lady Arabella 
until you return to the cottage," said Edith ; " and, to 
judge from appearances, there is no Avant of company 
here. " 

" Why, there is, to be sure, a mob of people — rather 
too many, indeed ; but I don't know hoAV it is, every- 
one is employed in their oAvn way, and, in short — but 
come this Avay ; let us go into the veranda, where Ave 



344 DESTINY. 

shall 1)6 quiet. You see how wonderfully Avell I am ; 
indeed I feel quite restored — quite renovated ; Lord 
Milberry said to me yesterday, I had got Je telnt reposd 
comme a qiiinze ans." 

Edith could with truth say she was happy to see 
that her Ladyship looked better ; and the lady went 
on : " It is particularly fortunate that I shoidd have 
regained my looks at this time, as I have a little plan 
in contemplation, the success of which will depend 
very materially upon my appearance. You are aware, 
I suppose, of Florinda's intention of having a French 
play and ballet performed here next week. I should 
have been happy to take a part in the play ; but really 
the labour of getting by heart I found would be too 
much for me ; in fact, I cannot take the trouble to 
commit anything to memory; then the fatigue of 
dancing in the ballet is more than I am yet able for ; 
indeed, the very thoughts of it made Florinda, poor 
dear, quite wretched — so I gave that up also; but 
something is expected of me on the occasion." 

"Nothing more, I am sure," said Edith, "than 
that you should be a pleased spectatoi'." 

" You are quite mistaken," said her Ladyship, Avith 
an air of displeasure ; " anybody may be that, but / 
must be something more ; I am expected to show off; 
it is the tax always levied on talented persons ; in 
fact, we are public property." Edith saw remon- 
strance would be vain, so she remained silent. 
"However, as I cannot undertake the drudgery of 
the play, and am not equal to the exertion required 



DESTINY. 345 

in the l)allet, I have devised a little interlude for my- 
self, which I think "will have a charming effect. I 
intend to come upon the stage in a little car, as a — a 
— in short, as Venus, Anth little Dudley in my lap, as 
Cupid, in a flesh-coloured silk dress and silver wings. 
My own dress I have not determined upon ; but 
I think of having it couleur de soiqnr^ ctouffe ; that, 
you know, "will be appropriate, and I shall sing Ecco 
d' Amor il Tenqj'io. The design is pretty — don't you 
think so?" 

Edith felt as if she could both laugh and cry at 
the idea of this preposterous exhibition, and she said 
something about Lady WaldegTave not approving of it. 

" Oh, as to that, the whole is to be kept a profound 
secret from Florinda, and to be quite a charming sur- 
prise to her. You must therefore promise me not to 
breathe a syllable of it to anybody ; indeed, had I not 
entertained a very high opinion of your prudence and 
good taste, I should not have let you into my secret." 

Edith Avould fain have tried to open the infatuated 
old woman's eyes to the folly and degradation of 
making herself a spectacle for the finger of scorn to 
point at ; but her gentle remonstrances were like the 
sweet south blowing, not on a bank of violets, but of 
nettles. Lady Elizabeth cut them short with much 
asperity. At that moment she heard Sir Reginald's 
voice inquiring for her, and in another instant he was 
by her side in the veranda. His air and manner were 
at first a little embaiTassed, but he soon regained his 
self-possession, and, expressing his pleasure at again 



3i6 DESTINY. 

seeing her there, he added a hope that she had come 
to remain with them. Edith could only repeat what 
she had before said on that subject. 

Sir Reginald looked displeased, then said, "You 
pay your relations a bad compliment, certainly, in 
preferring the society of strangers to theirs, or there 
must be something very attractive at Oakley." 

"Oh, by-the-bye!" exclaimed Lady Elizabeth, 
"that puts me in mind of what had almost escaped 
me — a little rumour I heard yesterday about you and 
a Mr. — what is his name — only a little flirtation 
perhaps — eh?" 

Edith blushed, and the consciousness she had done 
so, and that Sir Reginald's eyes were fixed upon her 
in deep scrutiny, increased her confusion. She then 
replied, "I am ignorant of any rumours you could 
have heard relating to me — certainly none which 
could be at all interesting either to myself or others, 
if they were founded in truth." 

"It is better," said Sir Reginald, "when there is 
no occasion given for rumours, either true or false." 

Edith made no reply, but motioned to Lady Eliza- 
beth to re-enter the drawing-room ; and in spite of 
Sir Reginald's attempt to detain her, she rejoined the 
partj'' she had quitted. 

Lady Elizabeth was in such spirits at the thoughts 
of the brilliant success that awaited her, that she 
continued to chatter away without intermission, while 
Lady Waldegrave whispered, smiled, and flirted with 
the loun2;ers who surrounded her. Sir Reginald con- 



DESTINY. 347 

versed with the Admiral, but his air was abstracted, 
and in the midst of all that was gay and brilliant his 
animation seemed forced and jojdess. The visit was 
indeed productive of little pleasure to any of the 
party, and Lady Arabella availed herself of the pri- 
vilege of fashion to make it a short one. When 
taking leave, the Admiral, as if recollecting himself, 
said, "By-the-bye, I believe I ought to apologise to 
you, Sir- Keginald, for my friend Mr. Melcombe ; he 
is gone to town this morning." 

Sir Reginald slightly bowed in acknowledgment, 
while he said, "I am not aware, Admiral, that any 
apology is due to me, as I have not the honour of Mr. 
Melcombe's accjuaintance." 

"I beg yom- pardon. Sir Reginald," said the 
Admiral, in his usual straightforward manner, " but I 
understood you had left a card for my friend at the 
same time you called upon me." 

Sir Reginald turned on Lady Waldegrave a look 
of inquiry, which changed to one of displeasure, as 
she said with affected carelessness, " I believe a card 
was left for Mr. Melcombe. If report says true," she 
added, with a malicious smile, to Edith, " he is hkely 
to prove more to us than a mere visiting acquaintance." 

"Perhaps your Ladyship is in Mr. Melcombe's 
confidence," said the Admiral, " and can tell us the 
name of the fair lady who has been able to fix even a 
roving sailor's affections from childhood V 

" No," said Lady Waldegrave haughtily ; " Mr. 
Melcombe and his liaisons are alike unknown to me." 



348 DESTINY. 

Lady Ai-abella saw a blunt retort ready to burst 
from the Admiral, and hastened to put a stop to all 
recrimination by taking leave. Lady Elizabeth again 
Avhispered secrecy to Edith, as she embraced her at 
parting. Lady Waldegrave's manner continued cold 
and pettish, and Sir Reginald, as he handed her into 
the carriage, uttered a haK- angry, haK- sorrowful re- 
monstrance against her for not remaining with them. 
But, homeless as she was, Edith would have preferred 
any species of dependence to the gilded snares of folly 
she there saw spread around. 



CHAPTER XLI 

The following day, as Edith sat alone in the drawing- 
roonij Mr. Melcombe entered. His appearance was so 
unexpected at the moment that she coloured a little 
with surprise as she met his salutation. He too at 
first appeared somewhat embarrassed, but quickly 
regaining his self-possession, he advanced to the table 
at which she was sitting. 

"I dare scarcely hope for a welcome after so short 
an absence," said he, as he extended his hand to her, 
with something of hesitation in his manner. 

" It would be a bad compliment to say that absence 
enhanced any one's value," replied Edith, with a smile, 
as she shook hands with him. 

"Even if it did, it would be paying almost too 
great a price," said he, and he fixed his eyes on her 
with a look and meaning she could not misunderstand ; 
"but," he added, "I flatter myself I may claim a 
welcome from you, when I tell you I have seen your 
old friend Mrs. Macauley." 

" Have you indeed been to visit Mrs. Macauley ? " 
exclaimed Edith, with glad sur})rise. "Ah, how 
kind ! is she well and happy as usual?" 



350 DESTINY. 

"Perfectly so; and I am charged with many 
aifectionate remembrances to you, and apologies for 
not having answered your last letter, as she has been 
even more than usually occupied of late." 

"Doing good and giving pleasure to all around 
her," said Edith. " Oh, how I long to see her ! I 
have never been so long separated from her ; and I 
fear, at her advanced age, such a change of life and 
habits, such a total deprivation of all the comforts she 
has been accustomed to, must be severely felt." 

"Do not be uneasy on her account," said Mr, 
Melcombe ; "she looks almost as well and happy as 
she did at Glenroy." 

"You remember her, then, at Glenroy?" exclaimed 
Edith; but she was sorry she had yielded to the 
surprise of the moment, when she beheld the agitation 
Mr. Melcombe evinced at being thus reminded of 
what appeared to have been an involuntary acknow- 
ledgment. An awkward pause followed, and while 
confusion was still visible on the countenances of both, 
Sir Reginald Malcolm was announced. 

At that moment Edith would have felt the presence 
of almost any one else a relief, but the sight of Sir 
Reginald only augmented her embarrassment. She, 
however, named Mr. Melcombe and him to each other ; 
but she was struck with the manner in which the 
introduction was taken by both parties. On the part 
of Sir Reginald was an air of haughty scrutiny, which 
was met on that of Melcombe with a glow that mounted 
almost to his temples ; and his eyes, which for an 



DESTINY. 351 

instant flashed fire, were then hastih^ averted, as 
though he both felt and feared the interrogation. 
Neither spoke ; but the bearing of both denoted that 
sort of instinctive repugnance for which it is sometimes 
impossible to account. With Melcombe, however, the 
emotion was of a transient nature, and soon his coun- 
tenance regained its wonted expression ; but the cloud 
did not pass so quickly from Sir Reginald's brow. Edith 
expressed her regret that the Admiral and Lady Ara- 
bella should be from home, having gone to pay a visit 
of condolence to an old friend in the neighbourhood. 

" I met them as I came hither," replied Sir Regi- 
nald, " and I learnt from them that I should find you 
alone, and disengaged." He pronounced the last word 
with marked emphasis. 

"A few minutes ago I was both," said Edith. 

"And I was so fortunate as to find you so," said 
Mr. Melcombe. At the sound of his voice Sir Reginald 
turned quickly round, and regarded him for a moment 
with a look Avhich seemed to say, " Who are you, sir f 
and again it was met by the rising colour and embar- 
rassed air of one to whom the interrogation was 
painful. Edith felt the situation of both parties was 
unpleasant ; but she regained her self-possession, and 
said, "Mr. Melcombe had just arrived from town, and 
when you entered I was engaged in hearing of my 
dear old friend Mrs. Macauley, Avhom he has been 
kindly visiting." 

"I cannot claim much merit on that score," said 
Melcombe ; " there is something so delightful in the 



352 DESTINY. 

sunshine of her heart, 'tis a pleasure to come within 
its influence." 

Sir Reginald made no reply, but again cast a 
haughty, scrutinising glance at Mr. Melcombe, which 
was evidently intended to silence him ; but his em- 
barrassment had fled, and it was now met by a look 
perfectly open and unshrinking ; and there was some- 
thing so noble in the stamp of the countenance, as 
seemed to denote that it never had quailed — never 
would quail — for the fear of man. Sir Reginald 
turned away his proud gaze, and abruptly addressing 
Edith, said, "I beg a few minutes' conversation with 
you. I wish to see you alone." 

Surprised and somewhat piqued at the haughty, 
peremptory manner in which this request was made, 
Edith hesitated to comply ; but as she marked Mr. 
Melcombe's rising colour, and Sir Reginald's flashing 
eye, she hastily rose and led the way into the small 
drawing-room. For a few seconds Sir Reginald was 
silent, as if striving to gain his self-command ; he then 
said, in a tone of assumed calmness, "May I beg to 
know who this gentleman — this JNIr. (or as some call 
him) Captam Melcombe is, to whom I have had the 
honour of being introduced f 

"He is the friend of Admiral Conway," replied 
Edith. 

"And nothing more?" demanded Sir Reginald, in 
the same restrained tone. 

" That is surely sufficient to entitle him to civility 
from Admiral Conway's visitors," said Edith coldly. 



DESTINY. 353 

" In some circumstances it might be so ; but I 
would know something more of this person — this 
Captain ]\Ielcombe. I would know who and what he 
is ?" Edith was silent. Sir Eeginald went on, still 
preserving his forced composure. " Although Admiral 
Conway may be imprudent enough to invite an 
adventurer to his house, you must permit me to say, 
Edith, it by no means follows as a matter of course 
that you ought to be drawn into an intimacy Avith a 
person of that description." 

" "While I remain under the roof of Admiral and 
Lady Ai-abella Conway, I shall certainly not shun 
holding intercourse with their friends," replied Edith, 
mildly but firmly. 

" The Conways would show a greater consideration 
for you if they were more chary in their friendsliips," 
said Sir Reginald, with asperity. 

"Excuse me, Sir Reginald," said Edith; "but 1 
have met Avith too much kindness from them to suffer 
them to be blamed, and especially on my account. 
I never can be injured by having their friends for 
my acquaintance." 

"Yet you are aware that your name is already 
coupled Avith this adventurer's. Is that not injuring 
you'?" cried Sir Reginald, now losing his self-com- 
mand. Edith's colour rose ; but ere she could reply, 
he proceeded with increasing vehemence : " As your 
nearest relation, I conceive myself entitled to ascertain 
the truth or the falsehood of this rejiort." 

" In no capacity whatever can I admit your right 
VOL. ir. 2 a u. 



354 DESTINY. 

to interfere in my aifairs," said Edith, rising with an 
air of displeasure, but he laid his hand upon her arm 
to prevent her leaving the room. 

" Then do you refuse me the satisfaction of being 
able to contradict a report discreditable to yourself 
and your family 1 " said he vehemently. 

"I refuse to ackno\yledge the authority of Sir 
Reginald Malcolm to demand any explanation from 
me," said Edith, roused beyond her usual meek 
endurance. 

"Then I shall seek an explanation elsewhere," 
cried Sir Reginald passionately. 

At this threat Edith's resolution failed her; she 
turned pale with apprehension at the thoughts of 
what might ensue were he to encounter Mr. Melcombe 
in the present irritated state of his feelings. " There 
is no one who can give any explanation," said she 
faintly. "There is none to give." 

" Thanks, dear Edith ; that is enough ! " he cried, 
with a look of pleasure, as he pressed her hand. 
"And you forgive me — you forgive the soHcitude 
that the inquiry " 

"I forgive everything," said Edith, "and every- 
one ; but I must consider the liberty you have taken 
as unjustifiable on your part as it was unwished for 
on mine. And now let us part." 

But Sir Reginald still held her hand, while he 
looked earnestly upon her. " I know you are truth 
itself, Edith," said he. "I am satisfied the rumour 
was as false as it was malicious ; but " — and his eyes 



DESTINY. 355 

flashed fire — " but I see plainly that unknown — that 
adventurer dares to love you ! There is degradation 
in the very thought of your ever casting yourseK 
away upon such a one. Promise, then, that you 
never will be his ! "' 

Edith's whole face was in a gloAv, and for some 
minutes she was too much confused to reply. Sir 
Eeginald's eyes were bent keenly upon her, and his 
lips were compressed, as if to restrain the workings of 
his breast. But soon regaining her self-possession, she 
replied, with calmness and dignity, "There is no 
subject which could be proposed on which I would 
bind myseK by a promise to any one, — certainly not 
to Sir Reginald Malcolm." And she again rose to 
quit the room. 

"But tell me," said he, still detaining her, "why 
did you quit Woodlands so hurriedly? Did Lady 

^\ aldegrave was it in consequence of anything she 

saidl" 

"You can scarcely suppose. Sir Reginald, that 
your house and Lady Waldegrave's would have been 
the residence I should have made choice of," said 
Edith. 

"But since you were there, why leave it so 
abruptly '2 " 

" I went, at Lady Waldegrave's earnest solicitation, 
to spend one day with her." 

"And you would not remain another to gratify 
me 1 Ah, Edith, if you but knew the hundredth part 
of the misery I endure !" 



356 DESTINY. 

"Why should it be so?" said Edith earnestly; 
" you have all that this world can give ! " 

Sir Reginald's only answer was a deep sigh and 
an impatient wave of the head. 

" Ah, Reginald, since you do not find your happi- 
ness in the follies — must I say in the vices — of the 
world, as no one ever did, will you not seek it in 
other and better sources, — your home — your child — 
your country — your God?" and she looked on him 
with eyes of almost seraph's purity and softness. 

Sir Reginald's lip quivered with emotion, and for 
some moments he remained silent, as if struggling 
with himself. He then exclaimed, " I wish you 
would talk to Lady Waldegrave on these subjects ; 
it is there the reform should begin. By Heaven, her 
caprice and extravagance would beggar a kingdom ! " 

"But were she to see you giving up any of your 
favourite pursuits " 

" That would make no difference ; or, if it did, it 
would only be to afford her still greater scope for her 
heartless folly." 

"At least the experiment is worth trying," said 
Edith. 

"Excuse me," he replied impatiently; "but women 
cannot possibly judge of those things. They may be 
of use to one another in the way of advice, and if you 
will take up your residence with us, I am convinced 
you might be of service to Florinda — if anything can 
be of service to one so selfish and hollow. Do, then, 
let me persuade you to come to us." 



DESTINY 357 

" No, Sir Eeginald, that can never be," said Edith, 
calmly and firmly; "from my heart, I wish Lady 
Waldegrave and you all happiness ; I would do much 
to promote it if I could, but the means seem beyond 
my reach." 

" Happiness ! Ah, Edith, you little know when you 
talk of happiness to me ! There was a time, indeed, 
when my happiness was in your hands ; and had you 
borne with me a httle longer — had you made a little 
more allowance for the folly and infatuation of a mere 
boyish fancy — we might both have been happier now ! " 

A shght blush tinged Edith's cheek, but there was 
no uncertain expression in her eyes, as she raised 
them to his wnth a look, grave and mild, but full of 
pity, while she said, "On my oAvn account I have no 
regret, and I never will listen to yours. As the 
friend and brother of my brother, as the successor to 
my father, as my nearest kinsman, — in all these rela- 
tions I shall ever be interested in your welfare, but 
in no other may you ever lay claim to my sympathy." 

There was a dignity in her manner that debarred 
all further discussion; and Sir Reginald made no 
attempt to detain her, as she returned to the room 
they had left, but followed with an air of haughty 
pique and mortification. Scarcely deigning to notice 
Mr. Melcombe, he took leave, and in an instant his 
horse's feet were heard galloping down the avenue. 



CHAPTER XLIL 

A SCENE such as this could not fail to disturb the 
serenity of Edith's mind ; but yet, amidst the painful 
emotions which had been excited, there was one of 
a more pleasurable kind. Sir Reginald had said that 
Melcombe loved her, though that could not be, for 
his affections, it seemed, had long been riveted on 
another, while hers had been too cruelly blighted 
ever again to revive. No ; love it could not be on 
either side, but it might be something better and 
more enduring. She admired Mr. Melcombe's char- 
acter, and was pleased with his society ; his senti- 
ments on most subjects agreed with hers ; their tastes 
and pursuits were similar ; and it was therefore but 
natural that he should evince a degree of preference 
for her which one unacquainted AAath the real state 
of the parties might mistake for love. Thus argued 
Edith, as she repeated to herself the words which had 
called forth this train of reflections. But even while 
she repelled the idea, it nevertheless operated on her 
feelings ; and when she again joined him, the ease 
and simplicity of her manners had given place to an 
air of timidity and embarrassment, which he could 
not fail to perceive. 



DESTINY. 359 

"Well," said the Admiral on his return, address- 
ing Edith, "you have had no lack of beaux in my 
absence, it seems ; here is one," pointing to Mr. Mel- 
combe, " who has found his way to you, and we met 
another, whom I allowed to pass, after stipulating 
with him that he should not run away with you in 
my absence ; if he did, I promised him a hot chase 
from myself and my captain when he should 
return." Edith's head was bent over her embroidery, 
and the Admiral went rattling on. "You had just 
come in the nick of time, Melcombe, to protect our 
fair prize," said he ; " other^vise I suspect she would 
have been carried off by a gay rover. Confess," cried 
he, turning to Edith, " that Sir Reginald came ■with 
some such nefarious design ^ " 

" Not absolutely," said Edith, trying to force a 
smile ; " I was only pressed to return to Woodlands 
by my cousin." 

"But you told him, I hope, that you preferred the 
company of an old couple and an absent lover," 
laying his hand on Mr. Melcombe's shoulder, as he 
sat in pensive abstraction, " to all the gay doings at 
Woodlands?" 

Edith coloured as she thought of Reginald's ideal 
suggestion, when Mr. Melcombe said, in a peculiar 
tone, "Not absent, only clouded." 

" That is a nice distinction, I suspect, in your case, 
my good friend," said the Admiral; "but we shan't 
differ about a Avord. Was this your first introduc- 
tion to Sir Reginald 1 " 



360 DESTINY. 

"Not my first," replied Melcombe, with f?ome 
hesitation ; "but it is many years since we met." 

" Many years ! " repeated the Admiral, laughing ; 
"neither of you has been many years in the Avorld, 
according to my mode of reckoning. Pray, may I 
ask, what you call many years ago?" 

"Thirteen years, and many, many years they 
have appeared to me ! " answered Melcombe, with a 
sigh. 

"If he had known Keginakl thirteen years ago, 
he must have known me too," thought Edith, for at 
that time Eeginald and she were inseparable ; and 
she gazed with wonder and inquiry. 

"Why, to be sure," said the Admiral, "thirteen 
years must be a respectable portion of your life ; but, 
as your old Scotch song says, 

'Sliould auld acquaintance be forgot,' 

I hope Sir Reginald and you renewed your acquaint- 
ance?" 

"No," replied Melcombe, "Sir Eeginald did not 
recognise me." 

" That is not surprising " said Edith ; " for I too 
must have known Mr. Melcombe in those childish 
days, as my cousin and I were educated together." 

" On some minds early impressions are faint and 
evanescent," replied Mr. Melcombe, evidently evading 
the inquiry; "on others, they are vivid and in- 
delible ; " and as he spoke his eyes were directed to 
Edith with a look of such deep and tender interest 



DESTINY. 361 

as seemed to speak of thoughts linked witli many a 
fond recollection. 

"Don't be too secure of the indelibihty of certain 
childish impressions," said the Admiral, with a signifi- 
cant look and an exj^ressive tone. 

" I thank you for your caution," replied Melcombe, 
Avith a smile, " ])ut I think I may venture to feel 
secure of sentiments which have stood the test of 
time and absence, and which every day tends only to 
strengthen and confirm," and again his look seemed 
unconsciously bent on Edith. 

"What say you to the volatility or the indeUbihty 
of early impressions. Miss Malcolm?" said the 
Admiral. "Are they fugitives or fixtures, think 
you 1 " 

" The impressions made in childhood are certainly 
very strong," said Edith; "but as the mind matures, 
it surely becomes our duty to examine them by a 
better light than that of nature, and to discard or 
retain them, according as we find them worthy of a 
place in our afi"ections." 

"You are a little philosopher," cried the Admiral, 
" and I should fear you never would fall in love, were 
it not for that sweet blush of yours ; but philosophy 
never blushes." 

"I may well blush at being styled a philosopher," 
said Edith, with a smile. 

" I suspect it is I who ought rather to do so, for 
having likened you to anything so odious as a female 
philosopher," said the Admiral ; " but you must spare 



362 DESTINY. 

a poor old weather-beaten tar. And here comes 
Arabella ; she will be jealous if she hears of all this 
blushing between us." 

" Indeed, I have some reason," said Lady Arabella, 
as she joined them ; " for I assure you, Miss Malcolm, 
the Admiral was so afraid of your cousin's carrying 
you off in his absence, that I could scarcely prevent 
him from returning to guard you himself ; but with 
a gouty foot and a shattered arm, I think he would 
scarcely have been able to cope with so gallant a 
knight as Sir Keginald. I hope you did not find it a 
service of great danger, Mr. Melcombef 

" Had there been danger, I should certainly have 
welcomed it in such a cause," replied he ; " but my 
trials were rather those of passive endurance than of 
active enterprise." 

Again Edith read, in the expression of his clear, 
eloquent eye a meaning beyond the words he uttered. 
Strange disjointed thoughts again came thronging 
upon her. " He loves one known from childhood," she 
thought, "and to-day he has all but acknowledged 
that he knew me in early life." 

But in another instant she rejected the wild idea, 
Avith shame at ever having harboured it, and some- 
thing of displeasure that the lover of another should 
thus presume to make it doubtful whether she was 
not the object of his secret affections. These re- 
flections rendered her silent and abstracted during 
the rest of the conversation. From that time she 
studiously avoided all opportunities of being alone 



DESTINY. 363 

with Mr. Melcombe, and would even have shortened 
her visit to Lady Arabella, had she knoAvn where to 
go. But, situated as she was, she had no alternative 
but to remain where she was. The return of the 
Eibleys was very uncertain, Mrs. Eibley having been 
taken ill at Cheltenham, and their stay having con- 
sequently been prolonged. 

Lady Ehzabeth's movements were too eccentric to 
be depended upon; and Mrs. Macauley was still in 
requisition in the various capacities of sick-nurse, 
governess, housekeeper, and universal favourite, in 
the little crowded, comfortless abode of the wise 
Johnnie. 

Such being the position of all parties, there was 
nothing for it but to acquiesce in the present arrange- 
ment of things. Mr. Melcombe appeared to feel the 
change which had taken place ; but though he looked 
thoughtful and melancholy, he made no attempt to 
win her back to the easy, friendly footing they had 
hitherto been upon. His attentions, if more guarded, 
however, seemed even more devoted than before ; and 
in spite of the reserve of both, there still seemed as if 
a secret though invisible chord of sympathy bound 
their minds together. 



CHAPTER XLIII 

The invitation to Woodlands was again repeated, and 
again declined, in mild but decisive terms. Edith 
therefore flattered herself she should be allowed to 
remain, for some time at least, in the repose of neglect. 
But repose is not the element in which the idle and 
frivolous can exist themselves, or allow others to in- 
dulge in. 

The day preceding Lady Waldegrave's fete Edith 
received a summons from Lady Elizabeth to repair 
immediately to the cottage. She was at no loss to 
conjecture that the impending Mairdssement between 
the mother and daughter had at last taken place, and 
had terminated, as she expected, in a violent fracas. 
The Admiral and Lady Arabella, alarmed at the 
thoughts of being deprived of their young favourite, 
proposed that, in case Lady Elizabeth had actually 
quitted Woodlands, she should be invited to take up 
her residence with them; and Edith promised to use her 
influence in prevailing upon her stepmother to consent. 
Lady Arabella and Mr. Melcombe accompanied her 
till within sight of the cottage, when the former 
turned back a few steps to speak to one of the gardeners. 



DESTINY. 365 

Edith was slowly retracing her steps to rejoin her 
friend, when Melcombe, in a hesitating tone, and with 
a heightened colour, said, " Were it not very presump- 
tuous in me either to hope or fear aught on my own 
account as connected with you, I should say I fear this 
interruption will prove only the prelude to a longer 
separation. " 

" I should have cause to grieve at anything that 
was to separate me from such kind and delightful 
friends as the Admiral and Lady Arabella," replied 
Edith ; " but there seems no likelihood of that at 
present." 

"But even should you remain, I must depart; I 
must return to Greece for a short time," said Melcombe 
earnestly ; " and should this be my only opportunity of 
seeing you alone, may I hope — forgive me," said he, in 
increasing agitation — " forgive me if I venture to hope 
that even amid doubts and suspicion we know and 
understand each other better than when we metf 

Edith was spai-ed the embarrassment of reply, as 
they were at that moment joined by Lady Arabella, 
who, after repeating her invitation for Lady Elizabeth, 
called upon her reluctant companion to retrace his 
steps, and the little party separated. 

Edith found Lady Elizabeth in her dressing-room, 
extended on a couch, her physician and attendants 
bustling around her, and the atmosphere loaded with 
the fumes of hartshorn, ether, and s^uch mental drugs 
as are usually supposed to minister to a mind rather 
than a body diseased. The paroxysm, however, 



366 DESTINY. 

appeared to be past, as she accosted Edith in her usual 
weak, querulous tone ; and having embraced her in a 
faint, hysterical manner, she dismissed her attendants, 
and began, " You find me excessively ill ; my whole 
system has received a shock which only the greatest 
skill and care will enable me to surmount ; nothing 
affects the looks so much as agitation, and before this 
happened I was looking so particularly well ! " Here 
her Ladyship applied her handkerchief to her eyes, and 
heaved repeated sighs. 

"I trust nothing of a very serious nature has 
occurred f said Edith soothingly. 

" Shocking !" was the reply, with a little hysterical 
sob, " In fact, the usage I have met with — but my 
nerves are so shattered I shall never be able to speak 
of it ! " And the small sighs now rose to little half- 
repressed shrieks. 

"Then do not attempt to talk of it, dear Lady 
Elizabeth," said Edith, in the same bland tone. 

"Not attempt to talk of it !" exclaimed her Lady- 
ship, taking the handkerchief from her face, in a 
sudden transport of indignation. "I shall make a 
point of talking of it — the world shall hear of it ! 
Such ingratitude ! Such — I — I — it is too shocking 
and foolish ! " 

By way of turning her mind from a subject which 
seemed too much for it, Edith here delivered the kind 
messages with which she had been charged by the 
Admiral and Lady Arabella ; but they were received 
with peevish contempt. " Don't talk about Admiral 



DESTINY. 367 

and Lady Arabella Conway at present," said she ; 
" they cannot be of the slightest service to me after 
the indignity I have met with. I can listen to nothing 
of the sort. To be so treated by my own daughter, 
who owes everything to me ! — though, poor dear un- 
fortunate, it is all owing to that unprincipled man. I 
always knew it would be so ! But, to dare to refuse 
me ! " Here a little hysterical laugh wound up the 
sentence. 

" Pardon me, if I venture to guess at the cause of 
this disagreement between you and Lady Waldegrave," 
said Edith gently; "and still more, if I take upon 
me to assure you it is not at present in her power to 
assist you.'' 

"Assist me V repeated her Ladyship with indigna- 
tion. "You strangely mistake the matter. I 
required no assistance ; on the contrary, my intention 
was to have assisted her." 

"Undoubtedly there is some mistake," said Edith. 

"There was much improper behaviour — much 
ingratitude — and — and folly — but no mistake ! " 

" Excuse me if I still think there must be some- 
thing misunderstood between Lady Waldegrave and 
you," said Edith. "I have reason to be assured that 
any assistance you could afford her would be most 
acceptable." 

"WTiy, so I thought, and most people would 
think ; but it has been refused in the most insulting 
manner." And her whole frame quivered with indig- 
nation as she spoke. 



368 DESTINY. 

Edith felt more and more perplexed. 

"I fear you will think me very troublesome in 
thus presuming to press my opinion on you," said she; 
"but from Avhat passed between Lady Waldegrave 
and me on the subject, I am certain there must be a 
misunderstanding on one side or other; it is very 
lately that she urged me to endeavour to procure your 
assistance to relieve her in her present embarrass- 
ments." 

"That is just of a piece with the rest of her 
behaviour," exclaimed Lady Ehzabeth. " Such dupli- 
city ! I was certain that she must desire it ; it would 
have been ridiculous to suppose I would be othermse 
than an acquisition to her ; and I had spared no 
expense ; everything had been prepared in the most 
perfect taste — my car, my doves, my wings — all so 
purely classical ! " 

Here a convulsive sob choked her utterance. Edith 
was confounded. At first she thought wounded affec- 
tion and mortified vanity had actually turned her 
brain, till the recollection of the fete, and the great 
things destined for it, flashed upon her memory, and 
the whole mystery was unravelled. But what an 
exhibition of human folly ! it Avas almost too humili- 
ating to be ridiculous ! Lady Elizabeth went on : 

"Conceive my feelings, after having been at so 
much trouble and ex[)ense, to be told that she could 
not possibly allow such an exhibition to take place. 
An exhibition ! what a word ! — shocking and foolish ! 
And such ingratitude, when I had been at the expense 



DESTINY. 369 

of getting a dress for her child — quite a beautiful 
thing, flesh-coloured silk, with the sweetest httle silver 
wings ! Altogether the whole device was charming, 
and the effect would have been irresistible ; but the 
fact is, I beheve Florinda is jealous of the success 
which she foresaw would attend my little interlude. 
But am I for that reason to remain a cipher — to suffer 
my talents to lie useless 1 I consider it due to myself 
to make an appearance upon this occasion, and I told 
Florinda that unless I was to have my own way, 
and appear in a manner worthy of myself, I should 
♦instantly quit the house. The consequence is, you 
see me here ! " Emotion choked further utterance. 

Of all mental sufferings, perhaps the most difficult 
to administer relief to by honest means are those 
which spring from wounded vanity. The only pana- 
cea for a weak, vain mind, in a state of irritation, is 
flattery, and that was one which Edith would in no 
circumstances have applied. She sought, however, to 
soothe the angry feelings of her stepmother into com- 
posure, and then to reconcile her to her disappoint- 
ment, by such arguments as she thought best suited 
to her capacity. But the attempts were fruitless ; the 
lady would hsten to nothing but her own wrongs. 
When in the midst of one of her angry bursts, she 
suddenly stopped, and exclaimed, "Now that you 
understand how matters are between my daughter 
and me, the only way in which you can be of use is, 
to go to her immediately, and endeavour to bring her 
to a sense of her duty before it is too late, I am still 
VOL. II. 2 b d. 



370 DESTINY. 

willing to forgive her, upon receiving a proper apology, 
and being invited — for I now must insist upon being 
invited to act my part. I shall order my carriage for 
you, for there is not a moment to lose." 

She Avas ringing the bell, when Edith stopped her. 
"Pray, excuse me, Lady Elizabeth," said she, "but 
I cannot really undertake this office ; at least, take a 
little time to consider of it, and allow me the same ! " 
" Not one instant ! " exclaimed her Ladyship vehe- 
mently ; "it must be done now, or not at all." 

" But it is late," answered Edith, " and the Admiral 
and Lady Arabella are in hopes of seeing you return 
mth me. They expect no company, so you will find 
a quiet family party." 

" The thing of all others I detest ! " exclaimed the 
lady peevishly. "I detest family dinners, and I 
detest cottages, which are, in fact, neither more nor 
less than small, dull, inconvenient houses ; and if the 
Conways imagine I am to remain mewed up in this 
baby- house, they are much mistaken ; so let me hear 
no more of the Conways and their dinners, but go 
directly to my daughter!" — again ringing the bell 
violently for the carriage. 

" Dear Lady Elizabeth," said Edith earnestly, " it 
pains me to refuse any recjuest of yours, but indeed 
I cannot go to Lady Waldegrave on such an errand. 
I would do much to reconcile you, but I think with 
her that the appearance you propose to make would 
be unbecoming her mother — the grandmother of her 
child — my father's Avidow," 



DESTmY. 371 

Lady Elizabeth turned almost blue "with anger, 
while she repeated, "Grandmothers and widows! — 
coarse and gross ! Who ever hears of such things 
in good society'? Such terms are never used by 
those who understand good manners," and a httle 
hysterical laugh rattled in her throat. She, however, 
quickly rallied, and went on : " However, since I 
am, it seems, your father's widow (certainly not 
what confers distinction upon me), you -will allow, 
I hope, that I am entitled to claim the obedience 
^of his daughter, and therefore I command you to 
go immediately to Lady Waldegrave — or even to 
her husband — and — and represent to them how ex- 
cessively ill I have been treated by them, and that 
I desire I may be invited to return and sustain my 
part, otherwise I insist upon my car, doves, and 
wings, being sent to me immediately; and then they 
shall see what it is to have incurred my displeasure." 

Vexed as Edith was, she could not refrain from 
smiling at the mock dignity with which this tirade 
was delivered. Li^nwilhng to accede to this prepos- 
terous request, or rather command, but afraid of the 
consequences of a refusal, in compassion to the wretched 
old woman she at last undertook the painful because 
almost hopeless task of acting as mediator between 
her and her daughter. She was not allowed much 
time to deliberate, for the carriage had been ordered 
even before her consent had been asked, and she was 
hurried away upon her embassy 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

It had occurred to Edith that the only way in which 
it would be possible to reconcile parties, would be for 
Lady Waldegrave to give up, or at least postpone, her 
theatricals, — a small sacrifice, she thought, when put in 
comparison with even a foolish mother's displeasure. 
On reaching Woodlands, however, her hopes became 
more faint when she perceived the bustle and excite- 
ment which pervaded the whole establishment. Ladies' 
maids with important faces and consequential airs were 
seen hurrying to and fro, their hands full of flowers, 
feathers, and drapery; sounds of many voices were 
heard declaiming, and repeating their parts in some of 
the rooms ; in others the tones of various instruments 
were heard ; and a half-open door disclosed a troop 
of dancers practising for the ballet. Upon being con- 
ducted to Lady Waldegrave, Edith found her not less 
occupied than her guests, she rehearsing her part with 
Lord Herbert, while one of the Ladies Bingly acted 
as prompter. When Miss INIalcolm was announced 
she uttered an exclamation of pleasure, and hastened 
forward to receive her with more than her usual 
suavity and softness of address. "This is so kind 



DESTINY. 373 

of you, my love ! " said she, tenderly eml3 racing her ; 
" so very kind ! I almost feared you would not come, 
and yet I thought you could not resist when you 
knew the cruel dilemma I am in." 

"It was in hopes of extricating you from it I 
came," replied Edith. 

Lady Waldegrave pressed her hand. "Dearest 
Edith ! how very kind and affectionate ! Indeed, I 
cannot express how much I feel obliged to you. I 
always was set upon having you, though you were 
so coy, and difficult to win ; but, however, since we 
have secured you, that is enough." 

" You mistake, Lady Waldegrave ; I do not come 
on my own accoimt." 

"Oh no, not at all — you come upon mine." 

" The purpose for which Ihave come,"said Edith 

"You could only come for one purpose, I am sure," 
interrupted her Ladyship sportively, — " the purpose of 
obhging me beyond expectation ; when that is done, 
we shall then talk of other purposes — of wise and 
good purposes, such as I often, very often, intend to 
follow, and shall, I am sure, some day or other begin 
to practise imder your auspices; en attendant, you 
will put yourself under mine for this one day. Was 
it not really too much that of my principal /f^Mra/i^es 
Lady Sophia ISIarley should have sprained her ankle, 
and Miss ToAvnshend's provoking old grandmother 
have chosen to die 1 so there are two frightful gaps 
in my corps de ballet ; but you will — I know you will, 
— kindly fill one of them." 



374 DESTINY. 

"Excuse me," said Edith gravely; I came for a 
very diiferent purpose — I came at the request of 
Lady Elizabeth." 

Lady Waldegrave's countenance changed. "What ! 
has mamma been teasing you already with her ab- 
surdities ? I thought you had been at the Conways. 
I sent a note there to you this morning." 

Edith explained to her that she had been sent for 
by Lady Elizabeth, and described the state in which she 
found her ; but Lady Waldegrave would scarcely hear 
her to an end. "Really this is too tiresome!" cried 
she impatiently. " Surely you might know mamma 
better than to paj^ any regard to such sdnes; and if she 
will be ridiculous, it is surely better that she should 
be so in her own dressing-room than in the face of the 
whole world. Nothing will induce me to j^ermit her to 
make such an exhibition. It might have passed at the 
Court of Louis Quatorze, when antiquated Venuses 
were quite a la mode ; but in the present day such an 
outrage against good taste is not to be endured ! " 

Edith gave a gentle assent as to the impropriety 
of the exhibition, then, as delicately as she could, 
conveyed Lady Elizabeth's message ; and added, " that 
surely something might be done to deprecate her 
displeasure and conciliate her." 

"Oh, after the thing is over it will be time enough 
to do that," replied her Ladyship carelessly. 

" But Lady Elizabeth declares she is determined to 
go abroad immediately, unless you make some con- 
cession to her," said Edith. 



DESTINY. 375 

"That is perhaps the very best thing she can 
do," replied Lady Waldegrave, in the same tone of 
indifterence. 

"But if she goes now, she leaves you in anger. 
Ah, Florinda, can you bear to live under a parent's 
displeasure 1 Will you not rather sacrifice the amuse- 
ment which is the cause of this strife, relinquish your 
theatrical representation, and recall your mother to 
your house f 

► "How ridiculous!" exclaimed Lady Waldegrave 
angrily. "I can scarcely suppose you serious in 
making such a proposal, and I really have no leisure 
at present ior persiflage." 

" Indeed I am serious," said Edith gravely. 

" Pshaw, that must be all make-believe. I know 
you Avould make a good actress ; so pray put oft' 
youi' bonnet, and I will introduce you to the ball- 
room, where my corps de hallet are now practising. 
Now, do dispense with all the lackadaisical, missyish 
can'ts and won'ts, and indeeds, and so forth, and I 
shall take them all for granted, for my moments are 
very precious." 

Edith saw that all hopes of touching a heart so 
seared by selfishness and folly were vain. She there- 
fore relinquished the attempt, and calmly but firmly 
assured Lady Waldegrave it would be in vain to urge 
her to take a part in any theatrical representation. 
Lady Waldegrave coloured with displeasure as she 
said, " Yet you can obstinately refuse to gratify me in 
so trifling a matter, ■while you expect I should sacrifice 



376 DESTINY. 

my own amusement, and that of my friends, for the 
unreasonable whim of another f 

"It is duty that makes the difference," said Edith 
gently. 

" Eather our opinion of what our duties are," 
replied Lady Waldegrave. "I consider it my duty 
to make my house agreeable to my friends, and to 
prevent mamma from making herself ridiculous. I 
also think it my duty to learn my part, Lord Her- 
bert," said she, addressing the intended lover of the 
piece. 

" And it is mine to see that you get it by heart — 
is it not 1 " said he with a smile. 

Edith rose to take leave, and, as she quitted the 
room, felt it a relief to return even to Lady Elizabeth 
and her cottage. 

The unsuccessful result of her embassy called forth 
a fresh burst of indignation from Lady Elizabeth, 
which was still further increased when, upon demand- 
ing her car, doves, and wings, Edith was obliged to 
confess she had wholly forgotten to inquire into their 
fate. Another messenger was immediately despatched, 
with orders not to return without them, as, with the 
true spirit of a little, vindictive mind, she seemed 
wretched at the idea of any one else profiting by her 
misfortunes. In the prospect of disappointing any 
such design, she became more reconciled to her own 
discomfiture, and at length seemed to experience posi- 
tive pleasure in the thoughts of the consternation that 
she flattered herself her sudden fiight would occasion. 



DESTINY 377 

" And now we must talk of our arrangements," said 
she ; " I have ordered my people to have everything 
ready to set off to-morrow, I am sorry, my dear, I 
must leave you behind, as I really cannot take you 
comfortably with me ; besides, girls are rather an 
incumbrance abroad ; but when I am settled myself, I 
shall not forget you. I shall endeavour to find un bon 
parti for you, and I think I shall succeed ; but should 
►I fail in that, you know you have always the resource 
of a convent, where you will have the very best 
society, so much better than living with bourgeois 
relations. In the meantime you must remain with 
me till I take my departure, for I have a thousand 
matters to arrange." 



CHAPTER XLV. 

As Lady Elizabeth's night was day, and her day 
night, Edith had the undistui'bed enjojTnent of the 
morning to herself. She therefore availed herseK of 
the opportunity of collecting the drawings and papers 
which she had previously left at the Cottage, and was 
so employed when ]\Ir. ]\Ielcombe was announced. 
Her writing-case and portefeuille were open before 
her, and part of their contents were scattered pro- 
miscuously on the table at Avhich she was seated. 
She rose to receive him, Init there was something 
of mutual constraint and embarrassment in the meet- 
ing. After the usual commonplace salutations and 
inqiiiries had been exchanged, Mr. Melcombe said, as 
if to deprecate her coldness, "I fear I have been 
guilty of an intrusion at this early hour; but if I 
have, you must forgive me." 

"Why should you fear, and why iwrnt I forgive 
you f inquired Edith, with a smile. 

"Because, when there is much to hope, there is 
always something to fear." 

" There is little room for either in this case," 
replied Edith slightly. 



DESTINY. 379 

" It is only indifference that would exclude hope or 
fear," said he, looking earnestly at her. 

"From anything so indifferent in its natiu'e as 
a morning visit they surely may be excluded," 
answered Edith : " though I believe we are all apt 
to expend oui- hopes and fears even in the issue of 
' to be — or not to be ' at home." 

" The issue of even so trifling an event may, hoAV- 
ever, be important." He paused, then added, "But 
even if I should have trespassed, I think you A\-ill 
forgive me when I tell you the offence is not hkely to 
be soon repeated ; and when next we meet, I trust I 
shall be in different circumstances from those in which 
3^ou have hitherto known me." 

His voice betrayed his emotion, and Edith was 
immediately struck with the thought that he alluded 
to his marriage with the object of his early affection. 
A strange sensation oppressed her. It might be that 
the difference of her own fate struck her forcibly 
when contrasted vrith. the more favoured destiny of 
another. Yet, was he indeed true to his early vows, 
or had she been unconsciously supplanting another ? 
Her heart shrank within her at the dread surmise. 
Alternately her cheek glowed with shame at the idea 
that she was the self- deluded sport of an imaginary 
attachment, and turned pale at the thought that per- 
fidy and falsehood could dwell in such a mind. All 
this Avas the work of a moment, but she remained 
silent for some minutes ; then, making an effort to 
regain her self-possession, she said, " It is seldom that 



380 DESTINY. 

after a long separation people meet under the same 
circumstances : the change in yours, I trust, will be a 
happy one." 

"Yes, the change that will restore an unknown 
exile to his family and country must be a happy 
one," said he, in a voice faltering with emotion. 
"That will entitle him to do what, as a friendless 
unknown adventurer, he dares not, — to seek the regard 
of one long and truly and fondly loved," 

There was no mistaking the tone and the look 
which accompanied the words ; these declared the 
secrets of a heart too noble for dissimulation. Yet 
Edith strove to repel the thought that she could be 
the object of his love; and while a deep blush mantled 
her cheek, she said, " Is she, then, not aware of the 
constancy of your attachment ?" 

"iVbw I hope she is," replied he; "and that even 
in absence, and under doubts and suspicions, she will 
believe that a time will come when all will be cleared 
up. Would she be wi'ong in granting me this much 
of hope r' 

" I cannot tell," said Edith faintly ; and she would 
have withdrawn the hand he had taken. 

"Ah, do not say so!" cried he earnestly, as he 
still retained it. 

"I cannot judge for another," said Edith, in 
increasing confusion. 

" No, not for another — for yourself ! " 

"And she so long and truly loved?" said Edith, 
in tones scarcely audible. 



DESTINY. 381 

" It is she whom I now ask only to believe that 
one daj' I may aspire to her regard, when the mystery 
which now excludes me from her sympathy is disclosed. 
Is this asking too much ?" he said, in deep agitation. 

" No," said Edith, in a low, faltering voice. 

"That is enough," he exclaimed, as a glow of 
pleasure lighted up his countenance. " In the midst 
of dear, approving friends, then, you will acknowledge 
me!" 

On the table which stood before them some drawings 
lay scattered ; and as Edith, in confusion, turned her 
eyes from the deep, earnest gaze which was fixed upon 
her, they fell upon a view of Inch Orran by sunset 
— the parting gift of Lucy. Beneath were written 
these words from Ossian — 

" My soul is full of other times ; 
The joy of my youth returns." 

"There," said she, in emotion, "is the dear home 
where, ere long, I hope to be." 

" Inch Orran ! " exclaimed Melcombe, in a tone 
that thrilled to her heart. She started, and- turned 
upon him a look of anxious inquiry, but his eyes were 
fixed on the drawing. Why should the simple pro- 
nouncing of a name conjure up visions of the past ? 
Why should a tone — the tone of a stranger's voice — thus 
suddenly recall the past, the lost, the loved of other 
times to him unknown 1 These feelings were depicted 
on Edith's countenance as she continued to gaze in 
breathless suspense. 



382 DESTINY. 

Struck with her paleness, and the intense interest 
expressed in her countenance, he seemed suddenly to 
recollect himself, and said, with assumed calmness, 
"That scene, once viewed, can never be forgotten. 
It was on such an evening I last beheld it," added he ; 
and his voice quivered as he spoke, while his eyes 
were again riveted on the drawing. With an impulse 
for Avhich she could not account, Edith took from her 
writing-box a miniature of Mrs. Malcolm ; it had been 
painted soon after Ronald's departure, and had been 
destined for him ; but subsequent events had defeated 
the intention, and the picture had been given to her. 
She now, with a feeling for which she could not have 
found a name, with a trembling hand placed the picture 
before him, while she said, "There is the picture of the 
only mother I ever knew. Was she too known to you f 

For a moment he gazed upon it with a look of the 
most passionate fondness ; tears filled his eyes, but 
still he continued to gaze. Then shading his brow 
with his hand, as if to conceal his weakness, the tears 
forced their way through the fingers, vainly spread to 
hide them. Struggling to rej)ress emotions too 
powerful to be restrained, he leant his head on the 
table, while his Avhole frame betrayed the agitation of 
his mind, and spoke those voiceless feelings with 
which his heart seemed panting. 

As Edith beheld this overpowering emotion, a 
thousand wild, vague, bewildering fancies floated 
through her brain ; looks and tones and words that 
told of the lost, the dead, came thronging upon her 



DESTINTY. 383 

in a strange confusion, mingling with the present, the 

living . Stronger and stronger, the visions crowded 

on her hrain ; she felt as if reason was forsaking her. 
With the paleness of death on her brow, and eyes 
which seemed as if bursting from their sockets, she 
started up, and exclaimed, " Who — oh ! in mercy tell 

me — who " Her gaze w^as fixed on him with an 

expression of fearful scrutiny ; but her pale lips were 
unable to utter more. Her lover's agitation was 
almost equal to her own ; words seemed to be strug- 
gling for utterance, while yet by a mighty effort he 
restrained them. At length, in a voice of deep, yet 
subdued emotion, he said, " Edith, I have not deceived 
you — can you trust mel" 

"Oh, you know not what you are doing!" she 
exclaimed, as she withdrew her hands wildly from 
his; "you know not the dark, the wild, the impossible 
things I fancy," and she gasped as she spoke, and 
drew shuddering aAvay. 

" Edith, dearest, Edith, believe — only believe that 
I am true, and that nothing is impossible ! " 

" What ! not that the seas should give up their 
dead '? " cried she frantically. 

" Not their dead ! But, Edith, do not — oh, do not 
tempt me thus to break a vow, rashly — perhaps im- 
piously — taken, but which I hold sacred ; in a little 
while, a few short months, the time will come ; 
dearest — most beloved — my first, my only love — say 
that you will yet trust me, and then — and then let 
us part ! " 



384 DESTINY. 

For some minutes Edith could not speak, but at 
length, restored to composure by the anguish which 
clouded his brow, she faintly articulated, " I will ! — 
I do ! " 

"At Inch Orran, then, let us meet. There let me 
find you — there let me claim you." 

Edith faintly breathed a single word — a name 
which had ever lain cherished in her heart. 

"Yours, and only yours, dearest Edith, by what- 
ever name ; to all else — dead — forgotten " 

" Oh, not forgotten," cried Edith, bursting into 
tears ; " still — still loved and mourned ! " 

"Edith, I conjure you, tempt me not; make not 
the error of my youth to bring do"\vn perjury and dis- 
honour upon me now ; you have said you would trust 
me — may I not trust you '2 " 

In a moment Edith conquered her tremors — her 
tears were arrested in their course — she did not 
speak; but the look with which she gave him her 
hand needed not words to attest her resolution. 
Melcombe pressed it to his lips, and tore himself 
away. 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

How like a dream, a vision of the night, did this brief 
and passing scene appear to Edith ! Again and again 
she asked herself, Could it be that the lost, the 
lamented, had thus, as it were, started into Hfe ; that 
the loved companion of her childish days was now 
the chosen of her matured affections? And these 
affections, had they been lightly transferred ? Could 
affections, once so blighted as hers had been, ever 
again revive, and o"\vn a second spring ? Was it 
indeed love that she now owned and felt? Oh, how 
different from that which had cast its dazzling and 
delusive glare over her young imagination, and tinged 
so many of the radiant years of youth with colours 
fair, 'tis true, but fading as the tints of the rainbow ! 

Love had formerly been a sentiment, — a false, 
narrow, exclusive sentiment, — shared only by the 
object which inspired it ; now, it was a noble, gener- 
ous, diffusive princijile, which glowed in her heart, 
and sought to impart a portion of its own blessedness 
around. She had loved Reginald as she could have 
loved anything that fancy had painted to her as fair 
and fascinating. She had invested him with every 

VOL. II. 2 C D. 



386 DESTINY. 

noble and generous attribute which the young and 
imaginative so lavishly bestow on those they love. 
But the illusion had long since been dispelled, never 
again to gather over her heart. Again she loved, but 
by a light which could not deceive, — by that divine 
light which taught her not to love the mere perishing 
idol of life's passing hour, but the immortal being, 
with whose soul her own might joy to claim kindred 
throughout eternity. And the dear ones who still 
mourned his loss — oh, theirs would be rapture 
almost to agony ! But she dared not allow her 
thoughts to dwell on such a theme. 

It was long ere her spirits were sufficiently tran- 
quillised to admit of her returning to the frivolous 
being with whom she was still associated, but from 
whom she was soon to part, most probably for ever. 
With her own heart overflowing with love and 
gratitude to the Divine Disposer of events, fain would 
she have sought to impart to another of His creatures 
a portion of that heavenly-mindedness which was the 
fountain of her own happiness. But Lady Elizabeth 
rejected with horror, as something that savoured of 
Methodism and enthusiasm, the slightest allusion to 
anything of a sacred nature when spoken out of 
church, and preferred the indulgence of her own dis- 
turbed fancy — as it painted to her pleasures and 
triumphs that might have been hers — to all the 
peculiar treasures of wisdom and peace which could 
be offered to her. 

The day was far advanced ere she made her ap- 



DESTINY, 387 

poarance, if possible, in increased ill-humour. As 
she dawdled over her dejeuner h, la fourchetie, suddenly 
the sound of horses' feet at full speed was heard 
advancing ; and as Edith raised her eyes she caught 
a glimpse of one of Lady Waldegrave's grooms, as he 
galloped past the window, his horse in a foam. He 
stopped at the principal entrance, and presently a 
loud, unsteady, ominous-soimding knock was heard at 
the hall door. 

"Who— what is thatf cried Lady EHzabeth. 

"I think it is a messenger from Woodlands," said 
Edith. 

"Ah! but he comes too late. I will listen to no 
apology now — the time is past," And at that moment 
the butler entered with consternation on his face. 

"An express from Woodlands, my lady," 

"Well, what then?" demanded his lady peevishly. 

" Sir Eeginald has been badly hurt, my lady," 

" Badly hurt ! " rej)eated she, much in the same tone. 

"Yes, my lady — wounded," 

" Wounded ! How very unpleasant — how was it — 
where? Edith, do you hear thaf?" Edith did hear, 
Ijut, pale and panic-struck, she was unable to articulate. 

"The ball has not been extracted, my lady," 

" A ball ! Good Heaven, how shocking ! I am 
quite overcome ! How dreadful ! Do call Monsieur 
Lamotte, I shall certainly faint ! " 

" Lady WaldegTave is in great distress, my lady." 

Edith waited to hear no more, but, quitting 
the apartment as Monsieur Lamotte entered, she 



388 DESTINY. 

hastened to find the servant, and learn from himself 
what had actually taken place ; but the man seemed 
too much stunned and surprised to be able to give a 
clear account of what had happened. What he did 
relate, however, was sufficiently tragical and appal- 
ling. Sir Eeginald had fought that morning Avith 
Lord Herbert, and been brought home severely 
wounded. The report of his death had circulated 
among his creditors, and executions were already in 
the house. Lady "Waldegrare was in fits, and left 
almost alone, the party having dispersed. 

Such was the amount of the intelligence with 
Avhich Edith returned to the breakfast-table. 

"This is too shocking — much too shocking!" ex- 
claimed Lady Elizabeth, in one of her hysterical 
tremors. "What is to be done ?" 

" Had we not best go to Woodlands immediately 1" 
replied Edith, who, though trembling ^dth horror, 
remained calm and collected. 

"Why, yes — perhaps so; and yet what can I do 
now 1 Had I been in the house, as I ought to have 
been, it would have been very different ; but now I 
can do nothing — the time is past " 

" Oh no ; do not say so," cried Edith ; " this is the 
time to be of use to Lady Waldegrave, now when she 
is in affliction. Oh, sm-ely you will go to her ! " 

"Why, considering how I have been treated," said 
her Ladyship with asperity. 

"Ah, do not think of that at such a time," inter- 
rupted Edith, with emotion. 



DESTINY. 389 

"It is the most inconvenient time for me that 
could possibly be ! " replied her Ladyship sharply. 
"At the very moment when I Avas setting off — my 
nerves so shook, too, with what has passed ! How in 
the world did it happen?" 

"I cannot tell," cried Edith; "I only know Sir 
Eeginald has fought, and been wounded, perhaps 
dying," added she, bursting into tears, 

" Shocking and foolish ! — 'tis too much. And an 
execution in the house ! — that surely might have been 
prevented?" 

" Let us still try what may be done. Oh, let us 
hasten to Woodlands !" 

" Have patience, child ! How is it possible for me, 
situated as I am ? And what am I to do after I am 
there?" 

"Then suffer me to go — allow me to order the 
carriage." 

" "N^Tiy, that is certainly very inconvenient for me ; 
but, however, I suppose I must give up thoughts of 
going to-day, — at least I shall not decide upon any- 
thing till you return. So pray make haste. Tell 
Florinda how excessively I have been shocked. And 
by -the -bye, I shall send my physician to poor Sir 
Reginald ; Monsieur Lamotte will accompany you." 

But Edith had learnt from the servant that there 
was abundance of medical assistance already provided; 
she therefore dechned the attendance of JNIonsieur 
Lamotte, and the carriage having been quickly got 
ready, she threw herself into it — every consideration 



390 DESTINY. 

absorbed in generous sympathy for those she was so 
earnest to befriend. 

How changed was the scene that awaited her at 
Woodlands from that which she had witnessed not 
many hours before ! Then all had been sunshine and 
gaiety and melody ; now the day was chill and dull ; 
the velvet lawn and beauteous flower-beds were already 
defaced and trodden down ; carts were loading in 
front of the house; the broad flight of steps was 
strewed with every description of furniture and valu- 
ables ; the beautiful vases, filled with the choicest 
exotics, had been overturned or broken in pieces, and 
their fragments lay mingled with the cherished plants 
that had graced them ; grim, scowling, hardened- 
looking men were pushing and swearing at one 
another, as they each laid claim to some article of 
value, and their loud execrations and tumultuous din 
were still worse than the silent mementoes of ruin 
which lay scattered around. The hall, lately filled 
with the fairest works of Italy, now presented a 
similar scene of devastation. The public rooms were 
fast dismantling ; Lady Waldegrave's suite had already 
been despoiled of its treasures. Shuddering at this 
painful spectacle, Edith, after some delay, got one of 
the housemaids to conduct her to Lady Waldegrave. 
As she passed along, she met one of the surgeons 
coming from Sir Reginald's apartment, and she was 
relieved to hear from him that the Avound was not 
considered dangerous ; that the ball, which had en- 
tered the fleshy part of the shoulder, had been safely 



DESTINY. 391 

extracted. The only danger now to be dreaded was 
from the agitation of mind occasioned by the distress- 
ing scenes that were passing, and which it was 
impossible Avholly to conceal from his knowledge. 
With a heart lightened of half its cares for the 
wretched fate of one Avho had been so dear to her, 
Edith followed her guide, shuddering with horror at 
the scenes of ferocious pillage she everyAvhere en- 
countered. At length, in a chamber in the attics, she 
found the refuge of the hapless mistress of all this 
splendid ruin ! 

Lady Waldegrave was extended on the bed, per- 
fectly calm, as if from exhaustion, but with misery 
and despair impressed on every feature. On Edith's 
entrance she half opened her eyes, but immediately 
closed them, as if determined neither to notice nor be 
noticed. Edith, however, approached the bed, and, 
taking the hand which lay almost powerless by her, 
pressed it in hers ; still Lady Waldegrave remained 
immovable. 

Edith was silent for some minutes. At length she 
said, "I have come on Lady Elizabeth's account as 
Avell as my own ; she charged me to express to you her 
sorrow on this occasion." Lady Waldegrave made no 
reply. " She Avill come to you, I am sure, if you wish 
it," resumed Edith ; but she received no answer. " In 
the meantime, if I can be of any service to you " 

" Oh, those horrid sounds ! " exclaimed Lady Walde- 
grave, shrieking, and burying her face in her pillow, 
as a volley of abuse and imprecations ascended from 



392 DESTINY. 

beneath her Ann clow, "Will no one save me from 
this?" and wild hysterical sobs shook her frame. 

*' I fear it is impossible," said Edith soothingly ; 
"distressing as it is, do try to bear it !" 

" Is there nobody to assist me 1 — nobody to drive 
away these people — these robbers? — they have seized 
even my jewels !" she exclaimed, casting her eyes up 
to Heaven, as if in appeal 

"This is indeed a trial, painful for you to endure," 
said Edith, in the same gentle tone ; " but, distressing 
as it is, there is still comfort in the midst of it ; Avhat 
a consolation to know that Sir Eeginald's wound is 
not dangerous ! " Lady Waldegrave waved her head 
with a gesture of impatience. "Ah, Florinda, think 
A\'hat it might have been to himself, what he might have 
inflicted on another, and thank God it is no worse ! " 

" He could have done nothing worse than he has 
done," exclaimed she passionately; "he has been the 
ruin of my happiness, of my fortune, of my reputation 
— ^his very name is my abhorrence ! " 

Edith's blood ran cold. " Oh, Florinda, in mercy 
do not talk thus ! Eemember he is your husband — the 
father of your child !" 

" And has been the ruin of mj^self and my child by 
his madness — but do not mention him." 

Edith feared there was guilt, no less than folly, in 
the case, or at least imprudence bordering upon guilt; 
and she said in a faltering voice, " I am ignorant of 
the cause of this unhappy rencontre." 

Lady Waldegrave's colour rose. " Then ' tis well 



DESTINY. 393 

you should remain so. — But no, that cannot be; you 
will hear a thousand lies, and you will perhaps believe 
them all, as some other of my friends have done, and 
like them you Avill desert me in the time of need." 

" No," said Edith ; " happen what may, I will not 
desert you in your present situation." 

Again Lady Waldegrave's colour deepened, while, 
with a rising at her throat, she said, "What! not 
even if you should be told that my husband fought 
to avenge his honour?" 

Edith became pale as death, and for some minutes 
she was imable to articulate. At length, in a low 
voice of deep emotion, she said, " Not even then could 
I forsake you in the hour of need." 

For a moment Lady Waldegrave appeared slightly 
touched, then in increasing confusion she went on : 
" The world had chosen to give me Lord Herbert as a 
lover. I need not tell you who know me, and had 
opportunities of judging for yourseK, that it was a 
mere idle or malicious rumour, such as are circulated 
in thousands every day, and which nobody pays any 
regard to ; but having drunk too much wine, or lost 
too much money, or, in short, I cannot tell how — but 
in a moment of delirium Sir Reginald thought proper 
to become jealous, and to insult Lord Herbert; the 
consequence was, it was necessary they should go out 
this morning; judge, then, whether I have not cause 
of resentment?" 

"I cannot judge," said Edith faintly; "God only 
can judge ; but if you are innocent" 



394 DESTINY. 

"Can you doubt it?" interrupted Lady Walde- 
grave indignantly. 

"At least there must have been imprudence to 
justify the suspicion of guilt," said Edith. 

" I am no hypocrite — I never studied appearances." 

" Then, since conscious of your innocence, you can 
more easily forgive Sir Eeginald if the imprudence 
has been his," said Edith. 

"You know not what I have to forgive!" cried 
Lady Waldegrave passionately. " AVhen brought 
home, even in presence of my servants he ordered me 
from his sight. Can I forgive such an insult as thati" 

"Forgive all, as you hope to be forgiven," said 
Edith. 

" Do not talk to me any more of this horrid affair, 
for Heaven's sake ; but tell me what I shall do — how 
I shall get away from these dreadful scenes." 

" Sir Reginald cannot be removed," said Edith ; 
" surely then you will not leave the house while he is 
in it?" 

"To what purpose should I remain"?" cried Lady 
Waldegrave impatiently. 

" To be near him," replied Edith. 

"What! after having suffered so great an indig- 
nity f' 

" Yes, assuredly ; he must have suffered, he is still 
suflfering, much on your account ; his state must still 
be precarious " 

"Pshaw — nonsense; the wound is a mere nothing 
— Dr. Smith told me so himself." 



DESTINY. 395 

"But the agitation of his mind may render it 
dangerous ; should it prove so (as who can tell 1), and 
if, in the prospect of danger, he should wish to see 
you once more, to exchange forgiveness — ah, Florinda, 
could you ever forgive yourself if you had forsaken 
^your husband's dying hedl" 

" But how is it possible for me to remain in this 
-svretched state'?" she exclaimed, giving way to a 
. violent burst of selfish sorrow as she cast her eyes 
around the room. 

"This apartment is quite comfortable," said Edith; 
" and if you will allow me, I Avill share it with you 
while you remain. But, oh ! do not think of quitting 
the house while your husband is in it. If, as you 
say, your reputation is at stake, surely even on that 
account you are better here than you could be else- 
where. " 

That consideration seemed to have some weight, 
and at length Edith prevailed. She therefore sent 
back the carriage to Lady Ehzabeth, with a note to 
prepare her for what she had to encounter, and a re- 
quest that she would lose no time in coming to her 
daughter ; then, with all the ardour and sweetness of 
Christian charity, she devoted herself to the task she 
had undertaken, of supporting the wretched being 
thus thrown upon her compassion. 



CHAPTER XLVIL 

Although Lady Waldegrave had expressed a wish 
that her mother should come to her, yet no sooner did 
she hear of her arrival than it was apparent it had 
only been for the sake of appearances she had desu-ed 
her presence. "For Heaven's sake, do not suffer 
mamma to talk to me," cried she to Edith ; "it will 
kill me if she does ; I cannot be tortured with ques- 
tions ; I shall go distracted if she talks of what has 
passed." 

But the duel, its causes and consequences, had 
made slight impression on Lady Elizabeth's mind, 
in comparison of the execution and its effects ; these, 
together with her own injuries and distresses, affected 
her so much that some time elasped before she was 
suJficiently composed to be conducted to her daughter. 
For some time sobs and broken exclamations were 
all the conversation. 

"My poor, dear Florinda!" exclaimed she, in 
hysterical emotion. " Good Heavens ! how shocking ! 
But you know I told you, you certainly would be 
punished for your undutiful behaviour towards me. 
Not that I blamed you, my sweetest. And all those 



DESTINY. 397 

charming pictures and marbles — shocking ! And that 
mosaic-table, which I did covet — it quite kills me to 
think of it. I foresaw this marriage Avould be your 
ruin, my darling; but we won't talk of it. How 
sadly you must have been shook by all this ! Dr. 
'Smith assures me a wound in the shoulder is nothing ; 
but you look very ill yourself, my dear, quite abinide ; 
and I have had a wretched night. Only conceive 
how very inconvenient — such a contretemps ! Every- 
thing was packed up, and, in fact, I was just setting 
off for the Continent when I received the provoking 
intelligence ; but I have put off my departure for a 
few days, that I may see you tolerably comfortable 
before I go. I am haj)py you have got dear, good 
Edith ; she will, I am sure, do everything for you. 
But it is dreadful remaining here. Surely, my dear, 
you will leave this dreadful place % " 

" I know not where to go," said Lady Waldegrave 
despairingly. 

" How foolish, my dear, to talk so ! Can't you go 
to town?" 

"And find things worse, if possible, than even 
here," replied Lady Waldegrave in the same tone. 

" Shocking ! Well, go anywhere ; to an hotel — 
to — to — in short, you can be at no loss ; but, apropos, 
Avhat was the cause of that horrid affair 1 — how was 
it? Lord Herbert is the best-natured man in the 
world." 

" Some foolish quarrel about anything, or nothing," 
cried Lady Waldegrave. "But pray, mamma, don't 



398 DESTINY. 

remain in this scene of horrors ; it makes me ^vl"etched 
to see you — it does, indeed." 

" 'Tis indeed very sad, and Monsieur Lamotte was 
quite opposed to my coming ; but I said I was deter- 
mined, whatever it might cost, to make a point of 
seeing you. I knew it would do you good, and that 
I should feel more comfortable ; for, you know, there 
are such absurd things said upon these occasions. My 
maid told me this morning the talk in the neighbour- 
hood was, that you had actually gone off with Lord 
Herbert — shocking and foolish! that Sir Eeginald 
had pursued you, and fought ; and, in short, I can't 
tell you what ridiculous things are said; but it is 
quite a comfort to me to see you so well, although 
j'ou do look pale. But surely those odious people 
will be obliged to replace everything 1 And, apropos, 
they can have no right whatever to my car and doves, 
and I assure you those wings cost me a great deal of 
money. How kind in Lady He;y'^vood to take poor 
Dudley out of the way ! " 

In this manner she continued to babble on till she 
took her departure, with a promise of returning the 
following day. But in the interim she had caught 
cold by her visit to Woodlands, she said, which kept 
her at home ; and Lady Waldegrave was seized with 
a nervous, feverish attack, which confined her to bed. 
Slighted and neglected by the few attendants who 
remained, it was Edith's part to nurse and tend her, 
which she did day and night with the most unremit- 
ting care and tenderness. 



DESTINY. 399 

Florinda received many pretty little pink and blue 
billets from dear friends in town, who were djdng to 
hear of her, and some even left cards of inquiry in 
the course of their morning's airing; but not one 
xame to offer personal aid or sympathy. Lady Eliza- 
beth seemed to think she had amply discharged her 
maternal duties by a single visit ; for the next account 
of her was, that she had set off for Paris, where she 
said she would expect to hear from dear Florinda 
before proceeding to Eome, Avhere it was absolutely 
necessary she should winter. 

Admu'al and Lady Arabella Conway had been 
kindly attentive, and done all in their power to pro- 
mote the comfort of the wretched pair, thus thro^mi 
for the present on the resources of their friends. 
They were not ignorant of the rumours that were 
afloat concerning the cause of the duel ; and without 
pretending to form a judgment one way or other, 
they had from the first agreed with Edith on the pro- 
priety of Lady \Yaldegrave remaining where she was. 
She seemed now on the brink of a precipice, and a 
single false step might plunge her in irretrievable ruin. 
She had also abated much of the high tone which she 
had at first assumed, and it was evident she was willing 
to submit to at least the appearance of a reconciliation. 

During this period Sir Eeginald had been making 
rapid progress towards recovery, as was learnt from 
his medical attendants, for neither by word nor deed 
had he taken the shghtest notice of Lady Waldegrave. 
The time was now come, however, when some explana- 



400 DESTINY. 

tion must take place. He had been able for the first 
time to be moved into the study adjoining his dressing- 
room, and having stood that trial, he had declared his 
determination of being removed to town the follow- 
ing day. On receiving this information Florinda 
appeared overwhelmed "svith surprise and mortifica- 
tion. It was evident from this that it was Sir Eegi- 
nald's intention to abandon her — to leave her destitute, 
friendless — almost penniless — with a stain upon her 
reputation which this desertion would render for ever 
indelible. In the tumult of her feelings she wrote to 
him, but her letter was returned in a blank cover, 
unopened. When the first burst of passionate indig- 
nation at this insult had subsided, she besought Edith 
to see him, and learn from himself what his intentions 
were ; to represent to him the sacrifice she had made 
in refusing to quit the house while he remained in it ; 
and, finally, that it was the opinion of her family and 
friends that no separation ought to take place at 
present. No office could be more revolting to Edith's 
feelings than the one she was thus called on to under- 
take — and by whom? By her who had so cruelly 
supplanted her in those afiections which had once 
been her all. "Was it indeed possible she was called 
upon to go a supplicant for favour to her now deserted 
rival 1 But Edith's pure and generous heart felt no 
base triumph at the thought ; no unhallowed gleam 
of pleasure shone in her sad but pitjdng eyes as she 
beheld the wretchedness of one who had wrought her 
so mucli Avoe ! 



DESTINY. 401 

Florinda's tears and entreaties prevailed over 
Edith's better judgment and finer feelings, and she 
sent to request an interview with Sir Reginald. Only 
the purity and the rectitude of her intentions could 
have Justified to herself the step she was now taking 
in thus interfering between those bound by so near 
and holy a tie — a tie which, when once burst asunder, 
can never be hallowed and blest again ! 

It was with such painful and embarrassing feelings 
that Edith entered the apartment Avhere Sir Reginald 
lay reclining on a sofa, pale and emaciated, with the 
languor of sickness and sorrow diff"used over his form 
and features. He rose to receive her, his wounded 
arm suspended in a sling; and as he extended his 
hand to her, she shuddered as she thought how re- 
cently that hand had been uplifted to take away the 
life of another ! Both were deeply affected, and for 
some minutes neither spoke. At length, making 
an effort, he said, " This is a kind visit, Edith, if I 

cannot say more " His voice faltered, and he 

stopped. 

"Do not say anything on that subject," replied 
Edith gently; "it is enough that you beheve it is 
kindly meant." 

Sir Reginald pointed to an open letter which lay 
on the table before him ; and, while wounded pride 
seemed to struggle with better feeling, he said, " Do 
you know from whence this camel Is it from 
Admiral Conway 1" 

Edith took the paper, on Avhich was simply 

VOL. IT. 2d d. 



402 DESTINY. 

written, "A loan from an old friend." It contained 
bills to the amount of five hundred pounds; and, 
even through the attempted disguise of the hand, she 
recognised, with an emotion of surprise and pleasure, 
the writing of Mr. Melcomhe. " I am certain it is 
not from Admiral Conway," she said ; " but there is 
a subject of greater interest I would speak to you 
of " 

"I am aware of all you have done," said Sir 
Eeginald, "and I know you can mean nothing that 
is not good ; but," added he, in increasing agitation, 
"the best intentions may be mistaken — they who 
mean well may be misled." 

Edith hesitated to proceed, as she perceived him 
already prepared to deprecate the introduction of the 
subject on which she had come, and she remained 
silent and irresolute. 

In a few minutes Sir Eeginald, with more firm- 
ness, said, "There is one subject, Edith, and only 
one, which I would not have you name to me — on 
any other say what you will." 

"I will not affect to misunderstand you. Sir 
Eeginald," said Edith ; " there is a subject which 
you may well deem too delicate to be intruded 
upon, I feel it is so, and fain, very fain, I would be 
spared " 

"I believe you," replied Sir Eeginald bitterly; 
" the task is not one fitted for you." 

" But I have undertaken it," said Edith faintly, 

" But you knoAv not — you could not know — what 



DESTINY. 403 

it was you had undertaken ; it has been imposed upon 
you by another." 

"Be it so," said Edith soothingly. "Can you 
blame that wife who would try every method to be 
reconciled to her husband?" 

The cloud still deepened on Sir Reginald's brow 
as he said, " Yes, I blame the wife who, conscious of 
her own unworthiness, could stain the purity of 
another by employing her to plead her cause." 

"Then see and hear her plead her own cause," 
said Edith eai-nestly, and with a deeiDening coloiu\ 

"Neither, and never!" answered Sir Reginald 
sternly. 

"Oh, in mercy say not so! — That is a fearful 
word; as you hope to be forgiven yourself, forgive 
her. Erring and imprudent she admits she has been, 
but in the face of Heaven, she attests her innocence." 
She paused, but Sir Reginald made no reply; she 
trusted that he was relenting, and went on : " Surely 
then you will not visit her errors thus harshly ; you 
Avill not cast from you the being you vowed to love 
and protect. She is in sickness — in sorrow — your own 
Florinda ! the mother of your boy ! Ah, Reginald, 
surely you Avill not thus abandon her?" 

" 'Tis in vain ! " answered Sir Reginald, -with 
a convulsive gasp, and shading his face with his 
hand. 

"Think how you once loved her!" said Edith 
imploringly. 

"You know how I did!" he replied in a tone so 



404 DESTINY. 

deep and stem as thrilled to Edith's heart. Tears 
rose to her eyes — she felt she could say uo more. 

Sir Eeginald made another effort to regain his 
firmness, but his voice still faltered, when he said, 
" This is perhaps the only request I could have re- 
fused you ; but I do refuse it ; my haj>piness has been 
sacrificed, my confidence has been for ever destroyed, 
and 'tis in vain to strive to renew it." He paused, 
then resumed in a firm and decided tone, " When I 
go to town, arrangements shall be immediately made 
for a final separation. All that can be done for her 
comfort shall be done on my part. Now, God bless 
you, Edith. Will you not say as much for me 1 " 

"Ah, Eeginald," said Edith, as the tears dropped 
upon the hand which held hers, " the blessings which 
I would ask for you of God are those which you 
would reject ; but I do ask of Him," added she with 
fervour, "to bless you %vith the knowledge of Him- 
self." They pressed each other's hands in silence, 
and parted — for ever ! 

There was more of indignation than sorrow in 
Lady Waldegrave's emotion when made acquainted 
with her husband's determination. The same day 
(having received a remittance from Sir Eeginald) she 
set off for Paris to join Lady Elizabeth ; and Edith 
retui'ned to her dear friends at Oakley House, to await 
the airival of the Eibleys. 



CHAPTER XLVIII. 

The autumn was now far advanced ; and even amid 
the pomp of groves and garniture of fields Edith 
sighed as she thought of that glorious effulgence which, 
at this season more especiall)^ would be lighting up 
her owTi mountain land ! — of those setting suns, not, 
as in softer climes, sinking gently and imperceptibly 
to rest, but retiring in the full majesty of a splendid 
retinue of gorgeous clouds, and even with their last 
rays imparting new beauty to the purple mountain, 
the green wave, and the gray rock. And oh ! what 
thick -coming fancies, what visions of even earthly 
joy, were now associated in her mind with the 
thoughts of her Highland home ! 

The Admiral and Lady Arabella were aware of 
the attachment which had been formed between her 
and Melcombe ; but they felt satisfied when they also 
learnt that it was when she should be in the midst of 
her nearest and dearest friends he was to return to 
claim her, and from their hands that he was to receive 
her. After repeated delays the Ribleys at length 
arrived; and Edith, to the mutual regret of herself 
and her kind friends, bade them adieu, and returned 



40G DESTINY. 

once more to the Grove and the Mall. The delays 
had been occasioned by Mrs. Eibley's illness; she 
had had several bilious attacks, and was still evidently 
far from being convalescent. She nevertheless re- 
laxed nothing of her minute observances, but pursued 
her course of small, dull, frivolous occupations with 
unabated rigour. 

"Been very near losing Kitty my dear !" said Mr, 
Eibley to Edith, with a shake of the head. "Sad 
thing, if I had lost Kitty my dear — eh?" 

"You are very good, Mr. Eibley," said his lady 
gravely; "and it did occur to me that, should you 
have been deprived of me, probably your best plan 
would have been, at a proper period, to have paid 
your addresses to our tried and excellent friend, Mrs. 
Eose Popkin." 

" Sure, my dear, if I didn't think the very same 
thing ! Nice little woman is Mrs. Eose — pretty 
fortune of her own ; and, sure, my dear, if it hadn't 
been for her the water souchey would have been 
quite spoiled ! " 

Mrs. Macauley had made many attempts to be per- 
mitted to return to her cottage, but in vain ; all her 
eflforts to extricate herself from Johnnie and his small 
people were fruitless. They had, one and all of them, 
discovered her value ; and, while she remained within 
their reach, it was evident she would never be suffered 
to rest. Edith had gone to visit her as often as it 
was in her power, and had found her the inmate of a 
small, crowded, noisy dwelling, beset with spoiled. 



DESTINY. 407 

sickly children, hanging round her, clinging to her, 
leaning and sitting upon her in all directions. The 
eflfect of all this was beginning to be visible upon her ; 
her neat, straight back seemed bending, as if more 
from the weight of children than of years ; her 
cheeks were draAvn down, as if by the constant strok- 
ing of fond hands; her bright, sunny eyes looked 
red and heavy, as if from want of sleep ; and she 
said she thought she was getting a little deaf ; but, 
maybe, it was only the din of the bairns, poor things ! 
Altogether, she had got what Mrs. Johnnie, in her 
dialect, called "a puled look." Edith, grieved to be- 
hold the ravages committed upon her dear old friend 
by the concentrated affection of a whole family, pre- 
vailed so far as to have her brought to the cottage 
for a week or two previous to the time when the 
Eibleys Avere to remove to town. 

"Oh, my dear!" said she to Edith, as, the first 
day of her return, she sat in the little garden, basking 
in the mild rays of an autumnal sun, — "this is a 
cordial to my heart ! and how thankful I ought to be 
— though I am not just so stout as I was — that I'm 
permitted to sit at my ease here, with all my senses 
about me ! and, for as old as I am, to be able to 
watch the sun going down, and to smell the flowers, 
and to hear the birds sing. 'Deed, that sweet robin 
redbreast puts me in mind of what I once read in an 
old book about it. And you know — though I'm no 
great reader — I never forget what I do read, which is 
a great mercy. 'As oft,' says he, 'as I hear the 



408 DESTINY. 

robin redbreast chaunt it as cheerfully in September, 
the beginning of winter, as in March, the approach of 
the summer, why should not we give as cheerful 
entertainment to the hoary, frosty hairs of our age's 
winter, as to the primroses of our youth's spring 1 I 
am sent to the ant to learne industry ; to the dove, to 
learne innocency ; to the serpent, to learne wisdome ; 
and why not to this bird, to learne patience and cheer- 
fulnesser But oh! my dear, where am I to go to 
learn something more particular of that fine creature 
that has gone away and left us? Not a bit if I'm 
any wiser than I was about him ! But you know 
who I mean, my darling, or your cheeks Avould not 
turn so red." 

"Dear Macky ! you will learn all in time ; he will 

meet us at Inch Orran, when " Edith could not 

proceed — emotion choked her utterance — she could 
only press her old friends hands in silence, as she laid 
her head on her shoulder to hide the tears which 
were swimming in her eyes. 

Mrs. Macauley understood what Avas implied in 
this agitation, and she exclaimed in rapture, " 'Deed 
then, and it gives me new heart to hear it, and I'll 
bide my time patiently ! Did not I always tell you 
he would turn out well 1 Not a bit I would wonder 
if he was to turn out a Malcolm after all !" 

In blissful anticipations of the great, though vague 
and shapeless things that were awaiting Glenroy's 
daughter, Mrs. Macauley soon regained her usual 
health and animation. When the time arrived for 



DESTINY. 409 

the Ribleys' removal to town, she again resumed her 
place in Johnnie's family; but the period of her sojourn 
was to be short, as the ■winter was now advancing, 
and early in spring Captain Malcolm was to come in 
person to convey them once more to Inch Orran. 
Meanwhile, they both devoted themselves to the 
duties that had devolved upon them. There was at 
least more of variety and animation in JNIrs. Macauley's 
life than in Edith's ; for her sole employment was to 
bear Mrs. Ribley company in her own apartment, to 
which she was chiefly confined. Certainly, if unfit- 
ness of minds in those who are condemned to associate 
closely together be a species of torture (as doubtless 
it is), Edith was sorely tried, but she bore it not only 
patiently, but cheerfully; insomuch that even Mrs. 
Ribley's cold nature seemed thawing into something 
that could not be called affection, but was decided 
approbation. 

Her health, however, now began to improve, and 
at length she was so much recovered that Edith Avas 
permitted to spend a week or two occasionally with 
Lady Arabella, who seemed to have no fears of the 
contamination of the City communicating itself to 
Grosvenor Square. 

At this time Edith received a letter from Lady 
Elizabeth from Rome, Mo-itten in her usual style. 
The purjjort of it was, in the first place, to let her 
know that she had quarrelled Avith her daughter, 
who had gone to reside at Naples, and that she her- 
self, feeling the want of a protector, was about to 



410 DESTINY. 

bestow her hand upon the Principe Pompolino, a 
very charming, talented person, though possessed of 
no fortune, and not particularly handsome. Some 
time or another she hoped to make him known to 
dear Edith, who, she was sure, would admire him 
excessively. 

Edith recollected having heard her mention this 
same Principe more than once as a frightful, tiresome 
little wretch, full of pretension, who was said to have 
married his first wife for her fortune, and then starved 
and beat her to death. Shocking and foolish ! So 
much for the pleasing prospect that had allured to 
him a second. Edith felt really distressed at the 
folly of the infatuated old woman, and thought what 
emblems she and her daughter presented of the weak 
and beggarly elements of mere worldly advantages. 
As for Sir Reginald, he was living in Paris on the 
debris of his fortune, in a career of heartless, joyless 
amusement — still the slave of the Avorld, even while 
he hated the chain which bound him to it. 

From contemplations such as these it was a relief 
even to turn to Mr. Eibley's transports of astonish- 
ment, disappointment, dehght, and what not, as he 
announced one day the news he had just received. 
"Why, now, what do you think 1 Only guess — sure 
you never would ! Eefused Miss Mogg ! And now, 
what do you think 1 going to be married — going to be 
married to a lady of quahty ! Eefused Miss Mogg, 
and going to be married to a duke's daughter ! ! ! 
Why, now, only think of ray being uncle-in-law to a 



DESTINY. 411 

duke's daughter ! But, then, refused three hundred 
thousand pound ! Have it all in a letter from him- 
self!" And he presented Edith with the letter he 
had received from Mr. Penshurst, containing the in- 
telligence of his being the accepted lover of the Lady 
Mary Morden ; and concluding vnih a hope that his 
uncle would enable him to make such settlements as 
the lady's rank rendered requisite. " Sure, now, Kitty, 
my dear, if he had but taken ]\Iiss INIogg, what a for- 
tune there would have been ! Four hundred and fifty 
thousand pound ! How comfortable for old Mogg and 
me to have put our money together — wouldn't it, 
Kitty, my dear V 

" It would, indeed, Mr. Eibley ; but we must ex- 
pect to meet vnth disappointments occasionally." 

"All his o^vn fault; but to think of his getting a 
duke's daughter — must settle handsomely upon her. 
Suppose we shall go to court, Kitty, my dear, eh? 
and be presented to their Majesties upon the occasion 
— eh, Kitty, my dear 1 Wonder what they will say 
tousf 

Edith was rejoiced to hear that Mr. Penshurst had 
got the better of his disappointment; and having 
heard Lady Arabella mention the lady's family in 
favourable terms, she trusted the marriage would 
prove a happy one. Mr. Eibley soon became recon- 
ciled to the loss of Miss Mogg's fortune in the splen- 
dour of this alliance, although his sensibilities were 
again awakened to the reality of the loss, when he 
soon after read in the papers the marriage of the 



412 DESTINY. 

Most Noble the Marquis of Carlingford to Charlotte 
Augusta Mogg, only child of Mark Mogg, Esquire, of 
Myrtle Grove. "Sure, now, to think how Charles 
could refuse Miss Mogg, and she a Marchioness ! 
Three hundred thousand pound, and a Marchioness ! 
And, Kitty, my dear, to think of old Mogg being a 
dowager Marchioness ! ! !" 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

It was now the season when " the flowers appear on 
the earth, the time of the singing of birds is come, 
and the voice of the turtle is heard in the laud," — 
the season when Edith was to exchange the crowded 
streets and stifling atmosphere of London for the 
silent glens and free mountain air of her dear High- 
land home. Captain Malcolm came, and joyful was 
the meeting between him and his beloved proUgk. 
Edith had much pleasure in introducing her dear and 
venerated guardian to her friends the Conways ; and 
the liking which took place was reciprocal. They 
promised to pay a \asit at Inch Orran in the course of 
the summer, " When I hope to dance a Highland reel 
at a Highland wedding," whispered the Admiral, as 
he gave Edith a paternal embrace at parting. Mrs. 
Ribley took a more formal adieu, but her words, 
though few, were to the purpose. 

"In consideration," said she, "of the propriety 
with which you have conducted yourself while a 
member of this family, I think it proper to inform 
you that, in the event of my demise, I have, with Mr. 
Eibley's concurrence, bequeathed to you one-half of 



414 DESTINY. 

my fortune, at present vested in the Three per cent 
Consols." 

"Good-bye, good-bye," said Mr, Eibley ; "better 
have stayed Avith us — won't find Birch's turtle-soup in 
the Highlands — perhaps find turtles of another sort — 
no green fat upon them, though — eh, Kitty, my 
dearf 

" 'Deed, I'm wae to leave this great world of brick 
and dust, after all," said Mrs. Macaulej', as she wiped 
her eyes, and turned her back on London, " when I 
think on the bits of childer that were so fond of me, 
and them all greetin', poor things, at my going away. 
Oh, surely that's one of the mercies of Providence, 
that wherever we go we'll find something to love, and 
somebody to love us. Do not you think so, my dear 1 
But I beg your pardon — I had forgot that I was not 
to speak of that till the time comes." 

Captain Malcolm smiled as he perceived the blush 
which the simplicity of her old friend called up on 
Edith's cheek, and doubted not but the cause Avould 
soon be revealed to Mrs. Malcolm. 

It was a joyous day when the little party arrived 
at Inch Orran. The bright sun, the silvery atmo- 
sphere, the blue Avaters, the tender green of the 
fohage just biursting from the bud; but far beyond 
all the loveliness of nature were the glad faces, the 
fond tones, and the warm embrace of long -severed 
friends. Much was there to say and to tell on both 
sides ; but oh, how much more had Edith to conceal ! 
Still, as she looked on the fair and happy band that 



DESTINY. 415 

surrounded her, one place seemed empty ; still, amid 
all the loviug looks that met hers, one look was want- 
ing ; amid all the sweet gay tones that rang in her 
ear, the sweetest of all was silent. When the first 
joyful excitement had subsided, and affection had 
returned to the natural flow of calm, social inter- 
course, it was then Mrs. Malcolm remarked with sur- 
prise the change that had taken place in Edith's 
manner. Instead of the calm, serene air whicli had 
formerly characterised her, she had now an anxious 
and abstracted look; or when roused from her reveries, 
it seemed only to agitation or embarrassment. 

At times she appeared as if oppressed with a 
weight more than she could bear ;- at others, a glow 
of pleasure would suddenly kindle on her cheek and 
sparkle in her eyes. Again her half-open lips seemed 
about to breathe the tale she longed to disclose ; but, 
as if recalled to sudden recollection, she would cjuickly 
fly from the social circle, and bury herself in solitude. 
]\Irs. Malcolm knew her too well for a moment to 
suspect Edith could have any attachment she would 
blush to avow, and she waited patiently for some time 
in hopes she would disclose the mystery which seemed 
thus to be haunting her. But da3^s passed on, and 
the symptoms of Edith's mental disquiet only became 
more striking. She seemed all eye and ear; the 
sight of a distant boat, the sound of a horse's feet, 
the entrance of a passing visitor, — all startled and 
agitated her, as though they had been strange and 
ominous events. At len2;th her kind and a;entlc 



416 DESTINY. 

friend spoke as a tender mother would have done to 
the daughter she loved, and besought her to disclose 
the cause Avhich was thus alienating her from the 
sympathies of all around. For some minutes Edith 
struggled with her emotion, but in vain; she could 
only throw herself into the arms of her friend, and 
yield to the passionate overflow of feelings, taxed 
almost beyond endurance. 

At length she looked up, and the glow and the 
smile which shone through her tears told that a tale 
of happiness lay hid beneath this shrouded mystery. 
" Soon, very soon, all A\-ill be told," said she, as her 
bosom heaved with emotion ; " and oh, may your 
heart be strengthened to bear it even as mine has been! 
But do not — do not ask me more." Mrs. Malcolm had 
too much delicacy to press the subject further. But she 
mused and pondered on these strange words, vainly 
seeking to elucidate their import. 

A few days after this, as Edith sat at breaMast 
with the family party, a letter was brought to her, 
which a glance told was fraught with the tidings she 
had so long panted to tell. AVith a heart throbbing 
with emotion, yet unable to articulate, she hastily 
rose, and with trembling limbs sought the privacy of 
her own chamber, ere she ventured to open it, and it 
was through a mist of blinding tears she traced its 
contents. 

"Now, dearest Edith, the time is come when I 
may claim you as my OAvn ! To-morrow I shall be 



DESTINY. 417 

at Inch Orran; to-inorrow I shall again behold the 
dear ones I so madly deserted. The concealment of 
nine long years will be at an end. But oh ! how 
dearly bought has this happy day been to all ! With 
what shame I now disclose the "ndld act of boyish 
romance which has so long divided us ! Xine years 
ago I returned a shipwrecked sea-boy to my home ; 
but I learnt that my return would bring only poverty 
and ruin on all I loved. I saw them seemingly happy. 
I believed myself forgotten, and I resolved to sacrifice 
myself to the continuance of the happiness and pros- 
perity of others. I fled far from ail I loved. In my 
delirium I even rashly, impiously, bound myseK by a 
solemn vow never to reveal myself till the period 
arrived when I could give them a right to all the 
possessions they then enjoyed, but of which my return 
at that time would have stripped them. 'Tis to you, 
Edith, I commit my cause, to plead for me with the 
dear parents I so cruelly injured, by breaking the 
holy tie which should have bound me to them. But 
they will forgive me — you will be the link again to 
unite us. To your hands, then, I commit myself ; to 
your discretion I trust the communication. Oh, how 
my heart has pined for this time, and how it feels 
overwhelmed at the very thought ! My mother ! pray 
for her, pray with her ; and pray, too, my first, my 
only love, for your Eonald JMalcolsl" 

" To-morrow ! Was it indeed so near?" And how 
prepare their hearts for the tide of joy which was 
VOL. II. 2 E p. 



418 DESTINY. 

about to rush in upon them ? How call upon them 
to give up the dead which had so long lain shrouded 
there, and receive in exchange the living to their 
arms ? Oh no ! it was not possible to prepare them 
for such a transition. It was by no slow and gradual 
light the truth could be learned. One single ray 
must flash instantaneous conviction on their souls. 
It was this consciousness which had hitherto restrained 
her from all attempts at a gradual disclosure. If the 
idea once took possession of the mind, with naught 
to feed and sustain it but a baseless hope and vague 
surmise, it could only serve to fever and disturb the 
imagination. Better it were that nothing should be 
hinted till aU could be told. But she must first still 
the tumult of her own heart, that she might find 
gentle access to those of others. While yet unable to 
compose her spirits suflSiciently to venture on the 
allotted task, a gentle tap at the door was followed by 
the entrance of JNIrs. Malcolm, who, struck by the 
agitation of Edith's manner, and alarmed at her pro- 
tracted absence, came to be satisfied if aU were weU, 
She looked with earnest inquiry on Edith's eloquent 
countenance, where all was struggling to reveal itself. 

"Edith," said she, taking her hand, "your spirit 
seems strangely stirred. If it is with joy, you will 
surely share it Avith me. If it is grief or anxiety, vnU 
you not sufier me to share it with you 1 " 

" Oh ! it is something that diflers from all," replied 
Edith, with emotion. " It is joy ; but joy so strange 
—so " 



DESTINY. 419 

Mrs. Malcolm looked at her Avith surprise. " It 
seems indeed strange that any joy should have such 
an effect upon you." 

"No — oh no ! You would not sa}' so if you knew — 
if you could guess." Her heart throbbed \aolently, 
and her colour went and came with the cpiickness of 
lightning. 

" Then, will you not tell me, my love, vdiat it is that 
thus strangely moves you?" said her friend soothingly. 

After a struggle to repress her feelings, Edith suc- 
ceeded. She became perfectly calm, but very pale, 
as she said, "Do you remember when once we talked 
of happiness 1 I knew not then what it was, but I 
believed you happy." She stopped. 

"Well, my love'? " inquired Mrs. Malcolm in a tone 
of surprise. 

" You said you were not," resumed Edith, in a 
low, suffocated voice ; "that wandering thoughts, wild 
di'eams of .... of one .... of ... ." 

" Of my Eonaldl" said ]\Irs. Malcolm, mom-nfully. 
" Yes, long — too long — I struggled %vith the mingled 
feelings of despondency and hope and fear." 

"You beheved that he had perished 1" said Edith, 
once more regaining her composure. 

"At the end of thirteen years could you wish 
me to doubt itf said Mrs. INIalcolm, almost reproach- 
fully. 

" But you did once hope, even while you feared. " 

Mrs. Malcolm sighed. " But now the hope and the 
fear are even as he is — no more ! " 



420 DESTINY. 

"Hope never dies, it is said," rejoined Edith with 
a beating heart. 

Mrs. Malcolm waved her head sorrowfully, and a 
sigh was her only answer. 

"At least it may revive — return. With God all things 
are possible ; He can loose the prisoner's bonds ; He 
can set the captive free ; He can recall the dead to 
life ;— oh ! He can make even the seas give up their 
dead!" 

Struck with the trembling fervour of her tones, for 
a moment Mrs. Malcolm regarded the deep, glowing 
expression of Edith's countenance ; then, as the sudden 
conviction flashed upon her, she wildly exclaimed, "My 
son ! Oh, do not mock me ! — say " 

Edith opened her arms to receive her, and, while 
tears of rapture streamed from her eyes, she faintly 
articulated, "He lives !" 

The mother uttered no cry — shed no tears; she 
stirred not — breathed not ; but every fibre seemed as 
if stiffening into stone, while with pale lips, and fixed 
but vacant eye, she gazed wistfully upon Edith, as 
though she looked on some fearful and delusive 
thing. 

" Will you not shed one tear, breathe one word of 
thanks to God?" said Edith soothingly. 

" For what 1 " inquired Mrs. Malcolm fearfully, as 
she laid her trembling hand on Edith's. 

"For Eonald, who lives, and comes to bless and 
be blessed by you ! " 

At length the mother's tears did flow, and the fer- 



DESTINY. 421 

vent ejaculation broke from her lips ! Then she called 
eagerly for her hus1)and, for the dear partner of all her 
joys and sorrows, to share in the blest tidings; and 
Edith left them to the overflow of feelings too sacred 
for aught but the eye of Heaven to A^dtness. Soon 
the joyful tidings spread, and everywhere they were 
received with rapture, for Eonald's name and memory 
had ever been fondly cherished far and near. Lucy, 
her husband, and two lovely children, were hastily 
summoned to complete the happy group that waited 
impatiently to welcome the wanderer's return. " To- 
morrow ! — the blest to-morrow ! — when, when would it 
come ! " 

Hours crept slowly along — hours ? — years ! ages 
they seemed to those longing hearts, whose only cry 
was, " My son ! my son ! " 

But these hours passed away, the day was drawing 
to a close, and now the evening Avas come, such an 
evening as that on which Ronald had torn himself 
from all he loved — calm, fair, and holy. There sat 
the mother even as then, the glorious firmament and 
the glowing waters spread out before her ; but her fer- 
vent eye was fixed Avith unvarying gaze on the going 
do"v\Ti of the sun, as though she sought to hasten its 
tardy course by marking each lessening ray — that sun 
whose next rising was to form a neAv epoch in her 
existence. And Edith was by her, watching the course 
of a still distant boat, which was rowed swiftly along; 
its course was directed to Inch Orran. With varying 
colour she marked its progress— nearer and nearer it 



422 DESTINY. 

drew — it reached the point, and in an instant, with 
light step, one sprang on shore. 

" 'Tis he !" she exclaimed, starting up. 

" 'Tis Eonald ! Eonald is come !" was the glad cry 
which broke from every lip. 

" Eager steps the threshold pressing, 
Open'd arms in haste advancing, 
Joyful looks through blind tears glancing ; 
The gladsome hounding of his aged hound, 
Say he in truth is here ! oiu- long, long lost is found ! " * 

But no such manifestations of delight came from 
the mother, as she was clasped in the arms of her son; 
her joy was too deep for words or looks or outward 
tokens ; and long she remained unconscious of whose 
were the arms that supported her, whose the warm 
tears that dropped upon her pale cheek ! ^Vhen at 
length by these fond cares recalled to consciousness, ah, 
what a gaze was that which dwelt upon those dear 
and cherished features ! Changed they might be to 
other eyes; but the look, the one look of her own 
child,— what can efface that from the mother's heart 1 
Still all seemed but as a dream, till, with his family 
and household assembled round him, she heard the 
father offer up to God his thanks for the recovery of 
his long -lost son — that the gift was acknowledged 
with tears of pious gratitude to Him, the giver of 
every good and perfect gift ! 

The Admiral kept his word — Lady Arabella and 

* The Beacon. 



DESTINY. 423 

he came to Inch Orran to witness the celebration of a 
Highland wedding. Benbowie also was forthcoming, 
in a waistcoat ten times more conspicuous than ever. 
" That was very true, — on my conscience, that was 
very true Avhat you said of the grazings," said he to 
JVIi-s. Macauley, as though he had been ruminating on 
it ever since ; " and I've brought a thousand pound 
for a tocher to Glenroy's daughter." 

" Ah, Benbowie, that is like you ; but 'deed you've 
been rather long of thinking of it, for Providence 
has been as kind to her as to the little bee that 
it feeds from dew and clouds; and now there's 
the sunshine and the flowers, and she wants for 
nothing." 

The marriage of Eonald and Edith was blessed by 
the venerable Mr, Stuart ; and the Admiral and 
Mrs. Macauley danced a Highland reel with gi-eat 
spirit in honour of it. Thus, when it was ended, she 
communed with her partner upon the event. " Oh, 
what curious creatures we are ! To think if Glenroy 
was to look up, what would he say to see his dochter 
the wife of Eonald Malcolm after all ! Not a bit but 
he was very near casting out Avith me once for evenin' 
her to such a thing ! Oh, should not that make us 
humble and trustful, when it is shown to us poor, 
blind craaters that it is not in man that -walketh to 
direct his steps ^ And to see how beautifully it is 
appointed to us, as to the naatral creation, to have 
our tribulations and our consolations, if we would but 
look to the hand that sends them ! for, as the old 



i-^/c^ 



424 DESTINY. 

Hieland distich saj's (but as j-ou do not understand 
Gaelic, I must give it to you in English), — 

" There is neither knoll nor rising, 
Nor yellow (green) grassy hillock, 
That will not for a space of time be joyous, 
And for a while be sad and tearful." 



THE END. 



Printed by R. S: R. Clark, Edinhuish. 
