OWEN CASTLE; 

* OR, 

WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 

IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

MARY ANN SULLIVAN, _.' 

f£ OF THE THEATRES ROYAL, LIVERPOOL, MANCHESTER, 
NEWCASTLE, BIRMINGHAM, AND NORWICH. 



Know then this truth, enough for man to know, 

Virtue alone is happiness below. POPE. 



SECOND EDITION. 
VOL. IV. 



^**~^<*<*<- 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOB 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENH ALL-STREET. 

1823. 



Edward Hodson, Printer, 15, Cross Street, Hatton Garden. 



8? 

OWEN CASTLE; 

OR, 

Which is the Heroine? 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

XHE base designs of Mrs. Wallace, 
with respect to Omphale, had in part 
succeeded, Lord Merioneth was enamour- 
ed by her beauty and sportive wit, and he 
anxiously sought opportunities to court 
her dangerous favour, which the baron 
was not slow to observe ; her extreme 
extravagance, disregard of appearances, 
and the odium of his friends, all heated 
his jealousy to an alarming height, and 
he often threatened to dissolve a connexion 
vol. iv. B 



2 OWLN castle; 

that brought on him nothing but involve- 
ments and his own abhorrence. Earl 
Northerland had greatly interested him- 
self in the baron's affairs, and painted to 
him the deformity of her conduct to Au- 
gustus in such a striking manner, as to 
convince the baron of the necessity of 
speedily abandoning her to her vices. 
She had heard, by means of a domestic 
belonging to Earl Northerland's establish- 
ment, the extraordinary escape of Augus- 
tus from the Parisian madhouse, with the 
creat influence he held over his lordship, 
whom she knew had been her enemy with 
the baron ; and she set her inventive 
malice at work to disturb the harmony of 
the families that were on such friendly 
terms. To this point she directed her 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 3 

discourse when Lord Merioneth called 
on her. " Your lordship is late, (cried 
she, with a reproving pat of her soft hand 
on his shoulder) I have been waiting 
for you some time." 

He apologized* 

" Don't pretend such penitence, yon 
viie creature (she laughingly returned) ; 
you are but this moment come from Lord 
Orkley's. Well ! you have the oddest 
taste in beauty — (his lordship coloured). 
Nay, now you are angry at my arraigning 
your choice. Every man has his peculiar 
fancy, and you are not alone. The mu- 
latto newly-made ladyship has had other 
admirers, I assure you." 



B 2 



4 owen castle; 

a You surprise me, madam ; her lady- 
ship is not long arrived from the West- 
Indies, or America." 

<f Do you suppose she came alone ?' 

" Some female friend, I suppose, con- 
ducted her to England." 

" Rather say a passionate admirer, who 
has been bribed to secrecy, in order to 
preserve her lad\ ship's tarnished re- 
putation. Did not you mark, how she 
trembled and dreaded my observing her 
when in the park, and her reserve and 
haughty carriage towards me, because 
I was too well acquainted with her 
amour." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE t b 

" Heavens! madam, how you amaze 
me ; and his lordship has dared to propose 
her to me, one tainted in reputation. 
Pray what is the name of the gallant :" 

m Now you press too far on my good 
nature. I will not reveal his name, and 
am sorry that I inadvertently mentioned 
having any knowledge of her ; but her 
ingratitude had hurt me, and we women 
are sad tell-tales. But I won't suffer your 
to breathe a sentence ; if you do, I'll 
banish you for ever from my smiles. 
I've just said sufficient to put you on 
your guard against imposition^ and I hope 
you will profit by it." 

f* Her agitation is now explained (said 



B3 



6 ©WEN CASTLE; 

he, anger flashing from his eye), but 1 am 
aware of the deception, and it is you, my 
angel, I have to thank for the rescue of 
my honour; but I promise to be obe- 
dient." 

" That's right; and as I am troubled 
with ennui to-day, pray take me in your 
barouche for an airing. She rang for her 
pelisse, and he, though with concealed 
unwillingness, conducted her to it, and 
drove to Kensington. Elated at hep 
triumph over Omphale, and the credulity 
t>f his lordship, she was all fascination and 
spirit during the drive. 

His lordship was extremely uneasy at 
the insinuations she had dropped respect- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE: 7 

ing Omphale, though the lightness of 
Mrs. Wallace's reputation made him 
doubt the authenticity. " Do you know 
what has become of that genius, Mr. 
Swithin r" said lie. 

u No (returned she, gaily) ; unless- he 
has taken flight to the mountains, with 
his spouse/' 

" He does not appear fit to take charge 
of her." 

" The poor gentleman is not overbur- 
dened with penetration ; and Lord Or- 
minstead seemed resolute in forciag 
himself on them. — Alas! and a-well-a- 
day ! yonder comes the gentleman." 

b 4 



S OWEN CASTLE; 

Tobit Swithin appeared galloping hastily 
towards them. " Pray, my lord, have 
somj2 sport with him." He stopped the 
horse. " Where hast thou been, killing 
swine ?" cried Mrs. Wallace. 

" What you've heard of it (replied 
Tobit), I thought it wouldn't be long a 
secret, at least, from you/' 

* I've a good eye, I can see a church by 
day light," 

44 Why, for the matter of that, so can 
any one that isn't blind/' smartly retorted 
Tobit, imagining he had said a witty thing, 

* But the matter." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 



" Matter enough, and I have to be 
obliged to you, madam, for your lordly 
friend, who would come and dine with 
me." 

" Civil as an orange, and something 
of its jealous complexion !" 

€t Jealous ! and who would'nt be 
jealous, when he had such a cause. I 
shan't enter into the particulars now, but 
I have sent Mrs. Swithin into Wales, to 
mamma, who will take care of her, I 
warrant ; and challenged my Lord Or- 
minstead, to let him see he was'nt to 
intrude on a welchman's territory with 
impunity. 



B5 



19- OWEN CASTLE; 

" Oh, bravo, bravo /" cried she, he- 
roically " 

" Bravo ! yes 1 don't want spirit. To 
be sure we did not shed any blood ; the 
seconds interfered, or we ' might have 
done one another a prejudice ; but there 
was a deal of heat between us, particu- 
larly on my side ; for I supposed my 
honour was impeached by his lordship's 
gallantry to Mrs. Swithin. But the second 
he had chosen, told me it was nothing 
more than fashionable manners, for that 
many married ladies had a cicisbeo, and 
that husbands now-a-days thanked them 
for taking the trouble of attending their 
wives off their hands. But as I was a 
country gentleman, and was new to 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 11 

London manners, his lordship would 
accept my apology. So I thought it was 
as well as having a bullet in my head, 
and I agreed to ask his pardon ; so we 
went home to dinner in a very agreeable 
way. But as I did not like exactly the 
gallantry of London, I sent Mrs. Swithin 
to Rusty Ha'l, on purpose to keep my- 
self out of harm's way." 

" And you did right; it is an excellent 
plan," said Lord Merioneth. <f A wife is a 
troublesome appendage to a gentleman in : 
town, and many would be glad of ome so 
obedient, as to leave the seat of pleasure 
for the monotony of the country. 

" And you asked his pardon r n said 
Mrs. Wallace, with a half laugh. 



12 OWEN CASTLE: 

6i I did, because his friend assured me, that 
his lordship meant no harm. I suppose, 
madam, you think that a deal of honour 
lies in having an ounce of lead in one's body ; 
but if a gentleman is shot, lie cares little 
for his honour then I believe, which veers 
about and wheels over to his antagonist. 
Fighting is all very well when one can't 
help it, but I see no fun in running one's 
head against stone walls, when one can be 
quietly drinking one's wine in a friendly 
way." 

u But honour, (cried she) honour.' 1 

" Well, honour makes me call a gen- 
tleman out, but honour need not make 
me kill him $ and I find going to fight a 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 13 

duel, is as good in making a person a 
man of fashion as the reality." 

" You will certainly put it in the pa- 
per," said she gravely. 

"I did'nt think of that myself, but 
some friend has for me; and I think it is 
very handsome. How they will all stare 
at Rusty Hall. Mamma will faint, Sa- 
bina will be in ecstacies ; and half the 
neighbourhood will go to see them on 
purpose to wish mamma joy at my escape. 
But read, read/' said he, pulling a paper 
out of his pocket, " and let your eyes 
convince you that a man's name for cou- 
rage does not always depend on fighting, 
but the appearance of it. Pray read out 



1 4 OWEN CASTLF. ; 

that his lordship may hear." Tobit drew 
himself erect, and importance swelled 
every muscle of his face, as Mrs Wallace 
read aloud the paragraph. 

H We are informed that a dispute of a 
delicate nature, arising between a country 
gentleman, and a nobleman of noted gal- 
lantry, was yesterday terminated in an un^ 
expected and amicable manner. The chal- 
lenger's courage was like the sensitive 
plant, no sooner touched than it shrunk. 
He became in an instant assured that 
Cicisbeonism was in perfect ton, and eon* 
fessed the ignorance of high breeding that 
led him into the absurdity of fighting on 
so trivial an affair. His apology was 
graciously accepted by his lordship-. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 15 

1 What a well bread age ive live in T 
The fair cause has indignantly fled the 
scene, but her champion will we trust still 
continue to grace the spot his valour has 
crowned- with perpetual laurel." 

She had just finished, when Lord Or- 
minstead and three other gentlemen rode 
up. " What ! my man of mettle/' cried 
he, shaking the hand of Tobit, " are you 
here ?" 

" That is fighting Bob," whispered one 
of them to Lord Merioneth, " I could have 
iworn he had belonged to the family of 
the Acres. I hear my lord you are on the 
point of matrimony, and no longer one of 
us. Is it a golden chain, or the rosy band 
of love that catches you P 1 



16 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Your jibs and jeers he laughs to scorn, 
" No staff so reverend as one tipped with 
horn.' , 



Said Mrs, Wallace, with great spirit. 

u Thank yon, madam," cried the gen- 
tleman who had last spoke ; " admirably 
said, 'pon my honour." 

" Yes, and quite in point, eh ! my lord ?" 
Lord Merioneth felt the allusion she so 
archly made, but did not relish its poig- 
nancy. 

" If I were rash enough to take some, 
that I could name (returned he,) I should 
justly fear a well directed sarcasm* Eh ! 



OH, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1/ 

Theodosius! Let the galled jade wince, 
my withers are unwrung." 

" That's severe, Jack, you need not 
remind a man of his misfortunes/' 

" The bait is gilt, (said the former 
gentleman ) or I'll be sworn he would not 
bite." 

" Prithee have done, I am not in tune for 
your rallying," said Lord Merioneth. 

u Ah, it is a serious matter, Jack. I vow 
you look as if you were already shackled. 
What a rueful phiz you draw up! But 
where is the dingy Desdemona ?" cried 
Lord Orminstead. 



IB OWEN CASTLE; 

« Sir r 

" Sir ! Why Jack, you are not married 
yet ; do for the love of mercy drop that 
threatening aspect ; It is time enough to 
look grave, when you are really tied. 
Your honest countryman has terrified me 
to death with his big looks ; 1 shan't be 
able to meet you, till I recover his attack. 
Have you seen the beauty, and her argus ; 
the Wesh baronet and the lily of the 
mountain I" 

" Oh! I- know whom you mean, ( cried 
Tobir,) it is Sir Matthew Fitzowen, and 
his young wife." 

"■ What, do you know her my boy of 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 19 

valour, will you introduce me r" said one 
of the gentlemen. 

" I dare not, Sir Matthew is so comical 
ha his ways ; and if the gout was twitching 
him, he would not mind my being an 
old acquaintance, but be very uncivil per- 
haps, and desire me to leave the house.** 

" The hesperian fruit should he guarded 
by a dragon, if all men were gifted 
with the fascinations of Mr. S within," said 
Lord Orminstead. 

" Now you are too polite, my lord, and 
something of a quiz. I knew Lady Fitz- 
owen, when Miss Fitzheauchamp. To be 
sure she was always 'particular to me t 



20 OWEN CASTLE; 

that I can't deny, and I shall take the 
liberty of calling, but as for introducing 
another, I vow I dare not. They arrived 
but two days ago, and reside in Park 
Lane. I must wish you now a good morn- 
ingjgentlemen/' 

" Nay you are not off, so, (cried Lord 
Orminstead, laying his hand on the bri- 
dle of his horse) we haven't half done with 
you; your society is so enlivening that 
you are the very spirit of the company 
you mix in." 

" Yes, (cried Mrs. Wallace) he should 
have had a place at court, but they 
have a house too full of such as him, al- 
ready." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 21 

u Bravo, Bravo!" vociferated the gentle- 
men, and Lord Merioneth wishing to 
escape further notice, bade them adieu 
and drove Mrs. Wallace home. 



22 ©WEN CASTLE; 



CHAPTER XXXIII 



V? HEN Mrs. Wallace returned to dress, 
she observed the baron's valet, and asked 
in a careless manner if there were com- 
pany to dinner, or if they were to dine 
tct'e d Mte. 

He answered with a joyous counte- 
nance, that his master dined at Earl Nor- 
therland's with his wife and children, and 
that he had orders to send his wardrobe, 
and every valuable after him ; he then 
delivered her a note and withdrew. 



Oil WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 23 

" Madam, 

"The voice of conscience 
has awakened me to a just sense of my 
cruel treatment of a virtuous wife and 
children, and proclaims that no peace 
can ever await a connexion where honour 
and every desirable sentiment form not a 
cement; I therefore withdrew my mis- 
placed protection, to give it where duty, 
affection, and virtue demand, and from 
this hour bid you an eternal farewell." 

Rage swelled each fibre of her heart, 
and many moments elapsed before it 
burst forth in vindictive upbraidings on 
the baron's ingratitude and avarice. Nor 
did Earl Northei land escape her fury ; she 
knew he was the counsellor and assistant 



24 OWEN castle; 

of the baron, and the chief means in 
restoring him to his wife and children. 
Curses on his interference were copiously 
showered upon his head, and every ex- 
pression a woman robbed of luxury and 
profusion, could be supposed to bestow 
on those she had reason to conclude had 
conspired to foil her arts, fell on the happy 
groupe that assembled at his lordship's. 

The house was in the greatest confu- 
sion ; upholsterers were taking down the 
draperies and removing every article of 
furniture ; the carpets were rolled up, and 
every apartment but her dressing room, 
was in disorder. 

" What's the meaning of all this," she 
demanded from the principal domestic. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 25 

• 

u The baron, madam, gave orders for 
its execution immediately, I know no- 
thing more ; our wages have been paid, 
and we all leave the house to night." 

" Order the carriage I shall dine 
abroad," cried she imperiously, and 
burning with every baneful passion insult 
and disdain could inflict on such a na- 
ture. 

" The baron has sent for it, madam, to 
convey his children to Earl Norther- 
land's:' 

She muttered a deep curse on their in- 
nocent heads, and desired dinner might 
be served in her dressing room. 

VOL. iv. C 



26 OWEN CASTLE; 

" The cook left an hour ago, madam ; 
the larder is empty and the fires are 
all out/' 

" Why was I not informed of this 
before, ('said she, stamping with mad- 
ness). I was the person whose orders 
were first to be attended to, and how 
dare you obey any without first inform- 
ing mer" 

i{ The barons valet, madam, settled 
every thing according to the orders he 
had received from his master. We obey 
the person who pays us, madam." 

" Silence, sir, and desire the valet to 
come to me." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 2? 

The servant murmured something about 
airs, and left the room ; shortly after the 
valet appeared, and requested to know 
her commands. 

" Tell your master, sir, that I shall 
leave this house in the morning, or when 
I choose, and demand every attendance 
from the domestics while I remain in this 
house." 

" I fear, madam, my delivering your 
message will be of no service, for his 
express orders were for me to deliver the 
key to the owner of the house to-night 
and if I might advise you — " 

" Advice from you! Insolent familiarity! 

c 2 



28 OWEN CASTLE; 

Leave the room, and henceforth know 
whom you address," said she, haughtily 
passing by him. 

" It is my perfect knowledge on that 
head, madam, that gave me presumption 
to offer it, (cried he bowing in evident 
derision and contempt) and I am ex- 
tremely sorry to say,, that you must 
remove your property yourself, as your 
maid has departed. When you are ready 
madam, I will call a hackney coach, that 
will convey you from here as well as my 
master's carriage, which is much better 
employed in the service of his children 
and amiable lady. 

A fiend-like look of resentment and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 29 

contempt was her only reply, as she flung 
out of the room, maddened at her de- 
basement to one she conceived so much 

her inferior. 

> 

Her trunks were rudely filled, and has- 
tily put into a coach, which she ordered to 
Park-lane. On her arrival there, she was 
informed that Sir Matthew and his lady 
were alone; the servant was a stranger to 
her person, and conducted her and her 
luggage to a parlour adjoining the hall, 
and soon sent Sir Matthew, who hearing a 
lady desired to speak with him, hobbled 
to receive her. His astonishment was 
great at the sight of his old colleague in 
former designs, he could not disguise his 
reluctance to comply with her desire of 



c 3 



SO OWEN CASTLE ; 

being accommodated in his house for a few 
days,, and plainly stated his objections. 

" You refuse my request," said she, 
sternly regarding him, "and this is the gra- 
titude you shew in reward for my assisting 
you in your marriage. What do you fear? 
I am no ?nan, to create your jealousy ; and 
as for the fantastic modesty of your lady, 
who may not receive me in the warmest 
manner; leave me alone to combat that." 

The baronet promised to entertain her 
for a few d^ys. He would have denied 
this favour^ if his former obligations had 
not forced him to grant it. 

Lady Fitzowen was thunder st ruck > 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 31 

when her husband led Mrs. Wallace into 
the drawing room, and without uttering 
a word, prepared to leave them. 

" Stay, Lady Fitzowen, (cried Mrs. 
Wallace, with an humble and beseeching- 
voice,) stay a moment. That I am an 
unwelcome intruder, I can well suppose; 
but when I inform you that distress has 
obliged me to entreat your hospitality for 
a jew days only, I am aware that your 
charitable nature will not dtny this smaM 
request." 

" Your own conscience, madam, (re- 
turned her ladyship, with virtuous digni- 
ty) may answer for me," and she moved 
toward the door. 

c 4 



32 owen castle; 

" Is this the fruit of your religious 
life? (said Mrs. Wallace, stopping 
before her) is this the charity you boast." 

" To deserving objects, madam, (re- 
plied her ladyship) I have never refused 
it, but I cannot bestow it where nei- 
ther esteem nor pity prompts. Nature and 
insulted virtue demand my detestation 
of one, who has hurried to her grave, a 
beloved relative; involved me in bondage, 
and plunged my friends in ruin and dis- 
quietude. You may be the guest of Sir 
Matthew, madam, but never can be mine.* 
She walked proudly by the intruder, who 
with all her audacity felt awed by such 
purity, and attempted not to retard her 
departure, yet inwardly determined with 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 33 

demoniac envy, to stigmatize, and, if pos- 
sible, to pollute it. 

The next day, when summoned to 
dinner, her ladyship, on seeing Mrs. Wal- 
lace coolly seat herself, could scarcely re- 
frain from quitting her situation at the 
head of the table ; but the peremptory 
tone in which Sir Matthew desired her 
to take a chair, and the look he cast on 
her, convinced her how impossible it would 
be to follow the impulse of her outraged 
feelings ; she therefore contented herself 
with a pointed silence during the meal, 
and rose as soon as the dessert came in. 

Her ladyship retired to her dressing 
room, where she waited for the appearance 
c 5 



34 OWEN CASTLE J 

of Sir Matthew until twelve o'clock. 
Wearied at his long stay, she had just 
taken up a book to beguile the time, when 
Mr. Maskall entered, apparently much ele- 
vated. He apologized for intruding en 
her privacy, and loudly blamed Sir Mat- 
thew for permitting Mrs. Wallace to re- 
main beneath the same roof with her; 
insinuated his dislike of her husband's 
conduct, and expressed his pity for her ill- 
treatment. a Surely, madam (said he) 
you ought to revenge yourself on such 
barbarous usage." lie drew his chair 
nearer to her's. 

" A wife, sir (said she, reservedly ), can- 
not wish revenge on him ; it is her duty to 
obey." 



OR. WHTCH IS THE HEROINE? 35 

" In all reasonable demands, certainly, 
madam ; but yon must confess, my dear 
abused lady, that in the latter instance he 
greatly degrades you, and not at all ho- 
nours himself?' 

u I could wish that my husband's be- 
haviour were such as not to expose him 
to censure/ 1 replied she, taking up a book 
to prove her reluctance to listen to himr 
and she begged to be alone. 

But disregarding her inattention and de- 
sire, he went on. " When I reflect on your 
youth and loveliness, which all eyes must 
admire and every heart be too sensible 
of — V Here he paused, and breathed a 
heavy sigh, fixing his eyes on her averted - 

c (> 



36 owen castle; 

face. " When I contrast his debilitated 
form with these possessions, and know he 
does not prize them as he ought, my re- 
gret is inexpressible. Oh ! madam (cried 
he), if you knew how deeply you interest 
me, you would — yes, I am certain you 
would deign one ray of pity — of hope," 
He caught her hand, and falling at her 
feet, poured forth his unhallowed love in 
the impassioned language of a romance. 

She beheld him with indignation, and 
repelling his advances with disdain, started 
from the sofa where she sat, when Mrs. 
Wallace appeared before them. " I beg 
pardon, madam (she cried), I did not know 
in what an agreeable way the evening 
was passing, and shall intrude no longer." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 3? 

A malicious sneer gathered on her features 
as she receded. 



" Remain, I command you ! (said her 
ladyship, in a voice of authority that for 
an instant astonished her hearers) nor 
dare to put an unbecoming construction 
on my actions." 

" I have put no construction as yet, 
madam, on your actions (replied Mrs. 
Wallace, with a bitter smile of ironical 
respect). Why should you fear it ? All 
conscious rectitude is its own defender, 
and can defy the defamation of the vile." 

" You have entered rather mal-apropos 
(said Mr. Maskall, in confusion) ; but if 



38 OWEN CASTLE; 

you have any generosity, you will keep 
our secret.'* 



Lady Fiizowen stood aghast at the ef- 
frontery that insinuated she wis an ac- 
complice in his meditative designs on the 
honour of Sir Matthew. 

" I did not think we should so soon be 
on a par, madam, (said Mrs. Wallace, 
gaily approaching her) or your chilling 
reception of my visit hod not passed with- 
out a reproof our present equality might 
have permitted; but you are a serious, 
sa at, like sinner, whose puritanic face 
and cold demeanour might mislead even 
me % who know the woild. Gome, shake 
hands, and 1 promise to be mute." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HPROINEr 39 

" I would sooner clasp a venomous ser- 
pent to my breast, than link my guiltless 
hand in thy contaminated grasp. As for 
that insinuating monster, who has, by 
his specious arts, blinded my credulous 
husband to his adulterous attempt on my 
honour, I'll unmask — will expose him 
to the whole world, a disgrace to the sacred 
profession he hypocritically affects to re- 
verence and serve." She rang the bell, 
and desired John, who answered it, to 
order the carriage, and to send Sir Matthew 
to the drawing room, to save her from her 
insulters. 

John answered, that his master was so 
overcome with wine that the servants 
were obliged to remove him to his cham- 



40 OWEN CASTLE; 

ber, where he soundly slept ; and he dare 
not order the carriage at that late hour 
without his permission. 

<f Good heaven! (cried her ladyship) 
how am I surrounded. Defenceless against 
my enemies, exposed by my husband to 
their villainy, without one friend to pu- 
nish their audacity, or shield me from un- 
merited contumely ; but I will soar above 
their malice; the truly virtuous mind can 
never be debased or shrink from scru- 
tiny." 

" Your ladyship is most incontestibly 
right (said Mrs. Wallace) ; but appear- 
ances ** 

" Are certainly against us ; but if you 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 41 

will permit me, madam, I will explain," 
said Mr. Maskall to Lady Fitzowen ; and 
passing to the door, continued to Mrs. 
Wallace, " In the morning, I will be in 
the study, madam, where I will give you 
every innocent statement of what may 
injure that lovely lady in your opi- 
nion. He bowed, and disappeared. 

His departure was followed by a con- 
temptuous laugh from Mrs. Wallace, 
who drawing a bundle of papers from 
beneath her lace veil, that had been care- 
lessly thrown across her shoulders, pre- 
sented them to her ladyship with a satanic 
smile. 

" What mean you (said she, regarding 



42 OWEN CASTLE; 

her with surprise), and why do you in- 
sult me with your presence ef 

<f Here is entertainment. Peruse these 
letters (said she, still holding them for- 
ward for her reception) and here is also a 
newspaper, which if you condescend to 
look over, will, I doubt not, please you, 
and divert a melancholly hour." 

" I once read a newspaper (groaned her 
ladyship, disturbed by the recollection of 
the heart-rending information it con^ 
tained), and I never wish to see another. 
Leave me." 

" And yet you lose much by the neg^ 
lect," replied she, tauntingly. 



GR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 43 

* I desire to be alone. The society of 
those whose actions are atrocious must 
ever be repugnant to the lovers of 
virtue." 

* f Virtue!" cried her inveterate in- 
truder, with mortifying derision, curving 
her lip, and with disgusting familiarity 
in her air. " Virtue! where is the virtue 
that resists not a form like Maskalfs } 
Would you indeed taste the joys of 
boundless love, I will unfold a tale that 
shall nil each vein with joy ; I will be the 
guardian of your bliss, I'll " 

" Woman V* cried Lady Fitzowen, 
shrinking from her detested toLich, for she 
had grasped her arm and her daring eye 



44 ©WEN CASTLE; 

fell full on her lovely face. Shocked 
at the intimation of her words, she bade 
her instantly quit her presence. 

" Yes, I will quit you," returned she, 
throwing her arm with triumphant force 
from her, and malignantly pointing to 
the papers which si e threw on the carpet, 
said, i{ Soon, soon will you bless this mo- 
ment of ignorance, for sweet and cordial 
will it be to the approaching one, that 
shall develope a two- fold misery. You 
have driven me from you ; s^on will you 
curse your folly, and wisli in vain for my 
proffered assistance." Her face shone 
with savage exultation as she darted from 
the dressing room, that made the blood 
recoil with terrifying sickness from the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 45 

heart of her ladyship, who fearfully took 
up the papers that were scattered at her 
feet. They were letters, the hand, the re- 
cent date, the signatures all rushed with 
such force to her tortured sight and 
memory, that giving a scream of distracted 
surprise she fell prostrate on the floor, 
and was conveyed cold, motionless, and 
without a sign of life, to her hed chamber. 



*G OWEN CASTLE ; 



CHAP. XXXIV. 



JL HE hastening nuptials of the now 
reinstated Rufus Marmaduke with the 
gentle Lady Sarah, made the mansion of 
Lord Orkley the scene of happy tranquil* 
lity. The pensive cast of his daughter's 
mind was impressed with pity for the 
cruel fate of Ladv Fitzowen, whom she 
had seen but once since her arrival in 
London, and -the form of Augustus that 
ever floated before her eyes, had renewed 
the picture of their former loves in the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 4? 

despondent bosom of the still tenderly 
attached Omphale. 

As the intended marriage was now 
become public, Jonathan hastened to 
London, and cherished the hope of 
turning Lady Sarah again to her per- 
suasion ; but his skdml preaching was 
heard without effect, and he was obliged 
to go back without his proselyte. In the 
hall he met Chloe, whom he had often 
importuned on the suspicious state of 
Lady Sarah's heart, but she never dis- 
closed or even satisfied his curiosity with 
a confirmation of his doubts, though 
from her attendance on her mistress, 
frequent opportunities had occurred to let 
her into the state of affairs. 



48 OWEN CASTLE ; 

He stopped short at beholding her, and 
shaking his head emphatically cried, 
" Thou art like unto a dark lanthorn in the 
hand of an evil doer. When the righteous 
seek him he turneth it round and shut- 
teth out tne light ; yea, he screeneth the 
flame from the path of the just, and leav- 
eth them in total darkness." 

" Why, (said David, who now served 
Omphale) why should you be so cross 
and black about the sweet Lady Sarah's 
marriage with a good young parson ? I'm 
sure he'll make her as good a husband as 
any stifl- necked quaker." 

'* My body, friend, is erect, so are my 
deeds, (returned Jonathan, drawing him- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE f 49 

self still straighter : " The crooked wind- 
ings of deceit are not known amongst the 
brethren : we are all upright men.!* 

" That I believe/' replied David, look- 
ing slyly at his formal figure. 

" Thou mayest believe the thing that is 
true, although there is a sneer on thy face, 
and a waggish sparkle in thine eye, that 
con trad icteth thv words,'* 

" I don't mean, friend Jonathan, to af- 
front you (said David), because you are, 
I hear, a charitable man to the poor, and 
ought to be respected ; but why don't you 
make merry sometimes, as we do; sing and 

vol. iv. D 



50 OWEN CASTLE ; 

dance, and tell funny stories, and be en- 
tertaining." 

" Friend, (said he, his visage becoming 
very grave) I was never entertaining — but 
once." 

" Well! I should like to have seen and 
heard you, vastly," said David. 

st There was a fire in my native village 
which burned down the poor house and 
many dwellings. I gazed on the flames 
with great sadness." 

" You should have run and helped 
to put them out," impatiently said 
David. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 51 

" The hand of man coo Id not prevail, 
and many tenements were destroyed, and 
the women and children ran about with 
scarce any covering. Yea, I heard their 
lamentations over the ashes of their goods 
and dwellings with pity ; my breast waxed 
into sorrow, and I turned away. The 
next morning I gathered together my 
stores, which were not mighty, but a 
little multiplies when charity is in the 
breast of the giver, and thankfulness 
abideth with those that receive ; my 
brethren did help my willingness by 
many mites, and a subscription did build 
anew the poor habitations that were 
burned to the ground. In my fathers barn 
I did spread a board with bread and 
wholesome food for many days, at whose 
p2 



52 OWEN CASTLE; 

bead 1 did stand, and saw the hungry 
feed ; I did also tell parables of righteous- 
ness, and did sing psalms, and was merry, 
for my heart was cheered by the orphans' 
and widows' tears of grateful thanks. I 
was then entertaining, friend, was I not?" 

" You were indeed, sir ( said David 
bowing), and I wish I may ever be as 
good a man." 

u All dat very well, but me love song 
and dance- — no harm neither," cried Chloe, 
skipping lightly over the marble pave- 
ment of the hall ; and Lady Sarah, she 
like dance too." 

" Yea, now thou hast said it ; she hath 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 53 

danced unto Belzebub's fiddle, until he 
hath led her astray. Oh! woman, wo- 
man !" he gave a deep sigh, and proceed- 
ed to his horse that was in waiting. 

" This is an old horse, sir/' said David, 
respectfully giving him the stirrup. 

" Yea, friend, he is quiet, and troubleth 
me with no viciousness. We are old ac- 
quaintances. He was a foaL when I was 
born, and has been now forty-one vears in 
the world. He is not without faults ; he 
stumbleth like unto a sinner, over nothing, 
and were it not for a check, would falL 
in the highway of danger." 

" Why don't you shoot him, sir* and 

D3 



54 OWEN castle; 

get another ; he is past work, has scarce 
an eye to see with, is broken winded, 
broken knee'd, and no manner of use, 
only to eat his provender. If he was 
mine, I would send him to the dogs." 

Jonathan had seated himself on his 
abused and aged beast ; but on hearing 
David, turned with a comic seriousness 
towards him, and patting the neck of his 
old horse, said, " This has been a faithful 
servant unto me for many years. Put 
the case to thyself, friend; wouldst thou 
not think it hard, if thou, after forty-one 
years of servitude, was to hear thy master 
say, ' David is now past labour, and only 
eateth up my bread; he is nearly blind, 
lame, and is plagued with asthma and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 55 

rheumatic pains. I will turn him away, 
and he may go to the dogs ?' Yea, then 
wouldst thou feel the value of a true 
friend, that in thy old days did not forget 
the activity of thy youth/' so saying, he 
moved slowly off. 

David, on turning into the hall, was 
met by Winifred. " Oh! David (cried 
she), I've been seeking you every where. 
There is such a rumpus above stairs ; 
they will surely kill my dear sweet Lady 
Fitzowen!" She then proceeded ot 
acquaint him, that Lady Fitzowen had 
that morning left Park Lane, and that 
Sir Matthew had come in haste to bring 
her back. " There he is, storming at my 
poor lady, and she is crying, and such a 
hubbub as I never heard." 
d i 



This was a true account of what was 
passing. The letters Mrs. Wallace had 
maliciously put into her ladyship's hands, 
had discovered a system of treachery that 
had for many months been practising 
against her, and now completely destroyed 
the composure she had laboured to ac- 
quire. The sight of her husband was 
dreadful ; his cruel treatment and newly- 
disclosed villainy rendered him and his 
confederate, Mr. Maskall, so abhorrent to 
her eyes, that she fled in a moment of 
suffering and distraction from his pre- 
sence, and sought the consoling aid of 
protecting friendship. 

Mrs. Wallace left the house to seek a 
new abode, enjoying the tumult she had 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? h*J 

raided, and the disgrace so rash & step 
would throw upon the unhappy truant. 

Sir Matthew soon learnt her place of 
shelter, and instantly demanded from 
Lord Orkley his wife, who he supposed 
had seduced her from her obedience. 
His lordship sought to mitigate his anger, 
by beseeching his patience, and declaring 
his innocence of his accusation ; but 
every remonstrance was useless. Nothing 
could a May the torrent of passion that 
flowed from his lips. He spurned all 
efforts that were made to abate his wrath, 
and in a peremptory voice cried, " By a 
husband's authority I com.nand you, Lady 
Fitzowen, to follow me home, or dread an 
injured lord's fury." 

D5 



58 owen castle; 

" The power of millions should not 
make me follow one step the man 
who has inhumanly beguiled me. — Oh! 
my friends, did you know the arts that 
have been practised against me, you would 
compassionate my misery," cried her lady- 
ship, supplicating their pity and inter- 
ference. 

11 Is it thus, madam (said the baronet), 
that you fulfil the duties of a wife ? To 
fly your home and abandon your husband. 
Are you aware of the everlasting blemish 
this conduct casts upon you ?" 

" I had been content (replied she) to 
have borne the tyranny you have ever 
exerted towards me until this moment, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 59 

had you not exposed me to the insidious 
addresses of your wily confidant ; in dis- 
believing my assurances and avowed dis- 
like of his villainy ; next to insult me, 
by forcing into my presence a woman 
whom of all others in the world I had 
most reason to hate, as the combining foe 
against my happiness ; the enemy of my 
departed aunt, whose injustice drove her 
her to a prison, and finally caused her 
ever-lamented death. A woman, whose 
tainted morals and depravity have brought 
her to the level of the vilest of her sex, and 
thrown her for ever from the notice of the 
virtuous. Thus it was you performed 
your oath of protector, of councellor, of 
tender companion. — Ask your heart, Sir 
Matthew, if have you been to me either a 



dS 



60 oWEtt CASft££ 

gentle guardian or a soothing friend — ■ 
loving, kind, or generous? No, heaven 
is my witness (she continued, her eyes 
turned upwards in appealing sorrow) 
you have not. Think you, that after 
reading this, and this (here she pointed to 
the letters she had received), I can ever 
look on you again ? Have you not 
blasted my youth with never-ending re- 
gret, and crushed in the very moment of 
coming bliss, my long promised joys? 
Oh, monster! what had we done to injure 
you, that you should relentlessly doom us 
to perpetual despair? 1 ' She burst into 
an agony of tears, and pressed the letters 
to her bosom. 

Sir Matthew, irritated at her just com- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 6l 

plainings, seized her arm, and forcing her 
to rise, repeated his command for her 
to return home. 

Lord Orkley attempted to persuade him 
to desist. 

" She is my wife, (cried the baronet, 
rage flushing in his eyes, and stamping 
madly on the ground) and I'll make the 
proudest here feel my vengeance who 
dares to impede my lawful power." 

<; Oh, my friends ! (said she,) am I 
indeed left to his mercy. Is there none 
who will save me from tyranny, cruelty, 
and madness r" 

Earl Northerland entered the drawing: 



62 OWEN CASTLE ; 

room unannounced. He started back a t 
the affecting scene before him, and gazed 
with astonishment on the pale but beau- 
tiful features of Lady Fitzowen, who in 
an attitude of entreaty sought to interest 
her beholders, whose hearts were with 
her but dare not oppose a husband's right. 
" Oh, mother! (she exclaimed) angelic 
spirit of the murdered Eliza ! Deign from 
thy seraphic realms to look on thy 
wretched child, and snatch her to thy 
heavenly bosom, where she may repose in 
eternal peace. Oh! woe to my fathers 
cruelty ! Woe to the hand that made me a 
destitute orphan!" 

" Enough, enough ! (cried Lord North- 
erland, rushing forwards, and clasping her 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? f3 

in his trembling arms ;) living picture of 
my slaughtered, loved Eliza, receive a 
father, a repentant father, in thy filial 
embrace ! 

" Father P said the astonished object 
of his fond endearments, and sinking on 
her knee, reposed her beauteous head 
upon his bosom, who overpowered by his 
strong emotions, had also dropped upon 
his knees, and in dumb transport fer- 
vently pressed her to his beating and 
parental heart.. 

* Child ! my child !" " My father ! my 
father P were for many moments the 
only words that escaped the kindred 
strangers ; while tears of joy glistened in 



64 OWEN C^TLE; 

every eye, but tjat of the baronet : who 
saw the 4iie< tng of a repenant parent 
and £i suffering daughter wuhout om- smile 
of plea sure or tender tear of sensibility. 
" He is her father, (whisjiered his callous 
heart,) but he cannot take her from my 
superior hold" 

u Image of my sainted Eliza! to thee 
will I endeavour to atone for the wrongs 
she meekly sunk under f said ihe earl, 
supporting to a sofa his daughter, who, 
drawing a miniature from her bosom com- 
pared it for an instant with the fondly 
beaming countenance before her ; then 
threw her arms about his neck, exclaim- 
ing, " it is, it is — my father ! and 1 am 
not without protection. He wdl not 
again desert his unhappy child." 



OR, WHICH U THE HEROINE? 65 

u Never, my suffering innocent ! I 
know the story of your life, and longed 
to meet your duteous embrace. These 
amiable ladies last night divulged the 
sorrows of my child, at which my accusing 
heart ached with compassion. " 

M When this tedious ceremony is over, 
(said the baronet imperiously regarding 
the earl ) I may conduct my wife to her 
forsaken home P" 

" Hard-hearted man! (returned his 
lordship) can nothing touch your flinty 
bosom ? Have you no comprehension of 
the feelings of a parent at this trying 
moment. The ecstatic blessing of enfold- 
ing a long deserted child within your 



66 owen castle; 

arms, can never be known to you. Ob- 
duratCy selfish and perverse, you steal 
a jewel from my throbbing heart that re- 
news the vital stream within my veins, 
and talisman-like, charms me to a life 
I had loathed for years." 

Sir Matthew largely expatiated on the 
elopement of his wife, and proclaimed 
himself the injured person, and swore no 
earthly consideration should persuade 
him to return to his home without 
her.' 9 

" Fear not, my child, ( said Earl North- 
erland) a father's presence shall insure 
protection and indulgence for you. 
You will not surely refuse to admit a 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 6*7 

father to his child" continued he, ad- 
dressing Sir Matthew, who, with an ill 
grace acceded to his wish ; and Lady 
Fitzowen, shielded by the tender autho- 
rity of a parent, was persuaded to return 
to Park Lane. When calmness was re_ 
stored to the bosom of her ladyship, she 
made known her provocations for flight ; 
she then gave a bundle of letters into her 
father's hand, and after having read them, 
implored his compassion and interference 
in separating her from a man who had so 
vilely trapanned her into marriage. Earl 
Northerland took them with great interest 
to the study, and with a melancholy 
curiosity began to peruse them. 



6& owen castle; 

" My adored Grace, 

" How shall I word a letter 
that will, from its unexpected appearance, 
cause the most tumultuous joy in your 
susceptible bosom ; for my flattering heart 
whispers that the fate of your ever ardent 
lover is not indifferent, though his ab- 
sence has been tediously long, and con- 
tending circumstances of no trivial nature 
have combined to retard his desire of re- 
lieving the anxiety of his beloved. I fear 
the papers have been the occasion of great 
distress to my parents and yourself, as I 
understand my name has been inserted 
among the killed, in a dreadful skirmish ; 
an occurrence as uncommon as cruel, for 
the returns are ever, for the most part, 
correct; but in this instance there is 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE: 69 

much excuse, as you will justly allow, on 
reading my miraculous escape from 
the pangs of death, for the unfounded 
insertion In the attack I, with my com- 
pany, took by order an ambush station ; 
the Americans fought desperately "; our 
force was scattered, yet victory was on 
our side. I was covering the retreat of a 
party, whose triumphant courage had 
inspired the enemy with savage rancour, and 
who endeavoured to cut through our little 
body of resolute resistance with ferocious 
vengeance; but we maintained our ground 
with dauntless intrepidity, and our troops 
-effectually gained the day. Those who 
had most engaged the attention of their 
assailants, were butchered in a shocking 
manner. 



70 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Several of my bravest brother officers 
and soldiers fall, covered with wounds, 
frightful victims of British valour. Nor 
did I escape, but was disabled in so des- 
perate a way, as to bid defiance to hope. 
I was secured and made prisoner by the 
enemy, and languished in confinement for 
about two months. One night, when all 
was still, I heard a person enter my 
wretched apartment, and approach softly 
towards my bed, and a female voice, in the 
language of my native hills, desired me 
to rise and put on a dress she had pro- 
cured, in which she promised my escape. 
I obeyed her with doubtful joy; but 
being weakened by severe illness, could 
not dress myself, without her assistance! 
in the new costume that she presented. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 7l 

When I was ready, she led me silently 
along the passages of the prison, when 
we were suddenly met by a man bearing 
a torch, who stopping for a moment, un- 
locked a small door, and eyeing me at- 
tentively, pushed us out, and barred it 
on the inside. My companion then clasped 
her hands in silent gratitude, and bade 
me quicken my speed. We ran along a 
dead wall, by uncertain star-light, for a 
considerable distance ; when she suddenly 
stopped, and in a low voice, whispered 
the word, Maurice, twice. A stout figure 
then joined us, who on opening a dark 
lanthorn discovered the corse of a sentry 
on the ground ; we then with great diffi- 
culty climbed a large iron-gate, and 
when on the other side again commenced 



^2 OWEN CASTLE; 

our running, and at length day-light 
found us within the lines of our own en- 
campment. 

" In my brave deliverers I recognized a 
soldier of my own company, and his 
wife a Welch woman. When free from 
the fear of pursuit, she explained the 
means by which she had so fortunately be- 
friended me and her husband. The num- 
ber of sick in the prison called for ad- 
ditional attendants; she had petitioned to 
be admitted to nurse her husband and me; 
she was permitted to perform this duty, 
and by her tender care restored us both 
to liberty. 

" The prison being so extremely full, the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 73 

good woman and another nurse, a nativer 
a woman of a very masculine appearance, 
were obliged to sleep in an outer building. 
They usually departed together about 
twelve o'clock at night, and were received 
in the morning as soon as the gate-keepe, 
was ready to admit them. On the event- 
ful night, my deliverer administered a 
strong portion of laudanum to her female 
companion, and disguising her husband 
in her clothes, conducted him safely by 
the door-keeper and sentries. When 
secured from observation, she returned 
with the borrowed clothes, and by the 
time the midnight watch was set, again 
sallied forth with me. None of the present 
guard had intelligence of her being before 
from the prison, and having given the 
vol. tv. E 



74 OWEN CASTLE; 

countersign which she had overheard, we 
escaped to the iron gate, where her husband 
had sprung on the sentry, and to secure 
our safety, plunged a sharp knife suddenly 
into his breast, and thus vanquished the 
only remaining obstacle that lay across 
the path of liberty. When my reappear- 
ance was known to the commanding officer* 
he graciously expressed his happiness at 
my return, and kindly promised to re- 
commend me for promotion, which he 
was pleased to say I greatly merited. 
Maurice O'Driscal, the soldier who aided 
my emancipation, was a corporal, but 
for his service to me, was soon made a 
serjeant. 

U Thus, my beloved Grace, I was restored 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 'Jh 

to the anticipation of future joys, in 
again meeting thee. Oh my adored! this 
absence has been in love's account, six 
hundred years, but will soon end, as I 
have a hope of gaining leave to return to 
England. My declining health demands 
rest, for I have wounds that none but 
my Grace can heal, by her heavenly 
smiles and long promised hand, which 
her humanity will not withhold from 
her faithful soldier. By the spring I 
cherish the fond expectation of holding in 
my arms the treasure of my soul, my 
beloved Grace; till then, adieu. I have 
written to my dear parents by the same 
conveyance, and beg that you will bless 
me with a letter by the same packet, 
which they will dispatch immediately, 

% 2 



76 OWEN castle; 

that I may have the cheering stimulus 
and contemplation, that my love and 
parents are enjoying perfect health, and 
impatiently anticipating my return. May 
every guardian power watch over and 
protect my adored, until I can shield, by 
the affectionate tenderness of a husband, 
your every hour from obtruding care. 
Once more, farewell, and ever believe me 
to be your faithful and ardent lover, 

William Murray." 

This letter arrived at Owen Castle, at 
the very time Grace was at the wood-cut- 
ter's in the forest ; Sir Matthew made no 
scruple of opening it, and was astonished 
at its contents. He wrote to Mrs. Wallace, 
who assisted in arresting the aunt of the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 7? 

helpless girl, and sent her into the toil 
her enemies had prepared. This was 
done to prevent her meeting her be- 
loved William, and it succeeded beyond 
their most sanguine wishes. 

The parents of Captain Murray, on 
hearing the sudden marriage of their 
intended daughter with Sir Matthew, 
forbore to address or reproach her; con- 
ceiving her to be unworthy the tender 
regard of their son. They contented them- 
selves in expressing their displeasure by 
a silent contempt, while the innocent 
offender blamed them for unmerited un- 
kindness : Thus was she kept in happy 
ignorance of the existence of her Wil- 
liam. 



E 3 



78 OWEN castle; 

Captain Murray was stung to the heart 
at having received no answer from his 
love ; jealousy and fear took possession of 
his breast on being informed by his mother 
(for she feared the true statement of her 
conduct would have too powerful an 
effect,) that Miss Fitzbeauchamp's attach- 
ment had been iveakened by so long an 
absence, and implored him to forget 
her. He wrote by every packet, letters 
couched in the tenderest strains of re- 
proaching love, complaining of the delay, 
that kept him still in America ; none of 
these readied Lady Fitzowen's hand, but 
were concealed by Sir Matthew with 
exulting villainy. 

At Plymouth, where he had arrived 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.- 79 

within the last month, he was met by 
Theobald Raymond, who in pity broke 
the marriage to him, with all the distres- 
ing circumstances, and persuaded him 
to with: jM from seeing her, as the 
meeting would increase her misery, and 
not relieve his own. He buried himself 
in the retirement of his parent's abode, 
and lingered near the castle, the spot of 
love and despair, In the dark of the dewy 
eve he would wander round, and gaze un- 
seen on his lost Grace; but this indulgence 
was of short duration, Sir Matthew had 
heard of hie arrival, and dreading their 
meeting, hurried his victim to London. 

Mrs. Wallace had been shown by the 
baronet^ with gratified villainy, the secret- 



83 OWEN CASTLE; 

eJ number of the wretched lover's letter?, 
who exulted with him in the victory over 
his youthful rival. 

The contemptuous coldness the wrong- 
ed object of their united baseness had ex- 
pressed towards her at her unwelcome 
intrusion, inspired her with the fiend-like 
desire of overthrowing the self-possession 
and calm resignation of her ladyship, by 
a disclosure of the treachery carried on. 
This was ample vengeance ; and her cor- 
rupt heart, judging by its own impurity, 
prognosticated the speedy fall of her lady- 
ship's honour, when hatred of a cruel 
husband and a lover's impetuosity should 
combine to shake her virtuou* resolves. 
But the wise and merciful Disposer of all 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 81 

events had sent a father to sustain his 
suffering and irritated daughter in the 
pious principles she had imbibed, and to 
yield a duteous obedience to his directing 
voice. 

The presence of Earl Northerland 
taught the baronet to adopt a different 
mode of conduct to his wife, who, graced 
by high birth and every apppendage of 
wealth, was an ornament that shed on 
his name the brightest lustre ; and she 
was now not treated altogether with the 
same remorseless brutality as the de- 
fenceless unclaimed orphan Grace. But 
the change he made in his behaviour did 
not move the settled resolve of her lady- 
ship, never to live with him again, and 



82 OWEN CASTLE; 

she hourly beseeched her father to break 
the galling chains, and take her to a place 
where she might mourn over her wreck 
of happiness. He soothingly endea- 
voured to console her affliction, by the 
constant intercourse of her friends, but 
could not bring himself to comply with 
her request of an immediate separation, 
which would cast a blemish on his name. 
He procured leave of Sir Matthew to re- 
move her for a short time to his own 
house, when persuasion and parental ad- 
vice might reconcile them in future har- 
mony. 

Sir Matthew consented to this arrange- 
ment; and likewise dismissed the insidi- 
ous Maskall from his presence. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? S3 

The delicate constitution of her lady- 
ship was much injured by her secret re- 
gret and undermining grief. The recent 
ecclaircissement had powerfully shook her 
frame, and the pleasure of finding her 
father, was overcast by the sorrows of her 
lover and her own despair. She sunk 
beneath the conflict, and fell ill, danger- 
ously ill, soon after her removal to her 
father's. 

Lord Merioneth's passion for Mrs. 
Wallace was of a very transient duration. 
He saw she was a woman of no principle; . 
and having heard an account of her for- 
mer life from Lord Orminstead, who, like 
a liberal self-confessed seducer, had di- 
vulged the history of her first transgres- 
e6 



84 owen castle; 

sion from the path of rectitude, with the 
many gallantries she had indulged in 
when mistress to the West Indian. Thus 
armed against her dangerous allurements, 
he emerged from her infatuations with a 
thorough disgust, and timely saved him- 
self from the artful snare she had laid. 
Thus do we see, that unless the mind of 
man be entirely vitiated, he will turn from 
the object where esteem adds not a charm 
to passion. Lord Orkley had been in- 
formed of his visits to Mrs. Wallace, and 
for that insult to his daughter, dismissed 
him from any further attendance on her. 
This cut (to use a fashionable term for 
breaking off a connexion) was felt se- 
verely by Lord Merioneth ; not that his 
affection for Omphale was of a nature to 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 85 

inflict much pain at being rejected by 
her, but her alliance was much to be de- 
sired, as the contiguity of her estates 
would be admirable, if inserted in his 
rent-roll. He likewise respected her 
amiable disposition, and though he could 
not divine the real foundation for the in- 
nuendos Mrs. Wallace had dropped with 
regard to a former attachment, he felt 
assured they were as untrue as gross. 
He made every concession to Lord Ork- 
ley, but without moving him to forgive- 
ness, and chagrined as he was by his ex- 
pectations being disappointed, he bore it 
as a gentleman, and consoled himself by 
a fresh pursuit of pleasure. He was not 
an every day character, yet not striking in 
his propensities. He had received lessons, 



86 OWEN CASTLE; 

but was not in love with the science of 
pugilism. He drove four-in-hand, but 
was not a coachman in appearance, lan- 
guage, or vulgarity. He attended New- 
market races, but was no jockey. The 
sports of the field were his greatest de- 
light; this did not lessen his dignity, for 
his pride of ancestry was great ; and 
though weak and unstable in his judg- 
ment and resolutions, his proceedings 
never blemished his origin. He was good 
from habit, and desisted from vice because 
he had no satisfaction in its pursuit. 
This may appear an insipid character, from 
want of spirit, yet it is natural, and I ve- 
rily believe, more productive of felicity 
than one more ardent. Moderation is 
the grand prop of substantial hap- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 8/ 

piness, and blest is he who is so en- 
dowed. 

Rufus Marmaduke rejoiced that he w r as 
saved the anguish of having supplanted 
a dearly valued friend ; he participated 
in the misery of the devoted pair, and had 
his nuptial arrangements permitted, would 
have flown to embrace his friend, and 
openly confessed how near he had been 
robbing him of his beloved Grace, whose 
melancholy sufferings made his heart 
bleed with commiseration. He wrote a 
letter breathing the true state of his 
heart, what it had been, and what it 
was; implored the renewal of his friend- 
ship, and expatiated on the supreme wis- 
dom of his bountiful Creator, who had 



88 owen castle; 

saved him the agony of destroying the 
felicity of his early and beloved friend ; 
yet, in the midst of his repining, had 
provided a consoling partner, whose vir- 
tue and possessions were more than his tur- 
bulent opposition had merited, or wished 
to obtain. He abjured his former errors, 
and longed by the most exemplary con- 
duct as a clergyman, a husband, and a 
man, to wash out their remembrance and 
effects. 

Captain Murray hastened to London, 
eager to embrace the brother of his affec- 
tion, and pour into his sympathetic 
breast the grief that festered in his own. 

It is with reluctance that I record the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? SQ 

progress of vice in tracing the steps of 
Mrs. Wallace, who foiled in her designs 
on Lord Merioneth, had accepted the 
protection of a Mr. Egerton, a reputed 
miser in every thing, but where his own 
gratifications were to be consulted. He 
was above fifty, unmarried, and master 
of immense wealth. The only relatives of 
this singular man, were a sister and her 
five orphan children, the eldest a youth 
of nineteen, possessing talents of a very 
superior order. The narrow income of his 
mother, was with the most rigid economy 
not more than enough to furnish their 
frugal meals. The youth endeavoured to 
lighten the burden of his parent by using 
the scientific excellence he had acquired 
in painting, and he laboured with unceas- 



§0 OWEN castle; 

ing industry to assist his mother. Hearing 
that his uncle was relaxing in his rigid 
parsimony, he ventured to solicit his 
remembrance of a sister and her helpless 
orphans, all of too tender an age to 
afford by their efforts, the assistance she 
required, 

Mrs. Wallace saw the suppliant for 
Mr. Egerton's bounty ; she was struck 
with his person and address, and readily 
promised to befriend his cause : she suc- 
ceeded so well as to obtain a small sum 
of money for their immediate relief, and 
indicated her hopes of softening the 
brother in his mother's favour. Shepressed 
his frequent visits with all the winning 
beauty she was mistres of, and was regard- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? $1 

ed by him as the benefactress of himself 
and family. Every hour stolen from labour 
was given to her society, which the youth 
thought well repaid by her seductive 
smiles. Intoxicated by her flattering 
favours, and poisoned by the cup of dissipa- 
tion she presented to his lips, he languished 
for the wealth which at his uncle's death 
would give him power to indulge the 
taste for expeuce and pleasure he had so 
suddenly imbibed. 

One evening, while elevated with wine, 
and softened by the condescending caresses 
of his artful but bewitching companion, 
he exclaimed, " Why! Oh, why! ami 
thus poor and powerless, when blest with 
the enchanting smiles of my Arpasia." 



92 oaven castle; 

u You have chosen the path strewed 
with thorns, and left the flowery road of 
pleasure for the empty reward of con- 
scious integrity, (replied she) I have laid 
before you, the way to wealth and power, 
yet you shrink from its pursuit. Though 
goaded by penury, you tremble to seize 
what in the course of a few years must 
be yours. Why should you sit down in 
contented wretchedness, and see your 
mother pine in poverty and contempt, 
and not force the miser to administer 
to their w r ants and your enjoyments? Is 
it not a virtue to take from the overflow- 
ing coffers of the rich, that which would 
otherwise rust within their iron hold, and 
distribute it to the poor? Believe me, in 
the sight of heaven it would be an act of 
charity."— Thus she argued. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE f 93 

" But in the sight of man," said the 
irresolute youth. 

" When escaped from his vengeance 
you might laugh at his opinion. It is not 
the shire love of equity that urges the 
pursuit of justice, but avarice, that insa- 
tiate monster of the miser's soul. Is it not 
nobler to make the affluent spare from 
their luxury, a few hundreds, than to rob 
or cheat a striving industurous tradesman, 
who furnishes your miserable board with 
bread, by not discharging his honest de- 
mand:-" 

" Most true, most true," said her weak 
hearer. 



94 owen castle; 

" I see, (cried she, disdain lightening 
from her eye, while a dimpled smile graced 
her beautiful mouth) you want the cou- 
rage to assert your right, and be the saviour 
of your family. You fear detection, not 
the deed. Shame! Shake off this sluggish 
dread of shadeless doubt, and by a brave 
and hazardous essay, force the sordid to be 
just." Thus did she insidiously sap the 
unstable morality and virtue of a heart 
her baneful loveliness had fettered to her 
will. 

He left her with a mind filled with 
important, but confused schemes for pro- 
curing the means to perpetrate a daring 
crime, and secure her blandishments. He 
had not strength of mind to controvert 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? £5 

her logical sophistry, but received, 
believed and was undone* 

The simple Winifred had received from 
Earl Northerland a wedding portion for 
her affection to his daughter, and with 
her husband, the equally honest David, 
removed to his lordship's residence, again 
to wait upon their beloved mistress. 

As Winifred was returning one morning 
from the city, from executing some busi- 
ness of her own, she met in the Strand a 
woman in whom she recognised a distant 
relation, and accosting her in Welch, was 
confirmed in the assurance. " Oh ! who 
would have thought to have seen you, 
Winny, in this big town Y* 



J)6 OWEN CASTLE ; 

" And who would have thought to have 
seen you, Taffline, as you was gone, my 
mam said nobody knowed where. I was 
but a little thing when you went away from 
Abergavenny, and was taken into Breck- 
nockshire very soon after, by my aunt 
Lewellyn, yet I remember your kissing 
me and crying, and saying you was 
going to a grand place with your mistress.'* 

te Ah! (said Taffline,) that was a dread- 
ful journey to be sure, I shall never 
forget the first night I set foot in this 
great town, and the tribulations and dis- 
asters I met with ; and the travels I've 
had since by sea and dry land, will make 
you bless yourself at the hearing of them, 
for I married a soldier, one Maurice O* 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROKIEi 9/ 

Driscal, an Irishman, and as fine a fighter 
and as good a husband as any, any- 
where, lie got leave to come to England 
with a Captain Murray, the best of officers 
and men." 

"Bless us! (cried Winifred,) if that 
is'ent the dear Mr. Murray, as we thought 
was dead, sweetheart to Miss Fitzbeau- 
champ." 

u Who /" exclaimed Taffline, with sur- 
prise and anxiety. 

t* My mistress, Miss Grace Fitzbeau- 
champ that ivas, now Lady Fitzowen." 

"Then she was not lost! Where is 
vol.' iv, F 



$S OWEN CASTLE; 

her mother, my dear mistress, Madam 
Eliza Fitzbeauchamp," cried TafBine, 
tears starting in her eyes, and hope speak- 
ing in each trembling nerve, 

" Oh laws! she has been dead years 
back, when her ladyship was quite a 
young thing, as I have been told, for it 
was'ent my place to ask questions," 

" Where did she die?' 

" In this very place, I believe ; I heard 
Madam Milbourne say, that she died for 
the loss of her son, as was stolen, for 
there was never any account of him." 

" Oh ! my dear, dear lady ! I have 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 99 

been the death of her, (cried Taffline, 
bursting into tears,) I had master George 
in my arms when, — but I can't tell you 
now, Winny, my heart is too full ; I was 
a simple Welch girl, just from the hills, 
and knowed nothing of London ways. 
Oh ! my beautiful baby, my sweet master 
George." 

"Miss Grace, I mean her ladyship, is 
very grand now, her father is an Earl, 
but she's so sick, I fear she won't live, for 
all the fine fathers in the world." 

" Sick ! oh, take me to her," cried 
Taffline, " I can't rest another moment 
without seeing her." 

F 2 



100 OWEN CASTLE ; 

Winifred conducted her to Earl Nor- 
therland, and after preparing her mistress 
to see her, brought Taffline into her pre- 
sence. 

She had heard at full the particulars 
previous to her mother's death ; but no 
trace had ever been found of her servant 
or child ; anxious to interrogate Taffline, 
and hoping her account might illustrate 
the mystery of her brother's disappearance, 
she sent for the earl, who listened with 
his daughter to her simple narration, 
which was as follows. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 101 



CHAP. XXXIV. 



VV HEN my lady with little Miss Grace, 
in her clear arms, bid me follow her with 
Master George, after leaving the coach I 
went along pretty well, but turning to 
look at a glass shop which mightily 
pleased Master George, and to tell truth 
your honour I was as foolish as the baby I 
had in my arms, for I stood staring in at 
the window for a good five minutes, when 
I bethought me, and set off as fast as the 
folks jostling would let me, down a long 

F 3 



102 OWEN CASTLE; 

street, but I could not see a sign of my 
mistress, look which way I would ; so I 
asked a woman that I met where the 
borough was, and a Mr. Stewart lived, 
in as good English as I could (for I never 
spoke any thing but Welch in my own 
home.) but she laughed, and said she 
did'ent understand gibberish Welch. 
Well, I went further and further, till I 
thought I was ready to die with weariness, 
when I took heart and asked a civil 
looking young man the same question ; 
he at last came to understand me, and 
said, I had best make my way back to 
the inn I came to, because he said, the 
lady might send there to enquire for me. 

" And did you ?" said the earL 



OK, WHICH rS THE HEROINE? 103 

u Yes, your lordship's honour, I went 
as he told me, staight hack again, but 
could not call to mind the sign as was 
right, but asked for the blackymoor's 
head." 

"The Saracen's head, you mean?" 
said the earl. 

" Ah, my lord ! if I had the sense of 
a goose, I might have remembered that, 
but only just had a glimpse of the sign 
by lamp-light, and to my thinking it was 
as black and ugly a face, as any blacka- 
moor's in the world." 

" To the point, woman," cried the earl,, 
impatiently. 

F4 



104 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Yes, your honour, the point is com- 
ing ; so I travelled a great many streets, 
and came to a lane, a very loathsome 
place to be sure it was ; but I thought 
to myself it might be the back door, as 
I was going round to; but law! I was 
a weary way off from the Samaritine's 
head, as I afterwards found. But I went 
in, and saw a parcel of soldiers and re- 
cruits drinking round the kitchen fire; 
which scared me ; for your honour, I 
was afeard of a red jacket then, though 
I have since seen a deal of service in 
their company. Well, I was sadly vexed 
and fell a crying, and so did little George, 
for he was hungry, and wanted to go to 
his mamma." 

The earl struck his forehead in painful 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1 J 

recollection of the desertion of his inno- 
cents, and said, " Woman, go on in your 
story without comment, or animadversion, 
or you will drive me mad. ,, 

" I am sure your lordship's worship, I 
don't mean to be tedious, but it is a 
round about story ; and twenty years ago 
requires a good head piece, to recollect 
what's gone so long back ; but while I 
was crying, who should jump up from the 
fireside, but the very Irishman who di- 
rected my mistress to Mr. Stewart's, 
when hur was in the coach. He was very 
kind indeed, and civil, and gave me some 
bread and cheese and ale ; and master 
George took greatly to him, and I told 
him how I had lost my mistress ; and he 
F5 



106 OWEN CASTLE; 

said, c I must make myself easy, and he 
would take me to her in the morning, for 
it was too late that night ; and was as 
comfortable, and mannerful as never was. 
And he could understand my talk, though 
nobody else did, for Irish and Welsh is a 
deal alike, when folks mind of it." 

" But the result, the result" said his 
lordship, 

" Dear a me ! your honour, there was 
no insult at all, for he was as modesty, 
and as pretty in behaviour as any body 
could be. As for what they say of Irish- 
men being so bold, they love bashfulness 
and wouldn't insult a virtuous young 
woman, half so soon as another haram 
skarum rantipole." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 10? 

" Well, well, did you return in the 
morning t" 

" I'll tell your honour. I sleeped with 
the servant of the house, and with 
master George, who cried all night long 
for his mamma ; and I wanted Mr, 
Maurice o'Driscal to go with me early 
in the morning to find my lady. But 
laws! I found out he had listed for a 
soldier, and was going to Deptford to he 
sworn in ; and was soon to go a great 
way beyond seas ; he vowed he was my 
true lover, and said he would not part 
with me, aad if I would go to Dep.ford 
he would marry me and take the sweet 
boy to his mamma, and I should see 
foreign parts.'* 

f6 



108 OWEN CASTLE; 

'* And you consented, v eagerly demanded 
the earl, " and took my child with 

you t 

" I was young and simple, and Mr. 
O'Briscal was very smart in his soldier's 
clothes. He was so kind and civil., and 
the only person I could depend on 
smongst strangers. But I wasent in a 
hurry to be married. No, I said I'd 
ask my mistresses leave first ; for I was 
in great trouble about her, your honour, 
for all I was so taken with Mr, O'Driscal ; 
so he good soul consented, and away we 
went to Deptford in a coach. He went 
to the officer, while I took a walk in the 
dock yard with master George ; we had 
been there about an hour, when I heard 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 109 

a drum beat, and so I ran- away to see 
what it was, like a giddy mad creature 
as I was, and left master George playing 
amongst the timber." 

" Well, woman ! tell me what became 
of my child," cried the earl, his feelings 
wound up to the highest pitch of fear and 
anxiety. 

u I don't know, your honour ; for when 
I and O'Driscal came back to seek him 
he was gone, and nobody knew where. I 
hope your honour won't transport me, 
for I was young and giddy, and as wild as 
the hare that runs over the mountains/' 
said Taffline, bursting into tears, and throw- 
ing herself at Earl Northerland's feet. 



110 OWEN CASTLE; 

" Enough (said the e3rl, struggling for 
composure, and lifting her up) he was 
drowned, I suppose." 

" No, your honour; for there was no- 
water nigh enough for him to toddle in ; 
indeed, indeed, there wasn't." 

" Did you make no inquiry for my lost 
boy?- 

" Oh, yes, your honour. O'Driscal 
inquired ofeverv body, but all to no use; 
and then he said, 1 should be transported 
for child- stealing, if I went to my mistress 
without poor little m<.srer George, which 
frightened me greatly, and I was nearly 
out my mind with sorrow and grief, and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? Ill 

did know what to do; but at last, we gave 
up asking and looking about, for there 
was no tidings of him. So G'Driscal said, 
if I wanted to save my life, I must list as 
well as he, and go to soldiering; and so 
we were married, your honour, for I dare 
not look my mistress in the face when I 
had lost her darling boy ; and so J went 
with my husband to foreign parts, and 
great trouble and distress I've had. About 
two years ago, my husband went to Ame- 
rica, and there I had the good luck to be 
of service to Captain Murray, your ho- 
nour, and my husband is a serjeltnt in the 
same regiment, and is come to London, 
to go to Ireland to see his loving rela- 
tions. But I hope your honour will be 
merciful, and not transport me, for I have 



112 OWEN CASTLE; 

told you the true and lawful matter, as I 
am a living christian woman. When I 
heard of the death of my sweet and hand- 
some lady (to be sure, you, madam, my 
lady, was then a little babe, but you are 
as like her now as two roses on the same 
stem) but when I heard of her dying of 
of grief all along of me, my heart was 
quite drawn across with repentance and 
sorrow ; so I hope your honour, for the 
sake of my three children, you won't take 
the law of me," cried she, supplicating his 
forbearance and forgiveness. 

" You have nothing to fear from me, 
woman (said the earl) ; I am the princi- 
pal cause of all the distress that hangs on 
myself and children. Still there is a pro- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 113 

bability he may yet be living," continued 
he, faintly smiling at the hope of clasping 
him to his bosom. 

" Ah! indeed, your honour, and so he 
may; and if I was to see him, I should 
know him amongst a thousand, if he was 
as tall as the monument and as big as a 
church, for he must be a fine youth now. 
Aye (continued she), he must be three- 
and-twenty to-day, for he was just three 
years old when I had the misfortune to 
lose him, and that is twenty years ago." 

H How should you know him ?" de- 
manded the earl, ready to catch at the 
most slender clue to the discovery of his 
son. 



114 OWEN CASTLE; 

" By something very particular/' cried 
*he, sagaciously tossing her head. 

" A mark ?* said his lordship. 

" No, your honour, no natural mark i 
but you'll be angry if I tell you." 

ic If you do not wish to create my dis- 
pleasure, woman, I charge you instantly 
to divulge your knowledge, how you 
should know my son, should you ever 
meet him r" said the earl, in a serious 
tone and frowning aspect, which greatly 
alarmed Taffline, who tremblingly re- 
turned — 

u Why, as my husband and another- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1 !£► 

soldier were marking their arms with 
gunpowder, your honour, the night be- 
fore we went to Deptford, master George 
was sitting on his knee, and seemed vastly 
pleased at the pretty marks, and my hus- 
band said, he was a fine little fellow, and 
fit for a soldier ; so, your honour, don't 
be angry, but he marked his little fat 
shoulder with a small crown, done with a 
needle and gunpowder; which vexed me 
sadly, for I know'd how my mistress 
would take me to task ; so I tried to wash 
it off, but I could not, and Maurice 
O'Driscal said, he would surely carry it 
to the grave with him." 

" It was the merciful ordinance of hea- 
ven, who foresaw that lie would be cast 



Il6 OWEN CASTLE ; 

upon the world defenceless and unknown, 
who inspired your husband with the 
whim of marking the forlorn innocent. 
Yes, yes — by that I may yet trace him, 
may yet find a son." 

ct I hope your honour is not offended, 
indeed he meant no harm (said Taffline) ; 
for Maurice G'Driscal is the best of fa- 
thers, and always speaks with sorrow for 
the dear babe's loss." 

ci Say no more (said the earl), I am not 
offended, but on the contrary, well pleased 
at the glimmerings of hope your informa- 
tion has given. Let me know where you 
are to be found, and how long you stay 
in England." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l\^ 

<c My husband is in the same house 
with Captaim Murray, your honour. He 
loves him dearly, and who would not, for 
he is the best of men and gentlemen f 

Lady Fitzowen heaved a profound 
sigh. 

" He lodges for the present, your 
honour, in Albemarle-street, and I and 
my husband wait on him. He went to 
see his friends in Wale?, and was there 
six weeks, and only returned the begin- 
ning of this week." 

* ; Good heaven! (exclaimed her lady- 
ship) was he then so near mel Now I see 
why I was hurried to tawn. Oh ! my lord 



118 OWEN CASTLE; 

and father! What does he think of his 
wretched Grace ?" 

Cf Good lack! (cried Taffline, you are 
the beautiful lady he is so melancholy 
about. Oh ! if you could see him, he is one 
of the unhappiest gentlemen in the king- 
dom." 

The earl fearing the effect her commu- 
nication might have on his debilitated 
daughter, ordered Winifred to take her 
to the housekeeper's room, and there en- 
tertain her, and to make her and her 
husband welcome whenever they came : 
he then gave her a handsome present, and 
bid her tell her husband he would endea- 
vour to serve him, and not to leave town 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1 Ig| 

without seeing him ; he then embraced 
his drooping daughter and -left the apart- 
ment. 

" Tell me," faintly cried her ladyship, 
u tell me, Taffline, how does Captain 
Murray look, is he in health?" 

" Bless you, madam/' answered Taf- 
fline, her eyes tilling with tears, " how like 
your voice and face is, to your dear 
mother's ; when she was in trouble, she 
would look just, aye, just as you do now. 
Her ladyship repeated her question. As to 
his health, it is but middling, and he looks 
quite pale ; I thought to be sure his com- 
ing to England would have done him great 
service, but it seems it is quite oth erwise> 



120 OWES castle; 

He has a handsome young gentleman 
constantly with him, one Mr. Marmaduke, 
I think, for my husband had his card in 
his hand. One day I heard him tell Mr, 
Marmaduke, my dear young lady, that 
he had seen the martyred angel when 
she east suspected it, and could read in 
her soft features the disquietude of her 
mind. Ah, them were the very words, but 
I little thought the martyred angel was 
the babe I had so often nursed. You'll 
excuse my boldness, madam, but I think 
you are the lady he talks so about to his 
friend ; and he said too, that if he could 
but speak once to you, his heart would 
be easier. Do now, my dear iady, for the 
love of charity, see and talk to him^ if it 
be only for once.'' 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE: 121 

Lady Fitzowen could scarcely restrain 
the emotion the words of her loquacious 
nurse called forth : she repressed the con- 
sent that hovered on her lips, and by a 
virtuous effort banished the obtruding 
softness that pleaded so powerfully for 
her beloved William, and assuming a 
hauteur, foreign to her nature, quelled 
the officious and unmeaning presumption 
of Taffline, by saying, " You cannot re- 
collect I am the wife of Sir Matthew 
Fitzowen, or you would not insult me by 
wishing me to act in a manner unbecom- 
ing his dignity and my own esteem? I am 
a married woman, and all intercourse 
with my former lover must cease; my 
duty, my honour, and my peace demand 
it." 

VOL. IV. G 



122 OWEN castle; 

" Oh, my poor master '!" cried Taffline, 
bursting into tears. * What a pity! What 
a thousand pities that you should be so 
m isfor lunate." 

David entered with a letter and pre- 
sented it to her ladyship, saying a servant 
waited for an answer. 

The well known hand in the superscrip- 
tion awakened every tender sensation, but 
mastering the impulse of love and anxiety 
that prompted her to break the seal, she 
returned it into his hand unopened, say- 
ing " That is my answer." 

David looked astonished, and stood ir- 
resolute, when he articulated with timid 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 123 

respect and intreaty, " Won't your lady- 
ship read it }" 

"You have your orders," she replied, 
hastening to an adjoining apartment as fast 
as her tremulous frame would permit, and 
throwing herself on a sofa, gave scope to 
the anguish her struggle for rectitude had 
caused. She was startled by a voice that 
thrilled every nerve with ecstatic joy, and 
looking up beheld her beloved William, 
who, gazing with grief and adoration 
ieaned over her in dumb but expressive 
sorrow. " My William!" exclaimed her 
ladyship, " recoiling from his ardent re- 
gards 5 why 1 oh, why are you here?'* 

" Lady Fitzowen," said he, stifling his 
q 2 



124 owen castle; 

feelings, " do not, I beseech, I implore 
you, unman me by this coldness, this un- 
necessary cruelty. I am now in your 
presence for the first time since my arri- 
val in England, and on the eve of an 
everlasting farewell, yet you repulse me, 
you deny me the bliss of beholding you. 
Oh my love! my Grace! (cried he, giving 
way to the transport which the sight of 
her created in his bosom, and forgetting 
in the tumult of his contending passions 
the restraint duty imposed on her, and 
his own honourable resolution of not 
trespassing on the tenderness that he 
knew dwelt in her heart for him, catch- 
ing her in his arms) let me held thee to 
my wretched breast, let our mutual tears 
mingle with our woes, while kisses such 
as angels give, seal our parting/' 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 125 

" Oh, inhuman William! (exclaimed 
she, bursting from his embrace,) do you 
conspire against me too? Leave me, I 
conjure you ; remember I am wife to 
another, no longer to be approached by- 
love or joy. — Oh ! in pity spare my 
anguish, unutterable as cruel, and instant- 
ly depart." 

M You love me ! (cried he, holding her 
trembling hands within his own nervous 
grasp,) you love me, you are my wife, 
not the monster's that tore ycu from me ; 
our vows are registered in heaven. — Mor- 
tal ceremony had not power to dissolve 
them ; — then let us fly together to distant 
shores, far from those who stole thee 
from me. We shall be blest ! supremely 
q 3 



126 OWEN CASTX.E; 

blest! (continued he, kneeling at her 
feet,) Heaven will smile upon us, will 
cancel your bondage with the aged tyrant 
that holds you from me. Oh! my 
Grace ! is this our promised joys ?" His 
tears, his energetic appeal, his counten- 
ance glowing with impassioned beauty; 
his fine and graceful form extended at 
her feet; all were powerful foes to ri- 
gid rectitude ; she struggled to be free 
from their seductive influence, and at- 
tempted to fly the apartment. He clung 
to her robe : " Do not, I conjure you, 
leave me thus, but banish that hovering 
frown that threatens death to my fond 
and ardent implorings. Oh ! Grace, celes- 
tially arrayed in relentless purity, does 
not one throb of pity move your heart,—- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 12/ 

the heart that once was mine} Scorn not 
my prayers, but let the love that flutters 
in your breast, bear down stern law, — Let 
us seize the happiness that heaven sanc- 
tions, and fly, blest in each other's love, 
Where arbitrary power can never part us." 

tc Captain Murray! (cried she, while 
misery wrung her heart, and with affected 
firmness she strove to hide her emotions,) 
you are unworthy the love I once 
cherished in my now broken heart ; you 
insult me with a passion, honour and 
every sentiment of religion condemns 
as base, and bids you for ever banish. 
Am I not another's ? Where is the love 
you so loudly proclaim, that would lure 
its object to destruction and infamy i 

G 4 



128 OWEN castle; 

Selfish, and regardless of the sacred title 
I bear, you rush into my unprepared 
presence, and think by a violent and 
frantic appeal to my ill-smothered tender- 
ness, to vanquish every sacred obstacle 
that withholds me from you. — Learn that 
you are deceived. I am bound by 
solemn ties never to suffer a treacherous 
thought against my husband's peace 
and my own integrity. In heaven I have 
an oath, that without perdition never 
can be broken, and though my tortured 
heart may break in the performance 
of my duty, yet I will not swerve from 
it; no not even your distraction, and 
my oivn despair, shall ever stain my soul 
with a guilty love/' 

"Cold and obdurate virtue! (cried 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 129 

Captain Murray, rising with a pallid 
look of deep despair,) you have fixed 
my doom ; — I leave you, Lady Fitzowen, 
for ever leave you ;" then clasping his 
hands together with the most bitter 
regret, continued in a voice of anguish, 
"Where are now the sanguine visions that 
cheered me on the bed of sickness? 
Where are now those heavenly smiles my 
flattering heart presaged would play 
round that lovely lip ? Where are now 
the imagined and enchanting greetings 
that wrung in my ear as whispered by 
my Grace on my return ? Oh! hea- 
vens ! she is not mine ; never, never will 
she be mine again.' 1 

u Why do you indulge this unavailing 
6 £ 



ISO OW£N CASTLE; 

grief, (said she, touched to the soul by 
the misery she saw him labour with.) 
Ah! think how much beneath your 
manly fortitude you fall, when you thus 
deplore my unworthy loss," As she ap- 
proached him, a seraphic radiance 
shone in her face, while she held forth 
her white hand, and a full tear not to 
be suppressed, rolled down her cheek, 
" I present you my hand, William ; I 
congratulate your long-wished arrival 
and — " She could articulate no more, the 
effort was more thun human to appear 
calm at such a moment, and she sunk on 
the sofa overcome by the strength of her 
ungovernable sorrow. 

In an instant William was again at her 
feet. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 131 

"And can you consume the life dedi- 
cated to me, to your William, in wretch- 
edness, and not embrace the moment of 
bliss and freedom he supplicates you^to ac- 
cept ? Loveliest and most adored of wo- 
men, let me beseech you to listen with 
compassion to what I propose. In Ire- 
land I have an estate lately lefc me; thi- 
ther let me bear you; thejustCreatorknows 
our hearts; a sacred ceremony shall ratify 
our vows, annul your present fetters, and 
place us in everlasting joys. By heaven 
the picture transports me beyond the earth, 
and I already taste the celestial paradise 
your presence would create." 

"Hear me, in mercy hear me;" ex- 
claimed she, casting her eyes to heaven,— 
g6 



132 OWEN CASTLE; 

"Just guardian of thy erring creatures! 
shield me from the temptation his honied 
words and adored presence casts round 
me, — Oh! give me fortitude to resist his 
weakness and my own:" — then starting 
from her reclining position, she cried, 
"William adieu, everlastingly adieu ! shame 
and remorse be banished eternally from 
us ; this is the crisis of our fate ; honour 
and duty divide us; we may meet in yon 
pure abode, and there unite in everlast- 
ing purity, but on this earth, we sepa- 
rate for ever." 

"Oh! why must I revere the inflexible 
virtue that dooms me to perpetual misery!" 
exclaimed he, trying to detain her. At that 
instant Maurice O'Driscal burst into the 
room, crying " By the blessed Pope Joan 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE t 153 

'tis I have the news. Och! is it there 
you are, honies T said he with respectful 
delight, as he beheld Captain Murray 
and her ladyship ; "sure and sure enough, 
it was myself that did it." 

"Did tvhat?" demanded Captain Mur- 
ray in a reprimanding tone. 

"Och! bad luck to my manners, (re- 
plied O'Driscal) and is it me that's of- 
fending you honour intentionally f 9 and 
bowing to the ground with a profound 
reverence to lady Fitzowen, continued, 
The blessing of blessings light on the 
baby that I see before me. Och ! and it's 
little you were when Maurice got the 
half crown from the sweet fist of your mo- 



134 OWEN CASTLE ; 

ther; by my faith, that half crown was 
the making of me, for the sup of whisky 
which I got with it filled me brim -full of 
valour. Och! I was bursting with bravery, 
was as drunk as a prince, and entered the 
army like a gentleman." 

"What business brings you here?" asked 
the Captain. "Business is it. Och! your 
honour, and it's a fine business, a noble 
business!" Here O'Driscal danced round 
the room with every demonstration of joy. 
"Its myself that's the lucky creature; but 
begging your honour's pardon, I'll come 
to the marrow of the whole truth in a few 
words. 5 * 

" I wish you would, and not intrude on 
Lady Fitzowen thus." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 135 

"Is it intruding?" By the fortunate pow- 
ers, but the beautiful erature won't say so, 
when she knows all. You must know, your 
ladyship, that one Mr. Marmaduke, and a 
certain person that we will call Mr. Mil- 
bourne for the fun o' the thing, (Maurice 
looked extremely sage and important as he 
said this, and Lady Fitzowen, giving a graci- 
ous but faint smile, listened with tranquil 
patience for his communication) but that's 
neither here nor there, jewel, we'll soon be 
after seeing the upshot. Faith, Mr. Mar- 
maduke and the other gentleman went 
their ways to the Serpentine river to take 
a dipping, my lady; natural enough, my 
lady, you 11 say, this hot day: well, I want- 
ed his honour to deliver some letters to him, 
and so thought I, may be he is gone too; 



136 owen castle; 

so I set off, thinking to find him with the 
other gentleman; the mothers son of me 
never dreaming himself was here all the 
while. Well, I went and I found them, 
and it was the greatest find that ever was 
found, my lady, for saving your presence, 
when I came to assist the gentleman to 
dress (for you know they had no clothes 
on in the water) I saw it; the saints set 
a blessing on the mark, I saw it on his 
shoulder" "A. what!*' said her ladyship 
nearly breathless. "A mark, a crown!" by 
St. Patrick; and it was a ^rown, as natural 
a crown as the king's own" 

"A crown? On whose shoulder," de- 
manded her ladyship. "On the gentleman 
misnamed Melbourne. By my faith but its 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 13f 

a blundering sort of hocus pocus ; but had 
you seen my joy, and his astonishment, 
you'd never have forgot it: and sure I 
brought him in a twinkling to my lord, 
his own natural-born father, and there they 
are as happy as princes; and there's 
a tawny lady, and a fine old gentleman, 
they are all together, and sent me for you, 
your ladyship. Och ! this is the day of 
all days in the year!" 

Earl Northerland now entered the room, 
holding Augustus by the hand, and fol- 
lowed by Lord Orkley and Omphale, who 
eagerly flew to her agitated friend. 

"Receive a brother, my beloved daugh- 
ter T cried the enraptured father, "and par- 



J 38 owen castle; 

ticipate in the happiness the discovery has 
occasioned to all around/' 

Her ladyship received him with affec- 
tionate surprise. " Can you, dear and in- 
jured sister, forgive the unkindness of Au- 
gustus, when he, in the character of a 
brother, solicits it:" 

"In this embrace I bury the re- 
membrance of former wrongs/' replied 
she. 

<( Miraculous are the ways of the Divine 
Providence/' said Earl Northerland. " I felt 
my heart incline warmly towards the dis- 
tressed beggar, and followed the bent of 
my then unaccountable predeliction in his 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 139 

favour. It was heaven sent him to a fa- 
ther's care, and nature, with her unseen cord 
of powerful instinct, drew me to my own. 
Oh my children! let me see in your 
pure lives, an atonement for my indiscre- 
tions, and I shall die content. You, my 
George, (said he, addressing Augustus) 
have seen sufficient of the dangerous and 
seductive path to shun it, and by expe- 
rience, dearly bought, are prepared to 
accept of power and dignity with an im- 
proved and chastened spirit. You are heir 
to a distinguished house ; may the dignity 
and virtue of your ancestors shine in all 
your actions; I do not desire a more able 
supporter of my honours, (continued he, 
beholding with parental delight his noble 
form and expressive aspect. ) You have 



140 OWEN castle; 

talents, genius, generosity, and every 
quality of mind to fill an elevated station. 
The impetuosity of an ardent nature had 
nearly overwhelmed you in ruin. Thank 
heaven! it has been checked by early 
misfortune ; but I perceive you yet retain 
the glow of enthusiasm, which properly 
directed, is so essential for a patriot, so 
necessary for an orator. Your eye is open 
to discern, your heart to liberality; you 
have penetration to detect villainy and re- 
ward merit; thus are you fitted for an 
English peer." His son was confounded 
by the instantaneous change in his pros- 
pects ; he saw how much he was exalted ; 
he rejoiced at his father's picture of what 
he should be, and with the proud swell of 
conscious ability for the task, with mingled 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 141 

reverence and gratitude, he threw himself 
at his feet, exclaiming, " Your son will 
supplicate heaven, that he may never 
disgrace his noble father." 

Omphale did not witness a scene so 
replete with pleasure and amazement 
unmoved; her heart throbbed with trans- 
port at the elevation of one so long", so 
tenderly beloved ; her feelings were ecstatic 
but confined to her own enraptured 
breast ; words could not adequately paint 
her joy ; silence was heaven with such 
guests, and she was mutely blest. 

Captain Murray was graciously received 
by the Earl of Northerland, and many 
encomiums paid him on his military 



142 OWEN CASTLE; 

achievements. The earl did not in the 
midst of his joy at finding a son, cease 
to regret the misery of his daughter. In 
Captain Murray he beheld a gallant 
officer, a gentleman of family and for- 
tune ; sorely did he lament the unnatural 
tie that witheld him from presenting 
his child to such a man, and his heart 
bled at their mutual unhappiness. His 
reliance on the rectitude of his daughter, 
and opinion of Captain Murray's honour, 
spared him the pain of supposing any 
criminality in their meeting, and delicacy 
denied his asking, why he was in his 
house. 

When Lord Orkley placed the hand of 
Omphale within that of the former Au- 



GR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 143 

•gustus, he bowed to the earl, and said 
" Thus I ratify our friendship, George, and 
heaven bless the trustees for our bond of 
amity." 

Lady Fitzowen, who had borne up 
through the affecting scene of unexpected 
love and surprise, could not, on con- 
trasting her friend's felicity and her o-.vn 
misery, longer conceal the struggles she 
had borne, but exclaiming with clasped 
hands, " Bless, ohl biess them for 
«ver. Oh God! why am I the only 
wretch, forlor.i of hope ?" Then casting a 
look of unfeigned tenderness and afflic- 
tion on Captain Murray, fell senseless in 
her father's arms. 

The authenticity of Augustus's birth 



144 owen castle; 

was sworn to by O'Driscal and Taffline, 
they also had recourse to the people of 
the public house, who were living, and 
swore they saw him put the peculiar 
mark on the infant's shoulder ; and after a 
most diligent search amongst the papers 
of the late Mr. Milbourne, a writing 
was found, directed for Augustus, to be 
opened by him five years after his arrival 
in England ; wherein was stated the 
means by which he gained him, with the 
name of the ship, and the sailor who 
stole him from England. No time was lost 
in ascertaining the sailor's existence, who 
w r as found and acknowledged the crime; 
he also observed the singular mark, and 
without hesitation made oath he was 
the child he had twenty years since sold 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 145 

to Mr Milbourne. Thus was the infant 
George Frederick Fitzbeauchamp found 
in the person of Augustus Milbourne, 
who for the future we shall distinguish 
as Lord George. 

Captain Wallace resigned the Whit- 
ford estate to the true claimant, a distant 
relation of the late Mr. Milbourne; and 
exchanging into a regiment destined for 
the East Indies, left his unworthy wife 
to the fate her destructive courses 
courted. 

The marriage of Lord George and Om- 
phale was to be celebrated on the same 
day that Rufus Marmaduke and Lady 

VOL. IV. H 



146 OWEN CASTLE; 

Sarah's took place ; and every settlement 
was adjusted with the greatest promp- 
titude and exactness. 



OR, WHTCH IS THE HEROIME? M? 



CHAPTER XXXV. 



V^/APTAIN Murray withdrew from the 
affecting scene he had witnessed at Lord 
Northerland's, in a most distracted state 
of mind ; but sought in the society of his 
early friend, to gain some composure, and 
by his consolatory advice, learned to bear 
the harsh separation fate had decreed. 
Rufus Marmaduke often dined with him, 
and devoted every friendly exertion to- 
wards calming the agitations of his breast. 
At an early hour his attendance on Lady 
h 2 



148 OWEN CASTLE; 

Sarah compelled him to take his leave. 
Captain Murray could not endure the so- 
litude of his lodgings with so oppressed 
a heart and tortured mind ; and in- 
vited by the beauty of the night, strolled 
down Picadilly. The air from St. James's 
Park greatly revived him. As he leaned de- 
jectedly against its iron pallisades, watching 
the reflection of the pale orb of night in 
the glassy surface of Rosamond's pond, 
he was roused from his melancholy train 
of thought by a sudden uproar, and turn- 
ing round, saw a groupe of watchmen 
surrounding a person whose voice struck 
him to be that of Tobit Swithin's, hem- 
med in with several other gentlemen in 
masqeurade habits. Tobit Swithin had on 
a motley dress, with a fool's cap and bells, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 149 

which in his violent gesticulations, shook 
with a jingling noise, that made his angry 
words more incoherent than his pas- 
sionate hesitation. 

i 

" I demand satisfaction/' cried he, " and 
1 will have it." 

" So you shall, Cloten," returned a half 
intoxicated mask, " Cloten the brave!' 

" So I will. I am as inoffensive and 
peaceable a man as any, when let alone; 
but I won't put up with an affront, look 
you to that." 

a You broke the lamp my master, "said 
a watchman, i( and Will Snorum's head, 
H 3 



150 OWEN CASTLE; 

so yo must go with me to the watch-house, 
in your fool's coat." 

"lama gentleman, fellow/' cried the 
enraged Tobit, " and will knock any man 
down, by St. David I will, that offers to 
molest me." 

" Here! you gem man in the shape of 
the devil," exclaimed a watchman, " what 
is the meaning of this here rumpus i n 

Captain Murray then observed a person 
in a dress meant to resemble that character, 
who made no other answer, than a roar of 
laughter, in which the masks joined. 

" You may laugh, gentlemen/' cried 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 151 

the irritated Tobit, " but its no joke to be 
bunted to death through the streets by a 
demon. The blessed Saint David him- 
self, nor St. Winifred to boot, would not 
stand it ; with his tail whisking about 
like a flambeau ; then his horns too. It 
is a sin and a shame, look you, and I'll 
have satisfaction/' 

" Take them to the watch-house/' cried 
the mob, u or the fool will kill the devil, 
and all London will go into mourning*" 
They attempted to seize Tobit, who 
nimbly escaping them, ran along the 
street with the masked devil in pursuit 
of him, and the whole mob shouting in 
full chase. 
i 

Captain Murray then enquired of one 
h 4 



15^ OWEN CASTLE; 

of the masks, who lingered behind the 
rest, if he could inform him of the mean- 
ing of the disturbance then making. 

" Only a masquerade frolic, sir, at the 
expence of a simple gentleman." He 
then proceeded to inform him of the 
whole affair. 

"When at dinner at the London Tavern, 
it was proposed that Mr. S within, who 
had a strong desire to witness the fluctua- 
tions of a masquerade groupe, should ac- 
company a large party then there, to the 
Pantheon in the evening. Accordingly 
we went to a warehouse, and chose our 
different dresses. Mr. Swithin was per- 
suaded to hire that of the fool, with his 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 153 

cap and bells, by Sir Frederick Hairbrain, 
who waggishly proposed to have some 
sport with the novice ; and being a little 
merry with the wine he had drank after 
dinner, equipped himself in the dress of 
his infernal majesty, but kept concealed 
from Mr. Swithin, until we all sallied 
into the thickest of the company. The 
country gentleman's surprise at every 
striking object, created the diversion of 
many, and brought on him the wit and 
impertinence of the masks ; he was 
roasted exceedingly, from his inability 
to support the character he had assumed. 
Sir Frederic Hairbrain, shortly presented 
himself to the astonished Tobit ; who 
trembled excessively at his terrific ap- 
pearance, and did not at all relish bis 
k5 



154 owen castle; 

selecting him for his companion ; but the 
extreme wit of Sir Frederick's sarcasms 
on many he knew, even in their diguise, 
made him the most followed and admired 
of the characters. Mr. Swithin perceiv- 
ing the protection of the majestic demon 
in a trifling measure saved him from the 
rough usage of the company, stuck close to 
him, and as the Japanese do, worshipped 
him through fear ; but he turned traitor 
to his servile adherent, and joined with 
the rest to worry and teaze him. He 
lashed him relentlessly with his fiery tail, 
and hunting him from the Pantheon, 
pursued him furiously along the streets. 
He was in the greatest terror, and in his 
speed to gain his lodgings, mistook his 
way, knocked down a watchman, and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 155 

breaking a lamp, raised the uproar you 
saw. Sir Frederick will not quit him 
until he sees him safe lodged at home, 
but I much fear the end of the frolic will 
not be so replete with mirth as the begin- 
ning ; they will certainly get lodged in 
the watch-house for disturbing the peace, 
and the morning bring forth a disgraceful 
appearance at Bow Street." 

Captain Murray lost no time in seek- 
ing his alarmed and distressed neighbour, 
whom he found seated in the corner of 
a watch- bouse with Sir Frederick, and 
the constable of the night sitting in judg- 
ment over them, with many creatures, 
whose tawdry misery and gross language 
shocked his &ight ; and seeing pickpockets 

n6 



156 



OWEN CASTLE ; 



and every species of beggarly depravity 
surrounding the grotesque and respectable 
strangers, he soon prevailed on the con- 
stable to take his bail, and liberated the 
prisoners, who as soon as a coach could 
be procured, were conveyed to their 
lodgings. 

" Well (cried Tobit, as he seated him- 
self in his own apartment), if I live a 
thousand and a thousand years, I shall 
never forget the frights and escapes I've 
had to-night ; and I'll not sleep another 
night in this wicked place, but give my 
orders, and gallop away from it as fast — 
aye, as fast as I came into it. Never was 
a simple country gentleman used in the 
barbarous way I have been. I shall never 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 15^ 

think myself safe from that flying devil 
until I am lodged in mamma's arm chair 
at Rusty Hall." 

When Captain Murray informed him 
that it was Sir Frederick Hairbrain who 
had tortured him with fright, Tobit 
stared incredulously in his face, and said 
that he could not credit that Sir Fre- 
derick, who had declared himself to be 
his particular friend while drinking to- 
gether after dinner, could be such a 
heathen and a traitor as to assume the 
disguise of a devil, and take part against 
him. Then with a rueful visage and a 
profound comicality of superstition, cried, 
" He danced me, 'tis true into a fever, 
but if Old Nick does not dance him, for 



158 OWEN CASTLE; 

being so familiar with his person, may 
St. David never protect me from the 
powers of witchcraft. My dear friend, if 
you had seen him capering with Venus 
and the conjurer at the Pantheon, you 
would never have forgot it ; whi-king his 
fiery tail, first to the right and then to 
the left — Lud, lud, it was vastly profane ! 
Tnen lie whips him off with Venus, and 
left the poor conjurer in the greatest 
trouble, for I heard the greybeard say, 
throwing down his wand, that since the 
devil had fled him, he had no further 
power over the minds of the people, and 
he must give up his trade. Soon after, 
he was ar the elbow of a methodist- 
preacher ; then, arm-in-arm with a states- 
man and a Jew ; then again holding up 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 159 

the train of a rantipole woman of quality, 
who flirted about in the disguise of a nun ; 
then he stood between a gipsey and a 
miser, and absolutely assisted the gipsey 
to pick his pocket ; now you know that 
was a downright robbery; then he jumped 
on the back of a lawyer, and rode round 
the room, brandishing his sceptre, swearing 
none should touch his loving disciple, 
and one after his own heart." 

" You may smile, captain, but I see no 
wit or pleasure in such doings ; the music 
and lights excepted, there was nothing 
pleasurable in the place." 

" Did you join in the dance?" 

" No, indeed, I had a better value for 



160 owen castle; 

myself than to dance with low company ; 
there was no distinction amongst persons ; 
there was a princess and chimney sweeper, 
a barrow woman and a mogul ; and an 
old match-woman had the assurance to 
make up to me and hauled me about, be- 
cause I refused her ; but I have a shrewd 
suspicion that the match-woman was a 
man, and one of the company at dinner, 
for he was the most indecent old hussey in 
nature. Then 1 had a -narrow escape from 
an oyster wench, and had liked to have 
been scraped to death with oyster shells." 

"Most probably the persons so habited," 
said Captain Murray, " were people of the 
first respectability and fortune. Duchesses 
often hide their rank beneath a patched 
petticoat." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l6l 

M May be so," returned Tobit, " but I 
like nothing out of reason, and as for 
Venus, Cupid, Apollo, Hercules, Bac- 
chus and his Bacchanalians, I was quite 
tired of blushing for their scanty drapery; 
but the ladies did so simper, that I am 
inclined to believe a state of nudity has no 
terrors for their delicacy." 

Captain Murray endeavoured to pur- 
suade him to stay a couple of days longer 
in town, when he would accompany him 
to his friends, but to no purpose, Mr. 
Swithin was determined to quit London 
that evening. l< Don't persuade me, my 
good friend," he cried, shaking him cor- 
dially by the hand, U don't persuade me 
to stay. I am convinced that the post 



162 owen castle; 

of honour, ( at least for me ) is a private 
station. If I continue here, I shall ruin 
my health by drinking, and my fortune 
by gambling ; besides I don't understand 
these hoaxing Londoners, and am best at 
Rusty Hall, where in a fox chase, and a 
pop at the partridges, I am your man. 
As for masquerading frolicks, I've no 
head for them ; so, my dear captain, ex- 
cuse me to all we know, while I make 
my escape before that madcap boisterous 
Sir Frederick lays hold of me. He swore 
he would beat up my quarters at Rusty 
Hall in the grouse season, but I don't 
care for that, let me but once get him 
admidst the mountains, and I will shew 
him sport for sport, I warrant." He la- 
vished a thousand congratulations on 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? l6'3 

Captain Murray's arrival in England, and 
expatiated very largely on his concern 
for his disappointment with Lady Fitz- 
owen. * I like a soldier, mightily, and 
wanted to go with the baronet, my vali- 
ant countryman ; but mamma would not 
let me, which mortified my rising spirit 
very much ; particularly when I saw him 
come safe back again, without the least 
damage. But would yea believe that I 
heard he said, he was only sorry that 
he had not an opportunity of leaving an 
arm or a leg behind him, in the field 
of battle. What an odd taste he must 
have! Now I should have been very 
loath to have lost any of my precious 
limbs ; and if anybody was to ask me 
which I would rather part with, I could 



1 64 OWEN CASTLE ; 

not make up my mind in a month. 
Here Tobit admiring himself in a large 
glass, gave Captain Murray an opening 
to wish him a good journey, and took 
his leave. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 165 



CHAP. XXXVI. 



iVxRS. Wallace now requires our atten- 
tion. She at length was weary of wheedling 
the coveted treasure from the iron hold 
of the miser, under whose protection she 
lived, and longed to place his infatuated 
nephew in the possession of his wealth. 
Her passion for the youth was as violent as 
it was shocking to all morality ; but 
her well feigned pity for the poor widow 
his mother, and her helplesss orphans, 
won the confidence of the whole family. 
She loaded the daughters with presents, 



\66 owen castle; 

and forced on the unhappy credulous pa- 
rents various sums of money. 

The young man had, by the assistance 
of his able instructress, forged several 
checks on his uncle's banker, to supply 
his unbounded extravagance, which had 
remained some time without detection, 
but by an unexpected examination of ac- 
counts was suddenly discovered. Shocked 
at the treachery of his nephew, and the 
ingratitude of the syren who had in- 
veigled him by her uncommon arts, and 
on whom he had lavished every expensive 
gratification, he was, as it were, stunned 
by the developement of their practices ; 
but pity for his innocent sister and or- 
phans, induced him to desist from pro* 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I67 

securing the offender. He commanded 
the wretched youth to quit the kingdom 
and never more appear within his sight, 
unless he wished to provoke the fate his 
unjust conduct and criminality deserved. 

Mrs. Wallace, maddened by her lover's 
ruin, and her own, resolved not to leave 
him ; but by a desperate exertion to gain 
the means of support during their banish- 
ment. To this end she turned her 
thoughts, and soon, fatally soon, their dread- 
ful result will appear. The night before 
her intended departure from London, Mrs. 
Wallace, by imposing on the favour and 
innocence of a servant, gained admittance 
into the house she had so lately been 
driven from ; and stealing softly to the 



I6S OWEN castle; 

bedchamber of Mr. Egerton, who was 
asleep, rummaged his escrutoire, and took 
from thence notes and cash to a vast 
amount. While she was thus employed, 
he awoke, and seeing her about to decamp 
loaded with her pillage, leaped from 
the bed, and threatened her with the pu- 
nishment her audacity and theft merited. 
She struggled to be free, but finding his 
superior strength would inevitably pre- 
vent her liberty, she drew a pistol from 
her bosom, and before he could wrest it 
from her hold, the contents were lodged 
in his head, and he was extended a life- 
less corse at her feet. An instantaneous 
horror of the crime took possession of her 
senses. The treasure she had purloined, 
fell from her nerveless hands ; she wrung 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1(5$ 

them in the utmost terror and dismay ; 
and flying down the stairs, was met by the 
watchmen, servants, and others, who a- 
larmed by the report of the pistol, were 
rushing up to ascertain the cause of so 
unusual a sound at that hour. They im- 
mediately seized the culprit, who con- 
founded by their sudden appearance, and 
the discovering of her crime, made no 
useless resistance. A torpid cessation of 
all the faculties of her mind, glared in her 
deadened eyes, and the perturbation of 
her body alone betokened that a sense of 
what had passed remained in her recol- 
lection. She was secured for the night, 
dragged before a magistrate next morn- 
ing and from thence sent to Newgate, where 
lodged in the gloomy cell assigned her, 

VOL. IV. I 



IJO OWEN CASTLE; 

and loaded with heavy chains, the lost 
Arpasia was condemned to linger the ap- 
pointed time before her Jlnal trial and 
condemnation. The midnight hour was 
replete with terror and distraction ; the 
form of her honest father flitted before 
her sight; the wronged and abused widow 
Milbourne haunted her imagination ; the 
divided loves of Grace and William up- 
braided her conscience ; all grouped in 
dreadful plaint around her straw pallet. 
Maddened by her final doom, she raved 
incessantly, and strove with unavailing 
frenzy to break the massy chains that 
bound her galled wrists and legs, and to 
burst the prison bolts. The horrid blas- 
phemy of her curses made her keepers 
?hudder> whose familiarity with crime 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 17 1 

rendered them almost callous to the la- 
mentings of the guilty sinner. Exhausted 
by her vehement complainings, and un- 
availing distraction, she sunk powerless 
on the cold pavement. 

In the seccud week of her confinement 
she was brought out to trial, was con- 
victed, and received the awful sentence 
of condemnation. The beauty of the 
culprit interested at first every spec- 
tator in her favour, but her crime could 
not be denied or palliated ; yet every 
heart melted when the judge, exhorting 
her to penitence, pronounced the fiat 
of her fate. The sanguine hopes of pardon 
she had indulged in, which the know- 
ledge of her interesting youth and beautiet 
I 2 



1^2 OWEN CASTLE; 

had given rise to, all vanished as the 
last sentence sounded in her ear. She 
threw a frantic look of supplication to- 
wards heaven, and uttering a piercing 
shriek of agonized despair, fell senseless 
at the keeper's feet, and was conveyed in 
that melancholy state to her cell. On 
her recovery to sense and feeling, her 
mother with her child stood lamenting 
over her. 

The wretched parent hearing of her 
doom had obtained permission and had 
travelled up to town on the sad occasion. 

6i My mother ! my wretched mother ! 
(cried the deplorable sufferer,) why did 
you not forget me as I did yoa" 



OR, WHICH IS THE IIEROIXE t 1 J3 

M Oh ! woe is the day I gave thee 
birth! (returned the miserable parent,) 
My loving folly has destroyed thee, and 
brought my grey hairs with shame 
and poverty to the grave. 

" Enough ! mother, (returned Arpasia,) 
the time is past; — let us pray, Oh! my 
boy! (she cried, snatching the unconscious 
child to her tortured breast,) may thy 
omnipotent Father guard thee ever! 
ever! Mother, (she cried, forcing heron 
her knees by her side,) recommend my 
soul to God, implore the intercession of 
my father for his once beloved Arpasia. 
Pray — Oh! mother, pray for your desper- 
ate and repentant child." The earnest 
expression of her sallow and despairing 
13 



174 OWEN castle; 

visage, her shrunken form and ghastly eye, 
overcame the heart-broken parent with 
awful fear; she obeyed her child, and 
sinking by her side, sobbingly articulated 
a mournful supplication for heavens 
mercy. Arpasia joined the pure hands 
of her boy together, and bending his 
little knees, bade him pray for his 
undone mother. The innocent rehearsed 
the prayers it had been taught, while 
the guilty mother, murmured in unison 
with her lisping mediator and aged 
suppliant. "Yes, yes! (she cried, a 
bright beam of sudden joy illuminating 
her face,) there is hope. My Father smiles 
from above ; he hears us, mother, he 
hears us! This innocent has opened the 
gates of heaven to me, and my soul shall 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? J75 

not perish." She embraced her child, 
then reclining on her straw, reached her 
hand out to her mother, and in a hollow 
tone implored her forgivenness, which 
was given in a sorrowful and broken 
voice. 

" It is well, (sighed she,) and /for- 
give you, my poor mis-judging parent, 
your mad excess of fondness that laid 
the foundation of my ruin. — Where is 
Reuben Blackthorn, who was so kind to 
your" she faintly enquired. 

? In his native village, he married a 

year and a half ago, Miss Spriggs, who 

had a great fortune left her by a death. 

He is the best of husbands and fathers and 

I 4 



176 OWEN CASTLE; 

the most thriving yeoman for many miles 
round." 

" God bless him! (cried Arpasia, clasp- 
ing her hands with fervency) God bless 
him! He was virtuous." 

" Oh, (exclaimed the mother) when I 
think on't, how gladsome your days 
might have been, and how comely and 
handsome you was, my heart is broke 
in two,'"* 

"Handsome! Yes, (replied Arpasia,) I 
was fatally so. Beauty ! thou baneful gift, 
how many watchful guardians do you 
demand! Religion, filial duty, prudence, 
fortitude. I had none of these to ward off 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 177 

danger and temptation, the too sure at- 
tendants on a beautiful exteroir. I was vain 
of my unsubstantial possession ; arrogant, 
romantic and overbearing; my passions 
unrestrained bore me on, until they 
wrecked my soul and body." 

The dungeon door slowly opened, and 
Lord Orminstead entered the solitary 
gloom of the faintly illumined cell. — The 
scene made him shudder ; the feeble rays 
of the suspended lamp fell on the altered 
countenance and worn frame of the miser- 
able sinner, who sat with her mother and 
son weeping by her side. His heart smote 
him, and he inwardly ejaculated " See 
the seducer's work, its fruit and punish- 
ment!" he drew nigh, and with ill collect- 
I 5 



l7§ OWEN castle; 

ed firmness said, " Arpasia! can you for- 
give your destroyer, the wretched Theo* 
dosiusr How shall I atone for being your 
seducer from the path of rectitude, and 
leading you to the delusive verge of vice 
and eternal shame? Teach me, oh, teach 
me how to make reparation !" He took 
her burning hand within his own, and 
knelt by her. 

She raised herself, and giving her boy 
into his arms, pointed to her wretched 
parent, " Shield the offspring of our crime 
from want and error ; guard him from 
the snares of youth, by implanting reli- 
gioTi in his young heart, securely, firmly ; 
be his counsellor, guardian, benefactor — 
father; for in that title are allunited : and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I/O, 

if his mother's crimes should threaten 
to overthrow your labour, oh! rebuke him 
not severely, or drive him from you, but 
win his obedience and return to virtue by 
gentleness, humanity and consideration. 
No breast so hardened, but feels the soft- 
ened touch of kindness." 

"I will, I will," cried his lordship, 
acutely sensible of the solemnity of the 
charge. 

" And my mother — never let her want." 

" I shall not burthen his charity," ex- 
claimed the disconsolate parent; " I shall 
die with grief and shame, before I need 
his help." 



180 OWEN CASTLE; 

He promised she should never know a 
care for the necessaries and comforts of 
life, and directing the child to be sent to 
him when he left his mother, took a 
melancholy and eternal leave of the once 
admired Arpasia. The good Mr. Stanley 
soon after appeared, as a missionary of 
peace and forgiveness from Lady Fitz- 
owen, Omphale, and Lord George. The 
worthy man was subdued to tears when 
he saw the penitent; and did not leave 
her until the clergyman appeared to pray 
by her during the night. The paroxysms 
of grief and despair she had given way to, 
at the first of her imprisonment, had 
broken a small blood vessel, which was 
attended with frequent and alarming con- 
vulsions ; it was with the greatest difficul- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 18 1 

ty she was arrayed in the sable dress, pre- 
pared for her execution : she hailed her 
agonies with a distressing joy, saying in 
the interval of each convulsion, " surely 
I cannot outlive another, God will hear 
my cry, and save me from the scaffold. " 
The turnkey appeared to summon her at 
the dreaded hour, and as she rose from 
the wretched straw, the solemn bell tolled 
the first sound of her knell; she shuddered, 
it seemed to virbate through her heart's 
core. " Hark, hark!" she cried, " I am 
called; did you not hear the dreadful 
summons ? Oh heaven ! is there no hope, 
— none, and die I must!" She burst into a 
loud and terrific laugh, the hlood gushed 
afresh from her mouth, and with a dreadful 
shriek, the lost, the wretched Arpasia 
expired. 



IS2 OWEN castle; 

Thus closed the life of ■ the fascinating 
Mrs. Wallace, an alarming example to 
those whose vain ambition in giving a 
high turned education to their children, 
force them from the sphere they were 
born to move in* Perfections such as 
Arpasia possessed^were the surest guides 
to ruin, when unprotected by piety ; and 
never let the fond parent's eye delight in 
the perfect exterior and dazzle of a child's 
accomplishments, unless assured a vir- 
tuous heart, impressed by devout princi- 
ples, unite with them. Her corpse, fol- 
lowed by her mother and innocent child, 
was decently interred ; Lord Orminstead 
punctually discharged his promise, and 
from the hour of the seduced Arpasia's 
sudden death, retrieved his errors, and by 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 183 

discharging the duties of a tender hus- 
band and father, led an admirable and 

newly regulated life. 

Lady Fitzowen, though smarting under 
the lash of tyranny Arpasia had assis- 
ted to inflict, was struck with hor- 
row and pity at her dreadful end, 
and with angelic benignity remembered 
the departed criminal in her prayers to 
the throne of mercies. Mild and indul- 
gent to the faults of others (though un- 
remitting in severity to her own) the in- 
juries she had received were no more 
remembered, but submitted to the grand 
judge before whose awful tribunal the 
guilty sufferer was answering, and where 
she herself might as suddenly be sum- 
moned to appear. 



1S4 OWEN CASTLE; 

" And can you forgive so soon the 
wrongs that unhappy woman joined to 
inflict (said the earl, her father, when 
hearing her ladyship's sentiments on her 
death) ? You are more of a philosopher 
than I should have supposed, particularly 
when you reflect the galiing fetters you are 
bound with were forged by her assis- 
tance/' 

"I trust I am a christian, my lord/' re- 
plied she, with the most benign counte- 
nance, "and how can a frail mortal dare to 
hold resentment in his heart against a 
brother sinner, when he repeats this bless- 
ed sentence, ( Forgive us our trespasses, as 
iv e forgive them that trespass against us,' 
Believe me, my dear father ; many repeat 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1S5 

this without weighing the sublime and 
truly christian doctrine it is meant to 
convey; and in my opinion, no man 
can call himself a christian that harbours 
the least spark of enmity in his breast* 
or permits the sun to set upon his re- 
sentment." 

The earl enfolding her in his arms, 
blest the careful hand that had early 
ingrafted such principles in her mind, 
and exclaimed, " You are a christian in 
the truest sense of the word ; the forgive- 
ness of injuries is indeed a heavenly com- 
mand, and I hope I may venture to 
affirm, without profanation, when you 
come forth before the radiant eye of 
mercy, a suppliant for purification; your 



186 OWEN castle; 

sins will be as readily pardoned, as you- 
have forgiven those of your numerous 
oppressors." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 187 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 



j^L Few days only intervened before the 
nuptials of Lord George and Omphale, 
with that of Lady Sarah and Rufus Mar- 
maduke were to take place; yet the infirm 
baronet threatened to force Grace from the 
protection of her father, before she 
could witness the felicity so near its com- 
pletion. Burning with jealousy at the 
knowledge he had obtained of his young 
rival the gallant and amiable Captain 
Murray having seen his wife, whose 



188 ovven castle; 

rectitude had made her scrupulous to 
avoid his presence and drop all intercourse 
with so dangerous and seductive an ad- 
vocate, he had sent a stern mandate for 
her immediate return home, and a speedy 
departure for the sequestered shades of 
Ovven Castle. She implored his permis- 
sion to witness the happiness of her friends, 
which he savagely denied ; she then 
petitioned to be permitted to retire to a 
distant estate of her father's, where she 
might lament in solitude the destiny hehad 
inflicted, but in vain ; the baronet was 
deaf to her entreaties ; she then openly 
declared her intention of never living 
beneath the same roof with him again, 
and in the most pathetic manner besought 
her father to procure a legal separation 



OR, WHICH I* THE HEROINE? 189 

between them. The earl was touched 
by the distress of his amiable child, yet 
he intimated, unless the baronet could 
be prevailed upon, or the law force him to 
consent to a separate maintenance, no 
chance of emancipation was likely to 
lighten the affliction she laboured with. 
" What can you, my dear child, alledge 
against your husband, (said the earl) 
that the world would call sufficient to 
disa tin ul, your union?" 

" He deceived me into marriage by the 
vilest stratagem, and has since embittered 
my every hour by the harshest treat- 
ment," replied his weeping daughter. 



" His fidelity you have never questioned, 



190 OWEN CASTLE; 

and no personal affront or violence of- 
fered, such as brutal cowardice inflicts, 
when the manly arm levels a blow at 
unprotected feminine weakness ; nor does 
he squander his fortune.'' 

"It is very true, my lord/' said she, 
" but there are other miseries in married 
life, though these are excepted, that 
destroy happiness, such as malignity of 
heart, and tenacious tyranny of temper > 
and a great disparity of years. Is it not 
hard, my lord, that crime only can 
separate a woman from undeserved 
cruelty ? Must she bear sorrow without 
redress, because the world understand* 
not her complainings?" 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 101 

u Alas, my child ! deceit and badness 
of temper, joined to disparity of years, 
though mountains in the road to felicity, 
are so common, and little noticed in the 
marriages of the present depraved age, that 
many would laugh at your distress, and 
think dissipation, title, youth and beauty, 
ample recompences for the loss of domestic 
peace. — But be cheerful, an accomodation 
may yet be made between you." 

"All I wish is a sequestered spot, where 
the unoccupied hours of my happy friends 
may remind me ofexistence. Friends who 
may devote a small portion of their time 
in charitable notice of my retired wretch- 
edness. I ask not wealth, grandeur, or su- 
perfluity ; but peace and retirement, (said 



192 OWEN CASTLE; 

she) and is it not hard, taking no pleasure 
in my society, save that of torturing me, 
that he can object to my lonely quiet?'* 

The ear] endeavoured to cheer her by 
the comfort his interference might pro- 
duce, and she prepared to attend the so- 
lemnization of her brother's marriage, in 
the hope of being allowed to enjoy the 
calm but unshaken melancholy that had 
taken a settled shelter in her bosom. Mr. 
Stanley waited on her, and had informed 
her, that the will of the deceased and 
murdered Mr. Egerton had been examin- 
ed, and found to contain an ample provi- 
sion for his sister and her orphans, with 
a small portion for his offending nephew, 
who, struck to the soul with contrition 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1<)3 

and dismay at his ensnarer's death, had fled 
in the deepest sorrow to a distant part of 
Scotland, there to bury in concealment his 
errors; thither his affectionate but sorrow- 
ing family had followed, to console his 
anguish and encourage his reformation. 

In arranging every thing for her bridal 
appearance, the time of Omphale delight- 
fully fled away. She felt herself the happi- 
est of the happy, in uniting her fate to that 
of Lord George, whose ardency of affec- 
tion was renewed with redoubled lustre, 
now he had emerged from the delusive 
mist that once obscured it; but in the 
midst of her joy, she did not behold the 
irreparable misery of her early friend 
without the most sincere regret ; she felt a 

vol. iv. K 



J Q4 OWEN CASTLE; 

fervent friendship for the amiable. Captain 
Murray, and aided by Lord George, was 
unremitting in her kind and commisera- 
ting attentions to him. 

On the evening previous to the marri- 
age of the elated Lord George, lie sought 
his sister in her boudoir, where her time 
was chiefly spent, for solitude was more 
accordant with her melancholy disposition 
of mind, than the smiling gaiety that 
shone in every face, and wafted from the 
lips around her. On entering he found it 
empty, and enquiring of Winifred where 
she was, learnt, to his inexpressible sur- 
prise, that she had not been seen since 
the morning. His lordship was petrified 
with astonishment ; a dreadful fear stole 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE: lg5 

into his mind, and curdled the warm tide 
that surrounded his heart. 

"If so long missing," demanded he, look- 
ing angrily upon Winifred, " why did you 
not make it known before ?" 

" Because, because/' replied Winifred, 
hesitatingly, " I did not wish to prevent 
her being as happy as other people, Hay 
lord." 

"Then you are certain she has fled with 
a companion," asked his lordship with a 
severe and scrutinizing look of enquiry. 

"No, indeed and in double deed, my 
lord, I don't know nothing, but lean guess, 
K 2 



196 owen castle; 

and heaven for ever bless and protect her, 
dear lady." 

"So can I/' exclaimed his lordship, 
checking the warm affection of her faith- 
ful attendant ; u so can I, and the villain 
shall not escape a brother's vengeance." 

"Dear heart/' whimpered Winifred, " I 
see no such great harm in running away 
with a faithful true lover, like the dear sweet 
Captain Murray; when such a cross ugly 
old man was the plague of her life, and 
other folks were going to be so joyous; it 
was enough to put her upon thinking how 
to be so herself." 

Lord George was confounded by shame, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1^7 

pity, and resentment. If, said he, Murray 
has seduced my sister from her duty, he 
has acted like a base designer, and has 
stained the honour of our noble house with 
lasting infamy. Wretched and deluded 
pair, whither have they fled. He threw 
himself on a sofa in the greatest agitation* 
(The earl soon after entered the apartment, 
who hearing the unwelcome tidings of 
Lady Fitzowen's elopement, insisted on 
Winifred's disclosing the particulars of her 
flight and place of destination, which she 
in vain protested her ignorance of her as- 
sertions were discredited, and for the fide- 
lity she appeared to maintain; was with her 
husband immediately dismissed the house. 
The earl next sent for Captain Murray's 
K 3 



198 owen castle; 

.faithful attendant, Maurice O' Driseal 
who lost no time in appearing before 
him, 

"Where is Captain Murray, sir/ 5 de- 
manded the Earl with passionate impa- 
tience. 

a Where is he ?" repeated Maurice bow- 
ing with profound respect, "and faith your 
honour its myself that was coming to 
know that thing when your gentleman 
came flying to fetch me ; they said there 
was a mighty botheration above stairs, 
and I was afraid the good captain was 
in mischief, or some misfortune had be- 
fallen himself, for love your honour is a 
devil of a thing, and when a gentleman 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.- 1<^ 

is sick of that disorder, there's no know- 
ing where it may lead him." 

"Is Captain Murray in town?" asked 
the Earl. 

" And isn't he here, your honour ?" 

" No! When did you see him last*" 

" Since he isn't here, I can't tell any- 
thing about him, because your honour, I 
don't know. He walked out about eight 
o'clock last night, saying nothing at all 
to nobody, but sure and I hope nothing 
has befel him!" cried he in a tone of de- 
jected enquiry, 

" £ Tis in vain to altercate with this pre- 

K 4 



200 OWEN CASTLE; 

varicating and trusty confident," said the 
Earl, " let a servant be dispatched to Sir 
Matthew Fitzowen, that measures may be 
considered for overtaking the fugitives." 

Sir Matthew was not long in obeying 
the summons; who on hearing his lady- 
had absconded, gave free vent to the rage 
and jealousy that swelled his breast. Mau- 
rice was made the most tempting offers to 
discover the retreat his master had chosen; 
but he was stedfast in proclaiming that 
his master had not entrusted him with any 
intelligence on that head, and protested 
utter ignorance of the whole afiair. 

e "T\s fahe, fellow," cried the infirm and 
inflamed Baronet, advancing to Maurice; 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 201 

you are the able assistant of the infamous 
transaction, and I insist on being imme- 
diately informed where they are to be 
found." 

"But for the good Captain I'd be after 
misbehaving myself, so I'll be going while 
I can," returned Maurice, retiring towards 
the door; "only I'd have been obliged to 
him, if heVl have mentioned his going 
away, because I am wanting to go to 
Ireland myself." 

"What, he's gone to Ireland', then?'* 
cried the Baronet. 

He has got a fine estate there, your ho- 
nour, lately given him by agentleman that's 
K 5 



203 OWEN CASTLE ; 

dead, and sure Old Ireland is the best 
place in the world for a gentleman to live 
in. May be, its there he is; but I don't 
know no more about the real truth than 
a sucking pig/' 

"You/zVj sir," said Sir Matthew, endea- 
vouring to strike him with his cane. 

cc Be asy old gentleman," said Maurice, 
putting it aside. "It isn't an old soldier 
that fears a rattan, after he has stood by 
the cannon's mouth when vomit ting red 
hot balls. Och, honey! and I'm not the lad 
to be frightened by a bit of a squib hissing 
about me." 

" A villain, cried the irritated Baronet, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 203 

but I'll pursue them to the end of time. 
I'll bring her back; I'll teach her to run 
away." 

The Earl motioned Maurice to quit the 
apartment. 

" I'm going your honours, but must beg 
leave to ^ay, that if my good captain has 
run away with the old gentleman's lady, 
I knowed nothing at all at all of the mat- 
ter. Och! and it's myself that wouid'nt 
have denied him assistance in any manner 
of way ; but in an act of charity I'd be the 
foremost, for sure it's a charity to rob a 
young wife of an old husband any day." 

"Get out" exclaimed the Baronet, who 
k 6 



204 OWEN CASTLE; 

storming with madness at bis familiarity, 
pushed him from the door. 

Sir Matthew ordered his chariot to be 
got ready immediately, and declared his 
intention of commencing his pursuit that 
very hour. He had heard of the estate be- 
queathed to Captain Murray in Ireland, 
and thither resolved to follow him and his 
lady, and force her back, and then divorce 
her with infamy. 

The Earl promised to overtake him the 
next day, as soon as the marriage ceremony 
of Lord George was over. Sir Matthew 
left London with the greatest dispatch, 
and in the utmost perturbation. The festive 
nuptials were greatly damped by the re- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 205 

cent supposed elopement of lady Fitzowen \ 
but what tongu ecan describe the wonder 
perplexity of the bridal groupe as assem- 
bled before the altar, when Captain Mur- 
ray, breathless with haste and many apo- 
logies, appeared to fulfil his promise to 
his friend Rufus Marmaduke, by being 
present at his marriage. Lord George 
could not conjecture what mystery enve- 
loped and withheld his sister, and with 
astonishment heard the Captain whisper to 
his friend, " Where is lady Fitzowen? I 
had hoped, yet dreaded, to behold her here. % 
An universal alarm spread through the bo- 
soms of her friends, lest some fatal acci- 
dent or premeditated act of grief and de- 
spair had caused her non-appearance. As 
soon as the ceremony was over, the bridal 



206 OWEN CASTLE; 

party took leave of London for Marble 
Hall, the seat of Lord Orkley, where the 
nuptials were to be celebrated with rustic 
festivity, and the partners of each other's 
hearts enjoy the tranquil charm of real fe- 
licity undisturbed by empty dissipation or 
parade. Thus blest in rational society 
and dear companionship, their hours glided 
on with rapidity, and had not their rank 
compelled a deviation from their sweet 
plan of elegant seclusion^ they would not 
have mingled in tumultuous gaiety, nor 
have proclaimed by ostentatious hospita- 
lity, the happiness that dwelt within their 
gate. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 207 



CHAPTER XXXVIII, 



XvUFUS Marmaduke remained with 
Lord George and his lady a fortnight 
only, when he left them, with his fair 
bride, to commence the zealous pastor of 
his flock. He could not give up his pious 
instruction of their religious duties to 
another, or set inactive in a trust so im- 
portant, when his heart and conscience 
disapproved the unholy neglect many of 
his brethren were led into by example, 



208 OWEN CASTLE; 

or by indolence, or from worse motive, 
had habitually indulged in. 

It is impossible to express the alarmed 
anxiety of Earl Notherlaud on his daugh- 
ter's account, and the distraction of Cap- 
tain Murray. Every effort had been made 
to gain tidings of the beloved absentee, 
but without avail ; they were doomed to 
linger for many hours in the deepest hor- 
ror and suspence. In the agony of re- 
morse, Captain Murry acknowledged the 
atrocity of endeavouring to seduce Lady 
Fitzowen from her duty ; her abhorrence 
and rejection of his unauthorized passion, 
and entire seclusion from his society a^d 
solicitations ; with his contrite sorrow, 
submission, and his total ignorance of her 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 209 

present afflicting disappearance or place 
of retreat. 



The EaiTs breast burnt with indigna- 
tion at the insult the ardour of his pas- 
sion had hurried him to commit ; but 
compassion for his present anguish lulled 
his resentment to a calm reprimand, and 
made him more readily credit the assur- 
ances he gave of his present innocence. 
" Yes, it is plain," cried the earl, " my 
wretched child could not endure the sight 
of her brother's happiness ; or meet at 
the altar of her creator, the man her 
heart called husband, when fate had linked 
her to another. Oh ! it was a task fitting 
a breast of adamant ; not the susceptible 
bosom of feminine weakness. The mi- 



210 owen castle; 

sery of her heart bewildered again her 
overcharged brain ; and in a desperate 
moment she has secretly rushed into the 
presence of an offended Divinity. I may 
embrace her cold corpse, but never hear 
her soft voice murmur on my ear again !" 
The wretched father sunk overpowered by 
his dreadful suggestion into his chair, while 
Captain Murray groaned with horror at 
the thought. 

We must now to proceed to account 
to our readrs for Lady Fitzowen's con- 
duct. 

Selfish sorrow had not so entirely en- 
tirely engrossed the mind of her lady- 
dyship, as to render her callous to the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 211 

distresses of others. The protectors of 
her helpless mother, the generous Henry 
El win, and his amiable companion 
in humanity, the lovely Susanna, had 
soon after the death of her mother, mar- 
ried, and kept up a correspondence with 
her aunt for some years after. But mis- 
fortunes had come thickly on them, and 
the inability of her aunt to relieve their 
distresses had deeply affected the greatful 
heart of her niece; when arrived in Lon- 
don her ladyship made every enquiry 
concerning them, and found that the kind 
comfortress of her mother was dead, but 
that Mr. El win was alive, surrounded by 
a large family and in very indigent circum- 
stances; she made a personal visit of gra- 
titude to the afflicted widower, put his 



212 OWEN CASTLE; 

youngest daughter to a boarding school, 
released him from many embarrassments, 
and finally procured him an advantageous 
situation. In these arrangements Sir Mat- 
thew had been courted to assist by his in- 
terest only; his purse had never been 
opened to the necessitous calls of charity, 
and from her own sparing allowance did 
his angel lady strive to evince her grateful 
remembrance of Mrs. El win's disinterested 
benevolence to her mother. The Reve- 
rend James Maskall was her agent in this 
gentle office ; her attendance on the baro- 
net made her dependant on a trusty aU 
moner. 

The beauty of the benevolent lady Fitz- 
owen had long been the adoration of her 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 2 13 

husband's friend and counsellor, the re- 
verend pious pastor, and hope whispered, 
that his patron's death would soon autho- 
rise an open avowal of his passion; in 
the mean time he endeavoured to ingra- 
tiate himself into her good opinion, by 
affecting abundance of piety and benevo- 
lence, and to blind the credulous baro- 
net, acted in perfect unison with all his 
humours: the result of his designs have 
been seen, which drove her to an unex- 
pected father's protection, and banished 
him the presence of Sir Matthew. 

Earl Northerland assiduously proved 
his gratitude to the worthy Mr. Elwin 
and his family, by taking his sons under 
his sanction, and promoting them in the 
service of their kin^. 



214 owen castle; 

To see the daughter of Mr. El win, lady 
Fitzowen often took an airing, the school 
she had carefully selected being near 
Chelsea; and determined after a twelve- 
month's serious application, to take the 
remainder of her education on herself, 
and thus procure an engaging companion 
in the dreary seclusion she had chosen. 
Her protegee was about fourteen, her 
education greatly neglected from the 
overpowering embarrasments of her father, 
required a zealous adherance to study 
and the refining hand of an accomplished 
female, before it could rise to superio- 
rity. 

The situation of the house and grounds, 
joined to the pure air, revived her droop- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 2 1 5 

ing spirits, and struck with the digni- 
iied suavity of the respectable governess, 
and the sweetness of temper displayed in 
the mind and manners of the engaging 
pupil, she was induced to stay the day. 
She dismissed her carriage and attendants, 
with a note to the earl, stating" the air 
had so greatly benefited her spirits, that 
she proposed reposing at the school that 
night and to return on the , following 
morning, w hen the carriage was to convey 
her back. The servant to whom this note 
was entrusted, conveyed it to Mr. Mask- 
all's man John, who with his master was 
continually on the watch for her ladyship ; 
the carriage returned, but no note ex- 
plained the reason assigned for her lady- 
ships, non-appeara nee; the footman mere- 



2 16 OWEN castle; 

ly said, his lady remained at the school ; 
and Winifred, misjudging the conduct of 
her lady, forbore to inform the earl or 
Lord George of he^r absence, who were 
engaged to dinner at Lord Ork ley's, and 
did not return till late that night. When 
the messenger arrived who had been sent 
to the school, he brought word, that her 
ladyship had in the cool of the evening 
walked out, but not being seen since, and 
every possible enquiry made, it was sup- 
posed she had taken coach and gone home. 
This was a true statement of all the gover- 
ness knew. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 217 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 



JLM DY Fitzovven had wandered to a con- 
siderable distance from the house, when 
a servant, breathless with haste, ap- 
proached her, saying, a sudden accident 
of a dangerous nature had befallen her 
friend, Lady Sarah Fairfield, who had sent 
a carriage, imploring her speedy appear- 
ance. Alarmed by the apparent flurry 
of the servant, and dreading to find Lady 
Sarah severely hurt, she sprung into the 
carriage, which the servant ordered to 

VOL. IV. L 



218 OWEN CASTLE; 

Windsor. She knew Lady Sarah had rela- 
tives there, and recollected to have heard 
her say, she must call on one of them 
that day, who was to be her bride's-maid. 
The rapidity of the horses were in uni- 
son with her anxious desire of being with 
her friend, and it was not until they 
entered Windsor forest, and the heavy 
mists of night began to gather, that she 
became uneasy, or entertained the least 
suspicion of insecurity or treachery. The 
distressing idea had scarcely entered her 
mind, when the carriage stopped, and 
ea^er to be ascertained of the truth of her 
fears, she entered a neat house by the 
road side; when shown into a parlour, a 
letter was presented to her,, she took it 
with a trembling hand and read as 
follows : 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 219 

" To Lady Grace Fitzowen. 

" Forgive me, divine love, the stratagem 
your cruelty has driven me to execute; 
and let me plead for pardon in snatching 
the blissful treasure I have so long coveted 
and envied another the possession of. In 
a few minutes I shall be with you in 
person, and convince you of those ardent 
and grateful emotions my pen can never 
describe, or my tongue adequately ex- 
press. 

"James Maskae!/* 

Greatly agitated, she rung the bell, and 
desired the servant who answered it, to 
send the master^or mistress of the house 
instantly to her. 

L 2 



220 OWEN CASTLE ; 

In a moment Mr. Maskall was before 
her. 

She demanded her immediate liberty, 
or hade him tremble for the consequences. 
His protestations of adoration, sighs and 
tears, were alike unheeded. He found 
her, not like many who unused to adver- 
sity sink at once beneath its stroke; but 
beheld her resolved to resist and punish 
his depravity. " You are not in a country, 
sir, where romance and fraud can find 
countenance or protection," cried her 
ladyship, cs if you persist to detain me, the 
law, and my husband's revenge shall 
overtake you even in the hour of boasted 
triumph." She abruptly passed to the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 221 

hall, and insisted on the postilions re- 
mounting, or bade them beware of the 
punishment their disobedience would 
draw on them. Self-preservation, and 
the temptation of a large reward, deter- 
mined them to comply with her request. 
Her presence of mind and haughty 
bearing, so different from the affrighted 
timidity he had expected, bereft Mr. 
Maskall of all power to oppose her leap- 
ing into the carriage, which by the time 
he recovered from his surprise, had va- 
nished from his sight. 

She ordered the postilions to return to 

Chelsea ; where by a few hours repose, 

she attempted to calm her agitation ; for 

notwithstanding the firmness she had 

L 3 



222 OWEN CASTLE; 

displayed, she had been greatly shocked 
and alarmed by the daring effort made to 
trepan her. The next morning, learning 
from the governess the consternation her 
absence had created, she hastened to her 
father's and entered the drawing room 
at the moment he had formed the 
dreadful idea of her death. He rose 
on her entrance, not daring to be- 
lieve his senses until the rapturous 
exclamation of joy uttered by Cap- 
tain Murray, convinced him of the 
reality of her safety and presence. 

The account she gave of the strata- 
gem that had detained her, filled them 
with indignant rage, and the assuming 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 223 

villain was not destined to escape their 
revenge. 

Earl Northerland dispatched a messen- 
ger to overtake Sir Matthew, and prevent, 
if possible, his visiting Ireland. The 
sixth day brought the messenger again 
to London, at the very moment Captain 
Murray was taking an affectionate 
leave of Lady Fitzowea and her 
father, who beheld the moving scene 
with feelings lktle short of those that 
agonized the bosoms of the sufferers be- 
fore him. 

With a countenance full of melancholy 
importance the messenger entered the 
room, and stated, that on his arrival at 



22 & OWEN CASTLE; 

Holyhead, he found the baronet had 
embarked on board the packet the day 
before; a dreadful Storm had arisen during 
the night, and although every assistance 
was rendered, humanity could suggest, 
or the darkness of the night allow, 
the vessel had been dashed to pieces, 
and every person on board perished. 

" Merciful heaven! Sir Matthew 
then has perished!" cried Lady Fitz- 
owen, insensibly falling into the out- 
stretched arms of Captain Murray, 
who fondly pressing her to his trans- 
ported breast, exclaimed, " She is free ! 
She will yet be mine ! Virtuous love 
and unshaken honour will ever be re- 
warded. " 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 22ft 

We have now only to add the few fol- 
lowing particulars. 

Lady Fitzowen, in dutiful compliment 
to an unworthy husband, remained a 
widow eighteen months, and then was 
prevailed upon to make Captain Murray 
happy. His estate in Ireland was one 
thousand two hundred pounds per annum. 
The earl presented him with thirty thou- 
sand pounds as a marriage portion with 
his daughter, and the large Fitzowen 
estate became her's by marriage settlement 
and will, Sir Matthew leaving no relative 
behind him. 

"The friendship contracted between 
kindred souls, who had early encountered 



226 OWEN CASTLE ; 

misfortunes, lasted the remainder of 
their lives ; they had now become doubly 
sisters by marriage. A strict intimacy 
subsisted between the Lords Orkley and 
Northerland. The noble earls lived to a 
good old age, beloved and respected by all 
their numerous friends and dependants, 
and Owen Castle recovered its ancient hos- 
pitality, under the all-cheering auspices 
and presence of the benevolent Lady 
Grace Fitzowen Murray, whose liberality 
was only equalled by her friend and sister, 
Lady Omphale Fitzbeauchamp. Rivals 
only in acts of goodness, these amiable 
women in creased inrespect from year to 
year, each diffusing, like the glorious sun, 
rays of comfort and cheerful happiness to 
all around them. Their example may be 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 227 

imitated, but can never be surpassed ; nor 
can our readers decide, we believe, any 
more than ourselves — which of the two 
is the Heroine ? 



END. 



F. iwaH H'd.<on. Printer, 
15, Cross Slreei, Hatton Garden, 



POPULAR NOVELS, 

Published by 

SIMPKIN AND MARSHALL, 

Stationer's Court. 



THINGS AS THEY ARE; or, the Adventures of 
CALEB WILLIAMS. In three Volumes. By Wil- 
liam Godwin. The fourth edition. 18s. boards. 

ST. "LEON; A Tale of the Sixteenth Century. By 
William Godwin. In 4 vols, the third edition. 24s. 
boards. 

THE MATRON OF ERIN; a National Tale. 3 Vo- 
lumes. 18s. boards. 

FORTITUDE; or Euphemia. By B. Taylor, Esq. 
2 Volumes. 10s. 6d. boards. 

THE CAVERN OF ASTOLPHO, a Spanish Romance- 
2 vols. 10s. 6d. boards. 

LOVE, RASHNESS, and REVENGE; or, Tales of 
Three Passions, by Rifpen Porter, Esq. 2 vols. 
10s. 61- boards. 

UNCLE TWEAZY AND HIS QUIZZICAL NEIGH- 
BOURS; a Comic Satiric Novel, by the Author of the 
Observant Pedestrian, &c. in 3 vols. 17s. boards. 

THE MAGIC OF WEALTH. By T. S. Surr, three 
vols. 18s. boards. 

A WiNTER IN LONDON; or, Sketches of Fashion, 
by the same Author, 13th edition, 3 vols. 15s. boards. 

SPLENDID MISERY. By thesame Author, 5th Edit. 
3 vols. 15?. boards. 

THE ( HRONICLES OF THE TON; or, a Spring and 
Summer in London, by Henry Mordaunt, Esq. 
3 vols. 18s. boards. 

THE ADVENTURES of RODERICK RANDOM. 
By Dr. Smollett, a New Edition, 5 volumes, 7s. boards. 

THE OBSERVANT PEDESTRIAN MOUNTED; 
or, a Donkey Tour to Brighton, by the Author of the 
Mystic Cottager, .Observant Pedestrian, &c. 
&c. 3 vols. 16s. 6d. boards. 
