WOMAN : 



IDA OF ATHENS. 



BY MISS OWENSON, 

AVTHOR OF THE ** WILD IRISH GIRL," THE " NOTICS 0» 
«T. DSMITMICK," &C. 



•• Nal doute qu'on ne s'elevat aux plus grands choses si I'on avoit 
l'»mour pou' prect-pteur — et quo la main cle la beatite jetta dan* 
noue ame les scmeoces de I'espni et de l.i vertu." 

Uihitius, Dl-court 'id, p. 153. 

"Si Irdesir etmeme I'esiwir de voir un jj)ur la lil>prt<' rendu aux 
Crecs ne si>Dt que des chlmercs, un doit pard mner ces douces illu- 
sions aceux dund'enfante a eie consacres j iVtude de leur ginires, et 
a radmiration de leur vertus." 

Dt Chweuil, Viyagi PilUraqut, p. S. 



IN FOUR VOLUMES. 
VOL. IV. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, AND ORMB, 
FATERN08TER-ROW. 

1809. 



tlMieii Dj' J. v. Pcwi. k, 

V>, Barbicsih. 






WOMAN; 

OR, 

IDA OF ATHENS. 



THE JANISSARY. 

Th E timid travellers had now passed the 
site of the gate, anciently Melita — 
and struck into that deserted road sacred 
to the memory of patriot heroism ! The 
road to Marathon! Ida pursued the 
hallowed track with interest, foj the 
sufferings of her heart had not yet ef- 
faced the classic associr^tions of her cul- 
tivated mind, or chilled the brilliancy 
of her vivid imagination. 

VOL. IV. 1 

732G95 



2 WOMAN; OR 

The road, like the hour, still favoured 
the flight of the wanderers ; it wound 
beneath the shade of Mount Pentel- 
icus, whose eastern point was already 
brightening with the first pure rays of 
dawning light, while the winding val- 
ley-path that reposed at its base, was 
still involved in the deep shadows 
thrown from the projecting outline of 
its stupendous summits ; until the sUn, 
effusing his glories from behind the dis- 
tant heights of Hymettus, shed a gold- 
en glow over a scene that gradually 
expanded into form, character, and 
beauty — the city of Athens, reposing 
in its extensive plain, and forming an 
amphitheatre round the hill of the 
Acropolis, which, majestically crown- 
ed with its unrivalled ruins, rose boldly 
above the high pointed minarets, and 
grey olive-grounds, by which it is sur- 
rounded ; the distant mountains of 



IDA Of ATHENS. 3 

Parnes and Egaleos seeming to float on 
the northern horizon, like masses ofdar 
vapours. The mountain path, which, 
"winding near Pentelicus, has become so 
noted by the flight of Thrasybulus 
and the purple brow of Plymettus, 
marking its wavy outline above the 
saff'ron clouds that rose from its sides, 
illuminated with the golden light of the 
morning sun ; — such were the promi- 
nent features of the landscape, which 
gradually and successively betrayed 
themselves ; while to a prospect so di- 
versified by objects of classic interest, 
a thousand gradationary tints of light 
and shade lent their picturesque ef- 
fect ; and a beam effused, a cloud dis- 
persed, prwluced an evanescent charm, 
pursued and felt by the imagination and 
the heart of Ida, to whom the eloquent 
voice of nature could not speak in vain. 
— So delicate were her perceptions, so 
warm was her fancy, so cultivated was 
B 2 



4 WOMAN; OR 

her taste, and so sensible her soul, 
that the minutest charm of scenic beau- 
ty which met her enquiring eye, the dew 
whose least tear bathed her fervid brow, 
the gale whose faint sigh breathed upon 
her cheek, all brought their separate 
, charms and interests to her fine-toned 
feelings. — Ida felt, and sighed ; — she 
could not help reflecting on the sensi- 
tive character which nature and educa- 
tion had formed for her, that innate ad- 
miration of harmony and order; — that 
ardent passion for beauty and sublimity, 
for the forms as for the spirit of nature ; 
' — that love of peace, and joy, and so- 
cial amity, and high intelligence ; and 
all those various capabilities to feel and 
to bestow felicity^ with which she was 
peculiarly endowed. Nor could she 
avoid opposing to that blessed and bless- 
ing thing, she might have been ; the 
sad and suffering creature which she 
then was 1 — The acute miseries of her 



IDA OF ATHENS. 5 

recent, the dread afflictions of her pre- 
sent, and the probable privations of her 
future life, all struck on her heart, and 
tears of self-commiseration, mingled 
with those drops with which a raptur- 
ous sensibility to all that was lovely in 
nature, had filled her glistening eyes. 
The fugitives had now crossed ^ 
branch of the Ismenus,and entered a lit- 
tle plain whose velvet surface spread to 
wards the eastern face of Pentelicus. 
Here, believing themselves beyond dis- 
covery or pursuit, they alighted to par- 
take of some refreshment ; and their 
simple feast concluded, the boys 
found amusement in gathering wild ho- 
ney, and the figs and olives, which 
grew spontaneously, while Kyra, over- 
come by fatigue, took her usual sies- 
ta, and Ida, incapable of repose, sat 
beneath a projecting rock, and gave 
herself up to the full flow of varying, 



G WOMAN; OR 

but profound reflection. The timid 
hope, the tender fear, the changeful 
anxiety, which agitated her heart for 
the still undecided fate of her unhap- 
py father, and the future destiny of that 
dear and beloved little family, whose 
interests and whose happiness were so 
intimately blended with every thought 
and feeling of existence ; were succeed- 
ed by a natural recurrence to those 
severe disappointments of the soul, and 
those acute sufFerino-s of the mind, 
which belonged only to herself.' Deso- 
late arid unfi'iended as she w^as, where 
now w^as the protector which nature 
assigns to support the weakness and 
sensibility of woman ? — The lover on 
whom her timid heart could repose ; — 
the friend, with whom it would be so 
dear even to suffer I — The name of Os- 
myn involuntarily burst from her lips, 
while his ima2;e and the love he had 
©nee professed, occupied her thoughts. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 7 

She sought to subdue her lingering 
weakness, or rather to lose it, in con- 
jectures relative to the mysterious Ja- 
nissary ; it was in vain she attempted to 
account for a conduct so incono:ruous 
in its various points of view, for con- 
sidered either as the agent of tyranny, 
as the minister of religion, as a creature 
breathing the spirit of cruelty, or act- 
ing from the dictates of disinterested 
benevolence, he still equally bade de- 
fiance to every supposition relative to 
those motives which actuated him to a 
conduct so mysterious and inexplica- 
ble. The confidence of his open iiature, 
united to her hopes, forbade her to sus- 
pect treachery v/here so much apparent 
kindness had been experienced ; for 
she doubted not, but that the liberation 
of her father was to have been effect- 
ed through his means ; and his li iving 
conveyed to her a valuable ring assured 



8 WOMAN; OR 

her of his fidelity, while his evident and 
trembling emotion in the ceil of the tem- 
ple, was the circumstance of all others, 
that defied all conjectures as toits cause. 
After having given near two hours 
rest to their mules, the travellers pro- 
ceeded on their journey ; and passing 
through the romantic and ruined vil- 
lage of Stimati, pursued their route 
fo 'the east, still keeping among those 
hills, which .swell from the base of 
Pentlicus towards the shores of the 
iEgean-sea. Kyra, peevish, from an 
impatience natural to her character, 
and from a fatigue to which her years 
and infirmities were unequal, sought 
to vent her humour on Stephaniki, 
whom she accused of not knowing the 
direct way, and of conducting them by 
a circuitous path. According to the 
ancient superstition of her country, she 
drew unfavourable omens from the 
clouds that floated on the summit of 



IDA OF ATHENS. 6 

Egaleos, and Began a story of a certain 
captain of Haidouts (or Turkish robr 
bers,) who, lurked among the lesser hills 
of Pentelicus, and kept a pirate boat off 
the neighbouring coast. Ida perceived 
the effect this produced on the childish 
imaginations of her brothers, and aware 
of the Tertility of Grecian memories in 
tales of wonder and of interest, she re- 
quested Stephaniki to relate them one. 
Stephaniki, flattered by the command,' 
continued to amuse them with many 
heathen stories and christian legends, 
partly related in bad Greek, and fre- 
quently interspersed with Arabic phra- 
ses, Turkish idioms, and corrupt Italian. 
And now, the sun declining towards 
the Athenian plains hastened to re- 
pose his glories in the gulph of Engia 
— the clouds which floated in the at- 
mosphere gave back his purple re- 
flexes with softened splendour. 
B3 



10 WOMAN; OR , 

The mountain path of the travellers 
still illuminated by his beam aflbrded 
them a prospect view of the ^gean, 
gleaming between the rich coasts of its 
numerous islands ; — and the hut of a 
goat-herd hanging on thevirid point 
of some neighbouring eminence, the 
minaret of a little Turkish mosque, or 
the towers of a Greek convent, were 
the only vestiges of man, that diversi- 
fied a scene, wild and romantic be- 
yond description ; while a pilgrim, re- 
turning from Mecca, a wandering 
Santon, and a peasant, driving a 
mule laden with milk and figs for a 
dervise-convent ; were the only per- 
sons who crossed the path of the timid 
fugitives. The shadows of evening now 
deepened round them; the wearied 
birds of day, wheeling their circling 
flight above their heads, sought the 
lowland shelter, and the solitary bircji^ 



IDA OF ATHENS. II 

of night, emerging from their caver- 
nous nests, mingled their melancholy 
cries, \s hile the sea hoot of the Athe- 
nian (or horned) owl, and the fainting 
moan of the grey-bittern, were clearly 
distinguishable, amidst sounds of lesser 
interest. 

Proceeding through a rocky defile, 
they now found themselves on the east- 
ern coast of Livadia, by the strait, of 
Euripus; and at a little distance they 
perceived the promontory of Cynosura, 
stretching; its shadow across the shore— 
and the cavern alluded to by the ar- 
chon in his letter, discovered its yawn- 
ing; mouth to their view. The wearied 
travellers alighted, and entered their 
desolate asylum. It was profound and 
dark, and the Paramana and the child- 
ren, less sensible of the dangers they 
had escaped, than of the existing im- 
pressions they received, gazed aiound 



15 WOMANj OR 

them with humid eyes, while they 
started at the fluttering of the sea-birds, 
which their presence chased from their 
ancient haunt, and trembled at the 
sea-blast that rushed through the sub- 
terraneous avenues of the cave. 

Ida observed, and endeavoured to 
dissipate their sadness and their fears ; 
while the melancholy which oppressed 
her own heart, was of a more profound 
nature, than that which touched their 
imaginations. — Cheering them by a 
thousand tender expressions of en- 
couragement and hope, she assisted 
Stephaniki to strike a light, lit up the 
branches of a blasted tree, that lay 
within the cave ; and engaged Kyra to 
prepare what remained of their re- 
freshments for their supper. This 
little bustle of occupations revived 
their spirits, and engrossed their 
thoughts. The cavern, illuminated by 
a blazing fire, lost much of its terrific 



IDA OF ATHENS. IS 

apd gloomy character. Innumerable 
spars and clustering fossils, sparkled 
to the deep red light of the burning 
wood, around whose blaze the young 
and beautiful Greeks, and the singular 
and marked figures of Kyra and Ste- 
phaniki closely circled, and presented 
a groupe eminently picturesque and 
interesting. 

The scene without, (perceptible 
through the mouth of the cave), was 
chill, vast, and gloomy. The ocean 
swelling into turbulence, the air mur- 
muring into storms, the coast dark, 
wild, and desolate ; formed a ^rand 
releivo to the glowing picture, which 
the interior of the cavern present- 
ed ; a picture, to which the spell of 
painting, or magic of poetry, could 
h^ve lent no heightening charm. — 
Equally overcome by the sudden, and 
ardent heat, as by the inordinate fa- 
tigue they had undergone, Kyra and 



14 WOMAN; OR 

her nurslings soon sunk into a pro- 
found sleep, on a cloak spread for them 
by Stephaniki near the fire, while he 
shared himself the flinty bed of his 
mules, which he had previously fed 
with such scanty herbage as the rocks 
afforded. 

Anxiety for her father, still chased 
repose from the aching brow of Ida : 
she could not enjoy the safety which 
he did not share ; she could not seek 
rest while he was deprived of it ; she 
calculated on his leaving Athens at 
that precise hour if his rescue had 
heen effected ; she went over in recol- 
lection every step he would take, and 
approaching the mouth of^ the cave, 
she watched the vicissitudes of the 
weather, with increasing anxiety, and ru- 
minated on the plans they should adopt 
for the safety of their future existence, 
To embark from some nel'jfhbourins; lit- 
tie port for Smyrna, and to sail from 



IDA OF ATHENS. 15 

thence with the Turkey fleet for Eng- 
land, (which she knew at that season 
put out to sea) was a resource sug- 
gested by the fertility of that mind, 
which the affectionate solicitudes of 
the heart rendered exhaustless. The 
sudden change in the weather now 
awakened fears which the delicate state 
of her father's health warranted. It is 
in vain, that the rude gusts of the 
rising storm blow amidst the disor- 
dered tresses of her flowing hair, that 
a chill air pierces the light drapery 
that veils her trembling form. She 
still remains at the mouth of the cave, 
watching, with eager eyes, the agi- 
tation of the clouds, the direction of 
the storm, while the solicitude of the 
child, rendered the delicate woman in- 
vulnerable. 

All slept in peace within the cavern, 
save only Ida I — The winds rushed 



16 WOMAlJf; OR 

from their secret caves, the ocean swell- 
ed mto mountainous billows, whose 
crests seemed to sweep along the dark 
descending clouds ; — the thunder roll- 
ed with an incessant peal, and the 
lightning, as it struck on the rocks, 
blasted the hardy shrubs that covered 
them ; a few sea-birds, scared from 
their rest, mingled their shrill cries 
amidst the roar of the gushing waves, 
and the solitary bittern, still preserved 
in its moan so sad and dismal, its me- 
lancholy pre-eminence. 

But still, Ida could not seek in sleeps 
a relief against the horrors which the 
awful spectacle of a sea-storm communi- 
cated to her imagination and her heart.. 

By the flashes of the lightning, she; 
perceived a vessel in distress at no great 
distance from the shore, and she be- 
lieved that her father, (if free) was at 
Ihat moment exposed to all the rage of. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 17 

the elements ; if he was not, the alter- 
native was still more dreadful ! — Thus 
feeling, thus reflecting, she continued 
to watch the direction of the tempest, 
till the sensibility of nature gave way 
to its weakness, and Ida, wholly van- 
quished by fatigue and emotion, threw 
herself beside her brothers, and slept 1 

But the agitation of her soul sub- 
sided not with the activity of her 
senses ; and the awful object of her 
waking contemplation, associated the 
impression it had left on, her fancy, 
with remembrances her reason had long 
endeavoured to subdue ; and gave to 
the dream of her rest, a vision which 
(brilliant and touching as it was) once 
possessed an actual existence. She was 
supported by Osmyn, amidst the ruins 
of the Temple of Minerva, amidst the 
war of elements 1 — The same sense of a 
pure and unequalled felicity, the same 



18 WOMAN; OR 

glow of tender and ardent feeling, the 
same bashful consciousness of a reci- 
procal and avowed passion, thrilled 
through her bosom ; and the transient 
era of the only unalloyed happiness she 
had ever known, was reflected in a 
dream ; more cheering, more soothing 
in its influence, than the repose on 
which it had huno-. For even the 
faded recollections of love are more 
delightful in the pensive and melan- 
choly joy they convey to the soul, than 
the happiest realities of a cold and 
perfect indifierence- 



The cloudless sun-beam of a brilli- 
ant morning, as it played through the 
mouth of the cave, fell on the brow 
of Ida, and awakened her from a sluqi- 
ber, which, though but short, had been 
profound and refreshing. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 19 

Stepbaniki had gone to a little ma- 
ritime village to procure such simple 
provision as it afforded ; the children 
were amusing themselves on the shore, 
and Kyra, with the selfishness of age, 
and the lingering affections of nature, 
was deploring the loss of those corn- 
Torts, to which she had been so long 
accustomed, and the misfortunes of 
that family, from whose bounty she 
had so long enjoyed them. 

Ida aros eand wandered towards the 
shore. Every thing around her pre- 
sented an exact contrast to the scene 
she had contemplated the preceding 
nigiht. The cheerins; influence of 
lig-ht I the universal visitation of reno- 
vated nature, the balsamic freshness of 
the air, all revived in the bosom of Ida, 
those subtile spirits which give birth to 
hope and joy. The sea, glittering to the 
sun-beams, was gently rippled by the un- 
dulating waves which, impelled by the 



fO WOMAN; OR 

force of a secret attraction towards the 
land, just marked the brilliant sands 
with their curving line, and seemed to 
flow back to the source from whence 
they came. 

The Greek bark, which Ida had ob- 
served tossed on the waves the night 
bejfore, had weathered out the storm, 
and lay undulating in a little creek, 
near the base of the promontory of Cy- 
nosura. 

There is in water, a life and anima- 
tion, which nature has not bestowed upon 
any of her other subordinate works: 
its continual motion, its murmur, its 
capability of reflection, and the Ticisi- 
tude to which it is subject, all render it 
at once an object of sublimity and inte- 
rest 1 calculated to charm the fancy, 
to terrify the imagination, and to awe 
the mind. 

Ida was cheered as she buns; over the 
^lear pellucid wave, that broke at her 



IDA OF ATHENS. tl 

feet ; and retiring amidst the obscurity 
of clustering rocks, she indulged in the 
luxury of bathing ; an indulgence* 
which habit had rendered so necessary 
to her health and pleasure. — Refreshed 
and invigorated, she directed her stepg 
towards the path her father would 
eventually take. A thousand objects in- 
distinctly seen in the haze of distance, 
deceived her eager impatience, till at last 
two horse-men descending a hill which 
woynd towards the shore, dissipated 
the idleness of conjecture, and con- 
firmed her hopes. — In a moment she 
recognized her father beneath the dis- 
guise of a Caloyer monk, and supposed 
that the Dervise who accompanied him 
could be no other than the Proteus Ja- 
nissary of the Acropolis. 

At the base of the hill, they alighted 
— Ida flew towards them with a velocity 
that mocked calculation : she stretch. 



22 WOMAN; OR 

ed out her arms to her enfeebled pa- 
rent, and he fainted in her embrace. 

The Dervise supports them both — 
and they are in a moment surrounded 
by the children, by Kyra, and Stepha- 
niki. The sufferings of his mind, the 
fatigue and hardship he endured from 
the inclemency of the night, had re* 
duced the archon to the last stage of 
human debility, and he was conveyed 
to the cave almost lifeless. It was the 
tears and tender caresses of his chil- 
dren, (even more than the cordial which 
the thrifty Kyra administered) that re- 
stored him to life, and to sensation; — - 
he raised his head — he looked around 
him, and the tears which he abundantly 
shed on the bosom of Ida, seemed to 
relieve the oppression that weighed 
upon his heart. 

Ida smiled and wept alternately ; 
and spoke in that true language of con- 



- IDA OF ATHENS. 23 

solation, which wisely draws the best 
consequences from the worst event, of 
which that event can be productive. 
She briefly detailed her little plans for 
their future life, and spoke with firm- 
ness and Avith fortitude of their mis- 
fortune, which was, on their parts, 
but an unavoidable participation in a 
common evil, to which every subject in 
a tyrannic and defective government 
was liable. 

" My father," (she said, with a cheer- 
ing smile) " it is in vain to deplore 
the affliction which is inevitable, and 
while those we love are spared to us, 
the greater felicity is still our own." — 
She stifled a sigh as she spok^, and felt 
that the conclusion of her speech was 
not wholly applicable to herself. 

The provisions which the honest Ste- 
phaniki had procured, were now spread 
before the comparatively happy family 



$4 WOMAN; OR 

of the archon, and when he had recover- 
ed sufficient strength to speak, he briefly 
detailed the means by which his libe- 
ration had been effected. 



The archon had already passed tw® 
suffering hours in the dungeon of the 
arsenal of Lycurgus, when the grate 
of his prison opened, and the centinel 
Janissary who guarded him appeared 
at its entrance. The archon believed 
the hour of death was already arrived. 
He attempted to address his guard, but 
he imposed silence by a look ; — he ap- 
proached the archon, — he took his 
arm — drew a ring from his finger, and 
led him into a subterraneous passage. — 
Here he paused for a moment, and said 
in a low voice, *' Go to the ruins of the 
temple which lies in that quarter of 
the city called PlaCa ; in the centre of 



IDA OF ATHENS. t^ 

the cell of the temple is a large stone ; 
roll it away — descend into the vault it 
covers, and then draw over your head 
a marble flag that lies near the opening, 
— you must remain there until this hour 
to-morrow night ; — I risk my life to 
save yours — on your caution depends 
the fate of both;" — he said! — and 
throwing the Turkish cloak he hitnself 
wore, over the shoulders of the ar- 
chon, he led him to the outside gate of 
the arsenal in silence, and returned to 
his post ! — Once only the trembling 
fug-itive "ventured to look back from an 
eminence on his way to the place of his 
concealment, he saw the guard placed 
on his prison relieving, and he saw hi<; 
mysterious, his unknown saviour, giv- 
ing up his post to another, and moving 
away. 

The archon adhered to ' the direc- 
tions of the Janissary, and the next 

VOL. IV. « 



26 WOMAN; OR 

night, when he was faint and nearly 
overcome with want of air and nou- 
rishment, the flag was removed from 
the entrance of the vault, and a person 
in the dress of a dervise stood beside 
it.^ — He assisted the feeble archon to 
ascend, — he presented a little flask of 
cordial to his lips ; — he placed him on 
a horse, and mounting another him- 
self, amidst the shadows of a dark 
and stormy night, they pursued their 
way to the eastern coast of Livadia. 

"And spoke he not to you?" de- 
manded Ida eagerly, " assigned he no 
other reason than that of pure bene- 
volence, for thus venturing his own 
life to preserve the life of another, and 
that other a stranger ? 

" He spoke not;" said the archon, 
" until we came within sight of this 
cave, and he imposed silence when I 
attempted to address him, in a manner 



IDA OF ATHENS. «7 

that obliged me to observe it." — " And 
what said he then, my father?" asked 
Ida ! " That he had wandered through 
Athens during the preceding day in 
the disguise of a Santon — that he had 
gone to a Cadi and given information 
that he had seen me, my family, and a 
Janissary embark in the night, on the 
gulph of Engia, and direct our course 
to the Morea, — that he had thus de- 
ceived their last vigilance, by an act 
too daring to rouse suspicion ; and that 
he thought we had no course to pur- 
sue, but to fly to Smyrna, (and if we 
had the means,) to sail with the Turkey 
fleet for England." 

" It is a strange coincidence I" ob- 
served Ida ; " such is the plan I had 
myself traced out ; but how is it to be 
put in execution ?" 

The archon made no reply ! — -He 
seemed witliout resource in himself 
c 2 



SS WOMAN; OR 

and wholly thrown dependent upon 
the execution of others. Fatio-ue had 
wholly overcome the delicacy of his 
shattered frame ; and he fell into a 
slumber on the cloak which Ida spread 
for him on the earth. She then left the 
cave, to seek, to thank, and to consult 
with the saviour of her beloved family 
and Herself. But from the shore' she 
observed him with Stephaniki, among 
the rocks, untying a cable, which fas- 
tened the boat of some fishermen to 
the coast. The next moment she saw 
them both jump into it, and row to- 
wards the vessel which had weathered 
out the storm on the preceding night, 
and had not yet put out to sea. Ida 
still pursued them with her strained 
and dazzled gl^fnce, and guessed the 
object of their exertion ; she saw therti 
ascend the vessel, and in ten minutes 
after Stephajaiki and a sailor leaped 



tt)A OF ATHENS. 29 

iuto th6 boat, and rowed towards the 
shore. 

" Archondessa," (cried Stephaniki,) 
" the, stranger has arranged every thing 
for your departure the volik which you 
perceive in yonder creek, is bound for 
Smyrna, and will soon «ail — lose not a 
moment, she only waits your arrival 
to weigh anchor." 

Ida raised her grateful wondering 
heart to heaven, and hastened to col- 
lect her little family ; and in a few mi- 
nutes they were all seated in the boat, 
in a few minutes they had reached the 
volick. The dervise stood at the helm 
of the vessel, conversing earnestly 
ivith its master, who advanced to assist 
them, while the dervise still remained 
with his b^ck turned towards them. 

All was now a little bustle on board 
the volick. The master gave his orders 
with the loud voice of conscious com- 



30 WOMAN; OR 

mand. The sails were unfurled. The 
anchor was on the point of being weigh- 
ed, and the dervise passing close by 
Ida, (so close as to touch her hand), 
■was about to return to the boat, when 
she detained him by his robe. 

She had already taken from her bo- 
som the precious cross to present him ; 
but the consciousness of the service he 
had done her ; the risks he had en- 
countered ; the omnipotence he -had 
betrayed ; the mystery in which he 
seemed to involve himself, and his ob- 
vious study to avoid the gratitude, the 
thanks, or even the observation of 
those whom he alone had rescued from 
destruction, all overwhelmed her with 
an unconquerable timidity to address 
him; since nothing she could say, could 
do justice to her feelings, and nothing 
she had to bestow could be adequate to 
his exertions. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 31 

She attempted twice to speak, and 
could not I— A few broken words, ac- 
companied by a few tears of uncon- 
troullable emotion, were all she could 
utter ; but she had taken the hand pf 
the feigned dervise, and it was on that 
hand, she wept ; — she felt that it trem- 
bled in her clasp, and when she en* 
deavoured to place in it the diamond 
cross, it was withdrawn; while the der- 
vise, turning towards the side of the 
vessel, suddenly sprung into the boat 
that undulated beneath it. 

" Stay, generous, wondrous, man," 
(exclaimed Ida passionately, and hang- 
ing over the railing of the deck while 
she addressed him) " one moment stay I 
at least tell me what chance I have of 
again beholding him, to whom I owe 
the preservation of all most dear and 
precious to my feeling; at least tell me 
the name of my benefactor, that it may 



32 WOMAN J OR 

be remembered in the prayers of grati- 
tude I address to heaven 1" 

The dervise replied only with a 
sigh. — The vessel was under sail as Ida 
spoke. The air drawn by' its flutter^ 
jng canvas wafted back the cowl of the 
religious, and Ida for the first time be- 
held the face of her saviour 1 — 

It was — Osmyn ! I ! 
~ The vessel swiftly cut the waves — a 
sailor who had followed the dervise 
into the boat, as swiftly rowed in an 
opposite direction. 

Osmyn stood, his head uncovered, 
the rays of the meridian sun playing 
with a glory round it. Ida remained 
in that attitude, emotions too powerful 
even for conception had thrown her 
ihto ; her arms were outstretched, her 
eye was fixed in a wild and earnest 
gaze. She panted for breath. The 
boat and vessel continued to recede 



IDA OF ATHENS. S3 

from each other. The boat lessened 
— became but a speck — became lost in 
the haze of distance ; — it still in fancy 
floated on the eye of Ida. At last, 
nearly exh>iusted by an emotion almost 
indulged to frenzy, an hysteric laugh 
broke from her quivering lips, and the 
arm of Kyra, who at that moment 
approached, supported her trembling 
frame, while she wept tears on the 
bosom of her nurse, that seemed to 
save her from bursting. 

" Holy Panaghea," exclaimed the 
Paramana, *' not a tear while we were 
all in jeopardy ; and now, forsooth, 
weeping to leave a country where the 
moment was never known when one's 
head was to be taken from their should- 
ers. Saint Stephen be our speed say I, 
we cannot change for the worse." 

Ida attempted not to undeceive her 
nurse, who had not observed Osrayn, 
c3 



34 WOMAN; OR 

and who was the only one of her fami- 
ly near that side of the vessel where the 
boat had put off. She entreated to 
be left to herself, and Kyra. blaming 
what she supposed to be her national 
sensibility, joined the archon and the 
children, while Ida continued to pace 
the deck in a perturbation of feeling 
and of thought, she could neither tran- 
quilize nor subdue. 

To have again beheld that form 
which had so often communicated in 
its contemplation a transport of the 
soul, no words could express ; which in 
the wearisome absence of two long 
years had so often visited the fancy in 
despite of the pride, and which re- 
sembled in its high superiority, the 
mind from which it borrowed its ex- 
pression of command and beauty : 
To have again beheld the toa dearly 
remembered object of a once unequalled 



IDA OF ATHENS. 35 

passion, under a character that resem- 
bled omnipotence itself, capable of a 
transformation that appeared like an 
effort of the magical art ; endowed 
with a power, that seemed to bend the 
events of life to its own purpose, adapt- 
ing every faculty to the part of the 
moment, and betraying or discarding 
each feeling of nature, as the pressure 
of the passing circumstance required. ! 
Now, the ferocious agent of an un- 
just tyranny ; now, the secret saviour 
of the miserable and the oppressed. 
Now, like the minister of a ruling 
Providence, opposing the machinations 
of the most powerful, and effecting the 
exaltation of the most lowly ; and now, 
alternately betraying the feelings of a 
man, and the insensibility of the stoic I 
— While his return to Athens— his 
having entered into the Janissary troops 
— his having risked his life to save that 



36 WOMAN; OR 

of an enemy — and his having suffered 
chance^ alone to discover the noble in-- 
trepidity ; the benevolent greatness of 
his conduct, was all a profound myste- 
ry, conformable, in the idea of Ida, to 
the sublimity of his character. It was 
like those points in faith which are be- 
lieved, without being understood ; it 
was like those mystic ordinances, which 
are venerated in proportion to their ob- 
scurity. 

He seemed to her rather as a destiny 
than as a man I that made and marred 
the fate of others, and governed and 
confirmed his own. 

His sudden appearance after an ab* 
sence of more than two years, with all 
its attendant circumstances, seized on 
her vivid imagination, revived the la- 
tent tenderness iof her heart, and by 
presenting him to her view in a new 
and splendid aspect, awakened a new 



IDA OF ATHENS. 37 

sentiment in her soul for his talents and 
his virtues, powerful as that which 
time and pride had mellowed into the 
thrilling recollection of a once indulged 
passion, rather than preserved in its 
actual existence. 

The fondness of a delicate and sensible 
woman, is inseparably connected with the 
hope of a returned tenderness ; and not 
even the splendid greatness of Osmyn's 
character, would have restored him to 
the heart of Ida, had she not believed 
that she still retained an influence over 
his. She now recalled the ardent gaze, 
the trembling emotion of the Janissary, 
amidst the ruins of the temple, whither 
she supposed he waited to meet her, in 
his knowledge of that filial love which 
would inevitably lead her back to the 
prison of her father. Siie now remeifi- 
bered the watchful solicitude with 
which he had followed her from the 



38 WOMAN; OR 

temple, and the emotion he had be- 
trayed when she had taken his hand on 
board the volick. It was for her, there- 
fore, he had risked his life, and even 
still exposed himself to danger or to 
death; and something of a lingering 
love might have mingled with the pa- 
triotic feeling that led him back to 
Athens, to visit the country he had 
once nearly died to save, and to be- 
hold the woman he had once only lived 
to love. To a belief so precious, his 
abrupt departure alone opposed itself* 
But Ida, in the hope of still preserving 
an influence over his heart, knew hu- 
man nature too well to suppose she 
would not preserve it over his. con- 
duct ; and her sanguine and tender 
wishes induced her to believe, that he 
would follow her to Smyrna, and per- 
haps accompany her family to England. 
His passion for Jumeli for a moment. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 39 

only clouded her awakened fancy ; but 
she was well aware, that she who had 
charms to render him inconstant, want- 
ed the powers to preserve him faithful. 
She was still lost in that species of 
reverie, so grateful to the soul, formed 
for the exercise of powerful emotions, 
when she was sent for by her father, — 
she hesitated for a moment to obey the 
summonsi— doubtful whether she should 
put the weakness and pride of his mind 
to a trial by betraying how deeply he 
stood indebted to the man whose inve- 
terate enemy he had invariably proved 
himself. — But she no lonsier hesitated, 
when her father shewed her a purse of 
roubles (to the amount of an hundred 
pounds British) to defray their expences 
to England, and a written papar with 
directions how they were to act in 
Smyrna relative to their embarkation — 
both left by the mysterious Janissary 



40 WOMAN; OR 

with the captain of the volik for their 
use. " And know you not who this 
benefactor is ?" demanded Ida, borne 
away by the enthusiasm of her feelings ; 
" Some person" (said the* archon) 
whom perhaps I have formerly served." 
Ah no, (said Ida in emotion, her face 
covered with blushes) it is a person 
whom you have injured ! It is the son 
of the immortal Limbona !" 

" Osmyn I — the rebel !" — cried the 
archon, with less surprize than evi-' 
dent mortification; "Osmyn, the pa- 
triot," returned Ida, warmly ; " the 
chance of a moment only discovered 
him to my view ; oh my father, he sav- 
ed your life — he preserved mine, and 
the lives of these children! yet he no- 
bly disdained to b&tray his generosity 
where it was neither merited nor expect- 
ed — he disdained to extort thanks where 
he had himself only received injuries ! 



IBA OF ATHENS. 41 

yes, even our gratitude was unworthy 
of him." 

The recollection of her having sa- 
crificed Osmyn to the prejudices and 
the happiness of her father and his fa- 
mily, rushed at tha|: moment on her 
mind — and the tears she could not sup-?- 
press, she coiald not conceal ; while 
they flowed from a two-fold cause — for 
had Osmyn intended to have accompa- 
nied them to England, or even to have 
followed them to Smyrna, he would not 
have been so accurate in his written di- 
rections, nor have offered them a pecuni- 
ary assistance, which even the pressing, 
and present necessities of her family, 
could not reconcile to the proud and 
delicate mind of Ida I. Mean-time, the 
archon worn out in spirit, harrassed 
in body, depressed in mind, neither ex- 
pressed nor felt any extraordinary emo- 
tion at the generous conduct of the 



42 WOMAN; OR, 

man he, hated, and was even more- 
wounded by the obligation, through the 
medium of his pride, than gratified by 
its benevolence, through the feelings 
of his heart. 

The imbecility of an ill-regulated 
mind, unconscious of its natural pow- 
ers, governed by its pasfidons, and sway- 
ed by its prejudices, now betrayed it- 
self most. At the moment when every 
effort of intellectual streno-th was he- 
cessary to support and counterbalance 
the severity of a cruel and unforeseen 
destiny ; without one self-dependent 
principle of happiness, the stay of life 
was withdrawn in the loss of those ex- 
ternal circumstances which should have 
been considered as its trappings. Suf- 
fering in mind, and in body, he lay 
reclined on the deck, the image of that 
despondency, to which hope denies 
her light, and memory her solace.—^ 



IDA OF ATHENS. 43 

Not so Ida ! the finest spring of.her be- 
ing had newly vibrated to a magic 
touch, the energies gf her mind were 
roused to exertion, and she emulated, 
in proportion as she admired, the com- 
manding genius of Osmyn I She felt 
herself capable of every effort which 
the extraordinary circumstances of her 
life required, and when the oft-recur- 
ring visions of the love that had gone 
by, or the dream of the love that 
might return, receded from the heart 
and imagination they so constantly 
cheered, Ida resigned herself to those 
active and solicitous speculations, 
which had the welfare, the safety, and 
the happiness of her family, for their 
sole object ; — while it was impossible a 
fancy so animated, an imagination so 
warmly alive to the sublime, vand beau- 
tiful of nature, could slumber over 
a prospect, rich and interesting as that 



44 WOMAN; OR 

which now presented itself to the 
Athenians. The power of mingling 
and combining feelings and sensations, 
the most opposite in their nature, pecu- 
liarly belonged to the versatile and 
awakened character of Ida, in whom 
the talents and the affections of the 
painter and the poet, the mistress and 
the child, the citizen and the philan- 
thropist, were sweetly and intimately 
blended, each giving force and energy 
to the other. 

The little vessel had now cleared the 
extreme point of Negropont I 

The irregular chain of mountains 
which seem to rise from the declension 
of Mount Ocha, boldly terminated to 
the south, in the ancient promontory 
of Gercestum ; and the eye of Ida, wea- 
ried by contemplating their heights, 
turned for relief on the smiling shores 
of the little island of Andros, as the 



IDA OF ATHENS. 45 

volik glided through the strait which 
divides it from Negropont. 

She gazed on the island as a spot sa- 
cred to the interesting woman whom 
the genius of Terence has immor- 
talized, and therefore dearer in her 
imagination than even for the beauty 
of its groves, where the orange, the 
pomegranate, and the citron, mingled 
their rich and golden fruits with the 
blossoms of the myrtle, and the luxuri- 
riant agnus-castus. — They had now 
launched into the Archipelago, that 
interesting sea, so precious to the soul 
of genius, and the mind of taste I — 
where the mor^l and the picturesque, 
so intimately blend their influence, and 
where the most inconsequent Islet, is 
hallowed by the memory of some cir- 
cumstance of poetic interest, or attract- 
ive from its rich display of scenic 
beauty. 



46 WOMAN; OR 

Ida sighed that her restless and un- 
happy mind blunted the enjoyment of 
her pure and classic taste, and felt how 
much more powerfully life was go- 
verned by the sensibilities of the heart, 
than by the gratification of the fancy 
and imagination. 

Leaving the island of Scio to the 
north, the outline of the Natolian 
shores began to define itself on the ho- 
rizon I — The heights of Mount Cor- 
cyra were partially distinguished J 
through the mists of distance ! by de- 
grees the coast assumed a balder form, 
and while the fertile island of Icaros, 
faded on the sight, Corcyra gradually 
resumed its own character of unrivalled 
majesty; and the romantic Turkish- 
town of Vuorlo, rose in the softness 
of distance amidst its groves of olive 

and pomagranate trees. But anew 

scene presented itself when the volik 



IDA OF ATHENS. 47 

doubled the cape, anciently Meloena, 
and the enchantino-, the luxurious 
shores that surround the gulpti of 
Sniyrna, glowed in all their animated 
beauty on the eye of the fugitives I 

The gulph of Smyrna is sheltered 
by a chain of hills cultivated to their 
summits ; and draped along their un- 
equal sides with the vines' fantastic 
wreathes ; the extreme richness of the 
soil, the fertilizing streams of the 
Herraus, from whence the gulph de- 
rived its ancient name, have induced 
innumerable colonies from the interior 
of Asia-Minor, to settle along the 
coast, and while their little villages, 
scattered through the groves that fringe 
the bay, give a high finish to the native 
beauty of the scene ; their flocks as 
they scale the hills, and the strains of 
the lyre or the pipe, which cheer the 
devious steps of the Asiatic shepherd, 



4^ WOMAN; OR 

bestow that moral and animated in- 
terest on the landscape, whose defici- 
ency chills the warmest scene, and ren- 
ders an Eden but a desolate and melan- 
choly waste. 

The Athenians had landed in the 
port of a little Greek village, to obtain 
that repose so necessary to their ex- 
hausted frames. The next morning 
they weighed anchor for the port of 
Smyrna. The inconsequence of the 
volik enabled them. to pass the fortress 
(which commands the entrance of the 
bay) unnoticed — that beautiful bay I 
which was now crowded with vessels 
of every nation, of every form, and 
every burthen I 

It was now, that that, ancient and 
celebrated city, which arose from the 
visionary dream of the world's con- 
queror, under the supposed guidance 
of deity, first presented itself to the 



IDA OF ATHENS. 49 

eyes of Ida, and gave to her reflective 
mind new images of the power and ge- 
nius of the man. 

For the first time she beheld a great 
and opulent city, become so by com- 
mercial exertion — she beheld it repos- 
ing at the base of those lofty hills, to 
whose marble veins so many of its an- 
cient edifices owed their beauty. — The 
spires of its christian character, the 
minarets of its Turkish mosques, the 
cupulos of its Jewish synagogues, 
spoke that happy and liberal toleration 
which the common interests of a com- 
mercial people produce; and in the 
fragrance and purity of its air, its de- 
licious climate, and luxurious groves, 
she recognized the happy and felicitous 
region which had given birth to the ge- 
nius of a Homer. — Several pleasure- 
boats passed them, decorated with taste 
— their gay streamers floating on the 

VOL. IV. D 



50 WOMAN; OR 

air, their decks crowded with persons 
indiscriminately habited in the Asiatic 
and European costume, and accompa- 
nied by bands of music. 

Ida understood from Stephaniki that 
these were parties of Smyrnian factors 
and European merchants, returning 
from one of those piscatory expedi- 
tions which form at that season of the 
year, a principal amusement to the in- 
habitants of Smyrna. 

It was evening when the Athenians 
entered the harbour; Smyrna, rising 
from the shore, towards the brow of 
its lofty liiountains, appeared blazing 
^ith illuminations, and resounded to 
the gay vibrations of joy, festivity, and 
pleasure. Colours were hoisted from 
-the masts of the vessels, — lamps of va- 
3:ious colours glittered on their prows, 
and Stephaniki informed the amazed 
Athenians that they would have the 



IDA OF ATHENS. 5 1 

good fortune to enter Smyrna on the 
night of its annual fair. ^ 

The children and the paramana de- 
lighted in a circumstance that promis- 
ed them so much amusement ; Ida was 
not averse to it, as the crowds that fill- 
ed the streets would prevent her family 
becoming an object of attention as they 
passed them on their way to a khan, 
or inn. 

The volik now anchored before the 
beautiful street of the Franks, which, 
running parallel with the harbour, is 
shaded by little groves of orange and 
citron trees, watered by streams flow- 
ing from the river Meles, w:hose shores 
the Smyrnians traditionally assert to 
have been the birth-place of Homer. — 
The splendid edifices of the factors dis- 
played a brilliant illumination reflect- 
ed on the green foliage of the trees ; — 
or flinging a level stream of light on 
D 2 , 



52 WOMAN; OR 

the bosom of the harbour, united by 
their reflexes the brightness of an ar- 
dent day, to the refreshing coolness of 
a balmy eastern evening. 

Several pleasure-boats lit up with co- 
loured^ lamps, and filled witli musi- 
cians, floated on the water, and a gay 
and pleasurable multitude hailed them 
from the shore. Ida and her little fa- 
mily landed near the street of the Franks, 
which was the principal scene of fes- 
tivity, and where all was calculated to 
dissipate, if not to amuse or touch the 
mind«> Here a booth displayed a va- 
riety of the most precious stones and 
richest stuffs — there a temporary bower 
supplied the happy revellers with cof- 
fee and sherbet. On one side a grave 
Arab danced an ape, to the rude 
sounds of the Taborah-basque — on the 
other, an Egyptian serpent-eater, drew 



IDA OF ATHENS. 53 

% scorpion from his bosom, or affected 
to devour a viper. 

Every where groups of Zinganies* 
asserted they alone possessed the black 
art, and delivered their oracles to a 
credulous multitude, while Jews per- 
formed pantomimes, juglers exhibited 
slight of hand, and conjurors swallow- 
ed fire, and inflicted wounds which 
healed as they were made. And a con- 
course of persons of almost every age 
and every nation, all differing in coun- 
tenance, dress, and language, formed a 
masquerade, whimsical and grotesque 
beyond the reach of art to imitate or 
rival. 

It was with difficulty that the Athe- 
nians at last reached the khan — and 
those thoughts, which for a moment 
were dissipated by a scene so various, 

♦ A species of ^ipsyt 



54 WOMAN; OR ^ 

and so novel, returned with all their 
gloom to Ida's bosom, amidst the so- 
litude of a comfortless and almost de- 
serted inn. 



The English fleet was to sail in two 
days following that on which the fugi- 
tives reached Smyrna: Ida perceived 
there was not a moment to be lost : she 
sent immediately for a Smyrnian factor, 
with whipffrf her father had transacted 
busines'S ; — to him she confided the se-- 
cret of their unhappy situation, and 
awakened so much interest in his heart 
for their fate, that he readily under- 
took the arrangement of their embar'k- 
ation. Meantime, the active mind of 
the young Athenian busied itself in the 
necessary preparation for their voyage ; 
— and assisted by the honest Stepha- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 55 

niki, she made such purchases of dress, 
provisions, Sec. fee. as ^were indispen- 
sibly necessary for the use and accpm- 
modation of .her family; — and on the 
afternoon of the second day from that ' 
of their arrival, the Athenian archon, 
and his helpless family, embarked with 
the fleet on board a merchant-man for 
England. 

The parting between Stephaniki and 
the objects oi his gratitude and bene- . 
volence was simple and affecting; — 
Ida in vain pressed on his acceptance 
a gratuity, rather as a token of her 
esteem and acknowledgement, than- a 
recompense worthy his services; the 
manner in which it was declined, taught 
her the indelicacy of urging a matter 
which would gratify her own feelings 
at the expence of his, who found in his 
own heart a recom pence no earthly 
power could bestow. She, however, 



56 WOMAN; OR 

forced on his finger the ring which her 
father had sent her as a token from the 
dungeon, and wept as she bade him 
adieu — while Stephaniki dissolved in 
an emotion that belonged not to his 
rude and simple character, followed 
the fleet in a little boat, till it had com- 
pletely cleared the gulph of Smyrna. 

The archon equally influenced by 
the timid apprehension of discovery, 
and the debility of an exhausted frame, 
and worn-out spirits, retired immedi- 
ately to bed in the little cabin devoted 
to the use of his family. Ida, oppress- 
ed, wearied, bashful, and timid, shun- 
ned equally the gaze of admiration and 
curiosity, and immediately took her 
station near her father's side, — while 
the boys remained on deck, amused by 
a scene so new, and the paramana be- 
wildered by every thing that surround- 
ed her, told her beads in a corner of 



EDA OF ATHENS. 57 

the cabin, and prayed to the sacred 
panaghea for the success and speed of 
their voyage. 

The consitutional weakness of the 
archon kept pace with the progress of 
his voyage ; and the tender, the all-so- 
licitous Ida, lost every sense of 'feeling 
in the anxiety her father's state awaken- 
ed: day after day was worn out in 
ceaseless suffering at his bed-side. — A 
confinement so unusual — the want of 
that pure air she had been accustomed 
to respire, of that mild and brilliant 
climate from whence so much of the 
animation of her character was derived, 
uncalled on, in the present moment, for 
that exertion, which, by combating the 
ills of life, render them comparatively 
supportable, she gradually sunk into 
that dreadful state of mind and feeling 
which vibrates between the extreme 
D3 



58 WOMAN; OR 

pang of suffering sensibility, and the 
apathetic gloom of hopeless sorrow. 

Even the love which had so lately 
revisited her bosom, now only added a 
deeper shade to her sadness ; for to 
love without hope, was impossible to 
a character so delicate and dignified in 
all its feelings ; but to lAve without 
love, was to exist without that vital 
sensibility of existence so indispensible 
to a sbul, warm, tender, and ardent, as 
that of the Athenians. - ' 

While her feelings thus preyed upon 
themselves, while her health became 
influenced by her mind and peculiar 
situation, the life of Ida would proba^ 
bly have become the victim of both, 
had not the speed of a prosperous voy- 
agCjignd the novel cirgumstances into 
whicn she was thrown, by her arrival 
in a country so distant, and so different 



IDA OF ATHENS. 59 

from her own, called on the latent 
powers of her strong and nervous 
mind, on the social feelings of her 
warm and affectionate heart. She be- 
held herself the protectress and sup- 
port of her little family ; and this con- 
sciousness indued her with the power 
of fulfilling those claims so sacred and 
so dear. 

On the hist day of the sixth week 
from their departure from Smyrna, the 
wished-for, welcome, sound of " Land," 
resounded on every side. The dark 
speck which seemed to float on the 
northern horizon, animated every heart 
with joyous emotion ; a favourable gale 
swelled the spreading sails ; the distant 
land gradually spread on the eye of the 
longing sailor ; the white cliffs that 
fling their protection round the hap- 
piest island, rose in bold defiance above, 
the; green and ebbing surge, and the. 



6a WOMAN J OR 

bright and varying hues of nature 
marked and beautified the expanding 
coast. As the vessel which contained 
the archon's family entered the port 
of ****, Ida stood on the deck support- 
ing her feeble father, and surrounded 
by her brothers and her Paratnana. 
Every heart beat light but that of Ida, 
and her little family I— The traits of na- 
tural land national affection which they 
witnessed, though less animated than 
those their ardent characters were ca- 
pable of betraying, brought to their 
recollection a lively sense of their own 
friendless and desolate state ; and of 
their eternal separation from their own 
jdear and much-loved country. 

Love of country! — Oh!' for ever 
distant from the soul of genius, from 
the heart of feeling, be that cold phi- 
losophy, which endeavours to lessen 
thy influence on the affections and the 



roA OF ATHENS. 61 

mind! — which paints thee as the dream 
of erring fancy ; as the hrilliant vision 
of enthusiastic, but mistaken virtue ! 

Legislators of the earth I it is for you 
to awaken and to cherish the sacred love 
of country, as the great basis of all hu- 
man excellence ! 

A universal denization is not com- 
patible with the limited sphere allotted 
to the exercise of human affections, but 
the love of country is at once conform- 
able to universal philanthropy, and to 
national affection; it is the brightest 
spark of genius, that sheds its lustre 
on our country's glory ! It is the purest 
glow of sensibility that warms the feel- 
ings for our country's happiness I It 
is the noblest effort of ambition, that 
struggles for our country's liberty and 
independence. Pleasure or interest 
may divert the mind from national so- 
licitude, — but the heart is always a pa- 



6$. ' WOMAN; OR 

triot ! — In that country where it first 
learns to feel, to love, to suffer, there 
will the associating ideas rivet the social 
affections ; and it is thus we insensibly 
attach ourselves to our country fiomr 
sentiment, even when we are destitute 
of the virtue to love it from principle. 



ENGLAND. 

Every eye brightened — every lip. 
smiled, as the fleet cast anchor I But 
Ida hid her face in her veil and wept!, 
— for the prosperity of the country shcv 
had reached, and the sufferings of the 
country she had left, stood too strongly 
opposed in her heart and imagination. 

As soon after their arrival as the 
laws would permit, the captain of the 
merchantman in which they had sailed, 
conducted the archon ^nd his family, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 63 

to an hotel ; where they found all those 
comforts and accommodations so gr-ate- 
ful after a long voyage, however pros- 
perous. 

But the younger Athenians scarcely 
allowed themselves a moment to par- 
take of a necessary refreshment. The 
attraction of a novelty the most strik- 
ing rivetted them to the Avindow of 
their apartment. The beautiful forms 
and glowing scenery, which had last 
presented themselves to the eye of Ida 
on the picturesque shore of the gulph 
of Smyrna, those remoter scenes, and 
that classic interest, which hung over 
the deserted port of the Pirceus, stood 
opposed in her quick appreh'ension, to 
the coarse busy, bustle of a crowded 
sea-port, in the most commercial, opu-- 
lent, but least picturesque, country in 
the world. The difference of language, 
accent, person, countenance, costume, 



64 WOMAN; OR 

even of the streets and buildings, from 
that she had been accustomed to be- 
hold, awakened that train of lively 
emotion, which a new impression com- 
municated to the senses, ever excites 
in the mind. But while the wonder- 
ing attention of her little family was 
confined to external forms only, Ida 
reflected, that man, every where differ- 
ing from man in exterior aspects, is 
every where from nature intrinsically 
the same ; actuated by the same feel- 
ings, impelled by the. same passions, 
and governed by the prejudice of early 
habits, or the influence of early asso- 
ciations ! 

" Alas !" she mentally observed, " if 
the voice of nature were but as univer- 
sally acknowledged as her power is 
felt, the tone of opinion would be as 
universal as the influence of feeling. 
It is on points of speculation that man^ 



IDA OF ATHENS. 6S 

kind differ, and for the obstinate sup- 
port of which mankind suffer. The earth 
is divided into religions and into sects, 
into parties, and into factions. But it is 
still every where occupied by crea- 
tures loving and beloved. The error 
of man separates his species into be- 
liever and inhdel, tyrant and slave, op- 
pressor and oppressed; but the be- 
neficence of nature every where, and 
equally diffuses the feelings of the 
lover, the husband, the father, and the 
friend. It is by the prejudice of arbi- 
trary reason, that the bonds of huma- 
nity are torn asunder. It is by the 
influence of natural sentiment that the 
ties of society are harmonized and re- 
united." 



Ida was the only one of her family 
who spoke English. She was the only 



^ 66 WOMAN; OR 

one on whom that family could repose 
for assistance or resource. The ar- 
chon's constitution was irreparably in- 
jured, his mind, taken from its habitual 
sphere of action, was incapable of ex- 
ertion. Ida was to him a little pro- 
vidence, and he resigned his desti- 
ny, and that of his children, into her 
hands. 

Her first desire was to remove her 
family to London : their little store of 
money was nearly exhausted, and as 
she had frequently written to the mer- 
chant in whose hands her fortune was 
placed, she received remittances of in- 
terest for the last two years, and sent 
him receipts by means of a Smyrnian 
factor, a relation of her father's, she 
was satisfied, that on making herself 
known to him, she would obtain every 
advice relative to the future disposition 
of her little property, and a sum of 



' IDA OF ATHENS. 67 

money to answer the purpases of pre- 
sent^contingencies. 

In three days from that of their land- 
ing they arrived in London ; the person 
at whose house they had been in at 
****, gave them a letter to a relation of 
his, who kept a splendid and expensive 
hotel near Piccadilly ; thither the sim- 
ple and inexperienced Greeks now 
drove. ;vmon .^l.iii/i, 

Ida, a novice in all worldly transac- 
tions, had, however, drawn her estimate 
of expenditure in England by the ex- 
travagant charges of the hotel at *^**; 
she was therefore extremely anxious to 
remove her family into some private 
house or lodging"; and she spoke ^okl' 
the subject to the waiter who attended 
them.^ The man mentioned a small 
house in a beautiful village on the banks 
of the Thames, near London ; which 
he said, his sister kept for the purpose 



68 • WOMAN; OR 

of hire. He detailed its accommoda- 
tions — its proximity to the metropolis, 
and the moderation of its terms, in a 
manner that induced Ida (always rather 
prompt and decisive in her conduct, 
than circumspect or cautious) to con- 
clude an agreement with him for the 
house for one month at a rate which 
(though extravagant according to her 
means), could be of no material conse- 
quence in consideration of the short- 
ness of the time for which the agree- 
ment was made. 

Ida's first object was .to remove her 
family to their new dwelling ; her next 
to wait on the merchant who was her 
banker, and whose address her memory 
had treasured, — The day, therefore, af- 
ter her arrival in London, she was 
making arrangements for her depar- 
ture, when she found the bill pre- 
sented to her by her landlord was 



IDA OF ATHENS. 69 

more than three times the sum ishe pos- 
sessed. 

This" was the first pecuniary embar- 
rassment she had ever been involved 
in ; but expecting that confidence to- 
wards herself, her frank and innocent 
nature extended to others, she felt less 
from the circumstance than a woman 
who united to an equal delicacy of feel- 
ing a more profound experience of the 
world would have done. 

And though she blushed when she 
compared the enormous amount of the 
bill, with the contents of her almost 
empty purse, she told the master of 
the hotel, with great simplicity, that — 
" she could not pay him then, but that 
when she should have seen her banker 
the following day, he should have his 
money." 

The man seemed thunder-struck; 
and told her, in a decided tone, 
that she could not -leave his house till 



70 WOMAN; OR > 

he was paid. — Ida started ; — blushed-— 
grew pale ;— she rather felt, than un- 
derstood the coarse inuendo with which 
he had concluded his rude declaration. 
-^-Dishonesty in matters of pecuniary 
dealing is a mean vice so peculiar to 
corrupt society, that until this moment, 
a idea of its existence had never en- 
tered into the elevated mind of Ida : 
to be supposed capable of it, inspired 
a horror, mingled with disgust, to- 
wards him who had given to her mind 
a new idea of the depravity of that 
species, to which she now almost blush- 
ed to belong; and knitting her dark 
brows above those brilliant and elo- 
quent eyes that now sparkled with in- 
dignation, she turned haughtily from 
him. j 

The man accustomed to imposition, , 
seemed yet struck by her air and coun- 
tenance, and suggested, that he would- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 71 

take care of any valuable trinket for 
her, until it was her convenience to pay 
the expence of her bill. With that 
promptitude of feeling, which^ so pe- 
culiarly belonged to her character, 
anxious only to remove from the house 
of -a person she held in equal abhor- 
rence and contempt, she drew fro^i her 
neck the diamond cross, and with a 
confidence she had not been able herself 
to inspire, she put it into his hands un- 
til she should return the next day to 
reclaim it. 

Meantime the waiter, from whom she 
had engaged the house, had gone for a 
carriage to convey the famHy of the 
archon to their new abode, to which 
he himself accompanied them ; and 
Ida having seen that beloved and help- 
less family comfortably settled in a neat 
and chaiming retreat, and left what 
money she then possessed with the 



H WOMAN; oft 

woman to whom the house beloi\ged 
for the purpose of immediate expen- 
diture, returned in the carriage to Lon- 
don, accompanied by her Paramana, to 
seek the merchant in whose hands her 
little property was vested. 

She repeated accurately the address 
of the merchant to the coachman — and 
they drove into the city. With that 
nobility of feeling so natural to her 
sex, her years, and nation,^ Ida gave 
herself up without reserve to an eager 
contemplation of the scenes that now 
presented themselves to her astonished 
view. 

But her taste, like her mind, purifi- 
ed and sublimed by the nature of the 
first impressions it had received, turned 
revoltingly from the coarse and un- 
interesting spectacles that so often met 
her eye ; — dark and narrow streets — ir- 
regular and ill-built houses, uncharac- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 7 J 

terized figyres and inelegant costume, 
combined with confused and discordant 
sounds, and sometimes with objects of 
disgust or commiseration, convey but 
little pleasure to that fancy and those 
feelings, replete with poetic imagery, 
and alive to the most delicate impres- 
sions. 

While her reflecting mind found 
ample room for meditation, as it dwelt 
on that new aspect of moral life, which 
the brilliant active bustle, and wond- 
rous population of a great, a free, a 
commercial, and polished people, pre- 
sented to its observation. 

The counting-house of the mer- 
chant lay in one of those narrow lanes 
in the city, whose opulence and luxu- 
ry seem so closely connected with ap- 
pearances of penury and want; and 
when Ida reached it, she observed, 
that its doors and windows wereclo:>ed, 

VOL. IV. s 



74 WOMAN; OR 

and a great part of the house Covered 
i^ith labels and papers. The coachman 
had knocked several times before a 
person came out of a neighbouring shop 
to say, that that house was un-inhabi- 
ted. Ida beckoned the man to the car- 
riage window, and made known to him 
her wish of seeing Mr. D. the mer- 
chant. , . 

The man replied, " that Mv. D. had 
lived there, but that he had been dead 
some months, and his son who had 
succeeded him in the house, had be- 
come so deeply involved, that he had 
absconded, no one knew whither I" 

It was some time, and not till after 
the man had repeated the information 
several times, that Ida understood its 
purport; — namely, that in a foreign 
country, and without a friend on earth, 
she, and her helpless family, were beg- 
gars ! 



IDA OF ATHENS. 75 

Ida now, perhaps, touched on the 
most wretched moment of her life !* — 
her heart seemed to wither in her bo- 
som, — the blood chilled in her veins, — 
and sickly languor crept through her 
sinking frame : — the names of her fa- 
ther and her brothers breathing on her 
trembling lips, and the agony painted 
in her countenance, gave Kyra some 
intimation of ^he nature of the misfor- 
tune that had befallen her ; the old 
woman in treated to be informed of its 
full extent. Ida, in a few inarticulate 
words, gave her to understand, that 
they were reduced to the last extreme 
of misery, by the flight of the person 
in whose hands all they possessed was 
vested. The Paramana wept abundant- 
ly ; and both were lost to all sense of 
their singular situation ; several per- 
sons, in idle curiosity, had collected 
round the carriage door, attracted by 
E 2 



76 WOMAN; OR 

the almost lifeless beauty of the dis- 
pairing Ida, and the loud convulsive 
sobs of her nurse ! At last, after fre- 
quent repetitions of the question of 
" Where he should drive ?" the coach- 
man asked, " if he should drive them 
home ?"— the word home struck on 
the heart of Ida ; and in an accent, at 
once tender and despondent, she re- . 
plied, " Home !" — the coachman drove 
away. ) ' 

■--' The mind of Ida was so dependent 
on itself — so accustomed to rely upon its 
own resources for support and aid un- 
der every pressure of affliction, that it 
was impossible its powers could long 
submit to the total subjugation even 0^ 
feelings so acute. 

And as she drove along throu^i 
^hose scenes whose gaiety and bustle 
were so strongly contrasted to her own 
desolate and wretched situation, she 



IDA OF ATHENS. 7 7 

revolved within her mind what cir- 
cumstance could possibly oppose itself 
to the immediate poverty and want that 
now threatened her family. 

The diamond cross in the possession 
of the master of the hotel, the gold 
chain still suspended from her neck ; 
were the only valuables she possessed; 
and she was so ignorant of their in- 
trinsic worth, or the price which such 
things brought in Eno;land, that she 
believed she had no alternative but to 
trust to the honesty of him, who had 
evidently entertained so strong a suspi- 
cion of hers ; to be obliged to apply to 
him at all upon such an occasion, was 
equally distressing to her feelings and 
her pride. Urged, however, by the 
tyranny of her necessitous situation, she 
stopped the coachman, and ordered 
him to drive to the hotel ; and she wept 
without ceasing till she arrived there.. 



7*: WOMAN j OR 

At the door stood its master! — At 
the sight of Ida he retreated into the 
house, and returned the next moment 
with her cross ; with a manner servilely 
courteous he appro::ched her, and at- 
tempted to apologize for his conduct in 
the morning. 

" I come not to reclaim the cross,'* 
said Ida, unable to suppress her emo- 
tion, " but to request you will purchase 
it from me." 

The man drew back and looked sur- 
prized — and Ida continued, with great 
simplicity; — " We are unfortunate 
Greeks, who have been driven by the 
miseries of our country, to seek refuge 
in a foreign nation ; the person in whose 
hands our property was vested, has 
fled — and we have no chance of the 
means of immediate support, but from 
the sale of that jewel and this chain. My 
ignorance of the manners and customs 



IDA OF ATHENS. 79 

of yotir country throw me entirely on 
your honesty and advice for depend- 
ance and relief." 

She ceased — the man seemed to hesi- 
tate for some time — at last he said 
" that he would consult a friend, and 
return to her in a few minutes." — So 
much was the better reason of Ida 
clouded by her timidity and apprehen- 
sions for the uncertainty of the fate 
of her unfortunate family, that these 
few minutes were an insupportable sus- 
pence to her trembling heart. — At last 
the master of the hotel returned, and 
with him the waiter from whom the 
house had been hired. 

The man in a few words observed, 
" that before he returned the cross he 
expected to see the person who was his 
waiter secured in his rent ; but that if 
the lady chose to dispose of it to him, 
he would give her an hundred guineas 



So WOMAN i OR 

for that and the chain, deducting froiH 
it the amount of his bill, and the 
month's rent of th^ house. 
. Ida had nothing to oppose to this of- 
fer — she had taken the house for a 
month, and said, as the rent was be- 
yond her means, she was obliged to 
submit to the agreement. 

She knew not the cross was worth 
double the sum she received for it ; 
and the idea of being relieved from im- 
mediate want in a strange country, was 
that most bonyant in her suffering 
mind. After having paid thirty gui- 
neas for the house, and discharged her 
bill, which came to ten more, she re- 
turned with the residue to her unfortu- 
nate family. 

It was evening when she reached her 
solitary home. Her brothers had been 
watching for her from one of the win- 
dows, and flew with deli8;ht to meet 



IDA OF ATHENS. , 81 

her ; — they had not been able to make 
their wants or wishes known to the wo- 
man of the house, their father was so 
ill, that he had retired to bed, and they 
expressed in artless and animated lan- 
guage, the anxiety her absence occa- 
sioned, the pleasure her return con- 
ferred. Ida listened to them in silent 
emotion, and bathed the tender kiss 
she impressed on their brows with 
tears. In proportion as she felt herself 
necessary to their happiness, in pro- 
portion did they become dearer to her 
heart. There is a chacm in the inno- 
cent affection of childhood, so pure 
and so natural, that Ida knew not the 
extent of the maternal interest she felt 
for these lovely children, until their 
helpless situation, by rendering her 
more necessary to their happiness, ren- 
dered them more dear to her affec* 
U90S i perha>ps this reciprocity of inte^ 



8^ ^ WOMAN; OR 

r^ts and feeling, is the greatest, strong- 
est tye that exists between the natural 
mother and her offspring. 

Ida with difficulty disengaged herself 
from the entwining arms of the endear- 
ing boys, and flew to the bedside of her 
father. Already was the change of 
climate betraying its influence on his 
broicen constitution, 

Ida found him oppressed in mind, 
debilitated in frame, and broken in spi- 
rit; and her feelings were unequal to 
the task of betraying tp him the full ex- 
tent of their misfortune. She evaded 
the few questions he put to her; she 
affected a cheeriness of manner foreign 
to her heart ; knd the confidence which 
her father placed in her management and 
conduct, was re-assured by the sooth- 
ing tenderness, the fortitude and resig- 
nation of her words and air. 

On whatever side the unhappy Ida 



IDA OF ATHENS. 83 

now cast her eyes, misery and want 
met their glance. A father in declin- 
ing health ; brothers young and help- 
less ; and a faithful domestic old and 
infirm, were the objects for whom her 
heart agonized in ceaseless suffering. 
Sometimes a thought of herself flashed 
across her nrind ; — devoted with all 
her attraction of genius and of person, 
to cheerless obscurity, denied the so- 
lace of that reciprocal affection which 
so sweetly lightens the burthen of every 
sorrow ; still retaining a lively and 
thrilling remembrance of joys once ex- 
perienced, of sentiments once cherish- 
ed, and involuntarily opposing them to 
her present unconnected and unaffec- 
tioned state : she remembered her ca 
pability of happiness, and wept for 
herself alone ; till again, the more 
home-affliction pressing on her heart, 
solicitude for her family involved every 



S4 WOMAN; OR 

feeling of selfish regret ; and, forgetful 
of her own individual sufferings, she 
thought only of those who seemed vo- 
luntarily and confidently to resign their 
fate into her hands. ''^ !>»»►' 

At the expiration of a week, her father 
was so much worse, that she believed it 
necessary to 'Call in a physician, from 
whom she received but little hope, and 
the decaying invalid but little assist- 
ance, while fees almost daily paid, and 
an apothecary's bill daily accumulating, 
considerably added td the expenditure 
she was unavoidably obliged to make** 

His fluctuating disorder kept hfer 
feelings on the perpetual stretch of so- 
licitude and anxiety; and the quick 
alternations of hope and fear, deprived 
her of all power of obliviating ^op'-a 
moment a present suffering, by the re- 
collection of past felicity, or dreams df 
future happiness. Almost transfixed 



11>A OF ATHENS. S5 

tQthe side of her father, she knew no 
relief from her anxious vigils, but 
what a walk with her brothers in the 
evening afforded her ; but the singular 
and lovely appearance of the pictu- 
resque group, excited no other inte- 
rest in the neighbourhood, but what a 
inere and lively curiosity alone gave 
rise to. When they appeared, they 
were followed by every eye, but no 
voice addressed them — they were fo- 
reigners I — and national prejudice was 
against them ; they were strangers ! 
and English caution refused them coun- 
tenance. Heart of the stranger, thine 
is no common sorrow I — which, fancy 
can justly pourtray, or which nature 
inevitably imposes ; thine is the sorrow 
that knows no solace ; that hangs cold 
and sad and unparticipated on the ar- 
dent feelings, and that contrad>icts the 



8^6 WOMAN; OR 

beneficence of nature, and the wise in- 
tentions of Providence. 

Man, who so soon found, " it was 
not good to be alone," is capable of ex- 
periencing this ; but woman alone can 
profoundly feel it. For woman is a 
local and an home-affectioned creature, 
and when her vanity or ambition, her 
imperious destiny, or harrassed feel- 
ings, urge her from the dear asylums 
of her national or domestic happi- 
ness — tender and timid — affectionate 
and doubtful — fearino- herself more than 
others, waiting on the advances of so- 
ciety, nor daring to make her own,— 
it is woman only who can truly know 
how sad, how desolate it is to be a 
stranger I — Ida had now no longer the 
power to conceal from her unfortunate 
father the flight of their banker: his 
debilitate dmind sunk beneath a blow 



IDA OF ATHENS. 87 

so unexpected. He grew daily worse, 
the expenses attending his illness daily 
increased ; and the fourth week of their 
residence in England had already com- 
menced. The woman of the house, 
low, selfish, ^vulgar, and illiberal, no 
longer confined herself to hints, rela- 
tive to the poverty of her guests, 
or their inability to continue in a 
lodging so expensive ; she hourly 
urged their departure, on the assu- 
rance that her house was engaged, and 
with some degree of reluctance, con- 
sented to take them into her own habi- 
tation, which was next to that in which 
the archon's family resided. 

Ida, distracted between her fears for 
her father's life, and the increasing 
difficulties of her situation, saw her 
purse reduced to a few guineas, and 
removed her unhappy family to their 
new abode, on the last day of the 



8S WOMAN; OR 

month. Her hostess was a publican) 
and the height of the attic floor devot- 
ed to the use of her lodgers was not 
proof against the noise and tumult 
which the rudeness and inebriety of 
her customers frequently produced. 

The rooms occupied by the Athe- 
nians, were chill, mean, and comfort- 
less ; and Ida gazed upon their rude 
walls, and miserable furniture with a 
thrill of discontent, she could not 
lull into a perfect resignation to her 
unhappy destiny. The strength of her 
mind was not proof against the priva- 
tidn of her delicate senses ; and the 
former luxurious enjoyments of the 
elegant Greek stood but too strongly 
opposed in her imagination to the scan- 
ty comforts of the miserable exile. But 
she soon chased from her cheek the 
weakest tear that had ever dewed its 
surface, and soon lost all sense of her 



IDA OF ATHENS. Sg 

»wn suJBTering, in her anxiety to ame- 
liorate tho^e of her father and her fa- 

The nature of the archon's disorder 
was such, that the physicians had dis- 
charged themselves ; and Ida lessened 
of an expense, was almost at the same 
moment deprived of a hope. Ano- 
ther miserable fortnight passed heavily 
away. She was in debt to the landlady 
for provisions and for rent ; and her 
pecuniary stock was reduced to three 
solitary guineas. Increasi/ig terrors 
for the future, now began to divide her 
attention with her existing misery ; she 
was so totally a stranger to the man- 
ners of the country in which she lived, 
that she knew not in what way the 
talents of women could contribute to 
her subsistence and support. Guided 
therefore by the customs of her own 
country only, she naturally supposed, 



# 



90 WOMAN; OR 

that the profession 'of an embroideress 
might be as lucrative in England, as in 
Greece ; and believing she had found 
out an exhaustless resource, she com- 
missioned the woman of the house to 
purchase for her materials to embroider 
a scarf, such as was prized and worn 
by the women of Athens. For this 
purpose, she had given her agent all 
the money she possessed, who ^8U^- 
prized at what she considered a wanton 
expenditure, believed she had been 
mistaken in the circumstances of her 
lodgers, and permitted them to keep 
a bill with her for almost every thing 
they wanted, induced by the exorbi- 
tant charges a credit thus given, ena- 
bled her to make. 

Ida, full of hope, and revived in 
spirit, applied herself to her work 
,with an intense application, that knew 
no interval. She worked incessantly 



IDA OF ATHENS. 9i 

by her father's bed-side-^calculated on 
the money she should receive for the 
scarf — on defraying, by degrees, the 
bill of her landlady, and on pur- 
chasing new materials for a new work, 
whose profits would enable them, at least, 
to keep above want, until time was al-^ 
lotted to her to consider of some mode 
more competent to their support and 
comfort. 

At the expiration of a fortnight, the 
rich and beautiful scarf was finished ; 
and the unfeeling landlady expressed 
surprize, contempt, and disappoint- 
ment, when Ida requested she would 
endeavour to dispose of it. Ida un- 
derstood not all the coarse speeches, 
with which it was received ; but her 
pride and feelings were deeply wound- 
ed by the impudent and arrogant air of 
the woman, and when she reluctantly 
\took away the scarf, with an assurance, 



95 WOMAN; OR 

that " she knew she could not dis- 
pose of such a frippery thing," Ida 
retired to her little room, and shed 
some of the bitterest tears that had ever 
flowed from her heart to her eyes ; 
for to a delicate and superior mind, 
the necessity of submitting to the in- 
solence of ^ vulgar and illiberal per- 
son, is, of all others, perhaps, the least 
supportable. 

Ida now daily observed, that the com- 
mon necessaries of life were obtainedwith 
great difficulty for her family, and never 
given by the lar?dlady but with obvious 
reluctance, or coarse reproof; at last, 
at the expiration of another week, she 
suffered the inexpressible disappoint- 
ment of seeing her scarf returned on 
h'er hands, and in so soiled and in- 
jured a state, that, i^.,w^$ impossible to 
offer it again for sale; at the same time, 
the woman presented her a bill for 



#' 



IDA OF ATHENS. 93 

twelve pounds/ with an assurance, that 
if it was not immediately paid, they 
must abide by the consequences. 

The scarf and the bill trembled in 
the hands of Ida; the paleness of death 
spread itself over her face ; she turned 
her helpless eyes on her father — he 
slept, but his countenance was haggard 
and ghastly, and strongly traced with 
care and with affliction ; she cast them 
towards her brothers, they were par- 
taking of a scanty dinner, the last she 
had it in her power to provide for 
them, and of which she would not 
touch herself, that her nurse, who was 
every day becoming more helpless, 
might partake of it. 

She then turned them in supplication 
towards the landlady, who had seated 
herself insolently near the door, and 
whoi understanding, rather than feel- 
ing, ibe silent but eloquent appeal, 



94 WOMAN; OR 

began a rude and noisy speech ; when 
Ida, trembling lest her unfortunate fa- 
ther should awaken to a full sense of his 
misery, gently led the woman out of 
the room ; but when she attempted to 
address her, she burst into tears, and co- 
vered her face with her hands, to pre- 
sent her audible sobs from reaching the 
ears of her family, who, depending 
solely on her, knew not the extent of 
their misery. 

" It does not signify, mainselle, (ex- 
claimed the woman) I get my bread 
hard enough, and am not to be fleeced 
by every outlandish person that leaves 
his own country to live upon old Eng- 
land ; so, either I must have my mo- 
ney, or monseer must go to jail;" with 
these words she walked away. 

Ida clung to the bannisters of the 
stairs for support — the boisterous man- 
ner, no less than the dreadful threat of 
the woman, excited so strong an emo- 



' IDA OF ATHENS. 95 

tion in her timid heart, that even the 
relief of tears was denied her. 

The faint accents of her father's 
voice reached her ear — she heard him 
pronounce her name once ; strong and 
powerful as was her agitation, she en- 
deavoured to affect tranquillity, and re- 
turned to administer that solace sh^' 
was incapable herself of receiving. 

The night passed in wakeful agony, 
that knew no interval of repose ; and 
in the morning, for the first time, she 
heard her brothers ask for that sus- 
tenance she had it not to give them. 
.Urged by despair that knew no re- 
source, her proud and suffering mind 
submitted to her wretched and lowly 
destiny, and she condescended to crave 
fromherunfeeling landlady, a trifling re- 
lief that was inhumanly denied her. She 
returned, with the air of a maniac, to 
the apartment of her father. She heard 



96 WOMAN; OR 

him call for an accustomed nourish- 
ment, which she could no longer ob- 
tain for him ; thoughts of death crossed 
her bewildered mind, and struck on her 
broken heart. There are moments of 
such exquisite, such hopeless misery, 
that the thoughts can associate them- 
selves with deeds and events of terror 
only; when the wearied and exhausted 
spirit, disdains to seek for comfort, and 
resigns itself to a sullen security of 
fortitude, that resists the light of hope, 
and the possibility of change. 

Such^ was the state of mind of the 
too sensible Athenian. — -The innocent 
solicitations of her brothers, who eager- 
ly demanded why they Avere not com- 
plied With, — the heart-breaking, but 
stifled lamentations of her nurse, and 
peevish irritation of her father,^ who 
blamed her negligence, while she still 
endeavoured to conceal the misery 



V. 



roA OF ATHENS. 1$ 

terized figures and inelegant costume, 
combined with confused and discordant 
sounds, and sometimes with objects of 
disgust or commiseration, convey but 
little pleasure to that fancy and those 
feelings, replete with poetic imagery, 
and alive to the most delicate impres- 
sions. 

While her reflecting mind found 
ample room for meditation, as it dwelt 
, on that new aspect of moral life, which 
the brilliant active bustle, and wond- 
rous population of a great, a free, a 
commercial, and polished people, pre- 
sented to its observation. 

The counting-house of the mer-^ 
iciiant lay in one of those narrow lanes 
in the city, whose' opulence and luxu- 
ry seem so clofie'y connected with ap- 
pearances of penury and want; and 
when Ida reached it, she observed, 
that its doors and windows were c'i ^xl, 

VOL. IV. $ 



74 WOMAN; OR 

and a great part of the house covered 
with labels and papers. The coachmaii 
had knocked several times before a 
person came out of a neighbouring shop 
to say, that that house was un-inhabi- 
ted, Ida beckoned the man to the car* 
riage window, and made known to him 
her wish of seeing Mr. D. the mer- 
chant. 

The man replied, " that Mr. D. had 
lived there, but that he had been dead 
some months, and his son who had 
succeeded him in the house, had be- 
come so deeply involved, that he had 
absconded, no one knew whither !" 

It was some time, and not till after 
the man had repeated the information 
several times, that Ida understood its 
purport ; — namely, that in a foreign 
country, and without a friend on earth, 
she, and her helpless family, were beg- 



gars 



IDA OF ATHENS. 75 

Ida now, perhaps, touched on the 
most wretched moment of her life ! — 
her heart seemed to wither in her bo- 
som, — the blood chilled in her veins, — 
and sickly languor crept through her 
sinking frame : — the names of her fa- 
ther and her brothers breathing on her 
trembling lips, and the agony painted 
in her countenance, gave Kyra some 
intimation of the nature of the misfor- 
tune that had befallen her ; the old 
woman intreated to be informed of its 
full exteat. Ida, in a few inarticulate 
words, gave her to understand, that 
they were reduced to the last extreme 
of misery, by the flight of the persoh 
in whose hands all they possessed was 
vested. The Parumana wept abundant- 
ly ; and both were lost to all sense of 
their singular situation ; several per- 
sons, in idle curiosity, had collected 
round the carriage door, attracted by 
i; 2 



7^ WOMAN; OR 

the almost lifeless beauty of the dis- 
|iairing Ida, and the loud convulsive 
sobs of her nurse ! At last, after fre- 
quent repetitions of the question of 
*' Where he should drive ?" thecoach- 
jnan asked, " if he should drive them 
home?" — the word home struck on 
the heart of Ida ; and in an accent, ' at 
once tender and despondent, she re- 
.plied, " Home 1" — the coachman drove 
away. 

. The mind of Ida was so dependent 
mi itself — so accustomed to rely upon its 
own resources for support and aid iin- 
der every pressure of affliction, that it 
was impossible its powers could long 
submit to the total subjugation even of 
feelings so acute. 

And as she drove along througii 
those scenes whose gaiety and bustle 
were so strongly contrasted to her own , 
desolate and wretched situation, she 



IDA. OF ATHENS. 77^ 

revolved within her mind what cir- 
cumstance could possibly oppose itself, 
to the immediate poverty and want that, 
now threatened her iTamily. 

The diamond cross in the possession, 
of the master of the hotel, the gold: 
chain still suspended from her neck ^ 
were the only valuables she possessed; 
and she was, so ignorant of their in- 
trinsic worth, or the price which sucb 
things brought in England, that she 
believed she had no alternative but to 
trust to the honesty of him, who had 
evidently entertained so strong a suspi- 
cion of hers ; to be obliged to apply to 
him at all upon such an occasion, was 
equally distressing to her feelings and 
hei- pride. Urged, however, by the 
tyranny of her necessitous situation, she 
stopped the coachman, and ordered 
him to drive to the hotel ; and she wept 
without ceasing till she arrived there. 



7$ WOMAN; 0R*( V 

At the door stood its master I^ — At 
the sight of Ida he retreated into the 
house, and returned the next moment 
with her cross ; with a manner servilely 
courteous he approached her, and at- 
tempted to apologize for his conduct in 
the morning. 

" I come not to reclaim the cross," 
said Ida, unable to suppress her emo- 
tion,- " but to request you will purchase 
it from me." 

The man drew back and looked sur- 
prized — and Ida continued, with great 
simplicity; — " We are unfortunate 
Greeks, who have been driven by the 
miseries of our country, to seek refuge 
in a foreign nation ; the person in whose 
hands our property was vested, has 
fled — and we have no chance of the 
means of immediate support, but from 
thesale of that jewel and this chain. My 
ignorance of the manners and customs 



IDA OF ATHENS. 79 

^r your country throw me entirely on 
your honesty and advice for depend- 
ance and relief." 
^ She ceased — the man seemed to hesi- 
tate for some time — at last he said 
" that he would consult a friend, and 
return to her in a few minutes." — So 
much was the better reason of Ida 
clouded by her timidity and apprehen- 
sions for the uncertainty of the fate 
of her unfortunate family, that these 
few minutes were an insupportable sus- 
pence to her trembling heart. — At last 
the master of the hotel returned, and 
with him the waiter from whom the 
house had been hired. ' 

The man in a few words observed, 
" that before he returned the cross he 
expected to see the person who was his 
waiter secured in his rent ; but that if 
the lady chose to dispose of it to him, 
he would give her an hundred guineas 



lO WOMAN; OR 

for that and the chain, deducting from 
it the amount of his bill, and the 
month's rent of the house. 

Ida had nothing to oppose to this of- 
fer — she had taken the house for a 
month, and said, as the rent was be- 
yond her means, she was obliged to 
submit to the agreement. 

She knew not the cross was worth 
double the sum she received for it;"' 
and the idea of "being relieved from im- 
mediate want in a strange country, wai ' 
that most bouyant in her suffering 
mind. After having paid thirty gui- 
neas for the house, and discharged her 
bill, which came to ten more, she re^* ' 
turned with the residue to her unfortu- 
nate family. 

It was evenino; when she reached her 
solitary home. Her brothers had been 
watching for her from one'of the win- 
dows, and flew with delight to meet 



IDA OF ATHENS. *I 

her : — they had not been able to make 
their wants or wishes known to the wo- 
man of the house, their father was so 
ill, that he had retired to bed, and they 
expressed in artless and animated lan- 
guage, the anxiety her absence occa- 
sioned, the pleasure her return con- 
ferred. Ida listened to them in silent 
emotion, and bathed the tender kiss 
she impressed on their brows with 
tears. In proportion as she felt herself 
necessary to their happiness, in pro- 
portion did they become dearer to her 
heart. There is a charm in the inno- 
cent affection of childhood, so pure 
and so natural, that Ida knew not the 
extent of the maternal interest she felt 
for these lovely children, until their 
helpless situation, by rendering her 
more necessary to their happiness, ren- 
dered them more dear to her affec-^ 
tions ; perhaps this reciprocity of inte" 

E3. 



$2 WOMAN; OR 

rests and feeling, is the greatest, strang- 
est tye that exists between the natural 
mother and her offspring. 

Ida with difficulty disengaged herself 
from the entwining arms of the endear- 
ing boys, and flew to the bedside of her 
father. Already was the change of 
climate betraying its influence on his 
broken constitution. 

Ida found him oppressed in mind, 
debilitated in frame, and broken in spi- 
rit; and her feelings were unequal to 
the task of betraying to him the full ex- 
tent of their misfortune. She evaded 
the few questions he put to her; she 
affected a cheeriness of manner foreign 
to her heart ; and the confidence which 
her father placed in her management and 
conduct, was re-assured by the sooth- 
ing tenderness, the fortitude and resig- 
nation of her words and air. 

On whatever side the unhappy Ida 



IDA OF ATHENS. 83 

now cast her eyes, misery and want 
met their glance. A father in declin- 
•ing health ; brothers young and help- 
kss ; and a faithful domestic old and 
infirm, were the objects for whom her 
heart agonized in ceaseless suffering. 
Sometimes a thought of herself Bashed 
across her mind; — devoted with all 
her attraction of genius and of person, 
to cheerless obscurity, denied the so- 
lace of that reciprocal affection which 
so sweetly lightens the burthen of every 
sorrow ; still retaining a lively and 
thrilling remembrance of joys once ex- 
perienced, of sentiments once cherish- 
ed, and involuntarily opposing them to 
her present unconnected and unaffec- 
tioned state : she remembered her ca 
pability of happiness, and wept for 
herself alone ; till again, the more 
home-affliction pressing on her hearty 
solicitude for her family involved every 



84 WOMAN; OR 

feeling of selfish regret ; and, forgetful 
of her own individual sufferings, she 
thought only of those who seemed vo- 
luntarily and confidently to resign their 
fate into her hands. 

At the expiration of a week, her father 
was so much worse, that she believed it 
necessary to call in a physician, from 
whom she received but little hope, and 
the decaying invalid but little assist- 
ance, while fees almost daily paid, and 
an apothecary's bill daily accumulating, 
considerably added to the expenditure 
she was unavoidably obliged to make. 

His fluctuating disorder kept her 
feelings on the perpetual stretch of so- 
licitude and anxiety ; and the quick 
alternations of hope and fear, deprived 
, her of all power of obliviating for a 
moment a present suffering, by the re- 
collection of past felicity, or dreams of 
future happiness. Almost transfixed 



IDA OF ATHENS. 85 

to thA side of ber iitther, she knew no 
relief from her anxious vigils, but 
what a walk with her brothers in the 
evening afforded her ; but the singular 
and lovely appearance of the pictu- 
resque group, excited no other inte- 
rest in the neighbourhood, but T^hat a 
mere and lively curiosity alone gave 
rise to. When they appeared, they 
were followed by every eye, but no 
voice addressed them — they were fo- 
reigners I — and national prejudice was 
against them ; they were strangers 1 
and English caution refused them coun- 
tenance. Heart of the stranger, thine 
is no common sorrow 1 — which fancy 
can justly pourtray, or which n:iture 
inevitably imposes ; thine is the sorrow 
that knows no solace ; that hangs cold 
and sad and unparticipated on the ar- 
dent feelings, and that contradicts the 



86 WOMAN; OR 

beneficence of nature, and the wise in- 
tentions of Providence. 
"■ Man, who so soon found, " it was 
not good to be alone," is capable of ex- 
periencing this ; but woman alone can 
profoundly feel it. For woman is a 
local and an home-affectioned creature, 
and when her vanity or ambition, her 
imperious destiny, or harrassed feel- 
ings, urge her from the dear asylums 
of her national or domestic happi- 
ness-^tender and timid — affectionate 
and doubtful — fearing herself more than 
others, waiting on the advances of so- 
ciety, nor daring to make her own,— 
it is woman only who can truly know 
how sad, how desolate it is to be a 
stranger ! — Ida had now no longer the 
power to conceal from her unfortunate 
father the fliglU of their banker: his 
debilitate dmind sunk beneath a blow 



IDA OF ATHENS. S7 

so unexpected. He grew daily worse, 
the expenses attending his illness daily 
increased ; and the fourth week of their 
residence in England had already com- 
menced. The woman of the house, 
low, selfish, vulgar, and illiberal, no 
longer confined herself to hints, rela- 
tive to the poverty of her guests, 
or^ their inability to continue in a 
lodging so expensive ; she hourly 
urged their departure, on the assu- 
rance that her house was engaged, and 
with some degree of reluctance, con- 
sented to take them into her own habi- 
tation, which was next to that in which 
the archon's family resided. 

Ida, distracted between her fears for 
her father's life, and the increasing 
difficulties of her situation, saw her 
purse reduced to a few guineas, and 
removed her unhappy family to their 
new abode, on the last day of the 



t» WOMAN ; OR 

month. Her hostess was a publican, 
and the height of the attic floor devot- 
ed to the use of her lodgers was not 
pcgof against the noise and tumult 
which the rudeness and inebriety of 
her customers frequently produced. 

The rooms occupied by the Athe- 
nians, were chill, mean, and comfort- 
less; and Ida gazed upon their rude 
wallsy and miserable furniture with a 
thrill of discontent, she could not 
lull into a perfect resignation to her 
unhappy destiny. The strength of her 
mind was not proof against the priva- 
tion of her delicate senses ; and the 
former luxurious enjoyments of the 
elegant Greek stood but too strongly 
opposed in her imagination to the scan- 
ty comforts of the miserable exile. But 
she soon chased from her cheek the 
weakest tear that had ever dewed its 
surface, and soon lost all sense of her 



IDA OF ATHENS. &9 

own sufiering, in her anxiety to ame- 
liorate those of her father and her fa- 
mily. 

The nature of the archon's disorder 
was such, that the physicians had dis- 
charged themselves; and Ida lessened 
of an expense, was almost al the same 
moment deprived of a hope. Ano- 
ther miserable fortnight passed heavilyi 
away. She was in debt to the landlady 
for provisions and for rent ; and hec 
pecuniary stock was reduced to three 
solitary guineas* Increasing terrors 
for the future, now began to divide her 
attention with her existing misery ; she 
\vas so totally a stranger to the man- 
ners of the country in which she lived, 
that she knew not in what way the 
talents of women could contribute to 
her subsistence and support. Guided: 
therefore by the customs of her own 
country only, she naturally supposed^ 



9©' WOMAN; OR 

that the profession of an embroideress ' 
might be as lucrative in England, as in 
Greece ; and believing she had found 
out an exhaustless resource, she com- 
missioned the woman of the house to 
purchase for her materials to embroider 
a scarf, such as was prized and worn 
by the women of Athens. For this 
purpose, she had given her agent all 
the money she possessed, who sur- 
prized at what she considered a wanton 
expenditure, believed she had been 
mistaken in the circumstances of her 
lodgers, and permitted them to keep 
a bill with her for almost every thing 
they wanted, induced by the exorbi- 
tant charges a credit thus given, ena- 
bled her to make. 

Ida, full of hope, and revived in 
spirit, applied herself to her work 
with an intense application, that knew 
no interval. She worked incessantly 



IDA OF ATHENS. 91' 

by her father's bed-side — calculated on 
the money she should receive for the 
scarf — on defraying, by degrees, the 
bill of her landlady, and on pur- 
chasing new materials for a new work, 
whose profits would enable them, at least, 
to keep above want, until time was al- 
lotted to her to consider of some mode 
more competent to their support and 
comfort. 

At the expiration of a fortnight, the 
rich and beautiful scarf was finished ; 
and the unfeeling landlady expressed 
surprize, contempt, and disappoint- 
ment, when Ida requested she would 
endeavour to dispose of it. Ida un- 
derstood not all the coarse speeches 
with which it was received ; but her 
pride and feelings were deeply wound- 
ed by the impudent and arrogant air of 
the woman, and when she reluctantly 
took away the scarf, with an assurance, 



S^ WOMAN;. OR 

that " shje knew she could not , dis- 
pose of such a frippery thing," Ida 
retired to her little room, and shed 
some, of the bitterest tears that had ever 
flowed from her heart to her eyes ; 
for to a delicate and superior mind, 
the necessity of submitting to the in- 
solence of a vulgar and illiberal per- 
!^Uy is, of all others, perhaps, the least: 
supportable. 

Ida now daily observed, that the com- 
mon necessaries of life were obtainedwith 
great difficulty for her family, and never 
given by the landlady but Avith obvious 
reluctance, or coarse reproof; at last, 
at the expiration of another week, she 
suffered the inexpressible disappoint- 
ment of seeing her scarf returned on 
her hands,, and in so soiled, and inr 
jured a state, that it: was impossible to 
pffer it again for sale ; at the same time, 
the worn aa presented her a bill fk>t 



IDA OF ATHENS. "^3 

twelve pounds, with an assurance, that 
if it was not immediately paid, they 
must abide by the consequences. 

The scarf and the bill trembled in 
the hands of Ida; the paleness of death 
spread itself over her face ; she turned 
her helpless eyes on her father — he 
slept, but his countenance was haggard 
and ghastly, and strongly traced with 
care and with affliction ; she cast them 
towards her brothers, they were par- 
taking of a scanty dinner, the last she 
had it in her power to provide for 
them, and of which she would not 
touch herself, that her nurse, who was 
every day becoming more helpless, 
might partake of it. 

She then turned them in supplication 
towards the landlady, who h^d seated 
herself insolently near the door, and 
who understanding, rather than feel- 
ing, the silent l)ut eloquent appeal, 



94 WOMAN; OR 

began a rude and noisy speech ; when 
Ida, trembling lest her unfortunate fa- 
ther should awaken to a full sense of his 
misery, gently led the woman out of 
the room ; but when she attempted ta 
address her, she burst into tears, and co- 
vered her face with her hands, to pre- 
vent her audible sobs from reaching the 
ears of her family, who, depending 
solely on her, knew not the extent of 
their misery. 

" It does not signify, mamselle, (ex- 
claimed the woman) I get my bread 
hard enough, and am not to be fleeced 
by every outlandish person that leaves 
his own country to live upon old Eng- 
land ; so, either I must, have my mo- 
ney, or monseer must go to jail ;" with 
these words she walked away. 

Ida dung to the bannisters of the 
stairs for support — the boisterous manr 
ner, no less than the dreadful threat of 
the woman, excited so strong an emo- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 95 

tion in her timid heart, that even the 
relief of tears was denied her. 

The faint accents of her father's 
voice reached her ear — she lieard him 
pronounce lier name once ; strong and 
powerful as was her agitation, she en- 
deavoured to affect tranquillity, and re- 
turned to administer that solace she 
was incapable herself of receiving. 

The night passed in wakeful agony, 
that knew no interval of repose ; and 
in the morning, for the first time, she 
heard her brothers ask for that sus- 
tenance she had it not to give them. 
Urged by despair that knew no re- 
source, her proud and suffering mind 
submitted to her wretched and lowly 
destiny, and she condescended to crave 
from her unfeeling landlady, a trifling re- 
lief that was inhumanly denied her. She 
returned, with the air of a maniac, to 
the apartment of her father. She heard 



96 WOMAN; OR 

him call for an accustomed nourish- 
ment, which she could no longer ob- 
tain for him ; thoughts of death crossed 
her bewildered mind, and struck on her 
broken heart. There are moments of 
such exquisite, such hopeless misery, 
that the thoughts can associate them-n 
selves with deeds and events of terror 
only; when the wearied and exhausted 
spirit, disdains to seek for comfort, and 
resigns itself to a sullen security of 
fortitude, that resists the light of hope^ 
and the possibility of change. 

Such was the state of mind of the 
too sensible Athenian. — The innocent 
solicitations of her brothers, who eager- 
ly demanded why they were not com- 
plied with, — the heart-breaking, but 
stifled lamentations of her nurse, and 
peevish irritation of her father, who 
blamed her negligence, while she still 
endeavoured to conceal the misery 



IDA OF ATHENS. 97 

which gave rise to the imputation, now 
beyond her power of sustension ; and 
unable to bear the presence of objects 
so beloved, and so unhappy, she fled 
from her comfortless apartments to a 
little garden, which lay at the rear of 
the house. 

Here she endeavoured to collect 
her scattered thoughts, and to strain 
her exhausted mind for some resource 
that might still effect the salvation of 
her family. 

But to whom could she fly for advice 
and counsel? — She had an uncle, rich 
and independent, but since the mar- 
riage of her mother, he had held no 
correspondence with her family, from 
a strong prejudice early imbibed against 
the archon ; and were that prejudice 
even now vanquishable, the great dis- 
tance which severed them, (as if he 
lived, he was still a resident in Con- 

VOL. IV. F 



98 WOMAN; OR 

stantinople) prohibited all hope of as- 
sistance. 

The English traveller had often 
arisen to her imagination since her ar- 
rival in England. But had she known 
his address, or recollected his new 
title which Stamati had mentioned to 
her ; she felt an irresistible repugnance 
to apply to him, for the pride of wo- 
man knows no sufferino; like that which 
arises from a pecuniary obligation to a 
man by whom she has been at once be- 
loved and insulted. 

In whatever way she turned her 
hopeless eyes, destruction met their 
glance; all hope, all relief, all re- 
source, was denied her : — She continu- 
ed to pace the garden with a feeble and 
tottering step ; her brain was on fire, — 
she dared not return to the house — 
her vivid imagination (disordered by 
her sufferings) painted to her distracted 



IDA OF ATHENS. 99 

mind, a father, brothers, and an old do- 
mestic, perishing for want in a strange 
country. Near two wretched hours 
had already elapsed since she had with- 
drawn from the contemplation of their 
wants, when she heard from an open 
window the heart-piercing cries of her 
brothers ; her strength failed her ; for 
a moment she had no power to move : 
— aorain their cries reached her inmost 
soul, — she darted forward with a strength 
and velocity borrowed from nerves and 
feelings, wound up to madness. At 
the foot of the narrow winding stairs 
she beheld her father, supported in the 
arms of two dark and ill-looking-men ; 
the terrified boys clung to his dress, 
the old nurse Ibllowed, wringing her 
hands and weeping bitterly. At sight 
of Ida, her himentations grew more 
loud. — Ida, pale and distracted, en- 
deavoured to obtain some explanation 
F 2 



\. 



100 WOMAN; OR 

of a scene so unexpected and so dread- 
ful; — she learnt in a few words, that 
her father was going to prison for the 
debts due to the landlady, and that she 
and her brothers were thrown adrift 
upon the world, without shelter or sup- 
port. — " Are these your boasted laws ?" 
she frantically exclaimed, throwing 
herself on her father's bosom. — " Is it 
thus by excluding every hope of exer- 
tion and relief, that a debt unavoidably 
incurred by a misery that had no re- 
dress, is to be defrayed? Oh! lead us 
where we can in time discharge it by 
our labour 1 lead us where these child- 
ren may not perish ! look at me, I am 
young and healthful, I can work for 
them all." As she spoke, a convulsive 
laugh mingled with her sobs, and she 
drew the children towards their father, 
and encircled them in her arms, while 
thiey wept on her bosom and pressed 



IDA OF ATHENS. 101 

her close to theirs. Mean-time, the 
old nurse knelt behind them, and offer- 
ed up supplications which were not 
even understood. ^ 

The bailiffs looked at each other, 
and then at the group of sufferers, — 
their eyes moistened, their wretched 
profession had not quite banished na- 
ture from their hearts. One of them 
*>vplQinpH tn THa how far the law sanc- 
tioned their wish to serve her, — that 
the utmost they could do was to take 
the prisoner to a lock-up house, and to 
suffer his children and his servant to 
accompany him. 

In all the madness of an affliction 
that knew no bounds, Ida was still 
alive to reason: she resigned herself 
to her unhappy destiny, with a sigh 
that seemed to rend the heart that 
breathed it, and with her brothers and 
her Paramana, followed her almost dy- 



102 WOMAN; OR 

ing father into a coach, which, in con- 
sequence of his debility, had been 
brought for him — during the whole of 
the transaction the landlady had not' 
appeared, and the sufferers ssere spar- 
ed the sight of anobjcQt so abhorrent 
to their feelings. 

When they reached the door of their 
prison, the shadows of evening and 
the gloom of the narrow street in 
which it was situated, rendered it per- 
fectly dark. 

One of the bailiffs to whom the lock- 
up house belonged, conducted the 
Greeks to the only room which he had 
then unoqcupied. The appearance of 
the turnkey, whose countenance exhi- 
bited traits of every vice — -the damp, 
dark, stone passage, through which 
they passed ; — the iron doors and mas- 
sive locks; — that gloomy silence, in- 
terrupted only by the creaking of hea- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 103 

vy hinges, and the fastening of chains 
— all struck with terrific force on the 
vivid imagination of the athenian. — 
But when she entered the cold, the de- 
solate, and narrow room ; when she 
saw her father faint upon the miserable 
bed, which formed almost its only fur- 
niture, and knew he fainted for v?ant 
of nourishment; when she heard her 
brothers' helpless cries, and beheld 
even the bailiff shed tears as he assist- 
ed the Paramana to recover the archon, 
all reason forsook her, — she rushed af- 
ter the turnkey as he left the room, to 
procure a draught of water for the al- 
most dying prisoner. She followed 
him to an outward passage, the street- 
door was not closed ; she passed it and 
ran with m incredible velocity, as if she 
had somi object to obtain by her flight. 
A vagu3 desire of applying for relief 
to sone fellow-creature occupied her 



104 WOMAN; OR 

bewildered mind ; yet, with an instinct 
that arose from ideas and from feelings 
her breaking heart had assoeiated, — she 
fled rapidly through tliose streets oc- 
cupied by persons in that class of Ijife, 
from one of whom her present miseries 
spl^in^. At last she reached * * * ♦ 
Square— the moon shone brightly on, 
the splendid Kouses that surrounded it ; 
■ — several carriages freighted with rank, 
with riches, and with beauty, were 
rolling away from their respective 
doors, ignorant or forgetful of the suf- 
ferings to which one half of their spe- 
cies was devoted ; — ignorant of the su- 
perior, but wretched creature, who 
with instinctive supplication raised her 
hands and eyes towards them as they 
rolled gaily past her. 

At last a house of sumpiuous ap- 
pearance struck the maniac gaie of Ida, 
and she flew i?p its steps, whei a car- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 105 

riage driving towards its doors, inti- 
midated her; she hastily descended, 
and clung to the railings for support — 
the next moment the door opened, two 
servants advanced to the carriage and a 
gentleman appeared in the hall, — he 
gave some orders to the porter, and 
was on the point of springing into the 
carriage, when Ida, rushing forward, 
detained him by the arm. 

The footman rudely seized her, and 
endeavoured to drive her back, but her 
grasp was the firm grasp of frenzy. — 
" Let her alone," exclaimed the gen- 
tleman, mildly — and then addressing 
her in an accent full of humanity, he ' 
asked, " Who are you ? and what is it 
you want?" She replied with a wild 
but affecting simplicity, " I ;^m an 
Athenian! — I am the daughter of an/ 
archon, and an exile, who, with his 
children, perishes for want in an Eng- 
F 3 

\ 



106 " WOMAN; 6tt 

lish prison, come with me and relieve 
them or I must expire here at your 
feet." " Merciful Gc,: !" he exclaim- 
ed, "Ida! Ida of Athens?" At the 
sound of her name, at the mention of 
her conntry, Ida uttered an hysterical 
and piercing shriek. o^ v ns : 

The gentleman caught her in his 
arms and bore her into the house ; but 
she struggled to be free, and continued 
to exclaim, "Give me back to my fa- 
ther, he dies, he perishes ! save him, 
Oh save him !" till exhausted and spent 
with fatigue, exertion, and want of sus- 
tenance, she fainted away. Life and 
reason returned together, she wept, and 
quietly accepted whatever was offered 
her. A female attendant was engaged 
in administering restoratives, and her 
head was supported on the shoulder of 
Lord B — — , the english traveller. 

Ida gazed earnestly, but with a look 



IDA OF ATHENS. 107 

of incredulity, around her ; she still 
doubted the fidelity of her reason and 
her senses. "Ida," said the english- 
man, ^in that voice always so touching 
and so impressive, " Ida, am I then 
quite forgotten?" Ida shook her head 
and wept, then with a flash of sudden 
recollection she started and exclaimed, 
" Come with me ! — save my father ! — 
lose not a moment I — save him, Oh 
save him !" and she fell at his feet and 
raised her hands in earnest supplica- 
tion ; — then suddenly springing up she 
endeavoured to lead him towards the 

door. Lord B attempted to tran-^ 

quillize her mind by soothing remon^ 
strance, and to induce her to remain at 
his house, while he went in quest of 
her family : — but she would not listen 
to the proposal, and holding his arm 
as if she feared he would escape her, 
she accompanied him into the carriage, 



lOS WOMAN; OR 

•when he asked her where they should 
go, she clasped her hands on her fore- 
head, as if to collect her scattered 
senses, but the effort was vain. It was 
so dark when she had reached the place 
of her father's confinement, her brain 
was so frenzied when she left it, that 
she retained not the faintest recollec- 
tion of its situation. 

" Oh God I" (she exclaimed) " is not 
the measure of my suffering yet com- 
plete ? — Is my father to perish, is he to 
die in other arms than those of his 
child? — Should he believe too that he 
is deserted by her?" The idea was 
frenzy. She attempted to spring out 
of the carriage, as if instinct would 
guid^ her to her parent, but Lord 

JB drew her back. He called to 

the footman and enquired if they knew 
of any lock-up house in the neighbour- 
hood; the man mentioned one, and 



IDA OF ATHENS. 109 

they drove to it, but it contained not 
the archon's family; — they were di- 
rected to another, and were again dis- 
appointed. In this manner they con- 
tinued to drive till near midnight, and 
until they were at last directed to that 
which contained tiie archon. Ida in- 
jstantly recognized the bailiiF who cams 
to the door of the carriage ; — iihe had 
not the power to enquire for her fa- 
ther; — she trembled to an €X«ess that 

prevented her moving. Lord B . 

supported her, and they proceeded to 
the prison-room of her family. It was 
lit up by one solitary candle. 

The Paramana seated at the head of 
the bed, supported the archon in her 
arms, one of his sons held a cup of 
wine and water to his lips, supplied by 
the bailiff's wife, who stood near him. 
The other boy was engaged in rubbing 
his father's damp and chilly hands, 



110 WOMAN; OR 

which he bathed with his innocent 
tears ; — at sight of Ida they uttered a 
piercing shriek of joy ; she rushed to 
the bed, and took her father in her 
arms ; the children knelt beside them ; 
the archon turned his eyes on his 
da\ighter ; a faint but ghastly smile lit 
up his features ; he turned then on his 
sons, for a moment, and then dropping 
his head on Ida's shoulder, expired 
with a gentle sigh. 



If there are sufferings, "which (how- 
ever dreadful in their endurance) are 
yet susceptible of amelioration, the sor- 
row which a parent's loss awakens is 
not among the number ; other ties may 
be replaced, other affections may be 
festored, but when death breaks the 
bond of filial love, nature, honouring 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1 1 1 

the most sacred of her feelings, forbids 
a sentiment less pure, less strong, suc- 
ceeding to it ; and though the tear 
which sorrow sheds upon the parent's 
grave, may be dried up by time, the 
loss which bids that tear to flow, can 
never be replaced by human tender- 
ness, or human power 1 

It was not till six long weeks of 
hopeless suffering had passed over the 
head of Ida, that she came to a full 
sense of her delicate and singular situ- 
ation. Her father's debts had been paid 

by Lord B ; he had placed her 

brothers at a small private school, and 
sent the Paramana to take care of and 
attend them. And she was herself re- 
siding at a beautiful villa, belonging to 
him, a few miles from London, where 
her wishes were anticipated, and her 

will seemed a law. Lord B did 

not reside in the house, but he came 



112 WOMAN; OR 

every day to visit her, and to pay her 
those soothing and delicate attentions 
so necessary and so gracious to a being 
so desolate and so afflicted. The pu- 
rity of the air, the regularity of her 
life, and the native strength and excel- 
lence of her constitution, triumphed 
over the languor and delicacy which 
lingering suffering had left behind it. 

The traces of her sorrow added to 
the expression of her beauty, and re- 
stored to her countenance and person 
that air of touchino; tender lans-uish- 
ment, which had formed the interest of 
her charms, in the shades of Livadia. 
Her spirits had not yet reached their 
wonted tone, but her mind was already 
recovering its native strength, and un- 
wearied activity. She had written to 
her uncle, who was the most opulent 
merchant in Constantinople ; and in 
the interval which must elapse before. 



IDA OF ATHENS. US 

the answer could arrive, she deter- 
mined on pursuing sorae mode of live- 
lihood, which would enable her to 
support her brothers and ^heir liurse. 
Ignorant of the forms and punctilios 
of the country in which she resided, 
her delicacy and her prid? rendered 
her anxious to leave the house of a 
man on whom she had no claims, and 
whose conduct and views had once 
militated against her happiness and 
honour. She knew not that hei cha- 
racter was compromised, by her resi- 
dence in his house ; though there were 
moments when the systematic reserve 
of his conduct gave way to ihat impas- 
sioned manner, which marked his at- 
tentions in Livadia, and awakened a 
timid apprehension that the benevolent 
protector, was resuming the dangerous 
character of the ardent lover, 

When Ida demanded of him in what 



114 WOMAN; OR 

manner her talents could be of service 
to herself or to her family, he either 
evaded the question, or replied to it 
by an equivocal smile, ©r by some play- 
ful sally of kindness and pleasantry ; 
while the solicitude expressed in the 
eloquent countenance of Ida, or the 
timid and increasing gravity of her con- 
duct, always restored him to that cir- 
cumspect reserve of manner, which 
continued to remove every suspicion, 
and to elicit the confidence of her un- 
guarded character. 

Sometimes he absented himself from 
her presence for two. or three days. 
But when he again returned to her, 
the expression of his countenance 
was not to be mistaken. Sometimes, 
during a morning's visit, he read to her 
or conversed upon indifferent subjects, 
till some artless word of gratitude or 
kindness falling from her lips, he be- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 115 

came abstracted and thoughtful, and 
,fixed his^eyes on her face, till her blush- 
es and confusion obliged him to with- 
draw his ardent gaze^ 

Every hour the situation of Ida be- 
came more distressing, and more deli- 
cate, she had not a friend in England 
to whom she could apply for protec- 
tion or relief; her brothers, her servant, 
and herself, were wholly and unavoid- 
ably thrown upon the bounty of a man, 
who, if he was the most generous, was 
also the most dangerous of benefac- 
tors. 

But dependence, and above all, that 
kind of dependence, to which Ida 
had hitherto submitted, was of all other 
states, that least supportable to the na- 
tural dignity of her feelings, and her 
mind ; and she resolved, whatever 
might be the consequence, to write to 
him (since he still refused to listen) 



116 WOMAN; OR 

her determination of leaving his house. 
Her letter was Simpl.^, affecting, and 
eloquent, it breat^ ed the sentiments 
of a great soul, conscious of its own 
superior powers, of a heart, pure, con- 
fidiiig, and grateful, and of a firm and 
resolute spirit, tliat preferred penury 
and want to an indolent, a mean, and 
ignoble dependence. Tlie letter was 
replied tv > n the s.ani^ ^Inv l■H^^ i<- is^oo 
forwarded to Lyndon, it was replied 
to with all the dangerous and insinu- 
ating sophistry which distinguislied 
the arffuments of the traveller in A- 
thetis ; he deplored his own situation, 
that w^s still dependent upon tlie will 
of others, he depicted in strong and 
fascinating language that passion, 
which 'his heart still tenderly che- 
rished, which resistisd the power of 
time and distance, and had associated 
itself so intimately with his existence, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 117 

that they could only both be destroyed 
together. He tlien in artful and de- 
licate colours painted the alternatives 
of her own situation, opposing want to 
opulence, danger to safety ; the de- 
sertion of the world to the adoration 
of an individual, and every insupport- 
able evil to every pleasurable good. 

He concluded by a proposal, which 
blended with the offer of a liberal in- 
dependence for life to herself ajid her 
brothers, the most ardent vows of un- 
alterable affection and eternal loyalty. 
Ida read this letter througli with a sul- 
len, but indignant, composure. To a 
mind, whose virtue was the inspiration 
of nature, and the development of 
sensibility and reason, vice, however 
couched, could hold out no lure; the 
resolution of Ida was formed, as she 

perused the letter of Lord B ; she 

pitied his errors, and she knew the 



118 WOMAN; OR 

natural benevolence and humanity of 
his character, she had therefore no 
doubt, but he would protect her bro- 
thers till she could reclaim them, and 
she determined on secretly leaving his 
house the following morning. 

She had but one hope to support 
her in her perilous enterprize, but one 
object to beckon her towards a world, 
so intimidating in the little experience 
she had already obtained of it ; and 
that hope, that object arose from a 
paragraph she had read the preceding 
day in a newspaper: — it ran as fol- 
lows, 

" Any person who understands the 
modern Greek, Turkish, or Italian 
languages, and who speaks English 
fluently, will hear of a good situation, 
by applying to the printer hereof." 

Ida did not doubt, that the person 
who had dictated this advertisement, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 119 

was some helpless foreigner, who, more 
happily circumstanced than herself, 
was not less a stranger in England, and 
who, perhaps, wanted an interpreter 
even to transact the common affairs of 
life. Vibrating between hope and de- . 
spair, she considered not the singula- 
rity of the paragraph, or of her own 
application. It was the only alterna- 
tive from want or infamy, and she 
gladly seized it. In the midst of the 
melancholy thoughts which occupied 
her mind during the night previous to 
her departure, Osmyn recurred to her 
soul, the fleet days of love, and joy, 
and pleasure, came back with his idea, 
and opposed themselves to her present 
destiny, while she almost wondered, 
that she, who had sustained the loss of 
the affections of him she loved, could 
be vulnerable to any other suffering, 



150 WOMAN; OR 

since every other lost its poignancy by^ 
the comparison. 

The next day Lord B — was to visit 
the villa. The next morning Ida quit- 
ted it for ever. She had obstinately 
refused to accept of any of the liberal 
presents he was anxious to lavish on 
her ; and the mourning suits he had 
presented to her family, and the dis- 
charge of her father's little debts, were 
obligations accepted from necessity, 
but equally insupportable to her feel- 
ings and her pride ; she was now, there- 
fore, destittite of the means of procur- 
ing any mode of conveyance from his 
villa to London. But the oppression 
that weighed upon her sad and suffer- 
ing heart, rendered her insensible to 
every other consideration. She left a 
note for her nurse and brothers, to 
calm their anxiety, with respect to her 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1«1 

absence, and to assure them, they, 
should hear from her immediately, and 
then without guide, and almost with- 
out hope, object, or expectation, she 
departed on foot for London, from the 
sumptuous and luxurious residence of 
a man who loved her. And did he 
love her? would he, to have rescued 
her from the hard and gloomy destiny 
that now seemed to await her — would 
he have talcen her to his boso^i — would 
he have protected her from the shame 
that hangs on woman's weakness, and 
given her a claim upon the world's 
esteem '^ — Oh, no I a conduct so just, 
so worthy, and beneficent,. would have 
been in his eyes romantic and impru- 
dent ; for still he saw in that woman, 
who was destined (in spite of ever)' ef- 
fort and every prejudice) to make the 
misery and happiness of his life, a poor 
and friendless foreigner, without rank* 

VOL. IV. G 



HS WOMAN; OR 

without fortune, and above all, witli"- 
out the suffrages of that world, whose- 
power he did not fear, but whose laugh 
he dreaded. 

The unhappy Ida, in her simple . 
mourning habit, and concealed in a longv 
black veil, pursued her way to Lon^^ 
don, sometimes guided by a passenger, 
of whom she timidly enquired the 
way, sometimes by the finger-boards, 
which pointed to it, while thoughts of 
a sad and gloomy cast occupied her 
mind. She had more than once lost the 
direct road, and was more than once 
obliged to pause and take rest, over- 
come by a fatigue she was unable, from 
the lingering delicacy of her health, to 
support ; and she entered London by>^ 
Kensington, at that hour when the 
brilliant bustle of business and amuse-,, 
ment, rendered it a scene the mt)st ■ 
animating to the thoughtless, and the 



IDA OF ATKIENS. IZ$ 

interested, and the gay. To the wretch- 
ed Ida, poor, friendless, and destitute, 
it gave so keen a sense of her desolate 
situation as opposed to the social 
groups, and happy countenances 
which met her view, that her steps in- 
voluntarily turned back towards the 
country, whose silence and solitude 
would at least harmonise with her iso- 
lated state. 

But necessity impelled her on, and 
her timidity and apprehension in- 
creased with every step ; she shrunk 
from every glance, — she trembled at 
the faintest observation ; the noise, the 
crowds, the bustle, that surrounded 
her, deprived her of all resolution. 
She held in her hand the paper, whose 
paragraph was her sole hope ; but it was 
some time before she had the courasie 
to inquire the way towards the street 
where the printer lived. At last the 



134 WOMAN; OR 

appearance of an elderly woman in- 
duced her to make application, and she 
was informed that the street was in the 
city, and near two miles distant; the 
woman then repeated to her the names 
of the several streets she was to pass 
through, and even this common place 
civility of a stranger affected the agi- 
tated feelings of Ida, and she wept. 

Though weary, and almost exhaust- 
ed, she continued her route with a 
rapid step ; her timid, humid eyes 
only raised at intervals to observe her 
road, while she envied the owners of 
the shops as she passed them, while 
she envied all who had a home to re- 
ceive, a roof to shelter them, for she 
knew not that night where she should 
lay her head. 

She at last reached the printing of- 
fice, but her voice was so tremulous, 
her accent so imperfect, and her tears 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1^5 

and emotion so ready to choak her ut- 
terance, that she with difficulty made 
the inquiry. 

The clerk to whom she applied, 
wrote down the name of the street and 
the number of the house where the 
person resided who had sent the para- 
graph to the paper, but declared that 
he had forgotten his name. 

" It is a gentleman then ?" said Ida, 
faintly, and enquired if he was mar- 
ried or had a family. The clerk could 
give no information, and Ida again set 
out on her weary pilgrimage, and had 
to retrace the steps she had already 
talcen ; for the person lived in the west 
end of the town. Evening was now 
approaching, a chill gloomy March 
evening; the streets were no longer 
crowded, the bustle of the day had 
subsided, that of the night had not yet 
begun ; — all was cold, and dark, and 



126 WOMAN; OR 

comfortless to the wanderer's heartirr- 
So faint, so exhausted did she feel, that 
unable to proceed she turned into the 
porch of an hotel, and seated herself 
on a bench outside the bar window, 
and begged a glass of water from a 
•waiter who passed her with a tray lux- 
uriously loaded ; — the man looked on 
her at first suspiciously, then compas- 
sionately. He brought her the water, 
and as she was about to raise it to her 
parched lips he drew it back, and said, 
*' stay poor creature," and then poured 
a little wine into the glass; — this act of 
humanity touched the heart of Ida, 
and her tears mingled in the draught 
she eagerly swallowed. The man was 
now called away, and the landlady 
coming out of the bar, with a look of 
surprize and anger demanded of the 
stranger what she wanted there, and 
by the coarseness of her language left 



IDA OF ATHENS. 157 

no doubt on the mind of Ida that she, 
was mistaken for a creature who forms 
the last degraded link 4n the chain of 
human society. Unable to reply, sh6^ 
was about to depart, when the impa- 
tience of the woman, brooking not the 
tardiness of her slow and feeble move- 
ments, took her roughly by the arm 
and turned her into the street. 

Ida had hitherto felt for others, she 
now, (and^ for the first time) felt for 
herself alone; the pang was insup- 
portable, for it was un-indeared; it 
was unassisted by those gracious feel- 
ings, which still, even in the darkest 
afiBiction, accompany that woe which 
we share with, or sustain for another. 
Nor was it the actual and sensible dan-^ 
ger that surrounded her, which spoke 
terror to her heart; — Oh I no, it was 
the relative desolation, it was the want 
of sopaething to suffer for or sufii^r 
withb Innumerable persons, innumer- 



1«S WOMAN; OR 

able carriages, passed her as she stood 
leanihg against one of the pillars of a 
church ; — but all was to her a desert ; — 
she knew there was no being to protect 
her, no roof to shelter- her. Had the wan- 
derer paused at the rude portal of an es- 
quimaux hut, and said, " I am come," its 
savage master would have said, " you 
are, and it is well," and she would 
have found relief at his board, and 
safety beneath his shed.* But in the 
great metropolis of the greatest coun- 
try she believed there was not one door 
from whose threshold she would not 
have been spurned ; — for confidence 
and humanity are the moral instincts of 
nature, suspicion, and distrust, the ne- 
cessary vices of society. 

Having taken a little rest, Id^ was 
about to pursue her way, when a man 
looking under her veil, which was now 

♦ See note (a) at the ead of the volume. 



IDA OF ATHENS. . 129 

partially raised, addressed her with a^ 
rude flattery it was impossible to mis- 
understand, and attempted to take her 
arm. Emotions of horror, disgust, and 
self humiliation, swelled in her bosom, 
and with an effort of strength, borrow^ 
ed from the energy of her indignant 
feelings, she burst from his grasp, and 
fled with the rapidity of lightning 
down a street which lay near the 
Thames. Ida rushed impetuously to- 
wards the river ; she paused and gazed 
wildly round her ; the street was silent 
and empty — she was alone, miserable, 
and unobserved, — hopeless and heart- 
broken. — Life, and all its joyless joys, 
appeared to her sad imagination, so tri-> 
vial and inconsequent ; life, with all its 
suffering trials, so dreadful and insup- 
portable, that death, like a kind and 
soothing friend, seemed to offer i|9 
arms to receive her, as the only asy- 



■130 WOMAN; OR 

lum to which she could no^y escape, 
and find that peace she -liad so long 
forfeited. She looked at the glossy bo- 
som of the water ; she approached it 
closer, and raised her eyes to the hea- 
vens, whose mild and brilliant serenity 
recalled to her heart that love of na- 
ture and acknowledgment of its bene- 
ficence, which man had for a moment 
destroyed. A few silver clouds tinged 
with the beam of the rising moon, alone 
varied the deep dark blue azure, or 
shaded the distant suns and their at- 
tendant worlds, whigh revolved in 
the mighty expanse of creation. So 
much of beauty and sublimity ; of that 
which soothes, and that which awes, 
mingled in the aspect of the heavens, 
that Ida, opposing the immensity of the 
universe, and the beneficence and har- 
mony of the laws by which it is go- 
verned, to the speck which formed her 



IDA OF ATHENS. -W 

ietm sphere of action, to the little suf- 
ferings which she individually sustain- 
ed, smiled at the pride and weakness of 
humanity, which bestows upon the 
brief moment of passing existertce that 
consideration which eternity alone has 
a right to claim; — her mind regained 
its wonted dignity, and the feelings of 
nature succeeded in her heart to its 
weakness and impatience; — her bro- 
thers and her second-mother rushed to 
her recollection. 

" Oh ! God," she exclaimed, " thou 
see'st into my mmost soul ; thou see'st 
I want not courage to die, but whila 
my life is necessary to another even in 
the remotest degree, so long may I bear 
its burthen." She remembered how 
desolate would have been the situation 
of her little family, when even the 
support of her tenderness and sympa- 
thy was withdrawn from it, and while 



132 WOMAN J OR 

she wept, she shuddered at the act she 
had meditated ; the only act which, in 
her, selfishness alone had inspired. — 
She now endeavoured to collect her 
thoughts, read over the address she 
had received, and re-commenced her 
pilgrimage. She at last reached the 
house. She felt the unseasonableness 
of the hour for the application she was 
about to make, but the dire necessity 
of her situation left her no alternative, 
and with a fainthope, inspired even by 
her despondency, she thought it might 
be possible the persons to whom she 
was going to apply, were Greeks — they 
were at all events foreigners ; — " And 
the heart of the stranger," (she said) 
" will surely not shut itself against the 
stranger's prayer," for the object of 
her immediate wishes was, simply tQ 
obtain a safe shelter for the coming 
night ; but as she approached the door 



IDA OF ATHENS. 133 

of the house, her strength and hopes 
failed her together. 

She had walked that day many miles. 
She had taken no sustenance for four 
and twenty hours, and the anxiety and 
suffering of her mind, had added to the 
debility of her frame. The knocker of 
the door fell from her feeble hand, and 
she clung tc^ the railing for support. 
Again she tried to gain admittance, and 
in a few minutes a servant appeared at 
the door — Ida attempted to speak, but, 
exhausted in feeling and in strength, 
she could not articulate. She drew aside 
her veil and raised her eyes to the face 
of the servant, a mist seemed to gather 
before them — she gazed at the servant 
— she doubted her senses — she clung 
to his arm, and with an hysteric laugh, 
faultered out, " Oh ! my God !" and 
fell on his shoulder. It was Stepha- 
niki of Athens I 



134 WOMAN; OR i 

When Ida recovered, she found her- 
self in an apartment seated on a couch* 
She thought she saw the grateful Ste- 
phaniki (whom she had left at Smyrna) 
at her feet ; her doubting eyes wander- 
ed to the person on whose bosom she 
reclined •, her shriek was loud and 
piercing — for she beheld the coun- 
tenance of her deceased Djako, but so 
haggard', so pale, so emaciated, and so 
spectral in its aspect, that it almost 
seemed to dissolve upon the sight — -an 
undefinable consciousness of insanity 
wandered in her brain. A voice that 
addressed her in her natiye language, 
attempted to soothe and to assure her, 
but it resembled not the voice of the 
friend whose loss she had so long wept 
— she again raised her eyes and gazed 
fearfully on the stranger. " Ida," (he 
said) " what is it you fear ? You are 
with a friend who has long sought you 



IDA OF ATHENS. 135 

-^With a kinsman, whose only wish on 
this side heaven was, to see you and to 
die", — look on me with confidence — 'tis 
the brother of her who gave you -birth, 
of him who reared you, to whom you 
are now united." " Yes, archondessa," 
sobbed Stephaniki, " it is your uncle 
from Turkey whom you behold." 

Convictions now flashed like light- 
ning on the mind of Ida ; she was then 
with persons who loved and sought 
her ; she again heard her native lan- 
guage; she again heard the voice of 
tenderness and affection addressed to 
her; she was again an object of interest 
and protection to some human creature 
— she fell prostrate on the earth, — she 
raised her eyes and heart to heaven — A 
smile, such as precedes the dissolution 
of sainted goodness, irradiated her 
countenance, and illuminated the tears 
that swam in her eyes, till her helpless 



136 WOMAN; OR 

brothers crossing her imagination, she 
uttered a wild exclamation of trans- 
port, and threw herself into her uncle's 
arms. He mingled his tears of joy 
with hers, while she repeated to him 
the accident which had brought her to 
his door. When some degree of com- 
posure returned to her bosom, and she 
had taken that nourishment her ex- 
hausted nature required, she again, in 
an ecstacy of new-born happiness, em- 
braced her uncle, who hung delighted 
over her, and traced in her loveliness 
all the beauty his sister had possessed, 
and in the vivacity of her emotions, 
more feeling than his sister had ever 
been endowed with. 

She then, with great anxiety, request- 
ed to be informed of the circumstances 
which led him to England, and under 
the influence of an agitation her sud- 
den appearance had excited, and which 



IDA OF ATHENS. 137 

his weak state of health was unable to 
sustain, he related to her the few events 
which had chequered his prosperous 
life, fiorn to an opulence which he 
had increased by the most successful 
exertions, until his fortune was equal 
to the purchase of every gratification, 
but that which the heart calls for, and 
which fortune alone can never give. 
With a character ardent as the sun 
under which it was formed, he spurned 
at the restraint which the habits and 
the faith of his fore-fathers * imposed, > 
and united the religion and the pur- 
suits of an English merchant, to the 
life and manners of a luxurious Asiatic. 
He had, therefore, never married ; and 
of the numerous offspring of his lawless 
loves, one son only had reached a 

• It'will be remembered, he was b6ra of english 
parents. 



138 WOMAN 5 OR' 

mature age. He was the object of *ft^II 
his exertions and all his hopes. It was 
his intention to have restored the youth 
to the free and prosperous land of his 
ancestors ; he had not only sent the 
youth to England, in whose legislature 
he intended he should take a share^ 
but he had made an annual transfer of 
the profits of his trade to that country, 
that he might place the independence 
of this darling son beyond- the reach 
of tiH-kish rapacity. But, at the mo« 
ment when he had himself ceased to 
'^oil at the oar of commerce, and was 
on the point of embarking from Smyr- 
na for England, to enjoy his opulence 
in the security of a free land, he was 
seized with the plague. It v^'as then,, 
that deserted in the last extremity of 
human suffering, he felt the loss of those 
tyes. which danger only closer, rivets, 
round die heart. Where then were 



IDA OP ATHENS. 1 39 

his numerous mistresses ? Where then 
"were the offspring of a promiscuous 
passion? — The wife andthecliild, who 
would alone brave every peril for his 
sake, lived not for him ; and a despair 
and a regret seized his heart, acute ^ 
the pangs that tortured his body. '- ^^ 
As soon as the symptoms of the 
most dreadful of human afflictions had 
appeared in his person, he was carried 
to an hospital, and his ward was at- 
tended by a woman who, as is the cus- 
tom, had had the plague herself; it 
was the sister of Stephaniki. Her pa- 
tient recovered, if recovery it could be 
called that but retarded death, and laid 
the foundation of ceaseless suffering 
and incurable disease. The liberal re- 
ward bestowed on her by the convales- 
cent, induced her brother to offer him 
his services, and he found in the be- 
nefactor of his sister, the relative of 



/" 



140 WOMAN; OR 

the archon Rosimeli's family. The aid* 
count which he simply detailed of the 
affliction of that family, awakened the 
sympathy and lulled the personal pre- 
judices of one, who had now learnt 
by his own sufferings to feel for those 
of others ; and having engaged Stepha- 
niki as his servant, he embarked for 
England, determined to cultivate the 
affections of those whom he had SQ 
long neglected. 

His arrival in England convinced 
him of the inimicality of a northern 
climate to an eastern constitution, bro- 
ken beyond all recovery by a pestilen- 
tial disease, and reduced him to the 
extreme of misery and despair ; for he 
learnt that his son had lost his life 
in a duel, in the cause of an aban- 
doned woman to whom he had at- 
tached himself, and whose life and 
character were consonant to those im- 



IDA OF ATHENS. I4I 

pressioQs his young mind had received 
from his own mother and her depraved 
associates. 

The unhappy father felt the dreadful 
retribution, and was only recovering, 
slowly recovering, from its first fatal 
effects, when chance bestowed on him 
a near relative, a tender nurse, and 
consoling friend. As yet involved in 
the sufferings of his own heart, he had 
often thought, but had not yet en- 
quired after the family of his sister. 
The paragraph in the paper had been 
sent at the instigation of the person in 
whose house he lodged, and who found 
too much inconvenience from the igno- 
rance of the Smyrnian and his attend- 
ants of the english language, not ear- 
nestly to desire an interpreter. 

There were in the warm heart of Ida, 
feelings to sympathize in every species 
of human suffering, that human nature 



148" WOMAN; OR 

could experience ; and the look, the 
air, the accent^ and the language of 
her uncle, awakened so lively a recol- 
lection of her country, and the friends 
of her youth, that she felt for him 
all the interest of an affectionate rela- 
tion, and all the pity of a commiserating 
friend. 

She wept over the affecting details of 
his suffering, and with a regret almost 
selfish, beheld their speedy termina- 
tion in his ghastly countenance and 
debilitated frame. She related to him, 
at his request, the incidents of her life 
most connected with her recent desolate 
situation, and though she spoke of her 
own exertions with that modesty which 
belongs to great minds, who see no 
merit in that high line of conduct 
which is rather the result of a senti- 
ment, than a duty, yet it was impossi- 
ble to conceal those virtues which had 



IDA OF ATHENS; H9 

marked her life, or the animated feel- 
ings which had inspired them. The 
beauty of her form, the seductive 
softness of her manner, and the ar- 
dour and brilliancy of her cha- 
racter, captivated what yet remained 
of the Smyrnian's warm imagination; 
and arrived at that stage of existence 
when the influence of the passions de- 
cline, and that of the affections is ac- 
knowledged, and when the soothing 
solicitude of a relative or a friend be- 
comes an actual want to the feebleness 
of our exhausted nature, he clung 
to his lovely and endearing niece, as 
to the last hope and comfort of his 
retreating life ; resigned his destiny into 
her hands, and bequeathed his fortune 
(at his death) to her possession. 

The first use which Ida made of her in*- 
fluence, was to send for her brothers and 
paramana ; and with a brief account of' 



144 WOMAN; OR 

the motives which induced her to leave 
the villa of Lord B -, and the sin- 
gular accident which had placed her 
under the protection of a near, an 
opulent, and respectable relative, she 
returned him the money he had ex- 
pended on her account. To this letter 
she received no answer, and the silence 
of him to whom it was addressed, con- 
vinced her of the mortification her 
conduct had excited ; a conduct which 
in its result had been productive of 
consequences so fortunate and un- 
hoped for. 

As soon as the afflicted Smyrnian 
was able to leave his apartment, change 
of air was ordered him by his physi- 
cians ; and he removed with the family 
he had adopted, to a beautiful seat pur- 
chased for him by his agent. But the 
principles of life were worn out: the 
peculiar diseases which the plague 



IDA OF ATHENS. 145 ^ 

frequently leaves after it, and the con- 
tinual affliction which the loss of an 
only child occasioned, rendered the 
protraction of his existence, but that 
of his sufferings and his sorrows. For 
four months he continued to linger 
through days of sadness, and nights of 
pain. 

The attentions of a creature who 
devoted herself to him, as if habits of 
affection rendered the cares she la- 
vished gracious to herself as they 
were grateful to him, and the utmost 
exertion of medical skill were alike un- 
availing: — he died I — and the atheniaa 
girl became at once the most friendless, 
and the most oppulent heiress in Eng- 
land. 



To feelings exhausted by perpetual 
exerti bns, to a sensibility wearied out by 

VOL. IV. H 



M6 WOMAN; OR 

suffering and distress — to a frame debi- 
litated by anxiety, fatigue and care, 
repose becomes the most positive and 
desirable of blessings. To enjoy that 
suspence of being which holds its tran- 
quil medium between pain and plea- 
sure, and is satisfied in its exclusion 
from both, was all that Ida now sighed 
for; and she continued, during the re- 
mainder of the summer and autumn, to 
dwell in the elegant sblitude of which 
she was the mistress. The arrange- 
ment of her affairs, the regulation of 
her family, and acts of beneficence and 
humanity, were the occupations which 
employed her days. Influenced, in her 
benevolence by the peculiar circum- 
stances of her own life, she laid aside 
a certain portion of her splendid in- 
come for the release of poor debtors, 
confined for sums to the amount of that 
which had caused the lat»t sigh of her 



IDA OF ATHENS. Ul 

father to be breathed within the con- 
fines of a pdson I-^and for the immedi- 
ate relief of strangers whom political 
vicissitudes had expatriated. And if 
the virtue which exerts itself for the 
good of others only, had been suffici- 
ent to constitute the happiness of life, 
the days of Ida must have been marked 
by uninterrupted . felicity. But that 
principle of activity, inherent to the 
human mind, which, if justly regula- 
ted, impels it to its fullest capability of 
excellence, that want incident to the 
human heart, which calls incessantly 
for the exercise of the affections, soon 
rendered the tranquil but isolated state 
of Ida irksome and oppressive, as it 
was foreign and uncongenial to her 
character, her principles, and her ha- 
bits. The consciousness of those bril- 
liant talents, (now given to obliviou)^ 
of that mind so formed for the high 
H 2 



14S WOMAN; OR 

intelligence of social intercourse, aijd 
above all of those tender and impas- 
sioned feelings, which now withered 
unparticipated in her bosom, was^ not 
to be lulled while memory, no longer 
chilled by the engagements of anxiety 
and care for the passing moment, re- 
verted to those scenes and circum- 
stances, on which the heart and fancy 
fondly lingered, and gave back to re- 
viving tenderness, an object who, in the 
midst of suffering and sorrow, amidst 
vicissitude and care, amidst the op- 
pression of life and thoughts of death, 
had preserved his ascendant in her 
bosom ; an object calculated by the in- 
cidents witli which he was associated, 
and by his genius and his character, to 
assimilate with her feelings and her 
mind; and to sympathize equally in 
the errors and the excellences of her 
disposition. Days of solitude, and 



IDA OF ATHENS. 149 

nights of reflection were given up to 
his remembrance, and if she ceased to 
think of the past, it was but to indulge 
in tender speculations of the future ; 
for the heart of woman, regulated by 
Its feelings in its view, never resigns 
hope but with love itself. And she 
who is still tenderly attached, will reject 
the possibility of being no longer be- 
loved. Ida, therefore, could not cre- 
dit that Osmyn was lost to her for 
ever I and her romantic imagination 
still fed her heart with the idea, that 
the spell of sympathy which had first 
drawn them together, would finally re- 
unite them, and with love's own credu- 
lity believed that which it was impos- 
sible to comprehend. 

Ida had a natural and a national 
taste for luxury and splendor; and 
she had indulged it in the furnishing 
and arrangement of her villa » ^dia- 



ISO WeMAi^; OR 

fluenced equally by her feelings and 
her habits, her apartments blended in 
their appearance all that was most ap- 
provable in the ancient and modern 
greek and turkish furniture, and her 
boudoir in England was the exact re- 
presentation of her gymnasium in 
Athens. 

In a country where all that is new 
is attractive, the villa of a reputed 
athenian princess, equally with her- 
self and her family, some of whom 
were greeks, became an object of uni- 
versal admiration and. curiosity. And 
mahy who came only to see her house, 
returned to offer their respects and 
services to its beautiful and original 
mistress. Those whose rank sanc- 
tioned their intrusion, and rendered 
their attentions flattery ; those whose 
character for taste, for talent, or virtue, 
enabled them to bestow fame and re- 



s ' 



IDA OF ATHENS. 151 

putalion upon others, sought her out, 
and endeavoured to distinguish them- 
selves by distinguishing her. — -And 
Ida creating universal amazement and 
admiration by the singularity of her 
manners, the attic delicacy of her wit, 
and the beauty of her person, daily 
attracted the world to her solitude, un- 
til led away by the ambition which 
" grew with what it fed on," she was 
herself attracted from her solitude to 
the world. 

The bankers and commercial men 
with whom her late uncle had been 
connecti^d, vouched for her national rank 
and situation in life. - The innocence, 
simplicity, and virtue of character and 
conduct, vouched for themselves ; and 
the protection of one who derived less 
lustre from the ducal coronet which 
encircled her brow, than the qualities 
which illumined her mind, and the 



152 WOMAN; OR 

feelings that distinguished her heart, 
presented Her in society under circum- 
stances the most favourable to a crea- 
ture so young, so friendless, and so at- 
tractive. 

Ida was just twenty when she entered 
on the magic scene of gay and polished 
life. The repose of mind she had 
lately enjoyed, had restored that bril- 
liant tone of spirit, that languor of 
manner, which blend so deliciously, 
and betray at once vivacity of imagina- 
tion, and sensibility of heart. 
.r The regular and healthful life she 
had led for many months, gave to the 
harmony of her features and the elo- 
quence of her countenance that bloom 
5ind loveliness, which almost personify 
^he loveliest era of youth ; and full of 
that complexional animation which 
gives birth to hope and renders us so 
alive to pleasure, she became a resi- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 153 

dent in London for that season which 
the law of fasliion devotes to the most 
splendid of its festivals and orgies. 



THE WORLD. 

In whatever age, in whatever coun- 
try, man has ardently pursued the study 
of nature, and guided his opinions and 
his feelings by her laws; the title of 
philosopher has been bestowed on him, 
sometimes as a term of approbation, 
sometimes of reproach, sometimes ob- 
taining his apotheosis, sometimes his 
martyrdom, as the different stages and 
prejudices of society have decreed. 
Upon principles of nature, therefore, 
the mind of Ida might be said to be 
purely philosophic, while her person, 
her manners, and disposition, were 
H S 



iB4 WOMAN; OR 

ttiofee of gity,' of feminine, and Iritlocent 
youth. 

She had few, perhaps tea few, loeal 
opinions; her ideas, like her senti- 
ments, were generalized, and relative to 
society at large, and her principles and 
conduct formed upon its obvious and 
universal interests. The nothings that 
constitute propriety in the east, and 
the violation of it in the west, that 
subject morality to climate, and ren- 
der virtue arbitrary as prejudice, were 
unknown to one who looked up to na- 
ture for truth, and believed the per- 
fect deyelppement and due regulation 
of the affections to be the great source 
of all moral excellence, " for if (she 
said,) we love one another, even as he 
who made uis loves us, how can we in- 
jure or be injured." 

Ida therefore appeared in a world 
where all was so new to her, ignorant 



IDA OF ATHENS. 155 

of its forms, inexperienced in its rules ; 
fair and young, impulsive and original. 
She appeared the unprotected mistress 
of a splendid and independent esta- 
blishment, while from the habits and 
the tastes of her early life, the whole 
regime of her present domestic system 
borrowed its colouring and character. 

•Ida, received into that class which 
gives the prevailing tone of opinion 
and of taste, for every other her national 
rank falsely estimated by the scale of 
english dignity ; her real opulence 
exaggerated through the medium of vo- 
luble report ; with a thousand graces 
in her awkwardness, and a thousand 
charms in her originality ; appeared in 
the metropolis of England an object 
the most attractive, because she was an 
object the most novel. She was soon, 
therefore, elevated on the shrine of fa^ 
shionable popularity ; the incense was 



156 WOMAN; OR 

offered ; the devotion was paid, and 
the influence of ^he season's deity was 
confirmed. Her talents were over-rated ; 
her charms were viewed through a fa- 
vourable prejudice; while those finer 
touches of character, the bold concep- 
tion of superior genius, the delicate 
play of exquisite fancy, the ardent 
sentiment of profound feeling, were 
rarely observed, and could have been 
but rarely felt or understood. 

Living in an age, and in a country, 
in which human powers have nearly 
attained the goal of human excellence, 
and when the new alone is proposed, 
because almost every combination of 
the beautiful is exhausted, it was to 
her originality that the athenian owed 
her success, even more than to her me- 
rits, which should have commanded, 
and must finally have secured it. Im- " 
|^i;^cticable to the routine of systematic 



IDA OF ATHENS. 15T 

manners, she betrayed every emotion* 
She discovered every feeling, as the in- 
cident of the moment called it into 
being, and enchanted the amazed ob- 
servers, not because she was so true to 
nature, but because nature was so new 
to them. 

In whatever society she appeared, 
she beheld herself surrounded, and 
overwhelmed with questions relative 
to her country ; while, misled by her 
national vanity, she was surprized 
to find, that where knowledge was so 
diffused, and obtained with such facili- 
ty, so much less should be known by 
others of her country than she had 
learned of theirs ; and often blushed 
more at the superiority she was obliged 
to betray, than at the ignorance she was 
obliged to witness. Every one praised 
the inimitable grace of her attitudes ; 
but she knew not that the simple resuH 



158 WOMAN; OR 

of indolent indulgence, blended with 
the most delicate harmony of propor- 
tion, could produce a picturesque ef- 
fect, or obtain the distinction of a talent. 

She was surrounded by proficients in 
musical science, in every respect iier 
superiors; but her song of national 
sorrow borrowed a charm from her 
feeling soul, which the heart acknow- 
ledged in defiance of the judgment, 
and her greek lyre, the most limited 
of instruments, became in her hands 
the most attractive, merely because it 
was seen in her hands only. 

Every one trembled for the growing 
correctness of her accent, lest in ac- 
quiring an excellence she should lose 
a charm; and everyone believed that 
her round and sighing voice was al- 
most independent of the language to 
which it lent its- delicious melody, so 
finely true was its attic modulation to 



IDA OF ATHENS. 159 

the fiieling that caitie -warm from the 
heart, or the thought that emanated • 
from the mind. Her observations, her 
sentiments, her opinions, always spring- 
ing unstudied to the lips, and obtain- 
ing no definite character in her own 
esteem, were repeated with admiration, 
simply, because they bore the stamp of 
that original turn of reflection which, 
revolting from the hackneyed creed of 
doating opinion, feels, e;camines, and 
judges for itself, sometimes right, some- 
times, perhaps, wrong, but bearing in 
its error a force and boldness which 
belongs alone to that genius which 
takes nature for its guide. 

While others depended on the me- ^ 
mory for the charm of their conversa- 
tion, while they quoted an author, re- 
peated a critique, detailed an anecdote, 
or commented on the passing occur- 
rence of the day ; the feelings, the 



160 WOMAN; OR 

mind, the fancy of Ida, exhaustless in 
tender sentiment, in the novelty of 
combination, or warmth of imagery, 
gave an attraction to all she uttered, 
which operated like a spell on her au- 
ditors ; for if it be consonant to the in- 
dolence of man to repose on the intel- 
lectual exertions of others, and tamely 
to believe, or to repeat what it would 
be troublesome to ascertain, or to dis- 
pute, it is also consonant to his love 
of new impressions, and the vivacity of 
sensation they bring with them, to be 
pleased with hearing what he had never 
heard before, or to add a novel idea to 
those which have long lost their force 
with their originality. 

If the human mind is liable to lose 
Itself in abstract reflection, the heart is 
not always capable of devoting itself to 
abstract devotion, the feelings will 
mingle with the existing circumstances 



IDA OF ATHENS. 161 

©r the hour, the disposition will some- 
times take its cast from the dominant 
colouring of the daily incident, and the 
character will assimilate in some de- 
gree to the passing events that occur 
within the sphere of actual observa- 
tion, even though no point of natural 
or habitual accordance exist between 
them. 

It was thus the susceptible and deli- 
cate existence of the athenian girl 
gradually became involved in a kind of 
pleasing delirium, from the novelty 
and influence of her situation in so< 
ciety. 

It was thus, that her character, cal- 
culated for all the energy of thought, 
and all the force of profound and ori- 
ginal reflection, for the exercise of the 
most lively sensibility, and the deve- 
lopement of the tenderest emotions, 
blended »ll its various powers in the 



162 'WOMAN; OR 

massi of general intercourse, and con- 
cealed those higher faculties of intel- 
lect and feeling, which now rarely 
called were now rarely betrayed. Na- 
ture, who beckons us by various means 
to happiness, beneficently makes the 
power of bestowing it the supreme 
point of its enjoyment. This truth i9 
best felt by woman ; and her heart 
must be cold, her mind must be chill, 
who meets the eye that beams appro- 
bation, and the voice that breathes it, 
and is yet insensible to that gracious 
emotion of self-complacency, and live- 
ly pleasure, which may indeed associ- 
ate too intimately with the weakness 
of our nature, but without which the 
strength of our character becomes ra- 
ther respectable than amiable, rather to 
be venerated than to be beloved. 

Ida was but too sensible to the tri- 
umphs decreed her, while the singula- 



IDA OF ATHENiS. l6$ 

rity of her situation presented the man- 
ners and habits of english society, ih 
a warmth of colouring that belonged 
not to its national character. Sought 
after as a thing to amuse or to amaze, 
she mistook the eagerness of curiosity 
for that kind warmth of manner "so 
welcome to the stranger's heart ; and 
brought forward to be seen or to be 
heard ; her youthful vanity readily 
construed the tedium of exhausted or 
unfurnished minds, (seeking relief 
against themselves) for a lively inte- 
rest in the character of one who, 
thrown off her guard by, the eclat of 
her situation, gave herself up to that 
naif and infantine simplicity of man-> 
ner which frequently accompanies thei 
indolence that arises from the security 
of pleasing, without the necessity of 
an exertion to please — and adds in fas- ^ 
cination, what it detracts from dignity-. 



164 WOMAN; OR 

But while the athenian girl continu- 
ed the central point of attraction to 
the radii of curiosity and admiration^ 
did that world, where to her percep- 
tions all was so new, simply pass before 
her gaze like the changeful scenes of 
some splendid spectacle, amusing the 
fancy, engrossing the senses, and leav- 
ing the mind rather amused than 
touched or enlarged. Oh, no ! curi- 
ous, reflecting, and observant, her eye 
soon penetrated beyond the brilliant, 
but flimsy veil, and discovered the 
simple spring which actuated with an 
individual impulse the various and 
motley groups with which she ming^led. 
Pleasure, (or to give it a term of more 
ethic consequence) happiness, was the 
goal for which all started with equal 
eagerness — while disparity of rank^ 
circumstance, or prejudice, diversified 
the means of its attainment ; those still 



IDA OF ATHENS. ^ 

approaching it nearest who adhered 
most closely to nature. .: 

She beheld ridicule, more powerful 
in its influence than truth, (of which 
it was so seldom the test) respected 
more than admonition, and feared more 
than reproof. She saw vice seldom ac- 
knowledo;ed but in crime: virtue but 
in restraint ; and prudence without Jin- 
nocence ; and caution without purity; 
more studied than the developement of 
those social affections, which, by close- 
ly knitting the bonds of confidence be- 
tween man and man, would render 
prudence unnecessary, and caution 
useless. 

She beheld truth still struggling to 
betray her divinity (opposed by the 
zeal of ignorance and bigotry) through 
a tissue of vague and confused dog- 
mas which perplex the mind they are 
meant to enlighten, which aim at facts 



SQ6 WOMAN; OR 

harmless in themselves, rather than 
the relative consequence of these facts, 
so fatal in their effects, and which by 
giving no precise and definite idea of 
right and wrong, inculcate a prejudice, 
rather than awaken a principle, or un- 
fold a sentiment. 

. Considering the different classes of 
society in a less abstract point of view, 
and taking them with their respective 
peculiarities, she thought she beheld 
nature here justified in proportion as 
she ascended the scale of rank and 
education; she did not fall into the 
common error of mistaking vulgarity 
for simplicity, and ignorance for na- 
ture ; she knew that the highest point 
of genius, of. science, or of feeling, 
was but the result of an intimate know- 
ledge of nature, and the perfect ejf- 
pansion of that sensibility which flows 
alone from her source,— -and she was 



IDA OF ATHENS. i^l 

«ware that the coarser avocations, and 
daily necessities of life, militated against 
that leisure and those pursuits, by 
which the better faculties and feelings 
of existence are nurtured and cultivated 
to perfection. She observed and ad- 
mired that high finish of manner, that 
tone of good society, which partly arises 
from arbitrary convention, and which, 
belonging to the better circles of so- 
ciety, can never find "its way into every 
rankof life:' at first charmed to fasci- 
nation, she saw tiot the delicate line 
which divided expressions of esteem 
and admiration, from the actual exist- 
ence of the sentiment, and believed 
every look an emanation of the soul — 
every smile a smile of pleasure — and 
every sigh a sigh of sympathy ; but a 
little experience soon dissipated the il- 
lusion, and taught her to lament that 



» V 



ICS WOMAN; OR 

the laws of sentiment and nature were 
expunged from the public code. 

To those conventions formed on the 
supposition of intellectual sympathy, 
and established on the basis of literary 
taste, she rushed with all the enthusi- 
asm of a character so ardent, and a 
heart so warm in its pursuit of those 
feelings, of those sentiments, w^hich 
were congenial to its own ; but she 
soon perceived that the most ingenious 
way of becoming stupid was, by laying 
dfown a system to become wise ; that 
the miiid, like the heart, had its im- 
pulses, and was more influenced by 
sympathy than by rule; that genius 
was not to be methodized into occa- 
•ional display, and that the determina- 
tion to be periodically witty, was too 
frequently disappointed by the neces- 
sity «f bLcomiDg irresistibly dull. She 



IDA OF ATHENS. 169 

had, however, in the first aera of her 
initiation, to encounter the same illu- 
sions in the learned circle of the bas- 
bleusy as in the fantastic rounds of the 
haut-ton. 

Caught by a rounded period, a jeu- 
de-mots, a profound critique, qf an 
erudite quotation, she guessed not sit^ 
the previous rehearsal which formed" 
the perfection of the actors, until her 
quick discernment itituitively detected * 
the studied exhibition of those whO 
had the character of wits to maintain, 
the reputation of authors to support, 
or the title of eccentrics to confirm. 

She thought she beheld in many of 
these candidates for public fame, and 
private admiration, a nervous restless- * 
ness, a dread of rivalry, a tenacious ap- 
prehension of the characters they had 
assumed, and to whose reputation tlfey" 
owed their place in distinguished so- 

VOL. IV. ' I 



VTQ WOMAN; OR 

clety, which restrained their natural 
feelings, and detracted from the charm 
which their talents must otherwise have 
possessed. , It was thus that she was fre- 
quently disappointed in her literary- 
connections, that she found not always 
the interesting man in the charming 
poet, public celebrity inseparably con* 
nected with private attraction, or su- 
periour abilities divested of frivolous 
and inconsequent manners. Wholly 
led away by the fanciful expectation of 
^ romantic recluse, she had often per- 
sonified female genius in her imagina- 
tion; and the brilliancy and softness, 
the ardor and sensibility, which she 
supposed should characterize and dis- 
tino-uish it, had assumed in her san^ 
guine idea, forms of correspondent 
loveliness ; it visited her poetic fancy 
as a muse, a grace, a sylph ; the intelli- 
gence of the soul, and the sensibility 



^ IDA OF ATHENS. 171 

of the heart, diflfusing their mingled 
charms over the motions and the form. 
She sought therefore among women of 
literary distinction, whom public fame 
had crowned, for that sweet season of 
life, whose ardent unworn feelings are 
so nutritive to the powers of the imagi- 
nation and the mind, but rarely found 
it. It seemed as if the flower of their 
youth had faded, before that of their 
genius had blown into existence ; — and 
she, who believed it was so easy to glide 
from the asylum of the loves into the 
sanctuary of the muses, was disappoint- 
ed to observe, that in her charmino- sex 
talents and the graces were not always 
intimately connected ; and that the wo- 
man too frequently chilled the glow 
of admiration which the authoress had 
illumined. 

While amidst the false and dazzling 
glare of learned or witty exhibition, 
12^ 



172 ^ WOMAN; OR 

which she so frequently witnessed, she 
more than ever learnt to feel, that the 
invariable accompaniments of true ge- 
nius, are nature and simplicity ; — the 
one as the source from whence the di- 
vine inspiration of genius flows, the 
other as the medium through which 
the sacred light of genius is effused. 

Ida herself ambitioned a distinguish- 
ed name ; but the ardor of her cha- 
racter-^her very nature, at once indo- 
lent and volatile, militated against its 
acquirement upon forced or artificial 
principles : wholly governed by feel- 
ing, by impulse, or by sympathy, she 
sometimes merely amused where she 
was expected to astonish, and frequent- 
ly disappointed the hope it was believ- 
ed she would have surpassed.^ Anxious 
to acquire the fame of versatility of ta- 
lent, she continued to risk it by a thou- 
sand inadvertencies of manner and con- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 175 

duct ; panting to shine, yet more form- 
ed to touch; vain, yet humble; enter- 
prising, though timid; endowed with 
less wit than sensibility, with more 
intuition than acquirement ; her anxiety 
to be celebrated arose from her wish to 
be loved ; and had the triumphs of no- 
toriety surpassed her hopes or met her 
desires, she would still delightedly 
have sacrificed the crown it placed 
upon her head, for the dearer triumphs 
which the heart alone can bestow. 

Yet still the young and sanguine 
athenian gave herself up, without re- 
serve, to society ; no spell of feeling 
lured her to the safe asylum of domes- 
tic felicity ; — the dearer ties which na- 
ture had twined round her heart, were 
broken— for she had lost the friend of 
her youth, the authors of her exist- 
ence, and the associates of early life. 
The stronger feelings of mature exist- 



I!r4 WOMAN; OR 

ence, which nature had so finely, so 
powerfully awakened, were blasted in 
all the bloom of their enjoyment, and 
as yet beholding no object worthy to 
touch her heart, she resigned herself to 
the influence of her ambition, and when 
the world eagerly sought her, she retir- 
ed not from the world's advances. 

Mingling in all the first and splendid 
circles of polished society, she was 
astonished and amused by the talents 
; that on every side presented themselves 
to her observation ; but she did not fail 
to remark, that genius in its true and 
highest sense was proportionably rare, 
and her habit of examining whatever 
presented itself with any degree of dif- 
ficulty to her apprehension, soon con- 
vinced her that the one was frequently 
the cause of which the other was the 
effect. 

To cultivate that versatility of (what 



IDA OF ATHENS. 175 

18 called) talent, is to embrace a pur- 
suit distinct from that great atid ex- 
pansive developement of Intnnd and 
feelings which is termed gehius — the 
talents of good company are the result 
of that minute attention to those " small 
arts" and elegant pursuits, which de- 
pend upon the lesser faculties of ex- 
istence, are perfected by mechanical 
practice, and, un-ambitious of attract- 
ing public esteem, are seen to captivate 
and amuse the attention of private and 
polished society. But genius is the 
concentration of the mind's forces, to 
great and noble objects, by which man- 
kind at large is improved or benefitted. 
It is the habit of seeing things in the 
aggregate, and judging of them in the 
whole. It is that transcendant power 
of intellect, that vivid quickness of in- 
tuition, which at once illuminates and 
pervades a subject, compares its esta- 



176 WOMAN; OR 

blished combinations, and creates nevr, 
— unfolds its difl&culties, and ascertains 
its relations and effects. 

It is that high feeling of the soul 
which at once receives an impression of 
right as a sentiment, while the mind 
instinctively acknowledges it as a truth. 
It is that free expansion of intellect 
and sensibility, which, unrestrained by 
the opinions, the authorities, and 
maxims of others, flows widely and 
freely to the sacred touch of nature ; 
and warmed and animated by her un- 
erring inspiration, dares to feel, to 
judge, and to decide for itself. 

Such was the idea which (perhaps 
erroneously) Ida had formed of genius ; 
an idea seldom answered among the ac- 
complished, or even talented, persons, 
who surrounded her ; but if in this in- 
stance her expectations were frequent-* 
ly disappointed, — in another, her pe- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 177 

netration was confused and perplexed. 
For she observed a genre of being fill- 
ing up the pauses of society, and form- 
ing a tintless ground-work to the more 
prominent groups, at whose class, in 
the human genus, she could not even 
form the remotest idea. — It was, how- 
ever, a species of character, if charac- 
ter it could be called, in which society 
abounds, whom all tolerate and none 
reject. A character neither serviceable, 
nor dangerous, to the world or to itself, 
unaffectioned in feeling, yet suscep- 
tible to social enjoyment, free from 
suffering and incapable of sympathy, 
carried gaily on by that light pride 
which is so easily satisfied by moderate 
approbation, and equally free from 
envy and malignity, equally destitute 
of the elevation of virtue, or the energy 
of vice, bears within its own being a 
I 3 



If 8 WOMAN; OR 

series of little views and trivial pro- 
pensities which never diverge from 
their own selfish centre, which neither 
love nor friendship can animate, nor 
philanthropy nor intelligence can ex- 
pand. 

While every where she ohserved 
that the talents, subservient to mo- 
mentary dissipation, were more eagerly 
pursued than those which were at once 
calculated to serve aud enlighten so» 
ciety, and that London, like her own 
Athens of old, was not so much the 
birth-place of genius, as its asylum, 
which her riches enabled her to en- 
'Courage, and the refined state of her 
society to appreciate and reward. 

Ida met with a few men of distin- 
guished genius, as orators, as wits, as 
dramatists, and as poets, whom she 
supposed, from their habits and man- 
ners, to be Englishmen: but she un- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 179 

derstood they were the natives of ano- 
ther country ! She became interested 
for a nation that could produce such 
men ; she could not understand how, 
having produced them, it could con- 
sent to their resignation ; she could not 
understand how they could quit the 
country that had given them birth, so 
inseparably connected were patriotism 
and genius in her romantic imagina- 
tion. 

*' It is at least," said she, " a proof 
of the freedom, prosperity, and hap- 
piness, of tliat country ; in the hour 
of national affliction, the supreme ge- 
nius of the few can alone reconcile or 
ameliorate the interests and sufTerindrs 
of the many. It is the actuating spirit, 
of which the mass of the people are the 
body, alas 1" she said, " if Athens, 
boasted of a few such men, its civil fac- 
tions, its religious dissensions, would 



180 WOMAN; OR 

soon cease to exist : their talents would 
be devoted to the service of their coun- 
try ; they would inculcate unanimity 
and toleration among their compatriots. 
And they would eloquently convince 
their rulers that there is but one reli- 
gion, and but one government, in the 
eyes of him who gives the sacred ex- 
ample of both, the religion of bene- 
ficence, and the government of affec- 
tion.^ They would say, that the closest 
bond of union between the subject and 
the throne, is that which nature sug- 
gests, by the most blessed of her feel- 
ings, paternal solicitude for those who 
are governed, and filial gratitude to 
him who governs. She was surprised 
to hear that the country alluded to 
had not quite so much cause to be hap- 
py ; but she could learn so little rela- 
tive to its internal state, that she would 
have supposed it a south-sea island, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 181 

had it not been named to her ; she 
then knew from her geographical in- 
formation, that it was separated from 
England by a narrow channel only. 



Every one was anxious to witness 
the lively impression made on the 
mind of the young and susceptible 
foreigner, by scenes and objects so new 
to her apprehension, as those which 
now presented themselves, and the 
mornings were devoted to shewing her 
public exhibitions of all that the arts 
had assembled in London ; but the 
taste of Ida was that of a greek, formed 
upon the principles of that nation, 
from which she never swerved. 

She liad acquired her judgment in 
the school of Phidias, amidst the ruins 
of the Parthenon. And she had stu- 



182 WOMAN; OR 

died the forms and colouring of nature^ 
under the influence of an Ionian cli- 
mate. She was not therefore to be de- 
ceived ; she knew that she breathed the 
chilly air of the north ; and that she 
lived in a country of commerce, 
where the feelings themselves were 
subject to the^ laws of calculation, and 
where tlie oppulence that rewards can- 
not Inspire genius. The perfection of 
art, is the imitation of nature in her 
finest forms and purest tints, because 
good taste Is then^ combined with su- 
periority of execution; but nature is 
found most worthy of imitation in 
those regions, where the natural ardor 
of the human character produces that 
enthusiasm so indispensibie and so nu- 
tritive to a love and a pursuit of the 
fine arts. It" was thus that Greece was 
the rival of nature herself, until moral 
causes counteracted complexional in- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 18S 

fiuence. — It was thus that Italy alone be- 
came the rival of Greece. Holland pro- 
duced a Vandyke, but it could never 
produce a Raphael; for his genius be- 
longed only to ^ a region where the 
passions betray themselves without re- 
serve ; and where objects of exquisite 
beauty, or high sublimity, give to ge- 
nius those images which form its finest 
inspiration. 

Ida was surprised to observe the list- 
less languor that hung on the countenan- 
ces of the crowded spectators that filled 
the exhibition, even when their atten- 
tion was rivetted on some picture they 
seemed to approve — " It appears," 
said she, " as if the admiration that 
flowed involuntarily from the mind, 
froze as it passed through the chilling 
medium of the manner." 



B4 WOMAN; OR 

The friends cf the young athenlan 
took her to the theatres, and were dis- 
appointed to find that her surprise and 
deligjit did not equal their expecta- 
tions. 

There is a middle age, when society 
stands half way between infancy and 
refinement, an age in which the rudi- 
ments of nature, wholly effaced, are 
not yet sought after by the impulse of 
taste or reason ; when education, 
partial and limited, is confined to the 
few, and even in their possession is 
clogged with errors, and obscured by 
prejudices ; when poverty of mind, 
coarseness of feeling, the want of a 
power of abstract combination, and 
the disordered wildness of a rude 
and wandering fancy, reduce the inter- 
courses of life to the suppliance of mu- 
tual wants, or the detail of improbable 
traditions; when man is destitute of 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1*5 

dependence upon his own intellectual 
resources, or of an intellectual sympa- 
thy with others. 

Such is the age when the drama re- 
ceives the warmest devotion. In ages 
such as this, the car of Thespis was 
surrounded by a delighted multitude, 
the plays of Ennius were received 
with rapturous applause, and the 
coarse rude pieces of early English 
dramatists were given in the forenoon 
to a crowded audience and graced by 
the presence of royalty itself. 

But in that splendid and polished 
era, when athens had reached the sum- 
mit of her greatness, and stood un- 
rivalled in her genius and refinement, 
personal malignity was resorted to, to 
rouse the slumbering taste of the drama 
into being, and those who had long 
deserted the theatres, returned only to 



186 WOMAN; OR 

hear the loves of Pericles exposed^ or 
the virtues of Socrates ridiculed. 

In the age of Augustus, when Rome 
had reached the ultimate goal of excel- 
lence in every intellectual and refined 
pursuit; an elephant was produced, 
ior a gladiator exposed, to allure back 
to the deserted theatres, a people that 
had once sought them as the source of 
their principal recreation and amuse- 
ment. 

It is thus, that in England, the 
drama no longer possesses that spell 
of attraction, which it possessed in 
days of less general refinement, and 
diffuse information. Not even the 
pure and classical taste of the scholar, 
united to an intimate study of the pas- 
sions of human nature, and the pro- 
found capability of expressing them, 
can now bring back that dramatic en- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 187 

thusiasm which, was felt, when taste 
and nature were equally outraged; 
when the justnesss of enunciation had 
not yet succeeded to the monotonous 
whine of ignorant declaimers, when the 
graces of natural and simple action, 
had not yet displaced the mechanical 
movements of studied awkwardness, 
when scenic accompaniments were 
rude and inappropriate, and when Co- 
riolanus adopted the costume of a 
preux chevalier of the round table, 
and King Lear appeared in the garb 
of an old French physician of th€ day 
of Louis XI V^. 

But the stale which hafr reached a 
certain point of intelligence and re- 
finement, has always proved its inde- 
pendence of public exhibitroii, Km the 
chaim of private society extends its 
influence as our ftelings expand, :ind 
minds enlarge, and happiness becomes 



iS8 WOMAN; OR 

the result of sympathy and social inter- 
course. 

In a word, as vre come home to 
nature, as intelligence brightens in the 
mind, and sensibility expands in the 
heart, dearth of intellect and blunt- 
ness of feeling no longer throw us 
upon extraneous amusement for re- 
source and occupation ; and we find 
within ourselves, and in each other, 
the true springs of happiness and plea- 
sure. 

But if Ida laughed at the absurdity 
of a modern farce, and yawned through 
the overstrained sentiment of what is 
termed genteel comedy. At a brilli- 
ant spectacle she felt that vivacity of 
emotion so natural to her sex, her years, 
and country. ' 

Public exhibition, which in the pre- 
sent state of society so seldom interests 
the mind, is capable in every age of at- 



^ " IDA OF ATHENS. 189 

tracting the senses ; but most in that 
when perfections in the arts and me- 
chanical crafts, have attained their ex- 
treme point of excellence ; when they 
lend their exquisite deceptions to the 
charm of some beautiful classical il- 
lusion or popular fable, given in the 
representation with truth and taste, 
when the eye and the ear borrow a new 
sense of enjoyment from the refined 
visions of the fancy, and when the mo- 
nastic procession, or heathen sacrifice, 
recals these two stages in society, so 
precious to the picturesque powers of 
the imagination and the mind. 

In every age, from the most rude to 
the most refined, the song that breathes 
the intimation of nature, and the motion 
which express them, will be felt and 
understood ; for though the mind may 
err, the senses are always true, and 
from the hut of the esquimaux Indian, 



190 WOMAN; OR 

to the court of the most refined states, 
the song and the dance will invari- 
ably preserve their influence and their 
charm. 



The woman who seeks or obtains 
popularity, exposes herself to a vicissi- 
tude of feeling, for which no fame 
can compensate. 

Ida, how generally known, generally 
received, and generally admired, al- 
ready began to be partially feared, and 
partially opposed. Envy threw round 
her cold glance of suspicious vigilance, 
eager to detect an error, and ready to 
magnify it to a vice. And prudence, 
not that pure and gentle quality, which 
endeavours to regulate its feelings and 
its forms, to the obvious well-being of 
society ; but that frigid prudence which 



IDA OF ATHENS. 191 

Founds its claim to propriety upon the 
want of ks temptation to swerve from 
it, sought with avidity for the faults of 
the young athenian, and exposed them 
with triumph to the world. 

Without guide, without experience, 
in all the glow of youth, of feeling, 
and of fancy ; guileless in intention ; 
innocent in fact, unsuspicious of her- 
self, and full of confidence in others, 
Ida freely gave herself up to those im- 
pulsions of nature hitherto so blameless 
in their result, and so lovely in their 
<li8play ; nor paused to consider, how 
far those feelings and those manners, 
so consonant to her former life, in the 
classic shades of her native country, 
might harmonize with the forms and 
system of that society, into which she 
was now so unexpectedly thrown. 

Kindness and admiration were the 
sentiments she was most formed to feel 



192 WOMAN; OR 

and to inspire, and those lively emo- 
tions so consonant to the heart of a 
woman, whose natural and national 
character so intimately blended the 
tenderness of affection with the viva- ' 
city of genius, frequently impelled her 
beyond that line which arbitrary de- ^ 
corum creates, which vice, systematic 
in its caution, may not even approach^ 
but which conscious innocence un-*-a 
guarded in its pursuits of pleasure, may 
be impelled to touch, and never can 
pass with impunity. 

Ida was surrounded by professed ad-*» 
mirers — their homage was grateful to 
her vanity, but unfelt by her heart. 

If they talked to her of love, she 
told them with her natural candour, 
she was insensible and free, while she 
was attached and faithful I- — She de- 
ceived them by the avowal, but blind- 
ed by delicacy and pride, she deceived 



ID^ OF ATHENS. 193 

herself also. Yet while she rejected 
the affectio^Qs, she endeavoured to con* 
ciliate the esteem ; while she refused the 
lover, she endeavoured to secwe the 
frieiid. This conduct, so natural to a 
gentle and affectionate wotnan, and 
so vpure m its mtative, was (fengerous 
in its result. In the sophisticated ^q- 
ciety »n which she lived, it rend^ed 
her sensibility questionable, and isub- 
jected her artless conduct to Jjbe impu" 
tation of coquetry and pride. 

Yet so powerful is the spell of in- 
ftocence, so incapable of disguise are 
the principles of a mind whose na^ 
live dignity revolts from vice, that tlie 
virtue of Ida received, even from her 
enemies, that homage which was some- 
times denied, even by her friends, to 
her prudence ; and those who arraigned 
her manners of volatility, dared not to 
taint tlie spotless purity of her cbarac- 

VOL. IV. K 



194 WOMAN; OR 

ter, whose unguarded confidence was 
at once its sanction and defence. 

Ida had just reached the acme of her 

popularity, when Lord B— returned 

to London, after an absence of some 
months in Ireland. -r'-^ja 

The fame of the athenian girl 
soon reached him ; it awakened no 
amazement — he was flattered in the 
sanction his own taste received from the 
world's opinion ; he knew she possessed 
all those brilliant graces which society 
requires in the object of its admiration, 
but he sighed to remember how man)* 
lovely traits of character and mamier 
belonged to her, of which the world 
must ever remain ignorant, which alone 
unfold themselves in the intimacy of 
fi'iendsiiip or of love, and which re- 
quired a daily intercourse to discover 
and appreciate. - 

Ida had fastened on his heart with an 



IDA OF ATHENS. 195 

influence that nothing could dispel ; 
but she had awakened some of the most 
irascible . passions of his nature; she 
had wounded his pride— she had mor- 
tified his vanity — she had disappointed 
his affections — and she had preferred 
poverty and want, in a strange country, 
to the independence and protection, his 
love had offered to her acceptance. 

It now became equally his anxiety to 
meet and to avoid her ; his lingering 
tenderness and lingering pride, at once 
drew him towards, and repelled him 
From her. Their situation in society 
would frequently unite them in its cii?<- 
cles ; and though he was determined 
not to add to her triumphs, and even 
felt a reluctance to witness them, yet 
it was deemed such b;id taste not to be 
known to her, and he was still so infatua- 
ted by the world's influence, that h© 
soughtj yet feared, an opportunity of 
K 2 



196 WOMAN; OR 

approaching her as an acqualntanc<s 
whom he had hitherto only pursued as 
a mistress. 

'Their first recognition of each other 
was on the first night of her appearance 
act the opera. She passed him on her 
way to her carriage — their eyes met-^ 
he bowed respectfully — Ida returned 
the sali^ — but her unpractised feel- 
ings were incapable of concealment, 
and the gentleman who led her oM- 
perceived the tremblings of that deli-* 
cate frame, which always so truly re- 
sponded to the emotions of the soul by- 
which' it was animated. '^ ''■ Mf ; vqr? 

>Ih the composition of the athenian, 
no *' jarring atoms" were to be found, 
"gentleness and joy made up her be- 
ing." She could resist, but she could 
TLdjt resent. Her kind and tender na- 
ture vvas impracticable to the influence 
of an irascible passion ; "and the ten- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 1«^7 

derness of her heart, the nobility of her 
feeliags, and the mildness of her cha- 
racter, too frequently militated against , 
the dignity of her manners, though 
not of her conduct. She had already 
ceased to remember the injury Lord 
B had meditated against her hap- 
piness ; but never could forget the ser-? 
vices he had rendered her little family 
in the hour of their distress, or those in- 
numerable and endearing attentions he 
had lavished on herself. 

She considered his conduct, not with 
the eye of a woman of the world, whose 
opinions and whose conduct are formed 
upon a certain convenience belonging 
to the sphere in which she moves, but 
with that eye of true discernment, which 
considers human nature, not abstract- 
edly, but according to the circuqa- 
stances and education under which it, 
acts. She therefore placed the coti^. 



1J>8 WOMAN; OR 

duct of Lord B to its true ac- 
count. She pitied his error, rather 
than condemned his faults, and bor- 
rowed an indulgence to his failings, 
from the consciousness of the virtue it 
had so often tried and proved in her- 
self. 

If in the world, or in her life, she 
beheld no form or character that could 
be deemed a parallel for Osmyn's 
matchless greatness, in the polished so- 
ciety she now lived in she behtld none 

who surpassed LordB , and few 

who resembled him, 

His strong feelings, his brilliant ta- 
lents, his, insinuating manners, his 
equal capability of doing a right as a 
wrong, a great as a weak action, still 
left him master of an admiration, on 
which the general apathy and preten- 
sion of many who surrounded her made 
no claim ; aud when they again met> 



IDA OF ATHENS. 199 

and he distantly, though politely, ad- 
dressed her, she neither betrayed aver- 
sion nor resentment in her manners, for 
she felt none in her heart ; but her deli- 
cacy taught her the necessity of reserve, 
and her experience inculcated the safe- 
ty of caution. 

They now continued to meet fre- 
frequently, and the confidence of Ida 
increased in proportion as her heart 
ascertained, by hourly experience, the 
indifference it felt towards every ob- 
ject, but that she believed now lost to it 
for ever. 

It was in vain that Lord B sys- 
tematically sought to fix his attention 
on other women; but in those who 
possessed her wit, he found not her 
heart, in those who possessed her ar- 
dour, he found not her delicacy ; and 
those who possessed her understanding, 
he found not that springing youth, that 



SOO WOMAN J OR 

sylphic form, which rendered wisdom 
so lovely, and genius so fascinating; 
while the seduction that lurked in her 
conversation still drew him back to 
her, even when he despaired of reco« 
vering a heart he believed he had 
once touched, or of possessing a person 
he still adored. 

Yet even still, so strong was the in- 
fluence ©f an early and fatal prejudice, 
of his slavery to the world's voice, and 
of habits and opinions, long confirmed 
into principles of c'onduCt, (hat had 
he been sure of the heart of Ida, with 
all her opulence, with the sanction of 
her situation in that society in ^hich 
she moved, even higher and more dis^, 
linguished than himself, he would have 
hesitated to have married her ; for he 
Still feared in the wife that genius h6 
adored in the mistress ; he still trem- 
bled to appear a proselyte to that doc- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 50 1 

trine he had himself established ; — he 
continued to assert, that " love and 
marriage were incompatible :" — he con- 
tinued to laugh at " the man who vo- 
luntarily threw a shackle over his plea- 
sures, and resigned his happiness into 
the keeping of another." But he still 
felt more than ever, that all human fe- 
licity depends upon the heart alone ; 
and that to retire from the world with 
Ida, to Idve, and be 4jeloved by a 
creature whose genius and sensibility 
rendered her so capable and so worthy 
of both, would have been a happiness 
worthy of a sacrifice, which though great 
almost to impossibility in his own fan- 
cy, existed in his own fancy only. For 
the vanity of man misleads him as to the 
opinion of the world, and the commu- 
nity at large seldom feels that lively 
interest in the conduct and affairs of an 
individual which he himself supposes, 



202 WOMAN; OR 

except where that conduct militates 
against the general interest and well- 
being of society. 

Meanwhile, an irresistible impulse 

still invariably drew Lord B to 

the side of Ida, wherever she appeared. 
Neither love nor gallantry animated 
his conversation, he talked to her in- 
cessantly of Athens, of its views, its. 
scenes, its ruins, and its inhabitants ; of 
the circumstances of their first ac- 
quaintance, and of a thousand little 
incidents which awakened in the soul 
of Ida that tender love of country, la- 
tent, but not lost to her feelings, and 
gave to his always enteresting conver- 
sation a spell, -a charm, she was unable 
to resist, but which she was unconsci- 
ous it possessed, for he talked to her 
of scenes sacred, in her imagination, to 
the purest love, the tenderest feelings, 
the noblest exertions which human abi~ 



IDA OF ATHENS- 203 

lity could make for human happiness, 
and . human freedom. It brought to 
her recollection the days of her youth, 
the friends of her affections, and the 
hero of her heart. The world mistook 
the interest with which Ida hung upon 

the words of Lord B ; and their 

attachment and immediate union was a 
report which had reached every ear 
but their own. Many, who had de- 
clared themselv<it the professed ad- 
mirers of the young athenian, with- 
drew their attentions ; and Ida rejoiced 
at her emancipation from their addres- 
ses, without guessing at its cause. 

The first season of Ida's appear- 
ance in that world, where all to her 
was strange and new, was already far 
advanced, and the developement of her 
genius and character confirmed and 
increased that popularity, which her 



S04 WOMAN; OR 

novelty alone had at first procured 
her. 

But Ida, at once gratified and grate^ 
ful, was yet incapable of a soliUry uti^ 
divided triumph* v - >- 

- When taknt offered its homage to 
her charms, — when rank solicited her 
attentioUj and bowed to the superiority 
of natural endowment, Ida received 
these tributes of admiration, so flatter- 
ing to a young and jpii ambitious wor- 
mian, with a smile, but it was followed 
by a sigh of tended 'regret, that the 
countny, which had so dearly cherished 
her, and that she stilt so dearly lovedj) 
witnessed not the credit she reflected ' 
on its chaiiacter : in a strange and dis*- 
tant nation, this sentiment, so natural 
to a heart attached equally from sen-' 
timent and principle to the spot wherft 
ite fir^t feelings were awakened, fre^> 



IDA OF ATHENS. SO^ 

quently, too frequently, concentrated 
its force to an object of more intimate 
consideration ; she thought of the man' 
whom she had loved, by whom she had 
been beloved, and praise-satiated, po- 
pularity wearied, and even homage 
palled, while the eye, whose beam 
was immortality, witnessed not that 
splendid triumph only sought after by 
her ambition, or precious in her esteem, 
as it was combined with powers that 
rendered her more capable of loving, 
or more worthy to be beloved. 

Too tender, too feeling to be long 
deceived, she soon discovered that the 
vain amusements of the world can only 
accord with a determined dissipation 
of mind, or a cold insensibility of 
heart. 
She had already begun to decline many 
of the numerous invitations that craved 
her acceptance, when she was induced 



206 WOMAN; OR 

by the novelty of the entertainment to 
go to a masquerade ; she was prevailed 
on to go in' the character of her cele- 
brated country-woman, Irene, and 
dressed it in the ancient costume of 
Athens. Always influenced in every 
action by some tender little association 
of idea and feeling, she was habited 
in the same manner as when she ap' 
peared at the feast of the chiledonia ; 
and this dress, recalling a thousand 
tender thouaihts and cherished recoUecT 
tions to her heart, diffused over her air 
and feelings, a pensive, tender languor, 
that always finely harmonized with the 
prevailing character of her person. 

Bewildered by the tumult and vari- 
ety that surrounded her, she thought 
not of the character she was meant to 
support, she was wholly lost in con- 
templation of the grotesque forms that 
presented themselves to her amused 



_ IPA OF ATHENS. 5a7 

and wondering eye, until the dress and 
air of a particular character attracted 
her attention from every other, it was 
a caloyer, or greek monk. His figure 
was almost bent to the earth, a long 
white staff grasped in his trembling 
hand, with difficulty supported his in- 
firm and tottering limbs ; a beard of 
snow fell to his girdle, and care, dis- 
ease, and age blended their traces in a 
visage which seemed rather to rival 
than to imitate nature. He stood near 
Ida when she first observed him, and 
seemed engaged in telling his beads, 
with an air so naturally abstracted, 
that Ida became the victim of the illu- 
sion. The masquerade disappeared 
from her imagination. It was a good 
and pious monk, of St. Cypriani, that 
stood before her; it was a. compatriot 
in a foreign country who presented 
himself. Athens I — Hymettus 1 — ros« 



208 WOMAN J OR 

to her susceptible fancy, and forgetful 
of her party, she advanced involun- 
tarily towards the monk ; she paused 
timidly; he raised his eyes — and for a 
moment their glance met ; the monk 
cast down his eyes to the earth, and : 
turned slowly away. — Ida impulsively 
followed him; his steps were so natu- 
rally feeble,— her imagination was so' 
completely buoyant, — that as he still 
tottered slow^ly on, — she still pursued 
him. — At last he paused, as if to stopi/' 
for breath, and Ida, new to every spe- 
cies of acting, detected not the art in 
its perfection, and advancing a few 
steps, she said, in a timid voice, and in 
modem greek, " shall I assist you fa- 
ther ?"; — The monk bowed in silence^ 
and took her offered arm ; she observ- 
ed he trembled, and that he seemed' ^ 
agitated and feeble. — " I perceive," ' 
she said, " you are not ivellj the heat 



IDA OF ATHENS. 509 

of this room is overcoming, shall I lead 
you to another ?" — " That which I ap- 
pear to be, that I am," replied the 
monk, in greek, " I alone am no actor 
here." — " I believe it," returned Ida, 
with credulous simplicity, and at that 
moment they entered an adjoining 
room ; a few masks only loitered in it, 
and Ida, rather led, tlian leading, ad- 
vanced to a balcony. — It hung over 
a private garden, and was shaded by a 
deep drapery. The moon shone bright- 
ly ; and Ida, no less than the monk,, 
felt the air cool and refreshing. 

The caloyer seated himself. 

*' I will try and procure you some 
refreshment," said Ida, unconscious of 
the singularity of her own situation, 
and of her being now separated from 
her party. — 

" Stay, daughter," cried the monk, 
'* I want for nothing, the only object I 



^10 WOMAN; OR 

sought on this side heaven I have now 
found I" " and that," said Ida impa- 
tiently, 

" Is yourself lady !" 

"Ah! then," she replied in amaze* 
ment, ** you know me !" 

The monk dropped his head on his 
shoulder, and after a pause, said, " I 
have heard you so frequently describ- 
ed, that it was impossible to mistake 
you — besides, that dress — I should have 
known you by that dress alone." 

" And now that you have found me** 
said Ida eagerly, " how can I serve 
you?" supposing it was a distressed 
compatriot she conversed with. 

The monk waved his head—" I came 
not here," he said, " to obtain services 
for myself, but to perform them to- 
wards another ; it has been committed 
to me to relate to you a tale, tedious 
perhaps to your ear, and uninteresting 
to your heart, but still not unconnected 



IDA OF ATHENS. 211 

with your destiny." Ida seated kerself 
by the monk — she doubted her senses 
at the moment that her mind awakened 
to their evidence. "Nol" she said, 
V;,you cannot deceive me; your lan- 
guage, your accent, your dress, and 
your infirmity, convince me that I am 
no longer misled by the force of ima- 
gination ; you must be all that you ap- 
pear—speak and I will hear you, yet 
for one of your profession how extra- 
ordinary is. the place you have chosen 
for an audience." " I was told you 
were only to be found in the haunts of 
pleasure (said the monk with severity) 
and there I sought you." 

" Ida sighed and blushed — and the 
monk in a rapid tone of voice again ad- 
dressed her. " The tale I have to relate 
shall be brief. The native of an inte- 
resting but unhappy country appeared 
some few years back as the defender of 



Sm WOMAN J OR 

her riglits, and was therefore exiled by 
her tyrants — engaged for some time in 
the service of a foreign country, who 
favoured his own ; he at last returned ii> 
disguise to his native land, to watch the 
moment favourable to its cause ; htf' 
brought with him an only son, the in* 
fant companion of his exile, he left him 
at the hospitable door of a poor greek 
peasant, ,att<t> entering the convenl^r* 
whose habit I now wear, adopted his onl^r i 
child, and reared the boy to arms, con*r 
cealing his birth and parentage, even y 
from himself, for so the safety of the. 
boy required. w? 

jPre manhood dawned upon his 
opening life, this boy had lost his fa4>5 
ther I— His fate was doubtful and most 
perilous. An angel's spirit, in a wo* 
man's form, gave it a sacred impress^; I 
and filled his soul alone with love an<fe. 
glory l-^Oii tt^en he formed such? 



IDA OF ATHENS. Sli$ 

views of high renown I — Oh ! tfecrt 
lie cherished sucii sentiments of bliss, 
that all the sufferings of his future life 
were cheap, too cheaply purchased, by 
hopes so noble, and by joys so pure.—- 
But in the moment when they reach- 
ed that great excess, which youth, and 
loveliness, and genius give, a woman's 
whim destroyed all that a woman's 
matchless powers had effected. The 
loYe which formed his spell to fame 
and glory was betrayed, another was 
proposed, and every ill which nature 
can sustain, followed in quick succes- 
sion. 

The country for which this wretch- 
ed lover bled, was ruined by the exer- 
tions he had made to save it ; and the 
tyrant, by whose power his every ef- 
fort was overruled, was even recom^ 
pensed by her possession, who had been 
the vanquished patriot's dearest inspi- 



514 WOMAN; OR 

ration. — Nay lady, hear me out. This 
patriot (and sure he never justly forfeit- 
ed theg!orioustitIe)wasbranded with the 
epithet of rebel — flung into a noisome 
dungeon — was twice led out to death, 
and with a dread refinement on the 
cruelty^ was twice led back to be re- 
tained for sufferings to which a lin2;er- 
ing death would have been mercy. 
For oh) above his dungeon's vaulted 
roof the nuptial festival was gaily ce- 
lebrated of her he loved— you start ! — 
It seems, and is, incredible, and it was 
at once impossible and true. He saw 
her for a moment from the place of 
death clasped in the arms of that fell 
tyrant who doomed him to destruction; 
nay more, he saw the instrument sign- 
ed by her hand (her still too dear, and 
well-known hand) which made her — 
God of heaven I — that tyrant's wife. 
It was that tyrant, it was that rival. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 215 

\yho, with cold destroying cruelty, 
sought out the victim's loathsome dun- 
geon, to blast his eyes, his ears, and 
heart, with triumphs such as these.— ^ 
A transient death relieved him from 
his sufferings. He woke as from a 
horrid dream, and by the lamp's un- 
certain light beheld a woman's form. — 
She came to offer freedom, life, and 
love. 

She said she had long been loved 
by one deep in her father's confidence, 
to whom she owed her present privi- 
lege and powers. She said she long 
had loved her father's enemy, and he, 
since now 'tis idle to conceal it, had 
long been importuned by her affection. 
Her lover thought her passion was but 
pity, and made his treachery towards his 
master, the purchase of her promised 
love. This generous liberator of a wretch 
condemned, was only child to him who 



•16 WOMAN; OR 

had condemned that wi-etch to endless 
misery on earth, to torture, and to ig- 
nominious death. The singular event 
offered a double triumph, and he did 
not fling it from hiiii. 

The rivals fled ; with the object of a 
coarse unmanly passion, of a pure un- 
alterable gratitude — ^^they fled, and af- 
ter a long and perilous journey, the 
imprudence of a woman, ardent but 
volatile, with affections unregulated as 
feer mind, discovered to the watchful 
eye of suspicious and unrequited love, 
the ffood fortune of a rival insensible 
to his happiness — an unavoidable com- 
bat ensued, and the wretched, but 
successful rival, Avas still destined to 
be miserable in his victory ; the life be 
loathed was saved ; the life he sought 
to save was lost. 

The fugitives continued their route 
towaids a frontier town of Russia, and 



IDA OF ATHENS. 217 

were supplied with means of expendi- 
ture by the jewels carried away by the 
enterprizing saviour* of a wretched 
life — when that life was reduced to the 
last ebb of existence. Wounds never 
healed broke out afresh — the sufferer 
lay stretched on a bed of agony, his 
affections had been blasted, his person 
was faded and disabled, and silent sul- 
len affliction only gave way at intervals 
to the violence of agony or of despair; 
where he had once inspired love, or 
something that dared to prostitute the 
sacred name, he now awakened but 
disgust, and wounded pride. But not 
to weary out thy patience, lady, this 

' ■ ; i ■ fi> ■ .y .■« i ' i' ;. 

* .^Turkish women (says dc Tott) of the first 
conditiuii, hurried away by an ungovernable pas- 
sion, escape from their prisons, and the unfortu- 
nates carry all their valuables with them, thinking 
nothing too precious to bestow ion the Im'cr wh« 
rescues them." 

VOL. IV. L 



518 WOMAN;. OR 

ardent, but unfeeling womanV Whose 
passions were her tyrants — who knew 
no tie, no sentiment, but what the mo- 
mentary impulse gave, abandoned him, 
for whom her father and her country- 
were abandoned, and fled with one, 
whom chance had given to her notice, 
and who becam^her beauty's slave ;— 
for she was young, and lovely, and sus- 
ceptible ; and was misled alone by ig- 
norance xnd passion : she blended not 
with all a seraph beauty, the mind of 
genius, and the soul of feeling, and 
then, (oh wondrous mystery I) Sacri- 
ficed those gifts so rare and precious, to 
mean ambition, or to a transient gust 
of shameful capricious preference ! 

Lady, your patience yet a moment. 
The suffering wretch thus again aban- 
doned, forlorn, and sad, commenced 
alone a solitary journey, and, after ma- 
ny a strange vicissitude, reached the 



IDA OF ATHENS. 219 

frontier town of that country, to whose 
interests he was bound from sentiment, 
after those of his own unhappy nation. 
He was well received, beyond his me- 
rits, and equal to his hopes ; for near 
two years he led a soldier's toilsome 
life; fought against the Swedes and 
Turks ; now braved a southern, now a 
northern clime ; was desperate and 
careless of his life, and therefore he 
obtained to high promotion, and to 
signal honours. 'Twas not his merits 
but his fortune: yet great and unex- 
pected as that fortune was, it deadened 
not his soul to patriot feeling ; it dead- 
ened not his heart to her the merciless I 
who first had waked the flame of glory 
there. 'Twas after Ismael's most san- 
guinary combat* that he attained 'a 
furlough from his brave commander. 
The time was limited to three short 

L 2. 
* See note (b). 



S20 WOMAN; OR 

months — it was devoted to the tender 
interest his heart still felt for- his most 
wretched country ; he sought to hide, 
(even from himself) that still another 
cause impelled him to re-visit his na- 
tive land. 

Disguised beneath a turkish garb, 
borne over the Euxine in a turkish 
caique, again he kissed the soil that 
gave him. birth, and was received 
into the service of its rulers.* Suspi- 
cion thus was lulled by one of those 
extravagant and daring efforts, which 
little minds can never reach or o-uess 

o 

at ; an act less bold had sure be- 
trayed him. 

It was on the very day when first he 
undertook to obey the tyranny he came 
to undermine, that he was placed a 
guard upon the man who once had 

* See note (c). 



IDA OF ATHENS. ^?i 

been his direst enemy ; by whom he 
once had been despised and hated. — 
Oh I it was a glorious moment of re- 
venge I — He seized it boldly, and risk- 
ed his life to save the life of him who 
once had sanctioned his destruction. But 
lived within his heart no other senti- 
ment but vengeance ? — Oh ! yes ! — and 
yet it was vengeance too. She lived, the 
only idol of his early vows, his inspira- 
tion, and his spell, still lived; the wi- 
dow of her country's tyrant, the widow 
of her lover's purposed, murderer. 
That she still lived was all he yet had 
learned. But when he saw her pros- 
trate at his feet, pleading for that fa- 
ther to whom she still was true, though 
false to others — Oh I it was a dreadful 
moment I Yet still he conquered na- 
ture — Merciful Heaven I — he spurned 
her from him, and silenced all suspi- 
cion by the unnatural act. He saved 



525 WOMAN; OR 

her father's life I — but, oh ! he risked 
his pride and honour in the effort ; for 
when she wept her grateful tears upon 
his hand, when her still vital touch 
thrilled to his very soul, he nearly had 
forgotten she had deserted, had betrayed 
him ; and rushed from his arms to fill 
his purposed murderer's ! 

Nay, Lady, pardon my vehemence — 
you are moved — and I am much to 
blame. — In brief then, the victory was 
gained — he found it was in vain to seek 
again that country, beyond redemption 
from any single force, and he sought 
again the nation to which his duty and 
esteem was due. 

There I beheld him — more fortunate 
than happy — caressed but still repin- 
ing. The world believed him proud and 
happy, but still the world was much 
deceived. I knew him better — for to a 
noble mind it is a dreadful feeling, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 22$ 

to love the very thing it should des- 
pise I 

The circumstance that brought me 
to this prosperous nation, "was not un- 
known to him, and as he pressed my 
hand at parting, thus he spoke I 

" Shouldst thou e'er meet a creature, 
who blends the beauty of an angel's as- 
pect, with all the spell of woman's dan- 
gerous power ; who seems most true to 
nature, and yet is ruled by art ; whom 
you would think could live alone for 
love, and yet is colder than the win- 
ter's snow ; who blends such genius to 
such sweet simplicity ; such lovely can- 
dour to such dark deception, as make 
conviction even doubt itself; whom 
all the world pursues — adores — and 
courts — and yet who seems insensible 
to all ; who wears a vestal's look, and 
bears a fame pure as a vestal's soul, 
yet lives alone for vanity and plea- 



S54 WOMAN; OR 

sure : — shouldst thou e'er find this 
creature, (and thou wouldst know her 
'midst a myriad,) for on earth this 
thing so fair, so false, so lovely, and 
incongruous stands alone, give her this, 
and tell her, that the spell that bound 
it to a doating heart is broken now for 
ever 1'* 

The monk arose — his bending form 
assumed majestic loftiness I — Swifter 
than a thought he disappeared from 
the glazed and dazzled eyes of the 
athenian. — She sat breathless and con- 
founded, as if a bolt from heaven had 
crushed her to the earth ! — ^The amulet 
once thrown round the neck of the 
young slave of the Acropolis trembled 
in her extended hand. The voice of 
the monk, as it gradually lost its tre- 
mulous weakness, still resounded on 
her ear. She was unconscious of the 
time she remained alone in the balco- 



roA OF ATHENS. St2i 

ny. The intrusion of some rude masks, 
who familiarly addressed her, awaken- 
ed her from her delirium. She rushed 
to the room she had left, and was 
found by her party, who had long 
sought her in vain. Her emotion was 
so powerful, that she had torn off her 
mask. She h^d no influence over her 
feelings, they betrayed themselves in 
despite of her delicacy and her reason. 
Her friends observed her disorder : she 
couiplained with truth of the agony of 
her head, of a suffocation -that pre- 
vented her breathing ; and attributing 
it to the heat of the room, they imme- 
diately carried her home. She instant- 
ly dismissed her attendants. She con- 
tinued during the night to pace her 
room in a state of perturbation that knew 
no interval. She felt assured that the 
monk was no other than Osmyn himselfl 
and the joy that diffused itself through 



526 WOMAN; OR 

her soul, in the consciousness of having' 
again beheld him ;. of his breathing the 
air she breathed ; of being perhaps 
even at that moment, but a few streets 
distant from her, overwhelmed every 
other. But it soon gave way to that 
tumult of opposite feelings, his detail 
and the developement of his senti- 
ments towards herself were calculated 
to inspire. 

There is, perhaps, no pang so acute, 
no sentiment so humiliating, to the 
heart of woman, as Jhe consciousness 
' of awakening distrust, when she most 
deserved to have inspired confidence. 
To find in that heart, where the secret 
of her own has been deposited; suspi- 
cion mingling with the throb of love, 
and causeless selfish jealousy, chilling 
the ardent glow of passion, to find 
each sentiment of tenderness, vibrating 
between contempt and admiration, and 



IDA OF ATHENS. 2i1 

where the purest, dearest, proofs of 
fond affection have been lavished, to 
meet with contumely, reproach, and 
doubt. 

"Oh ! it is too much !" exclaimed Ida, 
in an agony of tears, " him, for whose sake 
I risked my fame, my life, and happi- 
ness ; risked all, save innocence ; by 
him to be accused of knowing transient 
gusts of shameful and capricious pre- 
ference ; — of being faithless to the love 
for which I lived, and false to the cause 
for which I nearly died." 

The glow of indignant pride which 
this conviction awakened in the deli- 
cate and haughty mind of the athenian, 
gave birth in the same moment to a de- 
termination perfectly consonant to the 
Injured feeling of a pure and sensible 
heart, a determination never to seek by 
any act or word to refute the unjust 
accusation of a character which even to 



<28 WOMAN; OR 

"descend to exculpate, would be to in- 
jure ; while still in the midst of all 
her strong and powerful irritation, the 
woman's weakness was paramount to 
the woman's pride ; and the hope, the 
certainty of being still beloved, waked 
a thrilling glow in her heart, which the 
fear of being no longer esteemed could 
not subdue. 

For she knew, even to its finest shade 
of feeling and sensation, the character 
of Osmyn ; and she had now learnt, by 
long and various experience, to know 
and appreciate her own. 

" He will find many characters more 
perfect," she said, " but he will find 
not one who resembles mine 1 — or 
w4iose sympathies in excellence and in 
4!rror, so intimately associate and har- 
monize with his own. 

" Oh 1 yes he will love me', even when 
deceived by the inherent suspicion of 



IDA OF ATHENS. 529 

his character he ceases to esteem me ; 
fprthe heart is still true to the impul- 
sions of nature, and with difficulty re- 
gulates it feelings by the standard of 
arbitrary prudence or acquired preju- 
dice." 

She thlen went over in recollection the 
various cirumstances in the detail of Os- 
myn, which most awakened emotion and 
surprize : the story of his patriot father, 
his half-stifled, half revealed jealousy 
of Achmet, the treachery of the mus- 
sulman, the passion oSi-^the unhappy 
Jumeli, ^vhich she had herself disco- 
vered, and which he, from a deli- 
cate sense of honor, had concealed ; 
his indifference to the charms of the 
beautiful and tender turk, and his ob- 
vious allusion to her own want of sensi- 
bility, to her ambition, and imprudent 
conduct. 

For the first time, Ida felt that the. 



S30 WOMAN; OR 

innocence of her intentions were not 
proof against the stigma of impru- 
dence ; but with the fatal and mistaken 
pride which often misleads women of 
quick and sensitive feelings, she deter- 
mined on pursuing the conduct she had 
hitherto in careless negligence adopted. 
Thus, sacrificing her reason to her 
feelings, and more willing to suffer, 
than to submit, she dreaded the ac- 
cusation of error, even less, than the 
imputation of meanness. And, if in 
the fondnes" *of her heart, she wished 
that Osrnyn were acquainted with the 
sacrifices she had made for his sake, in 
the irritation of her lofty spirit, she 
determined to immolate every hope of 
that happiness the recovery of his af- 
fection alone could confer, rather than 
secure it by a submission which it was 
beneath the dignity, the innocence, and 
integrity of her character to make. 



IDA OF ATHENS. £51 

She could still labour for him, beg 
for him, die for him, for she still loved 
him ; but she could not stoop to com- 
bat his suspicions; " the faith of true 
love," she said, " should be like that of 
religion, it should be received rather 
as a divine inspiration, than on a hu- 
man testimony, and the soul should 
repose in that sweet confidence, which 
the evidence of the senses could not 
disturb." 

From the moment that Ida was as- 
sured that Osmyn was in England, the 
■world assumed a new aspect in her 
imagination. To the satiety of pleasure, 
to the tedium of an uninterestins; ex- 
istence, succeeded a restless agitation, 
that equally involved her feelings and 
her mind. 

The day after the masquerade was 
devoted to visits hitherto reluctantly 
made. 



2S2 • WOMAN; OR 

Wherever she was admitted, she 
talked of Russia, of the empress, of Po- 
temkin, and Suvaroff ; and she at last 
learnt that a russian* officer of distinc- 
tion had lately arrived in England, 
whom the russian ambassador had pre- 
sented in society, and who was cele- 
brated for his military abilities on the 
continent, for the grace and dignity of 
his manners, for the unrivalled beauty 
of his person, and for being high on 
the list of favouritism with Catharine 
the great. He was as yet known but 
to a few, but those few were of dis- 
tinction, and his reputation was al- 
ready extending beyond the limited, 
but splendid, circle to which he seemed 
anxious to confine himself. It was^ 
observed, that his demeanour was 
haughty, his manners reserved, that he 
was subject to fits of abstraction, and 
that intervals of impetuous eloquence 



IDA OF ATHENS. 233 

betrayed a genius impracticable to the 
common forms and mechanical sys- 
tems of society. 

In this delineation, Ida traced the 
singular and superior character of Os- 
myn ; and while the man gradually re- 
assumed his influence over her heart, 
the hero again possessed himself of her 
imagination. Yet, though she was 
well aware that it was in her power to 
restore herself to his esteem, and to 
confirm his love, by convincing him 
that the errors of which he accused her 
owed their apparent exifjtence to the 
sacrifices she had made for his salva- 
tion ; proud, and unbending in the 
consciousness of moral dignity and 
spotless innocence, she could not stoop, 
even by a word, to effect a purpose on 
which the felicity of her life depended. 
Her sole anxiety was now to meet him in 
society, to make him the witness of the 



234 WOMAN; OR 

triumph decreed to hfer talents, and her 
genius, by the most polished circles, 
of the most polished country, to make 
him the witness of those still dearer 
triumphs, which the simplicity of her 
character, the goodness of her heart, 
and the affectionate ardour of her na- 
tural manners obtained her, in the love, 
esteem, and solicitude she so generally 
excited. She also wished to have an 
opportunity afforded her of restoring 
the ,sum w ith which he had assisted 
her father in his flight. She now, 
therefore, accepted, of every invitation, 
she was every night to be met at pri- 
vate societies, or public entertainments. 
Emulous of increasing reputation, a 
dazzling brilliancy diffused itself over 
her enchanting manners, and conceal- 
ed the restless anxiety of her agitated 
heart : ev^ry hour she became an ob- 
ject of more general admiration, but 



IDA OF ATHENS. 235 

more worthy of secret pity. For, Os- 
myn still appeared not in those ele- 
gant, but dissipated circles, in which 
she shone the splendid meteor of the 
moment. She heard of his appearance 
at ofHcial dinners, at the tables of 
foreign ministers, and in the select so- 
cieties of people distinguished for 
rank or genius ; but more than once 
she was informed,- that the celebrated 
favourite of Catharine had refused an 
invitation, in which her name had been 
mentioned, as the strongest induce- 
ment to its acceptance. This mortify- 
ing conviction, added to the reserve 
her pride had imposed; and in pro- 
portion as she felt the increasing 
weakness of her heart, she endeavour- 
ed to acquire new force and resistance 
of conduct. Meantime, awakened to 
a keen sense of an imprudence, inno* 
^fit \5L J^I.C^V'se, but fatal in its result, 



236 WOMAN; OR 

she no longer received Lord B— — at 
.her house, even though she conthiued 
to distinguish him abroad, while her 
sad, her wearisome, and tedious days 
were the precise reverse of her short, 
her anxious, and brilliant nights. 

It was at the route of a person of 
distinguished rank and fashion, that 
the athenian, in that glow of personal 
beauty, which borrows its charm from 
the intelligence of the awakened soul, 
in that high, but false tone of spirit, 
which, without depriving innocence of 
of a single charm^ gives to gaiety so 
dangerous a rein, — anxious to attract, 
in the probability that if that attraction 
met not the eye of Osmyn, it might his 
ear, through the exaggerating mediums 
of report ; she suffered herself to be 
prevailed on by the united solicitations 
of the company, to perform a national 
dance, which she had frequently de- 



IDA OF Athens. 237 

scribed in her animated delineations of 
the manners and customs of her coun- 
try. Already she had taken the scarf, 
which in the maze of Ariadne's move- 
ments, marked the harmony of the 
perfect form, and played amidst the 
graces of the natural motions. Am- 
bitious of every excellence, timid of 
every display, she stood for a ipoment 
transfixed in the midst of the brilliant 
circle that surrounded her ; her modest 
eyes fastened on the earth, her averted 
face covered with blushes : anxious to 
delight — yet doubtful of success, and 
thus by the witchery of her look and 
attitude, shedding a resistless spell 
over her genius and her talents. The 
greek air which she had previously 
given to her elegant hostess, now vi- 
brated from a full band, on the national 
soul of Ida ; sentiment lent its inHuence 
to motion, feeling mingled with grace, 



53 S WOMAN; OR 

the senses and the soul bletided their 
powerful effusions, and the young, the 
lovely, the enthusiast patriot floated on 
the gaze of an admiring crowd, with a 
grace borrowed less from her move- 
ments than her mind. Panting and 
overwhelmed with plaudits, she paused 
in the midst of her interesting and 
*' storied dance," and cast round a 
smiling and triumphant look ; her quick ■ 

eye accidentally fell on Lord B , 

for whom she had last performed it in 
the delicious shades of Livadia. His^ 
gaze, impassioned and full of an ex- 
pression she understood, confused her ; 
she blushed, and smiled, and turned 
away those modest but meaning eyes, 
so eloquent in their arch and playful 
bashfulness. The plaudits were redoub- 
led*, the music again struck up, and Ida 
was again commencing her poetic mo- 
tions, when her glance, unfixed and 



IDA OF ATHENS. 539 

wandering, met the eye of an officer 
habited in the picturesque dress of" 
a russian hussar, for a moment that 
glance was wild, — it steadied, — grew 
fixed, and glazed. She raised her hand 
to her brow ; she attempted to continue 
the dance, but her steps were tottering, 
her strengh wholly failed, her foot be- 
came awkwardly entangled in the dra- 
pery of the scarf, and she must have fal- 
len had not the hussar, with the rapidity 
of lightning, sprung forward, and saved 
her in his arms. All presence of mind 
now forsook her, — she burst into tears : 
— a multitude surrounded her, — the 
hussar bore her towards an open win- 
dow, — he murmured in her ear, " na- 
ture is not then quite abandoned I" as 
he spoke, Lord B— - — advanced 
through the crowd ; every one receded 
t<)let him approach. The russian in- 



240 WOMAN; OR 

stantly withdrew, — the eyes of the be- 
wildered Ida, still pursued his lofty 
form. — It was Osmyn 1 

Every one believed a sudden illness 
had seized the young athenian. She 
instantly retired — and Lord B. led 
her to her carriage — he would have 
accompanied her home — but she firmly 
denied him, not from any, prudential 
motive, but his presence would have 
been a tie upon the free indulgence of 
her feelings. " W-ell then," s-^id he, 
pressing her hand that rested on the 
window of the carriage, " I must see 
you to-morrow, this night has fixed the 
destiny of my life." 

" Certainly ! certainly !" was the 
impatient reply of Ida, anxious only 
to be alone, scarcely hearing and not 
understanding: the words addressed to 
her ; while, as the carriage drove away, 



IDA OF ATHENS. 541 

she perceived a person standing near 

Lord B , whose towering form 

could belong to no other than Osmyn. 

Her heart died within her bosom, 
and she wept without ceasing until she 
reached her home. 



Let not woman repose a confidence 
in the stren2;th of her mind, or in the 
brilliancy of her genius ; for the pru- 
dence and safety of her conduct, her 
irritable feelings, her acute sensibili- 
ty, her ardent imao^ination, even her 
innocence, afford her no protection 
against weakness and error. Thus 
highly gifted, she must rise superior 
to vice, and will be incapable of crime ; 
but they canuot always gu^rd her from 
danger, from suffering, and dppr^j- 
brium. 

VOL. IV. M 



242 WOMAN; OR 

The prudence that reflects, com- 
pares, and regulates the- feelings to 
social happiness, and to selfish safety, 
is the virtue on which woman can best > 
depend, is the virtue by which the 
world's opinion must still be ruled and 
governed. 

Ida now felt the full force of her 
error in her conduct to Lord B — • — ; 
his last words,, as they recurred to her 
mind, were now understood. She 
feared there could be no alternative in 
the mind of Osmyn — either he must 
believe her attached to the dangerous 
englishman, or governed by a vain and 
coquettish insensibility, which led her 
to encourage hopes she never meant to 
realize. This thought distracted her; 
she did not wish that Osmyn should 
believe she loved him — her pride for- 
bad it. — But she did not wish him to 
suppose she loved another ; her ten- 
derness shrunk from it. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 243 

Th^ next day she discharged her debt 
to Osmyn, simply inclosing him a bill 
for the money which he sent by Stepha- 
niki ; — and the next day Lord B ■■ ■■ 
called at her house ; but Ida was not at 
home, her restless mind still led her 
abroad. He called again — she had not 
yet returned. In the evening, as she sat 
at dinner with her brothers, a letter was 
put into her hands -.-it was from Lord 

B , and she read the following 

lines in powerful emotion. , 



LETTER. 

" Ida, the victory is yours ; I am con- 
quered, and the influence of the world 
is subdued ; you have taught me how 
false and how dangerous is the opinion 
U 2 



344 WOMAN; OR 

that separates virtue from the graces, 
that draws a line of demarkation be- 
tween that which is good and that 
■which is fair, and that places senti- 
ments of admiration, and feelings of 
respect in opposition to each other. 
Oh ! Ida, wherefore, indeed, should a 
distinction exist between all that de- 
lights the imagination, and all that is 
required by the mind ; between that 
which should excite love, and that 
■which must secure esteem ; between 
that which we must inevitably adore, 
and that which we must decidedly re- 
spect: why should not the weakness and 
the strength of man, be equally con- 
sidered, and that which is necessary to 
the iraperfecti'f»n of his nature, be 
blended with '.'^at which can alone 
purify and exalt it. Ida, you have 
taught me to discard the influence of 
an unjust and vulgar prejudice, which 



IDA OF ATHENS. H5 

teaches that the genius of woman milir 
tales against her duties ; you have said 
to me, genius in its greatest extent is 
but to know and to appreciate the 
wonders and the charms of nature, and 
to feel and ascertain that line of con- 
duct which contributes to the happi- 
ness of the community, to which we 
belong ; you spolce, and I was charm- 
ed. But I beheld your theory brought 
to the test of a severe acumen, and 
then, and not till then, I was convinced I 
Ida, thou whom once loved art never 
to be forgotten ; thou whom I have so 
long and fruitlessly sought, as my mis- 
tress, wilt thou now consecrate the 
endearing name by adding to it the 
rights and privileges of a wife?" 



Something of triumph, of pleasure, 



f46 WOMAN; OR 

of regret, and pity, mingled their emo- ' 
tions in the soul of the astonished Ida, 
as she perused and reperused this 
letter. 

And after the reflection of a few mi- 
nutes, and in all that promptitude of 
feeling, which belonged to her sensi- 
tive character, she returned the foiM 
towing answer. 



TO LORD B- 



u \yhy should I conceal it from 
you — I triumph in the reformation of 
feeling, of opinion, of which you al- 
low me to believe I am the cause — I 
have restored you to nature — and to 
the power of uniting the liveliest bliss 
to the purest virtue — but not for me is 
it reserved to derive happiness from 



IDA op ATHENS. 24^ 

an event which is destined, I trust, to 
constitute the felicity of another. 

Amiable englishman ! I can never be 
yours I when love for another slum- 
bered in my bosom ; when your affec-' 
tion, sanctioned by your respect, li- 
censed by the duty we mutually owed 
society, might have lulled an unhappy 
sentiment into a perfect indifference, 
you had no confidence in yourself or 
me ; you bowed to the prejudice of the 
world, but found not happiness the re* 
suit of your obedience. 

I decline the honor you propose to 
me, not that you are disapproved, but 
that another is beloved — beloved with- 
out the hope of return. — I am grate- 
ful, and would conceal nothing from 
you, I am confiding, and repose my 
secret in your heart. 

The love which graduates on the 
scale of time through a wild variety of 



St4^ WOMAN J OR 

events^ which survives the influence of 
years, the power of change, ~may (by 
a mind the world has formed) be deem- 
ed a sophism, rather than a feeling, a 
metaphysical dream, rather than an ac- 
tual affection, but it is still natural and 
consonant to a certain character of soul, 
which can eventually meet with but 
few capable to excite or share its feel- 
ings, and which inevitably and ardently 
clings to that whose sensibility, and 
whose powers alone can meet or ap- 
preciate its own. . 

Oh! there is nothing so dangerous 
to the heart as the conscious impossibi- 
lity of finding no parallel for the ob- 
ject of its first affections, and surely it- 
is this fatal consciousness that rules my 
destinyT Him whom I loved in early 
youth is still the object of an unrequited 
tenderness — still he pursues, and still 
avoids me — still under circumstances 
of a peculiar and romantic nature, lie 



IDA OF ATHENS. 549 

has presented himself to my mind with 
such a display of virtue, of energy, and 
genius, as deifies the hero in my fancy, 
and sanctions all the tenderness the 
man inspires !" 

Ida then briefly related every event 
and circumstance of her life, connect- 
ed with her attachment to Osmyn, not 
even omitting her singular, but mo- 
mentary union with the Turk, in lan- 
guage the most simple and affecting^ — 
she brought down her little history to 
the moment in which it was written ; — 
nor in the gratitude and confidence of 
her full heart, concealed that her coun- 
try's champion, her fancy's hero, and 
her heart's beloved, was the young 
Russian officer, who impulsively urged 
to her assistance, had voluntarily re- 
signed her to the cares and attentions 
of Lord B on the preceding even- 
ing. 

M 3 



250 WOMAN J OR 

Ida wept as she indited the letter, 
she wept as she recurred to scenes and 
to events so intimately connected, with 
the profoimdest feelings of which her 
soul was susceptible ; she wept as she 
made confessions so humiliating to her 
pride, but which her simple, candid, 
and ingenuous nature, taught her to 
/feel she owed towards him whom she 
vas compelled to afflict, who had en- 
deared himself to her by a thousand 
amiable traits of character, and who so 
generously attributed to her influence 
that abjuration of an unjust and fatal 
prejudice, which the native force of 
his own mind, the excellence of his 
disposition, and the sensibility of his 
heart, must have in time eventually 
destroyed.. 

There was in the character of Lord 
B — — that complexional ardor which 
may be swerved from its aspiring di- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 531 

rection, by the fatal circumstances of 
education, or the imperious, influence 
of early association, but which can 
alone form a great character, or lead to 
high efforts and exalted deeds. He 
was proud, he was ambitious, but his 
pride and his ambition had been hither- 
to but too frequently impelled to an er- 
roneous bias. It now aimed at a great 
object, and it attained it. 

The letter of Ida overwhelmed him 
with emotions too various and too de- 
licate in their shades to admit of deli- 
neation. Regret for the past vacilla- 
tion of his undecided conduct, increas- 
ing love and admiration for the no- 
ble and interesting character of the 
athenian — and hatred, envy, and es- 
teem, for his fortunate and uncontrci- 
ous rival. The love of woman, of wo- 
men, of genius and sensibility, had 
ever been, and was still the object of 



55^ WOMAN; OR 

his existence. He had for ever lost 
her whom he believed he might once 
for ever have teade his ; and in the ex- 
tremity of his p:ission and his grief, he 
believed that there was no longer hap- 
piness for him on earth; but it w-as 
yet in his power to shew himself supe- 
rior to the destiny that oppressed him. 
It was in his power to triumph over 
the rival to whom he owed his insup- 
portable misery, and to surpass that 
rival in the esteem and admiration of 
Ida, as he had been surpassed by him 
in her affections and her heart. In a 
word, he believed that that passion 
which had created a great character for 
Osmyn, could create a still greater for 
himself. He was vain in his conscious^ 
ani3 natural superiority, and believed 
with some reason, that there was no 
test to which it could be brought to 
%hich it would prove itself inadequate 



IDA OF ATHENS. 253 

He therefore finally determined to tri- 
umph over Ida, to triumph ever Os- 
myn, but above all to triumph over 
himself! 

The next day the report of his im- 
mediate departure for the continent 
was circulated by the public papers. 
Ida alone understood the cause of this 
sudden determination, and wept her 
own sufferings and disappointments in 
his. 

Osmyn had presented to Stephaniki 
the money Ida had sent by him — and 
the greek, self-glorified in the rank and 
character of his revered compatriot, 
breathed to the ear of Ida those praises 
her heart echoed ; but she could not 
learn from Stephaniki that even her 
health had been enquired for by Os- 
myn. 

It was the day after that in which 
Ida had received and answered the let- 
ter of Lord B , that she appeared 



S54 WOMAN; OR 

at a public breakfast, at the house of a 
person of fashionable notoriety. Ma- 
ny persons were present who had not 
before an opportunity of beholding the 
celebrated greek girl, and who crowd- 
ed, round her with an eagerness more 
flattering than delicate. Once- this ho- 
mage of popular admiration would 
have been grateful to the vanity and 
ambition of Ida. It was so no longer I' 
her powerful feelings had awakened 
from their transient slumbers, — nature, 
pure, ardent, and impassioned, resum- 
ed its influence over her heart, and 
in proportion to its progress, the 
world receded from her imagination. 
Oh, she wag not fit for the world I— 
She \yasnot created, and had not been 
reared for it ; in her the finest nature 
had been fatally and highly cultivated. 
Calculated by endowments to enrich 
the most polished society, she was yet 
more calculated by sentiment to enjoy 



IDA OF ATHENS. t55 

that solitude, where the affections only 
reigned — and already weary of the 
world, she had yet neither excuse nor 
temptation to resign its follies, or to re- 
linquish its homage. 

It was in vain that she endeavoured 
to assun^e her wOnted brilliancy at an 
entertainment where she was herself 
the object of chief attraction ; the af- 
fected gaiety of her manner increased 
the natural sadness of hfer heart, and 
the smile that was forced to her lip, 
was, in spite of every effort, pursued 
by the tear that involuntarily, and al- 
most causelessly started to her eye. At 
^ last she escaped from a group of men * 
who sought distinction by surrounding 
her, and glided into a boudoir which 
though laid out for exhibition with all . 
the trappings of affected sentiment, 
was deserted and empty. 

She leaned against the frame of a 



256 WOMAN; OR 

window, and listened in profound emo- 
tion to an air played by the band in an 
adjoining room, and as she well knew, 
played in compliment to herself — for it 
was a simple greek air, such as is sung 
by the athenian women when their 
hearts sadden in the absence of those 
thjy love ; and when they find a pen- 
sive sound alone capable' of breathing 
a melancholy sentiment.* Ida listen- 
ed I and the tears coursed each other 
down her cheeks. She sighed pro- 
fo.undly, and a sigh still more profound 
than her own, called on her attention. 
She raised her eyes and beheld Osmyn 
leaning against the door of the bou- 
doir, and gazing on her; a faint ex- 
clamation broke from her lips, and she 
covered her face with her hands. 

Osmyn rushed forward, and seizing 
the drapery of her robe, said in a low 

» See note (d) 



IDA OF ATHENS. ' 557 

and hurried voice, " This is not the 
first time we have heard that air, and 
wept together. But our tears fall not 
now as then, in sympathy ; you weep 
for another, I weep fpr you ; he leaves 
you — ^^and your tears fall abundantly. 
But when you left me my heart wept 
b^pod. Let us both shew ourselves 
Vprthy of what we once were — and 
forget at once our weakness and its 
cause !" With these words, pro- 
nounced in all that frenzy of feeling 
which belonged to his character, he 
rushed out of the room, and Ida over- 
come by surprize and emotion sunk 
faint and sick, but not lifeless, on a 
couch that was near* her. 

Osmyn then had seen her fly from 
the homage of a world to indulge ia 
those sad and powerful emotions which 
he believed another awakened, but 
yrl^ich an unrequited love for him alone 



25B '. WOMAN; OR " 

had given rise to. But Osrayn, in the 
reproaches he had addressed to her ear, 
had conveyed to her, heart the dear 
the precious conviction, that she was 
still beloved by him. " Oh! why," 
she exclaimed in a transport of mingled 
joy and sorrow, " Oh I why should 
the suspicious delicacy of his character, 
the haughty, innate, pride of mine, 
for ever intervene between our luppi- 
ness and our love!" Yet she felt she 
had not the power to obviate that ob- 
stacle to her felicity she so bitterly la- 
mented ; jealous in her love, and 
proud in her fidelity, she could not 
stoop to extenuate where she should 
expect contrition, nor be the first to 
restore that confidence, without which 
she could conceive no perfect idea of 
affection. 

Still lost in a profound reverie, the 
approach of some persons to the apart- 



IDA OF ATHENS. 559 

merit she occupied, obliged her to 
leave it, and she mingled in a group 
of simple " Cynthias of the moment," 
who stood near a window, listening to 
the music of a party of Savoyards, who 
played beneath. Ida chose this situ- 
ation as one which commanded a view 
of the whole suite of apnrtnients, and 
where she coi^ld sec all that passed 
without being observed; but while her 
anxious eye sought, and vainly sought, 
the form of Osmyn, her ear was struck 
by the sound of a Turkish guitar. She 
cast her eyes on the Savoyards, and 
perceived among them the musician, 
whose guitar hagi attracted her notice. 
It was a woman, in an evident state of 
intoxication that seamed to increase to 
delirium with the air she rapidly, but 
imperfectly played ; and the gestures 
and motions she endeavoured to per- 



260 WOMAN; OR 

form, to the amusement of a crowd 
that was now gathering round her in 
the street, and who had obliged the 
other musicians to stop, to indulge 
themselves with the fra*itic exertions of 
the disgusting but singular bacchante — 
whose face was swollen and disfigured, 
whose person was thin and emaciated, 
and whose dress, though soiled and 
tattered, was still put on with some- 
thing of singularity and taste. Yet 
over this disguise of wretchedness and 
depravity, hung a certain air that dis- 
tinguished the .Savoyard from the rest 
of her companions — something of 
beauty was discernible in her features, 
something of grace in her form and 
movements, and the traces of better 
days, and better fortune, were still 
visible in her appearance. Ida knew 
not by what spell her eyes were rivet- 



IDADF ATHENS, 261 

ted on the musician,' yet she had no 
power to remove them. She followed 
her unsteady moven^ents with trem- 
bling atixiety, and when she beheld 
the wretched creature, overcome by 
fatigue and inebriety, fall with vio- 
lence against the pavement, and saw 
the blood flow in torrents from her 
head, all presence of mind forsook 
the hwror struck, the tender, and 
compassiorming Ida. She flew like 
lightning fb the assistance of the un- 
fortunate, and mingled amidst the 
crowd who surrounded her. The Sa- 
voyard was already in the arms of a 
person who bore her into the hall of 
the house, beneath whose window she 
had fallen. Ida shared in his chari- 
table attentions without observina: him : 
she administered water- to the lips of 
the apparently dying Savoyard, she 
ordered a surgeon to be sent for, and 



262 WOMAN; OR 

unbound the handkerchief, which, now 
bathed in blood, covered her Lead. It 
was then that a jprofusion of long and 
beautiful hair fell round her. It was 
then that Ida, almost doubting the 
evidence of her senses, recognized the 
golden tresses, the still snowy forehead, 
and arching brow of the once lovely 
Jumeli. " Merciful God ! Jumeli 1" 
exclaimed Ida in great emotion. At 
the sound of her name, Jjumeli raised 
her languid eyes, and a siight convul- 
sion crossed her features ; her gaze was 
wild and vacant, and she seemed not to 
recognize Ida, who kneeling beside her 
held a handkerchief to her wounded 
head, and bathed her face with her 
tears The lady of the house, and a 
few others, who had witnessed the 
transaction, and who were struck by 
the loveliness of Ida's tender pity for 
an unfortunate, now descended to the 



IDA OF ATHENS. 56S 

hall; and as the surgeon was arrived 
vit was deemed adviseable to remove the 
sufferer into an adjoining apartment. 
Ida involuntarily clasped her hand in 
that of the person who assisted her to 
raise the head of Jumeli, and for the 
first time raising her dimmed eyes to the 
face of her charitable coadjutor, she 
perceived that the hand she held was 
Osmyn's ! It was Osmyn ! It was 
Ida 1 It was Jumeli I who were thus 
so strangely-^so intimately associated. 
A dark mist hung on the sight of Ida I 
The singularity of their respective si- 
tuations, of their former connexions, 
struck her; all the force, all the weak- 
ness of her nature, was roused into ex- 
istence ; something of triumph, more 
of pity, a lingering feeling of friend- 
ship, an overwhelming one of love, 
mingled in Ker full heart ; she blushed. 



264 WOMAN ; OR 

and grew pale, and her tears fell on the 
brow of Jiimeli. This scene so intei^ 
esting, was but of a moment's daration, 
but in"" that moment Osmyn pressing 
the hand of Ida, murmured in her 
native language, " You have a heart 
then !-^and I am a wretch for ever." 

Ida answered only by a sigh, but 
she trembled to an excess that prevent- 
ed her assisting: Jumeli. She withdrew 
her hand from the clasp of Osmyn's, 
and the surgeon taking her place, Ju- 
meli was carried from the hall; and 
as Ida's recognition of her had been • 
observed, she was interrogated on the ^ 
subject with eager curiosity. — She 
briefly related what she knew of the 
story of the aga's daughter — except 
that part of it in which Osmyn was 
concerned; the tale was too romantic, 
not to excite female interest, and the 



IDA OF ATHENS. ^65^ 

master of the Savoyard band, who re- 
mained in the hall, was called on to 
conclude it : he said, " that six 
months back she had joined his party 
in Italy ; having been then reduced by 
an imprisonment for debt, and habits 
of intoxication, (acquired in a Russian 
camp, which he understood she had 
followed for some time,) to great 
wretchedness ; that he understood she 
had been a woman of depraved life, 
and that though she brought him some 
money by her singular performance, 
yet that her health was so precarious, 
and her habits^ of intoxication so in- 
veterate, he could never count upon 
her exertions." While he spoke, a 
faint cry from the unfortunate invalid 
caught the ear of Ida, she flew to her 
assistance, and found her working in 
convulsions ; the surgeon saw they 
were those of death, and attempted 

VOL. IV. N 



S^6d^ ^ WOMAN; OR 

not to add to her pangs by dressing 
the wound in her head. Osmyn was 
kneeling beside her. Ida took her damp 
and chilly hand, and bathed it with 
her tears ; they endeavoured to prevail 
on her to retire, but in vain ; she re- 
ceived the last sigh of the unfortunate 
Jumeli, who expired on her bosom. 

Thus perished in the summer of her 
life, under the influence of misery and 
vice, a creature, eminently formed for 
happiness and virtue, brought up in 
error, and estranged from nature. She 
knew not the moral relations of society, 
and she instinctively revolted from the 
artificial virtues imposed on her by the 
prejudices of her education. The ar- 
dent passions received not an elevated 
direction from the intelligent and 
awakened mind; and that complex- 
ional warmth, which under a happy 
and natural guidance might have en- 



IDA OF ATHENS. «67 

dowed her with the sensibility and 
genius, which distinguished the cha- 
racter of Ida of Athens, unregulated 
and debased by its fatal and early bias, 
hurried her into the low extremes of 
vice, and reduced her to the .last excess 
of human misery that can overtake or 
obliterate the generic features of the 
natural and lovely character of woman. 
Ida overcome by emotions that 
sprung not alone from the melancholy 
event she had witnessed, immedi^ely 
returned home, and sent a confidential 
servant to perform the last sad rites for 
one whom she had once almost consi- 
dered as a friend and compatriot. But 
she was informed that the melancholy 
office had been undertaien by Osmyn. 

CONCLUSION. 

There is in the aspect of death some- 
n2 



56S WOMAN; OR 

thing so humiliating to the natural 
pride of humanity, that it is not in its 
first and immediate influence to be 
counteracted by philosophy or by rea- 
son. 

The fate of the unfortunate Jumeli 
had awakened in the mind of Ida a train 
of melancholy reflection on the incon- 
sequence of life, and the chances of 
education, which, independent of the 
self-will, and governed by others, is so 
liable to militate against our peace and 
happiness, and virtue ; while the death 
of the young and once lovely turk, with 
all its attendant circumstances, threw 
a deep shade over her imagination. In 
the gloom of her soul she determined 
on retiring from the world where no 
true felicity, such as she was capable 
of enjoying, existed for her, and de- 
voting her life to the education of her 
brothers, and to the relief and solace 



IDA OF ATHENS. 569 

of the unfortunate. She perceived not 
that her unconquerable passion for a 
man who still resisted the conviction 
of her fidelity and love, either from 
indifference, or an unworthy and false 
estimate of her character, governed a 
determination so untrue and so imprac- 
ticable to her nature, her years, and 
disposition ; for who can silence the 
feelings of the heart in the spring and 
ardour of their existence ? who can 
live alone for jself-created duties, while ■ 
the sentiment, which is almost an in- 
stinct, calls upon the affections and the 
soul ? — who can unnecessarily reliur 
quish a bliss, and yet possess every 
power and aipability of its enjoyment ? 
Ida was deceived by lier mind's gloomy 
mood, and dreamed of a project it was 
not yet in her power to realize. 

Three days hud elapsed since the 
death of Jumeli, and Ida had passed 



570 WOMAN; OR 

them in solitude and in sadness. Os- 
myn had made no attempt to see or to 
write to her, and the faint but hourly 
expectations of her heart was followed 
by its hourly disappointment : neither 

had she heard from Lord B , and 

his silence convinced her, that the regret 
and mortifications she had excited, were 
proportioned to that she herself expe- 
rienced, and this sympathy in their 
fates awakened interest in his favour 
of a more tender cast than he had hi- 
therto given birth to in a heart, form- 
ed for the indulgence of all the softer 
feelings. 

On the evening of^ the fifth day from 
that on which she had written to him, 
she received the following 



BILLET. 
** Ida, I must never again behold you; 



IDA OF ATHENS. 271 

I know how far the forces of my nature 
can go, but I cannot answer for its 
weakness ; once more to have seen, — 
once more to have heard you, would 
have been a dear, but a fatal indul- 
gence I — Oh I Ida, your loss has been 
the bane of all my earthly happiness, 
and woman still retributes the errors of 
which woman was the cause ; — my 
heart is sad and isolated, — the feelings 
you awakened there you only could 
meet and satisfy, and you are lost to 
me for ever. Once, perhaps, I might 
have made you mine, — and once mine 
you might, — you must have loved me ! 
But the nation whom you have taught 
me to worship, in adoring yourself, 
had not yet in her returning influence 
subdued the fatal effects of an early 
and destructive impression, and that 
happiness, which is of the heart alone, 
was sacrificed to the prejudice which, 



212 WOMAN; OR 

equally untrue to reason and senti- 
ment, never yet bestowed a joy in its 
indulgence. But now, sweet Ida, it is 
all over. And to contemplate the fe- 
licity I have lost, is but to add a keener 
p«ti4£ to the misery I endure. Farewel. 
In a few minutes I set out on my long 
and lonely journey. I go not in search 
of peace ; it is lost to me for ever ! — 
but I go to avoid your presence, — to 
avoid the sight of a felicity of which I 
am the author, but which I have not 
strength of mind or feeling to witness. 
I go, most beloved of women, never to 
return ! — the prophecy arises from the 
consciousness of my feelings, and speaks 
to my Jieart in a manner not to be mis- 
understood. A person will wait on 
you in the evening, he will deliver to 
you a packet from me, — see him I — hear 
him I — and then give me your comr^ 
passion, — give me your applause, — 



IDA OF ATHENE. 273^ 

your respect — I must command.-rr 
Farewel for ever.'* 

Ida understood not all the purport 
of this letter, she thought there was 
more than one passage in it that spoke 
a disordered mind. But it deeply af- 
fected her, her spirits were not equal 
to the test to which it put them. A 
woman is always so sensible to the af- 
fection she excites, even when she has 
not the power to return it, to the suf- 
fering she causes, even when it is de- 
nied her to solace or assuage it ; and 
Ida, the most feeling of women, wept 
the loss of the interesting companion, 
the sufferings of the amiable man, whom 
she could not accept as a husband, and 
dared not retain as a friend ; while ig- 
norant of the purport of the packet to 
which he alluded, she determined on 
obeying his last request, and gave or- 
ders for th^ admission of the ^\er§aa 
N3 ,. ■ - ■■ 



S74 WOMAN; OR 

who was to deliver it; all that concerned 
the packet was a mystery to her, and 
the state of her mind and feelings 
checked the suggestions of an idle and 
unavailing curiosity. 

It was evening, she was alone, and 
indulging in a pensive reverie, which 
had for its subject the insufficiency of 
riches, of popularity, and of admira- 
tion to gratify the feelings of the heart, 
or to bestow true happiness on a cha- 
racter of great natural sensibility, when 
her servant presented her a letter, and 
informed her that the person who 
brought it waited in the anti-room : the 
servant then retired ; and Ida observed 
with astonishment that the letter was 
open ; she cast her eye on the writing, 
it was her own, — she read a few lines, 
and perceived that it was that she had 

last addressed to Lord B , in which 

her iQVje for Osmyn, the ^crifices that 



IDA OF ATHENS. 275 

love had induced her to make, and the 
chief incidents of her life, past and 
recent, were so affectingly detailed. 
The astonishment, the feeling of 
wounded delicacy this circumstance 
excited, were the overwhelming sen- 
-timents of the moment ; the exposition 
of her heart's most sacred secret to a 
stranger, was an insupportable morti- 
fication, it was apparently unmeaning 
in its object, and unexplicable in its 
nature ; and hurried away by the irri- 
tated feelings of the moment, she flew 
into the next apartment, where the 
stranger waited. As she entered, she 
perceived him gazing on her picture by 
the light of a Venetian lamp which hung 
near it, his back was turned towards 
.her, she could not command her in- 
rjdignant feelings, she advanced and 
fj said in a hurried voice, " Are you the 
person who brought this letter from 



2^6 WOMAN ; OR 

Lord B ?" The stranger started, 

paused — " J am the person," he repli- 
ed, in a low and tremulous accent, 
and advancing towards her, as she ti- 
midly retreated, Ida perceived that the 
person was Osmyn It! 

She sunk on a seat that was near her, 
and beheld him prostrate at her feet : 
the powers of her existence seemed 
suspended. It was the burning tears 
of Osmyn that bathed her hands, and 
recalled her to a perfect sense of her 
situation. She withdrew those hands, 
she recoiled from his touch, and con- 
cealed her face in thfe folds of her robe. 

*' No," (he exclaimed) " you cannot 
«*— you dare not, deny me one moment's 
hearing. From the moment I first be- 
held you, you have been the informing 
soul of my existence — you have go- 
verned my feelings — you have govern- 
ed my life — and you are accountable 



IDA OF ATHENS. 277 

for my future destiny ! — You have pur- 
sued me from region to region — from 
clime to clime. You could have dravvo 
me from one extremity of the earth to 
the^ other, and life was indured, or 
death was sought, as you influenced my 
actions and my fate. If I have wrong- 
ed you, the injury was inevitable in its 
cause, and has been terrific in its ef- 
fects : — for still I loved, where I doubt- 
ed — ^still I adored where I condemned. 
But, oh, lady I if the confidence which 
should be love's true character, sub- 
mitted to the tyranny of appearances — 
if my doating heart in vain resisted the 
evidence of my senses ; if when I was 
rejected, I believed I was not beloved, 
if when I beheld you in the arms of 
another, I fancied I was betrayed ; if 
while my fond and faithful heart pined 
in your absence, and while I proudly 
resigned and instinctively followed you 



278 ' WOMAN; OR 

to a strange and distant country, I 
perceived you courted by the world, 
and courting its suffrages, apparently 
led away by the ambition of popularity, 
and dead to the finer feelings of nature, 
suing for general admiration, yet ac- 
cepting the homage of a dangerous in- 
^idividiial ; — if thus observing, I doubted 
the sensibility of your heart, the strength 
of you mind, or constancy of your af- 
fection, let me be forgiven ; for if it 
was reserved for your unequalled influ- 
ence to give my heart its first tender, 
first noble feeling, let it be remembered, 
that still the first impressions your sex 
conveyed to my young and yielding 
mind, were received in the degrading 
and depraved circle of a turkish harem ; 
and that the basis of my suspicious deli-, 
cacy, with respect to woman, thus 
deeply laid, I became the victim of ap- 



IDA OF ATHENS. ^79 

pcarances, that accorded but too well 
with the prejudice of my character. 

Osmyn paused, hh voice faultered — " 
his, whole frame was convulsed by a 
powerful emotion he could not sup- 
press; he took the struggling hand of 
Ida which still held her letter, — he 
pressed it to his eyes and to his lips, 
and covered it with his kisses and his 
tears. 

In a low and scarcely articulate voice 
he continued — *' Oh ! you, for whom 
alone it is reserved to inspire a passion 
pure as the soul ever fancied, and 
ardent as the senses ever inspired, who 
are still destined to communicate to the 
character and feeling of him who loves 
you, some pure ray of the divinity which 
irradiates your own! — know, that the 
man whom your virtues have reformed, 
but whom your coldness has driven to 
despair, has sought me out, elicited 



280 WOMAN; Oil 

my confidence by voluntarily lavishing 
on me his own, detailed to me the ef- 
forts by which he vainly sought to de- 
grade you from that high eminence to 
which your genius and your virtues 
have exalted you, painted to me the 
sufferings and the exertions which have 
distinguished your recent life, and 
placed in my hands that letter, that 
precious letter, which now trembles in 
yours. 

' Archondessa I — Lady 1 — Ida I — look 
on me ! — I sue only for your pity — 
and it "is thus prostrate at your feet I 
sue I — If a secret that transports me 
beyond myself, has been betrayed by a 
generous rival, in bestowing rapture, 
it confirms not hope. — If by means, 
{perhaps not strictly justifiable) I have 
become acquainted with the weakness 
of your heart ; do I not also know the 
strength and dignity of your mind ; and 



IDA OF ATHENS. 5S1 

liiat that which your tenderness hag 
indulged in, your reason and your pride 

are capable to subdue. Oh I most 

adored! — if J qome into your prer 
sence with the maddening conscious- 
ness of being beloved, — rdo I therefore 
come presumptuous and assured ? — Oh, 
no I — As confident of my own unwor- 
thiness as of your superior excellence, 
I come to sue — not for your possession 
— but your pity and forgiveness. I am 
called away by the sovereign whom I 
serve, the sovereign who opposes the 
tyrants of my country, to resume my 
station in her army. I leave you, lady, 
in peace, in opulence, and in splendoii* ; 
the world's admiring gaze fixed on your 
genius and on your charms — lovers 
contending for your aflOections — friends 
for your esteem. Yet, e'er I go, deny 
not the only boon my heart (timid in 
its idolatry) dares to make ! — give me 



iH WOMAN; OR 

back that amulet once returned in the 
moment of irritated love and hopeless 
passion — give me back that amulet 
which as once given by you, became 
my spell to glory and renown — Again 
let nie in the hour of danger and of 
death feel it near my heart, that that 
heart's last throb may heave against 
that token of your Icindness which 
your touch once cons«crated." 

Osmyn paused and trembled — the 
face of Ida was still concealed by the 
drapery of her robe — teai^s were denied 
her — but stifled and convulsive sobs 
shook her frame ; at last uncovering her 
face, Osmyn saw it was paler than 
death, and the struggle of her feelings 
was visible in the great and eloquent 
' expression of her countenance. 

She drew from her bosom the amulet 
which she had always worn since it had 
been returned to her, and averting her 



IDA OF ATHENS. 58S 

eyes, presented it with an air rather 
dignified than tender, to Osmyn ! 

He took it, and gazed long and ar- 
dently on it in silence ! — he pressed it 
to his heart and to his lips, and waving 
his head, gently let the amulet fall on 
the hand of Ida ! — ** No," he said with 
a sigh, " I must not, I dare not receive 
it — it will still deceive my hopes, as 
when it was entwined with the rose 
and the melissa which came from the 
same hand ; — the rose and the melissa 
were the emblems of love and pity — 
they are withered and decayed and 
gone for ever ! but the sentiments they 
express are immortal I and if this be- 
loved amulet were again presented with 
those sentiments I — if one feeling of 
tenderness hallowed the donation ! — 
if the hand that bestowed the gift re- 
coiled not from him on whom it was 
lavished, then, oh I heavens I what 



^S4 WOMAN; OE 

could then exceed the ardour of my 
heart, the prowess of my arm ! 

But as it is, I dare not receive it ;— 
Oh ! no I — let it be restored with some 
faint glow of the pure and ardent feeling, 
which accompanied the rose and th^ 
melissa, or let it be with-held for ever 1'- - 

As he spoke, he gently drew from 
the face of Ida the veil with which shi^ 
had again concealed it ; that beautiful 
face was no longer white as the bosom 
on which it drooped. It was suffused 
with a crimson glow. The dark and 
languid eyes, humid and bright in their 
bewitching softness, were fastened on 
the earth, timidity and love mingling 
their sensurous expressions, chased from 
the beamy countenance each trace of 
pride and suffering. A smile, bashful 
in its lovely archness, played round 
the rich and trembling lip, and with 
an air which blended all the feelings oB 



IDA OF ATHENS. 5S5 

the mistress and the woman, she threw 
the amulet round the neck of Osmyn — 
he approached more closely to receive 
a donation which, thus presented, hur- 
ried him beyond all boundary oP rea- 
son. It was Ida's arms that fell on his 
shoulder — it was Ida's tresses that play- 
ed on his cheeks — it was Ida's sigh that 
breathed on his lip — and never had his 
heart known a moment so dear, so pre- 
cious, so inebriating to its feelings, as- 
that which it now deliriously enjoyed, 
since he had last unfolded to it the ob- 
ject of its idolatry, amidst the war of 
elements — amidst the mighty ruins of 
his native country. 



On the following day, Ida of Athens 
assumed the most sacred of characters 
— the character of a wife I — and for 



5$6 WOMAN; OR 

the man whom she loved, and t© 
whom she had united her fate, aban- 
doned the attractive splendor of her 
situation, and gave up the world for 
an individual who had become the 
world unto her. 

She made a transfer of her property 
from England to Russia ! She left a 
country the most prosperous, a society 
the most polished, fame, celebrity, and 
admiration ; and with her brothers, to 
whom she had assigned over a certain 
independence, and her faithful domes- 
tics whom she continued to cherish, 
she accompanied her husband to a 
country congenial by its climate to her 
delicate constitution, and luxurious 
habits; and by its character to her ten- 
der, sensitive, and fanciful disposition. 
But love created around her a region of 
its own, and the duty which affection 
prompted, subdued the antipathies 



IDA OF ATHENS. 587 

which taste and sentiment had cherish- 
ed. The fame and military character of 
her husband, who received the rank of 
general, shortly after his return to Rus- 
sia, and the splendour of her genius 
and her charms, procured her a distin- 
guished reception at the court of the 
greatest sovereign which Europe then 
boasted. 

In Russia she again found herself 
united to many of her beloved and un- 
happy compatriots ; among others her 
amiable but imprudent kinsman, Carlo 
Stamati, whom her interest with the 
empress materially served, and who 
became an officer in her husband's re- 
giment. Like the rest of the greeks, 
sanguine and ardent in her hopes, and 
fearless in her views, for her country's 
good, she saw not^that whatever ascend- 
ant Russia might have gained over the 
Turks, was now sacrificed to a pre- 



28S WOMAN; OR 

mature effort in the cause of other 
powers. 

IJow far the entire restoration of the 
greek empire was compatible with its 
moral and natural state, was a point her 
feelings did not suffer her to consider, 
or the ardor of her imagination to de- 
cide on ; but whatever change it would 
be advisable to make In the ottoman 
empire, she breathed her ardent pray- 
ers that that change might extend itself 
to the promotion of the interest and 
happiness of every class of Its subjects, 
by the equal preservation of their 
rights, the general participation of po- 
litical institutions, and the universal 
toleration to religious opinions. 

Ida having placed her brothers at a 
military academy. Instituted by the 
empress, in Petersburgh, left the lux- 
ury of a court to follow her husband 
amidst the toil and hardship of a camp. 



IDA OF ATHENS. 2S9 

In the hour of affliction she was his 
solace — in the hour of danger she was 
his shield, she cheered him when he 
drooped, she inspired him when lie 
doubted, and triumphed with him when 
he conquered.* With ail the firm- 
ness of a heroine, with all the soft- 
ness of a woman, she was at once his 
resource, his inspiration, and reward. 

At last the tender duties of the mis- 
tress and the wife, gave way to the 
more sacred duties of the mother. 

Ida felt the holy dignity of that cha- 
racter with which heaven had invested 
her, and solemnly pledged herself to 
society for the citizens she had given 
to it ; — tb her country, for the patriots 
she was to rear for it. And Ida, alter- 
nately a patriot heroine, — a tender mis* 

♦ See Note (ej .. 
VOL. IV. O 



390' WOMAN; OR 

tress,- — an affectionate daughter, — a vo- 
tarist of pleasure, — an adoring wife, — 
and an exemplary mother, was still 
in all and each, a Woman ! docile 
to the impulse, alive to the existing 
impression, but still rich in exhaust- 
less resources of tenderness and exer- 
tion, when circumstances should call 
for the full developement of that ar- 
dent, sensitive, and subtil character, 
which so finely corresponded to every 
state, every thought, and every feeling 
in the scale of human reflection, human 
woe, or human felicity — while she con- 
tinued to evince through her life and 
conduct, and the influence they pro- 
duced on those who surrounded her, 
that, if it is for man to perform great 
actions, it is for woman to inspire 
them I •- 



NOTES 

TO VOLUME THE FOURTH. 



(a) P. 128. Such is the simple mode of sa- 
lutation between the Molgolgues (a nation of 
North America) and the wanderers whom 
chance conducts to their huts. 

(b) P. 219. Ismael was taken by SuvarofF, 
who from the cruelties he committed there, ob- 
tained the name of Muley Israael. 

(c) P. 220. There is nothing more easy in 
Turkey than to be made a Jhen-gin-cheri, or 
new Janissary; according to Habesci, instead 
of recruiting parties going into the towns and 
villages to enlist the most robust and comely 
youths, they will receive any person into the 
corps of Janissaries ; christians, jews, or hea- 
thens are accepted by the officers on the re- 
cruiting service, if they have but the appearance 
of youth and strength. 



NOTES. 

(d) P. 256. The simple and beautiful air 
here alluded to, is popular among the modern 
atheniaris; and has been introduced into Eng- 
land by a gentleman whose classic researches 
have considerably added to the stock of elegant 
and liberal information. 

(e) P. 289. It is to the society of women, 
(says Tacitus) that the germans owed their 
courage in the combat, and their successes in 
the council. 



END OF VOL. IV. 



J. M'Creery, Printer, 
Black-Horse-court, Fleet-street. 



NEW WORKS 

Printed for Longman, Hurst Rees, 

andOrme; Paternoster Row. 



J. LETTERS from the MOUNTAINS; being 
rfie real Correspondence of a Lady, between the 
Years 1773 and 1803. In 3 vols. 12mo. The 
Fourth Edition. Price 13s. 6d. in Boards. 

" Tlie charm of these letters consists in their being the - 
artless effusion of a superior mind. There is sterling 
good sense in most of her remarks on books, manners, 
education, &c. and a great share of originality. She al- 
ways appears to us in a light at once respectable and 
amiable. Her understanding is strong, her fancy lively, 
her sensibility acute She has the art of placing every 
thing before our eyes ; we see her, we hear her, and we 
become acquainted with her; and when we shut her 
book, we seem to take leave of a friend." Ann. Rev. 

2. MEMOIRS of an AMERICAN LADY, 
with Sketches of Manners and Scenery in America 
as they existed previous to the Revolution. By the 
Author of " Letters from the Mountains," &:c. &c. 
In 2 vols. 12ino. Price 10s. 6d. in Boards. 

3. AMADIS of GAUL, from the Spanish Ver- 
sion of Garciordones the Montalvo, with a Preface, 
Sec. By ROBERT SOUTHEY. In Four hand- 
some Volumes, 12mo. Price ll. Is. in Boards, 

« We can recommend tliis work witli confidence. 

Brit. Crit, 
A. PALMERIN of ENGLAND. 

Bv FRANCISCO DE MOREAS. 
Corrected by Robert Southey, irom the origlDal 



Portuguese, with Araendments. In four large 
vols, foolscap 8vo. Price 11. 8s. in Boards. 

5. THE KNIGHTS. Tales illustrative of the 
Marvellous. By R. C. DALLAS, Esq. In 3 
vols, duodecimo. Price 1 5s. in Boards. 

6. THE SWISS EMIGRANTS. A Tale. In 
1 vol. l2mo. Price 4s. in Boards 

" This is on interesting, affecting, and instructive tale, 
replete with good sense and good morals. The narrative 
is ably written, the language is good, and the sentiments 
are unexceptionable." Anti Jac. " This is a very pleas- 
ing and well-told tale." Brit. Crit, 

7. THE MORALITY of FICTION ; or, an 
Inquiry into the Tendency of Fictitious Narratives, 
with Ohservations on some of the most Eminent. 
By H. MURRAY, Author of " The Swiss Emi- 
grants." In 1 vol. 12nio. Price 4s. in Boards. 

" We cannot too highly commend the design and exe- 
cution of this little work. We see nothing in it through- 
out, that does not tend to the improvement of taste, and 
moral sentiment." Brit. Crit. 

8. WOMEN: THEIR CONDITION and 
INFLUENCE IN SOCIETY. By JOSEPH 
ALEX. SEGUR. Translated from the French. 
In 3 vols. 12mo. Price 12s. 

9. A GOSSIP'S STORY, and LEGENDARY- 
TALE. By Mrs, WEST. In 2 vols. 12mo. 
Fourth Edition. Price 7s. in Boards. 

10. A TALE of the TIMES. By Mrs. WEST. 
In 3 vols, 12mo. Second Kdition. Price 13^. 
6d. sewed. 

11. THE ADVANTAGES of EDUCATION; 
or, The History of Maria Williams. A Tale for 
Very Young Ladies. By Mrs. WEST. Tlie 2d 
Edit. In 2 vols. l^mo. Price 7s. in Boards. 

i2. SIMPLE TALES. By Mrs. OPIE. Se- 



cond Edition. In 4 vols. 13mo. Price ll. Is. in 
Boards. 

" In the tales now before us we find much of the same 
merits as in her beautiful story of Adeline Mowbray ; thte 
same truth and delicacy of sentiment, the same graceful 
simplicity in the dialogue parts of tlie work; and th« 
same happy art of presenting ordinary feelings and oc- 
currences in a manner that iiTesistibly commands our 
sympathy and affection." Ed. Rev. 

13. THE FATHER AND DAUGHTER. A 
Tale. By Mrs. OPIE. The Fourth Edition, 
with a Frontispiece. 4s. 6d. in Boards. 

" Tliis tale is replete with interest, and possesses pathos 
enough to affect the heart of the most colons of crhicid 
readers." M. Rev. 

14. ADELINE MOWBRAY; or, the Mother 
and Daughter. A Tale. By Mrs. OPIE. The 
Second Edition. In 3 vols. 12ine. 13s^ 6d. in 
Boards. 

" These volumes arc, both in their design and execo* 
tion, so superior to those which wc usually encounter 
under the title of Novels, that we can safely recommead 
them to the perusal of our readers." Afon. Rev. 

15. THADDEUS of WARSAW. A Novel. 
By Miss PORTER. The Fifth Edition. In 4 
vols. Price 1 4s. in Boards. 

" Thaddeos is a work of genius, and has nothing td 
fear at the candid bar of taste : he has to receive the pre> 
cious meed of sympathy from every reader of uiisophisti. 
cated sentunent and genuine feeling" Imp. Rev. " This 
work has more merit than can be ascribed to the crowd 
of productions of this class, and inculcates virtuous and 
magnanimous sentiments." ItJ. Rev. 

16. The MYSTERIES of UDOLPHO ; a Ro- 
mance: interspersed with some Pieces of Poetry, 
Bv ANN RADCLIFFE, Author of the Romance 
of the Forest. The Sixth Edition, iQ4vols. l2mo« 
price ll. 4s. boards. 

, 17. Tlie ROMANCE of the FORfeST; inter- 



spersed with some Pieces of Poetry. By ANN 
RADCLIFFE. Tiie Sevciuli Edition, in 3 vols. 
.12mo. price 15s. in boards. 

18. A SICILIAN Romance. By ann 

RAiDCLIFFE. The Third Edition, in 2 vols. 
i2mo. price 7s. in boards. 

19. The CASTLES of ATHLIN and DUN- 

BAYNE; a Highland Story. By ANN RAD- 
CLIFFE. 12mo. price 3s. 6d. in boards. 

20. MEMOIRS of MARMONTEL. Written 

by Himself. Containing his Literary and Political 
Life, and Anecdotes of the Principal Characters of 
the Eighteenth Century. A new Edition, correct- 
ed throughout. In4vols. 12mo. Price One Gui- 
nea in boards, 

" Tliis is one of the most interesting productions which 
has issued from the French press since the revolution." 

M. Rev. 

21. TheLAKEofKILLARNEY. A Novel. By 
ANNA MARIA PORTER. In 3 vols. 12mo. 

price 13s. 6d. in boards. 

22. The HUNGARIAN BROTHERS. By 
Miss ANNA MARIA PORTER. In 3 volumes 

12mo. Second Edition, price 15s. in boards. 

" The incidents of this Novel are striking, and many of 
tlie characters are finely drawn. The two brothers are 
models of that chivalrous heroism with which Miss Porter , 
has on other occasions proved herself to be intimately ac-» 
qnainted." Crit. Rev. 

23. THEODORE; or, the ENTHUSIAST.^ 

In Four Volumes 12mo. price ll. Is. in boards. 

24. The FATAL REVENGE ; or, the FAMI- 
LY of MONTORIO. A Romance. By DENNIS 
JASPER MURPHY. In 3 volumes 12mo. price 
II. Is. in boards. 



'■ 25. ARTLESS TALES. InS vols. l2mo. By 
Mrs. HURRY. Price 15s. in boards. 

26. The WILD IRISH BOY. By the Author of 
Montorio. In 3 volutnes 12mo. price 16s. 6d. in 
boards, 

27. ROMANTIC TALES. By M. G. LEWIS, 
Author of the Monk, Adelgitha, &c. In 4 vols. 
12rao. price IL 4s. in boards. 

28. The RING and the WELL. A Romance. 
In 4vols. 12mo. price 18s. in boards. 

29. The HOUR of TRIAL, a Tale. By MARY 
ANNE NERI, Author of the Eve of San Pietro. 
In 3 vols. 12mo. price 15s. in boards. 

" This is an interesting story, told in very pleasing lan> 
guage." Antijac. Rev. 

30. LETTERS FROM ENGLAND. By DON 
MANUEL ALVAREZ ESPRIELLA. Transla- 
ted from the Spanish. The 2d edit, in 3 volumes 
12mo. price 18s. in boards, 

•' Viewing these Letters as spirited remarks on England, 
we must pronounce tliera to deserve, in niuny respects, the 
notice of English readers. They contain many particu* 
lars of wliich the generality of our countiymen are igno« 
rant, and they are interspersed with anecdotes and bon- 
mots, which end tlie narrative, and produce a good effect." 

M. Rev. 

31. APHORISMS of SIR PHILIP SIDNEY, 
with Remarks. By Miss PORTER, Author of 
"Thaddeus of Warsaw." In 2 volumes 12mo. 
price 10s. 6d. in boards, embellished with two 
beautiful Engravings, by Freeman, from Drawings 
by R. K. Porter, Esq. 

" The ^od sense, the pure morality, and the amiable 
piety, which tliis work displays, contribute to render it a 
very valuable performance. The merit of the aphorisms 
has been already sufficiently acknowledged ; and the ad- 
ditional remarks of the Editor, which are by no means 



ftparingly interspersed, will not snffcr in comparison, sine*, 
they 'manifest reading, discrimination, t^hought, and re- 
search." Moh. Rev. 

^2. I.ETTER5 written during a short Residency 
in SPAIN and PORTUGAL. By ROBERT 
SOUTHEY. In 2 vols, foolscap 8vo. A new 
Edition, corrected and amended, price 10s. 6d. in 
boards. 

33. An Account of JAMAICA and its Inhabi- 
tants. By a Gentleman, long resident in the West 
Indies. In 8vo. price 7s. 6d. in boards. 

" The present work contains a great deal of useful in- 
formation respecting Jamaica. We have been consider- 
ably gratified by the perusal ; and more so, as the infor- 
mation which it contains, instead of being copied from 
other books, seems to have been principally derived from 
personal observation. The author appears to be a judici- 
ous and impartial man, and it is with pleasure that we 
bestow on his pei'formance the praise of candour and of 
truth." Monthly Rev. 

34. The MINSTRELSY of the SCOTTISH 
BORDER ; consisting of Historical and Romantic 
Ballads, collected in the Southern Counties of Scot- 
land 5 with a few of a modern date, founded on 
local tradition. With an Introduction and Notes, 
by the Editor, WALTER SCOTT, Esq. Advocate. 
The Third Edition. In 3 vols. 8vo. finely printed 
by Ballantyne, of Edinburgh. Price ll. 16s. in 
boards. 

35. The LAY of the LAST MINSTREL, a 
Poem, with Ballads and Lyrical Pieces. By 
WALTER SCOTT, Esq. Elegantly printed by 
Ballantyne, on superfine wove paper, and hot- 
pressed. The Eighth Edition, In 4to. price 21. 2s. 
in boards. A few copies are printed on fine paper, 
price 31. 13s. 6d, in boards. This volume, with 



Marmlon, forms the whole of Mr. Scott's Poetical 
Works. Also an Edition in 8vo. price lOs. 6.d. in 
boards. 

36. BALLADS and LYRICAL PIECES. By, 
WALTER SCOTT, Esq. Second Edition, in I, 
vol. 8vo. price 7s. 6d. in boards. The two latter 
works contain the whole of Mr. Scott's original 
Poetry. 

37. SIR TRISTREM, a Metrical Romance of 
tlie Thirteenth Century. By THOMAS of ERCIL- 
DOUNE, called the RHYMER. Edited from the- 
Auchinleck MS. by WALTER SCOTT, Esq. 
Second Edition, in royal 8vo. price los. in boards. 

38. The NATURE of THINGS; a Didactic 
Poem. Translated from the Latin of TITUS LU- 
CRETIUS CARUS, accompanied with the original 
Text, and illustrated by Notes, philological and 
explanatory. By JOHN MASON GOOD. In 
2 vols. 4to. embellished with elegantly engraved 
Frontispices. Price 41. 4s. in boards. 

39. MADOC. A Poem. In Two Parts. By 
ROBERT SOUTHEY. In 2 vols, foolscap, ele- 
gantly printed by Ballantyne, with Four beautiful 
Vignettes. Price 128. in boards. A few copie^ 
of the original Quarto Edition may be had, price 
21. 2s. 

For a high character of this work, see An. ReVf 1805, 

40. JOAN of ARC. An Epic Poem. By 
ROBERT SOUTHEY. In 2 vols, foolscap 8vo. 
The Second Edition, 12s. boards. 

41. METRICAL TALES, and other Poems. 
Selected from the " Annual Anthology." By RO- 
BERT SOUTHEY. In 1 vol. foolscap 8vo. price 
^s. 6d. in boards. 



42. POEMS, including the Visions of the Marid 
of Orleans. By ROBERT SOUTHEY. 2 vols, 
price lis. in boards. 

43. THALABA the DESTROYER, a Metrical 
Romance, with copious Notes. By ROBERT 
SOURHEY. Elegantly printed in 2 vols, foolscap 
8vo. 14s. in boards. 

44. POEMS. By WM. WORDSWORTH, 
Author of the Lyrical Ballads. In 2 vols, foolscap 
8vo. elegantly printed on wove paper, and hot- 
pressed, price lis. in extra boards. 

45. The POEMS of OSSIAN; containing the 
Poetical Works of James Macpherson, Esq. in 
Prose and Rhyme ; with Notes and Illustrations. 
By MALCOLM LAING, Esq. In 2 large vols. 
8vo. Price ll. 10s. in boards. 

THE WANDERER of SWITZERLAND, and 
other Poems. By JAMES MONTGOMERY. 
Third Edit, in 1 vol. foolscap 8vo. Price 5s. in 
Boards. 

" Mr. Montgomery displays a rich and romantic fancy, 
a tender heart, a copious and active command of imagery 
and language, and an irresistible influence over the feel- 
ings." Eel, Rev. 

" For a very high ' character of this volume, see Ann. 
Rev. 1805. 

46. POEMS. By JAMES GRAHAME. In 
2 Volumes, Foolscap 8vo. Price 12s. 

Vol. I. containing the Sabbath (5th Edition;] 
Sabbath Walks ; the Rural Calendar; and smaller 
Poems. 

Vol. II. containing the Birds of Scotland ; and 
Mary Stuart, a Dramatic Poem. 
