KNEBWORTH LIMITED EDITION 



GODOLPHIN 



BY 



EDWARD BULWER LYTTON 



(LORD LYTTOy) 




WITH ILLUSTRATIONS 



BOSTON 

ESTES AND LAURIAT 

1892 



-:0^ 



KNEBIVORTH LIMITED EDITION. 
Limited to One Thousand Copies 

Wo,595 



.^s^tC4^:t^^J^~-'il^ - // 



TYPOGRAPHY, ELECTROTYPING, AND 
PRINTING BY JOHN WILSON AND SON. 
UNIVERSITY PRESS, CAMBRIDGE, U.S.A. 



9SS 



I' 

ill ^ 



TO COUNT ALFKED D'ORSAY. 



My dear Count d'Orsay, — When the parentage of Godolphin 
was still unconfessed and unknown, you were pleased to encourage his 
first struggles with the world ; now, will you permit the father he has 
just discovered to re-introduce him to your notice ? I am sorry to say, 
however, that my unfilial offspring, having been so long disowned, is not 
sufficiently grateful for being acknowledged at last ; he says that he 
belongs to a very numerous family, and, wishing to be distinguished 
from his brothers, desires not only to reclaim your acquaintance, but to 
borrow your name. Nothing less will content his ambition than the 
most public opportunity in his power of parading his obligations to the 
most accomplished gentleman of our time. "WiU you, then, allow him 
to make his new appearance in the world under your wing, and thus 
suffer the son as well as the father to attest the kindness of your heart 
and to boast the honour of your friendship ? 

Believe me, my dear Count d'Orsay, with the sincerest regard. 
Yours, very faithfully and truly, 

E. B. L. 



iv;5y::s3o 



PREFACE TO GODOLPHIN. 



In the Prefaces to this edition of my works, I have occa- 
sionally so far availed myself of that privilege of self-criti- 
cism which the French comic writer M. Picord maintains 
or exemphfies in the collection of his plays, — as, if not 
actually to sit in judgment on my own performances, still 
to insinuate some excuse for their faults by extenuatory 
depositions as to their character and intentions. Indeed, a 
writer looking back to the past is unconsciously inclined to 
think that he may separate himself from those children of 
his brain which have long gone forth to the world ; and 
though he may not expatiate on the merits his paternal 
affection would ascribe to them, that he may speak at 
least of the mode in which they were trained and reared, 
— of the hopes he cherished, or the objects he entertained, 
when he finally dismissed them to the opinions of others 
and the ordeal of Fate or Time. 

For mv part, I own that even when I have thought but 
little of the value of a work, I have always felt an interest 
in the author's account of its origin and formation ; and 
willing to suppose that what thus affords a gratification to 
my own curiosity may not be wholly unattractive to others, 
I shall thus continue from time to time to play the Showman 
to my own machinery, and explain the principle of the 
mainspring and the movement of the wheels. 

This novel was begun somewhere in the third year of 
my authorship, and completed in the fourth. It was. 



viii PREFACE. 

therefore, composed almost simultaneously with " Eugene 
Aram," and afforded to me at least some relief from the 
gloom of that village tragedy. It is needless to observe 
how dissimilar in point of scene, character, and fable the 
one is from the other ; yet they are alike in this, — that 
both attempt to deal with one of the most striking prob- 
lems in the spiritual history of man ; namely, the frustra- 
tion or abuse of power in a superior intellect originally 
inclined to good. Perhaps there is no problem that more 
fascinates the attention of a man of some earnestness at 
that period of his life when his eye first disengages 
itself from the external phenomena around him, and his 
curiosity leads him to examine the cause and' account for 
the effect ; when, to cite reverently the words of the wisest, 
" He applies his heart to know and to search, and to seek 
out wisdom and the reason of things, and to know the 
wickedness of folly, even of foolishness and madness." 

In " Eugene Aram," the natural career of genius is 
arrested by a single crime ; in " Godolphin," a mind of 
inferior order, but more fanciful colouring, is wasted away 
by the indulgence of those morbid sentiments which are the 
nourishment of egotism, and the gradual influence of the 
frivolities which make the business of the idle. Here, 
the Demon tempts or destroys the hermit in his solitary 
cell ; there, he glides amidst the pomps and vanities of the 
world, and whispers away the soul in the voice of his soft 
familiars. Indolence and Pleasure. 

Of all my numerous novels, " Pelham " and " Godolphin " 
are the only ones which take their absolute groundwork in 
what is called " The Fashionable World." I have sought 
in each to make the general composition in some harmony 
with the principal figure in the foreground. Pelham is 
represented as almost wholly unsusceptible to the more 
poetical influences. He has the physical compound, which, 



PREFACE. IX 

versatile and joyous, amalgamates easily with the world ; 
he views life with the lenient philosophy that Horace com- 
mends in Aristippus ; he laughs at the follies he shares, 
and is ever ready to turn into uses ultimately (if indi- 
rectly) serious the frivolities that only serve to sharpen 
his wit, and augment that peculiar expression which we 
term " knowledge of the world." In a word, dispel all his 
fopperies, real or assumed, he is still the active man of 
crowds and cities, determined to succeed, and gifted with 
the ordinary qualities of success. Godolphin, on the con- 
trary, is the man of poetical temperament, out of his place 
alike among the trifling idlers and the bustling actors of 
the world ; wanting the stimulus of necessity, or the higher 
motive which springs from benevolence, to give energy to 
his powers or definite purpose to his fluctuating desires ; 
not strong enough to break the bonds that confine his 
genius, not supple enough to accommodate its movements 
to their purpose. He is the moral antipodes to Pelham. 
In evading the struggles of the world, he grows indifferent 
to its duties ; he strives with no obstacles ; he can triumph 
in no career. Represented as possessing mental qualities 
of a higher and a richer nature than those to which Pelham 
can pretend, he is also represented as very inferior to him 
in constitution of character, and he is certainly a more 
ordinary type of the intellectual trifler. 

The characters grouped around Godolphin are those with 
which such a man usually associates his life. They are 
designed to have a certain grace, a certain harmony with 
one form or the other of his two-fold temperament ; namely, 
either its conventional elegance of taste or its constitutional 
poetry of idea. But all alike are brought under varying 
operations of similar influences ; for whether in Saville, 
Constance, Fanny, or Lucilla, the picture presented is 
still the picture of gifts misapplied, of life misunderstood. 



X PREFACE. 

The Preacher who exclaimed " Vanity of vanities ! all 
is vanity " perhaps solved his own mournful saying, 
when he added elsewhere, " This only have I found, that 
God made men upright, but they have sought out many 
inventions." 

This work was first published anonymously, and for that 
reason perhaps it has been slow in attaining to its rightful 
station amongst its brethren, whose parentage at first was 
openly acknowledged. If compared with " Pelham " it 
might lose, at the first glance, but would perhaps gain on 
any attentive reperusal. 

For although it must follow from the inherent difference 
in the design of the two works thus referred to that in 
" Godolphin " there can be little of the satire or vivacity 
which have given popularity to its predecessor, yet, on the 
other hand, in " Godolphin " there ought to be a more 
faithful illustration of the even polish that belongs to 
luxurious life, of the satiety that pleasure inflicts upon 
such of its votaries as are worthy of a higher service. 
The subject selected cannot admit the same facility for 
observation of things that lie on the surface ; but it may 
well lend itself to subtler investigation of character, allow 
more attempt at pathos, and more appeal to reflection. 

Regarded as a story, the defects of " Godolphin " most 
apparent to myself are in the manner in which Lucilla is 
re-introduced in the later chapters, and in the final catas- 
trophe of the hero. There is an exaggerated romance in 
the one, and the admission of accident as a crowning 
agency in the other, which my maturer judgment would 
certainly condemn, and which at all events appear to me 
out of keeping with the natural events, and the more 
patient investigation of moral causes and their conse- 
quences, from which the previous interest of the tale is 
sought to be attained. On the other hand, if I may pre- 



PREFACE. XI 

sume to conjecture the most probable claim to favour 
which the work, regarded as a whole, may possess, it may 
possibly be found in a tolerably accurate description of 
certain phases of modern civilization, and in the sugges- 
tion of some truths that may be worth considering in our 
examination of social influences or individual conduct. 



CONTENTS. 



CHAPTER I. 



Page 
The Death-bed of John Vernon. — His dying Words. — Description of 

his Daughter, the Heroine. — The Oath 1 

CHAPTER II. 

Remark on the Tenure of Life. — The Coffins of Great Men seldom neg- 
lected. — Constance takes Refuge with Lady Erpingham. — The 
Heroine's Accomplishments and Character. — The Manoeuvring 
Temperament 6 

CHAPTER III. 

The Hero introduced to our Reader's Notice. — Dialogue between him- 
self and his Father. — Percy Godolphin's Character as a Boy. — 
The Catastrophe of his School Life 10 

CHAPTER IV. 

Percy's first Adventure as a Free Agent 13 

CHAPTER V. 

The Mummers. — Godolphin in Love. — The Effect of Fanny Millin- 
ger's Acting upon him. — The two Offers. — Godolphin quits the 
Players 16 

CHAPTER VL 
Percy Godolphin the Guest of Saville. — He enters the Life-Guards and 

becomes the Fashion 20 



xiv CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER VII. 

Page 

Saville excused for having human Affections. — Godolphin sees One 

whom he never sees again. — The New Actress 23 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Godolphin's Passion for the Stage. — The Difference it engendered in 

his Habits of Life 26 

CHAPTER IX. 

The Legacy. — A New Deformity in Saville. — The Nature of Worldly 

Liaisons. — Godolphin leaves England 28 

CHAPTER X. 
The Education of Constance's Mind 32 

CHAPTER XL 

Conversation between Lady Erpingham and Constance. — Further Par- 
ticulars of Godolphin's Family, etc 34 

CHAPTER XIL 

Description of Godolphin's House. — The First Interview. — Its Effect 

on Constance 37 

CHAPTER XIII. 

A Ball Announced. — Godolphin's Visit to Wendover Castle. — His 

Manners and Conversation 43 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Conversation between Godolphin and Constance. — The Country Life 

and the Town Life 45 

CHAPTER XV. 

The Feelings of Constance and Godolphin towards each other. — The 
Distinction in their Characters. — Remarks on the Effects produced 
by the World upon Godolphin. — The Ride. — Rural Descriptions. 
— Omens. — The first indistinct Confession 47 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Godolphin's Return Home. — His Soliloquy. — Lord Erpingham's Arri- 
val at Wendover Castle. — The Earl described. — His Account of 
Godolphin's Life at Rome 54 



CONTENTS. XV 

CHAPTER XVII. 

Page 

Constance at her Toilet. — Her Feelings. — Her Character of Beauty 
described. — The Ball. —The Duchess of Wiustoun and her 
Daughter. — An Induction from the Nature of Female Rivalries. — 
Jealousy in a Lover. — Impertinence retorted. — Listeners never 
hear Good of themselves. — Remarks on the Amusements of a 
Public Assembly. —The Supper. — The Falseness of seeming Gay- 
ety. -Various Reflections, New and True. — What passes between 
Godolphin and Constance 53 

CHAPTER XVin. 
The Interview. — The Crisis of a Life 75 

CHAPTER XIX. 

A Rake and Exquisite of the best (worst) School. — A Conversation on 
a thousand Matters. — The Declension of the " Sui Profusus " into 
the " Alieni Appetens " 8.3 

CHAPTER XX. 

Fanny Millinger once more. — Love. — Woman. — Books. — A hundred 
Topics touched on the Surface. — Godolphin's State of Mind more 
minutely examined. — The Dinner at Saville's 92 

CHAPTER XXL 

An Event of great Importance to the principal Actors in this History. 

— Godolphin a second time leaves England 100 

CHAPTER XXIL 

The Bride alone. — A Dialogue political and matrimonial. — Con- 
stance's Genius for Diplomacy. — The Character of her Assemblies. 

— Her Conquest over Lady Delville 10-3 

CHAPTER XXin. 

An insight into the real Grande Monde, — being a Search behind the 

rose-coloured Curtains 108 

CHAPTER XXIV. 
The Married State of Constance HI 



x^'i CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

The Pleasure of retaliating Humiliation. — Constance's Defence of ^^^^ 
Fashion. — Remarks on Fashion. — Godolphin's whereabout.— 
Fanny Millinger's Character of herself . — Want of Courage in 
Moralists - 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

The Visionary and his Daughter. -An Englishman, such as Foreigners 

imagine the English , , „ 

CHAPTER XXVn. 

A Conversation little appertaining to the Nineteenth Century. — Re- 

searchesiutohumanFate.— The Prediction ........ 125 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

The Youth of Lncilla Volktman. — A mysterious Conversation. — The 

Return of One unlocked for . . ,o- 

lOD 

CHAPTER XXIX. 

The Effect of Years and Experience. — The Italian Character ... 143 

CHAPTER XXX. 

Magnetism. -Sympathy. -The Return of Elements to Elements . . 146 

CHAPTER XXXI. 

A Scene. -Lucilla's strange Conduct. - Godolphin passes through a 

severe Ordeal. — Egeria's Grotto, and what there happens . . . 150 

CHAPTER XXXII. 

The Weakness of all Virtue springing only from the Feelings . ... 162 

CHAPTER XXXIII. 
Return to Lady Erpingham. - Lady Erpingham falls ill. - Lord Er- 
pmgham resolves to go Abroad. - Plutarch upon Musical Instru- 
ments. - Party at Erpingham House. - SaviUe on Society and the 
Taste for the Little. - David Mandeville. - Women, their Influ- 
ence and Education. — The Necessity of an Object. - Religion 1 69 



CONTENTS. xvii 

CHAPTER XXXIV. 

Page 

Ambition vindicated. — The Home of Godolphin and LuciUa. — Lu- 
cilla's Miud. — The Effect of happy Love on Female Talent. — The 
Eve of Farewell. — Lucilla alone. — Test of a Woman's Affection . 177 

CHAPTER XXXV. 

Godolphin at Rome. — The Cure for a morbid Idealism. — His Em- 
barrassment in regard to Lucilla. — The Rencontre with an old 
Friend. — The Colosseum. — A Surprise 



188 



CHAPTER XXXVL 

Dialogue between Godolphin and Saville. — Certain Events explained. 
— Saville's Apology for a bad Heart. — Godolphin's confused Senti- 
ments for Lady Erpingham 19* 

CHAPTER XXXVn. 
An Evening with Constance 1 ^8 

CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Constance's undiminished Love for Godolphin. — Her Remorse and 
her Hope. — The Capitol. — The different Thoughts of Godolphin 
and Constance at the View. — The tender Expressions of Constance 201 

CHAPTER XXXIX. 

Lucilla's Letter. — The Effect it produces on Godolphin 205 

CHAPTER XL. 
Tivoli. — The Siren's Cave. — The Confession 210 

CHAPTER XLL 

Lucilla. — The Solitude. — The Spell. — The Dream and the Resolve . 214 

CHAPTER XLH. 
Joy and Despair 219 

CHAPTER XLm. 
Love strong as Death, and not less bitter 225 

CHAPTER XLIV. 
Godolphin 228 



xviii CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER XLV. 

Page 
The Declaration. — The approaching Nuptials. — Is the Idealist con- 
tented ? 230 

CHAPTER XLVI. 

The Bridals. — The Accident. — The first lawful Possession of Love . 233 

CHAPTER XL VII. 
News of LuciUa 235 

CHAPTER XLYIII. 
In which two Persons, permanently united, discover that no Tie can 

produce Union of Minds 237 

CHAPTER XLIX. 

The Return to London. — The eternal Nature of Disappointment. — 

Fanny MiUinger. — Her House and Supper 241 

CHAPTER L. 

Godolphin's Soliloquy. — He becomes a Man of Pleasure and a Patron 
of the Arts. — A new Character shadowed forth ; for as we ad- 
vance, whether in Life or its Representation, Characters are more 
faint and dimly drawn than in the earlier Part of our Career . . 246 

CHAPTER LI. 

Crodolphin's Course of Life. — Influence of Opinion and of Ridicule 
on the Minds of privileged Orders. — Lady Erpingham's Friend- 
ship with George the Fourth. — His Manner of Living 250 

CHAPTER LII. 

Radclyffe and Godolphin converse. — The Varieties of Ambition . . . 253 

CHAPTER LIII. 

Fanny behind the Scenes. — Reminiscences of Youth. — The Univer- 
sality of Trick. — The Supper at Fanny Millinger's. — Talk on a 
thousand Matters, equally light and true. — Fanny's Song . . . 255 

CHAPTER LIV. 
The Career of Constance. — Real State of her Feelings towards Godol- 
phin. — Rapid Succession of political Events. — Canning's Admin- 
istration. — Catholic Question. — Lord Grey's Speech. — Canning's 
Death 262 



CONTENTS. xix 

CHAPTER LV. 
The Death of George IV. — The political Situation of Parties, and of 

Lady Erpinghaui 2^C 

CHAPTER LVI. 
The Rou€ has become a Valetudinarian. — News. — A Fortune-Teller . 269 

CHAPTER LVn. 
Superstition, — its wonderful Effects 272 

CHAPTER LVIII. 

The Empire of Time and of Love. — The proud Constance grown 

weary and humble. — An Ordeal 274 

CHAPTER LIX. 
Constance makes a Discovery that touches and enlightens her as to 
Godolphin's Nature. — An Event, although in private Life, not 
without its Interest 279 

CHAPTER LX. 
The Reform Bill. — A very short Chapter 282 

CHAPTER LXI. 

The Soliloquy of the Soothsayer. — An Episodical Mystery, intro- 
duced as a Type of the many Things in Life that are never ac- 
counted for. — Gratuitous Deviations from our common Career . 283 

CHAPTER LXn. 

In which the common Life glides into the Strange, — equally true, but 

the Truth not equally acknowledged 288 

CHAPTER LXIII. 
A Meeting between Constance and the Prophetess 290 

CHAPTER LXIV. 
Lucilla's Flight. — The Perplexity of Lady Erpingham. — A Change 
comes over Godolphin's Mind. — His Conversation with Rad- 
clyffe. — General Election. — Godolphin becomes a Senator . . . 299 



XX CONTENTS. 

CHAPTER LXV. 

Page 
New Views of a privileged Order. — The Death-Bed of Augustus 

Saville 308 

CHAPTER LXVI. 

The Journey aud the Surprise. — A Walk in the Summer Night. — The 

Stars, and the Association that the Memory makes with Nature . 312 

CHAPTER LXVn. 

The full Renewal of Love. — Happiness produces Fear, and in To-day 

already walks To-morrow 318 

CHAPTER LXVIII. 

The last Conversation between Godolphin and Constance. — His 
Thoughts and solitary Walk amidst the Scenes of his Youth. — 
The Letter. — The Departure 321 

CHAPTER THE LAST. 
A dread Meeting. — The Storm. — The Catastrophe 326 



LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS. 



Page 
GoDOLPHiN MEETING THE TRAVELLING COMPANY . . . Frontispiece 

Constance fi2 

LUCILLA . 159 

Fanny and Godolpuin 261 



GODOLPHIN 



GODOLPHIK 



CHAPTER I. 

THE DEATH-BED OF JOHN VERNON. — HIS DYING "WORDS. — 
DESCRIPTION OF HIS DAUGHTER, THE HEROINE. — THE OATH. 

"Is the night calm, Constance?" 

"Beautiful! the moon is up." 

" Open the shutters wider, there. It is a beautiful night. 
How beautiful! Come hither, my child." 

The rich moonlight that now shone through the windows 
streamed on little that it could invest with poetical attrac- 
tion. The room was small, though not squalid in its charac 
ter and appliances. The bed-curtains, of a dull chintz, were 
drawn back, and showed the form of a man, past middle age, 
propped by pillows, and bearing on his countenance the marks 
of approaching death. But what a countenance it still was ! 
The broad, pale, lofty brow ; the fine, straight, Grecian nose ; 
the short, curved lip; the full, dimpled chin; the stamp of 
genius in every line and lineament, — these still defied dis- 
ease, or rather borrowed from its very ghastliness a more im- 
pressive majesty. Beside the bed was a table spread with 
books of a motley character, — here an abstruse system of Cal- 
culations on Finance; there a volume of wild Bacchanalian 
Songs; here the lofty aspirations of Plato's "Phsedon;" and 
there the last speech of some County Paris on a Malt Tax : 
old newspapers and dusty pamphlets completed the intel- 
lectual litter; and above them rose, mournfully enough, the 
tall spectral form of a half-emptied phial, and a chamber 
candle-stick, crested by its extinguisher. 

1 



^ GODOLPHIN. 

A light step approached the bedside, and opposite the dy- 
ing man now stood a girl, who might have seen her thirteenth 
year. But her features — of an exceeding, and what may be 
termed a regal beauty — were as fully developed as those of 
one who had told twice her years; and not a trace of- the 
bloom or the softness of girlhood could be marked on her 
countenance. Her complexion was pale as the whitest mar- 
ble, but clear and lustrous; and' her raven hair, parted over 
her brow in a fashion then uncommon, increased the statue- 
like and classic effect of her noble features. The expression 
of her countenance seemed cold, sedate, and somewhat stern; 
but it might, in some measure, have belied her heart; for, 
when turned to the moonlight, you might see that her eyes 
were filled with tears, though she did not weep; and you 
might tell by the quivering of her lip, that a little hesitation 
an replying to any remark from the sufferer arose from her 
difficulty in commanding her emotions. 

"Constance," said the invalid, after a pause, in which he 
seemed to have been gazing with a quiet heart on the soft 
skies, that, blue and eloquent with stars, he beheld through 
the unclosed windows, — " Constance, the hour is coming; I 
feel it by signs which I cannot mistake. I shall die this 
night." 

"0 God! my Father! my dear, dear Father!" broke from 
Constance's lips, "do not speak thus — do not; I will go to 
Doctor — " 

"No, child, no! I loathe, I detest the thought of help. 
They denied it me while it was yet time. They left me to 
starve or to rot in jail, or to hang myself! They left me like 
a dog, and like a dog I will die! I would not have one iota 
taken from the justice, the deadly and dooming weight, of my 
dying curse." Here violent spasms broke on the speech of 
the sufferer; and when, by medicine and his daughter's at- 
tentions, he had recovered, he said, in a lower and calmer 
key; "Is all quiet below, Constance? Are all in bed,— the 
landlady, the servants, our fellow-lodgers?" 

"All, my Father." 

"Ay; then I shall die happy. Thank Heaven, you are my 



GODOLPHIN. o 

only nurse and attendant. I remember the day when I was 
ill after one of tlieir rude debauches. Ill ! — a sick headache, 
a fit of the spleen, a spoiled lapdog's illness! Well: they 
wanted me that night to support one of their paltry meas- 
ures, — their parliamentary measures; and I had a prince 
feeling my pulse, and a duke mixing my draught, and a 
dozen earls sending their doctors to me. I was of use to 
them then! Poor me! Eead me that note, Constance, — 
Flamborough's note. Do you hesitate? Eead it, I say!" 
Constance trembled and complied. 

My dear Yerxox, — I am really au desespoir to hear of your mel- 
ancholy state, — so sorry I cannot assist you ; but you know my embar- 
rassed circumstances. By the by, I saw Ms Royal Highness yesterday. 
" Poor Vernon ! " said he ; " would a hundred pounds do him any good ? " 
So we don't forget you, mon cher. Ah, how we missed you at the Beef- 
steak ! Xever shall we know again so glorious a bon vivant. You would 

laugh to hear L attempting to echo your old jokes. But time 

presses : I must be off to the House. You know what a motion it is ! 

"Would to Heaven you were to bring it on instead of that ass T . 

Adieu ! I wish I could come and see you ; but it would break my heart. 
Can I send you any books from Hookham's ? 

Yours ever, 

Flamborough. 

"This is the man whom I made Secretary of State," said 
Vernon. " Very well ! oh, it 's very well,— very well indeed. 
Let me kiss thee, my girl. Poor Constance! You will have 
good friends when I am dead! They will be proud enough to 
be kind to Vernon's daughter, when Death has shown them 
that Vernon is a loss. You are very handsome,— your poor 
mother's eyes and hair, my father's splendid brow and lip; 
and yoxir figure even now so stately! They will court you: 
you will have lords and great men enough at your feet; but 
you will never forget this night, nor the agony of your 
father's death-bed face, and the brand they have burned in 
his heart. And now, Constance, give me the Bible in which 
you read to me this morning : that will do. Stand away from 
the light and fix your eyes on mine, and listen as if your soul 
were in your ears. 



4 GODOLPHIX. 

"When I was a young man, toiling my way to fortune 
through the labours of the Bar, — prudent, cautious, indefatig- 
able, confident of success, — certain lords, who heard I pos- 
sessed genius and thought I might become their tool, came to 
me, and besought me to enter parliament. I told them I was 
poor, was lately married, that my public ambition must not 
be encouraged at the expense of my private fortunes. They 
answered that they pledged themselves those fortunes should 
be their care. I yielded; I deserted my profession; I obeyed 
their wishes; I became famous — and a ruined man! They 
could not dine without me; they could not sup without me; 
they could not get drunk without me; no pleasure was sweet 
but in my company. What mattered it that, while I minis- 
tered to their amusement, I was necessarily heaping debt 
upon debt, accumulating miseries for future years, laying up 
bankruptcy, and care and shame and a broken heart and an 
early death? But listen, Constance! Ai^e you listening, — 
attentively? Well! note now, I am a just man. I do not 
blame my noble friends, my gentle patrons, for this. No; if 
I were forgetful of my interests, if I preferred their pleasure 
to my happiness and honour, that was my crime, and I de- 
serve the punishment! But look you: time went by, and my 
constitution was broken; debts came upon me; I could not 
pay; men mistrusted my word; my name in the country fell! 
With my health, my genius deserted me; I was no longer 
useful to my party ; I lost my seat in parliament ; and when 
I was on a sick-bed — you remember it, Constance — the 
bailiffs came, and tore me away for a paltry debt, — the value 
of one of those suppers the prince used to beg me to give him. 
From that time my familiars forsook me! — not a visit, not a 
kind act, not a service for him whose day of work was over ! 
'Poor Vernon's character was gone! Shockingly involved, 
could not perform his promises to his creditors, always so 
extravagant, quite unprincipled, must give him up! ' 

" In those sentences lies the secret of their conduct. They 
did not remember that for them, hj them, the character was 
gone, the promises broken, the ruin incurred ! They thought 
not how I had served them; how my best years had been de- 



GODOLPIIIX. 5 

voted to advance them, — to ennoble their cause in the lying 
page of History! All this was not thought of: my life was 
reduced to two epochs, — that of use to them, that not. Dur- 
ing the first, I was honoured ; during the last, I was left to 
starve, to rot! "Who freed me from prison; who protects me 
now? One of my ' party,' my ' noble friends,' my * honour- 
able, right honourable friends ' ? No ! a tradesman whom I 
once served in my holiday, and who alone, of all the world, 
forgets me not in my penance. You see gratitude, friend- 
ship, spring up only in middle life; they grow not in high 
stations ! 

"And now, come nearer, for my voice falters, and I would 
have these words distinctly heard. Child, girl as you are, 
you I consider pledged to record, to fulfil my desire, my 
curse ! Lay your hand on mine : swear that through life to 
death, — swear! You speak not! repeat my words after me" 
— Constance obeyed — "through life to death; through good, 
through ill, through weakness, through power, you will de- 
vote yourself to humble, to abase that party from whom your 
father received ingratitude, mortification, and death! Swear 
that you will not marry a poor and powerless man, who can- 
not minister to the ends of that solemn retribution I invoke I 
Swear that you will seek to marry from amongst the great; 
not through love, not through ambition, but through hate, 
and for revenge ! You will seek to rise that you may humble 
those who have betrayed me ! In the social walks of life you 
will delight to gall their vanities; in state intrigues you will 
embrace every measure that can bring them to their eternal 
downfall. For this great end you will pursue all means. — 
What! you hesitate? Eepeat, repeat, repeat! — You will lie, 
cringe, fawn, and think vice not vice, if it bring you one jot 
nearer to Revenge! With this curse on my foes, I entwine 
my blessing, dear, dear Constance, on you, — you, who have 
nursed, watched, all but saved me! God, God bless you, my 
child! " And Vernon burst into tears. 

It was two hours after this singular scene, and exactly in 
the third hour of morning, that Vernon woke from a short and 
troubled sleep. The gray dawn (for the time was the height 



o GODOJ.PIim. 

of summer) already began to labour through the shades and 
against the stars of night. A raw and comfortless chill crept 
over the earth, and saddened the air in the death-chamber. 
Constance sat by her father's bed, her eyes fixed upon him, 
and her cheek more wan than ever by the pale light of that 
crude and cheerless dawn. When Vernon woke, his eyes, 
glazed with death, rolled faintly towards her, fixing and 
dimming in their sockets as they gazed; his throat rattled. 
But for one moment his voice found vent; a ray shot across 
his countenance as he uttered his last words,— words that 
sank at once and eternally to tlie core of his daughter's heart, 
— words that ruled her life, and sealed her destiny : " Con- 
stance, remember — the Oath — Eevenge I " 



CHAPTER II. 

REMARK ON THE TENURE OF LIFE. — THE COFFINS OF GREAT 
MEN SELDOM NEGLECTED. — CONSTANCE TAKES REFUGE 
WITH LADY ERPINGHAM. THE HEROINE's ACCOMPLISH- 
MENTS AND CHARACTER. THE MANCEUVRING TEMPERA- 
MENT. 

What a strange life this is ! What puppets we are ! How 
terrible an enigma is Fate ! I never set my foot without my 
door but what the fearful darkness that broods over the next 
moment rushes upon me. How awful an event may hang 
over our hearts! The sword is always above us, seen or 
invisible ! 

And with this life, this scene of darkness and dread, some 
men would have us so contented as to desire, to ask for 
no other! 

Constance was now without a near relation in the world. 
But her father predicted rightly : vanity supplied the place 
of affection. Vernon, who for eighteen months preceding his 



GODOLPIIIN. ' 

death had struggled with the sharpest afflictions of want,— 
Vernon, deserted in life by all, was interred with the insult- 
ing ceremonials of pomp and state. Six nobles bore his pall; 
long trains of carriages attended his funeral; the journals 
were filled with outlines of his biography and lamentations 
at his decease. They buried him in Westminster Abbey, and 
they made subscriptions for a monument in the very best sort 
of marble. Lady Erpingham, a distant connection of the 
deceased, invited Constance to live with her; and Constance 
of course consented, for she had no alternative. 

On the day that she arrived at Lady Erpingham's house, 
in Hill Street, there were several persons present in the 
drawing-room. 

"I fear, poor girl," said Lady Erpingham,— for they were 
talking of Constance's expected arrival,— -'I fear that she 
will be quite abashed by seeing so many of us, and under such 
unhappy circumstances." 

"How old is she? " asked a beauty. 
"About thirteen, I believe." 
"Handsome? " 

" I have not seen her since she was seven years old. She 
promised then to be very beautiful ; but she was a remarkably 
shy, silent child." 

"Miss Vernon," said the groom of the chambers, throwing 
open the door. 

With the slow step and self-possessed air of womanhood, 
but with a far haughtier and far colder mien than women 
commonly assume, Constance Vernon walked through the long 
apartment, and greeted her future guardian. Though every 
eye was on her, she did not blush; though the Queens of the 
London World were round her, her gait and air were more 
royal than all. Every one present experienced a revulsion of 
feeling. They were prepared for pity; this was no case in 
which pity could be given. Even the words of protection 
died on Lady Erpingham's lip, and she it was who felt bash- 
ful and disconcerted. 

I intend to pass rapidly over the years that elapsed till 
Constance became a woman. Let us glance at her education. 



8 GODOLPHIN. 

Vei-non had not only had her instructed in the French and 
Italian, but, a deep and impassioned scholar himself, he had 
taught her the elements of the two great languages of the an- 
cient world. The treasures of those languages she afterwards 
conquered of her own accord. 

Lady Erpingham had one daughter, who married when 
Constance had reached the age of sixteen. The advantages 
Lady Eleanor Erpingham possessed in her masters and her 
governess Constance shared. Miss Vernon drew well, and 
sang divinely; but she made no very great proficiency in the 
science of music. To say truth, her mind was somewhat too 
stern, and somewhat too intent on other subjects, to surrender 
to that most jealous of accomplishments the exclusive devo- 
tion it requires. 

But of all her attractions, and of all the evidences of her 
cultivated mind, none equalled the extraordinary grace of her 
conversation. Wholly disregarding the conventional leading- 
strings in which the minds of young ladies are accustomed to 
be held, — leading-strings, disguised by the name of "proper 
diffidence " and " becoming modesty," — she never scrupled to 
share, nay, to lead, discussions even of a grave and solid na- 
ture. Still less did she scruple to adorn the common trifles 
that make the sum of conversation with the fascinations of a 
wit, which, playful, yet deep, rivalled even the paternal source 
from which it was inherited. 

It seems sometimes odd enough to me, that while young 
ladies are so sedulously taught the accomplishments that a 
husband disregards, they are never taught the great one he 
would prize. They are taught to be exhibitors; he wants a 
companion. He wants neither a singing animal, nor a draw- 
ing animal, nor a dancing animal: he wants a talking animal. 
But to talk they are never taught; all they know of conversa- 
tion is slander, and that "comes by nature." 

But Constance did talk beautifully, — not like a pedant or 
blue or a Frenchwoman. A child would have been as much 
charnied with her as a scholar; but both would have been 
charmed. Her father's eloquence had descended to her; but 
in him eloquence commanded, in her it won. There was 



GODOLPHIX. 9 

another trait she possessed in common with her father: Ver- 
non (as most disappointed men are wont) had done the world 
injustice by his accusations. It was not his poverty and his 
distresses alone which had induced his part}' to look coolly 
on his declining day. They Avere not without some apparent 
excuse for desertion, — they doubted his sincerity. It is true 
that it was without actual cause. Xo modern politician had 
ever been more consistent. He had refused bribes, though 
poor; and place, though ambitious. But he was essentially — 
here is the secret — essentially an intrigua7it. Bred in the 
old school of policy, he thought that manoeuvring was wis- 
dom, and duplicity the art of governing. Like Lysander,^ 
he loved plotting, yet neglected self-interest. There was not 
a man less open, or more honest. This character, so rare in 
all countries, is especially so in England. Your blunt squires, 
your politicians at Bellamy's, do not comprehend it. They 
saw in Vernon the arts which deceive enemies, and they 
dreaded lest, though his friends, thej^ themselves should be 
deceived. This disposition, so fatal to Vernon, his daughter 
inherited. With a dark, bold, and passionate genius, which 
in a man would have led to the highest enterprises, she 
linked the feminine love of secrecy and scheming. To borrow 
again from Plutarch and Lysander, "When the skin of the 
lion fell short, she was quite of opinion that it should be 
eked out with the fox's." 

1 Plutarch : Life of Lysander. 



10 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER III. 

THE HERO INTRODUCED TO OUR READEr's NOTICE. — DIALOGUE 

BETWEEN HIMSELF AND HIS FATHER. PERCY GODOL- 

PHIn's CHARACTER AS A BOY. THE CATASTROPHE OF 

HIS SCHOOL LIFE. 

"Percx". remember that it is to-morrow you will return to 
school, " said Mr. Godolphin to his only son, 

Percy pouted, and after a momentary silence replied, "No, 
Father, I think I shall go to Mr. Saville's. He has asked me 
to spend a month with him ; and he says rightly that I shall 
learn more with him than at Dr. Shallowell's, where I am 
already head of the sixth form." 

*' Mr. Saville is a coxcomb, and you are another ! " replied 
the father, who, dressed in an old flannel dressing-gown, with 
a worn velvet cap on his head, and cowering gloomily over a 
wretched fire, seemed no bad personification of that mixture 
of half-hypochondriac, half-miser, which he was in reality. 
" Don't talk to me of going to town, sir, or — " 

"Father," interrupted Percy, in a cool and nonchalant tone, 
as he folded his arms, and looked straight and shrewdly on 
the paternal face, — "Father, let us understand each other. 
My schooling, I suppose, is rather an expensive affair? " 

" You may well say that, sir ! Expensive ! it is frightful, 
horrible, ruinous! Expensive! £20 a year board and Latin; 
five guineas washing; five more for writing and arithmetic. 
Sir, if I were not resolved that you should not want education, 
though you may want fortune, I should — yes, I should — 
What do you mean, sir? — you are laughing! Is this your 
respect, your gratitude to your father? " 

A slight shade fell over the bright and intelligent counte- 
nance of the boy. 

"Don't let us talk of gratitude," said he, sadly; "Heaven 
knows what either you or I have to be grateful for! Fortune 



GODOLPHIX. 11 

has left to your proud name but these bare walls and a handful 
of barren acres; to me she gave a father's affection, — not 
such as Nature had made it, but cramped and soured by 
misfortunes." 

Here Percy paused, and his father seemed also struck and 
affected. "Let us," renewed in a lighter strain this singular 
boy, who might have passed, by some months, his sixteenth 
year, — "let us see if we cannot accommodate matters to our 
mutual satisfaction. You can ill afford my schooling, and I 
am resolved that at school I will not stay. Saville is a rela- 
tion of ours ; he has taken a fancy to me ; he has even hinted 
that he may leave me his fortune ; and he has promised, at 
least, to afford me a home and his tuition as long as I like. 
Give me free passport hereafter to come and go as I list, and 
I in turn will engage never to cost you another shilling. 
Come, sir, shall it be a compact? " 

" You wound me, Percy, " said the father, with a mournful 
pride in his tone; "T have not deserved this, at least from 
you. You know not, boy, you know not all that has hard- 
ened this heart; but to you it has not been hard, and a taunt 
from you, — yes, that is the serpent's tooth! " 

Percy in an instant was at his father's feet; he seized both 
his hands, and burst into a passionate fit of tears. " Forgive 
me," he said, in broken words; "I — I meant not to taunt 
you. I am but a giddy boy! Send me to school! do with me 
as you will ! " 

"Ay," said the old man, shaking his head gently, "you 
know not what pain a son's bitter word can send to a parent's 
heart. But it is all natural, perfectly natural! You would 
reproach me with a love of money, it is the sin to which 
youth is the least lenient. But what ! can I look round the 
world and not see its value, its necessity? Year after year, 
from my first manhood, I have toiled and toiled to preserve 
from the hammer these last remnants of my ancestors' re- 
mains. Year after year fortune has slipped from my gi'asp; 
and, after all my efforts, and towards the close of a long life, 
I stand on the very verge of penury. But you cannot tell — 
no man whose heart is not seared with many years can tell or 



12 GODOLPHIN. 

can appreciate — the motives that have formed my character. 
You, however," — and his voice softened as he laid his hand 
on his son's head, — "you, however, — the gay, the bold, the 
young, — should not have your brow crossed and your eye 
dimmed by the cares that surround me. Go ! I will accom- 
pany you to town; I will see Saville myself. If he be one 
with whom my son can at so tender an age be safely trusted, 
you shall pay him the visit you wish." 

Percy would have replied, but his father checked him; and 
before the end of the evening, the father had resolved to for- 
get as much as he pleased of the conversation. 

The elder Godolphin was one of those characters on whom 
it is vain to attempt making a permanent impression. The 
habits of his mind were durably formed: like waters, they 
yielded to any sudden intrusion, but closed instantly again. 
Early in life he had been taught that he ought to marry an 
heiress for the benefit of his estate, — his ancestral estate; 
the restoration of which he had been bred to consider the 
grand object and ambition of life. His views had been 
strangely baffled; but the more they were thwarted the more 
pertinaciously he clung to them. Naturally kind, generous, 
and social, he had sunk at length into the anchorite and the 
miser. All other speculations that should retrieve his ances- 
tral honours had failed; but there is one speculation that 
never fails, — the speculation of saving / It was to this that 
he now indissolubly attached himself. At moments he was 
open to all his old habits ; but such moments were rare and 
few. A cold, hard, frosty penuriousness was his prevalent 
characteristic. He had sent his son, with eighteenpence in 
his pocket, to a school of £20 a year, where, naturally enough, 
he learned nothing but mischief and cricket; yet he conceived 
that his son owed him eternal obligations. 

Luckily for Percy, he was an especial favourite with a cer- 
tain not uncelebrated character of the name of Saville; and 
Saville claimed the privilege of a relation to supply him with 
money and receive him at his home. Wild, passionate, fond 
to excess of pleasure, the young Godolphin caught eagerly at 
these occasional visits; and at each his mind, keen and pene- 



GODOLPIIIX. 13 

trating as it naturally was, took new flights, and revelled in 
new views. He was already the leader of his school, the tor- 
ment of the master, and the lover of the master's daughter. 
He was sixteen years old, but a character. A secret pride, a 
secret bitterness, and an open wit and recklessness of bearing, 
rendered him to all seeming a boy more endowed with ener- 
gies than affections ; yet a kind word from a friend's lips was 
never without its effect on him, and he might have been led by 
the silk while he would have snapped the chain. But these 
were his boyish traits of mind: the world soon altered them. 

The subject of the visit to Saville was not again touched 
upon. A little reflection showed Mr. Godolphin how nuga- 
tory were the promises of a schoolboy that he should not cost 
his father another shilling; and he knew that Saville's house 
was not exactly the spot in which economy was best learned. 
He thoughf it, therefore, more prudent that his son should 
return to school. 

To school went Percy Godolphin; and about three weeks 
afterwards, Percy Godolphin was condemned to expulsion for 
returning, with considerable unction, a slap in the face that 
he had received from Dr. Shallowell. Instead of waiting for 
his father's arrival, Percy made up a small bundle of clothes, 
let himself drop, by the help of the bed-curtains, from the 
window of the room in which he was confined, and towards 
the close of a fine summer's evening found himself on the 

highroad between and London, with independence at his 

heart and — Saville's last gift — ten guineas in his pocket. 



CHAPTEPv TV. 

Percy's first advexture as a free agent. 

It was a fine, picturesque outline of road on which the 
young outcast found himself journeying, whither he neither 
knew nor cared. His heart was full of enterprise and the un- 



14 GODOLPHIN. 

fledged valour of inexperience. He had proceeded several 
miles, and the dusk of the evening was setting in, when he 
observed a stage-coach crawling heavily up a hill, a little 
ahead of him, and a tall, well-shaped man walking alongside 
of it, and gesticulating somewhat violently. Godolphin re- 
marked him with some curiosity; and the man, turning 
abruptly round, perceived, and in his turn noticed very in- 
quisitively, the person and aspect of the young traveller. 

"And how now?" said he, presently, and in an agreeable, 
though familiar and unceremonious tone of voice ; " whither 
are you bound this time of day? " 

"It is no business of yours, friend," said the boy, with the 
proud petulance of his age; "mind what belongs to yourself." 

"You are sharp on me, young sir," returned the other; 
"but it is our business to be loquacious. Know, sir," — and 
the stranger frowned, — " that we have ordered many a taller 
fellow than yourself to execution for a much smaller inso- 
lence than you seem capable of." 

A laugh from the coach caused Godolphin to lift up his 
eyes, and he saw the door of the vehicle half -open, as if for 
coolness, and an arch female face looking down on him. 

"You are merry on me, I see," said Percy; "come out, and 
I '11 be even with you, pretty one." 

The lad}'^ laughed yet more loudly at the premature gal- 
lantry of the traveller; but the man, without heeding her, 
and laying his hand on Percy's shoulder, said, — 

"Pray, sir, do you live at B ? " naming the town they 

were now approaching. 

"iSTot I," said Godolphin, freeing himself from the 
intrusion. 

"You will, perhaps, sleep there?" 

"Perhaps I shall." 

"You. are too young to travel alone." 

"And you are too old to make such impertinent remarks," 
retorted Godolphin, reddening with anger. 

"Faith, I like this spirit, my Hotspur," said the stranger, 
coolly. " If you are really going to put up for the night at 
B , suppose we sup together? " 



GODOLPHIX. 15 

"And who and what are you?" asked Percy, bluntly. 

"Anything and everything! in other words, an actor! " 

"And the young lady? " 

" Is our prima donna. In fact, except the driver, the coach 
holds none but the ladies and gentlemen of our company. 

"We have made an excellent harvest at A , and we are now 

on our way to the theatre at B ; pretty theatre it is too, 

and has been known to hold seventy-one pounds eight shil- 
lings." Here the actor fell into a revery; and Percy, moving 
nearer to the coach-door, glanced at the damsel, who returned 
the look with a laugh which, though coquettish, was too low 
and musical to be called bold. 

" So that gentleman, so free and easy in his manners, is not 
your husband? " 

"Heaven forbid! Do you think I should be so gay if he 
were? But, pooh! what can you know of married life? Ko! " 
she continued, with a pretty air of mock dignity ; " I am the 
Belvidera, the Calista, of the company, — above all control, 
all husbanding, and reaping thirty -three shillings a week." 

"But are you above lovers as well as husbands?" asked 
Percy, with a rakish air, borrowed from Saville. 

" Bless the boy ! Xo ; but then my lovers must be at least 
as tall, and at least as rich, and, I am afraid, at least as old, 
as myself." 

"Don't frighten yourself, my dear," returned Percy; "7 
was not about to make love to you." 

"Were you not? Yes, you were, and you knov/ it. But 
why will you not sup with us?" 

" WTiy not, indeed ? " thought Percy, as the idea, thus more 
enticingly put than it was at first, pressed upon him. "If 
you ask me," he said, "I will." 

" I do ask you, then, " said the actress ; and here the hero 
of the company turned abruptly round with a theatrical 
start, and exclaimed, "To sup or not to sup? that is the 
question." 

"To sup, sir," said Godolphin. 

"Very well! I am glad to hear it. Had you not better 
mount and rest yourself in the coach? You can take my 



16 GODOLPHIX. 

place — I am studying a new part. We have two miles far- 
ther to B yet." 

Percy accepted the invitation, and was soon by the side of 
the pretty actress. The horses broke into a slow trot, and 
thus delighted with his adventure, the son of the ascetic 
Godolphin, the pupil of the courtly Saville, entered the town 
of B — — , and commenced his first independent campaign in 
the great tcorld. 



CHAPTEE V. 

THE MUMMERS. — GODOLPHIN IN LOVE. — THE EFFECT OF 

FANNY MILLINGER's ACTING UPON HIM. THE TWO OFFERS. 

GODOLPHIN QUITS THE PLAYERS. 

Our travellers stopped at the first inn in the outskirts of 
the town. Here they were shown into a large room on the 
ground-floor, sanded, with a long table in the centre ; and be- 
fore the supper was served, Percy had leisure to examine all 
the companions with whom he had associated himself. 

In the first place, there was an old gentleman, of the age of 
sixty-three, in a bob-wig, and inclined to be stout, who always 
played the lover. He was equally excellent in the pensive 
Eomeo and the bustling Rapid. He had an ill way of talking 
off the stage, partly because he had lost all his front teeth, — 
a circumstance which made him avoid, in general, those parts 
in which he had to force a great deal of laughter. Next, 
there was a little girl of about fourteen, who played angels, 
fairies, and, at a pinch, was very effective as an old woman. 
Thirdly, there was our free-and-easy cavalier, who, having a 
loud voice and a manly presence, usually performed the 
tyrant. He was great in Macbeth, greater in Bombastes 
Purioso. Fourthly, came this gentleman's wife, a pretty, 
slattemish woman, much painted. She usually performed 



GODOLPHIX. 17 

the second female, — the confidante, the chambermaid, — the 
Emilia to the Desdemona. And fifthly, was Percy's new in- 
amorata, — a girl of about one-and-twenty, fair, with a nez 
retrousse : beautiful auburn hair, that was always a little di- 
shevelled; the prettiest mouth, teeth, and dimple imaginable ; 
a natural colour; and a person that promised to incline here- 
after towards that roundness of proportion which is more dear 
to the sensual than the romantic. This girl, whose name was 
Fanny Millinger, was of so frank, good-humoured, and lively 
a turn, that she was the idol of the whole company, and her 
superiority in acting was never made a matter of jealousy. 
Actors may believe this, or not, as they please. 

"But is this all your company? " said Percy. 

"All? no! " replied Panny, taking off her bonnet, and curl- 
ing up her tresses by the help of a dim glass. " The rest are 
provided at the theatre along with the candle-snuffer and 
scene-shifters part of the fixed property. Why won't you 
take to the stage? I wish you would! you would make a very 
respectable — page. " 

" Upon my word ! " said Percy, exceedingly offended. 

" Come, come ! " cried the actress, clapping her hands, and 
perfectly unheeding his displeasure, " why don't you help me 
off with my cloak; why don't you set me a chair; why don't 
you take this great box out of my way; why don't you — 
Heaven help me ! " and she stamped her little foot quite seri- 
ously on the floor. " A pretty person for a lover you are ! " 

"Oho! then I am a lover, you acknowledge? " 

"Nonsense! get a chair next me at supper." 

The young Godolphin was perfectly fascinated by the lively 
actress ; and it was with no small interest that he stationed 
himself the following night in the stage-box of the little 

theatre at , to see how his Fanny acted. The house was 

tolerably well filled, and the play was " She Stoops to Con- 
quer." The male parts were, on the whole, respectably man- 
aged; though Percy was somewhat surprised to observe that a 
man, who had joined the corps that, morning, blessed with the 
most solemn countenance in the world, — a fine Eoman nose, 
and a forehead like a sage's, — was now dressed in nankeen 

2 



18 GODOLPHIN. 

tights, and a coat without skirts, splitting the sides of the 
gallery in the part of Tony Lumpkin. But into the heroine 
Fanny Millinger threw a grace, a sweetness, a simple yet 
dignified spirit of true love, that at once charmed and aston- 
ished all present. The applause was unbounded; and P.ercy 
Godolphin felt proud of himself for having admired one whom 
every one else seemed also resolved upon admiring. 

When the comedy was finished, he went behind the scenes, 
and for the first time felt the rank which intellect bestows. 
This idle girl, Avith whom he had before been so familiar; 
who had seemed to him, boy as he was, only made for jesting 
and coquetry and trifling, he now felt to be raised to a sudden 
eminence that startled and abashed him. He became shy and 
awkward, and stood at a distance stealing a glance towards 
her, but without the courage to approach and compliment 
her. 

The quick eye of the actress detected the effect she had 
produced. She was naturall}'- pleased at it, and coming up to 
Godolphin, she touched his shoulder, and with a smile ren- 
dered still more brilliant by the rouge yet unwashed from the 
dimpled cheeks, said, "AYell, most awkward swain, no flat- 
tery ready for me? Go to! you won't suit me: get yourself 
another empress." 

"You have pleased me into respecting you," said Godolphin. 

There was a delicacy in the expression that was vevy char- 
acteristic of the real mind of the speaker, though that mind 
was not yet developed ; and the pretty actress was touched by 
it at the moment, though, despite the grace of her acting, she 
was by nature far too volatile to think it at all advantageous 
to be resjjected in the long run. She did not act in the after- 
piece, and Godolphin escorted her home to the inn. 

So long as his ten guineas lasted — which the reader will 
conceive was not very long — Godolphin stayed with the gay 
troop, as the welcome lover of its chief ornament. To her he 
confided his name and history: she laughed heartily at the 
latter, — for she was one of Venus's true children, fond of 
striking mirth out of all subjects. "But what," said she, 
patting his cheek affectionately, "what should hinder you 



GODOLPHIX. 19 

from joining us for a little while? I could teach you to be 
an actor in three lessons. Come now, attend! It is but a 
mere series of tricks, — this art that seems to you so 
admirable." 

Godolphin grew embarrassed. There was in him a sort of 
hidden pride that could never endure to subject itself to the 
censure of others. He had no propensity to imitation, and he 
had a strong susceptibility to the ridiculous. These traits of 
mind thus early developed — which in later life prevented his 
ever finding fit scope for his natural powers, which made him 
too proud to bustle, and too philosophical to shine — were of 
service to him on this occasion, and preserved him from the 
danger into which he might otherwise have fallen. He could 
not be persuaded to act : the fair Fanny gave up the attempt 
in despair. "Yet stay with us," said she, tenderly, "and 
share my poor earnings." 

Godolphin started; and in the wonderful contradictions of 
the proud human heart, this generous offer from the poor 
actress gave him a distaste, a displeasure, that almost recon- 
ciled him to parting from her. It seemed to open to him at 
once the equivocal mode of life he had entered upon. " No, 
Eanny," said he, after a pause, "I am here because I resolved 
to be independent; I cannot, therefore, choose dependence." 

"Miss Millinger is wanted instantly for rehearsal," said the 
little girl who acted fairies and old women, putting her head 
suddenly into the room. 

" Bless me ! " cried Fanny, starting up ; " is it so late? Well, 
I must go now. Good-by ! look in upon us, — do! " 

But Godolphin, moody and thoughtful, walked into the 
street; and lo! the first thing that greeted his eyes was a 
handbill on the wall, describing his own person, and offering 
twenty guineas reward for his detention. " Let him return to 
his afflicted parent," was the conclusion of the bill, "and all 
shall be forgiven." 

Godolphin crept back to his apartment; wrote a long, affec- 
tionate letter to Fanny; enclosed her his watch, as the only 
keepsake in his power; gave her his address at Saville's; and 
then, towards dusk, once more sallied forth, and took a place 



20 GODOLPHIN. 

in the mail for London. He had no money for his passage, 
but his appearance was such that the coachman readily trusted 
him; and the next morning at daybreak he was under Saville's 
roof. 



CHAPTER VI. 

PERCY GODOLPHIN THE GUEST OF SAVILLE. HE ENTERS THE 

LIFE-GUARDS AND BECOMES THE FASHION. 

"And so," said Saville, laughing, "you really gave them 
the slip: excellent! But I envy you your adventures with 
the player folk. 'Gad! if I were some years younger, I 
would join them myself; I should act Sir Pertinax Macsyco- 
phant famously; I have a touch of the mime in me. Well! 
but what do you propose to do, — live with me, eh? " 

"Why, I think that might be the best, and certainly it 
would be the pleasantest, mode of passing my life. But — " 

"But what?" 

"Why, I can scarcely quarter myself on your courtesy; I 
should soon grow discontented. So I shall write to my father, 
whom I, kindly and consideratel}^, by the way, informed of 

my safety the very first day of my arrival at B . I told 

him to direct his letters to your house; but I regret to find 
that the handbill which so frightened me from my propriety 
is the only notice he has deigned to take of my whereabout. 
I shall write to him therefore again, begging him to let me 
enter the army. It is not a profession I much fancy; but 
what then? I shall be my own master." 

"Very well said!" answered Saville; "and here I hope I 
can serve you. If your father will pay the lawful sum for a 
commission in the Guards, why, I think I have interest to get 
you in for that sura alone, — no trifling favour." 

Godolphin was enchanted at this proposal, and instantly 
wrote to his father, urging it strongly upon him; Saville, in a 



GODOLPHIN. 21 

separate epistle, seconded the motion. " You see," wrote the 
latter, — "you see, my dear sir, that your son is a wild, reso- 
lute scapegrace. You can do nothing with him by schools 
and coercion: put him to discipline in the king's service, and 
condemn him to live on his pay. It is a cheap mode, after 
all, of providing for a reprobate; and as he will have the good 
fortune to enter the army at so early an age, by the time he is 
thirty, he may be a colonel on full pay. Seriously, this is the 
best thing you can do with him, — unless you have a living in 
your family." 

The old gentleman was much discomposed by these letters, 
and by his son's previous elopement. He could not, however, 
but foresee that if he resisted the boy's wishes, he was likely 
to have a troublesome time of it. Scrape after scrape, diffi- 
culty following difficulty, might ensue, all costing both anx- 
iety and money. The present offer furnished him with a fair 
excuse for ridding himself, for a long time to come, of further 
provision for his offspring; and now growing daily more and 
more attached to the indolent routine of solitary economies in 
which he moved, he was glad of an opportunity to deliver 
himself from future interruption, and surrender his whole 
soul to his favourite occupation. 

At length, after a fortnight's delay and meditation, he 
wrote shortly to Saville and his son, saying, after much re- 
proach to the latter, that if the commission could really be 
purchased at the sum specified he was willing to make a sac- 
rifice, for which he must pinch himself, and conclude the 
business. This touched the son, but Saville laughed him out 
of the twinge of good feeling ; and very shortly afterwards, 

Percy Godolphin was gazetted as a cornet in the Life- 

Guards. 

The life of a soldier, in peace, is indolent enough. Heaven 
knows ! Percy liked the new uniforms and the new horses — 
all of which were bought on credit. He liked his new com- 
panions; he liked balls; he liked flirting; he did not dislike 
Hyde Park from four o'clock till six; and he was not very 
much bored by drills and parade. It was much to his credit 
in the world that he was the protege of a man who had so 



22 GODOLPHIN, 

great a character for profligacy and gambling as Augustus 
Saville; and under such auspices he found himself launched 
at once into the full tide of "good society." 

Young, romantic, high-spirited, with the classic features of 
an Autinous, and a very pretty knack of complimenting "and 
writing verses, Percy Godolphin soon became, while yet more 
fit in years for the nursery than the world, " the curled dar- 
ling " of that wide class of high-born women who have noth- 
ing to do but to hear love made to them, and who, all artifice 
themselves, think the love sweetest which springs from the 
most natural source. They like boyhood when it is not bash- 
ful; and from sixteen to twenty, a Juan need scarcely go to 
Seville to find a Julia. 

But love was not the worst danger that menaced the intoxi- 
cated boy. Saville, the most seductive of tutors,— Saville 
who, in his wit, his ho7i ton, his control over the great world, 
seemed as a god to all less elevated and less aspiring,— Saville 
was Godolphin's constant companion; and Saville was worse 
than a profligate,— he was a gambler! One would think that 
gaming was the last vice that could fascinate the young : its 
avarice, its grasping, its hideous selfishness, its cold, calcu- 
lating meanness, would, one might imagine, scare away all 
who have yet other and softer deities to worship. But, in 
fact, the fault of youth is that it can rarely resist whatever is 
the Mode. Gaming, in all countries, is the vice of an aris- 
tocracy. The young find it already established in the best 
circles ; they are enticed by the habit of others, and ruined 
when the habit becomes their own. 

"You look feverish, Percy," said Saville, as he met his 
pupil in the Park. "I don't wonder at it; you lost infernally 
last night." 

"More than I can pay," replied Percy, with a quivering 

lip. 

" No ! you shall pay it to-morrow, for you shall go shares 
with me to-night. Observe," continued Saville, lowering his 
voice, "I nevei' loseJ' 

" How never ? " 

"Never, unless by design. I play at no game where chance 



GODOLPHIX. 23 

only presides. Whist is my favourite game : it is not popu- 
lar; I am sorry for it. I take up with other games, — I am 
forced to do it; but even at rouge-et-noir I carry about with 
me the rules of whist. I calculate, I remember." 

"But hazard?" 

"I never play at that," said Saville, solemnly. "It is the 
devil's game; it defies skill. Forsake hazard, and let me 
teach you ecarte; it is coming into fashion." 

Saville took great pains with Godolphin; and Godolphin, 
who was by nature of a contemplative, not hasty mood, was 
no superficial disciple. As his biographer, I grieve to confess 
that he became, though a punctiliously honest, a wise and 
fortunate gamester; and thus he eked out betimes the slender 
profits of a subaltern's pa3^ 

This was the first great deterioration in Percy's mind, — a 
mind which ought to have made him a very different being 
from what he became, but which no vice, no evil example, 
could ever entirely pervert. 



CHAPTER VII. 

SAVILLE EXCUSED FOR HAVING HUMAX AFFECTIONS. — GODOL- 
PHIX SEES OXE WHOM HE XEVER SEES AGAIX. THE XEW 

ACTRESS. 

Saville was deemed the consummate man of the world, — 
wise and heartless. How came he to take such gratuitous 
pains with the boy Godolphin? In the first place, Saville 
had no legitimate children; Godolphin was his relation: in 
the second place, it may be observed, that hackneyed and 
sated men of the world are fond of the young, in whom 
they recognize something — a better something — belonging 
to themselves. In Godolphin's gentleness and courage, Sa- 
ville thought he saw the mirror of his own crusted urbanity 



24 GODOLPHIX. 

and scheming perseverance; in Godolphin's fine imagination 
and subtle intellect he beheld his own cunning and hypocrisy. 
The boy's popularity flattered him; the boy's conversation 
amused. Xo man is so heartless but that he is capable of 
strong likings, when they do not put him much out of his 
way; it was this sort of liking that Saville had for Godol- 
phin. Besides, there was yet another reason for attachment, 
which might at first seem too delicate to actuate the refined 
voluptuary; but examined closely, the delicacy vanished. 
Saville had loved, at least had offered his hand to, Godol- 
phin's mother (she was supposed an heiress!). He thought 
he had just missed being Godolphin's father; his vanity made 
him like to show the boy what a much better father he would 
have been than the one that Providence had given him. His 
resentment, too, against the accepted suitor, made him love to 
exercise a little spiteful revenge against Godolphin's father; 
he was glad to show that the son preferred where the mother 
rejected. All these motives combined made Saville take, as 
it were, to the young Percy ; and being rich, and habitually 
profuse, though prudent, and a shrewd speculator withal, the 
pecuniary part of his kindness cost him no pain. But Godol- 
phin, who was not ostentatious, did not trust himself largely 
to the capricious fount of the worldling's generosity. For- 
tune smiled on her boyish votary; and during the short time 
he was obliged to cultivate her favours, showered on him at 
least a sufficiency for support, or even for display. 

Crowded with fine people, and blazing with light, were the 

rooms of the Countess of B , as, flushed from a late dinner 

at Saville's, young Godolphin made his appearance in the 
scene. He was not of those numerous gentlemen, the stock- 
flowers of the parterre, who stick themselves up against 
walls in the panoply of neckclothed silence. He came not to 
balls from the vulgar motive of being seen there in the most 
conspicuous situation, — a motive so apparent among the stiff 
exquisites of England. He came to amuse himself; and if he 
found no one capable of amusing him, he saw no necessity in 
staying. He was always seen, therefore, conversing or danc- 
ing, or listening to music — or he was not seen at all. 



GOUOLPIIIX. 25 

In exchanging a few words with a Colonel D , a noted 

rou^ and gamester, he observed, gazing on him very intently 

— and as Percy thought, very rudely — an old gentleman in 
a dress of the last century. Turn where he would, Godol- 
phin could not rid himself of the gaze ; so at length he met it 
with a look of equal scrutiny and courage. The old gentle- 
man slowly approached. "Percy Godolphin, I think?" said 
he. 

"That is viij name, sir," replied Percy. "Yours — " 
"N"o matter! Yet stay! you shall know it. I am Henry 
Johnstone, — old Harry Johnstone. You have heard of him? 

— your father's first cousin. Well, I grieve, young sir, to 
find that you associate with that rascal Saville. — ^ay, never 
interrupt me, sir! — I grieve to find that you, thus young, 
thus unguarded, are left to be ruined in heart and corrupted 
in nature by any one who will take the trouble ! Yet I like 
your countenance ! I like your countenance ! — it is open, yet 
thoughtful; frank, and yet it has something of melancholy. 
You have not Charles's coloured hair; but you are much 
younger, — much. I am glad I have seen you; I came here 
on purpose; good-night! " and without waiting for an answer, 
the old man disaj)peared. 

Godolphin, recovering from his surprise, recollected that 
he had often heard his father speak of a rich and eccentric 
relation named Johnstone. This singular interview made a 
strong but momentary impression on him. He intended to 
seek out the old man's residence; but one thing or another 
drove away the fulfilment of the intention, and in this world 
the relations never met again. 

Percy, now musingly gliding through the crowd, sank into 
a seat beside a lady of forty-five, who sometimes amused her- 
self in making love to him — because there could be no harm 
in such a mere boy! And presently afterwards, a Lord 
George Somebody sauntering up asked the lady if he had not 
seen her at the play on the previous night. 

"Oh, yes! we went to see the new actress. How pretty she 
is! so unaffected too! how well she sings! " 

"Pretty well — er!" replied Lord George, passing his 



26 GODOLPHIN. 

hand through his hair. " Very nice girl — er ! — good ankles. 
Devilish hot — er, is it not — er — er? What a bore this is, 
eh! Ah, Godolphin! don't forget Wattier's — er!" and his 
lordship er\l himself off. 

"What actress is this?" 

"Oh, a very good one indeed! — came out in 'The Belle's 
Stratagem.' We are going to see her to-morrow; will you 
dine with us early, and be our cavalier? " 

" Nothing will please me more ! Your ladyship has dropped 
your handkerchief." 

"Thank you! " said the lady, bending till her hair touched 
Godolphin's cheek, and gently pressing the hand that was 
extended to her. It was a wonder that Godolphin never 
became a coxcomb. 

He dined at Wattier's the next day according to appoint- 
ment; he went to the play; and at the moment his eye first 
turned to the stage, a universal burst of applause indicated 
the entrance of the new actress^ — Fanny Millinger! 



CHAPTER VIII. 

godolphin's passion for the stage. — THE DIFFERENCE 
IT ENGENDERED IN HIS HABITS OF LIFE. 

Now this event produced a great influence over Godolphin's 
habits, — and I suppose, therefore, I may add, over his char- 
acter. He renewed his acquaintance with the lively actress. 

" What a change ! " cried both. 

"The strolling player risen into celebrity! " 

"And the runaway boy polished into fashion! " 

"You are handsomer than ever, Fanny." 

"I return the compliment," replied Fanny, with a 
courtesy. 



GODOLPHIX. 27 

And now Godolphin became a constant attendant at tlie 
theatre. Tliis led him into a mode of life quite different 
from that which he had lately cultivated. 

There are in London t^o sets of idle men: one set, the 
butterflies of balls, the loungers of the regular walks of so- 
ciety, diners out, the "old familiar faces," seen everywhere, 
known to every one; the other set, a more wild, irregular, 
careless race, who go little into parties, and vote balls a 
nuisance, who live in clubs, frequent theatres, drive about 
late o' nights in mysterious-looking vehicles, and enjoy a 
vast acquaintance among the Aspasias of pleasure. These 
are the men who are the critics of theatricals; black-neck- 
clothed and well-booted, they sit in their boxes and decide 
on the ankles of a dancer or the voice of a singer. They 
have a smattering of literature, and use a great deal of 
French in their conversation; they have something of ro- 
mance in their composition, and have been known to marry 
for love. In short, there is in their whole nature a more rov- 
ing, liberal. Continental character of dissipation than belongs 
to the cold, tame, dull, prim, hedge-clipped indolence of more 
national exquisitism. Into this set, out of the other set, fell 
young Godolphin; and oh! the merry mornings at actresses' 
houses; the jovial suppers after the play; the buoyancy, the 
brilliancy, the esprit, with which the hours, from midnight to 
cockcrow, were often pelted with rose-leaves and drowned in 
Ehenish. 

By degrees, however, as Godolphin warmed into his attend- 
ance at the playhouses, the fine intellectual something that 
lay yet undestroyed at his heart stirred up emotions which 
he felt his more vulgar associates were unfitted to share. 

There is that in theatrical representation which perpetually 
awakens whatever romance belongs to our character. The 
magic lights, the pomp of scene, the palace, the camp, the 
forest, the midnight wold, the moonlight reflected on the 
water, the melody of the tragic rhythm, the grace of the comic 
wit, the strange art that gives such meaning to the poet's 
lightest word; the fair, false, exciting life that is detailed 
before us, crowding into some three little hours all that our 



28 GODOLPHIN. 

most busy ambition could desire — love, enterprise, war, 
glory; the kindling exaggeration of the sentiments which 
belono- to the stage like our own in our boldest moments, — 
all these appeals to our finer senses are not made in vain. 
Our taste for castle-building and visions deepens upon us; 
and we chew a mental opium which stagnates all the other 
faculties, but wakens that of the ideal. 

Godolphin was peculiarly fascinated by the stage ; he loved 
to steal away from his companions, and, alone and un- 
heeded, to feast his mind on the unreal stream of existence 
that mirrored images so beautiful. And oh! while yet we 
are young; while yet the dew lingers on the green leaf of 
spring; while all the brighter, the more enterprising part of 
the future is to come; while we know not whether the true 
life may not be visionary and excited as the false, — how deep 
and rich a transport is it to see, to feel, to hear Shakspeare's 
conceptions made actual, though all imperfectly, and only for 
an hour! Sweet Arden! are we in thy forest, — thy "shadowy 
groves and unfrequented glens" ? Rosalind, Jaques, Orlando, 
have you indeed a being upon earth? Ah, this is true en- 
chantment! And when we turn back to life, we turn from 
the colours which the Claude glass breathes over a winter's 
landscape to the nakedness of the landscape itself I 



CHAPTER IX. 

THE LEGACY. A NEW DEFORMITY IN SAVILLE. THE NA- 
TURE OF WORLDLY LIAISONS. GODOLPHIN LEAVES ENG- 
LAND. 

But then it is not always a sustainer of the stage delusion 
to be enamoured of an actress : it takes us too much behind 
the scenes. Godolphin felt this so strongly that he liked 
those plays least in which Fanny performed. Off the stage 
her character had so little romance that he could not deceive 



GODOLPHIN. 29 

himself into the romance of her character before the lamps. 
Luckily, however, Fanny did not attempt Shakspeare. She 
was inimitable in vaudeville, in farce, and in the lighter 
comedy; but she had prudently abandoned tragedy in desert- 
ing the barn. She was a girl of much talent and quickness, 
and discovered exactly the paths in which her vanity could 
walk without being wounded. And there was a simplicity, a 
frankness, about her manner, that made her a most agreeable 
companion. 

The attachment between her and Godolphin was not very 
violent; it was a silken tie, which opportunity could knit and 
snap a hundred times over without doing much wrong to the 
hearts it so lightly united. Over Godolphin the attachment 
itself had no influence, while the effects of the attachment had 
an influence so great. 

One night, after an absence from town of two or three days, 
Godolphin returned home from the theatre, and found among 
the letters waiting his arrival one from his father. It was 
edged with black; the seal, too, was black. Godolphin's 
heart misgave him: tremblingly he opened it, and read as 
follows : — 

Dear Percy, — I have news for you, which I do not know whether 
I should call good or bad. On the one hand, your cousin, that old 
oddity, Harry Johnstone, is dead, and has left you, out of his immense 
fortune, the poor sum of £20,000. But mark ! on condition that you 
leave the Guards, and either reside with me, or at least leave London, 
till your majority is attained. If you refuse these conditions you lose 
the legacy. It is rather strange that this curious character should take 
such pains with your morals, and yet not leave me a single shilling. 
But justice is out of fashion nowadays; your showy virtues only are 
the rage. I beg, if you choose to come down here, that you will get me 
twelve yards of house-flannel ; I inclose a pattern of the quality. 
Snug, in Oxford Street, near Tottenham Court Road, is my man. It is. 
certainly a handsome thing in old Johnstone ; but so odd to omit me. 
How did you get acquainted with him? The £20,000 will, however, do 
much for the poor property. Pray take care of it, Percy, — pray do. 

I have had a touch of the gout, for the first time. I have been too 
luxurious; by proper abstinence, I trust to bring it down. Compli- 
ments to that smooth rogue, Saville. 

Your affectionate, A. G. 



30 GODOLPIIIN. 

P. S. — Discharged Old Sally for Hirting with the butcher's boy, — 
flirtations of that sort make meat weigh much heavier. Bess is my only 
she-helpmate now, besides the old creature who shows the ruins : so 
much the better. What an eccentric creature that Johnstone was ! I 
hate eccentric people. 

The letter fell from Percy's hands. And this, then, -was 
the issue of his single interview with the poor old man! It 
was events like these, wayward and strange (events which 
checkered his whole life), that, secretly to himself, tinged 
Godolphin's character with superstition. He afterwards deal^ 
con amove with fatalities and influences. 

You may be sure that he did not sleep much that night. 
Early the next morning he sought Saville, and imparted to 
him the intelligence he had received. 

" Droll enough ! " said Saville, languidly, and more than a 
little displeased at this generosity to Godolphin from another; 
for, like all small-hearted persons, he was jealous; "droll 
enough ! Hem ! and you never knew him but once, and then 
he abused me! I wonder at that; I was very obliging to his 
vulgar son." 

"What! he had a son, then? '' 

"Some two-legged creature of that sort, raw and bony, 
dropped into London, like a ptarmigan, wild, and scared out 
of his wits. Old Johnstone was in the country, taking care 
of his wife, who had lost the use of her limbs ever since she 
had been married, — caught a violent — husband — the first 
day of wedlock! The boy, sole son and heir, came up to 
town at the age of discretion; got introduced to me; I pat- 
ronized him; brought him into a decent degree of fashion; 
played a few games at cards with him; won some money; 
would not win any more; advised him to leave off, — too 
young to play; neglected my advice; went on, and, d — n the 
fellow! if he did not cut his throat one morning; and the 
father, to my astonishment, laid the blame upon me ! " 

Godolphin stood appalled in speechless disgust. He never 
loved Saville from that hour. 

"In fact," resumed Saville, carelessly, "he had lost very 
considerably. His father was a stern, hard man, and the 



GODOLPHIN. 31 

poor boy was frightened at the thought of his displeasure. 
I suppose Monsieur Papa imagined me a sort of moral ogre,, 
eating up all the little youths that fall in my way, since he 
leaves you £ 20,000 on condition that you take care of your- 
self and shun the castle I live in! Well, well! 't is all very 
flattering! And where will you go? To Spain? " 

This story affected Percy sensibly. He regretted deeply 
that he had not sought out the bereaved father, and been of 
some comfort to his later hours. He appreciated all that 
warmth of sympathy, that delicacy of heart, which had made 
the old man compassionate his young relation's unfriended 
lot, and couple his gift with a condition, likely perhaps to 
limit Percy's desires to the independence thus bestowed, and 
certain to remove his more tender years from a scene of con- 
stant contagion. Thus melancholy and thoughtful, Godol- 
phin repaired to the house of the now famous, the now 
admired Miss Millinger. 

Fanny received the good news of his fortune with a smile, 
and the bad news of his departure from England with a tear. 
There are some attachments, of which we so easily sound the 
depth that the one never thinks of exacting from the other 
the sacrifices that seem inevitable to more earnest affections. 
Panny never dreamed of leaving her theatrical career, and 
accompanying Godolphin; Godolphin never dreamed of de- 
manding it. These are the connections of the great world : 
my good reader, learn the great world as you look at them ! 

All was soon settled. Godolphin was easily disembarrassed 
of his commission. Six hundred a year from his fortune was 
allowed him during his minority. He insisted on sharing 
this allowance with his father; the moiety left to himself was 
quite sufficient for all that a man so young could require. At 
the age of little more than seventeen, but with a character 
which premature independence had half formed, and also half 
enervated, the young Godolphin saw the shores of England 
recede before him, and felt himself alone in the universe, — 
the lord of his own fate. 



32 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTEE X. 

THE EDUCATION OF COXSTAXCE's MIND. 

Meanwhile, Constance Vernon grew up in womanhood and 
beauty. All around her contributed to feed that stern re- 
membrance which her father's dying words had bequeathed. 
Naturally proud, quick, susceptible, she felt slights, often 
merely incidental, with a deep and brooding resentment. 
The forlorn and dependent girl could not, indeed, fail to 
meet with many bitter proofs that her situation was not for- 
gotten by a world in which prosperity and station are the 
cardinal virtues. Many a loud whisper, many an intentional 
"aside," reached her haughty ear and coloured her pale cheek. 
Such accidents increased her early-formed asperity of thought, 
chilled the gushing flood of her young affections, and sharp- 
ened with a relentless edge her bitter and caustic hatred to a 
society she deemed at once insolent and worthless. To a 
taste intuitively fine and noble, the essential vulgarities — 
the fierceness to-day, the cringing to-morrow ; the veneration 
for power ; the indifference to virtue, — which characterized 
the framers and rulers of "society " could not but bring con- 
tempt as well as anger; and amidst the brilliant circles to 
which so many aspirers looked up with hopeless ambition, 
Constance moved only to ridicule, to loathe, to despise. 

So strong, so constantly nourished, was this sentiment of 
contempt, that it lasted with equal bitterness when Con- 
stance afterwards became the queen and presider over that 
great world in which she now shone, — to dazzle, but not to 
rule. What at first might have seemed an exaggerated and 
insane prayer on the part of her father grew, as her experi- 
ence ripened, a natural and laudable command. She was 
thrown entirely with that party amongst whom were his 
early friends and his late deserters. She resolved to humble 



GODOLPHIX. 33 

the crested arrogance around her, as much from her own de- 
sire as from the wish to obey and avenge her father. From 
contempt for rank rose naturally the ambition of rank. The 
young beauty resolved to banish love from her heart; to de- 
vote herself to one aim and object; to win title and station, 
that she might be able to give power and permanence to her 
disdain of those qualities in others; and in the secrecy of 
night she repeated the vow which had consoled her father's 
death-bed, and solemnly resolved to crush love within her 
heart and marry solely for station and for power. 

As the daughter of so celebrated a politician, it was natural 
that Constance should take interest in politics. She lent to 
every discussion of state events an eager and thirsty ear. She 
embraced with masculine ardour such sentiments as were then 
considered the extreme of liberality ; and she looked on that 
career which society limits to vian, as the noblest, the loftiest 
in the world. She regretted that she was a woman, and pre- 
vented from personally carrying into effect the sentiments she 
passionately espoused. Meanwhile, she did not neglect, nor 
suffer to rust, the bright weapon of a wit which embodied at 
times all the biting energies of her contempt. To insolence 
she retorted sarcasm ; and, early able to see that society, like 
virtue, must be trampled upon in order to yield forth its in- 
cense, she rose into respect by the hauteur of her manner, the 
bluntness of her satire, the independence of her mind, far 
more than by her various accomplishments and her unrivalled 
beauty. 

Of Lady Erpingham she had nothing to complain: kind, 
easy, and characterless, her protectress sometimes wounded 
her by carelessness, but never through design; on the con- 
trary, the countess at once loved and admired her, and was as 
anxious that \iGr protegee should form a brilliant alliance as if 
she had been her own daughter. Constance, therefore, loved 
Lady Erpingham with sincere and earnest warmth, and en- 
deavoured to forget all the commonplaces and littlenesses 
which made up the mind of her protectress, and which, other- 
wise, would have been precisely of that nature to which one 
like Constance would have been the least indulgent. 

3 



34 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER XI. 

CONVERSATION BETWEEN LADY ERPINGHAM AND CONSTANCE. 
FURTHER PARTICULARS OF GODOLPHIn's FAMILY, ETC. 

Lady Erpingham was a widow ; her jointure, for she had 
been an heiress and a duke's daughter, was large; and the 
noblest mansion of all the various seats possessed by the 
wealthy and powerful house of Erpingham had been allotted 
by her late lord for her widowed residence. Thither she went 
punctually on the first of every August, and quitted it punctu- 
ally on the eighth of every January. 

It was some years after the date of Godolphin's departure 
from England, and the summer following the spring in which 
Constance had been "brought out; " and after a debut of such 
splendour that at this day (many years subsequent to that 
period) the sensation she created is not only a matter of re- 
membrance but of conversation, Constance, despite the tri- 
umph of her vanity, was not displeased to seek some refuge, 
even from admiration, among the shades of Wendover Castle. 

"When," said she one morning, as she was walking with 
Lady Erpingham upon a terrace beneath the windows of the 
castle, which overlooked the country for miles, — "when will 
you go with me, dear Lady Erpingham, to see those ruins of 
which I have heard so much and so often, and which I have 
never been able to persuade you to visit? Look! the day is 
so clear that we can see their outline now — there, to the 
right of that church ! — they cannot be so very far from 
Wendover." 

"Godolphin Priory is about twelve miles off," said Lady 
Erpingham; "but it may seem nearer, for it is situated on 
the highest spot of the county. Poor Arthur Godolphin ! he 
is lately dead! " Lady Erpingham sighed. 

"I never heard you speak of him before." 



GODOLPIIIN. 35 

"There might be a reason for my silence, Constance. He 
was the person, of all whom I ever saw, who appeared to me 
when I was at your age the most fascinating. Not, Con- 
stance, that I was in love with him, or that he gave me any 
reason to become so through gratitude for any affection on 
his part. It was a girl's fancy, idle and short-lived, — noth- 
ing more ! " 

"And the young Godolphin, — the boy who, at so early an 
age, has made himself known for his eccentric life abroad? " 

"Is his son; the present owner of those ruins, and, I fear, 
of little more, unless it be the remains of a legacy received 
from a relation." 

"Was the father extravagant, then? " 

" Not he ! But his father had exceeded a patrimony greatly 
involved, and greatly reduced from its ancient importance. 
All the lands we see yonder — those villages, those woods — 
once belonged to the Godolphins. They were the most an- 
cient and the most powerful family in this part of England; 
but the estates dwindled away with each successive genera- 
tion, and when Arthur Godolphin, mi/ Godolphin, succeeded 
to the property, nothing was left for him but the choice of 
three evils, — a profession, obscurity, or a wealthy marriage. 
My father, who had long destined me for Lord Erpingham, 
insinuated that it was in me that Mr. Godolphin wished to 
find the resource I have last mentioned, and that in such re- 
source was my only attraction in his eyes. I have some rea- 
son to believe he proposed to the duke ; but he was silent to 
me, from whom, girl as I was, he might have been less certain 
of refusal." 

"What did he at last?" 

" Married a lady who was supposed to be an heiress ; but he 
had scarcely enjoyed her fortune a year before it became the 
subject of a lawsuit. He lost the cause and the dowry ; and, 
what was worse, the expenses of litigation, and the sums he 
was obliged to refund, reduced him to what, for a man of his 
rank, might be considered absolute poverty. He was thor- 
ouglily chagrined and soured by this event; retired to those 
ruins, or rather to the small cottage that adjoins them, and 



36 GODOLPHIK 

there lived to the day of his death, shunning society, and cer- 
tainly not exceeding his income." 

"I understand you: he became parsimonious." 

"To the excess which his neighbours called miserly." 

"And his wife?" 

"Poor woman! she was a mere fine lady, and died, I be- 
lieve, of the same vexation which nipped, not the life, but the 
heart of her husband." 

"Had they only one son? " 

"Only the present owner: Percy, I think, — yes, Percy; it 
was his mother's surname, — Percy Godolphin." 

" And how came this poor boy to be thrown so early on the 
world? Did he quarrel with Mr. Godolphin? " 

"I believe not; but when Percy was about sixteen, he left 
the obscure school at which he was educated, and resided for 
some little time with a relation, Augustus Saville. He stayed 
with him in London for about a year, and went everywhere 
with him, though so mere a boy. His manners were, I well 
remember, assured and formed. A relation left him some 
moderate legacy, and afterwards he went abroad alone." 

"But the ruins? The late Mr. Godolphin, notwithstanding 
his reserve, did not object to indulging the curiosity of his 
neighbours?" 

"No; he was proud of the interest the ruins of his heredi- 
tary mansion so generally excited, — proud of their celebrity 
in print-shops and in tours ; but he himself was never seen. 
The cottage in which he lived, though it adjoins the ruins, 
was, of course, sacred from intrusion, and is so walled in, 
that that great delight of English visitors at show-places, — 
peeping in at windows, — was utterly forbidden. However 
that be, during Mr. Godolphin's life I never had courage to 
visit what, to me, would have been a melancholy scene; now, 
the pain would be somewhat less ; and since you wish it, sup- 
pose we drive over and visit the ruins to-morrow? It is the 
regular day for seeing them, by the by." 

" Not, dear Lady Erpingham, if it give you the least — " 

"My sweet girl," interrupted Lady Erpingham, when a 
servant approached to announce visitors at the castle. 



GODOLPHIN. 37 

"Will you go into the saloon, Constance?" said the elder 
lady, as, thinking still of love and Arthur Godolphin, she 
took her way to her dressing-room to renovate her rouge. 

It would have been a pretty amusement to one of the lesser 
devils, if, during the early romance of Lady Erpingham's 
feelings towards Arthur Godolphin, he had foretold her the 
hour when she would tell how Arthur Godolphin died a 
miser, — just five minutes before she repaired to the toilette 
to decorate the cheek of age for the heedless eyes of a com- 
mon acquaintance. 'T is the world's way ! For my part, I 
would undertake to find a better world in that rookery opposite 
my windows. 



CHAPTER XII. 

DESCRIPTION OF GODOLPHIn's HOUSE. — THE FIRST INTER- 
VIEW. ITS EFFECT ON CONSTANCE. 

"But," asked Constance, as, the next day. Lady Erping- 
ham and herself were performing the appointed pilgrimage to 
the ruins of Godolphin Priory, "if the late Mr. Godolphin, 
as he grew in years, acquired a turn of mind so penurious, 
was he not enabled to leave his son some addition to the pied 
de terre we are about to visit? " 

"He must certainly have left some ready money," answered 
Lady Erpingham. " But is it, after all, likely that so young 
a man as Percy Godolphin could have lived in the manner he 
has done without incurring debts? It is most probable that 
he had some recourse to those persons so willing to encourage 
the young and extravagant, and that repayment to them will 
more than swallow up any savings his father might have 
amassed." 

" True enough ! " said Constance ; and the conversation 
glided into remarks on avaricious fathers and prodigal sons. 



38 GODOLPHIN. 

Constance was witty on the subject, and Lady Erpingham 
lauglied herself into excellent humour. 

It was considerably past noon when they arrived at the 
ruins. 

The carriage stopj)ed before a small inn, at the entrance of 
a dismantled park; and taking advantage of the beauty of the 
day, Lady Erpingham and Constance walked slowly towards 
the remains of the Priory. 

The scene, as they approached, was wild and picturesque 
in the extreme. A wide and glassy lake lay stretched be- 
neath them; on the opposite side stood the ruins. The large 
oriel window, the Gothic arch, the broken yet still majestic 
column, all embrowned and mossed with age, were still 
spared, and now mirrored themselves in the waveless and 
silent tide. Fragments of stone lay around, for some con- 
siderable distance, and the whole was backed by hills, cov- 
ered with gloomy and thick woods of pine and fir. To the 
left, they saw the stream which fed the lake stealing away 
through grassy banks, overgrown with the willow and pollard 
oak; and there, from one or two cottages, only caught in 
glimpses, thin wreaths of smoke rose in spires against the 
clear sky. To the right, the ground was broken into a thou- 
sand glens and hollows; the deer-loved fern, the golden 
broom, were scattered about profusely; and here and there 
were dense groves of pollards; or, at very rare intervals, 
some single tree decaying (for all round bore the seal of 
vassalage to Time), but mighty, and greenl}^ venerable in its 
decay. 

As they passed over a bridge that, on either side of the 
stream, emerged, as it were, from a thick copse, they caught 
a view of the small abode that adjoined the ruins. It seemed 
covered entirely with ivy; and so far from diminishing, 
tended rather to increase the romantic and imposing effect of 
the crumbling pile from which it grew. 

They opened a little gate at the other extremity of the 
bridge, and in a few minutes more, they stood at the entrance 
to the Priory. 

It was an oak door, studded with nails. The jessamine 



GODOLPHIX. 39 

grew upon either side; and, to descend to a commonplace 
matter, they had some difficulty in finding the bell among the 
leaves in which it was imbedded. When they had found and 
touched it, its clear and lively sound rang out in that still 
and lovely though desolate spot with an effect startling and 
impressive from its contrast. There is something very fairy- 
like in the cheerful voice of a bell sounding among the wilder 
scenes of nature, particularly where Time advances his claim 
to the sovereignty of the landscape ; for the cheerfulness is a 
little ghostly, and might serve well enough for a tocsin to the 
elfish hordes whom our footsteps may be supposed to disturb. 

An old woman, in the neat peasant dress of our country, 
when, taking a little from the fashion of the last century (the 
cap and the kerchief), it assumes no ungraceful costume, re- 
plied to their summons. She was the solitary cicerone of the 
place. She had lived there, a lone and childless widow, for 
thirty years ; and of all the persons I have ever seen would 
furnish forth the best heroine to one of those pictures of 
homely life which Wordsworth has dignified wdth the patri- 
archal tenderness of his genius. 

They wound a narrow passage, and came to the ruins of the 
great hall. Its gothic arches still sprang lightly upward on 
either side; and opening a large stone box that stood in a 
recess, the old woman showed them the gloves and the helmet 
and the tattered banners, which had belonged to that Godol- 
phin who had fought side by side with Sidney, when he, 
whose life — as the noblest of British lyrists hath somewhere 
said — was "poetry put into action,"^ received his death- 
wound in the field of Zutphen. 

Thence they ascended by the dilapidated and crumbling 
staircase to a small room, in which the visitors were always 
expected to rest themselves, and enjoy the scene in the garden 
below. A large chasm yawned where the casement once was ; 
and round this aperture the ivy wreathed itself in fantastic 
luxuriance. A sort of ladder, suspended from this chasm 
to the ground, afforded a convenience for those who were 
tempted to a short excursion by the view without. 

1 Campbell. 



40 GODOLPHIN. 

And the vievr luas tempting! A smooth green lawn, sur- 
rounded by shrubs and flowers, was ornamented in the centre 
by a fountain. The waters were, it is true, dried up; but 
the basin, and the "Triton with his wreathed shell," still 
remained. A little to the right was an old monkish sun-dial; 
and through the green vista you caught the glimpse of one of 
those gray, grotesque statues with which the taste of Eliza- 
beth's day shamed the classic chisel. 

There was something quiet and venerable about the whole 
place ; and when the old woman said to Constance, " Would 
you not like, my lady, to walk down and look at the sun-dial 
and the fountain?" Constance felt she required nothing more 
to yield to her inclination. Lady Erpingham, less adventu- 
rous, remained in the ruined chamber; and the old woman, 
naturally enough, honoured the elder lady with her company. 

Constance, therefore, descended the rude steps alone. As 
she paused by the fountain, an indescribable and delicious 
feeling of repose stole over a mind that seldom experienced 
any sentiment so natural or so soft. The hour, the stillness, 
the scene, — all conspired to lull the heart into that dreaming 
and half -unconscious revery in which poets would suppose the 
hermits of elder times to have wasted a life, indolent, and 
yet scarcely, after all, unwise. "Methinks," she inly solilo- 
quized, "while I look around, I feel as if I could give up my 
objects of life; renounce my hopes; forget to be artificial 
and ambitious; live in these ruins, and" (whispered the 
spirit within), "loved and loving, fulfil the ordinary doom 
of woman." 

Indulging a mood which the proud and restless Constance, 
who despised love as the poorest of human weaknesses, though 
easily susceptible to all other species of romance, had scarcely 
ever known before, she wandered away from the lawn into 
one of the alleys cut amidst the grove around. Caught by 
the murmur of an unseen brook, she tracked it through the 
trees, as its sound grew louder and louder on her ear, till at 
length it stole upon her sight. The sun, only winning 
through the trees at intervals, played capriciously upon the 
cold and dark waters as they glided on, and gave to her, as 



GODOLPHIX. 41 

the same effect has done to a thousand poets, ample matter for 
a simile or a moral. 

She approached the brook, and came unawares upon the 
figure of a young man, leaning against a stunted tree that 
overhung the Twiters, and occupied with the idle amusement 
of dropping pebbles in the stream. She saw only his profile; 
but that view is, in a fine countenance, almost always the 
most striking and impressive, and it was eminently so in the 
face before her. The stranger, who was scarcely removed 
from boyhood, was dressed in deep mourning. He seemed 
slight, and small of stature. A travelling cap of sables con- 
trasted, not hid, light brown hair of singular richness and 
beauty. His features were of that pure and severe Greek of 
which the only fault is that in the very perfection of the 
chiselling of the features there seems something hard and 
stern. The complexion was pale, even to wanness; and the 
whole cast and contour of the head were full of intellect, and 
betokening that absorption of mind which cannot be marked 
in any one without exciting a certain vague curiosity and 
interest. 

So dark and wondrous are the workings of our nature, that 
there are scarcely any of us, however light and unthinking, 
who would not be arrested by the countenance of one in deep 
reflection ; who would not pause, and long to pierce into the 
mysteries that were agitating that world, most illimitable by 
nature, but often most narrowed by custom, — the world 
within. 

And this interest, powerful as it is, spelled and arrested 
Constance at once. She remained for a minute gazing on the 
countenance of the young stranger, and then she — the most 
self-possessed and stately of human creatures — blushing 
deeply, and confused though unseen, turned lightly away and 
stopped not on her road till she regained the old chamber and 
Lady Erpingham. 

The old woman was descanting upon the merits of the late 
lord of Godolphin Priory. 

" For though they called him close, and so forth, my lady, 
yet he was generous to others ; it was only himself he pinched. 



42 GODOLPHIN". 

But, to be sure, the present squire won't take after him 
there." 

"Has Mr. Percy Godolphin been here lately? " asked Lady 
Erpingham. 

"He is at the cottage now, my lady," replied the .old 
woman. "He came two days ago." 

"Is he like his father?" 

" Oh, not near so line-looking a gentleman ! much smaller, 
and quite pale-like. He seems sickly : them foreign parts do 
nobody no good. He was as fine a lad at sixteen years old as 
ever I seed; but now he is not like the same thing." 

So then it was evidently Percy Godolphin whom Constance 
had seen by the brook, — the owner of a home without coffers, 
and estates without a rent-roll; the Percy Godolphin, of 
whom, before he had attained the age when others have left 
the college, or even the school, every one had learned to 
speak, — some favourably, all with eagerness. Constance felt 
a vague interest respecting him spring up in her mind. She 
checked it, for it was a sin in her eye to think with interest 
on a man neither rich nor powerful ; and as she quitted the 
ruins with Lady Erpingham, she communicated to the latter 
her adventure. She was, however, disingenuous, for though 
Godolphin's countenance was exactly of that cast which Con- 
stance most admired, she described him just as the old 
woman had done; and Lady Erpingham figured to herself, 
from the description, a little yellow man, with white hair 
and a turned-up nose. Truth! what a hard path is thine! 
Does any keep it for three inches together in the commonest 
trifle? — and yet two sides of my library are filled with 
histories ! 



GODOLPIIIX. 43 



CHAPTER XIII. 

A BALL AXXOUNCED. — GODOLPHIx's VISIT TO WEXDOVER 
CASTLE. — HIS MAXNEKS AXD COXVERSATIOX. 

Lady Erpixgham (besides her daughter, Lady Eleanor, 
married to Mr. Clare, a county member, of large fortune) 
was blessed with one son. 

The present earl had been for the last two years abroad. 
He had never, since his accession to his title, visited Wend- 
over Castle; and Lady Erpingham one morning experienced 
the delight of receiving a letter from him, dated Dover, and 
signifying his intention of paying her a visit. In honour of 
this event. Lady Erpingham resolved to give a grand ball. 
Cards were issued to all the families in the county; and, 
among others, to Mr. Godolphin. 

On the third day after this invitation had been sent to the 
person I have last named, as Lady Erpingham and Constance 
were alone in the saloon, Mr. Percy Godolphin was an- 
nounced. Constance blushed as she looked up, and Lady 
Erpingham was struck by the nobleness of his address, and 
the perfect self-possession of his manner. And yet nothing 
could be so different as was his deportment from that which 
she had been accustomed to admire, from that manifested by 
the exquisites of the day. The calm, the nonclialance, the 
artificial smile of languor, the evenness, so insipid, yet so 
irreproachable, of English manners when considered most 
polished, — all this was the reverse of Godolphin's address 
and air. In short, in all he said or did there was something 
foreign, something unfamiliar. He was abrupt and enthusi- 
astic in conversation, and used gestures in speaking. His 
countenance lighted up at every word that broke from him on 
the graver subjects of discussion. You felt, indeed, with 
him that you were with a man of genius, — a wayward and a 



44 GODOLPHIN. 

spoiled man, who had acquired his habits in solitude, but his 
graces in the world. 

They conversed about the ruins of the Priory, and Con- 
stance expressed her admiration of their romantic and pictu- 
resque beauty. "Ah," said he, smiling, but with a slight 
blush, in which Constance detected something of pain, "I 
heard of your visit to my poor heaps of stone. My father 
took great pleasure in the notice they attracted. When a 
proud man has not riches to be proud of, he grows proud of 
the signs of his poverty itself. This was the case with my 
poor father. Had he been rich, the ruins would not have 
existed, — he would have rebuilt the old mansion. As he 
was poor, he valued himself on their existence, and fancied 
magnificence in every handful of moss. But all life is de- 
lusion; all pride, all vanity, all pomp, are equally deceit. 
Like the Spanish hidalgo, we put on spectacles when we eat 
our cherries, in order that they may seem ten times as big as 
they are ! " 

Constance smiled; and Lady Erpingham, who had more 
kindness than delicacy, continued her praises of the Priory 
and the scenery round it. 

"The old park," said she, "with its wood and water, is so 
beautiful ! It wants nothing but a few deer, just tame enough 
to come near the ruins, and wild enough to start away as you 
approach." 

"Now you would borrow an attraction from wealth," said 
Godolphin, who, unlike English persons in general, seemed 
to love alluding to his poverty. " It is not for the owner of 
a ruined Priory to consult the aristocratic enchantments of 
that costly luxury, the Picturesque. Alas! I have not even 
wherewithal to feed a few solitary partridges ; and I hear that 
if I go beyond the green turf, once a park, I shall be warned 
off forthwith, and my very qualification disputed." 

"Are you fond of shooting? " said Lady Erpingham. 

" I fancy I should be ; but I have never enjoyed the sport in 
England." 

"Do pray come, then," said Lady Erpingham, kindly, "and 
spend your first week in September here. Let me see : the 



GODOLPHIN. 45 

first of the month will be next Thursday; dine with us on 
Wednesda3\ We have keepers and dogs here enough, thanks 
to Eobert; so you need only bring your gun." 

"You are very kind, dear Lady Erpingham," said Godol- 
phin, warmly; "I accept your invitation at once." 

"Your father was a very old friend of mine," said the lady 
with a sigh. 

"He was an old admirer," said the gentleman, with a bow. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

CONVERSATION BETWEEN GODOLPHIN AND CONSTANCE. — THE 
COUNTRY LIFE AND THE TOWN LIFE. 

And Godolphin came on the appointed Wednesday. He 
was animated that day even to brilliancy. Lady Erpingham 
thought him the most charming of men; and even Constance 
forgot that he was no match for herself. Gifted and culti- 
vated as she was, it was not without delight that she listened 
to his glowing descriptions of scenery, and to his playful, yet 
somewhat melancholy strain of irony upon men and their pur- 
suits. The peculiar features of her mind made her, indeed, 
like the latter more than she could appreciate the former; for 
in her nature there was more bitterness than sentiment. Still, 
his rich language and fluent periods, even in description, 
touched her ear and fancy, though they sank not to her heart; 
and she yielded insensibly to the spells she would almost have 
despised in another. 

The next day, Constance, who was no very early riser, 
tempted by the beauty of the noon, strolled into the gardens. 
She was surprised to hear Godolphin's voice behind her: she 
turned round and he joined her. 

"I thought you were on your shooting expedition? " 

" I have been shooting, and I am returned. I was out by 



46 GODOLPHIN. 

daybreak, and I came back at noon in the hope of being al- 
lowed to join you in your ride or walk." 

Constance smilingly acknowledged the compliment; and as 
they passed up the straight walks of the old-fashioned and 
stately gardens, Godolphin turned the conversation upon the 
varieties of garden scenery; upon the poets who have de- 
scribed those varieties best; upon that difference between the 
town life and the country, on Avhich the brothers of the min- 
strel craft have, in all ages, so glowingly insisted. In this 
conversation, certain points of contrast between the characters 
of these two young persons might be observed. 

"I confess to you," said Godolphin, "that I have little faith 
in the permanence of any attachment professed for the country 
by the inhabitants of cities. If we can occupy our minds 
solely with the objects around us, if the brook and the old 
tree, and the golden sunset and the summer night, and the 
animal and homely life that we survey, — if these can fill our 
contemplation, and take away from us the feverish schemes 
of the future, — then indeed I can fully understand the reality 
of that tranquil and happy state which our elder poets have 
described as incident to a country life. But if we carry with 
us to the shade all the restless and perturbed desires of the 
city; if we only employ present leisure in schemes for an 
agitated future, — then it is in vain that we affect the hermit 
and fly to the retreat. The moment the novelty of green 
fields is over, and our projects are formed, we wish to hurry 
to the city to execute them. We have, in a word, made our 
retirement only a nursery for schemes now springing up, and 
requiring to be transplanted." 

" You are right, " said Constance, quickly ; " and Avho would 
pass life as if it were a dream? It seems to me that we put 
retirement to the right use when we make it only subservient 
to our aims in the world." 

"A strange doctrine for a young beauty," thought Godol- 
phin, "whose head ought to be full of groves and love. — 
Then," said he aloud, "I must rank among those who abuse 
the purposes of retirement ; for I have hitherto been flattered 
to think that I enjoy it for itself. Despite the artificial life 



GODOLPHIX. 47 

I have led, everything that speaks of Nature has a voice that 
I can rarely resist. What feelings created in a city can com- 
pare with those that rise so gently and so unbidden within us 
when the trees and the waters are our only companions, our 
only sources of excitement and intoxication? Is not contem- 
plation better than ambition? " 

"Can you believe it?" said Constance, incredulously. 

"I do." 

Constance smiled; and there would have been contempt in 
that beautiful smile, had not Godolphin interested her in 
spite of herself. 



CHAPTER XV. 

THE FEELINGS OF COXSTAXCE AND GODOLPHIN^ TOWARDS EACH 
OTHER. THE DISTINCTION IN THEIR CHARACTERS. RE- 
MARKS ON THE EFFECTS PRODUCED BY THE WORLD UPON 

GODOLPHIN. THE RIDE. RURAL DESCRIPTIONS. OMENS. 

THE FIRST INDISTINCT CONFESSION. 

Every day, at the hour in which Constance was visible, 
Godolphin had loaded the keeper, and had returned to attend 
upon her movements. They walked and rode together; and 
in the evening, Godolphin hung over her chair, and listened 
to her songs ; for though, as I have before said, she had but 
little science in instrumental music, her voice was rich and 
soft beyond the pathos of ordinary singers. 

Lady Erpingham saw, with secret delight, what she be- 
lieved to be a growing attachment. She loved Constance for 
herself, and Godolphin for his father's memory. She thought 
again and again what a charming couple they would make, — 
so handsome, so gifted : and if Prudence whispered also — so 
poor, the kind countess remembered that she herself had 
saved from her ample jointure a sum which she had always 
designed as a dowry for Constance, and which, should Godol- 



48 GODOLPHIN. 

phin be the bridegroom, she felt she shoukl have a tenfold 
pleasure in bestowing. With this fortune, which would place 
them, at least, in independence, she united in her kindly 
imagination the importance which she imagined Godolphin's 
talents must ultimately acquire; and for which, in her aristo- 
cratic estimation, she conceived the senate the only legitimate 
sphere. She said, she hinted, nothing to Constance ; but she 
suffered nature, youth, and companionship to exercise their 
sway. 

And the complexion of Godolphin's feelings for Constance 
Vernon did indeed resemble love, — was love itself, though 
rather love in its romance than its reality. What were those 
of Constance for him? She knew not herself at that time. 
Had she been of a character one shade less ambitious or less 
powerful, they would have been love, and love of no common 
character. But within her musing and self-possessed and 
singularly constituted mind there was, as yet, a limit to every 
sentiment, a chain to the wings of every thought, save those 
of one order; and that order was not of love. There was a 
marked difference, in all respects, between the characters of 
the two ; and it was singular enough that that of the woman 
was the less romantic, and composed of the simpler materials. 

A volume of Wordsworth's most exquisite poetry had then 
just appeared. "Is not this wonderful?" said Godolphin, 
reciting some of those lofty but refining thoughts which char- 
acterize the Pastor of modern poets. 

Constance shook her head. 

"What! you do not admire it? " 

"I do not understand it." 

"What poetry do you admire? " 

"This." 

It was Pope's translation of the "Iliad." 

"Yes, yes, to be sure," said Godolphin, a little vexed; "we 
all admire this in its way: but what else?" 

Constance pointed to a passage in the " Palamon and Arcite " 
of Dryden. 

Godolphin threw down his Wordsworth. "You take an 
ungenerous advantage of me," said he. "Tell me something 



GODOLPHIN. 49 

you admire, which, at least, I may have the privilege of dis- 
puting,— something that you think generally neglected." 

"I admire few things that are generally neglected," an- 
swered Constance, with her bright and proud smile. " Fame 
gives its stamp to all metal that is of intrinsic value." 

This answer was quite characteristic of Constance; she 
worshipped fame far more than the genius which won it. 

"Well, then," said Godolphin, "let us see 7iow if we can 
come to a compromise of sentiment; " and he took up the 
"Comus" of Milton. 

No one read poetry so beautifully : his voice was so deep 
and flexible ; and his countenance answered so well to every 
modulation of his voice. Constance was touched by the 
reader, but not by the verse. Godolphin had great penetra- 
tion; he perceived it, and turned to the speeches of Satan in 
"Paradise Lost." The noble countenance before him grew 
luminous at once; the lip quivered, the eye sparkled; the 
enthusiasm of Godolphin was not comparable to that of Con- 
stance. The fact was, that the broad and common emotions 
of the intellectual character struck upon the right key. Cour- 
age, defiance, ambition, — these she comprehended to their 
fullest extent; but the rich subtleties of thought which mark 
the cold and bright page of the "Comus," the noble Platon- 
ism, the high and rare love for what is abstractedly good, — 
these were not "sonorous and trumpet-speaking" enough for 
the heart of one meant by Nature for a heroine or a queen, 
not a poetess or a philosopher. 

But all that in literature was delicate and half-seen and 
abstruse had its peculiar charm for Godolphin. Of a reflec- 
tive and refining mind, he had early learned to despise the 
common emotions of men : glory touched him not, and to am- 
bition he had shut his heart. Love, with him — even though 
he had been deemed, nor unjustly, a man of gallantry and 
pleasure — love was not compounded of the ordinary elements 
of the passions. Full of dreams and refinements and intense 
abstractions, it was a love that seemed not homely enough 
for endurance, and of too rare a nature to hope for sympathy 
in return. 

4 



50 GODOLPHIN. 

And so it was in his intercourse with Constance both were 
continually disappointed. "You do not feel this," said Con- 
stance. "She cannot understand me," sighed Godolphin. 

But we must not suj^pose — despite his refinements and his 
reveries and his love for the intellectual and the pure — that 
Godoli^hin was of a stainless character or mind. He was one 
who, naturally full of decided and marked qualities, was, by 
the peculiar elements of our society, rendered a doubtful, 
motley, and indistinct character, tinctured by the frailties 
that leave us in a wavering state between vice and virtue. 
The energies that had marked his boyhood were dulled and 
crippled in the indolent life of the world. His wandering 
habits for the last few years, the soft and poetical existence 
of the South, had fed his natural romance, and nourished 
that passion for contemplation which the intellectual man of 
pleasure so commonly forms ; for pleasure has a philosophy 
of its own, — a sad, a fanciful, yet deep persuasion of the 
vanity of all things, a craving after the bright ideal — 

"The desire of the moth for the star." 

Solomon's thirst for pleasure was the companion of his 
wisdom: satiety was the offspring of the one, discontent of 
the other. But this philosophy, though seductive, is of no 
wholesome nor useful character; it is the philosophy of feel- 
ings, not principles ; of the heart, not head. So with Godol- 
phin: he was too refined in his moralizing to cling to what 
was moral. The simply good and the simply bad he left for 
us plain folks to discover. He was unattracted by the doc- 
trines of right and wrong which serve for all men; but he had 
some obscure and shadowy standard in his own mind by which 
he compared the actions of others. He had imagination, ge- 
nius, even heart; was brilliant always, sometimes profound; 
graceful in society, yet seldom social; a lonely man, yet a 
man of the world; generous to individuals, selfish to the 
mass. How many fine qualities worse than thrown away ! 

Who will not allow that he has met many such men? — 
and who will not follow this man to his end? 

One day (it was the last of Godolphin's protracted visit), 



GODOLPHIN. 61 

as tlie sun was waning to its close, and the time was unusu- 
ally soft and tranquil, Constance and Godolphin were return- 
ing slowly home from their customary ride. They passed by 
a small inn, bearing the common sign of the Chequers, round 
which a crowd of peasants were assembled, listening to the 
rude music which a wandering Italian boy drew from his 
guitar. The scene was rustic and picturesque ; and as Godol- 
phin reined in his horse and gazed on the group, he little 
dreamed of the fierce and dark emotions with which, at a far 
distant period, he was destined to revisit that spot. 

"Our peasants," said he, as they rode on, "require some 
humanizing relaxation like that we have witnessed. The 
music and the morris-dance have gone from England; and in- 
stead of providing, as formerly, for the amusement of the 
grinded labourer, our legislators now regard with the most 
watchful jealousy his most distant approach to festivity. They 
cannot bear the rustic to be merry : disorder and amusement 
are words for the same offence." 

"I doubt," said the earnest Constance, "whether the legis- 
lators are not right; for men given to amusement are easily 
enslaved. All noble thoughts are grave." 

Thus talking, they passed a shallow ford in the stream. 
"We are not far from the Priory," said Godolphin, pointing 
to its ruins, that rose grayly in the evening skies from the 
green woods around it. 

Constance sighed involuntarily. She felt pain in being 
reminded of the slender fortunes of her companion. Ascend- 
ing the gentle hill that swelled from the stream, she now, to 
turn the current of her thoughts, pointed admiringly to the 
blue course of the waters, as they wound through their shagged 
banks. And deep, dark, rushing, even at that still hour, went 
the stream through the boughs that swept over its surface. 
Here and there the banks suddenly shelved down, mingling 
with the waves; then abruptly they rose, overspread with 
thick and tangled umbrage, several feet above the level of 
the river. 

"How strange it is," said Godolphin, "that at times a feel- 
ing comes over us, as we gaze upon certain places, which 



52 GODOLPHIN. 

associates the scene either with some dim-remembered and 
dream-like images of the Past, or with a prophetic and fear- 
ful omen of the Future ! As I gaze now upon this spot — 
those banks, that whirling river — it seems as if my destiny 
claimed a mysterious sympathy with the scene: when, how, 
wherefore, I know not, guess not; only this shadowy and 
chilling sentiment unaccountably creeps over me. Every 
one has known a similar strange, indistinct feeling at certain 
times and places, and with a similar inability to trace the 
cause. And yet, is it not singular that in poetry, which wears 
most feelings to an echo, I have never met with any attempt 
to describe it? " 

"Because poetry," said Constance, "is, after all, but a 
hackneyed imitation of the most common thoughts, giving 
them merely a gloss by the brilliancy of verse. And yet how 
little poets know ! They imagine, and they imitate, — behold 
all their secrets ! " 

"Perhaps you are right," said Godolphin, miTsingly; "and 
I, who have often vainly fancied I had the poetical tempera- 
ment, have been so chilled and sickened by the characteristics 
of the tribe that I have checked its impulses with a sort of 
disdain; and thus the Ideal, having no vent in me, preys 
within, creating a thousand undefined dreams and unwilling 
superstitions, making me enamoured of the Shadowy and Un- 
known, and dissatisfying me with the petty ambitions of the 
world." 

" You will awake hereafter, " said Constance, earnestly. 

Godolphin shook his head, and replied not. 

Their way now lay along a green lane that gradually wound 
round a hill commanding a view of great richness and beauty. 
Cottages and spires and groves gave life — but it was scat- 
tered and remote life — to the scene ; and the broad stream, 
whose waves, softened in the distance, did not seem to break 
the even surface of the tide, flowed onward, glowing in the 
sunlight, till it was lost among dark and luxuriant woods. 

Both once more arrested their horses by a common impulse, 
and both became suddenly silent as they gazed. Godolphin 
was the first to speak ; it brought to his memory a scene in 



GODOLPHIX. 53 

tliat delicious land, whose Southern loveliness Claude has 
transfused to the canvas, and De Staiil to the page. With 
his own impassioned and earnest language, he spoke to Con- 
stance of that scene and that country. Every tree before him 
furnished matter for his illustration or his contrast; and as 
she heard that magic voice, and speaking, too, of a country 
dedicated to love, Constance listened with glistening eyes, 
and a cheek which he — consummate master of the secrets of 
womanhood — perceived was eloquent with thoughts which 
she knew not, but which he interpreted to the letter. 

"And in. such a spot," said he, continuing, and fixing his 
deep and animated gaze on her, — "in such a spot I could 
have stayed forever but for one recollection, one feeling, — I 
should hace been too much alone! In a wild or a grand or 
even a barren country, we may live in solitude, and find fit 
food for thought; but not in one so soft, so subduing, as 
that which I saw and see. Love comes over us then in spite 
of ourselves; and I feel — I feel now — " his voice trembled 
as he spoke — " that any secret we may before have nursed, 
though hitherto unacknowledged, makes itself at length a 
voice. We are oppressed with the desire to be loved; we 
long for the courage to say we love." 

Never before had Godolphin, though constantly verging 
into sentiment, spoken to Constance in so plain a language. 
Eye, voice, cheek, — all spoke. She felt that he had con- 
fessed he loved her ! And was she not happy at that thought? 
She was ; it was her happiest moment. But, in that sort of 
vague and indistinct shrinking from the subject with which 
a woman who loves hears a disclosure of love from him on 
whose lips it is most sweet, she muttered some confused at- 
tempt to change the subject, and quickened her horse's pace. 
Godolphin did not renew the topic so interesting and so dan- 
gerous, only, as with the winding of the road the landscape 
gradually faded from their view, he said in a low voice, as 
if to himself, — "How long, how fondly, shall I remember 
this day ! " 



64 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

GODOLPHIn's return home. — HIS SOLILOQUY, LORD ERP- 

INGHAm's arrival at WENDOVER castle, THE EARL DE- 
SCRIBED. HIS ACCOUNT OF GODOLPHIN's LIFE AT ROME. 

With a listless step, Godolphin re-entered the threshold of 
his cottage-hoine. He passed into a small chamber, which 
was yet the largest in his house. The poor and scanty furni- 
ture scattered around; the old, tuneless, broken harpsichord; 
the worn and tattered carpet; the tenantless birdcage in the 
recess by the window; the book-shelves, containing some 
dozens of worthless volumes; the sofa of the last century 
(when, if people knew comfort, they placed it not in loung- 
ing), small, narrow, highbacked, hard, and knotted, — these, 
just as his father had left, just as his boyhood had seen, them, 
greeted him with a comfortless and chill though familiar wel- 
come. It was evening. He ordered a fire and lights; and 
leaning his face on his hand as he contemplated the fitful and 
dusky outbreakings of the flame through the bars of the nig- 
gard and contracted grate, he sat himself down to hold com- 
mune with his heart. 

"So, I love this woman," said he, "do I? Have I not de- 
ceived myself ? She is poor, — no connection; she has noth- 
ing whereby to reinstate my house's fortunes, to rebuild this 
mansion, or repurchase yonder demesnes. I love her! /who 
have known the value of her sex so well, that I have said, 
again and again, I would not shackle life with a princess! 
Love may withstand possession, — true; but not time. In 
three years there would be no glory in the face of Constance, 
and I should be — what? My fortunes, broken as they are, 
can support me alone, and with my few wants. But if mar- 
ried! the haughty Constance my wife! ISTay, nay, nay! this 
must not be thought of! I, the hero of Paris! the pupil of 



GODOLPHIX. 55 

Saville! I, to be so beguiled as even to dream of such a 
madness! 

" Yet I have that within me that might make a stir in the 
world; I might rise. Professions are open; the Diplomacy, 
the House of Commons. What! Percy Godolphin be ass 
enough to grow ambitious ! to toil, to fret, to slave, to answer 
fools on a first principle, and die at length of a broken heart 
or a lost place! Pooh, pooh! I, who despise your prime 
ministers, can scarcely stoop to their apprenticeship. Life is 
too short for toil. And what do men strive for? — to enjoy; 
but why not enjoy without the toil? And relinquish Con- 
stance? Ay, it is but one woman lost!" 

So ended the soliloquy of a man scarcely of age. The world 
teaches us its last lessons betimes; but then, lest we should 
have nothing left to acquire from its wisdom, it employs the 
rest of our life in unlearning all that it first taught. 

Meanwhile, the time approached when Lord Erpingham 
was to arrive at Wendover Castle; and at length came the 
day itself. Naturally anxious to enjoy as exclusively as pos- 
sible the company of her son the first day of his return from 
so long an absence, Lady Erpingham had asked no one to 
meet him. The earl's heavy travelling-carriage at length 
rolled clattering up the courtyard; and in a few minutes a 
tall man, in the prime of life, and borrowing some favourable 
effect as to person from the large cloak of velvet and furs 
which hung round him, entered the room, and Lady Erping- 
ham embraced her son. The kind and familiar manner with 
which he answered her inquiries and congratulations was 
somewhat changed when he suddenly perceived Constance. 
Lord Erpingham was a cold man, and, like most cold men, 
ashamed of the evidence of affection. He greeted Constance 
very quietly, and as she thought, slightly; but his eyes 
turned to her far more often than any friend of Lord Erping- 
ham's might ever have remarked those large round hazel eyes 
turn to any one before. 

When the earl withdrew to adjust his toilet for dinner. 
Lady Erpingham, as she wiped her eyes, could not help ex- 
claiming to Constance, "Is he not handsome? What a 
figure ! " 



56 GODOLPHIN. 

Constance was a little addicted to flattery where she liked 
the one who was to be flattered, and she assented readily- 
enough to the maternal remark. Hitherto, however, she had 
not observed anything more in Lord Erpingham than his 
height and his cloak; as he re-entered and led her to the 
dining-room she took a better, though still but a casual, 
survey. 

Lord Erpingham was that sort of person of whom vien al- 
ways say, " What a prodigiously fine fellow ! " He was above 
six feet high, stout in proportion: not, indeed, accurately 
formed, nor graceful in bearing, but quite as much so as a 
man of six feet high need be. He had a manly complexion 
of brown, yellow, and red. His whiskers were exceedingly 
large, black, and well arranged. His eyes, as I have before 
said, were round, large, and hazel; they were also unmean- 
ing. His teeth were good; and his nose, neither aquiline nor 
Grecian, was yet a very showy nose upon the whole. All the 
maidservants admired him; and you felt, in looking at him, 
that it was a pity our army should lose so good a grenadier. 

Lord Erpingham was a Whig of the old school : he thought 
the Tory boroughs ought to be thrown open. He was gener- 
ally considered a sensible man. He had read Blackstone, 
Montesquieu, Covvper's Poems, and "The Rambler;" and he 
was always heard with great attention in the House of Lords. 
In his moral character he was a bon vivant, as far as wine is 
concerned; for choice eating he cared nothing. He was good- 
natured, but close; brave enough to fight a duel, if necessary; 
and religious enough to go to church once a week — in the 
country. 

So far Lord Erpingham might seem modelled from one of 
Sir Walter's heroes: we must reverse the medal, and show 
the points in which he differed from those patterns of 
propriety. 

Like the generality of his class, he was peculiarly loose in 
his notions of women, though not ardent in pursuit of them. 
His amours had been among opera-dancers, "because," as he | 
was wont to say, "there was no d — d bore with them." Lord 
Erpingham was always considered a high-minded man. Poo- 



GODOLPHIN. 57 

pie chose him as an umpire in quarrels; and told a story 
(which was not true) of his having lield some state ofiBce for 
a whole year, and insisted on returning the emoluments. 

Such was Eobert Earl of Erpingham. During dinner, at 
which he displayed, to his mother's great delight, a most ex- 
cellent appetite, he listened, as well as he might, considering 
the more legitimate occupation of the time and season, to 
Lady Erpingham's recitals of county history, her long an- 
swers to his brief inquiries whether old friends were dead 
and young ones married; and his countenance brightened up 
to an expression of interest — almost of intelligence — when 
he was told that birds were said to be plentiful. 

As the servants left the room, and Lord Erpingham took 
his first glass of claret, the conversation fell upon Percy 
Godolphin. 

"He has been staying with us a whole fortnight," said Lady 
Erpingham ; " and, by the by, he said he had met you in Italy, 
and mentioned your name as it deserved." 

"Indeed! And did he really condescend to praise me?" 
said Lord Erpingham, with eagerness; for there was that 
about Godolphin, and his reputation for fastidiousness, which 
gave a rarity and a value to his praise, at least to lordly 
ears. "Ah, he's a queer fellow; he led a very singular life 
in Italy." 

"So I have always heard," said Lady Erpingham. "But of 
what description, — was he very wild? " 

"Ko, not exactly; there was a good deal of mystery about 
him; he saw very few English, and those were chiefly men 
who played high. He was said to have a great deal of learn- 
ing and so forth." 

" Oh, then he was surrounded, I suppose, by those medallists 
and picture-sellers and other impostors, who live upon such 
of our countrymen as think themselves blessed with a taste 
or afflicted with a genius, " said Lady Erpingham, — who, hav- 
ing lived with the wits and orators of the time, had caught 
mechanically their way of rounding a period. 

"Far from it! " returned the earl. "Godolphin is much too 
deep a fellow for that; he 's not easily taken in, I assure you. 



58 GODOLPHIX. 

I confess I don't like him the worse for that," added the close 
noble. "But he lived with the Italian doctors and men of 
science ; and encouraged, in particular, one strange fellow who 
affected sorcery, I fancy, or something very like it. Godol- 
phin resided in a very lonely spot at Eome: and I believe 
laboratories and caldrons, and all sorts of devilish things, 
were always at work there — at least so people said." 

"And yet," said Constance, "you thought him too sensible 
to be easily taken in? " 

"Indeed I do, Miss Vernon; and the proof of it is, that no 
man has less fortune or is made more of. He plays, it is true, 
but only occasionally; though as a player at games of skill — 
piquet, billiards, whist — he has no equal, unless it be Sa- 
ville. But then Saville, entre nous, is suspected of playing 
unfairly." 

"And you are quite sure," said the placid Lady Erping- 
ham, "that Mr. Godolphin is only indebted to skill for his 
success? " 

Constance darted a glance of fire at the speaker. 

""Why, faith, I believe so! No one ever accused him of a 
single shabby or even suspicious trick; and indeed, as I said 
before, no one was ever more sought after in society, though 
he shuns it; and he 's devilish right, for it 's a cursed bore! " 

"My dear Eobert! at your age! " exclaimed the mother. 

"But," continued the earl, turning to Constance, — "but, 
Miss Vernon, a man may have his weak point; and the cun- 
ning Italian may have hit on Godolphin's, clever as he is in 
general; though, for my part, I will tell you frankly, I think 
he only encouraged him to mystify and perplex people, just to 
get talked of — vanity, in short. He 's a good-looking fellow, 
that Godolphin, eh?" continued the earl, in the tone of a 
man who meant you to deny Avhat he asserted. 

" Oh, beautiful ! " said Lady Erpingham. " Such a coun- 
tenance ! " 

"Deuced pale, though! — eh? — and not the best of figures; 
thin, narrow-shouldered, eh, eh?" 

Godolphin's proportions were faultless ; but your strapping 
heroes think of a moderate-sized man as mathematicians de- 



GODOLPHIN. 59 

fine a point, — declare that he has no length nor breadth 
whatsoever. 

"What say you, Constance?" asked Lady Erpingham, 
meaningly. 

Constance felt the meaning, and replied calmly that Mr, 
Godolphin appeared to her handsomer than any one she had 
seen lately. 

Lord Erpingham played with his neckcloth, and Lady Erp- 
ingham rose to leave the room. " D — d fine girl ! " said the 
earl, as he shut the door upon Constance ; " but d — d sharp ! " 
added he, as he resettled himself on his chair. 



CHAPTER XYII. 

COXSTAXCE AT HER TOILET. HER FEELINGS. HER CHARAC- 
TER OF BEAUTY DESCRIBED. THE BALL. THE DUCHESS 

OF WINSTOUX AXD HER DAUGHTER. AX IXDUCTIOX FROM 

THE NATURE OF FEMALE RIVALRIES. JEALOUSY IN A 

LOVER. IMPERTINENCE RETORTED. LISTENERS NEVER 

HEAR GOOD OF THEMSELVES. REMARKS ON THE AMUSE- 
MENTS OF A PUBLIC ASSEMBLY. THE SUPPER. THE 

FALSENESS OF SEEMING GAYETY. VARIOUS REFLECTIONS, 

NEW AND TRUE. WHAT PASSES BETWEEN GODOLPHIN 

AND CONSTANCE. 

It was the evening of the ball to be given in honour of Lord 
Erpingham's arrival. Constance, dressed for conquest, sat 
alone in her dressing-room. Her woman had just left her. 
The lights still burned in profusion about the antique cham- 
ber (antique, for it was situated in the oldest part of the 
castle) ; those lights streamed full upon the broad brow and 
exquisite features of Miss Yernon. As she leaned back in 
her chair — the fairy foot upon the low Gothic stool, and the 
hands drooping beside her despondingly — her countenance 
betrayed much but not serene thought; and mixed with that 



60 GODOLPHIN. 

thouglit was something of irresolution and of great and real 
sadness. 

It is not, as I have before hinted, to be supposed that Con- 
stance's lot had been hitherto a proud one, even though she 
was the most admired beauty of her day; even though she 
lived with, and received adulation from, the high and noble 
and haughty of her land. Often in the glittering crowd that 
she attracted around her, her ear, sharpened by the jealousy 
and pride of her nature, caught words that dashed the cup of 
pleasure and of vanity with shame and anger. "What! that 
the Vernon's daughter? Poor girl! dependent entirely on 
Lady Erpingham! Ah, she '11 take in some rich roturier, I 
hope." 

Such words from ill-tempered dowagers and faded beauties 
were no unfrequent interruj)tion to her brief -lived and weari- 
some triumphs. She heard manoeuvring mothers caution their 
booby sons, whom Constance would have looked into the dust 
had they dared but to touch her hand, against her untitled 
and undowried charms. She saw cautious earls, who were all 
courtesy one night, all coldness another, as some report had 
reached them accusing their hearts of feeling too deeply her 
attractions, or as they themselves suspected for the first time 
that a heart was not a word for a poetical nothing, and that 
to look on so beautiful and glorious a creature was sufficient 
to convince them, even yet, of the possibility of emotion. 
She had felt to the quick the condescending patronage of 
duchesses and chaperons; the oblique hint; the nice and fine 
distinction which, in polished circles, divides each grade from 
the other, and allows you to be galled without the pleasure of 
feeling justified in offence. 

All this, which, in the flush and heyday of youth and gayety 
and loveliness, would have been unnoticed by other women, 
rankled deep in the mind of Constance Vernon. The image 
of her dying father, his complaints, his accusations (the jus- 
tice of which she never for an instant questioned), rose up 
before her in the brightest hours of the dance and the revel. 
She was not one of those women whose meek and gentle na- 
ture would fly what wounds them : Constance had resolved to 



GODOLPHIX. 61 

conquer. Despising glitter and gayety and show, she burned, 
she thirsted for power, — a power which could retaliate the 
insults she fancied she had received, and should turn conde- 
scension into homage. This object, which every casual word, 
every heedless glance from another, fixed deeper and deeper 
in her heart, took a sort of sanctity from the associations 
with which she linked it, — her father's memory and his 
dying breath. 

At this moment in which we have portrayed her, all these 
restless and sore and haughty feelings were busy within ; but 
they were combated, even while the more fiercely aroused, by 
one soft and tender thought, — the image of Godolphin, — of 
Godolphin, the spendthrift heir of a broken fortune and a 
fallen house. She felt too deeply that she loved him; and 
ignorant of his worldlier qualities, imagined that he loved 
her with all the devotion of that romance, and the ardour of 
that genius, which appeared to her to compose his character. 
But this persuasion gave her now no delightful emotion. 
Convinced that she ought to reject him, his image only 
coloured with sadness those objects and that ambition which 
she had hitherto regarded with an exulting pride. She was 
not the less bent on the lofty ends of her destiny; but the 
glory and the illusion had fallen from them. She had taken 
an insight into futurity, and felt that to enjoy power was to 
lose happiness. Yet, with this full conviction, she forsook 
the happiness and clung to the power. Alas! for our best 
and wisest theories, our problems, our systems, our philoso- 
phy ! Human beings will never cease to mistake the means 
for the end; and despite the dogmas of sages, our conduct 
does not depend on our convictions. 

Carriage after carriage had rolled beneath the windows of 
the room where Constance sat, and still she moved not; until 
at length a certain composure, as if the result of some deter- 
mination, stole over her features. The brilliant and trans- 
parent hues returned to her cheek ; and as she rose and stood 
erect, with a certain calmness and energy on her lip and fore- 
head, perhaps her beauty had never seemed of so lofty and 
august a cast. In passing through the chamber, she stopped 



62 GODOLPHIN. 

for a moment opposite the mirror that reflected her stately 
shape in its full height. Beaut}' is so truly the weapon of 
woman that it is as impossible for her, even in grief, wholly 
to forget its effect, as it is for the dying warrior to look with 
indifference on the sword with which he has won his trophies 
or his fame. Nor was Constance that evening disposed to be 
indifferent to the effect she should produce. She looked on 
the reflection of herself with a feeling of triumj^h, not arising 
from vanity alone. 

And when did mirror ever give back a form more worthy 
of a Pericles to worship, or an Apelles to paint? Though 
but little removed from the common height, the impression 
Constance always gave was that of a person much taller than 
she really was. A certain majesty in the turn of the head, 
the fall of the shoulders, the breadth of the brow, and the 
exceeding calmness of the features invested her with an air 
which I have never seen equalled by an}" one, but which, had 
Pasta been a beauty, she might have possessed. But there 
was nothing hard or harsh in this majesty. Whatsoever of a 
masculine nature Constance might have inherited, nothing 
masculine, nothing not exquisitely feminine, was visible in 
her person. Her shape was rounded, and sufficiently full to 
show that in middle age its beauty would be preserved by 
that richness and freshness which a moderate increase of the 
proportions always gives to the sex. Her arms and hands 
were, and are, even to this day, of a beauty the more striking, 
because it is so rare. Nothing in any European country is 
more uncommon than an arm really beautiful both in hue and 
shape. In any assembly we go to, what miserable bones, 
what angular elbows, what red skins, do we see under the 
cover of those capacious sleeves, which are only one whit less 
ugly. At the time I speak of, those coverings were not worn ; 
and the white, round, dazzling arm of Constance, bare almost 
to the shoulder, was girded by dazzling gems, which at once 
set off, and were foiled by, the beauty of nature. Her hair 
was of the most luxuriant and of the deepest black; and it 
was worn in a fashion — then uncommon, without being 
bizarre — now hackneyed by the plainest faces, though suit- 



GODOLPHIX. 63 

ing only the highest order of beauty, — I mean that simple 
and classic fashion to which the French have given a name 
borrowed from Calypso, but which appears to me suited 
rather to an intellectual than a voluptuous goddess. Her 
long lashes, and a brow delicately but darkly pencilled, gave 
additional eloquence to an eye of the deepest blue, and a 
classic contour to a profile so slightly aquiline that it was 
commonly considered Grecian. That necessary completion to 
all real beauty of either sex, the short and curved upper lip, 
terminated in the most dazzling teeth, and the ripe and dewy 
under lip added to what was noble in her beauty that charm 
also which is exclusively feminine. Her complexion was ca- 
pricious ; now pale, now tinged with the pink of the sea-shell, 
or the softest shade of the rose leaf: but in either it was so 
transparent that you doubted which became her the most. To 
these attractions add a throat, a bust of the most dazzling 
whiteness, and the justest proportions; a foot, whose least 
beauty was its smallness, and a waist narrow, — not the nar- 
rowness of tenuity or constraint, but round, gradual, insen- 
sibly less in its compression, — and the person of Constance 
Vernon, in the bloom of her youth, is before you. 

She passed with her quiet and stately step from her room, 
through one adjoining it, and which we stop to notice, because 
it was her customary sitting-room when not with Lady Erping- 
ham. There had Godolphin, with the foreign but courtly 
freedom, the respectful and chivalric ease of his manners, 
often sought her; there had he lingered in order to detain her 
yet a moment and a moment longer from other company, seek- 
ing a sweet excuse in some remark on the books that strewed 
the tables, or the music in that recess, or the forest scene 
from those windows through which the moon of autumn now 
stole with its own peculiar power to soften and subdue. As 
these recollections came across her, her step faltered and her 
colour faded from its glow: she paused a moment, cast a 
mournful glance round the room, and then tore herself away, 
descended the lofty staircase, passed the stone hall, melan- 
choly with old banners and rusted crests, and bore her beauty 
and her busy heart into the thickening and gay crowd. 



64 GODOLPHIN. 

Her eye looked once more round for the graceful form of 
Godolphin : but he was not visible ; and she had scarcely sat- 
isfied herself of this before Lord Erpiugham, the hero of the 
evening, approached and claimed her hand. 

"I have just performed my duty," said he, with a gallantry 
of speech not common to him, " now for my reward. I have 
danced the first dance with Lady Margaret Midgecombe: 1 
come, according to your promise, to dance the second with 
you." 

There was something in these words that stung one of the 
morbid remembrances in Miss Vernon's mind. Lady Mar- 
garet Midgecombe, in ordinary life, would have been thought 
a good-looking, vulgar girl; she was a duke's daughter, and 
she was termed a Hebe. Her little nose and her fresh colour 
and her silly but not unmalicious laugh were called enchant- 
ing; and all irregularities of feature and faults of shape were 
absolutely turned into merits by that odd commendation, so 
common with us, — "A deuced fine girl; none of your regular 
beauties." 

Not only in the county of shire, but in London, had 

Lady Margaret Midgecombe been set up as the rival beauty 
of Constance Vernon. And Constance, far too lovely, too 
cold, too proud, not to acknowledge beauty in others where it 
really existed, was nevertheless unaffectedly indignant at a 
comparison so unworthy; she even, at times, despised her own 
claims to admiration, since claims so immeasurably inferior 
could be put into competition with them. Added to this sore 
feeling for Lady Margaret, was one created by Lady Margaret's 
mother. The Duchess of Winstoun was a woman of ordinary 
birth, — the daughter of a peer of great wealth but new family. 
She had married, however, one of the most powerful dukes in 
the peerage, — a stupid, heavy, pompous man, with four castles, 
eight parks, a coal-mine, a tin-mine, six boroughs, and about 
thirty livings. Inactive and reserved, the duke was seldom 
seen in public ; the care of sujjporting his rank devolved on the 
duchess, and she supported it with as much solemnity of pur- 
pose as if she had been a cheesemonger's daughter. Stately, 
insolent, and coarse ; asked everywhere ; insulting all ; hated 



GODOLPHIN. 



65 



and courted,— such was the Duchess of Winstoun, and such, 
perhaps, have been other duchesses before her. 

Be it understood that, at that day, Fashion had not risen to 
the despotism it now enjoys : it took its colouring from Power, 
not controlled it. I shall show, indeed, how much of its present 
condition that Fashion owes to the Heroine of these Memoirs. 
The Duchess of Winstoun could not now be that great person 
she was then; there is a certain good taste in Fashion which 
repels the mere insolence of Eank, which requires persons to be 
either agreeable or brilliant or at least original, which weighs 
stupid dukes in a righteous balance and finds vulgar duchesses 
wanting. But in lack of this new authority, this moral sebasto- 
crator between the Sovereign and the dignity hitherto consid- 
ered next to the Sovereign's, her Grace of Winstoun exercised 
with impunity the rights of insolence. She had taken an es- 
pecial dislike to Constance : partly because the few good judges 
of beauty, who care neither for rank nor report, had very un- 
reservedly placed Miss Vernon beyond the reach of all com- 
petition with her daughter; and principally because the high 
spirit and keen irony of Constance had given more than once 
to the duchess's effrontery so cutting and so public a check, 
that she had felt with astonishment and rage there was one 
woman in that world — that woman too unmarried — who 
could retort the rudeness of the Duchess of Winstoun. Spite- 
ful, however, and numerous were the things she said of Miss 
Vernon, when Miss Vernon was absent; and haughty beyond 
measure were the inclination of her head and the tone of her 
voice when jSIiss Vernon was present. If, therefore, Con- 
stance was disliked by the duchess, we may readily believe 
that she returned the dislike. The very name roused her 
spleen and her pride ; and it was with a feeling all a woman \s, 
though scarcely feminine in the amiable sense of the word, 
that she learned to whom the honour of Lord Erpingham's 
precedence had been (though necessaril}^) given. 

As Lord Erpingham led her to her place, a buzz of admira- 
tion and enthusiasm followed her steps. This pleased Erping- 
ham more than, at that moment, it did Constance. Already 
intoxicated by her beauty, he was proud of the effect it pro- 

5 



66 GODOLPHIN. 

duced on others, for that effect was a compliment to his taste. 
He exerted himself to be agreeable; nay, more, to be fasci- 
nating: he att'ected a low voice; and he attempted — poor 
man! — to flatter. 

The Duchess of Winstoun and her daughter sat behind on 
an elevated bench. They saw with especial advantage the 
attentions with which one of the greatest of England's earls 
honoured the daughter of one of the greatest of England's 
orators. They were shocked at his want of dignity. Con- 
stance perceived their chagrin, and she lent a more pleased 
and attentive notice to Lord Erpingham's compliments; her 
eyes sparkled and her cheek blushed; and the good folks 
around, admiring Lord Erpingham's immense whiskers, 
thought Constance in love. 

It was just at this time that Percy Godolphin entered the 
room. 

Although Godolphin 's person was not of a showy order, 
there was something about him that always arrested atten- 
tion. His air, his carriage, his long fair locks, his rich and 
foreign habits of dress, which his high bearing and intel- 
lectual countenance redeemed from coxcombry, — all, united, 
gave something remarkable and distinguished to his appear- 
ance; and the interest attached to his fortunes, and to his 
social reputation for genius and eccentricity, could not fail of 
increasing the effect he produced when his name was known. 

From the throng of idlers that gathered around him, from 
the bows of the great and the smiles of the fair, Godolphin, 
however, directed his whole notice — his whole soul — to the 
spot which was hallowed by Constance Vernon. He saw her 
engaged with a man rich, powerful, and handsome ; he saw 
that she listened to her partner with evident interest, that 
he addressed her with evident admiration. His heart sank 
within him; he felt faint and sick; then came anger, morti- 
fication; then agony and despair. All his former resolutions, 
all his prudence, his worldliness, his caution, vanished at 
once; he felt only that he loved, that he was supplanted, 
that he was undone. The dark and fierce passions of his 
youth, of a nature in reality wild and vehement, swept away 



GODOLPHIN. 67 

at once the projects and the fabrics of that shallow and chill 
philosophy he had borrowed from the world, and deemed the 
wisdom of the closet. A cottage and a desert with Constance 
— Constance all his, heart and hand — would have been Para- 
dise; he would have nursed no other ambition, nor dreamed 
of a reward beyond. Such effect has jealousy upon us. We 
confide, and we hesitate to accept a boon ; we are jealous, and 
we would lay down life to attain it. 

" What a handsome fellow Erpingham is ! " said a young 
man in a cavalry regiment, 

Godolphin heard and groaned audibly. 

"And what a devilish handsome girl he is dancing with! " 
said another young man, from Oxford. 

"Oh, Miss Yernon! By Jove, Erpingham seems smitten. 
What a capital thing it would be for her! " 

"And for him, too! " cried the more chivalrous Oxonian. 

"Humph! " said the officer. 

"I heard," renewed the Oxonian, "that she was to be mar- 
ried to young Godolphin. He was staying here a short time 
ago. They rode and walked together. What a lucky fellow 
he has been! I don't know any one I should so much like to 
see." 

"Hush! " said a third person, looking at Godolphin. 

Percy moved on. Accomplished and self-collected as he 
usually was, he could not wholly conceal the hell within. 
His brow grew knit and gloomy; he scarcely returned the 
salutations he received; and moving out of the crowd, he 
stole to a seat behind a large pillar, and, scarcely seen by any 
one, fixed his eyes on the form and movements of Miss 
Vernon. 

It so happened that he had placed himself in the vicinity 
of the Duchess of Winstoun, and within hearing of the con- 
versation that I am about to record. 

The dance being over, Lord Erpingham led Constance to a 
seat close by Lady Margaret Midgecombe. The duchess had 
formed her plan of attack; and, rising as she saw Constance 
within reach, approached her with an air that affected civility. 

"How do you do, Miss Vernon? I am happy to see you 



68 GODOLPHIN. 

looking so well. "What truth in the report, eh? " And the 
duchess showed her teeth, — videlicet, smiled. 

"What report does your grace allude to? " 

"Nay, nay; I am sure Lord Erpingham has heard it as well 
as myself; and I wish for your sake (a slight emphasis), in- 
deed, for both your sakes, thab it may be true." 

" To wait till the Duchess of Winstoun speaks intelligibly 
would be a waste of her time and my own," said the haughty 
Constance, with the rudeness in which she then delighted, 
and for which she has since become known. But the duch- 
ess was not to be olfended until she had completed her 
mancBuvre. 

"Well, now," said she, turning to Lord Erpingham, "I 
appeal to you; is not Miss Vernon to be married very soon 
to Mr. Godolphin? I am sure [with an affected good-nature 
and compassion that stung Constance to the quick], I am sure 
I hope so." 

"Upon my word you amaze me," said Lord Erpingham, 
opening to their fullest extent the large, round, hazel eyes 
for which he was so justly celebrated. " I never heard this 
before." 

"Oh, a secret as yet?" said the duchess; "very well! I 
can keep a secret." 

Lady Margaret looked down, and laughed prettily. 

"I thought till now," said Constance, with grave compos- 
ure, "that no person could be more contemptible than one 
who collects idle reports : I now find I was wrong : a person 
infinitely more contemptible is one who invents them." 

The rude duchess, beat at her own weapons, blushed with 
anger even through her rouge; but Constance turned away, 
and, still leaning on Lord Erpingham's arm, sought another 
seat; that seat, on the opposite side of the pillar behind 
which Godolphin sat, was still within his hearing. 

"Upon my word. Miss Vernon," said Erpingham, "I ad- 
mire your spirit. Nothing like setting down those absurd 
people who try to tease one, and think one dares not retort. 
But pray — I hope I 'm not impertinent — pray, may I ask if 
this rumour have ayiy truth in it? " 



GODOLPHIN. 



69 



"Certainly not," said Constance, with great effort, but in a 
clear tone. 

"ISTo; I should have thought not, I should have thought 
not. Godolphin 's much too poor, — much too poor for you. 
Miss Vernon is not born to marry for love in a cottage, is 
she? " 

Constance sighed. 

That soft, low tone thrilled to Godolphin's very heart. He 
bent forward: he held his breath; he thirsted for her voice, 
for some tone, some word in answer; it came not at that 
moment. 

"You remember," renewed the earl, — "you remember Miss 

L ? No? she wag before your time. Well, she married 

S , much such another fellow as Godolphin. He had not 

a shilling ; but he lived well, had a house in Mayf air, gave 
dinners, hunted at Melton, and so forth, — in short, he played 
high. She had about £10,000. They married, and lived for 
two years so comfortably, you have no idea. Every one en- 
vied them. They did not keep a close carriage, but he used 
to drive her out to dinners in his French cabriolet.^ There 
was no show, no pomp: everything deuced neat, though; quite 
love in a cottage, — only the cottage was in Curzon Street. 

At length, however, the cards turned; S lost everything: 

owed more than he could ever pay. We were forced to cut 

him; and his relation, Lord , coming into the ministry a 

year afterwards, got him a place in the Customs. They live 
at Brompton; he wears a pepper-and-salt coat, and she a 
mob-cap, with pink ribbons ; they have five hundred a year, 

and ten children. Such was the fate of S 's wife; such 

may be the fate of Godolphin's. Oh, Miss Vernon could not 
marry him ! " 

"You are right. Lord Erpingham," said Constance with 
emphasis; "but you take too much license in expressing your 
opinion." 

Before Lord Erpingham could stammer forth his apology, 
they heard a slight noise behind. They turned; Godolphin 
had risen. His countenance, always inclined to a calm se- 
1 Then uncommon. 



70 GODOLPHIN. 

verity — for thought is usually severe in its outward aspect — 
bent now on both the speakers with so dark and menacing an 
aspect that the stout earl felt his heart stand still for a mo- 
ment; and Constance was appalled as if it had been the ap- 
parition, and not the living form, of her lover that she beheld. 
But scarcely had they seen this expression of countenance 
ere it changed. With a cold and polished smile, a relaxed 
brow, and profound inclination of his form, Godolphin greeted 
the two ; and passing from his seat with a slow step glided 
among the crowd and vanished. 

What a strange thing, after all, is a great assembly ! An 
immense mob of persons, who feel for each other the pro- 
foundest indifference, met together ta join in amusements 
which the large majority of them consider wearisome beyond 
conception. How unintellectual, how uncivilized, such a 
scene and such actors ! What a remnant of barbarous times, 
when people danced because they had nothing to say! Were 
there nothing ridiculous in dancing, there would be nothing 
ridiculous in seeing wise men dance. But that sight would 
be ludicrous because of the disparity between the mind and 
the occupation. However, we have some excuse; we go to 
these assemblies to sell our daughters, or flirt with our neigh- 
bours' wives. A ballroom is nothing more or less than a 
great market-place of beauty. For my part, were I a buyer, 
I should like making my purchases in a less public mart. 

"Come, Godolphin, a glass of champagne," cried the young 
Lord Belvoir, as they sat near each other at the splendid 
supper. 

*' With all my heart ; but not from that bottle ! We must 
have a new one ; for this glass is pledged to Lady Delmour, 
and I would not drink to her health but from the first sparkle ! 
jSTothing tame, nothing insipid, nothing that has lost its first 
freshness, can be dedicated to one so beauiful and young." 

The fresh bottle was opened, and Godolphin bowed over his 
glass to Lord Belvoir's sister, — a Beauty and a Blue. Lady 
Delmour admired Godolphin, and she was flattered by a com- 
pliment that no one wholly educated in England would have 
had the gallant courage to utter across a crowded table. 



GODOLPHIN. 71 

"You have been dancing? " said she. 

"No!" 

"What then?" 

"What then?" said Godolphin. "Ah, Lady Delmour, do 
not ask." The look that accompanied the words supplied 
them with a meaning. "Need I add," said he, in a lower 
voice, "that I have been thinking of the most beautiful person 
present? " 

"Fooh," said Lady Delmour, turning away her head. 

Now, that ^oo7t is a very significant word. On the lips of 
a man of business, it denotes contempt for romance; on the 
lips of a politician it rebukes a theory; with that monosylla- 
ble a philosopher massacres a fallacy; by those four letters 
a rich man gets rid of a beggar. But in the rosy mouth of a 
woman the harshness vanishes, the disdain becomes encour- 
agement. "Pooh!" says the lady, when you tell her she is 
handsome; but she smiles when she says it. With the same 
reply she receives your protestation of love, and blushes as 
she receives. With men it is the sternest, with women the 
softest, exclamation in the language. 

"Pooh! " said Lady Delmour, turning away her head, — 
and Godolphin was in singular spirits. What a strange thing 
that we should call such hilarity from our gloom ! The stroke 
induces the flash; excite the nerves by jealousy, by despair, 
and with the proud you only trace the excitement by the mad 
mirth and hysterical laughter it creates. 

Godolphin was charming comvie iin amo^ir, and the young 
countess was delighted with his gallantry. 

"Did you ever love? " asked she, tenderly, as they sat alone 
after supper. 

"Alas, yes!" said he. 

"How often?" 

"Kead Marmontel's story of the * Four Phials; ' I have no 
other answer." 

" Oh, what a beautiful tale that is ! The whole history of a 
man's heart is contained in it." 

While Godolphin was thus talking with Lady Delmour, his 
whole soul was with Constance; of her only he thought, and 



72 GODOLPHIN. 

on her he thirsted for revenge. There is a curious phenome- 
non in love, showing how much vanity has to do with even 
the best species of it, when, for your mistress to prefer an- 
other, changes all your affection into hatred : — is it the loss 
of the mistress, or her preference to the other? The last, to 
be sure: for if the former, you would only grieve; but jeal- 
ousy does not make you grieve, it makes you enraged; it does 
not sadden, it stings. After all, as we grow old, and look 
back on the "master passion," how we smile at the fools it 
made of us, at the importance we attach to it, of the millions 
that have been governed by it! When we examine the pas- 
sion of love, it is like examining the character of some great 
man; we are astonished to perceive the littlenesses that be- 
long to it. We ask in w^onder, " How come such effects from 
such a cause? " 

Godolphin continued talking sentiment with Lady Delmour, 
until her lord, who was very fond of his carriage-horses, came 
up and took her away ; and then, perhaj)s, glad to be relieved, 
Percy sauntered into the ballroom, where, though the crowd 
was somewhat thinned, the dance was continued with that 
spirit which always seems to increase as the night advances. 

For my own part, I now and then look late in at a ball as a 
warning and grave memento of the flight of time. No amuse- 
ment belongs of right so essentially to the young in their 
first youth, to the unthinking, the intoxicated, to those whose 
blood is an elixir. 

"If Constance be woman," said Godolphin to himself, as he 
returned to the ballroom, " I will yet humble her to my will. 
I have not learned the science so long to be now foiled in the 
first moment I have seriously wished to triumph." 

As this thought inspired and excited him, he moved along 
at some distance from but carefully within the sight of Con- 
stance. He paused by Lady Margaret Midgecombe. He ad- 
dressed her. Notwithstanding the insolence and the ignorance 
of the Duchess of Winstoun, he was well received by both 
mother and daughter. Some persons there are, in all times 
and in all spheres, who command a certain respect, bought 
neither by riches, rank, nor even scrupulous morality of con- 



I 



GODOLPHIX. 73 

duct. They win it by the reputation that talent alone can 
win them, and which yet is not always the reputation of 
talent. No man, even in the frivolous societies of the great, 
obtains homage without certain qualities, which, had they 
been happily directed, would have conducted him to fame. 

Had the attention of a Grammont, or of a , been early 

turned towards what ought to be the objects desired, who can 
doubt that, instead of the heroes of a circle, they might have 
been worthy of becoming names of posterity? 

Thus the genius of Godolphin had drawn around him an 
Mat which made even the haughtiest willing to receive and 
to repay his notice; and Lady Margaret actually blushed with 
pleasure when he asked her to dance. A foreign dance, thon 
only very partially known in England, had been called for: 
few were acquainted Avith it, — those only who had been 
abroad; and as the movements seemed to require peculiar 
grace of person, some even among those few declined, through 
modest}", the exhibition. 

To this dance Godolphin led Lady Margaret. All crowded 
round to see the performers ; and as each went through the 
giddy and intoxicating maze, they made remarks on the awk- 
wardness or the singularity or the impropriety of the dance. 
But when Godolphin began, the murmurs changed. The slow 
and stately measure then adapted to the steps was one in 
which the graceful symmetry of his person might eminently 
display itself. Lady Margaret was at least as well acquainted 
with the dance : and the couple altogether so immeasurably 
excelled all competitors, that the rest, as if sensible of it, 
stopped one after the other; and when Godolphin, perceiving 
that they were alone, stopped also, the spectators made their 
approbation more audible than approbation usually is in pol- 
ished society. 

As Godolphin paused, his eyes met those of Constance. 
There was not there the expression he had anticipated: 
there was neither the anger of jealousy, nor the restlessness 
of offended vanity, nor the desire of conciliation, visible in 
those large and speaking orbs. A deep, a penetrating, a sad 
inquiry seemed to dwell in her gaze, — seemed anxious to 



74 GODOLPHIN. 

pierce into liis heart, and to discover whether there she 
possessed the power to wound, or whether each had been 
deceived: so at least seemed that fixed and melancholy in- 
tenseness of look to Godolphin. He left Lady Margaret 
abruptly; in an instant he was by the side of Constance. 

**You must be delighted with this evening," said he, bit- 
terly. " Wherever I go I hear your praises : every one ad- 
mires you; and he who does not admire so much as worship 
you, he alone is beneath your notice. He, born to such shat- 
tered fortunes, — he indeed might never aspire to that which 
titled and wealthy idiots deem they may corinnand, — the 
hand of Constance Vernon." 

It was with a low and calm tone that Godolphin spoke. 
Constance turned deadly pale: her frame trembled; but she 
did not answer immediately. She moved to a seat retired a 
little from the busy crowd ; Godolphin followed and sat him- 
self beside her; and then, with a slight effort, Constance 
spoke. 

" You heard what was said, Mr. Godolphin, and I grieve to 
think you did. If I offended you, however, forgive me, I 
pray you; I pray it sincerely, warmly. God knows I have 
suffered myself enough from idle words, and from the slight- 
ing opinion with which this hard world visits the poor, not 
to feel deep regret and shame if I wound, by like means, 
another, more especially" — Constance's voice trembled, — 
"more especially you ! " 

As she spoke, she turned her eyes on Godolphin, and they 
were full of tears. The tenderness of her voice, her look, 
melted him at once. Was it to him, indeed, that the haughty 
Constance addressed the words of kindness and apology, — to 
him whose intrinsic circumstances she had heard described 
as so unworthy of her, and, his reason told him, with such 
justice? 

" Oh, Miss Vernon ! " said he, passionately; " Miss Vernon — 
Constance — dear, dear Constance! dare I call you so? hear 
me one word. I love you with a love which leaves me no 
words to tell it. I know my faults, my poverty, my un- 
worthiness ; but — but — may I — may I hope? " 



GODOLPinX. T5 

And all the woman was in Constance's cheek, as she lis- 
tened. That cheek, how richly was it dyed! Her eyes 
drooped; her bosom heaved. How every word in those 
broken sentences sank into her heart! never was a tone for- 
gotten. The child may forget its mother, and the mother 
desert the child; but never, never from a woman's heart 
departs the memory of the first confession of love from him 
whom she first loves ! She lifted her eyes, and again with- 
drew them, and again gazed. 

"This must not be," at last she said; "no, no! it is folly, 
madness in both ! " 

*' Xot so ; nay, not so ! " whispered Godolphin, in the soft- 
est notes of a voice that could never be harsh. " It may seem 
folly, madness if you will, that the brilliant and all-idolized 
Miss Vernon should listen to the vows of so lowly an adorer ; 
but try me, prove me, and own — yes, you will own some 
years hence — that that folly has been happy beyond the hap- 
piness of prudence or ambition." 

"This," answered Constance, struggling with her emo- 
tions, — "this is no spot or hour for such a conference. Let 
us meet to-morrow — the western chamber." 

"And the hour?" 

"Twelve!" 

"And I may hope — till then? " 

Constance again grew pale ; and in a voice that, though it 
scarcely left her lips, struck coldness and dismay into his 
sudden and delighted confidence, answered, — 

" No, Percy, there is no hope ! — none ! " 



CHAPTER XYIII. 

THE INTERVIEW. THE CRISIS OF A LIFE. 

The western chamber was that I have mentioned as the one 
in which Constance usually fixed her retreat, when neither 
sociability' nor state summoned her to the more public apart- 



76 GODOLPHIN. 

nients. I should have said that Godolphin slept in the house; 
for, coming from a distance and through country roads, Lady 
Erpingham had proffered him that hospitality, and he had 
willingly accepted it. Before the appointed hour, he was at 
the appointed spot. 

He had passed the hours till then without even seeking his 
pillow- In restless strides across his chamber, he had re- 
volved those words with which Constance had seemed to deny 
the hopes she herself had created. All private and more sel- 
fish schemes or reflections had vanished, as by magic, from 
the mind of a man prematurely formed, but not yet wholly 
hardened in the mould of worldly speculation. He thought 
no more of what he should relinquish in obtaining her hand; 
with the ardour of bo3'ish and real love, he thought only of 
her. It was as if there existed no world but the little spot 
in which she breathed and moved. 

Poverty, privation, toil, the change of the manners and 
habits of his whole previous life, to those of professional en- 
terprise and self-denial, — to all this he looked forward, not 
so much with calmness as with triumph. 

"Be but Constance mine!" said he again and again; and 
again and again those fatal words knocked at his heart, "No 
hope, — none!" and he gnashed his teeth in very anguish, 
and muttered, " But mine she will not — she will never be ! " 

Still, hoAvever, before the hour of noon, something of his 
habitual confidence returned to him. He had succeeded, 
though but partially, in reasoning away the obvious meaning 
of the words; and he ascended to the chamber from the gar- 
dens, in which he had sought, by the air, to cool his mental 
fever, with a sentiment, ominous and doubtful indeed, but 
still removed from despondency and despair. 

The day was sad and heav}-. A low, drizzling rain, and 
labouring yet settled clouds, which denied all glimpse of the 
sky, and seemed cursed into stagnancy by the absence of all 
wnnd or even breeze, increased, by those associations we en- 
deavour in vain to resist, the dark and oppressive sadness of 
his thoughts. 

He paused as he laid his hand on the door of the chamber : 



GODOLPHIN. 77 

he listened; and iu the acute and painful life which seemed 
breathed into all his senses, he felt as if he could have heard 
— though without the room — the very breath of Constance, 
or known, as by an inspiration, the presence of her beauty. 
He opened the door gently : all was silence and desolation for 
him, — Constance was not there! 

He felt, however, as if that absence was a relief. He 
breathed more freely, and seemed to himself more prepared 
for the meeting. He took his station by the recess of the 
window: in vain, — he could rest in no spot; he walked to 
and fro, pausing only for a moment as some object before him 
reminded him of past and more tranquil hours. The books 
he had admired, and which, at his departure, had been left in 
their usual receptacle at another part of the house, he now 
discovered on the tables; they opened of themselves at the 
passages he had read aloud to Constance: those passages, in 
his presence, she had not seemed to admire ; he was inexpres- 
sibly touched to perceive that, in his absence, they had be- 
come dear to her. As he turned with a beating heart from 
this silent proof of affection, he was startled by the sudden 
and almost living resemblance to Constance, which struck 
upon him in a full-length picture opposite, — the picture of 
her father. That picture, by one of the best of our great 
modern masters of the art, had been taken of Vernon in the 
proudest epoch of his prosperity and fame. He was por- 
trayed in the attitude in which he had uttered one of the 
most striking sentences of one of his most brilliant orations : 
the hand was raised, the foot advanced, the chest expanded. 
Life, energy, command, flashed from the dark eye, breathed 
from the dilated nostril, broke from the inspired lip. That 
noble brow, those modelled features, that air, so full of the 
royalty of genius — how startlingly did they resemble the 
softer lineaments of Constance! 

Arrested, in spite of himself, by the skill of the limner, 
and the characteristic of the portrait, Godolphin stood mo- 
tionless and gazing till the door opened, and Constance 
herself stood before him. She smiled faintly, but with 
sweetness as she approached; and seating herself, motioned 



78 GODOLPHIN. 

him to a chair at a little distance. He obeyed the gesture 
in silence. 

"Godolphin!" said she, softly. At the sound of her voice 
he raised his eyes from the ground, and lixed them on her 
countenance with a look so full of an imploring and earnest 
meaning, so expressive of the passion, the suspense of his 
heart, that Constance felt her voice cease at once. But he 
saw as he gazed how powerful had been his influence. Not a 
vestige of bloom was on her cheek: her very lips were colour- 
less; her eyes were swollen with weeping; and though she 
seemed very calm and self-possessed, all her wonted majesty 
of mien was gone. The form seemed to shrink within itself. 
Humbleness and sorrow — deep, passionate, but (^uiet sorrow 

— had supplanted the haughtiness and the elastic freshness of 
her beauty. "Mr. Godolphin," she repeated, after a pause, 
"answer me truly and with candour; not with the world's 
gallantry, but with a sincere, a plain avowal. Were you not 

— in your unguarded expressions last night — were you not 
excited by the surprise, the passion, of the moment? Were 
you not uttering what, had you been actuated only by a 
calm and premeditated prudence, you would at least have 
suppressed? " 

"Miss Vernon," replied Godolphin, "all that I said last 
night, I now, in calmness, and with deliberate premeditation, 
repeat: all that I can dream of happiness is in your hands." 

"I would, indeed, that I could disbelieve you," said Con- 
stance, sorrowfully; " I have considered deeply on your words. 
I am touched, made grateful, proud — yes, truly proud, by 
your confessed affection — but — " 

"Oh, Constance! " cried Godolphin, in a sudden and agon- 
ized voice, and rising, he flung himself impetuously at her 
feet, — "Constance! do not reject me!" 

He seized her hand; it struggled not with his. He gazed 
on her countenance : it was dyed in blushes ; and before those 
blushes vanished, her agitation found relief in tears, which 
flowed fast and full. 

"Beloved!" said Godolphin, with a solemn tenderness, 
''why struggle with your heart? That heart I read at this 



GODOLPinX. 79 

moment: that is not averse to me." Constance wept on. "I 
know wliat you would say, and what you feel," continued 
Godolpbin; ''you think that I — that we both are poor; that 
you could ill bear the humiliations of that haughty poverty 
which those born to higher fortunes so irksomely endure. 
You tremble to link your fate with one who has been impru- 
dent, lavish, — selfish, if you will. You recoil before you in- 
trust your happiness to a ma,n who, if he wreck that, can offer 
you nothing in return, — no rank, no station, nothing to heal 
a bruised heart, or cover its wound, at least, in the rich dis- 
guises of power and wealth. Am I not right, Constance? 
Do I not read your mind?" 

" Xo I " said Constance, with energy, " Had I been born 
any man's daughter but his from whom I take my name; 
were I the same in all things, mind and heart, save in one 
feeling, one remembrance, one object, that I am now, — 
Heaven is my witness that I would not cast a thought upon 
poverty, upon privation; that I would — nay, I do — I do 
confide in your vows, your affection. If you have erred, I 
know it not. If any but you tell me you have erred, I believe 
them not. You I trust wholly and implicitly. Heaven, I 
say, is my witness that, did I obey the voice of my selfish 
heart, I would gladly, proudly, share and follow your for- 
tunes. You mistake me if you think sordid and vulgar ambi- 
tion can only influence me. No! I could be worthy of you! 
The daughter of John Vernon could be a worthy wife to the 
man of indigence and genius. In your poverty I could soothe 
you; in your labour I could support you; in your reverses 
console, in your prosperity triumph. But — but, it must not 
be. Go, Godolphin — dear Godolphin! There are thousands 
better and fairer than I am, who will do for you as I would 
have done ; but who possess the power I have not, who, in- 
stead of sharing, can raise your fortunes. Go! — and if it 
comfort, if it soothe you, believe that I have not been insen- 
sible to your generosity, your love. My best wishes, my 
fondest prayers, my dearest hopes, are yours." 

Blinded by her tears, subdued by her emotions, Constance 
was still herself. She rose; she extricated her hand from 



80 GODOLPHIN. 

Godolpli ill's; she turued to leave the room. But Godolphin, 
still kneeling, caught hold of her robe, and gently but efCeotu- 
ally detained her. 

" The picture you have painted," said he, '*do not destroy 
at once. You have portrayed yourself my soother, guide, 
restorer. You can, indeed yo\x can, be this. You do not 
know me, Constance. Let me say one word for myself. 
Hitherto, I have shunned fame and avoided ambition. Life 
has seemed to me so short, and all that even glory wins so 
poor, that I have thought no labour worth the price of a 
single hour of pleasure and enjoyment. For you, how joy- 
fully will I renounce my code! For myself I could ask no 
honour; for you, I will labour for ail. No toil shall be dry 
to me, no pleasure shall decoy. I will renounce my idle and 
desultory pursuits. I Avill enter the great public arena, where 
all who come armed with patience and with energy are sure 
to win. Constance, I am not without talents, though they 
have slept within me; say but the word, and jow know not 
what they can produce." 

An irresolution in Constance was felt as a sympathy by 
Godolphin; he continued, — 

"We are both desolate in the world, Constance; we are 
orphans, — friendless, fortuneless. Y"et both have made our 
way without friends, and commanded our associates, though 
without fortune. Does not this declare we have that within 
us which, when we are united, can still exalt or conquer our 
destiny? And we — we — alone in the noisy and contentious 
world with which we strive — we shall turn, after each effort, 
to our own hearts, and find there a comfort and a shelter. 
All things will bind us closer and closer to each other. The 
thought of our past solitude, the hope of our future objects, 
will only feed the fountain of our present love. And how 
much sweeter, Constance, will be honours to you, if we thus 
win them, — sanctified as they will be by the sacrifices we have 
made; by the thought of the many hours in which we de- 
sponded, yet took consolation from each other; by the thought 
how we sweetened mortifications by sympathy, and made even 
the lowest successes noble by the endearing associations with 



GODOLnilN. 81 

which we allied them! How much sweeter to you will be 
such honours than those which you might command at once, 
but accompanied by a cold heart; rendered wearisome because 
won with ease and low because undignified by fame! Oh, 
Constance! am I not heard? Have not love, nature, sense, 
triumphed? " 

As he spoke, he had risen gently, and wound his arms 
around her not reluctant form ; her head reclined upon his 
bosom; her hand was surrendered to his; and his kiss stole 
softly and unchidden to her cheek. At that instant, the fate 
of both hung on a very hair. How different might the lot, 
the character, of each have been, had Constance's lips pro- 
nounced the words that her heart already recorded! And 
she might have done so; but as she raised her eyes, the same 
object that had before affected Godolphiu came vividly upon 
her, and changed, as by an electric shock, the whole current 
of her thoughts. Full and immediately before her was the 
picture of her father. The attitude there delineated, so strik- 
ing at all times, seemed to Constance at that moment more 
than ever impressive, and even awful in the livinfjness of its 
command. It was the face of Vernon in the act of speech, of 
warning, of reproof; such as she had seen it often in private 
life; such as she had seen it in his bitter maledictions on his 
hollow friends at the close of his existence; nay, such as she 
had seen it — only more fearful, and ghastly with the hues of 
(^eath — in his last hours; in those hours in which he had 
pledged her to the performance of his revenge, and bade her 
live not for love but the memory of her sire. 

With the sight of that face rushed upon her the dark and 
solemn recollections of that time and of that vow. The weak- 
ness of love vanished before the returning force of a senti- 
ment nursed through her earliest years, fed by her dreams, 
strengthened by her studies, and hardened by the daring ener- 
gies of a nature lofty yet fanatical, into the rule, the end, nay, 
the very religion of life! She tore herself away from the sur- 
prised and dismayed Godolphin; she threw herself on her 
knees before the picture; her lips moved rapidly; the rapid 
and brief prayer for forgiveness was over, and Constance rose 

6 



82 GODOLPHIN. 

a new being. She turned to Godolphin, and, lifting her arm 
towards the picture, as she regarded, with her bright and 
kindling eyes, the face of her lover, she said, — 

" As you think now, thought he whose voice speaks to you 
from the canvas; he, who pursued the path that you" would 
tread ; who, through the same toil, the same pursuit, that you 
would endure, used the same powers and the same genius you 
would command; he, who won — what you might win also at 
last — the smile of princes, the trust of nobles, the shifting 
and sandy elevation which the best, the wisest, and greatest 
statesmen in this country, if unbacked by a sordid and cabal- 
ling faction, can alone obtain, — he warns you from that 
hollow distinction, from its wretched consummation. Oh, 
Godolphin ! " she continued, subdued, and sinking from a 
high-wrought but momentary paroxysm, uncommon to her 
collected character, " oh, Godolphin ! I saw that man dying, 
deserted, lonely, cursed by his genius, ruined by his pros- 
perity. I saw him dying — die — of a broken and trampled 
heart. Could I doom another victim to the same course and 
the same perfidy and the same fate? Could I, with a silent 
heart, watch by that victim; could I, viewing his certain 
doom, elate him with false hopes? No, no! fly from me, — 
from the thought of such a destiny. Marry one who can 
bring you wealth, and support you with rank; then be ambi- 
tious if you will. Leave me to fulfil my doom, — my vow; 
and to think, however wretched I may be, that I have not in- 
flicted a permanent wretchedness on you." 

Godolphin sprang forward; but the door closed upon his 
eyes ; and he saw Constance — as Constance Vernon — no 
more. 



GODOLPHIN. 83 



CHAPTER XIX. 

A RAKE AND EXQUISITE OF THE BEST (wORST) SCHOOL. — A 
CONVERSATIOX OX A THOUSAND MATTERS. THE DECLEN- 
SION OF THE "SUI PROFUSUS" INTO THE " ALIENI APPE- 
TENS." 

There was, in the day I now refer to, a certain house in 
Chesterfield Street, Mayfair, which few young men anxious 
for the ddat of society passed without a wish for the acquaint- 
ance of the inmate. To that small and dingy mansion, with 
its verandas of dusky green and its blinds perpetually drawn, 
there attached an interest, a consideration, and a mystery. 
Thither, at the dusk of night, were the hired carriages of 
intrigue wont to repair, and dames to alight, careful seem- 
ingly of concealment, yet wanting, perhaps, even a reputa- 
tion to conceal. Few, at the early hours of morn, passed that 
street on their way home from some glittering revel without 
noticing some three or four chariots in waiting, or without 
hearing from within the walls the sounds of protracted fes- 
tivity. That house was the residence of a man who had never 
done anything in public, and yet was the most noted person- 
age in "Society:" in early life, the all-accomplished Love- 
lace! in later years mingling the graces with the decayed 
heart and the want of principle of a Grammont. Feared, 
contemned, loved, hated, ridiculed, honoured, the very genius, 
the very personification, of a civilized and profligate life 
seemed embodied in Augustus Saville. Hitherto we have 
spoken of, let us now describe him. 

Born to the poor fortunes and equivocal station of cadet in 
a noble but impoverished house, he had passed his existence 
in a round of lavish, but never inelegant, dissipation. Un- 
like other men, whom yoiith and money and the flush of 
health and aristocratic indulgence allure to follies which 
shock the taste as well as the morality of the wise, Augustus. 



84 GODOLPHIN. 

Saville had never committed an error which was not var- 
nished by grace, and limited by a profound and worldly discre- 
tion. A systematic votary of pleasure, no woman had ever 
through him lost her reputation or her sphere, — whether it 
was that he corrupted into fortunate dissimulation the minds 
that he betrayed into guilt, or whether he chose his victims 
with so just a knowledge of their characters and of the cir- 
cumstances round them, that he might be sure the secrecy 
maintained by himself would scarcely be divulged elsewhere. 
All the world attributed to Augustus Saville the most various 
and consummate success in that quarter in which success is 
most envied by the lighter part of the world; yet no one 
could say exactly who, amongst the many he addressed, had 
been the object of his triumph. The same quiet and yet 
victorious discretion waited upon all he did. Never had he 
stooped to win celebrity from horses or from carriages; noth- 
ing in his equipages showed the ambition to be distinguished 
from another; least of all did he affect that most displeasing 
of minor ostentations, that offensive exaggeration of neatness, 
that outre simplicity, which our young nobles and aspiring 
bankers so ridiculously think it hon ton to assume. No har- 
ness industriously avoiding brass ; no liveries pretending to 
the tranquillity of a gentleman's dress; no panels disdaining 
the armorial attributes of which real dignity should neither 
be ashamed nor proud, converted plain taste into a display of 
plainness. He seldom appeared at races, and never hunted; 
though he was profound master of the calculations in the 
first, and was, as regarded the second, allowed to be one of 
the most perfect masters of horsemanship in his time. So, 
in his dress, while he chose even sedulously what became 
him most, he avoided the appearance of coxcombry, by a dis- 
regard to minutiae. He did not value himself on the perfec- 
tion of his boot, and suffered a wrinkle in his coat without 
a sigh; yet even the exquisites of the time allowed that no 
one was more gentleman-like in the tout- ensemble; and while 
he sought by other means than dress to attract, he never even 
in dress offended. Carefully shunning the character of the 
professed wit or the general talker, he was yet piquant, 



GODOLPHIN. 85 

shrewd, and animated to the few persons whom he addressed, 
01- with whom he associated; and though he had refused all 
offers to enter public life, he was sufficiently master of the 
graver subjects that agitated the times to impress even those 
practically engaged in them with a belief in his information 
and his talents. 

But he was born poor; and yet he had lived for nearly 
thirty years as a rich man! What was his secret? — he had 
lived upon others. At all games of science he played with a 
masterly skill; and in those wherein luck preponderates, 
there are always chances for a cool and systematic calcu- 
lation. He had been, indeed, suspected of unfair play; but 
the charge had never cooled the eagerness with which he had 
been courted. With far better taste, and in far higher esti- 
mation than Brummell, he obtained an equal though a more 
secret sway. Every one was desirous to know him : without 
his acquaintance, the young debutant felt that he wanted the 
qualification to social success; by his intimacy, even vulgar- 
ity became the rage. It was true that, as no woman's dis- 
grace was confessedly traced to him, so neither was any 
man's ruin — save only in the doubtful instance of the unfor- 
tunate Johnstone. He never won of any person, however 
ardent, more than a certain portion of his fortune, — the rest 
of his undoing Saville left to his satellites; nay, even those 
who had in reality most reason to complain of him never per- 
ceived his due share in their impoverishment. It was com- 
mon enough to hear men say, "Ah, Saville, I wish I had 
taken your advice, and left off while I had yet half my for- 
tune ! " They did not accurately heed that the first half was 
Saville's, because the first half had excited, not ruined them. 

Besides this method of making money, so strictly social, 
Saville had also applied his keen intellect and shrewd sense 
to other speculations. Cheap houses, cheap horses, fluctua- 
tions in the funds, all descriptions of property (except per- 
haps stolen goods), had passed under his earnest attention; 
and in most cases such speculations had eminently succeeded. 
He was therefore now, in his middle age, and still unmar- 
ried, a man decidedly wealthy; having, without ever playing 



86 GODOLPIIIX. 

the miser, without ever stinting a luxury or denying a wish, 
turned nothing into something, poverty into opulence. 

It was noon; and Saville was slowly finishing his morning 
repast, and conversing with a young man stretched on a sofa 
opposite in a listless attitude. The room was in perfect "keep- 
ing with the owner: there was neither velvet nor gilding nor 
buJd nor marquetrie — all of which would have been inconsis- 
tent with the moderate size of the apartment. But the fur- 
niture was new, massive, costly, and luxurious without the 
ostentation of luxury. A few good pictures, and several ex- 
quisite busts and figures in bronze, upon marble pedestals, 
gave something classic and graceful to the aspect of the room. 
Annexed to the back drawing-room, looking over Lord Ches- 
terfield's gardens, a small conservatory, filled with rich ex- 
otics, made the only feature in the apartment that might 
have seemed, to a fastidious person, effeminate or unduly 
voluptuous. 

Saville himself was about forty-seven years of age : of a 
person slight and thin, without being emaciated; a not un- 
graceful, though habitual stoop, diminished his height, which 
might be a little above the ordinary standard. In his youth 
he had been handsome ; but in his person there was now little 
trace of any attraction beyond that of a manner remarkably soft 
and insinuating: yet in his narrow though high forehead, his 
sharp aquiline nose, gray eye, and slightly sarcastic curve of 
lip, something of his character betrayed itself. You saw, or 
fancied you saw, in them the shrewdness, the delicacy of tact; 
the consciousness of duping others; the subtle and intuitive, 
yet bland and noiseless penetration into the characters around 
him, which made the prominent features of his mind. And, 
indeed, of all qualities, dissimulation is that which betrays 
itself the most often in the physiognomy. A fortunate thing, 
that the long habit of betraying should find at times the index 
in which to betray itself. 

"But you don't tell me, my dear Godol plain," said Saville, 
as he broke the toast into his chocolate, — "you don't tell me 
how the world emploj'ed itself at Rome. Were there any of 
the true calibre there, — steady fellows, yet ardent, like my- 



GODOLPHIN. 87 

self; men who make us feel our strength and put it forth, 
with whom we cannot dally nor idle, who require our coolness 
of head, clearness of memory, ingenuity of stratagem, — in a 
word, men of my art, the art of play: were there any 
such? " 

"Not many, but enough for honour," said Godolphin; "for 
myself, I have long forsworn gambling for profit," 

" Ah, I always thought you wanted that perseverance which 
belongs to strength of character. And how stand your re- 
sources now, — sufficient to recommence the world here with 
credit and iclat ? " 

"Ay, were I so disposed, Saville. But I shall return to 
Italy. Within a month hence, I shall depart." 

"What! and only just arrived in town! An heir in 
possession! " 

"Of what?" 

" The reputation of having succeeded to a property, the ex- 
tent of which, if wise, you will tell to no one ! Are you so 
young, Godolphin, as to imagine that it signifies one crumb 
of this bread what be the rent-roll of your estate, so long as 
you can obtain credit for any sum to which you are pleased 
to extend it? Credit! beautiful invention! — the moral new 
world to which we fly when banished from the old. Credit! 
— the true charity of Providence, by which they who other- 
wise would starve live in plenty, and despise the indigent 
rich. Credit! — admirable system, alike for those who live 
on it and the wiser few who live by it. Will you borrow 
some money of me, Godolphin? " 

"At what percentage? " 

"Why, let me see: funds are low; I '11 be moderate. But 
stay; be it with you as I did with George Sinclair. You 
shall have all you want, and pay me with a premium, when 
you marry an heiress. Why, man, you wince at the word 
' marry ' ! " 

"'T is a sore subject, Saville: one that makes a man think 
of halters." 

"You are right, — I recognize my young pupil. Your old 
play-writers talked nonsense when they said men lost liberty 



88 GODOLPHIN. 

of persoa by marriage. Men lose liberty, but it is the liberty 
of the mind. We cease to be independent of the world's 
word, when we grow respectable with a wife, a fat butler, 
two children, and a family coach. It makes a gentleman 
little better than a grocer or a king! But you have -seen 
Constance Vernon. Why, out on this folly, Godolphin ! You 
turn away. Do you fancy that I did not penetrate your weak- 
ness the moment you mentioned her name ; still less, do you 
fancy, my dear young friend, that I, who have lived through 
nearly half a century, and know our nature, and the whole 
thermometer of our blood, think one jot the worse of you for 
forming a caprice — or a passion, if you will — for a woman 
who would set an anchoret, or, what is still colder, a worn- 
out debauchee, on fire? Bah! Godolphin, I am wiser than 
you take me for. And I will tell you more. For your sake, 
I am happy that you have incurred already this, our common 
folly (which we all have once in a life), and that the fit is 
over. I do not pry into your secrets, — I know their delicacy. 
I do not ask which of you drew back; for, to have gone for- 
ward, to have married, would have been madness in both. 
Nay, it was an impossihilitij : it could not have happened to 
niy pupil, — the ablest, the subtlest, the wisest of my pupils. 
But, however it was broken off, I repeat that I am glad it 
happened. One is never sure of a man's wisdom till he has 
been really and vainly in love. You know what that moral- 
izing lump of absurdity, Lord Edouard, has said in the 
'Julie,' — 'The path of the passions conducts us to phi- 
losophy ! ' It is true, very true : and now that the path has 
been fairly trod, the goal is at hand. Now, I can confide in 
your steadiness ; now, I can feel that you will run no chance 
in future of over-appreciating that bauble, AVoman. You 
will beg, borrow, steal, and exchange or lose the jewel, with 
the same delicious excitement, coupled with the same steady 
indifference, with which we play at a more scientific game, 
and for a more comprehensive reward. I say more compre- 
hensive reward : for how many women may we be able to buy 
by a judicious bet on the odd trick ! " 

"Your turn is sudden," said Godolphin, smiling; "and 



GODOLPHIN. 89 

there is some justice in your reasoning. The fit is over; and 
if ever I can be wise, I have entered on wisdom now. But 
talk of this no more." 

"I will not," said Saville, whose unerring tact had reached 
just the point where to stop, and who had led Godolphin 
through just that vein of conversation, half sentimentalizing, 
half sensible, all profligate, which seldom fails to win the ear 
of a man both of imagination and of the world. "I will not; 
and, to vary the topic, I will turn egotist, and tell you my 
adventures." 

With this, Saville began a light and amusing recital of his 
various and singular life for the last three years. Anecdote, 
jest, maxim, remark, interspersed, gave a zest and piquancy 
to the narration. An accomplished roite always affects to 
moralize; it is a part of his character. There is a vague and 
shrewd sentiment that pervades his viorale and his system. 
Frequent excitement, and its attendant relaxation; the con- 
viction of the folly of all pursuits; the insipidity of all life; 
the hollowness of all love; the faithlessness in all ties; the 
disbelief in all worth, — these consequences of a dissipated 
existence on a thoughtful mind produce some remarkable, 
while they make so many wretched, characters. They col- 
oured some of the most attractive prose among the French, 
and the most fascinating verse in the pages of Byron. It 
might be asked, by a profane inquirer (and 1 have touched on 
this before), what effect a life nearly similar — a life of lux- 
ury, indolence, lassitude, profuse, but heartless love — im- 
parted to the deep and touching wisdom in his page, whom 
we consider the wisest of men, and who has left us the most 
melancholy of doctrines? 

It was this turn of mind that made Saville's conversation 
peculiarly agreeable to Godolphin in his present humour; and 
the latter invested it, from his own mood, with a charm 
which in reality it wanted. For, as I shall show in Godol- 
phin what deterioration the habits of frivolous and worldly 
life produce on the mind of a man of genius, I show only in 
Saville the effect they produce on a man of sense. 

"Well, Godolphin," said Saville, as he saw the former rise 



90 GODOLPHIN. 

to depart; "you will at least dine with me to-day, — a punctual 
eight. I think I can promise you an agreeable evening. The 
Linettini and that dear little Fanny Millinger (your o\& flame) 
are coming; and I have asked old Stracey, the poet, to say bons 
mots for them. Poor old Stracey! He goes about to all his 
former friends and fellow -liberals, boasting of his favour witli 
the Great, and does not see that we only use him as we would 
a puppet-show or a dancing-dog." 

"What folly," said Godolphin, "it is in any man of genius 
(not also of birth) to think the Great of this country can 
possibly esteem him! Nothing can equal the secret enmity 
with which dull men regard an intellect above their compre- 
hension. Party politics, and the tact, the shifting, the com- 
monplace that Party politics alone require, — these they 
can appreciate; and they feel respect for an orator, even 
though he be not a county member, for he can assist them 
in their paltry ambition for place and pension: but an 
author or a man of science — the rogues positively jeer at 
him!" 

"And yet," said Saville, "how few men of letters perceive 
a truth so evident to us, so hackneyed even in the conversa- 
tions of society ! For a little reputation at a dinner-table, for 
a coaxing note from some titled demirep affecting the De 
Stael, they forget not only to be glorious but even to be re- 
spectable. And this, too, not only for so petty a gratification, 
but for one that rarely lasts above a London season. We allow 
the low-born author to be the lion this year, but we dub him 
a bore the next. We shut our doors upon his twice-told jests, 
and send for the Prague minstrels to sing to us after dinner 
instead." 

"However," said Godolphin, "it is only poets you find so 
foolish as to be deceived by you. There is not a single prose 
writer of real genius so absurd." 

"And why is that?" 

"Because," replied Godolphin, philosophizing, "poets ad- 
dress themselves more to women than men; and insensibly 
they acquire the weaknesses which they are accustomed to 
address. A poet whose verses delight the women will be 



GODOLPHIN. 91 

found, if we closely analyze his character, to be very like a 
woman himself." 

"You don't love poets? " said Saville. 

"The glory of old has departed from them, — I mean less 
from their pages than their minds. We have plenty of beau- 
tiful poets, but how little poetry breathing of a great soul ! " 

Here the door opened, and a Mr. Glosson was announced. 
There entered a little, smirking, neat-dressed man, prim as a 
lawyer or a house-agent. 

"Ah, Glosson, is that you?" said Saville, with something 
like animation; "sit down, my good sir, — sit down. Weill 
well! [rubbing his hands] what news? what news?" 

" Why, Mr. Saville, I think we may get the land from old 

. He has the right of the job. I have been with him all 

this morning. He asks £6,000 for it." 

" The rinconscionable dog ! He got it from the crown for 
two." 

"Ah, very true, — very true: but you don't see, sir, — you 
don't see, that it is well worth nine. Sad times, sad 
times: jobs from the crown are growing scarcer every day, 
Mr. Saville." 

"Humph! that's all a chance, a speculation. Times are 
bad indeed, as you say : no money in the market ; go, Glosson, 
offer him five; your percentage shall be one per cent higher 
than if I pay six thousand, and shall be counted up to the 
latter sum." 

"He, he, he! sir! " grinned Glosson; "you are fond of your 
joke, Mr. Saville." 

"Well, now; what else in the market? Never mind my 
friend : Mr. Godolphin — Mr. Glosson ; now all gene is over ; 
proceed, —proceed." 

Glosson hummed and bowed and hummed again, and then 
glided on to speak of houses and crown lands and properties 
in Whales, and places at court (for some of the subordinate 
posts at the palace were then — perhaps are now — regular 
matter of barter) ; and Saville, bending over the table, with 
his thin delicate hands clasped intently, and his brow denot- 
ing his interest, and his sharp shrewd eye fixed on the agent, 



92 GODOLPHIN. 

iurnislied to the contemplative Godolphin a picture whicli he 
did not fail to note, to moralize on, to despise ! 

What a spectacle is that of the prodigal rake, hardening 
and sharpening into the grasping speculator! 



CHAPTER XX. 

FANNY MILLINGER ONCE MORE. LOVE. WOMAN. BOOKS. 

A HUNDRED TOPICS TOUCHED ON THE SURFACE. GO" 

DOLPHIn's STATE OF MIND MORE MINUTELY EXAMINED. 

THE DINNER AT SAVILLE's. 

GoDOLPHiN went to see and converse with Fanny Millinger. 

She was still unmarried, and still the fashion. There was 
a sort of allegory of real life, in the manner in which, at cer- 
tain epochs, our Idealist was brought into contact with the 
fair actress of ideal creations. There was, in short, some- 
thing of a moral in the way these two streams of existence — 
the one belonging to the Actual, the other to the Imaginary — 
flowed on, crossing each other at stated times. Which was 
the more really imaginative, — the life of the stage, or that of 
the world's stage? 

The gay Fanny was rejoiced to welcome back again her 
early lover. She ran on, talking of a thousand topics, with- 
out remarking the absent mind and musing eye of Godolphin, 
till he himself stopped her somewhat abruptly, — 

"Well, Fanny, well, and what do you know of Saville? 
You have grown intimate with him, eh? We shall meet at 
his house this evening." 

"Oh, yes, he is a charming person in his little way; and 
the only man who allows me to be a friend without dreaming 
of becoming a lover. Now that 's what I like. We poor ac- 
tresses have so much would-be love in the course of our lives, 
that a little friendship now and then is a novelty which other 
and soberer people can never appreciate. On reading ' Gil 



GODOLPHIN. 93 

Bias ' the otiier day — I am no great reader, as you may re- 
member — I was struck by that part in which the dear Santil- 
lane assures us that there was never any love between him 
and Laura the actress. I thought it so true to nature, so 
I^robable, that they should have formed so strong an intimacy 
tor each other, lived in the same house, had every opportu- 
nity for love, yet never loved. And it was exactly because 
she was an actress and a light good-for-nothing creature that 
it so happened ; the very multiplicity of lovers prevented her 
falling in love; the very carelessness of her life, poor girl, 
rendered a friend so charming to her. It would have spoiled 
the friend to have made him an adorer; it would have turned 
the rarity into the every-day character. Xow, so it is with 
me and Saville; I like his wit, he likes my good temper. We 
see each other as often as if we were in love ; and yet I do not 
believe it even possible that he should ever kiss my hand. 
After all," continued Fanny, laughing, "love is not so neces- 
sary to us women as people think. Fine writers say, ' Oh, men 
have a thousand objects, women but one ! ' That 's nonsense, 
dear Percy; women have their thousand objects too. They 
have not the Bar, but they have the milliner's shop; they 
can't fight, but they can sit by the window and embroider a 
work-bag; they don't rush into politics, but they plunge their 
souls into love for a parrot or a lap-dog. Don't let men flatter 
themselves ; Providence has been just as kind in that respect 
to one sex as to the other: our objects are small, yours great; 
but a small object may occupy the mind just as much as the 
loftiest." 

"Ours great! pshaw!" said Godolphin, who was rather 
struck with Fanny's remarks; "there is nothing great in 
those professions which man is pleased to extol. Is sellish- 
ness great? Are the low trickery, the organized lies of the 
Bar, a great calling? Is the mechanical slavery of the soldier 
— fighting because he is in the way of fighting, without know- 
ing the cause, without an object, save a dim, foolish vanity 
which he calls glory, and cannot analyze — is that a great aim 
and vocation? Well: the senate! look at the outcry which 
wise men make against the loathesome corruption of that 



94 GODOLPIIIK. 

arena; then look at the dull hours, the tedious talk, the 
empty boasts, the poor and flat rewards, and tell me where 
is the greatness? No, Fanny! the embroidered work-bag and 
the petted parrot afford just as great — morally great — occu- 
pations as those of the Bar, the army, the senate. It is only 
the frivolous who talk of frivolities; there is nothing frivo- 
lous; all earthly occupations are on a par, — alike impor- 
tant if they alike occupy; for to the wise all are poor and 
valueless." 

"I fancy you are very wrong," said the actress, pressing 
her pretty Angers to her forehead, as if to understand him; 
"but I cannot tell you why, and I never argue. I ramble on 
in my odd way, casting out my shrewd things without de- 
fending them if any one chooses to quarrel with them. What 
I do I let others do. My maxim in talk is my maxim in life. 
I claim liberty for myself, and give indulgence to others." 

"I see," said Godolphin, "that you have plenty of books 
about you, though you plead not guilty to reading. Do j^ou 
learn your philosophy from them, — for I think you have con- 
tracted a vein of reflection since we parted which I scarcely 
recognize as an old characteristic." 

"Why," answered Fanny, "though I don't read, I skim. 
Sometimes I canter through a dozen novels in a morning. I 
am disappointed, I confess, in all these works; I want to see 
more real knowledge of the world than they ever disjAay. 
They tell us how Lord Arthur looked, and Lady Lucy dressed, 
and Avhat was the colour of those curtains, and these eyes, and 
so forth; and then the better sort, perhaps, do also tell us 
what the heroine felt as well as wore, and try with might and 
main to pull some string of the internal machine; but still I 
am not enlightened, not touched. I don't recognize men and 
women; they are puppets with holiday phrases: and I tell 
you what, Percy, these novelists make the last mistake you 
would suppose them guilty of, — they have not romance enough 
in them to paint the truths of society. Old gentlemen say 
novels are bad teachers of life, because they make it too ideal; 
quite the reverse : novels are too trite ! too superficial ! Their 
very talk about love, and the fuss they make about it, show 



GODOLPHIN". 95 

how shallow real romance is witli them; for they say nothing 
new ou it, and real romance is forever striking out new- 
thoughts.' Am I not right, Percy? Xo! life, be it worldly 
as it may, has a vast deal of romance in it. Every one of us 
(even poor I) have a mine of thoughts and fancies and wishes, 
that books are too dull and commonplace to reach : the heart 
is a romance in itself." 

"A philosophical romance, my Fanny; full of mysteries 
and conceits and refinements, mixed up with its deeper pas- 
sages. But how came you so wise?" 

"Thank you!" answered Fanny, with a profound courtesy. 
'•The fact is — though you, as in duty bound, don't perceive 
it — that I am older than I was when we last met. I reflect 
where I then felt. Besides, the stage fills our heads with a 
half sort of wisdom, and gives us that strange melange of 
shrewd experience and romantic notions which is, in fact, the 
real representation of nine human hearts out of ten. Talking 
of books, I want some one to write a novel which shall be a 
metaphysical ' Gil Bias ; ' which shall deal more with the 
mind than Le Sage's book, and less with the actions; which 
shall make its hero the creature of the world, but a different 
creation, though equally true; which shall give a faithful 
picture in the character of one man of the aspect and the 
effects of our social system, — making that man of a better 
sort of clay than the amusing lacquey was, and the produce 
of a more artificial grade of society. The book I mean would 
be a sadder one than Le Sage's, but equally faithful to life." 

" And it would have more of romance, if I rightly understand 
what you mean? " 

''Precisely: romance of idea as well as incident, — natural 
romance. By the way, how few know what natural romance 
is : so that you feel the ideas in a book or play are true and 
faithful to the characters they are ascribed to, why mind 
whether the incidents are probable? Yet common readers 
only go by the incidents ; as if the incidents in three-fourths 
of Shakspeare's plays were even ordinarily possible! But 
people have so little nature in them that they don't know 
what is natural ! " 



06 GODOLPHIN. 

Thus Fanny ran on, in no very connected manner; string- 
ing together those remarks which, unless I am mistaken, 
show how much better an uneducated, clever girl, whose very 
nature is a quick percei^tion of art, can play the critic .than 
the pedants who assume the office. 

But it was only for the moment that the heavy heart of 
Godolphin could forget its load. It was in vain that he 
sought to be amused while yet smarting under the freshness 
of regret. A great shock had been given to his nature ; he 
had loved against his will; and as we have seen, on his re- 
turn to the Priory, he had even resolved on curing himself of 
a passion so unprofitable and unwise. But the jealousy of a 
night had shivered into dust a prudence which never of right 
belonged to a very ardent and generous nature: that jealousy 
was soothed, allayed; but how fierce, how stunning was the 
blow that succeeded it! Constance had confessed love, and 
yet had refused him — forever! Clear and noble as to herself 
her motives might seem in that refusal, it was impossible 
that they should appear in the same light to Godolphin. 
Unable to penetrate into the effect which her father's death- 
bed and her own oath had produced on the mind of Constance; 
how indissolubly that remembrance had luiited itself with all 
her schemes and prospects for the future ; how marvellously, 
yet how naturally, it had converted worldly ambition into a 
sacred duty, — unable, I say, to comprehend all these various 
and powerful and governing motives, Godolphin beheld in her 
refusal only the aversion to share his slender income, and the 
desire for loftier station. He considered, therefore, that sor- 
row was a tribute to her unworthy of himself; he deemed it a 
part of his dignity to strive to forget. That hallowed senti- 
ment which, in some losses of the heart, makes it a duty to 
remember, and preaches a soothing and soft lesson from the 
very text of regret, was not for the Avrung and stricken soul 
of Godolphin, He only strove to dissipate his grief, and shut 
out from his mental sight the charmed vision of the first, the 
only woman he had deeply loved. 

Godolphin felt, too, that the sole impulse which could have 
united the fast-expiring energy and enterprise of his youth 



GODOLPHIX. 97 

to the ambition of life was forever gone. With Constance — 
with the proud thoughts that belonged to her — the aspirings 
after earthly honours were linked, and with her were broken. 
He felt his old philosophy — the love of ease, the profound 
contempt for fame — close like the deep waters over those 
glittering hosts for whose passage they had been severed for 
a moment, whelming the crested and gorgeous visions forever 
beneath the wave ! Conscious of his talents — nay, swayed to 
and fro by the unquiet stirrings of no common genius — 
Godolphin yet foresaw that he was not henceforth destined to 
play a shining part in the crowded drama of life. His career 
was already closed; he might be contented, prosperous, happy, 
but never great. He had seen enough of authors, and of the 
thorns that beset the paths of literature, to experience none 
of those delusions which cheat the blinded aspirer into the 
wilderness of publication, — that mode of obtaining fame and 
hatred to which those who feel unfitted for more bustling con- 
cerns are impelled. Write he might: and he was fond (as 
disappointment increased his propensities to dreaming) of 
brightening his solitude with the golden palaces and winged 
shapes that lie glassed within the fancy, — the soul's fairy- 
land. But the vision with him was only evoked one hour to 
be destroyed the next. Happy had it been for Godolphin, 
and not unfortunate perhaps for the world, had he learned 
at that exact moment the true motive for human action which 
he afterwards, and too late, discovered. Happy had it been 
for him to have learned that there is an ambition to do good, 
— an ambition to raise the wretched as well as to rise. 

Alas ! either in letters or in politics, how utterly poor, bar- 
ren, and untempting is every path that points upward to the 
mockery of public eminence, when looked upon by a soul that 
has any real elements of wise or noble, unless we have an im- 
pulse within, which mortification chills not, — a reward with- 
out, which selfish defeat does not destroy. 

But, unblest by one friend really wise or good, spoilt by 
the world, soured by disappointment, Godolphin's very fac- 
ulties made him inert, and his very wisdom taught him to be 
useless. Again and again — as the spider in some cell where 

7 



98 GODOLPHIX. 

no winged insect ever wanders builds and rebuilds his mesh 
— the scheming heart of the Idealist v.'as doomed to weave 
net after net for those visions of the Lovely and the Perfect 
which can never descend to the gloom}' regions wherein mor- 
tality is cast. The most common disease to genius is n3'm- 
pholepsy, — the saddening for a spirit that the world knows 
not. Ah, how those outward disappointments which should 
cure only feed the disease ! 

The dinner at Saville's was gay and lively, as such enter- 
tainments with such participators usuall}^ are. If nothing in 
the world is more heavy than your formal banquet, nothing, 
on the other hand, is more agreeable than those well-chosen 
laissez-aller feasts at which the guests are as happily selected 
as the wines ; where there is no form, no reserve, no effort ; 
and people having met to sit still for a few hours are willing 
to be as pleasant to each other as if they were never to meet 
again. Yet the conversation in all companies not literary 
turns upon persons rather than things; and your wits learn 
their art only in the School for Scandal. 

"Only think, Fanny," said Saville, "of Clavers turning 
beau in his old age! He commenced with being a jockey; 
then he became an electioneerer; then a Methodist parson; 
then a builder of houses ; and now he has dashed suddenly up 
to London, rushed into the clubs, mounted a wig, studied an 
ogle, and walks about the Opera House swinging a cane, and, 
at the age of fifty-six, punching young minors in the side, and 
saying tremulously, ' We young fellows! ' " 

" He hires pages to come to him in the Park with three- 
cornered notes," said Fanny; "he opens each with affected 
nonchalance; looks full at the bearer, and cries aloud, ' Tell 
your mistress I cannot refuse her; ' then canters off, with the 
air of a man persecuted to death ! " 

"But did you see what an immense pair of whiskers Ches- 
ter has mounted? " 

"Yes," answered a Mr. de Lacy; "A saj^s he has cul- 
tivated them in order to ' plant out ' his ugliness." 

"But vy you no talk. Monsieur de Dauphin?" said the 
Linettini gently, turning to Percy; "you ver silent." 



GODOLPHIN. 99 

"Unhappily, I have been so long out of town, that these 
anecdotes of the day are caviare to me." 

"But so," cried Saville, "would a volume of French Me- 
moirs be to any one that took ic up for the first time ; yet the 
French Memoirs amuse one exactly as much as if one had 
lived with the persons written of. Now that ought to be the 
case with conversations upon persons. I flatter myself, Fanny, 
that you and I hit off characters so well by a word or two, 
that no one who hears us wants to know anything more about 
them." 

"I believe you," said Godolphin; "and that is the reason 
you never talk of yourselves." 

"Bah! Apropos of egoism, did you meet Jack Barabel in 
Rome? " 

"Yes, writing his travels. ' Pray,' said he to me (seizing 
me by the button) in the Colisseum, ' what do you think is the 
highest order of literary composition? ' ' Why, an epic, I 
fancy,' said I; 'or perhaps a tragedy, or a great history, or a 
novel like "Don Quixote." ' ' Pooh! ' quoth Barabel, looking 
important, ' there 's nothing so high in literature as a good 
book of travels ; ' then sinking his voice into a whisper and 
laying his finger wisely on his nose, he hissed out, ' / have a 
quarto, sir, in the press ! ' " 

"Ha, ha! " laughed Stracey, the old wit, picking his teeth, 
and speaking for tlie first time; "if you tell Barabel you have 
seen a handsome woman, he says, mysteriously frowning, 
'Handsome, sir! has she travelled? — answer me that! ' " 

"But have you seen Paulton's new equipage? Brown car- 
riage, brown liveries, brown harness, brown horses, while 
Paulton and his wife sit within dressed in brown cap-a-pie. 
The best of it is that Paulton went to his coachmaker, to or- 
der his carriage, saying, ' Mr. Houlditch, I am growing old, — 
too old to be eccentric any longer; I must have something re- 
markably plain; ' and to this hour Paulton goes brown-in^j; 
about the town, crying out to every one, 'Nothing like sim- 
plicity, believe me.' " 

"He discharged his coachman for wearing white gloves 
instead of brown," said Stracey. " * What do you mean, sir,' 



100 GODOLPHIN. 

cried he, * with your d — d showy vulgarities? Don't you 
see me toiling my soul out to be plain and quiet, and you 
must spoil all, by not being brown enough ! ' " 

"Ah, Godolphin, you seem pensive," whispered Fanny; 
"yet we are tolerably amusing, too." 

"My dear Fanny," answered Godolphin, rousing himself, 
" the dialogue is gay, the actors know their parts, the lights 
are brilliant; but — the scene — the scene cannot shift for 
me! Call it what you will, I am not deceived. I see the 
paint and the canvas, but — and yet, away these thoughts ! 
Shall I fill your glass, Fanny? " 



CHAPTER XXI. 

AN EVENT OF GREAT IMPORTANCE TO THE PRINCIPAL ACTORS 

IN THIS HISTORY. GODOLPHIN A SECOND TIME LEAVES 

ENGLAND. 

Godolphin was welcomed with enthusiasm by the London 
world. His graces, his manners, his genius, his hon ton, and 
his bonnes fortunes were the theme of every society. Verses 
imputed to him — some erroneously, some truly — were mys- 
teriously circulated from hand to hand; and every one envied 
the fair inspirers to whom they were supposed to be addressed. 

It is not my intention to reiterate the wearisome echo of 
novelists who descant on fashion and term it life. No de- 
scription of rose-coloured curtains and buhl cabinets; no 
miniature paintings of boudoirs and salons; no recital of con- 
ventional insipidities, interlarded with affected criticisms, 
and honoured by the name of dramatic dialogue, shall lend 
their fascination to these pages. Far other and far deeper 
aims are mine in stooping to delineate the customs and springs 
of polite life. The reader must give himself wholly up to 
me; he must prepare to go with me through the grave as 
through the gay, and unresistingly to thread the dark and 



GODOLPHIN. 101 

subtle interest which alone I can impart to these memoirs, 
or — let him close the book at once. I promise him novelty ; 
but it is not, when duly scanned, a novelty of a light and 
frivolous cast. 

But throughout that routine of dissipation in which he 
chased the phantom Forgetfulness, Godolphiu sighed for the 
time he had iixed on for leaving the scenes in which it was 
pursued. Of Constance's present existence he heard noth- 
ing; of her former triumphs and conquests he heard every- 
where. And when did he ever meet one face, however fair, 
which could awaken a single thought of admiration while 
hers was yet all faithfully glassed in his remembrance? I 
know nothing that so utterly converts society into "the gal- 
lery of pictures" as the recollection of one loved and lost. 
That recollection has but two cures, — Time and the hermi- 
tage. Foreigners impute to us the turn for sentiment; alas! 
there are no people who have it less. We seek forever after 
amusement; and there is not one popular prosebook in our 
language in which the more tender and yearning secrets of 
the heart form the subject-matter. The "Corinne" and the 
"Julie" weary us, or we turn them into sorry jests! 

One evening, a little before his departure from England — 
that a lingering and vague hope, of which Constance was the 
object, had considerably protracted beyond the allotted time 
— Godolphin was at a house in which the hostess was a rela- 
tion to Lord Erpingham. 

"Have you heard," asked Lady G , "that my cousin 

Erpingham is to be married?" 

"No, indeed; to whom?" said Godolphin, eagerly. 

"To Miss Vernon." 

Sudden as was the shock, Godolphin heard, and changed 
neither hue nor muscle. 

"Are you certain of this? " asked a lady present. 

"Quite: Lady Erpingham is my authority; 1 received the 
news from herself this very day." 

"And does she seem pleased with the match? " 

" Why, I can scarcely say, for the letter contradicts itself 
in every passage. Now, she congratulates herself on having 



102 GODOLPHIN. 

so charming a daughter-iu-law ; now, she suddenly stops short 
to observe what a pity it is that young men should be so pre- 
cipitate ! Now, she says what a great match it will be for her 
dear ward ! and now, what a happy one it will be for Erping- 
ham! In short, she does not know whether to be pleased or 
vexed; and that, pour dire vrai, is my case also." 

"Why, indeed," observed the former speaker, "Miss Ver- 
non has played her cards well. Lord Erpingham would have 
been a great match in himself, with his person and reputation. 
Ah, she was always an ambitious girl."' 

"And a proud one," said Lady G . "Well, I suppose 

Erpingham House will be the rendezvous to all the blues and 
wits and savans. Miss Vernon is another Aspasia, I hear." 

"I hate girls who are so designing," said the lady who 
spoke before, and had only one daughter, very ugly, who, at 
the age of thirty-five, was about to accept her first offer, and 
marry a younger son in the Guards. "I think she 's rather 
vulgar; for my part, I doubt if — I shall patronize her." 

"Well, what do yotc think of it, Mr. Godolphin? — you 
have seen Miss Vernon." 

Godolphin was gone. 

It was about ten days after this conversation that Godol- 
phin, waiting at a hotel in Dover the hour at which the 
packet set sail for Calais, took up the "Morning Post;" 
and the first passage that met his eye was the one which I 
transcribe : — 

" Marriage in High Life. — On Thursday last, at Wendover Castle, 
the Earl of Erpingham, to Constance, only daughter of the celebrated 
Mr. Vernon. The bride was dressed, etc." 

And then followed the trite, yet pompous pageantry of 
words, the sounding nothings, with which ladies who become 
countesses are knelled into marriage. 

"The dream is over!" said Godolphin mournfully, as the 
paper fell to the ground; and burying his face within his 
hands, he remained motionless till they came to announce the 
moment of departure. 

And thus Percy Godolphin left, for the second time, his 



GODOLPHIN. 103 

native shores. When we return to him, what changes will 
the feelings now awakened within him have worked in his 
character! The drops that trickle within the cavern harden, 
yet brighten into spars as they indurate. Nothing is more 
polished, nothing more cold, than that wisdom which is the 
work of former tears, of former passions, and is formed 
within a musing and solitary mind ! 



CHAPTER XXII. 

THE BRIDE ALONE. A DIALOGUE POLITICAL AND MATRIMO- 
NIAL. — Constance's genius for diplomacy. — the char- 
acter OF her assemblies. HER CONQUEST OVER LADY 

DELTILLE. 

"Bring me that book, place that table nearer, and leave 
me." 

The abigail obeyed the orders, and the young Countess of 
Erpingham was alone. Alone! what a word for a young and 
beautiful bride in the first months of her marriage ! Alone ! 
and in the heart of that mighty city in which rank and 
wealth — and they were hers — are the idols adored by 
millions. 

It was a room fancifully and splendidly decorated. Flowers 
and perfumes were, however, its chief luxury; and from the 
open window you might see the trees in the old Mall deepen- 
ing into the rich verdure of June. That haunt, too — a clas- 
sical haunt for London — was at the hour I speak of full of 
gay and idle life; and there was something fresh and joyous 
in the air, the sun, and the crowd of foot and horse that 
swept below. 

Was the glory gone from your brow, Constance, or the 
proud gladness from your eye? Alas! are not the blessings 
of the world like the enchanted bullets, — that which pierces 
our heart is united with the gift which our heart desired ! 



104 GODOLPHIN. 

Lord Erpingham entered the room. "Well, Constance," 
said he, "shall you ride on horseback to-day?" 

"I think not." 

" Then I wish you would call on Lady Delville. You. see 
Delville is of my party : we sit together. You should be very 
civil to her, and I did not think you were so the other 
night." 

"You wish Lady Delville to support your political interest; 
and, if I mistake not, you think her at present lukewarm? " 

"Precisely." 

" Then, my dear lord, will you place confidence in my dis- 
cretion? I promise you if you will leave me undisturbed in 
my own plans, that Lady Delville shall be the most devoted 
of your party before the season is half over; but then, the 
means will not be those you advise." 

"Why, T advise none." 

"Yes, civility, — a very poor policy." 

"D — n it, Constance! why, you would not frown a great 
person like Lady Delville into affection for us? " 

"Leave it to me." 

"Nonsense! " 

"My dear lord, only try. Three months is all I ask. 
You will leave the management of politics to me ever after- 
wards! I was born a schemer. Am I not John Vernon's 
daughter? " 

"Well, well, do as you will," said Lord Erpingham; "but 
I see how it will end. However, you will call on Lady 
Delville to-day?" 

"If you wish it, certainly." 

"I do." 

Lady Delville was a proud, great lady ; not very much liked 
and not so often invited by her equals as if she had been 
agreeable and a flirt. 

Constance knew with whom she had to treat. She called 
on Lad}' Delville that day. Lady Delville was at home; a 
pretty and popular Mrs. Trevor was with her. 

Lady Delville received her coolly, — Constance was haugh- 
tiness itself. 



GODOLPHIX. 105 

"You go to the Duchess of Daubigny's to-night?" said 
Lady Delville, in the course of their broken conversation. 

"Indeed I do not. I like agreeable society. It shall be 
my object to form a circle that not one displeasing person 
shall obtain access to. Will you assist me, my dear Mrs. 
Trevor?" — and Constance turned, with her softest smile, to 
the lady she addressed. 

Mrs. Trevor was flattered ; Lady Delville drew herself up. 

"It is a small party at the duchess's," said the latter; 
"merely to meet the Duke and Duchess of C ." 

" Ah, few people are capable of giving a suitable entertain- 
ment to the royal family." 

"But surely none more so than the Duchess of Daubigny, — 
her house so large, her rank so great ! " 

" These are but poor ingredients towards the forming of au 
agreeable party, " said Constance, coldly. " The mistake made 
by common minds is to suppose titles the only rank. Eoyal 
dukes love, above all other persons, to be amused ; and amuse- 
ment is the last thing generally provided for them." 

The conversation fell into other channels. Constance rose 
to depart. She warmly pressed the hand of Mrs. Trevor, 
whom she had only seen once before. 

"A few persons come to me to-morrow evening," said she; 
^^ do waive ceremony, and join us. I can promise you that 
not one disagreeable person shall be present, and that the 
Duchess of Daubigny shall write for an invitation and be 
refused." 

Mrs. Trevor accepted the invitation. 

Lady Delville was enraged beyond measure. Never was 
female tongue more bitter than hers at the expense of that 
insolent Lady Erpingham! Yet Lady Delville was secretly 
in grief; for the first time in her life, she was hurt at not 
having been asked to a party: and being hurt because she 
was not going, she longed most eagerly to go. 

The next evening came. Erpingham House was not large, 
but it was well adapted to the description of assembly its 
beautiful owner had invited. Statues, busts, pictures, books, 
scattered or arranged about the apartments, furnished matter 



106 GODOLPHIN. 

for intellectual couversatiou, or gave at least an intellectual 
air to the meeting. 

About a Lundred persons were present. They were selected 
from the most distinguished ornaments of the time, — musi- 
cians, painters, authors, orators, fine gentlemen, dukes, 
princes, and beauties. One thing, however, was impera- 
tively necessary in order to admit them, — the profession of 
liberal opinions. No Tory, however wise, eloquent, or beau- 
tiful, could, that evening, have obtained the sesame to those 
apartments. 

Constance never seemed more lovely, and never before was 
she so winning. The coldness and the arrogance of her man- 
ner had wholly vanished. To every one she spoke; and to 
every one her voice, her manner, were kind, cordial, familiar, 
but familiar with a soft dignity that heightened the charm. 
Ambitious not only to please but to dazzle, she breathed into 
her conversation all the grace and culture of her mind. They 
who admired her the most were the most accomplished 
themselves. 

Now exchanging with foreign nobles that brilliant trifling 
of the world in which there is often so much penetration, 
wisdom, and research into character; now with a kindling 
eye and animated cheek commenting, with poets and critics, 
on literature and the arts; now, in a more remote and quiet 
corner, seriously discussing, with hoary politicians, those 
affairs in which even they allowed her shrewdness and her 
grasp of intellect; and combining with every grace and every 
accomplishment a rare and dazzling order of beauty, — we 
may readily imagine the sensation she created, and the sud- 
den and novel zest which so splendid an Armida must have 
given to the tameness of society. 

The whole of the next week, the party at Erpingham House 
was the theme of every conversation. Each person who had 
been there had met the lion he had been most anxious to see. 
The beauty had conversed with the poet, who had charmed 
her; the young debutant in science had paid homage to the 
great professor of its loftiest mysteries; the statesman had 
thanked the author who had defended his measures ; the au- 



GODOLPHIN. 107 

thor had been delighted with the compliment of the states- 
man. Every one then agreed that, while the highest rank in 
the kingdom had been there, rank had been the least attrac- 
tion; and those who before had found Constance repellent 
were the very persons who now expatiated with the greatest 
rapture on the sweetness of her manners. Then, too, every 
one who had been admitted to the coterie dwelt on the rarity 
of the admission; and thus, all the world were dying for an 
introduction to Erpingham House, — partly, because it was 
agreeable; principally, because it was difficult. 

It soon became a compliment to the understanding to say 
of a person, "He goes to Lady Erpingham's! " They who 
valued themselves on their understandings moved heaven and 
earth to become popular with the beautiful countess. Lady 
Delville was not asked ; Lady Delville was furious : she af- 
fected disdain, but no one gave her credit for it. Lord 
Erpingham teazed Constance on this point. 

"You see I was right, for you have afl'ronted Lady Del- 
ville. She has made Delville look coolly on me; in a few 
weeks he will be a Tory; think of that. Lady Erpingham! " 

"One month more," answered Constance, with a smile, 
"and you shall see," 

One night, Lady Delville and Lady Erpingham met at a 
large party. The latter seated herself by her haughty enemy; 
not seeming to heed Lady Delville's coolness, Constance en- 
tered into conversation with her. She dwelt upon books, 
pictures, music : her manner was animated, and her wit play- 
ful. Pleased, in spite of herself. Lady Delville warmed 
from her reserve. 

"My dear Lady Delville," said Constance, suddenly turning 
her bright countenance on the countess with an expression of 
delighted surprise, "will you forgive me? — I never dreamed 
before that you were so charming a person! I never conceal 
my sentiments; and I own with regret and shame that, till 
this moment, I had never seen in your mind — whatever I 
might in your person — those claims to admiration which 
were constantly dinned into my ear." 

Lady Delville actually coloured. 



108 GODOLPHIN. 

"Pray," continued Constance, "condescend to permit me 
to a nearer acquaintance. Will you dine with us on Thurs- 
day? — we shall have only nine persons beside yourself; but 
they are the nine persons whom I most esteem and admire." 

Lady Delville accepted the invitation. From that hour, 
Lady Delville — who had at first resented, from the deepest 
recess of her heart, Constance Vernon's accession to rank and 
wealth ; who, had Constance deferred to her early acquaint- 
ance, would have always found something in her she could 
have affected to despise,— from that hour, Lady Delville was 
the warmest advocate, and a little time after, the sincerest 
follower, of the youthful countess. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

AN INSIGHT INTO THE REAL GRANDE MONDE, BEING A 

SEARCH BEHIND THE ROSE-COLOURED CURTAINS. 

The time we now speak of was the most brilliant the Eng- 
lish world, during the last half century, has known. Lord 
Byron was in his brief and dazzling zenith ; De Stael was in 
London ; the Peace had turned the attention of rich idlers to 
social enjoyment and to letters. There was an excitement 
and a brilliancy and a spirituality about our circles, which 
we do not recognize now. Never had a young and ambitious 
woman — a beauty and a genius — a finer moment for the 
commencement of her power. It was Constance's early and 
bold resolution to push to the utmost — even to exaggera- 
tion— a power existing in all polished states, but now mostly 
in this,— the power of fashion! This mysterious and subtle 
engine she was eminently skilled to move according to her 
will. Her intuitive penetration into character, her tact, and 
her grace were exactly the talents Fashion most demands ; and 
they were at present devoted only to that sphere. The rude- 
ness that she mingled, at times, with the bewitching softness 



GODOLPHIN. 109 

and ease of manner she could command at others increased the 
effect of her power. It is much to intimidate as well as to 
win. And her rudeness in a very little while grew popular; 
for it was never exercised but on those whom the world 
loves to see humbled. Modest merit in any rank, and 
even insolence, if accompanied with merit, were always 
safe from her satire. It was the hauteur of foolish duch- 
esses or purse-proud roturiers that she loved, and scrupled 
not, to abase. 

And the independence of her character was mixed with 
extraordinary sweetness of temper. Constance could not be 
in a passion : it was oat of her nature. If she was stung, she 
could utter a sarcasm ; but she could not frown or raise her 
voice. There was that magic in her, that she was always 
feminine. She did not stare young men out of countenance; 
she never addressed them by their Christian names; she 
never flirted, never coquetted : the bloom and flush of modesty 
was yet all virgin upon her youth. She, the founder of a new 
dynasty, avoided what her successors and contemporaries have 
deemed it necessary to incur. She was the leader of fashion; 
but — it is a miraculous union — she was respectable ! 

At this period, some new dances were brought into Eng- 
land. These dances found much favour in the eyes of several 
great ladies young enough to dance them. They met at each 
other's houses in the morning to practise the steps. Among 
these was Lady Erpingham; her house became the favourite 
rendezvous. 

The young Marquess of Dartington was one of the little' 
knot. Celebrated for his great fortune, his personal beauty, 
and his general success, he resolved to fall in love with Lady 
Erpingham. He devoted himself exclusively to her; he joined 
her in the morning in her rides, in the evening in her gaye- 
ties. He had fallen in love with her? — yes! Did he love 
her? — not the least. But he was excessively idle! — what 
else could he do? 

Constance early saw the attentions and designs of Lord 
Dartington. There is one difficulty in repressing advances in 
great society, — one so easily becomes ridiculous by being a 



110 GODOLPHIX. 

prude. But Constance dismissed Lord Partington with great 
dexterity. This was the occasion. 

One of the apartments in Erpingham House communicated 
with a conservatory. In this conservatory Constance " was 
alone one morning, when Lord Dartington, who had entered 
the house with Lord Erpingham, joined her. He was not a 
man who could ever become sentimental; he was rather the 
gay lover, — rather the Don Gaolor than the Amadis ; but 
he was a little abashed before Constance. He trusted, how- 
ever, to his fine eyes and his good complexion; plucked up 
courage ; and, picking a flower from the same plant Constance 
was tending, said, — • 

"I believe there is a custom in some part of the world to 
express love by flowers. May I, dear Lady Erpingham, trust 
to this flower to express what I dare not utter? " 

Constance did not blush nor look confused, as Lord Dart- 
ington had hoped and expected. One who had been loved by 
Godolphin was not likely to feel much agitation at the gal- 
lantry of Lord Dartington; but she looked gravely in his face, 
paused a little before she answered, and then said, with a 
smile that abashed the suitor more than severity could possi- 
bly have done, — ■ 

"My dear Lord Dartington, do not let us mistake each 
other. I live in the world like other women, but I am not 
altogether like them. Not another word of gallantry to me 
alone, as you value my friendship. In a crowded room, pay 
me as many compliments as you like. It will flatter my van- 
ity to have you in my train. And now, just do me the favour 
to take these scissors and cut the dead leaves off that plant." 

Lord Dartington, to use a common phrase, *' hummed and 
hawed." He looked, too, a little angry. An artful and 
shrewd politician, it was not Constance's wish to cool the 
devotion, though she might the attachment, of a single mem- 
ber of her husband's party. With a kind look — but a look 
so superior, so queenlike, so free from the petty and coquet- 
tish condescension of the sex, that the gay lord wondered 
from that hour how he could ever have dreamed of Constance 
as of certain other ladies — she stretched her hand to him. 



GODOLPHIX. Ill 

"We are friends, Lord Dartington? — and now we know 
each other, we shall be so always." 

Lord Dartington bowed confusedly over the beautiful hand 
he touched; and Constance, walking into the drawing-room, 
sent for Lord Erpingham on business. Dartington took his 
leav6. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

THE MARRIED STATE OF COXSTAXCE. 

Constance, Countess of Erpingham, was young, rich, lovely 
as a dream, worshipped as a goddess. Was she happy; and 
was her whole heart occupied with the trifles that surrounded 
her? 

Deep within her memory was buried one fatal image that 
she could not exorcise. The reproaching and mournful coun- 
tenance of Godolphin rose before her at all times and seasons. 
The charm of his presence no other human being could renew. 
His eloquent and noble features, living and glorious with 
genius and with passion; his sweet deep voice; his conversa- 
tion, so rich with mind and knowledge, and the subtle deli- 
cacy with which he applied its graces to some sentiment 
dedicated to her (delicious flattery, of all flatteries the most 
attractive to a sensitive and intellectual woman!), — these 
occurred to her again and again, and rendered all she saw 
around her flat, wearisome, insipid. Nor was this deep-seated 
and tender weakness the only serpent — if I may use so con- 
fused a metaphor — in the roses of her lot. 

And here I invoke the reader's graver attention. The fate 
of women in all the more polished circles of society is emi- 
nently unnatural and unhappy. The peasant and his dame 
are on terms of equality, — equality even of ambition; no 
career is open to one and shut to the other : equality even of 
hardship, and hardship is employment; no labour occupies 
the whole energies of the man but leaves those of the woman 



112 GODOLPHIN. 

unemployed. Is this the case with the wives in a higher 

station, the wives of the lawyer, the merchant, the senator, 

the noble? There, the men have their occupations; and the 
women (unless, like poor Fanny, work-bags and parrots- can 
employ them) none. They are idle. They employ the imagi- 
nation and the heart. They fall in love and are wretched; 
or they remain virtuous, and are either wearied by an eternal 
monotony or they fritter away intellect, mind, character, in 
the minutest frivolities,— frivolities being their only refuge 
from stagnation. Yes, there is one very curious curse for 
the sex which men don't consider! Once married, the more 
aspiring of them have no real scope for ambition ; the ambi- 
tion gnaws away their content, and never finds elsewhere 
wherewithal to feed on. 

This was Constance's especial misfortune. Her lofty and 
restless and soaring spirit pined for a sphere of action, and 
ballrooms and boudoirs met it on every side. One hope she 
did indeed cherish; that hope was the source of her intrigu- 
ings and schemes, of her care for seeming trifles, the waste 
of her energies on seeming frivolities. This hope, this ob- 
ject, was to diminish, to crush, not only the party which had 
forsaken her father, but the power of that order to which she 
belonged herself; which she had entered only to humble. 
But this hope was a distant and chill vision. She was too 
rational to anticipate an early and effectual change in our 
social state, and too rich in the treasures of mind to be the 
creature of one idea. Satiety — the common curse of the 
great — crept over her day by day. The powers within her 
lay stagnant, the keen intellect rusted in its sheath. 

"How is it," said she to the beautiful Countess of , 

"that you seem always so gay and so animated; that with all 
your vivacity and tenderness, you are never at a loss for occu- 
pation? You never seem weary — ennur/4e — why is this?" 

"I will tell you," said the pretty countess, archly; "I 
change my lovers every month." Constance blushed, and 
asked no more. 

Many women in her state, influenced by contagious exam- 
ple, wearied by a life in which the heart had no share ; with- 



GODOLPHIX. 113 

out cliilclren, without a guide; assailed and wooed on all 
sides, in all shapes, — many women might have ventured, if 
not into love, at least into coquetry. But Constance re- 
mained as bright and cold as ever,— "the unsunned snow! " 
It might be, indeed, that the memory of Godolphin preserved 
her safe from all lesser dangers. The asbestos once conquered 
by fire can never be consumed by it; but there was also an- 
other cause in Constance's very nature, — it was pride! 

Oh, if men could but dream of what a proud woman en- 
dures in those caresses Avliich humble her, they would not 
wonder why proud women are so difficult to subdue. This 
is a matter on which we all ponder much, but we dare not 
write honestly upon it. But imagine a young, haughty, guile- 
less beauty, married to a man whom she neither loves nor 
honours; and so far from that want of love rendering her 
likely to fall hereafter, it is more probable that it will make 
her recoil from the very name of love. 

About this time the Dowager Lady Erpingham died, — an 
event sincerely mourned by Constance, and which broke the 
strongest tie that united the young countess to her lord. 
Lord Erpingham and Constance, indeed, now saw but little of 
each other. Like most men six feet high, with large black 
whiskers, the earl was vain of his person; and like most rich 
noblemen, he found plenty of ladies who assured him he was 
irresistible. He had soon grown angry at the unadmiring and 
calm urbanity of Constance; and, living a great deal with 
single men, he formed liaisons of the same order as they do. 
He was, however, sensible that he had been fortunate in the 
choice of a wife. His political importance the wisdom of 
Constance had quadrupled, at the least; his house she had 
rendered the most brilliant in London, and his name the most 
courted in the lists of the peerage. Though munificent, she 
was not extravagant; though a beauty, she did not intrigue; 
neither, though his inconstancy was open, did she appear 
jealous; nor, whatever the errors of his conduct, did she ever 
disregard his interest, disobey his wishes, or waver from the 
smooth and continuous sweetness of her temper. Of such a 
wife Lord Erpingham could not complain : he esteemed her, 

8 



114 GODOLPHIN. 

praised her, asked her advice, and stood a little in awe of 
her. 

Ah, Constance! had you been the daughter of a noble or a 
peasant, had you been the daughter of any man but John. Ver- 
non, what a treasure beyond price, without parallel, would 
that heart, that beauty, that genius, have been! 



CHAPTER XXV. 

THE PLEASURE OF RETALIATING nUMILlATION". CONSTANCe's 

DEFENCE OP FASHION. REMARKS ON FASHION. GODOL- 

PHIN's WHEREABOUT. FANNY MILLINGER's CHARACTER 

OF HERSELF. WANT OF COURAGE IN MORALISTS. 

It was a proud moment for Constance when the Duchess of 
Winstoun and Lady Margaret Midgecombe wrote to her, wor- 
ried her, beset her, for a smile, a courtesy, an invitation, or a 
ticket to Almack's. 

They had at first thought to cry her down ; to declare that 
she was plebeian, mad, bizarre, and a blue. It was all in 
vain. Constance rose every hour. They struggled against 
the conviction, but it would not do. The first person who 
confounded them with a sense of their error was the late King, 
then Regent; he devoted himself to Lady Erpingham for a 
whole evening, at a ball given by himself. From that hour 
they were assured they had been wrong: they accordingly 
called on her the next day. Constance received them with 
the same coldness she had always evinced; but they went 
away declaring they never saw any one whose manners were 
so improved. They then sent her an invitation! she refused 
it; a second! she refused; a third, begging her to fix the day! 
she fixed the day, and disappointed them. Lord bless us ! how 
sorry they were, how alarmed, how terrified ! — their dear 
Lady Erpingham must be ill! they sent every day for the 
next week to know how she was! 



GODOLPHIN. 115 

"Why," said Mrs. Trevor to Lady Erpingham, — "why do 
you continue so cruel to these poor people? I know they 
were very impertinent, and so forth, once; but it is surely 
wiser and more dignified now to forgive; to appear uncon- 
scious of the past: people of the world ought not to quarrel 
with each other." 

"You are right, and yet you are mistaken," said Constance; 
"I do forgive, and I don't quarrel; but my opinion, my con- 
tempt, remain the same, or are rather more disdainful than 
ever. These people are not worth losing the luxury we all 
experience in expressing contempt. I continue, therefore, 
but quietly and without affectation, to indulge that luxury. 
Besides, I own to you, my dear Mrs. Trevor, I do think that 
the mere insolence of titles must fairly and thoroughly be put 
down, if we sincerely wish to render society agreeable ; and 
where can we find a better example for punishment than the 
Duchess of Winstoun? " 

"But, my dear Lady Erpingham, you are thought insolent; 

your friend. Lady , is called insolent, too, — are you sure 

the charge is not merited? " 

"I allow the justice of the charge; but you will observe, 
ours is not the insolence of rank : we have made it a point to 
protect, to the utmost, the poor and unfriended of all circles. 
Are we ever rude to governesses or companions or poor writers 
or musicians? When a man marries below him, do we turn 
our backs on the poor wife? Do we not, on the contrary, 
lavish our attention on her, and throw round her equivocal 
and joyless state the protection of Fashion? Xo, no! our in- 
solence is Justice ! it is the chalice returned to the lips 
which prepared it; it is insolence to the insolent; reflect, and 
you will allow it." 

The fashion that Constance set and fostered was of a gen- 
erous order ; but it was not suited to the majority ; it was cor- 
rupted by her followers into a thousand basenesses. In vain 
do we make a law, if the general spirit is averse to the law, 
Constance could humble the great, could loosen the links of 
extrinsic rank, could undermine the power of titles ; but that 
was all! She could abase the proud, but not elevate the gen- 



116 GODOLPHIN. 

eral tone: for one slavery she only substituted another, — 
people hugged the chains of Fashion as before they hugged 
those of Titular Arrogance. 

Amidst the gossip of the day Constance heard much of 
Godolphin, and all spoke of him with interest,— even those 
who could not comprehend his very intricate and peculiar 
character. Separated from her by lands and seas, there 
seemed no danger in allowing herself the sweet pleasure of 
hearing his actions and his mind discussed. She fancied she 
did not permit herself to love him ; she was too pure not to 
start at such an idea; but her mind was not so regulated, so 
trained and educated in sacred principle, that she forbade 
herself the luxury to remember. Of his present mode of life 
she heard little. He was traced from city to city, from shore 
to shore ; from the haughty noblesse of Vienna to the gloomy 
shrines of Memphis, by occasional report, and seemed to tarry 
long in no place. This roving and unsettled life, which se- 
cretly assured her of her power, suffused his image in all 
tender and remorseful dyes. Ah, where is that one person 
to be envied, could we read the heart? 

The actress had heard incidentally from Saville of Godol- 
phin's attachment to the beautiful countess. She longed to 
see her ; and when, one night at the theatre, she was informed 
that Lady Erpingham was in the Lord Chamberlain's box 
close before her, she could scarcely command her self-posses- 
sion sufficiently to perform with her wonted brilliancy of 
effect. 

She was greatly struck by the singular nobleness of Lady 
Erpingham's face and person; and Godolphin rose in her es- 
timation from the justice of the homage he had rendered to 
so fair a shrine. What a curious trait, by the by, that is in 
women, — their exaggerated anxiety to see one who has been 
loved by the man in whom they themselves take interest : and 
the manner in which the said man rises or falls in their esti- 
mation, according as they admire, or are disappointed in, the 
object of his love. 

"And so," said Saville, supping one night with the actress, 
"you think the world does not overlaud Lady Erpingham? " 



GODOLPHIN. 117 

"Xo; she is what Medea would have been, if innocent, — 
full of majesty, and yet of sweetness. It is the face of a 
queen of some three thousand years back. I could have wor- 
shipped her." 

"My little Fanny, you are a strange creature. JNIethinks 
you have a dash of poetry in you." 

"Xobody who has not written poetry could ever read my 
character," answered Fanny, with naivete, yet with truth. 

"Yet you have not much of the ideal about you, prettj- 
one." 

"No; because I was so early thrown on myself, that I was 
forced to make independence my chief good. I soon saw that 
if I followed my heart to and fro, wherever it led me, I should 
be the creature of every breath, the victim of every accident; 
I should have been the very soul of romance; lived on a 
smile, and died, perhaps, in a ditch at last. Accordingly, I 
set to work with my feelings, and pared and cut them down 
to a convenient compass. Happy for me that I did so! What 
would have become of me if, years ago, when I loved Go- 
dolphin, I had thrown the whole world of my heart upon 
him?" 

"Why, he has generosity; he would not have deserted 
you." 

"But I should have wearied him," answered Fanny; "and 
that would have been quite enough for me. But I did love 
him well, and purely — ah! you may smile! — and disinter- 
estedly. I was only fortified in my resolution not to love any 
one too much, by perceiving that he had affection but no sym- 
pathy for me. His nature was different from mine. I am 
woman in everything, and Godolphin is always sighing for a 
goddess ! " 

"I should like to sketch your character, Fanny. It is 
original, though not strongly marked. I never met with it 
in any book; yet it is true to your sex, and to the world." 

"Few people could paint me exactly," answered Fanny. 
" The danger is, that they would make too much or too little 
of me. But such as I am, the world ought to know what is 
so common, and, as you think, so undescribed." 



118 GODOLPHIN. 

Aud now, beautiful Constance, farewell for the present! I 
leave you surrounded by power and pomp and adulation. En- 
joy as you may that for which you sacrificed affection! 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

THE VISIONARY AND HIS DAUGHTER. — AN ENGLISHMAN, 
SUCH AS FOREIGNERS IMAGINE THE ENGLISH. 

We must now present the reader to characters very differ- 
ent from those which have hitherto passed before his eye. 

Without the immortal city, along the Appia Via, there 
dwelt a singular and romantic visionary, of the name of 
Volktman. He was by birth a Dane; and Nature had be- 
stowed on him that frame of mind which might have won 
him a distinguished career, had she placed the period of his 
birth in the eleventh century. Volktman was essentially a 
man belonging to the past time : the character of his enthu- 
siasm was weird and Gothic; with beings of the present day 
he had no sympathy; their loves, their hatreds, their politics, 
their literature, awoke no echo in his breast. He did not 
affect to herd with them ; his life was solitude, and its occu- 
pation study, — and study of that nature which every day 
unfitted him more and more for the purposes of existence. 
In a word, he was a reader of the stars, a believer in the 
occult and dreamy science of astrology. Bred up to the art 
of sculpture, he had early in life sought Rome, as the nurse 
of inspiration; but even then he had brought with him the 
dark and brooding temper of his northern tribe. The images 
of the classic world; the bright and cold and beautiful divini- 
ties, whose natures as well as shapes the marble simulation of 
life is so especially adapted to represent, spoke but little to 
Volktman's pre-occupied and gloomy imagination. Faithful 
to the superstitions and the warriors of the North, the love- 
liness and majesty of the southern creations but called forth 



GODOLPHIX. 119 

in him the desire to apply the principles by which they were 
formed to the embodying those stern visions which his hag- 
gard and dim fancies only could invoke. This train of inspir- 
ation preserved him, at least, from the deadliest vice in a 
worshipper of the arts, — commonplace. He was no servile 
and trite imitator; his very faults were solemn and command- 
ing. But before he had gained that long experience which 
can alone perfect genius, his natural energies were directed 
to new channels. In an illness which prevented his apply- 
ing to his art, he had accidentally sought entertainment in a 
certain work upon astrology. The wild and imposing theo- 
ries of the science — if science it may be called — especially 
charmed and invited him. The clear bright nights of his 
fatherland were brought back to his remembrance ; he recalled 
the mystic and unanalyzed impressions with which he had 
gazed upon the lights of heaven, and he imagined that the 
very vagueness of his feelings was a proof of the certainty of 
the science. 

The sons of the North are pre-eminently liable to be af- 
fected by that romance of emotion which the hushed and 
starry aspect of night is calculated to excite. The long- 
broken luxurious silence that, in their frozen climate, reigns 
from the going down of the sun to its rise ; the wandering 
and sudden meteors that disport, as with an impish life, 
along the noiseless and solemn heaven; the peculiar radiance 
of the stars; and even the sterile and severe features of the 
earth, which those stars light up with tlieir chill and ghostly 
serenity, serve to deepen the effect of the wizard tales which, 
are instilled into the ear of childhood, and to connect the 
less known and more visionary impulses of life with the in- 
fluences, or at least with the associations, of iS'ight and 
Heaven. 

To Volktman, more alive than even his countrymen are 
wont to be to superstitious impressions, the science on which 
he had chanced came with an all-absorbing interest and fasci- 
nation. He surrendered himself wholly to his new pursuit. 
By degrees the block and the chisel were neglected, and, 
though he still worked from time to time, he ceased to con- 



120 GODOLPHIX. 

sider the sculptor's art as the vocation of his life and the end 
of his ambition. Fortunately, though not rich, Volktman 
was not without the means of existence, nor even without the 
decent and proper comforts; so that he was enabled, as few 
men are, to indulge his ardour for unprofitable speculations, 
albeit to the exclusion of lucrative pursuits. It may be noted 
that when a man is addicted to an occupation that withdraws 
him from the world, any great affliction tends to confirm, with- 
out hope of cure, his inclinations to solitude. The world, 
distasteful in that it gave no pleasure, becomes irremediably 
hateful when it is coupled with the remembrance of pain. 
Volktman had married an Italian, a woman who loved him 
entirely, and whom he loved with that strong though unca- 
ressing affection common to men of his peculiar temper. Of 
the gay and social habits and constitution of her country, the 
Italian was not disposed to suffer the astrologer to dwell only 
among the stars. She sought, playfully and kindly, to attract 
him towards human society; and Volktman could not always 
resist — as what man earth-born can do? — the influence of 
the fair presider over his house and hearth. It happened, 
that on one day in which she peculiarly wished his attendance 
at some one of those parties in which Englishmen think the 
notion of festivity strange — for it includes conversation — 
Volktman had foretold the menace of some great misfortune. 
Uncertain, from the character of the prediction, whether to 
wish his wife to remain at home or to go abroad, he yielded 
to her wish, and accompanied her to her friend's house. A 
young Englishman lately arrived at Eome, and already cele- 
brated in the circles of that city for his eccentricity of life 
and his passion for beauty, was of the party. He appeared 
struck with the sculptor's wife; and in his attentions, Volkt- 
man, for the first and the last time, experienced the pangs of 
jealousy ; he hurried his wife away. 

On their return home, whether or not a jewel worn by the 
signora had attracted the cupidity of some of the lawless race 
who live through gaining, and profiting by, such information, 
they were attacked by two robbers in the obscure and ill- 
lighted suburb. Though Volktman offered no resistance, the 



GODOLPHIX. 121 

manner of their assailants Avas rude and violent. The signora 
was fearfully alarmed; her shrieks brought a stranger to their 
assistance ; it was the English youth who had so alarmed the 
jealousy of Volktman. Accustomed to danger in his profes- 
sion of a gallant, the Englishman seldom, in those foreign 
lands, went from home at night without the protection of 
pistols. At the sight of firearms, the ruffians felt their cour- 
age evaporate ; they fled from their prey ; and the Englishman 
assisted Volktman in conveying the Italian to her home. 
But the terror of the encounter operated fatally on a delicate 
frame ; and within three weeks from that night Volktman was 
a widower. 

His marriage had been blessed with but one daughter, who 
at the time of this catastrophe was about eight years of age. 
His love for his child in some measure reconciled Volktman 
to life; and as the shock of the event subsided, he returned 
with a pertinacity which was now subjected to no interruption 
to his beloved occupations and mysterious researches. One 
visitor alone found it possible to win frequent ingress to his 
seclusion; it was the young Englishman. A sentiment of 
remorse at the jealous feelings he had experienced, and for 
which his wife, though an Italian, had never given him even 
the shadow of a cause, had softened into a feeling rendered 
kind by the associations of the deceased, and a vague desire 
to atone to her for an acknowledged error, the dislike he had at 
first conceived against the young man. This was rapidly con- 
firmed by the gentle and winniug manners of the stranger, by 
his attentions to the deceased, to whom he had sent an Eng- 
lish physician of great skill, and, as their acquaintance ex- 
panded, by the animated interest which he testified in the 
darling theories of the astrologer. 

It happened also that Volktman's mother had been the 
daughter of Scotch parents. She had taught him the English 
tongue; and it was the only language, save his own, which 
he spoke as a native. This circumstance tended greatly to 
facilitate his intercourse with the traveller; and he found 
in the society of a man ardent, sensitive, melancholy, and 
addicted to all abstract contemplation, a pleasure which, 



122 GODOLPHIN. 

among the keen but uncultivated intellects of Italy, he had 
never enjoyed. 

Frequently, then, came the young Englishman to the lone 
house on the Appia Via; and the mysterious and unearthly 
conversation of the starry visionary alforded to him, who had 
early learned to scrutinize the varieties of his kind, a strange 
delight, heightened by the contrast it presented to the worldly 
natures with which he usually associated, and the common- 
place occupations of a life in pursuit of pleasure. 

And there was one who, child as she was, watched the 
coming of that young and beautiful stranger with emotion 
beyond her years. Brought up alone; mixing, since her 
mother's death, with no companions of her age; catching 
dim and solemn glimpses of her father's wild but lofty specu- 
lations ; his books, filled with strange characters and imi)os- 
ing "words of mighty sound," open forever to her young and 
curious gaze, — it can scarce be matter of wonder that some- 
thing strange and unworldly mingled with the elements of 
character which Lucilla Volktman early developed, — a char- 
acter that was nature itself, yet of a nature erratic and bizarre. 
Her impulses she obeyed spontaneously, but none fathomed 
their origin. She was not of a quiet and meek order of mind; 
but passionate, changeful, and restless. She would laugh and 
weep without apparent cause, and the colour on her cheek 
never seemed for two minutes the same ; and the most fitful 
changes of an April heaven were immutability itself compared 
with the play and lustre of expression that undulated in her 
features and her wild, deep, eloquent eyes. 

Her person resembled her mind; it was beautiful, but the 
beauty struck you less than the singularity of its character. 
Her eyes were of a darkness that at night seemed black, but 
her hair was of the brightest and purest auburn; her com- 
plexion, sometimes pale, sometimes radiant even to the flush 
of a fever, was delicate and clear ; her teeth and mouth were 
lovely beyond all words ; her hands and feet were small to a 
fault; and as she grew up (for we have forestalled her age in 
this description) her shape, though wanting in height, was in 
such harmony and proportion, that the mind of the sculptor 



GODOLPHIN. 123 

would sometimes escape from the absorption of the astrologer, 
and Volktman would gaze upou her with the same admiration 
that he would have bestowed, in spite of the subject, on the 
goddess-forms of Phidias or Canova. But then, this beauty 
was accompanied with such endless variety of gesture, often 
so wild, though always necessarily graceful, that the eye 
ached for that repose requisite for prolonged admiration. 

When she was spoken to, she did not often answer to the 
purpose, but rather appeared to reply as to some interroga- 
tory of her own ; in the midst of one occupation, she would 
start up to another; leave that, in turn, undone, and sit down 
in silence lasting for hours. Her voice, in singing, was ex- 
quisitely melodious; she had, too, an intuitive talent for 
painting ; and she read all the books that came in her way 
with an avidity that bespoke at once the restlessness and the 
genius of her mind. 

This description of Lucilla must, I need scarcely repeat, 
be considered as applicable to her at some years distant from 
the time in which the young Englishman first attracted her 
childish but ardent imagination. To her, that face, with its 
regular and harmonious features, its golden hair, and soft, 
shy, melancholy aspect, seemed as belonging to a higher 
and brighter order of beings than those who, with exag- 
gerated lineaments and swarthy hues, surrounded and dis- 
pleased her. She took a strange and thrilling pleasure in 
creeping to his side, and looking up when unobserved at the 
countenance which in his absence she loved to imitate with 
her pencil by day, and to recall in her dreams at night. But 
she seldom spoke to him, and she shrank, covered with pain- 
ful blushes, from his arms, whenever he attempted to bestow 
on her those caresses which children are wont to claim as an 
attention. Once, however, she summoned courage to ask 
him to teach her English, and he complied. She learned 
that language with surprising facility; and as Volktman loved 
its sound she grew familiar with its difficulties by always 
addressing her father in a tongue which became inexpressibly 
dear to her. And the young stranger delighted to hear that 
soft and melodious voice, with its trembling, Italian accent, 



124 GODOLPHIN. 

make music from the nervous and masculine language of his 
native land. Scarce accountably to himself, a certain tender 
and peculiar interest in the fortunes of this singular and be- 
witching child grew up within him, — peculiar and not easily 
accounted for, in that it was not wholly the interest we feel 
in an engaging child, and yet was of no more interested nor 
sinister order. Were there truth in the science of the stars, 
I should say that they had told him her fate was to have 
affinity with his; and with that persuasion, something mys- 
terious and more than ordinarily tender entered into the 
affection he felt for the daughter of his friend. 

The Englishman was himself of a romantic character. He 
had been self-taught; and his studies, irregular though often 
deep, had given directions to his intellect frequently enthu- 
siastic and unsound. His imagination preponderated over 
his judgment; and any pursuit that attracted his imagination 
won his entire devotion, until his natural sagacity proved it 
deceitful. If at times, living as he did in that daily world 
which so sharpens our common-sense, he smiled at the per- 
severing fervour of the astrologer, he more often shared it; 
and he became his pupil in " the poetry of heaven, " with a 
secret but deep belief in the mysteries cultivated by his mas- 
ter. Carrying the delusion to its height, I fear that the 
enthusiast entered upon ground still more shadowy and 
benighted, — the old secrets of the alchemist, and perhaps 
even of those arcana yet more gloomy and less rational, were 
subjected to their serious contemplation; and night after 
night, they delivered themselves wholly up to that fearful 
and charmed fascination which the desire and effort to over- 
leap our mortal boundaries produce even in the hardest and 
best regulated minds. The train of thought so long nursed 
by the abstruse and solitary Dane was, perhaps, a better 
apology for the weakness of credulity than the youth and 
wandering fancy of the Englishman. But the scene around 
— not alluring to the one — fed to overflowing the romantic 
aspirations of the other. 

On his way home, as the stars (which night had been spent 
in reading) began to wink and fade, the Englishman crossed 



GODOLPHIN. 125 

the haunted Almo, renowned of yore for its healing virtues, 
and in whose stream the far-famed simulacrum (the image of 
Cybele), which fell from heaven, was wont to be laved with 
every coming spring: and around his steps, till he gained his 
home, were the relics and monuments of that superstition 
which sheds so much beauty over all tha.t, in harsh reasoning, 
it may be said to degrade ; so that his mind, always peculiarly 
alive to external impressions, was girt, as it were, with an 
atmosphere favourable both to the lofty speculation and the 
graceful credulities of romance. 

The Englishman remained at Eome, with slight intervals 
of absence, for nearly three years. On the night before the 
day in which he received intelligence of an event that re- 
called him to his native country, he repaired at an hour acci- 
dentally later than usual to the astrologer's abode. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

A COXVERSATIOX LITTLE APPEKTAIXIXG TO THE XIXETEEXTH 
CENTURY. RESEARCHES INTO HUMAN FATE. — THE PRE- 
DICTION. 

On entering the apartment, he found Lucilla seated on a 
low Stool beside the astrologer. She looked up when she 
heard his footsteps ; but her countenance seemed so dejected, 
that he turned involuntarily to that of Volktman for expla- 
nation. Yolktman met his gaze with a steadfast and mourn- 
ful aspect. 

" What has happened? " asked the Englishman. " You seem 
sad, — you do not greet me as usual." 

"I have been with the stars," replied the visionary. 

"They seem but poor company," rejoined the Englishman; 
"and do not appear to have much heightened your spirits." 

"Jest not, my friend," said Volktman; "it was for the loss 
of thee I looked sorrowful. I perceive that thou wilt take a 
journey soon, and that it will be of no pleasant nature." 



126 GODOLPIIIN. 

*' Indeed ! " answered the Englishman, smilingly. " I ask 
leave to question the fact: you know better than any man, 
how often, through an error in our calculations, through haste, 
even through an over-attention, astrological predictions are 
exposed to falsification; and at present I foresee so little 
chance of my quitting Rome that I prefer the earthly proba- 
bilities to the celestial." 

" My schemes are just, and the Heavens wrote their decrees 
in their clearest language," answered the astrologer. "Thou 
art on the eve of quitting Kome." 

"On what occasion? " 

The astrologer hesitated; the young visitor pressed the 
question. 

"The lord of the fourth house," said Volktman, reluctantly, 
" is located in the eleventh house. Thou knowest to whom 
the position portends disaster." 

"My father! " said the Englishman, anxiously, and turning 
pale; " I think that position would relate to him." 

"It doth," said the astrologer, slowly. 

"Impossible! I heard from him to-day; he is well. Let 
me see the figures." 

The young man looked over the mystic hieroglyphics of the 
art, inscribed on a paper that was placed before the vision- 
ary, with deep and scrutinizing attention. Without bewilder- 
ing the reader with those words and figures of weird sound 
and import which perplex the uninitiated, and entangle the 
disciple of astrology, I shall merely observe that there was 
one point in which the judgment appeared to admit doubt as 
to the signification. The Englishman insisted on the doubt: 
and a very learned and edifying debate was carried on be- 
tween pupil and master, in the heat of which all recollec- 
tion of the point in dispute (as is usual in such cases) 
evaporated. 

"I know not how it is," said the Englishman, "that I 
should give any credence to a faith which (craving your for- 
giveness) most men out of Bedlam concur, at this day, in 
condemning as wholly idle and absurd. For it may be pre- 
sumed that men only incline to some unpopular theory in 



GODOLPHIX. 127 

proportion as it flatters or favours them; and as for this 
theory of yours — of ours, if you will — it has foretold me 
nothing but misfortune." 

"Thy horoscope," replied the astrologer, "is indeed singu- 
lar and ominous: but, like my daughter, the exact minute 
(within almost a whole hour) of thy birth seems unknown; 
and however ingeniously we, following the ancients, have 
contrived means for correcting nativities, our predictions (so 
long as the exact period of birth is not ascertained) remain 
in my mind always liable to some uncertainty. Indeed, the 
surest method of reducing the supposed time to the true — 
that of 'Accidents ' — is but partially given, as in thy case; 
for, with a negligence that cannot be too severely blamed or 
too deeply lamented, thou hast omitted to mark down, or 
remember, the days on which accidents — fevers, broken 
limbs, etc. — occurred to thee ; and this omission leaves a 
cloud over the bright chapters of fate — " 

"Which," interrupted the young man, "is so much the 
happier for me, in that it allows me some loophole for 
hope." 

"Yet," renewed the astrologer, as if resolved to deny his 
friend any consolation, "thy character, and the bias of thy 
habits, as well as the peculiarities of thy person, — nay, 
even the moles upon thy skin, — accord with thy proposed 
horoscope." 

"Be it so!" said the Englishman, gayly. "You grant me, 
at least, the fairest of earthly gifts, — the happiness of pleas- 
ing that sex which alone sweetens our human misfortunes. 
That gift I would sooner have, even accompanied as it is, 
than all the benign influences without it." 

"Yet," said the astrologer, "shalt thou even there be met 
with affliction; for Saturn had the power to thwart the star 
Venus, that was disposed to favour thee, and evil may be the 
result of the love thou inspirest. There is one thing remark- 
able in our science, which is especially worthy of notice in 
thy lot. The ancients, unacquainted with the star of Her- 
schel, seem also scarcely acquainted with the character which 
the influence of that wayward and melancholy orb creates. 



128 GODOLPHIN. 

Thus, the aspect of Herschel neutralizes, in great measure, 
the boldness and ambition and pride of heart thou wouldst 
otherwise have drawn from the felicitous configuration of the 
stars around the Moon and Mercury at thy birth. That yearn- 
ing for something beyond the narrow bounds of the world, 
that love for revcry, that passionate romance, yea, thy very 
leaning, despite thy worldly sense, to these occult and starry 
mysteries, — all are bestowed on thee by this new and poten- 
tial planet." 

"And hence, I suppose," said the Englishman, interested 
(as the astrologer had declared) in spite of himself, "hence 
that opposition in my nature of the worldly and romantic; 
hence, with you, I am the dreaming enthusiast, but the in- 
stant I regain the living and motley crowd, I shake off the 
influence with ease, and become the gay pursuer of social 
pleasures." 

"Never at heart gay,'''' muttered the astrologer; "Saturn 
and Herschel make not sincere mirth-makers." The English- 
man did not hear or seem to hear him. 

"No," resumed the young man, musingly, "no! it is true 
that there is some counteraction of what, at times, I should 
have called my natural bent. Thus, I am bold enough, and 
covetous of knowledge, and not deaf to vanity; and yet I 
have no ambition. The desire to rise seems to me wholly un- 
alluring: I scorn and contemn it as a weakness. But what 
matters it? So much the happier for me if, as you predict, 
my life be short. But how, if so unambitious and so quiet of 
habit, how can I imagine that my death will be violent as 
well as premature ? " 

It was as he spoke that the young Lucilla, who, with fixed 
eyes and lips apart, had been drinking in their conversation, 
suddenly rose and left the room. They were used to her 
comings in and her goings out without cause or speech, and 
continued their conversation. 

" Alas ! " said the visionary, " can tranquillity of life or 
care or prudence preserve us from our destiny? No sign is 
more deadly, whether by accident or murder, than that which 
couples Hyleg with Orion and Saturn. Yet thou mayest pass 



GODOLPllIX. 129 

the year in which that danger is foretold thee ; and beyond 
that time peace, honour, good fortune, await thee. Better to 
have the menace of ill in early life than in its decline. Youth 
bears up against misfortune; but it withers the heart, and 
crushes the soul of age!" 

"After all," said the young guest, haughtily, "we must do 
our best to contradict the starry evils by our own internal 
philosophy. We can make ourselves independent of fate; 
that independence is better than prosperity ! " Then, chang- 
ing his tone, he added, "But you imagine that, by the power 
of other arts, we may control and counteract the prophecies 
of the stars — " 

" How meanest thou? " said the astrologer, hastily, " Thou 
dost not suppose that alchemy, which is the servant of the 
heavenly host, is their opponent?" 

"Xay," answered the disciple; "but you allow that we 
may be enabled to ward off evils, and to cure diseases, other- 
wise fatal to us, by the gift of Uriel and the charm of the 
Cabala? " 

"Surely," replied the visionary; "but then I opine that the 
discovery of these precious secrets was foretold to us by the 
Omniscient Book at our nativity; and, therefore, though the 
menace of evils be held out to us, so also is the probability of 
their correction or our escape. And I must own," pursued 
the enthusiast, "that, to me, the very culture of those divine 
arts hath given a consolation amidst the evils to which I have 
been fated ; so true seems it that it is not in the outer nature,, 
in the great elements, and in the bowels of the earth, but also' 
within ourselves, that we must look for the preparations, 
whereby we are to achieve the wisdom of Zoroaster and 
Hermes. We must abstract ourselves from passion and 
earthly desires. Lapped in a celestial revery, we must work 
out, by contemplation, the essence from the matter of things : 
nor can we dart into the soul of the Mystic World until we 
ourselves have forgotten the body; and by fast, by purity, 
and by thought have become, in the flesh itself, a living 
soul." 

Much more, and with an equal wildness of metaphysical 

9 



130 GODOLPHIN. 

eloquence, did the astrologer declare in praise of those arts 
condemned by the old Church; and it doth indeed appear 
from reference to the numerous works of the alchemists and 
magians yet extant, somewhat hastily and unjustly. - For 
those books all unite in dwelling on the necessity of virtue, 
subdued passions, and a clear mind, in order to become a for- 
tunate and accomplished cabalist, — a precept, by the way, 
not without its policy; for, if the disciple failed, the failure 
might be attributed to his own fleshy imperfections, not to 
any deficiency in the truth of the science. 

The young man listened to the visionary with an earnest 
and fascinated attention. Independent of the dark interest 
always attached to discourses of supernatural things more 
especially, we must allow, in the mouth of a fervent and rapt 
believer, there was that in the language and very person of 
the astrologer which inexpressibly enhanced the effect of the 
theme. Like most men acquainted with the literature of a 
country, but not accustomed to daily conversation with its 
natives, the English words and fashion of periods that oc- 
curred to Volktman were rather those used in books than in 
colloquy; and a certain solemnity and slowness of tone ac- 
companied with the frequent, almost constant use of the pro- 
noun singular, — the ^7io?^ and the thee, — gave a strangeness 
and unfamiliar majesty to his dialect that suited well with 
the subjects on which he so loved to dwell. He himself was 
lean, gaunt, and wan; his cheeks were drawn and hollow; 
and thin locks, prematurely bleached to gray, fell in disorder 
round high, bare temples, in which the thought that is not 
of this world had paled the hue and furrowed the surface. 
But, as may be noted in many imaginative men, the life that 
seemed faint and chill in the rest of the frame collected it- 
self, as in a citadel, within the eye. Bright, wild, and deep, 
the expression of those blue large orbs told the intense enthu- 
siasm of the mind within, and even somewhat thrillingly 
communicated a part of that emotion to those on whom they 
dwelt. No painter could have devised, nor even Volktman 
himself, in the fulness of his northern fantasy, have sculp- 
tured forth a better image of those pale and unearthly stu- 



GODOLPHIN. 131 

dents who, iu the darker ages, applied life and learning to 
one unhallowed vigil, the Hermes or the Gebir of the alche- 
mist's empty science, — dreamers, and the martyrs of their 
dreams. 

In the discussion of mysteries which to detail would only 
weary while it perplexed the reader, the enthusiasts passed 
the greater portion of the night; and when at length the Eng- 
lishman rose to depart, it cannot be denied that a solemn and 
boding emotion agitated his breast. 

"We have talked," said he, attempting a smile, "of things 
above this nether life; and here we are lost, uncertain. Qn 
one thing, however, we can decide, — life itself is encom- 
passed with gloom; sorrow and anxiety avv^ait even those 
upon whom the stars shed their most golden influence. We 
know not one day what the next shall bring ! — no ; I repeat 
it; no, — in spite of your scheme and your ephemeris and 
your election of happy moments. But, come what will, 
Volktman, come all that you foretell to me, — crosses in my 
love, disappointment in my life, melancholy in my blood, 
and a violent death in the very flush of my manhood, — me 
at least, me! my soul, my heart, my better part, you shall 
never cast down nor darken nor deject. I move in a certain 
and serene circle; ambition cannot tempt me above it, nor 
misfortune cast me below! " 

Volktman looked at the speaker with surprise and admira- 
tion; the enthusiasm of a brave mind is the only fire broader 
and brighter than that of a fanatical one. 

"Alas! my young friend," he said, as he clasped the hand 
of his guest, " I would to Heaven that my predictions may be 
wrong: often and often they have been erroneous," added he, 
bowing his head humbly; "they may be so in their reference 
to thee. So young, so brilliant, so beautiful too; so brave, 
yet so romantic of heart, I feel for all that may happen to 
thee, — ay, far, far more deeply than aught which may be 
fated to myself; for I am an old man now, and long inured 
to disappointment; all the greenness of my life is gone: even 
could I attain to the Grand Secret, the knowledge methinks 
would be too late. And, at my birth, my lot was portioned 



132 GODOLPIIIN. 

out unto me in characters so clear, that, while I have had time 
to acquiesce in it, I have had no hope to correct and change 
it. For Jupiter in Cancer, removed from the Ascendant, and 
not impedited of any other star, betokened me indeed some 
expertness in science, but a life of seclusion, and one that 
should bring not forth the fruits that its labour deserved. 
But there is so much in thy fate that ought to be bright and 
glorious, that it will be no common destiny marred, should 
the evil influences and the ominous seasons prevail against 
thee. But thou speakest boldly,— boldly, and as one of a 
high soul, though it be sometimes clouded and led astray. 
And I, therefore, again and again impress upon thee, it is 
from thine own self, thine own character, thine own habits, 
that all evil, save that of death, will come. Wear, then, I 
implore thee, wear in thy memory, as a jewel, the first great 
maxim of alchemist and magian, — ' Search thyself; cor- 
rect thyself; subdue thyself:' it is only through the 
lamp of crystal that the light will shine duly out." 

"It is more likely that the stars should err," returned the 
Englishman, " than that the human heart should correct itself 
of error: adieu! " 

He left the room, and proceeded along a passage that led to 
the outer door. Ere he reached it, another door opened sud- 
denly, and the face of Lucilla broke forth upon him. She 
held a light in her hand; and as she gazed on the English- 
man, he saw that her face was very pale, and that she had 
been weeping. She looked at him long and earnestly, and 
the look affected him strangely; he broke silence, which at 
first it appeared to him difficult to do. 

"Good-night, my pretty friend," said he: "shall I bring 
you some flowers to-morrow? " 

Lucilla burst into a wild eldrich laugh; and abruptly clos- 
ing the door, left him in darkness. 

The cool air of the breaking dawn came freshly to the 
cheek of our countryman ; yet, still, an unpleasant and heavy 
sensation sat at his heart. His nerves, previously weakened 
by his long commune with the visionary, and the effect it had 
produced, yet tingled and thrilled with the abrupt laugh and 



GODOLPHIN. 133 

meaning countenance of that strange girl, wlio differed so 
widely from all others of her years. The stars were growing 
pale and ghostly, and there was a mournful and dim haze 
around the moon. 

"Ye look ominously upon me," said he, half aloud, as his 
eyes fixed their gaze above; and the excitement of his spirit 
spread to his language, — "ye on whom, if our lore be faithful, 
the Most High hath written the letters of our mortal doom. 
And if ye rule the tides of the great deep, and the changes of 
the rolling year, what is there out of reason or nature in our 
belief that ye hold the same sympathetic and unseen influence 
over the blood and heart, which are the character (and the 
character makes the conduct) of man?" Pursuing his solilo- 
quy of thought, and finding reasons for a credulity that af- 
forded to him but little cause for pleasure or hope, the 
Englishman took his way to St. Sebastian's gate. 

There was, in truth, much in the traveller's character that 
corresponded Avith that which was attributed and destined to 
one to whom the heavens had given a horoscope answering to 
his own; and it was this conviction, rather than any acciden- 
tal coincidence in events, which had first led him to pore with 
a deep attention over the vain but imposing prophecies of 
judicial astrology. Possessed of all the powers that enable 
men to rise; ardent, yet ordinarily shrewd; eloquent, witty, 
brave, and, though not what may be termed versatile, possess- 
ing that rare art of concentrating the faculties which enables 
the possessor rapidly and thoroughly to master whatsoever 
once arrests the attention, he yet despised all that would 
have brought these endowments into full and legitimate dis- 
play. He lived only for enjoyment. A passionate lover of 
women, music, letters, and the arts, it was society, not the 
world, which made the sphere and end of his existence. Yet 
was he no vulgar and commonplace epicurean : he lived for 
enjoyment; but that enjo3'ment was mainly formed from ele- 
ments wearisome to more ordinary natures. Revery, con- 
templation, loneliness, were at times dearer to him than the 
softer and more Aristippean delights. His energies were 
called forth in society, but he was scarcely social. Trained 



134 GODOLPHIN. 

from his early boyhood to solitude, he was seldom weary of 
being alone. He sought the crowd, not to amuse himself, but 
to observe others. The world to him was less as a theatre on 
which he was to play a part than as a book in which he loved 
to decipher the enigmas of wisdom. He observed all that 
passed around him. No sprightly cavalier at any time, the 
charm that he exercised at will over his companions was that 
of softness, not vivacity. But amidst that silken blandness 
of demeanour, the lynx eye of Eemark never slept. He pene- 
trated character at a glance, but he seldom made use of his 
knowledge. He found a pleasure in reading men, but a fa- 
tigue in governing them. And thus, consummately skilled as 
he was in the science du monde, he often allowed himself to 
appear ignorant of its practice. Forming in his mind a beau- 
ideal of friendship and of love, he never found enough in the 
realities long to engage his affection. Thus with women he 
was considered fickle, and with men he had no intimate com- 
panionship. This trait of character is common with persons 
of genius ; and, owing to too large an overflow of heart, they 
are frequently considered heartless. There is always, how- 
ever, danger that a character of this kind should become with 
years what it seems, — what it soon learns to despise. Noth- 
ing steels the affections like contempt. 

The next morning an express from England reached the 
young traveller. His father was dangerously ill ; nor was it 
expected that the utmost diligence would enable the young 
man to receive his last blessing. The Englishman, appalled 
and terror-stricken, recalled his interview with the astrolo- 
ger. Nothing so effectually dismays us as to feel a confirma- 
tion of some idea of supernatural dread that has already 
found entrance within our reason; and of all supernatural 
belief, that of being compelled by a predecree, and thus 
being the mere tools and puppets of a dark and relentless 
fate, seems the most fraught at once with abasement and with 
horror. 

The Englishman left Rome that morning, and sent only 
a verbal and hasty message to the astrologer, announcing the 
cause of his departure. Volktman was a man of excellent 



GODOLPHIN. 135 

heart ; but one would scarcely like to inquire whether exulta- 
tion at the triumph of _his prediction was not with him a far 
more powerful sentiment than grief at the misfortune to his 
friend ! 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

THE YOUTH OF LUCILLA VOLKTMAN. — A MYSTERIOUS CON- 
VERSATION. THE RETURN OF ONE UNLOOKED FOR. 

Time went slowly on, and Lucilla grew up in beauty. The 
stranger traits of her character increased in strength, but per- 
haps in the natural bashfulness of maidenhood they became 
more latent. At the age of fifteen, her elastic shape had 
grown round and full, and the wild girl had already ripened 
to the woman. An expression of thought, when the play of 
her features was in repose, that dwelt upon her lip and fore- 
head, gave her the appearance of being two or three years 
older than she was; but again, when her natural vivacity 
returned, when the clear and buoyant music of her gay laugh 
rang out, or when the cool air and bright sky of morning sent 
the blood to her cheek and the zephyr to her step, her face 
became as the face of childhood, and contrasted with a singu- 
lar and dangerous loveliness the rich development of her 
form. 

And still was Lucilla Volktman a stranger to all that sa- 
voured of the Avorld; the company of others of her sex and age 
never drew forth her emotions from their resting-place : — 

" And Nature said, a lovelier flower 
Ou eartii was never sown : 



" Myself will to my darling be 
Both law and ini])ulse; and with me 

The girl, in rock and jdain. 
In earth and heaven, in glade and bower, 
Shall feel an overseeing power 

To kindle or restrain. 



136 GODOLPHIN. 

" The stars of midnight shall be dear 
To her ; and she shall lean her ear 

In many a secret place ; 
Where rivulets dance their wayward round, 
And beauty, born of murmuring sound. 

Shall pass into her face." ^ 

These lines liave occurred to me again and again, as I 
looked on the face of her to whom I have applied them. And 
remembering as I do its radiance and glory in her happier 
moments, I can scarcely persuade myself to notice the faults 
and heats of temper which at times dashed away all its lustre 
and gladness. Unrestrained and fervid, she gave way to the 
irritation or grief of the moment with a violence that would 
have terrified any one who beheld her at such times. But it 
rarely happened that the scene had its witness even in her 
father, for she fled to the loneliest spot she could find to in- 
dulge these emotions ; and perhaps even the agony they oc- 
casioned — an agony convulsing the heart and whole of her 
impassioned frame — took a sort of luxury from the solitn.ry 
and unchecked nature of its indulgence. 

Volktman continued his pursuits with an ardour that in- 
creased — as do all species of monomania — with increasing 
years ; and in the accidental truth of some of his predictions, 
he forgot the erroneous result of the rest. He corresponded 
at times with the Englishman, who, after a short sojourn in 
England, had returned to the Continent, and was now making 
a prolonged tour through its northern capitals. 

Very different, indeed, from the astrologer's occupations 
were those of the wanderer; and time, dissipation, and a ma- 
iurer intellect had cured the latter of his boyish tendency to 
studies so idle and so vain. Yet he always looked back with 
an undefined and unconquered interest to the period of his 
acquaintance with the astrologer; to their long and thrilling 
watches in the night season; to the contagious fervour of 
faith breathing from the visionary; his dark and restless ex- 
cursions into that remote science associated with the legends 
of eldest time, and of — 

1 Wordsworth. 



GODOLPHIX. 137 

" The crew, who, under names of old renown, 
Osiris, Isis, Orus, and their train. 
With monstrous shapes and sorceries, abused 
Fanatic Egypt and her priests." 

One night, four years after the last scene we have described 
in the astrologer's house, Volktman was sitting alone in his 
favourite room. Before him was a calculation on which the 
ink was scarcely dry. His face leaned on his breast, and he 
seemed buried in thought. His health had been of late gradu- 
ally declining; and it might be seen upon his worn brow and 
attenuated frame that death was already preparing to with- 
draw the visionary from a world whose substantial enjoyments 
he had so sparingly tasted. 

Lucilla had been banished from his chamber during the 
day. She now knew that his occupation was over, and en- 
tered the room with his evening repast; that frugal meal, 
common with the Italians, — the polenta (made of Indian corn), 
the bread and the fruits, which after the fashion of students, 
he devoured unconsciously, and would not have remembered 
one hour after whether or not it had been tasted! 

*'Sit thee down, child," said he to Lucilla, kindly, — "sit 
thee down." 

Lucilla obeyed, and took her seat upon the very stool on 
which she had been seated the last night on which the Eng- 
lishman had seen her, 

"I have been thinking," said Volktman, as he placed his 
hand on his daughter's head, " that I shall soon leave thee ; 
and I should like to see thee protected by another before my 
own departure." 

"Ah, Father," said Lucilla, as the tears rushed to her eyes, 
" do not talk thus ! indeed, indeed, you must not indulge in 
this perpetual gloom and seclusion of life. You promised to 
t-ike me with you some day this week to the Vatican. Do let 
it be to-morrow; the weather has been so fine lately; and who 
knows how long it may last? " 

"True," said Volktman; "and to-morrow will not, I think, 
be unfavourable to our stirring abroad, for the moon will be 
of the same age as at my birth, — an accident that thou wilt 



138 GODOLPHIX. 

note, my child, to be especially auspicious towards any 
enterprise." 

The poor astrologer so rarely stirred. from his home, that 
he did well to consider a walk of a mile or two in the. light 
of an enterprise. "I have wished," continued he, after a 
pause, "that I might see our English friend once more, — that 
is, ere long; for, to tell thee the truth, Lucilla, certain events 
happening unto him do, strangely enough, occur about the 
same time as that in which events equally boding will befall 
thee. This coincidence it was which contributed to make me 
assume so warm an interest in the lot of a stranger. I would 
I might see him soon." 

Lucilla' s beautiful breast heaved, and her face was covered 
with blushes : these were symjjtoms of a disorder that never 
occurred to the recluse. 

"Thou rememberest the foreigner?" asked Volktman, after 
a pause. 

" Yes, " said Lucilla, half inaudibly . 

" I have not heard from him of late : I will make question 
concerning him ere the cock crow." 

•' Nay, my father ! " said Lucilla, quickly : " not to-night ; 
you want rest, your eyes are heavy." 

" Girl, " said the mystic, " the soul sleepeth not, nor wanteth 
sleep; even as the stars, to which (as the Arabian saith) there 
is also a soul, wherewith an intent passion of our own doth 
make a union, so that we by an unslumbering diligence do 
constitute ourselves a part of the heaven itself, — even, I say, 
as the stars may vanish from the human eye nor be seen in 
the common day, though all the while their course is stopped 
not nor their voices dumb, even so doth the soul of man re- 
tire, as it were, into a seeming sleep and torpor; yet it work- 
eth all the same, and perhaps with a less impeded power, in 
that it is more free from common obstruction and trivial 
hindrance. And if I purpose to confer this night with the 
* Intelligence ' that ruleth earth and earth's beings concerning 
this stranger, it will not be by the vigil and the scheme, but 
by the very sleep which thou imaginest, in thy mental dark- 
ness, would deprive me of the resources of my art." 



GODOLPHIX. 139 

"Can you really, then, my father,'" said Lucilla, in a tone 
half anxious, half timid,— "can you really, at will, conjure 
up in your dreams the persons you wish to see; or draw, 
from sleep, any oracle concerning their present state?" 

"Of a surety," answered the astrologer; "it is one of the 
great — though not perchance the most gifted — of our 
endowments." 

" Can you teach me the method? " asked Lucilla, gravely. 

"All that relates to the art I can," rejoined the mystic: 
"but the chief and main power rests with thyself. For 
know, my daughter, that one who seeks the wisdom that is 
above the earth must cultivate and excite, with long labour 
and deep thought, his least earthly faculty." 

Here the visionary, observing that the countenance of 
Lucilla was stamped with a fixed attention, which she did 
not often bestow upon his metaphysical exordiums, paused 
for a moment; and then pursued the theme with the tone of 
one desirous of making himself at once as clear and impres- 
sive as the nature of an abstruse science would allow. 

" There are two things in the outer creation, which, accord- 
ing to the great Hermes, suffice for the operation of all that 
is wonderful and glorious, — Fire and Earth. Even so, my 
child, there are in the human mind two powers that affect all 
of which our nature is capable, — reason and imagination. 
i^'ow mankind — less wise in themselves than in the outer 
world — have cultivated, for the most part, but one of these 
faculties, and that the inferior and more passive, — reason. 
They have tilled the earth of the human heart, but suffered 
its fire to remain dormant, or waste itself in chance and frivo- 
lous directions. Hence the insufficiency of human knowledge. 
Inventions founded only on reason move within a circle from 
which their escape is momentary and trivial. When some 
few, endowed with a just instinct, have had recourse to the 
diviner element, imagination, thou wilt observe that they 
have used it only in the service of the lighter arts, and those 
chiefly disconnected from reason. Such is poetry and music, 
and other delicious fabrications of genius, that amuse men, 
soften men, but advance them not. They have — with but 



140 GODOLPHIN. 

rare exceptions — left this glorious and winged faculty ut- 
terly passive in the service of Philosophy. There, reason 
alone has been admitted, and imagination hath been care- 
fully banished, as an erratic and deceitful meteor.- Now 
mark me, child: I, noting this our error in early youth, did re- 
solve to see what might be effected by the culture of this re- 
nounced and maltreated element; and finding, as I proceeded 
in the studies that grew from this desire, by the occult yet 
guiding writings of the great philosophers of old, that they 
had forestalled me in this discovery, I resolved to learn from 
their experience by what means the imagination is best fos- 
tered, and, as it were, sublimed. 

*' Anxiously following their precepts — the truth of which 
soon appeared — I found that solitude, fast, intense revery 
upon the one theme on which we desired knowledge, were 
the true elements and purifiers of this glorious faculty. It 
was by these means and by this power that men so far behind 
us in lesser lore achieved, on the mooned plains of Chaldea 
and by the dark waters of Egypt, their penetration into the 
womb of Event; by these means and this power the solitaries 
of the Gothic time not only attained to the most intricate 
arcana of the stars, but to the empire of the spirits about, 
above, and beneath the earth, — a power, indeed, disputed by 
the presumptuous sophists of the present time, but of which 
their writings yet contain ample proof. Nay, by the con- 
stant feeding and impressing and moulding and refining and 
heightening the imaginative power, I do conceive that even 
the false prophets and the evil practitioners of the blacker 
cabala clomb into the power seemingly inconceivable, — the 
power of accomplishing miracles and prodigies, that to ap- 
pearance belie, but in truth verify, the course of nature. By 
this spirit within the flesh, we gvowfrom the flesh, and may 
see, and at length invoke the souls, of the dead, and receive 
warnings, and hear omens, and girdle our sleep with dreams. 

"Not unto me," continued the cabalist, in a lowlier tone, 
"have been vouchsafed all these gifts; for I began the art 
when the first fire of youth was dim within me ; and it was 
therefore with duller and already earth-clogged pinions that 



GODOLPHIN. lil 

I sought to rise. Something, however, I have won as a 
recompense for austere abstinence and much labour; and 
this power over the land of dreams is at least within my 
command." 

"Then," said Lucilla, in a disappointed tone, "it is only 
by a long course of indulgence to the fervour of the imagina- 
tion, and not by spell or charm, that one can gain a similar 
power? " 

"Xot wholly so, my daughter," replied the mystic; "they 
who do so excite, and have so raised the diviner faculty, can 
alone possess the certain and invariable power over dreams, 
even without charms and talismans; but the most dull or idle 
may hope to do so with just confidence (though not certainty) 
by help of skill, and by directing the full force of their half- 
roused fancy towards the person or object they wish to see 
reflected in the glass of Sleep." 

"And what means should the uninitiated employ?" asked 
Lucilla, in a tone betokening her interest. 

"I will tell thee," answered the astrologer. "Thou must 
inscribe on a white parchment an image of the sun." 

"As how? " interrupted Lucilla. 

"Thus!" said the astrologer, drawing from among his 
papers one inscribed with the figure of a man asleep on the 
bosom of an angel. "This was made at the potential and 
appointed time, when the sun was in the Ninth of the Celes- 
tial Houses, and the Lion shook his bright mane as he as- 
cended the blue mount. Observe, that on the figure must 
be written thy desire, — the name of the person thou wishest 
to see, or the thing thou wouldst have foreshown ; then, hav- 
ing prepared and brought the mind to a faith in the effect, — 
for without faith the imagination lies inert and lifeless, — 
this image will be placed under the head of the invoker, and 
when the moon goeth through the sign which was in the 
Ninth House of his nativity, the Dream will glide into him, 
and his soul walk with the spirit of the vision." 

"Give me the image," said Lucilla, eagerly. 

The mystic hesitated. "Xo, Lucilla," said he, at length; 
" no, it is a dark and comfortless path, that of prescience and 



142 GODOLPHIN. 

unearthly knowledge, save to the few that walk it with a 
gifted light and a fearless soul. It is not for women or 
children, — nay, for few amongst men; it withers up the sap 
of life, and makes the hair gray before its time. No, no; 
take the broad sunshine, and the brief but sweet flowers of 
earth ; they are better for thee, my child, and for thy years, 
than the fever and hope of the night-dream and the planetary 
influence." 

So saying, the astrologer replaced the image within the 
leaves of one of his books ; and with a prudence not common 
to him, thrust the volume into a drawer, which he locked. 
The fair face of Lucilla became clouded, but the ill health 
of her father imposed a restraint on her wild temper. 

Just at that moment the door slowly opened, and the Eng- 
lishman stood before the daughter and sire. They did not 
note him at first. The solitary servant of the sage had ad- 
mitted him; he had proceeded, without ceremony, to the 
well-remembered apartment. 

As he now stood gazing on the pair, he observed with an 
inward smile how exactly their present attitudes (as well as 
the old aspect of the scene) resembled those in which he had 
broken upon them on the last evening he had visited that 
chamber, — the father bending over the old, worn, quaint 
table; and the daughter seated beside him on the same low 
stool. The character of their countenances struck him, too, 
as wearing the same ominous expression as when those coun- 
tenances had chilled him on that evening. For Volktman's 
features were impressed with the sadness that breathed from, 
and caused, his prohibition to his daughter; and that prohi- 
bition had given to her features an abstraction and shadow 
similar to the dejection they had worn on the night we 
recur to. 

This remembered coincidence did not cheer the spirits of 
the young traveller; he muttered to himself; and then, as if 
anxious to break the silence, moved forward with a heavy 
step. 

Volktman started at the sound; and looking up, seemed 
literally electrified by this sudden apparition of one whom he 



GODOLPHIX. 143 

had so lately expressed his desire to see. His lips muttered 
the intruder's name, one well known to the reader (it was the 
name of Godolphin), and then closed; but Lucilla sprang 
from her seat, and clasping her hands joyously together, 
darted forward till she came within a foot of the unexpected 
visitor. There she abruptly arrested herself, blushed deeply, 
and stood before him humbled, agitated, but all vivid with 
delight. 

"What, is this Lucilla?" said Godolphin, admiringly; 
" how beautiful she is grown ! " and advancing, he saluted, 
with a light and fraternal kiss, her girlish and damask cheek; 
then, without heeding her confusion, he turned to the astrolo- 
ger, who by this time had a little recovered from his amaze. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 

THE EFFECT OF YEARS AND EXPERIENCE. — THE ITALIAN 
CHARACTER. 

Godolphin now came almost daily to the astrologer's 
abode. He was shocked to perceive the physical alteration 
four years had wrought in his singular friend ; and with the 
warmth of a heart naturally kind, he sought to contribute to 
the comfort and enjoyment of a life that was evidently draw- 
ing to a close. 

Godolphin's company seemed to give Volktman a pleasure 
which nothing else could afford him. He loved to converse 
on the various incidents that had occurred to each since they 
met; and in whatsoever Godolphin communicated to him, the 
mystic sought to impress upon his friend's attention the ful- 
filment of an astrological prediction. 

Godolphin, though no longer impressed with a belief in 
the visionary's science, did not affect to combat his asser- 
tions. He had not, in his progress through life, found much 



1^^ GODOLPHIN. 

to shake his habitual indolence in ordinary affairs; and it 
was no easy matter to provoke one of his quiet temper and 
self-indulging wisdom into conversational dispute. Besides, 
who argues with fanaticism? 

Since the young idealist had left England, the elements of 
his character had been slowly performing the ordination of 
time, and working their due change in its general aspect. 
The warm fountains of youth flowed not so freely as before : 
the selfishness that always comes, sooner or later, to solitary 
men of the world, had gradually mingled itself with all the 
channels of his heart. The brooding and thoughtful disposi- 
tion of his faculties having turned from romance to what he 
deemed philosophy, that which once was enthusiasm had 
hardened into wisdom. He neither hated men nor loved 
them with a sanguine philanthropy; he viewed them with 
cool and discerning eyes. He did not think it within the 
power of governments to make the mass, in any countrj-, 
much happier or more elevated than they are. Eepublics, he 
was wont to say, favoured aristocratic virtues, and despotisms 
extinguished them; but, whether in a monarchy or republic, 
the hewers of wood and the drawers of water, the multitude, 
still remained intrinsically the same. 

This theory heightened his indifference to ambition. The 
watchwords of party appeared to him ridiculous; and politics 
in general — what a great moralist termed one question in 
particular — a shuttlecock kept up by the contention of noisy 
children. His mind thus rested as to all public matters in a 
state of quietude, and covered over with the mantle of a most 
false, a most perilous philosophy. His appetites to pleasure 
had grown somewhat dulled hj experience, but he was as yet 
neither sated nor discontented. One feeling at his breast 
still remained scarcely diminished of its effect, when the 
string was touched, — his tender remembrance of Constance; 
and this had prevented any subsequent but momentary attach- 
ment deepening into love. Thus, at the age of seven and 
twenty, Percy Godolphin reappears on our stage. 

There was a great deal in the Italian character that our 
traveller liked: its love of ease, reduced into a system; its 



GODOLPHIX. 145 

courtesy ; its content with the world as it is ; its moral apathy 
as regards all that agitates life, save one passion, and the 
universal tenderness, ardour, and delicacy which, in that 
passion, it ennobles itself in displaying. The commonest 
peasant of Rome or Naples, though not perhaps in the freer 
land of Tuscany, can comprehend all the romance and mys- 
tery of the most subtle species of love ; all that it requires in 
England the idle habits of aristocracy, or the sensitive fibre 
of genius, even to conceive. And what is yet stranger, the 
worn-out debauchee, sage with an experienee and variety of 
licentiousness, which come not within the compass of a north- 
ern profligacy, remains alive to the earliest and most innocent 
sentiments of the passion. And if Platonism in its coldest 
purity exist on earth, it is among the Aretins of southern 
Italy. 

This unworldly refinement, amidst so much worldly cal- 
lousness, was a peculiarity that afforded perpetual amuse- 
ment to the nice eye and subtle judgment of Godolphin. He 
loved not to note the common elements of character; what- 
ever was most abstract and difficult to analyze, pleased him 
most. He mixed then much with the Romans, and was a 
favourite amongst them ; but during his present visit to the 
Immortal City, he did not, how distantly soever, associate 
with the English, His carelessness of show, and the inde- 
pendence of a single man from burdensome connections, ren- 
dered his income fully competent to his wants; but, like 
many proud men, he was not willing to make it seem even 
to himself as a comparative poverty, beside the lavish ex- 
penses of his ostentatious countrymen. Travel, moreover, 
had augmented those stores of reflection which rob solitude 
of ennui. 



10 



146 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER XXX. 

MAGNETISM. — SYMPATHY. — THE RETUKN OF ELEMENTS TO 
ELEMENTS. 

Daily did the health of Volktman decline; Lucilla was 
the only one ignorant of his danger. She had never seen the 
gradual approaches of death : her mother's abrupt and rapid 
illness made the whole of her experience of disease. Phy- 
sicians and dark rooms were necessarily coupled in her mind 
with all graver maladies; and as the astrologer, rapt in his 
calculations, altered not any of his habits, and was insensible 
to pain, she fondly attributed his occasional complaints to the 
melancholy induced by seclusion. With sedentary men, dis- 
eases, being often those connected with the organization of 
the heart, do not usually terminate suddenly : it was so with 
Volktman. 

One day he was alone with Godolphin, and their conversa- 
tion turned u.pon one of the doctrines of the old Magnetism, a 
doctrine which, depending as it does so much upon a seeming 
reference to experience, survived the rest of its associates, 
and is still not wholly out of repute among the wild imagina- 
tions of Germany. 

" One of the most remarkable and abstruse points in what 
students call metaphysics," said Volktman, *'is sympathjj ! 
the first principle, according to some, of all human virtue. It 
is this, say they, which makes men just, humane, charitable. 
When one who has never heard of the duty of assisting his 
neighbour sees another drowning, he plunges into the water 
and saves him. Why? because involuntarily, and at once, 
his imagination places himself in the situation of the stranger: 
the pain he would experience in the watery death glances 
across him ; from this pain he hastens, without analyzing its 
cause, to deliver himself. 



GODOLPHIX. 147 

" Humanity is thus taught him by sympathy : where is this 
sympathy placed? In the nerves. The nerves are the com- 
municants Avith outward nature ; the more delicate the nerves, 
the finer the sympathies; hence, women and children are 
more alive to sympathy than men. Well, mark me : do not 
these nerves have attraction and sympathy, not only with 
human suffering, but with the powers of what is falsely 
termed inanimate nature? Do not the winds, the influences 
of the weather and the seasons, act confessedly upon them? 
And if one part of nature, why not another, inseparably con- 
nected too with that part? If the weather and seasons have 
sympathy with the nerves, why not the moon and the stars, 
by which the weather and the seasons are influenced and 
changed? Ye of the schools may allow that sympathy origi- 
nates some of our actions; I say it governs the whole world, — 
the whole creation ! Before the child is born, it is this secret 
affinity which can mark and stamp him with the witness of 
his mother's terror or his mother's desire." 

" Yet, " said Godolphin, " you would scarcely, in your zeal 
for sympathy, advocate the same cause as Edricius Mohynnus, 
who cured wounds by a powder, not applied to the wound, 
but to the towel that had been dipped in its blood? " 

"Xo," answered Volktman; "it is these quacks and pre- 
tenders that have wronged all sciences, by clamouring for 
false deductions. But I do believe of sympathy that it has 
a power to transport ourselves out of the body and reunite us 
with the absent. Hence, ti*ances, and raptures, in which the 
patient, being sincere, will tell thee, in grave earnestness, 
and with minute detail, of all that he saw and heard and en- 
countered, afar off, in other parts of the earth, or even above 
the earth. As thou knowest the accredited story of the 
youth, who, being transported with a vehement and long- 
nursed desire to see his mother, did through that same desire 
become as it were rapt, and beheld her, being at the distance 
of many miles, and giving and exchanging signs of their real 
and bodily conference." 

Godolphin turned aside to conceal an involuntary smile at 
this grave affirmation; but the mystic, perhaps perceiving it, 
continued vet more eagerlv : — 



148 GODOLPHIN. 

" Nay, I myself, at times, have experienced such trance, if 
trance it be ; and have conversed with them who have passed 
from the outward earth, — with my father and my wife. 
And," continued he, after a moment's pause, "I do -believe 
that we may, by means of this power of attraction — this 
elementary and all-penetrative sympathy — pass away, in our 
last moments, at once into the bosom of those we love. For, 
by the intent and rapt longing to behold the Blest and to be 
amongst them, we may be drawn insensibly into their pres- 
ence, and the hour being come when the affinity between the 
spirit and the body shall be dissolved, the mind and desire, 
being so drawn upward, can return to earth no more. And 
this sympathy, refined and extended, will make, I imagine, 
our powers, our very being, in a future state. Our sympathy 
being only, then, with what is immortal, we shall partake ne- 
cessarily of that nature which attracts us ; and the body no 
longer clogging the intenseness of our desires, we shall be 
able by a wish to transport ourselves wheresoever we please, 
— from star to star, from glory to glory, charioted and winged 
by our wishes." 

Godolphin did not reply, for he was struck with the grow- 
ing paleness of the mystic, and with a dreaming and intent 
fixedness that seemed creeping over his eyes, which were 
usually bright and restless. The day was now fast declining. 
Lucilla entered the room, and came caressingly to her father's 
side. 

"Is the evening warm, my child?" said the astrologer. 

"Very mild and warm," answered Lucilla. 

"Give me your arm, then," said he; "I will sit a little 
while without the threshold." 

The Eomans live in flats, as at Edinburgh, and with a com- 
mon stair. Volktman's abode was in the secondo piano. He 
descended the stairs with a step lighter than it had been of 
late; and sinking into a seat without the house, seemed si- 
lently and gratefully to inhale the soft and purple air of an 
Italian sunset. 

By and by the sun had entirely vanished: and that most 
brief but most delicious twilight, common to the clime, had 



GODOLPHIN. 149 

succeeded. Veil-like and soft, the mist that floats at that 
hour between earth and heaven lent its transparent shadow 
to the scene around them ; it seemed to tremble as for a mo- 
ment, and then was gone. The moon arose, and cast its 
light over Volktman's earnest countenance, over the rich 
bloom and watchful eye of Luc ilia, over the contemplative 
brow and motionless figure of Godolphin. It was a group of 
indefinable interest : the Earth was so still, that the visionary 
might well have fancied it had hushed itself, to drink within 
its quiet heart the voices of that Heaven in whose oracles 
he believed. Kot one of the group spoke: the astrologer's 
mind and gaze were riveted above; and neither of his com- 
panions wished to break the meditations of the old and 
dreaming man, 

Godolphin, with folded arms and downcast eyes, was pur- 
suing his own thoughts; and Lucilla, to whom Godolphin's 
presence was a subtle and subduing intoxication, looked in- 
deed upward to the soft and tender heavens, but with the soul 
of the loving daughter of earth. 

Slowly, nor marked by his companions, the gaze of the my- 
stic deepened and deepened in its fixedness. 

The minutes went on ; and the evening waned, till a chill 
breeze, floating down from the Latian Hills, recalled Lucilla's 
attention to her father. She covered him tenderly with her 
own mantle, and whispered gently in his ear her admonition 
to shun the coldness of the coming night. He did not an- 
swer; and on raising her voice a little higher, with the same 
result, she looked appealingly to Godolphin. He laid his hand 
on Volktman's shoulder; and, bending forward to address 
him, was struck dumb by the glazed and fixed expression of 
the mystic's eyes. The certainty flashed across him; he 
hastily felt Volktman's pulse, — it was still. There was no 
doubt left on his mind; and yet the daughter, looking at him 
all the while, did not even dream of this sudden and awful 
stroke. In silence, and unconsciously, the strange and soli- 
tary spirit of the mystic had passed from its home, in what 
exact instant of time, or by what last contest of nature, was 
not known. 



150 GODOLPHLN. 



CHAPTER XXXI. 

A SCENE. LUCILLA's STRANGE CONDUCT. — GODOLPHIN PASSES 

THROUGH A SEVERE ORDEAL. — EGERIA's GROTTO, AND 
WHAT THERE HAPPENS. 

Let US pass over Godolpliin's most painful task. What 
Lucilla's feelings were, the reader may imagine; and yet, 
her wayward and unanalyzed temper mocked at once imagi- 
nation and expression to depict its sufferings or its joys. 

The brother of Volktman's wife was sent for: he and his 
wife took possession of the abode of death. This, if possible, 
heightened Lucilla's anguish. The apathetic and vain char- 
acter of the middle classes in Rome, which her relations 
shared, stung her heart by contrasting its own desolate aban- 
donment to grief. Above all, she was revolted by the un- 
natural ceremonies of a Roman funeral. The corpse exposed, 
the cheeks painted, the parading procession, — all shocked 
the delicacy of her real and reckless affliction. But when 
this was over; when the rite of death was done, and when, 
in the house wherein her sire had presided, and she herself 
had been left to a liberty wholly unrestricted, she saw strangers 
(for such comparatively her relatives were to her) settling 
themselves down, with vacant countenances and light words, 
to the common occupations of life; when she saw them move, 
alter (nay, talk calmly, and sometimes with jests, of selling), 
those little household articles of furniture which, homely and 
worn as they were, were hallowed to her by a thousand dear 
and infantine and filial recollections; when, too, she found 
herself treated as a child, and, in some measure, as a depend- 
ant; when she, the wild, the free, saw herself subjected to 
restraint, — nay, heard the commonest actions of her life 
chidden and reproved; when she saw the trite and mean na- 
tures which thus presumed to lord it over her, and assume 
empire in the house of one, of whose wild and lofty, though 



GODOLPHIX. 151 

erring speculations, of whose generous though abstract ele- 
ments of character, she could comprehend enough to respect, 
while what she did not comprehend heightened the respect 
into awe, — then the more vehement and indignant passions 
of her mind broke forth! her flashing eye, her scornful ges- 
ture, her mysterious threat, and her open defiance astonished 
always, sometimes amused, but more often terrified, the apa- 
thetic and superstitious Italians. 

Godolphin, moved by interest and pity for the daughter of 
his friend, called once or twice after the funeral at the house; 
and commended, with promises and gifts, the desolate girl to 
the tenderness and commiseration of her relations. There is 
nothing an Italian will not promise, nothing he will not sell; 
and Godolphin thus purchased, in reality, a forbearance to 
Lucilla's strange temper (as it was considered) which other- 
wise, assuredly, would not have been displayed. 

More than a month had elapsed since the astrologer's de- 
cease; and, the season of the malaria verging to its com- 
mencement, Godolphin meditated a removal to Naples. He 
strolled, two days prior to his departure, to the house on the 
Appia Via, in order to take leave of Lucilla, and bequeath to 
her relations his parting injunctions. 

It was a strange and harsh face that peered forth on him 
through the iron grating of the door before he obtained ad- 
mittance ; and when he entered, he heard the sound of voices 
in loud altercation. Among the rest, the naturally dulcet and 
silver tones of Lucilla were strained beyond their wonted 
key, and breathed the accents of passion and disdain. 

He entered the room whence the sounds of dispute pro- 
ceeded, and the first face that presented itself to him was 
that of Lucilla. It was flushed with anger; the veins in the 
smooth forehead were swelled; the short lip breathed beauti- 
ful contempt. She stood at some little distance from the 
rest of the inmates of the room, who were seated ; and her 
posture was erect and even stately, though in wrath : her arms 
were folded upon her bosom, and the composed excitement of 
her figure contrasted with the play and fire and energy of her 
features. 



152 GODOLPHIN. 

At Godolphin's appearance, a sudden silence fell upon the 
conclave; the uncle and the aunt (the latter of whom had 
seemed the noisiest) subsided into apologetic respect to the 
rich (he was rich to them) young Englishman ; and -Lucilla 
sank into a seat, covered her face with her small and beauti- 
ful hands, and — humbled from her anger and her vehemence 
— burst into tears. 

"And what is this?" said Godolphin, pityingly. 

The Italians hastened to inform him. Lucilla had chosen 
to absent herself from home every evening; she had been 
seen, the last night, on the Corso, crowded as that street was 
with the young, the profligate, and the idle. They could not 
but reprove "the dear girl" for this indiscretion (Italians, 
indifferent as to the conduct of the married, are generally 
attentive to that of their single, women) ; and she announced 
her resolution to persevere in it. 

"Is this true, my pupil?" said Godolphin, turning to 
Lucilla; the poor girl sobbed on, but returned no answer. 
"Leave me to reprimand and admonish her," said he to the 
aunt and uncle; and they, without appearing to notice the 
incongruity of reprimand in the mouth of a man of seven-and- 
twenty to a girl of fifteen, chattered forth a Babel of concili- 
ation and left the apartment. 

Godolphin, young as he might be, was not unfitted for his 
task. There was a great deal of quiet dignity mingled with 
the kindness of his manner; and his affection for Lucilla had 
hitherto been so pure that he felt no embarrassment in ad- 
dressing her as a brother. He approached the corner of the 
room in which she sat; he drew a chair near to her, and took 
her reluctant and trembling hand with a gentleness that made 
her weep with a yet wilder vehemence. 

"My dear Lucilla," said he, "you know your father hon- 
oured me with his regard: let me presume on that regard, 
and on my long acquaintance with yourself, to address you as 
your friend, as your brother." Lucilla drew away her hand; 
but again, as if ashamed of the impulse, extended it towards 
him. 

"You cannot know the world as I do, dear Lucilla," con- 



GODOLPHIN. 153 

tinued Godolphin ; "for experience iu its affairs is bought at 
some little expense, which I pray that it may never cost you. 
In all countries, Lucilla, an unmarried female is exposed to 
dangers which, without any actual fault of her own, may em- 
bitter her future life. One of the greatest of these dangers 
lies in deviating from custom. With the woman who does 
this, every man thinks himself entitled to give his thoughts, 
his words, nay, even his actions, a license which you cannot 
but dread to incur. Your uncle and aunt, therefore, do right 
to advise your not going alone, to the public streets of Eome 
more especially, except in the broad daylight; and though 
their advice be irksomely intruded, and ungracefully couched, 
it is good in its principle, and — yes, dearest Lucilla — even 
necessary for you to follow." 

"But," said Lucilla, through her tears, "you cannot guess 
what insults, what unkindness, I have been forced to submit 
to from them. I, who never knew, till now, what insult 
and unkindness were! I, who — " here sobs checked her 
utterance. 

"But how, my young and fair friend, how can you mend 
their manners by destroying their esteem for you? Respect 
yourself, Lucilla, if you wish others to respect you. But, per- 
haps, " — and such a thought for the first time flashed across 
Godolphin, — " perhaps you did not seek the Corso for the 
crowd, but for one; perhaps you went there to meet — dare I 
guess the fact? — an admirer, a lover." 

"Now yoxi insult me! " cried Lucilla, angrily, 

"I thank you for your anger; I accept it as a contradic- 
tion," said Godolphin. "But listen yet a while, and forgive 
frankness. If there be any one, among the throng of Italian 
youths, whom you have seen, and could be happy with; one 
who loves you and whom you do not hate, remember that I 
am your father's friend; that I am rich; that I can — " 

"Cruel, cruel!" interrupted Lucilla; and withdrawing her- 
self from Godolphin, she walked to and fro with great and 
struggling agitation. 

"Is it not so, then? " said Godolphin, doubtingly. 

"No, sir; no! " 



154 GODOLPHIN. 

"Lucilla Volktman," said Godolphin, with a colder gravity 
than he had yet called forth, " I claim some attention from 
you, some confidence, nay, some esteem, — for the sake of 
your father, for the sake of your early years, when I assisted 
to teach you my native tongue, and loved you as a brother. 
Promise me that you will not commit this indiscretion any 
more, — at least till we meet again; nay, that you will not 
stir abroad, save with one of your relations." 

"Impossible! impossible!" cried Lucilla, vehemently; "it 
were to take away the only solace I have : it were to make 
life a privation, a curse." 

"Not so, Lucilla; it is to make life respectable and safe. 
I, on the other hand, will engage that all within these walls 
shall behave to you with indulgence and kindness." 

" I care not for their kindness ! — for the kindness of any 
one, save — " 

"Whom?" asked Godolphin, perceiving she would not 
proceed: but as she was still silent, he did not press the ques- 
tion. "Come!" said he, persuasively: "come, promise, and 
be friends with me ; do not let us part angrily : I am about to 
take my leave of you for many months." 

" Part ! you ! months ! — God, do not say so ! " 

With these words, she was by his side, and gazing on him 
with her large and pleading eyes, wherein was stamped a 
wildness, a terror, the cause of which he did not as yet 
decipher. 

"No, no," said she, with a faint smile; "no! you mean to 
frighten me, to extort my promise. You are not going to 
desert me ! " 

"But, Lucilla, I will not leave you to unkindness; the}" 
shall not, they dare not wound you again." 

"Say to me that you are not going from Rome; speak, 
quick! " 

"I go in two days." 

"Then let me die!" said Lucilla, in a tone of such deep 
despair that it chilled and appalled Godolphin, who did not, 
however, attribute her grief (the grief of this mere child, — a 
child so wayward and eccentric) to any other cause than that 



GODOLPIIIX. 155 

feeling of abandonment which the young so bitterly experi- 
ence at being left utterly alone with persons unfamiliar to 
their habits and opposed to their liking. 

He sought to soothe her, but she repelled him. Her feat- 
ures worked convulsively ; she walked twice across the room ; 
then stopped opposite to him, and a certain strained compos- 
ure on her brow seemed to denote that she had arrived at 
some sudden resolution. 

"Wouldst thou ask me," she said, "what cause took me 
into the streets as the shadows darkened, and enabled me 
lightly to bear threats at home and risk abroad? " 

"Ay, Lucilla; will you tell me? " 

" Thou wast the cause ! " she said, in a low voice, trem- 
bling with emotion, and the next moment sank on her knees 
before him. 

With a confusion that ill became so practised and favoured 
a gallant, Godolphin sought to raise her. "Xo! no!" she 
said; "you will despise me now; let me lie here, and die 
thinking of thee. Yes!" she continued, with an inward but 
rapid voice, as he lifted her reluctant frame from the earth, 
and hung over her with a cold and uncaressing attention, 
"yes! you I loved — I adored — from my very childhood. 
When you were by, life seemed changed to me; when absent, 
I longed for night, that I might dream of you. The spot 
you had touched I marked out in silence, that I might kiss it 
and address it when you were gone. You left us; four years 
passed away: and the recollection of you made and shaped 
my very nature. I loved solitude, for in solitude I saw you ; 
in imagination I spoke to you, and methought you answered 
and did not chide. You returned — and — and — but no mat- 
ter: to see you, at the hour you usually leave home, to see 
you, I wandered forth with the evening. I tracked you, my- 
self unseen; I followed you at a distance; I marked you dis- 
appear within some of the proud palaces that never know 
what love is. I returned home weeping, but happy. And do 
you think — do you dare to think — that I should have told 
you this, had you not driven me mad; had you not left me 
reckless of what henceforth was thought of me, became of 



156 GODOLPIilX. 

me? What will life be to me when you are gone? And 
now I have said all! Go! You do not love me: I know 
it; but do not say so. Go, leave me; why do you not 
leave me? " 

Does there live one man who can hear a woman, young and 
beautiful, confess attachment to him, and not catch the con- 
tagion? Affected, flattered, and almost melted into love 
himself, Godolphin felt all the danger of the moment; but 
this young, inexperienced girl — the daughter of his friend — 
no ! her he could not, loving, willing as she was, betray. 

Yet it was some moments before he could command himself 
sufficiently to answer her. "Listen to me calmly," at length 
he said; "we are at least to each other dear friends; nay, lis- 
ten, I beseech you. I, Lucilla, am a man whose heart is fore- 
stalled, — exhausted before its time. I have loved deeply 
and passionately; that love is over, but it has unfitted me for 
any species of love resembling itself, — any which I could 
offer to you. Dearest Lucilla, I will not disguise the truth 
from you. Were I to love you, it would be — not in the eyes 
of your countrymen (with whom such connections are com- 
mon), but in the eyes of mine — it would be dishonour. Shall 
I confer even this partial dishonour on you? Xo! Lucilla, 
this feeling of yours towards me is (pardon me) but a young 
and childish fantasy; you will smile at it some years hence. 
I am not worthy of so pure and fresh a heart; but at least" 
— here he spoke in a lower voice, and as to himself — " at 
least I am not so unworthy as to wrong it." 

"Go!" said Lucilla; "go, I implore you." She spoke, and 
stood hueless and motionless, as if the life (life's life was in- 
deed gone!) had departed from her. Her features were set 
and rigid; the tears that stole in large drops down her cheeks 
were unfelt; a slight quivering of her lips only bespoke what 
passed within her. 

" Ah ! " cried Godolphin, stung from his usual calm, stung 
from the quiet kindness he had sought, from principle, to 
assume, "can I withstand this trial? — I, whose dream of life 
has been the love that I might now find! I, who have never 
before known an obstacle to a wish which I have not con- 



GODOLPHIN^. 157 

tended against, if not conquered; and, weakened as I am with 
the habitual indulgence to temptation, which has never been 
so strong as now — but no ! I will — I will deserve this at- 
tachment by self-restraint, self-sacrifice." 

He moved away ; and then returning, dropped on his knee 
before Lucilla. 

"Spare me!" said he, in an agitated voice, which brought 
back all the blood to that young and transparent cheek, which 
was now half averted from him — " spare me ! spare yourself ! 
Look around, when I am gone, for some one to replace my 
image: thousands younger, fairer, warmer of heart, will as- 
pire to your love ; that love for them will be exposed to no 
peril, no shame : forget me ; select another ; be happy and re- 
spected. Permit me alone to fill the place of your friend, 
your brother. I will provide for your comforts, your liberty ; 
you shall be restrained, offended no more. God bless you, 
dear, dear Lucilla; and believe" (he said, almost in a whis- 
per), "that, in thus flying you, I have acted generously, and 
with an effort worthy of your loveliness and your love." 

He said, and hurried from the apartment. Lucilla turned 
slowly round as the door closed and then fell motionless on 
the ground. 

Meanwhile Godolphin, mastering his emotion, sought the 
host and hostess ; and begging them to visit his lodging that 
evening to receive certain directions and rewards, hastily 
left the house. 

But instead of returning home, the desire for a brief soli- 
tude and self -commune, which usually follows strong excite- 
ment (and which, in all less ordinary events, suggested his' 
sole counsellers or monitors to the musing Godolphin), led his 
steps in an opposite direction. Scarcely conscious whither 
he was wandering, he did not pause till he found himself in 
that green and still valley in which the pilgrim beholds the 
grotto of Egeria. 

It was noon, and the day warm, but not overpowering. The 
leaf slept on the old trees that are scattered about that little 
valley; and amidst the soft and rich turf the wanderer's step 
disturbed the lizard, basking its brilliant hues in the noon- 



158 GODOLPHIX. 

tide, and glancing rapidly through the herbage as it retreated. 
And from the trees and through the air, the occasional song 
of the birds (for in Italy their voices are rare) floated with a 
peculiar clearness, and even noisiness of music, along the 
deserted haunts of the Nymph. 

The scene, rife with its beautiful associations, recalled 
Godolphin from his re very. "And here," thought he, "Fable 
has thrown its most lovely enduring enchantment ; here, every 
one who has tasted the loves of earth, and sickened for the 
love that is ideal, finds a spell more attractive to his steps, 
more fraught Avith contemplation to his spirit, than aught 
raised by the palace of the Csesars or the tomb of the 
Scipios." 

Thus meditating, and softened by the late scene with 
Lucilla (to which his thoughts again recurred), he sauntered 
onward to the steep side of the bank, in which faith and 
tradition have hollowed out the grotto of the goddess. He 
entered the silent cavern, and bathed his temples in the deli- 
cious waters of the fountain. 

It was perhaps well that it was not at that moment Lucilla 
made to him her strange and unlooked-for confession; again 
and again he said to himself (as if seeking for a justification 
of his self-sacrifice), "Her father was not Italian, and pos- 
sessed feeling and honour: let me not forget that he loved 
me!" In truth, the avowal of this wild girl — an avowal 
made indeed with the ardour, but also breathing of the in- 
nocence, the inexperience of her character — had opened to 
his fancy new and not undelicious prospects. He had never 
loved her, save with a lukewarm kindness, before that last 
hour; but now, in recalling her beauty, her tears, her pas- 
sionate abandonment, can we wonder that he felt a strange 
beating at his heart, and that he indulged that dissolved and 
luxurious vein of tender meditation which is the prelude to 
all love? We must recall, too, the recollection of his own 
temper, so constantly yearning for the unhackneyed, the un- 
tasted; and his deep and soft order of imagination, by which 
he involuntarily conjured up the delight of living with one, 
watching one, so different from the rest of the world, and 



GODOLPHIN. 159 

whose thoughts and passions (wild as they might be) were all 
devoted to him! 

And in what spot were these imaginings fed and coloured? 
In a spot which in the nature of its divine fascination could 
be found only beneath one sky, tliat sky the most balmy and 
loving upon earth! Who could think of love within the 
haunt and temple of — 

" That Nympholepsy of some fond despair," 

and not feel that love enhanced, deepened, modulated, into at 
once a dream and a desire? 

It was long that Godolphin indulged himself in recalling 
the image of Lucilla; but nerved at length and gradually, by 
harder, and we may hope better, sentiments than those of a 
love which he could scarcely indvilge without criminality on 
the one hand, or what must have appeared to the man of the 
world derogatory folly on the other, he turned his thoughts 
into a less voluptuous channel, and prepared, though with 
a reluctant step, to depart homew^ards. But what was 
his amaze, his confusion, when, on reaching the mouth 
of the cave, he saw within a few steps of him Lucilla 
herself! 

She was walking alone and slowly, her eyes bent upon the 
ground, and did not perceive him. According to a com- 
mon custom with the middle classes of Eome, her rich hair, 
save by a single band, was uncovered ; and as her slight and 
exquisite form moved along the velvet sod, so beautiful a 
shape, and a face so rare in its character and delicate in its 
expression, were in harmony with the sweet superstition of 
the spot, and seemed almost to restore to the deserted cave 
and the mourning stream their living Egeria. 

Godolphin stood transfixed to the earth; and Lucilla, who 
was walking in the direction of the grotto, did not perceive, 
till she was almost immediately before him. She gave a faint 
scream as she lifted her eyes; and the first and most natural 
sentiment of the woman breaking forth involuntarily, she 
attempted to falter out her disavowal of all expectation of 
meeting him there. 



160 GODOLPHIN. 

" Indeed, indeed, I did not know — that is — I — I — " slie 
could achieve no more. 

"Is this a favourite spot with you?" said he, with the 
vague embarrassment of one at a loss for words. 

"Yes," said Lucilla, faintly. 

And so, in truth, it was : for its vicinity to her home, the 
beauty of the little valley, and the interest attached to it — 
an interest not the less to her in that she was but imperfectly 
acquainted with the true legend of the Nymph and her royal 
lover — had made it, even from her childhood, a chosen and 
beloved retreat, especially in that dangerous summer time, 
which drives the visitor from the spot, and leaves the scene, 
in great measure, to the solitude which befits it. Associated 
as the place was with the recollections of her earlier griefs, it 
was thither that her first instinct made her fly from the rude 
contact and displeasing companionship of her relations, to 
give vent to the various and conflicting passions which the 
late scene with Godolphin had called forth. 

They now stood for a few moments silent and embarrassed, 
till Godolphin, resolved to end a scene which he began to feel 
was dangerous, said in a hurried tone, — 

" Farewell, my sweet pupil ! — farewell ! May God bless 
you ! " He extended his hand ; Lucilla seized it, as if by 
impulse, and conveying it suddenly to her lips, bathed it 
with tears. 

"I feel," said this wild and unregulated girl, "I feel, from 
your manner, that I ought to be grateful to you ; yet I scarcely 
know why : you confess you cannot love me, that my affection 
distresses you — you fly — you desert me. Ah, if you felt one 
particle even of friendship for me, could you do so? " 

"Lucilla, what can I say? — I cannot marry you." 

"Do I wish it? I ask thee but to let me go with thee 
wherever thou goest." 

"Poor child!" said Godolphin, gazing on her; "art thou 
not aware that thou askest thine own dishonour?" 

Lucilla seemed surprised. "Is it dishonour to love? They 
do not think so in Italy. It is wrong for a maiden to confess 
it ; but that thou hast forgiven me. And if to follow thee, to 



GODOLPHIN. 161 

sit with thee, to be near thee, bring aught of evil to myself, 
not thee, let me incur the evil; it can be nothing compared 
to the agony of thy absence ! " 

She looked up timidly as she spoke, and saw, with a sort 
of terror, that his face worked with emotions which seemed 
to choke his answer. "If," she cried passionately, "if I have 
said what pains thee, if I have asked what would give dis- 
honour, as thou callest it, or harm, to thyself, forgive me — 
I knew it not — and leave me. But if it were not of thyself 
that thou didst speak, believe that thou hast done me but a 
cruel mercy. Let me go with thee, I implore! I have no 
friend here: no one loves me. I hate the faces I gaze upon; 
I loathe the voices I hear. And, were it for nothing else, 
thou remindest me of him who is gone. Thou art familiar to 
me ; every look of thee breathes of my home, of my household 
recollections. Take me with thee, beloved stranger! — or 
leave me to die — I will not survive thy loss!" 

" You speak of your father : know you that, were I to grant 
what you, in your childish innocence, so unthinkingly re- 
quest, he might curse me from his grave? " 

"0 God, not so! — mine is the prayer — be mine the guilt, 
if guilt there be. But is it not unkinder in thee to desert his 
daughter than to protect her? " 

There was a great, a terrible struggle in Godolphin's breast. 
"What," said he, scarcely knowing what he said, — "what 
will the world think of you if you fly with a stranger? " 

" There is no world to me but thee ! " 

"What will your uncle, your relations say? " 

"I care not; for I shall not hear them." 

"iSTo, no; this must not be! " said Godolphin, proudly, and 
once more conquering himself. "Lucilla, I would give up 
every other dream or hope in life to feel that I might requite 
this devotion by passing my life with thee; to feel that I 
might grant what thou askest without wronging thy inno- 
cence; but — but — " 

"You love me then! You love me!" cried Lucilla, joy- 
ously, and alive to no other interpretation of his words. 

Godolphin was transported beyond himself; and clasping. 

11 



162 GODOLPHIN. 

Lucilla in his arms he covered her cheeks, her lips, with im- 
passioned and burning kisses; then suddenly, as if stung by 
some irresistible impulse, he tore himself away, and fled from 
the spot. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

THE WEAKNESS OF ALL VIRTUE SPRINGING ONLY FROM THK 

FEELINGS. 

It was the evening before Godolphin left Rome. As he 
was entering his palazzo he descried, in the darkness, and 
at a little distance, a figure wrapped in a mantle, that re- 
minded him of Lucilla; ere he could certify himself, it was 
gone. 

On entering his rooms, he looked eagerly over the papers 
and notes on his table ; he seemed disappointed with the re- 
sult, and sat himself down in moody and discontented thought. 
He had written to Lucilla the day before, a long, a kind, nay, 
a noble outpouring of his thoughts and feelings. As far as 
he was able to one so simple in her experience, yet so wild in 
her fancy, he explained to her the nature of his struggles and 
his self-sacrifice. He did not disguise from her that, till the 
moment of her confession, he had never examined the state of 
his heart towards her; nor that, with that confession, a new 
and ardent train of sentiment had been kindled within him. 
He knew enough of women to be aware that the last avowal 
would be the sweetest consolation both to her vanity and her 
heart. He assured her of the promises he had received from 
her relations to grant her the liberty and the indulgence 
that her early and unrestrained habits required; and, in 
the most delicate and respectful terms, he inclosed an order 
fox a sum of money sufficient at any time to command 
the regard of those with whom she lived, or to enable her to 
choose, should she so desire (though he advised her not to 



GODOLPHIN. 163 

adopt such a measure, save for the most urgent reasons), 
another residence. 

" Send me in return," he said, as he concluded, " a lock of your hair. 
I want nothing to remind me of your beauty ; but I want some token of 
the heart of whose affection I am so mournfully proud. I will wear it 
as a charm against the contamination of that world of which you are so 
happily ignorant ; as a memento of one nature beyond the thought of 
self ; as a surety that, in finding within this base and selfish quarter of 
earth one soul so warm, so pure as yours, I did not deceive myself, and 
dream. If we ever meet again, may you have then found some one 
happier than I am, and in his tenderness have forgotten all of me save 
one kind remembrance. Beautiful and dear Lucilla, adieu ! If I have 
not given way to the luxury of being beloved by you, it is because your 
generous self-abandonment has awakened within a heart too selfish to 
others a real love for yourself." 

To this letter Godolphin had, hour after hour, expected a 
reply. He received none, — not even the lock of hair for which 
he had pressed. He was disappointed, angry, with Lucilla, 
dissatisfied with himself. " How bitterly, " thought he, "the 
wise Saville would smile at my folly! I have renounced the 
bliss of possessing this singular and beautiful being; for 
what? — a scruple which she cannot even comprehend, and at 
which, in her friendless and forlorn state, the most starched 
of her dissolute countrywomen would smile as a ridiculous 
punctilio. And, in truth, had I fled hence with her, should I 
not have made her throughout life happier — far happier — 
than she will be now? Kor would she, in that happiness, 
have felt, like an English girl, any pang of shame. Here, 
the tie would have never been regarded as a degradation; nor 
does she, recurring to the simple laws of nature, imagine that 
any one could so regard it. Besides, inexperienced as she is 
— the creature of impulse — will she not fall a victim to 
some more artful and less generous lover; to some one who 
in her innocence will see only forwardness; and who, far 
from protecting her as I should have done, will regard her 
but as the plaything of an hour, and cast her forth the mo- 
ment his passion is sated! — sated! bitter thought, that 
the head of another should rest upon that bosom now so 



164 GODOLPHIN. 

wholly mine ! After all, I have, in vainly adopting a seem- 
ing and sounding virtue, merely renounced my own happiness 
to leave her to the chances of being permanently rendered 
unhappy, and abandoned to want, shame, destitution, by 
another ! " 

These disagreeable and regretful thoughts were, in turn, 
but weakly combated by the occasional self-congrafculation 
that belongs to a just or generous act, and were varied by a 
thousand conjectures — now of anxiety, now of anger — as to 
the silence of Lucilla. Sometimes he thought — but the 
thought only glanced partially across him, and was not dis- 
tinctly acknowledged — that she might seek an interview 
with him ere he departed; and in this hope he did not retire 
to rest till the dawn broke over the ruins of the mighty and 
breathless city. He then flung himself on a sofa without 
undressing, but could not sleep, save in short and broken 
intervals. 

The next day, he put off his departure till noon, still in the 
hope of hearing from Lucilla, but in vain. He could not flat- 
ter himself with the hope that Lucilla did not know the exact 
time for his journey, — he had expressly stated it. Some- 
times he conceived the notion of seeking her again; but he 
knew too well the weakness of his generous resolution; and, 
though infirm of thought, was yet virtuous enough in act not 
to hazard it to certain defeat. At length in a momentary 
desperation, and muttering reproaches on Lucilla for her 
fickleness and inability to appreciate the magnanimity of his 
conduct, he threw himself into his carriage, and bade adieu 
to Eome. 

As every grove that the traveller passes on that road was 
guarded once by a nymph, so now it is hallowed by a memory. 
In vain the air, heavy with death, creeps over the wood, the 
rivulet, and the shattered tower : the mind will not recur to 
the risk of its ignoble tenement; it flies back; it is with the 
Past! A subtle and speechless rapture fills and exalts the 
spirit. There — far to the West — spreads that purple sea, 
haunted by a million reminiscences of glory; there the moun- 
tains, with their sharp and snowy crests, rise into the bosom 



GODOLPHIN. 165 

of the heavens; on that plain, the pilgrim yet hails the tra- 
ditional tomb of the Curiatii and those immortal Twins who 
left to their brother the glory of conquest, and the shame by 
which it was succeeded; around the Lake of Nemi yet bloom 
the sacred groves by which Diana raised Hippolytus again 
into life. Poetry, Fable, History, watch over the land: it is 
a sepulchre; Death is within and around it; Decay writes 
defeature upon every stone; but the Past sits by the tomb as 
a mourning angel; a soul breathes through the desolation; a 
voice calls amidst the silence. Every age that hath passed 
away hath left a ghost behind it ; and the beautiful land seems 
like that imagined clime beneath the earth in which man, 
glorious though it be, may not breathe and live, but which is 
populous with holy phantoms and illustrious shades. 

On, on sped Godolphin. Night broke over him as he trav- 
ersed the Pontine Marshes. There, the malaria broods over 
its rankest venom; solitude hath lost the soul that belonged 
to it; all life, save the deadly fertility of corruption, seems 
to have rotted away ; the spirit falls stricken into gloom ; a 
nightmare weighs upon the breast of Nature; and over the 
wrecks of Time, Silence sits motionless in the arms of Death. 

He arrived at Terracina, and retired to rest. His sleep 
was filled with fearful dreams ; he woke, late at noon, languid 
and dejected. As his servant, who had lived with him some 
years, attended him in rising, Godolphin observed on his 
countenance that expression common to persons of his class 
when they have something which they wish to communicate, 
and are watching their opportunity. 

" Well, Maiden ! " said he, " you look important this morn- 
ing: what has happened?" 

"E — hem! Did not you observe, sir, a carriage behind us 
as we crossed the marshes? Sometimes you might just see it 
at a distance, in the moonlight." 

"How the deuce should I, being within the carriage, see 
behind me? No; I know nothing of the carriage: what 
of it?" 

"A person arrived in it, sir, a little after you, would not 
retire to bed, and waits you in your sitting-room." 



166 GODOLPHIN. 

^'■K person! what person?" 

"A lady, sir, — a young lady; " said the servant, suppress- 
ing a smile. 

" Good heavens ! " ejaculated Godolphin ; " leave me." The 
valet obeyed. 

Godolphin, not for a moment doubting that it was Lucilla 
who had thus followed him, was struck to the heart by this 
proof of her resolute and reckless attachment. In any other 
woman, so bold a measure would, it is true, have revolted his 
fastidious and somewhat English taste. But in Lucilla, all 
that might have seemed immodest arose, in reality, from that 
pure and spotless ignorance which, of all species of modesty, 
is the most enchanting, the most dangerous to its possessor. 
The daughter of loneliness and seclusion, estranged wholly 
from all familiar or female intercourse, rather bewildered 
than in any way enlightened by the few books of poetry, or 
the lighter letters, she had by accident read, — the sense of 
impropriety was in her so vague a sentiment that every im- 
pulse of her wild and impassioned character effaced and swept 
it away. Ignorant of what is due to the reserve of the sex, 
and even of the opinions of the world — lax as the Italian 
world is on matters of love — she only saw occasion to glory 
in her tenderness, her devotion, to one so elevated in her 
fancy as the English stranger. Nor did there — however 
unconsciously to herself — mingle a single more derogatory 
or less pure emotion with her fanatical worship. 

For my own part, I think that few men understand the 
real nature of a girl's love. Arising so vividly as it does 
from the imagination, nothing that the mind of the libertine 
would impute to it ever (or at least in most rare instances) 
sullies its weakness or debases its folly. I do not say the 
love is better for being thus solely the creature of imagina- 
tion : I say only so it is in ninety -nine out of a hundred in- 
stances of girlish infatuation. In later life, it is different; 
in the experienced woman, forwardness is always depravity. 

With trembling steps and palpitating heart, Godolphin 
sought the apartment in which he expected to find Lucilla. 
There, in one corner of the room, her face covered with her 



GODOLPUIN. 167 

mantle, he beheld her. He hastened to that spot; he threw 
himself on his knees before her; with a timid hand he re- 
moved the covering from her face; and through tears and 
paleness and agitation, his heart was touched to the quick by 
its soft and loving expression. 

"Wilt thou forgive me?" she faltered; "it was thine own 
letter that brought me hither. Now leave me, if thou canst! " 

"Never, never!" cried Godolphin, clasping her to his 
heart. "It is fated, and I resist no more. Love, tend, 
cherish thee, I Avill to my last hour. I will be all to thee 
that human ties can afford, — father, brother, lover — all but 
— " He paused; "all but husband," whispered his con- 
science, but he silenced its voice. 

"I may go with thee! " said Lucilla, in wild ecstasy; that 
was her only thought. 

As, when the notion of escape occurs to the insane, their 
insanity appears to cease ; courage, prudence, caution, inven- 
tion (faculties which they knew not in sounder health), flash 
upon and support them as by an inspiration, so a new genius 
had seemed breathed into Lucilla by the idea of rejoining 
(xodolphin. She imagined — not without justice — that, could 
she throw in the way of her return home an obstacle of that 
worldly nature which he seemed to dread she should encoun- 
ter, his chief reason for resisting her attachment would be 
removed. Encouraged by this thought, and more than ever 
transported by her love since he had expressed a congenial 
sentiment; excited into emulation by the generous tone of his 
letter, and softened into yet deeper weakness by its tender- 
ness, she had resolved upon the bold step she adopted. A 
vetturino lived near the gate of St. Sebastian. She had 
sought him ; and at sight of the money which Godolphin had 
sent her, the vetturino willingly agreed to transport her to 
whatever point on the road to Naples she might desire, — nay, 
even to keep pace with the more rapid method of travelling 
which Godolphin pursued. Early on the morning of his de- 
parture, she had sought her station within sight of Godol- 
phin's palazzo; and ten minutes after his departure the 
vetturino bore her, delighted but trembling, on the same road. 



168 GODOLPHIN. 

The Italians are ordinarily good-natured, especially when 
they are paid for it; and courteous to females, especially if 
they have any suspicion of the influence of the helle passion. 
The vetturino's foresight had supplied the deficiencies of her 
inexperience: he had reminded her of the necessity of pro- 
curing her passport; and he undertook that all other difficul- 
ties should solely devolve on him. And thus Lucilla was now 
under the same roof with one for whom, indeed, she was un- 
aware of the sacrifice she made, but whom, despite of all that 
clouded and separated their after-lot, she loved to the last, 
with a love as reckless and strong as then, — a love passing 
the love of woman, and defying the common ordinances of 
time. 

On the blue waters that break with a deep and far voice 
along the rocks of that delicious shore, above which the 
mountain that rises behind Terracina scatters to the air the 
odours of the citron and the orange, on that sounding and 
immemorial sea the stars, like the hopes of a brighter world 
upon the darkness and unrest of life, shone down with a sol- 
emn but tender light. On that shore stood Lucilla and he — 
the wandering stranger — in whom she had hoarded the peace 
and the hopes of earth. Hers was the first and purple flush 
of the love which has attained its object; that sweet and 
quiet fulness of content, that heavenly, all-subduing and sub- 
dued delight, with which the heart slumbers in the excess of 
its own rapture. Care, the forethought of change, even the 
shadowy and vague mournfulness of passion, are felt not in 
those voluptuous but tranquil moments. Like the waters 
that rolled, deep and eloquent, before her, every feeling 
within was but the mirror of an all-gentle and cloudless 
heaven. Her head half -declined upon the breast of her 
young lover, she caught the beating of his heart, and in it 
heard all the sounds of what was now become to her the 
world. 

And still and solitary deepened around them the mystic 
and lovely night. How divine was that sense and conscious- 
ness of solitude! how, as it thrilled within them, they clung 



GODOLPHIN. 169 

closer to each other! Theirs as yet was that blissful and 
unsated time when the touch of their hands, clasped together, 
was in itself a happiness of emotion too deep for words. And 
ever, as his eyes sought hers, the tears which the sensitive- 
ness of her frame, in the very luxury of her overflowing 
heart, called forth glittered in the tranquil stars a moment 
and were kissed away. "Do not look up to heaven, my love," 
whispered Godolphin, " lest thou shouldst think of any world 
but this ! " 

Poor Lucilla! will any one who idly glances over this page 
sympathize one moment with the springs of thy brief joys and 
thy bitter sorrow? The page on which, in stamping a record 
of thee, I would fain retain thy memory from oblivion, that 
page is an emblem of thyself, — a short existence, confounded 
with the herd to which it has no resemblance, and then, 
amidst the rush and tumult of the world, forgotten and cast 
away forever! 



CHAPTER XXXIII. 

RETURN" TO LADY EKPIXGHAM. — LADY ERPINGHAM FALLS 
ILL. LORD ERPIXGHAM EESOL\'ES TO GO ABROAD. PLU- 
TARCH UPON MUSICAL INSTRUMENTS. PARTY AT ERPING- 

HAM HOUSE. SAVILLE ON SOCIETY AND THE TASTE FOR 

THE LITTLE. DAVID MANDEVILLE. WOMEN, THEIR IN- 
FLUENCE AND EDUCATION. THE NECESSITY OF AN OB- 
JECT. RELIGION. 

As after a long dream, we rise to the occupations of life, 
even so, with an awakening and more active feeling, I re- 
turn from characters removed from the ordinary world — like 
Volktman ^ and his daughter — to the brilliant heroine of my 
narrative. 

1 After all, an astrologer — nay, a cabalist — is not so monstrous a prodigy 
in the nineteenth century ! In tlie year 1801, Lackington published a quarto, 
entitled " Magus : a Complete System of Occult Philosophy ; treating of 
Alchemy, the Cabalistic Art, Natural and Celestial Magic," etc. — and a very 



170 GODOLPHIN. 

There is a certain tone about Loudon society which enfee- 
bles the mind without exciting it; and this state of tempera- 
ment, more than all others, engenders satiety. In classes 
that border upon the highest this effect is less evident ; for in 
them there is some object to contend for. Fashion gives 
them an inducement. They struggle to emulate the ton of 
their superiors. It is an ambition of trifles, it is true ; but it 
is still ambition. It frets, it irritates, but it keeps them 
alive. The great are the true victims of ennui. The more 
firmly seated their rank, the more established their position, 
the more their life stagnates into insipidity. Constance was 
at the height of her wishes. No one was so courted, so 
adored. One after one, she had humbled and subdued all 
those who, before her marriage, had trampled on her pride, 
or who after it had resisted her pretensions: a look from her 
had become a triumph, and a smile conferred a rank on its 
receiver. But this empire palled upon her: of too large a 
mind to be satisfied with petty pleasures and unreal distinc- 
tions, she still felt the something of life was wanting. She 
was not blessed or cursed (as it may be) with children, and 
she had no companion in her husband. There might be times 
in which she regretted her choice, dazzling as it had proved; 
but she complained not of sorrow, but monotony. 

Political intrigue could not fill up the vacuum of which 
Constance daily complained ; and of private intrigue the then 
purity of her nature was incapable. When people have really 
nothing to do, they generally fall ill upon it; and at length 
the rich colour grew faint upon Lady Erpingham's cheek, her 
form wasted; the physicians hinted at consumption, and rec- 
ommended a warmer clime. Lord Erpingham seized at the 
proposition : he was fond of Italy ; he was bored with England. 

Very stupid people often become very musical : it is a sort 
of pretension to intellect that suits their capacities. Plutarch 
says somewhere that the best musical instruments are made 

impudent publication it is too. That Raphael should put forth astrological 
manuels is not a proof of his belief in the science he professes ; but that it 
should nnsicer to Raphael to put them forth, shows a tendency to belief in his 
purchasers. 



GODOLPHIN. 171 

from the jaw-bones of asses. Plutarch never made a more 
sensible observation. Lord Erpiugham had of late taken 
greatly to operas: he talked of writing one himself; and not 
being a performer, he consoled himself by becoming a patron. 
Italy, therefore, presented to him manifold captivations, — he 
thought of fiddling, but he talked only of his wife's health. 
Amidst the regrets of the London world, they made their 
arrangements, and prepared to set out at the end of the sea- 
son for the land of Paganini and Julius Caesar. 

Two nights before their departure. Lady Erpingham gave a 
farewell party to her more intimate acquaintance. Saville, 
who always contrived to be well with every one who was 
worth the trouble it cost him, was of course among the guests. 
Years had somewhat scathed him since he last appeared on 
our stage. Women had ceased to possess much attraction for 
his jaded eyes : gaming and speculation had gradually spread 
over the tastes once directed to other pursuits. His vivacity 
had deserted him in great measure, as years and infirmity 
began to stagnate and knot up the current of his veins; but 
conversation still possessed for and derived from him its 
wonted attraction. The sparkling jeu d'esprit had only so- 
bered down into the quiet sarcasm; and if his wit rippled less 
freshly to the breeze of the present moment, it was coloured 
more richly by the glittering sands which rolled down from 
the experience that overshadowed the current. Por the wis- 
dom of the worldly is like the mountains that, sterile with- 
out, conceal within them unprofitable ore: only the filings 
and particles escape to the daylight and sparkle in the Avave; 
the rest wastes idly within. The Pactolus takes but the sand- 
drifts from the hoards lost to use in the Tmolus. 

"And how," said Saville, seating himself by Lady Erping- 
ham, "how shall we bear London when you are gone? When 
society, the everlasting draught, had begun to pall upon us, 
you threw your pearl into the cup ; and now we are grown so 
luxurious, that we shall never bear the wine without the 
pearl." 

"But the pearl gave no taste to the wine: it only dissolved 
itself, — idly, and in vain." 



172 GODOLPHIN. 

"Ah, my dear Lady Erpingham, the dullest of us, having 
once seen the pearl, could at least imagine that we were able 
to appreciate the subtleties of its influence. Where, in this 
little world of tedious realities, can we find anything even to 
imagine about, when you abandon us ? " 

"Nay! do you conceive that I am so ignorant of the frame- 
work of society as to suppose that I shall not be easily re- 
placed? King succeeds king, without reference to the merits 
of either ; so, in London, idol follows idol, though one be of 
jewels and the other of brass. Perhaps, when I return, I shall 

find you kneeling to the dull Lady A , or worshipping the 

hideous Lady Z ." 

" ' Le temps assez souvent a rendu legitime 
Ce qui sembloit d'abord ne se pouvoir sans crime ; ' " 

answered Saville, with a mock heroic air. " The fact is, that 
we are an indolent people; the person who succeeds the most 

with us has but to push the most. You know how Mrs. , 

in spite of her red arms, her red gown, her city pronuncia- 
tion, and her city connections, managed — by dint of perse- 
verance alone — to become a dispenser of consequence to the 
very countesses whom she at first could scarcely coax into a 
courtesy. The person who can stand ridicule and rudeness 
has only to desire to become the fashion — she or he must be 
so sooner or later." 

" Of the immutability of one thing among all the changes I 
may witness on my return, at least I am certain no one still 
will dare to think for himself. The great want of each indi- 
vidual is, the want of an opinion ! For instance, who judges 
of a picture from his own knowledge of painting? Who does 

not wait to hear what Mr. , or Lord (one of the six 

or seven privileged connoisseurs), says of it? Nay, not only 
the fate of a single picture, but of a whole school of painting, 
depends upon the caprice of some one of the self-elected dic- 
tators. The King, or the Duke of , has but to love the 

Dutch school and ridicule the Italian, and behold a Raphael 
will not sell, and a Teniers rises into infinite value ! Dutch 
representations of candlesticks and boors are sought after 



GODOLPHIX. 173 

with the most rapturous delight; the most disagreeable ob- 
jects of nature become the most worshipped treasures of art ; 
and we emulate each other in testifying our exaltation of taste 
by contending for the pictured vulgarities by which taste it- 
self is the most essentially degraded. In fact, too, the meaner 
the object, the more certain it is with us of becoming the rage. 
In the theatre, we run after the farce; in painting, we wor- 
ship the Dutch school ; in — " 
"Literature?" said Saville. 

«Xo! — our literature still breathes of something noble; 
but why? Because books do not always depend upon a clique. 
A book, in order to succeed, does not require the opinion of 
;Mr. Saville or Lady Erpingham so much as a picture or a 
ballet." 

"I am not sure of that," answered Saville, as he withdrew 
presently afterwards to a card-table, to share in the premedi- 
tated plunder of a young banker, who was proud of the honour 
of being ruined by persons of rank. 

In another part of the rooms Constance found a certain old 
philosopher, whom I will call David Mandeville. There was 
something about this man that always charmed those who had 
sense enough to be discontented with the ordinary inhabitants. 
of the Microcosm, — Society. The expression of his counte- 
nance was different from that of others ; there was a breathing 
goodness in his face, an expansion of mind on his forehead. 
You perceived at once that he did not live among triflers, 
nor agitate himself with trifles. Serenity beamed from his 
look — but it was the serenity of thought. Constance sat 
down by him. 

"Are you not sorry," said Mandeville, "to leave England, 
— you, who have made yourself the centre of a circle which, 
for the varieties of its fascination, has never perhaps been 
equalled in this country? Wealth, rank, even wit, others 
might assemble round them; but none ever before convened 
into one splendid galaxy all who were eminent in art, famous 
in letters, wise in politics, and even (for who but you were 
ever above rivalship?) attractive in beauty. I should have 
thought it easier for us to fly from the Armida, than for the 



174 GODOLPHIN. 

Armida to renounce the scene of her enchantment, — the scene 
in which De Stael bowed to the charms of her conversation, 
and Byron celebrated those of her person." 

We may conceive the spell Constance had cast around her, 
when even philosophy (and Mandeville of all philosophers) 
had learned to flatter; but his flattery was sincerity. 

"Alas!" said Constance, sighing, "even if your compli- 
ment were altogether true, you have mentioned nothing that 
should cause me regret. Vanity is one source of happiness, 
but it does not suffice to recompense us for the absence of 
all others. In leaving England, I leave the scene of ever- 
lasting weariness. I am the victim of a feeling of sameness, 
and I look with hope to the prospect of change." 

"Poor thing! " said the old philosopher, gazing mournfully 
on a creature who, so resplendent with, advantages, yet felt 
the crumpled rose-leaf more than the luxury of the couch. 
"Wherever you go the same polished society will present to 
you the same monotony. All courts are alike: men have 
change in action; but to women of your rank all scenes are 
alike. You must not look without for an object, — you must 
create one within. To be happy we must render ourselves 
independent of others." 

"Like all philosophers, you advise the impossible," said 
Constance. 

"How so? Have not the generality of your sex their pecu- 
liar object? One has the welfare of her children; another 
the interest of her husband; a third makes a passion of 
economy; a fourth of extravagance; a fifth of fashion; a 
sixth of solitude. Your friend yonder is always employed 
in nursing her own health: hypochondria supplies her with 
an object; she is really happy because she fancies herself ill. 
Every one you name has an object in life that drives away 
ennui, save yourself." 

"I have one too," said Constance, smiling, "but it does not 
fill up all the spaces of time. The intervals between the acts 
are longer than the acts themselves." 

"Is your object religion? " asked Mandeville, simply. 

Constance was startled: the question was novel. "I fear 



GODOLPHIN. 175 

not," said she, after a moment's hesitation, and with a down- 
cast face. 

"As I thought," returned Mandeville. "N'ow listen. The 
reason why you feel weariness more than those around you, 
is solely because your mind is more expansive. Small minds 
easily find objects: trifles amuse them; but a high soul covets 
things beyond its daily reach: trifles occupy its aim mechani- 
cally; the thought still wanders restless. This is the case 
with you. Your intellect preys upon itself. You would have 
been happier if your rank had been less ; " Constance winced 
— she thought of Godolphin ; " for then you would have been 
ambitious, and aspired to the very rank that now palls upon 
you." Mandeville continued, — 

" You women are at once debarred from public life, and yet 
influence it. You are the prisoners, and yet the despots of 
society. Have you talents? it is criminal to indulge them in 
public; and thus, as talent cannot be stifled, it is misdirected 
in private; you seek ascendency over your own limited cir- 
cle; and what should have been genius degenerates into cun- 
ning. Brought up from your cradles to dissembling your 
most beautiful emotions, your finest principles are always 
tinctured with artifice. As your talents, being stripped of 
their wings, are driven to creep along the earth, and imbibe 
its mire and clay, so are your affections perpetually checked 
and tortured into conventional paths, and a spontaneous feel- 
ing is punished as a deliberate crime. You are untaught the 
broad and soiind principles of life: all that you know of 
morals are its decencies and forms. Thus you are incapable 
of estimating the public virtues and the public deficiencies 
of a brother or a son ; and one reason why toe have no Brutus, 
is because ymi have no Portia. Turkey has its seraglio for 
the person; but Custom in Europe has also a seraglio for the 
mind." 

Constance smiled at the philosopher's passion; but she was 
a woman, and she was moved by it. 

"Perhaps," said she, "in the progress of events, the state 
of the women may be improved as well as that of the men." 

"Doubtless, at some future stage of the world. And be- 



176 GODOLPHIN. 

lieve me, Lady Erpingham, politician and schemer as you 
are, that no legislative reform alone will improve mankind: 
it is the social state which requires reformation." 

"But you asked me some minutes since," said Constance, 
after a pause, ''if the object of my pursuit was religion. I 
disappointed but not surprised you by my answer." 

"Yes: you grieved me, because, in your case, religion 
could alone fill the dreary vacuum of your time. For, with 
your enlarged and cultivated mind, you would not view the 
grandest of earthly questions in a narrow and sectarian light. 
You would not think religion consisted in a sanctified de- 
meanour, in an ostentatious almsgiving, in a harsh judgment 
of all without the pale of your opinions. You would behold 
in it a benign and harmonious system of morality, which 
takes from ceremony enough not to render it tedious but im- 
pressive. The school of the Bayles and Voltaires is annihi- 
lated. Men begin now to feel that to philosophize is not to 
sneer. In Doubt we are stopped short at every outlet beyond 
the Sensual. In Belief lies the secret of all our valuable ex- 
ertion. Two sentiments are enough to preserve even the 
idlest temper from stagnation, — a desire and a hope. What 
then can we say of the desire to be useful, and the hope to be 
immortal? " 

This was language Constance had not often heard before, 
nor was it frequent on the lips of him who now uttered it. But 
an interest in the fate and happiness of one in whom he saw 
so much to admire, had made Mandeville anxious that she 
should entertain some principle which he could also esteem. 
And there was a fervour, a sincerit}^, in his voice and man- 
ner, that thrilled to the very heart of Lady Erpingham. She 
pressed his hand in silence. She thought afterwards over his 
words;' but worldly life is not easily accessible to any lasting 
impressions save those of vanity and love. Eeligion has two 
sources, — the habit of early years, or the process of after 
thought. But to Constance had not been fated the advantage 
of the first ; and how can deep thought of another world be a 
favourite employment with the scheming woman of this? 

This is the only time that Mandeville appears in this 



GODOLPHIN. 177 

work, — a type of the rarity of the intervention of religious 
■wisdom on the scenes of real life. 

"By the way," said Saville, as, in departing, he encoun- 
tered Constance by the door, and made his final adieus, — 
"by the way, you will perhaps meet, somewhere in Italy, 
my old young friend, Percy Godolphin. He has not been 
pleased to prate of his whereabout to me ; but I hear that he 
has been seen lately at jSTaples." 

Constance coloured, and her heart beat violently ; but she 
answered indifferently, and turned away. 

The next morning they set off for Italy. But within one 
week from that day, what a change awaited Constance ! 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

AMBITION VINDICATED. THE HOME OF GODOLPHIN AND LU- 

CILLA. LUCILLA's MIND. THE EFFECT OF HAPPV LOVE 

ON FEMALE TALENT. THE EVE OF FAREWELL. LUCILLA 

ALONE. TEST OF A WOMAN 's AFFECTION. 

MUCH-ABUSED and highly-slandered passion ! — passion 
rather of the soul than the heart; hateful to the pseudo- 
moralist, but viewed with favouring though not undiscrimi- 
nating eyes by the true philosopher, — bright-winged and 
august ambition! It is well for fools to revile thee, because 
thou art liable, like other utilities, to abuse ! The wind up- 
roots the oak, — but for every oak it uproots it scatters a 
thousand acorns. Ixion embraced the cloud, but from the 
embrace sprang a hero. Thou, too, hast thy fits of violence 
and storm ; but without thee, life would stagnate. Thou, too, 
embracest thy clouds ; but even thy clouds have the demigods 
for their offspring! 

It was the great and prevailing misfortune of Godolphin's 
life that he had early taught himself to be superior to exer- 
tion. His talents, therefore, only preyed on himself; and 

12 



178 GODOLPHIN. 

instead of tlie vigorous and daring actor of the world, he was 
alternately the indolent sensualist or the solitary dreamer. 
He did not view the stir of the great Babel as a man with a 
wholesome mind should do ; and thus from his infirmities we 
draw a moral. The moral is not the worse in that it opposes 
the trite moralities of those who would take from action its 
motive : the men of genius, who are not also men of ambition, 
are either humourists, or visionaries, or hypochondriacs. 

By the side of one of the Italian lakes, Godolpliin and 
Lucilla fixed their abode; and here the young idealist for 
some time imagined himself happy. Never until now so 
fond of Nature as of cities, he gave himself up to the en- 
chantment of the Eden around him. He spent the long sunny 
hours of noon on the smooth lake, or among the sheltering 
trees by which it was encircled. The scenes he had witnessed 
in the world became to him the food of quiet meditation, 
and for the first time in his life, thought did not weary him 
with its sameness. 

When his steps turned homeward, the anxious form of 
Lucilla waited for him ; her eye brightened at his approach, 
her spirit escaped restraint and bounded into joy ; and Godol- 
phin, touched by her delight, became eager to witness it, — 
he felt the magnet of a Home. Yet as the first enthusiasm 
of passion died away, he could not but be sensible that Lucilla 
was scarcely a companion. Her fancy was indeed lively, and 
her capacity acute ; but experience had set a confined limit to 
her ideas. She had nothing save love, and a fitful tempera- 
ment, upon which she could draw for conversation. Those 
whose education debars them from deriving instruction from 
things have in general the power to extract amusement from 
persons, — they can talk of the ridiculous Mrs. So-and-so, or 
the absurd Mr. Blank. But our lovers saw no society, and 
thus their commune was thrown entirely on their internal 
resources. 

There was always that in the peculiar mind of Godolphin 
which was inclined towards ideas too refined and subtle even 
for persons of cultivated intellect. If Constance could scarcely 
comprehend the tone of his character, we may believe that to 



GODOLPHIN. 179 

Lucilla he was wholly a mystery. This, perhaps, enhanced 
her love, but the consciousness of it disappointed his. He 
felt that what he considered the noblest faculties he possessed 
were unappreciated. He was sometimes angry with Lucilla 
that she loved only those qualities in his character which 
he shared with the rest of mankind. His speculative and 
Hamlet-Vike temper — let us here take Goethe's view of 
Hamlet, and combine a certain weakness with the finer traits 
of the royal dreamer — perpetually deserted the solid world, 
and flew to aerial creations. He could not appreciate the 
present. Had Godolphin loved Lucilla as he once thought 
that he should love her, the beauties of her character would 
have blinded him to its defects ; but its passion had been too 
sudden to be thoroughly grounded. It had arisen from the 
knowledge of her affection, not grown step by step from the 
natural bias of his own. Between the interval of liking and 
possession, love (to be durable) should pass through many 
stages. The doubt, the fear, the first pressure of the hand, 
the first kiss, each should be an epoch for remembrance to 
cling to. In moments of after coolness or anger, the mind 
should fly from the sated present to the million tender and 
freshening associations of the past. With these associations 
the affection renews its youth. How vast a store of melting 
reflections, how countless an accumulation of the spells that 
preserve constancy, does that love forfeit, in which the 
memory only commences with possession! 

And the more delicate and thoughtful our nature, the more 
powerful are these associations. Do they not constitute the 
immense difference between the love and the intrigue? All 
things that savour of youth make our most exquisite sensa- 
tions, whether to experience, or recall: thus, in the seasons 
of the year, we prize the spring ; and in the effusions of the 
heart, the courtship. 

Beautiful, too, and tender — wild and fresh in her tender- 
ness — as Lucilla was, there was that in her character, in 
addition to her want of education, which did not wholly accord 
with Godolphin's preconception of the being his fancy had 
conjured up. His calm and profound nature desired one in 



180 GODOLPHIN. 

whom lie could not only confide, but, as it were, repose. Thus 
one great charm that had attracted him to Constance was the 
evenness and smoothness of her temper. But the self -formed 
mind of Lucilla was ever in a bright, and to him a wearying, 
agitation; tears and smiles perpetually chased each other. 
Not comprehending his character, but thinking only and 
wholly of him, she distracted herself with conjectures and 
suspicions, which she was too ingenuous and too impas- 
sioned to conceal. After watching him for hours, she would 
weep that he did not turn from his books or his rerery to 
search also for her, with eyes equally yearning and tender 
as her own. The fear in absence, the absorbed devotion 
when present, that absolutely made her existence, she was 
wretched because he did not reciprocate with the same in- 
tensity of soul. She could conceive nothing of love but 
that which she felt herself; and she saw, daily and hourly, 
that in that love he did not sympathize, and therefore she 
embittered her life by thinking that he did not return her 
affection. 

"You wrong us both," said he, in answer to her tearful 
accusations; "but our sex love differently from yours." 

"Ah," she replied, "I feel that love has no varieties: there 
is but one love, but there may be many counterfeits." 

Godolphin smiled to think how the untutored daughter of 
nature had unconsciously uttered the sparkling aphorism of 
the most artificial of maxim-makers. ^ Lucilla saw the smile, 
and her tears flowed instantly. 

"Thou mockest me." 

"Thou art a little fool," said Godolphin, kindly, and he 
kissed away the storm. 

And this was ever an easy matter. There was nothing un- 
feminine or sullen in Lucilla's irregulated moods; a kind 
word, a kind caress, allayed them in an instant, and turned 
the transient sorrow into sparkling delight. But they who 
know how irksome is the perpetual trouble of conciliation to 
a man meditative and indolent like Godolphin, will appreciate 
the pain that even her tenderness occasioned him. 
^ Rochefoucauld. 



GODOLPHIN. 181 

There is one thing very noticeable in women when they 
have once obtained the object of their life,— the sudden check 
that is given to the impulses of their genius. Content to 
have found the realization of their chief hope, they do not 
look beyond to other but lesser objects, as they had been wont 
to do before. Hence we see so many who, before marriage, 
strike us with admiration from the vividness of their talents, 
and after marriage settle down into the mere machine. We 
wonder that we ever feared, while we praised, the brilliancy 
of an intellect that seems now never to wander from the 
limits of house and hearth. So with poor Lucilla; her rest- 
less mind and ardent genius had once seized on every object 
within their reach: she had taught herself music; she had 
learned the colourings and lines of art; not a book came in 
her way, but she would have sought to extract from it a new 
idea. But she was now with Gk)dolphin, and all other occu- 
pations for thought were gone ; she had nothing beyond his 
love to wish for, nothing beyond his character to learn. He 
was the circle of hope, and her heart its centre ; all lines were 
equal to that heart, so that they touched him. It is clear that 
this devotion prevented her, however, from fitting herself to 
be his companion; she did not seek to accomplish herself, but 
to study him: thus in her extreme love was another reason 
why that love was not adequately returned. 

But Godolphin felt all the responsibility that he had taken 
on himself. He felt how utterly the happiness of this poor 
and solitary child — for a child she was in character, and 
almost in years — depended upon him. He roused himself, 
therefore, from his ordinary selfishness, and rarely, if ever, 
gave way to the irritation which she unknowingly but con- 
stantly kept alive. The balmy and delicious climate, the 
liquid serenity of the air, the majestic repose with which 
Nature invested the loveliness that surrounded their home, 
contributed to soften and calm his mind; and he had persuaded 
Lucilla to look without despair upon his occasional although 
short absences. Sometimes he passed two or three weeks at 
Rome, sometimes at Naples or Florence. He knew so well 
how necessary such intervals of absence are to the preserva- 



182 GODOLPHIN. 

tion of love, to the defeat of that satiety which creeps over 
us with custom, that he had resolutely enforced it as a neces- 
sity, although always under the excuse of business, — a plea 
that Lucilla could understand and not resist; for the word 
"business" seemed to her like destiny, — a call that, however 
odious, we cannot disobey. At first, indeed, she was discon- 
solate at the absence only of two days; but when she saw 
how eagerly her lover returned to her, with what a fresh 
charm he listened to her voice or her song, she began to con- 
fess that even in the evil might be good. 

By degrees he accustomed her to longer intervals; and 
Lucilla relieved the dreariness of the time by the thousand 
little plans and surprises with which women delight in re- 
ceiving the beloved wanderer after absence. His departure 
was a signal for a change in the house, the gardens, the ar- 
bour; and when she was tired with these occupations, she 
was not forbidden at least to write to him and receive his 
letters. Daily intoxication! and men's words are so much 
kinder when written than they are when uttered! Fortu- 
nately for Lucilla, her early habits, and her strange qualities 
of mind, rendered her independent of companionship, and 
fond of solitude. 

Often Godolphin, who could not conceive how persons 
without education could entertain themselves, taking pity on 
her loneliness and seclusion, would say, — 

" But how, Lucilla, have you passed this long day that I have 
spent away from you, — among the woods or on the lake? " 

And Lucilla, delighted to recount to him the history of 
her hours, would go over each incident, and body forth every 
thought that had occurred to her, with a grave and serious 
minut.eness that evinced her capabilities of dispensing with 
the world. 

In this manner they passed somewhat more than two years ; 
and, in spite of the human alloy, it was perhaps the happiest 
period of Godolphin 's life, and the one that the least disap- 
pointed his too-exacting imagination. Lucilla had had one 
daughter, but she died a few weeks after birth. She wept 
over the perished flower, but was not inconsolable; for, be- 



GODOLPHIX. 183 

fore its loss, she had taught herself to thiuk no affliction could 
be irremediable that did not happen to Godolphin. Perhaps 
Godolphin was the more grieved of the two; men of his char- 
acter are fond of the occupation of watching the growth of 
minds; they put in practice their chimeras of education. 
Happy child, to have escaped an experiment! 

It was the eve before one of Godolphin's periodical excur- 
sions, and it was Eome that he proposed to visit; Godolphin 
had lingered about the lake until the sun had set, and Lucilla, 
grown impatient, went forth to seek him. The day had been 
sultry, and now a sombre and breathless calm hung over the 
deepening eve. The pines, those gloomy children of the for- 
est, which shed something of melancholy and somewhat of 
sternness over the brighter features of an Italian landscape, 
drooped heavily in the breezeless air. As she came on the 
border of the lake, its waves lay dark and voiceless ; only, at 
intervals, the surf, fretting along the pebbles, made a low and 
dreary sound, or from the trees some lingering songster sent 
forth a shrill and momentary note, and then again all 
became — 

" An atmosphere without a breath, 
A silence sleeping there." 

There was a spot where the trees, receding in a ring, left 
some bare and huge fragments of stone uncovered by verdure. 
It was the only spot around that rich and luxuriant scene that 
was not in harmony with the soft spirit of the place : might I 
indulge a fanciful comparison, I should say that it was like 
one desolate and gray remembrance in the midst of a career 
of pleasure. On this spot Godolphin now stood alone, look- 
ing along the still and purple waters that lay before him. 
Lucilla, with a light step, climbed the rugged stones, and 
touching his shoulder, reproached him with a tender playful- 
ness for his truancy. 

"Lucilla," said he, when peace was restored, "what im- 
pressions does this dreary and prophetic pause of nature be- 
fore the upgathering of the storm create in you? Does it 
inspire you with melancholy, or thought, or fear? " 

" I see my star," answered Lucilla, pointing to a far and soli- 



184 GODOLPHIN. 

tary orb, which hung islanded in a sea of cloud, that swept 
slowly and blackly onward, — "I see my star, and I think 
more of that little light than of the darkness around it," 

" But it will presently be buried among the clouds,"" said 
Godolphin, smiling at that superstition which Lucilla had 
borrowed from her father. 

"But the clouds pass away, and the star endures." 

"You are of a sanguine nature, my Lucilla." Lucilla 
sighed. 

"Why that sigh, dearest? " 

"Because I am thinking how little even those who love us 
most know of us! I never tell my disquiet and sorrow. 
There are times when thou wouldst not think me too warmly 
addicted to hope ! " 

"And what, poor idler, have you to fear? " 

"Hast thou never felt it possible that thou couldst love 
me less? " 

"Xever!" 

Lucilla raised her large searching eyes, and gazed eagerly 
on his face ; but in its calm features and placid brow she saw 
no ground for augury, whether propitious or evil. She turned 
away. 

"I cannot think, Lucilla," said Godolphin, "that you ever 
direct those thoughts of yours, wandering though they be, to 
the future. Do they ever extend to the space of some ten or 
twenty years? " 

"No. But one year may contain the whole history of my 
future." 

As she spoke, the clouds gathered round the solitary star to 
which Lucilla had pointed. The storm was at hand; they felt 
its approach, and turned homeward. 

There is something more than ordinarily fearful in the 
tempests that visit those soft and garden climes. The unfre- 
quency of such violent changes in the mood of Nature serves 
to appall us as with an omen ; it is like a sudden affliction in 
the midst of happiness, or a wound from the hand of one we 
love. For the stroke for which we are not prepared we have 
rather despondency than resistance. 



GODOLPHIX. 185 

As they reached their home, the heavy raindrops began to 
fall. They stood for some minutes at the casement, watching 
the coruscations of the lightning as it played over the black 
and hesivj waters of the lake. Lucilla, whom the influences 
of Nature always strangely and mysteriously affected, clung 
pale and almost trembling to Godolphin ; but even in her fear 
there was delight in being so near to him in whose love alone 
she thought there was protection. Oh, what luxury so dear 
to a woman as is the sense of dependence! Poor Lucilla! it 
was the last evening she ever spent with one whom she wor- 
shipped so entirely. 

Godolphin remained up longer than Lucilla. When he 
joined her in her room, the storm had ceased; and he found 
her standing by the open window, and gazing on the skies 
that were now bright and serene. Far in the deep stillness 
of midnight crept the waters of the lake, hushed once more 
into silence, and reflecting the solemn and unfathomable stars. 
That chain of hills, which but to name awakens countless 
memories of romance, stretched behind, their blue and dim 
summits melting into the skies; and over one, higher than 
the rest, paused the new-risen moon, silvering the first be- 
neath, and farther down, breaking with one long and yet mel- 
lower track of light over the waters of the lake. 

As Godolphin approached he did so, unconsciously, with a 
hushed and noiseless step. There is something in the quiet 
of nature like worship; it is as if, from the breathless heart 
of Things, went up a prayer or a homage to the Arch-Creator. 
One feels subdued by a stillness so utter and so august; it ex- 
tends itself to our own sensations, and deepens into an awe. 

Both, then, looked on in silence, indulging it may be dif- 
ferent thoughts. At length, Lucilla said softly, "Tell me, 
hast thou really no faith in my father's creed? Are the stars 
quite dumb? Is there no truth in their movements, no proph- 
ecy in their lustre? " 

"My Lucilla, reason and experience tell us that the astrolo- 
gers nurse a dream that has no reality." 

"Reason! well! — Experience! — why, did not #/<y father's 
mortal illness hurry thee from home at the very time in which 



186 GODOLPHIN. 

mine foretold thy departure and its cause? I was then but a 
child ; yet I shall never forget the paleness of thy cheek when 
my father uttered his prediction." 

*'I, too, was almost a child then, Lucilla." 

*'But that prediction was verified? " 

"It was so; but how many did Yolktman utter that were 
never verified? In true science there are no chances, no 
uncertainties." 

"And my father," said Lucilla, unheeding the answer, 
"always foretold that thy lot and mine were to be entwined." 

"And the prophecy, perhaps, disposed you to the fact. 
You might never have loved me, Lucilla, if your thoughts 
had not been driven to dwell upon me by the prediction." 

"Nay; I thought of thee before I heard the prophecy." 

"But your father foretold vie, dearest, cross and disap- 
pointment in my love, — was he not wrong; am I not blest 
with you? " 

Lucilla threw herself into her lover's arms, and, as she 
kissed him, murmured, "Ah, if I could make thee happy! " 

The next day Godolphin departed for Eome. Lucilla was 
more dejected at his dejDarture than she had been even in his 
earliest absence. The winter was now slowly approaching, 
and the weather was cold and drear3^ That year it was un- 
usually rainy and tempestuous, and as the wild gusts howled 
around her solitary home — how solitary now ! — or she heard 
the big drops hurrying down on the agitated lake, she shud- 
dered at her own despondent thoughts, and dreaded the gloom 
and loneliness of the lengthened night. For the first time 
since she had lived with Godolphin she turned, but discon- 
solately, to the company of books. 

Works of all sorts filled their home, but the spell that once 
spoke to her from the page was broken. If the book was not 
of love, it possessed no interest; if of love, she thought the 
description both tame and false. No one ever painted love 
so as fully to satisfy another : to some it is too florid, to some 
too commonplace; the god, like other gods, has no likeness 
on earth, and every wave on which the star of passion beams 
breaks the lustre into different refractions of light. 



GODOLPIIIN. 187 

As one day she was turning listlessly over some books that 
had been put aside by Godolphin in a closet, and hoping to 
find one that contained, as sometimes happened, his com- 
ments or at least his marks, she was somewhat startled to find 
among them several volumes which she remembered to have 
belonged to her father. Godolphin had bought them after 
^'olktman's death, and put them by as relics of his singular 
friend, and as samples of the laborious and self-willed aber- 
ration of the human intellect. 

Few among these works could Lucilla comprehend, for they 
were chiefly in other tongues than the only two with which 
she was acquainted. But some, among which were manu- 
scripts by her father, beautifully written, and curiously orna- 
mented (some of the chief works on the vainer sciences are 
only to be found in manuscript), she could contrive to de- 
cipher by a little assistance from her memory, in recalling 
the signs and hieroglyphics which her father had often ex- 
plained to her, and, indeed, caused her to copy out for him 
in his calculations. Always possessing an untaxed and un- 
questioned belief in the astral powers, she now took some in- 
terest in reading of their mysteries. Her father, secretly, 
perhaps, hoping to bequeath his name to the gratitude of 
some future Hermes, had in his manuscripts reduced into a 
system many scattered theories of others, and many dogmas 
of his own. Over these, for they were simpler and easier 
than the crabbed and mystical speculations in the printed 
books, she more especially pored; and she was not sorry at 
finding fresh reasons for her untutored adoration of the stars 
and apparitions of the heavens. 

Still, however, these bewildering researches made but a 
small part, comparatively speaking, of the occupation of her 
thoughts. To write to and hear from Godolphin had become 
to her more necessary than ever, and her letters were fuller 
and more minute in their details of love than even in the 
period of their first passion. Wouldst thou know if the 
woman thou lovest still loves thee, trust not her spoken 
words, her present smiles; examine her letters in absence, 
see if she dwells, as she once did, upon trifies — but trifles 



188 GODOLPHIN. 

relating to thee. The things which the indifferent forget are 
among the most treasured meditations of love. 

But Lucilla was not satisfied with the letters — frequent as 
they were — that she received in answer; they were kind, 
affectionate, but the something was wanting. " The best part 
of beauty is that which no picture can express." That which 
the heart most asks is that which no words can convey. Hon- 
esty, patriotism, religion, — these have had their hypocrites 
for life; but passion permits only momentary dissemblers. 



CHAPTER XXXV. 

GODOLPHIN AT ROME. — THE CURE FOR A MORBID IDExVLISM. 

HIS EMBARRASSMENT IN REGARD TO LUCILLA. THE 

RENCONTRE WITH AN OLD FRIEND. — THE COLOSSEUM. — A 
SURPRISE. 

GoDOLPHiN arrived at Eorae: it was thronged with Eng- 
lish, Among them were some whom he remembered with es- 
teem in England. He had grown a little weary of his long 
solitude, and he entered with eagerness into the society of 
those who courted him. He was still an object of great in- 
terest to the idle; and as men grow older, they become less 
able to dispense with attention. 

He was pleased to find his own importance, and he tasted 
the sweets of companionship with more gust than he had yet 
done. His talents, buried in obscurity, and uncalled for by 
the society of Lucilla, were now perpetually tempted into 
action, and stimulated by reward. It had never before ap- 
peared to him so charming a thing to shine; for before he 
had been sated with even that pleasure. Now, from long 
relaxation, it had become new ; vanity had recovered its nice 
perception. He was no longer so absorbed as he had been by 
visionary images. He had given his fancy food in his long 
solitude, and with its wild co-mate; and being somewhat dis- 



GODOLPHIN. 189 

appointed in the result, the living world became to him a 
fairer prospect than it had seemed while the world of imagi- 
nation was untried. Nothing more confirms the health of the 
mind than indulging its favourite infirmity to its own cure. 
So Goethe, in his memoirs, speaking of "Werther," remarks, 
that "the composition of that extravagant work cured his 
character of extravagance." 

Godolphin thought often of Lucilla; but perhaps, if the 
truth of his heart were known even to himself, a certain sen- 
timent of pain and humiliation was associated with the ten- 
derness of his remembrance. With her he had led a life, 
romantic, it is true, but somewhat effeminate ; and he thought 
now, surrounded by the gay and freshening tide of the world, 
somewhat mawkish in its romance. He did not experience a 
desire to return to the still lake and the gloomy pines; he 
felt that Lucilla did not suffice to make his world. He would 
have wished to bring her to Eome; to live with her more in 
public than he had hitherto done; to conjoin, in short, her 
society with the more recreative dissipation of the world : but 
there were many obstacles to this plan in his fastidious im- 
agination. So new to the world, its ways, its fashions, so 
strange and infantine in all things as Lucilla was, he trem- 
bled to expose her inexperience to the dangers that would be- 
set it. He knew that his "friends" would pay very little 
respect to her reserve; and that for one so lovely and un- 
hackneyed, the snares of the wildest and most subtle adepts 
of intrigue would be set. Godolphin did not undervalue 
Lucilla's pure and devoted heart; but he knew that the only 
sure antidote against the dangers of the world is the knowl- 
edge of the world. There was nothing in Lucilla that ever 
promised to attain that knowledge; her very nature seemed 
to depend on her ignorance of the nature of others. Joined 
to this fear and a confused sentiment of delicacy towards her, 
a certain remorseful feeling in himself made him dislike 
bringing their connection immediately before the curious and 
malignant world: so much had circumstance, and Lucilla's 
own self-willed temper and uncalculating love, contributed to 
drive the poor girl into his arms, and so truly had he chosen 



190 GODOLPHIN. 

the generous not the selfish part, until passion and nature 
were exposed to a temptation that could have been withstood 
by none but the adherent to sterner principles than he (the 
creature of indolence and feeling) had ever clung "to, that 
Godolphin, viewing his habits, his education, his whole bias 
and frame of mind, the estimates and customs of the world, 
may not, perhaps, be very rigidly judged for the nature of his 
tie to Lucilla. But I do not seek to excuse it, nor did he 
wholly excuse it to himself. The image of Volktman often 
occurred to him, and always in reproach. Living with Lucilla 
in a spot only trod by Italians, so indulgent to love, and 
where the whisper of shame could never reach her ear or 
awaken Ms remorse, her state did not, however, seem to her 
or himself degraded, and the purity of her girlish mind al- 
most forbade the intrusion of the idea. But to bring her into 
public, among his own countrymen, and to feel that the gen- 
erous and devoted girl, now so unconscious of sin, would be 
rated by English eyes with the basest and most abandoned 
of the sex, with the glorifiers in vice or the hypocrites for 
money, — this was a thought which he could not contemplate, 
and which he felt he would rather pass his life in solitude 
than endure. But this very feeling gave an embarrassment 
to his situation with Lucilla, and yet more fixedly combined her 
image with that of a wearisome seclusion and an eternal ennui. 

From the thought of Lucilla, coupled with its many embar- 
rassments, Godolphin turned with avidity to the easy enjoy- 
ments of life, — enjoyments that ask no care and dispense 
with the trouble of reflection. 

But among the visitors to Rome, the one whose sight gave 
to Godolphin the greatest pleasure was his old friend, Augus- 
tus Saville. A decaying constitution, and a pulmonary attack 
in especial, had driven the accomplished voluptuary to a war- 
mer climate. The meeting of the two friends was quite char- 
acteristic; it was at a soiree at an English house. Saville 
had managed to get up a whist-table. 

" Look, Saville, there is Godolphin, your old friend ! " cried 
the host, who was looking on the game, and waiting to 
cut in. 



GODOLPHIN. 191 

"Hist!" said Saville; "don't direct his attention to me 
until after the odd trick! " 

Notwithstanding this coolness when a point was in ques- 
tion, Saville was extremely glad to meet his former pupil. 
They retired into a corner of the room, and talked over the 
world. Godolphin hastened to turn the conversation on Lady 
Erpingham. 

"Ah," said Saville, "I see from your questions, and yet 
more your tone of voice, that although it is now several years 
since you met, you still preserve the sentiment, the weakness 
— Ah! bah!" 

"Pshaw!" said Godolphin; "I owe her revenge, not love. 
But Erpingham? Does she love him? He is handsome." 

"Erpingham? What — you have not heard — " 

"Heard what?" 

"Oh, nothing; but, pardon me, they wait for me at the 
card-table. I should like to stay with you, but you know one 
must not be selfish ; the table would be broken up without me. 
No virtue without self-sacrifice, eh? " 

" But one moment. What is the matter with the Erping- 
hams; have they quarrelled?" 

"Quarrelled? Bah! Quarrelled? no; I dare say she likes 
him better now than ever she did before." And Saville 
limped away to the table. 

Godolphin remained for some time abstracted and thought- 
ful. At length, just as he was going away, Saville, who, hav- 
ing an unplayable hand and a bad partner, had somewhat lost 
his interest in the game, looked up and beckoned to him. 

" Godolphin, my dear fellow, I am to escort a lady to see 
the lions to-morrow; a widow, — a rich widow; handsome, 
too. Do, for charity's sake, accompany us, or meet us at the 
Colosseum. How well that sounds, eh? About two." 

Godolphin refused at first, but being pressed, assented. 

Not surrounded by the lesser glories of modern Rome, but 
girt with the mighty desolation of the old city of Romulus, 
stands the most wonderful monument, perhaps, in the world, of 
imperial magnificence, — the Flavian Amphitheatre, to which, 
it has been believed, the colossal statue of the worst of em- 



192 GODOLPHIN. 

perors gave that name (the Colosseum!), allied with the least 
ennobling remembrances yet giving food to the loftiest 
thoughts. The least ennobling remembrances; for what can 
be more degrading than the amusements of a degraded peo- 
ple, who reserved meekness for their tyrants, and lavished 
ferocity on their shows? From that of the wild beast to that 
of the Christian martyr, blood has been the only sanctifica- 
tion of this temple to the Arts. The history of the Past 
broods like an air over those mighty arches ; but Memory can 
find no reminiscence worthy of the spot. The amphitheatre 
was not built until history had become a record of the vice 
and debasement of the human race. The Faun and the Dryad 
had deserted the earth; no sweet superstition, the faith of 
the grotto and the green hill, could stamp with a delicate and 
undying spell the labours of man. Nor could the ruder but 
august virtues of the heroic age give to the tradition of the 
arch and column some stirring remembrance or exalting 
thought. Not only the warmth of fancy, but the greatness 
of soul was gone ; the only triumph left to genius was to fix 
on its page the gloomy vices which made the annals of the 
world. Tacitus is the historian of the Colosseum. But the 
very darkness of the past gives to the thoughts excited within 
that immense pile a lofty but mournful character. A sense 
of vastness — for which, as we gaze, we cannot find words, 
but which bequeaths thoughts that our higher faculties would 
not willingly forego — ■ creeps within us as we gaze on this 
Titan relic of gigantic crimes forever passed away from the 
world. 

And not only within the scene, but around the scene, what 
voices of old float upon the air! Yonder the triumphal arch 
of Constantine, its Corinthian arcades, and the history of 
Trajan sculptured upon its marble; the dark and gloomy ver- 
dure of the Palatine; the ruins of the palace of the Caesars; 
the mount of Fable, of Fame, of Luxury (the Three Epochs 
of Nations); the habitation of Saturn; the home of Tully; the 
sight of the Golden House of Nero! Look at your feet, look 
around; the waving weed, the broken column,— Time's wit- 
ness, and the Earthquake's. In that contrast between grand- 



GODOLPHIX. 193 

eur and decay, in the unutterable and awful solemnity that, 
while rife with the records of past ages, is sad also with their 
ravage, you have felt the nature of eternity! 

Through this vast amphitheatre, and giving way to such 
meditations, Godolphin passed on alone, the day after his 
meeting with Saville ; and at the hour he had promised the 
latter to seek him, he mounted the wooden staircase which 
conducts the stranger to the wonders above the arena, and by 
one of the arches that looked over the still pines that slept 
afar off in the sun of noon, he saw a female in deep mourning, 
whom Saville appeared to be addressing. He joined them; 
the female turned round, and he beheld, pale and saddened, 
but how glorious still, the face of Constance! 

To him the interview was unexpected, by her foreseen. The 
colour flushed over her cheek, the voice sank inaudible within. 
But Godolphin's emotion was more powerful and uncontrolled : 
violent tremblings literally shook him as he stood; he gasped 
for breath; the sight of the dead returned to earth would have 
affected him less. 

In this immense ruin, in the spot where, most of earth, 
man feels the insignificance of an individual life, or of the 
rapid years over which it extends, he had encountered, sud- 
denly, the being who had coloured all his existence. He was 
reminded at once of the grand epoch of his life, and of its 
utter unimportance. But these are the thoughts that would 
occur rather to us than him. Thought at that moment was an 
intolerable flash that burst on him for an instant, and then 
left all in darkness. He clung to the shattered corridor for 
support. Constance seemed touched and surprised by so 
overwhelming an emotion, and the habitual hypocrisy in 
which women are reared, and by which they learn to conceal 
the sentiments they experience, and affect those they do not, 
came to her assistance and his own. 

"It is many years, Mr. Godolphin," said she, in a collected 
but soft voice, "since we met." 

"Years!" repeated Godolphin, vaguely, and approaching 
her with a slow and faltering step; "years! you have not 
numbered them ! " 

13 



194 GODOLPHIX. 

Saville had retired a few steps on Godolphin's arrival, and 
had watched with a sardonic yet indifferent smile the proof 
of his friend's weakness. He joined Godolphin, and said, — 

" You must forgive me, my dear Godolphin, for not appris- 
ing you before of Lady Erpingham's arrival at Rome; but a 
delight is perhaps the greater for being sudden," 

The word Erpingham thrilled displeasingly through Godol- 
phin's veins; in some measure it restored him to himself. 
He bowed coldly, and muttered a few ceremonious words; 
and while he was yet speaking, some stragglers that had be- 
longed to Lady Erpingham's party came up. Fortunately, 
perhaps, for the self-possession of both, they, the once lovers, 
were separated from each other. But whenever Constance 
turned her glance to Godolphin, she saw those large, search- 
ing, melancholy eyes, whose power she well recalled, fixed 
unmovingly on her, as seeking to read in her cheek the 
history of the years which had ripened its beauties — for 
another. 



CHAPTER XXXVI. 

DIALOGUE BETWEEN GODOLPHIX AND SAVILLE. — CERTAIN 

EVENTS EXPLAINED. SAVILLE's APOLOGY FOR A BAD 

HEART. GODOLPHIn's CONFUSED SENTIMENTS FOR LADY 

ERPINGHAM. 

"Good heavens I Constance Vernon once more free! " 

"And did you not really know it? Your retreat by the 
lake must have been indeed seclusion. It is seven months 
since Lord Erpingham died." 

"Do I dream?" murmured Godolphin, as he strode hur- 
riedly to and fro the apartment of his friend. 

Saville, stretched on the sofa, diverted himself with mixing 
snuffs on a little table beside him. Nothing is so mournfully 
amusing in life as to see what trifles the most striking occur- 
rences to us appear to our friends. 



GODOLPHIN. 195 

"But," said Saville, not looking up, "you seem very incu- 
rious to know how he died, and where. You must learn that 
Erpingham had two ruling passions, — one for horses, the 
other for fiddlers. In setting off for Italy he expected, natu- 
rally enough, to find the latter, but he thought he might as 
well export the former. He accordingly filled the vessel with 
quadrupeds, and the second day after landing he diverted the 
tedium of a foreign clime with a gentle ride. He met Avith a 
fall, and was brought home speechless. The loss of speech 
was not of great importance to his acquaintance ; but he died 
that night, and the loss of his life was! — for he gave very 
fair dinners — ah, bah! " And Saville inhaled the fragrance 
of a new mixture. 

Saville had a very pleasant way of telling a story, particu- 
larly if it related to a friend's death, or some such agreeable 
incident. "Poor Lady Erpingham was exceedingly shocked; 
and well she might be, for I don't think weeds become her. 
She came here by slow stages, in order that the illustrious 
Dead might chase away the remembrance of the deceased." 

"Your heart has not improved, Saville." 

"Heart! What's that? Oh, a thing servant-maids have, 
and break for John the footman. Heart! my dear fellow, 
you are turned canter, and make use of words without 
meaning." 

Godolphin was not prepared for a conversation of this 
order; and Saville, in a somewhat more serious air, con- 
tinued: "Ever}^ person, Godolphin, talks about the world. 
The world! it conveys different meanings to each, according 
to the nature of that circle which makes his world. But we 
all agree in one thing, — the worldliness of the world. Now, 
no man's world is so void of affection as ours, — the polished, 
the courtly, the great world; the higher the air, the more 
pernicious to vegetation. Our very charm, our very fascina- 
tion, depends upon a certain mockery; a subtle and fine ridi- 
cule on all persons and all things constitutes the essence of 
our conversation. Judge if that tone be friendly to the seri- 
ousness of the affections. Some poor dog among us marries, 
and household plebeianisms corrupt the most refined. Custom 



196 GODOLPHIN. 

attaches the creature to his ugly wife and his squalling chil- 
dren; he grows affectionate, and becomes out of fashion. But 
we single men, dear Godolphin, have no one to care for but 
ourselves; the deaths that happen, unlike the ties that fall 
from the married men, do not interfere with our domestic 
comforts. We miss no one to make our tea, or give us our 
appetite-pills before dinner. Our losses are not intimate and 
household. We shrug our shoulders, and are not a whit the 
worse for them. Thus, for want of grieving and caring and 
fretting, we are happy enough to grow — come, I will use an 
epithet to please you — hard-hearted ! We congeal into phi- 
losophy; and are we not then wise in adopting this life of 
isolation and indifference?" 

Godolphin, rapt in reflection, scarcely heeded the volup- 
tuary, but Saville continued; he had grown to that height in 
loneliness that he even loved talking to himself. 

"Yes, wise! For this world is so filled with the selfish, 
that he who is not so labours under a disadvantage. Nor are 
wc the worse for our apathy. If we jest at a man's misfor- 
tune, we do not do it to his face. Why not out of the ill, 
which is misfortune, extract good, which is amusement? 
Three men in this room are made cheerful by a jest at a 
broken leg in the next. Is the broken leg the worse for it? 
No; but the three men are made merry by the jest. Is the 
jest wicked, then? Nay, it is a benevolence. But some cry, 
'Ay, but this habit of disregarding misfortunes blunts your 
wills when you have the power to relieve them.' Relieve! 
was ever such delusion? What can we relieve in the vast 
mass of human misfortunes? As well might we take a drop 
from the ocean, and cry, 'Ha, ha! we have lessened the sea! ' 
What are even your public charities ; what your best institu- 
tions? How few of the multitude are relieved at all; how 
few of that few relieved permanently! Men die, suffer, 
starve just as soon, and just as numerously; these public in- 
stitutions are only trees for the public conscience to go to 
roost upon. No, my dear fellow, everything I see in the 
world says, Take care of thyself. This is the true moral of 
life; every one who minds it gets on, thrives, and fattens; 



GODOLPHIN. 197 

they who don't, come to us to borrow money, if gentlemen; 
or fall upon the parish, if plebeians. / mind it, my dear 
Godolphin; I have minded it all my life; I am very con- 
tented — content is the sign of virtue, — ah, bah!" 

Yes; Constance was a widow. The hand of her whom 
Percy Godolphin had loved so passionately, and whose voice 
even now thrilled to his inmost heart and awakened the 
echoes that had slept for years, it was once more within her 
power to bestow, and within his to demand. "What a host of 
emotions this thought gave birth to! Like the coming of the 
Hindoo god, she had appeared, and lo, there was a new 
world! "And her look," he thought, "was kind, her voice 
full of a gentle promise, her agitation was visible. She loves 
me still. Shall I fly to her feet? Shall I press for hope? 
And, oh, what, what happiness ! but Lucilla ! " 

This recollection was indeed a barrier that never failed to 
present itself to every prospect of hope and joy which the 
image of Constance coloured and called forth. Even for the 
object of his first love, could he desert one who had forsaken 
all for him, whose life was wrapped up in his affection? The 
very coolness with which he was sensible he had returned the 
attachment of this poor girl made him more alive to the duties 
he owed her. If not bound to her by marriage, he considered 
with a generosity — barely in truth but justice, yet how rare 
in the world ! — that the tie between them was sacred, that 
only death could dissolve it. And now that tie was, per- 
haps, all that held him from attaining the dream of his past 
life. 

Absorbed in these ideas, Godolphin contrived to let Saville's 
unsympathizing discourse glide unheeded along, without re- 
flecting its images on the sense, until the name of Lady Erp- 
ingham again awakened his attention. 

"You are going to her this evening," said Saville; "and 
you may thank me for that; for I asked you if you were 
thither bound in her hearing, in order to force her into grant- 
ing you an invitation. She only sees her most intimate 
friends, — you, me, and Lady Charlotte Deerham. Widows 
are shy of acquaintance during their first affliction. I always 



198 GODOLPHIN. 

manage, however, to be among the admitted — caustic is good 
for some wovmds." 

"Nay," said Godolphin, smiling, "it is your friendly dis- 
position that makes them sure of sympathy." 

"You have hit it. But," continued Saville, "do you think 
Madame likely to marry again, or shall you yourself adven- 
ture? Erpingham has left her nearly his whole fortune." 

Irritated and impatient at Saville's tone, Godolphin rose. 
"Between you and me," said Saville, in wishing him good-by, 
" I don't think she will ever marry again. Lady Erpingham 
is fond of power and liberty; even the young Godolphin — 
and you are not so handsome as you were — will find it a 
hopeless suit." 

" Pshaw ! " muttered Godolphin, as he departed. But the 
last words of Saville had created a new feeling in his breast. 
It was then possible, nay, highly probable, that he might 
have spared himself the contest he had undergone, and that 
the choice between Lucilla and Constance might never be 
permitted him. 

"At all events," said he, almost aloud, "I will see if this 
conjecture be true; if Constance, yet remembering our early 
love, yet feeling for the years of secret pining which her am- 
bition bequeathed me, should appear willing to grant me the 
atonement fate has placed within her power, then, then, it 
will be time for this self-sacrifice." 

The social relations of the sex often make men villanous — 
they more often make them weak. 



CHAPTER XXXVII. 

AN EVENING WITH CONSTANCE. 



Constance's heart was in her eyes when she saw Godol- 
phin that evening. She had, it is true, as Saville observed, 
been compelled by common courtesy to invite him; and al- 



GODOLPHIN. 199 

though there was an embarrassment in their meeting, who 
shall imagine that it did not bring to Constance more of pleas- 
ure than pain? She had been deeply shocked by Lord Erp- 
ingham's sudden death ; they had not been congenial minds, 
but the great have an advantage denied to the less wealthy 
orders. Among the former, a husband and wife need not 
weary each other with constant companionships; different 
establishments, different hours, different pursuits, allow them 
to pass life in great measure apart, so that there is no neces- 
sity for hatred, and indifference is the coldest feeling which 
custom induces. 

Still in the prime of youth and at the zenith of her beauty, 
Constance was now independent. She was in the enjoyment 
of the wealth and rank her early habits of thought had deemed 
indispensable, and she now for the first time possessed the 
power of sharing them with whom she pleased. At this 
thought how naturally her heart flew back to Godolphin! 
And while she now gazed, although by stealth, at his counte- 
nance, as he sat at a little distance from her, and in his turn 
watched for the tokens of past remembrance, she was deeply 
touched by the change (light as it seemed to others) which 
years had brought to him; and in recalling the emotion he 
had testified at meeting her, she suffered her heart to soften, 
while it reproached her in whispering, " Thou art the cause ! " 
All the fire, the ardour of a character not then confirmed, 
which, when she last saw him spoke in his eye and mien, 
were gone forever. The irregular brilliancy of his conversa- 
tion, the earnestness of his air and gesture, were replaced by 
a calm and even and melancholy composure. His forehead 
was stamped with the lines of thought ; and the hair, grown 
thinner towards the temples, no longer concealed by its luxu- 
riance the pale expanse of his brow. The air of delicate 
health which had at first interested her in his appearance 
still lingered, and gave its wonted and ineffable charm to his 
low voice, and the gentle expression of his eyes. By degrees, 
the conversation, at first partial and scattered, became more 
general. Constance and Godolphin were drawn into it. 

"It is impossible," said Godolphin, "to compare life in a 



200 GODOLPHIN. 

southern climate with that which we lead in colder countries. 
There is an indolence, a laissez aller, a philosophical insou- 
ciance, produced by living under these warm suns, and apart 
from the ambition of the objects of our own nation, which 
produce at last a state of mind that divides us forever from 
our countrymen. It is like living amidst perpetual music, — 
a different kind of life, a soft, lazy, voluptuous romance of 
feeling, that indisposes us to action, — almost to motion. So 
far from a sojourn in Italy being friendly to the growth of 
ambition, it nips and -almost destroys the germ." 

"In fact, it leaves us fit for nothing but love," said Saville, 
— " an occupation that levels us with the silliest part of our 
species." 

"Fools cannot love," said Lady Charlotte. 

" Pardon me, love and folly are synonymous in more lan- 
guages than the French," answered Saville. 

"In truth," said Godolphin, "the love which you both 
allude to is not worth disputing about." 

"What love is? " asked Saville. 

"First love," cried Lady Charlotte; "is it not, Mr. 
Godolphin?" 

Godolphin changed colour, and his eyes met those of Con- 
stance. She too sighed and looked down; Godolphin re- 
mained silent. 

"Nay, Mr. Godolphin, answer me," said Lady Charlotte; 
"I appeal to you! " 

"First love, then," said Godolphin, endeavouring to speak 
composedly, "has this advantage over others, — it is usually 
disappointed, and regret forever keeps it alive." 

The tone of his voice struck Constance to the heart. Nor 
did she speak again — save with visible effort — during the 
rest of the evening. 



GODOLPHIN. 201 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Constance's undiminished love foe godolphin. — her re- 
morse AND HER HOPE. THE CAPITOL. THE DIFFERENT 

THOUGHTS OF GODOLPHIN AND CONSTANCE AT THE VIEW. 
THE TENDER EXPRESSIONS OF CONSTANCE. 

All that Constance heard from others of Godolphin 's life 
since they parted increased her long-nursed interest in his 
fate. His desultory habits, his long absences from cities, 
which were understood to be passed in utter and obscure soli- 
tude (for the partner of the solitude and its exact spot were 
not known), she coupled with the quiet melancholy in his as- 
pect, with his half-reproachful glances towards herself, and 
with the emotions which he had given vent to in their con- 
versation. And of this objectless and unsatisfactory life she 
was led to consider herself the cause. With a bitter pang she 
recalled his early words, when he said, " My future is in your 
hands ; " and she contrasted his vivid energies, his cultivated 
mind, his high talents, with the life which had rendered them 
all so idle to others and unprofitable to himself. Few, very 
few, know how powerfully the sentiment that another's hap- 
piness is at her control speaks to a woman's heart. Accus- 
tomed to dependence herself, the feeling that another depends 
on her is the most soothing aliment to her pride. This makes 
a main cause of her love to her children; they would be in- 
comparably less dear to her if they were made independent 
of her cares. And years, which had brought the young coun- 
tess acquainted with the nothingness of the world, had soft- 
ened and deepened the sources of her affections, in proportion 
as they had checked those of her ambition. She could not, 
she did not, seek to disguise from herself that Godolphin yet 
loved her; she anticipated the hour when he would avow that 
love, and v\'hen she might be permitted to atone for all of dis- 
appointment that her former rejection might have brought to 



202 GODOLPHIN. 

him. She felt, too, that it would be a noble as well as de- 
lightful task to awaken an intellect so brilliant to the natural 
objects of its display; to call forth into active life his teem- 
ing thought, and the rich eloquence with which he could con- 
vey it. Nor in this hope were her more selfish designs, her 
political schemings, and her desire of sway over those whom 
she loved to humble forgotten; but they made, however, — to 
be just, — a small part of her meditations. Her hopes were 
chiefly of a more generous order. "I refused thee," she 
thought, " when I was poor and dependent ; now that I have 
wealth and rank, how gladly will I yield them to thy 
bidding!" 

But Godolphin, as if unconscious of this favourable bias of 
her inclinations, did not warm from his reserve. On the con- 
trary, his first abstraction and his first agitation had both sub- 
sided into a distant and cool self-possession. They met often, 
but he avoided all nearer or less general communication. She 
saw, however, that his eyes were constantly in search of her, 
and that a slight trembling in his voice when he addressed her 
belied the calmness of his manner. Sometimes, too, a word, 
or a touch from her, would awaken the ill-concealed emo- 
tions, — his lips seemed about to own the triumph of her and 
of the past; but, as if by a violent effort, they were again 
sealed ; and not unof ten, evidently unwilling to trust his self- 
command, he would abruptly depart. In short, Constance 
perceived that a strange embarrassment, the causes of which 
she could not divine, hung about him, and that his conduct 
was regulated by some secret motive, which did not spring 
from the circumstances that had occurred between them. For 
it was evident that he was not withheld by any resentment 
towards her from her former rejection; even his looks, his 
words, had betrayed that he had done more than forgive. 
Lady Charlotte Deerham had heard from Saville of their 
former attachment: she was a woman of the world, and 
thought it but common delicacy to give them all occasion to 
renew it. She always, therefore, took occasion to retire from 
the immediate vicinity of Constance whenever Godolphin 
approached, and, as if by accident, to leave them the op- 



GODOLPHIN. 203 

portunity to be sufficiently alone. This was a danger 
that Godolphin had, however, hitherto avoided. One day 
fate counteracted prudence, and a conference ensued which 
perplexed Constance and tried severely the resolution of 
Godolphin. 

They went together to the Capitol, from whose height 
is beheld perhaps the most imposing landscape in the 
world. It was a sight pre-eminently calculated to arouse 
and inspire the ambitious and working mind of the young 
countess. 

"Do you think," said she to Godolphin, who stood beside 
her, " that there lives any one who could behold these count- 
less monuments of eternal glory, and not sigh to recall the 
triteness, or rather burn to rise from the level, of our ordi- 
nary life?" 

"Nay," said Godolphin, "to you the view may be an in- 
spiration, to others a warning. The arch and the ruin you 
survey speak of change yet more eloquently than glory. Look 
on the spot where once was the temple of Komulus: there 
stands the little church of an obscure saint. Just below you 
is the Tarpeian Rock : we cannot see it ; it is hidden from us 
by a crowd of miserable houses. Along the ancient plain of 
the Campus Martins behold the numberless spires of a new 
religion, and the palaces of a modern race ! Amidst them you 
see the triumphal columns of Trajan and Marcus Antoninus ; 
but whose are the figures that crown their summits? Saint 
Peter's and Saint Paul's ! And this awful wilderness of men's 
labours, this scene and token of human revolutions, inspires 
you with a love of glory; to me it proves its nothingness. An 
irresistible, a crushing sense of the littleness and brief life of 
our most ardent and sagacious achievements seems to me to 
float like a voice over the place ! " 

"And are you still, then," said Constance, with a half sigh, 
"dead to all but the enjoyment of the present moment? " 

"Xo," replied Godolphin, in a low and trembling voice; "I 
am not dead to the regret of the past ! " 

Constance blushed deeply; but Godolphin, as if feeling he 
had committed himself too far, continued in a hurried tone. 



204 GODOLPHIX. 

"Let us turn our eyes," said he, "yonder among the olive 
groves. There — 

" ' Far from the maddiug crowd's ignoble strife ' — 

were the summer retreats of Rome's brightest and most en- 
during spirits. There was the retirement of Horace and 
Maecenas; there Brutus forgot his harsher genius; and there 
the inscrutable and profound Augustus indulged in those 
graceful relaxations — those sacrifices to wit, and poetry, and 
wisdom — which have made us do so unwilling and reserved 
a justice to the crimes of his earlier and the hypocrisy of his 
later years. Here, again, is a reproach to your ambition," 
added Godolphin, smiling; "his ambition made Augustus 
odious; his occasional forgetfulness of ambition alone re- 
deems him." 

"And what, then?" said Constance, "would you consider 
inactivity the happiest life for one sensible of talents higher 
than the common standard? " 

"Nay, let those talents be devoted to the discovery of 
pleasures, not the search after labours; the higher our tal- 
ents, the keener our perceptions; the keener our perceptions, 
the more intense our capacities for pleasure : ^ — let pleasure, 
then, be our object. Let us find out what is best fitted to 
give our peculiar tastes gratification, and, having found out, 
steadily pursue it." 

" Out on you ! it is a selfish and ignoble system, " said Con- 
stance. " You smile ; well, I may be unphilosophical, I do not 
deny it. But give me one hour of glory, rather than a life of 
luxurious indolence. Oh, would," added Constance, kindling 
as she spoke, "that you, — you, Mr. Godolphin, — with an in- 
tellect so formed for high accomplishment, with all the weapons 
and energies of life at your command, — would that you could 
awaken to a more worthy estimate — pardon me — of the uses 
of exertion ! Surely, surely, you must be sensible of the calls 
that your country, that mankind, have at this epoch of the 
world, upon all, — all, especially, possessing your advantages 
and powers. Can we pierce one inch beyond the surface of 

1 I suppose Godolphin by the word " pleasure " rather signifies " hap- 
piness." 



GODOLPHIN. 205 

society, and not see that great events are hastening to their 
birth? Will you let those inferior to yourself hurry on be- 
fore you, and sit inactive while they win the reward? Will 
you have no share in the bright drama that is already pre- 
pared behind the dark curtain of fate, and which will have a 
world for its spectators? Ah, how rejoiced, how elated with 
myself I should feel, if I could win over one like you to the 
great cause of honourable exertion! " 

For one instant Godolphin's eye sparkled, and his pale 
cheek burned; but the transient emotion faded away as he 
answered, — 

"Eight years ago, when she who spoke to me was Con- 
stance Vernon, her wish might have moulded me according to 
her will, Now," and he struggled with emotion, and turned 
away his face, — "wo^^ it is too late! " 

Constance was smitten to the heart. She laid her hand 
gently on his arm, and said, in a sweet and soothing tone, 
" No, Percy, not too late ! " 

At that instant, and before Godolphin could reply, they 
were joined by Saville and Lady Charlotte Deerham. 



CHAPTER XXXIX. 

LUCILLA's letter. — THE EFFECT IT PRODUCES ON 
GODOLPHIN". 

The short conversation recorded in the last chapter could 
not but show to Godolphin the dangerous ground on which 
his fidelity to Lucilla rested. Never before — no, not in the 
young time of their first passion — had Constance seemed to 
him so lovely or so worthy of love. Her manners now were 
so much more soft and unreserved than they had necessarily 
been at a period when Constance had resolved not to listen to 
his addresses or her own heart, that the only part of her 
character that had ever repulsed his pride or offended his 



206 GODOLPHIN. 

tastes seemed vanished forever. A more subdued and gentle 
spirit had descended on her surpassing beauty, and the change 
was of an order that Percy Godolphin could especially appre- 
ciate. And the world, for which he owned reluctantly that 
she yet lived too much, had, nevertheless, seemed rather to 
enlarge and animate the natural nobleness of her mind, than 
to fritter it down to the standard of its common votaries. 
When she spoke he delighted in, even while he dissented 
from, the high and bold views which she conceived. He 
loved her indignation of all that was mean and low, her pas- 
sion for all that was daring and exalted. Never was he cast 
down from the height of the imaginative part of his love by 
hearing from her lips one petty passion or one sordid desire; 
much about her was erroneous, but all was lofty and generous, 
even in error. And the years that had divided them had only 
taught him to feel more deeply how rare was the order of her 
character, and how impossible it was ever to behold her like. 
All the sentiments, faculties, emotions, which, in his affec- 
tion for Lucilla had remained dormant, were excited into full 
play the moment he was in the presence of Constance. She 
engrossed no petty portion, she demanded and obtained the 
whole empire, of his soul. And against this empire he had 
now to contend ! Torn as he was by a thousand conflicting 
emotions, a letter from Lucilla was suddenly put into his 
hands ; its contents were as follows : — 

LUCILLA'S LETTER. 

" Thy last letter, my love, was so short and hurried, that it has not 
cost me my usual pains to learn it by heart ; nor (shall I tell the truth ? ) 
have I been so eager as I once was to commit all thy words to my mem- 
ory. Why, I know not, and will guess not, but there is something in 
thy letters since we parted that chills me ; they throw back my heart 
upon itself. I tear open the seal with so much eagerness, — thou 
wouldst smile if thou couldst see me, — and when I discover how few 
are the words upon which I am to live for many days, I feel sick and 
disappointed, and lay down the letter. Then I chide myself and say, 
* At least these few words will be kind ! ' — and I spell them one by one, 
not to hurry over my only solace. Alas 1 before I arrive at the end, I 



GODOLPHIX. 207 

am blinded by my tears ; my lo%e for thee, so bounding and full of life, 
seems frozen and arrested at every line. And then I lie down for very 
weariness, and wish to die. O God, if the time has come which I have 
alwaj's dreaded, — if thou shouldst no longer love me ! And how rea- 
sonable this fear is ! For what am I to thee ? How often dost thou 
complain that I can understand thee not, how often dost thou imply that 
there is much of thy nature which I am incapable — unworthy — to 
learn! If this be so, how natural is it to dread that thou wilt find 
others whom thou wilt fancy more congenial to thee, and that absence 
will only remind thee more of my imperfections ! 

"And yet I think that I have read thee to the letter; I think that my 
love, which is always following thee, always watching thee, alwavs con- 
jecturing thy wishes, must have penetrated into every secret of thy 
heart : only I want words to express what I feel, and thou layest the 
blame upon the want of feeling ! I know how untutored, how ignorant, 
I must seem to thee ; and sometimes — and lately very often — I re- 
proach myself that I have not more diligently sought to make myself a 
worthier companion to thee. I think if I had the same means as others, 
I should acquire the same facility of expressing my thoughts ; and my 
thoughts thou couldst never blame, for I know that they are full of a 
love to thee which — no, not the wisest — the most brilliant, whom thou 
mayest see could equal even in imagination. But I have sought to mend 
this deficiency since we parted ; and I have looked into all the books 
thou hast loved to read, and I fancy that I have imbibed now the same 
ideas which pleased thee, and in which once thou imaginedst I could not 
sympathize. Yet how mistaken thou hast been ! I see, by marks thou 
hast placed on the page, the sentiments that more especially charm 
thee ; and I know that I have felt them much, oh ! how much more 
deeply and vividly than they are there expressed, — only they seem to 
me to have no language ; methinks that I have learned the language 
now. And I have taught myself songs that thou wilt love to hear when 
thou returnest home to me ; and I have practised music, and I think — 
nay, I am sure — that time will not pass so heavily with thee as when 
thou wast last here. 

" And when shall I see thee again ? — forgive me if I press thee to 
return. Thou hast stayed away longer than thou hast been wont ; but 
that I would not heed ; it is not the number of days, but the sensations 
with which I have counted them, that make me pine for thy beloved 
voice, and long once more to behold thee. Xever before did I so feel 
thy absence, never before was I so utterly wretched. A secret voice 
whispers me that we are parted forever. I cannot withstand the omens 
of my own heart. When my poor father lived, I did not, child as I was, 



208 GODOLPHIN. 

partake of those sentiments witli whic-h he was wont to say the stars 
inspired us. I could not see in them the boders of fear and the preach- 
ers of sad tidings ; they seemed to me only full of serenity and tenderness 
and the promise of enduring love I And ever when I looked on them, I 
thought of thee ; and thy image to me then, as thou knowest it was from 
childhood, was bright with unimaginable but never melancholy spells. 
But now, although I love thee so far more powerfully, I cannot divest 
the thoughts of thee from a certain sadness ; and so the stars, which are 
like thee, which are full of thee, have a sadness also ! And this, the 
bed, where every morning I stretch my arms for thee, and find thee not, 
and have yet to live through the day, and on which I now write this let- 
ter to thee — for I, who used to rise with the sun, am now too dispirited 
not to endeavour to cheat the weary day — I have made them place 
nearer to the window ; and I look out upon the still skies every night, 
and have made a friend of every star I see. I question it of thyself, and 
wonder, when thou lookest at it, if thou hast any thought of me. I love 
to look upon the heavens much more than upon the earth ; for the trees 
and the waters and the hills around, thou canst not behold, but the same 
heaven which I survey is above thee also ; and this, our common com- 
panion, seems in some measure to unite us. And I have thought over 
my father's lore, and have tried to learn it; nay, thou mayest smile, but 
it is thy absence that has taught me superstition. 

"But tell me, dearest, kindest, tell me when — oh, when wilt thou 
return ? Return only this once — if but for a day — and I will never 
persecute thee again. Truant as thou art, thou shalt have full liberty 
for life. But I cannot tell thee how sad and heavy I am grown, and 
every hour knocks at my heart like a knell ! Come back to thy poor 
Lucilla — if only to see what joy is ! Come — I know thou wilt ! But 
should anything I do not foresee detain thee, fix at least the day — nay, 
if possible, the hour — when we shall meet, and let the letter which con- 
veys such happy tidings be long and kind and full of thee, as thy letters 
once were. I know I weary thee, but I cannot help it. I am weak and 
dejected and cast down, and have only heart enough to pray for thy 
return." , 

"You have conquered! you have conquered, Lucilla! " said 
Godolphin, as he kissed this wild and reproachful letter, and 
thrust it into his bosom ; " and I — I will be wretched rather 
than you shall be so ! " 

His heart rebuked him even for that last sentence. This 
pure and devoted attachment — was it indeed an unhappiness 
to obtain, and a sacrifice to return ! Stung by his thoughts, 



GODOLPHIX. 209 

aud impatient of rest, he hurried into the air; he traversed 
the city; he passed St. Sebastian's Gate, gained the Appia 
Via, and saw, lone and sombre, as of old, the house of the 
departed Volktman. He had half unconsciously sought that 
direction, in order to strengthen his purpose, and sustain his 
conscience in its right path. He now hurried onwards, and 
stopped not till he stood in that lovely and haunted spot — 
the valley of Egeria — in which he had met Lucilla on the 
day that he first learned her love. There was a gloom over 
the scene now, for the day was dark and clouded : the birds 
were silent; a heavy oppression seemed to brood upon the 
air. He entered that grotto which is the witness of the most 
beautiful love-story chronicled even in the soft South. He 
recalled the passionate and burning emotions which, the last 
time he had been within that cell, he had felt for Lucilla, 
and had construed erroneously into real love. As he looked 
around, how different an aspect the spot wore ! Then, those 
walls, that spring, even that mutilated statue, had seemed to 
him the encouragers of the soft sensations he had indulged. 
Now, they appeared to reprove the very weakness which hal- 
lowed themselves; the associations spoke to him in another 
tone. The broken statue of the river god, the desert silence 
in which the water of the sweet fountain keeps its melancholy 
course, the profound and chilling solitude of the spot, — all 
seemed eloquent, not of love, but the broken hope and the 
dreary loneliness that succeed it! The gentle plant (the 
capillaire) that overhangs the sides of the grotto, and nour- 
ishes itself on the dews of the fountain, seemed an emblem of 
love itself after disappointment, — the love that might hence- 
forth be Lucilla's, — drooping in silence on the spot once con- 
secrated to rapture, and feeding itself with tears. There was 
something mocking to human passion in the very antiquity of 
the spot; four-and-twenty centuries had passed away since 
the origin of the tale that made it holy — and that tale, too, 
was fable ! What, in this vast accumulation of the sands of 
time, was a solitary atom! What, among the millions, the 
myriads, that around that desolate spot had loved and forgot- 
ten love, was the brief passion of one mortal, withering as it 

14 



210 GODOLPHIN. 

sprung! Thus differently moralizes the heart, according to 
the passion which bestows on it the text. 

Before he regained his home, Godolphin's resolve" was 
taken. The next day he had promised Constance to attend 
her to Tivoli ; he resolved then to take leave of her, and on 
the following day to return to Lucilla. He remembered, 
with bitter reproach, that he had not written to her for a 
length of time treble the accustomed interval between his 
letters ; and felt that, while at the moment she had written 
the lines he had now pressed to his bosom, she was expecting, 
with unutterable fondness and anxiety, to receive his luke- 
warm assurances of continued love, the letter he was about to 
write in answer to hers was the first one that would greet her 
eyes. But he resolved that in that letter, at least, she should 
not be disappointed. He wrote at length, and with all the 
outpourings of a tenderness reawakened by remorse. He in- 
formed her of his immediate return, and even forced himself 
to dwell upon it with kindly hypocrisy of transport. For the 
first time for several weeks, he felt satisfied with himself as 
he sealed his letter. It is doubtful whether that letter 
Lucilla ever received. 



CHAPTER XL. 

TIVOLI. THE siren's CAVE. THE CONFESSION. 

Along the deathly Campagna, a weary and desolate length 
of way, through a mean and squalid row of houses, you thread 
your course ; and behold — Tivoli bursts upon you ! 

" Look ! look ! " cried Constance, with enthusiasm, as she 
pointed to the rushing torrent that, through matted trees and 
cragged precipices, thundered on. 

Astonished at the silence of Godolphin, whom scenery was 
usually so wont to kindle and inspire, she turned hastily 
round, and her whole tide of feeling was revulsed by the 
absorbed but intense dejection written on his countenance. 



GODOLPHIN. 211 

" Why, " said she, after a short pause, and affecting a play- 
ful smile, "why, how provoking is this! In general, not a 
common patch of green with an old tree in the centre, not a 
common rivulet with a willow hanging over it, escapes you. 
You insist upon our sharing your raptures, you dilate on the 
picturesque, you rise into eloquence; nay, you persuade us 
into your enthusiasm, or you quarrel with us for our coldness ; 
and now, with this divinest of earthly scenes around us, — 
when even Lady Charlotte is excited, and Mr. Saville forgets 
himself, you are stricken into silence and apathy ! The rea- 
son — if it be not too abstruse? " 

"It is here! " said Godolphin, mournfully, and pressing his 
hand to his heart. 

Constance turned aside ; she indulged herself with the hope 
that he alluded to former scenes, and despaired of the future 
from their remembrance. She connected his melancholy with 
herself, and knew that, when referred to her, she could dispel 
it. Inspired by this idea, and exhilarated by the beauty of 
the morning, and the wonderful magnificence of nature, she 
indulged her spirits to overflowing. And as her brilliant 
mind lighted up every subject it touched, now glowing over 
description, now flashing into remark, Godolphin at one time 
forgot, and at another more keenly felt, the magnitude of the 
sacrifice he was about to make. But every one knows that 
feeling which, when we are unhappy, illumines (if I may so 
speak) our outward seeming from the fierceness of our inward 
despair, — that recklessness which is the intoxication of our 
grief. 

By degrees Godolphin broke from his reserve. He seemed 
to catch the enthusiasm of Constance; he echoed back, he led 
into new and more dazzling directions, the delighted remarks 
of his beautiful companion. His mind, if not profoundly 
learned, at least irregularly rich, in the treasures of old 
times, called up a spirit from every object. The waterfall, 
the ruin, the hollow cave, the steep bank crested with the 
olive, the airy temple, the dark pomp of the cypress grove, 
and the roar of the headlong Anio, — all he touched with the 
magic of the past, clad with the glories of history and of 



212 GODOLPHIN. 

legend, and decked ever and anon with the flowers of the eter- 
nal Poesy that yet walks, mourning for her children, amongst 
the vines and waterfalls of the ancient Tibur. And €on- 
stance, as she listened to him, entranced, until she herself un- 
consciously grew silent, indulged without reserve in that, the 
proudest luxury of love,— pride in the beloved object. Never 
had the rare and various genius of Godolphin appeared so 
worthy of admiration. When his voice ceased, it seemed to 
Constance like a sudden blank in the creation. 

Godolphin and the young countess were several paces before 
the little party, and they now took their way towards the 
Siren's Cave. The path that leads to that singular spot is 
humid with an eternal spray ; and it is so abrupt and slip- 
pery, that in order to preserve your footing, you must cling 
to the bushes that vegetate around the sides of the precipice. 

" Let us dispense with our guide, " said Godolphin. " I know 
every part of the way, and I am sure you share with me in 
dislike to these hackneyed indicators and sign-posts for ad- 
miration. Let us leave him to Lady Charlotte and Saville, 
and suffer me to be your guide to the cavern." Constance 
readily enough assented, and they proceeded. Saville, by no 
means liking the difficult and perilous path which was to lead 
only to a very cold place, soon halted, and suggested to Lady 
Charlotte the propriety of doing the same. Lady Charlotte 
much preferred the wit of her companion's conversation to 
the picturesque. "Besides," as she said, "she had seen the 
cave before." Accordingly, they both waited for the return 
of the more adventurous countess and her guide. 

Unconscious of the defalcation of her friends, and not — 
from the attention that every step required — once looking 
behind, Constance continued. And now, how delightful to 
her seemed that rugged way, as, with every moment, Godol- 
phin's care, Godolphin's hand, became necessary; and he, in- 
spired, inflamed by her company, by her touch, by the softness 
of her manner, and the devotion of her attention — no, no! 
not yet was Lucilla forgotten! 

And now they stood within the Siren's Cave. From this 
spot alone you can view that terrible descent of waters which 



GODOLPHIN. 213 

rushes to earth like the coming of a god ! The rocks dripped 
around them, the torrent dashed at their very feet. Down, 
down, in thunder, forever and forever, dashed the might of 
the maddening element; above, all wrath; below, all black- 
ness; there, the cataract; here, the abyss. I^ot a moment's 
pause to the fury, not a moment's silence to the roar; forward 
to the last glimpse of the sun, — the curse of labour, and the 
soul of unutterable strength, shall be upon those waters ! The 
demon, tormented to an eternity, filling his dread dwelling- 
place with the unresting and unearthly voice of his rage and 
despair, is the only type meet for the spirit of the cataract. 

And there — amidst this awful and tremendous eternity of 
strife and power — stood two beings whose momentary exist- 
ence was filled with the master-passion of humanity. And 
that passion was yet audible there : the nature without could 
not subdue that within. Even amidst the icy showers of 
spray that fell around, and would have frozen the veins of 
others, Godolphin felt the burning at his heart. Constance 
was indeed utterly lost in a whirl and chaos of awe and ad- 
miration, which deprived her of all words. But it was the 
nature of her wayward lover to be aroused only to the thor- 
ough knowledge of his powers and passions among the more 
unfrequent and fierce excitements of life. A wild emotion 
now urged him on ; something of that turbulent exaggeration 
of mind which gave rise to a memorable and disputed say- 
ing, — "If thou stoodest on a precipice with thy mistress, 
hast thou ever felt the desire to plunge with her into the 
abyss? If so, thou hast loved! " No doubt the sentiment is 
exaggerated, but there are times when love is exaggerated 
too. And now Constance, without knowing it, had clung 
closer and closer to Godolphin. His hand at first, now his 
arm, supported her; and at length, by an irresistible and 
maddening impulse, he clasped her to his breast, and whis- 
pered in a voice which was heard by her even amidst the 
thunder of the giant waters, " Here, here, my early, my only 
love, I feel, in spite of myself, that I never utterly, fully, 
adored you until now ! " 



214 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER XLI. 

LUCLLLA. THE SOLITUDE. — THE SPELL. — THE DREAM AND 

THE RESOLVE. 

While the above events, so fatal to Luc ilia, were in pro- 
gress at Rome, she was holding an unquiet commune with her 
own passionate and restless heart, by the borders of the lake, 
whose silver quiet mocked the mind it had, in happier mo- 
ments, reflected. She had now dragged on the weary load of 
time throughout the winter; and the early and soft spring 
was already abroad, smoothing the face of the waters, and 
calling life into the boughs. Hitherto this time of the year 
had possessed a mysterious and earnest attraction for Lucilla, 
— now all its voices were mute. The letters that Godolphin 
had written to her were so few and so restrained, in compari- 
son with those which she had received in the former periods of 
absence, that — ever alive as she was to impulse, and unregu- 
lated by settled principles of hope — her only relief to a 
tearful and spiritless dejection was in paroxysms of doubt, 
jealousy, and despair. 

It is the most common thing in the world, that, when we 
have once wronged a person, we go on in the wrong, from a 
certain soreness with which conscience links the associations 
of the injured party. And thus, Godolphin, struggling with 
the return to his early and never-forgotten love, felt an un- 
willingness that he could seldom successfully combat in play- 
ing the hypocrite to Lucilla. His very remorse made him 
unkind; the feeling that he ought to write often, made him 
write seldom : and conscious that he ought to return her ex- 
pressions of eager devotion, he returned them with involuntary 
awkwardness and reserve. All this is very natural, and very 
evident to us ; but a thousand mysteries were more acceptable 
to, more sought for and more clung to, by Lucilla than a con- 
jecture at the truth. 



GODOLPHIN. 215 

Meanwhile she fed more and more eagerly on those vain re- 
searches which yet beguiled her time, and flattered her imagi- 
nation. In a science so false and so unprofitable, it mattered, 
happily, little whether or not the poor disciple laboured with 
success; but I need scarcely tell to any who have had the curi- 
osity to look over the entangled schemes and quaint figures of 
the art, how slender was the advancement of the daughter in 
the learning of the sire. Still it was a comfort and a soothing 
even to look upon the placid heaven, and form a conjecture as 
to the language of its stars. And, above all, while she ques- 
tioned the future, she thought only of her lover. But day 
after day passed, — no letter, or worse than none; and at 
length Lucilla became utterly impatient of all rest : a nervous 
fever possessed her; the extreme solitude of the place filled 
her with that ineffable sensation of irritability which some- 
times preludes the madness that has been produced in crimi- 
nals by solitary confinement. 

On the day that she wrote that letter to Godolphin which I 
have transcribed, this painful tension of the nerves was more 
than hitherto acute. She longed to fly somewhere; nay, once 
or twice, she remembered that Rome was easily gained, that 
she might be there as expeditiously as her letter. Although 
in that letter only we have signified that Lucilla had expressed 
her wish for Godolphin's return, yet in all her later letters she 
had (perhaps more timidly) urged that desire. But they had 
not taken the same hold on Godolphin; nor, while he was 
playing with his danger, had they produced the same ener- 
getic resolution. Lucilla could not, however, hope with much 
reason that the success of her present letter would be greater 
than that of her former ones; and, at all events, she did not 
anticipate an immediate compliance with her prayers. She 
looked forward to some excuses, and to some delay. We can- 
not, therefore, wonder that she felt a growing desire to follow 
her own epistle to Rome; and although she had been pre- 
vented before, and still drew back from absolutely favouring 
and enforcing the idea, by the fear of Godolphin's displeas- 
ure, yet she trusted enough to his gentleness of character to 
feel sure that the displeasure could scarcely be lasting. Still 



216 GODOLPHIN. 

the step was "bold, and Lucilla loved devotedly enough to be 
timid; and besides, her inexperience made her look upon the 
journey as a far more formidable expedition than it really was. 

Debating the notion in her mind, she sought her usual re- 
treat, and turned listlessly over the books which she had so 
lately loved to study. At length, in moving one she had not 
looked into before, a paper fell to the ground; she picked it 
up ; it was the paper containing that figure, which it will be 
remembered, the astrologer had shown to his daughter, as a 
charm to produce dreams prophetic of any circumstance or 
person concerning whom the believer might be anxious to 
learn aught. As she saw the image, which, the reader will 
recollect, was of a remarkable design, the whole of her con- 
versation with Volktman on the subject rushed into her mind, 
and she resolved that very night to prove the efficacy of the 
charm on which he had so confidently insisted, draught with 
the chimerical delusion, she now longed for the hours to pass, 
and the night to come. She looked again and again at the 
singular image and the portentous figures wrought upon the 
charm; the very strangeness of the characters inspired her, 
as was natural, with a belief in their efficacy; and she felt a 
thrill, an awe, creep over her blood, as the shadows of eve, 
deepening over the far mountains, brought on the time of 
trial. At length it was night, and Lucilla sought her 
chamber. 

The hour was exceedingly serene, and the stars shone 
through the casement with a lustre that to her seemed omi- 
nous. With bare feet, and only in her night-robe, she stole 
tremblingly across the threshold. She paused for a moment 
at the window, and looked out on the deep and quiet night ; 
and as . she so stood, it was a picture that, had I been a 
painter, I would have devoted a youth to accomplish. Half 
in light, half in shadow, her undress gave the outline, and 
somewhat more, of a throat and breast whose roundness, 
shape, and hue never were surpassed. Her arms were lightly 
crossed above her bosom; and her long rich hair seeming 
darker by that light, fell profusely, yet not dishevelled, 
around her neck, parting from her brow. Her attitude at 



GODOLPIIIN. 217 

that moment was quite still, as if in worship, — and perhaps 
it was; her face was inclined slightly upward, looking to the 
heavens and towards Rome. But that face — there was the 
picture! It was so young, so infantine, so modest; and yet 
the youth and the timidity were elevated and refined by the 
earnest doubt, the preternatural terror, the unearthly hope, 
which dwelt upon her forehead, her parted lip, and her wist- 
ful and kindled eye. There was a sublimity in her loneliness 
and her years, and in the fond and vain superstition, which 
was but a spirit called from the deeps of an unfathomable and 
mighty love. And afar was heard the breaking of the lake 
upon the shore — no other sound ! And now, among the un- 
waving pines, there was a silver shimmer as the moon rose 
into her empire, and deepened at once, along the universal 
scene, the loveliness and the awe. 

Lucilla turned from the window, and kneeling down wrote 
with a trembling hand upon the figure one word, — the name 
of Godolphin. She then placed it under her pillow, and the 
spell was concluded. The astrologer had told her of the ne- 
cessary co-operation which the mind must afford to the charm ; 
but it will easily be believed that Lucilla required no injunc- 
tion to let her imagination dwell upon the vision she expected 
to invoke. And it would have been almost strange, if, so in- 
tently and earnestly brooding as she had done over the image 
of Godolphin, that image had not, without recurring to any 
cabalistical spells, been present to her dreams. 

She thought that it was broad noonday, and that she was 
sitting alone in the house she then inhabited, and weeping 
bitterly. Of a sudden the voice of Godolphin called to her; 
she ran eagerly forth, but no sooner had she passed the thresh- 
old than the scene so familiar to her vanished, and she was 
alone in an immense and pathless wilderness ; there was no 
tree and no water in this desert; all was arid, solitary, and 
inanimate. But what seemed most strange to her was, that 
in the heavens, although they were clear and bright, there 
was neither sun nor stars; the light seemed settled and stag- 
nant, — there was in it no life. 

And she thought that she continued to move involuntarily 



218 GODOLPIIIN. 

along the waste; and that, ever and anon, she yearned and 
strove to rest, but her limbs did not obey her will, and a 
power she could not control urged her onward. 

And now there was no longer an utter dumbness and death 
over the scene. Forth from the sands, as from the bowels 
of the reluctant earth, there crept, one by one, loathly and 
reptile shapes; obscene soimds rang in her ears, — now in a 
hideous mockery, now in a yet more sickening solicitation. 
Shapes of terror thickened and crowded round her. She was 
roused by dread into action; she hurried faster and faster; 
she strove to escape; and ever as she fled, the sounds grew 
louder, and the persecuting shapes more ghastly, — abomina- 
tions which her pure mind shuddered to behold presented 
themselves at every turn: there was no spot for refuge, no 
cave for concealment. Wearied and despairing, she stopped 
short; but then the shapes and sounds seemed gradually to 
lose their terror; her eye and ear became familiar to them; 
and what at first seemed foes grew into companions. 

And now, again, the wilderness was gone; she stood in a 
strange spot, and opposite, and gazing upon her with intent 
and mournful eyes, stood Godolphin. But he seemed much 
older than he was, and the traces of care were ploughed deeply 
on his countenance; and above them both hung a motionless 
and livid cloud; and from the cloud a gigantic hand was 
stretched forth, pointing with a shadowy and unmoving figure 
towards a quarter of the earth which was enveloped in a thick 
gloom. While she sought with straining eyes to penetrate 
the darkness of the spot thus fearfully marked out, she thought 
Godolphin vanished, and all was suddenly and utter night, — 
night, but not stillness ; for there was a roar as of many winds, 
and a dashing of angry waters, that seemed close beneath; 
and she heard the trees groan and bend, and felt the icy and 
rushing air: the tempests were abroad. But amidst the min- 
gling of the mighty sounds, she heard distinctly the ringing 
of a horse's hoofs; and presently a wild cry, in which she 
recognized the voice of Godolphin, rang forth, adding to the 
wrath of nature the yet more appalling witness of a human 
despair. The cry was followed by the louder dashing of the 



GODOLPHIN. 



219 



waves, and the fiercer turmoil of the winds ; and then her an- 
guish and horror freeing her from the Prison of Sleep, she woke. 
It was nearly day, but the serenity of the late night had 
gone; the rain fell in torrents, and the house shook beneath 
the fury of a violent storm. This change in the mood of 
nature had probably influenced the latter part of her dream. 
But Lucilla thought of no natural solution to the dreadful 
vision she had undergone. Her superstition was confirmed 
and ratified by the intense impression wrought upon her mind 
by the dream. A thousand unutterable fears — fears for 
(jrodolphin, rather than herself,— or if for herself, only in 
connection with him — bore irresistible despotism over her 
thoughts. She could not endure to wait, to linger any longer 
in the dark and agitated suspense she herself had created; 
the idea she before had nursed now became resolve; she de- 
termined forthwith to set out for Rome,— to see Godolphin. 
She rose, woke her attendant, and that very day she put her 
resolution into effect. 



CHAPTER XLn. 

JOY AND DESPAIR. 

It was approaching towards the evening as Lucilla paused 
for a few seconds at the door which led to Godolphin's apart- 
ments. At length she summoned courage. The servant who 
admitted her was Godolphin's favourite domestic; and he 
was amazed, but overjoyed, to see her; for Lucilla was the 
idol of all who knew her, — save of him, whose love only she 
cared and lived for. 

His master, he said, was gone out for a short time, but the 
next day they were to have returned home. Lucilla coloured 
with vivid delight to hear that her letter had produced an 
effect she had not hoped so expeditiously to accomplish. She 
passed on into Godolphin's apartment. The room bore evi- 



220 GODOLPHIN. 

dent signs of approaching departure; the trunks lay half- 
packed on the floor; there was all that importance of confu- 
sion around which makes to the amateur traveller a luxury 
out of discomfort. Lucilla sat down and waited, anxious and 
trembling, for her lover. Her woman, who had accompanied 
her, thinking of more terrestrial concerns than love, left her, 
at her desire. She could not rest long; she walked, agitating 
and expecting, to and fro the long and half -furnished chamber 
which characterizes the Italian palace. At length, her eye 
fell on an open letter on a writing-table at one corner of the 
room. She glanced over it mechanically, — certain words 
suddenly arrested her attention. Were those words — words 
of passion — addressed to her? If not, Heaven! to whom? 
She obeyed, as she ever did, the impulse of the moment, and 
read what follows : — 

" Constance, — As I write that word how many remembrances rush 
upon me ! for how many years has that name been a talisman to my 
heart, waking its emotions at will ! You are the first woman I ever 
really loved ; you rejected me, yet I could not disdain you. You became 
another's, — but my love could not desert you. Your hand wrote the 
history of my life after the period when we met ; my habits, my thoughts, 
— you influenced and coloured them all ! And now, Constance, you are 
free ; and I love you more fervently than ever ! And you — yes, you 
would not reject me now ; you have grown wiser, and learned the value 
of a heart. And yet the same Fate that divided us hitherto will divide 
us now ; all obstacles but one are passed away, — of that one you shall 
hear and judge. 

" When we parted, Constance, years ago, I did not submit tamely to 
the burning remembrance you bequeathed me ; I sought to dissipate 
your image, and by wooing others to forget yourself. Need I say that 
to know another was only to remember you the more ? But among the 
other and far less worthy objects of my pursuit was one whom, had I not 
seen you first, I might have loved as ardently as I do you ; and in the 
first flush of emotion, and the heat of sudden events, I imagined that I 
did so love her. She was an orphan, a child in years and in the world ; 
and I was all to her, — I am all to her. She is not mine by the ties of 
the Church ; but I have pledged a faith to her equally sacred and as 
strong. Shall I break that faith ; shall I betray that trust ; shall I crush 
a heart that has always been mine, — mine more tenderly than yours, 
rich in a thousand gifts and resources, ever was or ever can be ? Shall 



GODOLPHIX. 221 

r, sworn to protect her, — I, who have already robbed her of fame and 
friends, rob her now of father, brother, lover, husband, the world itself, 
— for I am all to her ? Xever ! never ! I shall be wretched through- 
out life: I shall know that you are free — that you — oh, Constance! 
you might be mine ! — but she shall never dream what she has cost me ! 
I have been too cold, too ungrateful to her already, — I will make her 
amends. My heart may break in the effort, but it shall reward her. 
You, Constance, in the pride of your lofty station, your strengthened 
mind, your regulated virtue (fenced in by the hundred barriers of cus- 
tom), you cannot, perhaps, conceive how pure and devoted the soul of 
this poor girl is ! She is not one whom I could heap riches upon and 
leave ; my love is all the riches she knows. Earth has not a consolation 
or a recompense for the loss of my affection; and even heaven itself 
she has never learned to think of, except as a place in which we shall be 
united forever. As I write this I know that she is sitting afar off and 
alone, and thinking only of one whose whole soul, fated and accursed as 
he is, is maddened by the love of another. My letters, her only com- 
fort, have been cold and few of late ; I know how they have wrung her 
heart. I picture to myself her solitude, her sadness, her unfriended 
youth, her ardent mind, which, not enriched by culture, clings, feeds, 
lives only on one idea. Before you receive this, I shall be on the road 
to her. Xever again will I risk the temptation I have undergone. I 
am not a vain man ; I do not deceive myself ; I do not imagine, I do not 
insult you by believing, that you will long or bitterly feel my loss. 
I have loved you far better than you have loved me, and you have un- 
counted channels for your bright hopes and your various ambition. 
You love the world, and the world is at your feet ! And in remember- 
ing me now, you may think you have cause for indignation. Why, with 
the knowledge of a tie that forbade me to hope for you, why did I linger 
round you ; why did I give vent to any word, or license to any look, 
that told you I loved you still ? Why, above all, on that fated yester- 
day, when we stood alone surrounded by the waters, — why did I 
dare forget myself ; why clasp you to my breast ; why utter the assu- 
rance of that love which was a mockery, if I were not about solemnly 
to record it ? 

" This you will ask ; and if you are not satisfied with the answer, your 
pride will clothe my memory with resentment. Be it so, yet hear me. 
Constance, when, in my first youth, at the time when the wax was yet 
soft, and the tree might yet be bent ; when I laid my heart and my 
future lot at yonr feet ; when you, at the dictates of a worldly and cold 
ambition (disguise the name as you will, the reality is the same), threw 
me back on the solitary desert of Ufe ; when you rejected, forsook me, 



222 GODOLPHIN. 

— do you think that, although I loved you still, there was no anger min- 
gled with the love ? We met again : but what years of wasted existence, 
of dimmed hope, of deadened emotion, had passed over me since then ! 
And who had thus marked them? — You! Do you wonder, then, that 
something of human pride asked for human vengeance ? Yes 1 I pined 
for some triumph in my turn ; I longed to try whether I was yet for- 
gotten, — whether the heart which stung me had been stung also in 
the wound that it inflicted. Was not this natural ? Ask yourself, and 
blame me if you can. But by degrees, as I gazed upon a beauty, and 
listened to a voice, softer in their character than of old, as I felt that 
you would not deny me retribution, this selfish desire for revenge died 
away, and, by degrees, all emotions were merged in one, — uncon- 
quered, unconquerable love. And can you blame me, if then — traitor 
to myself as to you — I lingered on the spot ; if I had many struggles 
to endure before I could resolve on the sacrifice I now make ? Alas ! 
it has cost me much to be just. Can you blame me if at all times I 
could not control my words and looks ? Nay, even in our last meeting, 
when I was maddened by the thought that we were about to part for- 
ever ; when we stood alone ; when no eye was near ; when you clung 
to me in a delicious timidity ; when your breath was on my cheek; 
when the heaving of your heart was heard by mine ; when my hand 
touched that which could give me all the world in itself ; when my arm 
encircled that glorious and divine shape — O Heaven ! can you blame 
me, can you wonder if I was transported beyond myself ; if conscience, 
reason, all were forgotten, and I thought — felt — lived — but for the 
moment and for you? No, you will feel for the weakness of nature ; 
you will not judge me harshly. 

"And why should you rob me of the remembrance of that brief 
moment, that wild embrace? How often shall I recall it ! How often 
when the light step of her to whom I return glides around me, shall I 
cheat myself, and think it yours ; when I feel her breath at night, shall 
I not start and dream it comes from your lips ? And in returning her 
unconscious caress, let me fancy it is you whispers me the assurances of 
unutterable love ! Forgive me, Constance, my yet adored Constance, 
whom I shall never see more, for these wild words, this momentary 
weakness. Farewell! Whatever becomes of me, may God give you 
all His blessings ! 

" One word more — no, I will not" close this letter yet ! You remem- 
ber that you once gave me a flower — years ago. I have preserved its 
leaves to this day ; but I will give no indulgence to a folly that will now 
wrong you, and be unworthy of myself. I will send you back those 
leaves ; let them plead for me, as the memories of former days. I must 



GODOLPHIN. 223 

break off now, for I can literally write no more. I must go forth and 
recover my self-command. And oh I may she whom I seek to-morrow, 
whose unsuspecting heart admonished by temptation I will watch over, 
guide, and shield, far, far more zealously than I have yet done, never 
know what it has cost me not to abandon and betray her 1 " 

And Lucilla read over every word of this letter! How 
wholly impossible it is for language to express the agony, the 
hopeless, irremediable despair that deepened within her as 
she proceeded to the end ! Everything that life had, or could 
ever have had for her, of common peace or joy, was blasted 
forever! As she came to the last word, she bowed her head 
in silence over the writing, and felt as if some mighty rock 
had fallen upon her heart and crushed it to dust. Had the 
letter breathed but one unkind, one slighting expression of 
her, it would have been some comfort, some rallying point, 
however forlorn and wretched ; but this cruel tenderness, this 
bitter generosity! 

And before she had read that letter, how joyously, how 
breathlessly she had anticipated rushing to her lover's breast! 
It seems incredible that the space of a few minutes should 
suffice to blight a whole existence, — blacken, without a ray of 
hope, an entire future ! 

She was aroused by the sound of steps, though in another 
apartment; she would not now have met Godolphin for 
worlds ; the thought of his return alone gave her the power 
of motion. She thrust the fatal letter into her bosom; and 
then, in characters surprisingly distinct and clear, she wrote 
her name, and placed that writing in the stead of the epistle 
she took away. She judged rightly that that single name 
would suffice to say all she could not then say. Having done 
this, she rose, left the room, and stole softly and unperceived 
into the open street. 

Unconscious and careless whither she went, she hurried 
on, her eyes bent on the ground, and concealing her form and 
face with her long mantle. The streets at Eome are not 
thronged as with us; nor does there exist, in a city conse- 
crated by so many sublime objects, that restless and vulgar 
curiosity which torments the English public. Each lives in 



224 GODOLPHIN. 

himself, not in liis neighbour. The moral air of Rome is 
Indifference. 

Lucilla, therefore, hurried along unmolested and unob- 
served, until at length her feet failed her, and she sank 
exhausted, but still unconscious of her movements and of all 
around, upon one of the scattered fragments of ancient pride 
that at every turn are visible in the streets of Eome. The 
place was quiet and solitary, and darkened by the shadows of 
a palace that reared itself close beside. She sat down; and 
shrouding her face as it drooped over her breast, endeavoured 
to collect her thoughts. Presently the sound of a guitar was 
heard ; and along the street came a little group of the itinerant 
musicians who invest modern Italy with its yet living air of 
poetry: the reality is gone, but the spirit lingers. They 
stopped opposite a small house; and Lucilla, looking up, saw 
the figure of a young girl placing a light at the window as a 
signal well known, and then she glided away. Meanwhile, 
the lover (Avho had accompanied the musicians, and seemed 
in no very elevated rank of life) stood bare-headed beneath ; 
and in his upward look there was a devotion, a fondness, a 
respect, that brought back to Lucilla all the unsparing bitter- 
ness of contrast and recollection. And now the serenade be- 
gan. The air was inexpressibly soft and touching, and the 
words were steeped in that vague melancholy which is insepa- 
rable from the tenderness, if not from the passion, of love. 
Lucilla listened involuntarily, and the charm slowly wrought 
its effect. The hardness and confusion of her mind melted 
gradually away, and as the song ended she turned aside and 
burst into tears. "Happy, happy girl!" she murmured; 
" she is loved ! " 

Here let us drop the curtain upon Lucilla. Often, Reader ! 
shalt thou recall this picture ; often shalt thou see her before 
thee, alone and broken-hearted, weeping in the twilight streets 
of Rome! 



GODOLPHIX. 225 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

LOVE STROKG AS DEATH, AND NOT LESS BITTER. 

When Godolpliin returned home the door was open, as 
Lucilla had left it, and he went at once into his apartment. 
He hastened to the table on which he had left, with the neg- 
ligence arising from the emotions of the moment, the letter 
to Constance; the paper on which Lucilla had written her 
name alone met his eye. While yet stunned and amazed, his 
servant and Lucilla's entered: in a few moments he had 
learned all they had to tell him ; the rest Lucilla's handwrit- 
ing did indeed sufficiently explain. He comprehended all; 
and in a paroxysm of alarm and remorse, he dispersed his 
servants, and hurried himself in search of her. He went to 
the house of her relations ; they had not seen or heard of her. 
It was now night, and every obstacle in the way of his search 
presented itself. Not a clew could be traced; or, sometimes 
following a description that seemed to him characteristic, 
he chased, and found some wanderer — how unlike Lucilla! 
Towards daybreak he returned home, after a vain and weary 
search; and his only comfort was in learning from her at- 
tendant that she had about her a sum of money which he 
knew would in Italy always purchase safety and attention. 
Yet, alone, at night, in the streets, — so utter a stranger as 
she was to the world, so young and so lovely — he shuddered, 
he gasped for breath at the idea. Might she destroy herself? 
That hideous question forced itself upon him ; he could not 
exclude it: he trembled when he recalled her impassioned 
and keen temper, and when, in remembering the tone and 
words of his letter to "Constance, he felt how desperate a 
pang every sentence must have inflicted upon her. And, in- 
deed, even his imagination could not equal the truth, when it 
attempted to sound the depths of her wounded feelings. He 

15 



226 GODOLPHIN. 

only returned home to sally out again. He now employed tlie 
police, and those most active and vigilant agents that at Rome 
are willing to undertake all enterprises; he could not but feel 
assured of discovering her. 

Still, however, noon, evening came on, and no tidings. As 
he once more returned home, in the faint hope that some in- 
telligence might await him there, his servant hurried eagerly 
out to him with a letter; it was from Lucilla, and it was 
worthy of her: I give it to the reader. 

LUCILLA'S LETTER. 

" I have read your letter to another ! Are not these words sufficient 
to tell you all ? All ? no ! you never, never, never can tell how crushed 
and broken my heart is ! Why ? Because you are a man, and because 
you have never loved as I loved. Yes, Godolphin, 1 knew that I was 
not one whom you could love. I am a poor, ignorant, untutored girl, 
with nothing at my heart but a great world of love which I could never 
tell. Thou saidst I could not comprehend thee : alas 1 how much was 
there — is there — in my nature, in my feelings, which have been, and 
ever will be, unfathomable to thy sight ! 

"But all this matters not; the tie between us is eternally broken. 
Go, dear, dear Godolphin ! link thyself to that happier other one, seem- 
ingly so much more thine equal than the lowly and uncultivated Lucilla. 
Grieve not for me ; you have been kind, most kind, to me. You have 
taken away hope, but you have given me pride in its stead ; the blow 
which has crushed my heart has given strength to my mind. Were 
you and I left alone on the earth, we must still be apart ; I could never, 
never live with you again ; my world is not your world ; when our 
hearts have ceased to be in common, what of union is there left to us ? 
Yet it would be something if, since the future is shut out from me, you 
had not also deprived me of the past : I have not even the privilege of 
looking back ! What ! all the while my heart was lavishing itself upon 
thee ; all the while I had no other thought, no other dream but thee ; 
'all the while I sat by thy side, and watched thee, hanging on thy wish, 
striving to foresee thy thoughts, — all the while I was the partner of 
thy days, and at night my bosom was thy pillow, and I could not sleep 
from the bliss of thinking thee so near me, thy heart was then indeed 
away from me ; thy thoughts estranged ; I was to thee only an encum- 
brance, — a burthen, from which thy sigh was to be free ! Can I ever 
look back, then, to those hours we spent together? All that vast his- 



GODOLPHIN. 227 

tory of the past is but one record of bitterness and shame. And yet I 
cannot blame thee ; it were something if I could : in proportion as you 
loved me not, you were kind and generous ; and God will bless you for 
that kindness to the poor orphan. A harsh word, a threatening glance, 
I never had the affliction to feel from thee. Tracing the blighted past, 
I am only left to sadden at that gentleness which never came from 
love I 

" Go, Godolphin — I repeat the prayer in all humbleness and sin- 
cerity — go to her whom thou lovest, perhaps as I loved thee ; go, and 
in your happiness I shall feel at last something of happiness myself. 
We part forever, but there is no unkindness between us ; there is no 
reproach that one can make against the other. If I have sinned, it has 
been against Heaven and not thee ; and thou — why, even against 
Heaven jnine was all the fault, the rashness, the madness ! You will 
return to your native land ; to that proud England, of which I have so 
often questioned you, and which, even in your answers, seems to me so 
cold and desolate a spot, — a land so hostile to love. There, in your 
new ties, you will learn new objects, and you will be too busy and too 
happy for your thoughts to turn to me again. Too happy ? — Xo, I 
wish I could think you would be; but I, whom you deny to possess 
sympathies with you, — I have at least penetrated so far into your heart 
as to fear that, come what may, you will never find the happiness you 
ask. You exact too much, you dream too fondly, not to be discontented 
with the truth. What has happened to me must happen to my rival, 
will happen to you throughout life. Your being is in one world, your 
soul is in another. Alas ! how foolishly I run on, as if seeking in your 
nature and not circumstances the blow that separates us. 

" I shall hasten to a conclusion. I have gained a refuge in this con- 
vent ; seek me not, follow me not, I implore, I adjure thee ; it can serve 
no purpose. I would not see thee ; the veil is already drawn between 
thy world and me, and it only remains, in kindness and in charity, to 
bid each other farewell. Farewell, then ! I think I am now with thee ; 
I think my lips have breathed aside thy long hair, and cling to thy fair 
temples with a sister's — that word, at least, is left me — a sister's kiss. 
As we stood together, at the gray dawn, when we last parted ; as then, 
in sorrow and in tears, I hid my face in thy bosom ; as then, uncon- 
scious of what was to come, I poured forth my assurances of faithful 
unswerving thought ; as thrice thou didst tear thyself from me and 
didst thrice return, — and as, through the comfortless mists of morn I 
gazed after thee, and fancied for hours that thy last words yet rancr in 
my ear, so now, but with different feelings, I once more bid thee fare- 
well, — farewell forever ! " 



228 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

GODOLPHIN. 

*' No, signor, she will not see you I " 

" You have given my note, given that ring? " 

"I have, and she still refuses." 

"Refuses? — and is that all the answer; no line to — to 
soften the reply?" 

"Signor, I have spoken all my message." 

"Cruel, hard-hearted! May I call again, think you, with a 
better success?" 

"The convent, at stated times, is open to strangers, signor; 
but so far as the young signora is concerned I feel assured, 
from her manner, that your visits will be in vain." 

"Ay, ay, I understand you, madam; you wish to entice her 
from the wicked world, — to suffer not human friendships to 
disturb her thoughts. Good heavens ! and can she, so young, 
so ardent, dream of taking the veil? " 

"She does not dream of it," said the nun, coolly; "she has 
no intention of remaining here long." 

" Befriend me, I beseech you ! " cried Godolphin, eagerly ; 
"restore her to me; let me only come once to her within 
these walls and I will enrich your — " 

"Signor, good-day." 

Dejected, melancholy, and yet enraged amidst all his sor- 
row, Godolphin returned to Rome, Lucilla's letter rankled 
in his heart like the barb of a broken arrow ; but the stern 
resolve with which she had refused to see him appeared to 
the pride that belongs to manhood a harsh and unfeeling in- 
sult. He knew not that poor Lucilla's eyes had watched him 
from the walls of the convent, and that while, for his sake 
more than her own, she had refused the meeting he prayed 
for, she had not the resolution to deny herself the luxury of 
gazing on him once more. 



GODOLPHIN. 229 

He readied Kome ; he found a note on his table from Lady 
Charlotte Deerham, saying she had heard it was his intention 
to leave Eome, and begging him to receive from her that 
evening her adieus. "Lady Erpingham will be with me," 
concluded the note. 

This brought a new train of ideas. Since Lucilla's flight, 
all thought but of Lucilla had been expelled from Godolphin's 
mind. We have seen how his letter to Lady Erpingham mis- 
carried : he had written no other. How strange to Constance 
must seem his conduct, after the scene of the avowal in the 
Siren's Cave: no excuse on the one hand, no explanation on 
the other; and now what explanation should he give? There 
was no longer a necessity, for it was no longer honesty and 
justice to fly from the bliss that might await him, — the love 
of his early-worshipped Constance. But could he, with a 
heart yet bleeding from the violent rupture of one tie, form 
a new one? Agitated, restless, self-reproachful, bewildered, 
and uncertain, he could not bear thoughts that demanded 
answers to a thousand questions ; he flung from his cheerless 
room, and hastened, with a feverish pulse and burning tem- 
ples, to Lady Charlotte Deerham's. 

" Good heavens ! how ill you look, Mr. Godolphin ! " cried 
the hostess, involuntarily. 

"111! — ha, ha! I never was better; but I have just re- 
turned from a long journey : I have not touched food nor felt 
sleep for three days and nights. I — ha, ha ! no, I 'm not ill ; " 
and, with an eye bright with gathering delirium, Godolphin 
glared around him. 

Lady Charlotte drew back and shuddered; Godolphin felt a 
cool, soft hand laid on his ; he turned, and the face of Con- 
stance, full of anxious and wondering pity, was bent upon 
him. He stood arrested for one moment, and then, seizing 
that hand, pressed it to his lips, his heart, and burst suddenly 
into tears. That paroxysm saved his life; for days after- 
wards he was insensible. 



230 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

THE DECLAKATIOlSr. THE APPROACHING NUPTIALS. IS THE 

IDEALIST CONTENTED? 

As Godolphin returned to health, and, day after day, the 
presence of Constance, her soft tones, her deep eyes, grew on 
him, renewing their ancient spells, the reader must perceive 
that bourne to which events necessarily tended. For some 
weeks not a word that alluded to the Siren's Cave was uttered 
by either; but when that allusion came at last from Godol- 
phin's lips, the next moment he was kneeling beside Con- 
stance, her hand surrendered to his, and her proud cheek all 
bathed in the blushes of sixteen. 

"And so," said Saville, "you, Percy Godolphin, are at last 
the accepted lover of Constance, Countess of Erpingham. 
When is the wedding to be? " 

" I know not, " replied Godolphin, musingly. 

"Well, I almost envy you; you will be very happy for six 
weeks, and that 's something in this disagreeable world. Yet, 
now I look on you, I grow reconciled to myself again; you do 
not seem so happy as that I, Aug-ustus Saville, should envy 
you while my digestion lasts. What are you thinking of ? " 

"Nothing," replied Godophin, vacantly; the words of Lu- 
cilla were weighing at his heart, like a prophecy working 
towards its fulfilment: ^^ Come what may, you will never find 
the happiness you ask : you exact too m.uchy 

At that moment Lady Erpingham 's page entered with a 
note from Constance, and a present of flowers. No one ever 
wrote half so beautifully, so spiritually, as Constance ; and to 
Percy the wit was so intermingled with the tenderness ! 

"No," said he, burying his lips among the flowers; "no! I 
discard the foreboding ; with you I must be happy ! " But 
conscience, still unsilenced, whispered Lucilla ! 



GODOLPHIX. 231 

The marriage was to take place at Eome. The day was 
fixed ; and, owing to Constance's rank, beauty, and celebrity, 
the news of the event created throughout "the English in 
Italy " no small sensation. There was a great deal of gossip, 
of course, on the occasion; and some of this gossip found its 
way to the haughty ears of Constance. It was said that she 
had made a strange match, — that it was a curious weakness 
in one so proud and brilliant to look no loftier than a private 
and not very wealthy gentleman; handsome, indeed, and re- 
puted clever ; but one who had never distinguished himself in 
anything, — who never would! 

Constance was alarmed and stung, not at the vulgar accu- 
sation, the paltry sneer, but at the prophecy relating to Go- 
dolphin: "He had never distinguished himself in anything, — 
he never Avould." Eank, wealth, power, Constance felt these 
she wanted not, these she could command of herself; but she 
felt also that a nobler vanity of her nature required that the 
man of her mature and second choice should not be one in re- 
pute of that mere herd, above whom in reality his genius so 
eminently exalted him. She deemed it essential to her future 
happiness that Godolphin's ambition should be aroused, that 
he should share her ardour for those great objects that she 
felt would forever be dear to her. 

" I love Rome ! " said she, passionately, one day, as accom- 
panied by Godolphin, she left the Vatican; "I feel my soul 
grow larger amidst its ruins. Elsewhere through Italy we 
live in the present, but here in the past." 

"Say not that that is the better life, dear Constance; the 
present — can we surpass it? " 

Constance blushed, and thanked her lover with a look that 
told him he was understood. 

"Yet," said she, returning to the subject, "who can breathe 
the air that is rife with glory, and not be intoxicated with 
emulation? Ah, Percy!" 

"Ah, Constance! and what wouldst thou have of me? Is 
it not glory enough to be thy lover? " 

"Let the world be as proud of my choice as I am." 

Godolphin frowned; he penetrated in those words to Con- 



232 GODOLPHIK 

stance's secret meaning. Accustomed to be an idol from his 
boyhood, he resented the notion that he had need of exertion 
to render him worthy even of Constance; and sensible that it 
might be thought he had made an alliance beyond his just 
pretensions, he was doubly tenacious as to his own claims. 
Godolphin frowned, then, and turned away in silence. Con- 
stance sighed; she felt that she might not renew the subject. 
But after a pause Godolphin himself continued it. 

"Constance," said he, in a low, firm voice, "let us under- 
stand each other. You are all to me in the world, — fame and 
honour and station and happiness. Am I, also, that all to 
you? If there be any thought at your heart which whispers 
you, * You might have served your ambition better; you have 
done wrong in yielding to love and love only, ' — then, Con- 
stance, pause; it is not too late." 

"Do I deserve this, Percy? " 

"You drop words sometimes," answered Godolphin, "that 
seem to indicate that you think the world may cavil at your 
choice, and that some exertion on my part is necessary to 
maintain your dignity. Constance, need I say, again and 
again, that I adore the very dust you tread on? But I have 
a pride, a self-respect, beneath which I cannot stoop; if you 
really think or feel this, I will not condescend to receive even 
happiness from you: let us part." 

Constance saw his lips white and quivering as he spoke; 
her heart smote her, her pride vanished; she sank on his 
shoulder, and forgot even ambition; nay, while she inly 
murmured at his sentiment, she felt it breathed a sort of 
nobility that she could not but esteem. She strove then to 
lull to rest all her more worldly anxieties for the future; to 
hope that, cast on the exciting stage of English ambition, 
Godolphin must necessarily be stirred despite his creed; and 
if she sometimes doubted, sometimes despaired of this, she 
felt at least that his presence had become dearer to her than 
all things. N^ay, she checked her own enthusiasm, her own 
worship of fame, since they clashed with his opinions; so 
marvellously and insensibly had Love bowed down the proud 
energies and the lofty soul of the daughter of John Vernon, 



GODOLPHIN. 233 



CHAPTER XLVI. 

THE BRIDALS. — THE ACCIDEXT. THE FIRST LAWFUL POS" 

SESSIOX OF LOVE. 

It was the morning on which Constance and Godolphin were 
to be married ; it had been settled that they were to proceed 
the same day towards Florence, and Constance was at her 
toilette when her woman laid beside her a large bouquet of 
flowers. 

"From Percy — from Mr, Godolphin, I mean?" she asked, 
taking them up, 

"No, my lady; a young woman outside the palace gave 
them me, and bade me in such pretty English be sure to give 
them to your ladyship; and when I offered her money, she 
would not take anything, my lady." 

"The Italians are a courteous people," replied Constance; 
and she placed the flowers in her bosom. 

As, after the ceremony, Godolphin assisted his bride into 
the carriage, a girl, wrapped in a large cloak, pressed forward 
for a moment, Godolphin had in that moment turned his 
head to give some order to his servant, and with the next the 
girl had sunk back into the throng that was drawn around the 
carriage — yet not before Constance had heard her murmur in 
deep, admiring, yet sorrowful tone: "Beautiful! hoxu beauti- 
ful!— Ah me!" 

" Did you observe what beautiful eyes that young girl had? " 
asked Constance, as the carriage whirled off, 

"What girl? I saw nothing but you! " 

"Hark! there is a noise behind," 

Godolphin looked out; the crowd seemed collected round 
one person, 

"Only a young woman fainted, sir!" said his servant, 
seated behind. "She fell down in a fit just before the 
horses; but they started aside, and did not hurt her." 



234 GODOLPHIN. 

"That is fortunate! " said Godolphin, reseating himself by 
his new bride; "drive on faster." 

At Florence, Godolphin revealed to Constance the outline 
of Lucilla's history, and Constance shared somewhat of the 
feelings with which he told it. 

"I left," said he, "in the hands of the abbess a sum to be 
entirely at Lucilla's control, whether she stay in the convent 
or not, and which will always secure to her an independence. 
But I confess I should like now once more to visit the con- 
vent, and learn on what fate she has decided." 

"You would do well, dear Percy," replied Constance, who 
from her high and starred sphere could stoop to no vulgar 
jealousy; "indeed, I think you could do no less." 

And Godolphin covered those generous lips with the sweet 
kisses in which esteem begins to mingle with passion. What 
has the earth like that first fresh union of two hearts long 
separated, and now blended forever? However close the 
sympathy between woman and her lover, however each thinks 
to have learned the other, what a world is there left un- 
learned, until marriage brings all those charming confidences, 
that holy and sweet intercourse, which leaves no separate in- 
terest, no undivided thought! But there is one thing that 
distinguishes the conversation of young married people from 
that of lovers on a less sacred footing,— fAe^ tallc of the 
future ! Other lovers talk rather of the past; an uncertainty 
pervades their hereafter; they feel, they recoil from it; they 
are sensible that their plans are not one and indivisible. But 
married people are always laying out the "to come; " always 
talking over their plans: this often takes something away 
from the tenderness of affection, but how much it adds to its 

enjoyment! ^ 

Seated by each other, and looking on the silver Arno Go- 
dolphin and Constance, hand clasped in hand, surrendered 
themselves to the contemplation of their future happiness. 
"And what would be your favourite mode of life, dear 

Percy*^ " 

"Why, I have now no schemings left me, Constance. With 
you obtained, I have grown a dullard, and left off dreaming. 



GODOLPHIX. 



285 



But let me see, a house in England - you like England - some 
ten or twenty miles from the great Babel; books, pictures, 
statues, and old trees that shall put us in mind of our Gor- 
man fathers who planted them; above all, a noisy, clear 
sunny stream gliding amidst them; deer on the opposite 
bank half hidden amongst the fern, and rooks overhead; a 
privilege for eccentricity that would allow one to be social or 
solitary as one pleased; and a house so full of guests, that to 
shun them all now and then would be no aifront to one. 
"Well," said Constance, smiling, "go on." 
"I have finished." 

"Finished?" „ 

"Yes my fair Insatiable! What more would you have? 
"Why, this is but a country-life you have been talking of, 
— very well in its way for three months in the year." 
"Italy, then, for the other nine," returned Godolphm. 
"Ah, Percy! is pleasure, mere pleasure, vulgar pleasure, 
to be really the sole end and aim of life? " 

"Assuredly." _ ^^ 

"And action, enterprise,— are these as nothing? 
Godolphin was silent, but began absently to throw pebbles 
into the water. The action reminded Constance of the first 
time she had ever seen him among his ancestral groves; and 
she sic^hed as she now gazed on a brow from which the effemi- 
nacy Tnd dreaming of his life had banished much of its early 
chivalric and earnest expression. 



CHAPTER XLVII. 

NEWS OF LUCILLA. 



GoDOLPHix was about one morning to depart for the con- 
vent to which Lucilla had flown, when a letter was brought 
to him from the abbess of the convent herself; it had fol- 
lowed him from Rome. Lucilla had left her retreat,— left it 



236 GODOLPHIN. 

three days before Godolpliin's marriage; the abbess knew not 
wliither, but believed she intended to reside in Kome. She 
inclosed him a note from Lucilla, left for him before her. de- 
parture. Short but characteristic, it ran thus : — 

LUCILLA TO GODOLPHIN. 

" I can stay here no longer ; my mind will not submit to quiet ; this 
inactivity wears me to madness. Besides, I want to see thy wife. I 
shall go to Rome ; I shall witness thy wedding ; and then — ah ! what 
then ? Give me back, Godolphin, oh, give me back the young pure 
heart I had ere I loved you ! Then, I could take joy in all things ; 
noto ! — But I will not repine ; it is beneath me. I, the daughter of the 
stars, am no love-sick and nerveless minion of a vain regret ; my pride 
is roused at last, and I feel at least the independence of being alone. 
Wild and roving shall be my future life ; that lot which denies me hope 
has raised me above all fear. Love makes us all the woman ; love has 
left me, and something hard and venturous, something that belongs to 
thy sex, has come in its stead. 

" You have left me money — I thank you — I thank you — I thank 
you ; my heart almost chokes me as I write this. Could you think of 
me so basely ? For shame, man ! if my child — our child were living 
(and O Percy, she had thine eyes !), I would see her starve inch by 
inch rather than touch one doit of thy bounty ! But she is dead, thank 
God ! Fear not for me, I shall not starve ; these hands can support 
life. God bless thee, — loved as thou still art! Jf, years hence, I 
should feel my end draw near, I will drag myself to thy country, and 
look once more on thy face before I die." 

Godolphin sank down, and covered his face with his hands. 
Constance took up the letter. "Ay, read it! " said he, in a 
hollow voice. She did so, and when she had finished, the 
proud Constance, struck by a spirit like her own, bathed the 
letter in her tears. This pleased, this touched, this consoled 
Godolphin more than the most elaborate comfortings. " Poor 
girl ! " said Constance, through her tears, " this must not be ; 
she must not be left on the wide world to her own despairing 
heart. Let us both go to Eome, and seek her out. I will 
persuade her to accept what she refuses from you." 

Godolphin pressed his wife's hand, but spoke not. They 
went that day to Rome. Lucilla had departed for Leghorn, 



GODOLPHIN. 237 

and thence taken her passage in a vessel bound to the northern 
coasts of Europe. Perhaps she had sought her father's land? 
With that hope, in the absence of all others, they attempted 
to console themselves. 



CHAPTEE XLYIII. 

IX "WHICH TWO PERSONS, PERMAXEXTLY UNITED, DISCOVER 
THAT NO TIE CAN PRODUCE UNION OF MINDS. 

Weeks passed on, and, apparently, Godolphin had recon- 
ciled himself to the disappearance and precarious destiny of 
Lucilla. It was not in his calm and brooding nature to show 
much of emotion ; but there was often, even in the presence 
of Constance, a cloud on his brow, and the fits of abstraction 
to which he had always been accustomed grew upon him more 
frequently than ever. Constance had been inured for years 
to the most assiduous, the most devoted attentions ; and now, 
living much alone with Godolphin, she began somewhat to 
miss them, — for Godolphin could be a passionate, a romantic, 
but he could not be a very watchful lover. He had no petits 
soins. Few husbands have, it is true ; nor is it necessary for 
husbands in general. But Constance was not an ordinary 
woman; she loved deeply, but she loved according to her 
nature, as a woman proud and exacting must love. For Go- 
dolphin, her haughty step waxed timorous and vigilant; she 
always sprang forward the first to meet him on his return 
from his solitary ramblings, and he smiled upon her with 
his wonted gentleness, — but not so gratefully, thought Con- 
stance, as he ought. In truth, he had been too much accus- 
tomed to the eager love of Lucilla to feel greatly surprised at 
any proof of tenderness from Constance. Thus, too proud to 
speak, to hint a complaint, Constance was nevertheless per- 
petually wounded, and by degrees (although not loving her 



238 GODOLPHIN. 

husband less) she taught that love to be more concealed. Oh, 
that accursed secretiveness in women, which makes them 
always belie themselves! 

Godolphin, too, was not without his disappointments. There 
was something so bright, so purel}^ intellectual about Con- 
stance's character, that at times, when brought into constant 
intercourse with her, you longed for some human weakness, 
some wild, warm error on which to repose. Dazzling and 
fair as snow, like snow your eye ached to gaze upon her. She 
had, during the years of her ungeuial marriage, cultivated her 
mind to the utmost; few women were so accomplished, — it 
might be learned; her conversation flowed forever in the same 
bright, flowery, adorned stream. There were times when 
Godolphin recollected how hard it is to read a volume of that 
Gibbon who in a page is so delightful. Her aifection for 
him was intense, high, devoted; but it was Avholly of the 
same intellectual spiritualized order; it seemed to Godolphin 
to want human Avarmth and fondness. In fact, there never 
was a woman who, both by original nature and after habits, 
was so purely and abstractedly "mind" as was Constance; 
there was not a single trait or taste in her character that a 
sensualist could have sneered at. Her heart was wholly 
Godolphin's; her mind was generous, sympathizing, lofty; 
her person unrivalled in the majesty of its loveliness; all 
these, too, were Godolphin's, and yet the eternal something 
was wanting still. 

"I have brought you your hat, Percy," said Constance; 
"you forget the dews are falling fast, and your head is 
uncovered. " 

"Thank you," said Percy, gently; yet Constance thought 
the tone might have been warmer. " How beautiful is this 
hour! Look yonder, the sun's ray still upon those immortal 
hills, that lone gray tower amongst the far plains, the pines 
around — hearken to their sighing! These are indeed the 
scenes of the Dryad and the Faun. These are scenes where 
we could melt our whole nature down to love: Nature never 
meant us for the stern and arid destinies we fulfil. Look 
round, Constance, in every leaf of her gorgeous book, how 



GODOLPHIN. 239 

glowingly is written the one sentence, 'Love and be happy! ' 
You answer not; to these thoughts you are cold." 

"They breathe too much of the Epicurean and his rose- 
leaves for me," answered Constance, smilingly. "I love bet- 
ter that stern old tower, telling of glorious strife and great 
deeds, than all the softer landscape, on which the present 
debasement of the South seems written." 

"You and your English," said Godolphin, somewhat bit- 
terly, "prate of the debasement of my poor Italians in a 
jargon that I confess almost enrages me." (Constance col- 
oured and bit her lip.) "Debasement! why debasement? 
They enjoy themselves: they take from life its just moral; 
they do not affect the more violent crimes; they feel their 
mortality, follow its common ends, are frivolous, contented, 
and die! Well; this is debasement. Be it so. But for what 
would you exchange it? The hard, cold, ferocious guilt of 
ancient Rome; the detestable hypocrisy, the secret villany, 
fraud, murder, that stamped republican Venice? The days of 
glory that you lament are the days of the darkest guilt ; and 
man shudders when he reads what the fair moralizers over 
the soft and idle Italy sigh to recall!" 

"You are severe," said Constance, with a pained voice. 
"Eorgive me, dearest, but you are often severe on my 
feelings." 

Constance was silent; the magic of the sunset was gone; 
they walked back to the house, thoughtful, and somewhat 
cooled towards each other. 

Another day, on which the rain forbade them to stir from 
home, Godolphin, after he had remained long silent and medi- 
tating, said to Constance, who was busy writing letters to her 
political friends, in which, avoiding Italy and love, the schem- 
• ing countess dwelt only on busy England and its eternal 
politics, — 

"Will you read to me, dear Constance? my spirits are sad 
to-day; the weather affects them." 

Constance laid aside her letters, and took up one of the 
many books that strewed the table : it was a volume of one of 
our most popular poets. 



240 GODOLPIIIN. 

" I hate poetry, " said Godolphin, languidly. 

"Here is Machiavel's history of the Prince of Lucca," said 
Constance, quickly. 

" Ah, read that, and see how odious is ambition, " returned 
Godolphin. 

And Constance read, but she warmed at what Godolphin 's 
lip curled with disdain. The sentiments, however, drew him 
from his apathy ; and presently, with the eloquence he could 
command when once excited, he poured forth the doctrines of 
his peculiar philosophy. Constance listened, delighted and 
absorbed; she did not sympathize with the thought, but she 
was struck with the genius which clothed it. " Ah, " said she, 
with enthusiasm, " why should those brilliant words be thus 
spoken and lost forever? Why not stamp them on the living 
page, or why not invest them in the oratory that would render 
you illustrious and them immortal?" 

"Excellent!" said Godolphin, laughing; "The House of 
Commons would sympathize with philosophy warmly!" 

Yet Constance was right on the whole. But the curse of a 
life of pleasure is its aversion to useful activity. Talk of the 
genius that lies crushed and obscure in poverty! Wealth 
and station have also their mute Miltons and inglorious 
Hampdens. 

Alas! how much of deep and true wisdom do we meet 
among the triflers of the world ! How much that in the stern 
middle walks of life would have obtained renown, in the 
withering and relaxed air of loftier rank dies away unheeded! 
The two extremes meet in this, — the destruction of mental 
gifts. 



GODOLPHIX. 241 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

THE RETURX TO LOXDOX. — THE ETERNAL NATURE OF DIS- 
APPOINTMENT. — FANNY MILLINGER. — HER HOUSE AND 
SUPPER. 

It was in the midst of spring, and at the approach of 
night, that our travellers entered London. After an absence 
of some duration, there is a singular emotion on returning to 
the roar and tumult of that vast city. Its bustle, its life, its 
wealth, — the tokens of the ambition and commerce of the 
Great Island Eace, — have something of inconceivable excite- 
ment and power, after the comparative desertion and majestic 
stillness of Continental cities. Constance leaned restlessly 
forth from the window of the carriage as it whirled on. 

"Oh, that I were a man! " said she, fervently. 

"And why?" asked Godolphin, smilingly. 

"Why! look out on this broad theatre of universal ambi- 
tion, and read the why. What a proud and various career 
lies open in this free city to every citizen! Look, look 
yonder, — the old hereditary senate, still eloquent with high 
memories." 

"And close by it," said Godolphin, sneering, "behold the 
tomb! " 

"Yes, but the tomb of great men!" said Constance, 
eagerly. 

"The victims of their greatness." 

There was a pause; Constance would not reply, she would 
scarcely listen. 

"And do you feel no excitement, Percy, in the hum and 
bustle, the lights, the pomp of your native city? " 

"Yes; I am in the mart where all enjoyment may be 
purchased." 

"Ah, fie!" 

16 



242 GODOLPIIIN. 

Godolphin drew his cloak round him, and put up the 
window. 

"These cursed east winds! " 
Very true — they are the curse of the country ! 
The carriage stopped at the stately portico of Erpingham 
House. Godolphin felt a little humiliated at being indeblied 
to another, — to a woman, — for so splendid a tenement; but 
Constance, not penetrating into this sentiment, hastened up 
the broad stairs, and said, pointing to a door that led to her 
boudoir, — 

"In that room Cabinets have been formed and shaken." 
Godolphin laughed; he was alive only to the vanity of the 
boast, because he shared not the enthusiasm ; this was Con- 
stance's weak point: her dark eye flashed fire. 

There 's nothing bores a man more than the sort of uneasy 
quiet that follows a day's journey. Godolphin took his hat, 
and yawningly stretching himself, nodded to Constance, and 
moved to the door; they were in her dressing-room at the 
time. 

"Why, what, Percy, you cannot be going out now? " 
"Indeed I am, my love." 
" Where, in Heaven's name? " 

"To White's, to learn the news of the Opera, and the 
strength of the Ballet." 

" I had just rung for lights to show you the house ! " said 
Constance, disappointed, and half -reproachfully. 

"Mercy, Constance! damp rooms and east winds together 
are too much. House, indeed! what can there be worth see- 
ing in your English drawing-rooms after the marble palaces 
of Italy? Any commands?" 

" None ! " said Constance, sinking back into her chair, with 
the tears in her eyes. Godolphin did not perceive them; he 
was only displeased by the cold tone of her answer, and he 
shut the door, muttering to himself, "Was there ever such 
indelicate ostentation! " 

"And thus," said Constance, bitterly, "I return to Eng- 
land; friendless, unloved, solitary in my schemes and my 
heart as I was before. Awake, my soul! thou art my sole 



. GODOLPHIN. 243 

strength, my sole support. Weak, weak that I was, to love 
this man in spite of — Well, well, I am not sunk so low as 
to regret." 

So saying, she wiped away a few tears, and turning with a 
strong effort from softer thoughts, leaned her cheek on her 
hand, and gazing on the fire, surrendered herself to the 
sterner and more plotting meditations which her return to 
the circle of her old ambition had at first called forth. 

Meanwhile Godolphin sauntered into the then arch-club of 
St. James's, that reservoir of idle exquisites and kid-gloved 
politicians. There are two classes of popular men in Lon- 
don, — the sprightly, joyous, good-humoured set; the quiet, 
gentle, sarcastic herd. The one are fellows called " devilish 
good," the other, fellows called "devilish gentlemanlike." To 
the latter class belonged Godolphin. As he had never written 
a book nor set up for a genius, his cleverness was tacitly al- 
lowed to be no impediment to his good qualities. Nothing 
atones for the sin, in the eyes of those young gentlemen who 
create for their contemporaries reputation, of having in any 
way distinguished oneself. " He 's such a d — d bore, that 
man with his books and poetry," said an arch-dandy of By- 
ron, just after " Childe Harold " had turned the heads of the 
women. There happened to be a knot assembled at White's 
when Godolphin entered; they welcomed him affectionately. 

"Wish you joy, old fellow," said one. "Bless me, Godol- 
phin! well, I am delighted to see you," cried another. "So 
you have monopolized Lady Erpingham! — lucky dog! " whis- 
pered a third. 

Godolphin, his vanity soothed by the reception he met 
with, spent his evening at the Club. The habit begun, be- 
came easy, — Godolphin spent many evenings at his club. 
Constance, running the round of her acquaintance, was too 
proud to complain. Perhaps complaint would not have 
mended the matter; but one word of delicate tenderness, or 
one look that asked for his society, and White's would have 
been forsaken! Godolphin secretly resented the very even- 
ness of temper he had once almost overprized. 

"Oh, Godolphin," one evening whispered a young lord, 



244 GODOLPHIN. 

"we sup at the little actress's, — the Millinger; you remem- 
ber the Millinger? You must come; you are an old favourite, 
you know: she'll be so glad to see you, — all innocent, by 
the way : Lady Erpingham need not be jealous " — jealous ! 
Constance jealous of Fanny Millinger ! — " all innocent. Come, 
I '11 drive you there; my cab is at the door." 

"Anything l^etter than a lecture on ambition," thought 
Godolphin; and he consented. Godolphin's friend was a 
lively young nobleman, of that good-natured, easy, uncap- 
tious temper, which a clever, susceptible, indolent man often 
likes better than comrades more intellectual, because he has 
not to put himself out of his way in the comradeship. Lord 
Falconer rattled on, as they drove along the brilliant streets, 
through a thousand topics, of which Godolphin heard as much 
as he pleased; and Falconer was of that age and those spirits 
when a listener may be easily dispensed with. 

They arrived at a little villa at Brompton. There was a 
little garden round it, and a little bower in one corner, all 
kept excessively neat; and the outside of the house had just 
been painted white from top to bottom ; and there was a ve- 
randa to the house; and the windows were plate-glass, with 
mahogany sashes — only, here and there, a Gothic casement 
was stuck in by way of looking " tasty ; " and through one 
window on the ground-floor, the lights shining within showed 
crimson silk and gilded chairs, and all sorts of finery, — Louis 
Quatorze in a nutshell ! The reader knows the sort of house 
as well as if he had lived in it. Ladies of Fanny Millinger's 
turn of mind always choose the same kind of habitation. It 
is astonishing what a unanimity of taste they have ; and young 
men about town call it " taste " too, and imitate the fashion 
in their own little tusculums in Chapel Street. 

After having threaded a Gothic hall four feet by eight and 
an oval conservatory with a river-god in the middle, the two 
visitors found themselves in the presence of Fanny Millinger. 

Godolphin had certainly felt no small curiosity to see again 
the frank, fair, laughing face which had shone on his boy- 
hood, and his mind ran busily back to that summer evening 
when, with a pulse how different from its present languid 



GODOLPHIN. 245 

tenor, and a heart burning with ardour and the pride of novel 
independence, the young adventurer first sallied on the world. 
He drew back involuntarily as he now gazed on the actress : 
she had kept the promise of her youth, and grown round and 
full in her proportions. She was extravagantly dressed, but 
not with an ungraceful, although a theatrical choice: her fair 
hands and arms were covered with jewels, and that indescrib- 
able air which betrays the stage was far more visibly marked 
in her deportment than when Godolphin first knew her; yet 
still there was the same freedom as of old, the same joyous- 
ness, and good-humoured carelessness in her manner, and in 
the silver ring of her voice as she greeted Falconer, and turned 
to question him as to his friend. Godolphin dropped his 
cloak, and the next moment, with a pretty scream, quite 
stage-effect, and yet quite natural, the actress had thrown 
herself into his arms. 

"Oh, but I forgot," said she, presently, with a mock salu- 
tation of respect, "you are married now; there will be no 
more cakes and ale. Ah, what long years since we met; yet 
I have never quite forgotten you, although the stage requires 
all one's memory for one's new parts. Alas! your hair — it 
was so beautiful — it has lost half its curl, and grown thin. 
Very rude in me to say so, but I always speak the truth, and 
my heart warms to see you, so all its thoughts thaw out." 

"Well," said Lord Falconer, who had been playing with a 
little muffy sort of dog, "you '11 recollect me presently." 

"You! Oh, one never thinks of you, except when you 
speak, and then one recollects you — to look at the clock." 

" Very good, Fanny — very good. Fan : and when do you 
expect Windsor? — He ought to be here soon. Tell me, do 
you like him really?" 

^^ Like him? — yes, excessively; just the word for him — 
for you all. If love were thrown into the stream of life, my 
little sail would be upset in an instant. But in truth, what 
with dressing and playing and all the grave business of life, 
I am not idle enough to love. And oh, Godolphin, I 'm so 
improved! Ask Lord Falconer if I don't sing like an angel, 
although my voice is hardly strong enough to go round a loo- 



246 GODOLPHIX. 

table J but on the stage, one learns to dispense with all quali- 
ties. It is a curious thing, that fictitious existence, side by 
side with the real one ! We live in enchantment, Percy, and 
enjoy what the poets pretend to." 

The dreaming Godolphin was struck by the remark. He 
was surprised, also, to see how much Fanny remained the 
same. A life of gayety had not debased her. 

Tom Windsor came next, an Irishman of five-and-forty, not 
like his countrymen in aught save wit. Thin, small, shriv- 
elled, but up to his ears in knowledge of the world, and with 
a jest forever on his tongue; rich and gay, he was always 
popular, and he made the most of his little life Avithout being 
an absolute rascal. Next dropped in the handsome French- 
man De Damville; next the young gambler St. John; next, 
two ladies, both actresses, — and the party was complete. 

The supper was in keeping with the house; the best wines, 
excellent viands, — the actress had grown rich. Wit, noise, 
good-humour, anecdote, flashed round with the champagne; 
and Godolphin, exhilarated into a second youth, fancied him- 
self once more the votary of pleasure. 



CHAPTER L. 

GODOLPHIn's soliloquy. — HE BECOMES A MAX OF PLEASURE 
AND A PATROX OF THE ARTS. A NEW CHARACTER SHAD- 
OWED forth; FOR AS WE ADVANCE, WHETHER IN LIFE 
OR ITS REPRESENTATION, CHARACTERS ARE MORE FAINT 
AND DIMLY DRAWN THAN IN THE EARLIER PART OF OUR 
CAREER. 

"Yes," said Godolphin, the next morning, as he solilo- 
quized over his lonely breakfast-table, — lonely, for the hours 
of the restless Constance were not those of the luxurious and 
indolent Godolphin, and she was already in her carriage ; nay, 



GODOLPHIN. 247 

already closeted with an iutriguing ambassadress, — "yes; I 
have passed two eras of life, — the first of romance, the second 
of contemplation; once my favourite study was poetry, next 
philosophy. Xow, returned to my native country, rich, set- 
tled, yet young, new objects arise to me; not that vulgar and 
troublous ambition (which is to make a toil of life) that Con- 
stance suggests, but a more warm and vivid existence than 
that I have lately dreamed away. Let luxury and pleasure 
now be to me what solitude and thought were. I have been 
too long the solitary, I will learn to be social." 

Agreeably to this resolution, Godolphin returned with avid- 
ity to the enjoyment of the world; he found himself courted, 
he courted society in return. Erpingham House had been for 
years the scene of fascination : who does not recollect the yet 
greater refinement which its new lord threw over its circles? 
A delicate and just conception of the fine arts had ahvays 
characterized Godolphin. He now formed that ardour for 
collecting, common to the more elegant order of minds. From 
his beloved Italy he imported the most beautiful statues ; his 
cabinets were filled with gems; his walls glowed with the 
triumphs of the canvas ; the showy but heterogeneous furni- 
ture of Erpingham House gave way to a more classic and per- 
fect taste. The same fastidiousness, which, in the affairs of 
the heart, had characterized Godolphin's habits and senti- 
ments, characterized his new pursuits; the same thirst for 
the Ideal, the same worship of the Beautiful, and aspirations 
after the Perfect. 

It was not in Constance's nature to admit this smaller am- 
bition : her taste was pure but not minute ; she did not de- 
scend to the philosophy of detail. But she was glad still to 
see that Godolphin could be aroused to the discovery of an 
active object; and although she sighed to perceive his fine 
genius frittered away on the trifles of the virtuoso, although 
she secretly regretted the waste of her great wealth (which 
afforded to political ambition so high an advantage) on the 
mute marble, and what she deemed, nor unjustly, frivolous 
curiosities, she still never interfered with Godolphin's ca- 
prices, conscious that, to his delicacy, a single objection to his 



248 GODOLPHIN. 

wishes on the score of expense would have reminded him of 
what she wished him most to forget, — namely, that the 
means of this lavish expenditure were derived from. her. 
She hoped that his mind, once fairly awakened, would soon 
grow sated with the acquisition of baubles, and at length sigh 
for loftier objects ; and, in the mean while, she plunged into 
her old party plots and ambitious intrigues. 

Erpingham House, celebrated as ever for the beauty of its 
queen and for the political nature of its entertainments, re- 
ceived a new celebrity from its treasures of art and the spir- 
itual wit and grace with which Godolphin invested its attrac- 
tions. Among the crowd of its guests there was one whom its 
owners more particularly esteemed, — Stainforth Eadclyffe was 
still considerably under thirty, but already a distinguished 
man. At school he had been distinguished, at college distin- 
guished, and now in the world of science distinguished also. 
Beneath a quiet, soft, and cold exterior, he concealed the most 
resolute and persevering ambition ; and this ambition was the 
governing faculty of his soul. His energies were undistracted 
by small objects; for he went little into general society, and 
he especially sought in his studies those pursuits which nerve 
and brace the mind. He was a profound thinker, a deep 
political economist, an accurate financier, a judge of the intri- 
cacies of morals and legislation, — for to his mere book studies 
he added an instinctive penetration into men; and when from 
time to time he rejoined the world, he sought out those most 
distinguished in the sciences he had cultivated, and by their 
lights corrected his own. In him there was nothing desultory 
or undetermined; his conduct was perpetual calculation. He 
did nothing but with an eye to a final object; and when, to 
the superficial, he seemed most to wander from the road their 
prudence would have suggested, he was only seeking the surest 
and shortest paths. Yet his ambition was not the mere vul- 
gar thirst for getting on in the world; he cared little for the 
paltry place, the petty power, which may reward what are 
called aspiring young men. His clear sight penetrated to 
objects that seemed wrapped in shade to all others; and to 
those only — distant, but vast and towering — he deigned 



GODOLPHIN. 249 

to attacli his desires. He cared not for small and momentary 
rewards; and while always (for he knew its necessity) upper- 
most on the tide of the hour, he had neither joy nor thought 
for the petty honours for which he was envied, and by which 
he was supposed to be elated. Always occupied and always 
thoughtful, he went, as I have just said, very little into the 
gay world, and was not very well formed to shine in it when 
there ; for trifles require the whole man as much as matters 
of importance. He did not want either wit or polish, but 
he tasked his powers too severely on great subjects not to be 
sometimes dull upon small ones : yet, when he was either ex- 
cited or at home, he was not without — what man of genius 
is? — his peculiar powers of conversation. There was in this 
young, dark, brooding, stern man that which had charmed 
Constance at first sight; she thought to recognize a nature 
like her own, and Eadclyffe's venturous spirit exulted in a 
commune with hers. Their politics were the same; their ulti- 
mate ends not very unlike ; and their common ambition fur- 
nished them with an eternity of topics and schemes. Radclyffe 
was Constance's guest; but Godolphin soon grew attached to 
the young politician, though he shrugged his shoulders at his 
opinions. In youth, Godolphin had been a Tory; now, if 
anything he was a Tory still. Such a political creed was per- 
haps the natural result of his philosophical belief. Con- 
stance, Whig by profession, ultra-Liberal in reality, still 
however gave the character to the politics of the house; and 
the easy Godolphin thought politics the veriest of all the 
trifles which a man could leave to the discretion of the lady 
of his household. We may judge, therefore, of the quiet, 
complacent amusement he felt in the didactics of Eadclyffe or 
the declamations of Constance. 

"That is a dangerous, scheming woman, believe me," said 

the Duchess of to her great husband, one morning, when 

Constance left her Grace. 

"^Nonsense! women are never dangerous." 



250 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER LI. 

GODOLPHIn's course of life. — IXFLUENCE OF OPINION AND 

OF RIDICULE ON THE MINDS OF PRIVILEGED ORDERS. 

LADY ERPINGHAM's FRIENDSHIP WITH GEORGE THE FOURTH. 
HIS MANNER OF LIVING. 

The course of life whicli Godolphin now led was exactly 
that which it is natural for a very rich intellectual man to 
indulge, — voluptuous but refined. He was arriving at that 
age when the poetry of the heart necessarily decays. Wealth 
almost unlimited was at his command ; he had no motive for 
exertion ; and he now sought in pleasure that which he had 
formerly asked from romance. As his faculties and talents 
had no other circle for display than that which "society" 
affords, so by slow degrees, society — its applause and its re- 
gard — became to him of greater importance than his "phi- 
losophy dreamt of." Whatever the circle we live amongst, 
the public opinion of that circle will, sooner or later, obtain 
a control over us. This is the reason why a life of pleasure 
makes even the strongest mind frivolous at last. The lawyer, 
the senator, the man of letters, all are insensibly guided, 
moulded, formed, by the judgment of the tribe they belong 
to, and the circle in which they move. Still more is it the 
case with the idlers of the great world, amongst whom the 
only main staple of talk is "themselves." 

And in the last-named set, Eidicule being more strong and 
fearful a deity than she is amongst the cultivators of the 
graver occupations of life, reduces the inmates, by a constant 
dread of incurring her displeasure, to a more monotonous and 
regular subjection to the judgment of others. Eidicule is the 
stifler of all energy amongst those she controls. After a 
man's position in society is once established, after he has 
arrived at a certain age, he does not like to hazard any intel- 



GODOLPHIN. 251 

lectual enterprise which may endanger the quantum of re- 
spect or popularity at present allotted to him. He does not 
like to risk a failure in parliament, a caustic criticism in 
literature; he does not like to excite new jealousies, and 
provoke angry rivals, where he now finds complaisant in- 
feriors. The most admired authors, the most respected 
members of either House, now looked up to Godolphin as a 
man of wit and genius, — a man whose house, whose wealth, 
whose wife, gave him an influence few individuals enjoy. 
Why risk all this respect by provoking comparison? Among 
the first in one line, why sink into the probability of being 
second-rate in another? 

This motive, which secretly governs half the aristocracy, — 
the cleverer half, namely, the more diffident and the more 
esteemed, which leaves to the obtuse and the vain a despised 
and unenviable notoriety, added new force to Godolphin's 
philosophical indifference to ambition. Perhaps, had his 
situation been less brilliant, or had he persevered in that 
early affection for solitude which youth loves as the best 
nurse to its dreams, he might now, in attaining an age when 
ambition, often dumb before, usually begins to make itself 
heard, have awakened to a more resolute and aspiring tem- 
perament of mind. But as it was, courted and surrounded 
by all the enjoyments which are generally the reward to 
which exertion looks, even an ambitious man might have 
forgotten his nature. No wound to his vanity, no feeling 
that he was underrated (that great spur to proud minds), 
excited him to those exertions we undertake in order to belie 
calumny. He was "the glass of fashion," at once popular 
and admired; and his good fortune in marrying the cele- 
brated, the wealthy, the beautiful Countess of Erpingham 
was, as success always is, considered the proof of his genius, 
and the token of his merits. 

It was certainly true, that a secret and mutual disappoint- 
ment rankled beneath the brilliant lot of the husband and 
wife. Godolphin exacted from Constance more softness, 
more devotion, more compliance, than belonged to her nature; 
and Constance, on the other hand, ceased not to repine that 



252 GODOLPHIN. 

she found in Godolphin no sympathy with her objects and no 
feeling for her enthusiasm. As there was little congenial in 
their pursuits, the one living for pleasure, the other for am- 
bition, so there could be no congeniality in their intercourse. 
They loved each other still ; they loved each other warmly ; 
they never quarrelled, for the temper of Constance was mild, 
and that of Godolphin generous : but neither believed there was 
much love on the other side; and both sought abroad that fel- 
lowship and those objects they had not in common at home. 

Constance was a great favourite with the reigning king; 
she was constantly invited to the narrow circle of festivities 
at Windsor. Godolphin, who avoided the being bored as the 
greatest of earthly evils, could not bow down his tastes and 
habits to any exact and precise order of life, however distin- 
guished the circle in which it became the rule. Thirsting to 
be amused, he could not conjugate the active\evh "to amuse." 
No man was more fitted to adorn a court, yet no man could 
less play the courtier. He admired the manners of the sov- 
ereign, he did homage to the natural acuteness of his under- 
standing; but, accustomed as he was to lay down the law in 
society, he was too proud to receive it from another, — a com- 
mon case among those who live with the great by right and 
not through sufferance. His pride made him fear to seem a 
parasite ; and, too chivalrous to be disloyal, he was too haughty 
to be subservient. In fact, he was thoroughly formed to be the 
Great Aristocrat, — a career utterly distinct from that of the 
hanger-on upon a still greater man; and against his success at 
court, he had an obstacle no less in the inherent fierte of his 
nature than in the acquired philosophy of his cynicism. 

The king, at first, was civil enough to Lady Erpingham's 
husband.; but he had penetration enough to see that he was 
not adequately admired: and on the first demonstration of 
royal coolness, Godolphin, glad of an excuse, forswore Castle 
and Pavilion forever, and left Constance to enjoy alone the 
honours of the regal hospitality. The world would have 
insinuated scandal; but there was that about Constance's 
beauty which there is said by one of the poets to belong to 
an angel's,— it struck the heart, but awed the senses. 



GODOLPHIN. 253 



CHAPTER LII. 

KADCLYFFE AND GODOLPHIN CONVERSE. — THE VARIETIES 
OF AMBITION. 

"I don't know," said Godolphin to Radclyffe, as they were 
one day riding together among the green lanes that border 
the metropolis, — "I don't know what to do with myself this 
eyening. Lady Erpingham is gone to Windsor; I have no 
dinner engagement, and I am wearied of balls. Shall we 
dine together, and go to the play quietly, as we might have 
done some ten years ago? " 

"Nothing I should like better; and the theatre — are you 
fond of it now? I think I have heard you say that it once 
made your favourite amusement." 

"I still like it passably," answered Godolphin; "but the 
gloss is gone from the delusion. I am grown mournfully 
fastidious. I must have excellent acting, an excellent play. 
A slight fault, a slight deviation from nature, robs me of my 
content at the whole." 

" The same fault in your character pervading all things, " 
said Radclyffe, half smiling. 

"True," said Godolphin, yawning; "but have you seen my 
new Canova? " 

"Xo: I care nothing for statues, and I know nothing of the 
Fine Arts." 

"What a confession! " 

" Yes, it is a rare confession ; but I suspect that the Arts, 
like truifies and olives, are an acquired taste. People talk 
themselves into admiration where at first they felt indiffer- 
ence. But how can you, Godolphin, with your talents, fritter 
away life on these baubles? " 

"You are civil," said Godolphin, impatiently. "Allow me 
to tell you that it is your objects / consider baubles. Your 



254 GODOLPHIN. 

dull, plodding, wearisome honours ; a name in the newspapers ; 
a phice, perhaps, in the ministry, purchased by a sacrificed 
youth and a degraded manhood; a youth in labour, a man- 
hood in schemes. No, Radclyffe! give me the bright, the glad 
sparkle of existence ; and ere the sad years of age and sick- 
ness, let me at least enjoy. That is wisdom! Your creed 
is — But I will not imitate your rudeness ! " and Godolphin 
laughed. 

"Certainly," replied Eadclyffe, ''j^ou do your best to enjoy 
yourself. You live well and fare sumptuously ; your house is 
superb, your villa enchanting. Lady Erpingham is the hand- 
somest woman of her time; and, as if that were not enough, 
half the fine women in London admit you at their feet. Yet 
you are not happy." 

"Ay; but who is?" cried Godolphin, energetically. 

" I am, " said Radclyffe, dryly. 

"You! humph!" 

"You disbelieve me ?" 

"I have no right to do so: but are you not ambitious? And 
is not ambition full of anxiety, care, — mortification at defeat, 
disappointment in success? Does not the very word ambi- 
tion — that is, a desire to be something you are not — prove 
you discontented with what you are? " 

"You speak of a vulgar ambition," said Eadclyffe. 

" Most august sage ! — and what species of ambition is 
yours ? " 

" Not that which you describe. You speak of the ambition 
for self; my ambition is singular, — it is the ambition for 
others. Some years ago I chanced to form an object in what 
I considered the welfare of my race. You smile. Nay, I 
boast no virtue in my dream; but philanthropy was my 
hobby, as statues may be yours. To effect this object, I see 
great changes are necessary; I desire, I work for these great 
changes. I am not blind, in the meanwhile, to glory. I de- 
sire, on the contrary, to obtain it ! but it would only please 
me if it came from certain sources. I want to feel that I 
may realize what I attempt; and wish for that glory that 
comes from the permanent gratitude of my species, not that 



GODOLPHIN. 255 

which springs from the momentary applause. Now, I am 
vain, very vain: vanity was, some years ago, the strongest 
characteristic of my nature. I do not pretend to conquer the 
weakness, but to turn it towards my purposes. I am vain 
enough to wish to shine, but the light must come from deeds 
I think really worthy." 

"Well, well!" said Godolphin, a little interested in spite 
of himself; " but ambition of one sort resembles ambition of 
another, inasmuch as it involves perpetual harassments and 
humiliations." 

"Not so," answered Eadclyffe; "because when a man is 
striving for what he fancies a laudable object, the goodness 
of his intentions comforts him for a failure in success, whereas 
your selfishly ambitious man has no consolation in Jiis defeats ; 
he is humbled by the external world, and has no inner world 
to apply to for consolation." 

" man ! " said Godolphin, almost bitterly, " how dost thou 
eternally deceive thyself! Here is the thirst for power, and 
it calls itself the love of mankind! " 

"Believe me," said Radclyffe, so earnestly, and with so deep 
a meaning in his grave, bright eye, that Godolphin was stag- 
gered from his scepticism, — "believe me, they may be dis- 
tinct passions, and yet can be united." 



CHAPTER LIII. 

FANNY BEHIND THE SCENES. REMINISCENCES OF YOUTH. — 

THE UNIVERSALITY OF TRICK. THE SUPPER AT FANNY 

MILLINGEr's. TALK ON A THOUSAND MATTERS, EQUALLY 

LIGHT AND TRUE. FANNy's SONG. 

The play was "Pizarro," and Fanny Millinger acted Cora. 
Godolphin and Radclyffe went behind the scenes. 

"Ah," said Fanny, as she stood in her white Peruvian dress, 
waiting her turn to re-enter the stage, — "ah, Godolphin! this 
reminds me of old times. How many years have passed since 



256 GODOLPHIN. 

you used to take sucli pleasure in this mimic life ! "Well do I 
remember your musing eye and thoughtful brow bent kindly 
on me from the stage-box yonder! and do you recollect how 
prettily you used to moralize on the deserted scenes when the 
play was over? And you sometimes waited on these very 
boards to escort me home. Those times have changed. 
Heigh-ho!" 

"Ay, Fanny, we have passed through new worlds of feel- 
ing since then. Could life be to us now what it was at that 
time, we might love each other anew. But tell me, Fanny, 
has not the experience of life made you a wiser woman? Do 
you not seek more to enjoy the present, — to pluck Time's 
fruit on the bough, ere yet the ripeness is gone? I do. I 
dreamed away my youth, — I strive to enjoy my manhood." 

"Then," said Fanny, with that quickness with which, in 
matters of the heart, women beat all our philosophy, — "then 
I can prophesy that, since we parted, you have loved or lost 
some one. Eegret, which converts the active mind into the 
dreaming temper, makes the dreamer hurry into activity, 
whether of business or of pleasure." 

"Right," said Radclj^ffe, as a shade darkened his stern 
brow. 

"Eight," said Godolphin, thoughtfully, andLucilla's image 
smote his heart like an avenging conscience. "Right," re- 
peated he, turning aside and soliloquizing; "and those words 
from an idle tongue have taught me some of the motives of 
my present conduct. But away reflection! I have resolved 
to forswear it. My pretty Cora ! " said he aloud, as he turned 
back to the actress, " you are a very De Stael in your wisdom : 
but let us not be wise ; 't is the worst of our follies. Do you 
not give us one of your charming suppers to-night?" 

"To be sure; your friend will join us. He was once the 
gayest of the gay, but years and fame have altered him a 
little." 

"Radclyffe gay! Bah!" said Godolphin, surprised. 

"Ay, you may well look astonished," said Fanny, archly; 
"but note that smile, — it tells of old days." 

And Godolphin turning to his friend saw indeed on the 



GODOLPHIX. 257 

thin lip of that earnest face a smile so buoyant, so joyous, 
that it seemed as if the whole character of the man were 
gone ; but while he gazed, the smile vanished, and Kadclyffe 
gravely declined the invitation. 

Cora was now on the stage; a transport of applause shook 
the house. 

"How well she acts! " said Eadclyffe, warmly. 

"Yes," answered Godolphin, as with folded arms he looked 
quietly on ; " but what a lesson in the human heart does good 
acting teach us ! Mark that glancing eye, that heaving breast, 
that burst of passion, that agonized voice : the spectators are 
in tears! The woman's whole soul is in her child! Not a 
bit of it ! She feels no more than the boards we tread on : 
she is probably thinking of the lively supper we shall have ; 
and when she comes off the stage, she will cry, ' Did I not 
act it well? ' " 

"Nay," said Radclyffe, "she probably feels while she de- 
picts the feeling." 

" Not she ; years ago she told me the whole science of acting 
was trick ; and trick — trick — trick it is, on the stage or off. 
The noble art of oratory — noble forsooth ! — is just the same ; 
philosophy, poetry, — all, all hypocrisy! ' Damn the moon! ' 

said B to me, as we once stood gazing on it at Venice ; 

' it always gives me the ague : but I have described it well in 
my poetry, Godolphin, eh? ' " 

"But — " began Radclyffe. 

"But me no buts," interrupted Godolphin, with the playful 
pertinacitj"- which he made so graceful. "You are younger 
than I am; when you have lived as long, you shall have a 
right to contradict my system, — not before." 

Godolphin joined the supper party. Like Godolphin 's, 
Fanny's life was the pursuit of pleasure; she lavished on it, 
in proportion to her means, the same cost and expense, 
though she wanted the same taste and refinement. Generous 
and profuse, like all her tribe, — like all persons who win 
money easily, — she was charitable to all and luxurious in 
herself. The supper was attended by four male guests, — 
Godolphin, Saville, Lord Falconer, and Mr. Windsor. 

17 



258 GODOLPHIX. 

It was early summer; the curtains were undrawn, the win- 
dows were half opened, and the moonlight slept on the little 
grassplot that surrounded the house. The guests were in high 
spirits. " Fill me this goblet," cried Godolphin; "champagne 
is the boy's liquor; I will return to it con amore. Fanny, let 
us pledge each other: stay, a toast! What shall it be?" 

"Hope till old age, and Memory afterwards," said Fanny, 
smiling. 

"Pshaw! theatricals still, Fan?" growled Saville, who had 
placed a large screen between himself and the window; "no 
sentiment between friends." 

" Out on you, Saville, " said GodoliDhin ; " as well might you 
say no music out of the opera; these verbal prettinesses colour 
conversation. But you roues are so d — d prosaic, you want 
us to walk to Vice without a flower by the way." 

"Vice indeed!" cried Saville. "I abjure your villanous 
appellatives. It was in your companionship that I lost my 
character, and now you turn king's evidence against the poor 
devil you seduced." 

" Humph ! " cried Godolphin, gayly ; " you remind me of 
the advice of the Spanish hidalgo to a servant: always 
choose a master with a good memory; for ' if he does not 
pay, he will at least remember that he owes you.' In future, 
I shall take care to herd only with those who recollect, after 
they are finally debauched, all the good advice I gave them 
beforehand." 

" Meanwhile, " said the pretty Fanny, with her arch mouth 
half -full of chicken, "I shall recollect that Mr. Saville drinks 
his wine without toasts — as being a useless delay." 

"Wine," said Mr. Windsor, sententiously, "wine is just 
the reverse of love. Your old topers are all for coming at 
once to the bottle, and your old lovers forever mumbling the 
toast." 

" See what you have brought on yourself, Saville, by affect- 
ing a joke upon me," said Godolphin. "Come, let us make 
it up ; we fell out with the toast, let us be reconciled by the 
glass. Champagne?" 

"Ay, anything for a quiet life, — even champagne," said 



GODOLPHIX. 259 

Saville, with a mock air of patience, and dropping his sharp 
features into a state of the most placid repose. " You wits 
are so very severe. Yes, champagne, if you please. Fanny, 
my love," and Saville made a wry face as he put down the 
scarce-tasted glass; "go on, — another joke, if you please; I 
now find I can bear your satire better, at least, than your 
wine." 

Fanny was all bustle; it is in these things that the actress 
differs from the lady, — there is no quiet in her. *' Another 
bottle of champagne; what can have happened to this?" 
Poor Fanny was absolutely pained. Saville enjoyed it, for 
he always revenged a jest by an impertinence. 

"Nay," said Godolphin, "our friend does but joke. Your 
champagne is excellent, Fanny. Well, Saville, and where 
is young Greenhough? He is vanished. Report says he 
was marked down in your company, and has not risen 
since." 

"Report is the civilest jade in the world. According to 
her all the pigeons disappear in my fields. But, seriously 
speaking, Greenhough is off — gone to America, over head 
and ears in debt, — debts of honour. Now," said Saville, 
very slowly, "there 's the difference between the gentleman 
and the parvenu; the gentleman, when all is lost, cuts his 
throat : the parvenu only cuts his creditors. I am really very 
angry with Greenhough that he did not destroy himself. A 
young man under my protection and all; so d — d ungrateful 
in him." 

"He was not much in your debt, eh? " said Lord Falconer, 
speaking for the first time, as the wine began to get into his 
head. 

Saville looked hard at the speaker. 

" Lord Falconer, a pinch of snuff : there is something singu- 
larly happy in your question, — so much to the point; you 
have great knowledge of the world, — great. He was very 
much in my debt. I introduced the vulgar dog into the 
world, and he owes me all the thousands he had the honour 
to lose in good society! " 

"Do you know, Percy," continued Saville, "do you know, 



260 GODOLPHIN. 

by tlie way, that my poor dear friend Jasmin is dead, — died 
after a hearty game of whist? He had just time to cry ' Youv 
by honours,' when death trumped him. It was a great shock 
to me; he was the second best player at Graham's. Those 
sudden deaths are very awful, — especially with the game in 
one's hands." 

"Very mortifjdng, indeed," seriously said Lord Falconer, 
who had just been initiated into whist. 

" 'T is droll," said Saville, "to see how often the last words 
of a man tally with his life ; 't is like the moral to the 
fable. The best instance I know is in Lord Chesterfield, 
whose fine soul went out in that sublime and inimitable 
sentence, ' Give Mr. Darrell a chair. ' " 

''Capital," cried Lord Falconer. "Saville, a game at 

As the lion in the Tower looked at the lapdog, so in 
all the compassion of contempt looked Saville on Lord 
Falconer. 

"Infelix puer!" muttered Godolphin; "infelix puer atque 
impar congressus Achilli." 

" With all my heart," said Saville at last. " Yet, no ; we 've 
been talking of death — such topics waken a man's conscience. 
Falconer, I never play for less than — " 

" Ponies ! I know it ! " cried Falconer, triumphantly. 

" Ponies ! less than chargers ! " 

"Chargers — what are chargers? " 

"The whole receipts of an Irish peer. Lord Falconer; and 
I make it a point never to lose the first game." 

"Such men are dangerous," said Mr. Windsor, with his 
eyes shut. 

"0 Night!" cried Godolphin, springing up theatrically, 
" thou wert made for song, and moonlight, and laughter — but 
woman's laughter. Fanny, a song,— the pretty quaint song 
you sang me, years ago, in praise of a town love and an easy 
life." 

Fanny, who had been in the pouts ever since Saville had 
blamed the champagne — for she was very anxious to be of 
Ion ton in her own little way — now began to smile once 



GODOLPHIN. 261 

more; and as the moon played on her arch face, she seated 
herself at the piano, and, glancing at Godolphin, sang the 
following song : — 



LOVE COUETS THE PLEASURES. 



Believe me, Love was never made 

In deserts to abide ; 
Leave Age to take the sober shade, 

And Youth the sunny side. 



Love dozes by the purling brook, 
No friend to lonely places ; 

Or, if he toy with Strephon's crook, 
His Chloes are the Graces. 



Forsake " The Flaunting Town ! " Alas '. 

Be cells for saints, my own love ! 
The wine of life 's a social glass, 

Nor may be quafied alone, love. 



Behold the dead and solemn sea. 
To which our beings flow ; 

Let waves that soon so dark must be 
Catch every glory now. 

V. 

I would not chain that heart to this, 

To sicken at the rest ; 
The cage we close a prison is, 

The open cage a nest. 



262 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER LIV. 

THE CAREER OF CONSTANCE. — REAL STATE OF HER FEELINGS 

TOWARDS GODOLPHIN. RAPID SUCCESSION OF POLITICAL 

EVENTS. — canning's ADMINISTRATION. — CATHOLIC QUES- 
TION. — LORD grey's SPEECH. — CANNING's DEATH. 

While in scenes like these, alternated with more refined 
and polished dissipation, Godolphin lavished away his life, 
Constance became more and more powerful as one of the 
ornaments of a great political party. Few women in Eng- 
land ever mixed more actively in politics than Lady Erping- 
ham, or with more remarkable ability. Her friends were out 
of office, it is true; but she saw the time approaching rapidly 
when their opinions must come into power. She had begun 
to love for itself the scheming of political ambition, and 
in any country but England she would have been a conspira- 
tor, and in old times might have risen to be a queen; but as 
it was, she was only a proud, discontented woman. She 
knew, too, that it was all she could be, — all that her sex 
allowed her to be, — yet did she not the less struggle and toil 
on. The fate of her father still haunted her; her promise 
and his death-bed still rose oft and solemnly before her; the 
humiliations she had known in her early condition, the hom- 
age that had attended her later career, still cherished in her 
haughty soul indignation at the faction he had execrated, and 
little less of the mighty class which that faction represented. 
That system of " fashion " she had so mainly contributed to 
strengthen, and which was originally by her intended to 
build up a standard of opinion, independent of mere rank 
and in defiance of mere wealth, she saw polluted and de- 
based, by the nature of its followers, into a vulgar effrontery, 
which was worse than the more quiet dulness it had attempted 
to supplant. Yet still she was comforted by the thought that 
through this system lay the way to more wholesome changes. 



GODOLPHIN. 263 

The idols of rank and wealth once broken, she believed that 
a pure and sane worship must ultimately be established. 
Doubtless in the old French regime there were many women 
who thought like her, but there were none who acted like 
her, deliberately, and with an end. What an excellent, 
what a warning picture is contained in the entertaining Me- 
moirs of Count Segur! how admirably that agreeable gossip 
develops the state of mind among the nobility of France ! — 
"merry censurers of the old customs," "enchanted by the 
philosophy of Voltaire," "ridiculing the old system," "em- 
bracing liberality as a fashion," and "gayly treading a soil 
bedecked with ilowers, which concealed a precipice from their 
view! " In England, there are fewer flowers, and the preci- 
pice will be less fearful. 

A certain disappointment which had attended her marriage 
with Grodolphin, and the disdainful resentment she felt at the 
pleasures that allured him from her, tended yet more to deepen 
at once her distaste for the habits of a frivolous society, 
and to nerve and concentrate her powers of political intrigue. 
Her mind grew more and more masculine; her dark eye 
burned with a sterner fire; the sweet mouth was less prodigal 
of its smiles ; and that air of dignity which she had always 
possessed grew harder in its character, and became command. 
This change did not tend to draw Godolphin nearer to her; 
he, so susceptible to coldness, so refining, so exacting, be- 
lieved fully that she loved him no more, that she repented 
the marriage she had contracted. His pride was armed against 
her ; and he sought more eagerly those scenes where all for 
the admired, the gallant, the sparkling Godolphin wore smiles 
and sunshine. 

There was another matter that rankled in his breast with 
peculiar bitterness. He had wished to raise a large sum of 
money (in the purchase of some celebrated works of art), 
which could only be raised with Lady Erpingham's consent. 
When he had touched upon the point to her, she had not re- 
fused, but she had hesitated. She seemed embarrassed, and, 
he thought, discontented. His delicacy took alarm, and he 
never recurred to the question again; but he was secretly 



264 GODOLPHIN. 

much displeased witli lier reluctant manner on that occasion. 
Nothing the proud so little forget as a coolness conceived 
upon money matters. In this instance, Godolphin afterwards 
discovered that he had wronged Constance, and misinter- 
preted the cause of her reluctance. 

Yet, as time flew on for both, both felt a yearning of the 
heart towards each other; and had they been thrown upon a 
desert island, had there been full leisure, full opportunity, 
for a frank, unfettered interchange and confession of thought, 
they would have been mutually astonished to find themselves 
still so beloved, and each would have been dearer to the other 
than in their warmest hour of earlier attachment. But when 
once in a very gay and occupied life a husband and wife have 
admitted a seeming indifference to creep in between them, 
the chances are a thousand to one against its after-removal. 
How much more so with a wife so proud as Constance and a 
husband so refining as Godolphin! Fortunately, however, as 
I said before, the temper of each was excellent; they never 
quarrelled; and the indifference, therefore, lay on the sur- 
face, not at the depth. They seemed to the world an affec- 
tionate couple, as couples go; and their union would have 
been classed by Rochefoucauld among those marriages that 
are very happy, — il n'y a point de delicieux. 

Meanwhile, as Constance had predicted, the political his- 
tory of the country was marked by a perpetual progress 
towards liberal opinions. Mr. Canning was now in office; 
the Catholic Question was in every one's mouth. 

There was a brilliant meeting at Erpingham House. Those 
who composed it were of the heads of the party, but there 
were divisions amongst themselves; some were secretly for 
joining Mr. Canning's administration; some had openly done 
so ; others remained in stubborn and jealous opposition. With 
these last was the heart of Constance. 

"Well, well. Lady Erpingham," said Lord Paul Plympton, 
a young nobleman, who had written a dull history, and was 
therefore considered likely to succeed in parliamentary life, 
— " well, I cannot help thinking you are too severe upon 
Canning; he is certainly very liberal in his views." 



GODOLPHIN. 265 

" Is there one law he ever caused to pass for the benefit of 
the working classes? No, Lord Paul, his Whiggism is for 
peers, and his Toryism for peasants. With the same zeal 
he advocates the Catholic Question and the Manchester 
Massacre." 

"Yet, surely," cried Lord Paul, "you make a difference 
between the just liberality that provides for property and 
intelligence, and the dangerous liberality that would slacken 
the reins of an ignorant multitude." 

"But," said Mr. Benson, a very powerful member of the 
Lower House, "true politicians must conform to circum- 
stances. Canning may not be all we wish, but still he ought 
to be supported. I confess that I shall be generous: I care 
not for office, I care not for power; but Canning is surrounded 
with enemies, who are enemies also to the people : for that 
reason I shall support him." 

"Bravo, Benson!" cried Lord Paul. 

" Bravo, Benson ! " echoed two or three notables, who had 
waited an opportunity to declare themselves; "that's what I 
call handsome." 

"Manly!" 

"Fair!" 

" Disinterested, by Jove ! " 

Here the Duke of Aspindale suddenly entered the room. 
"Ah, Lady Erpingham, you should have been in the Lords 
to-night: such a speech! Canning is crushed forever!" 

" Speech ! from whom? " 

"Lord Grey. Terrific: it was the vengeance of a life 
concentrated into one hour; it has shaken the ministry 
fearfully. " 

"Humph!" said Benson, rising; "I shall go to Brooks's 
and hear more." 

"And I too," said Lord Paul. 

A day or two after, Benson in presenting a petition alluded 
in terms of high eulogy to the masterly speech made "in 
another place;" and Lord Paul Plympton said, "It was in- 
deed unequalled." 

That 's what I call handsome. 



266 GODOLPHIN. 

Manly ! 

Fair! 

Disinterested, by Jove ! 

And Canning died ; his gallant soul left the field of politics 
broken into a thousand petty parties. From the time of his 
death the two great hosts into which the strugglers for power 
were divided have never recovered their former strength. 
The demarcation that his policy had tended to efface was 
afterwards more weakened by his successor, the Duke of 
Wellington ; and had it not been for the question of Eef orm 
that again drew the stragglers on either side around one de- 
termined banner, it is likely that Whig and Tory would, 
among the many minute sections and shades of difference, 
have lost forever the two broad distinguishing colours of their 
separate factions. 

Mr. Canning died; and now, with redoubled energy, went 
on the wheels of political intrigue. The rapid succession of 
short-lived administrations, the leisure of a prolonged peace, 
the pressure of debt, the writings of philosophers, — all in- 
sensibly yet quickly excited that popular temperament which 
found its crisis in the Reform Bill. 



4 



CHAPTEPv LV. 

THE DEATH OF GEORGE IV, THE POLITICAL SITUATION OF 

PARTIES, AXD OF LADY ERPIXGHAM. 

The death of George the Fourth was the birth of a new 
era. During the later years of that monarch a silent spirit 
had been gathering over the land, which had crept even to 
the very walls of his seclusion. It cannot be denied that the 
various expenses of his reign, no longer consecrated by the 
youthful graces of the prince, no longer disguised beneath 
the military triumphs of the people, had contributed far 



GODOLPHIN". 267 

more than theoretical speculations to the desire of political 
change. The shortest road to liberty lies through attenuated 
pockets ! 

Constance was much at Windsor during the king's last 
illness, one of the saddest periods that ever passed within the 
walls of a palace. The memorialists of the reign of the mag- 
nificent Louis XIV. will best convey to the reader a notion of 
the last days of George the Fourth. For, like that great 
king, he was the representation m himself of a particular 
period, and he preserved much of the habits of (and much too 
of the personal interest attached to) his youth, through the 
dreary decline of age. It was melancholy to see one who had 
played, not only so exalted, but so gallant a part, breathing 
his life away; nor was the gloom diminished by the many 
glimpses of a fine original nature, which broke forth amidst 
infirmity and disease. 

George the Fourth died; his brother succeeded; and the 
English world began to breathe more freely, to look around, 
and to feel that the change, long coming, was come at last. The 
French Revolution, the new parliament, Henry Brougham's 
return for Yorkshire, Mr. Hume's return for Middlesex, the 
burst of astonished indignation at the Duke of Wellington's 
memorable words against reform, — all betrayed, while they 
ripened, the signs of the new age. The Whig ministry was 
appointed, — appointed amidst discontents in the city, sus- 
picions amongst the friends of the people, amidst fires and 
insurrections in the provinces, convulsions abroad, and turbu- 
lence at home. 

The situation of Constance in these changes was rather 
curious; her intimacy with the late king was no recommen- 
dation with the Whig government of his successor. Her 
power, as the power of fashion always must in stormy times, 
had received a shock; and as she had of late been a little 
divided from the main body of the Whigs, she did not share 
at once in their success, or claim to be one of their allies. 
She remained silent and aloof; her parties were numerous 
and splendid as ever, but the small plotting riunions of in- 
triguers were suspended. She hinted mysteriously at the 



268 GODOLPHIN. 

necessity of pausing, to see what reform the new ministers 
would recommend, and what economy they would effect. The 
Tories, especially the more moderate tribe, began to court 
her; the Whigs, flushed with their triumph, and too busy to 
think of women, began to neglect. This last circumstance 
the high Constance felt keenly, but with the keenness rather 
of scorn than indignation; years had deepened her secret dis- 
gust at all aristocratic ordinances, and looking rather at what 
the Whigs had been than what, pressed by the times, they 
have become, she regarded them as only playing with demo- 
cratic counters for aristocratic rewards. She repaid their 
neglect with contempt, and the silent neutralist soon became 
regarded by them as the secret foe. 

But Constance was sufficiently the woman to feel mortified 
and wounded by that which she affected to despise. No post 
at court had been offered to her by her former friends; the 
confidant of George the Fourth had ceased to be the confidant 
of Lord Grey. Arrived at that doubtful time of life when 
the beauty, although possessing, is no longer assured of, her 
charms, she felt the decay of her personal influence as a per- 
sonal affront; and thus vexed, wounded, alarmed, in her mid- 
career, Constance was more than ever sensible of the peculiar 
disquietudes that await female ambition, and turned with 
sighs more frequent than heretofore to the recollections of 
that domestic love which seemed lost to her forever. 

Mingled with the more outward and visible stream of poli- 
tics there was, as there ever is, a latent tide of more theoretic 
and speculative opinions. While the practical politicians 
were playing their momentary parts, schemers and levellers 
were propagating in all quarters doctrines which they fondly 
imagined were addressed to immortal ends. And Constance 
began to turn with some curiosity to these charlatans or 
sages. The bright countess listened to their harangues, pon- 
dered over their demonstrations, and mused over their hopes. 
But she had lived too much on the surface of the actual 
world, her habits of thought were too essentially worldly, to 
be converted, while she was attracted, by doctrines so start- 
ling in their ultimate conclusions. She turned once more to 



GODOLPHIX. 269 

herself, and waited, in a sad and thoughtful stillness, the 
progress of things, convinced only of the vanity of them 
all. 



CHAPTER LVI. 

THE ROUE HAS BECOME A VALETUDIXARIAX. — NEWS. — 
A FORTUNE-TELLER. 

Meanwhile the graced Grodolphin floated down the sunny 
tide of his prosperity. He lived chiefly with a knot of epi- 
curean dalliers with the time, whom he had selected from the 
wittiest and the easiest of the London world. Dictator of 
theatres, patron of operas, oracle in music, mirror of enter- 
tainments and equipage, — to these conditions had his natural 
genius and his once dreaming dispositions been bowed at last! 
A round of dissipation, however, left him no time for reflec- 
tion ; and he believed (perhaps he was not altogether wrong) 
that the best way to preserve the happy equilibrium of the 
heart is to blunt its susceptibilities. As the most uneven 
shapes, when whirled into rapid and ceaseless motion, will 
appear a perfect circle, so, once impelled in a career that 
admits no pause, our life loses its uneven angles, and glides 
on in smooth and rounded celerity, with false aspects more 
symmetrical than the truth. 

One day Godolphin visited Saville, who now, old, worn, 
and fast waning to the grave, cropped the few flowers on the 
margin, and jested, but with sourness, on his own decay. He 
found the actress (who had also come to visit the Man of 
Pleasure) sitting by the window, and rattling away with her 
usual vivacity, while she divided her attention with the 
labours of knitting a purse. 

"Heaven only knows," said Saville, "what all these times 
will produce. I lose my head in the dizzy quickness of 
events. Fanny, hand me my snuff-box. Well, I fancy my 
last hour is not far distant ; but I hope, at least, I shall die a 



270 GODOLPHIN. 

gentleman. I have a great dislike to the thought of being 
revolutionized into a roturier. That 's the only kind of revo- 
lution I have any notion about. What do you say to all this, 
Godolphin? Every one else is turning politician; young 
Sunderland whirls his cab down to the House at four o'clock 
every day, dines at Bellamy's on cold beef, and talks of noth- 
ing but that d — d good speech of Sir Kobert's! Kevolution! 
faith, the revolution is come already. Eevolutions only change 
the aspect of society ; is it not changed enough within the last 
six months? Bah! I suppose you are bit by the mania? " 

"Not I! while I live I will abjure the vulgar toil of ambi- 
tion. Let others rule or ruin the State; like the Due de 
Lauzun, while the guillotine is preparing, I will think only 
of my oysters and my champagne." 

*'A noble creed! " said Fanny, smiling: "let the world go 
to wreck, and bring me my biscuit! That's Godolphin's 
motto." 

"It is life's motto." 

"Yes — a gentleman's life." 

"Pish! Fanny, no, satire from you, — you, who are not 
properly speaking even a tragic actress ! But there is some- 
thing about your profession sublimely picturesque in the 
midst of these noisy brawls. The storms of nations shake not 
the stage; you are rapt in another life; the atmosphere of 
poetry girds you. You are like the fairies who lived among 
men, visible only at night, and playing their fantastic tricks 
amidst the surrounding passions, — the sorrow, the crime, 
the avarice, the love, the wrath, the luxury,- the famine, that 
belong to the grosser dwellers of the earth. You are to be 
envied, Fanny." 

"Not so; I am growing old." 

"Old!" cried Saville: "ah, talk not of it! Ugh! Ugh! 
Curse this cough! But hang politics; it always brings dis- 
agreeable reflections. Glad, my old pupil, glad am I to see 
that you still retain your august contempt for these foolish 
stragglers,— insects splashing and panting in the vast stream 
of events, which they scarcely stir, and in which they scarcely 
drop before they are drowned — " 



GODOLPHIN. 271 

"Or tlie fishes, their passions, devour them," said 
Godolphin. 

"News!" cried Saville; "let us have real news; cut all 
the politics out of the ' Times,' Fanny, with your scissors, 
and then read me the rest." 

Fanny obeyed. 

" ' Fire in Marylebone ! ' " 

"That 's not news! skip that." 

" 'Letter from Radical.' " 

"Stuff! What else?" 

"Emigration. ' No fewer than sixty-eight — ' " 

"Hold, for mercy's sake! What do I, just going out of the 
world, care for people only going out of the country? Here, 
child, give the paper to Godolphin; he knows exactly what 
interests a man of sense." 

" 'Sale of Lord Lysart's wines — ' " 

" Capital ! " cried Saville ; " that 's news ; that 's inter- 
esting! " 

Fanny's pretty hands returned to their knitting. When 
the wines had been discussed, the following paragraph was 
chanced upon : — 

" There is a foolish story going the round of the papers about Lord 
Grey and his vision ; the vision is only in the silly heads of the inven- 
tors of the story, and the ghost is, we suppose, the apparition of Old 
Sarum. By the way, there is a celebrated fortune-teller, or prophetess, 
now in London, making much noise. We conclude the discomfited 
Tories will next publish her oracular discourses. She is just arrived in 
time to predict the passing of the Reform Bill, without any fear of being 
proved an impostor." 

"Ah, by the by," said Saville, "I hear wonders of this 
sorceress. She dreams and divines with the most singular 
accuracy; and all the old women of both sexes flock to her 
in hackney-coaches, making fools of themselves to-day in 
order to be wise to-morrow. Have you seen her, Fanny? " 

"Yes," replied the actress, very gravely; "and, in sober 
earnest, she has startled me. Her countenance is so striking, 
her eyes so wild, and in her conversation there is so much 



272 GODOLPHIN. 

enthusiasm, that she carries you away in spite of yourself. 
Do you believe in astrology, Percy? " 

"I almost did once," said Godolphin, with a half sigh; 
"but does this female seer profess to choose astrology in pref- 
erence to cards? The last is the more convenient way of 
tricking the public." 

"Oh, but this is no vulgar fortune-teller, I assure you," 
cried Fanny, quite eagerly : " she dwells much on magnetism ; 
insists on the effect of your own imagination; discards all 
outward quackeries; and, in short, has either discovered a 
new way of learning the future, or revived some forgotten 
trick of deluding the public. Come and see her some day, 
Godolphin." 

" No, I don't like that kind of imposture, " said Godolphin, 
quickly; and turning away, he sank into a silent and gloomy 
revery. 



CHAPTEK LVir. 

SUPEESTITIOX, — ITS WONDEEFUL EFFECTS. 

It was perfectly true that there had appeared in London a 
person of the female sex who, during the last few years, had 
been much noted on the Continent for the singular boldness 
with which she had promulgated the wildest doctrines, and 
the supposed felicity which had attended her vaticinations. 
She professed belief in all the dogmas that preceded the dawn 
of modern philosophy; and a strange, vivid, yet gloomy elo- 
quence that pervaded her language gave effect to theories 
which, while incomprehensible to the many, were alluring to 
the few. None knew her native country, although she was 
believed to come from the North of Europe. Her way of life 
was lonely, her habits eccentric; she sought no companion- 
ship; she was beautiful, but not of this earth's beauty; men 
admired, but courted not; she, at least, lived apart from the 



GODOLPHIN. 273 

reacli of human passions. In fact, the strange Liehbur, for 
such was the name the prophetess was known by (and she 
assumed before it the French title of Madame), was not an 
impostor, but a fanatic ; the chords of the brain were touched, 
and the sound they gave back was erring and imperfect. She 
was mad, but with a certain method in her madness; a cold 
and preternatural and fearful spirit abode within her, and 
spoke from her lips ; its voice froze herself, and she was more 
awed by her own oracles than her listeners themselves. 

In Vienna and in Paris her renown was great, and even 
terrible. The greatest men in those capitals had consulted 
her, and spoke of her decrees with a certain reverence; her 
insanity thrilled them, and they mistook the cause. Besides, 
in the main, she was right in the principle she addressed: 
she worked on the imagination, and the imagination after- 
wards fulfilled what she predicted. Every one knows what 
dark things may be done by our own fantastic persuasions; 
belief insures the miracles it credits. Men dream they shall 
die within a certain hour; the hour comes, and the dream is 
realized. The most potent wizardries are less potent than 
fancy itself. Macbeth was a murderer, not because the 
witches predicted, but because their prediction aroused the 
thought of murder. And this principle of action the proph- 
etess knew well; she appealed to that attribute common to us 
all, the foolish and the wise, and on that fruitful ground she 
sowed her soothsay ings. 

In London there are always persons to run after anything 
new, and Madame Liehbur became at once the rage. I my- 
self have seen a minister hurrying from her door with his 
cloak about his face ; and one of the coldest of living sages 
confesses that she told him what he believes, by mere human 
means, she could not have discovered. Delusion all! But 
what age is free from it? 

The race of the nineteenth century boast their lights, but 
run as madly after any folly as their fathers in the eighth. 
What are the prophecies of Saint Simon but a species of 
sorcery? Why believe the external more than the inner 
miracle? 

18 



274 



GODOLPHIN. 



There were but a few persons present at Lady Erpingham's, 
and when Radclyffe entered, Madame Liehbur was the theme 
of the general conversation. So many anecdotes were told, 
so much that was false was mingled with so much that seemed 
true, that Lady Erpingham's curiosity was excited, and she 
resolved to seek the modern Cassandra with the first oppor- 
tunity. Godolphin sat apart from the talkers, playing a 
quiet game at ecarte. Constance's eyes stole ever and anon 
to his countenance; and when she turned at length away with 
a sigh, she saw that Radclyffe's deep and inscrutable gaze 
was bent upon her, and the proud countess blushed, although 
she scarce knew why. 



CHAPTER LVIII. 

THE EMPIRE OF TIME AND OF LOVE. THE PROUD CONSTANCE 

GROWN WEARY AND HUMBLE. — AN ORDEAL. 



About this time the fine constitution of Lady Erpingham 
began to feel the effects of that life which, at once idle and 
busy, is the most exhausting of all. She suffered under no 
absolute illness ; she was free from actual pain ; but a fever 
crept over her at night, and a languid debility succeeded it 
the next day. She was melancholy and dejected; tears came 
into her eyes without a cause ; a sudden noise made her trem- 
ble; her nerves xoere shaken, — terrible disease, which marks 
a new epoch in life, which is the first token that our youth is 
about to leave us ! 

It is in sickness that we feel our true reliance on others, 
especially if it is of that vague and not dangerous character 
when those around us are not ashamed or roused into attend- 
ance; when the care and the soothing and the vigilance are 
the result of that sympathy which true and deep love only 
feels. This thought broke upon Constance as she sat alone 



GODOLPHIN. 275 

one morning in that mood when books cannot amuse, nor 
music lull, nor luxury soothe, — the mood of an aching mem- 
ory and a spiritless frame. Above her, and over the mantel- 
piece of her favourite room, hung that picture of her father 
which I have before described; it had been long since re- 
moved from Wendover Castle to London, for Constance wished 
it to be frequently in her sight. " Alas ! " thought she, gaz- 
ing upon the proud and animated brow that bent down upon 
her; "alas! though in a different sphere, tJuj lot, my father, 
has been mine, — toil unrepaid, affection slighted, sacrifices 
forgotten ; a harder lot in part ; for thou hadst at least, in thy 
stirring and magnificent career, continued excitement and 
perpetual triumph. But I, a woman, shut out by my sex 
from contest, from victory, am left only the thankless task 
to devise the rewards which others are to enjoy; the petty 
plot, the poor intrigue, the toil without the honour, the hu- 
miliation without the revenge. Yet have I worked in thy 
cause, my father, and thou — thou, couldst thou see my heart, 
wouldst pity and approve me." 

As Constance turned away her eyes, they fell on the op- 
posite mirror, which reflected her still lofty but dimmed and 
faded beauty; the worn cheek, the dejected eye, those lines 
and hollows which tell the progress of years ! There are cer- 
tain moments when the time we have been forgetting makes 
its march suddenly apparent to our own pyes, when the 
change we have hitherto marked not stares upon us rude and 
abrupt; we almost fancy those lines, those wrinkles, planted 
in a single hour, so unperceived have they been before. And 
such a moment was this to the beautiful Constance; she 
started at her own likeness, and turned involuntarily from 
the unflattering mirror. Beside it, on her table, lay a 
locket, given her by Godolphin just before they married, 
and containing his hair; it was a simple trifle, and the sim- 
plicity seemed yet more striking amidst the costly and mod- 
ern jewels that were scattered round it. As she looked on 
it, her heart, all woman still, flew back to the day on which, 
whispering eternal love, he hung it round her neck. "Ah, 
happy days! would that they could return! " sighed the deso- 



276 GODOLPHIN. 

late schemer; and she took the locket, kissed it, and softened 
by all the numberless recollections of the past, wept silently 
over it. "And yet," she said, after a pause, and wiping away 
her tears, — "and yet this weakness is unworthy of me. 
Lone, sad, ill, broken in frame and spirit as I am, he comes 
not near me ; I am nothing to him, nothing to any one in the 
wide world. My heart, my heart, reconcile thyself to thy 
fate ! — what thou hast been from thy cradle, that shalt thou 
be to my grave. I have not even the tenderness of a child to 
look to — the future is all blank ! " 

Constance was yet half yielding to, half struggling with, 
these thoughts, when Stainforth Radclyffe (to whom she was 
never denied) was suddenly announced. Time, which, sooner 
or later, repays perseverance, although in a deceitful coin, 
had brought to Eadclyffe a solid earnest of future honours. 
His name had risen high in the science of his country; it was 
equally honoured by the many and the few ; he had become a 
marked man, one of whom all predicted a bright hereafter. 
He had not yet, it is true, entered parliament, usually the 
great arena in which English reputations are won ; but it was 
simply because he had refused to enter it under the auspices 
of any patron, and his political knowledge, his depth of 
thought, and his stern, hard, ambitious mind were not the 
less appreciated and acknowledged. Between him and Con- 
stance friendship had continued to strengthen, and the more 
so as their political sentiments were in a great measure the 
same, although originating in different causes, — hers from 
passion, his from reflection. 

Hastily Constance turned aside her face, and brushed away 
her tears, as Radclyffe approached; and then seeming to busy 
herself amongst some papers that lay scattered on her escri- 
toire, and gave her an excuse for concealing in part her coun- 
tenance, she said, with a constrained cheerfulness, "I am 
happy you are come to relieve my ennui; I have been look- 
ing over letters written so many years ago, that I have been 
forced to remember how soon I shall cease to be young, — no 
pleasant reflection for any one, much less a woman." 

"I am at a loss for a compliment in return, as you may 



GODOLPHIN. 277 

suppose," answered Eadclyffe; "but Lady Erpingham de- 
serves a penance for even hinting at the possibility of being 
ever less charming than she is; so I shall hold my tongue." 

"Alas!" said Constance, gravely, "how little, save the 
mere triumphs of youth and beauty, is left to our sex! How 
much, nay, how entirely, in all other and loftier objects, is 
our ambition walled in and fettered! The human mind must 
have its aim, its aspiring; how can your sex blame us, then, 
for being frivolous, when no aim, no aspiring, save those of 
frivolity, are granted us by society?" 

"And is love frivolous?" said Radclyffe. "Is the empire 
of the heart nothing? " 

"Yes!" exclaimed Constance, with energy; "for the em- 
pire never lasts. W'e are slaves to the empire we would 
found; we wish to be loved, but we only succeed in loving 
too well ourselves. We lay up our all — our thoughts, hopes, 
emotions, all the treasures of our hearts — in one spot; and 
when we would retire from the deceits and cares of life, we 
find the sanctuary walled against us ; we love, and are loved 
no longer! " 

Constance had turned round with the earnestness of the 
feeling she expressed; and her eyes, still wet with tears, her 
flushed cheek, her quivering lip, struck to Eadclyffe's heart 
more than her words. He rose involuntarily; his own agita- 
tion was marked; he moved several steps towards Constance, 
and then checked the impulse, and muttered indistinctly to 
himself. 

"No," said Constance, mournfully, and scarcely heeding 
him, " it is in vain for us to be ambitious. We only deceive 
ourselves; we are not stern and harsh enough for the passion. 
Touch our affections, and we are recalled at once to the sense 
of our weakness; and I — I — would to God that I were a 
humble peasant girl, and not — not what I am ! " 

So saying, the lofty Constance sank down, overpowered 
with the bitterness of her feelings, and covered her face with 
her hands. Was Radclyffe a man that he could see this 
unmoved; that he could hear those beautiful lips breathe 
complaints for the want of love, and not acknowledge the 



278 GODOLPHIN. 

love that burned at his own heart? Long, secretly, reso- 
lutely, had he struggled against the passion for Constance 
which his frequent intercourse with her had fed, adid which 
his consciousness that in her was the only parallel to himself 
that he had ever met with in her sex, had first led him to 
form; and now lone, neglected, sad, this haughty woman 
wept over her unloved lot in his presence, and still he was 
not at her feet ! He spoke not, moved not, but his breath 
heaved thick, and his face was as pale as death. He con- 
quered himself. All within Radclyffe obeyed the idol he had 
worshipped, even before Constance; all within him, if ardent 
and fiery, was also high and gcQcrous. The acuteness of his 
reason permitted him no self -sophistries ; and he would have 
laid his head on the block rather than breathe a word of that 
love which he knew, from the moment it was confessed, would 
become unworthy of Constance and himself. 

There was a pause. Lady Erpingham, ashamed, confounded 
at her own weakness, recovered herself slowly and in silence. 
Eadclyffe at length spoke; and his voice, at first trembling 
and indistinct, grew, as he proceeded, clear and earnest. 

"Never," said he, "shall I forget the confidence your emo- 
tions have testified in my — my friendship; I am about to de- 
serve it. Do not, my dear friend (let me so call you), do not 
forget that life is too short for misunderstandings in which 
happiness is concerned. You believe that — that Godolphin 
does not repay the affection you have borne bim: do not be 
angry, dear Lady Erpingham; I feel it indelicate in me to 
approach that subject, but my regard for you emboldens me. 
I know Godolphin's heart; he may seem light, neglectful, 
but he loves you as deeply as ever, — he loves you entirely." 

Constance, humbled as she was, listened in breathless si- 
lence; her cheek burned with blushes, and those blushes were 
at once to Radclyffe a torture and a reward. 

"At this moment," continued he, with constrained calm- 
ness, "at this moment he fancies in you that very coldness 
you lament in him. Pardon me, Lady Erpingham; but Go- 
dolphin's nature is wayward, mysterious, and exacting. Have 
you consulted, have you studied it sufficiently? Note it well, 



GODOLPHIX. 279 

soothe it; and if his love can repay you, you will be repaid. 
God bless you, dearest Lady Erpingham." 

In a moment more Radclyffe had left the apartment. 



CHAPTER LIX. 

COXSTANCE MAKES A DISCOVEKY THAT TOUCHES AND ENLIGHT- 
ENS HER AS TO GODOLPHIn's NATURE. AN EVENT, AL- 
THOUGH IN PRIVATE LIFE, NOT WITHOUT ITS INTEREST. 

If Constance most bitterly reproached herself, or rather 
her slackened nerves, her breaking health, that she had be- 
fore another — that other too, not of her own sex — betrayed 
her dependence upon even her husband's heart for happiness; 
if her conscience instantly took alarm at the error (and it was 
indeed a grave one) which had revealed to any man her do- 
mestic griefs, — yet, on the other hand, she could not control 
the wild thrill of delight with which she recalled those words 
that had so solemnly assured her she was still beloved by 
Godolphin. She had a firm respect in Radclyffe's penetration 
and his sincerity, and knew that he was one neither to de- 
ceive her nor be deceived himself. His advice, too, came 
home to her. Had she, indeed, with sufficient address, suffi- 
cient softness, insinuated herself into Godolphin's nature? 
Xeglected herself, had she not neglected in return? She 
asked herself this question, and was never weary of examin- 
ing her past conduct. That Eadclyffe, the austere and chill- 
ing Radclyffe, entertained for her any feeling warmer than 
friendship, she never for an instant suspected; that suspicion 
alone would have driven him from her presence forever. And 
although there had been a time, in his bright and exulting 
youth, when Radclyffe had not been without those arts which 
win, in the opposite sex, affection from aversion itself, those 
arts doubled, ay, a hundredfold, in their fascination, would 



280 GODOLPHIN. 

not have availed him with the pure but disappointed Con- 
stance, even had a sense of right and wrong very different 
from the standard he now acknowledged permitted him to exert 
them. So that his was rather the sacrifice of impulse than of 
any triumph that impulse could afterwards have gained him. 

Many and soft and sweet were now the recollections of 
Constance. Her heart flew back to her early love among the 
shades of Wendover; to the first confession of the fair enthu- 
siastic boy, when he offered at her shrine a mind, a genius, a 
heart capable of fruits which the indolence of after-life and 
the lethargy of disappointed hope had blighted before their 
time. 

If he was now so deaf to what she considered the nobler, 
because more stirring, excitements of life, was she not in 
some measure answerable for the supineness? Had there not 
been a day in which he had vowed to toil, to labour, to sacri- 
fice the very character of his mind, for a union with her? 
Was she, after all, was she right to adhere so rigidly to her 
father's dying words, and to that vow afterwards confirmed 
by her own pride and bitterness of soul? She looked to her 
father's portrait for an answer; and that daring and eloquent 
face seemed, for the first time, cold and unanswering to her 
appeal. 

In such meditations the hours passed, and midnight came 
on without Constance having quitted her apartment. She 
now summoned her woman, and inquired if Godolphin was at 
home. He had come in about an hour since, and, complain- 
ing of fatigue, had retired to rest. Constance again dismissed 
her maid, and stole to his apartment. He was alread}^ asleep; 
his cheek rested on his arm, and his fair hair fell wildly over 
a brow that now worked under the influence of his dreams. 
Constance put the light softly down, and seating herself be- 
side him, watched over a sleep which, if it had come sud- 
denly on him, was not the less unquiet and disturbed. At 
length he muttered, "Yes, Lucilla, yes; I tell you, you are 
avenged. I have not forgotten you ! I have not forgotten 
that I betrayed, deserted you! but was it my fault? Xo, no! 
Yet I have not the less sought to forget it. These poor ex- 



GODOLPHIN. 281 

cesses, these chilling gayeties, — were they not incurred for 
you? And now you come — you — ah, no — spare me ! " 

Shocked and startled, Constance drew back. Here was a 
new key to Godolphin's present life, his dissipation, his 
thirst for pleasure. Had he indeed sought to lull the stings 
of conscience? And she, instead of soothing, of reconciling 
him to the past, had she left him alone to struggle with bit- 
ter and unresting thoughts, and to contrast the devotion of 
the one lost with the indifference of the one gained? She 
crept back to her own chamber, to commune with her heart 
and be still. 

"My dear Percy," said she, the next day, when he care- 
lessly sauntered into her boudoir before he rode out, "I have 
a favour to ask of you." 

" Who ever denied a favour to Lady Erpingham ? " 

"Not you, certainly; but my favour is a great one." 

"It is granted." 

"Let us pass the summer in shire." 

Godolphin's brow grew clouded. 

"At Wendover Castle? " said he, after a pause. 

"We have never been there since our marriage," said Con- 
stance, evasively. 

"Humph! — as you will." 

"It was the place," said Constance, "where you, Percy, 
first told me you loved! " 

The tone of his wife's voice struck on the right chord in 
Godolphin's breast; he looked up, and saw her eyes full of 
tears and fixed upon him. 

"Why, Constance," said he, much affected, "who would 
have thought that you still cherished that remembrance? " 

"Ah, when shall I forget it?" said Constance; 'Hhen you 
loved me ! " 

"And was rejected." 

"Hush! but I believe now that I was wrong." 

" Xo, Constance ; you were wrong, for your own happiness, 
that the rejection was not renewed." 

"Percy!" 

" Constance 1 " and in the accent of that last word there was 



282 GODOLPHIN. 

something that encouraged Constance, and she threw herself 
into Godolphin's arms, and murmured, — 

"If I have offended, forgive me; let us be to each other 
what we once were." 

Words like these from the lips of one in whom such tender 
supplications, such feminine yearnings, were not common, 
subdued Godolphin at once. He folded her in his arms, and 
kissing her passionately, whispered, "Be always thus, Con- 
stance, and you will be more to me than ever." 



CHAPTEE LX. 

THE REFORM BILL. A VERY SHORT CHAPTER. 

This reconciliation was not so short-lived as matters of the 
kind frequently are. There is a Chinese proverb which says, 
" How near are two hearts when there is no deceit between 
them ! " And the misunderstanding of their mutual senti- 
ments being removed, their affection became at once visible 
to each other. And Constance, reproaching herself for her 
former pride, mingled in her manner to her husband a gentle, 
even a humble sweetness, which, being exactly that which 
he had most desired in her, was what most attracted him. 

At this time. Lord John Eussell brought forward the Bill 
of Parliamentary Keform. Lady Erpingham was in the lan- 
tern of the House of Commons on that memorable night; like 
every one else, her feelings at first were all absorbed in sur- 
prise. She went home; she hastened to Godoli^hin's library. 
Leaning his head on his hand, that strange person, in the 
midst of events that stirred the destinies of Europe, was 
absorbed in the old subtleties of Spinosa. In the frank confi- 
dence of revived love, she put her hand upon his shoulder, 
and told him rapidly that news which was then on its way to 
terrify or delight the whole of England. 



GODOLPHIN. 283 

"Will this charm you, dear Constance?" said he, kindly; 
"is it a blow to the party you hate, and I sympathize 
with — or — " 

"My father," interrupted Constance, passionately, "would 
to Heaven he had seen this day! It was this system, the 
patron and the nominee system, that crushed and debased and 
killed him. And now I shall see that system destroyed! " 

"So, then, my Constance will go over to the Whigs in 
earnest? " 

"Yes, because I shall meet there truth and the people! " 

Godolphin laughed gently at the French exaggeration of 
the saying, and Constance forgave him. The fine ladies of 
London were a little divided as to the merits of the "Bill; " 
Constance was the first that declared in its favour. She was 
an important ally, — as important at least as a woman can be. 
A bright spirit reigned in her eye; her step grew more elastic; 
her voice more glad. This was the happiest time of her life, 
— she was happy in the renewal of her love, happy in the 
approaching triumph of her hate. 



CHAPTER LXI. 

THE SOLILOQUY OF THE SOOTHSAYER. AN EPISODICAL MYS- 
TERY, INTRODUCED AS A TYPE OF THE MANY THINGS IN 

LIFE THAT ARE NEVER ACCOUNTED FOR. GRATUITOUS 

DEVIATIONS FROM OUR COMMON CAREER. 

In Leicester Square there is a dim old house, which I have 
but this instant visited, in order to bring back more vividly 
to my recollection the wild and unhappy being who, for some 
short time, inhabited its old-fashioned and gloomy chambers. 

In that house, at the time I now speak of, lodged the mys- 
terious Liehbur. It was late at noon, and she sat alone in 
her apartment, which was darkened so as to exclude the broad 
and peering sun. There was no trick nor sign of the falla- 
cious art she professed visible in the large and melancholy 



284 GODOLPHIN. 

room. One or two books in the German language lay on the 
table beside which she sat; but they were of the recent poetry, 
and not of the departed dogmas, of the genius of that tongue. 
The enthusiast was alone; and, with her hand supporting her 
chin, and her eyes fixed on vacancy, she seemed feeding in 
silence the thoughts that flitted to and fro athwart a brain 
which had for years lost its certain guide, — a deserted man- 
sion, whence the lord had departed, and where spirits not of 
this common life had taken up their haunted and desolate 
abode. And never was there a countenance better suited to 
the character which this singular woman had assumed. Rich, 
thick, auburn hair was parted loosely over a brow in which 
the large and full temples would have betrayed to a phrenolo- 
gist the great preponderance which the dreaming and the 
imaginative bore over the sterner faculties. Her eyes were 
deep, intense, but of the bright and wandering glitter which 
is so powerful in its effect on the beholder, because it be- 
tokens that thought which is not of this daily world, and 
inspires that fear, that sadness, that awe, which few have 
looked on the face of the insane and not experienced. Her 
features were still noble, and of the fair Greek symmetry of 
the painter's Sibyl; but the cheeks were worn and hollow, and 
one bright spot alone broke their marble paleness ; her lips 
were, however, full, and yet red, and by their uncertain and 
varying play gave frequent glimpses of teeth lustrously white ; 
which, while completing the beauty of her face, aided — with 
somewhat of a fearful effect — the burning light of her strange 
eyes, and the vague, mystic expression of her abrupt and un- 
joyous smile. You might see when her features were, as now, 
in a momentary repose, that her health was broken, and that 
she was not long sentenced to wander over that world where 
the soul had already ceased to find its home; but the instant 
she spoke, her colour deepened, and the brilliant and rapid 
alternations of her countenance deceived the eye, and con- 
cealed the ravages of the worm that preyed within. 

"Yes," said she, at last breaking silence, and soliloquizing 
in the English tongue, but with somewhat of a foreign accent; 
" yes, I am in his city ; within a few paces of his home ; I 



GODOLPHIX. 285 

have seen him, I have heard him. Night after night, in 
rain, and in the teeth of the biting winds, I have wandered 
round his home. Ay ! and I could have raised my voice, and 
shrieked a warning and a prophecy, that should have startled 
him from his sleep as the trumpet of the last angel! but I 
hushed the sound within my soul, and covered the vision 
with a thick silence. God! what have I seen and felt and 
known, since he last saw me ! But we shall meet again ; and 
ere the year has rolled round, I shall feel the touch of his 
lips and die! Die! what calmness, what luxury in the word! 
The fiery burthen of this dread knowledge I have heaped upon 
me shuffled off; memory no more; the past, the present, the 
future exorcised; and a long sleep, with bright dreams of a 
lulling sky, and a silver voice, and his presence ! " 

The door opened, and a black girl of about ten years old, 
in the costume of her Moorish tribe, announced the arrival of 
a new visitor. The countenance of Madame Liehbur changed 
at once into an expression of cold and settled calmness ; she 
ordered the visitor to be admitted; and presently Stainforth 
Eadclyffe entered the room. 

"Thou mistakest me and my lore," said the diviner; "I 
meddle not with the tricks and schemes of the worldly; I 
show the truth, not garble it." 

"Pshaw!" said Radclyffe, impatiently; "this jargon can- 
not deceive me. You exhibit your skill for money. I ask 
one exertion of it, and desire you to name your reward. Let 
us talk after the fashion of this world, and leave that of the 
other to our dupes," 
"Yet thou has known grief too," said the diviner, musingly, 
" and those who have sorrowed ought to judge more gently of 
each other. Wilt thou try my art on thyself, ere thou askest 
it for others? " 

"Ay, if you could restore the dead to my dreams." 

"I can! " replied the soothsayer, sternly. 

Eadclyffe laughed bitterly. "Away with this talk to me; 
or, if you would convince me, raise at once the spectre I de- 
sire to see ! " 



286 GODOLPHIN. 

"And dost thou think, vain man," replied Liehbur, haugh- 
tily, "that I pretend to the power thou speakest of? Yes; 
but not as the impostors of old (dull and gross, appealing to 
outward spells, and spells wrought by themselves alone) af- 
fected to do. I can bring the dead before thee, but thou thy- 
self must act upon thyself." 

"Mummery! What would you drive at? " 

"Wilt thou fast three days, and for three nights abstain 
from sleep, and then visit me once again? " 

"No, fair deluder; such a preliminary is too much to ask 
of a Neophyte. Three days without food, and three nights 
without sleep! Why, you would have to raise myself from 
the dead!" 

"And canst thou," said the diviner, with great dignity, 
" canst thou hope that thou wouldst be worthy of a revelation 
from a higher world, that for thee the keys of the grave 
should unlock their awful treasure, and the dead return to 
life, when thou scruplest to mortify thy flesh and loosen the 
earthly bonds that cumber and chain the spirit? I tell thee 
that only as the soul detaches itself from the frame, can its 
inner and purer sense awaken, and the full consciousness of 
the invisible and divine things that surround it descend upon 
its powers." 

"And what," said Radclyffe, startled more by the counte- 
nance and voice than the words themselves of the soothsayer, 
— "what would you then do, supposing that I perform this 
penance ? " 

"Awaken to their utmost sense, even to pain and torture, 
the naked nerves of that Great Power thou callest the imagi- 
K'ATiON", — that Power which presides over dreams and visions; 
which kindles song, and lives in the Heart of Melodies ; which 
inspired the Magian of the East and the Pythian voices, and 
in the storms and thunder of savage lands originated the no- 
tion of a God and the seeds of human worship ; that vast pre- 
siding Power which, to the things of mind, is what the Deity 
is to the Universe itself, — the creator of all. I would awaken, 
I say, that Power from its customary sleep where, buried in 
the heart, it folds its wings, and lives but by fits and starts. 



GODOLPIIIN. 287 

unquiet, but unaroused; and by that Power thou wouldst see, 
and feel, and know, and through it only thou wouldst exist. 
So that it would be with thee as if the body were not, — as if 
thou wert already all-spiritual, all-living. So thou wouldst 
learn in life that which may be open to thee after death ; and 
so, soul might now, as hereafter, converse with soul, and re- 
voke the Past, and sail prescient down the dark tides of the 
Future. A brief and fleeting privilege, but dearly purchased : 
be wise, and disbelieve in itj be happy, and reject it! " 

Eadclylfe was impressed, despite himself, by the solemn 
novelty of this language, and the deep mournfulness with 
which the soothsayer's last sentence died away. 

"And how," said he, after a pause, — "how, and by what 
arts, would you so awaken the imaginative faculty?" 

"Ask not until the time comes for the trial," answered 
Liehbur. 

" But can you awaken it in all, — the dull, the unideal, as 
in the musing and exalted? " 

"No! but the dull and unideal will not go through the ne- 
cessary ordeal. Few besides those for whom fate casts her 
great parts in life's drama ever come to that point when I can 
teach them the Future." 

"Do you mean that your chief votaries are among the great? 
Pardon me, I should have thought the most superstitious are 
to be found among the most ignorant and lowly." 

" Yes ; but they consult only what imposes on their credu- 
lity, without demanding stern and severe sacrifice of time and 
enjoyment, as T do. The daring, the resolute, the scheming, 
with their souls intent upon great objects and high dreams, — 
those are the men who despise the charms of the moment, 
who are covetous of piercing the far future, who know how 
much of their hitherward career has been brightened, not by 
genius or nature, but some strange confluence of events, some 
mysterious agency of fate. The great are always fortunate, 
and therefore mostly seekers into the decrees of fortune." 

So great is the influence which enthusiasm, right or wrong, 
always exercises over us, that even the hard and acute Ead- 
clylfe — who had entered the room with the most profound 



288 GODOLPIIIN. 

contempt for the pretensions of the soothsayer, and partly 
from a wish to find materials for ridiculing a folly of the 
day, partly, it may be from the desire to examine which be- 
longed to his nature — began to consider in his own mind 
whether he should yield to his curiosity, now strongly ex- 
cited, and pledge himself to the preliminary penance the 
diviner had ordained. 

The soothsayer continued, — 

"The stars and the clime and the changing moon have 
power over us, — why not? Do they not have influence over 
the rest of Nature? But we can only unravel their more au- 
gust and hidden secrets by giving full wing to the creative 
spirit which first taught us their elementary nature, and 
which, when released from earth, will have full range to wan- 
der over their brilliant fields. Know, in one word, the Im- 
agination and the Soul are one, — one indivisible and the 
same; on that truth rests all my lore." 

" And if I followed your precepts, what other preliminaries 
would you enjoin? " 

"Not until thou engagest to perform them, will I tell thee 
more." 

" I engage ! " 

"And swear?" 

" I swear ! " 

The soothsayer rose — and — 



CHAPTER LXII. 

IN" WHICH THE COMMON LIFE GLIDES INTO THE STRANGE, 

EQUALLY TRUE, BUT THE TRUTH NOT EQUALLY ACKNOWL- 
EDGED. 

It was on the night of this interview that Constance, com- 
ing into Godolphin's room, found him leaning against the 
wall, pale and agitated and almost insensible. "Percy, 



GODOLPHIN. 289 

Percy, you are ill!" she exclaimed, and wound her arms 
round his neck. He looked at her long and wistfully, 
breathing hard all the time, until at length he seemed slowly 
to recover his self-possession, and seating himself, motioned 
Constance to do the same. After a pause, he said, clasping 
her hand, — 

"Listen to me, Constance. My health, I fear, is breaking; 
I am tormented by fearful visions ; I am possessed by some 
magic influence. For several nights successively, before fall- 
ing asleep, a cold tremor has gradually pervaded my frame; 
the roots of my hair stand on end; my teeth chatter; a vague 
horror seizes me; my blood seems turned to a solid substance, 
so curdled and stagnant is it. I strive to speak, to cry out, 
but my voice clings to the roof of my mouth ; I feel that I 
have no longer power over myself. Suddenly, and in the 
very midst of this agony, I fall into a heavy sleep ; then come 
strange bewildering dreams, with Volktman's daughter for- 
ever presiding over them; but with a changed countenance, 
calm, unutterably calm, and gazing on me with eyes that 
burn into my soul. The dream fades, I wake with the morn- 
ing, but exhausted and enfeebled. I have consulted physi- 
cians; I have taken drugs; but I cannot break the spell, — the 
previous horror and the after-dreams. And just now, Con- 
stance, just now — you see the window is open to the park, 
the gate of the garden is unclosed ; I happened to lift my eyes, 
and lo! gazing upon me in the sickly moonlight, was the coun- 
tenance of my dreams, — Lucilla's, but how altered ! Merciful 
Heaven ! is it a mockery, or can the living Lucilla really be 
in England? And have these visions, these terrors, been part 
of that mysterious sympathy which united us ever, and which 
her father predicted should cease but with our lives? " 

The emotions of Godolphin were so rarely visible, and in 
the present instance they were so unaffected and so roused, 
that Constance could not summon courage to soothe, to cheer 
him ; she herself was alarmed and shocked, and glanced fear- 
fully towards the window, lest the apparition he had spoken 
of should reappear. All without was still ; not a leaf stirred 
on the trees in the Mall; no human figure Avas to be seen. 

19 



290 GODOLPIIIX. 

She turned again to Godolphin, and kissed the drops from his 
brow, and pressed his cheek to her bosom. 

"I have a presentiment," said he, "that something dread- 
ful will happen shortly. I feel as if I were near some great 
crisis of my life, and as if I were about to step from the 
bright and palpable world into regions of cloud and darkness. 
Constance, strange misgivings as to my choice in my past life 
haunt and perplex me. I have sought only the present; I 
have abjured all toil, all ambition, and laughed at the future; 
my hand has plucked the rose-leaves, and now they lie with- 
ered in the grasp. My youth flies me, age scowls on me from 
the distance, — an age of frivolities that I once scorned; yet 
— yet, had I formed a different creed, how much I might 
have done! But — but, out on this cant! My nerves are 
shattered, and I prate nonsense. Lend me your arm, Con- 
stance; let us go into the saloon, and send for music!" 

And all that night Constance watched by the side of Godol- 
phin, and marked in mute terror the convulsions that wrung 
his sleep, the foam that gathered to his lip, the cries that 
broke from his tongue. But she was rewarded when, with 
the gray dawn, he awoke, and, catching her tender and tear- 
ful gaze, flung himself upon her bosom, and bade God bless 
her for her love! 



CHAPTER LXIII. 

A MEETIXG BETWEEN COXSTANCE AND THE PROPHETESS. 

A STRANGE suspicion had entered Constance's mind, and 
for Godolphin's sake she resolved to put it to the proof. She 
drew her mantle round her stately figure, put on a large dis- 
guising bonnet, and repaired to Madame Liehbur's house. 

The Moorish girl opened the door to the countess; and her 
strange dress, her African hue and features, relieved by the 



GODOLPHIX. 291 

long, glittering pendants in her ears, while they seemed 
suited to the eccentric reputation of her mistress, brought a 
slight smile to the proud lip of Lady Erpingham, as she con- 
ceived them a part of the charlatanism practised by the sooth- 
sayer. The girl only replied to Lady Erpingham's question 
by an intelligent sign; and running lightly up the stairs, 
conducted the guest into an anteroom, where she waited but 
for a few moments before she was admitted into Madame 
Liehbur's apa,rtment. 

The effect that the personal beauty of the diviner always 
produced on those who beheld her was not less powerful than 
usual on the surprised and admiring gaze of Lady Erpingham. 
She bowed her haughty brow with involuntary respect, and 
took the seat to which the enthusiast beckoned. 

"And what, lady," said the soothsayer, in the foreign 
music of her low voice, — " what brings thee hither? Wouldst 
thou gain, or hast thou lost, that gift our poor sex prizes so 
dearly beyond its value? Is it of love that thou wouldst 
speak to the interpreter of dreams and the priestess of the 
things to come? " 

While the bright-eyed Liehbur thus spoke, the countess 
examined through her veil the fair face before her, comparing 
it with that description which Godolphin had given her of the 
sculptor's daughter, and her suspicion acquired new strength, 

"I seek not that which you allude to," said Constance; 
"but of the future, although without any definite object, I 
would indeed like to question you. All of us love to pry into 
dark recesses hid from our view, and over which you profess 
the empire." 

"Your voice is sweet, but commanding," said the oracle; 
"and your air is stately, as of one born in courts. Lift your 
veil, that I may gaze upon your face, and tell by its lines the 
fate your character has shaped for you." 

"Alas!" answered Constance, "life betrays few of its past 
signs by outward token. If you have no wiser art than that 
drawn from the lines and features of our countenances, I 
shall still remain what I am now, — an unbeliever in your 
powers." 



292 GODOLPHIN. 

" The brow and the lip and the eye and the expression of 
each and all," answered Liehbur, "are not the lying index 
you suppose them." 

"Then," rejoined Constance, "by those signs will I read 
yoLir own destiny, as you would read mine." 

The sibyl started, and waved her hand impatiently j but 
Constance proceeded, — 

"Your birth, despite your fair locks, was under a southern 
sky; you were nursed in the delusions you now teach; you 
were loved, and left alone ; you are in the country of your 
lover. Is it not so, — am I not an oracle in my turn?" 

The mysterious Liehbur fell back in her chair, her lips 
apart and blanched, her hands clasped, her eyes fixed upon her 
visitant. 

"Who are you?" she cried at last, in a shrill tone; "who, 
of my own sex, knows my wretched history? Speak, speak! 
in mercy speak! tell me more! convince me that 3'ou have 
but vainly guessed my secret, or that you have a right to 
know it! " 

" Did not your father forsake, for the blue skies of Eome, 
his own colder shores? " continued Constance, adopting the 
heightened and romantic tone of the one she addressed; "and, 
Percy Godolphin — is that name still familiar to the ear of 
Lucilla Volktman?" 

A loud, long shriek burst from the lips of the soothsayer, 
and she sank at once lifeless on the ground. Greatly alarmed, 
and repenting her own abruptness, Constance hastened to her 
assistance. She lifted the poor being, whom she uncon- 
sciously had once contributed so deeply to injure, from the 
ground; she loosened her dress, and perceived that around 
her neck hung a broad ivory necklace wrought with curious 
characters, and many uncouth forms and symbols. This evi- 
dence that, if deluding others, the soothsayer deluded herself 
also, touched and affected the countess; and while she was 
still busy in chafing the temples of Lucilla, the Moor, brought 
to the spot by that sudden sliriek, entered the apartment. 
She seemed surprised and terrified at her mistress's condition, 
and poured forth, in some tongue unknown to Constance, what 



GODOLPHIX. 293 

seemed to her a volley of mingled reproach and lamentation. 
She seized Lady Erpingham's hand, dashed it indignantly 
away, and, supporting herself the ashen cheek of Lucilla, 
motioned to Lady Erpingham to depart; but Constance, not 
easily accustomed to obey, retained her position beside the 
still insensible Lucilla; and now, by slow degrees, and with 
quick and heavy sighs, the unfortunate daughter of Volktman 
returned to life and consciousness. 

In assisting Lucilla, the countess had thrown aside her 
veil, and the eyes of the soothsayer opened upon that superb 
beauty, which once to see was never to forget. Involun- 
tarily she again closed her eyes, and groaned audibly; and 
then, summoning all her courage, she withdrew her hand 
from Constance's clasp, and bade her Moorish handmaid leave 
them once more alone. 

" So, then, " said Lucilla, after a pause, " it is Percy Godol- 
phin's wife, his English wife, who has come to gaze on the 
fallen, the degraded Lucilla; and yet," sinking her voice into 
a tone of ineffable and plaintive sweetness — "yet I have 
slept on his bosom, and been dear and sacred to him as thou ! 
Go, proud lady, go ! — leave me to my mad and sunken and 
solitary state. Go! " 

"Dear Lucilla! " said Constance, kindly, and striving once 
more to take her hand, " do not cast me away from you. I 
have long sympathized with your generous although erring 
heart, — your hard and bitter misfortunes. Look on me only 
as your friend, — nay, your sister, if you will. Let me per- 
suade you to leave this strange and desultory life; choose 
your own home: I am rich to overflowing; all you can desire 
shall be at your command. He shall not know more of you 
unless (to assuage the remorse that the memory of you does, 
I know, still occasion him) you will suffer him to learn, from 
your own hand, that you are well and at ease, and that you 
do not revoke j^our former pardon. Come, dear Lucilla! " 
and the arm of the generous and bright-souled Constance 
gently wound round the feeble frame of Lucilla, who now, 
reclining back, wept as if her heart would break. 

"Come, give me the deep, the grateful joy of thinking I 



294 GODOLPHIN. 

can minister to your future comforts. I was the cause of all 
your wretchedness ; but for me, Godolphin would have been 
yours forever, — would probably, by marriage, have redressed 
your wrongs; but for me you would not have wandered an 
outcast over the inhospitable world. Let me in something 
repair what I have cost you. Speak to me, Lucilla! " 

"Yes, I will speak to you," said poor Lucilla, throwing 
herself on the ground, and clasping with grateful warmth the 
knees of her gentle soother ; " for long, long years — I dare 
not think how many — I have not heard the voice of kindness 
fall upon my ear. Among strange faces and harsh tongues 
hath my lot been cast; and if I have wrought out from the 
dreams of my young hours the course of this life (which you 
contemn, but not justly), it has been that I may stand alone 
and not dependent, — feared and not despised. And now you, 
you whom I admire and envy, and would reverence more than 
living woman (for he loves you and deems you worthy of 
him), — you, lady, speak to me as a sister would speak, and 
— and — " Here sobs interrupted Lucilla's speech; and Con- 
stance herself, almost equally affected, and finding it vain to 
attempt to raise her, knelt by her side, and tenderly caress- 
ing her, sought to comfort her, even while she wept in 
doing so. 

And this was a beautiful passage in the life of the lofty 
Constance. Xever did she seem more noble than when, thus 
lowly and humbling herself, she knelt beside the poor victim 
of her husband's love, and whispered to the diseased and 
withering heart tidings of comfort, charity, home, and a 
futurity of honour and of peace. But this was not a dream 
that could long lull the perturbed and erring brain of Lucilla 
Volktman; and when she recovered, in some measure, her 
self-possession, she rose, and throwing back the wild hair 
from her throbbing temples, she said, in a calm and mournful 
voice, — 

"Your kindness comes too late. I am dying fast, — fast. 
All that is left to me in the world are these very visions, this 
very power — call it delusion if you will — from which you 
would tear me. Nay, look not so reproachfully, and in such 



GODOLPHIK 295 

wonder. Do you not know that men have in poverty, sick- 
ness, and all outer despair clung to a creative spirit within — 
a world peopled with delusions — and called it poetry; and 
that gift has been more precious to them than all that wealth 
and pomp could bestow? So," continued Lucilla, with fervid 
and insane enthusiasm, "so is this, my creative spirit, my 
imaginary world, my inspiration, what poetry may be to 
others. I may be mistaken in the truth of my belief. There 
are times when my brain is cool, and my frame at rest, and I 
sit alone and think over the real past, when I feel my trust 
shaken, and my ardour damped; but that thought does not 
console but torture me, and I hasten to plunge once more 
among the charms and spells and mighty dreams that wrap 
me from my living self. Oh, lady! bright and beautiful and 
lofty as you are, there may come a time when you can con- 
ceive that even madness may be a relief. For " (and here the 
wandering light burned brighter in the enthusiast's glowing 
eyes), "for, when the night is round us, and there is peace 
on earth, and the world's children sleep, it is a wild joy to 
sit alone and vigilant, and forget that we live and are 
wretched. The stars speak to us then with a wondrous and 
stirring voice ; they tell us of the doom of men and the wreck 
of empires, and prophesy of the far events which they taught 
to the old Chaldeans. And then the Winds, walking to and 
fro as they list, bid us go forth with them and hear the songs 
of the midnight spirits; for you know," she whispered with a 
smile, putting her hand upon the arm of the appalled and 
shrinking Constance, who now saw how hopeless was the 
ministry she had undertaken, " that this world is given up to 
two tribes of things that live and have a soul, — the one 
bodily and palpable as we are ; the other more glorious, but 
invisible to our dull sight — though I have seen them, — 
Dread Solemn Shadows, even in their mirth; the night is 
their season as the day is ours; they march in the moon- 
beams, and are borne upon the wings of the winds. And 
with them, and by their thoughts, I raise myself from what 
I am and have been. Ah, lady, wouldst thou take this com- 
fort from me?" 



296 GODOLPHIN. 

"But," said Constance, gathering courage from the gentle- 
ness which Lucilla's insanity now wore, and trying to soothe, 
not contradict her in her present vein, " but in the country, 
Lucilla, in some quiet and sheltered nook, you might indulge 
these visions without the cares and uncertainty that must now 
perplex you; without leading this dangerous and roving life, 
which must at times expose you to insult, to annoyance, and 
discontent you with yourself." 

"You are mistaken, lady," said the astrologer, proudly; 
"none know me who do not fear. I am powerful, and I hug 
my power, — it comforts me; without it, what should I be, — 
an abject, forsaken, miserable woman. No! that power I 
possess, — to shake men's secret souls, — even if it be a deceit; 
even if I should laugh at them, not pity, — reconciles me to 
myself and to the past. And I am not poor, madam," as, 
with the common caprice of her infirmity, an angry suspicion 
seemed to cross her; "I want no one's charity, — I have 
learned to maintain myself. Nay, I could be even wealthy 
if I would!" 

"And," said Constance, seeing that for the present she 
must postpone her benevolent intentions, " and he — Godolphin 
— you forgive him still? " 

At that name, it was as if a sudden charm had been whis- 
pered to the fevered heart of the poor fanatic ; her head sank 
from its proud bearing; a deep, a soft blush coloured the wan 
cheek; her arms drooped beside her; she trembled violently, 
and, after a moment's silence, sank again on her seat, and 
covered her face with her hands. "Ah," said she, softly, 
" that word brings me back to my young days, when I asked 
no power but what love gave me over one heart; it brings me 
back to the blue Italian lake, and the waving pines, and our 
solitary home, and my babe's distant grave. Tell me," she 
cried, again starting up, "has he not spoken of me lately, — 
has he not seen me in his dreams; have I not been present to 
his soul when the frame, torpid and locked, severed us no 
more, and in the still hours I charmed myself to his gaze? 
Tell me, has he not owned that Lucilla haunted his pillow? 
Tell me; and if I err, my spells are nothing, my power is 



GODOLPHIX. 297 

vanity, and I am tlie helpless creature thou wouldst believe 
me!" 

Despite her reason and her firm sense, Constance half shud- 
dered at these mysterious words, as she recalled what Percy 
had told her of his dreams the preceding evening, and the 
emotions she herself had witnessed in his slumbers when she 
watched beside his bed. She remained silent, and Lucilla 
regarded her countenance with a sort of triumph. 

'' My art, then, is not so idle as thou wouldst hold it. But 

— hush ! — last night I beheld him, not in spirit, but visibly, 
face to face; for I wander at times before his home (his home 
was once mine!), and he saw me, and was smitten with fear; 
in these worn features he could recognize not the living 
Lucilla he had known. But go to him ! — thou, his wife, his 
own — go to him; tell him — no, tell him not of me. He 
must not seek me; we must not hold parley together: for oh, 
lady" (and Lucilla's face became settled into an expression 
so sad, so unearthly sad, that no word can paint, no heart 
conceive, its utter and solemn sorrow), "when we two meet 
again to commune, to converse, when once more I touch that 
hand, when once more T feel that beloved, that balmy breath, 

— m7/ last hour is at hand, and danger — imminent, dark, 
and deadly danger — clings fast to him/" 

As she spoke, Lucilla closed her eyes, as if to shut some 
horrid vision from her gaze; and Constance looked fearfully 
round, almost expecting some apparition at hand. Presently 
Lucilla, moving silently across the room, beckoned to the 
countess to follow : she did so. They entered another apart- 
ment; before a recess there hung a black curtain. Lucilla 
drew it slowly aside, and Constance turned her eyes from a 
dazzling light that broke upon them. "When she again looked, 
she beheld a sort of glass dial marked with various quaint 
hieroglyphics and the figures of angels, beautifully wrought; 
but around the dial, which was circular, were ranged many 
stars, and the planets, set in due order. These were lighted 
from within by some chemical process, and burned with a 
clear and lustrous, but silver light. And Constance observed 
that the dial turned round, and that the stars turned with it, 



298 GODOLPHIN. 

each in a separate motion; and in the midst of the dial were 
the hands as of a clock, that moved, but so slowly, that the 
most patient gaze alone could observe the motion. - 

While the wondering Constance regarded this singular de- 
vice, Lucilla pointed to one star that burned brighter than 
the rest; and below it, half-way down the dial, was another, 
a faint and sickly orb, that, when watched, seemed to per- 
form a much more rapid and irregular course than its 
fellows. 

"The bright star is his," said she; "and yon dim and dy- 
ing one is the type of mine. Xote: in the course they both 
pursue they must meet at last; and when they meet, the 
mechanism of the whole halts, — the work of the dial is for- 
ever done. These hands indicate hourly the progress made to 
that end; for it is the mimicry and symbol of mine. Thus 
do I number the days of my fate; thus do I know, even al- 
most to a second, the period in which I shall join my Father 
that is in heaven! 

"And now," continued the maniac (though maniac is too 
harsh and decided a word for the dreaming wildness of 
Lucilla's insanity), as, dropping the curtain, she took her 
guest's hand and conducted her back into the outer room, — 
"and now, farewell! You sought me, and, I feel, only from 
kind and generous motives. We never shall meet more. 
Tell not your husband that you have seen me. He will 
know soon, too soon, of my existence. Fain would I 
spare him that pang and," growing pale as she spoke, "that 
peril; but Fate forbids it. What is writ, is writ; and who 
shall blot God's sentence from the stars, which are His book? 
Farewell! high thoughts are graved upon your brow: may 
they bless you; or, where they fail to bless, may they console 
and support. Farewell ! I have not yet forgotten to be grate- 
ful, and I still dare to pray." 

Thus saying, Lucilla kissed the hand she had held, and 
turning hastily away, regained the room she had just left; 
and, locking the door, left the stunned and bewildered coun- 
tess to depart from the melancholy abode. With faltering 
steps she quitted the chamber, and at the foot of the stairs 



GODOLPHIX. 299 

the little Moor awaited her. To her excited fancy there was 
something eldrich and preternatural in the gaze of the young 
African, and the grin of her pearly teeth, as she opened the 
door to the visitant. Hastening to her carriage, which she 
had left at a corner of the square, the countess rejoiced when 
she gained it; and throwing herself back on the luxurious 
cushions, felt as exhausted by this starry and weird incident 
in the epic of life's common career, as if she had partaken of 
that overpowering inspiration which she now almost incredu- 
lously asked herself, as she looked forth on the broad day and 
the busy streets, if she had really witnessed. 



CHAPTER LXIV. 

LUCILLA's flight. — THE PERPLEXITY OF LADY EEPINGHAM. 
A CHAXGE COMES O^TIE GODOLPHIx's MIXD. HIS CON- 
VERSATION WITH RADCLYFFE. GENERAL ELECTION. GO" 

DOLPHIN BECOMES A SENATOR. 

No human heart ever beat with more pure and generous 
emotions, when freed from the political fever that burned 
within her (withering, for the moment, the chastened and 
wholesome impulses of her nature), than those which ani- 
mated the heart of the queenly Constance. She sent that 
evening for the most celebrated physician in London, — that 
polished and courtly man who seems born for the maladies of 
the drawing-room, but who beneath so urbane a demeanour 
conceals so accurate and profound a knowledge of the dis- 
orders of his unfortunate race. I say accurate and profound 
comparatively, for positive knowledge of pathology is what 
no physician in modern times and civilized countries really 
possesses. No man cures us, — the highest art is not to kill! 
Constance, then, sent for this physician, and, as delicately as 
possible, related the unfortunate state of Lucilla, and the 
deep anxiety she felt for her mental and bodily relief. The 



300 GODOLPHIN. 

physician promised to call the next day; he did so, late in 
the afternoon: Lucilla was gone. Strange, self-willed, mys- 
terious, she came like a dream, to warn, to terrify, and to de- 
part. They knew not whither she had fled, and her Moorish 
handmaid alone attended her. 

Constance was deeply chagrined at this intelligence; for 
she had already begun to build castles in the air, which poor 
Lucilla, with a frame restored and a heart at ease and nothing 
left of the past but a soft and holy penitence, should inhabit. 
The countess, however, consoled herself with the hope that 
Lucilla would at least write to her, and mention her new place 
of residence; but days passed, and no letter came. 

Constance felt that her benevolent intentions were doomed 
to be unfulfilled. She was now greatly perplexed whether 
or not to relate to Godolphin the interview that had taken 
place between her and Lucilla. She knew the deep, morbid, 
and painful interest which the memory of this wild and vis- 
ionary creature created in Godolphin; and she trembled at 
the feeling she might re-awaken by even a faint picture of 
the condition and mental infirmities of her whose life he had 
so darkly shadowed. She resolved, therefore, at all events 
for the present, and until every hope of discovering Lucilla 
once more had expired, to conceal the meeting that had oc- 
curred. And in this resolve, she was strengthened by per- 
ceiving that Godolphin's mind had become gradually calmed 
from its late excitement, and that he had begun to consider, 
or at least appeared to consider, the apparition of Lucilla at 
his window as the mere delusion of a heated imagination. 
His nights grew once more tranquil, and freed from the dark 
dreams that had tormented his brain; and even the cool and 
unimaginative Constance could scarcely divest herself of the 
wild fancy that, when Lucilla was near, a secret and preter- 
natural sympathy between Godolphin and the reader of the 
stars had produced that influence over his nightly dreams 
which paled and receded and vanished, as Lucilla departed 
from the actual circle in which he lived. 

It was at this time, too, that a change was perceptible in 
Godolphin's habits, and crept gradually over the character of 



GODOLPHm. 301 

his thoughts. Dissipation ceased to allure him, the light wit 
of his parasites palled upon his ear; magnificence had lost its 
gloss, and the same fastidious, exacting thirst for the ideal 
which had disappointed him in the better objects of life, be- 
gan now to discontent him with its glittering pleasures. 

The change was natural and the causes not difficult to 
fathom. The fact was, that Godolphin had now arrived at 
that period of existence when a man's character is almost in- 
variably subject to great change, — the crisis in life's fever, 
when there is a new turn in our fate, and our moral death or 
regeneration is sealed by the silent wavering or the solemn 
decision of the hour. Arrived at the confines of middle age, 
there is an outward innovation in the whole system; un- 
looked-for symptoms break forth in the bodily, unlooked-for 
symptoms in the mental, frame. It happened to Godolphin 
that, at this critical period, a chance, a circumstance, a straw, 
had reunited his long interrupted but never stifled affections 
to the image of his beautiful Constance. The reign of pas- 
sion, the magic of those sweet illusions, that ineffable yearn- 
ing which possession mocks, although it quells at last, were 
indeed forever over; but a friendship more soft and genial 
than exists in any relation save that of husband and wife had 
sprung up, almost as by a miracle (so sudden was it), between 
breasts for years divided. And the experience of those years 
had taught Godolphin how frail and unsubstantial had been 
all the other ties he had formed. He wondered, as sitting 
alone with Constance, her tenderness recalled the past, her wit 
enlivened the present, and Ms imagination still shed a glory 
and a loveliness over the future, that he had been so long 
insensible to the blessings of that communion which he now 
experienced. He did not perceive what in fact was the case, 
— that the tastes and sympathies of each, blunted by that 
disappointment which is the child of experience, were more 
willing to concede somewhat to the tastes and sympathies of 
the other; that Constance gave a more indulgent listening to 
his beautiful refinements of an ideal and false epicurism; 
that he, smiling still, smiled with kindness, not with scorn, 
at the sanguine politics, the worldly schemes, and the rank- 



302 GODOLPHIX. 

ling memories of the intriguing Constance. Fortunately, too, 
for her, the times were such, that men who never before 
dreamed of political interference were roused and urged into 
the mighty conflux of battling interests, which left few mod- 
erate and none neuter. Every coterie resounded with political 
war-cries; every dinner rang, from soup to the coffee, with 
the merits of the Bill; wherever Godolphin turned for refuge, 
Eeform still assailed him; and by degrees the universal feel- 
ing, that was at first ridiculed, was at last, although reluc- 
tantly, admitted by his mind. 

"Why," said he, one da}^, musingly, to Eadclyffe, whom 
he met in the old Green Park, — for since the conversation 
recorded between Eadclyffe and Constance the former came 
little to Erpingham House, — "why should I not try a yet 
wwtried experiment? Why should I not live like others in 
their graver as in their lighter pursuits? I confess, when I 
look back to the years I have spent in England, I feel that I 
calculated erroneously. I chalked out a plan, I have followed 
it rigidly. I have lived^for self, for pleasure, for luxury; I 
have summoned wit, beauty, even wisdom around me. I have 
been the creator of a magic circle, but to the magician him- 
self the magic was tame and ignoble. In short, I have 
dreamed, and am awake. Yet what course of life should 
supply this, which I think of deserting? Shall I go once 
more abroad, and penetrate some untravelled corner of the 
earth? Shall I retire into the country, and tcrite, draining 
my mind of the excitement that presses on it; or lastly, shall 
I plunge with my contemporaries into the great gulf of actual 
events, and strive and fret and struggle; or — in short, Ead- 
clyffe, you are a wise man: advise me! " 

" Alas ! " answered Eadclyffe, " it is of no use advising one 
to be happy who has no object beyond himself. Either en- 
thusiasm or utter mechanical coldness is necessary to recon- 
cile men to the cares and mortifications of life. You must 
feel nothing, or you must feel for others. Unite yourself to 
a great object; see its goal distinctly; cling to its course 
courageously; hope for its triumph sanguinely; and on its 
majestic progress you sail, as in a ship, agitated indeed by 



GODOLPHIX. 303 

the storms, but unheeding the breeze and the surge that 
woukl appall the individual effort. The larger public objects 
make us glide smoothly and unfelt over our minor private 
griefs. To be happy, my dear Godolphin, you must forget 
yourself. Your refining and poetical temperament preys 
upon your content. Learn benevolence, — it is the only cure 
to a morbid nature." 

Godolphin was greatly struck by this answer of Eadclyffe, 
— the more so, as he had a deep faith in the unaffected sin- 
cerity and the calculating wisdom of his adviser. He looked 
hard in E.adclyffe's face, and, after a pause of some moments, 
replied slowly, " I believe you are right after all ; and I have 
learned in a few short sentences the secret of a discontented 
life." 

Godolphin would have sought other opportunities of con- 
versing with Eadclyffe, but events soon parted them. Par- 
liament was dissolved! What an historical event is recorded 
in those words! The moment the king consented to that 
measure, the whole series of subsequent events became, to an 
ordinary prescience, clear as in a mirror. Parliament dis- 
solved in the heat of the popular enthusiasm, a majority, a 
great majority of Eeformers, was sure to be returned. 

Constance perceived at a glance the whole train of conse- 
quences issuing from that one event, — perceived and exulted. 
A glory had gone forever from the party she abhorred. Her 
father was already avenged. She heard his scornful laugh 
ring forth from the depths of his forgotten grave ! 

London emptied itself at once. England was one election. 
Godolphin remained almost alone. For the first time a sense 
of littleness crept over him, — a feeling of insignificance, 
which wounded and galled his vain nature. In these great 
struggles he was nothing. The admired, the cultivated, 
spirituel, the splendid Godolphin sank below the commonest 
adventurer, the coarsest brawler, — yea, the humblest free- 
man, who felt his stake in the State, joined the canvass, 
swelled the cry, and helped in the mighty battle between old 
things and new, which was so resolutely begun. This feeling 
gave an impetus to the growth of the new aspirations he had 



304 GODOLPHIX. 

already suffered his mind to generate ; and Constance marked, 
with vivid delight, that he now listened to her plans with in- 
terest, and examined the political field with a curious and 
searching gaze. 

But she was soon condemned to a disappointment propor- 
tioned to her delight. Though Godolphin had hitherto taken 
no interest in party politics, his prejudices, his feelings, his 
habits of mind, were all the reverse of democratic. When he 
once began to examine the bearings of the momentous ques- 
tion that agitated England, he was not slow in coming to 
conclusions which threatened to produce a permanent dis- 
agreement between Constance and himself. 

"You wish me to enter parliament, my dear Constance," 
said he, with his quiet smile; "it would be an experiment 
dangerous to the union re-established between us. I should 
vote against your Bill." 

"You!" exclaimed Constance, with warmth; "is it pos- 
sible that you can sympathize with the fears of a selfish 
oligarchy, — with the cause of the merchants and traffickers 
of the plainest right of a free people, — the right to select 
their representatives?" 

"My dear Constance," returned Godolphin, "my whole 
theory of Government is aristocratic. The right of the peo- 
ple to choose representatives ! — 3'ou may as well say the 
right of the people to choose kings or magistrates and judges 
— or clergymen and archbishops ! The people have, it is 
true, the abstract and original right to choose all these, and 
every year to chop and change them as they please; but the 
people, very properly, in all States, mortgage their elemen- 
tary rights for one catholic and practical right, — the right to 
be well governed. It may be no more to the advantage of 
the State that the People (that is, the majority, the populace) 
should elect uncontrolled all the members of the House of 
Commons than that they should elect all the pastors of their 
religion. The sole thing we have to consider is, will they be 
better governed? " 

"Unquestionably," said Constance. 

" Unquestionably ! — Well, I question it. I foresee a more 



GODOLPHIX. 305 

even "balance of parties, — nothing else. When parties are 
evenly balanced. States tremble. In good government there 
should be somewhere sufficient power to carry on, not unex- 
amined but at least with vigour, the different operations of 
government itself. In free countries, therefore, one party 
ought to preponderate sufficiently over the other. If it do 
not, all the State measures are crippled, delayed, distorted, 
and the State languishes while the doctors dispute as to the 
medicines to be applied to it. You will find by your Bill, not 
that the Tories are destroyed, but that the Whigs and- the 
Kadicals are strengthened; the Lords are not crushed, but 
the Commons are in a state to contest with them. Hence 
party battles upon catchwords, struggles between the two 
chambers for things of straw. You who desire progress and 
movement will find the real affairs of this great Artificial 
Empire, in its trade, commerce, colonies, internal legislation, 
standing still while the Whigs and the Tories pelt each other 
with the quibbles of faction. Xo, I should vote against your 
Bill I I am not for popular governments, though I like free 
States. All the advantages of democracy seem to me more 
than counterbalanced by the sacrifice of the peace and tran- 
quillity, the comfort and the grace, the dignity and the chari- 
ties of life, that democracies usually entail. If the object of 
men is to live happily, — not to strive and to fret; not to 
make money in the market-place, and call each other rogues 
on the hustings, — who would not rather be a German than an 
American? I own I regret to differ from you. For — but no 
matter — " 

"For! — what were you about to say? '' 

" For — then, since you must know it — I am beginning to 
feel interest in these questions, — excitement is contagious. 
And, after all, if a man really deem his mother-country in 
some danger, inaction is not philosophy, but a species of par- 
ricide. But to think of the daily and hourly pain I should 
occasion to you, my beloved and ardent Constance, by shocking 
all your opinions, counteracting all your schemes, working 
against objects which your father's fate and your early asso- 
ciations have so singularly made duties in your eyes, — to do 

20 



806 GODOLPHIN. 

all this is a patriotism beyond me. Let us glide out of this 
whirlpool, and hoist sail for some nook in the country where 
we can hear gentler sounds than the roar of the democracy." 

Constance sighed, and suffered Godolphin to quit her in 
silence. But her generous heart was touched by his own 
generosity. This is one of the great curses of a woman who 
aspires to the man's part of political controversy. If the man 
choose to act, the woman, with all her wiles, her intrigues, her 
arts, is powerless. If Godolphin were to enter parliament a 
Tory, the great Whig rendezvous of Erpiugham House was lost, 
and Constance herself a cipher, — and her father's wrongs for- 
gotten, and the stern purpose of her masculine career baffled 
at the very moment of success. She now repented that she 
had ever desired to draw Godolphin's attention to political 
matters. She wondered at her own want of foresight. How, 
with his love for antiquity, his predilections for the elegant 
and the serene, his philosophy of the " Eose-garden," could she 
ever have supposed that he would side with the bold objects 
and turbulent will of a popular party in a stormy crisis? 

The subject was not renewed. But she had the pain of 
observing that Godolphin's manner was altered: he took 
pleasure in none of his old hobbies, — he was evidently dis- 
satisfied with himself. In fact, it is true that he, for the 
first time in his life, felt that there is a remorse to the mind 
as well as to the soul, and that a man of genius cannot be 
perpetually idle without, as he touches on the middle of his 
career, looking to the past with some shame and to the future 
with some ambition. One evening, when he had sat by the 
open window in a thoughtful and melancholy, almost morose, 
silence for a considerable time, Constance, after a violent 
struggle with herself, rose suddenly, and fell on his neck. 

''Forgive me, Percy," she said, unable to suppress her 
tears, — "forgive me. It is past; I have no right that you, 
so superior to myself, should be sacrified to my — my x>reju- 
dices you would call them — so be it. Is it for your wife to 
condemn you to be inglorious? ISTo, no, dear Godolphin; ful- 
fil your destiny, — you are born for high objects. Be active, 
be distinguished, and I will ask no more ! " 



GODOLPHIN. 307 

John Vernon, in that hour you were forgotten ! ■\\Tio among 
the dead can ever hope for fidelity, when love to the living 
invites a woman to betray? 

"My sweet Constance," said Godolphin, drawing her to his 
heart, and affected in proportion as he appreciated all that in 
that speech his wife gave up for his sake, — the all, far more 
than the lovely person, the splendid wealth, the lofty rank 
that she had brought to his home, — "my sweet Constance, do 
not think I will take advantage of words so generously but 
hastily spoken. Time enough hereafter to think of differ- 
ences between us. At present let us indulge only the luxury 
of the new love, the holiness of the new nuptials, that have 
made us as one Being. Perhaps this restlessness, so unusual 
to me, will pass away; let us wait a while. At present 
* Sparta has many a worthier son.' One other year, one 
sweet summer, of the private life we have too much suffered 
to glide away, enjoyed, and then we will see whether the 
harsh realities of Ambition be worth either a concession or a 
dispute. Let us go into the country, — to-morrow if you 
will." 

And as CoHstance was about to answer, he sealed her lips 
with his kiss. 

But Lady Erpingham was not one of those who waver in 
what they deem a duty. She passed the night in stern and 
sleepless commune with herself; she was aware of all that 
she hazarded, all that she renounced; she was even tortured 
by scruples as to the strange oath that had almost unsexed 
her. Still, in spite of all, she felt that nothing would excuse 
her in suffering that gifted and happy intellect, now awak- 
ened from the sleep of the Sybarite, to fall back into its lazy 
and effeminate repose. She had no right to doom a human 
soul to rot away in its clay. Perhaps, too, she hoped, as all 
polemical enthusiasts do, that Godolphin, once aroused, would 
soon become her convert. Be that as it may, she delayed, on 
various pretences, their departure from London. She went 
secretly the next day to one of the proprietors of the close 
Boroughs, the existence of which was about to be annihilated, 
and a few days afterwards Godolphin received a letter in- 



308 GODOLPHIN. 

forming him that he had been duly elected member for . 

I will not say what were his feelings at these tidings. Per- 
haps, such is man's proud and wayward heart, he felt- shame 
to be so outdone by Constance. 



CHAPTER LXV. 

NEW VIEWS OF A PRIVILEGED ORDER. — THE DEATH-BED 
OF AUGUSTUS SAVILLE. 

This event might indeed have been an era in the life of 
Percy Godolphin, had that life been spared to a more ex- 
tended limit than it was ; and yet, so long had his ambition 
been smoothed and polished away by his peculiarities of 
thought, and so little was his calm and indifferent tone of 
mind suited to the hot contests and nightly warfare of parlia- 
mentary politics, that it is not probable he would ever have 
won a continuous and solid distinction in a career which re- 
quires either obtuseness of mind or enthusiasm of purpose to 
encounter the repeated mortifications and failures which the 
most brilliant debutant ordinarily endures. As it was, how- 
ever, it produced a grave a,nd solemn train of thought in Go- 
dolphin's breast. He mused much over his past life, and the 
musing did not satisfy him. He felt like one of those re- 
corded in physiological history who have been in a trance for 
years: and now slowly awakening, he acknowledged the stir 
and rush of revived but confused emotions. Nature, perhaps, 
had intended Godolphin for a poet ; for, with the exception 
of the love of glory, the poetical characteristics were rife 
within him; and over his whole past existence the dimness of 
unexpressed poetical sensation had clung and hovered. It 
was this which had deadened his soul to the active world, 
and wrapped him in the land of dreams; it was this which 
had induced that vague and restless dissatisfaction with the 
Actual which had brought the thirst for the Ideal; it was 



GODOLPHIN. 309 

this which had made him fastidious in love, repining in 
pleasure, magnificent in luxury, seeking and despising all 
things in the same breath. There are many, perhaps, of this 
sort, who, having the poet's nature, have never found the 
poet's vent to his emotions; have wandered over the visionary 
world without chancing to discover the magic wand that was 
stored within the dark chamber of their mind, and would have 
reduced the visions into shape and substance. Alas! what 
existence can be more unfulfilled than that of one who has 
the soul of the poet and not the skill; who has the suscepti- 
bility and the craving, not the consolation or the reward? 

But if this cloud of dreamlike emotion had so long hung 
over Godolphin, it began now to melt away from his heart; 
a clearer and distincter view of the large objects of life lay 
before him ; and he felt that he was standing, half stunned 
and passive, in the great crisis of his fate. 

The day was now fixed for their departure to Wendover, 
when Saville was taken alarmingly ill; Godolphin was sent 
for, late one evening. He found the soi-disant Epicurean at 
the point of death, but in perfect possession of his senses. 
The scene around him was emblematic of his life : save Go- 
dolphin, not a friend was by. Saville had some dozen or two 
of natural children — where were they? He had abandoned 
them to their fate ; he knew not of their existence, nor they 
of his death. Lonely in his selfishness, was he left to breathe 
out the small soul of a man of hon ton ! But I must do Saville 
the justice to say, that if he was without the mourners and 
the attendants that belong to natural ties, he did not require 
them. His was no whimpering exit from life: the cham- 
pagne was drained to the last drop ; and Death, like the true 
boon companion, was about to shatter the empty glass. 

"Well, my friend," said Saville, feebly, but pressing with 
weak fingers Godolphin's hand, — "well, the game is up, the 
lights are going out, and presently the last guest will depart, 
and all be darkness ! " Here the doctor came to the bedside 
with a cordial. The dying man, before he took it, fixed upon 
the leech an eye which, although fast glazing, still retained 
something of its keen, searching shrewdness. 



310 GODOLPHm. 

" Now, tell me, my good sir, how many hours more can you 
keep in this — this breath? " 

The doctor looked at Godolphin. 

*'I understand you," said Saville; "you are shy on these 
points. Never be shy, my good fellow; it is inexcusable 
after twenty : besides, it is a bad compliment to my nerves, — 
a gentleman is prepared for every event. Sir, it is only a 
roturier whom death, or anything else, takes by surprise. 
How many hours, then, can I live? " 

"Not many, I fear, sir; perhaps until daybreak." 

"Ill/ <iay breaks about twelve o'clock, p. m.," said Saville, 
as dryly as his gasps would let him. " Very well ; give me 
the cordial. Don't let me go to sleep,— I don't want to be 
cheated out of a minute. So, so! I am better. You may 
withdraw, doctor. Let my spaniel come up. Bustle, Bustle ! 
poor fellow! poor fellow! Lie down, sir! be quiet! And 
now, Godolphin, a few words in farewell. I always liked 
you greatly; you know you were my profile, and you have 
turned out well. You have not been led away by the vulgar 
passions of politics and place and power. You have had 
power over power itself; you have not office, but you have 
fashion. You have made the greatest match in England; 
very prudently not marrying Constance Vernon, very pru- 
dently marrying Lady Erpingham. You are at the head and 
front of society; you have excellent taste, and spend your 
wealth properly. All this must make your conscience clear, 
— a wonderful consolation ! Always keep a sound conscience ; 
it is a great blessing on one's death-bed; it is a great blessing 
to me in this hour, for I have played my part decently, eh? I 
have enjoyed life, as much as so dull a possession can be enjoyed; 
I have loved, gamed, drunk, but I have never lost my char- 
acter as a gentleman: thank Heaven, I have no remorse of 
that sort! Follow my example to the last and you will die 
as easily. I have left you my correspondence and my journal : 
you may publish them if you like; if not, burn them. They 
are full of amusing anecdotes; but I don't care for fame, as 
you well know, — especially posthumous fame. Do as you 
please, then, with my literary remains. Take care of my 



GODOLPHIN. 311 

dog — 't is a good creature ; and let me be quietly buried. 
No bad taste, no ostentation, no epitaph. I am very glad I 
die before the d — d Revolution that must come; I don't want 
to take svine with the member for Holborn Bars. I am a type 
of a system; I expire before the system; my death is the 
herald of its fall." 

TVith these expressions — not continuously uttered, but at 
short intervals — Saville turned away his face : his breathing 
became thick: he fell into the slumber he had deprecated; 
and, after about an hour's silence, died away as insensibly as 
an infant. " Sic transit gloria mundi ! " 

The first living countenance beside the death-bed on which 
Godolphin's eye fell was that of Fanny Millinger; she (who 
had been much with Saville during his latter days, for her 
talk amused him, and her good-nature made her willing to 
amuse any one) had been, at his request, summoned also with 
Godolphin at the sudden turn of his disease. She was at the 
theatre at the time, and had only just arrived when the de- 
ceased had fallen into his last sleep. There, silent and 
shocked, she stood by the bed, opposite Godolphin. She had 
not stayed to change her stage-dress; and the tinsel and mock 
jewels glittered on the revolted eye of her quondam lover. 
What a type of the life just extinguished! What a satire on 
its mountebank artificialities! 

Some little time after, she joined Godolphin in the desolate 
apartment below. She put her hand in his, and her tears — 
for she wept easily — flowed fast down her cheeks, washing 
away the lavish rouge which imperfectly masked the wrinkles 
that Time had lately begun to sow on a surface Godolphin 
had remembered so fair and smooth. 

"Poor Saville! " said she, falteringl}"; "he died without a 
pang. Ah, he had the best temper possible ! " 

Godolphin sat by the writing-table of the deceased, shading 
his brow with the hand which the actress left disengaged. 

"Fanny," said he, bitterly, after a pause, "the world is 
indeed a stage. It has lost a consummate actor, though in a 
small part." 

The saying was wrung from Godolphin, — and was not said 



312 GODOLPHIN. 

unkindly, though it seemed so, for he too had tears in his 
eyes. 

"Ah," said she, "the play-house has indeed taught -us, in 
our youth, many things which the real world could not teach 
us better." 

"Life differs from the play only in this," said Godolphin, 
some time afterwards, — " it has no plot ; all is vague, desul- 
tory, unconnected, till the curtain drops with the mystery 
unsolved." 

Those were the last words that Godolphin ever addressed 
to the actress. 



CHAPTER LXVI. 

THE JOUKNEY AND THE SURPRISE. — A WALK IN THE SUMMER 
NIGHT. — THE STARS, AND THE ASSOCIATION THAT MEMORY 
MAKES WITH NATURE. 

This event detained Godolphin some days longer in town. 
He saw the last rites performed to Saville, and he was pres- 
ent at the opening of the will. 

As in life Saville had never lent a helping hand to the dis- 
tressed, as he had mixed with the wealthy only, so now to 
the wealthy only was his wealth devoted. The rich Godol- 
phin was his principal heir; not a word was even said about 
his illegitimate children, not an inquiry ordained towards his 
poor relations. In this, as in all the formula of his will, 
Saville followed the prescribed customs of the world. 

Fast went the panting steeds that bore Constance and Go- 
dolphin from the desolate city. Bright was the summer sky, 
and green looked the smiling fields that lay on either side 
their road. Nature was awake and active. What a delicious 
contrast to the scenes of Art which they left behind ! Con- 
stance exerted herself to the utmost to cheer the spirits of 
her companion, and succeeded. In the small compass which 
confined them together, their conversation flowed in confi- 



GODOLPHIX. 313 

dence and intimate affection. Xot since the first month of 
their union had they talked with less reserve and more entire 
love — only there was this difference in their topics : they 
then talked of the future only, they now talked more of the 
past. They uttered many a fond regret over their several 
faults to each other; and, with clasped hands, congratulated 
themselves on their present reunion of heart. They allowed 
how much all things independent of affection had deceived 
them, and no longer exacting so much from love, they felt its 
real importance. Ah, why do all of us lose so many years in 
searching after happiness, but never inquiring into its nature ! 
"We are like one who collects the books of a thousand tongues, 
and knowing not their language, wonders why they do not 
delight him. 

But still, athwart the mind of Constance one dark image 
would ever and anon obtrude itself; the solitary and mystic 
Lucilla, with her erring brain and forlorn fortunes, was not 
even in happiness to be forgotten. There were times, too, in 
that short journey, when she felt the tale of her interview 
with that unhappy being rise to her lips; but ever when she 
looked on the countenance of Godolphin, beaming with more 
heartfelt and homeborn gladness than she had seen for years, 
she could not bear the thought of seeing it darkened by the 
pain her story would inflict, and she shrank from embittering 
moments so precious to her heart. 

All her endeavours to discover Lucilla had been in vain; 
but an unquiet presentiment that at any moment that dis- 
covery might be made, perhaps in the presence of Godolphin, 
constantly haunted her, and she even now looked painfully 
forth at each inn where they changed horses, lest the sad, 
stern features of the soothsayer should appear, and break 
that spell of happy quiet which now lay over the spirit of 
Godolphin. 

It was towards the evening that their carriage slowly wound 
up a steep and long ascent. The sun yet wanted an hour to 
its setting ; and at their right, its slant and mellowed beams 
fell over rich fields, green with the prodigal luxuriance of 
June, and intersected by hedges from which, proud and fre- 



314 GODOLPHIN. 

quent, the oak and elm threw forth their lengthened shadows. 
On their left the grass less fertile and the spaces less in- 
closed were whitened with flocks of sheep ; and far and soft 
came the bleating of the lambs upon their ear. They saw 
not the shepherd nor any living form; but from between the 
thicker groups of trees the chimneys of peaceful cottages 
peered forth, and gave to the pastoral serenity of the scene 
that still and tranquil aspect of life which alone suited it. 
The busy wheel in the heart of Constance was at rest, and 
Godolphin's soul, steeped in the luxury of the present hour, 
felt that delicious happiness which would be heaven could it 
outlive the hour. 

"My Constance," whispered he, "why, since we return at 
last to these scenes, why should we ever leave them? Amidst 
them let us recall our youth! " Constance sighed, but with 
pleasure, and pressed Godolphin's hand to her lips. 

And now they had gained the hill, a sudden colour flushed 
over Godolphin's cheek. 

"Surely," said he, "I remember this view. Yonder valley! 
This is not the road to Wendover Castle; this — my father's 
home ! — the same, and not the same ! " 

Yes! Below, basking in the western light, lay the cot- 
tage in which Godolphin's childhood had been passed. There 
was the stream rippling merrily; there the broken and fern- 
clad turf, with " its old hereditary trees ; " but the ruins ! — 
the shattered arch, the mouldering tower, were left indeed; 
but new arches, new turrets had arisen, and so dexterously 
blended with the whole that Godolphin might have fancied 
the hall of his forefathers restored, — not indeed in the same 
vast proportions and cumbrous grandeur as of old, but still 
alike in shape and outline, and such even in size as would 
have contented the proud heart of its last owner. Godolphin's 
eyes turned inquiringly to Constance. 

" It should have been more consistent with its ancient di- 
mensions," said she; "but then it would have taken half our 
lives to have built it." 

"But this must have been the work of years? " 

"It was." 



GODOLPHIN. 315 

"And ijour work, Constance? " 

"For you." 

" And it was for tliis tliat you hesitated when I asked you 

to consent to raising the money for the purchase of Lord 's 

collection?" 

" Yes; am I forgiven? " 

"Dearest Constance," said Godolphin, flinging his arms 
around her, "how have I wronged you! During those very 
years, then, of our estrangement, during those very years in 
which I thought you indifferent, you were silently preparing 
this noble revenge on the injury I did you. Why, why did I 
not know this before? Why did you not save us both from so 
long a misunderstanding of each other?" 

"Dearest Percy, I was to blame; but I always looked to 
this hour as to a pleasure of which I could not bear to rob 
myself. I always fancied that when this task was finished, 
and you could witness it, you would feel how uppermost you 
always were in my thoughts, and forgive me many faults from 
J;hat consideration. I knew that I was executing your father's 
great wish; I knew that you always, although unconsciously, 
perhaps, sympathized in that wish. I only grieve that, as 
yet, it has been executed so imperfectly." 

"But how," continued Godolphin, gazing on the new pile 
as they now neared the entrance, "how was it this never 
reached my ears through other quarters?" 

"But it did, Percy; don't you remember our country neigh- 
bour, Dartmour, complimenting you on your intended improve- 
ments, and you fancied it was irony, and turned your back on 
the discomfited squire? " 

They now drove under the gates surmounted with Godol- 
phin's arms; and in a few minutes more, they were within 
the renovated halls of the Priory. 

Perhaps it was impossible for Constance to have more sen- 
sibly touched and flattered Godolphin than by this surprise. 
It affected him far more than the political concession which 
to her had been so profound a sacrifice ; for his early poverty 
had produced in him somewhat of that ancestral pride which 
the poor only can gracefully wear; and although the tie be- 



316 GODOLPHIN. 

tween his father and himself had not possessed much endear- 
ment, yet he had often, with the generosity that belonged to 
him, regretted that his parent had not survived to share in 
his present wealth, and to devote some portion of it to the 
realization of those wishes which he had never been permitted 
to consummate. Godolphin, too, was precisely of a nature to 
appreciate the delicacy of Constance's conduct, and to be 
deeply penetrated by the thought that, while he was follow- 
ing a career so separate from hers, she, in the midst of all 
her ambitious projects, could pause to labour, unthanked and 
in concealment, for the delight of this hour's gratification to 
him; the delicacy and the forethought affected him the more, 
because they made not a part of the ordinary character of the 
high and absorbed ambition of Constance. He did not thank 
her much by words, but his looks betrayed all he felt, and 
Constance was overpaid. 

Although the new portion of the building was necessarily 
not extensive, yet each chamber was of those grand propor- 
tions which suited the magnificent taste of Godolphin, and 
harmonized with the ancient ruins. Constance had shown 
her tact by leaving the ruins themselves (which it was pro- 
fane to touch) unrestored; but so artfully were those con- 
nected with the modern addition, and thence with the apart- 
ments in the cottage, which she had not scrupled to remodel, 
that an effect was produced from the whole far more splendid 
than many Gothic buildings of greater extent and higher pre- 
tensions can afford. Godolphin wandered delightedly over 
the whole, charmed with the taste and judgment which pre- 
sided over even the nicest arrangement. 

"Why, where," said he, struck with the accurate antiquity 
of some of the details, "where learned you all these minutiae? 
You are as wise as Hope himself upon cornices and tables." 

"I was forced to leave these things to others," answered 
Constance; "but I took care that they possessed the neces- 
sary science." 

The night was exceedingly beautiful, and they walked forth 
under the summer moon among those grounds in which Con- 
stance had first seen Godolphin. They stood by the very 



GODOLPHIX 317 

rivulet, they paused at the very spot! On the murmuring 
bosom of the wave floated manj^ a water-flower; and now and 
then a sudden splash, a sudden circle in the shallow stream, 
denoted the leap of the river-tyrant on his prey. There was 
a universal odour in the soft air, — that delicate, that ineffa- 
ble fragrance belonging to those midsummer nights which the 
rich English poetry might well people with Oberon and his 
fairies; the bat wheeled in many a ring along the air; but 
the gentle light bathed all things, and robbed his wanderings 
of the gloomier associations that belong to them; and ever 
and ever, the busy moth darted to and fro among the flowers, 
or misled upwards by the stars whose beam allured it, wan- 
dered, like Desire after Happiness, in search of that light it 
might never reach. And those stars still, with their soft, 
unspeakable eyes of love, looked down upon Godolphin as of 
old, when, by the Italian lake, he roved with her for whom 
he had become the world itself. No, not now, nor ever, 
could he gaze upon those wan, mysterious orbs, and not feel 
the pang that reminded him of Lucilla ! Between them and 
her was an affinity which his imagination could not sever. 
All whom we have loved have something in nature especially 
devoted to their memory, — a peculiar flower, a breath of 
air, a leaf, a tone. What love is without some such 
association, — 

" Striking the electric cliain -wherewith we 're bound ? " 

But the dim and shadowy and solemn stars were indeed 
meet remembrances of Yolktman's wild daughter; and so in- 
timately was their light connected in Godolphin's breast with 
that one image, that their very softness had, to his eyes, 
something fearful and menacing, — although as in sadness, 
not in anger. 



318 GODOLPHIN. 



CHAPTER LXVII. 

THE FULL RENEWAL OF LOVE. — HAPPINESS PRODUCES FEAR, 
AND IN TO-DAY ALREADY WALKS TO-MORROW. 

O, FIRST Love ! well sang the gay minstrel of France, that 
we return again and again to thee. As the earth returns to 
its spring, and is green once more, we go back to the life of 
life and forget the seasons that have rolled between ! Whether 
it was — perhaps so — that in the minds of both was a feeling 
that their present state was not fated to endure ; whether they 
felt, in the deep calm they enjoyed, that the storm was al- 
ready at hand, — whether this was the truth I know not; but 
certain it is that during the short time they remained at Go- 
dolphin Priory, previous to their earthly separation, Con- 
stance and Godolphin were rather like lovers for the first 
time united than like those who have dragged on the chain 
for years. Their perfect solitude, the absence of all intru- 
sion, so unlike the life they had long passed, renewed all 
that charm, that rapture in each other's society, which belong 
to the first youth of love. True that this could not have en- 
dured long ; but Fate suffered it to endure to the last of that 
tether which remained to their union. Consta,nce was not 
again doomed to the severe and grating shock which the sense 
of estrangement brings to a woman's heart; she was sensible 
that Godolphin was never so entirely, so passionately her 
own, as toAvards the close of their mortal connection. Every- 
thing around them breathed of their first love. This was 
that home of Godolphin to which, from the splendid halls of 
Wendover, the young soul of the proud orphan had so often 
and so mournfuly flown with a yearning and wistful interest; 
this was that spot in which he, awaking from the fever of the 
world, had fed his first dreams of her. The scene, the soli- 



GODOLPHIX. 319 

tufle, was as a batli to their love, — it braced, it freshened, it 
revived its tone. They wandered, they read, they thought 
together; the air of the spot was an intoxication. The world 
around and without was agitated; they felt it not : the breakers 
of the great deep died in murmurs on their ear. Ambition 
lulled its voice to Constance ; Godolphin had realized his vis- 
ions of the ideal. Time had dimmed their young beauty, but 
their eyes saw it not; they were young, they were all beauti- 
ful, to each other. 

And Constance hung on the steps of her lover — still let 
that name be his ! She could not bear to lose him for a mo- 
ment: a vague indistinctness of fear seized her if she saw 
him not. Again and again, in the slumbers of the night, she 
stretched forth her arms to feel that he was near; all her 
pride, her coldness seemed gone, as by a spell; she loved as 
the softest, the fondest, love. Are we, Euler of the fut- 
ure ! imbued with the half -felt spirit of prophecy as the hour 
of evil approaches, — the great, the fierce, the irremediable 
evil of a life? In this depth and intensity of their renewed 
passion, was there not something preternatural? Did they 
not tremble as they loved? They were on a spot to which 
the dark waters were slowly gathering; they clung to the 
Hour, for eternity was lowering round. 

It was one evening that a foreboding emotion of this kind 
weighed heavily on Constance. She pressed Godolphin's hand 
in hers, and when he returned the pressure, she threw herself 
on his neck, and burst into tears. Godolphin was alarmed; 
he covered her cheek with kisses, he sought the cause of her 
emotion. 

"There is no cause," answered Constance, recovering her- 
self, but speaking in a faltering voice, "only I feel the im- 
possibility that this happiness can last; its excess makes me 
shudder." 

As she spoke, the wind rose and swept mourningly over the 
large leaves of the chestnut-tree beneath which they stood; 
the serene stillness of the evening seemed gone; an unquiet 
and melancholy spirit was loosened abroad, and the chill of 
the sudden change which is so frequent to our climate came 



320 GODOLPHIN. 

piercingly upon them. Godolphin was silent for some mo- 
ments, for the thought found a sympathy in his own. 

"And is it truly so?" he said at last. "Is there really to 
be no permanent happiness for us below? Is pain always to 
tread the heels of pleasure? Are we never to say the harbour 
is reached, and we are safe? No, my Constance," he added, 
warming into the sanguine vein that traversed even his most 
desponding moods, "no! let us not cherish this dark belief; 
there is no experience for the future; one hour lies to the 
next; if what has been seem thus chequered, it is no type of 
what may be. We have discovered in each other that world 
that was long lost to our eyes ; we cannot lose it again ; death 
only can separate us ! " 

" Ah, death ! " said Constance, shuddering. 

" Do not recoil at that word, my Constance, for we are yet 
in the noon of life; why bring, like the Egyptian, the spectre 
to the feast? And, after all, if death come while we thus 
love, it is better than change and time, — better than custom 
which palls, better than age which chills. Oh," continued 
Godolphin, passionately, "oh, if this narrow shoal and sand 
of time be but a breathing spot in the great heritage of im- 
mortality, why cheat ourselves with words so vague as life 
and death? What is the difference? At most, the entrance 
in and the departure from one scene in our wide career. How 
many scenes are left to us ! We do but hasten our journey, 
not close it. Let us believe this, Constance, and cast from 
us all fear of our disunion." 

As he spoke, Constance's eyes were fixed upon his face, 
and the deep calm that reigned there sank into her soul, and 
silenced its murmurs. The thought of futurity is that which 
Godolphin (because it is so with all idealists) mvist have re- 
volved with the most frequent fervour; but it was a thought 
which he so rarely touched upon that it was the first and only 
time Constance ever heard it breathed from his lips. 

They turned into the house : and the mark is still in that 
page of the volume which they read, where the melodious 
accents of Godolphin died upon the heart of Constance. Can 
she ever turn to it again? 



GODOLPHIN. 321 



CHAPTER LXVIII. 

THE LAST CONVERSATION BETWEEN GODOLPHIN AND CON- 
STANCE. HIS THOUGHTS AND SOLITARY WALK AMIDST 

THE SCENES OF HIS YOUTH. THE LETTER. THE DE- 
PARTURE. 

They had denied themselves to all the visitors who had at- 
tacked the Priory ; but on their first arrival, they had deemed 
it necessary to conciliate their neighbours by concentrating 
into one formal act of hospitality all those social courtesies 
which they could not persuade themselves to relinquish their 
solitude in order singly to perform. Accordingly, a day had 
been fixed for one grand fete at the Priory ; it was to follow 
close on the election, and be considered as in honour of that 
event. The evening for this gala succeeded that which I 
have recorded in the last chapter. It was with great reluc- 
tance that they prepared themselves to greet this sole inter- 
ruption of their seclusion; and they laughed, although they 
did not laugh cordially, at the serious annoyance which the 
giving a ball was for the first time to occasion to persons who 
had been giving balls for a succession of years. 

The day was remarkably still and close ; the sun had not 
once pierced through the dull atmosphere, which was charged 
with the yet silent but gathering thunder; and as the evening 
came on, the sullen tokens of an approaching storm becam;' 
more and more loweringly pronounced. 

"We shall not, I fear, have propitious weather for our fes- 
tival to-night," said Godolphin; "but after a general election, 
people's nerves are tolerably hardened. What are the petty 
fret and tumult of nature, lasting but an hour, to the angry 
and everlasting passions of men ? " 

" A profound deduction from a wet night, dear Percy, " said 
Constance, smiling. 

21 



322 GODOLPHIN. 

"Like our friend C ," rejoined Godolpliin, in the same 

vein, " I can philosophize on the putting on one's gloves, you 
know;" and therewith their conversation flowed into a vein 
singularly contrasted with the character of the coming events. 
Time fled on as they were thus engaged until Constance started 
up, surprised at the lateness of the hour, to attend the duties 
of the toilette. 

"Wear this, dearest," said Godolphin, taking a rose from 
a flower-stand by the window, "in memory of that ball at 
Wendover Castle, which, although itself passed bitterly enough 
for me, has yet left so many happy recollections." Constance 
put the rose into her bosom; its leaves were then all fresh and 
brilliant, — so were her prospects for the future. He kissed 
her forehead as they parted, — they parted for the last time. 

Godolphin, left alone, turned to the window, which, open- 
ing to the ground, invited him forth among the flowers that 
studded the grass-plots which sloped away to the dark and 
unwaving trees that girded the lawn. That pause of nature 
which precedes a storm ever had a peculiar attraction to his 
mind ; and instinctively he sauntered from the house, wrapped 
in the dreaming, half-developed thought which belonged to 
his temperament. Mechanically he strayed on until he found 
himself beside the still lake which the hollows of the disman- 
tled park embedded. There he paused, gazing unconsciously 
on the gloomy shadows which fell from the arches of the 
Priory and the tall trees around. Not a ripple stirred the 
broad expanse of waters; the birds had gone to rest; no 
sound, save the voice of the distant brook that fed the lake 
beside which, on the first night of his return to his ancestral 
home, he had wandered with Constance, broke the universal 
silence. That voice was never mute. All else might be 
dumb; but that living stream, rushing through its rocky bed, 
stilled not its repining music. Like the soul of the land- 
scape is the gush of a fresh stream; it knows no sleep, no 
pause: it works forever, — the life, the cause of life to all 
around. The 'great frame of nature may repose, but the 
spirit of the waters rests not for a moment. As the soul of 
the landscape is the soul of man ; in our deepest slumbers its 



GODOLPHIX. 323 

course glides on, and works imsilent, unslumbering, through 
its destined channel. 

With slow step and folded arms Godolphin moved along. 
The well-remembered scenes of his childhood were all before 
him; the wild verdure of the fern; the broken ground, with 
its thousand mimic mounts and valleys ; the deep dell over- 
grown with matted shrubs and dark as a wizard's cave; the 
remains of many a stately vista, where the tender green of 
the lime showed forth, even in that dusky light, beneath the 
richer leaves of the chestnut, — all was familiar and home- 
breathing to his mind. Fragments of boyish verse, forgotten 
for years, rose hauntingly to his remembrance, telling of wild 
thoughts, unsatisfied dreams, disappointed hopes. 

"But I am happy at last," said he, aloud, — "yes, happy. 
I have passed that bridge of life which divides us from the 
follies of youth; and better prospects and nobler desires ex- 
tend before me. What a world of wisdom in that one saying 
of Kadclyffe, 'Benevolence is the sole cure to idealism;' to 
live for others draws us from demanding miracles for our- 
selves. What duty as yet have I fulfilled? I renounced am- 
bition as unwise, and with it I renounced wisdom itself. I 
lived for pleasure, — I lived the life of disappointment. With- 
out one vicious disposition, I have fallen into a hundred vices; 
I have never been actively selfish, yet always selfish. I nursed 
high thoughts — for what end? A poet in heart, a voluptuary 
in life. If mine own interest came into clear collision with 
that of another, mine I would have sacrificed; but I never 
asked if the whole course of my existence was not that of a 
war with the universal interest. Too thoughtful to be with- 
out a leading principle in life, the one principle I adopted 
has been one error. I have tasted all that imagination can 
give to earthly possession, — youth, health, liberty, knowl- 
edge, love, luxury, pomp. Woman was my first passion, — 
what woman have I wooed in vain? I imagined that my 
career hung upon Constance's breath, — Constance loved and 
refused me. I attributed my errors to that refusal; Con- 
stance became mine: — how have I retrieved them? A vague, 
a dim, an unconfessed remorse has pursued me in the memory 



324 GODOLPHIN. 

of Lucilla; yet, wliy not have redeemed that fault to her by 
good to others? What is penitence not put into action but 
the great fallacy in morals? A sin to one, if irremediable, 
can only be compensated by a virtue to some one else. Yet 
was I to blame in my conduct to Lucilla? Why should con- 
science so haunt me at that name? Did I not fly her? Was 
it not herself who compelled our union? Did I not cherish, 
respect, honour, forbear with her more than I have since 
with my wedded Constance? Did I not resolve to renounce 
Constance herself, when most loved, for Lucilla's sake alone? 
Who prevented that sacrifice, who deserted me, who carved 
out her own separate life? — Lucilla herself. Ko, so far, my 
sin is light. But ought I not to have left all things to follow 
her, to discover her, to force upon her an independence from 
want, or possibly from crime? Ah, there was my sin, and 
the sin of my nature ; the sin, too, of the children of the 
world, — passive sin. I could sacrifice my happiness, but not 
my indolence; I was not ungenerous, I was inert. But is it 
too late? Can I not yet search, discover her, and remove 
from my mind the anxious burthen which her remembrance 
imposes on it? For, oh, one thought of remorse linked with 
the being who has loved us is more intolerable to the con- 
science than the gravest crime ! " 

Muttering such thoughts, Godolphin strayed on until the 
deepening night suddenly recalled his attention to the late- 
ness of the hour. He turned to the house and entered his 
own apartment. Several of the guests had already come. 
Godolphin was yet dressing, when a servant knocked at the 
door and presented him a note. 

"Lay it on the table," said he to the valet; "it is probably 
some excuse about the ball." 

"Sir," said the servant, "a lad has just brought it from 

S ," naming a village about four miles distant; "and says 

he is to wait for an answer. He was ordered to ride as fast 
as possible." 

With some impatience Godolphin took up the note ; but the 
moment his eye rested on the writing, it fell from his hands ; 
his cheek, his lips, grew as white as death; his heart seemed 



GODOLPHIN. 325 

to refuse its functions ; it was literally as if life stood still for 
a moment, as by the force of a sudden poison. With a strong 
effort he recovered himself, tore open the note, and read as 
follows : — 

Percy Godolphin, the hour has arrived, — once more we shall meet. 
I summon you, fair love, to that meeting, — the bed of death. Come ! 

LUCILLA VOLKTMAN. 

"Don't alarm the countess," said Godolphin to his servant, 
in a very low, calm voice ; " bring my horse to the postern, 
and send the bearer of this note to me." 

The messenger appeared, — a rough country lad, of about 
eighteen or twenty. 

"You brought this note? " 

"I did, your honour." 

"From whom?" 

" Why, a sort of a strange lady, as is lying at the Chequers, 
and not expected to live. She be mortal bad, sir, and do 
run on awesome." 

Godolphin pressed his hands con\Tilsively together. 

"And how long has she been there? " 

"She only came about two hours since, sir; she came in a 
chaise, sir, and was taken so ill that we sent for the doctor 
directly. He says she can't get over the night." 

Godolphin walked to and fro, without trusting himself to 
speak, for some minutes. The boy stood by the door, pulling 
about his hat, and wondering and staring and thoroughly 
stupid. 

"Did she come alone?" 

"Eh, your honour?" 

"Was no one with her? " 

" Oh, yes ! a little nigger girl ; she it was sent me with the 
letter," 

"The horse is ready, sir," said the servant; "but had you 
not better have the carriage brought out? It looks very 
black; it must rain shortly, sir; and the ford between this 
and S is dangerous to cross in so dark a night." 

"Peace!" cried Godolphin, with flashing eyes, and a low 



326 GODOLPHIN. 

convulsive laugh. " Shall I ride to that death-bed at my ease 
and leisure? " 

He strode rapidly down the stairs, and reached the small 
postern door; it was a part of the old building. One of the 
grooms held his impatient horse, — the swiftest in his splen- 
did stud; and the dim but flaring light, held by another of 
the servitors, streamed against the dull heavens and the im- 
perfectly seen and frowning ruins of the ancient pile. 

Godolphin, unconscious of all around, and muttering to 
himself, leaped on his steed. The fire glinted from the 
courser's hoofs; and thus the last lord of that knightly race 
bade farewell to his father's halls. Those words which he 
had muttered, and which his favourite servant caught and 
superstitiously remembered, were the words in Lucilla's 
note, — ^^ The hour has arrived!" 



CHAPTER THE LAST. 

A DREAD MEETING. THE STORM. — THE CATASTROPHE. 

On the humble pallet of the village inn lay the broken form 
of the astrologer's expiring daughter. The surgeon of the 
place sat by the bedside, dismayed and terrified, despite his 
hardened vocation, by the wild words and ghastly shrieks 
that ever and anon burst from the lips of the dying woman. 
The words were, indeed, uttered in a foreign tongue unfa- 
miliar to the leech, — a language not ordinarily suited to 
inspire terror; the language of love and poetry and music, 
the language of the sweet South. But, uttered in that voice 
where the passions of the soul still wrestled against the gath- 
ering weakness of the frame, the soft syllables sounded harsh 
and fearful; and the dishevelled locks of the sufferer, the 
wandering fire of the sunken eyes, the distorted gestures of 
the thin, transparent arms, gave fierce effect to the unknown 



GODOLPHIX. 327 

words, and betrayed the dark strength of the delirium which 
raged upon her. 

One wretched light on the rude table opposite the bed broke 
the gloom of the mean chamber; and across the window flashed 
the first lightnings of the storm about to break. By the other 
side of the bed sat, mute, watchful, tearless, the Moorish girl, 
who was Lucilla's sole attendant, — her eyes fixed on the suf- 
ferer with faithful, unwearying love ; her ears listening, with 
all the quick sense of her race, to catch, amidst the growing 
noises of the storm, and the tread of hurrying steps below, 
the expected sound of the hoofs that should herald Godol- 
phin's approach. 

Suddenly, as if exhausted by the paroxysm of her disease, 
Lucilla's voice sank into silence; and she lay so still, so mo- 
tionless, that, but for the faint and wavering pulse of the 
hand, which the surgeon was now suffered to hold, they might 
have believed the tortured spirit was already released. This 
torpor lasted for some minutes, when, raising herself up, as 
a bright gleam of intelligence stole over the hollow cheeks, 
Lucilla put her finger to her lips, smiled, and said, in a low, 
clear voice, "Hark! becomes!" 

The Moor crept across the chamber, and opening the door, 
stood there in a listening attitude. She, as yet, heard not 
the tread of the speeding charger. A moment, and it smote 
her ear; a moment more it halted by the inn-door. The snort 
of the panting horse, the rush of steps, Percy Godolphin was 
in the room, was by the bedside ; the poor sufferer was in his 
arms; and softened, thrilled, overpowered, Lucilla resigned 
herself to that dear caress ; she drank in the sobs of her 
choked voice ; she felt still, as in happier days, burning into 
her heart, the magic of his kisses. One instant of youth, of 
love, of hope, broke into that desolate and fearful hour, and 
silent and scarcely conscious tears gushed from her aching 
eyes, and laved, as it were, the burthen and the agony from 
her heart. 

The Moor traversed the room, and, laying one hand on the 
surgeon's shoulder, pointed to the door. Lucilla and Godol- 
phin were alone. 



328 GODOLPHIN. 

" Oh ! " said he, at last finding voice, " is it thus — thus we 
meet? But say not that you are dying, Lucilla! have mercy, 
mercy upon your betrayer, your — " 

Here he could utter no more; he sank beside her, covering 
his face with his hands, and sobbing bitterly. 

The momentary lucid interval for Lucilla had passed away; 
the maniac rapture returned, although in a wild and solemn 
shape. 

"Blame not yourself," said she, earnestly; "the remorse- 
less stars are the sole betrayers: yet, bright and lovely as 
they once seemed when they assured me of a bond between 
thee and me, I could not dream that their still and shining 
lore could forbode such gloomy truths. Oh, Percy! since we 
parted, the earth has not been as the earth to me : the Natural 
has left my life; a weird and roving spirit has entered my 
breast, and filled my brain, and possessed my thoughts, and 
moved every spring of my existence. The sun and the air, 
the green herb, the freshness and glory of the world, have 
been covered with a mist in which only dim shapes of dread 
were shadowed forth. But thou, my love, on whose breast I 
have dreamed such blessed dreams, wert not to blame. ISTo ! 
the power that crushes we cannot accuse; the heavens are 
above the reach of our reproach ; they smile upon our agony ; 
they bid the seasons roll on, unmoved and -unsympathizing, 
above our broken hearts. And what has been my course 
since your last kiss on these dying lips? Godolphin," — and 
here Lucilla drew herself apart from him, and writhed, as with 
some bitter memory, — "these lips have felt other kisses and 
these ears have drunk unhallowed sounds, and wild revelry 
and wilder passion have made me laugh over the sepulchre of 
my soul. But I am a poor creature; poor, poor — mad, Percy, 
— mad, — they tell me so! " Then, in the sudden changes in- 
cident to her disease, Lucilla continued : " I saw your bride, 
Percy, when you bore her from Rome, and the wheels of your 
bridal carriage swept over me, for I flung myself in their 
way ; but they scathed me not : the bright demons above or- 
dained otherwise, and I wandered over the world; but you 
shall know not," added Lucilla, with a laugh of dreadful 



GODOLPHIN. 329 

levity, "whither or with whom, for we must have conceal- 
ments, my love, as you will confess ; and I strove to forget 
you, and my brain sank in the effort. I felt my frame with- 
ering, and they told me my doom was fixed, and I resolved to 
come to England, and look on my first love once more ; so I 
came, and I saw you, Godolphin; and I knew, by the wrinkles 
in your brow, and the musing thought in your eye, that your 
proud lot had not brought you content. And then there came 
to me a stately shape, and I knew it for her for whom you 
had deserted me : she told me, as you tell me, to live, to for- 
get the past. Mockery, mockery ! But my heart is proud as 
hers, Percy, and I would not stoop to the kindness of a tri- 
umphant rival; and I fled, what matters it whither? But 
listen, Percy, listen; my woes have made me wise in that 
science which is not of earth, and I knew that you and I 
must meet once more, and that that meeting would be in this 
hour; and I counted, minute by minute, with a savage glad- 
ness, the days that were to bring on this interview and my 
death! " Then raising her voice into a wild shriek, "Beware, 
beware, Percy ! — the rush of waters is on my ear — the splash, 
the gurgle! Beware! — ijour last hour, also, is at hand! " 

Prom the moment in which she uttered these words, Lucilla 
relapsed into her former frantic paroxysms. Shriek followed 
shriek ; she appeared to know none around her, not even Go- 
dolphin. With throes and agony the soul seemed to wrench 
itself from the frame. The hours swept on; midnight came; 
clear and distinct the voice of the clock below reached that 
chamber. 

" Hush ! " cried Lucilla, starting. " Hush ! " and just at that 
moment, through the window opposite, the huge clouds, 
breaking in one spot, discovered high and far above them a 
solitary star. 

" Thine, thine, Godolphin ! " she shrieked forth, pointing 
to the lonely orb; "it summons thee. Farewell, but not for 
long!" 

The Moor rushed forward with a loud cry; she placed her 
hand on Lucilla's bosom; the heart was still, the breath was 



330 GODOLPHIN. 

gone, tlie fire had vanished from the ashes : that strange un- 
earthly spirit was perhaps with the stars for whose mysteries 
it had so vainly yearned. 

Down fell the black rain in torrents; and far from the 
mountains you might hear the rushing of the swollen streams, 
as they poured into the bosom of the valleys. The sullen, 
continued mass of cloud was broken, and the vapours hurried 
fast and lowering over the heavens, leaving now and then a 
star to glitter forth ere again "the jaws of darkness did de- 
vour it up." At the lower verge of the horizon, the lightning 
flashed fierce, but at lingering intervals ; the trees rocked and 
groaned beneath the rain and storm; and immediately above 
the bowed head of a solitary horseman broke the thunder that, 
amidst the whirl of his own emotions, he scarcely heard. 

Beside a stream, which the rains had already swelled, was 
a gypsy encampment; and as some of the dusky itinerants, 
waiting perhaps the return of a part of their band from a 
predatory excursion, cowered over the flickering fires in 
their tent, they perceived the horseman rapidly approaching 
the stream. 

"See to yon gentry cove," cried one of the band; "'tis 
the same we saw in the forenight crossing the ford above. 
He has taken a short cut, the buzzard ! and will have to go 
round again to the ford ; a precious time to be gallivanting 
about!" 

"Pish!" said an old hag; "I love to see the proud ones 
tasting the bitter wind and rain as we bear alway ; 't is but 
a mile longer round to the ford. I wish it was twenty." 

"Hallo!" cried the first speaker; "the fool takes to the 
water. He '11 be drowned; the banks are too high and rough 
to land man or horse yonder. Hallo ! " and with that painful 
sympathy which the hardest feel at the imminent peril of an- 
other when immediately subjected to their eyes, the gypsy 
ran forth into the pelting storm, shouting to the traveller to 
halt. For one moment Godolphin's steed still shrunk back 
from the rushing tide ; deep darkness was over the water, and 
the horseman saw not the height of the opposite banks. The 
shout of the gypsy sounded to his ear like the cry of the dead 



GODOLPHIN. 331 

■whom he had left; he dashed his heels into the sides of the 
reluctant horse, and was in the stream. 

"Light — light the torches! " cried the gypsy; and in a few 
moments the banks -were illumined with many a brand from 
the fire, which the rain however almost instantly extin- 
guished; yet by that momentary light they saw the noble 
animal breasting the waters, and perceived that Godolphin, 
discovering by the depth his mistake, had already turned the 
horse's head in the direction of the ford. They could see no 
more, but they shouted to Godolphin to turn back to the place 
from which he had plunged; and, in a few minutes after- 
wards, they heard, several yards above, the horse clamber- 
ing up the rugged banks, which there were steep and high, 
and crushing the boughs that clothed the ascent. They 
thought, at the same time, that they distinguished also the 
splash of a heavy substance in the waves ; but they fancied it 
some detached fragment of earth or stone, and turned to their 
tent, in the belief that the daring rider had escaped the peril 
he had so madly incurred. That night the riderless steed of 
Godolphin arrived at the porch of the Priory, where Con- 
stance, alarmed, pale, breathless, stood exposed to the storm, 
awaiting the return of Godolphin, or the messengers she had 
despatched in search of him. 

At daybreak his corpse was found by the shallows of the 
ford ; and the mark of violence across the temples, as of some 
blow, led them to guess that in scaling the banks his head 
had struck against one of the tossing boughs that overhung 
them, and the blow had precipitated him into the waters. 

LETTER FROM CONSTANCE, COUNTESS OF ERPING- 
HAM, TO 

August, 1832. 
I have read the work you have so kindly compiled from the papers 
transmitted to your care, and from your own intimate knowledge of 
those to whom they relate. You have in much fulfilled my wishes with 
singular success. On the one hand, I have been anxious that a History 
should be given to the world, from which lessons so deep and, I firmly 
believe, salutary, may be generally derived ; on the other hand, I have 



332 GODOLPHIN. 

been anxious that it should be clothed in such disguises that the names 
of the real actors in the drama should be forever a secret. Both these 
objects you have attained. It is impossible, I think, for any one to read 
the book about to be published without being impressed with the truth 
of the moral it is intended to convey, and without seeing, by a thousand 
infallible signs, that its spring and its general course have flowed from 
reality and not fiction. Yet have you, by a few slight alterations and 
additions, managed to effect that concealment of names and persons, 
which is due no less to the living than to the memory of the dead. 

So far I thank you from my heart ; but in one point you have utterly 
failed. You have done no justice to the noble character you meant to 
delineate under the name of Godolphin ; you have drawn his likeness 
with a harsh and cruel pencil ; you have enlarged on the few weak- 
nesses he might have possessed, until you have made them the fore- 
ground of the portrait ; and his vivid generosity, his high honour, his 
brilliant intellect, the extraordinary stores of his mind, you have left in 
shadow. O God ! that for such a being such a destiny was reserved ! 
and in the prime of life, just when his mind had awakened to a sense of 
its own powers and their legitimate objects ! What a fatal system of 
things, that could for thirty-seven years have led away, by the pursuits 
and dissipations of a life suited but to the beings he despised, a genius 
of such an order, a heart of such tender emotions ! ^ But on this sub- 
ject I cannot, cannot write. I must lay down the pen ; to-morrow I 
will try and force myself to resume it. 

Well, then, I say, you have not done justice to Mm. I beseech you 
to remodel that character, and atone to the memory of one whom none 
ever saw but to admire, or knew but to love. 

Of me, — of me, the vain, the scheming, the proud, the unfeminine 
cherisher of bitter thoughts, of stern designs, — of me, on the other 
hand, how flattering is the picture you have drawn ! In that flattery is 
my sure disguise ; therefore I will not ask you to shade it into the poor 
and unlovely truth. But while, with agony and shame, I feel that you 
have rightly described that seeming neglectfulness of one no more, which 
sprang from the pride that believed i/seZ/ neglected, you have not said 
enough — :- no, not one millionth part enough — of the real love that I 
constantly bore to him, — the only soft and redeeming portion of my 

1 The reader will acquit me of the charge of injustice to Godolphin's char- 
acter when he arrives at this sentence ; it conveys exactly the impression that 
my delineation, faithful to truth, is intended to convey, — the influences of 
our actual world on the ideal and imaginative order of mind, when that mind 
is without the stimulus of pursuits at once practical and ennobling. 



GODOLPHIX. 333 

nature, But who can know, who can describe what another feels? 
Even I knew not what I felt, until death taught it me. 

Since I have read the whole book, one thought constantly haunts 
me, — the strangeness that I should survive his loss ; that the stubborn 
strings of my heart have not been broken long since ; that I live, and 
live, too, amidst the world ! Ay, but not one of the world; with that 
consciousness I sustain myself in the petty and sterile career of life. 
Shut out henceforth and forever from all the tenderer feelings that 
belong to my sex ; without mother, husband, child, or friend ; unloved 
and unloving, I support myself by the belief that I have done the Uttle 
suffered to my sex in expediting the great change which is advancing 
on the world. And I cheer myself by the firm assurance that, sooner 
or later, a time must come when those vast disparities in life which have 
been fatal, not to myself alone, but to all I have admired and loved ; 
which render the great heartless, and the lowly servile ; which make 
genius either an enemy to mankind or the victim to itself ; which debase 
the energetic purpose ; which fritter away the ennobling sentiment ; 
which cool the heart and fetter the capacities, and are favourable only to 
the general development of the Mediocre and the Lukewarm, shall, if 
never utterly removed, at least be smoothed away into more genial and 
unobstructed elements of society. Alas ! it is with an aching eye that 
we look abroad for the only solace, the only occupation of life, — Soli- 
tude at home, and Memory at our hearth. 



THE END. 
