CHAPTER I.


O primavera gioventu dell" anno

Bella madre di fiori

D'erbe novelle, e di navelli amort.

THE lovers were-on their way to France,

after which they purposed visiting Italy.

What brilliant prospects before them!—

Youth, passion, genius, affluence,—every

felicity of life seemed mingled in the cup

that was held to their lips, and no two iifi-

toxicated revellers at life's short banquet*

ever sat down more determined to quaff the

poison, and believe it nectar.

4 WOMEN.

All was soon arranged between them;

Zaira, whose principles were unshaken and

uncorrupted, amid the indulgence o her


strongest feelings, opposed an invincible

barrier to the impetuosity of De Courcy.

Not all his importunities could prevail on

her to consent to an immediate marriage.

She had fears (taught by her former suffer-

ings) amid all her hopes and her present fe-

licity. She wished to develope his charac-

ter, to mature his intellects, to fix his feel-

ings, before she could intrust her happiness

to them. She succeeded in convincing

him, or at least persuading him, it would

be best to pass a year on the continent as

strangers and travellers, to enlarge their

minds with observations on existing life,

and enrich their imaginations with the re-

collection of antiquity; and at the end of

that period, if " If," repeated De

Courcy, pressing her hand to his lips; and

she was silent from conviction and delight.

The state of the continent was favour-

WOMEN. 5

able for the first time for more than twenty

years to their plans and their hopes. Peace,

peace every where. No prisons, no pass-


ports, no fears; the family of mankind

wandered about the world at large. King-

doms appeared like different apartments in

the same mansion, and the allied sovereigns

went visiting about like country gentlemen

calling at each other's seats.

Zaira's affairs required they should first

visit England; they did, and as soon as

they could, went to France; and, during

their whole progress, the plan which Zaira

had internally laid down was resolutely

pursued. Curiosity itself must have pe-

rished for want of food in watching them.

They travelled like brother and sister, only

with rather less proximity than is allowed

to relations so near. They never sat in the

same carriage; they never rested in the

same house ; they never met but at meals

like other travellers. It must be owned,

that had Zaira been studying for artificial

$ WOMEN.

influence over the desultory, fluctuating

mind of De Courcy, she could not have un-

intentionally adopted a better expedient.


The restraint produced perpetual novelty,

and perpetual novelty was necessary for

him.

It was during her short stay in England

that Zaira wrote to Madame St Maur on

the subject of her present hopes and feel-

ings. Part of her letter was employed in

deprecating Madame St Maur's astonish-

ment at her having selected an Irishman

for the partner of her life, after seeing the

continent at her feet, and seeing it without

emotion. In another part she says,—" I

know I shall appear eccentric to the world

in the formation of my plan of happiness;

but perhaps every human being, however

limited in intellect, makes their happiness

dependent on their imagination. I cannot

understand why the intellectual intercourse

between men and women should be limit-

ed as it always is, annihilated as it often is,

WdMEN. 7

by the prejudices of society, arising from

subjects that have nothing in common with

intellectual cultivation.


" The connection between men and

women is always supposed to include mar-

riage or crime. Has mental union no tie,

:no bond independent of either ? Is it not

possible to devote ene's self to intellectual

enjoyment exclusively, and to enjoy it in

the presence of the object that partakes of

it, in his continued presence, without an

appeal to the laws to secure it, whose inter-

ference would probably banish it for ever.

a I covet neither to be-the wife or the mis-

tress of the man I love; I seek to enjoy that

intellectual existence, of which I can better

comprehend the felicity than of the agi-

tations of passion. I would wish to travers

the world with him, to see all that life

could shew, and recollection supply; to

pass from the splendours of Paris to the

ruins of Rome; to smile on him in festivi-

ty, and to muse with him in solitude; to

5

8 WOMEN.

talk of the wonders of the days of old, amid

the architectural desert of Tadmor or Per-

sepolis; or enjoy the felicities of modern re-


finement amid the scavans of enlightened

Europe; to blend all the charms of the arts

with all the resources of literature ; to touch

my harp for him where Horace tuned his

lyre, and read with him the poetry of Vir-

gil, while reclining on his tomb; to blend

in one delicious draught all that nature,

genius, antiquity, and society can offer, and

drink with him the amreeta cup of immorta-

lity, that unites human existence to the di-

vine by the only power they have in com-

mon, the power of mind. Why should such

an union as this be fettered by the prejudi-

ces of society ? The ties of interest, of ca-

price, of physical passion, which society is

hourly forming and sanctioning, are crimi-

nal, compared to this.

" Society demands too much for what it

gives: It may have a right to controul our

manners, but when it presumes to interfere

WOMEN. 9

with our happiness, we disdain the " little

brief authority" which would tyrannize over

what must ever be exempt from its juris-


diction."

Zaira pursues this subject for a consider-

able time, and at length ends with these

words:—" I feel, Delphine, you do not un-

derstand me."

Madame St Maur's answer came soon.

She was greatly shocked when she heard

the step Zaira had taken.

" Not understand you, my charming

Zaira! I ask ten thousand pardons, but you

really remind me of Madame du Terrasson,

the most frivolous woman in all Paris, (and

that is saying a great deal) who is perpetu-

ally telling her friends they cannot pene-

trate a character so profound as her's. I

really never found the least difficulty in-

understanding a person who understood

themselves. I see exactly your situation;

and the more eloquence and sentiment you

waste in hiding it from yourself, the more

A2

10 WOMEN.

you betray it to me. It is a bad omen

your attacking the present state of society.

No woman ever inveighed against society,


but with the hopes of making it worse.

The world is a very good world, (if there

were not so many taxes), and when I leave

it, I never expect to see a better; but that

may be my humility.

" The truth is, you are in love with a

beautiful youth, whom nature has made an

Adonis, and whom you would fain make

an Apollo. Now this is a very common oc-

currence, and you are angry because it is

so. You wish to make it something un-

common ; and to do so, you only require to

unhinge the entire frame of society, and to

wander over the world in a fit of platonism

run mad. We are amazingly fond of ima-

gining ourselves in situations in which hu-

man beings never before were placed, and

to conceive that these situations must sug-

gest and justify new and unprecedented

measures in our own conduct, when, in

WOMEN. 11

fact, we are just in the same circumstances

that our mothers and grandmothers, and so

on up to Eve, were in before us."


[Here Madame St Maur makes a digres-

sion about a Kashmeer shawl, that her lover,

M. de ViosmeniJ, had just presented her

with; and declares she is so intoxicated by

this homage, and the perfume of the superb

shawl, that she is unable for some -time to

proceed. At length she goes on.]

" If I understand your future plan, it is

in fact to educate a husband for yourself.

Now, granting what is beyond all latitude

even of hypothesis, that an Irishman was

the properest person to select for this singu-

lar experiment; that this melange of love

and literature should happen to hit his fan-

cy as well as your's ; that he should wan-

der all over the continent with you in all

the constancy of nineteen, without ever wish-

ing to sacrifice at the shrine of. another

French grace, or Italian muse; and that

you wandered with him, without the least

12 WOMEN.

.

compromise of your character, nominal or

real, (and I hardly know which is worse)—


granting all this, and that you played this

desperate game with the utmost dexterity

and success, what would you gain by it ?

Misery for life—absolute misery. Your

success must leave on his mind a decided

impression of your intellectual superiority,

the very last impression a woman should

leave on the mind of a man whom she

wished to love her. Of all superiority, it

is that of which men are most jealous, be-

cause it is the only one of which they are

in any danger. Physical force they have

all to themselves, (ever since the times of

the Amazons at least); and the advantages

of nature are of so precarious and inferior a

character, as not to form a subject of com-

petition.

" None but a fop, a Dandi, would envy

his wife's beauty ; and none but a fool would

undervalue her wealth or consequence, be-

cause he can make his own advantage of

9

WOMEN. 13

them. But of what use are a woman's ge-

nius and talents, except to impress her hus-

band every moment of his humiliated exist-


ence, with a sense of his own inferiority ?

Never tell me of Le Fevre and Madame

Docier, a pair of pedants. I am sure they

were squabbling eternally, and threw Ho-

mer and Horace at each other's heads, lite-

rally or metaphorically, every moment of

their lives.

" Voltaire and Madame du Chatelet did

much better. They contented themselves

with mangling poor Newton between them,

and satisfied with this- amusement, never

thought of marrying at all. Besides, these

people had only learning; you are a genius,

Zaira; and genius, (which I venerate from

my soul, and think superior to every thing

under heaven, except common sense) makes

a woman a charming mistress, but the devil

of a wife.

" I know, my charming Zaira, that you

unite with genius a mixture of enthusiasm

14 WOMEN*

and mildness, that woman, till you, never

possessed; woman (admired as you) cer-

tainly never exhibited before. But it does


not signify ; man will and must be supe-

rior. They may twine the chains in which

they bind us with the brilliant flowers of

chivalric courtesy, or impassioned devotion;

but still they are chains. Our best attitude

in wearing them is that of a graceful but

conscious submission, and we never con-

quer effectually, but in appearing to be

slaves. Take my advice, beautiful Zaira !

dazzle on the theatre; charm in crowds;

come to Paris ; be the first

.. . i ' to lead the regal ball,

Adored by thousands, and admired by all;'

but give up all idea of being la bonne mere

dufamitte; it will never do.—What colour

are De Courcy's eyes ?"

In a long postscript, Madame St Maur

15

tells Zaira of the incomparable dancing of

the Emperor of Russia at the Parisian

balls, and her regrets that he was so soon


to go to London—her regrets. However,

she believed she had excited some sensa-

tion, and had had some success during his

stay in Paris.

Zaira could well discriminate the plain

good sense, the worldly knowledge of lea

convenances du societe, and the Parisian le-

vity, that entered into the composition of

this letter. She was amused by the levity,

revolted by the worldliness, and not convin-

ced by the good sense.

De Courcy and Zska w&ee now on their

way to Paris.

16 WOMEN.

CHAPTER II.

11 n'est guere plaisant d'etre empoiwnnee meme par 1'esprit

de rose.


THE day after she wrote her letter, Ma-

dame St Maur was obliged to quit Paris to

attend the event of a suit pending against

her in Languedoc, where the greater part

of her property lay. Her affection, her

strong affection, struggled and survived

amid the claims of her own interest ; and

before she quitted Paris, she implored M.

de Viosmenil, her lover, a man of sense,

and knowledge of the world, (which are-

common}, and of feeling, (which is uncom-

mon, at least in alliance with the other qua-

J;-

WOMEN. 17

lities), to be present with Zaira, and watch

her with all the vigilance of friendship.

M. de Viosmenil undertook the task just


as Zaira and De Courcy arrived in Paris.

It was an interesting, almost an awful

period when they arrived. Paris, in May

1814, was, what no one now need be told,

the metropolis of all Europe ; all mankind

were hurrying there, and astonished to find

themselves there. The plunder of all Eu-

rope ; the wonders of antiquity ; the chef-

(Pceuvres of modern imitation; all that Her-

culaneum could be disembowelled of; all

that could be gleaned from Thebais or Alex-

andria ; all that could be swept away from

modern palaces, from Milan to Moscow,

from Berlin to Vienna; all the riches of

that dreadful harvest, that had been reaped

in blood from one end of the earth to the

other, were accumulated there. The spoiler

was gqne»'Vut the spoil was yet there; and

there .Were living wonders enough to satiate

the e^e, and fill the soul, had the streets been

18 WOMEN.

grass-grown, and the buildings hovels.

There were emperors, and kings, and he-

roes—names that one wonders at in gazettes,


were spoken of as familiarly by the popu-

lace of Paris, " as maids of thirteen do of

puppy-dogs."—All the embodied genius,

energy, patriotism, and military skill, which

had conducted those tremendous operations,

which had been approximating each other

since the battle of Leipsic, and had now

united them in a common centre of com-

bined and interminable hostility—one could

not walk the streets without jostling against

a sovereign, a general, a hero—Paris seem-

ed like the city of the gods.

Charles believed himself breathing em-

pyreal air ; he felt the military mania

(though its force was now spent) in all its

first intoxicating inspiration. What would

he have given to have been crossing the

Pyrenees with Wellington, or the Rhine

with the allies! How contemptible his

past existence appeared to him, whether

WOMEN. rH9

passed in the conventicle with Eva, or hi

the boudoir with Zaira !—Equally con-

temptible. Europe had been won and lost,


and he had not struck a blow for her safety,

or her ruin !—Yes, even the latter alterna-

tive appeared at the moment less shameful.

He forgave (in his own behalf) Solon for

making the law which declared it criminal

to be neutral in civil war.

All this passed rapidly through his mind

-as he stood on the inspiring heights of

Montmartre; he descended, entered Paris,

.passed the two following days in traversing

it, and forgot every thing, but that it was

the centre of every luxury which the ima-

gination or the senses, in their most ambi-

tious and unbounded revelry, could de-

mand or enjoy.

It was a mad step of Zaira to bring him

to Paris first. She should have taken him

to the banks of the Tiber rather than the

banks of the Seine. Amid the awful solir

tudes of antiquity, his mind might have,

20 WOMEN.

•

acquired that decided taste for literature

and reflection which she wished to inspire.


Paris could give literature enough to be

sure; but was Paris the place to inspire

reflection ? It was a desperate step. Pa-

ris had too many charms for De Courcyv

and De Courcy had charms too for Pa-

ris. There is a high value set on mere

physical qualities by -a nation almost pro-

verbially destitute of them. The Apollo

Belvidere seemed to have arrived at Pa-

ris only to harbinger De Courcy. His

beauty; his towering stature ; the softness

of his manners ; the result of his timidity

taken for the quality itself; and his enthu-

siasm, so like genius, as to have deceived

even Zaira, were a brilliant security for his

success in Parisian society, introduced as

he was. Eager as he set out for all and

every species of information and improve-

ment, " jealous" of literary " honour," he

soon began to find that Paris could afford

WOMEN. 21

• ••

more than intellectual pleasures, and that

there were more things in it than Zaira's


philosophy dreamt of.

It was just at this period that M. de

Viosmenil, at Madame St Maur's entrea-

ty, entered on his invidious, suspicious,

painful office of Providor of Zaira's happi-

ness. His first bulletin, issued in conse-

quence of his new office, runs in these

words—alarming words.

M. DE VIOSMENIL'S Letter.

«* Well—my beloved Delphine, I have

seen your friends; your friend rather I

should say, for you have not yet seen M.

de Courcy. I have seen him, and have

half-forgiven Zaira. I have studied him,

and trembled for her. He is the most per-

fect human form I ever beheld; nothing

like him has ever trod the earth ; and the

gentleness of his manners makes a contrast

«S WOMEN.

almost ludicrous with his gigantic stature

and commanding presence. His manners

are singular, a mixture of diffidence and


enthusiasm altogether incredible, totally

tm-Parisian—destitute of our inimitable ease,

and borrowing their chiefest charm from

that destitution. This stranger enslaves

us, by fighting with weapons unknown to

us before. He blushes like a girl, frolics

like a boy, talks like a man, and looks like

a hero. He is a man, in the language of

that inimitable poet you taught me to

read—

" Who could win woman's heart, ruin and leave her."

" Believe me it is this class of men, so

seductive from their softness, who are the

destruction of women; that very gentleness

and flexibility that lends its dangerous

charm to their manners, extends its in-

fluence to their character, and the idol of

WOMEN. 3S

*

yesterday is trod into dust, while they rush

to offer their worship to the deity of to-


morrow over the fragments.

" I think Zaira is lost—lost—Her charac-

ter is not yet compromised, but her peace

must be gone. I do not rest my con-

clusion on abstract reasoning, nothing could

be more absurd; for the wanderings of the

human mind, when indulged, defy and de-

feat all reasoning founded on their opera-

tions.

" I speak of facts only—facts that I

have witnessed. Yesterday I met them at

a party at our friend 's. The circle

was brilliant, and Zaira was unusually elo-

quent in literature. At the end of a stri-

king sentence which had called forth loud

applauses from her auditors, she looked

round with a flush of triumph in her love-

ly countenance for De Courcy. She saw

him engaged, not in conversation, but in

delighted listening attention to the beau-

tiful Eulalie de Touranges He was bend-

24 WOMEN.

ing over her chair in silence. I marked

the change in her countenance, in her

voice; the subsiding of her whole fi-


gure ; the gloomy vacancy of disappoint-

ment in her expression. Her hearers

did not notice it; they pressed her with

some new remarks. She attempted to an-

swer, but evidently did not understand,

them ; struggled to recover her composure,

and went on, obviously not knowing of |

what she was speaking. Music was pro-

posed soon after; and apparently deter-

mined to force De Courcy to feel an in-

terest in what she was undertaking, she

asked him what she should sing. He ap-

peared not pleased at the publicity which

this application gave him, and returned

some slight answer, referring her to her

own choice. She sat down. I could hear

her sigh. She turned languidly over the

leaves of her music-book, and sung an air

aotto voce with a tone, a look, a manner

unlike,—oh, how unlike Zaira! At the

25

WOMEN.

close of the air, she turned her head almost

imperceptibly, and saw De Courcy arran-


ging the men on a chess-hoard with Made-

moiselle de Touranges. The last notes of the

air were nearly unintelligible. IfZairagoes

on this way, she is ruined. She is too daz-

zling, too exigeante, too anxious to make

every moment pass in a paroxysm of de-

light. Pleasure itself so protracted, so ex-

aggerated* must become pain. It is like

the punishment said to be inflicted on Re-

gulus, cutting off the eyelids to turn the

light of the sun into torture., Men sooner

forgive women for pleasing even too little

than too much ; for we pay ourselves the

compliment of believing, that the failure of

the former arises from our not having taken

the trouble of drawing them out, that they

might be charming if we pleased to make

them so; but women, who show their pow-

ers of pleasing to be independent of us, can-

notwonderif weleave them to the enjoyment

they can procure.for themselves. If

V.OL. in. B

26 WOMEN.

had common sense (a faculty amazingly

scarce,) she would feel her own advantage

in suffering him to converse with other


women as much as possible ; for what wo-

man would not suffer by a comparison with

her, if Zaira gives him time to make it ? I

pity her. When a woman once suffers the

display of her talents to depend on her feel-

ings, and suffers the look, the whisper, the

conscious presence of an individual, to in-

fluence her more than the homage of crowds,

she becomes wretched; for, alas ! it is much

easier to obtain the bravos of a crowd, than

the applause of an individual.

" I shall observe them, however, more

closely, with all the vigilance that my de-

votion to you inspires.

" DE VIOSMENIL."

The next day M. de Viosmenil called on

Zaira; he found matters a little worse.

.She was waiting with repressed but visible

wretchedness of impatience for De Courcy.

He had promised to attend her to a lecture

WOMEN. 27

of the Abbe Sicard's, and he had gone to

visit what was once the Bois de Boulogne,

and hear the exclamation of his Parisian


Ciceroni against " les coquins Prussiens, et

les vilains Cosacks."* Company arrived;

Zaira forced herself to converse; it was but

force. She accompanied them to the lec-

ture, was absent and uninterested. The

rest viewed her with wonder; De Viosme-

nil, who knew the secret, with deep and

painful interest^ and he talked, more than

any Frenchman ever talked, for two hours,

to withdraw the attention of the party from

her.

Zaira was at a splendid ball that even-

ing ; she had been introduced in the course

of it to some distinguished personages; she

had been requested to sing by a sovereign;

her ambition seemed a little to revive, and

a smile once more was diffused over her

beautiful features ; but De Viosmenil, who

* Anachronism. Tranteat cum caterit.

28 WOMEN.

marked her frequent abstraction, her glances

for ever reverting to the door, the stifled

sigh of disappointment, and the forced gaiety


of her renewed conversation, felt and under-

stood what was the hope that caused this

partial excitement, and how little that hope

was likely to be verified.

At length she could struggle no longer;

she retired gradually from the circle that

had gathered round her; and in the most

brilliant society in Paris, Zaira was sitting

in a remote corner almost alone, and ut-

terly neglected, except by M. de Vios-

menil, when (among a group that en-

tered the room) she recognized De Courcy

—started from her seat—uttered almost a

scream of joy ; then restraining herself, sat

down, but turned such a look of eager, con-

fidential pleasure on De Viosmenil, that he

could not help grasping her hand as a token

of intuitive recognition of her feelings.

De Courcy approached; he seemed an-

xious to make his way to Zaira; it was

easily made; he advanced and uttered

WOMEN. 29

some inarticulate expressions of apology.—

The tone was enough for Zaira; her coun-

tenance was radiant with smiles as he ap-


proached ; but when he appeared anxious

to sooth her feelings for his involuntary ne-

glect, tears, which she could not repress,

started into her eyes.

De Courcy, shocked and distressed, and

(dare we say it) incensed, retired. He

could not bear (what man with insular feel-

ings could bear) being made so conspicuous

as the cause of Zaira's tears.

De Viosmenil, in spite of all his know-

ledge of life, and all his Parisian experience

of the characters of women, turned away in

astonishment.—" Good God ! is this possi-

ble ?"—so deep, so desperate an infatuation

appeared to him without precedent. /.

Whether the company took a favourable

omen from the renewed radiance of Zaira's

countenance on De Courcy's entrance, or

from some other cause, they surrounded

her with.importunities for a song; first-

30 WOMEN.

rate accompaniment was ready, was impa-

tient ; far, far different from the puny aid

of the musicians she had been accompanied


by often in De Courcy's hearing in Dublin.

Supported by his presence, her performance

was equal to all her former excellence and

fame.

The dancing was then about to be re-

newed, when the illustrious personage be-

fore mentioned expressed a wish for ano-

ther air.

De Courcy was just then solicited to join

in a quadrille. Zaira, however, took an op-

portunity of saying to him, with brief eager-

ness, " I am pressed to sing again by ;

Do you wish I should ?" and she remem-

bered the time when the bare mention of

such a hope would have illuminated his

whole evening. How soon a woman loses

her power when she loses her heart! De

Courcy, who was really anxious to dance,

replied coldly, " Yes, surely, if you wish

it." If she wished it! Alas, when it comes

WOMEN. 31

to this reference to wishes, it is a sign that

we have lost that intuitive sense'of each

other's feelings which is understood without


questions, and expressed without condi-

tions. When we really love, we decide for

each other without hesitation, for we feel

that we have but one heart. Zaira hurried

through her song, and in a few moments De

Courcy was engaged in a quadrille with

Eulalie de Touranges.

The next day, De Courcy, who felt really

anxious for intellectual eminence, met some

literary men at Zaira's, and the morning

would have been delightful, but for a coiir

stant kind of tacit reference to him as Zai-

ra's favourite,—a kind of watching for his

opinions and sentiments as an implied ho-

mage to Zaira's, that abashed and embar-

rassed De Courcy. He did not wish their

identity of sentiment to be thus publicly re-

cognised. What man wishes to have his

whole intellectual stock supposed to be the

borrowed property of a female mind?—

S2 WOMEN.

There was a dinner-party at De Viosme

nil's, and Eulalie de Touranges was there,

more beautiful than ever. She was emi-


nently handsome, though not in the usual

style of French beauty, and there was a soft-

ness and diffidence in her manner, which,

though only the veil to consummate cold-

ness of heart, and levity of character, struck

De Courcy as a grateful contrast to the

glare, the ambition, the admitted pre-emi-

nence of Zaira. At all events, no man is

long without a reason to justify his grati-

tude to a woman who distinguishes him by

her preference.

The company, after dinner, amused them-

selves in composing epitaphs for Buonaparte

in his retreat at Elba. They then passed on

to epitaphs in general, and De Courcy was

astonished at the latitude allowed in Parisi-

an conversation, when he heard the pun-

ning Latin epitaph translated into bad, in-

decent French, and the occasion related.

Habe mortem prse oculis,

L'Abbe mort en prez au evil lis..

WOMEN. ,*?8

The beautiful Eulalie looke d down. De

Viostnenil, whose quick eye caught and

comprehended the cause of De Courcy'»


embarrassment, turned the conversation to

a subject which he thought must obliterate

the traces of the last. He had been in

England, and he spoke of English epitaphs ;

and he repeated, in good English, that beau-

tiful one on the only daughter of Sir Brooke

Boothby,—"The unhappy parents ventu-

red their whole freight of happiness in this

frail bark, and the wreck was total."

The hearers applauded, and Zaira, rai-

sing her eyes, filled with tears, fixed them

on De Courcy with a peculiar expression.

De Courcy did not observe her; he had

lost that sixth sense of love, by which we feel

that the eyes of those who love us are fixed

on us, as distinctly as we hear then: voices

when addressed to us. De Viosmenil saw.

it, and felt for her at the bottom of his heart \

he' saw the bark was frail, and he dreaded;

the wreck would be total.

34 WOMEN.

At the other end of the table, a M. De

Cardonneau, one of those atheistical philo-

sophising sciolists, (the pest of Parisian so-


ciety,) had been quoting, with an air of sen-

timental profundity, the well-known sen-

tence of a French writer,—" It is impos-

sible to determine which are most to blame,

those who cease to please, or those who

cease to be pleased." Eulalie, in the soft-

est tones of her soft voice, declared she

thought nothing could be more easily de-

termined, though she forbore to decide

which. Instantly her opinion was espoused,

by one-half of the company, and opposed

by the other, and a conflict commenced so,

vehement, so agitated, so sustained with all

powers of heart, soul, and voice, but all with-

in the bounds of French politeness, that one

would have imagined some question rela-t

ting to the everlasting salvation of the com*

pany was at stake. It was indeed to them

a question of much more importance, for it

related to the glory of a popular author.

WOMEN. 85

The debate ran so high, that De Viosme-

nil, who possessed some taste for English

quietness in conversation, proposed putting


it to the vote. Zaira determined against

those who cease to please, and De Courcy

against those who cease to be pleased; and

this hypocrisy of mutual politeness, by

which each tried to avoid wounding the

other, and expressed sentiments just oppo-

site to their own, settled the matter with

De Viosmenil. Some of the party went in

the evening to the Theatre Fran<jaise. De

Courcy went with them; and on his re-

turn to a petit souper where most of them

were re-assembled, De Cqurcy was eagerly

interrogated on a subject always near and

dear to Parisian hearts—then: theatre, their

Talma, then- actresses—Mademoiselle Du-

chesnois or Mademoiselle George, for life

and death—^which ? Eulalie, with her de-,

licious suppressed voice, spoke with grace-*

ful rapture of Mademoiselle George—-" Sa,

belle taille—sa beaut£ eclatante—ah, U

36 WOMEN.

semble, qu*elle est la divinite du theatre—

Mademoiselle George!"

There appeared to De Courcy something


generous in this praise of personal beauty,

which the company in a moment referred

by their eyes to Zaira ; and he felt no less

delighted than amazed by this tacit ho-

mage to the superior beauty of Zaira, in-

a female who possessed so large a share

of it herself. Unacquainted himself with-

the peculiarities of the French stage, and

struck rather by the physical than dra-

matic powers of the performers, he deci-

ded readily in favour of the superior grace

and majesty of Mademoiselle George. He

had not heard Zaira's testimony of the

far superior powers of Mademoiselle Du-

chesnois. Eulalie, proud of his suffrage in

favour of her favourite, carried all before

her in her own small circle ; and, elated by

her success, ventured far out of her depth,

and risked a few vapid superficial remarks

on Racine and Shakespeare. Foolish and

WOMEN. 37

presumptuous, she knew as little of Shake-

speare as Frenchwomen usually do; and

as little did she know before whom she


ventured her rash, crude criticisms. Zaira

had sat silent and abstracted, taking little

notice, and less share in the conversation,

since she heard De Courcy's preference of

Mademoiselle George, while her own of

Mademoiselle Duchesnois was unnoticed.

How little pleasure she felt then in the

looks of the company, who had referred to

her all the homage bestowed on the beauty

of Mademoiselle George ! She now saw De

Courcy, as she thought, bending in delight-

ed attention toEulalie's feeble observations;

He was, in fact, bending forward to conceal

his shame of their weakness, while he still

flattered her by the appearance of atten-

tion.

Zaira tried to collect herself. She be-

lieved, vainly believed, that this was a trial

of mind, and that she could in a moment

silence the " puny battle" of her antagonist.

10

38 WOMEN.

She entered into the conversation 5 she felt,

or imagined, she had been too silent, too ab-

stracted—that her intellectual superiority


would at once fix De Courcy. She trem-

bled to think that she might lose him by

suffering a momentary declension of those

mental powers which had won him once,

and which might win him still. She spoke

—she opened the vast volumes of her mind,

enriched with intellectual treasures " pass-

ing that of women ;" she displayed all her

powers—all her eloquence—^all her litera-

ture; she exhausted antiquity—traversed

the wide domain of modern knowledge

with the step of a queen who came to re-

ceive its homage and collect its tributes,

and returned with its ample stores, to lay

them, as she hoped, not at the shrine of

public applause, but at the feet of him she

loved. The circle applaudedrrr-lpudly ap-

plauded; Eulalie was silent—timidly si-

lent.

Zaira, whose eye was traversing the

WOMEN. 39

groupe with the pride she had once felt,

and the mingled apprehension which she

now began to feel, rested it on De Courcy.


That ark was of more value to her than

the world she had encircled, and found a

waste. His eyes were fixed on EuJalie with

an expression of sympathy, of commisera-

tion, so sincere, so tender, so respectful, tbat

Zaira would gratefully have exchanged her

triumph for a share in that glance so pity-

ing, though so humiliating.

Thus the distinction of sexes is preserved

even hi minds ; a woman must always be

the object of protection; and all Zaira's

intellectual superiority was at that moment

st sacrifice to the weakness of her rival.

40 WOMEN.

CHAPTER III.

S'e| tuna 9tm 3i p

HOMER.


DE COURCY carried away at least one

salutary impression from the preceding

evening. He felt his intellectual taste re-

vive ; he was ashamed any longer, in the

centre of Paris, to waste his days in sights

and his nights at the theatres. He resolved

to shut himself up and study their litera-

ture ; for he felt that, in the society that

surrounded Zaira, there was a perpetual

demand for it, and that the Parisians,

though not intellectual, are always lite-

rary. He kept his resolution for two days,

(as long as resolutions of that kind are usu-

ally kept,) and was then tempted out to

WOKEN. 41

hear a lecture of the Abbe" Sicard. The lec-

ture was very long, but De Courcy's atten-

tion never remitted ; the sparkling intelli-


gence and varying expression of his features

struck the Abbe", contrasted with the usual

immobility of English countenances, and

he was flattered by an attention more pro-

found than the generality of his country-

men could bring .themselves to pay. He

spoke of him after the lecture with all the'

enthusiasm of gratitude, and exerted him-

self so effectually in his favour, that in a

few days De Courcy found himself in a

circle more retired,—more exclusive cer-

tainly, but far more intellectual than he

had yet met in Paris. Among them was a

M. d'Orbessan, a man of whom De Courcy

felt disposed to reverse the French sentence,

and admit " he was not English, but well

deserved to be so." His candour, humility,

strict morals, and unobtruded literature,

were a rarity in a metropolis—the greatest

of all in Paris. He was preparing a trans-

42 WOMEN.

lation of Shakespeare, and sometimes con-

descended to shew De Courcy passages of

his work. He was in no danger of abusing


his original with the petulant and jealous

impotence of Voltaire, or of falling into the

errors of those translators who render " pale

and woe-begone!"—-pale, et douleur alley,

vous-en,—and " Still^ slavery, thou art a

bitter drauglni"^~tranquille esclavage, &c.

and brogue (the Irish accent) " sabot"

But still he was ignorant of many collo-

quial peculiarities and idiomatic niceties of

the language, and gratefully accepted the

respectful assistance of De Courcy.

One day that the latter dined with M.

d'Orbessan and a number of literary men,

the conversation turned on English poetry.

De Courcy was amazed at the ignorance

they betrayed, and hurt to find it was the

ignorance of pride; they appeared to know

we had a Shakespeare, of whom one of

them quoted Voltaire's acknowledgment

of the few pearls he had found on his enor-

mous dunghill, (which De Courcy answer-

WOMEN. 43

ed in the well-known words of Mrs Mon-

tague, " Ce'st unfumier qui a fertilise une

terre bien ingrattT'); and they spoke of


Young's Night Thoughts with an enthu-

siasm that astonished De Courcy. But

they appeared actually ignorant that Eng-

land could boast of a modern poet; and

when De Courcy repeated the names of

Byron, Scott, Moore, Wilson, Words-

worth, Southey, &c. it sounded to them

like Alcandrumque, Hatiumque, Noemo-

naque, Prytanimque. De Courcy then re-

cited passages from their works, with which

he was well acquainted; and, in the ardour

of the moment, risked a French translation.

This, though imperfect and inadequate, as

extempore translation must be, charmed

the hearts of his French auditors hi a mo-

ment. His fluency delighted them, and

his command of their language raised him

in a moment far higher in their estimation

than the most profound acquaintance, the

most exquisite sensibility of the literary

44 WOMEN.

treasures of his own. There was a mixture

of animation and diffidence in his delivery

that enchanted them; it seemed as if he


was asking pardon of their language for the

liberty he took in making it the vehicle of

English poetry. M. d'Orbessan, in particu-

lar, was delighted by the display of talents

he had always divined and appreciated; and,

after looking at De Courcy for some mo-

ments, he exclaimed with emotion, " Ah,

mon Dieu, quelle pitie !"

" Pity!" the word struck on De Cour-

cy's ears ; how had he rendered himself an

object of pity ? He blushed, and wondered

why he blushed ; attempted to speak to

M. d'Orbessan, and felt he knew not what

to say; at length he articulated, " He

knew not how he had merited the honour

of M. d'Orbessan's pity."

M. d'Orbessan bowed, executed an in-

describable French shrug,' took snuff re-

peatedly, and the conversation gradually

was renewed.

WOMEN. 45

The next day, De Courcy took an early

opportunity of questioning him on the sub-

ject of his exclamation the preceding even-


ing. The good-natured, warm-hearted

Frenchman viewed him with a look of

infinite compassion. " Monsieur will then

pardon the liberty a stranger takes in feel-

ing an infinite interest for him."

" Pardon, M. d'Orbessan ! I am grateful

—honoured by the interest you feel for

me—permit me to prove how grateful."

" Then, Monsieur, is it not a pity that

a young man, who might distinguish him-

self in society a thousand ways, should

choose to achieve distinction by being an-

nounced to all dissipated Paris as the fa-

vourite of an actress ?"

" The favourite of an actress !" repeated

De Courcy in horror, as the meaning of

these words indistinctly opened on him.

" Your ingenuous blushes refute a thou-

sand calumnies in a moment," said d'Or-

bessan ; " but will you then permit me to

46 WOMEN.

ask on what terms you are with Madame

Dalmatian! ?"

" Terms with Madame Dalmatian! !"


repeated de Courcy, gasping with feelings

he could not utter. " What terms ? we

are friends."

The Frenchman looked first incredu-

lous, and then commiserating,—" Friends!

—that friendship must be pure indeed,

which subsists between a young man of

nineteen and a beautiful female, without a

construction far different from what, doubt-

less, their own purity justifies, and would

merit. Madame Dalmatian! is beautiful,

unmarried (at present;) you, sir, are young

and interesting—you are always together,

though neither united by blood or mar-

riage."

" Stop, sir," said De Courcy; " you

have said Madame Dalmatian! is unmar-

ried at present. What is your meaning ?

or have you a meaning ?"

" I mean," laid d'Orbessan," simply, that


48 WOMEN.

mother—what a woman—and all unknown

to me ! Oh, Eva ! from your purity of

heart, from your sanctity of manners, could


I ever have experienced such a discovery

—such a disappointment! He hurried to

his hotel; a message was there from Zaira,

entreating him to accompany her to some

party; he flung it away. A letter from Mr

Asgill; that he opened, read, and felt every

line, every word of. Some of the words

were these:—

" I no longer adopt the style of a guar-

dian, I address you as a friend. Of the

preceding part of your conduct, I shall say

nothing; because I could not say what

would not be more painful to myself than

to you. You must have hardened your

heart against all reproach before you left

Ireland. I shall forbear reproaches. I speak

in the hope, not of saving you from re-

WOMEN. 49

morse for the past, but from ruin for the

future. I have hopes you are not yet mar-

ried ; if you are not, I adjure you fly-from


that dangerous woman, that enchantress,

who intoxicates you that she may turn

you into a brutal slave of passion. Fly

from her, renounce her, her habits, her in-

fluence, her country, every thing belonging

to her.

" Think, rash, inebriated boy, of the con-

sequence of being united to an actress.—

Illiberal—illiberal—your polished, conti-

nental society will say. Be it so ; I submit

to be called so; I hope, I pray, that the

world, on some points, may always be thus

illiberal. I know the name of a profession

is nothing; a diplomatist may be sincere,

and an attorney may be honest"; but the

habits of a profession are every thing. Such

is the peculiar delicacy, the natural domes-

ticity of the female character, that a wo-

man, who can give herself up to the public

display of her person and talents for bread,

VOL. III. C

50 WOMEN.

who can inhale the coarse and fetid air of

a bravoing theatre as her vital breath, has

departed from the character of a woman,


has almost forfeited the privileges of her

sex. T am convinced that a great part of

our moral character depends on the kind

of applause we are accustomed to seek and

enjoy. Laudatus a laudandis, is a glorious

distinction of the human character. Can

it be applied to a woman who must be in-

debted to her physical powers for half her

popularity, who is accustomed to the per-

petual praises of her beauty, not in the

whisper of timid delight, but in the shouts

of a theatre ? The life of such a woman

must be passed in intervals of exhaustion

and excitement. She has not a moment's

pause for calm reflection, for domestic tran-

quillity, for that sober certainty of waking

bliss that women were formed by Heaven

to feel and to communicate. She is a crea-

ture out of her place,—a fine, abused, glit-

tering, wretched being,—-a thing produced

WOMEN. 31

like the fish at the Roman banquets, to de-

light the unfeeling guest with its brilli-

ancy and its agony. Theatres must be, in


all civilized countries—a necessary evil—

(and, like most evils, tolerated to prevent

worse) and there must be actresses too—-

but why need we marry them ? why need

we break down the barriers that society has

fixed between actors and audience ? Would

it be a seemly sight to see this confusion at

the theatre ? Is it not a scandalous sight to

see it in the world, where the evil is ten-

fold greater?

" Your Zaira has quitted the stage, I

hear. Well—but can such a woman ever be

qff" the stage ?—Will not the mimetic ha-

bits, studied attitudes, artificial feelings,

and insatiable thirst for indiscriminating

applause accompany her every where ? But

she is a woman of genius—so much the

worse ten thousand times. The pride and

•pretensions of a woman of literature, graft-

ed on the second-hand sentimentality

52 WOMEN.

factitious existence of an actress, Avould

be enough to drive a saint out of his

senses ; and you are no saint, De Courcy.


I am not fastidious; I honour literature,

a qua confiteor nullam partem mece tetatis ab-

fiorruisse. I do not condemn the stage, un-

der certain restrictions; but never would

I wish to meet an actress but on the stage,

or encounter an author but in his works.

Louis XIV. said no man could be a great

man to his valet-de-chambre. The little-

nesses of those people when taken off the

stilts, on which our imagination and their

own vanity have helped to prop them, are

intolerably mean, irritating, and disgust-

ing. A. literary woman professed, I should

perhaps like to meet once or twice in mixt

company ; but never at my dinner-table, if

I wished for a comfortable meal; never at

my fire-side, if I wished for peace.

" Ilia tamen gravior, quse, cum discumbere coepit,

Laudat Virgilium, periturse ignoscit Elisae,

WOMEN. 52

Committit vates, et comparat inde Maronem.

Atque alia parte in trutina suspendit Homerum.

Cedunt graramatici, vincuntur rhetores, omnig


Turba tacet, nee causidicus, nee prceco loquatur

Altera nee mulier."

-

" A woman of literature is infinitely

more insupportable than a man ; for, to the

pride and irritability of an author, is super-

added the prescriptive distinction of her

sex, that homage with which women in

civilized society are intoxicated from their

very cradles.

" Oh, my dear De Courcy ! my heart is

wrung at this moment at the thought that

my advice is, perhaps, coming too late. If

it be so ; if you are married, return to Ire-

land ; bring with you your wife, and I will

be the first to meet and welcome her with

an aching heart. If you are not, leave her,

leave her this moment, and for ever! for

God's sake, for your country's sake, and for

your own, leave her! Let not Europe

witness the shameful spectacle of an inde-

34 WOMEN.

pendent man, a gentleman, trailed over the

continent in the wake of an actress, the

overgrown pupil of a female pedagogue.


Let not the country that can boast a Grat-

tan, a Curran, a Moore, an Edgeworth, a

Lady Morgan, a Philips, a Sheil, reckon

a character so degraded among those of her

children!

" E. ASGILL."

De Courcy answered this letter imme-

diately, delighted to find an excuse for his

feelings even in the reproaches of another.

He announced his intention of returning to

Ireland ; he did not speak either of Zaira

or of Eva; he dared not; self-degradation

assailed him when he thought either of his

connection with the one, or his desertion of

the other. A thousand things rushed on

his mind while writing, that flushed his

cheek, that " doubly dyed it with imperial

crimson." The hints, the repeated hints of

his being " un homme des bonnes fortunes;"

WOMEN. oi

the constant suspicious deference to his

opinions in Zaira; the doubtful homage;

the invidious submission; the guarded man-


ner of the old; the jealous sneers of the

young—all—how could he have been in-

sensible to them.' it was madness, stupefac-

tion.

All the day following, Zaira's billets

came to enquire into the cause of his ab-

sence, and came unanswered. He was re-

solved to quit her—he knew not how—he

dreaded that the next interview with her

would overthrow his resolution—he dread-

ed, he bewailed, from the bottom of his

heart, the total want of resolution in his

character, the misery it must cause to others,

the misery it had caused to himself. He

remained the whole day in a state of gloo-

my irresolution, satisfied with but one de-

cisive step he had taken; he had written to

Mr Asgill, he had sent off his letter, and

he was determined to abide by its contents,

and quit the continent, where he had left

£6 WOMEN.

peace, character, and manly fame, for ever

behind him.

Zaira, her notes unanswered, and mo-


lested all day by visitors whose presence

was torture to her, sought refuge in her

usual habits, and prepared to go to that last

splendid party which was given to the Rus-

sian nobles the night before they were to

follow the emperor on his way to England.

While dressing, she made a thousand ex-

cuses to herself, disbelieved them all, and

again repeated them to herself as she would

•to a stranger whom she was trying hu-

manely to impose on. Perhaps this was

the first night she felt the influence of her

feelings predominate over that of her ha-

bits ; her beauty, her genius, never met

Avith more homage, yet she was wretched—

but still she persisted in exacting the tribute

always paid her in society with a kind of

splenetic triumph—never had she felt so an-

xious for distinction, yet never so indiffer-

ent to it. Strange paradox of the human

WOMEN. 47

heart, or rather of the human mind, that

can prey on the spoils of feeling, and sit at

the banquet with terrible gaiety, aggrava-


ted by the sight of the hand-writing on the

wall that at once dooms and excites it.

When destiny is thus armed against us,

we seem to take a melancholy pleasure in

rushing to the fight, though we feel the

battle is lost.

The Russians whom Zaira met were not

literary men, but they were sufficiently im-

pressed with her literary fame to attend to

her with the deepest interest,—the interest

of curiosity, if not of feeling; and they

knew the literature of their own country.

Zaira struggled to remember the success of

Voltaire, who, when conversing with Rus-,

sian noblemen who lamented the sterility

of their country, observed, that it had at

least been fruitful in laurels. She exerted

herself—she tried to recal some traces that

once had existed in her memory of Rus-

5» WOMEN.

sian literature. They had all escaped her;

she remembered but two trifling anecdotes,

but the grace and spirit with which she told


them made them interesting.

Knowing that uncivilized nations are

most flattered by the praise of refinement,

she mentioned, as a proof of it, the inscrip-

tion on the medals of the Russian officers,

who, having defeated the Turks in a naval

engagement, were desired to wear on their

reverse the words, " I was there,"—simple

and sublime memorial! Then she advert-

ed to the rings, the mourning rings, worn

on the death of Catherine, which bore the

motto, " Paul consoles me." Then feeling

her success, she passed on to the lighter

compositions of the Russians, and repeated

the singular political satire, in the form of

a ballad, whose profaneness may almost he

forgiven for its humour.

" God starting from sleep at a great

noise, asked the angel Gabriel the cause

of it; and the angel answered, the Rus-

WOMEN. 59

sians are at war with the Turks; and

God answered, Who leads the Russians ?

and Gabriel said, the Prince G ; then


God turned himself to sleep again. A great

noise was again heard ; the Deity started

up, made the same enquiry, was answered

again by the angel, the Russians are at

war with the Turks. Who leads my belo-

ved Russians now ? said God; and Gabriel

answered, the Prince P , (Zaira took

care to mention no names, for she knew

nothing of the political or family conned

tions of those whom she was addressing,)—

then said God, Get me my boots, Gabriel,

for now I must go myself."

The Russians were delighted with this

reference to what they knew; it was seldom

they met with it in Paris; the Parisians

were too full of themselves. Zaira seemed

to have naturalized them in the midst of a

city so unlike Petersburgh. Music follow-

ed ; the Russians are musical, and ample

justice was done to her by her delighted.

60 WOMEN.

audience. Some of them expressed their

pleasure in those exaggerated phrases, that

false or defective sensibility loves to shelter


itself in. They talked of muses, and the

strains of Orpheus, and melting rocks, and

listening trees, and " such branches of learn-

ing." Zaira looked disconcerted.

" It is classical praise," said De Viosme-

nil.

" And for that very reason the last I

would wish to hear. The ancients, possess-

ing either a very limited knowledge, or a

feeble sensibility, never describe the powers

of music but by their effects on physical

creation. They speak of their influence on

rocks and forests, on which they could have

no influence, but to add a thrilling power

to their echoes ; but they never tell us that

music sent one image to the memory, or

one feeling to the heart; that they loved to

listen to it when it trembled over the sur-

face of a wave, or lent a charm to moon-

light."

WOMEN. 61

When she got to the ancients, her Rus-

sian auditory soon quitted her. Dancing,

in which they are national adepts, followed,


and Zaira was waltzing with a Russian of-

ficer when De Courcy entered the room.

He was glad to see it; he felt himself justi-

fied in leaving her to " a world she loved

so well." As he gazed on the brilliant

scene, another image involuntarily rose on

his mind, like the deities in Homer,

" OtU Ifail/OU£XIl, TWV $O.\\U>V OUTi; OgiXTO."

It was the form of Eva; how unlike those

around him ! He started as if he actually

beheld her, hurried into the crowd, and

sought to lose himself in noise and glare.

That night his manner to Zaira was unusu-

ally soft. Thus it is that we feel disposed

to palliate the blow when we are deter-

mined to strike it with mortal violence.

The unfortunate Zaira, deluded, and happy

in delusion, resigned herself to all the in-

5

62 WOMEN.

toxication of delight. When we love, we

need no language to describe the changes

of the heart; to us the eye alone, and in a


moment, the very moment we meet it, an-

nounces our destiny. So Zaira imagined,

and perhaps she trusted to the language of

the eyes, with as much reason as others trust

the language of the lips. De Courcy at-

tended her home; he said nothing that

might lead to an explanation ; perhaps he

dreaded that an explanation might justify

her, and leave him without an excuse ; per-

haps he wanted a pretext, and when we do

we are not very nice in the choice of one.

He saw her to the door of her apartment,

and took his leave with; a tenderness, in

which Zaira, blinded by imaginary happi-

ness, did not discover the melancholy of in-

voluntary remorse. After he retired, she

returned to her anti-chamber for a book ; a

piece of paper lay on the floor, she took

it up. De Courcy, like many other per-

WOMEN. 68

sons, was in the habit of trying over and

over again the pens he was writing with,

and of tracing on the paper on which he


tried them some lines of the letter he was

engaged in. He had written thus on a

piece of paper, (while answering Mr As-

gil,) " lam weary, sick to the soul of my pre-

sent situation; I shall fly from it as soon as

possible."

He had retained the lines about him

accidentally, and dropt them in Zaira's

anti-chamber. She took them up; read

them;—they were his own words, written

by his own hand. No escape, no retreat

from conviction—not a gleam of hope—

and in the moment of her happiness, in

a moment when his smile had been the

pledge of renewed tenderness. Impossible

—she took up the paper again—certain.

How dreadful when the mind thus calls on

hope, and is answered by despair—when it

appeals to the mercy of doubt, and is re-

pelled by the tyranny of absolute certitude!

64 WOMEN.

She stood with her eyes fixed on the paper

till she could stand no longer; all was mist

and darkness round her; she did not see


the chair she sunk on. Accustomed to

strong efforts, she struggled for the rer

sumption of her reason, and attained some

degree of consciousness—horrible consci-

ousness. The first moments of such re-

turning recollection are like the first mo-

ments of those who recover after fainting

on the rack. They hoped it was death,

but are tortured into existence by pain;

the grating of the iron that is to renew

their sufferings, invades their ears almost

before they have recovered the sense of

hearing. She awoke, she felt she lived,

and her first sensation was a horror of life.

She rose, and walked rapidly up and down

the room; violent pain always impels to

motion ; she looked round on every object,

to convince herself that they filled the same

apartment in which he had just quitted her.

On the walls, on the ceiling, on the floor,

WOMEN. 65

on the furniture, on every thing above, be-

low, around her, she saw legibly the same

words traced, shifting, revolving, burning


before her eyes, the same words, " I shall

fly from it as soon as possible." She fell

terrified at the increasing number, rapidity,

and fiery light of the characters. She quit-

ted the room, and went into a balcony fill-

ed with flowers ; their fragrance and beau-

ty seemed to reproach her wretchedness;

she gazed upward on the sky, but the same

letters were there. She looked up at the

stars with a feeble reminiscence of the de-

light that the view had once given her; it

was in vain—she could indeed see the stars,

but she felt their beauty no longer. She

retired to her room, and passed the remain-

der of that horrible night walking up and

down the apartment, as if she was in search

of something. The lights burnt out; she

paused and drew aside the curtains,—the

pale, but lovely light of the morning, came

gleaming on, smiling at, mocking her. She

66 WOMEN.

leaned her head against the edge of the win-

dow, but felt not the relief of tears. The

day advanced without her being able to fix


one idea in her mind, to form one plan.

She expected every moment to see him en-

ter and announce her fate. He came, as he

usually did, but earlier than usual; she ad-

vanced to meet him, almost convulsed with

emotion ; she was instantly calmed by the

perfect unconsciousness of his look. He

knew nothing of her having seen the pa-

per and being apprized of his intentions.

He was surprised at her agitation, and to

have seen them, one would have imagined

that it was she who was about to enter on

a subject of emotion, and he who was about

to listen.

He came to enquire into her arrange-

ments for the day; and then she tried

to recollect what would have been her

plans the day before. He appeared to

listen to them with pleasure, engaged to

join in some of them, and retired just as

WOMENv . * €7

others were entering. In one moment

Zaira passed from despair to delight. Not

a word of explanation;—not a hint had


been given. It was impossible that he

could be determined to desert her, that he

could visit her with so little emotion on the

eve of separation. " Impossible,—impos-

sible !" repeated the wretched Zaira; " and

with those eyes and with that voice!—

Their expression still unaltered, their tones

still so delicious. Impossible—I will dis-

trust my own senses first. It was scrawl-

ed in a moment without thought;—it re-

lates to something else ;—it was a quota-

tion ;—it wa» not his hand;—no matter

what it was;—I am the happiest of women."

And the happiest of women she was all

that day and all night; and who can say

that her happiness was not as well founded

as that of those who might deride its hol-

lowness and fallacy ?

De Courcy was unusually soft and ten-

der in his manner; this was a good

68 . WOMEN.

* . • .

but every thing would have been a good

omen in her present state of excitement.


Her penetration was blinded by her hopes,

or she would have discovered that his ac-

cent and manner were exactly like those

of a physician who softens his tone when

compelled to pronounce there is no hope.

For many days she struggled to impose

on herself—(miserable imposition !), Fought

the dubious battle of decreasing hopes

and increasing fears—lived on a look—

treasured a whisper—weighed glance with

glance—existed but on the chance of hope

that his looks supplied, when their expres-

sion denoted any thing but a thought of

her—watched his conversation when ad-

dressed to strangers, and tried to extort a

confirmation of her hopes from all, that

rightly understood, would have realized

her fears. Then hope itself could no long-

er deceive her ; her heart began to fail her ;

certain decisive indications appeared in his

manner. Perhaps he thought that unless

WOMEN. 69

he undeceived her, she never would unde-

ceive herself; perhaps he thought that

when cruelty is brief, it is like mercy. At


all events, his manner could no longer he

misunderstood. In despair, Zaira shut her-

self up for one day, the most horrible she

ever had past—the desolation of her mind

was united with that of her heart. Every

thing she saw gave her a sensation of min-

gled fear, pain, and repelling sense of hosti-

lity and vacancy together, inconceivable,

except to those who have suffered like her.

Such sufferings have been.

That day De Viosmenil called; his inti-

macy justified his advancing to her apart-

ment unannounced. Zaira fled from it on

hearing the sound of his voice; the sight of

a friend gives us horror in the first disap-

pointment of passion; then we feel how in-

ferior is every resource that human life, in

aB its infinite variety of relations, can offer,

and the contrast is an insult to our agony.

On the sofa which she had just quitted,

76 WOMEN.

De Viosmenil found only a handkerchief

drenched in her tears, and a volume of Lord

Byron's poems. He knew English litera-


ture well; he took it up,—it was open at

the notes,—the note where that great poet

mentions, in prose as affecting as his poetry

is sublime, the grief of his wild attendant

on their separation,—the simple thrilling

expression of that grief—M'«fe;«/—" He

leaves me" The page was still wet with

Zaira's tears, and the words were distin-

guished by reiterated pencil lines.

De Viosmenil comprehended the whole

in a moment, and on the spot he wrote

a letter to Madame St Maur, to entreat

her, as her suit was likely to terminate

favourably, to hasten instantly to Paris;

and he added, that her presence might be

necessary to console Zaira. Madame St

Maur, on receiving this letter, lost not a

moment in hastening to Paris; the very

hour she arrived she hurried to Zaira's re-

sidence. Zaira understood the meaning of

WOMEN. 7.1

this sudden journey, this abrupt appear-

ance, and flinging herself into the arms of

the affectionate, but French-hearted wo-


man, (whose feelings actually deprived her

of speech, the greatest sacrifice perhaps a

French woman ever made, even to friend-

ship,) she wept in agony, Madame St Maur

wept too, like a good-natured child, who

weeps because those it loves are shedding

tears.

72 WOMEN.

CHAPTER IV.

L'ultima che si perde e la speranza.—Tasso.

Madame St Maur's advice was good,


so was De Viosmenil's ; but people give ad-

vice in a cold reluctant way when they are

forced to advise on the consequences of a

step the direct opposite to what they have

recommended. They cannot help giving so-

lemn credit to their own sagacity, even in

the very condolence they administer on its

being neglected. Then followed the wretch-

ed expedients of beauty dreading the de-

cline of its power. Grief made her humble;

she was terrified out of all reliance on her

mental powers;—they had deceived her;—

perhaps they had revolted him. She tried

WOMEN. 73

to attract by her exterior ; she varied her

costume, but nothing now seemed to be-

come her. A thousand times, listening to


the hopes of others rather than her own, or

drawing temporary good omens from his

silence, she reasoned herself, by resolute so-

phistry, into the belief that he would not

desert her; and just as she arrived at this

conviction, the thought of the lines in his

own hand would stab her like a dagger.

Often she tried to derive the impossibi-

lity of his leaving her, from her having her-

self given no cause for it. What folly!—

When men desert women, it is sufficient

tbat the cause is in themselves. Often she

said to herself, " What have I done unto

thee, or wherein have I wearied thee ? Tes-

tify against me." She did not know that

it was enough that he was weafied. Once,

when they were accidentally alone together

for a moment, she resolved on speaking to

him ; one simple word would have done it,

VOL. III. D

74 WOMEN.

but a thousand came rushing to her throat,

and choaked all utterance ; she tried to

throw out all her genius and her passion in


one appeal of eloquent agony ; and all fail-

ed her. A woman of less talent and less

feeling would have spoken with ease. The

sudden change of her expression, the dumb

anguish of her look, were understood by

De Courcy, but not answered. He turned

away—some others entered—the opportu-

nity was lost.

She still continued to appear with him

at assemblies, at the theatres, at lectures,

everywhere where popularity flattered her

with the hopes her heart was hourly feel-

ing the falsehood of; she clung like decli-

ning royalty to forms, as she felt its power

was diminishing. They went together the

next day to hear a popular preacher. The

preachers were now resuming their influ-

ence, and displaying their eloquence in Pa-

ris. Bourdaloue and Massillon were ex-

10

WOMEN. . 75

pected to revive under the auspicious shade

of the lily once more.

The preacher was veiy eloquent, unlike


the preachers of the continent, who waste

their talents in panegyrising a saint whom

no one cares three straws about . He took

his subject from the charities of domestic

Ufe, of which all are doomed to enjoy the

blessing, or bitterly to feel the want. His

text was from St Peter, " Be pitiful, be

courteous." There was much mention of

the Bourbons, delightful to the ears of

many, gratin to the ears of more. He

cared not how he brought them in; it was

in 1814, and all was well. At last he came

to the subject. He spoke of the religion

of Christ, of its power to diffuse, not only

its blessedness over the mind, but over the

manners of mankind. He compared it t»

the precious oil that was poured, not mere-

ly on Aaron's head, but went down to the

skirts of his clothing. He exclaimed, " Oh,

76 WOMEN.

that we felt how much misery we may

cause in life, and how little happiness it is

in our power to bestow ! Even when, from


the force of destiny, from the irresistible vi-

cissitudes of life, we are compelled to be

the cause of unhappiness to our fellow-

creatures, how much of their wretchedness

may be palliated by the manner of its in-

infliction ! If we must draw the bow, we

need not barb the dart with cruelty; we

need not dip it in the poison of wilful hos-

tility ; we must often smite our victims in

life, but let us smite them like a sacrificing

priest, not like an immolating foe."

At these words the wretched Zaira turn-

ed her eyes all bathed in tears on De

Courcy; his were averted. He was re-

marking to De Viosmenil the peculiarity

of the chairs hired in the French churches

to the congregation, and making a compa-

rison, not at all favourable to the former,

between this arrangement so theatrical, and

WOMENT. 77

the quiet decent accommodation in the

pews of English churches. After this she

gave up all hope of touching his heart by


a public appeal—she trusted to she knew

not what—she was conscious of a power, a

depth of passion in her own heart, whose

resources, if once developed, if once dis-

played to him, must infallibly affect him.

" If he would but hear me!" said she to

Madame St Maur; " if I could but pour

out before him the thoughts that are de-

vouring my heart, he might not love, but

he must pity me; he could not banish me;

be would suffer me to follow as a slave."

A slave !—thus the image of subjection

always recurs to a woman, when the tem-

porary triumph to which men raise her is

over; with subjection her course began,

and with that it is doomed to end. Ma-

dame St Maur strongly opposed this des-

perate step of throwing herself on her lo-

ver's mercy. She iirged many reasons,

78

drawn from the wit and habits of French-

women and Frenchmen; she had better

have urged one plain reason, drawn from


the nature of men and women in general—*

that when we rush to prostrate ourselves

with hearts all on fire before those to whose

hearts we cannot communicate a single

spark, it appears like a dramatic scene where

we are the sole actors, and, wanting sym-

pathy, we almost begin to appear like im-

postors to ourselves. Thus the hope of ap-

peaT, of explanation, was altogether given

up, and she lingered through a few days

more of misery, during which she tried to

find a shelter in his silence. ** He has not

spoken" said she to herself; " all may be

well."

Wretched resource! when we imagine

we shall not be deserted, because those who

announce it a thousand other ways, have not

announced it in words. That hour at last

came. One evening at De Viosmenil's, Eu-

WOMEN. 79

lalie de Touranges, who was a violent Buo-

napartist, was mentioning, as the chief

glory of his dynasty, that he had accumu-


lated the spoils of all Europe in Paris, and

thus reduced the tour of the continent to a

visit to the metropolis of France,—as if men

ought to have their throats cut for the

sublime consolation, that, after their death,

their plundered property would be carried

blfto embellish Paris.

" You will not now," said she to De

Courcy, " have to visit Italy to see an

Apollo or a Venus de Medici," ,

" It is no longer my intention to visit

Italy," said De Courcy firmly.

" Not visit Italy!" repeated the whole

party, with various feelings, and in differ-

ent discordant keys of amazement—" not

visit Italy !-~but what then ?—where do

you purpose to go ?"

" I purpose-—soon.—to return to Ire-

land/' said De Courcy, his voice gaining

firmness as he announced his resolution.

80 WOMEX.

" Ireland !—Ireland !" was echoed by all

in such tones of horror, as if the place of

his destination had been Pandemonium—


" Ireland!" all were in a moment in arms

against the thought. Eulalie expostulated,

in her most seductive tones, against it; for

she felt that when he quitted the continent,

she must lose him for ever. M. d'Orbessan

opposed it with manly reasoning; for he

wished his mind to be enriched by varied

imagery, and his character strengthened by

acquaintance with life. And the generous

suffering friendship of Madame St Maur

and De Viosmenil inspired them with un-

availing eloquence. Zaira's cause could not

have been supported with more zeal, had

they been pleading for their own lives^

They read her doom in this resolution, and

they struggled hard to avert it with zeal-

ous energy and fruitless kindness. They

brought him to confess, that Ireland was a

country where one could neither find intel-

lectual or physical luxury; where the inha-

WOMEN 81

bitants were neither cultivated enough to

furnish the refinements of continental, or rich

enough to supply the comforts of English


life, (which they allowed rather grudgingly,

and obliged to naturalize the word comfort

with a very indifferent grace;) they brought

him to confess, that, as an orphan, he had

no ties of nature ; as a man of taste and li-

terature, he could have no enjoyment there.

—Granted—he granted all—" What then

could be his motive ? what could be his

motive ?" repeated all the voices; their va-

rious tones of selfishness, disinterestedness,

curiosity, and affection, mingling in one

common tide of vehement enquiry.

" It is my country," said De Courcy;

and, as he uttered these words, the expres-

sion of his beautiful and heroic features

seemed to announce a sentiment which he

did not feel. He spoke merely to get rid

of their importunity. The French taste for

sentiment swallowe4 up all other feelings;

D2

82 WOSfEN.

when he spoke, all applauded eagerly, all

but Madame St Maur, who, with proud and

generous indignation, retired, and seated


herself beside Zaira, who had heard all.

Zaira pressed her friend's hand in her cold

one. The room was so spacious they could

speak without observation.

" Yes," said Zaira, her tears dropping

fast on the hand she held—" yes, my dear,

my generous friend, I feel your kindness

at my broken heart—I see the generous

useless efforts your friendship is prompting

you to make—it is all over. I am like the

man in Lewis's tale of the Anaconda, wha

knew in his horrible retreat, surrounded by

the serpent, all his friends were doing, and

knew all was done in vain. His misery

was only aggravated by the struggles for

his relief; mine is aggravated too," said

she, weeping more bitterly, " by the feeling

that my crushed heart has not room now

even for gratitude." »

WOMEN, 88

That night Be Courcy went to the Thea-

tre Feydeau; the entertainments passed be-

fore him like figures in a magic lantern.


He was weary of glare, excitement, attrac-

tion ; he wished for repose, bnt his heart

denied him that. His powers, both physi-

cal and mental, had been too early excited';

his fluctuation of character was not entire-

ly criminal—too easily excited, too early-

developed by love, beauty, and genius, he

felt too early the miserable misanthropy of

premature excitement. Excitement to men

may be useful, to boys it must be fatal. Sir

Philip Mordaunt thus, in early youth, tast-

ed the ewp of life, was disgusted, and pe-

rished by IMS own hand. As De Courcy re-

tired from the theatre, fie observed some one

was following him j he turned ; he caught

a glimpse of the figure j it was a female. A

faint dread of" an explanation, which he was

determined t© avoid, stole over him when*-

the steps of a Jemale were heard fbL-

84 WOMEN.

lowing him in the streets of Paris. He

stopt; muffled as the figure was, he caught

a glimpse of Zaira's features; he hurried


On ; the sobs of the muffled female follow-

ed, but did not make him turn. It is im-

possible to say how low love may reduce a

woman.

When, the next day, Madame St Maur,

who had sense enough left to see that a

man could not be persecuted into love, ex-

postulated with her on this desperate step^

Zaira answered her, in wretched despera-

tion, " Yes, I am sunk so low ; I cannot hide

it from myself; why should I try to hide it

from others ? Yes, I am degraded ;" and

she repeated it with that ferocity against

herself, that leaves no room for reproach

from others. " I am degraded—I am sunk

even to the bare hope—the miserable wish

that he may still remain—remain in my

sight, barely in my sight, though lost to

my hopes forever. Lg^me be placed where

85

I may but see him—merely see him. Let

me but catch the shadow of his passing

figure on the wall, that figure which con-


tains all perfection. Let me but hear the

sound of his voice, though never addressed

to me. Let me but kiss the earth where

his steps have been impressed. Let him

but stay—stay where I may see him ;" she

repeated in wild agony, and with convul-

sive action—" and I am resigned ;—Let

him marry, and I will crouch in some

corner of the church to gaze on his bride ;

and if he has a child—how I would idolize

his child! I would be a mother to it—Alas !

I might have been its mother."

Madame St Maur could not reason with

feelings she never knew; she was terrified,

—" hopeless she spoke of hope"—all hope

was vain. Zaira grew worse, she became

delirious; her friend then determined to

watch that night by her miserable bed;

but the day was as bad as the night, and

the following night she was much worse.

86 WOMBS.

Madame St Maur never quitted her.:

the French terror of fever seemed to make

an exception in her case ; she watched her


friend incessantly, and stole down every

moment to enquire whether De Courcy

had called. The call was not so punctual

as she could wish, but she always went up

with a flattering message. He had called,

was in a hurry ; she (Madame St Maur,\

had great difficulty in keeping him from

rushing to her apartment. When nothing

better could be said, she assured Zaira that

he was waiting in the anti-chamber, and that

she would not suffer him to enter. That

night—(the third night).—Zaira was in astate

of stupor till a late hour; her attendants

then undressed her, and Madame St Maur

sat by her bedside. Zaira started up after

a few minutes perturbed rest, and eagerly

enquired after Madame St Maur's mother,

Madame St Maur imagined this was deli-

rium, and she replied that her mother was

WOMEN. 87

in Languedoc, and was well. Zaira wr»

silent for a long time, and then said, in a

feeble tone, " I was dreaming of my own mo-


ther—I am not superstitious ; but I nerer

dreamt of that most unfortunate Woman,

that her image was not a precursor of some

calamity."

Madame St Maur had never heard her

speak of her mother before; but her sense

of Zaira's^sufferings was stronger than her

cariosity, and she forbore to make any en-

quiries. Zaira slept soon after, but in *

short time her sleep became dreadfully dis-

turbed ; her features were distorted and

her respiration was a groan. Madame St

Maur, terrified by the state in which she

savv her, awoke her; she started up.

" I have seen her—I have seen her !" she

cried, sitting up in her bed, and grasping

Madame $t Maut's hand, while a terrible

expression perradftd her pale fixed fea-

tures, it

9'

**

. •* . V

88 WOMEN.

" Seen whom ?—what have you seen ?*

said Madame St Maur, terrified in her

turn.


" Oh ! that pale girl—that girl with the

light hair, and blue eyes—that pale girl

whom I murdered—Yes," she continued

with increasing energy, as her delirium di-

minished ; " yes, murdered, as surely as if

I had thrust a sword into her heart. I saw

them all; I was in Ireland again, and De

Courcy was there; he offered me wine, and

while I drank it he told me it was blood—

blood drawn from her heart; and then he

pointed to her—that pale girl—oh ! she was

standing near so horribly pale—and she

smiled on me with her white bloodless lips

—and all her friends were behind her—her

religious friends, in a kind of solemn mist

—they were singing a hymn, and she join-

ed them, and they parted all in light, and

left me in darkness—sdfei darkness!"

Madame St Maur tnld to reason with

• *

WOMEN. 89

her on the folly of heeding a nervous

dream.

"• I am not nervous—I am not mad," said


Zaira ; " it was no dream. I never saw her

before, yet I know her as well now as if she

were sitting beside my bed, Delphine ; her

light hair, her blue fixed eye, her horrible

whiteness, her death-like smile, and I drink-

ing her blood, and so I did. Oh, Delphine !

what have I to answer for !—My triumph

has been short, and every blow that I struck

on her heart, has been visited on my own,

and with a mortal force."

Madame St Maur, terrified herself, ex-

erted all her powers to sooth and..compose

her, and at last succeeded. She lay down

again, and from exhaustion slept several

hours ; when she awoke, she drew aside her

curtain, and saw Madame St Maur stand

smiling at her bed-side.

" Oh !" said she, starting up, " you have

good news for me—your salutation is like

90 WOMEN.

that of the Chinese; felicity is painted on

your countenance."

" De Courcy is in the anti-chamber,"


said Madame St Maur, smiling with affec-

tionate delight; " he says he will wait there

till he sees you, if you are able to see

him."

" If I am able /" cried Zaira, springing

up. " Oh, my dear Delphine ! ring for my

women ; I am well, quite well; I shall be

drest in a moment."

The trepidation of her eagerness delayed

her preparation, and she was a little shock-

ed when she viewed herself in the glass;

her women, however, the moment they

had fastened the combs in her hair, pro-

nounced her mise a ravir, and she was will-

ing to believe them. She flung a shawl

round her, to hide the obvious decline of

her wasted figure, and hurried to the room

where De Courcy was. Their meeting was

not as warm on his side as she expected;

perhaps it was impossible that it could ap-

WdMEX. 91

pear sufficiently so to her; but he was at

least tender, anxious, and respectful. His

visit, too, was of an unusual length, and


when he retired, though she wouM have

wished him to stay, she felt that her ex-

hausted spirits could not support a longer

visit, and she hoped that his consciousness

of this might have induced him to shorten

it. When all was over, Madame St Mauf

could not help flinging herself into Zaira's

arms in an agony of affectionate joy. We

need not say the embrace was returned.

That day was happiness unmixed, without

a reference to the past, without a glance at

the future. The present was enough. The

present always should be enough, for who

can reckon on more ?

Did we know what is passing in the

hearts of those on whom our happiness de-

pends, how long would that happiness

last ? Had they known, however, what was

passing in De Courcy's, their'awvould not

have been diminished. He was touched*

%

.-,

92 WOMEN.

awakened, pained by the illness of Zaira;

He had time for thought, and he thought it

was enough that one had suffered so much


by him already ; he was determined to give

Zaira an opportunity of explanation, to en-

quire about her husband (that husband of

whom he felt as much indignant jealousy

as if he had been the husband,)—and heE

child—if she had a child.

He felt, in his short separation from her,

the suspended effect of her beauty, her ta-

lents, and her constant power of excite-

ment. He felt that his existence with her

might be disgraceful; but without her was

wretched. He was resolved to lead, to list-

en to an explanation. M. D'Orbessan, too*

terrified at his agitation and sufferings du-

ring this interval, had qualified, moderated,

almost retracted—there might be a hus-

band—he did not know—-there might be a

child—of that fee knew still less. It might

be a reporj^p-merely a report. De Courcy

in vaiir^ressed for an explicit statement;

WOMEN. 93

he could not give one, and if he could he

would not; he trembled at the mischief

he had done, though with the best inten-


tions.

In the mean time, De Courcy thought-

he thought of the night when Zaira faint-

ed, on receiving a letter in Dublin ; of her

subsequent illness ; of her retirement from

the stage immediately ; of her hurrying so

soon to France.—There was some mystery,

and love can never bear a mystery in which

it has no share.

Zaira's mysteries were evidently not those

of love; and the old woman's frightful in-

trusions, and evident knowledge of Zaira—

all this pressed on his mind; he was deter-

mined to know the worst—to do Zaira jus-

tice, he said ; he should have said, to do jus-

tice to his own suspicions. - „

He waited on her that morning; yes;,

waited on her ; (strange phrase for a meet-

ing between those who have lovqd,) if pos-

sible to learn the truth ; she was obviously

5

94

too ill and too much agitated to bear an ex-

planation. He resolved to defer it; and

that evening, as he was walking in the


Boulevards, a group of young men passed

him ; one of them he immediately distin-

guished as not being a Frenchman; the

next time be passed him, he caught a strong-

er view of him. De Courcy trembled with

emotion ; he loitered near the spot, unable

to proceed for some moments. The party

soon returned ; he started forward; one of

them, the one he had recognized, quitted

the rest, started forward too, and stood face

to face, and breast to breast, opposite to De

Courcy. It was twilight; they saw, and

yet they.did not see each other's presence;

it was Montgomery who stood opposite to

him. A short, hurried salutation—a cold

grasp of each other's hands—and a long

pause followed. Then Montgomery took

De Courcy's arm, and walked away with

him,; they walked in silence for some time.

At length De Courcy said, in a broken

WOMEN. 95

voice, " How are all our friends in Ire-

land ?"

" Your friends—what friends ?"


« The—the Wentworths."

" Mr and Mrs Wentworth are very

well."

«< And" •

. "Well?"

" And their niece—Miss Wentworth—.,

Eva ?" . »•

" She is dying." . .

De Courcy gasped—staggered—made a

faint effort to tear open his vest, and fell

senseless. Montgomery, terrified, rushed to

his assistance; it was long before any assist-

ance could restore him. Montgomery ba-

red his throat and bosom, and, supporting

him on his knees, watched him in silence,

not without anxiety. He had long to

watch ; the relaxed jaw, the white, open

lips, the cheek and forehead colder than

matfble, the very hair, seeming to lose all

96 WOMEN.

its elasticity, impressed him with the perfect

ghastliness of death ; and as he lay thus,

Montgomery, struck with the contrast,


could not forbear wondering how a being,

frail and powerless as that before him, could

be the cause of such sufferings to others:

and reflecting on those sufferings, he almost

wished him to remain so ; his renewed life

seemed only a pledge of renewed misery, to

all whose ill-fate it was to love him. He re-

covered, but his recovery was more fright-

ful than his temporary death. He reco-

vered to the wild delirium of raving agony;

he recovered to curse himself, to tear his

hair, to dash himself on the ground with

horrible prayers, that he might never rise

alive; in a word, to exhibit the frightful

picture of one who is startled from the

dream of pleasure by conscience for the

first time tearing open the curtains, and

awakening him.

With difficulty Montgomery had him

WOMEN. 97

conveyed home, with still greater difficulty

did he keep him in his bed, from which lie

was trying to spring, determined to set out


that moment for Ireland. Kneeling, gro-

velling in unspeakable wretchedness (when

his strength totally feUed,) before Montgo-

mery, he implored to be suffered to fly and

save her. Montgomery would have pitied

him; but the figure of Eva, as he last saw her

before he quitted Ireland, filled all his in in,!,

and dried up his heart; besides, he felt that

his sufferings, violent as they were, were

physical, and therefore transient, while the

sufferings be inflicted on his victims were

mental, and not soon to pass away.

The next day he was exhausted—alarm-

ingly ill—a low intermitted pulse, rest-

lessness, mntterings—every bad indica-

tion.

Zaira, who had heard an indistinct ac-

count of his agitation, on meeting an //•/«&

gendewun the evening before on the Boule-

vards, was at his bedside in the morning.

TOL. III. K

' ; A.

"V

98 WOMEN.

There the first object she saw was Mont-

gomery ; her heart sunk within her at the

sight; she felt as if she met her evil genius.


De Courcy was not conscious of her being

there; and when the next day and the next

she came, she was told that Mr De Courcy

was better, but declined seeing any one but

the Irish gentleman. She turned away in

silence ; she thought of the time when he

had waited at her door on her slightest in-

disposition, and kissed the pencil-lines in

which she had assured him of her conva-

lescence—she went home, and waited hour

after hour for a message intimating a wish

to see her—it came not—then she confined

her hopes to a bare answer to her enquiries

after his health—none.

De Viosmenil and Madame St Maur

were with her, and, in the impatience of

an agonized spirit, she turned from one to

the other, as if either could give those

hopes that were denied by the only source

that could supply them. Then she was

WOMEN. 99

appeased by De Viosmenil's promise to

stand centinel at his door, and send her

by her servants hourly intelligence of his


health. De Viosmenil promised, but was

much shocked to observe, that she thought

more of his sufferings than of her own.

This excluded all hope; when our suffer-

ings are derived from others, we know not

when they will end.

De Courcy was better, better every hour;

for Montgomery no longer opposed his in-

tention of returning to Ireland. De Vios-

menil knew nothing of this, and hoped that

she would be appeased by the intelligence

of his recovery; but as her fears for his

safety diminished, other fears arose, and,

with agonizing importunity, she besought

him, if possible, to see De Courcy, to hear

from his own lips what she had to fear or

to hope, (she laid much emphasis on the first

word, and uttered the last scarce audibly).

—She implored but to hear her fate,- and

J 00 WOMEN.

still she could not resign the thought that

De Courcy could not pronounce her fate.

De Viosmenil promised to bear faithfully


this simple message, and swore to bring a

direct and conclusive answer. Then when

the words " a direct and conclusive answer"

thrilled in her ears, she wished to delay what

she might precipitate, but could not avert—'

then she tried to add the interest of passion

and eloquence to her message—she felt too

much could not be said in this last appeal;

but when De Viosmenil, with the patience

of French politeness, and the zeal of an-

xious friendship, repeated over her long,

long address word for word, those very

Words that came burning from her very

heart a few moments past, appeared to her,

from the lips of another, so cold that she

felt it impossible they could touch De Cour-

cy, and burst into tears. She made a thou-

sand alterations and additions, till her mean-

ing became obscure and confused even to

WOMEN. 101

herself; and she, at length, suffered De

Viosmenil to depart, with the feeling which

always accompanies our reposing our last


concerns with another,—a feeling that they

cannot act for us as if they were ourselves,

and a consciousness that if we acted for our-

selves, the event would be equally hopeless.

He went—returned. These Kngcrings

of misery, this protracted distillation of

wretchedness, when we watch it drop by

drop, see every one gathering, and have

time to count it before it falls, and almost

measure the period of descent, is like the

punishment described in Moore's poetry,

where the criminal is placed beneath the

" Drippings of the gory dew,

From the corse of him he slew."

Zaira suffered aU this. De VIosmenil's

answer could not mitigate it; he could not

see.De Courcy ; but he could see servants

102 WOMEN.

busy, trunks packing—all the " fearful note

of preparation" announcing a journey. Then

Zaira thought of employing Madame St


Maur as her intercessor, for she had sunk

to the hope of intercession. Madame St

Maur dreaded the office, for she feared that

her feelings for her friend would operate

against her interests, or rather her hopes.

She went, however ; insisted on seeing De

Courcy, succeeded in seeing him, and the

result has been already told in language

which we can never hope to equal.

Zaira, who remembered the influence

which the animation, the naivete, and the

exhaustless spirits of Madame St Maur had

obtained over De Courcy, implored her to

exert it in her behalf.

• " Misera hoc tamen unum

Exequere anna, mihi, solam nam perfidus ille

Te colere, arcanos etiam tibi credere sensus—

Sola viri molles at aditus et tempera noras."

VIRGIJU

WOMEN. 108

The rest may be best told in the same

exquisite language.

" Talibus orabat, talesque miserrima fletus


Fertque refertque soror, sed nullis ille movetur

Fletibus."—VIRGIL.

Then all was over. Zaira herself had

hope no longer—she now found employ-

ment in watching, by her servants, every

movement at De Courcy's—sometimes she

appeared happy when she heard there were

no immediate preparations for a journey ;

oftener, when she saw from their counte-

nances what she was to hear, she shrunk

from the sight, and motioned them from

the room, without listening to what they

had to say.

One day the person, from whom they

had bespoke attendants to accompany them

when they were to quit Paris, came to en-

104 WOMEN.

quire when she proposed to set out. Zaira

was silent for some time; the person, ima-

gining it was forgetfulness, repeated her


former orders, and reminded her it was near

the time when she and Mr De Courcy bad

proposed to leave Paris. " And so he will,"

said Zaira, " perhaps sooner."

She dismissed the person, who went away

.surprised at this change of her intentions.

A party who were going to Italy, pressed

her soon after to join them ;—she shook her

bead " Ah, you are indispensible," said

one of them; "• your genius will alike eia*

bellish life and antiquity."

" Not now, I fear," said Zaira. A day

cur two more elapsed, and thai arrived which

had been fixed on for her leaving Paris

with De Courcy. Madame St Maur ob-

served the increased gloomy agitation of

Zaira that day, though she knew not the

cause. ' These continued blows of accident

are what the heart i& least able to bear.

WOMEN. 105

When one great and overwhelming calami^

ty is thus parcelled out into minute por-

tions, and brought before our minds in dis-


tinct features, when not a trivial circum-

stance can occur without recalling what we

were stubbornly struggling to forget,.-—not

a moment can strike without sounding the

knell of departed happiness; our resolu-

tion is in vain, and every step we take, the

ground seems stuck with daggers.

One day she seemed unusually calm; De

Viosmenil and Madame St Maur were hap-

py and deceived; she entreated to be left

alone at an early hour, and promised to

compose herself to rest; they believed her.

It is dangerous to leave persons suffering

under an incureable calamity; like mad-

men, they have always the cunning to de-

ceive their keepers. They left her. £aira

had heard that day that De Courcy intend-

ed to quit Pari® on his way to Irel^Jd, in

E8

106 WOMEN.

the evening; she resolved to make one last

appeal, and to make it in person.

No mind could be worse disposed than


De Courcy's at this moment to such an ap-

peal. He had to contend with the morbid

feelings of a broken constitution, broken by

premature excitement,—the remorse of a

conscience wounded in youth, when the

wound is incurable,—and the loathings of

unspeakable horror at the thought of her

to whom he was willing to ascribe the dying

sufferings of Eva, that he might escape the

burthen of them himself. Zaira's beauty

now appeared like the effect of deliberate

seduction,—her genius like a spell. Her

great and good qualities were all underva-

lued—her simplicity of character, sweetness

of temper, and genuine humility, (the hu-

mility inseparable from true genius;) the

devotedness of heart with which she was

attached to him, were all crimes in the eye

of one who now could see nothing but

-

•

WOMEN. 107

crimes in her conduct, to hide his sense of

his own.

With all this fatal prepossession against


her presence, against her very image, was

combined a determination to leave France

for Ireland,—a determination the stronger,

because it had no distinct object, but mere-

ly a general hope of relief from the change of

place. Montgomeiy, who urged this step,

saw its inefficacy every moment; but. he

knew that a vehement resolution with weak

minds stands in the place both of principles

and feelings; it natters them with an ap-

pearance of the energy they want, and they

are satisfied with the flattery. So De Cour-

cy was to set off for Ireland in a few mo-

ments ; those few moments were all that

remained to Zaira. As soon as De Vios-

menil and Madame St Maur left her, she

wrapped • herself in a mantle and went to

the hotel where De Courcy resided. He

was out;—she sat down in his apartment.

108 WOMEN.

Every thing around her announced his ap-

proaching departure;—that nightly prepay

ration, at once tumultuous and silent;—


the hurrying tread of domestics;—rights

burning feebly, from the haste with which

they were carried about;-—trunks, packa-

ages heaped on the deranged furniture ;—

the desolate look of rooms which the pos-

sessor is about to quit;—she saw it alL

In a few minutes De Courcy arrived; he

entered without knowing she was there;

discovered her; started and turned away.

She rose, attempted to follow him* but he*

cold and stiffening feet seemed nailed to

the floor. He passed rapidly from room to

room,—gave directions in a hasty voice,

and recalled them again; at last, returning,

he threw himself on a sofa at the opposite

end of the room, folded his arms, and let-

ting his head fall on his bosom, remained

silent. The room was very dark, he could

hardly see her muffled figure, but he could

WOMEN. 109

hear her sobs, hep choaked attempts to

speak, and see her try to hold out her clasped

hands to him in an agony of silent suppli-


cation. He bent his head still lower, and

rooted his eyes on the ground. It would

have been some consolation to the wretch-

ed Zaira to know he dared not look up;

one. glance, one word, might have over-

thrown his resolution. Suddenly a servant

entered, and whispered him—he rose; Zaira

rose too—she felt her hour was come—

in a moment, in less than a moment, she

felt him dart from his seat, felt him at her

feet, felt him clasp her in a last, last em-

brace, (like that in which death is mingled

with passion,) and rush from the room.

Every object then swam before her; she

neither saw or heard, but she knew his steps

rapidly descending the stairs, knew when

he touched the last, when he rushed through

the passage, when the door opened—closed

—then the thunder of the wheels, as they

5


110 WOMEN.

bore him away, shook the pavement—She

heard, and felt that if one word could have

retained him, she could not utter it.

WOMEN. Ill

CHAPTER V.

• Orba resedit

Diriguitque mahs.


Ovid.

The first hours of desertion by those we

love, are hours of which, not even those

who have felt them, can describe the mi-

sery. It is " the first dark day of nothing-

ness ;" moments pass on, and thoughts fol-

low thoughts, like the waves of the sea un-

t!er a midnight sky—neither shade, nor

fight—neither distinction, or pause. One

gloomy level of unbroken darkness, mo-

ving, but not diversified—with the sufferer

£ime is no more. They feel like the guilty

in a future state, who, in the terrible de-

scription of the French preacher, are made

* .-*

112 WOMEN.

to ask each other in hell, What is the hour ?

and the answer is—Eternity ! It is in this

state that we look around, and wonder that


things continue the same, when we are no

longer so—that objects make the same im-

pression on our senses, without leaving any

on our minds—that the sun still shines,

and we cannot see its light—that men

continue to speak, to be employed abou'

we know not what, for we have ceased t

understand the language of life. We'am

surprised to feel the hands of friends press

our's still, when we can »o longer return

the pressure. The world has past away fror t

us; we live in a world of our own, a wit •

world of misery, dreams, and recollections

We are as if in the grave, but without the.

repose of the grave.

Madame St Maur and Vfosmenil now

never quitted her for a moment, and thes ^

two amiable persons seemed to have cousc

lidated their affection for each other inti

WOMEN. 113

one single sentiment of friendship for Zaini.

Xn their hands she was quite passive—did

every thing she was asked—felt nothing


that was done for her. When they assisted

her into a carriage, she suffered them to

direct it where they pleased, without any

observation. Sometimes when Madame St

Maur remarked the beauty of the sky, oar of

the country, she wept. Nature bad still a

power over her heart—a power to give pain.

At home they always surrounded her

with a select society; but she heard no-

thing, answered no one, without an effort

painful to those who addressed her. She

sat among them passive and abstracted.

Sometimes, her natural sweetness strug-

gling with her wretched situation, she felt

she ought to appear sensible of the kind-

ness, and tried to reward it with a smile ;

but there was a mixture of vacancy and

ghastliness in it that terrified them.

At other times, when literature was dis-

114 WOMEN.

/ •

cussed, after a vain effort to collect her

ideas, she hurried out of the room,


" Nor quite unconscious of her wretched plight,

Gave one sad look, and hurried out of sight."

BLOOMFIELD.

Even these struggles were soon to be ter-

minated. One day they were driving

through a village near Paris. Its inhabit-

ants had been great sufferers in the late

war; and Zaira, who heard of their dis-

tress on her arrival, had relieved it with

munificence almost regal.

Shortly afterwards, in one of her excur-

sions with De Courcy, she happened to

pass through this village; the inhabitants

recognised her, and rushed from their houses

to load her with blessings, while the child-

dren (with the onction and theatrical feel-

ing of French children) flung a profusion of

flowers beneath the wheels of her carriage.

De Courcy was delighted with this scene,

which exalted his passion in his own eyes by

WOMEN. 115

the virtues of its object. Zaira was affected,

and she said to De Courcy, " I am jealous

of the happiness these people give me; I


would not wish to feel a moment's happi-

ness but what I owe to you." She remem-

bered the rapture with which De Courcy

kissed her hands.

All this seemed to pass before her eyes,

to pass through her heart, as she went

through the village, without either applause

or passion. Her benevolence was now for-

gotten ; her heart was broken—

" There died the best of passions, Lore and Fame."

In dreadful agony she sat back in the

carriage, and signified, by her gestures,

that they should get on as quick as pos-

sible. Her agitation that day suggest-

ed to Madame St Maur the expediency of

removing her from Paris, where every ob-

ject seemed calculated to revive what it

was their unavailing struggle to make her

116 WOMEN.

forget. De Viosmenil agreed with her, and

they went to a villa of his about ten miles

from Paris. Zaira made no opposition, she


hardly understood their proposal, and ac-

ceded to it to avoid having it explained to

her They both agreed in hoping that this

removal would be beneficial to her; they

agreed also in peopling this retreat with all

that taste, literature, and affection could

supply; but they could not agree on the

subject of De Courcy's precipitate deser-

tion, and many and eager were their bat-

tles about it.

De Viosmenil, reasoning on the nature

of man in general, derived it from the in-

consistency of the human heart, which in

De Courcy's case had been precipitated by

a fastidious and satiated sensibility—a torn

early and dangerous acquaintance with the

luxuries of the heart. Madame St Mamy

arguing from the feelings of Frenchwomen,

m particular, ascribed it all to the seduc-.

tions of Eulalie de Touranges. " I saw it,

WOMEN. 117

I saw it all—saw it from the first . I obser-

ved her the night she presumed to talk of

llacine and Shakespeare—She talk of Ra-


cine and Shakespeare !—But her mica was

1 just equal to ore with that silly Irishman.

Do you know she had one day the confi-

dence to say to me—Yes, Zaira has great

talents—I have discovered them—She dis-

cover Zaire's talents! But what effrontery !

it is just like the impudence <of Horace

Walpole,* who pretended to discover that

Johnson had sense." Madame St Maur, it

seems, understood English literature better

than the human character-—and that is a

very singular praise for a Frenchwoman.

* Vide Walpok's Letter published m the first volume

of the Miseries of Authors. By M.

118 WOMEN.

CHAPTER VI.

—- tune nee mens niihi, nee color

Certa sede manet—arguens


Quam lentis penitue macerer ignibus.

IIOSACE.

DE COURCY and Montgomery set out;

they went by the way of Bourdeaux and

Cork, for Montgomery, who was of age

now, had some business to settle with his

guardians there, and he was resolved that

De Courcy should not quit him, or rather

that he would not quit De Courcy till they

were both safe in Ireland. He supported

him on the journey by suggesting hopes

that he hardly felt himself, that they might

not be too late.

WOMEN. ll§

De Courcy's rapidly declining health

struck him, and he began to tremble for

both. It was August—lovely weather—


just three months since De Courcy had

quitted Ireland. When dates are connect-

ed with subjects of strong emotion, how ac-

curately the memory retains the most tri-

vial. During the voyage, it was De Cour-

cy's constant habit to remain leaning over

the deck till a late hour—dangerously late

for him. When Montgomery could. not

dissuade him from this practice, he partook

it with him. One night, after De Courcy

had gazed long on the beauty of .the calm

moon, he exclaimed,—" She was so lovely!"

(Montgomery hoped he was thinking of

Eva,) " How often, on such a night as this,

we have gazed on heaven together, till we

felt that sublime inebriation which such a

light infuses, when we taste it along with

those we love!—How pure, how celestial

was her eloquence then !

120 WOMEN.

It is impossible to believe that her heart

was not as pure as her sentiments.

' IF the ill Spirit have so fair an house,


Good things will strive to dwell -with it.' "

Montgomery bore all this with patience,

(though he felt it could not relate to Eva;)

he thought it the natural expression of in-

evitable regret, better indulged than sup-

pressed. " Was she not very lovely ?" said

JDe Courcy, appealing even to Montgo-

mery.

" She was," said Montgomery;" Imt the

Jews, when they saw the second Temple,

ivept."

. No allusion was made even to Zaira's name

during the rest of the voyage. Montgo-

mery hoped he would have been detained

in Cork but a short time by his business;

but De Courcy's increasing ill health com-

pelled him to continue there a considerable

time, and when at length they set out . he

WOMEN. HI

)

felt as if De Courcy was hastening to join

Eva in the tomb. They arrived in Dublin


about the middle of September. Many

changes had taken place since De Courcy

had quitted it. At first no one, not even in

her own family, could observe the slightest

alteration in Eva's health or habits. She lookT

ed pale indeed, paler than usual; but that

caused them little surprise, and no concern,

while they all saw her as active in her cha-

ritable visits, as earnest in her religious du-

ties, as ready to every good word and work

as she ever had been. The name of De

Courcy never passed her lips, and it may

be concluded it was never uttered by any

of her friends.

Thus passed on a few, very few weeks ;,

it was easy, then, for the quick eye of affec-

tion to mark a languor in her motions, a re-

luctance to conversation, which, however,

alarmed no one but Mrs Wentworth. Then

appeared rapidly " the many infallible

VOL. ill. F

122 WOMEN.

signs" that a mortal change ifi about to be

wrought in the mortal tabernacle. They

came in quick and alarming succession ;—


the failing appetite—failing—gone—the

vegetables spread over the untasted meat

to hide it from her watchful family—the

plate conveyed away by a glance to the ser-

vant—the indifference to conversation de-

clining gradually into an unconsciousness of

what was said, till it was actual pain to

give the simplest directions to the ser-

vants, or utter an answer to the plainest

questions, on which she was compelled long

to pause before she could discover their

meaning—The mist that began to spread

alike over the faces of visitors, friends, and

family, till she scarce knew one from the

other, and spoke to them almost at ran-

dom,—the voices even of those she knew,

sounding as if they came from a great dis-

tance, their sound failing, not increasing, as

the sentences ended. The dreadful apathy

with which she mingled in the religious ex-

WOMEN. 12$

ercises, struck herself. Other symptoms

she would have regarded less, but they for-

ced themselves on her. When she took up


a hook, she read page after page mechani-

cally, without retaining a sentence; then

she fixed her eye on the lines, and tried to

force her attention in vain ;—she read, her

eyes only grew dim;—she closed the book

and tried to examine her memory, but her

memory retained nothing;—she attempted

to excite herself by walking up and down

the room, but this motion only increased the

confusion of her head, and the objects she

was accustomed to see every day, were now

becoming every day more and more indis-

tinct. Then came the shortened respiration;

—sighs every moment were becoming ne-

cessary to enable her to draw her breath,

till respiration itself became only a succes-

sion of sighs. Often she placed her hand

on her heart, and wept from the pain with

which she drew her breath.

Soon more distressing symptoms occur.

124 WOMEN.

red, more perplexing, for no one could guess

the cause, that being always the phrase

when the sufferer is known to be dying of


a broken heart. Physicians were then called

in ; Mrs Wentworth, with trembling affec-

tion, insisted on medical advice, and Went-

worth, proud of his wealth, feed them libe-

rally ; of course it was easy to procure a

variety of opinions. Weary of examining

symptoms that could never lead them to

the source of her complaint, they all lucki-

ly agreed in change of air for the patient.

Change of air was to do wonders. They

must go to the sea-side,—must go to Bray,

the medical men said, for medical men al-

ways like to point out a place, as if there

were a charm in a name.

Mrs Wentworth was gratified by the

readiness with which Wentworth gave up

his usual summer visit to Glassnevin, where

he had had a villa ever since he had given up

business. She prepared for their removal

to Bray, and Wentworth, in the mean time>

WOMEN. 125

went about among his evangelical friends,

and many was the prayer-meeting at which

he knelt, where teachers engaged in prayer


at his request, for a female believer under

the hidings of God's face, and sometimes

for a female believer grievously buffeted by

Satan. To Bray they went. Eva smiled

passively. The physicians attended, found

the sea air too keen for her, took more fees,

and recommended Dundrum, mountain

air, and goats whey. Mrs Wentworth's

spirits revived with the prospect of a change

of place; her spirits had nothing else to

support them; she knew more than the

physicians knew, but she echoed what they

said, because she wished to believe it. Dun-

drum, mountain air, and goats whey were

to work miracles. Wentworth, on his re-

moval, enquired, " Was there an evangeli-

cal chapel in the neighbourhood ?"—that

was all.

Eva left Bray, with the addition of a

slight cough to her former tendencies ; but

that was the consequence of the sea-air, (so

1£6 WOMEN.

every one said,) and the mountain-air would

soon remove it. This redoubtable moun-

tain played for another month on Eva's


gasping lungs, but the battery was ineffec-

tual. Still every visitor said she was bet-

ter ; she must be better from such frequent

change of place. Mrs Wentworth believed

them in the credulity of despair—Went-

worth believed them, because he thought

hopes given were a kind of value received

for his money, of which he was not sparing

»—the visitors believed, because people be-

lieve any thing improbable sooner than re-

turn without some news after visiting an

invalid—Every one believed them but the

patient—she had good reasons for mistrust-

ing them, but she kept them to herself, or

suffered them to be read only in her looks.

It was a horrid thing to see her come into

the breakfast-room every morning with

those looks, and with that voice to say

" she was better."

Towards the beginning of August, her

principal physician was obliged to go to the

WOMEN. 1S7

country. He took his leave with much

kindness, urged attention to his prescrip-

tions, and, shaking her hand with a gay


expression of hope, desired her to be well

•when they met in winter. Eva smiled;

Mrs Wentworth saw that smile, and, quit-

ting the room, wept bitterly.

The work was going on—that hand,

which no human hand can repel, was ur-

ging on the wheels of life with a rapidity

irresistible, and 'no longer imperceptible.

Mrs Wentworth trembled at the brilliant

deepening colour, which every other eye

hailed as the glow of health.—" Never saw

Eva look so well before," said the visitors

with one voice.

" I never saw her look so before," said

Mrs Wentworth, with a deep sigh.

" Eva has now so far recovered her looks"

said Mr Wentworth to his wife, " that I

think we need no longer delay the mention

that even her late awful backsliding has not

entirely alienated our spiritually-minded

friend Macowen. He is willing still to ac-

128 WOMEN.

cept of her as his wife, and to restore her

steps to the way of peace ; and the change

of her looks"—


" Never mind her looks," said Mrs Went-

worth, rather hastily for her; " wait till

her health is better."

" Her health !" said Wentworth, in

amaze ; " sure she ought to be quite well—

all the physicians say so. I am sure they

have been paid regularly ; and her colour,

I never saw it so bright—without exercise,

without food, for she never eats any thing,

fihe comes from her room in the morning

with a glow in her cheeks I never saw be-

fore."

" Nor I either," said Mrs Wentworth,

with tears in her eyes.

" Then what objection, since her health

is restored, to her being united to that gift-

ed young man ?"

" Mr Wentworth," said his wife, with an

earnestness that made him start, " let me

implore you—implore you, not to mention

this subject to Eva for some time."

WOMEN. 129

" For what time ?" said Wentworth. " I

am willing to wait a reasonable time ; but

she should be prepared, that I am resolved


not to be made a fool of twice by a girl—

I am resolved that she shall be united to

him."

" She never will," said Mrs Wentworth,

" to him or to any one;" and her tears

gushed out, and almost choaked her voice,

while she struggled to add, " she is dying !"

" Dying !" repeated Wentworth in

amaze, not without a mixture of anger—

" Then I consider myself very ill-used in-

deed ; taking . so many fees, going from

place to place, and to die after all; I might

have been told that at once. You know,

Mrs Wentworth, Eva is no relative of ours;

we have no tie to her, and her conduct lat-

terly has been productive of nothing but un-

easiness to us both"<•

" I thought that mutter had been settled

long ago," said Mrs Wentworth. " The

interest of her fortune has amply paid for

F2

130 WOMEN.

Tier board and education, and the protection

she has enjoyed under the name of your

niece."


" Well—well," said Wentworth; " but,

if you think die is dying, had we not bet.

ter have a prayer-meeting, and get some

spiritual man to wrestle with the Lord in

her behalf?"

" Certainly, I think so. I do pray, I

do lift up my heart to God for her ; but it

would be my wish that the effectual fervent

prayer of the righteous should also plead for

her ; and, till we know more of the mind

of the Lord concerning her, let us talk no

more of marriage."

Wentworth acceded with a readiness that

astonished his wife. She looked up in his

face to discover an ulterior meaning. He

had turned away—a thought had occurred

to him, that, on its first intrusion, he re-

pelled with disdain—it came again, and

was not treated so discourteously—again.

and he began to parley with it.

WOMEN. 131

Now, the thought was this; that if Eva

died, it was highly improbable her fortune

would ever be claimed at his hands, consi-


dering the mysterious manner in which

both she and it had been entrusted, or nu

ther thrust into them. " Now," said Went-

worth, trying to misunderstand his own

motives, " that would enlarge the sphere

of my utility. I would double my sub-

scriptions to the Bible Society, and the Mis-

sionary Society, and the Society for Propa-

gating the Gospel in Foreign Parts—I will

subscribe to the fund for purchasing livings

in lay patronage for evangelical preachers ;

I will treble my donations at Bethesda Cha-

pel-^-and when she dies, (if was already ex-

changed for when in his reasonings), I will

maintain her school, and leave it an ample

sum in my will."

This being settled, Wentworth set off

for Dublin, to meet the trustees of a cha-

ritable institution. The physician who at-

tended that day declared Eva much worse;

132 WOMEN.

the all-powerful mountain-air had failed;

and the goat's-whey was little better than

it should be. The last medical attendant


was all for air and variety; the present

was all for warmth and repose. Her na-

tive air, the air of Dublin, was far better

for her in the chill mornings of an Irish

September, ushered in with a light frost,

than the keen breeze of the mountains,

whose spicula, this gentleman said, were

only exacerbating her lungs. Back to her

native air she must go, (apropos she was

born in Munster, two hundred miles from

Dublin,) and there warm rooms, early hours,

the strictest precautions against cold, ab-

stinence from animal food, and plentiful

draughts of Koumis, were to do for her

that—which no mortal medicine now could

do. So back to her native air (as it was

called) she went; and, to the surprise of

all, in a few days she was visibly better.

The physician triumphed; Macowen

exulted, (to himself,) but he could not look

1

WOMEN'. 133

at her now without" glittering •with ungod-

ly dew," and his red hair actually looking

redder with joy. Even Mrs Wentworth


was deceived, but Eva was not; she knew

the cause, it was a place of recollections:

Here they had met, loved, and parted;

and had she been acquainted with tthe ne-

glected poetry of Lee, she might have ex-

claimed,—

" There's not a soul beneath,

Who died (as I must die) for fatal love,

That better knows the gloomy arbours there,

Than I each chamber in this house of death ;

'Twas here"

LEE'S Mithridates.

She saw him every where, she heard his

voice, she saw him on the seat where he

had last sat, remembered eveiy board he

had trod, and when the door was opened by

any one, still felt (a little more faintly every

day,} the delicious agitation of heart that

announced his presence before she saw

134 WOMEN.

him. It was when twilight came, that the

indulgence of this visionary existence be-

came most exquisite. She dwelt with him


in her mind; held imaginary conversations;

and heard, amid silence, the tones of that

voice which, dying as she was, had not cea-

sed to charm her. The state of her mind

began to resemble that of the light, which

flattered its morbid indulgence—clouded,

but not obscured,—more solemn, pictu-

resque, and full of imagery, than the bright-

ness of day.

She yielded to this indulgence at first

without resistance, not feeling the fatal ef-

fect it was producing on her remains of life.

It was like the system of assassination for-

merly practised in Italy, when poison was

conveyed in the most exquisite perfumes.

Her religious feelings soon returned, and

warned her away from such indulgence—it

was suitable neither to her feelings, or her

situation. She obeyed the summons—she

felt it came from God—then she gave up

WOMEN. 135

all thoughts, all feelings, and struggled to

think of God alone. She struggled, but

did not soon succeed. The apparent resto-


ration of her health furnished her with an

excuse for renewing her former habits ; no

one opposed her. Mrs Wentworth wa6

happy, so was her husband ; for, as the re-

ligious people were now coming to Dublin,

he had ample employment in his way ; two

of the Bethesda people had lately joined

Mr Kelly's congregation ; some of M*

Kelly's had also joined another body of

separatists, (after a vigorous pamphlet-con'

troversy on baptism, which nobody read

but themselves.) Mr Wentworth continu-

ed to repeat, " they went out from us, be*

cause they were not of us ;" and Mr Kelly's

followers repeated exactly the same text,

to console themselves for the defection of

their fallen brethren.

Eva's first attentions were paid to her

school; she sat among them, and wonder-

ed that she no longer felt the same plea-

136 WOMEN.

sure—she heard their lessons, that is, she

held the book in her hands as long as she

could, while her dim eye was ineffectually


fixed on the page, where every line seemed

doubled—she tried to superintend their

work, but after giving directions, which

she recalled again, without being able to

correct them, and praises all at random,

mistaking the names of those to whom she

addressed them, she was compelled, faintly

smiling, to resign her charge to some other.

It was this touched her most—this little

seminary of candidates for heaven had been

her delight in happier hours ; and she sup-

plicated fervently, with many tears, that

her health, or, at least, her intellects might

be spared, till she saw some of them

on whom her cares and prayers had been

bestowed, " bring forth fruit unto ever-

lasting life." Formerly site had jway-

ed for them, now she was compelled to

pray for lierself. She was still able to

N

WOMEN. 137

walk out; the air, the open air, was all that

seemed to revive her; we cling to it ea-

gerly when we feel we have not long to


inhale it. At all events, it is a great mat-

ter for a sufferer to be enabled to encoun-

ter the enemy in the open air. We think

ourselves better when we can thus mimic

the habits of convalescence. She still went

to Bethesda Chapel, though the ascent to

Dorset-Street was trod with slower steps,

and more painful respiration every day.

She mixed, also, in the parties of her reli-

gious friends, where reading the Scriptures

and praying formed the object of meeting;

yet these were becoming less and less plea-

sant to her, for not even the serious habits

of the females could altogether suppress

their curiosity about De Courcy's leaving

her, and her subsequent illness. One night,

at one of these meetings, Macowen (her

persecutor) was requested to give " a word

of prayer." He complied; and whether

he now despaired of his prey, or was

138 WOMEK.

ing to display his precatory eloquence at

her expence, the whole of his supplication

was addressed to the Deity through her;


he implored the mercy of Heaven for a

wanderer who had strayed from the fold ;

for one " who had forsaken the guide of

her youth, and forgotten the Covenant of

her God; who had loved strangers, and

after them would go." And as he went on,

aided by the sympathising murmuT of the

audience, his memory supplying him witk

images, and his passions with eloquence,

there was not a single metaphor in the

Old Testament descriptive of the apostacy

of the Jews from their God, that he did

not apply to Eva, who, compelled to kneel

out this martyrdom, wished to sink into

the earth to escape it. This cruel holding

her up as an object to a numerous circle,

was the most painful trial she had yet ex-

perienced. Wentworth thought it excel-

lent, and expressed much hope from the

strivings of that godly man in her behalf.

6

WOMEN. 1B9

Mrs Wentworth thought very differently;

her feelings were so much outraged, she

could hardly remain on her knees-, and


when her husband soon after proposed Mao.

owen to be of a party that was to meet at

-their house, Mrs Wentworth strenuously

declared, " He should not come into thek

city, nor shoot an arrow there." And Went-

worth was not displeased with her opposi-

tion to his wishes, because it was couched

in the language of Isaiah, whom Macowen

had taught him to call the fifth evangelist.

Eva's resources were now contracting

very rapidly. She no longer went out;

she was becoming more reluctant to meet

the evangelical parties at home—there were

a number of females always—much whis-

pering with Mrs Wentworth, who, in vain,

tried to repel it. Her friends were kind,

but still they were human beings; and cu-

riosity is human too. She imagined every

eye was bent on her since Macowen's

140 WOMEN.

,

public appeal, and from every eye she now

wished to shrink. i


Music—that resource alike powerful in

society and solitude—that had failed her ;

her voice no longer could be heard among

the singers at Bethesda, it now could scarce-

ly be heard across the narrow room. She

often tried to sing the hymns she had been

accustomed to lead in, and was astonished at

her own deficiencies; for, as her vocal powers

had never been the subject of her thought,

this failure seemed to her like a failure of

devotional sentiment. She was soon unde-

ceived ; the loss of her voice forced itself

on her, as little as she had once regarded it;

and she was now obliged to murmur those

praises which once she uttered in tones

that might have been accompanied by the

harps of cherubims. Her voice, broken, fee-

ble, but exquisitely toned, appeared rather

like melodious respiration than music; it

seemed as if she was collecting its decli-

WOMEN. 141

ning powers to join that choir, of whose

harmony there shall be no interruption and

no end.


Society, (such society as she was accus-

tomed to)—Music, (the music she loved,)

were thus lost to her. Reading became her

only resource; Went worth's loaded shelves

promised exhaustless materials for religi-

ous study; but the works of man interested

her no longer, her attention failed in fol-

lowing them ; she had a mistrust, a fear of

delusion, of uncertainty ; and all her facul-

ties, withdrawn from human teachers, re-

posed in confidence on the word of God

alone. Wentworth saw the Bible in her

hands every day, and sometimes wondered

she was so-long in reading the lessons of the

day. He called it formality ; she felt it was

*not: he pressed on her some popular works

of divinity; she clung to her Bible. With

delight beyond expression, she felt that

her faculties, that were growing so cold

and obtuse, kindled as she read the sacred

14* WOMEN.

writings — she understood, felt, lived at

every line—weakness was suspended, and

death itself seemed to pause, and spare


the moments that were devoted to eterni-

ty; but, like a relentless creditor, it put

all to the account, and exacted it to the

uttermost farthing. The Bible was her

constant study—feebly she turned over the

pages of human writers—closed them;—

opened the pages of inspiration—all was

Kght—it was the word of God—no error—

no dream. The words of man might de-

ceive-^-had deceived her;—the word of God

could not. She knelt, and read the pre-

cious pages on her knees as long as she was

afcle to kneeL Inestimable volume! that

reveals, amid all the vicissitudes of life, the

only two certainties known to man—grief

and futurity. What sufferer can read it,

and not feel his sufferings anticipated by

that sorrow that passeth all sorrow ? Every

thing in the sacred books either instructs

or consoles the. sufferer; but all prepares

WOMEN. 143

for suffering. This is the truest lesson of

life—That " man was made to mourn," is

pot merely the sentiment of a poet, proud


of sentimental melancholy—it is the ex-

perience, the daily terrible experience of life.

JCven He who knew life best, proclaimed it&

awful universal character, " Come unto me,

all ye that labour, and are heavy laden;"

and in this invitation did he not include the

whole of the human race, for who is there

that does not labour—that is not heavy la-

den ? But the Bible reconciles us to suffer-

ing> by shewing not only that it ia the path

all must tread, but the path the best have

trod—a path consecrated by the steps, the

tears, and the blood of those to whom hu-

manity looks up for solace and for eleva-

tion.. Patriarchs and prophets, saints and

martyrs, and Him whose name must not

be named in a page so light, they were all

destitute, afflicted, and tormented, and shall

we repine ?'

144 WOMEN.

This was the question Eva asked her

heart, and the answer spoke peace to it.

She had also those outward mitigations


of her sufferings which the mild and" linger-

ing nature of her mortal disease did not

yet withhold from her. She made copious

extracts from the Scriptures, and this em-

ployed a great part of her time. They were

written with tolerable steadiness for a hand

trembling with emotion, and weakened by

approaching death; there was only one

passage that betrayed a failing hand—a tre-

mor of the heart. " It was not an open

enemy that did me this dishonour; for then

I could have borne it; neither was it mine

adversary that did magnify himself against

me, for then, peradventure, I would have

hid myself from him ; but it was thou"

Here the extract was broken off.

The weather was unusually fine, though

it was September, and the evenings mild

and beautiful. Eva passed them almost

entirely in the garden. She had always

WOMEN. 145

loved the fading light, and delicious tints

of an evening sky, and now they were en-

deared by that which endears even indiffer-


ent things—an internal consciousness that

we have not long to behold them. Mrs

Wentworth remonstrated against this in-

dulgence, and mentioned it to the physi-

cian ; but he " answered neglectingly;"

said, any thing that amused her mind could

do her no harm, &c. Then Mrs Wentworth

began to feel there was no hope; and Eva

was suffered to muse life away unmolested.

To the garden every evening she went, and

brought her library with her ; it consisted

of but three books—the Bible, Young's

Night Thoughts, and Blair's Grave. One

evening the unusual beauty of the sky

made her involuntarily drop her book.

She gazed upward, and felt as if a book

was open hi heaven, where all the lovely

and varying phenomena presented in living

characters to her view the name of the Di-

voi,. in. «

146 WOMEN.

vinity. There was a solemn congeniality

between her feelings of her own state and

the view of the declining day—the parting


light and the approaching darkness. The

glow of the western heaven was still re-

splendent and glorious ; a little above, the

blending hues of orange and azure were

softening into a mellow and indefinite light;

and in the upper region of the air, a deli-

cious blue darkness invited the eye to re-

pose in luxurious dimness ; one star alone

shewed its trembling head,—another and

another, like infant births of light; and in

the dark east the half-moon, like a bark of

pearl, came on through the deep still ocean

of heaven.

Eva gazed on ; some tears came to her

eyes ; they were a luxury. Suddenly she

felt as if she were quite well; a glow like

that of health pervaded her whole frame—

one of those indescribable sensations that

seem to assure us of safety, while, in fact,

WOMEN. 147

they are announcing dissolution. She ima-

ginedherself suddenly restored to health and

happiness. She saw De Courcy once more, as


in their early hours of love, when his face

was to her as if it had been the face of an

angel; thought after thought came back

on her heart like gleams of paradise. She

trembled at the felicity that filled her whole

soul; it was one of those fatal illusions,

that disease, when it is connected with

strong emotions of the mind, often flat-

ters its victim with—that mirage, when

the heart is a desert, which rises before the

wanderer, to dazzle, to delude, and to de-

stroy.

" It is an illusion," she exclaimed, " but

I will enjoy it. It is the last, and God,—

yes God, will forgive me this last human

feeling: He will forgive my shedding this

last human tear. This city of shelter, may

I not fly to it for a moment ? is it not a lit-

tle one, and my soul shall live ?"

148 WOMEN.

A fairy landscape glowed in her heart

for a moment; her withered youth, health,

and passion bloomed again. It was that


resurrection of the heart that we sometimes

experience when we have long believed it

dead. Eva glowed, trembled, wept once

more, when she imagined no mortal object

could draw another tear. Such gleams of

soul sometimes brighten its twilight, even

when the sun has gone down for ever and

ever. Eva lingered on its rich and fading

light; lost in a reverie too nearly resem-

bling insanity, she did not hear a noise

among the leaves of the arbour where she

sat, (unconscious where she was,)—it increa-

sed,—she started,—the noise seemed like

that of a person bursting the branches of

the withered liburnum. It was not a stran-

ger foot—she knew the tread, and was fix-

ed to the spot—it was—no—-it could not be

—*-it was—for his wasting arms were twined

around her the next moment; with all her


WOMEN. 149

remaining strength she tore herself from

his grasp. * * * *

De Courcy fell at her feet.

150 WOMEN.

CHAPTER VII.

By pain of heart, oft check'd and oft impell'd,

The intellectual power through words and things


Went sounding on, a dim and perilous way.

WOKDSWOBTH.

MADAME ST MAUR'S mother died about

the time De Courcy quitted France, and

no obstruction remained to her union with

her lover; but these affectionate friends

were too generous to be happy while Zaira

was wretched. They forgot themselves,

and seemed to live only for her. Their

efforts were incessant, hopeless, and un-

availing. They were not so absurd as to

attempt consolation; they tried to open

new channels for her mind in every direc-

WOMEN* 151

I

tion, but the stream would flow no long-

er. Paintings, sculptures, books, every in-


tellectual luxury were in vain exhibited

at De Viosmenil's villa. Every thing in-

tended to interest Zaira, seemed only to

increase her sufferings, and her miserable

smile was latterly becoming worse than

tears. When strong intellectual powers

are combined with grief, the union is fatal.

The shallow superficial characters of the

world feel grief very lightly ; their tears

are as easily wiped as they are shed; to

those who are accustomed to think deeply,

grief is a fire that supplies its own fuel, and

can continue to burn when all outward

materials appear to be exhausted. Her

friends had hoped that a recurrence to her

former intellectual habits might have in-

terested Zaira ; they were mistaken. Her

former habits appeared to her like crimes,

for they all came armed with reproaches;

what ceases to please us, appears to con-

demn us for our lost sense of their charms ;

152 WOMEN.

and thus the wretched seem to themselves

like the guilty, for they suffer almost the

same pains, and dare not upbraid their ac-


cusers.

Zaira tried her former resources; she

weighed them in the balance, and found

them wanting, as all in their hour of cala-

mity must feel them. Books, paintings,

'•-music ; she tried them all—tried them with

the remains of her former powers, but with

no remains of her former enjoyment. The

terrible, heart-annihilating thought; the

cut bono apathy of soul that we feel when

the god of our earthly idolatry has quitted

the shrine, rushed on her whenever she at-

tempted to read, to think, to feel, to sing,

or even to look on nature. These former

friends of her heart seemed all turned

against her; she could not approach one

of them, without feeling that they exclaim-

ed, as with a living voice, " to what pur-

pose do you cultivate us now ?" She had

no answer; she had once clasped them to

WOMEN. 153

her heart, and cherished them there, and

now they seemed to return her embrace

with the stab of a smiling, beautiful, mur-


derous Arpega. She shrunk away from

their clasp, but the " iron had entered into

her soul."

Conversation then became her only re-

source. The Scavans who frequented De

Viosmenil's charming villa were eager to

avail themselves of the distinction which

her joining in their society gave it;—she

gave it, but could not enjoy it. She mixed

in society from an union of apathy and de-

spair not unusual; a state of mind in which

society may be a burthen, but solitude

would be madness. She could no longer

either communicate or receive ; but she

could bear the most frivolous sentiments

better than her own thoughts. She could

laugh with a facility that deceived those

who had no penetration, but could not now

shed a tear. Thus our misanthropy in-

F3

154 WOMEN.

creases in proportion with our inability to

be alone; and our dependence on society is

never so great as when we thoroughly de-


spise it.

Among the company that crowded to De

Viosmenil's villa, the most constant was M.

De Cardonneau, of whom already honour-

able mention has been made as an atheist, a

wretch who had no more heart than creed—•

no more sensibility than principle. But he

was a Scavan, was well received in society,

had imposing manners, and a fluency on

habitual topics ; he was a Macowen under

a different dispensation, that was all. This

man had been attached to Zaira for years,

as a .Frenchman is usually attached, with

all the powers, not of his heart, or soul, or

mind, but of his vanity, to which he would

have sacrificed all mankind, if he could.

In the hour of Zaira's eminence and pros-

perity he was proud to be admitted into

her society ; and magnified his consequence

by repeating her conversation to men, and

WOMEN. 155

her costume to women, who were not ho

noured by a nearer approach.

When he heard of Zaira's misfortunes,


his mind changed. He could not, like

Leonora Di Galigai, pretend to exercise

the power of a strong mind over a weak

one; but he knew that every mind is en-

feebled by suffering. He imagined, too,

that the natural excitability of the human

heart might prepare hers for a new impres-

sion, while it was yet warm from the pain-

ful process of the former being effaced; but,

above all, he founded his hopes on her suf-

ferings ; he knew (or, at least, he believed,)

she had no religion to oppose to those suf-

ferings, and on this he built his hopes. He

conceived, that if her principles were de-

stroyed, he might obtain influence over her

intellects, if not over her feelings. Perhaps

he wished to succeed, from the natural

anxiety of infidelity to make proselytes.

Those who feel they are walking in darkness

are glad of a companion. '

] 56 WOMEN.

He had too much sense to commence the

attack in the vulgar blasphemies of Paine,

by calling Christ an impostor, and the


apostles liars ; he tried to lead her into the

wild labyrinth of metaphysics, and had lit-

tle doubt of her losing herself, if he could

once get her there. One evening, as she,

De Viosmenil, and Cardonneau, were walk-

ing, the beauty of the stars, emerging in

sparkling succession in the deep blue hea-

ven, drew the eyes and thoughts of the

party upwards. They were silent; and De

Viosmenil was pleased to observe the tran-

quillity of her expression.

" It is impossible," said Zaira, " to look

on those bright mansions, and not conceive

them the abodes of bliss. ' Who dwell

happy there?'"

" None, probably, happier than the in-

habitants of this planet," said Cardonneau;

" and if their lot resembles ours, they have

no reason to complain of being incumbered

with too much felicity. It is not probable

WOMEN. 157

that all the sufferers in creation are crowd-

ed into this planet, that earth is the dun-

geon of the vast fabric of the universe. Evil


probably is every where—probably it pre-

ponderates every where—I argue from ana-

logy"—

" And I from grief," said Zaira, " that

forces us to look for relief to any place but

that where we are condemned to feel.it."

" Grief," said Cardonneau," reproduces

itself by its own fertility. Grief, driven to

extremity, becomes the parent of hope,—

hope produces delusion, and delusion brings

us back to grief again."

At these words, De Viosmenil, who saw

Zaira silently wipe away a tear, called on

them both to observe a beautiful meteor,

and tried to engage Zaira by a description of

a meteoric stone that had lately fallen in

the neighbourhood. She tried to listen to

him, but Cardonneau, who, like most other

atheists, was very cowardly, retired into the

house, dreading, perhaps, a similar explo-

158 WOMEN.

sion, and not coveting the fate of Pliny.

De Viosmenil smiled, and repeated to him-

self, " Parcus Deorum cultor et infrequens,


insanientis dum sapientias consultus erro,

nunc—namque Diespiter igni corusco nubi-

la dividens plerumque, per purum tonan-

tes egit equos, volucremque currum."

There was a numerous company in the

saloon. Zaira went to a window, drew

aside the curtain, and sat alone gazing on

the glorious night. Cardonneau approach-

ed softly; she did not perceive him; he

overheard her repeating to herself, " God

is love." He retreated—" If she is quoting

from the Bible," thought the tempter, " this

is no time for me."

A few moments after, when he hoped

the religious effervescence had subsided, he

ventured to approach again—" You no

longer find society interesting," said he ;

" those men cannot any longer amuse you,"

pointing to a groupe of literary men who

were conversing.

WOMEN. 159

" II n'y a point d'hommc pour celle qui

aime," said Zaira; " son amant est plus,

tous les autres sont moins."


He was rejoiced to hear her quote from

Rousseau, and congratulated himself that

half the work was done. " You are fond

of gazing on the night," said he ; " so am

I. This lovely light is congenial to grief,

the only permanent inmate of the human

heart."

" It is congenial to a feeling more su-

blime and salutary," said Zaira—" to the

hope of futurity. There is no sophistry in

the stars ; those hieroglyphics, those sacred

letters, traced by the finger of God, disclose

more of his mind to man, than he can learn

from the wisest of his fellow-mortals. I

look there, and forget all you have said."

" I shall take care to refresh your me-

mory, however," said Cardonneau to him-

self. " I have only said," he added, " what

the stars, if they speak truth, can ne\ er con-

tradict ; to gaze on the phenomena of na-

160 WOMEN.

ture for a consolation of grief is harmless ;

for grief is ' highfantastical f and whether-

it derives relief from the charms of nature


or of society, is little matter, provided re-

lief be obtained; but to apply to those phe-

nomena for a solution of the evils of life,

and imagine, because the stars are bright,

that their inhabitants are happy, is a wan-

dering of intellect."

" Malo cum Platone errare," said Zaira,

forcing a smile; " if my philosophy be

false, it is at least more comfortable than

yours."

" I congratulate you on its comforts,"

said Cardonneau, drily.

" And do you believe, then, I should feel

happier, if I believed, like you, the univer-

sal predominance of evil ?" said Zaira.

" If truth be an approach to happiness,

you certainly would."

" Lead me then to happiness your own

way, if it must be," said Zaira, with a me-

lancholy smile. " The general predominance

WOMEN. 161

of evil cannot be disputed; pain ushers us

into life, pain attends us through it, and

pain at length opens for us the gates of the


grave : but it is often rendered supportable

(nay enviable) by mental energy ; and phy-

sical evil may thus even be productive of

moral good."

" Physical and moral evil are separated

only in the dreams of theory," said Cardon-

neau. " They are closely allied in the ex-

perience of life; severe bodily sufferings

often produce the fiercest exacerbations of

mind; want makes men murderers and

robbers. I would not give much for the

morality of famine. Ugolino would have

cut my throat to give his children a meal.

When Louis XIV. laid waste the Palatinate,

or his Irish general (worthy of his master)

drove all the population of the adjacent

country under the walls of Londonderry,

to starve in the sight of their countrymen,

who could not assist them, don't you ima-

gine that many of the sufferers were driven

161 WOMEN.

to all the extremities of rage, blasphemy,

and despair, who might have been very mo-

ral men, but for their physical sufferings ?


. Do you conceive that they sat down, naked

and famishing among snows, to console

themselves with the thought of the moral

good to be deduced from their circum-

stances ?"

" To state extreme cases as examples may

be admissible," said Zaira; " but it can

scarcely be so to adduce them as general

principles in argument."

" They are not extreme cases," said Car-

donneau ; " those wretches whom we call

kings, intoxicated by the power of diffusing

misery, (which man always mistakes for

real power) have always rendered such cases

rather common than extreme. Look at his-

tory—what is it but a loathsome and weary-

ing repetition of one man, or community of

men, wresting the rod of power from the

hands of another to convert it into a scourge

for the weak ?"

WOMEN. 163

Cardonneau was proceeding to examples,

for he piqued himself on his powers of de-

clamation, and certainly there was an am-


ple field for them here; but Zaira inter-

rupted him.

" Crime and evil are generally public,

both from their nature and their conse-

quences," said she ; " but the very modes-

ty of virtue prevents its notoriety. There

is something very dramatic in evil; we

dwell long on the description of a storm or

a pestilence ; but who can fill his imagina-

tion with the idea of days without a cloud,

or write a diary of health that knows no in-

terruption ? Volumes have been filled with

the details of human misery; but who ever

wrote a book to tell mankind he was hap-

py ? Happiness is a single, perhaps an in-

communicable sentiment; but grief is in-

exhaustibly fertile and eloquent."

" The very circumstance of. the greater

abundance of the details of calamity should

164 WOMEN.

prove its greater quantum in life," said Car-

donneau.

" Perhaps not," replied Zaira; " grief,


compelled to look abroad for consolation

or compassion, must try to procure them

by a description of its sufferings; while

happiness requires only consciousness, and

stands in no need of witnesses. Were we

to form the true estimate of life, it should

be taken from man, not as he is represent-

edi in history, where all his worst feelings

are brought into action, but as he exists in

domestic life, where his best are generated

and cultivated."

" I fear," said Cardonneau, " if we had

the power, like le Diable Boiteux, to take

off the roof of every man's house and look

in, we should find ample confirmation of

the predominance of evil. Man, in the

struggles of public life, may be criminal,

but is rarely contemptible—his vices, like

the stage on which they are exhibited, are

great—but in domestic life the sufferings

WOMEN. 165

are wholly without grandeur, and our dis-

gust at meanness is only added to our hor-

ror of depravity. Could we look into the


cottage of the peasant with as much facili-

ty as their conspicuous station enables us

to view the palaces of princes, we should

find the same intrigue, vanity, envy, and

selfishness struggling for interest and for

power in the narrowest circle of domestic

life, as ever was read of in courts and cabi-

nets—and the history of the humblest in-

dividual for a single day, including the

petty subjects of domestic strife—the eager

pursuits of forbidden indulgence—the vain

attempts of the aged to maintain power

over rebellious youth—and the fierce strug-

gles of premature manhood for early eman-

cipation—the plots of brothers and sisters

to obtain an exclusive share of parental

partiality—or the dangerous and wicked

preference of a parent for one child, per-

haps the most worthless of all—the wars

and rumours of wars, in one single day, un-

166 WOMEN.

der one roof, ay, in one room—if we could

see it—would leave us little reason to sup-

pose that evil was confined to the greater


events and more prominent characters of

Kfe.—Perhaps," said he, pursuing the point

with increasing eagerness from its antici-

pated effect on Zaira's peculiar feelings—

" perhaps if any part of life might be sup-

posed more free from the predominant in-

fluence of evil than another, it would be

that of the liberal and cultivated man of

letters."—(Zaira sighed, and the atheist

caught a good omen from her sigh ; he de-

termined, however, to sketch the portrait

at a safe distance, and leave it to her con-

templation.) —" A man" he continued,

" who has studied books and nature; who

has learned from historical examples ,to

correct or avoid the evils of life ; and who,

while he is laying up stores of moral wis-

dom for the regulation of his conduct, is

also led by the very habit of study into a

course of rational and elegant enjoyment—

WOMEN. 167

or, if such a case be too rare, let us imagine

a man, (he was on his guard,) devoted to

some beautiful art, that occupies his heart,


his hands, and his time—whose life is pass-

ed in vicissitudes of pleasing toil, or of

public triumph—in whose favour the curse

pronounced on mankind seems to be re-

versed—whose devotion to his darling em-

ployment enables him to eat his bread, not

in the sweat of his brow, but with almost

as much pleasure, from the bare labour of

his hands, as its consummation gives to the

delighted spectator.—Well, may not such

men be happy ? may they not set life at

defiance ? may they not at least contrive to

cheat it of a smile ? the wisest and rarest

art ever practised. Let facts speak. Facts

proclaim loudly, too loudly, to leave an ex-

cuse to the wilful deafness of human pride,

or human negligence, that philosophers, and

poets, and artists are universally known to

be the most irritable, restless, and jealous

of mankind; and while their works breathe

168 WOMEN.

the most exalted sentiments, and the most

enchanting descriptions, and furnish the

most exquisite representations of nature,


physical or impassioned; and while the rea-

der, or spectator, imagines, that the being

who could write or feel, or even paint thus,

must be half in Heaven,—that being is an

utter stranger to the delights he can com-

municate so copiously and so richly, and

sits in his study or school, stung by ne-

glect, if unnoticed; mad with vanity, if

popular; tremblingly dependent on, and

meanly canvassing for the praise he affects

to despise; and frantic with rage or with

envy against the competitors, whom he

damns with faint praise, or writhing with

bitterer agony, pretends to disdain."——

" All intellectual persons," said Zaira,

collecting her broken voice, and forcing

herself to continue the debate from the mere

orphaned feeling of misery, from a determi-

nation to support this " bald disjointed

talk," lest the improvident kindness of

WOMEN. 169

friends might haply touch another, a feel-

ing like that of the Countess of Rousillon,

when she said to her clown,—' Well, sir",


for want of other foolery > I'll bide your

proof.' All intellectual persons are not

thus degraded; I have appeared in public,

and my success never was attended by one

pang of jealousy,"

" Because you" were superior to it," said

Cardonneau> " not only from the eminent

distinction of your talents, but from your

goodness of heart."

That was the worst point of his argu-

ment. Zaira shuddered at a compliment

now;—any thing that reminds us of our

former existence, when the spring and the

hope of it are lost, appears like a mixture

of insult and reproach. Cardonneau felt in

a moment he was on a wrong tack, and shift-

ed with instantaneous and admirable dex-

terity. " We must allow," said he, (ilfaut

avouer, the language a Frenchman uses

VOL. III. H

170 WOMEN.

when, by dint of idiom, he is passing his

own assertions for general truths,)—" We

must allow that human expectations should


he reduced to a very low standard indeed ;

but can our expectations be ever brought

so low as reality brings them ? Let us rate

the estimate of life as low as we can bring

it, health, peace, and competence at least

must be items in the sum—to enjoy peace

and comfort in any reasonable degree, or

indeed in any degree at all, (and that is no

very high demand,) we must certainly be

exempt from all fear of wanting food for the

day, and shelter for the night. Compared

to this distress, all intellectual agitation is a

farce, and all impassioned feeling a fever.

But is this exemption enjoyed by ten out

of twenty ? No, not perhaps by five; no,

(taking the ordinary vicissitudes of life into

account) not by one. What multitudes are

there whose sole occupation is to labour

every day for the bread that must be every

day consumed, and even on this hard con-

171

dition, how many are there who cannot ob-

tain it ? What multitudes are there who

cannot procure at the doors of their own


houses a share of the alms which they dis-

tributed with their own hands to mendi-

cants but a short space before ? But grant-

ing even, (what experience forbids us to

grant) that competence includes the whole

of life, is man then reduced to place his hap-

piness in living a life like that of the beasts

that perish, satisfied with daily food and

nightly shelter ? That man cannot have the

heart of man who can crawl through life

without a single tie of nature or of passion,

—without any thing to love beside himself,

—who can crouch into his hovel and munch

his sordid morsel in brutal silence, satisfied

that he has enough to protract his worth-

less existence while the many perish."

" Such a picture is horrid," said Zaira;

" but" (and her voice trembled as she con-

tinued the sentence) " has nature no ties ?

9

172 WOMEtf.

Has passion no charms ? May not many

sufferings be diminished or forgotten if we

love much ?"


" And if we do," said Cardonneau, eager

to catch his victim in her own snare, " on

how frail a foundation is even this pallia-

tive of misery placed ? If the object is hu-

man, it must be transient."

Tears fell fast from Zaira's eyes at these

words; and Cardonneau, whose object and

hope were to make her not feel, hastened

on to generalities. " Disease may corrode,

age must decay it, death must remove it;

and even while the objects we love remain

with us, they may be so changed by the

changes of life,—so altered by absence,—so

withered by misfortune,—so parched and

blasted by those winds that are for ever tra-

versing the deserts of life, that we may find

them likely to contribute to any thing but

our happiness.—No, they are spared only

to make us feel them drop, grain by grain,

WOMEN. 173

from our agonizing hands, and to learn it is

only sand we have grasped after all."

There was a long pause, till Zaira, col-


lecting rather her feelings than her powers

of reasoning, said,—" What is your object

in thus pressing on the mind the predomi-

nance of evil, as if it were a salvatory clause

in the creed of humanity ? What interest

can any human being have in disclosing to

another views that must blast the sight ?

Revelation has assured us that ' God is

love;' and this single sentence, if we believe

it, furnishes a refutation of all your argu-

ments, or a consolation."

" Revelation," said Cardonneau, who was

a very well-bred atheist, " is doubtless en-

titled to profound respect; but we may be

pardoned, if we refuse to surrender to that

respect the evidences of our senses, the sug-

gestions of our reason, the experience of

our lives. We are told that' God is love ;*

but we must look abroad for the proof,

174 "WOMEN.

which must be sought in his works. In the

creation of that Being who is love, we find

nothing but hatred and hostility; thecircum-


stances of man both physical and moral; his

nature as a savage, or his habits when civi-

lized ; the passions of his heart, or the insti-

tutions of society; the very elements them-

selves ; the earth on which he treads con-

vulsed by storms ; the air that he breathes

impregnated by pestilence—all seem sworn

against the happiness of man; and if he ob-

tains a short respite from these, his fellow-

creatures are perpetual instruments of per-

petually-recurring wretchedness; or place

him alone, the very abstraction from strug-

gle and difficulty, the very lassitude which

that abstraction generates, is the most hor-

rible sensation of all. Man becomes his

own enemy then, his inanity is the worst

of agonies, and, like the scorpion, he darts

into himself that sting, which has no longer

an enemy to pierce, and perishes by his own

WOMEN. 175

poison. Amid such a world (bis creation),

•where shall we recognize the ' God of love?'

Is it not obvious, beautiful and intelligent


>£aira, that if our creed, if our national my-

thology, intimated that an evil spirit had

created the earth, and was permitted to

amuse his malignity by the sufferings of its

inhabitants, that we could expect no worse

results than we daily witness or experi-

ence ?"

" You make me shudder," said Zaira, ri-

sing hastily ; " your expressions tremble

on the verge of blasphemy."

" What is blasphemy ?" said Cardonneau,

rising also, and following her. " In ancient

Athens or Rome, it would have been deny-

ing the divinity of Jupiter; in Constanti-

nople, decrying the impostor Mahomet;

in Madrid, speaking against the power of

the Inquisition ; or in Widah, that of the

Great Serpent."

Cardonneau was glad to take shelter for

176 WOMEN.

the time in these bewildering generalities,

as the divers in the gulph of Ormus, when

they see fish approaching to devour them,

feet.


try to escape by raising the mud with their

The next day Cardonneau was laid up

with a severe toothaeh. De Viosmenil sat

in his room for nearly an hour, during which

time the conversation ran in its usual chan-

nel ; Cardonneau talking the whole time

like an atheist, or, in his own phrase, en phi-

losophe.

At last, De Viosmenil, weary of him and,

his subject, rose to depart.

" Ab, stay !" said Cardonneau, announ-

cing in the same breath defiance of God

and dependence on man—" Stay a little

longer; I am in horrible pain ; stay, and

if philosophy displeases you, I will talk

tres rcligicusement."

De Viosmenil was not tempted to stay,

oven by this promise.


WOMEN. 177

The next day the toothach had ceased,

and Cardonneau was able to talk blasphemy

as well as ever.

178 WOMEN.

CHAPTER VIII.

Of good and evil much they argued then ;

Of happiness and final misery,


Passion and apathy, and glory and shame-

Vain wisdom all, and false philosophy.

MILTON.

ZAIRA was in no mood to hear him. She

had felt deeply her deficiency in the argu-

ment the preceding evening, and was an-

xious to supply it, before she was again

called on to controversy. In grief, the

mind is very apt to blame itself; it acquires

a species of irritability, which it is disposed

to vent even at its own expense—a kind of

suicidal hostility. We imagine we cannot

too much punish the heart that has cost us

so much.

WOMEN. J 79

Zaira now blamed herself for not having

studied the evidences of revealed religion

in her happier hours, though she felt that


those hours presented little motive for such

studies. Idolized and flattered then, she

was contented with a general admission

of abstract truths, and even gave herself

much credit for thinking so well of the

other world, while the present was full of

charms and honours—it was a kind of fair-

weather religion, fit for the happy—but now

that the storm came on, she was forced to

look to the tackle of the threatened vessel,

and see whether it was fit to ride out the

gale. Grief certainly leads more to think

of religion than joy does. Singular pheno-

menon of the human mind! One would

imagine that the effusion of gratitude was

as natural as the supplication for support:

It is not so however, for the reading-desks

in our churches are loaded with requests to

pray for the sick, and there is scarcely ever

an acknowledgment of gratitude from the

180 WOMEN.

*

convalescent, though there is an appropriate

form for each. As in the days of Christ,


of the nine cleansed, only one returns to

give glory. Thus, joy leads us to commu-

nion with man, who can share it; and grief

to communion with God, who alone can re-

lieve it.—Which is best ?

Zaira betook herself to study the evi-

dences of religion with a kind of satisfaction

derived from the feeling that it was her

duty. Oh how soon, when unhappy, we

fly to duties as a kind of atonement; how

closely are the ideas of suffering and guilt

connected in all human minds !

Zaira was unfortunate in undertaking

this study in France, where there is a

" plentiful scarcity" of such works. She

enquired in vain for Stillingfleet's " Ori-

gines Sacra?," for Leland's " Account of

Deistical Writers," for Browne's " Answer

to Shaftesbury," for the masterly work of

Paley on the " Evidences of Christianity,"

and that of her living countryman, Murray,

WOMEK. 181

(one of the best of them all). No such books

could be had—nothing but Chateaubriant,

andhis "Genie du Christianisme," (so called)


a frivolous, superficial, gaudy, French work,

reminding us perpetually of the necessity

of condoling with the angels, who, we are

told by Shakespeare, weep when men " play

such fantastic tricks before high Heaven."

What could Zaira make of a writer who

substitutes for a proof of the Trinity an illu-

sion drawn from the threefold appearance of

the sun, at his rising, meridian, and setting ?

She toiled on through floods of eloquent

nonsense; and les femmes Scavantes, who

visited at Viosmenil's villa, looked over her

shoulder as she read, exclaimed, " Monsieur

Chateaubriant! Ah qu'il est charm ant!"

and tried to apply to the author of " Genie

du Christianisme" the pun of a Frenchwo-

man on the title of Montesquieu's work,

who said, " L? Esprit des loix," should have

been " Esprit sur lea loiv"

All this did Zaira no good; she was

5

182 WOMEN. •

wearied to death by Monsieur Chateau-

briant; there was no standing his

" Cages for gnats, and chains to yoke a flea,


Dried butterflies, and tomes of casuistry."

POPE.

I

When under the power of strong emotion,

nothing but truth can satisfy the soul.

When the unhappy Dodd was going to

execution, he exclaimed, " All will be real

in a few moments!" We pant for this reality

in grief, for we feel that half our sufferings

have been owing to illusion. Zaira began

to wish to hear the worst that could be said

on the other side—dangerous curiosity!

Like Pilate, she could have asked, " What

is truth ?" a question to which no answer

was returned, doubtless because it was ask-

ed in presumption or impatience. This

restlessness, however, was owing to her suf-

ferings.

When our minds' are at peace; when we

are at ease in our possessions; when we

WOMEN.

are " settled on our lees," we are disposed

to be very well satisfied with the present

state of things—the national religion and


the church as by law established, all inclu-

ded—and we are ready to raise an outcry

against those who seek to disturb us. But

misfortune forces us to dig to the founda-

tions, and we toil hard, and dive deep, if

we may indeed find a drop of water to

cool the flames that are devouring our very

souls.

The next time they conversed, Cardon-

neau was more on his guard. He remem-

bered she had been shocked by some of his

former expressions; he watched himself.

" Peu a peu," said Cardonneau to himself,

" if I can get her to confess that she is

thoroughly miserable, it will be easy enough

to lead her to throw the blame of it from

herself on the Deity; and a Deity that has

once come to be blamed is good for no-

thing ever after. Oh, if I can get her to

tbatJ then"

184 WOMEN.

" So spake the spirited sly snake;" and

he began his next meditated attack more

and more en philosophe; he spoke of


Christianity as of something he wished well

to, and was willing to treat with lenity.

He spoke of it like one making the best of

a bad cause, and wishing, with all his sin-

cere soul, that it was a better one, " God

defend me from my friends," says some in-

telligent Frenchman, " and I will take care

of my enemies."

He began his circumvallations far and

wide, like a skilful besieger; the garrison

must have had supernatural sight to descry

his approaches. He lamented ike prevalence

of evil, like one who was humanely lament-

ing human calamity, not metaphysically

searching into its causes. Zaira, in the im-

patient agony of a wounded spirit, tried to

call him back to the subject. He appeared

to submit to her commands, executed an

incomparable French shrug, and performed,

with eloquent circumlocution and admira-

WOMEN. 185

ble colloquial navigation, a kind of coast-

ing voyage round and round the forbidden

shore, without ever touching on one of its


dangerous bearings. This would not do for

Zaira; she went straight to the point, to

the origin of evil, that tremendous rock,

against which the human mind may lie

beating till it becomes a wreck. Cardon-

neau appeared to listen with a kind of de-

ferential reluctance, and confessed the sub-

ject beyond his comprehension.

" It has occurred to me," said Zaira,

" when I have thought on the subject, that

evil is owing to the necessary imperfection

of created beings. Divinity alone is per-

fect ; every created being may fall, how far

depends on himself; and thus evil may be

perpetually generated by what constitutes

the essential difference between the Creator

and the created, the want of absolute and in-

fallible perfection on the part of the latter."

" That is plausible," said Cardonneau,

with the air of a man who wishes to be

186 WOMEN.

convinced, " but it cannot account for the

predominance of evil in the creation—the

end of the Deity in creation would be


frustrated—It would reduce the whole sys-

tem to a God, and a universe of demons

— a monstrous and frightful hypothesis.

Even your great English philosopher,* in

his observations on Soame Jennings's fool-

ish pamphlet, confesses, ' we can easily

conceive how evil comes into the world,

but we cannot so easily conceive why there

is so much of it, or why there might not be

less.' If you were introduced into the house

of a man, remarkable for his placidity and

philanthropby, and who was perpetually

announcing his wish to make his family

happy, would you not be surprised at find-

ing every head bent down, and every eye

filled with tears, to hear on every side the

wailings of wretchedness and discontent—

Dr Johnson,

WOMEN.

in effect, to witness as much misery as could

be inflicted by a domestic tyrant, or suffer-

ed by his dependents ?"


" Not if their sufferings arose from them*

selves," said Zaira. " The master of a fa-

mily is not answerable for the wilful mis-

conduct of his children and domestics."

" That is the disadvantage of arguing

from metaphor," said Cardonneau ; " the

features in the resemblance are only inci-

dental, no man is created a servant,—in

the original they are essential, for every

man is born a sufferer, physically or men-

tally, or both perhaps—both certainly."

Through this " war of words" Zaira

fought her way, and she endeavoured to

make it plain that nine-tenths of human

sufferings are owing to the agent himself;

and her heart supplied her with that terri-

ble eloquence of experience, before which

all eloquence is dumb or is weak.

" You are mocking human wretched-

ness," said Cardonneau, " when you speak

188 WOMEN.

thus, when you describe the misery of

man as arising from himself—does it not

in a million of cases arise from circum-


stances over which man has no controul;

from habit, from national institutions, from

national religion, from power in unjust

hands? Could the Helots be happy in

Sparta ?—Could Galiko be happy in the

dungeons of the Inquisition ?—Could Re-

gulus be happy in his tub ?—Could Lati-

mer and Ridley and Hooper be happy

when the fresh, green,* slow-burning wood

was kindled round their shrinking, scorch-

ing limbs ?"

He had gone too far ; he was treading on

hallowed ground—ground unfit for him to

touch ; he had not put off his mortal san-

dals when he ventured to approach it.

Zaira seized the point with all the powers

of her imagination.

* Vide Hume's History of England.

WOMEN. 189

*' Yes," said she, her beautiful face flush-

ed for a moment, as if it reflected the flames

in which the martyrs perished,—"Yes, they


were happy—they suffered for the truth,

and they went to God—Yes, they were

happy—and their happiness, amid the most

horrible extreme of physical suffering, dis-

proves the argument that human misery

depends on external causes."

Cardonneau felt his hopes sink within

him at these words—they indicated religi-

ous feeling—he was aghast—a new enemy

had started up—he knew not what to make

of her; Zaira, declaiming in the tone of

" Taylor and the Book of Martyrs !" Then,

with rapid French (penetration, he concei-

ved all this was said pour facon, and he

shifted directly. He appeared like a man

who had listened merely to declamation,

and was waiting to finish his sentence when

the interruption was over,

" I was going," said he, with an air of

patient deference, " I was going to men-

190 WOMB*?.

tion causes, barely physical, as productive

of human misery—(there he thought he

was safe)—climate, for instance. When


Nature is armed against man, (as she is

over three-fourths of the globe,) what de-

fence can he make, and what consolation

can he seek ? No man can be an agent in

being born in a particular climate ; it can

neither be matter of choice or of blame :

yet how much of human happiness or mi-

sery depends on the degree of latitude in

which we exist."

Zah-a, no longer able to rely on her ima-

gination ; on the unprompted facility of a

happy mind, that pours out its conceptions

and images with felicitous and unlaboured

luxuriance, was now searching her memory

for something to oppose to his argument.

She felt it to be false, but had not spirit

now to encounter it m the abstract; she

tried to shelter herself-under particular in-

stances of opposition. She spoke of Ice-

land, a country that seems to have incurred

WOMEN. 191

the wrath of all the elements ; a country of

fire and frost, the Cam of inanimate nature,

branded and rejected and set apart from its


species. " Yet in this country," said Zaira,

" literature is cultivated to a degree un-

known in the most delicious regions; and

a woman is not suffered to marry till a

priest furnishes a certificate of her being

able to read, and being acquainted with the

poetical histories of the island."

" A solitary instance is no argument,"

said Cardonneau; " I appeal to the 'gene-

ral state of the universe; its physical cir-

cumstances are such as to exclude a majo-

rity of its inhabitants from the bare parti-

cipation of comfort, (Cardonneau was obli-

ged to naturalize an English word)—What

is the state of the inhabitants of the Ork-

neys, of Lapland, of Siberia ? Does not the

mere climate under which they live con-

demn the natives to a state below that of

intellectual beings,—to a state little above

that of the animals whom they destroy for

192 WOMEN.

the support of their miserable existence, of

the uncouth furniture of their den-like

huts ?"•—(And as he spoke, Cardonneau ra.-*


pidly turned over a superb collection of en*

gravings illustrative of the costume of the

inhabitants of the north of Europe.) " Per-

haps," said he, " the most miserable fea-

ture in the situation of these Farias qfhu*

manity, is that their bare representation

furnishes a subject of wonder and curiosity

to their more enlightened fellow-creatures;

that we are gazing at them this moment as

we would at the figures of animals in some

wild remote country, and blessing ourselves

that no such monsters are indigenous to our

soil."

He went on in the triumph of his soul,

and he spoke of the Boshiesmen, near the

Cape of Good Hope, and of the Albinos,

and of the men mentioned by Locke (in his

Quixotic combat with the wind-mill giants

of innate ideas), who had no name for a spi-

ritual being, and can reckon no further than

WOMEN. 198

their fingers, (offering their hairs as a substi-

tuted symbol for a number beyond five;)

and he was still going on, when it occurred


to him, (though a Frenchman,) that a wo-

man must be allowed one moment to speak.

" All your positions," said Zaira, " tend

to prove that misery is the lot of those who

have not attained intellectual cultivation.

If'lions could paint" she continued, trying

to exert her former pleasantry—she failed

in the attempt. An internal monition,—a

blow on the heart struck her at the nu>-

ment,—she struggled with it,—struggled

vainly, and burst into tears. Cardonneau

was instantly and intently employed in ex-

amining the engravings. Zaira dried her

tears, and went on with the conversation,

" as well as she might."

" Do not imagine," said Cardonneau,

" that I absurdly ascribe all the sufferings

of man to the climate he lives under. He

ftas more enemies than Nature. But where

tyranny of the elements ceases, that of

VOL. III. I

194 WOMEN.

his fellow-men commences. A being who

is enabled, by the progress of society, to con-

struct a habitation that will defend him from


their inclemency, to furnish it with what

may contribute to his comforts, and to be

within the reach of all that he may want,

from being surrounded by other men and

their habitations, is certainly a being of

much less privations and physical suffering

than the savage; but then he has sold his

liberty for his indulgence. From that mo-

ment, he becomes liable to all the evils of

society, viciously constituted ;—he must

fight in a cause that he is neither interest-

ed about, or conscientiously justified in, if

his rulers please;—he must march to cut

the throats of men he has never seen, at the

command of one for whom he does not

care;—he must submit to have his property

drained by taxation, to support schemes

which even those who devise them do not

understand. And even supposing him ex-

empt from the prescriptive evils of politi-

WOMEN. 195

cally-constituted society, he must submit

to all the evils of opinion, the false standard

of morals and manners perpetually erected


in society by those who take on them to be

arbiters of its internal structure ;—dissimu-

lation must be his study, and hypocrisy his

pride. He must for ever smile on those he

hates, and often look coldly on those he

loves; his joy must be art, and his very

grief affectation. Is such a state more en

viable than that of the savage ? Or rather,

does it not often combine the sufferings of

savage life, hunger, cold, and nakedness,

(for many have perished for want in civili-

zed society,) with the evils of a sophistica-

ted mind, artificial manners, and all the

luxurious impotence of a vitiated debility ?"

" The end of your commonwealth for-

gets the beginning," said Zaira, forcing a

faint smile. " You began by proving the

miseries of savage life, and you end by pro-

ving the superior wretchedness of civilized

life."

196 WOMEN.

" I have only supported my general ar-

gument," said Cardonneau, " by demonstra-

ting the essential and predominant wretch-


edness of both."

" But," said Zaira, who saw the use he

was going to make of this point when he

had established it, " Is it fair to charge on

the destiny of man those evils of which he

himself is the author ? Are not more than

half the sufferings of life wilfully inflicted

by man on himself? Is not disease owing

to intemperance, and is not mental wretch-

edness the result of ungoverned passion ?"

" Are the diseases of infants, which of-

ten continue to affect the constitution

through life, the consequence of intempe-

rance ?" said Cardonneau ; " and is not the

cureless malady of a broken heart a suffer-

ing always inflicted by others, from whom

we have perhaps deserved better ?" Zaira,

struggling with the feelings roused by this

appeal, was unable to answer,—

8

WOMEN. 197

" The tempter saw his time, the work he plied."

" We are born," said he, " with a constitu-

tion the prey of disease, and with a mind the


victim of passions—Are we agents in either?

We are not the cause of our own existence,

though we are inevitable sufferers by th«

.consequence." (He turned quickly, and with,

an air of inconsequence, to a book that lay on

the table,—he had markedand doubled down

the passage for the purpose that morning ;

it was Lord Valentia's Travels, and he

turned to a strong description of a storm

which the author witnessed in the East In-

dies;-—darkness was over all the land for

hours. The business of life was suspend-

ed—fear froze the soul of every man, prince

and slave,—one person died of mere actual

terror.) " This person," said Cardonneau,

" was not a voluntary agent in his own suf-

ferings and horrible death. He might have

been a mild, benevolent, inoffensive being:

198 "WOMEN.

most probably he was; such persons are

often constitutionally timid. Yet, can we

imagine a death more hideous and dismal,


on the rack, or at the stake, than a death

caused by mere terror ? Recollect also,

that this feeling could not be powerful

enough to cause his dissolution without ha-

ving been the inmate of his heart and na-

ture for years;—he must all his life-long

have been in bondage to it;—he must have

felt every day that ' fear which hath tor-

ment ;'—he must for ever have been depend-

ent on the " beggarly elements;"—when-

ever he rose in the morning he gazed on

the atmosphere with anxious wretchedness,

to know whether he was to pass the day in

torture. Every passing cloud, every rising

breeze, every whirl of dust was like the mi-

nister of death to his soul;—under this bur-

then of existence he lingered, writhed, and

died. Can more consummate misery be

imagined? No tyrant has it in his power

to inflict any thing like this; yet there was

WOMEN. 199

110 guilt here, I mean ho guilt connected

•with such sufferings. He was not answer-

able for the gathering of the clouds, or the


dispersion of the dust that filled the air

for forty miles. Nor was one deviseable

purpose, even in reference to a future state,

to be answered by this wretch's expiring

under feelings that might have made him

envy a martyr in the fire. Sufferings we

are told are intended to make us better;

but what benefit, here or hereafter, could be

derived from his ? Were his virtues exalted,

or his love of the Deity inflamed by such a

state of feeling ?—I trow not."

" If suffering does not purify us," said

Zaira, " it is our own fault."

" You do not speak as you feel," said

Cardonneau.

Zaira could only weep in answer.

" Nothing can be more absurd," said

Cardonneau, " than to talk of the benefi-

cial effect of suffering—nothing can be

more contrary to experience. The pride of

200 WOMEN.

the ancients enabled them to defy it, or to

talk as if they did—which conies to the

•same thing with the readers. And the pe-


culiar theology of Christians has taught

them to speak of the benefit of sufferings ;

but they are obliged to take all on credit,

and draw on futurity for what time can-

not afford to pay them. But look to life,

not to theory; look not to what men should

do, but to what they really are doing. Ex-

perience teaches that sufferings, whether

physical or mental, so far from acting as

emollients on the heart and passions, tend

generally to imbitter the one, and exaspe-

rate the other. Is there any place where

less patience is to be found than in an

hospital ? How many pious ejaculations are

wafted in the curses, groans, and inarticu-

late imprecations of afield of battle? Grief

itself, though more refined in its expres-

sion, is not less hostile. Grief, violent grief,

generally at first vents itself in blasphemy,

WOMEN. 201

and then sinks into a kind of querulous

sullenness."

" You have spoken only of suffering,"


said Zaira; " you have yet to mention

what ample resources a cultivated intellect

can oppose to pain. All that the mind can

suffer, the mind, properly armed, can also

repel."

" That is the false language of a theo-

rist," said Cardonneau ; " the language of

one who has reached the top of the house

by help of a ladder, and then draws it up

after him, and bids the gazers below follow

him at their leisure. When we speak of in-

tellectual resources, of the oil which they

effuse over the storms of life, we should re-

collect that those resources are in the power

of a very few. The Deity, we are told,

has declared, that in the sweat of man's

brow he shall eat his bread; and certainly

he has kept his word. The bare care of

providing for subsistence, for food for the

12

202 WOMEN.

day that is passing over them, occupies

about nine-tenths of our species. What

time, what opportunity have they for in-


tellectual improvement, or philosophical

discussion ? I grant that an enlarged mind

can reason evil almost out of its nature,

certainly out of its' power, but what means

have savages and slaves to attain enlarge-

ment of mind ? (and all men are either sa-

vages or slaves.) The wild naked wan-

derer on the banks of Senegal, or of the

Lake Ontario, who rises at the break of

day to obtain with his bow and arrow

provision for the day ; and ' the pale artist

who plies the sickly trade,' in a close shop

in the unwholesome streets of Paris or of

London, are bound down by the same

yoke of necessity—they must toil daily to

live daily—their thoughts must be of the

earth, earthly. What can enlarged intel-

lect do for them, but mock their misery by

objects of hopeless and impossible attain-

ment ? They may form subjects of specu-

WOMEN. 203

lation to a philosopher, but can they ever

hope to be philosophers themselves ?"

He paused—Zaira was silent; he went


on Avith irresistible eagerness, with all the

eloquence of vice, more eloquent than vir-

tue, because more in need of rhetorical

support, and trusting its cause chiefly to

words. He went on successfully—we spare

our readers his arguments. The sum of

them was this:—Either there is no God,

or, if there is, he is a Being wholly insen-

sible to human actions and their conse-

quences. The predominance of evil in crea-

tion is irreconcileable with the idea of the

active presidency of a benevolent Being;

it intimates either a want of power, or a

want of will, to remove that evil which

defaces creation, and (in the apprehension

of all finite judgments) frustrates the ob-

ject of the Creator. Now Omnipotence

cannot be charged with want of power;

want of will, therefore, or the want of es-

sential benevolence in the nature of the

6

204 WOMEN.

Deity, is the next conclusion ; but there is

something so frightful and appalling in this

that atheism itself seems a relief to it.


" Must atheism be my refuge then ?"

said Zaira, pausing at the brink of the pre-

cipice to which he had led her, and view-

ing the blackness of the gulph beneath, im-

measureable, impenetrable. " Is this the

region, this the soil, the clime?" said then

the lost archangel.

" The alternative is necessary," said Car-

donneau.

" And tremendous," added Zaira—and

she retired to do the worst thing she could

—to deliberate on it.

That evening there was a numerous com-

pany at De Viosmenil's ; he had observed

her lately, and feared she was listening too

much to Cardonneau; he sought to di-

vide her attention by numbers. The even-

ing was so serene and beautiful that some

of the company were dispersed through

the gardens, while the rest were seated in

AVOMEN. 205

a saloon, whose large glass doors opened

on it, and which was illuminated only by

the bright moon, thus they appeared to be


together; the same pure element was re-

spired and enjoyed by both, whether in the

saloon or garden.

In France, nothing is more usual than

the discussion of abstract questions on the

most important subjects. The company,

as they wandered through the gardens,

spoke of the immortality of the soul, and

the being of a God, with the perfect ease of

continental latitudinarianism. The scene,

and the conversation, brought strongly to

the recollection of Zaira that resplendent

passage in Tacitus that precedes the aer

count of the death of Thrasea, " Turn ad

Thraseam, in hortis agentem, quaestor con-

sulis missus, advesperascente jam die. In^

lustrium virorum faeminarumque coetus

frequentes egerat, maxime intentus De-

metrio, Cynicas institutionis doctori, cum

quo, ut conjectare erat intentione vultus et

auditis (si qua clarius proloquebantur,) de

206 WOMEN.

natura animae et dissociatione spiritus cor-

porisque inquirebat, donee advenit Domi-

tius Caecilianus," &c. She repeated these


lines to Cardonneau, who observed, that the

ancients, at least, possessed the advantage

of a free discussion of the most awful sub-

jects that the mind of man can admit or

contemplate. " In modern society," said

he, " we are ' hedged up unto the faith;'

revealed religion has done so much for us,

that we have no discoveries to make for

ourselves ; and if we had, we dare not—or-

thodoxy stops our mouths at every turn;

the empire of the ocean of futurity is pos-

sessed by a mighty power, who does not

suffer a single bark to sail on a voyage of

discovery. In Greece they managed mat-

ters much better."

" Not in Greece, surely," said De Vios-

menil, " where they persecuted Anaxago-

ras for teaching the elements of the Coper-

nican system, with as much virulence as

the Inquisition, centuries after, persecuted

Galileo for the same crime, and where

WOMEN. 207

Socrates was put to death for introducing

Ka/w ©«?. When you speak of liberality,

my friend, forget that the ancients existed."


" The liberty of conversation they cer-

tainly allowed, and encouraged," said Car-

donneau; " and I cannot but think that the

Dialogue of Thrasea and Demetrius was a

much better induction to the death of a ra-

tional being discussing those sublime sub-

jects, when he is just on the point of pro-

ving the truth or the falsehood of his argu-

ments, than the manner in which we pre-

pare for it—a darkened chamber, closed

curtains, tiptoe attendants, silent friends,

and the hireling prayers of an ecclesiastical

pedant."

Zaira's attention was drawn away by

some of the company coming in from the

garden, and concluding their debates on

" fixed fate, free-will, foreknowledge abso-

lute," by proposing to try the sortes Vir-

gilianse—Singular vacillation of the human

mind between scepticism and the blindest

credulity!

208 AVOMEN.

Cardonneau said it was perfectly natu-

ral—that the restless pain of the human

mind was for ever impelling it to make


these wide excursions, and traverse the

whole extent of intellectual space between

the frigid zone of infidelity and the torrid

one of superstition.—" It is a pity it does

not rest in the temperate one of religion at

Jast," said De Viosmenil. The company

were now learning their fate from the pages

of Virgil. Zaira looked on ; she involun-

tarily remembered that night in Dublin

when she had tried them—and when she

was called on to follow the example of the

rest, she shrunk away. She saw Cardon-

neau's smile of derision, and, ashamed of

having incurred, or encountered it, she ad-

vanced timidly. It was a singular acci-

dent, that this evening also she should

open on a passage equally significant,-—

*r Tune vero infelix, fatis exterrita Dido,

Mortem orat, taedet coeli convexa tuerf.''

WOMEN.

She stood aghast; it seemed as if the

finger of Heaven was writing her destiny

even on a page that she opened by acci-


dent. De Viosmenil tried to divert her

attention by repeating the often-repeated

remark on the ignorance of astronomy, so

obvious in the expression fs cceli convexa."

He felt in a moment the attempt was

vain. Cardonneau repeated almost audibly,

" Another JEneas may be found."

Zaira retired at these words, which inti-

mated more of Cardonneau's mind than he

had yet ventured to shew—she retired to

think, but not of him. She surveyed her

splendid apartment with a melancholy ah-;

flowers were there, whose fragrance she was

no longer sensible of—books, which she no

longer enjoyed, or indeed understood—her

harp was there, which she never touched.

These instruments of pleasure areaperpetual

reproach to us when we are under the influ-

ence of grief; we try to transfer the reproach

to them, and complain that they have lost the

210 WOMEN.

power of pleasing, because we dread to tell

ourselves that we have ceased to be plea-

sed. She turned from them all in infinite,


unspeakable loathing of soul. She threw

herself beside the window, and gazed long

on the lovely moon ; the objects of nature

always suggest or cherish a delicious me-

lancholy ; their very silence appears a kind

of speechless consolation to the unfortunate;

" there is no language, but a voice is heard

among them." The objects of art, on the

contrary, always present themselves as mi-

nisters of pleasure, and insult us by their

presence, when they become only the re-

membrances of sensations which they no

longer excite, but by the force of con-

trast.

Zaira sat long at the window ; the clock

struck two,—all was hushed in the house.

The beauty of the night seemed increased

and confirmed by this suspension of all hu-

man existence. No one spoke, moved, or

breathed. There was a kind of spiritual glo-

WOMEN. Sll

ry in the light and in the hour. The wretch-

ed Zaira, parched by that fever of the soul,

•whose thirst no water on earth can be found


to quench, quitted her room and wandered

into the garden. The garden seemed too con-

fined for her ; her heart burned within her;

the atheistical sentiments of Cardonneau had

taken strong hold of her mind ; her philo-

sophical religion made but a poor defence

against them. Grief took their part with

terrible power ; yes, grief, that irresistibly

impels the mind to the extreme either of

religion or of scepticism. A mediocrity of

religion is not suited to a strong crisis of

feeling. She found a kind of miserable re-

lief in plunging into the darkness of atheism

—religion had not light enough for her—

it must be a mild habitual light, to whose

benign diffusion we have long been ac-

customed, before we can participate in

its comforts—but absolute scepticism fur-

nishes us with a sudden desperate promise

of relief. There are no gradations, no pre-

212 WOMEN.

paratory steps; we rush into it, and at-

tain a horrible sullen repose.

Perhaps there were other causes that in-


fluenced Zaira in the present state of her

mind;—in grief we certainly do not wish

to ascribe our sufferings to an intelligent

cause—it is more consoling to think that

chance, or blind fate, is armed against

us. An intelligent being promises no re-

spite to our sufferings; if they proceed

from intention, there is no knowing where

they may end, and we must always con-

nect the idea of guilt with them, for an

intelligent being cannot be supposed to in-

flict sufferings without provocation ; while

the inflictions of chance are obviously

.arbitrary, and though they may excite

in us a species of resentment at the HV-

dignity we suffer from mechanical uncon-

scious causes, certainly justify us from all

responsibility about it, and make us look to

relief from causes as unexpected as those

that produced our calamities.—There have

WOMEN. 213

been unhappy people who have said, ** I

dare not thank the Deity for the few

gleams of comfort I enjoy, for then I must


also refer my sufferings to him, and they

are by far the most numerous."

To think that God is angry with and

punishes us, is a tremendous thought,—a

thought that has driven the strongest minds

to incurable madness,—to ascribe our dis-

tress to the physical operation of a neces-

sary cause, arms us with a stubborn reso-

lution, that knows little pain, and no re-

morse. Thus she was rapidly taking shel-

ter in the enemy's camp. The garden, with

its placid regular beauty, tortured her by

its contrast to the agitation of her soul. A

gate, at the extremity of it, opened into

a wood; she hurried into that wood, its

darkness was as light unto her, it seem-

ed as a shelter from her own thoughts, and

she fled to it with avidity. Nature, in all

its rich and exhaustless luxuriance, has no-

214 WOMEN.

thing to the eye or to the soul so delirious

as the mild splendour of moonlight, shed

over the darkness of a forest. There is


darkness beneath for the unhappy to muse

—there is light above for the happy to gaze

on—and the trembling gleams between the

branches give a strong image of life, che-

quered indeed with fitful and precarious

lustre, but of which the predominant image

is gloom—diversified, but essential.

Zaira wandered on ; the beauty of the

night, the mildness of the climate, pre-

cluded all apprehension from her wander-

ing at this late hour. She found herself in

a part of the wood where the thick-min-

gling branches excluded all light, but a

tremulous and checquered gleam, that ap-

peared and disappeared among the foliage

above, as it was agitated slightly by the

breeze. Suddenly a figure appeared to her

in the darkness ; a white figure, as large as

life. She started at first, but a moment af-

WOMEN. SIS

\

ter approached it; just where it seemed to

stand, the trees opened a little, and the


moonlight fell strongly on it, producing a

remarkable and solemn effect. It was a fi-

gure of Christ on the cross, which had been

taken from a ruined church in the neigh-

bourhood, and placed there by the peasant-

ry. It was of wood, but it was well execu-

ted, and the light that fell on it at once

concealed its defects, and magnified its ex-

pression. What an object for a mind in the

state of Zaira's !—Accident, that had so of-

ten presented her with the most terrible

omens, seemed in this to seek to make

atonement. The image of the Saviour of

the world hanging on the cross a sacrifice

for mankind, surrounded by darkness, and

concentrating and reflecting the light sole-

ly from his own figure, was an intuitive

symbol of relief. She approached it, as she

would the presence of a friend. The pale

and dying countenance, the woe-bent head,

the outspread arms, seemed to unite the

216 WOMEN.

expression of suffering and protection—sin-

gular but intelligible combination. None

can pity but those who have suffered. " He


that suffered, being tempted, is able to suc-

cour those that are tempted."

As Zaira gazed on this figure, it seemed

to live, to speak to her. Texts of scripture

rushed on her heart, as if whispered to it

by the Deity. She appeared to hear these

sounds issuing audibly from the lifeless lips

of the figure—" Come unto me, all ye that

are weary and heavy-laden, and I will give

you rest." She obeyed the call thus echoed

from the bottom of her heart; she prostra-

ted herself before the cross. Her spirit

was bowed down along with her body, as

she exclaimed, " Oh, my God! accept a

heart that has wandered, but longs to re-

turn to its Saviour. Purify it, regenerate

it, fill it with the love of you alone. Had

it known no other but yours, it had never

been almost broken. Let your Spirit de-^

scend on it, and aid me to struggle with

WOMEN. 217

that itaage, for which all its pulses have

beat, which has been wrapt in its very core.

You alone are worthy of that place, which


a mortal has too long usurped. Vindicate

it for yourself, and set me free. Deliver

me into the glorious liberty of the children

of God, unconscious of any presence, inca-

pable of admitting any image, but your's;

dead to the world, and absorbed in God

alone."

Bu| though she uttered these words, it

seemed as if some inner winding of her

treacherous heart was disclosed to her, where

the image of Charles rested, and defied the

power even of heaven to displace him. It

seemed to her as if she dreaded lest her own

prayers should be heard; and that if the

Deity had that moment offered to efface

that image for ever from her soul, to make

it as the image of one she had never seen,

or seen always with indifference, she w ould

have shrunk from the offer, and implored

any other infliction at his hands.

VOL. III. K

218 WOMEN.

The discovery of this self-betraying du-

plicity, this treachery of the heart, at a mo-

ment when she believed herself all-sincere,


flung her into an agony—she grovelled at

the foot of the cross—she pressed her bosom

to the cold earth, as if crushing her heart

could change it—she inwardly petitioned

the mercy of God, with groanings that can-

not be uttered.—Alas ! this paroxysm of

feeling had nothing in alliance with that

broken and contrite state of heart, which

we are told God will not despise; it was

the agony of those who love, not the " de-

sire of such as be sorrowful."—She had

sought God in the whirlwind and the earth-

quake, but God was not there.

The exhaustion of her feelings by their

own vehemence was the only relief she ex-

perienced. She waited prostrate on the

ground for the answer of heaven—she wait-

ed for some dawning of light on her soul—

some smile from the divine countenance—

WOMEN. 219

some fluttering of the dove, as his wings,

outspread in heaven, prepared to descend

on her soul.—" There was no voice, nor any


that answered."

It is not thus God is to be sought, or,

perhaps, he only hides himself to teach us

the necessity of absolute dependence, and

ceaseless prayer. He is a God that waiteth

to be gracious; but he requires also that

we should wait for him. '

Zaira rose stupified, dried up, heart, and

soul, and brain—something hostile, sullen,

and indurated, bound up in the very core

of her feelings. She felt as if she had been

repulsed, spurned from the foot-stool of the

Almighty. She retired slowly, gazing on

the crucifix with the dry eye of despair;

her lips moved, and she uttered sounds that

seemed to issue from them, almost without

her being conscious of them. " There is

no mercy for me there," said she, her eyes

fixed on the cross; " those arms are ex-

tended to embrace all the world but me ;

that head was crowned with thorns ThSt for

me; not a drop of that blood ever stream-

ed for me ; I am excluded for ever; I have


no love for God in my heart, or I never

could have loved a mortal so well. Oh, my

God!" she cried, bursting into an mcontrowl-

able agony of tears; " ob, my God! forgive

me. When I was happy I believed religion

and love to be the same thing; I imagined

that, in worshipping that perfect beteg, 1

was paying the most acceptable- homage to

my Creator; I looked on him as reflecting

the image of Him "who is lore* and whose

imageought to be reflected in his creatures.

I nave been deceived—I ha-ve been guilty,

perhaps. My God, my Cod I accept a bro-

ken heart, and heal it."

Again she prostrated herself before the

crucifix,—again, with tears fhat.seemed to

gush from her heart, with convulsions tbat

almost threatened her existence, she implo-

WOMEN. £21

red God to infuse a sentiment of peace into

her heart. She was too anxious to pass im-

mediately from one state of strong excite-


ment to another. She knew that there must

be gradations, preliminary steps, painful, but

necessary to be trod, but she had not pa-

tience to tread them. She wished, from a

devoted lover, to become a devoted reli-

gionist in a moment—it is not to be done

in a moment. She could not do what no

mortal can do, pass from the desperate fren-

zy of earthly love to the " passion of im-

•mortals." She could not remain in the

half-way-house of hopeful tranquillity, like

Christiana, in the Pilgrim's Progress, wait-

ing at the Interpreter's house for a guide.

Dreadful state! when reason forbids the

only resource which the human mind hi

these terrible vacillations imperiously de-

mands.

She was too rational for superstition, the

necessary intermediate stage in such a case

222 , WOMEN.

with such a mind,—the stupifying opiate

that was to procure slumber between the

transition from one feverish state to an-


other. Deserted by her earthly love, re-

jected, as she believed, by God, she stood

for a moment reeling in body and mind,

on the precipice between time and eter-

nity. It was the Zorat arch, a hair,

breadth's space, and hell beneath it. The

evil power prevailed ;•—she turned away

from the cross;—a burning rigour, like that

of iron heated red-hot, seemed to pervade

her whole frame. She felt as if she could

sustain the horrors of penal eternity that

moment. She could not long support this

preternatural " harrowing up." The mor-

tal instrument was wound beyond its pitch

and beyond its powers; the strings cracked

in the effort. She fell to the ground;—

she was found there the next morning by

Delphine, who had quitted the house at an

early hour in search of her, hearing from

WOMEN. 223

her attendants she was not in her apart-

ment. She was found stretched on the

earth, drenched in her cold tears, colder


than the dew that drenched her garments

from head to foot. They bore her to

her apartment, but for several days she

was very ill, and even deranged. Her

intellects (those intellects so powerful, so

worshipped) were sunk below infancy, were

as wild and weak as dotage. The struggle

of religion and love was obviously predo-

minant in the wanderings of her intellect.

Strange and rich fragments might be pick-

ed up amid the burning ruin, as the confla-

gration of Corinth produced the extraordi-

nary metalline amalgamation known by

the name of Corinthian brass. She called

for the cross, and Madame St Maur, who,

since the return of the Bourbons, had be-

come une tres bonne Catholique, enquired

for a crucifix among the servants. One

was produced. " Hold it near me," cried

S24 WOMEN.

Zaira; " let the blood drop on me;—one

drop will purify my heart. They held it

close to her, then she mistook the figure on


the cross for that of De Courcy;—she kiss-

ed in that agony of devotion which love

produces when mingled with the senti-

ments of religion. It was frightful to see

her;—at one time she implored it to pray

for her as the representative of Christ—at

another she prayed to it as the image of

De Courcy.

To this horrible depravation of the ima-

gination a deep and sullen calm succeeded.

Madame St Maur was with her constantly,,

but could scarce ever get a word from her.

Her fever was gone, but her mind evi-

dently was overclouded. One day that Ma-

dame St Maur was absent for a short time

on a visit, she suddenly ordered her car-

riage, and desired to be conveyed back to

her house in Paris. Her servants trembled

while they obeyed her.

WOMEN. 225

The next day Madame St Maur got a

letter from her, written with a trembling

hand, and in broken sentences ; part of it


apologized for her abrupt flight. She said,

" Do not be angry with me, Delphine, for

flying from your sight; the very feeling •

that rendered me incapable of bearing the

sight of a friend, is a sufficient punishment

for any offence. How altered I must be

when the testimonies of your kindness are

a torture I can,-no longer endure!—-that

Gain like feeling, that brand on the heart,

deeper than on the forehead, separates me

for ever from my species. A word of kind-

ness stabs me more than, the most cruelT

insult; it is the most oruel of all insults. I

ask myself, why am I thus capable of in- .

spiring affection in every heart,, but the

only one -in the world in which mine is-

bound up? why am I mocked with" offers

of kindness from others ? Perhaps the bit-

terest ingredient in my cup is, that friend-

K2

226 WOMEN.

ship itself irritates me. I curse my own in-

gratitude, yet I cannot be grateful. When

he left me, he took away the jewels of sil-


ver and of gold, and when I attempt to fol-

low him, the waves close over me.

" Had he left me one single source of

feeling to substitute in the place of that of

which he deprived me, I could have par-

doned him; but he has deprived my heart

of all sensibility but that of pain. It is in

vain I attempt to generate a sentiment of

religion in my soul. I try in vain to pe-

netrate the cause of the sufferings that op-

press me. In my prosperity I never ne-

glected the poor, or the unhappy; but per-

haps I did not act from that feeling of pure

devotion to God whicli he requires; per-

haps it was only the gratification of my

WOMEN. 327

own benevolence I sought. I have not the

courage now to enquire into this.

** I may ultimately obtain some relief


from assisting the unhappy ; it is the only

thing that appears to lighten the burden

of my heart at times. I visit the hospitals,

I relieve all the poor I hear of. May not

this at some period bring me nearer to

God?

" Pray for me, Delphine,—alas, the

prayers of the happy have little unction!

Pray, however, that I may be kept from

despair. My portion must be religion,

or"

Immediately on the receipt of this letter,

Madame St Maur set out for Paris; on

S28 WOMEN.

her arrival she found Zaira was out; she

had gone to a convent at some little dis-

tance from Paris. She had at this time an


idea of taking the veil, and she understood

that this convent was remarkable for the

strictness of its discipline and its manners.

" So much the better," said Zaira to her-

seif; " their deadening influence may in

time still and compose me ; I may grow a

mechanical thing of habits and of duties; a

being that performs its functions by tiae

sound of a bell—a wreath hung on a grave

to wither there."

She urrived at the convent—Over the

gate was the inscription copied from the

Port-Royal convent; on the outside of it—

" Time is before thee;" on the inside—

" Time is for ever behind thee." Zaira

gazed on this long. The superior was

engaged, and while waiting for her, she

walked up and down a gallery leading

to the chapel, (this motion pain had ren-

WOMEN. 229

dercd habitual to her;) an old nun came

out of the choir, and stood observing her.

There was a singular contrast between their


figures ; Zaira's, "whose beauty was yet un-

faded, but whose features had the expres-

sion of despair, and the old religieuse, i»

whose calm demeanour, and placid pallid

aspect, there was not a trace of human feel-

ing, or of human suffering. She stood a

complete exemplar of the annihilating ef-

fect of monasticism—torpid, obtuse, self-

Gentraeted, self-sufficed, withoxit malevo-

lence or kindness, pleasure or pain, love or

grief. Zaira, the beautiful, the intellectual

Zaira, gazed on her with envy. " How

long have you h'ved here ?" said she.

•* So long that I have lost every trace of

my former existence."

" Had you friends in the world ?"

" I had, but they are dead."

" While they lived, it must have given

you pleasure to see them at the grate, or in

the parlour ?"

230 WOMEN.

" It did at first, a little; but as I lost my

recollection of the world, they began to ap-

pear to me like strangers."


" Your life must then be very monoto-

nous?" '

"So much the better; that tranquillizes."

" Have you any books ?"

" None, but what are necessary for my

duties. The superior, I have heard, has

books ; I never enquired."

• " In this deep retirement you must have

cultivated some resources for which you

have such leisure. Do you love music ?"

" Yes, in the choir."

" Has it no charms but in the choir ?"

" I have never tried. I believe I am

pleased with the sound rather from habit

than any thing else, for, except from the

words, I should not know the difference

between the De Profundis and the Veni

Creator Spiritus."

" Are you fond of painting ?"

WOMEN. 331

" There is a very fine painting over the

altar of the chapel, I have been told; I

don't know; I am as well pleased with the


wood-cuts in the life of St Francis Xavier."

" Have you never sought to employ your

heart ? have you no favourites among the

sisters ? have you no animal whom you ca-

ress ? when your affections overflow within

your bosom, what vent, what mode of ex-

pression do you adopt ?" :

The nun stared up in her face with an

expression of such perfect apathy—such in-

accessibility of heart; her countenance said

so plainly, " What new language is this in

which I am addressed ?" that Zaira felt in

a moment she was answered.

" Your time must be very much unoc-

cupied," said Zaira, pursuing this hopeless

enquiry, for misery made her very inqui-

sitive; " how do you employ your lei-

sure?" • .

" Leisure ! my duties leave me very lit-

1

932 WOMEN.

tie; at the intervals, I pick lint for an hos-

pital."

" You have nothing to love on earth ?"


-" I seek to love God alone."

"Thatis right," said Zaira; " but have

you ever known happiness ?" .

" I have attained peace," said the old

nun, crossing herself.—'* Have you any

other questions to ask ?"

" None," said Zaira. " I fear I have

oeen troublesome."

" Not at aD," said the old nun. " I pray

God to give you peace."

" Have you ever known happiness ?"

said Zaira, vehemently.

" I have always known peace," said the

nun.

At these words Zaira turned away; tears

of the bitterest anguish, mixed with pride,

ran fast down her cheeks ; she had no wit-

ness of her agony; the old nun had gone-

away. "Oh, my God!" she cried, "are these

WOMEN. 238

beings, desecrated of their humanity almost

—of the divinity of reason at least—the ob-

jects of your exclusive favour ? Must we


become " temples of the Holy Ghost" only

by ceasing to become receptacles of a think-

ing spirit ? Do you, indeed, require for

your service such beings, in preference to

intelligent souls that love knowledge, that

have dared to penetrate the secrets of the

intellectual world, and to extract from the

cultivation of the arts a few flowers to

scatter over the desert of life ? Will you

reject such because they have expanded

tiie faculties you gave them ? Does it please

you that they should remain contracted

and withered ? Was that wonderful and

admirable vessel, the soul—that " ship of

Heaven!" constructed only to lie rotting

on the spot where it was launched ? Never

to spread its sails on a voyage of discovery,

to traverse the intellectual deep, and touch

at the isles of light?"

234 WOMEN.

She went away without seeing the supe-

rior ; this specimen of conventual life was

enough for her. She tried to form, a sys-


tem for herself; it was composed very much

of austerities, penances, and painful acts

of charity; visiting the most loathsome

states of disease ; viewing the naked defor-

mity of poverty, more loathsome than dis-

ease ; holding herself down to the picture

of the moral cancer of evil eating into the

core of life, and melting the fair face of

things into a featureless and festering mass

of corruption.

This may be called the natural religion

of the unhappy. The idea of atonement is

indissolubly connected with that of suffer-

ing, of which we always suspect some un-

known offence to be the cause, and thus

we punish ourselves merely for being un-

happy. An atonement must be made either

for us, or by us; and those who have not

been taught to look to Calvary, or have

WOMEN. 335

looked, and in their pride turned away,

must construct a kind of substitute out of

their own sufferings. To this she attempt-


ed to add a theology of her own; it was

more inquisitive, daring, and autocrative

than Catholicism; more full of exterior

forms, self-infliction, and "voluntary hu-

mility," than the reformed religion; its

speculative part verged very much toward

Calvinism ; its outward towards popery;

for her imagination dictated even in reli-

gion, and it was gratified by combining the

ambitious and exclusive theory of Calvin,

(which may be said to establish a kind of

religious aristocracy,) with the meretrici-

ous and attractive exterior of Catholicism.

Madame St Maur in vain tried to dis-

suade her from the rigours she imposed on

herself, under the influence of her new ha-

bits. She went on with desperate and

fruitless perseverance. When we become

the objects of vengeance to ourselves, (and

236 WOMEN.

such a state of mind has been,) there is no

victim whom we punish with more seve-

rity. We can forgive any thing that has


deceived us, sooner than our own hearts.

She saw no company ; admitted no friend

but Madame St Maur ; she never read ; if

her hand touched a book accidentally, she

withdrew it as if a serpent stung her; mu-

sic was the last thing she relinquished; a&

she placed, with her own hands, the cover-

ing on her harp, never to be removed, a few

tears dropt from her eyes. So intense was

the pain of her heart at this moment, that

she did not wipe them away ; she was not

conscious that she wept. Those are very

bitter tears which we forget to dry.

Cardonneau often and vainly applied for;

admittance now ; he had overdone his own

mischief, his purpose had

" O'erkapt itself, and fall'n on t'other side."'

He had sought to make her an atheist, and

'WOMEN. 237

he had driven her into the fearful extreme

t>F misanthropical religion,—a religion all

pains and penalties, all suffering here, and


^terror hereafter. Like the sorceress in the

OM Testament, he had attempted to show

his art, and call up the delusions that wait-

red on his power ; but a more potent spirit

answered the invocation; and could he have

beheld the present state of his victim, he

would, like that sorceress, have ".cried out

for fear" at the apparition fee had unwit-

tingly raised. Of-this man's very name

she felt an invincible horror ; she had a se-

cret feeling, that to Cardoraieawte system

she must come at last^ and this thought

never occurred to her mind, without fill-

ing it with the most dreadful agitation.

'.Like animals in a state of fascination, her

mind seemed to approach this point with

a velocity, the greater in proportion to

the horror with which she contemplated

it. Cardonneau was the object of her in-

238 women.

-

vincible abhorrence; she trembled, when

she heard his knock at the door, which she


distinctly recognized from that of any other

person; she thought her servants never

could deny her fast enough. It appeared

as if excluding his person was a kind of

protection against the infection of his sys-

tem. She felt almost in the state of those

who are said to have made a compact with

the evil spirit, and who dread every mo-

ment his coming to claim the fulfilment of

his bond—" Not yet, not yet," she re-

peated to herself, as Cardonneau reluctant-

ly quitted her door—" my time is not yet

come."

The time was coming sooner than she

believed. One day she returned home ear-

lier than usual; there was a peculiar ex-

pression in her countenance that rivetted

the attention of Madame St Maur in a mo-

ment ; there was less of grief, and more of

resolution and calmness than usual; but it

J

WOMEN. 2S9

£

Was that kind of resolution and calmness,

to which Madame St Maur would have pre-

sion. .


ferred the most frightful expression of pas-

" I can no longer," she said, in a deep,

hollow, but firm tone,—" I can no longer

support this Existence—I cannot make my-

self religious—-f cannot .create the love of

God in my soul—my heart is stone—my

conscience is seared^-the heaven above me

is brass, and the earth beneath iron. I am

eursed with a curse—not one being, di-

vine or human, in the illimitable creation,

can touch my heart with a sentiment of

affection. It is in vain," said she, answering

Madame St Maur's look of appeal; " it

is in vain—I have made the experiment

with all the powers of my nature—I have

grown to the pavement with my knees—

I have clung to the cross with the arms

of my soul—not a beam of light has fallen

on me—not a whisper of hope has reached

240 WOMEN.

me. I am the unwatered fleece—-I am a

fountain sealed—I am the rock from whicfa

not even the arm of the prophet can bring


one drop of water. I pray, and my words

are all mechanical. I receive no answer

even from my own heart. I read the Bible,

and when I have done, I shut it as a book

whose language has no meaning for me. I

exhaust myself on works of charity, but

they have no charms for me. I am glad

when I have been the means of removing

physical pain; but when mental sufferings

are spoken of I shudder, from my incapa-

city, either to sympathise with or console

them. I tremble at the blessings of their

gratitude; they wish me health and long

life—long life, I cannot support that. Their

blessings are curses—I cannot support this

existence. I cannot love God, and man

will not love me. What have I to do with

life any longer ?—my last resource is near."

She paused some time; but Madame Sf

WOMEN. 241

Maur, who felt nothing but a wild sensa-

tion of terror, did not, and could not an-

swer her.


" Delphine," said Zaira, " my dear Del-

phine,! am happy in announcingto you, that

your toils are nearly concluded. To watch

the wanderings of a distracted spirit, is worse,

perhaps, than to feel them. I dismiss you

from your painful, horrible attendance. I

call to you confidently, as a traveller does

to a guide of whom he has need no longer.

You may lay down your torch, I cannot

see by its light; the rest of my journey

must be past in darkness. I have to tra-

vel the valley of the shadow of death ; that

is a path that must be trod alone."

She paused again—Madame St Maur's

vague look spoke distress, but not intelli-

gence.

" I must die," said Zaira; " Do you

understand me now, Delphine ? I speak

thus merely to save you and my friends the

VOL. III. I,

iJ42 WOMEN.

task of vindicating my memory. I do not

act from a rash impulse; I am not mad;

no one need bring in their verdict, lunacy,


(as they say in England;) I am determined

on dying,—while I retain my will and my

reason, no one can pretend to controul me.

I am sane and sensible, I will procure for

myself the easiest means of death; but if I

am opposed, I cannot answer for my not

having recourse to those horrible modes

that will disfigure my body, leave an im-

peachment on my conscience, and the eter-

nal burden on that of my friends, of ha-

ving precipitated that which they could not

prevent."

Madame St Maur was no fit auditor for

such a communication—her knowledge was

confined to this life only, of which she was

no bad judge, but she could not be an ar-

biter in the crisis of destiny—she could not

hold the balance with a steady hand where

suicide was weighed against despair; her

WOMEN. 243

hand trembled and dropt the scales on this

emergency—she had lost the power of

soothing Zaira; she never had the power


of controuling her. In the struggle be-

tween her terrors and her affection, she fell

into strong fits, and when she recovered,

as a last resource, wrote to Viosmenil to

come to Paris instantly to her assistance.

The generous sensible Viosmenil came,

but all assistance was too late. Zaira had

thought, and would think, for herself. She

had shut herself up with some books; she

did not tell what they were, but she read

them incessantly. She scarce ever spoke to

Viosmenil or Madame St Maur, but they

read her terrible purpose in her face, cha-

racterized by the indelible lines of thought-

ful despair—Deliberate, morteferocior. The

tears of these generous friends burst forth

involuntarily when they thought of this

brilliant, benevolent, happy being, who

had seemed more like a vision that ho-

244 WOMEN.

vered in a poetic imagination, than a crea-

ture that walked this dry sterile earth of

ours, who had never been seen but to daz-


zle, never spoke but to charm; this cpixo/x-

IMtiSnf ApfoJiTii, with tenfold the charms of

the fabled cestus, so suddenly fallen into

the sere, the yellow leaf,—so withered,

irritable, inaccessible, repelling, paralyzed

in mind, effiete in heart. They spoke of

her according to their different modes of

feeling, (in which, however, there was a

concordia discors.)

" Oh, what a woman lost to society!"

cried Delphine

" Oh, what a noble creature lost to life !"

said Viosmenil.

As they were speaking, Zaira entered,

and instantly began to address Viosmenil

on the subject that occupied her mind, as

if its suggestions were incontrollable, as if

she was the organ of a spirit whose im-

pulses she could not resist. " I have been

WOMT.N. 245

astonished," said she, " at my own weak-

ness. When one is determined on the

greatest of all risks, it seems a miserable


pusillanimity to deliberate on the means.

Yet why should I conceal it ? I wish to

die by the easiest means, by means that

will not convulse my frame, or destroy my

reason; let life be as wretched as it may,

such a death is very horrible. I would not

terrify my friends in my last moments, or

leave my image distorted on their memo-

ries. I wish to die calmly, in the full pos-

session (if possible) of my faculties ; their

possession at that moment would be a con-

solation to me, though their consciousness

now is an incessant torment. If I could

discover such a means of death, I would

die to-night."

The firmness of her voice in speaking

these words left them little doubt of the

strength of her resolution. Viosmenil ea-

gerly grasped at the hope which this hesi

246 WOMEN.

tation about the means seemed to suggest.

He spoke of a self-inflicted death being ne-

cessarily violent; and even that, by the ope-


ration of laudanum, which is supposed the

easiest, is often repelled by the constitu-

tion, and produces the severest sufferings

without causing death. He observed also

of suicides, that their features are known

to retain, beside the traces of bodily agony,

a peculiar expression of convulsive reluc-

tance, of posthumous repentance, if it may

be so called, that seemed to indicate a

change of sentiment when all change was

become fruitless. He added too, as a well-

known fact, that in the cases of those who

had been prevented from meditated suicide,

or recovered after the attempt, not one in one

thousand had ever made it again. He left

this strong fact to sink into Zaira's mind

without a comment.

That night she passed in the study of

the classical authors, whom she supposed

WOMEN. 247

likely to satisfy her mind by arguments, or

confirm her resolution by examples of the

step she meditated. There were enough


of both to animate her to desperation. It

•was a singular spectacle—a human being

on the verge of human existence is an aw-

ful object to its fellow-creatures—it is a

sight so rarely witnessed, except by those

whose feelings are paralyzed by grief, or

callous from habit, that there have been

persons who have sought to gratify theii?

fearful curiosity by witnessing public exe-,

cutions, by seeing men brought to the brink

of the grave without disease, or any of the

ordinary means of death, and passing through

the tremendous change in the presence of

multitudes—multitudes who must partake

that change with them in the stillness and

darkness of the domestic chamber of death.

Still more awful, certainly more interesting,

is the spectacle of a being brought to that

state by its own choice, and becoming itself

248 WOMEN.

its own executioner, all personal sensibi-

lity annihilated, and the sufferers inflicting

on themselves all they could have feared


or shunned from the persecution of a mor-

tal enemy. In Zaira's case there was every

aggravation. Youth and beauty seem at

perpetual war with death; they have not an

image in common. Wealth seems to defy

the vicissitudes of mortality, and to be al-

ways sufficient for its own enjoyment, as

long as its duration is protracted; and ge-

nius, always eminent in time, and aspiring

after eternity, appears to be still more inde-

pendent of the transition. It has a power

of assimilating itself to both worlds; it

seems scarce a resident of earth while on

earth; its communications are even here

extended to futurity. Yet, in the posses-

sion of youth and beauty, and genius and

affluence, Zaira sat meditating death, as if

she was one to whom the want of all these

accessories of existence had left no other al-

ternative.

WOMEN. 249

To the painter or the philosopher, to the

lover of the picturesque or the terrible, her

figure and employment that night present-


ed a strange and-fearful contrast. Her

splendid apartment, her beauty, the books,

Containing all the wealth of antiquity, that

were scattered round her, formed a singular

opposition to the terrible purpose that filled

her soul while she sat there. It seemed a

kind of luxurious reception for death; a

defiance of his terrors, like that which Juan,

at his magnificent banquet, prepares for the

spectre whom he expects to meet him there.

She read long, but without any fixed ideas;

she read rather to confirm her own senti-

ments, than to add to them; she was be-

yond argument, she sought for support.

The images of Cato, Brutus, and Portia,

struck most on her imagination-—they had

not been hurried out of life by indirect or

ignoble means—they had perished by their

own hands, but not under the power of foul

L3

250 WOMEN.

and degraded passions—they might have

been wrong, but they were not debased,

Her imagination still prevailed, and she


dwelt long on the death of Brutus, announ-

ced by a phantom, appearing with such

mysterious solemnity in the shadowy dark-

ness of the tent where the warlike philoso-

pher sat studying alone at midnight;—then

she reverted to the death-scene, after the

loss of Philippi—night—the scattered at-

tendants—the rock against which he lean-

ed—the sparkling sky at which he gazed—-

the apostrophe to virtue, containing per-

haps too much reproach, but indicating

complete independence of spirit in the

midst of suffering, and on the verge of

death;—all this at once flattered her ima-

gination and her pride ; it combined a false

confidence in human power, with a deli-

ci6us reminiscence of those objects of na-

ture, that are not usually the accompani-

ments of a dying hour. She could have

WOMEN. 251

died there. To carry an unabated resolu-

tion to the verge of eternity, has often been

the lot of saints and martyrs; but it has


seldom been their lot to expire under the

glittering resplendency of a Grecian sky.

The accompanying circumstances of their

death are as stem and hard as the iron that

tears their joints; but when our souls, in

parting, reflect the lustre of the objects that

surround us, and that are assimilated to

their loftiest emotions; when we breathe

our last amid the glories of nature, and en-

joy them to the last, our triumph is com-

plete ; it is but passing with an exalted

tread from one apartment of the creation

to another more spacious.

She contemplated the deaths of Antony

and Cleopatra; there was certainly some-

thing in the situation of the latter that in-

terested her more than the fate of patriots

and stoics. Cleopatra was a woman, to

whose lips the cup of joy and of grief had

252 WOMEN.

been alternately held, and who had been

compelled to drain both to the dregs. She

had been a queen, a beauty, and a genius,


surrounded by all that is eminent or envi-

able ; the mistress of successive masters of

the world; yet she died by her own hand.

Over this picture Zaira paused like him in

Terence, who, meditating a crime, encou-

rages himself by the example of a god,

She had remained so long alone this even-

ing, that Madame St Maur became terrifi-

ed ; she went and knocked softly at the

door, scarce expecting the answer of a li-

ving voice.

Zaira answered in a voice whose calm-

ness surprised her.

" May I enter ? may M. de Viosmenil

enter then ?" said Madame St Maur, in a

trembling voice, for she had an indistinct

consciousness, that where Viosmenil was

admitted, there could be no danger.

De Viosmenil, hardly waiting for per-

WOMEK. 253

mission, glided in after her. " I see," said

he, glancing at the books, " I see who have

been your companions—What is their coun-


sel ?"

" To die !" said Zaira,

" And what encouragement do they give

you ?"

" The wretched need little encourage-

ment to invite them to change their des-

tiny."

" If they are sure the change will be be-

neficial."

" The best and wisest of antiquity thought

so," said Zaira, in the false confidence of

her late studies.

" They were not Christians," said Vios.

menil.

" The Gospel does not forbid suicide,"

said Zaira, starting at this observation.

" The Gospel does not forbid either par-

ricide or incest in words," said Viosmenil;

" but it condemns them implicitly; it is

254 WOMEN.

the glory of Christianity that it is not a

code, but a spirit of laws."

Zaira was silent for some moments after


these words; but it appeared from the ex-

pression of her features, that the spirit was

too strong to be cast out by words. She

made an immediate effort to pass to some

other subject. The effort failed. A long

silence followed. Viosmenil had sense

enough to lead.back to the subject, and

urge her to exhaust her mind on it •, though

a Frenchman, he merited to be an English-

man. He felt with Shakespeare, " give sor-

row words."

Madame St Maur and he sat with her

till morning. They felt, or they hoped, that

if they could get her over this dreadful night,

all would be well, (just as if grief had any

connection with time).

Zaira spoke as calmly that night as if she

had sat it out only to entertain her friends.

They were delighted to hear her speak;

WOMEN. 255

b

Madame St Maur encouraged her from ha-

bit. Zaira's eloquence appeared to her like


the repetition of some delightful music she

had been long accustomed to hear. Vios-

menil urged her to speak from a stronger

feeling; he thought it less dangerous for a

woman to speak than to act; but he was

much struck, as she spoke, by the remark-

able change in her expression, and still de-

clares that its traces on his memory will be

ineffaceable.

She seemed to have come from conver-

sing with the dead—she had been sitting as

it were on the verge of mortality, and ask-

ing the secrets of the future state—she had

been grasping at the inhabitants of the in-

visible world, as they passed in shadowy

array before her memory, and bidding them

tell their name, as she wrestled with them

in darkness. The strength of her intellec-

tual power, combined with the intenseness

of her feelings, all working with painful

256 WOMEN.

toil to " double the stormy cape," and find

out a new communication with undiscover-

ed worlds—the severity of her purpose—had


wrought so on her exterior, that the expres-

sion of her figure and countenance were

changed as by the lapse of years. She was

" settled and bent up ;" the rigour of her

frame, the breathless stillness of her fea-

tures, her rayless and unmoving eyes, heir

hollow voice, speaking always in one key,

made her appear already like one of those

whom she hastened to be among.

Viosmenil had come to reason with her,

if she was capable of reasoning; but, awed

and overcome, he remained only to listen.

At intervals she said, " How little is

known of futurity ? For how many ages

was man contented with his ignorance of

another world, though always complaining

of this ? Antiquity supplies nothing but

conjecture; conjecture pursued rather as

the exercise of reason, or the sport of ima.

WOMEN. 257

gination, than in the hope of useful and pro-

fitable discovery. The mythology of Homer

is very barren; he presents a train of gloomy


phantoms, restless and dissatisfied; but his

ideas are encumbered by matter; so, per-

haps, are the ideas of all when turned to

futurity. The purest of all theology min-

gles music * among the enjoyments of hea-

ven. Virgil knew more than Homer: the

march of the human mind in the path of

knowledge had already begun; yet how

little more than Homer has he told ? His

spirits in Elysium are merely mortals ex-

empt from pain; then1 pursuits and pleasures

are all terrestrial; his minstrels still sing,

and his warriors exercise heroic games—

.

' Eadem sequitur cura repostos."

There is no God there, whose presence con-

* Vide the Book of Revelation,

258 WOMEN.

stitutes the beatitude of the departed, and

but one shade of sentiment gives its deli-

c-ious gloom to the picture—


' Hie quos durug amor crudeli tabe peredit

Secret! celant ealh-s, et myrtea circum

Sylva tegit, curae non ipsse in inorte relinquunt.'

Their philosophers knew as little as theh

poets ;—the Somnhim Scipionis is beautirul,

but not demonstrative. There is nothing

satisfactory, nothing profound in their sen-

timents ; they say nothing, for the truth

of which they would have died. The great

Jewish legislator does not make a future

state the basis of his system. Of the trans-

lation of Enoch, (which might have led to

its introduction), he speaks in mysterious

brevity, and without a comment. In the

study of the human mind, we are perplexed

with perpetual inconsistencies. The insen-

sibility of death expressed by the .followers

10

WOMEN. 259

ef Mahomet must be ascribed to their fixed

belief of a future state of happiness ; and

Bartholinus, ' De Causis Contempts Mor-


tis,' attributes the fearless hardihood of the

northern warriors to the same motive.

Doubtless it was sufficiently powerful; yet

the Greeks and Romans owed their stoi-

cism, their courage, and their magnanimity,

to the very absence of this motive. The

majority of them knew nothing of a future

state ; they had no hope, indeed ; but they

had also no fear. But, perhaps, a different

creed was requisite for a rude band of mili-

tary barbarians, and a polished and intelli-

gent people. The Koran or the JKdda would

never have done for a Plato or a Tacitus.

Thus, wherever I turn, all is darkness ; the

darkness of scepticism, or the blindness of

credulity. My feet stumble on the dark

mountains; I seem to wander among tombs

that all bear the inscriptions put there by

the living, but none of them containing

intelligence from the dead. One effort,

260 VTOMEN.

the result of a single moment's resolution,

will tell me more than mortal can ever

know. Were this the presumption of cu-


riosity ; were it the vain temerity of an

Empedocles, I would be very guilty ; but

it is grief—grief (to whom our submis-

sion is never voluntary) that compels me,

and I hope God will forgive me. Doubt-

less, the Deity would not have left men for

so many ages under a fatal error, when it

could be so easily removed. The tranquil-

lity with which the ancients shifted off the

burthen of life, proves that man's natural

conscience does not consider it a crime;

they had laws against murder, and even

against ingratitude, but none against sui-

cide. This could not be because the cri-

minal was already beyond their reach; for

the punishment of a crime is often visited

on the relatives and descendants of the guil-

ty ; it must have been that they did not

consider it a crime. Their fearless inde-

pendence of death strikes me as irresistibly

WOMEN. 261

powerful over the imagination at least.

They looked on life as something which

they could lay down when they pleased.


Thrasea dissuades his wife from suicide, be-

cause their daughter would be left unpro-

tected. He does not threaten her with the

wrath of the Deity;—no terror waited on

their dying hours. They considered death

as they would any other natural evil; talk-

ed of it with equal calmness, and encoun-

tered it with perhaps greater resolution, be-

cause its infliction was shorter. Death, of

which Christianity, if it has not taught us

terror, has certainly taught us cowardice,

they viewed only as a certain refuge from

suffering, as an honourable defiance of those

creditors of the heart which it has no longer

the means to pay. I envy them this reck-

lessness ; I do not possess it. The nation-

al creed has

•c grown with my growth,

And strengthened with my strength."

262 WOMEN.

I cannot defy death as they have done.

I loathe existence, but I dread futurity.

We are weak, luxurious, and depraved


beings; we are too much dependent on so-

ciety and its artificial modes. What a sen-

sation does suicide produce among us! If

an instance of it occurs, the family (if of any

consideration) are disgraced beyond the

power of misfortune to disgrace them. Had

the person been known to die the victim of

the most profligate pursuits, the most loath-

some vices,—had he died by inches in the

sight of his agonizing family, in the hearts

of whom the sight of his immedicable suf-

ferings had sowed the seeds of their own

deaths, all would have been well—the fune-

ral would be conducted with due solem-

nity, and the eulogy of the departed pro-

perly declaimed by the survivors. But let

that man be stated to have perished by his

own hand, the scene is changed at once.

We know nothing of his motives, but we

WOMEN. 263

know them by charity implicit to have

been very bad, such as shut him out from

all sympathy but the shuddering sympathy


of horror—such as condemn his family to

shame and seclusion—such as leave on the

act the doubtful construction, whether it

was perpetrated under the pressure of dis-

tress or debt. Singular confusion of the

causes of suffering arising from the present

complicated state of society ! Thus we re-

duce to the same level, the internal feeling

of the impossibility of supporting existence,

and the external want of the physical means

of its support. In the polished creed of ar-

tificial society, a broken heart, and the want

of fifty louis', constitute a similar assign-

able cause for despair. The suicide is shud-

dered over, interred ;—we array ourselves

for a ball, and wonder at his impatience of

life. This is the case only with the higher

classes; beggars, it seems, may die with im-

punity. We hear of their death, and hope

264 WOMEN.

they have been driven to suicide only from

poverty and despair. This is a very per-

verted state of feeling. Christianity, by fill-


ing our minds with the terrors of futurity,

drives us to a sophisticated anxiety for life,

under all its evils, and on any terms. Life !

life is all we call for; we swallow it, find

every drop poison, and thirst for more.

" There was nothing of this among the

ancients. We exclaim against the cruelty

of the Hindoos in exposing their infants to

expire in baskets suspended from the trees ;

at the Indians, for leaving their decrepit

parents to perish in the woods by famine or

by wild beasts; at the Romans, for sending

their sick slaves to perish in a desert island.

But is there cruelty in all this ? Could the

sick, the aged, and the mutilated be permit,

ted to speak the language of nature to us,

they would probably say,—We are wretch-

ed, we are helpless! Our existence is loath-

some to ourselves, and burthensome to you.

8

WOMEN. 265

We stand before you an example of morta-

lity, and yet the disgust and weariness

which we inspire, deprives you of the bene-


fit of the lesson,—' Deliver us, and deliver

yourselves; our lingering existence is suf-

fering to ourselves, and injury to you.—

Death will obtain ease for both.'

" Thus they would speak, if they were al-

lowed to speak as truth would urge them.

Would we be injured if we listened to them,

if we diminished the quantum of pain in

life ? And shall we shrink to hear such lan-

guage from ourselves, when our hearts im-

peratively utter it to us in a tone that will

neither be resisted nor misunderstood? I will

not shrink, not another day—yes, one day

more I will, Delphine, for I see you weep—

and you weep too, M. De Viosmenil—cease

—the tears of a man overcome me. He

wept—I have seen his tears; but he wept to

betray me to misery, and you weep to wit-

ness into what misery he has plunged me,

VOL. in. : M • -

266 WOMEN.

There is a great difference, but the sight of

tears shed by men is horrible to me; I

would rather live under the droppings of


the Upas tree."

Madame St Maur and Viosmenil were

astonished. From the moment of De

Courcy's departure she had never mention-

ed his name—never alluded to him directly

or indirectly; now she spoke of him—spoke

plainly of him. They did not know what

to make of it; but each argued internally

according to their different conceptions.

Madame St Maur imagined that Zaira was

resolved on life, because she spoke of her

lover; Viosmenil believed that the men-

tion of his name could be drawn from her

heart only in its last agonies. Madame St

Maur triumphed finally in the full pride of

conviction, for as she was retiring, Zaira

said to ,her, " If I could but once utter bis

name—if I could heave from the bottom of

my heart the weight that lies there, I might

eel relief. I will try to mingle his name

WOMEN. 267

in my prayers, for I pray still," said she,

grasping the hand of Delphine in hers, and

enforcing the pressure to convince her of


the truth of her assertion; " and perhaps

God may grant me the grace to have his

name the last I utter." Madame St Mau»

went away quite satisfied; she was sure

that no woman who could pray for a man,

was in the least danger of dying of a bro-

ken heart. She remembered the times of

the League, when it was thus customary to

mingle passion and devotion, and to have

the portraits of the Virgin and the saints, in

the margin of their illuminated missals,

taken and coloured and arrayed after the

originals of their lovers—so, Madame St

Maur was contented after the manner of

French women—And, moreover, she re-

membered Zaira's promise.not to destroy

herself that night; and Madame St Mauj

was a woman to be - comforted with the

mention of a night's interposition between

268 WOMEN.

her and any calamity she dreaded—a night

had a very long sound to her.

Zaira was now alone—it was very late—


she felt exhausted—her eyes wandered over

many books, and she felt that in many books

ftere was weariness. She rested on the

Bible, and accidentally opened on the thirty-

second chapter of the prophesies of Ezekiel

—that tremendous chapter, before the lan-

guage of whose denunciatory vengeance,

and unsparing desolation, all other menaces,

national or individual, flit away, as the leaf

before the gale, or as the small dust of

the balance. She read on, with feelings

at first stupified with terror, and then so-

lemnized by the difference of the threat-

ened desolation of the world, and the de-

solation of a single heart.—She read on,

" Wail for the multitude of Egypt, and

cast them down, her and the daughters

of the famous nations * * * Whom

dost thou pass in beauty?—Go down"—

WOMEN. 269

Awful reply to all human pretensions strug-

gling for exemption from mortality, whe-

ther for glory as a nation, or for eminence


as an individual.—She read on, " Assur is

there, and all her company, * * all of

them slain, fallen by the sword, whose

graves are set in the sides of the pit; and

her company is round about her grave, all

of them slain, fallen by the sword, which

caused terror in the land of the living,—

There is Elam, and all her multitude round

about her grave, &c. &c. They have set

her a bed in the midst of the slain, with all

her multitude, &c. &c.—There is Meshech

Tubal, and all her multitude, &c. &c. &c.

—There is Edom, her kings, and all her

princes, &c.—There be the princes of the

north all of them, and all the Zidonians

which are gone down with the slain, &c.

&c. &c. Pharaoh shall see them, and

shall be comforted over all his multitude,

even Pharaoh, and all his army, slain by

270 WOMEN.

the sword, saith the Lord God, for I have

caused my terror in the land of the living."

Zaira read these tremendous words—words


ill suited to the present state of her mind.

" There is all that is great on earth," shecried,

" and shall I hesitate to follow ? Mighty na-

tions are there, and shall I, an individual,

tremble to meet them? The heathen Elysium

presents but a barren group; there is not

one with whom I could hold society. The

Christian heaven calls me to a brighter com-

pany ; there are no sciolists—no warriors

tilting in the dusk ; there are the " spirits

of just men made perfect"—there are those

whom we loved and lost on earth, and shall

I be there ?" As she uttered these words,

she felt such a sudden elation of spirits—

such a rush of blood through her frame,

that for a moment she was raised to a kind

of supernatural madness. She looked round

for some omen—some testimony of divine

interference accordant to the tone of her

WOMEN. 271

mind, and which it was sufficiently intoxi-

cated almost to demand. She remembered

(for though her imagination was inebriated,


her intellects were unimpaired)—she re-

membered the extraordinary tale told by

Lord Herbert of Cherbury of himself.

When he had finished his deistical work,

he was so convinced of its truth, and so

anxious for a testimony of the divine ap-

probation, that he knelt down before an open

window, and implored of God to give him

some sensible sign that he approved of this

work. He describes afterwards a sound

wholly unearthly, something between mu-

sic and the murmur of the wind, entering

his apartment, diffusing itself through it

and gradually sinking away.

For a moment, Zaira almost expected

such an omen as this. Before the moment

had expired, a sound deep and mournful

struck on her ear; it was evidently in the

apartment. She paused ; this incident re-

stored her to recollection; she was not weak

278 WOMEN.

enough to believe it supernatural. It was

a string of her harp that had broken ; the

omen ceased to affect her imagination, but


it struck on her heart. The art that she

had so loved and embellished, seemed to

warn her by its dying, melancholy sound.

It seemed to say, " Your hand will never

touch these strings again; take then fare-

well in this last vibration."—" Some say the

genius thus cries, come F

Then crowded on her mind the awful

story of that night in Alexandria, when

the sound of subterranean music and revel-

ry, passing out towards the enemy's camp,

was heard by those who were feasting with

Antony and Cleopatra at their last banquet,

reminding them terribly of the contrasted

splendour of their former destiny, and the

gloom of that which was approaching. Then

followed the tremendous MerxGocwuptQd «-

T£u9£f, of the Jewish history, when God left

them for ever; when * Ichabod was pro-

i. e. The glory is departed.

WOMEN. 273

nounced by the voice of the eternal Judge,

and the glory of their hierarchy and their

temple departed from them for ever.


" I come then," said Zaira; " my steps

already tremble on the verge of mortality—

but if they tremble it is not from fear. One

recollection alone (which may perhaps sur-

vive beyond it,) makes them faulter. My

God ! may I in this last hour, when I need

all your mercy for myself, may I dare to

implore it for another ? His image lies at

the bottom of my heart. Alas! I feel at

this moment that only the influence of

that name could suggest a prayer to me;

I want the power to utter one for myself!"

She sunk on her knees; she buried her

head in the sofa before which she knelt;

her arms were flung desperately over her

head ; her figure was prostrated almost on

the ground. She tried to raise her heart to

God; her heart returned the thrilling an-

swer, " You will soon know alL" She re-

MS

27* Women.

mained long in this attitude; she knew not

how long.

Something that was not sleep eame over


her as she lay thus. It certainly was not

sleep ; her faculties were not suspended. A

still, but conscious sensation, pervaded her ;

a dull twilight gathered round her. It

broke, and the day of judgment glared on

her trance. It seemed like a dream, but it

was reality to the sufferer.

She started from sleep, as she imagined,

and saw the heavens on fire, and the earth

passing away as a scroll. Myriads on my-

riads of human beings glanced and disap-

peared before her, like bubbles sparkling

and bursting in the dash of a cataract; all

hurrying on, on, on, as the tide of time bore

its tribute to the ocean of eternity. Earth

was gone, there was no place to stand on,

nothing to look up to; above, below, around,

all was darkness illimitable, intangible, un-

substantial,—an ocean, whose dark waves

WOMEN. 275

dashed against nothing. Suddenly a flash

of lightning burst on the gloom; a flash

that appeared to tear open heaven up to the


throne of God. She called on darkness to

shelter her in vain; she called on the moun-

tains to fall on her, but the mountains were

no more ; she grovelled to the centre in her

spirit, but from the centre she beheld the

Son of God coming in glory and in judg-

ment. Millions, an infinity of millions,

stood bright and shivering before him, as

the blaze of His descending glory gleamed

on their huddled shadows. Among mil-

lions I shall be concealed, she felt; but the

eye of the Judge was fixed on her alone ;

the trumpet sounded, but its tone thunder-

ed in her ear alone; the book was opened,

but her name was on the page alone. None

but a disembodied spirit could endure this

agony ; she became insensible.

The dream changed its imagery; she

seemed to see creation as after judgment—-

276 women. , .

darkness and a wreck—desolation and no-

thingness—a land of shadows, where the

light was as darkness—a place on which the


Almighty had stretched out " the line of

confusion, and the stones of emptiness."

There was no sun—a pallid and clouded

gloom, like the spectre of departed light-

there was no earth—the elements were

confused and chaotic—masses of disorga-

nized matter came dashing against each

other, whirled along in a tide of ruin. Dark,

formless, and void was every thing,—-

; A wild abyss,

The womb of nature, and perhaps her graven

The throne

Of Chaos, and his dark pavilion spread

Wide on the wasteful deep."

She felt herself borne along in this whirl

of nothingness ; this tide without a wave

and without a shore. Suddenly a light

gleamed on her as she floated on. It came

from an eminence, where stood a female

WOMEN. 277

form, a well-remembered form, though seen

but once before, and then also in a dream;

the pale calm countenance had lost its mor-


tal expression. The figure leaned on a lu-

minous cross, from which the light emana-

ted, and which bore a bright inscription—E»

rvrta HX.K. She attempted to grasp it^ but

was borne away.

During this dream, her cries were so

loud and incessant as to alarm Madame St

Maur, who was in an adjoining room, and

who had not yet retired to rest. She rush-

ed to her apartment, and found her stretch-

ed on the floor in convulsions. The physi-

cians who were sent for pronounced her

life, or her reason, or both, in danger. Her

state continued doubtful for many days;

but grief, the only malady which make*

the sufferer wish for death, is, of all others,

the least mortal. She recovered, but to a

state of miserable debility ; she was forbid

even to speak, an injunction she showed no.

wish to disobey. By the utmost submis-

278 WOMEN.

sion to her medical attendants, she seemed

to indicate a wish for life.

Madame St Maur communicated this ob-


servation to Viosmenil with great delight;

they drew different conclusions from it,

however. Madame St Maur believed she

was repelled from her purpose by the ter-

rors of the vision. Viosmenil concluded

she had some ulterior object, in which the

image of He Courcy

One night, while Madame St Maur sat

by her bedside, she observed her lips mo-

ving as if they formed sounds which she

had not strength to utter. Madame St

Maur softly enquired if she wished for any

thing ?

" I am calculating," said Zaira, in a faint

but distinct voice,—" I am calculating, if I

live, how soon I may be able to reach Ire-

land."

Madame St Maur, believing this to be

raving, made no answer; but the next

morning, speechless with astonishment, she

9

WOMEN. 279

heard Zaira calmly declare her resolution,

the moment her health enabled her, to re-

turn to Ireland.


" I am not superstitious," said she, lay-

ing her cold hand on Madame St Maur's ;

" the habits of my life would rather justify

a contrary conclusion—nor do I feel that

my intellects have been unpaired by the

blow that has crushed my heart—but a

power, which I cannot resist, appears to

summon me to this step—a voice calls me

from this which I dare not disobey. Ever

since that night," she continued, lower-

ing her voice, and a visible shudder agita-

ting her frame, " that form has never quit-

ted me—it is standing beside me now.

When you are near me, it shifts its place;

but it does not disappear. When you are

gone, it returns, and stands before me. I

know that form well, though I never saw

it in life; it is the form of that Irish girl

for whom I was deserted. I was deserted

soon myself. I see her form for ever; it?

280 "WOMEN.

bears no longer a hostile expression ; with

gentle but solemn gesture, it wafts me

home. The cross to which it points is fix-


ed on the shore I remember well, the

shore of Ireland; there its light is shed, and

there its light invites me. Something is to

be done or suffered there; what it is I know

not, but I feel I am summoned there.

There I drew my first breath, there I first

beheld him, there perhaps"

She was too much exhausted to continue

the conversation; but, some days after-

wards, Madame St Maur, who had almost

forgot the subject, was astonished at seeing

Zaira's domestics making preparations for

a journey. This phenomenon opened her

eyes at once. Madame St Maur, with all

her affection and good sense, was more lia-

ble to access through the channel of the

senses than any other. She certainly never

could have been forced by any evidence,

but the evidence of her senses, to believe

that one who might live in Paris would

281

voluntarily go to Dublin; but the evidence

•was irresistible, Zaira's servants were pack-

ing her trunks in the hall.


She went with her astonishment and des-

pair (as on all great emergencies she was

•wont) first to Viosmenil; then, as her last

resource, she went to argue the point, after

the manner of Frenchwomen, with Zaira.

The fixt expression of calm despair in Zai-

ra's face awed and silenced her—she lost all

her nationality in a moment, and became

the candid, affectionate, intelligent being

nature had formed her—she burst into tears,

and this expression of feeling completely

overcame Zaira.

" Where are you going then ?" said Ma-

dame St Maur.

" I am going to Ireland, my affection-

ate friend," said Zaira, tenderly pressing

her hands,—" to Ireland, where my life

and my misery both began, and where

both, perhaps, are to be terminated. I feel

that my destiny is to be fulfilled there ; it

282 WOMEN.

will be better that I should perish by his

hand, than by my own."

She saw the change in Madame St Maur's


countenance at these ominous words, and

she hastened to add, " My dear friend, my

life is misery ; I am dying by inches, dying

by despair. The cruellest enemy I have on

earth would relent at the tortures I suffer,

if he could behold them. The terrors of

futurity have been disclosed to me, yet they

in all their terrors struggle with his image

in vain. It would be the greatest mercy I

could experience, if he would plunge a knife

into my heart this moment. I think I could

draw out theblade, dyed in my heart's blood,

and kiss it, if his hand placed it there. You

know I have almost with a superstitious

dread shrunk from mentioning his name.

Could I have uttered it, it would have been

heaving a mountain from my heart; shut

up there, it burned and preyed on my vi-

tals. In addition to this feeling, which is

consuming me in silence, another—a more

283

awful one, calls me to the last struggle of

my varied life. I cannot express to you,

Delphine, that secret sense which the un-


fortunate have, and by which they hold

communication with the invisible world;

they are so near the grave that they can

hear and understand the language which no

mortal but themselves can bear—I feel, but

never can express that immortal intelli-

gence."

Madame St Maur would have reasoned,

but she felt the effort useless; and she had

that sense of the superiority of Zaira's in-

tellectual character, which not even grief,

sophistry, superstition, and misplaced pas-

sion, could ever diminish. She could only

weep, and silently leave her to seek for con-

solation from Viosmenil, though she felt

that even his masculine mind shrunk from

encountering with Zaira's. Some days

elapsed ; the preparations went on silently,

but certainly. Viosmenil and Madame St

Maur only looked at each other as they be-

281 WOMEN.

held them ; then they began to talk of the

event as hourly probable; and lastly, they

felt some comfort in speaking of it, for


whatever brings exalted minds to the level

of lower ones, furnishes a kind of consola-

tion to our perverted natures. They won-

dered, shrugged their shoulders, and ac-

knowledged to each other tacitly, that

Zaira, whom they had hitherto beheld as a

superior being, was reduced completely to

the level of mortality. Viosmenil and Ma-

dame St Maur were affectionate friends,

but still they were human creatures ; they

would have laid down their lives for Zaira,

but they could not lay down their natures.

As a last resource, the very night before

her departure Viosmenil ventured to talk

the language of the world ; he knew that

Zaira had been a woman who cherished a

keen sensibility of popular applause, and of

the popular sentiment concerning her ; she

was proud of the rare union of a spotless

character and resplendent talents. Viosme-

WOMEN. - 285

nil spoke of this, and how much would be

lost by this wild pursuit of a phantom of

the imagination—by this spendthrift waste


of all the treasures of existence at the feet

a worthless boy, who trampled on them,

and turned again to rend her. He said re-

peatedly, " What will the world think ?"—

an argument of mighty weight—talismanic

words, of which the strongest spirits have at

times felt the operation. Zaira was silent

for some time; at last she said, " If mis-

fortunes are made the subjects of reproach,

what mortal can be free ? Are those objects

which nature points out to us as the centre

of our affections, more likely to secure our

'happiness than the objects suggested by our

hearts ? As a wife, or a mother, might I

not have'been rendered as miserable by the

cruelty, the neglect, or the errors of a hus-

band or a child, as I have been by him ?

The only difference is, that in the one case,

the cause of our sufferings is imposed by

necessity, and in the other, by choice. This

286 M'OMEN.

difference is very immaterial to the sufferer

—we may cease to reproach our own hearts,

when they cause us no more misery than is


hourly inflicted by life."

These were the last words Madame St

Maur and Viosmenil ever heard from Zaira.

They wept at parting with her, but the

near prospect of their own happiness assist-

ed to dry their tears. They married, and,

by aid of good sense, good tempers, much

esteem for each other, some literary taste,

and an easy fortune, they became such adepts

in moral chemistry, as actually to extract

comfort from life!!!

WOMEN. 287

CHAPTER VIIl.

1 ct Tyrios deserta quserere terra.

VlBGIL.


ZAIRA arrived in Ireland ;~what a differ-

ent arrival from her first, when, as De

Courcy was accustomed to say, she made

her avatar there! It was September when

she landed; the fading light and shorten-

ing days were now congenial to her feel-

ings, and as she sat on the deck, and view-

ed the shore through the dim twilight of a

hazy evening, that made every thing ap-

pear pale, -cold, and colourless, she felt as if

she was approaching the shores of the " un-

discovered country"—" the land of sha-

dows," where all things are forgotten.

288 WOMEN.

She took a house at a little distance from

Dublin, under an assumed name, saw no

society, and never appeared in public. She


was soon discovered, however, and the con-

ductors of some charitable institution wait-

ed on her to intreat her to exert her talents

at some concert or play that was to be per-

formed for its benefit. This application ap-

peared to give her great agony;—she was

unable, for a considerable time, to return an

answer. At length she said,—" I would

assist those unhappy persons with the sa-

crifice of half my fortune sooner than ap-

pear in public again." The persons who

conducted the charity, distressed by the ef-

fect of their application, retired. She sent

a liberal donation, and immediately chan-

ged her residence, to escape similar persecu-

tions. Her life was very monotonous, but

calm. There was a dull weight on her sen-

ses and her faculties, an obtuse sense of

pain never very excruciating, but never for

a moment remitting. She said to herself

4

WOMEN.

perpetually,—" It will soon be over, it will

soon cease." When we thus try to impose

on ourselves, when we talk to ourselves as


to another whom we try to pacify, the im-

position is not more vain than it is melan-

choly. Still a sense of fatality, connected

with her return to Ireland, operated at the

bottom of her heart. She was like one of

those in ancient times who is directed to

visit an oracle, and who sits down before

the doors of the temple till they unclose,

and there, overcome by grief and weari-

ness, falls asleep. She could have said, with

Lee's unfortunate hero, to the prophet Ti

resias—

• •

" Therefore instruct us what remains to do,

Or suffer—tot I feel a sleep like death

Upon me, and I long to be at rest."

This state, which mentions doing and

suffering in the same breath, and almost as

the same thing, which expects no relief

VOL. III. N

290 WOMEN.

from fortitude, passive or active, is a fine

image of a mind broken down by grief.

She walked incessantly during the day;


she said it was to deaden the sense of in-

ward pain ; perhaps it was because she ho-

ped somewhere to meet De Courcy. She

did see him sometimes; she saw his figure

at a distance ; she trod with frantic fond-

ness where his shadow had passed, but

when she approached him, the beating of

her heart amounted almost to suffocation.

She shuddered,—she paused; and shocked

at this public exposure of her weakness, she

was compelled to grasp the fails of a house

for support till ;he Was out of sight. It was

singular enough, that, during this period,

she bore the loathsome, horrible spectacles

of mendicity, misery, and vice, with which

the streets of Dublin are almost putrid,

with a kind of wretched patience almost

V

WOMEN*.

approaching to satisfaction. The sight of

physical suffering is at once a balance and

consolation to the victim of internal pain.


Misery is certainly very misanthropic in i£s

simple operations.

The beautiful buildings of the city, its

bay, its mountains—she never looked on

them now;—she walked constantly through

the streets—there was enough there to

feed her mood. The perpetual spectacle

of intoxication that occurred at every step,

seemed to shock or terrify her no longer.

Misery seeks misery every where, from the

irresistible desire for comparison or analy-

sis. When she saw these wretched objects

raving or grovelling in the mire, she said,—

" Life is insupportable without some spe-

cies of intoxication; I wish I could share

the delirium of those wretches, without

their brutalizing degradation. The lowest

class of life seeks physical intoxication to

forget its miseries; the higher seeks mental

intoxication. The highest class of all tries

10

292 WOMEN.

the desperate intoxication of the heart, ir-

recoverable and incureable; whose deliri-

um is "sweet madness,"—whose waking


is " despair,"

Zaira's knowledge or memory worked

with terrible perverted industry in aid of the

false theory of predominant misery. Spen-

cer, she thought, tells of the miserable in-

habitants of Ireland in the reign of Eliza-

beth, that they take snuff to " beget fresh

spirits." The inhabitants of the Isles of the

South-Sea produce this excitation by gliding

along the surf in their light canoes; and some

writers tell us of a more savage people, who

try to attain it by standing on their heads

till they arrive at stupefaction. How envi-

able !—Such were the miserable wanderings

of a mind broke from its moorings, and dri-

ving before that storm which perhaps no

human mind can ride out without " tackle

torn," inglorious, dismasted, and disarrayed.

When she saw the crowds of beggars that

pollute and infest the streets of the " beau-

WOMEN. 293

tiful city," the same perverted feeling mi-

nistered fuel to the fire that was consuming

her. Mendicity, she thought with herself,


is always the concomitant of a certain reli-

gion—it abounds to loathsomeness in coun- ;

tries professedly Catholic—it is diminished

in England under the influence of the es-

tablished religion, and almost disappears

under that of Presbyterianism in Scotland.

To what is this vast increase or diminution

of human misery, this fluctuation of the vast

tide of calamity, to be ascribed?—Merely to

climate, to a cause in which man has no share.

The religion of the south of Europe is uni-

versally Catholic, that of the north gene-

rally Protestant; this must be purely phy-

sical. Well, then, the religion of men de-

pends on their climate, and on their reli-

gion depends a large portion of their ex-

ternal comforts, of their human destiny,

which is, doubtless, connected with their

future and immortal one; and all this is

brought about by their being natives of a

S94 WOMEN.

T

certain climate. Had I been born in ano-

ther country, had other causes operated on


my constitution and my feelings, what a

different being might I have been !

Thus she strengthened herself in bad me-

taphysics, and worse sentiment. A singu-

lar contrast took place, (perceptibly to her-

self,) between her sensibility of objects that

give pleasure, and of objects that give pain.

She had formerly lived among every ob-

ject that could exalt the mind, and delight

the senses; her heart favoured her creed of

optimism; her life was passed in a kind of

refined and dignified voluptuousness. Now

she sought out the spectacle of wretched-

ness every where with anxious and mis-

chievous avidity. She left the fair moun-

tain to batten on the moor.

On her arrival in Dublin the preceding

spring, she had been much delighted by

the picturesque situation and architectural

beauty of the city. Now, her sentiments

were changed, and her senses appeared

WOMEN. 295

changed along with them; undoubtedly

the music of the soul is most exquisite on-

ly when both are in harmony. A friend


reminded her of the admiration with which

the heauty of the city impressed her a few

months before. -«

" Its beauty continues," said Zaira, " but

it is the frightful lifeless beauty of a corse;

and the magnificent architecture of its

public buildings seems like the skeleton of

some gigantic frame, which the inhabiting

spirit has deserted; like the vast structure

of the bones of the Behemoth, which has

ceased to live for ages, and around whose

remains modern gazers fearfully creep and

stare. We can bear the ruins of a city

long deserted by human inhabitants, but it

is awful to observe the inhabitants stealing

from a city whose grandeur they can no

longer support. Thus the Dauphin (father

of Louis XVI.) saw with his dying eyes

the furniture thrown from the windows in-

to the court of the castle where he lay, from

596 WOMEN.

the impatience of the attendants to quit it

the moment he expired. I walk through

the streets of this fine city—I pause at the


gate of its superb university—I see a few

sizars and porters lounging there—I ask

where are the ' illustrious men and inge-

nuous youths,' whom the eloquent patriot

greeted in other times?-—Its ingenuous

youth are all gone to Oxford, or Cam--

bridge, and the day might be marked

with a cretic note, when a gown with a

gold, or even a silver tassel, is seen a pur-

pureus pannus amid the beggary of its de-

serted walls.

a Opposite to it I behold a building

which would have embellished Athens in

the purest days of its architectural pride—

It was the Senate-house of Ireland—It is

now the Sank; and along those steps, wor-

thy of a temple of Minerva or of Jupiter,

the inhabitants of this impoverished city,

Without trade and without wealth, are

crawling to pay bills; and among those

WOMEN. 297

splendid passages which once echoed to the

eloquence of a Flood, a Grattan, a Foster,

and a Plunkett, is heard the jargon of run-


ners and tellers ; and in that splendid apart-

ment of the House of Peers still hung

with the triumphs of William, the directors

meet to ascertain dividends, and strike a

bonus. I seek the residences of the nobili-

ty in this beautiful city; they are easily

pointed out; their altered destination is

enough to mark them. The palace of the

Duke of Leinster (the only Duke in Ire-

land) belongs to the Dublin Academy; the

mansion of the Powerscourt family has be-

come the station of the Stamp-office; the

residence of Lord Glerawly has been level-

led for the erection of a catholic chapel;

that of the Gowper family has been pur-

chased by the trustees of a charter-school;

and the splendid modern house of Lord

Aldborough (built within twenty years) is

become the seat of the seminary of Profes,

N2

298 WOMEN.

sor Feinagle. Woe to the land where the

mansions of her nobility have become the

receptacles of office, or the palaces of pe-


dagogues !"

Whether these observations are just or

not, it is certain they did not occur to

Zaira on her former arrival in Dublin.

With the Old Marquis in Gil Bias, per-

haps, she was beginning to suspect that

even the peaches of the latter time were

degenerating. It is very terrible when

grief, by destroying our sensibility, both of

nature and art, deprives us of those auxi-

liaries against its power of which it has re-

duced us to the utmost need. It is like

sending one to carry on war in a country

which the enemy has already wasted with

fire and sword before us.

One day she wandered to a very obscure

part, called Swift's-alley ; there is a dissent-

ing meeting-house there. The sight of it

awoke many recollections in her mind ;—

her heart grew full, and she paused in the

WOMEN1. 299

vain hope of being relieved by tears. An

old woman who observed her,- offered her a

seat in her humble dwelling; she was invo-


luntarily interested by that beautiful figure

-which could interest every heart but De

Courcy's. She believed her ill. The poor,

who know little but of physical sufferings,

are apt to ascribe all signs of emotion to the

one cause, they seldom suspect one of grief.

Z&ira, accepted the offer ; and with the re-

mains of her former sweetness, made some

inquiries about her hostess. She was a

very old woman, nearly eighty years old,

upwards of sixty of which had been passed

in her present abode, a small building close

to the meeting-house; she had a small pit-

tance for keeping the keys of it, and seeing

that it was cleansed and aired on the day

of public worship. She had outlived her

immediate relations, and perhaps forgotten

her remote descendants ; no one ever came

to see her, nor did she perhaps wish for it,

and her. infirmities prevented her from

300 WOMEN.

going abroad. Her room contained a chair,

a bed, a table, Bunyan's Holy War, and a

Bible. The latter she could no longer read,


ao that her habitation seemed as sterile as

her existence. This hermitage, in a po-

pulous city, certainly presents a singular

image. There have been persons who be-

came enamoured of solitude, because it was

embellished by the exquisite attractions of

nature ; this, one may say, is a sensuality so

refined as almost to approach intellectual

pleasure. It is a glorified body, whose sen-

sibilities are no longer physical or impure.

But there was nothing of this kind here;

before, around, and above the dwelling of

this woman, rose high and heavy walls of

the darkest stone. The sun could so sel-

dom shine on the narrow pavement before

her door, that there was no verdure forcing

its way between the stones—a few withered

squalid blades of grass only, that seemed as

if they had mistaken the place for a tomb-

stone, there they grew like the forbidden

WOMEN; SOI

enjoyments of life, struggling for their

abode in a heart devoted to religion. The

"building itself, the only object she saw


throughout the day, had the rigidity of

Calvinism in every feature of it; it stood

there like the substantial image of an ab-

stract religion, without grace or embellish-

ment, imparting its own sternness to the

heart and the manners.

Zaira thought of the decorative splen-

dour of the churches on the continent; and

she remembered the rebuke of Jesus to the

Pharisee^—" Mine head with oil thou did'st

hot anoint; thou gavest me no water," &c.

Would it not have been better if she had

reflected,—" He dwelleth not in temples

made by hands."

" Gorgeous—yet love I not this pomp of prayer,"

says one of 'our first poets. Certainly in

churches, architectural magnificence and

luxurious embellishment are rather a sacri-

302 WOMEN.

fice to the pride of man than to the glory

of God, and the worshipper seems to come

there rather to boast of what he has done


for the Deity, than to shew what the Deity

has done for him.

Zaira was withdrawn from her musings

by the talking (for it could not be called

conversation) of the old woman. " She

had remembered better days," she said,—

" the days of famous preachers, long dead,

when the meeting-house was so crowded,

that there was not room for half that came

to hear the Word of Life ; when there was

a talk about forty years ago of enlarging it,"

(and as she spoke she stretched out her wi-

thered arms, as if the idea was too vast for

her mind, unless she relieved it by a cor-

responding gesture.)—" Now," she said,

" things are very different" And to hear

her, one would imagine that the salvation

of all mankind were dependent on the full-

ness of the congregation at an obscure

meeting-house in Dublin. In her mind,

WOMEN.

a member of that meeting, and a Christian,

were evidently synonimous terms, and

inseparable ideas. Zaira enquired a little


further, and learned, that at the time when

the meeting was so much crowded, her fees

had been very considerable. " But people

have all left off going the right way," said

the old woman. This was a wretched dis-

covery ; it is horrid to find littleness of

soul in the dying, or in those who make re-

ligious pretensions, whom we nearly iden-

tify with the former. They both belong,

in our minds, to another world.

This woman revived in Zaira's memory

the idea of the old nun in the convent near

Paris. There was the same sterility, va-

cancy, and uniformity in their characters.

A person unacquainted with religious dis-

tinctions, would scarce have known one

from the other; yet, in one respect, they

were antipodes to each other—Catholicism

and Calvinism placed an immeasurable dis-

tance between them. Had either heard of

304 WOMEN.

the other, she would have considered her

as a being devoted to the devil and his an-

gels, placed under the concentrated and im-


mitigable wrath of the Almighty for ever

and ever. Singular mixture of inanity and

ferocity in the same mind!

Zaira then recollected a door-keeper at

one of the foreign theatres ; he was so old

that he was called the patriarch, and high-

ly amusing from the importance he attach-

ed to his situation. To hear him " magni-

fy his office," one would think him an apos-

tle, and that the duties of the drama were

quite on a level with the duties of religion.

He remembered the times of Senesino, Fa-

rinelli, Faustina, Cuzzoni, &c.; and it was

singular enough, that, in speaking of them,

and of the crowded houses assembled to

hear them, he used exactly the same lan-

guage that the humble portress of Swift's

Alley Meeting-house did, when recalling

the departed glories of former days. Their

sentences were constructed and expressed

WOMEN. 305

exactly in the same style of deliberate en-

thusiasm. The interests of the stage and

the preaching of the gospel made the only


difference between them.

This coincidence, that might have sug-

gested, to a mind more happily disposed, a

useful speculation, operated very different-

ly on Zaira's. She compared the different

characters and situations, and she said to

herself, " there is no difference, but that of

habit." When she once entered on this

subject, she sunk deeper and deeper, plun-

ging amid billows that came

" Booming and buzzing o'er her sinking head."

• • „ •..'•?

She imagined there must be rest at the bot-

tom—it was the rest of a sunk wreck, over

which a thousand storms have passed, and

the ocean pours its waves in fathomless si-

lence. She thought, and was worse for,

every thought that passed through her

mind. There is an atrophy of the soul, as

306* WOMEN.

well as of the body, and the mind when

diseased can convert the most wholesome

nutriment into actual poison.


That evening while pursuing her usual

restless walk, (more like the wanderings of

an " unlaid spirit," than the activity of a

human being), she felt more misery than

usual. She gave alms to the miserable ob-.

jects that obstructed her path in every di-

rection ; she felt for the first time that the

action was quite mechanical, she had no

pleasure from it now. This sensation in-

creased her wretchedness greatly ; she be-

gan to feel that she was losing the only feel-

ing that made life supportable. How lit-

tle she knew of the state of her heart at that

moment! It is said in Ulloa's Voyages,

that, in the severest climate of North Ame-

rica, the spirits were frozen through the

bottle—they were all ice; but the spirit

retreating to the centre, formed a column

of actual fire, that burned the lips that

WOMEN. 307

*

tasted them. Zaira's heart was frozen thus;

the external surface was hard and cold, but


the centre contained one burning drop. De

Courcy's image glowed there still more

strongly from the intensity of the surround-

ing and encroaching cold.

She was now near Island-bridge, when a

heavy shower drove her (rather from consi-

deration for her servant than herself) to seek

for shelter. She went into a small shop,

where was a great appearance of neatness

and industry. The frequent calls of custo-

mers, and the pleased assiduity of the shop-

keeper, gave token that things were going

on prosperously. In a back room his wife

was instructing her children ; and the ea-

ger, happy voice of childhood, proud of

newly-acquired intelligence, sounded de-

lightfully in the ear. It gave no pleasure

to her—she trembled at the sight of happi-

ness—she felt as Adam did, perhaps, when,

on the evening of his expulsion from Para-

dise, he might have wandered near its be.

308 WOMEN.

ft

loved limits, and drank the fragrance of its

forbidden sweets, wafted to him by airs he


must never breathe again; then looking

up, saw the flaming sword of exclusion

turning every way against him.

In a few moments, the officious, but not

servile attentions of the man forced them-

selves on her notice. She did not recog-

nize him, till at last, unable to struggle any

longer with the fullness of his heart, he told

her he was the person whom she had assist-

ed with such generosity before she quitted

Ireland; that her liberality had enabled him

to recommence business, in which he was

succeeding so well, that, as he said with

Irish enthusiasm, " he believed there was a

blessing on all she did.'1

At these words, which went too near her

heart, she fixed her eyes on him with a

look of such ghastly incredulity, that the

man paused, fearful he had offended, though

not understanding how. She was silent;

and he resumed the subject in a lower voice.

-

WOMEN. 309

« %

He hoped that the young gentleman, who

was the means of introducing him and his


distress to her notice, was well and happy.

This was too much. Zaira struggled in

vain to answer him. The man then found

out that something (he knew not what) was

wrong, and became silent, " though it was

pain and grief to him*"

Zaira rose to depart, and then he could

contain no longer; he followed her to the

door with blessings and thanks, and conti-

nued them till she was out of sight. These

blessings, these prayers for our happiness

and long life, are terrible to those who feel

life a curse, and happiness an impossibility.

Language, black with execration and hor-

ror, would be less painful to them. She

hurried on to escape the insult of gratitude,

and she felt as if she was doomed to go on,

like Ladurlad, with " a fire in her heart

and a fire in her brain," condemned to do

good without a share in it herself,—bless-

ing, but unblessed. . .

310 WOMEN.

.

Again compelled to stop by the violence

of the weather, an autumnal storm of wind


and rain, she took shelter in a cabin, and

directed her servant to go forward, and

send the carriage for her, that she might

" return home." Home!—what a word for

the unhappy to use—a place where they

meet nothing but that desolate heart which

they brought out with them. In a few

minutes her attention was drawn to an ob-

scure corner of the cabin by groans that is-

sued from it at long intervals. It was so

dark, that it was long before she discovered

there what had been a bed, on which was

stretched something squalid, hagard, spent*

and moaning.

" It is a poor creature," said the woman

who owned the cabin, " that came in here

for a night's lodging—by times T think she

is only half and half, and she is not expect-

ed now, any how."

Zaira approached the bed; and to her

inexpressible horror recognized in the sunk,

WOMEX. 311

but wild features, the feeble, but singularly-

modulated voice of the dying object, those

of the madwoman whom she had thrice be-


fore encountered under circumstances so

extraordinary. The woman appeared to

recognize her too; she raised her hollow

and livid looks to Zaira.

** Oh, my eyes are dim !" said she, " but

I know you well — and are you come

at last — come to hear the secret none

knows but me—come to close the eyes

of your "

And she stretched out her withered arms

to Zaira. Zaira recoiled with an impulse

she could not account for; she had never

before thus shrunk from wretchedness and

death. She was even hastening from the

cabin, when the maniac, sitting up in her

bed, called out to the woman to detain

her.

" Stop her !" she cried, in a voice hollow

but piercing; " bid her stop, if she would

shun the curse of "

312 WOMEN.

" Of whom ?" cried Zaira.

" Of her mother .'" said the maniac, sink-

ing back on her bed, and extending her


clasped hands towards Zaira.

The latter approached the bed, trembling

and subdued ; her former recollections sug-

gested the terrible possibility that this in-

telligence was true.

" Tell me," said the old woman, " are

you not Irish by birth ? Are you not the

daughter of—of—, in the county of Ferma-

nagh? And tell me the truth, for I am

passing fast"

" I am," said Zaira.

*' Then I am your mother—though when

I saw you before I had not the power to

tell you so."

" My mother!—and in this hovel, and

in these rags—Oh, merciful Heaven !"

" Ay, Heaven is merciful, or I would

not be spared to tell you even this."

" Oh, let me remove you from this

wretched place," v

9

WOMEN. 313

" Hush!" said her mother, raising her

•withered hand ; " what matters it to a soul

going to judgment, whether it parts from


straw or from down ?—Listen to me. You

had a child?"

" I had,"

" Well, that child is still alive, and I can

tell you where."

" Oh, speak, for God's sake, speak !"

" Not a word—not another word to-

night, if the world was kneeling there.

To-night / must make my soul,* and that's

enough for a parting sinner to have to

do."

No supplication, no adjuration of .Zaira's

agony was powerful enough to extort an-

other syllable from her mother, beyond the

bare permission to see her the next even-

ing, if she lived. .. ,

" Oh, you will, you must live!" said

* i. e. Perform my religious duties.

VOL. III. O

3-14 WOMEN.

Zaira, as she quitted the hovel, in emotion

unutterable.

To explain this interview, it will be ne-


cessary to lay before the reader, the letter

which it was mentioned Zaira wrote to

Madame St Maur, on her first arrival in

Ireland, and which contained the particu-

lars of her former life. After stating the

agitation with which she revisited Ireland,

the emotion with which she beheld the sea

that bore her, and listened to the breeze

that wafted her there ; she adds, " it is the

privilege of poetry and of grief alike to in-

vest inanimate things with consciousness.

Joy, full of itself, needs no sympathy from

external things. To the happy every day

is bright. But grief, like superstition,

makes even the physical creation populous,

and converts every object into an agent of

consolation or of reproach.

" When in the morning we came within

sight of the bay,—when I got on deck, and

saw the blue mountains of my country

WOMEN. 31S

bright on the left, and the bay, with its

sweeping shores, and the city shrouded in

the western mist, marking the horizon -with


its thin grey line, that trembled on the va-

poury skirts of the morning,—when I felt

what none but those who had left it long,

and who perhaps return to find suffering

not respited, but renewed, can feel, I clasped

my hands on my heart; I almost thought

its beatings would betray me.—I tried to

utter some prayers, but I felt that my lips

moved without articulating. The ocean

lay as calm around me as if it had never

borne the weight of suffering on its waves.

The joy of the passengers, the short techni-

cal answers of the sailors, and the still colder

language of the captain, who answered

every question as if the progress of the

elements had never affected human hap-

piness or suffering, made a strange contrast

to all I felt. Strange indifference, that is

produced by a constant intercourse with

the most awful phenomena ! Thus, the

more physical our existence is, the more

316 WOMEN.

tranquillity it enjoys ; it is intellect alone

that is always agitated, and almost always

by pain. Singular awardment, whether it


be the result of inconsistency or of delibe-

ration—whether it proceed from an intel-

ligent or unintelligent cause! But from

whatever source insensibility arises, how

enviable does it seem to those who suf-

fer? Thus, those who witness the Falls

of Niagara are stunned by a crash that

seems capable of uprooting nature ; while

those who dwell near it, deafened by the

habitual roar, soon lose all impression ; and

here alone, dear Delphine, have I cou-

rage to relate the events of my former life

to you. We have the same dread to re-

trace misfortune that we have to expose a

wound ; but we have more reason, for it is

the wounds of the mind alone that are ex-

empt from ever closing.

" Even here, I hesitate to begin to tell

what I have been. Misfortune always

seems to females like disgrace. I am, what

none of my continental friends but you

WOMEN. 317

know, a native of Ireland.—I am the ille-

gitimate daughter of a man of fortune in

the west of Ireland, whose least error, per-


haps, was his being the parent of a number

of unfortunate nameless beings, none of

whom he acknowledged or noticed but me.

The singular beauty of my mother, I have

heard, entitled me to this distinction. She

possessed more influence over him than

any other of his temporary favourites, and

might have retained it but for a singular

circumstance. Though she had sacrificed

all that is valuable in the female character,

she cherished a strong devotion for the ca-

tholic religion, perhaps with a view of pal-

liating her other errors, and was so out-

raged by my father's avowed profession of

the most daring infidelity, that even when

I was an infant she declared she would ra-

ther see me perish than brought up under

the roof of a mbnster, who defied both hea-

ven and hell. After several attempts to

take me from my father, whose fondness

to me probably grew from opposition, sh,e

918 WOMEK.

was detected in one, and after a dread-

ful altercation, she was driven from the

house, with an injunction never again to


be seen in the neighbourhood. I have

heard, that as the servants forced her out,

she broke from them, and, kneeling in

the hall, poured on my father and me a

curse, the most solemn, bitter, and wild

that ever passed the lips of a human being.

On one of us, at least, it was fulfilled. Per-

haps no curse could be more effectually ac-

complished than by my being left with the

parent I was. He was a man of intellec-

tual powers superior to most I have known,

a " scholar, and a ripe one;" but he press-

ed every power he possessed into the ser-

vice of obdurate scepticism. He called

himself a philosophical unbeliever, but he

did not disdain to borrow the aid of sophis-

try, invective, sneer, cavil;—all the light as

well as heavy armed troops were at his ser-

vice, and he had a full command of them

all. His rage for converts was beyond that

of the Pharisees; his scepticism had made

VOMEN. 319

him miserabte, and, perhaps, he thought to

communicate misery was to lessen it; his

genius and eloquence in the evil cause


were indeed enough to draw after him the

third part of the host.

" My education, which, next to the dis-

semination of. infidelity, was his principal

object, was beyond what most women re-

ceive. I had teachers of every language,

masters in every art, instructors in every

science, and my father illustrating, conden-

sing, and harmonizing every thing into one

vast mass of intellectual discipline. I was

taught to know every thing but the one

thing needful; I was permitted to read

every thing but the Bible. My father was

not the fool who saith in his heart, ' There

is no God ;' but he had so many objections

against his power, goodness, or wisdom,

drawn either from the physical constitution

of things, or from the state of man, and his

knowledge was so various, his reasoning

powers so strong, and his resources so ex-

baustless, that those who encountered him

320 WOMEN.

were soon unequal to the task, and, weary

of defending the attributes of the Deity

against endless objections, were contented


to compromise for His existence, -which

was generally allowed them ; this, at least,

was my case when I was permitted to rea-

son with him. His wish to make me a pro-

digy in literature and the arts was rapidly

fulfilling, as far as it could be fulfilled by a

girl not fourteen. Singular and perversed

ambition ! In depriving me of heaven, he

wished to multiply my ties to earth ; and

while he took away my birth-right, aggra-

vated its value by the price he seemed an-

xious to give for it, as if one world could

ever be a balance for the other. One dark

cloud hung over me from the earliest period

—one image haunted me from the com-

mencement of my life,—it was that of my

mother, whom the frightful tales of the ser-

vants still described as wandering about

the house at night in stormy weather, and

repeating her maledictions in a voice ' not

WOMEN. 321

of this world.' Her disappearance, my to-

tal ignorance of her situation, or whether

she was yet alive, and that terrible sensa-


tion so common in the imaginations of the

Irish, of a being whom we believe not to

be alive, yet know not to be dead—who

holds a kind of hovering intermediate ex-

istence between both worlds, and combines

the passions of human existence with the

power of a spirit, all produced in me a spe-

cies of indefinite feeling towards this awful

being, that neither reason or change of si-

tuation has ever been able to remove.

, " The mythology of all countries has ad-

mitted and favoured the existence of such,

from Thomas of Ercildoun to Wordsworth's

Lucy Gray. Perhaps the cause of such

wild imagery exists in the very nature of

the human mind, and its unknown relation

to futurity. We have never trod the con-

fines of human existence with feet that felt

the landmark ; of the boundaries of the fu-

02

WOMEN.

ture world we know still less ; and we are

therefore compelled to admit the existence

of beings, whose state, partaking of both,


can at least be arrayed in the images bor-

rowed from one, while the rest of its sha-

dowy existence fades away in the imperme-

able gloom of the other. Perhaps the loath-

some superstition of the vampire, and our

representation of Death by his physical

form, both have this origin. Those who

said they saw my unhappy mother, de-

scribed her as wandering near the house

in the stormy twilight of a winter's even-

ing.—She was meagre, ragged, and bloody,

and they gave dark hints of my father's

passions.

" Sometimes I have heard strange sounds

under my window at night. Do not won-

der at this superstition of infidelity ;—the

widest extremes have been found to meet

at last, as the Spaniards, in sailing round

the globe, first expressed their wonder,

when, after long pursuing what they thought

WOMEN. 323

a direct course, it brought them to the

point from which they had set out. The

vacillations of the human mind are inces-


sant, and the strongest impulse, given in a

direction contrary to our natural one, only

-makes us return again with augmented ve-

locity. The human mind may be said na-

turally to gravitate towards religion. But.

I was allowed no choice.

" Among the talents which my father

was most anxious to cultivate, and which

nature developed earliest in me, were my

extraordinary vocal powers and musical en-

thusiasm, which have been the cause of sa

much suffering, and so much celebrity ta

me. My father, liberal in every thing, was

extravagant in the cultivation of this dar-

ling art, that may well be called ' the

Poetry of the Sciences,' The first teachers

were engaged, at an enormous expense, to

attend at hi» remote residence; and among

them was a young Italian, who had made

a conspicuous debut on the foreign stages,

324 WOMEN.

but whose voice, failing from disproportion-

ate exertion, compelled him to adopt the

profession of a teacher. Many things re-


commended him to my father ; his musical

skill was profound: even Frederic of Prus-

sia would have found him no less invinci-

ble than he did Mara. His camera voce was

still delightful, though he could no longer

fill theatres. He was well acquainted with

the literature of his own country; and,

above all, he was an atheist, vehement and

declamatory; though, by a singular, but

not inexplicable contrast, he always carried

about him a portrait of the Virgin, and al-

ways crossed himself when he heard a peal

of thunder ;—dreadful preceptor for a girl

of fourteen to be consigned to, intoxicated

with his delightful art, and incapable of

being alarmed by his principles.

" My father (oh, what a father !) left me

for hours alone with this man, to listen to

his brilliant and seductive picture of Italy,

a land of palaces and flowers, a land where

WOMEN. 325

the luxuries of art were combined with

classic memorials; and the relaxation of

manners was alike favourable to the indo-


lence of literary enjoyment, and the silent

felicities of the heart.

" Let me hurry over this miserable pe-

riod of my existence. We were married-

by a catholic priest, but our marriage was

kept secret from my father ; for though he

professed himself master of a splendid pa-

trimony in his native country, he still

seemed fearful of my father's displeasure.

After some time it was necessary to dis-

close it: I was about to become linked to

society by more than one tie. Oh! that

dreadful disclosure !—Fioretti quitted the

house, and left me to make it alone. The

undivided, unmitigated storm of my fa-

ther's fury burst on me, and stunned me.

He cursed me, he spurned me; and I have

heard would have killed me, but for the

interposition of the terrified but merciful

female servants, whom, however, he forced

326 WOMEN.

to bear me, still insensible, from his house,

and from his sight for ever !

" In his rage of malediction, he cursed


me as a monster destitute of principle; yet

he had taught me none ; and had torn me

when an infant from my knees, when he

saw a domestic attempting to teach me to

form a prayer. He cursed me for a wretch

and fool, ignorant of the duties of life; yet

he had taught me, and his example justi-

fied his instructions, that to obey our pas-

sions was the only rule of human life. He

cursed my disobedience as a child ; yet he

had taught me, that the only tie between

parent and child was a temporary conven-

tion formed by mutual interest, and disso-

luble when that interest ceased to exist.

" An old woman, in compassion, shelter-

ed me in her wretched hovel (but I was

insensible of its wretchedness) till my hus-

band was apprized of my having now no

other abode. He came; and still I won-

der how even youth and obstinate health

WOMEN. 327

sustained my existence after that inter-

view, which fully developed his motives

and his character. After wasting hours in


imprecations on me, whose bitterness was

aggravated by the foreign language that

used to be the vehicle of such different

sentiments, till within the few last mise-

rable hours, he left me, telling me, with a

laugh more frightful than a curse, to be

ready to accompany him in a few hours to

the continent.

" I had no preparation to make. We set

out on our melancholy journey to Dublin.

He was silent the whole time, and this

was like a relief to me; for early wretch-

edness is jealous of imaginary consolation,

while confirmed misery rejects even real.

I tried to reason myself into excuses for

his disappointment, for his temper, for the

vehemence of his national character ; I

tried to hope that my submission, my help-

lessness, and perhaps the exertion of the

talent that he had cultivated and admired,

WOMEN.

might at some future time procure me his

compassion, if not his affection. I had cea-

sed to love him, but it is hard to disbelieve


the only source of protection that humani-

ty affords us. I even hoped that his child

his child !—Ah, Heaven ! how much less

would I have suffered, had I been its grave

before I was its parent!

" We arrived in Dublin; and he was

expediting our departure, when I felt that

to depart immediately was impossible;

with difficulty I was allowed an attendant.

My sufferings were very great; they gave

me a great quantity of laudanum ; I know

not whether it is usual at such times, still

less do I know what might have been its

effect. I was insensible for many hours.

" I asked for my child; it was hours be-

fore I could obtain an answer ; the women

about me wept. At length my husband,

WOMEN. ( 329

the father of my child, told me, I never

should see it more. ' Do you not think,'

said he, talking himself by passion into a


justification of his unnatural crime, ' that

the incumbrance of a wife is sufficient ?

Must I have a screaming brat to remind me

of my wretchedness every where ?—You

will never see it more—you must prepare

yourself for another destiny.'

" I was insensible of all that he said af-

terwards. He had torn my child from me

-—a child from a mother of fifteen, dying to

clasp to her heart a being almost like her-

self in helplessness and weakness. I would

have forgiven him every thing—I would

have worshipped him 1 am unable to

go on.

" A dismal light, like twilight, seemed

to surround me for months—forms hover-

ed around me, but I could not distinguish

them—voices spoke to me, but I knew not

what they meant—thoughts, too, were with

me, of which I hardly comprehended the

330 WOMEN.

depth or the darkness, hut they suited my

desperation—despair unenlightened by reli-

gion, unsustained by hope—they haunt me


still—they have been with me in solitude

and in crowds—you have witnessed them,

and started at their effect, when even I be-

lieved I had forgotten them—forget them

—yes, I might, I would—but they never

forget me.

" No one heeded me, no one comforted

me ; and perhaps to this I owe my life and

reason—the torturing of officious consola-

tion would have irritated me to madness—

I never had a gleam of recollection till the

bright sun of Italy glared on me like un-

welcome light on a feverish sleeper, waking

him to pain. I was not allowed a long re-

spite—I wondered, knowing my husband's

hatred, that he had not killed me, (it is

easy to crush a flower in the bud,)—\t would

have been so easy, for I could have made

no resistance, and would have expressed no.

WOMEN.

reluctance. I did not know then how much

his interest was connected with my existence.

" "We were now in Italy. He watched me,


not with the interest of affection, not with

the feeling of humanity, not even with the

naked instinct of compassion, but with the

hungry cupidity of avarice. He seized al-

most the first moment of my recovered

reason to inform me, that his only object

in bringing me there was to compel me to

exhibit my musical talents publicly, or, in

plainer language, to go on the stage.

" At times I feel it impossible to pro-

ceed—Such degradation, such misery! I

have before said, a woman always feels a

tale of shame like a tale of guilt.

" The first night of my public appear-

332 WOMEN.

ance seems to me like a dream—I went on

the stage in a state of absolute stupefaction

—the lights, the crowd, my terrors, my


former sufferings, the appalling novelty of

my situation, bewildered me. I moved in

a kind of dazzling mist—the exertion of

my powers was quite involuntary, and the

enthusiastic applauses with which they were

received, I returned with bursts of hysteri-

cal laughter. Habit, that never could recon-

cile me to my situation, reconciled me at

last to its circumstances. Fioretti's avarice

(the only passion he had) strongly excited by

my success, prompted him to every measure

that could ensure its lustre or its permanen-

cy. The study of my profession, both as a

singer and actress, by occupying my time,

began at length to occupy my mind. He

easily discovered that my intelligence of

the graces of the poetry I recited gave me

an obvious advantage over his illiterate

country-women. I was furnished with a

library; the love of literature revived in

WOMEN. 333

my heart; that heart had no other object to

love. My mornings were passed in study

and seclusion, and in the evenings Fioretti


attended me to the theatre, and prevented,

by his constant presence, the expression of

that admiration which I was said to have

excited. Thus, in the midst of the dissi-

pated cities of the continent, I lived a life

of almost vestal retirement. The monoto-

nous simplicity of this mode of existence

was singularly contrasted with the brilliant

applauses that attended my public exer-

tions. I have often felt when I heard them

as if they were not addressed to me.

" Fioretti died ; and though I could not

feel unhappy, I felt desolate at his loss. It

was then, that, for the first time, a hope

trembled through my heart, that seemed

to add a new pulse to its beatings,—a hope

of communication with my father, perhaps

with my child. Days after days have I

passed writing on my knees, and bathed in

tears letters that I hoped might touch his

334 WOMEN.

heart, and tearing them because no Ian- *

guage could supply me with words, sub-

missive, piercing, and supplicating enough.


I humbled myself even to the dust before

him, and implored him to allow me to

prostrate myself at his feet, if it were only

to be spurned. Years passed on in these

fruitless struggles; and, in the mean time,

my public exertions were unremitting, for

I felt I was acquiring a fortune and repu-

tation that might one day be my child's.

Oh, that child !—How have I sat hour af-

ter hour, trying to imagine its features, its

growth, the tones of its voice, till my rea-

son was almost lost from the intoxicating

indulgence.

" This year I received a letter for the first

time from my father ; it told me that my

child still lived, and that though he could

not yet prevail on himself to forgive me, he

would consent to see me before his death,

and inform me of the name and situation

of my child. He permitted me to come to

10

WOMEN. S35

treland, on condition of my appearing still

as a public character, concealing my birth

and connexions, and never intruding into


nis presence till summoned by himself. I

came—all conditions were easy to me—

my child was still alive—I lingered for a

month in a breathless hope of momentary

intelligence; it came last night; my fa-

ther died suddenly, without disclosihg the

name—the—I cannot go on. What have

I now to do in this country ? What have I

to do in life ? Even you, Delphine, cannot

feel for me; you have never been a mother."

It was after the receipt of the letter allu-

ded to, that Zaira had fainted on one of her

earlier nights of meeting with De Courcy.

336 WOMEN.

CHAPTER XI.

. > » •

-*— -hereby doth she evitate and shun


A thousand irreligious cursed hours,

Which such a marriage would have brought on her.

SHAKESPEARE.

THE shock of De Courcy's unexpected

presence had produced on the exhausted

frame of Eva every effect that might have

been dreaded. She did not faint, but she

became ghastly, rigid, and speechless. He

was terrified out of his purpose ; he forgot

to speak of himself or his feelings. The

hope on which his heart had fed since his

leaving France, fled from it in a moment,

and for ever. He bore her in his arms to

the house—the withered flower that he had

blasted. He could not stand the inquisi-

tion of the servants' eyes, (who, having li-

WOMEN. 337

ved in this regular family for years, knew

him as well as they knew their master,) and

he dreaded still more encountering Mr or


Mrs Wentworth. He remained at the door,

to send in his enquiries after Miss Went-

worth. The servants answered him brief-

ly, Miss Wentworth was dangerously ill—

much worse that evening—could not be

worse. With what tremendous apathy per-

sons who speak from habit announce intel-

ligence that kills the listener! The message

ended with,—Mr and Mrs Wentworth's-

compliments to the gentleman, and much

obliged.

De Courcy rushed from the door, grind-

ing the words between his teeth,—" Com-

pliments—much obliged. They have little

reason—the gentleman /—Oh, yes, I am a

stranger. They do not me, though I stand

as a lacquey at their doors—I deserve it all."

He went to his hotel, where the faithful

Montgomery waited for him, and that night

was passed in paroxysms of despair, and

VOL. III. . ' P

tfi.

338 WOMEN.

and hope, and condemnation, and self-con-

solation. He cursed himself, then he prayed

for T^va; execration and devotion trembled


together on his lips. Montgomery stood

by with his usual firm patience; he was at

comparative ease for a moment, when De

Courcy sat down to write. He wrote—

tore the paper into a thousand pieces—

trampled on the fragments—gnashed his

teeth—stalked up and down the room—

dashed himself beside the table, and wrote

again.

Montgomery sat tranquilly, but his

thoughts were not tranquil. He felt that

he must yet witness many miserable, some

dreadful scenes. The object before him,

too, was irresistibly painful and interesting.

He remembered De Courcy but the year

before, the delight of every female eye, the

admiration of all who beheld him. A -sculp-

tor could have added nothing to the perfec-

tion of his formj a painter would vainly have

imitated its freshness and bloom. What a

WOMEN. 339

figure was he now !—he had shrunk from

his natural dimensions. He was literally

a perfect skeleton. Sculptors and painters


might as well have sought models among

the bony, unbreathing inmates of a vault

.

The meagre arms tossed over the head, and

wildly deranging the luxuriant hair—the

white reeking forehead frightfully display-

ed—the light of the eye quenched for ever—

a sepulchral glare alone visible there—the

lips that once disclosed " persuasion sleep-

ing among roses," white, quivering, and

churning the foam of madness.

" Good God!" said Montgomery, " is this

the object that could turn a female brain,

that has broke a female hear£!"

It was near morning, when De Cpurcy

finished his letter. He sat beside it—read

it over and over again; he shivered from

head to foot—his teeth chattered audibly—

340 WOMEN.

a blue, contracted look began to spread it-

self over his altered features.

" De Courcy," said Montgomery, (and


he repeated his name several times before

the sound reached his ear),—" De Courcy,

will you come to the fire ? it is very late,

and very cold."

" I am on fire already—I am burning,"

said De Courcy, while he trembled more

and more, and the chattering of his teeth

became frightfully audible, and his shaking

hand could hold the pen no longer.

A long pause followed.

" Will you go to bed, De Courcy ?" said

the anxious Montgomery.

" Will you come to hell?" yelled De Cour-

cy, and his grinding teeth, his shuddering

figure, and Satanic glare of features, gave

the horrible question an emphasis Montgo-

mery shuddered to hear.

A few moments after, he flung himself,

relaxed and insensible, on a sopha.

Montgomery, with the assistance of a ser-

J

WOMEN. 341

va»t, got him to bed; but when he was laid

there, he placed his hand on his heart, and

raised his eyes to Montgomery with a look


of such anguish, that the latter found it im-

possible to quit him. His lips moved, but

he did not articulate. Montgomery bent

low, and caught the words " Take it away."

Imagining he might be encumbered by some-

thing, he opened his shirt-collar, and put his

hand to his bosom—" Do you not feel it,"

said De Courcy ; " that burning cord that

I feel ?"

" There is nothing there," said Montgo-

mery.

" I tell you there is," said De Courcy;

" and unless it is loosened, I cannot live."

" Live for Eva !" said Montgomery,

risking every thing to pacify him.

At that name a faint smile trembled on

his lips, and with this smile still lingering

on them he fell asleep. Montgomery watch-

ed him, cautiously withdrew the light, and

retired. He thought, as he glided away

.342 WOMEN.

on tiptoe, and with reverted eye, that De

Courcy's features had a calmer, but more

death-like look than he had yet beheld.


The morning revived his hopes—De

Courcy was up and dressed before him.

Montgomery did not venture to ask where

he was going.

The servant who opened the door for

him in Dominick-Street looked surprised,

but carried up his name. Wentworth was

not at home, and Mrs Wentworth delibe-

rated long with herself, whether she would

see him—whether she could even bear his

sight. At length she conceived that by

seeing him once, she might deliver Eva's

dying moments from a repetition of these

persecuting intrusions ; she felt it therefore

her duty, and where duty impelled her she

never hesitated long. She descended to

the parlour where De Courcy was—no wo-

man had ever less thought of making an

impression by her appearance than Mrs

Wentworth; the plainness of her figure,

WOMEN. 343

and the simplicity of her hajrits, had pre-

vented such an image from ever visiting her

thoughts ; yet so it was that the dignity of


silent grief, the sense of unmerited injury,

the consciousness of rectitude, and the puri-

ty of religion, lent such an elevation to her

figure and movements, that, as she entered,

the humbled De Courcy sunk on his knees

before her.

Mrs Wentworth's passions had naturally

been very strong; the power of religion had

kept them dormant for years, but had not

extinguished them, and now the thoughts

of Eva's dying state, and the sight of him

who had so cruelly reduced her to it, made

them blaze out with a violence proportion-

ed to their long and forcible suppression—

" Her heart was not within her—the fire

kindled, and she spake."—" Lie there for

ever," said Mrs Wentworth, " till all man-

kind trample on you, as I cquld do this mo-

ment! It is fitting that your posture should

be as ignominious as your nature is base. I

344 WOMEN.

would not lend a finger to raise you. Rise,

sir, however, and do not mock, with this

show of humiliation, those whom you have


humbled to the dust, on whose grey hairs

you have laid a burthen that will bring

them down with sorrow to the grave. Do

not flatter yourself that this is repentance.

No ; it is one of the delusions of your wild

feelings, a kind of intoxication, like that

into which you worked yourself, when you

persuaded yourself you loved that unhappy

girl; and, fatally for her life and peace, per-

suaded her too well to love you. You saw

youth and beauty, and you imagined you

loved; now you see death, and imagine you

feel repentance. Were you worthy of feel-

ing it, you never would have incurred it.

No man that could have loved Eva would

have left her to die. You are the victim of

a perpetual inebriation of the mind. Oh,

that you were the only victim !—There is

nothing steady, manlike, honest, or honour-

able in your whole composition. I am con-

WOMEN. 345

vinced you could not be consistent in the

pursuit of a, worthy object for an hour to-

gether ; and were you a being to be en-


trusted with the heart of a woman ? I

would not entrust you with the life of a

dog I valued. And now you weep? oh

what insulting hypocrisy ! Reserve your

tears, sir, for some fair hand to dry them—

some foreign singer—some painted harlot—

no matter to me or her. She is dying, sir—

my niece is dying; your cruelty has killed

her—your tears cannot save her."

" Oh, if you saw my heart!" said De

Courcy, in a voice choaked by tears.

" Your heart!" echoed Mrs Wentworth;

" and you talk of hearts ? Oh, wretch, you

have no heart! I lose myself while I talk

to you—I forget all female reserve—I for-

get the meekness that becomes the disciples

of Christ. Rise, sir, and begone. I pray

to the Lord that I may never, by encoun-

tering your sight, run a second risk of for-

p2

346 WOMEN',

getting what ought to be the feelings and

the language of a Christian."

" I must not see her then ?" said De

able.


Courcy, in a voice of anguish unutter-

" See her!—Oh, few are the sands you

have left in her glass, and would you shake

them with your own hand ?"

" Will not you suffer her to see this let-

ter ?" and he dropt it from his trembling

hands.

" If you intrust it to me," said Mrs

Wentworth, " I warn you before-hand, I

will tear it into ten thousand atoms—Fare-

well, sir !"—And with compressed lips, and

a stern bend of her figure, Mrs Wentworth

motioned him to the door.

De Courcy remained motionless; but

the pleading of his look and posture had

no effect on her. She crossed the room,

and took hold of the bell; De Courcy

caught her arm. " Will you expose me to

your servants, at your feet ?" said he.

WOMEN. 347

" I would expose you to all the world,

were it in my power," answered Mrs Went-

worth. Her hand was on the cord. De


Courcy held it. . ,

" Hear me for a moment—you, you who

are a Christian, should your Saviour reject

your petitions, as you have rejected mine,

what would you do ? Can any of us offend

a fellow-creature as much as all of us have

offended God ?"

At these words Mrs Wentworth let go

her hold; her features relaxed; she held

out at length her slow, conceding hand.

" You have made an appeal I dare not

resist. I will take your letter, on the con-

dition that you instantly depart."

De Cour,cy obeyed; her firm eye, and

steady, voice, left him no alternative. Mrs

Wentworth sat meditating long with the

letter in her hand; her promise then oc-

curred to her; that was sacred as an oath

with her, she decided to show the letter to

Eva when she was able to bear it; " yet,"

348 WOMEN.

said Mrs Wentworth, " of what use can it

be now V and while she said this, she wept

bitterly.


Eva had never mentioned her momentary

interview with De Courcy; it was only an

additional blow on a heart that could no

longer feel, but could still suffer. It left

her without power, even if she had the

wish, to speak of it. But the servants, to

whose care De Courcy had been compelled

to leave her, mentioned it in the house.

Wentworth and his wife knew of it; in

fact every one but Eva seemed to know of

it. She never uttered his name, nor could

it have appeared that they had met, but

from a mixture of increased lassitude and

agitation, dreadful to her aunt, who knew

the cause, but not dreadful to the sufferer,

who now viewed every thing in reference

to eternity, and to whom nothing that ap-

peared to hasten its approach could be un-

welcome.

At intervals, and as she could bear it,

WOMEN. 349

Mrs Wentworth read this letter. " It was

in the bond," and Mrs Wentworth steadily

fulfilled her obligation. The letter con-


tained these words :—-

" I should despair of seeking pardon of

any woman but you, Eva, and even of you,

but that you are a Christian. Your reli-

gion breathes nothing but mercy and for-

giveness, it has infused its blessedness into

you; it is- to its spirit embodied in your

frame that I address myself for pardon.

Eva, your lips taught me the divine lesson,

which I implore once more to hear from

your lips. I have listened to it in delight

and hope; I call on it now in despair;. let

it not fail me. The view of heaven was

first revealed to me by you, it is united

with your image; if you renounce me, I

am forsaken by both, and for ever. Do

not imagine this the wretched language of

artificial despair. Mine is real. Could you

see my withered figure, Eva, you would

6

550 WOMEN.

not be incredulous. I know I am guilty—

I plead no justification. But I know I am

dying—and I feel I shall shortly need


none. Those who tread on my grave,

though they condemned me living, will

not curse me when I am laid so low. I

feel I have been a wretch, but no one has

suffered more from my crimes than myself.

I cannot bring myself, Eva, to utter an at-

tempt at vindication to your pure ears ; the

very terms I must employ would be unin-

telligible to you ; and if you even under-

stood them, you would never accept them

as palliatives.

" Yet deign to remember at least my

sex, my youth, my strong temptations, the

contrast to which my feelings were expo-

sed ; all the seductions of the world on

one side; beauty yielding to me, genius

intoxicating me, life flattering me. And

on the other side—But I grow guilty in

my very justification. I will not say an-

9

WOMEN. 351

ether word, except to aggravate my guilt.

I am guilty then; this is a plea you your-

self have told me would avail with the


Saviour of mankind, the friend of sin-

ners. Shall it be unavailing with one who

declares herself his faithful follower? I

again repeat I am guilty ; so guilty, that,

if I appeared so much so in your eyes as

I am in my own, I never could dare to

supplicate your pardon. But mine was no

crime of the heart. At eighteen years of age,

and I am no more, what does a man know

of his heart ? His errors should be ascribed

to his ignorance of life, to the intoxication

of passion, to any thing but a source from

which the crimes of the heart rarely flow.

" If my crime has been great, my expia-

tion has been perfect. I have renounced

the enchantress for ever—I have dashed

her cup of abominations from my lip—/

never tasted it—I return as pure in soul and

frame as I left you. I am a wretch to speak

thus of Zaira—she was generous, mild,

352 WOMEN.

beautiful. You are not a woman who

could be gratified by seeing your rival tram-

pled on. No, wherever I turn myself, I


feel I alone am guilty, and all others are

innocent. I try to collect my last breath,

like a dying wretch, for one strong suppli-

cation for pardon. I have nothing to plead

but my utmost need of it. Man could not

prostrate himself more before the Almighty;

let him not kneel to a fellow-creature, and

be rejected

" I appeal to your creed, to that which

constitutes the support of your own soul,

as the only hope of mine. I implore you

to admit me once more to your sight; if

you are what you are described to me, that

object will be a sufficient punishment to

me ; if you reject me, I must feel the ter-

rible consolation that you never loved

me."

Several following lines Mrs Wentworth

suppressed in reading; the language of

despair and imprecation that filled them,

WOMEN. 353

on the supposition of his being refused ad-

mission, harrowed Mrs Wentworth; she

spared Eva words that would have almost


killed her with horror.

The last words were—" If my eyes are

denied beholding you, I swear by ,

they shall be closed by my own hand!—

Shudder not, Eva, at the expression of my

despair, while you disdain to listen to the

feeling itself. This is affectation which you

must be above. Remember, that if I pe-

rish, it is you who hold the cup to my lips,

it is you who make me taste the bitterness

of death ; you may yet snatch it away, and

bid my soul live"

Mrs Wentworth would never have read

this letter to her niece, had she not believed

her beyond its influence ; perhaps she was

mistaken. Eva was dreadfully agitated,

but her exhausted frame prevented any in-

dication of it; she suffered internally, but

she suffered the more.

354 WOMEN.

It was some days before she collected her-

self enough to be able to speak on the sub-

ject, and nothing but the increasing distrac-


tion of De Courcy, who called every day,

and every hour in the day, could have dri-

ven Mrs Wentworth to ask Eva for the

answer to that frantic letter,

A faint gleam revisited Eva's pallid cheek

and sunk eye at the mention of his name.

She was silent for some time, and then said,

with great difficulty, " I cannot write to

him. The effort to speak of him seems to

draw the last breath from my heart . I

have struggled long (with what pain he

knows not, I fear he never will know) to

fix the image of my crucified Saviour there.

He comes to contend with that image. Oh,

with what agony of soul I have struggled

to think only of Christ, and still the thought

of.him forced itself between ! I could not

sustain this struggle long—Why does he

dare to renew it ? If I could hold a pen, I

Tfould write to him—perhaps the intelUV

WOMEN.

,

gence that I can hold one no longer may

affect him. I wish"


Her voice failed her, and Mrs Went-

worth, imagining that she wanted some-

thing, asked her,with eager affection," What

she wished ?"

" That he would suffer a wanderer to re-

turn to her God, and to die in peace," said

Eva ; " that is all. If he knew what an

effect his presence had on me—if he knew

that, while held to his heart, though almost

insensible, I dared to wish for life again—

that, a guilty hope wandered through my

veins—that that moment was enough to

efface hours of suffering and of repentance—-

if he knew this, he would cease to add fuel

to those flames that scorch without purify-

ing. His letter has kindled a fire within

me again. I wander in my prayers. A

gleam of light had broke on my soul, and

he has darkened it again. If it were possi-

ble that I could recover, that I could live,

still it would be madness to listen to him.

WOMEN.

*

But tell him, I am dying. No human

power can save me. Let him forbear to


distract my last moments—it is impossible

for him to retard them."

She was so much agitated in uttering

, these words, that Mrs Wentworth never

again mentioned his name to her.

When she next saw De Courcy, she de-

termined to summon all her resolution to

deliver her solemn message, and bid him

depart in peace. But though thus " settled

and bent up," her heart melted at the sight

of his despair.

The spectacle of youth in despair is ter-

rifying ; it is like one of those frosts in

spring, which cut off all the hope of the

year.

Mrs Wentworth wept, but she refrained

herself—repeated Eva's words, and added

some of her own. " Pray," said she to the

convulsed and gasping wretch, —" cry

mightily to the Lord. Hasten to the foot

of the cross, and lay your heart and your

WOMEN. 357

sorrows before Him who perished there for

the chief of sinners ; He is able to purify the

one, and to remove the other; He can wipe


away tears from all eyes. To see her, to

persecute her longer with unanswered let-

ters, is impossible and useless. It is but a

vain sacrifice to that earthly feeling to which

you have already sacrificed too much. You

sacrificed her life, you almost sacrificed her

soul. Your image is the only object that

still'interposes between God and her. But

you have also sacrificed yourself, and I can-

not reproach you. I see your altered look,

and I pity you, as much as I can pity the

destroyer of my heart's only mortal bless-

ing. I pray for you, De Courcy ; so does

your dying victim. You meet no more on

earth, but you may meet where your union

will be eternal; ' and your light affliction,

which is but for a moment, will work for

you a far more exceeding and eternal weight

of glory.' Seek the inheritance which she

is about to partake—the inheritance of saints

WOMEN.

in light. She leaves you for ever here; but

her example abides with you. She is gone

too far to listen to any mortal voice that


would recall her. Her's bids you arise and

follow her. She treads the path that the

blessed have trod—a path of suffering and

of glory, bedewed with the tears of earth,

but brightened with gleams of heaven—

* the redeemed shall walk there.' By that

path ' the ransomed of the Lord shall re-

turn to Zion with songs, and everlasting

joy shall be upon their heads; they shall

obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and

sighing shall flee away.'" -

WOJttKN, 359

CHAPTER XII.

•

The leech then said,


And he shook his head,

"She never could health recover;

Vet long in pain

Did the wretch remain,

-Sorrowing for her lover.

Lewis.

WHEN Mrs Wentworth returned to

Eva, she found the physician with her. He

drew her to the window, with that air of

solemn and fruitless precaution by which

the living tantalize death, to announce to

her that Eva was much worse, so much

that—he paused, with a look of grave con-

cern—" Something," he said; " had agitated

her since his last visit."

360 WOMEN.

When he was gone, Eva beckoned to

her aunt to approach the bed, which she

had never quitted since the fatal night she


met De Courcy. She came—then Eva

drew De Courcy's letter from beneath her

pillow, and, giving it to Mrs Wentworth,

implored her to remove it from her sight

for ever.

" Till that is removed," said she, " I ne-

ver can regain that small portion pf peace

for which I have laboured since he deserted

me. Oh, how dreadful it is to detect de-

ception in our hearts even on the verge of

the grave ! I had thought all was over. I

refused to see him, and believed my victory

complete ; but I received his letter, and I

am punished as I deserve for the self-plea-

sing treachery of my heart. Take it away;

let all the memorials of my earthly frailty

perish. God will not deign to share a di-

vided heart with a mortal. Yet let me

read it once more," she added, as her aunt

WOMEN. 361

took the letter ; " it is the last look I shall

test behind me."

She read it without much emotion, till


she came to the passage, where he hints at

the consolation he will derive from the

thought that she never loved him—" Cruel,"

she exclaimed, laying her hand on her throb-

bing heart, with a look of agonizing convic-

tion—" Cruel!—Oh, let him do any thing

but reproach me with the want of that feel-

ing, whose excess has brought me to an

early grave ! What could I do more than

die for him ? Even she for whom I was

deserted, might have trembled to give the

proof, that I, deserted as I was, have given

without a murmur."

Sinking back on her bed as she spoke,

she signified that she wished to be left alone.

Mrs Wentworth understood the meaning

of that look, and retired.

The next day the physician called. He

felt her pulse. With the same solemn pre-

VOL. III. (i

362 WOMEN.

caution he took Mrs Wentworth to the

window, and announced that his future vi-

sits would be unnecessary ; recommended


that any thing she liked should be given

her, and took his last leave.

As he went out of the room, Eva's dy-

ing eyes followed his departure; then she

turned to her aunt, and said tranquilly,

" That man will never return—He will see

me no more—Man gives me up."

Mrs Wentworth wept.

" Oh, weep not for me, my beloved

friend!" said Eva. " Yes, friend let me

call you ; for the state which I am fast

approaching dissolves all relationship.—

Friend of my soul, you who taught my

feet the way of peace, do you weep to see

me tread it in patience and in faith ? Oh,

your tears are the only stumbling-blocks

in my way ! Remove them. I have trod

over his, and paused not, let me not en-

counter those drops which true affection

WOMEN. 363

wrings from your heart, and I shall dread

no other obstruction. I die in youth ; but

with what a hand of mercy has the tie that


bound me to life been torn! Sooner or

later the delusion of life must have been

dispersed. Is it not better that it was

removed before it destroyed more than

my life ? When I was smote, God in his

wrath remembered mercy. When the agents

in our seduction from the ways of God be-

come the immediate punishers of our dere-

liction, it is impossible to mistake the les-

son. Had I lived, what must have been

my fate ? I would have lived only for

him—I would have loved every thing he

loved—I would have been intoxicated with

the world. Such would have been my fate.

I still shudder at the thought. How dif-

ferent is the result! How different are

God's ways from ours! In the whole

range of his dispensations of mercy, what

is so merciful, as that the hand that led me

364 WOMEN.

astray was the hand that pushed me back

from the precipice ! He was the author of

the delusion, and he seems appointed by


God to have dissolved it; perhaps, because

none but he could. Had any one else been

the cause of misfortune to me, how little

should I have regarded it! He knew not

the power of the feeling with which he in-

spired me. Had the whole world been

armed against me, against the whole world

I would have stood on his side alone. What

could dissolve the spell ?—he. ' It was thou,

my companion, my guide, my own familiar

friend.' Oh, none but he could have twined

such a bond around my heart, and none

but he could have rent it away ! I am con-

vinced, so iutoxicatedwas my heart, nothing

but his desertion could have undeceived me.

I am undeceived, and let me bless the hand

that has taken only my mortal life as the

price of my conviction."

That evening, when Mrs Wentworth re-

WOMEN. 365

turned to her, she found her still more

composed; the removal of that letter seem-

ed to have removed the last burthen from


her heart. She had nothing more to give

up. Earth had no part in her now. It

was a lovely, glorious evening, in autumn ;

Eva's feeble eyes were fixed on the win-

dow ; there was a rich dark blue in the ho-

rizon, that offered repose alike to the eye

and mind. " All is mercy !" murmured

Eva to herself. Mrs Wentworth heard her

and paused. Eva gently waved her for-

ward—" Yes, my dearest aunt, all things

around me are ministers of mercy—my

dying eyes close with delight amid this de-

licious scene. Autumn was always my fa-

vourite season. I count it a blessing from

God that I die in autumn—its fading co-

lours, its rich darkness, its shortened even-

ings, are congenial to my soul. Perhaps

even in early youth I had a presentiment."

She paused for a moment, and then wiping

366 WOMEN.

away a few tears, said, " No, no, I am not

thinking of him now."

Her dissolution was now obviously near;


she rose no more from her bed, but her

countenance became gradually more celes-

tial ; a faint but lovely tinge overspread

the cheek it had long deserted; her eyes

had a light beyond the brightness of mor-

tality, they did " comfort and not burn."

Her evangelical friends were much in her

apartment; this is customary, and, when

practicable from the state and habits of the

invalid, is undoubtedly a solemn and edify-

ing spectacle. But it had somewhat too

much publicity for Eva. One night, after

there had been prayers and hymn-singing

in her room, and each departing, had so-

lemnly wished her peace, she said to Mrs

Wentworth, " When / am dying, do not

let the preachers be about me ; let me die

in private ; death is too solemn a thing for

witnesses. They might, perhaps, press me

WOMEN. 367

on some points, which I could not then an-

swer clearly; and the failure of my intel-

lects, the natural decline of my strength,


might be mistaken for ' unsoundness in the

faith.' They are fond of proposing tests at

such a time; it is no time to answer nice

questions; one must enjoy their religion

then, not define it. If my testimony could

be offered up, I would offer it in the pre-

sence of the assembled world; but God

.needs no such witness to his truth. The

curtains of a death-bed should be closed—

let mine be so, my dearest aunt. Shall I

confess the truth to you ? I think there

is something too public in the printed ac-

counts of the deaths of evangelical persons.

I do not wish to be surrounded by preach-

ers and persons calling on me to witness

the truth, when I have no longer a breath

to heave in witness of it. Oh, no, there is

something too theatrical in that—and I,"

said Eva, wiping the drops from her stream-

868 WOMEN.

ing forehead, and forcing a ghastly smile

—" / have suffered too much by the

theatre."


At these words, Wentworth, who was

in the room, came forward. He could not

hear that a niece of his, brought up in

the very straitest sect of evangelical reli-

gion, should thus depart without leaving

a memorable article for the obituary of an

Evangelical Magazine. He had expected

this, at least, from her. He had (uncon-

sciously in his own mind) dramatized her

whole dying scene, and made a valuable

addition to the testimony of those who die

in all the orthodoxy of genuine Calvinism.

" My dear Eva," said he, approaching

her bed, and softening his voice to its soft-

est tones, " I trust that I am not to disco-

ver in your last words a failure from the

faith, for which the saints are desired to

eontend earnestly, and to resist even unto

blood. I trust that your approach to the

WOMEN. 36?

valley of the shadow of death docs not

darken your view of the five points, those

immutable foundations on which the gos-


pel rests, namely,"—and Wentworth began

reckoning on his fingers—Mrs Wentworth

in vain made signs to him—he went on

as far as Perseverance, when Eva, lifting

her wasted hand, he became involuntarily

silent.

" My dear uncle," said the dying Chris-

tian ; " the language of man is as ' the dust

of the balance' to me now. Reality, reah'ty

is dealing with me. I am on the verge

of the grave, and all the wretched distinc-

tions that have kept men at war for centu-

ries seem to me as nothing. I know that

' salvation is of grace through faith,' and,

knowing that, I am satisfied. Oh, my

dear uncle, I am fast approaching that

place where there is neither ' Jew or

Greek, barbarian or Scythian, bondman or

free, but Christ is all, and in all.' Speak

tft

370 WOMEN.

no more of points, which I cannot under-

stand ; but feel with me that the religion

of Christ is a religion of the soul—that


its various denominations (which I have

heard so often discussed, and with so little

profit,) are of light avail, compared with its

vital predominance over our hearts and lives.

I call," said she, collecting her hollow voice

to utter the words strongly,—" I call two

awful witnesses to my appeal—the hour of

death and the day of judgment—they are

witnesses against all the souls that live. Oh,

my dear, dear uncle, how will you stand their

testimony ? You have heard much of the

language of religion, but I fear you have

yet to learn its power." She paused ; for,

dim as her eyes were hourly growing, she

could see the tears running fast down Went-

worth's rugged cheeks. His wife led him

from ^ie room. The mercy of God visited

him even at the seventh hour, and we are

rejoiced to relate that thelabourer is (though

called so late) in expectation of receiving

WOMEN. 371

the same reward as those who bore the bur-

then and heat of the day. Mrs Wentworth

returned, to pass the night beside the bed


of death. Eva said to her at intervals that

night, " Do not let the weakness of my

dying frame, or even the wanderings of my

intellect, (if I should wander) induce you

to think that God has deserted me, that I

have not an anchor of the soul, sure and

stedfast. The body may fail, the workings

of the soul are invisible, but I feel that the

everlasting arms are under me, though I

may not always be able to express my feel-

ing. Remember this, when I am no longer

able to utter it; and let the thought that

this was my declaration, while yet the

power of speech remained, be your conso-

lation." At another she said, " Death is a

very different thing from what we read of

in Evangelical Magazines. I have read of

many who departed in triumph, who ex-

claimed continually,' Why tarry the wheels

of his chariot?' whose spirits were almost

372 WOMEN.

glorified while yet in the flesh. I feel none

of this—no ecstacy, no enthusiasm. Death

is an awful thing ! how awful none but the


dying can tell—I tremble, but I hope ; tri-

umph becomes not a dying sinner, who

casts herself with fearful confidence on the

mercy of God. The waters of Jordan are

cold to the foot of the passenger, but God

will be with me there, and the waters shall

be a wall on the right hand and en the left."

Towards morning she slept, and Mrs Went-

worth approached nearer the bed, to watch

her countenance; she wished to accustom

herself to the change produced by sleep so

closely resembling that which must soon be

produced by death. When she awoke, a

female friend who had sat up along with

Mrs Wentworth enquired how she found

herself? She answered, "Perfectly calm."

It was explained, that the question referred

to her bodily feelings ; her answer was gi-

ven with more than usual strength of tone.

" I am so little accustomed to think of my

10

WOMEN.

bodily feelings, that when I hear the inqui-

ries of a friend, I can only conceive that

they mean, ' how my soul is faring ?'" A


few moments after, she said to Mrs Went-

worth, " I die a monument of the power

of religion. What could the whole world

do for me as I lie this moment ? could it

restore my withered youth, or heal my bro-

ken heart ? could it suggest a single hope

to brighten the dark road I am about to

travel ? Oh what a difference between the

powers of this world, and the powers of the

world to come! Men might pity me, but

never could imagine that they are objects

of pity to me. My feet stand on the thresh-

old of the house of many mansions, and

worlds could not bribe me to look back for

a moment; and this the religion of Christ

has done for me. Oh how little consola-

tion could I derive at a moment like this

from ' gay religions, full of pomp and

gold "—from a religion that promised no-

thing but temporal power or splendour to

374 WOMEN.

its professors—from any religion but that

pf the heart and of grief? Amid the dark-

ness of my earthly prospects, the cross


brightens by the contrast. I lie here a

helpless dying wretch; the world views me,

and passes by on the other side; but he,

the divine Samaritan, had pity on me, and

the wounds of my spirit are healed."

In the course of the day, many friends

came to see her; she was not able to speak

to all, but her smile said much. Among

the rest, Montgomery was admitted; he

came to catch the mantle of the parting

saint, and heal the despair of De Courcy by

a touch of its folds. It was observed, that

on his entrance she was slightly agitated;

some recollections connected with his pre-

sence shook her soul in parting, but in a

few moments her calmness was restored.

She pressed his hand with a kind expres-

sion ; she remembered how kind he had

been to her. After a pause, she drew- a

ring from her finger, and gave it to him.

WOMEN.

It had been the gift of De Courcy ; round

a beautiful figure of Constancy there was

.a French motto-r-C'est dans les coeurs des


femmes, qu'ils habitent leslongs souvenirs—

" Take this to him," she said, " and"—she

turned aside, and wept for a moment. Du-

ring the remainder of the day, she spoke

no more; but she expressed evident satis-

faction when passages from the Bible were

read to her. There are some, especially in

the Old Testament, where the messengers

of God, doubtless to accommodate them-

selves to human frailty, deign to borrow

the language of earthly passion; such as, " I

have loved thee with an everlasting love."

" My beloved is mine, and I am his."

" Thouartmine, I havecalled thee by name."

It was remarked, that she immediately sig-

nified her wish to hear passages in a differ-

ent style ; perhaps there was a reason at the

bottom of her heart for this. Towards night,

she made a sign that the " Pilgrim's Pro-

gress," which lay on her bed, should be put

376 WOMEN.

into her hand. The circulation of this ex-

traordinary work among the religious of aft

Europe is well known j and when the Spa>-


nish and Italian translators had expunged

the name of Giant Pope, they had nothing to

fear for its popularity. It was given to her,

and, pointing out a page which she had

folded down, she made a sign it should be

read to her; it was that sublime passage

that describes the departure of some of the

allegorical personages for the celestial city ;

one is this, " When the day that He must

go hence was come, many accompanied him

to the river side, into which as he went he

said, ' Death, where is thy sting ?' and as

he went down deeper, he said, ' Grave,

where is thy victory ?'—so he passed over,

and all the trumpets sounded for him on the

other side." Another is this, (it contains

the dying declaration of one of the pilgrims

when about to cross the mystical Jordan ;)

" This river has been a terror tamany; yea,

the thoughts of it also have often frighten.-

WOMEN. 377

ed me. Now, methinks, I stand easy; my

foot is fixed on that on which the feet of

the priests that bare the ark of the covenant


stood while Israel went over Jordan. The

waters, indeed, are to the palate bitter, and

to the stomach cold; yet the thoughts of

what I am going to, and of the conduct

that waits for me on the other side, lie like

a glowing coal at my heart. I see myself

now at the end of my journey ; my toil-

some days are ended; I am going to see

that head which was crowned with thorns,

and that face that was spit on for me; I

have formerly lived by hearsay and faith,

but now I go where I shall live by sight,

and shall be with him in whose company

I delight myself. I have loved to hear my

Lord spoken of; and wherever I have seen

the print of his foot on the earth, there I

have coveted to set my foot too. His voice

to me has been most sweet, and his coun-

tenance I have more desired than they that

378 WOMEN.

have most desired the light of the sun. * *

• » * * * While he was thus in discourse,

his countenance changed, his ' strong man


bowed under him;' and after he had said,

' Take me, for I come unto thee,' he cea-

sed to be seen of them. But glorious it

was to see, how the open region was filled

with horses and chariots, to welcome the

pilgrims as they went up; and followed one

another in at the beautiful gate of the

tity."

No one, even dying, need blush to listen

to such words, mingled with those of Scrip-

ture. Eva testified her satisfaction on hear-

ing them, and it pleased God shortly after

to restore her speech, and along with it an

extraordinary portion of strength. This is

not uncommon even in the last extremity;

she herself felt this unusual accession, it

quickened all her senses, and she perceived

the faint sound of infant voices, apparently

in distress; she enquired what it was.

" The children," said Mrs Wentworth.

WOMEN. 379

hesitatingly; " your children—the little

orphans—they have been in the house day

after day; and now they cannot repress


their tears, though I tried to calm them."

" And I forgot them," said Eva, smiting

her bosom with her wasted hand; " Oh,

let them come in, dearest aunt, their sight

will do me good. I can still see them,

though my eyes are weaker and weaker.

God has granted me strength for a mo-

ment. Oh, let me employ it for his glory !

My soul is as the chariots of Aminadab.

Let them come in; my dying voice may

touch their young hearts." They came,

and at her own desire they surrounded the

bed where she lay. There was the rare

and touching spectacle of youth in its bud

and youth blasted—of flowers, still fresh

and vernal, blooming in bright contrast

round the fairest of the field, withered and

dying.

" Come near me," said Eva ; and the chil-

dren wept at hearing her altered voice.

380 WOMEN.

" Come near me, and weep not; my voi«

is feeble; but may God grant it strength to

penetrate your souls. 1 am dying—start


not, dear children, you must die too. "When

as healthful as you are now, when death ap-'

peared as far from me as from any of you

this moment, I spoke to you of death. You

did not heed it then ;—behold it now, and

believe it. I am dying. Oh, dear chil-

dren, look at me; there is not one of" you

that entered life with views like mine. I

had wealth; I had many distinctions that

none of you can ever expect or will attain ;

yet 1 leave them all, and leave them with-

out a murmur. What is it that supports

me ? The gospel of Christ, that alone. Oh,

my dear children, love your God; in his

love alone will you find an equivalent for

all you can ever lose in life; for more, for

all that I have lost. If the happiest lot in

life awaited you, you must part with it ;—

you must die, and then your only support

will be what forms the strength of my soul

WOMEN. 381

now. Oh, then, my dear children, love

your God, look not to any other source for

happiness ; remember what must be your


resource in death; remember what is

mine. Mary," said she to the eldest girl,—

" Mary, I am but a few years older than

you—but two years. You are fourteen,

and I am not yet sixteen; yet I cannot

survive more than a few hours, and a long

life is probably before you. Mary, let the

sight of this dying bed never quit your me-

mory. You are young, but your youth may

be withered as soon as mine. / did not ex-

pect—my voice is failing. Dear children,

love your God, and him only; had I done

so, my last voice would not have addressed

you from this bed so soon. It is the will

of God that my life can no longer benefit

you ; but oh let the spectacle of my early

death stand in the pkce of many lessons!

May you feel my resignation, but for ever

be strangers to my errors and my suffer-

ings."

382 WOMEN.

The poor children wept sore, and strug-

gled to be each the foremost to kiss the dy-

ing hand of their benefactress. This ac-


tion touched her heart; she turned her eyes,

bright with lambent glory, on her weep-

ing relatives. " / leave you," said she ;

" but"—. Her uncle and aunt understood

the appeal; they swallowed the tears that al-

most choaked them, and exclaimed, " God

do so to us, and more also, if your last charge

be not cherished by us like the apple of our

eyes." Eva bowed her head faintly, and

Mrs Wentworth led the children from the

room. She returned soon, and found that

two or three of her female friends were pre-

paring to sing a hymn. They were very

good women, but they certainly had expect-

ed something more from Eva. Those whose

thoughts dwell much on a future state, are

impelled, by a natural sentiment, to gather

round a dying bed ; they almost expect to

receive intelligence of the world of spirits

WOMET*. 38S

from one who is so near their confines. This

is very pardonable; they had been kind

and faithful visitants in her long illness,


and now they prepared to lift their voices,

and hymn their departing companion to

glory. If there was somewhat of a " form

of godliness" in this, it must be allowed

there was something of its " spirit" also.

They sung a hymn which Eva herself had

composed a little before her acquaintance

with De Courcy. Its subject appears to

be taken from a chapter in the Revela-

tion.

I.

There is a plain above the skies,

And there a glorious city stands ;

God is the builder of her walls,

Unwrought by art, unmade by hands.

II.

Salvation shines upon her gates,

In characters of pearly light;

Her walls a pile of adamant,

Her streets a sea of jasper bright.

384 WOMEN.

III.

And who are they who solemn move

In robes of liglit her ways among,


With crowns upon each halo'ed head,

And praises on each burning tongue ?

IV.

Through toil and trouble sore who passed

On earth while wandering, those are they ;

But God hath cleansed the spotted robe,

And wiped th' unhallowed tear away.

V.

Of earthly joy their share was small,

Pain wrung the heart, want bow'd the head ;

Sorrow and sin and shame they knew,

And oft they wept, and oft they bled.

VI.

Yet through the power of sov'reign grace,

Eedeem'd from sin, renew'd to God ;

They loved the truth that Jesus taught,

And triumph'd in the path he trod.

VII.

And who is He upon the mount,

Whose forehead bears the unutter'd name?

Round him his ransom'd people shout,

" 'Tis He—and worthy is the Lamb."

WOMEN. 4 885

VIII.

And who is He upon the throne,

Whose glory angel-harpings tell ?


His name is Spirit, Light, and Love,

Tis God himself, th' unsearchable.

XI.

Blessed, oh city, are thy walls,

And blessed who inhabit them ;

God is thy temple and thy light.

Thy name the New Jerusalem.

At the words

" Through toil and trouble sore rvho passed,"

Eva pressed her hand on her withered

breast—this was the last expression of her

mortal feeling—she listened to the rest

with a countenance exquisitely calm. At

the close of the hymn they sat down round

the bed and watched her, each praying

from her heart. Some of these whispered

ejaculations reached her ear, they seemed to

please her ; the clock struck two, she heard

it, and said, " There are no clocks in eter-

VOL. III. R

386 • WOMEN.

nity; here time serves to measure pain;

we shall not need it there." Soon a great

change took place in her countenance ; her


friends observed it, and looked on each

other. That night the dying sufferer, al-

most sainted, seemed to have a foretaste of

the blessedness that awaited her. Her rea-

son wandered, but her heart was awake,

wrapt in a glorious intensity ; it was only

by the varying illumination of her counte-

nance they could guess at the state of her

mind ; for though her lips moved, she did

not speak. She imagined herself one of

the * women who visited the sepulchre, her

spirit seemed to slumber in the hallowed

cave ; then her countenance became ineffa-

bly bright, as she appeared to converse

with the angels who watched the body^

then an expression of anxious dejection

over-shadowed it, like that perhaps of Mary,

Vide Crabbe's Tales, " The Mother."

WOMEN. 387

*

when she cried, " I know not where they

have laid him." Then all became bright,


placid, and heavenly, as her returning spirit

recognized her Lord, and heard the pro-

mise, " I ascend to my Father, and your

Father, and my God, and your God."

During this solemn period her look was

not disturbed or fearful, like those who die

in delirium, but glorious and lovely ; " her

face was as it had been the face of an an-

gel." Her friends were silent from awe,

for they could not but feel that something

extraordinary was passing in her mind.

She lay still for about an hour, and then

said to Mrs Wentworth, " Bring the candle

nearer to me." It was brought. " Nearer

still," said she.

" It is close to you, my love," said her

trembling aunt.

" Then my sight is gone," said Eva, " for

I cannot see it any longer. God is untwi-

ning the cord of life with a slow and mer-

ciful hand. First, my feet were unable to

388 WOMEN.

bear me to his house—then my voice be-

came unable to sound his praise—now my

sight is no more—those that look out of


the windows are darkened—soon the silver

cord shall be loosed, and the golden bowl

broken." As she spoke her countenance

changed.

" God Hess you ! Ob, God bless you r

cried her friends, gathering round her, and

wringing their hands in the involuntary

anguish of human affection. Eva attempt-

ed to return the blessing.

Near as she appeared to death, what an

event was yet to occur! Mrs Wentworth

was summoned from her bed by repeated

messages from a stranger, who implored to

see her, who declared something of the ut-

most importance was to be communicated.

Mrs Wentworth waved the servant away,

and whispered it was impossible for her to

WOMEN. 389

see any one at that moment. Another

message came, more imploring and more

imperative than the first; the stranger in-


timated, that it was possible Miss Went-

worth's life might yet be saved, if this com-

munication were listened to immediately.

Mrs Wentworth's heart smote her; by

gentle imperceptible degrees she withdrew

the supporting arm from beneath the sink-

ing head of Eva, and glided down stairs.

There was that confusion in the house

which always occurs in a house of grief,

(even if the household is as regular as

Wentworth's.) One light burnt dimly in

the parlour, and scarcely shewed a female

figure, who was wrapt in a long pelisse and

veil, and who sat still, apparently regard-

less of Mrs Wentworth's entrance.

Mrs Wentworth paused—she heard the

audible sobs of the stranger—all grief ap-

peared trifling now, compared to her own.

" Why am I summoned," said she, " at

such an hour, and from such a scene ?"

390 WOMEN.

The stranger rose; and then her noble,

graceful figure, forced itself involuntarily on

Mrs Wentworth's notice. It could have


been no trifle that impressed her at such a

moment.

" Is the person who is called Eva Went-

worth still alive ?" said the stranger.

" I believe she may still live," said Mrs

Wentworth, " but life is parting from her

fast."

The stranger rushed past her with a

sudden motion. Mrs Wentworth, alarm-

ed, interposed, and asked by what right

she broke into the chamber of death at

such an hour ?

" I am her mother!" cried Zaira, in a

voice trembling with agony, but still re-

taining its commanding tone; and, flying

past her, she was already on the stairs. Mrs

Wentworth, stupified by grief and amaze-

ment, followed her, but, benumbed by her

sufferings and fatigue, she followed but

slowly. The female friends were closing

WOMEN. 391

the eye-lids ; at this action the stranger re-

coiled for a moment, then dashing herself

on the bed, she screamed in a voice that


froze the blood, (while grasping one of

the lifeless hands that lay on the quilt,)—

" Cold—dead—Oh, God ! my child ! my

child!"

892 WOMEN.

CHAPTER XII.

Una restabat, quam toto corpore mater,

Tota veste tegens, unam minimumque relinque,


«**•***

Dumque rogat, pro qua rogat—occidit.

OVID.

ZAIRA had gone the evening of that day

to the wretched hovel where her mother

lay. She went in a kind of delirium ; there

was no connexion of persons and events,

nothing that could realize her feelings ; she

went, but knew not what she was to expect.

When she entered the cabin, she was struck

by the resolute, upright figure of the old

woman, sitting up in her bed of rags, and

still retaining shreds of that fantastical and

terrific habit she was accustomed to wear,

WOMEN. 393

There was about her a wild and fearful con-

trast of mental energy with the utmost

wretchedness of physical nature. The mo-


ment the old woman saw her, she stiffened

herself frightfully in her posture, beckoned

to her with her bare, sallow arm ; and as she

observed Zaira's reluctance to approach, a

light came to her sunk but burning eyes; she

darted their dying fires at Zaira, as if they

would blast her if she disobeyed. A dying-

wretch, clothed in rags, a mendicant all her

life and a maniac, in her bed, commanding

a female, whose intellectual powers were

almost without competition or parallel, was

a singular spectacle. The old woman again

waved her meagre arm, and again flashed

her sunk and blasting eyes. Zaira ap-

proached and knelt, trembling, on the damp

earth, beside the bed of straw.

" Listen to me," said the old woman;

" it is of little avail that you are my daugh.-

ter; you would as soon that I had not told

B2

394 WOMEN.

you that; you come to me to hear about

your own daughter."

" My daughter! then my child was a


daughter ?"

"She was—she was.—Don't come across

me again. My head is not right any more

than my heart, and if I am put out of my

way, if once it begins to turn and to burn

again, I will die, and then it all dies with

me."

Zaira made a silent motion of attentive

submission.

" There was a child, that the foreign vil-

lain you married took from you the mi-

nute it was born, and sent to your father;

he did not care whether it lived or died.

Your father gave it to a woman he knew

nothing about, except that she went about

helping the poor, and teaching them her

own religion, (but it was not the true one,)

on the condition that he never saw or heard

more of it or you."

6

WOMEN. 395

" My father!" said Zaira, breaking the

injunction involuntarily. " Oh, my poor '

cruel father!—and was he so pitiless to my


infant ?—But he is dead."

" He is!" said the hag, her vindictive

feelings giving a terrible strength to her fa-

culties, and making her forgive interrup-

tion and every thing. " Yes, that lie is,

dead, and gone to his long, terrible account.

I remember that—I can stop for that—I

could talk and hear of that day and night

for evermore. He brought all his bastards

into the house, after you left him to marry

that foreign rogue, (he was of the true

church, however, more's the pity.) Well,

where was I—oh !—they lived together like

the devils in hell—they drank, and cursed,

and fought by the hour—and one night

they quarrelled in their drink, and one of

the boys, his favourite, struck him, and the

devil was strong in him; he knocked his

old father down, and dragged him by his

grey hair to the head of the stairs; and

396 WOMEN.

when he was a-dragging of him, (your fa-

ther,) along by the hair, the old man cried

out, and he said, * ' Oh, drag me no further


than the stairs, for there / dragged my own

father, but no further.' The cry of the fa-

ther sobered the boy; he saw what he had

done, and his father lying at the feet of

him, and he ran back to the room, where

there was a loaded piece, or something, I

don't t mind now what it was, and he shot

himself through the head, cursing the hand

that had struck his father. He was the fa-

ther's darlint (after you)—he heard the shot

—and he never spoke a word more, but to

say, ' that shot went through my heart,

though he struck me.' He never spoke

more than that till he died. That was his

end—ay, that was his end—and so I said

it would be when he drove me from his

* Fact—in an Irish family,

t Mind, t. e- recollect.

WOMEN. 39T

house—and so I said when I was driven

from that place, a beggar, and a vagabond,

and a madwoman. I said it would be his


end—and it was" said the dying wretch ;

her hagard features brightening with the

long-reflected flames of her vengeance, " It

was—'that was his end."

Zaira, in the silent agony of her horror,

paused long ; she dared not to enquire af-

ter her child. The beldame went on ; she

seemed to have received a powerful stimu-

lant from relating the horrible death of her

betrayer.

" There he lies," said she, glancing her

hollow eyes to the side of her bed, as if she

saw the soul there weltering in flames;

" and there let him lie.—I was telling you

of your child—well—your father gave her

up to that woman, but when he found she

was breeding her up well, (in her own way,

that was not the true way)—the pride of a

gentleman came to his heart, and he settled

398 WOMEN.

a load of money on her, if the woman would

keep her, and he get shut of her, quite en-

tirely, and for ever. Then the woman, (I


forget her name,) she married a black pres-

byterian, some of what they call the new

light; but they have no light at all but the

light of hell-fire, which that it may be on

them for ever and ever, Amen.—And then

the madness was on me for years and years,

and I thought to make her soul, however it

went with mine. I had money, for I star-

ved and begged, and starved and begged

till I got more than those that gave it could

tell; and my thought was to get her carri-

ed off to Spain, or some place, where she

might live and die in the true faith,—

Well, the money was ready, and the boys

were ready that carried her off, and the

ship was ready to take her away, and no

more to be said or known of her—and least

of all of the old madwoman. I don't know,

a slip of a boy got her away from me; I

WOMEN. 399

don't mind how it was now, my head was

never right before, and it was never better

since, but only worse betimes ; yet if I am


a living woman, (which I witt not be long),

I saw that same boy beside you at Bray,

and at the fire, the great fire where all the

bells were ringing, and the bells in my head

outringing them all."

" Good God! you knew me then," said

Zaira; " and why, oh why, mother, did

you not tell me that my child was still

alive ?"

" I knew you, and I did not know you,"

said her mother; " sometimes I thought,

but when I thought, I grew madder than

ever. What could I know of my own

child, with her foreign name, and beautiful

look? Now that you look miserable, I

know you better. Yet one night, the night

"of the fire—that fire seemed to give me

some light. I knew you for a minute—I

was on my knees to you, and the tall lad

400 WOMEN.

beside you. If you did not know your own

mother from the heart, can you blame the

mother for not knowing her child ?"


The word " child" thrilled on the chords

of Zaira's heart; some detached parts of the

story, too, sickened her with unimaginable

apprehensions; " But my child—my daugh-

ter—mother—speak to me—I can no long-

er speak," cried Zaira.

" Nor I either," said the old woman,

drawing up her feet into the bed with the

horrible rigidity of death.

" Her name—her name!" shrieked Zaira,

bending over her.

" Her name!" said the old woman ; " oh

they gave her no true name. They should

have called her Mary, after the Virgin, or

Teresa, or some holy name, after the bless-

ed saints; but they called her after some

black, bitter Presbyterian. Her name is

blotted from the book of life. They called

her Eva Wentworth—some such thing—

WOMEN. 401

no matter now. Bid them put some co-

vering on my feet—I am deadly cold."

Eva Wentworth—Madness was Zaira's


refuge for some moments; she spun and

twirled in agony on the narrow floor, and

fell on it shrieking, " I have murdered her,

I have murdered my own child—my own

child!"

It was too true; Eva was the child of Fio-

retti and Zaira, adopted at first from cha-

rity by Mrs Wentworth, and afterwards

brought up as her niece. Zaira's altered

name, and long residence on the continent,

could not awaken any recollection of the

wife of Fioretti in the mind of Mrs Went-

worth, and her unfaded beauty never could

suggest to the beholder that she was the

mother of a child fifteen years of age. The

only ray of light or hope that flashed on

402 WOMEN.

the darkness of her soul was a wUd belief

that, by disclosing herself to her daughter,

by prostrating herself before her, she might


perhaps protract her life, might perhaps save

it. Late as the hour was, she desired to be

conveyed insfantly to Wentworth's house,

and came—too late.

The interval between Eva's death and

interment was passed by De Courcy in sul-

len and calm despair. He never spoke but

to enquire when her funeral was to take

place; and on the morning of it attired

himself in mourning to attend it. Mont-

gomery felt it would be useless to oppoiie

him. They went together. When the cof-

fin was brought into the aisle, and placed

before the reading-desk, where the clergy-

man was about to read the awful chapter

from the Epistle to the Corinthians, there

WOMEN. 403

I

was a short pause—it was then very touch-

ing to remark the difference between the


mute and solemn grief of her relatives and

friends in the surrounding pews, and the

wailing of the poor who filled the aisle, and

wept aloud for their benefactress. But all

feebler feelings were lost in the spectacle

of Zaira and De Courcy, seated on each

side of the coffin in silence. Zaira's face

was covered by her veil, but De Courcy

kept his eyes immoveably fixed on the plate,

where he read for the last time the name of

Eva Wentworth.

The lesson was concluded; the attend-

ants came forward to bear the coffin to the

church-yard; then Zaira and De Courcy

rising, stood opposite to and recognised

each other. They did not speak, nor,

from the expression of their features, could

it have been discovered that they had ever

met before. In going out of the church,

they again were close to each other fof a

404 WOMEJt.

moment, but "neither of them experienced

the slightest sensation from the presence of

the other. Singular meeting of two per-


sons, who, a few months before, had felt

that the existence of each depended on the

other ! Thus, perhaps, spirits meet in a fu-

ture state, in a cold, averted, shuddering

state of recognition, when they see no

longer with the eyes of the flesh. When

the earth was heaped over the grave, and

the black coaches slowly retired with the

friends and relatives, De Courcy lingered

behind the rest; and when all were gone,

he threw himself on the grave, and re-

mained there for several hours. Montgo-

mery stood beside him; neither of them

uttered a word ; when, at last, he suffered

himself to be torn away, no entreaties could

prevail on him to speak; he never chan-

ged his posture, tasted food, or closed his

eyes in sleep. It was obvious that this could

not continue long.

WOMEN. 405

On the evening of the second day, he

said, hi a voice hollow and painful, from

long-suspended articulation, and approach,


ing death, " You saw her in her last mo-

ments—was there no word of peace for

me?"

" She sent you this ring," said Montgo-

mery^ " and"—— .

« WeH!"

" She was then unable to speak," said

Montgomery ; " but her countenance ex-

pressed all you could wish."

De Courcy took the ting, and pressed it

to Tiis pale lips. Encouraged by the per-

mission to speak to him, Montgomery

pressed him to recline on the sopha, and

try to get some rest. De Courcy lay down

—slept—and awoke no more. As Mont-

gomery beheld the calmness of his exqui-

site features, he " trusted his soul had got-

ten grace." He was interred near Eva, for

Montgomery knew the wish of his heart,

9

406 WOMEN.

though death had prevented his uttering

it. On his grave-stone was this simple

line:—


CHARLES DE COURCY,

Obiit Mense Novembris, anno Domini, 1814,

JEtatis SUCE lg.

, Perhaps the date of such inscriptions is

as profound a lesson as was ever taught—

the tomb-stones of the young are fall of

instruction.

WOMEN. 407

CHAPTER XIII.

THE following spring, the Miss Long-

woods, gay and happy, were escorted by


youthful, titled bridegrooms into that very

church. They entered it fluttering in bri-

dal finery, and as they quitted it, their steps

trod lightly on the graves of De Courcy

and Eva.—Such is the condition of life.

Zaira still lives, and lives in Ireland. A

spell seems to bind her to the death-place

of her daughter and lover. Her talents are

gone, at least they are no longer exerted ;

the oracles may still be there, but it is only

the tempest of grief that now scatters their

408 WOMEN.

leaves. Like Carathis in the vaults of Eblis,

her hand is constantly pressed on her heart,

in token of the fire that is burning there


for ever ; and those who are near her, con-

stantly hear her repeat, " My child—I have

murdered my child!"

When great talents are combined with

calamity, their union forms the tenth wave

of human suffering—grief becomes inex-

haustible from the unhappy fertility of ge-

nius, and the serpents that devour us, are

generated out of our own vitals.

PINTS.
