EDGAR: 

A NATIONAL TALE. 



By miss APPLETON, 

AUTHOR OF PRIVATE EDUCATIQN, &C, 



God and my Right. 

Edward III. King of England. 

Man h* made, and for him built, 

^fagnificent, this woild, and Earth his seat. 

Him Lord pronounced; 

Subjected to his service, angel-wings. 
And flaming ministers, to watch and tend 
Their earthly charge. 

Alilton. Paradise Lout, b. ix. 

To you a Father should be as a God, 

One thatcompos'd your beauties ; yea, and one 

To whom you are but as a form in wax 

By him imprinted ; and within his power 

To leave the figure, or cKsfigure it. 

Shakenpeare . Mids. yignt's Dreiim. 



IN THREE VOLUMEr 
VOL. III. 



LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR HENRY COLBURN, 

PUELIC LIBRARY, COXDUIT STREET, HANOVBR SaUARE. 

1816. 



Printed by Cox and Baylis. 
Great Queen Street, Lincoln's-lnn-Fields, 






EDGAR. 

BOOK XI. 
THE MORAL. 

Who is yonder smiling maid, robed ia 
purity, that hovers round the favoured 
dwellings of mortals ? I behold her deli- 
cate touch inspiring courage, animation, 
tenderness and joy. Every eye sparkles in 
her approach ; even the sad heart leaps in 
the welcome sight. The infant spies, and 
stretching forth his little arms, half laugh- 
ing, half complaining, spurns his cradle- 
bed with his tender foot, and heaves his 
straining body upwards. The blushipg 
virgin feels the grasp of this angelic being, 
and sighing, courts the silent shades. At 
a distance she hears a step ; with agitated 
bosom she turns her graceful head, and 
quickly perceives the youth to whom she 
VOL. III. B is 



2 E D G A R. 

is dear ; modesty teaches her to avert the 
gaze ; and onward impulsive she hastens, 
hearing in vain the voice that implores her 
stay. But she flies in vain, for the step, 
strong and swift, overtakes her's. With 
soft reluctance and downcast look she 
yields the snowy hand ; and as the village 
bells murmur on the ear, suffers words to 
mingle that calm her lovely agitation, and 
satisfy her spotless innocence. Who is the 
maid that can thus dispense sweet gifts, 
and unite by such golden links, man to 
man, father to child, youth to maid ? Her 
name is Love. Unlike to that turbulent 
and audacious boy, who is the son of Pas- 
sion, and the brother of Vice, she is the 
chabite daughter of Virtue and Social-tie ; 
born to be the cementer of kindred souls, 
the guardian of helpless infancy, the prop 
of declining age, the smoother of affliction, 
the pledge of happiness, — to bless all the 
earth, and to reconcile his Redeemer with 
man. 

As Prince Edgar finished tlw? relation, 
the lady Berengaria sighed to find it ended; 
and having gracefully presented her thanks, 

retired 



B O O K XI. 3 

retired with her favourite and the attend- 
ants. " I see,'* said the Cypriot Prince, 
" that ray sister greatly admires thy story ; 
she is much affected ; and I trust thou wilt 
relate, with thy ready invention, many 
such for her amusement. The Princess is 
tender and innocent. Dost thou find her 
engaging, my lord ?" — " So engaging,** 
replied Atheling, " that methiriks I would 
I had such a sister.'' — " Thou hast not a 
wish that slie were dearer, then, aiy lor(i? 
The hand of my little sister hath beea 
already courted by powerful princes.'* — 
Edgar deeply blushed, and was for several 
moments silent. A few pangs for the past 
sliot across his bosom — but he presently 
drew Jiear to de Lusignan, and grasping his 
hand, solemnly said, *' the moon rises in 
placid beauty — suffer me to lead thee to 
the royal gardens, and to speak to thee as 
my friend, my early friend, and to forget 
for an hour the dignity of thy station ; 
suffer me to lose the sovereign, and to re- 
member only the man." — " Oh ! that it 
could ever be so,^' hastily answ^ered de Lu- 
signan, " come, let us go this moment — 
B 2 the 



4 EDGAR. 

the air is sweet and mild, yet will we be 
guarded by the mantle." 

The Princes descended the marble steps, 
and trode the spacious walks. The heart 
of Atheling throbbed in agitation, as he 
drew forth events which he b.ad striven to 
suppress ; however, the mild breeze revived 
him ; the sweet serenity of heavenly mo- 
tions strengthened his drooping mind, and 
as he pressed the arm of his friend, he 
began : 

*' I owe it to myself, to my generous and 
royal host, the explanation I would present 
him. Listen, my friend : and pity the 
breast which has suffered the sting of re- 
proach, from disregarding the cautions of 
virtue. 

" After Poictier's battle, I remained two 
years imprisoned, and was only^ released 
under promise of not returning to my na- 
tive country, or France, during three 
years. Imprudently I passed through Italy 
and the state of Venice, disguised ; re- 
taining too long, precautions once neces- 
sary. — Oh ! had I not done so, I might 
then have embraced a beloved friend. Alas ! 

to 



B O K XI. 5 

to do wrong asks but a moment — remorse 
and repentance demand whole years. By 
my own imprudence, I hurried away from 
Venice, and entered into the service of 
the Venetian army in Candia. Here the 
greatness of my general's virtue, and my 
own anxiety to retrieve my error, urged 
me to exertion, and encouraged me to 
hope. After six months I rose to honours, 
and gained the esteem of the noblest and 
most generous of men. The wavering 
Candians had begun by being rebels ; they 
wished to make a traitor ; I was kindly ad- 
vised to retreat, and I fled towards Egypt 
with the generous pilgrim who had attached 
himself to me, and to whom I am indebted 
for present existence and honour. But in 
choosing Egypt for my destiny, I had still, 
oh de Lusignan, a secret motive, though I 
suspected not myself. Weak, vain, pre- 
sumptuous, and rasii as I am, do not hate 
me, my friend. There was an Egyptian 
lady, beautiful and engaging. I thought 
her innocent ; with her I fled to Alexan- 
dria ; I resisted the earnest prayers of the 
experienced pilgrim— I trusted mine own 
B 3 deceitful 



<3 EDGAR. 

deceitful heart ; but where shall man stop 
in error, when he passes its boundary ? I 
touched the bark, intending to view only 
the shores of Egypt — I touched the shore, 
intending only to view the pillar of Pom- 
pey — alas i I desired only to gaze on the 
charms of the magnificent Nourrayah." — 
*' Nourrayah ! ah !" exclaimed the Cypriot 
Prince j but he immediately said, " pro- 
ceed." 

" What, Sir, dost thou then know her T^ 
cried Edgar. ** No," replied his friend; 
" yet the name is not quite strange to me 
— proceed.'' — ** This lady,'* continued 
Atheling — " but why do I speak of her ? — 
Oh, upon what a gulf! — what passions ! — 
what misery ! — my heart beat — my mind 
was distracted — advice, precept, my coun- 
try, my religion, my home, all nearly — 
nearly forgotten ; she too that should have 
taught me the reserve of diffidence. But 
m the midst of my phrenzy, whilst head- 
strong emotion shook my reason, whilst 
my foot trembled on the edge of a preci- 
pice, heaven itself deigned — surely it was 
the intervention of heaven ! — to interpose 

in 



B O O K XI. 7 

in my behalf. I was struck vath a dread- 
ful malady — my soul was sick, and loathed 
existence ; I raved and despaired by turns ; 
yet even in this dreadful chastisement, a 
path of escape was left me ; an interval of 
reason afforded me the means of escape. 
Though I was under correction, yet was 
mercy shewn me ; disease balanced herself, 
and dozed, that I might crawl from those 
tremendous shores. Oh, ^lameluke ! I see 
thee now, as dark passion sits on thy pitiless 
brow — I hear thy terrible words — I see her 
distraction, and her sullied lobe. Oh, de 
Lusignan 1 great Prince, thou who art one 
day to govern realms, and set a precedent 
before man — oh, de Lusignan 1 take cau- 
tion from me. Behold mine eye still hol- 
low, my ciieek wan, my strength faded, 
my frame trembling in the agitation of re- 
collected struggles, strong passions, and 
racking disease ; behold me thus, and re- 
member that the first breach in virtue leaves 
space for any assault upon the fabric of life. 
How did the cold dew encrust my pover- 
ished limb, and then what burnino; anscuish 
succeeded ; my tongue, how parched and 
ii 4 swollen ! 



8 EDGAR. 

swollen! yet uttering the broken plaints of 
remorse, or the rude defiance of guilty 
conflicts — my soul as a hidden valley 
of the deep, on whose breast rise innu- 
merable hosts of waters pressing with 
irresistible force, and Iiowhng with ter- 
rors exliaustless. Darkness, confusion, 
and dismay, rolled over me, yet in the 
midst of distraction was I conscious ; but 
conscious only of existence and wretched- 
ness. Nevertheless, oh Prince! though 
all the accumulated miseries of possibility 
had been aggregated round my head; 
though I had been locked up in earth's 
centre, and had, in my sorrows, heaved 
the ponderous mass and shaken even to the 
tall mountain pine in mine agonized effort,- 
yet were I happy, and smiling in cloudless 
joy, to witness my great deliverance. Oh, 
my heavenly maker ! thou who fillest the 
wide orbs of the universe w^ith matter, and 
hast given them motion by thy word ; thou 
who presidest in majesty and glory exalt- 
ed above the widest stretch of human appre- 
hension ; thou who art omnipotent over the 
millions of enthroned seraphim of heaven ; 

thou 



B O O K XI. 9 

thou whose seat is so high above power, 
dominion, and principality, and so daz- 
zHng in rays of awful majesty, that burning 
spheres and scorching suns are to thee as 
the black abyss ; that the blazing cherubim 
who stand veiled in their radiant plumes 
trembling to dazzling grandeur, are over- 
awed by thy effulgent presence ; thou. Lord, 
exalted to this pinnacle immensurate of 
bliss and glory ; thou couldst look down 
even to earth ; and from earth, even to 
the dust, for a poor insect groaning under 
sorrow, violence, and despair. Thou 
couldst look down and compassionate ; 
couldst behold the foot estranged from thy 
path and thee, and yet say, I will have 
mercy and not sacrifice ; I will not destroy 
but fulfil. Oh, my father ! who art thus 
immensely gracious and long-suffering with 
guilty men, accept my poor imperfect 
praise. I am not worthy to sound thy 
dread name, yet my lip shall bless thee -, I 
am not worthy that thou shouldst look upon 
me, yet I presume to supplicate for thy 
^countenance— I presume — not in my merits 
for thou knowest I have none — but em- 
B 5 boldened 



IQ EDGAR. 

boldened by past mercy, and by the word 
of him, who said, " go and sin no more." 

The Cypriot Prince folded his arms 
across his breast, and bent to the ground 
as the repentant Edgar stood gazing in 
\^onder, love, and piety upon the etherial 
curtain of heaven. The fervour of his 
ejaculation lighted up in solemn brilliancy 
his imagination, and he seemed to view 
the planets swell from their limits, rush 
together in one pyramid of creation, and 
to hear a voice loud and exulting cry from 
them, * we too are the work of his hand.' 
— *' Yes," exclaimed Atheling, " ye too, 
oh stars ! which break through the darkness 
of night ; thou, oh pale mo< vho art per- 
chance the first model of a nether earth, 
formed as a sample of perfection ; majestic 
suiTl^ ye fiery comets. Yes, all may boast of 
the sacred impress of an omnipotent finger. 
Speak ! stars — sun — earth — creation — 
speak — man shall join ye, and we will shout 
glory to the eternal. 

The hp of youth glowing with piety and 
gratitude, was well pleasing to the minis- 
tering angels of night. They stilled the 

rustling 



B O O K XI. II 

rustling tree, hushed the bubbling water, 
soothed the beetle to rest, and shaded on 
each side the breath of Edgar, that the 
Creator's praise might rise up, sweet, and 
uninterrupted, before the throne of mercy. 
Atheling continued some time mute — 
gazing still upon the sublime arch of the 
world. By soft gradation, the transports 
of his ardent soul melted into tenderness 
and placid delight. Again he seized the 
arm of his companion. " Look upward, 
oh, my friend 1" said he, "fix thine eye 
upon that sweet grey shade, which creeps 
gently forward: behold! now it gathers 
force, it advances, it darkens thai bright 
planet; it obscures, it conceals — the orb 
is no longer visible. Does it not resemble 
the progress of passion in the human soul > 
Allurements steal onward with soft tender 
and gentle charms ; we gaze, we smile — 
they gather strength 'and assume a deeper 
cast — still man retreats not ; they advance, 
they overwhelm, they wrap in profound 
darkness. Rouse thyself, sweet moon! 
strengthen every beam, pierce through the 
entanglement — think not the first effort so 
B 6 arduous! 



12 EDGAR. 

arduous ! Ah ! I perceive a silver edge, 
already bordering the dark veil, luminous 
points burst forth j thou art conqueror. 
But, thou moon, thou nature, who art 
all harmony, have I taxed thee with for- 
getting thy destiny, or the eternal law? 
have I likened thee, immutable in thy ac- 
cordance, to man ever changeful, ever per- 
plexing, eVer forgetful of his maker and 
his immortality? Oh nature! have I so 
outraged thee ? forgive, forgive me, proud 
works of perfection. *Tis man only that 
rebels ; and nature only under heaven, that 
turns not aside from her appointment." 

The Cypriot Prince touched the hand of 
Atheling, and said, " my lord, I respect 
thy feelings, I perceive thou hast suffered — 
but time — a bride— young — innocent — 
gentle — affectionate — nor is haste needful. 
The princess is of noble mind — much be- 
yond a year is yet in thy power— stay in the 
island — my father should return in six 
months. Meantime, all that is ours, command ; 
forget thy misfortunes in the palace of the 
King of Cyprus ; and by gentle attention, 
win the heart of the fairest blossom of the 

east. 



B O O K XT. 13 

east. My father already loves thee by re- 
port; he himself will smile to give the 
hand of his little daughter, and to divide 
the succession between his adopted and his 
real son. Speak then, Atheling, speak ; 
that I may rush to the embrace of my bro- 
ther." 

The impetuous Cypriot with arms out- 
stretched, waited wath breathless impatience 
the answer of Edgar — he waited — he 
stamped with his foot — Athehng hung his 
head. " Oh, Sir, do you not reply?" 
said the eastern Prince, whilst eagerness, 
hope, and resentment, alternately sat on 
his dark brow. " Generous, and noble 
Prince !" cried Edgar, with half smothered 
articulation, ** if thou knewest all that 
strives in my breast ! I adore thy magnani- 
mous sentiments; I cherish and exult in 
thy friendship — listen to me, generous 
Prince. No idea of the unhappy Egyptian, 
but what is made of terror and pity, lurks 
in my soul ; but, oh de Lusignan, yet turn 
not aside, my friend — but other recollec- 
tions — oh tell me ; hast thou wrapped in 
thy memory the soft image which gave thee 

birth ? 



14 EDGAR. 

birth ? Dost thou look back upon the fair 
maternal hand which parted the ringlet 
from thy brow to hide under it a kiss, and 
then folded thee close to a tender bosom ? 
Was thy cheek when rounded by infancy's 
mould, never pressed by a fond father? 
And when the noble of thy parent's court 
stood ready to sever thee from parental 
embraces, and to transport thee to the col- 
leges of England, did not thy young heart 
sink with grief and despondence ? Was it 
not to me, that thou hastened with a spark- 
ling joy in thy leisure, to mark the lessen- 
ing time as it stood between thee and thy 
return to thy native soil ? Oh de Lusignan 
Edgar too, should have a father — heaven 
has also spared him a mother— he has a 
country — and he has also a heart — a heart 
which swells in gratitude to his royal host 
— which is throbbing in emotion at thy 
greatness, de Lusignan ; thy ofters to a 
stranger, a wanderer; poor, friendless^a 
repentant — an exile — and, what an offer ! 
the hand of a beautiful princess for which 
kings might struggle — oh, de Lusignan, 
whilst I decHne the gracious offers, how 

do 



BOOK. XI. 15 

do I wish that this heart could, for once» 
break its way and utter sounds, then 
shouldst thou know my admiration and love* 
Thou silver orb, lighten with strong rays 
the marble of Paria looking in feminine 
grace, from yon terrace. Turn this way 
sculptured and lovely representative of 
what once was ; be seen of thy princely 
son. Let him contemplate thy soft feature, 
and remember the endearing caress of a 
parent ; then shall his own generous heart 
teach him to find pardon for the ungracious 
refusal to offers so vast, when filial duty 
rises and pleads in its own behalf." 

The Cypriot Prince on these words, 
raised his kindling eye upon the snowy sta- 
tue which stood in the proportions of beauty 
and excellence, on a neighbouring turf. 
Every delicate feature of the fair Circassian, 
with the touching and melancholy strokes 
of youtiiful decay sat in languor round her 
braided tresses and transparent veil. The 
head drooped gently, and the chisel had 
directed the full eye to the ground, where 
it now seemed to meet her son. 

De Lusignan stood silent and motionless. 

Suddenly, 



If) EDGAR. 

Suddenly, a dark body rushed by, and im- 
mediately a part fell to the earth — a piteous 
cry arose. The Princes started, and direct- 
ed their attention to the spot : now a large 
wing flapped near, an immense bird groped 
on to the fallen, and as he discovered it, 
moaned, caressed it with his beak, and 
fluttered his pinion; then he lowly bent and 
stretched out his long neck to assist in re- 
placing the heavy burden on his shoulder ; 
he flaps the ground, he struggles, he rises, 
he soars, he is gone. *' Behold, Prince, 
the stork !" cried Atheling, " behold him, 
riding to southern shores, perchance to 
Egypt, with his precious burthen— he bears 
on his wing a parent. Happy father with 
such a son ; happy age, which is never 
chilled by filial negLct 1" 

As Edgar spoke, the Cypriot, deeply 
affected, turned away ; soon, however, he 
moved back to the English Prince, and em- 
bracing him, said, " I have ever admired 
thee, Edgar ; thou hast the open heart, the 
sensibility and delicacy of thy country, with 
all its undaunted valour. — I regret, but I 
yield to what thou hast urged ; — yet, I see 

a way 



BOOK xr. 17 

a way — remember, I expect liere no refu- 
sal," added he, with impetuosity ; « time 
to beyond a year is thine. — What canst 
thou do better than — Enough, to-mor- 
row we meet — this night I give to my plan 
— farewell." The flashing eye of de Lu- 
signan seemed to scorn a reply ; he started 
up : plucked his hand from the retaining 
Edgar, who fearful to exasperate, yet shud- 
dering in wonder, said, " What mean you, 
Prince?" — ** I mean..." rephed he, with 
raised finger, ** fare thee well — to-morrow's 
dawn shall instruct thee," and he fled with 
haste to the palace. 

Atheling attempted not to follow ; he 
flung himself upon the earth, which still 
glowed in the warm kiss of the audacious 
sunbeam ; he looked up, musing, to the 
azure canopy of his head, and sighing 
deeply, murmured, *' What next, oh man, 
shall agitate thy bosom ? W^hat new emo- 
tion shall envelop thy wondering soul ? 
What more of life shall teach thee to mo- 
derate thy wishes, abate thy fond hopes, 
contract thy wants, be ever prepared for 
reverse, and t© tremble in the shade of 

pros- 



18 EDGAR. 

prosperity? Oh, my revered father, my 
loved mother, if ye do indeed exist, when 
may your son again throw himself before 
ye, and on his knees crave one last bles- 
sing? Thou, oh de Clifford, where art 
thou ? — what clime wafts thee breath ? Art 
thou near the Prince, thy delight and Eng- 
land's ? Or, art thou established by thine 
own hearth, giving a sigh to the memory 
of thine early friend, who has enfolded 
thee among the sweet blossoms of youth- 
ful recollection ? Beauteous luminary, 
couldst thou speak, and that I might un- 
derstand thy word, how wouldst thou tell 
of those, whose eye hath watered in gazing 
on thee, and in forming the tender wish 
that a kindred one was also fixed on the 
same point. Oh, heart of mine, whose 
slackened strings, and slow beat, shew the 
despondence, the inequality of man ; and 
thou, my soul, which in melancholy strains 
reminds him of sorrows inherited, entailed, 
deserved ! I praise ye, even ye, humi- 
liating sensations, which teach man, that 
he is not born for earthly happiness. I 
praise ye, glorious convictions, that man is 

immortal, 



B O O K XI. 19 

immortal, and that earth is no place of 
rest and full enjoyment ; for his soul is ill 
at ease in a mortal casement, and strives to 
soar to higher habitations. I praise ye, 
sensations that prove the right to immor- 
tality, yet suffer me to weep under the in- 
firmities of man. 

The dark lashes of Atheling's eye, were 
sparkling through a tear, when sleep crept 
over his limb, and leaning on his polished 
forehead, softly drew down the silken cur- 
tain over each visual orb. The respiration 
of Edgar grew sweet and tranquil ; the 
motion of his vital harmony was restored 
from its depression ; imagination rekindled 
— the cloud of melancholy was dissipated, 
and objects now rose before him natural 
and just, marked either with the yielding 
form and colour of fancy, or assisted by 
the retrospective grasp of memory. 

There gradually arose to his perception, 
an immense tract of land, watered by in- 
tersecting rivulets, which bubbled wjth a 
soft murmur over the rounded stones of 
their clear bed. On the edge of these in^ 
viting streams, sweet flowrets smiled in ever- 
lasting 



so EDGAR. 

lasting spring and perfame inexhaustible" ; 
over these tender blossoms hung the load- 
ed tree, otlering either a lofty shade, or 
nutritious food. The carpet of this luxu- 
rious retreat, was one downy bed of the 
tenderest green herbage, or the gentlest 
brushwood. Entirely around, sprouted 
coverts of thyme, sweet marjorum, violets, 
and pansies. The sun yielded to the en- 
chantment, his brightest ornament by day, 
and the zephyrs suspended every interrup- 
tion to calm and sweet joy by night. Athe- 
ling smiled and gazed, but the prospects 
changed : immense mountains, which hatl 
before appeared as a soft grey veil in the 
distance, moved forward, and he perceived 
their vast and rugged tops nearly shadowed 
by dark and lowering clouds, which, at 
intervals broke, and the barren heath, the 
hideous crag, the turbulent fall of waters, 
and the deep chasms were partly visible ; 
rude winds shook the rugged soil, or in- 
tense heat dried up the struggling blade. 
Often the thunder howled through the cre- 
vices; often the spattering storm in shape 
of hail, snow, or rain swept forward to de- 
vastation 



BOOK XI. 21 

vastation and ruin. Edgar now sighed. 
" Alas !" thought he, " what a reverse 
to yonder happy scene !'' He averted 
the eye ; and as it fell upon the 
briglit plain, he observed, that a mul- 
titude of creatures enlivened the paradise. 
They resembled young lambs in their form, 
countenance and motion. Some reposed 
beneath the sweet branches of scented 
blossoms, in voluptuous thoughtlessness ; 
some lapped the sparkling edge, and 
then stood playful, or careless, to view 
the reflected images of the heavens, the 
landscape, or themselves, in the glass of 
nature ; some sported together, and gam- 
bolled on the silken carpet ; and some 
chased each other to the very boundaries 
of the plain, and then, weary with sport, 
fell into pleasant repose. Again, Atheling 
impulsively raised his glance. The moun- 
tain too, was peopled with creatures re- 
sembling the young kid. To them, enjoy- 
ment or security seemed unknown. The 
barren estate alloted them, scarcely afford- 
ed a supply to the moderate wants of exist- 
ence, much less of luxury. Accustomed 

to 



^2 EDGAR. 

to privation, to hardship, to dangers of the 
elements, to uncertainty, to reverse, they 
looked with patient eye, and moved with 
light and humble step. Did a small in- 
viting tuft rise afar off? they sprang from 
crag to crag towards it, but yet with doubt 
and caution ; and through life prepared for 
disappointment, repined not when another 
ray of light shewed the treachery of dii^- 
tant apprehension. Ever familiarized to 
danger, they lived prepared to meet it; 
and, as when the storm pelted round their 
heads, they suffered not themselves to be 
cast down by terrors, so, neither, when a 
breath of soft air ascended from the de- 
licious plain, or a beam from the sun, en- 
livened their wild retreat, did they presume 
on perpetual favour. *' Wretched animals !" 
thought Atheling, as a stream of electric 
fluid curled round the mount. 

A light cloud now moved dov^^nward, and 
from it broke forth the semblance of a 
heavenly spirit ; — a mild effulgence shone 
in his celestial visage, and benignity smiled 
ifi his aspect. Thus it breathed to the 
mind of Atheling: " Thou art rash, oh 

mortal, 



BOOK xr. 23 

mortal, in thy determination ! Suspend 
awhile further judgment, and look towards 
the happy plam/' Edgar surprised, di- 
rected his attention according to the com- 
mand he had received. 

In the air, immediately over the plain, 
he observed innumerable hosts of birds 
of prey, which fixed their keen eye on the 
assembly below. Thick mists hung sus- 
pended over some ill-fated heads, and dis- 
ease, in the shape of a scorpion, slily 
marked her victim. The ravenous crea- 
tures of prey darted forward^ and seized, 
in one stoop, hundreds of unprepared lamb- 
kins. Some of the gentle tribes that re- 
mained, gazed too eagerly in the bright 
streams, fell in and were lost. Some were 
stung by disease ; and of those that scour- 
ed and gamboled across the soft turf, 
many fell into pits. Still in the midst of 
the calamity and danger, the general mul- 
titude that looked neither to the right nor 
the left, to be warned or instructed, con* 
tinned unconscious of harm and heedless, 
to eat, to frisk, to slumber, till their turn 
came to be snatched away. " Turn thine 



24 EDGAR. 

eye to the mountain," the celestial guide 
seemed to say. Edgar obeyed. He per- 
ceived that the kids, though oppressed 
with evils, were nevertheless cheerful, 
light, resigned. From the high pinnacles 
they observed all that passed below, and 
they scrupulously marked the savage wings 
which rode for their destruction. Every 
chasm, every precipice, they avoided with 
care, and felt ever reluctant and timid in 
approaching dazzling verdure, or inviting 
drops. " Whether of the two wouldst thou 
be?" inquired the angelic voice. ** Ah I" 
replied Atheling, "vain is the judgment of 
man. I behold mine error ; much rather 
would I that my habitation were on the 
wild rough mountain ; life is there less 
sweet, yet it bears more content ; enjoy- 
ment is there more scanty, yet I might be 
taught from it, to feel the less when life 
should be relinquished." " Thou hast well 
said," the spirit replied ; *' and now, oh 
mortal ! remember the lesson I am per- 
mitted to give thee. The creatures thou 
has seen are intended to represent youth. 
The lambs, those which are nursed m 

luxury 



BOOK XI. 25 

luxury, pleasure, and inactivity; who know 
not, or are prepared to endure want, suf- 
fering, deprivation, sickness, or decay ; 
who, when calamities, in the shape of 
birds, flutter around them, either fall to 
rise no more, or suffer, with murmurs and 
impatience, the allotted dispensations. Tlie 
kids, on the other hand, like thee, are ac- 
customed, from their birth, to temperance, 
to caution, to humanity, to activity. Ills 
of every kind are permitted to assail them, 
and the possibility of destruction is ever 
familiar to their sense. Thus are they per- 
suaded of the infelicity of earthly exist- 
ence, and are prepared for reverses ; and 
whenever they are tempted to repine, one 
gaze below teaches them resignation. Trea- 
sure up then in thy mind the example, and 
let the precept sink deep in thy heart. 
Thou too hast suffered — thou hast endured 
chastisement ; life with thee may be darkly 
chequered, or it may brighten. In either 
event, presume not to question the ways of 
Providence, but hold to resignation — and 
if thou feel mortality wither under thy 
sufferings, give thy soul the support and 
VOL, in. c consolation 



26 EDGAR. 

consolation, which alone are certain, and 
which no human hand hath power to wrest 
from thee.*' 

The guardian spirit, as he breathed these 
words in the mind of his charge, inter- 
cepted his fervid reply. The lesson was 
ended ; and he touched the inmost recess 
of memory to preserve the impression to 
futurity. Then he immediately assembled 
the beaming innocents, and appointed each 
to his charge ; whilst he instantaneously 
unbent every stretched fibre of imagination, 
drew a veil over the inverted eye, and 
quickly gathered a mist in which to 
wrap every remaining faculty. Now Athe- 
ling drew gentler breath, he slept the 
unconscious sleep of inanition ; and whilst 
every limb was anointed by the angelic at- 
tendants, and every function of life sup* 
plied and repaired by some, others stood to 
the nightly watch, carefully chased away 
the enormous-crested serpent which missed 
his scent ; the baneful vapour, which lost 
its force ; and the creeping tarantula, whicli 
forgot its sting. Thus sweetly reposed 
the young Prince 5 — and thus sweetly do 

' the 



B O O K XI. 57 

the angels of Providence temper the lot 
of virtuous man. 

The gorgeous sun had reared up his 
huge base on the resplendant waves, and 
had himself heaved from them in misty par- 
ticles, a supply to fill the magazines of 
floating moisture, — had dispersed his clou- 
dy stores, and covered them with various 
tinted webs, when Atheling awakened from 
sleep, and for a moment listened in pleas*- 
ing surmise, as the turtle-dove plaintively 
held converse with her mate, in a neigh- 
bouring citron. 

The memory, true to its sacred func- 
tion and divine purpose, by sweet grada- 
tion now lifted the sofl veil, and Edgar 
beheld on its pinnacle, enthroned, the 
vision of the night. Smihng and placid, 
he half raised his noble frame, and lean- 
ing on his manly arm, cast an eye upon 
the green carpet and fixed it ; but as yet 
seeing nought. '* Come back, sweet de- 
lusion, if thou wast one,'* said be ; " re- 
turn ye instructive images, ye that grew in 
my fancy, and still linger there, return ; 
delight and teach me wisdom. I submit — I 
c 2 yield 



28 EDGAR. 

yield; whatever be my portion on earth. 
Yet how amazing is the wide sketch of 
human capacity, even when the curtain of 
reahty is but for a moment withdrawn ! — 
How immense the faculty, which, when 
lassitude shuts it from an actual world, can 
instantly raise up an universe in its gran- 
deur, or a fly in its minute perfection, by 
mere single imagination ! Sun, moon, stars, 
cloud, skies, earth, magnificent as ye are, 
— roll on — ye have no mind. Air ! thou 
wonder, thou miracle, felt but never to be 
viewed ; vast in power, in substance no- 
thing ; thou that canst lev^el the mountain 
with the plain, and raise on the glassy sur- 
face the stupendous pyramid ; thou who 
art the feeder of life, and master of ele- 
ments — thou Air, swell on ! thou hast no 
imagination. Proud elephant, tear open 
thy breast, shew its centre beating perfect 
time — shew thy vital fluid, thy powerful 
nerve, thy proportioned stature, discover 
thy instinct so nice, so wise, so true, that 
we contemplate, we start, we pause, and 
then we smile grateful for our own good ; 
As we say, thou bearest the touch of Om-, 

niscience. 



B O O K XI. 29 

niscience, but man alone received the 
breath from his God. Chaos fluttered — 
mountains rose — deeps filled — air swelled 
— vegetation burst — creation stalked — man 
moved — the blast from the Almighty rush- 
ed into his nostrils; he sprang up, he 
thought, he reasoned, he spoke. Imagi- 
nation just kindled from the Godhead blaz- 
ed through his frame ; it endeavoured to 
run through infinity, and it broke forth in 
raptures of glory and praise. Sacred behest 
of the Most High ! oh mayst thou ever 
be preserved, pure and unclouded, that 
the splendid gift of my Maker may return 
spotless and undefiled to Him from whom 
it came/' 

As the Prince finished, he rose up from 
his grassy couch, and perceived the chief 
minister of his royal host before him. 
Profoundly he bent as he advanced, and 
kneeling before Atheling, placed in his 
hands a roll of parchment, and a costly 
jewel ring. ** Permit me," said the obse- 
quious minister, ** to salute the dust that is 
pressed by the favoured of my Lord. Vice- 
roy of seven cities ; I salute thee !*' Athe- 
c 3 ling, 



•^0 EDGAR. 

ling, wondering unfolded the scroll ; and 
saw his name joined with eastern titles of 
power and grandeur j and that he was in- 
vested with the government of a whole 
province of Cyprus, to the west of the 
Olympus. " Thy royal master is infinitely 
good and gracious," replied the Prince; 
** but my age, my inexperience, my pm'suits, 
disqualify me for a trust of such magnitude. 
Return, Sir, I entreat, with the deeds ; I 
will attend the Prince." The minister, 
who had observed the countenance of Ed- 
gar during the pause, with anxious dread 
and doubt, now flung himself upon the 
earth, and embracing the feet of Atheling, 
said, " gracious Sir, be not angry, I must 
speak, — my royal master's words to me are 
these, ' return with his consent, or deliver 
thy head.' " '* Impossible," exclaimed 
Edgar. The messenger delivered his scy- 
metar — ** strike, my lord, if thou wilt, but 
refuse me not. My master has sworn by a 
solemn oath, that he will notb e thwarted 
in this matter, without a revenge upon 
me." ^' Stay then. Sir," answered Athe- 
ling, ^* I conjure you, a moment — let me 

reflect 



B O O K XI. Si 

reflect — if the thing were not impracti- 
cable " 

Then the Prince challenged prudence 
and reason to his assistance — " am I not an 
exile from ray country," thought he, *' for 
above a year longer ! have I engagements 
or sacred duties, or even employment? 
and have I not been taught that vice is the 
offspring of idleness ? I can fight, I can 
wield the sword, but should man be ever 
engaged in war ? are not the acts of peace 
more sweet, the exercise of justice and 
mercy more delightful, than those of war, 
even when that war is defensive ? does man 
live for himself? ought he not to exert his 
little ability to the benefit or improvement 
of others ? and, above all, is a little diffi- 
culty to overwhelm him with appreliension, 
when he has such proofs of the support and 
goodness of Providence in every perplexity 
and danger ? " " No," replied he, aloud, 
" Heaven be my guide. Sir, be pleased to 
lead on to the Prince, and give me the in- 
signia of my new dignity." 

The minister something encouraged, rose 

up, and profoundly saluting Edgar, con- 

c 4 ducted 



^S E D G A R. 

4u€ted him to his master j wlio impatient 
sat in th«^ hall of state, surrounded by his 
council and nearest kindred. 

The Enghsh Prince with a noble courtesy, 
saluted the throne of Christian Jerusalem 
and Cyprus. The impetuous heir instantly 
bowed, and with majesty addressed his 
council : 

" Faithful advisers of the king, my fa- 
ther, and of me his son ; ye know that 
seven days since, expired the governor of 
the western province of the beauteous Isle 
of Cyprus. Little did I guess when I 
heard the news, that my friend might be 
prevailed on to stay with us ; but from his 
story which he last night gave me, I dis- 
cover that his time is not secured for nearly 
two years. Friends ! I have known the 
Prince in England, that famed country of 
which ye have heard so much ; and I have 
ever respected him. On behalf of myself 
and the King, I offered him the hand of 
the princess, my sister ; but his affections 
lead another way — still I ardently desire 
his stay ; and I bestow on him the post so 
lately made vacant, for which I trust in 

your 



B O O K XI. 33 

your approbation. Now, amiable Prince> 
what hast thou to observe ? or what wilt 
thou require, that we should refuse thee ?" 
Atheling blushed as every eye turned 
upon him ; and he hesitated. The Cypriot 
Prince urged his reply, and at length, thus 
he spoke. " Most generous Princef my 
heart strongly feels, but words are refused 
me, to express gratitude, not only for this 
mark of goodness, but for every benefit 
since my approach to these hospitable 
shores. Thy goodness was affecting in its 
tenderness to the sick ; gracious in its con- 
descension and famiharity to the guest ; 
magnanimous in the project of investing him 
with purple honours and sharing with him a 
future kingdom ; and it is noble in its offers 
of an employment of honour and trust to 
a comparative stranger, and an exile." 

" Say not thus,'' interrupted the vehe- 
ment Prince, ** only speak to the ques- 
tion ; thou wilt then accept of the autho- 
rity?" ** Sir," answered Edgar, with a 
respectful steadiness, *' on three conditions 
only, can I feel it right to accept of this 
high and distinguished trust." " Name, 
c 5 name 



Sif E D G A E. 

name them," cried the Prince. *^ The 
first is, Sir,*' rejoined Atheling, " that an 
old and wise counsellor be appointed to 
attend and assist my inexperience with sage 
advice ; the second, that the post of ho- 
nour be only continued to me from season 
to season, so that when time shall have 
loosened me from my banishment, or that 
other reasons may press me, I may liave 
full permission to lay down my authority 
at the foot of the throne, and to depart 
whither I list; the third, that I meet not 
the noble and charming princess again, till 
the return of the king." " Enough, 
enough!" exclaimed the eastern Prince. 
*' Be every condition accepted, — and this 
the pledge of my faith," — and he darted 
from his seat, and brandishing high his 
sword, cried, " I swear." Then he pre- 
sented it to Atheling, who pressed it to his 
lip, and instantly returned it. " Nay, my 
lord, not so ; keep it, I entreat," answered 
the Cypriot, ** and these two," as he slid the 
signet of authority on his finger ; and cast 
over his shoulder a costly broidered mantle 
fringed with gold. 

Atheling 



B O O K XI. 35 

Atheling would have bent to the throne, 
but the Prince stepped forward, and pre- 
vented by embracing him ; and having dis- 
missed the council who did homage to the 
new governor, the Princes departed from 
tlie hall of state, and, having visited the 
bath, sat down to refreshment. 

Edgar anxious, thoughtful, fearing lest 
he might have cause to repent of his preci- 
pitance, ate but sparingly, and conversed 
still less. The impetuous de Lusignan, al- 
ready commanded a royal guard to attend 
the English Prince, and a large retinue of 
slaves. Atheling sighed as he heard of 
these appendages of office, and already 
half-repenting turned away to seek the old 
pilgrim, whom he had not perceived since 
the evening before. 

Leolf v;as seated on a mat by the palace 
gate, scrawling on the sand. He frowned 
when he perceived Edgar, but spoke not, 
" Good-morrow ! my friend," said the 
Prince, " I wish to converse awhile v/ith 
thee. Tell me, what wouldst thou think, 
should the King of Cyprus invest Athe- 
ling with the government of a province?'* 
c 6 « That 



!6 



EDGAR. 



** That it should seem as though he had 
dark designs on him, and I should think he 
would refuse ; '' muttered Leolf. " And 
why so, my friend ? " said Edgar ; " give 
me thine arm, Leolf; and let us together 
pace the long valley of cypress yonder. 
Methinks, I would wish to hear all thy 
suggestions." The old pilgrim suffered 
himself to be raised by the youthful hand 
that was stretched towards him ; nor could 
he thrust out the ray of pride which shot 
through his cold breast, on observing the 
diffidence of the Prince, and the import- 
ance he gave to his sentiments. But Leolf 
shielded his inward satisfaction under a 
more gloomy air, and unresisting followed 
his noble friend. 

The ardent eye of Atheling rested full 
upon the old pilgrim, animated by the 
flush of new-born projects, and yet tem- 
pered by the modesty of doubt, as he said, 
*« Tell me, now, Leolf, I entreat thee j 
thou who knowest by experience, how to 
calculate upon the issue of events, and to 
weigh possibility in a balance; — tell me 
what, and all thou shouldst fear for Athe- 
ling, 



B K XT. 37 

ling, if he were to reside the term of his 
banishment in Cyprus. Neither friend nor 
stranger is near to listen — save ourselves ; 
and for me, my bosom shall retain thy 
words, but further they shall never stray — 
this, by my honour, — I could add more, 
but, perhaps, Leolf is assured." Thus re- 
plied the pilgrim : " I obey, Sir ; yet what 
will avail my poor words ! I poor and 
worthless, I a wretched pilgrim, to advise 
with a Prince and a man of power : what 
should matter the words of Leolf; and who 
will say that he shall not suffer for his 
audacity?" '' Oh Leolf!" interrupted 
the Prince, embracing him, ** I will answer 
to thee ; Edgar will answer to thee by his 
love for truth ; his honour, and his life. 
Speak, Leolf ; fear not ; Edgar can bear 
plain words ; his cradle was not the couch 
of flattery ; no pernicious tongue ever ap- 
proached it, to teach him he was other 
than weak and mortal — other than the pure 
lip of a chaste mother, or a generous and 
anxious father, never opened to his ear du- 
ring infancy. Oh ! my mother ! thou who 
first taught me to love virtue in loving 

thee, 



38 EDGAR. 

thee, art thou still on earth ? or art thou 
beaming in immortality ? and thou too, my 
honoured, my respected father." — Athe- 
ling looked aside, as the big drop rose in 
his eye. But Leolf perceived with anger* 
that the eagerness of Edgar was diverted 
from himself — he knit bis brow, he mur- 
mured, but he was not heard. At length, 
with caution he said, *' my lord, for what 
did you conduct me here ?" " Alas ! my 
friend," replied Atheling, " I scarcely re- 
collect aught beside, when the loved guar- 
dians of my childhood rush with all their 
sweetness, their gentleness, their anxiety, 
their exertions, their sv/eet precepts, into 
my heart. Ah Leoif, did not thy parents 
quit this nether world whilst thou wast in 
infancy? else thou mightst look back to 
early life, and pardon my wanderings : 
sweet, oh very sweet, are the first blossoms 
of memory ; every turf, every tree, every 
stone has its charm ; but sweeter the 
bloom when beloved friends are entwined 
under every leaf. Dost thou not, Leolf, 
look back with any delight upon thy 
morning's dawn ? does not thiue heart beat 

on 



B O O K XI. 39 

on recollecting some hand that delighted 
to feed thee j or an eye which loved to 
gaze on thine expanding stature ? Where 
do the warm affections of thy soul rest, 
good Leolf ? that I may smile on them with 
thee, or listen in sympathy to the relation 
of kindred love." 

Leolf trembled through his gigantic 
frame, as the words of the engaging prince 
fell on his ear ; his dark cheek took a mar- 
ble hue, as the old blood flitted from it ; 
his head lowered, and he sank on the 
earth. Edgar with anxious tenderness 
bent one knee, and pressing his cold hand, 
sweetly said, '' if, oh my friend, I have 
said aught to wound the sensitive touch of 
thine heart, forgive me, generous old man ; 
I respect thy grief, and will inquire no 
more. I fear I have, with the forward 
vivacity of youth, caused those venerable 
grey hairs to tremble- Pardon me, my 
friend and my preserver ; suffer me to 
kneel for forgiveness, if I have dared to 
forget the privilege and honours of thine 
age." Leolf suddenly looked up : remorse 
and wild despair stru^led in his eye ; he 

gazed 



40 E D G A R. 

gazed strong upon Edgar — he grasped his 
hand — he looked upward to heaven, and 
struck his breast ; then he elevated him- 
self, and stretching wide his arms, folded 
Atheling within them, and gasping with 
emotion, one immense tear gushed from 
his wide orb. '* Enough," said he, " His 
done — the struggle is over. I have em- 
braced thee, Edgar, noble and generous 
-as thou art ; I have given thee one em- 
brace, perchance my last ; for thou wilt 
fly from Leolf, when he has told thee his 
dark lale ! Nay, start not — didst thou not 
ask me ? — and 'tis but short. But let me 
hasten — yet, once more, give me thine 
hand — a last token of friendship j then I 
shall again say, Leolf may die unregretted 
by man. Now silence — hush — still as 
death ! 

" Thunder! where art thou? — flashes of 
fire, hasten hither! — Leolf speaks — Leolf 
relates his crimes! Stand back, Prince — 
our ties are broken : thou hast desired 
Leolf's history— stand back, 'tis policy j 
for thou too mayst be involved in the pu- 
nishment, by associating with Leolf T* 

The 



B O K XI. 41 

The traveller, winding his way through 
fields and meadows, is overtaken by twi- 
light ; and, glowing in the warmth of 
summer's day, casts himself on the soft 
enamelled verdure, and hastily seizing a 
large mossy pillow, roots it up, drags it 
forward, and thereon resting his head, ad- 
dresses himself to pleasing slumber. As 
Nature quaffs the refreshment, the sweet 
moon steals from behind a dove-tipped 
cloud, and dresses all creation in silver. 
-The man, but half conscious, lifts his hand 
to stroke away the tickling curl over his 
forehead — it resists his touch — his breath 
is laboured ; he applies the finger to his 
throat — a strong ligature binds it round ; 
he endeavours to pluck it away — it slips 
from the touch — it recoils — it palpitates — 
it has warmth ! Now he bursts from sleep 
with throbbing bosom, with glaring eye, 
with damp-chilled front j in trepidation he 
looks downward, around, behind — he starts 
upon his feet — when lo ! from, his head and 
breast hangs pendant the tremendous snake, 
which in many a fold, with envenomed tooth 
knit over the temple secures his grasp; 

the 



4^ EDGAR. 

the limb gf the traveller flutters, ghastly 
horror creeps round his visage — the hairs 
of his crawling skin rise erect, and draw 
at their roots the rough pedicle 

The locks of Atheling so stiffened — so 
horror-struck grew his mien, as he heard 
the dark words, and marked the strong 
remorse of the pilgrim. But Leolf ob- 
served him not — he gazed with scowling 
eye around, and shielding half his visage 
with his hand, cast a sidelong look on hea- 
ven. ** Ah !" muttered he, " the firma- 
ment is serene— the thunder howls not — 
all is well, and I have time. Listen, Ed- 
gar ; I would have thy good wishes, nay, 
thy prayer, if abhorrence will let them 
pass ; perhaps — perhaps thy compassion : 
and if so, thou wilt pray for me — for oh, 
Edgar, I scarce remember the day when I 
dared supplicate fpr myself. For these I 
speak, ibr these I unfold past deeds ; long, 
long has my soul laboured to give utterance 
to her griefs, but it dreaded eternal. ven- 
geance." 

" Atheling, thou hast to thank heaven 
for its best gifts : virtuous parents, and 

good 



B o o ic xr. 43 

good precept in thine infancy — these, had 
Leolf had, he too might have been like 
thee. Yes, Prince ; Leolf can turn to 
days of childhood, and he too might feel 
the invigorating glow : but alas ! ere the 
smile be suffered to rise on his parted lip, 
remorse steps between, and curdles the 
emotion : like the northern blast, which 
crisps the genial fluid as it falls. Yet I had 
a mother — Atheling, I had indeed — and I 
knew a mother. Oh, mine eye, wherefore 
so dim — pretend not to shed a tear — thou 
art Leolf. remember ! Whence the stream ? 
gush on : thou art not water, water is pure, 
and Leolf is stained, deep stained, in guilt 
— but time wears — listen. 

** My mother was young and lovely, 
when her father, a noble Cambrian, took 
her with him upon a foreign mission. Long 
he remained absent ; and, as he washed to 
court attention for his only child, adorned 
a noble palace, for her use and pleasure, 
on the banks of the Ebro. Here his 
daughter caught the admiration of a native 
of Spain, who by perseverance and various 
stratagems won her heart. The lady's fa- 
ther 



44 EDGAR. 

ther forbade the union, disliking the man ; 
but the marriage was nevertheless solem- 
nized ; and when the old father, bowed 
with grief and vexation, returned to Eng- 
land, his children accompanied him, and 
death soon put an end to his cares. 

** Soon I appeared. Magnificence ga- 
thered round my birth, yet was no one 
happy. Happy, ye fiends of wretchedness ! 
Behold how imprudence leads to fault — • 
fault to sin — sin to misery — aye, even 
Leolf can say this. Why did the old man 
conduct from her native home his inexpe- 
rienced child ? Why, when he had been 
thus imprudent, did he allow his pride, his 
accursed pride, to environ her with grandeur 
^nd adulation ? Here was the imprudence : 
the maiden was caught, entangled ; she 
rebelled against her parent — she broke the 
first law of nature — and surely, even I may 
say, can happiness follow sin ? Where is 
the world that respects the rebellious child ? 
Should man, for whose sake she rebelled ? 
< — never. Who respects a parricide — aye, 
who ? And she broke his heart—her fa- 
ther's !— Hold, thou vile tongue— -ah ! what 

said 



B K XI. ' 45 

said I ? what dreadful word burst from 
me ? — Peace to my gentle mother — peace 
to the unhappy — not to the old father ! — 
Barbarian ! 'twas not thy child that mur- 
dered thee : 'twas thou, by thy vanity, 
thy pride ; why display her charms ? why 
court applause? What mattered it, that 
foreign nobles saw and praised her beauty ? 
Infatuated old man ! oh, may the spot 
which thy foot touched on Spanish land, 
be ever barren and withered ! May the pa- 
lace, in which was offered thy daughter for 
vain sacrifice, fall down, one confused hor- 
rible mass of ruin ! — may. ..." 

Leolf stopped, gasping for breath. Whilst 
the Prince horror-struck, pale, and speech- 
less gazed upon him — soon he continued : 

" Pomp and grandeur attended my ni- 
fant days ; and domestics, a venial train, 
perpetually warped my opening faculties by 
strains of flattery and meanness. Once 
daily, for a few moments, I saw my parents. 
My mother was ever trembling and in tears ; 
my father stern, haughty, jealous, passion- 
ate. I dreaded the interview, and fled 
whenever they approached my chamber. 

By 



46 ^ I> G A R. 

By de^ees, my cliaracter unfolded : in vain 
did any alarming indication arise ; no one re- 
jected beyond the instant, and I was, by 
turns caressed, hated, punished and flattered, 
for the same error. As I advanced in agfe, 
iny father saw me oftener; and noticing 
the arts I practised to avoid him, con- 
ceived the idea of teaching me every clue 
of suspicion, and of making me exercise 
my talents on my mother, whose faith he 
mistrusted. Oh misery ! — misery ! — and 
yet, when I reported imaginary wrongs to 
my vindictive father, and received his 
caress, my heart at first exulted not, but 
tears gushed from me, poor fool that I was! 
in fuller growth, this tenderness of con- 
science — conscience — pshaw ! — 'twas gone 
— and I could suspect angels without a 
blush. 

** 1 had a brother — neglected too like me, 
but less flattered — better inclined — more 
loved, the viper ! by my mother. 'Tis but 
faintly speaking, to say I abhorred him. 
Yes, he was my hatred — my aversions- 
like a deadly blast he withered my hopes 
while they were yet green and tender j but 

he 



BOOK XI. 47 

he paid the forfeit — hush !— oh ! well-^well 

be merited 

** He addressed a lady whom I thought too 
lovely for him — I supplanted him — prevail- 
ed — and married. My brother reproached 
me ; I scorned and defied hrm — we fought 
— I struck him, he fell and rose no more. 
Oh justice ! oh retribution ! — I fled my 
country ; in twelve months, I privately re- 
turned — I watched my wife — methought 
she was too happy in my absence. She 
nourished my son, and her health was ten- 
der — ^yet I reflected only upon her imagined 
guilt, and bursting from my concealment 
one night with an unsheathed sword, point- 
ed to her breast, and desired her to confess 
her crimes or die. She sprang forward, 
and fell senseless at my feet — her lips never 
more unclosed in speech, and in ten days, 
she and my son were deposited in the cold 
earth. Cold bed and dreary ; but not cold 
enough for Leolf. Wretched in misery — 
wretched in his enmity to the dead— - 
wretched in his hatred to the living — yet 
time — even time alters nothing — forty 
years are fled-*— yet the deeds are fresh — 

what 



48 EDGAR, 

what is time to Leolf ? What avails his pil- 
grimage ? — Alas ! my unhappy mother still 
pining in a convent — horrible catastrophe 
— and her husband — yet she would go— 
Leolf prayed her not — and her reason gone 
— flown for ever. Oh Prince ! oh Athel- 
ing ! pray for rae ; pray for Leolf — thou 
owest much, thou hast had parents. Oh ! 
if precept had gilded my early day — if only 
one generous hp had taught me goodness, 
perhaps, perhaps I might yet have been 
saved. Even I — even I can remember to 
have wept in my childhood with joy, to see 
my father smile — yes ; once he smiled on 
my mother, and pressed her hand on his 
breast. She burst into tears ; a wild joy 
sliot through my veins; I ran from the 
apartment, and hid myself in a little cham- 
ber, and in the fulness of my awakened 
tenderness, tears gushed down my face 
too — I bent to the earth my young knee, 
gazed on the heavens, and said, ** God 
who art, as some one has told me, above, 
and canst do every thing, let, I beg of 
thee, my father and mother be ever kind 
as they now are/' I rose up, beaming in 

hope 



B O O K XI. 49 

hope and good will. Oh ! that some gene- 
rous tongue had spoken 1 — that some good 
precept had fallen on mine ear, to encourage 
me to goodness. I returned to my mother 
unbidden. She was ill — to the servants, 
some of whom called me peevish for having 
the marks of weeping. Some spoke harshly 
of my parents, and the others fearful lest I 
had been hurt, cautioned me not to com- 
plain, and flattered me by praises and con- 
dolence. Whilst, disdaining them all, and 
knowing not right, I was disgusted with 
wrong, and more haughty and imperious 
than ever, I accepted the bribes, hated the 
givers — shut up my feelings in my poor 
breast, and lived a wretched life of grandeur, 
sin, ignorance, and misery. Oh! that I 
had died ! when the first sweep of air inflat- 
ed my breast, and raised the piercing cry 
of a new-born babe ; or, that the matron 
who swathed my limb and gave me to a 
^father's arm, had first circled round my 
Jittle ductile throat her strong hand, and so 
had stopped the beat of life, and left only 
the black print of her heavy finger— oh 

that.. " 

VOL. III. D Leo]f 



50 EDGAR. 

Leolf stopped his mouth, fixed wide his 
glaring eye. Edgar shuddered, and leaned 
speechless against a tall cedar. " Is he 
really « a man ! heaven have mercy — *Gh 
dreadful! most dreadful! God, what am 
I that I was blessed with precept and sweet 
example in mine early life ? Oh mercy — 
•gratitude — pity — joy — might I not have 
been as guilty? — Look down, just angels 
upon him, and plead at the throne of mercy 
and redemption — and thou, oh Omnipo- 
tence ! accept my humble and grateful sense 
of thy mercies — ^mercies bestowed ere I 
knew their value, and all arising in the vir- 
tue of my parents. Happy the offspring 
favoured through the authors of their exis- 
tence. Happy children who can refer back 
every enjoyment to the solicitude of their 
parents. Humble me, oh heaven ! in mine 
own idea ; make me sensible that the only 
difference between the unhappy pilgrim and 
myself is, that whereas his parents were 
faulty, mine good. Had I been born of 
his, and he of mine ; oh! might I not be 
to the full as guilty— oh dreadful ! my 
heart sickens — I knew not that a tongue 

durst 



B O O K XI. 51 

durst utter such words — i. knew not— I 
thought not- -what perplexing ideas ! — and 
to live thus long in crime — oh that my soul 
were cahn to resolve and to speak to him. 
Thou, my good spirit, for we are taught 
that angels deign to instil good notions into 
the human soul, if thou art near, instruct 
my fluttering reason. I would speak com- 
fort to this unhappy man, but I dread to 
arrogate privilege to myself, I who have so 
often rebelled against my divine monitor, 
I who am a weak insect, dread to be sev-ere 
and proud to the unhappy and the self- 
abased. Yet does my soul recoil on his 
deeds ; I would console him by words, but 
my tongue will not move for horror. I 
would look upon him, but mine eye will 
not bend his way: I would raise him from 
the earth ; but he hath cursed his own 
existence — he has — oh angels of men teach 
me — instruct me — raise in my soul at once 
a pity for his sufferings, and an abhorrence 
of his crimes." 

Thus thought Atheiing, in all the beauty 
and delicacy of severe virtue. Tears gush- 
ed from his labouring breast, and, as his 
D 2 soul 



LIBRARY 

UKIVERSfTY 0f HUf^^ 



52 EDGAR. 

soul grew calmer, the angelic guardian of 
his days advanced unseen, and pressing 
him invisible in his chaste embrace, in- 
fused through his generous mind a soft re- 
lief. The Prince, animated by the angelic 
tiouch, raised his head, and instantly he 
moved, with the majestic step of virtue, 
towards the wretched pilgrim. " Leolf," 
said he, with calm sweet severity, *^ clasp 
not thy hand to me ; for how shall mortal 
frailty dare to sound the condemnation of 
its brother ! Yet, Leolf, though I dare not 
say, that the perfect Redeemer will not re- 
ceive thee repentant to his bosom, yet do 
I shudder over thy deeds ; and my voice 
trembles lest it should presume to flatter 
thee. God is a God of mercy, else might 
no mortal hope. Thou hast suffered much 
— but, oh Leolf, pardon me ! I pity thy 
reverend age, and thy grey hairs. Thou 
hast rendered me kindness j which, hadst 
thou even still more crimes on thy head, 
they should never cancel my gratitude. 
Oh Leolf 1 I pity and would advise with 
thee, not presuming on my better life, 
God knoweth my means of improvement, 

and 



B O K XI. 53 

and my unworthiness ; but as thy friend, 
for I still love thee, not as Leolf, but as my 
preserver, I pity thee, not as thou art 
man, but as a sufferer. Leolf ! repent. 
Alas ! forty years of pilgrimage — have 
they softened thy heart ? — Didst thou 
not, oh, Leolf! cast too strong reflection 
for a repentant Christian on thy father's 
memory, and on the father of thy mother ? 
Leolf, pardon me- — humble, I entreat of 
thee, thyself before the throne of heaven 
— conquer and subdue, oh, hasten to sub- 
due every rankling prejudice against the un- 
happy authors of thine existence. Pray 
for them — pray for thy departed brother- 
beg, earnestly beg for mercy, and 1 will 
kneel by thy side and fervently join with 
thee.'' 

Atheling, with beaming sweetness, as his 
words melted into the Christian, held out 
his pure hand to raise the guilty man, who 
had buried his visage, unable to support 
the grandeur of virtue. Edgar touched his 
shoulder as he spoke. Leolf suddenly rose 
at the last sentence — his large eye rolled in 
fury — foam burst from his mouth; with 
D 3 stiffened 



S4f EDGAR. 

stiiFened arm, he tossed the proffered aid, 
and with a desperate struggle, cried, " I 
pray for him ? I plead for my hated brother, 
the cause of all my misery ? Never. May 
my tongue ere it pronounce a blessing on 

him, be iced in cold — may " 

The guardian spirit quick perceived ap- 
proaching, with rapid wing, the avenging 
angel of the Almighty j and as he looked 
severity, the guardian of man, saiti, " I 
salute thee, minister of Omnipotent will." 
" Peace be to thee," returned the other ; 
" my errand is to justify the ways of God 
to man, and to shew thy beloved charge, 
that however the Great Creator and Father 
of Mercies may permit the wicked to live, 
to sin, or to prosper for a time, that the 
day of retribution shall come, when long 
proffered mercy shall be shut put for ever, 
and the Majesty of Eternal Justice be as- 
serted. The wicked, thou well knowest, 
are often permitted to live and triumph, 
but to further the secret purposes of heaven. 
This man hath been useful to thy charge. 
He is now no longer needful, but by his 
end, to impress another lesson on mortals. 

The 



B O O K XI. 55 

The ministering archangel of to-day hath 
given me command from the throne, to 
strike. Fix now the attention, I entreat, 
blessed sphit, that the prince may see, may. 
learn, and may for ever remember the 
dreadful judgments of an offended God." 

Atheling, pale with horror in the action 
and words of Leolf, would have rushed 
from him, but he felt restrained by a secret 
power. With eager dread he gazed. The 
pilgrim remained distorted by the fury of 
passion ; his jaw suddenly strained wider 
apart — he roared aloud — he threw his hand 
on his side — a wliole tide of black blood 
spouted with dreadful noise from his mouth. 
" God is just!" cried he, " Oh horrible, 
dreadful eternity !" He stopped. Every 
string that supported his throbbing heart 
in a moment burst, cut asunder -by the 
celestial two-edged sword of justice. He 
rolled forward in the dust, and his impure 
essence instantly dislodged from mortality 
saw the angels standing, trembled, crouch- 
ed down befoie them, and rushing onward, 
was caught up by the ministers of death 
to be reserved to the last great day. 

D 4 The 



56 E D G A R« 

The Prince grasped his hands ; on one 
knee he fell j he essayed to speak, whilst 
large cold drops swelled round his face, 
and fell to the earth. " Without one hope, 
oh, Leolf !'' at length he murmured in low 
tremulous whispers, as he looked wildly on 
his expiring struggler. " Hast thou not 
one little hope ? — Speak Leolf — speak — 
strive. — Oh God ! mercy, mercy for him — 
look upward — say but mercy — ask for 
mercy, thy soul is rushing to its tremen- 
dous judge — a word, Leolf! one word ! 
Great Almighty, 'tis done ! and his soul 
stands now already before thee 1 Oh, Leolf 
—Leolf!" 

Edgar now fell senseless, overcome by 
his emotions; and the royal guard, who 
had witnessed at a respectful distance the 
whole scene, quickly advanced to his aid. 
They threw on his face some water from 
the fountain, and he speedily recovered. 
The first object that met his sight was the 
corpse of the wretched pilgrim ; and turn- 
ing from it, he covered his face and slowly 
moved towards the palace. Scarcely was 
he arrived, when de Lusignan met him, 

and 



B O O K XI, 57 

and made hasty enquiry into his terror. 
AtheHng, in few words, explained the 
sudden decease of Leolf. " Cheer thyself* 
if this be all, then," said the Cypriot — 
" look not so mournful ; 'twas an old man, 
and death is sometimes sudden with the 
aged ; he shall be interred on the spot 
where he died — we never pace the dark 
cedar and cypress grove. Come, Atheling, 
I would converse with thee." *' My lord," 
answered Edgar, with solemn air, *' permit 
me to meditate on this awful lesson. My 
desire is to be alone this day. The pilgrim 
has been my friend — I have loved him. 
Whatever be his sins, God alone is his 
judge ; I am a mortal, and owe him the 
last proof of humanity and respect. Fa- 
vour me, I beseech thee, with one of thy 
ministers of the holy Christian Church, 
and I myself will, with the sharp tool, 
prepare his bed of earth." 

The Cypriot bowed, impressed with re- 
verence in the greatness of his friend. 
Atheling waited for the man of religion, 
and then mournfully advanced with him to 
the spot. Then he began to dig the space, 
D 5 whilst 



58 EDGAR. 

whilst his reverend companion knelt bythe 
deceased, and repeated, in low accents^ the 
funereal orisons of the dead. 

Atheling for a time threw himself on the 
earth and wept ; but, as the religious man 
ceased, he rose up, and began to open the 
cavity wherein to hide the remains, which 
already, in the heated clime, began to re- 
quire sepulchral oblivion. The pit was now 
ready, and Edgar approached the corpse 
suffused in congealed gore ; the reverend 
father aided him, and together they de, 
posited it in the last bed. The prayers 
now recommenced ; the dust was preci- 
pitated upon the corpse, and soon it was 
lost for ever to the perception of mortality. 
The religious continued some time in me- 
ditation, and then slowly retired. 

The Prince remained alone, and seating 
himself by the new-made grave, wholly re- 
signed his mind to reflections upon the 
awful event of the day. ** Oh, Death ! so- 
lemn and great catastrophe of the world, 
■which art to strip off every fancy, and 
shew the illusion of every false hope 5 thou 
whose stroke can sever us from all we love, 

to 



B O O K XI. 59 

to all we dread ; from man, who is our 
equal, to Omnipotence, who is infinity. 
Oh, death 1 ever awful to the good, but 
appaJHng to the wicked ; fearful even in 
the gradual approach of sickness, tremen- 
dous in the sudden shock — Oh ! how shall 
man live so as to welcome thee at a mo- 
ment's notice? Who is there that shall lay his 
hand on his breast, and say, " I am ready !*' 
If any dare utter such, oh, my father ! 
teach me tlielife he should follow ; instruct 
me in the means he should employ to 
subdue the frailty and corruption of his 
nature ; teach me, oh, Divine wisdom — so 
instruct me, that if it should please thee to 
strike me from the existing in a moment^ I 
might dare to hope in thy mercy, though I 
should tremble in thy presence. Oh, thou 
who hast favoured me in my descent from 
virtuous parents, melt my heart in gratitude 
and piety ; and when my rebellious passions 
stir within me, oh let me be taught to re- 
collect, that thou hast only to raise thy 
hand, and the soul springs away with all its 
deeds, guilty or righteous, stamped on its 
front, with which it must stand in thy 
D 6 sightj 



60 EDGAR. 

sight, for rewards immortal, or punishmeat 
everlasting." 

So meditated Atheling, with a devout 
solemnity, and christian humiliation. Till 
midnight he meditated and prayed ; and 
then, by the lustre of the unclouded moon, 
he slowly sought the palace, where he en- 
tered unnoticed in his chamber, and retir- 
ed to rest. 

When the Prince awoke the next dawn, 
he resolved to solicit leave from the court, 
immediately to depart to his government. 
" Let me dread to live without occupation, 
or I frustrate the great end of my being, 
and disregard precepts that ought to be 
sacred," thought Edgar, as he sprang from 
his couch, parted the drapery of the case- 
ment, and looked out upon happy crea- 
tion. Two turtle doves flew near him, in 
quest of food ; some bees hummed in the 
air, and lighted on the myrtle blossoms 
close by, to gather sweets ; the virgin 
heron, domesticated in the royal gardens, 
flapped her wing, and drove her long beak 
through the artificial swamp ; whilst the 
smaller gay feathered tribe lighted on the 

black 



B O O K XI. 61 

black bed of mould, or imbibed the drop 
on the edge of the fountain. " Industry, 
then, is the order of creation," said Athe- 
ling ; " providing for itself and its young 
is the sum of a brute's life ; its duty is 
small, and it is punctually fulfilled. But 
the end of man is to provide for the pre- 
sent and the future, and to benefit others 
as well as improve himself. No man exists 
for himself alone ; even if he have neither 
child nor parent ; in an enlarged view every 
man is his brother ; and, according as he 
himself has been blessed with instruction, 
so should he impart the advantages to 
others, and so measure his responsibihty. 
And thou, Edgar, art thou employed ? To 
what advantage dost thou live ? where is 
thy industry ? where thy works ? where thy 
obedience to a father, who commanded thee 
to^ook on idleness with horror ? — Enough j 
I have opportunity, I will find exertion.'' 

The Prince no sooner met his royal 
friend, than he respectfully desired permis- 
sion to enter upon his employment. " So 
soon ? well, be it so," cried the impetuous 
de Lusignan, ** and I will accompany thee 

to 



62 EDGAR. 

to thy residence. Let the coursers be rea- 
dy/' commanded he, *' and the attend- 
ants ; we will depart ere noon." 

The chief minister received the com- 
mand with profound submission, and quit- 
ted the saloon. Dissatisfied in the simpli- 
city and unaffected virtue of the noble 
guest, he fled with precipitation to the 
chief of the slaves, and desired her to drop 
hints in presence of the young princess,, 
that might alarm her for the absence of 
Jerusalem's heir. The lady Berengaria in- 
stantly dispatched a messenger to her bro- 
ther ; and as she ran to his embrace, said 
mournfully, ** why should my brother leave 
me? Since the stranger will depart, why 
not allow him to set off alone?" — ** Lovely 
Berengaria," replied the Cypriot, " I wish 
to shew him honour ; he is my guest ; and 
moreover I have given him, in my nam-e 
and that of the King, the government of 
ihe western district ; only two days would 
I be absent from thee, sweet maid." — 
'f Why doth the stranger depart so soon ?" 
inquired the Princess, with a fretful sigh. 
" I know not, except it be," answered, 

smiling, 



B o o K xr. 63 

smiling, de Lusignan, " that he dreads thy 
charms ; and as he dare not marry a fo- 
reign lady, lest he disoblige his parents, 
that he shuns a court and its brightest 
pearl." The Princess blushed ; deeply she 
bit her rosy lip, and frowning said, " how 
earnest thou, imprudent man, to know 
this ?" The Prince again smiled ; " sup- 
pose I had said, that kings aspired to my 
little sister's hand ; and that he, in reply, 
had done my sister homage, in words of 
admiration, lamenting that his inclination 
were awed by duty." The Princess endea- 
voured to hide the dimple of her cheek, 
but it betrayed her smile. Yet was she 
displeased. ** Brother, thou art very hasty 
and unguarded ; why talk of me to a man ? 
hadst thou not begun, he would not have 
dared to suppose so extravagant a matter, 
as that Bereiigaria, princess of Cyprus, 
should hearken to a stranger." — «* 'Tis 
true, sister," answered de Lusignan ; '* and 
a man who, although of royal blood, will 
yet never wear a crown — he should not 
have said so much." — " Nay, brother, thou 
art severe " replied Berengaria , " me- 

thinks 



64 E D Q A R. 

thinks 'twas only courtesy urged him ; for, 
brother, he is both modest and respectful. 
Prithee, what was the name of the English 
prince, who married a princess of Cyprus, 
whose name was. . . ?'* — *' Her name was 
Berengaria,'* said de Lusignan, «« and her 
lord was Richard, surnamed, from his 
proud courage, Heart of Lion." — " Ah !'* 
replied the Princess, glowing still deeper, 
** 'tis very well ; pray do not leave me — I 
will weep myself to sickness if thou depart ; 
let the proud guest retire." — *' Why dost 
thou call him proud ?" interrupted the 
Prince, hastily ; *' has he in aught offend- 
ed thee?" — " Oh, brother," answered 
Berengaria, " did I not tell thee he was 
modesty and respect ! What aileth thee, 
my brother ? Promise me to stay, and 
the sweetest festival shall enchant thee this 
evening; I have ordered soft music, and 
the gay dance ; two cunning men are this 
day anived from China, skilled in won- 
drous feats ; and I would that thou be pre- 
sent, to hear the sweet song of the beauti- 
ful Circassian slave, that my favourite 
yesterday bought me. Promise me to stay, 

for 



B O O K XI. 65 

for I like not the influence thy guest has 
over thee ; I know if once thou leave me, 
I shall long mourn thine absence/' 

The eye of the Prince sparkled, as the 
lady soothed him with promise. *' I obey 
thee, my little sister," said he, with ar- 
dour ; *' I go and bid him farewell, and I 
return to thy pleasure." Then he pressed 
her hand, and hastily left her, still half- 
dejected and discontented. With ready 
invention, he gave the excuse to Atheling, 
who implicitly believed, and acquiesced. 
And now the retinue filed in order ; Athe- 
ling assisted the old man, who was selected 
to be his minister, to mount, vaulted upon 
his courser, the Princes affectionately sa- 
luted, and distance widened between them. 

The luxuriant island, tasselled by the 
venerable Olympus, spread before Edgar 
its fertilizing scenes. On the second day 
the city of his government slowly rose in 
his view. He still passed on, and entered 
the Paphian province ; and as he gazed 
around, his ready mind pondered on the 
changefulness of history, and the revolu- 
tions of ages. " Oh, famed Paphian Isle, 

what 



66 EDGAR. 

what changes hast thou undergone ! Thou' 
that wast once annexed by Egypt* in the 
train of her dependants ; when a Sesostiis 
might make thee tributary, and drag forth 
tby children into bondage, to rear the stu- 
pendous pyramid. Then the haughty Per- 
sian reduced thy beauties to his yoke, and 
bade thy nine kings bow to him. Then the 
superb Greeks snatched thee to their list of 
nestHng isles ; and a Lycurgus, or a So- 
phocles, might honour thee with considera- 
tion : so sprang the beauteous fiction, 
which gave energy to native talent, and 
raised for thee the magnificent temple, and 
the exquisite statue. Thus, by favouring 
thee with every thing of enchanting and 
lovely, imagination made thine the sweet 
residence of* a creaUue of female sex, ajid 
the queen of beauty and grace. Such was 
the delusion 1 and even when the proud 
chain of the Roman dominion was tiung 
over thy little neck, still the heathen res- 
pected thy pretty and engaging dreams, 
and bowed before the altar of imaginary 

loveliness. 

* RoUin's Ancient History. 



BOOK XI. .67 

loveliness. Then the generous and magni* 
iicent crusade kings touched thy shore ; 
Richard, the noble hearted King of Eng- 
land, punished thy cruel king, married his 
daughter, and bestowed thee on the house 
of Lusignan, a christian monarch, to rule 
in happiness over a christian people. Long 
mayst thou flourish, little isle, in beauty 
and luxuriance ; thou hast native riches, 
and mayst thou continue long to hold rank 
among the insulated shores of the Medi- 
terranean." 

The Prince alighted at the entrance of 
the palace ; silence reigned in the vast 
court, and gloom and desolation spread 
around. As he entered it, a few meagre 
slaves stepped trembling forward ; Athe- 
ling spoke kindly to them, yet they made 
no reply ; he desired to survey the apart- 
ments, and was instantly conducted through 
a long range, in which was every mark of 
neglect and ruin. The baths choked up ; 
the marble founts without one drop of chrys- 
tal fluid ; rooms dismantled of conveniences 
of life ; no carpet j no couch for repose ; 

no 



68 E D G A R. 

no utensil for the preparation of food ; 
— neither comfort nor luxury. 

The Prince, in astonishment, turned to 
the chief of the household, and said, 
** Could this be the residence of the last 
governor?" — " Mighty sir," replied the 
man with fear and trembling, " he lived 
here ten years, and died in this chamber." 
— " Yet," interrupted Atheling hastily, *^ I 
see nothing but wretchedness and desola- 
tion. Had he not a bed, a couch, even a 
mat to rest on? I see no place on which he 
might rest his limb." As the Prince spoke, 
he gazed around, and the slave, lifting up 
his eyes, smote his breast and rushed from 
the apartment. <* 'Tis very strange ; what 
aileth him, think you, sir ?" said Edgar to 
one of his retinue, who answered, " 1 know 
not, my lord, unless he is guilty of the di- 
lapidation complained of." The Prince, dis- 
pirited with all he met, remained silent, 
and turned to the large and naked hall* 
Presently entered a man, dragging in a fe- 
male veiled, accompanied by several chil- 
dren, they all flung themselves at his feet. 
The man looked up, and, pointing to the 

group, 



B K XI. 69 

group, said, " Behold, sir, all I possess 
on earth, you may ask for my head, for my 
children, my wife, but money we have 
none. Scarcely does the shed at one end 
of the palace suflSce to keep out the au- 
tumn rains ; food we have none ; raiment 
we have hardly to shield our limbs. The 
province groans in its own distress, and is 
cold to the supplications of want in its 
universal poverty. Take then my head, 
for life, under continued oppression is mi- 
sery." The chief of the household, as he 
s5)oke, ran and embraced his family ; then 
breaking from his fainting partner, rushed 
to the foot of the astonished Prince, and 
baring his meagre breast, lifted his dagger. 
" Hold, impious hand !" exclaimed Ed- 
gar, and grasped the instrument of death. 
'* What wouldst thou dare attempt thine 
own life ? What frantic rage hath urged 
thee ? Art thou in need ? Tell me calmly 
thy tale ; is not thy governor a man ? and 
dost thou think man should be denied 
access to man ? For shame in thy rash 
meditated deed ; tell me thy injury, and 
sheath thy sabre, I will listen to thy grie- 
vance 



7^ EDGAR. 

yance and perchance lessen it Speak and 
give me thy confidence. 

The man, thus encouraged, thought a 
moment, and then shaking his head, said, 
** I thought, sir, thou hadst been our go- 
vernor, and then he sat on the pavement, 
mute, with folded arms. The Prince, 
touched with the words, mildly approached 
him, and replied, ** Even so, friend ; I am 
the governor ; yet may I listen to thy 
wrongs, if wrong thou hast sustained. Shall 
not the strong protect the weak ? To what 
purpose is man elevated above the common 
mass, if he exert not his talent for the be- 
nefit of every inferior ? For what purpose 
doth man gather knowledge, if it be not to 
impart it again ? The sun gathers up 
moisture, but to disperse it abroad ; the 
earth gathers the grain to send forth ten- 
fold, and thus man, who strives to live 
well, turns advantage of birth or situation 
to the profit of all within his reach ; there- 
fore hesitate not ; *tis true I am thine ap- 
pointed governor, but I would also be thy 
friend : speak, and freely, for I command 
thee so to do/* 

The 



BOOK XI. 71 

Tl>e man gazed ardently on the Prince, 
he prostrasted himself three times to the 
earth : *^ Too much, 'tis too much 1" cried 
he, " if he be really a man — not a go- 
vernor ; surely a governor never thus spoke 
— yet I obey. How shall I dare ? oh, par- 
don the boldness of thy slave. Conrad 
the Mighty loved gold— he loved treasure 
—he...'' ** Speak on to thy own tale," 
interrupted Atheling. *' Yea, sir," re- 
plied the household chief, '* he loved gold, 
and he looked to me to procure him trea- 
sures for his cofier ; he had too a minister 
who loved to extort from the people ; I 
levied but with ijegret ; he liked not my 
reluctance, and he upbraided me ; I laid 
mine all before him — I offered, and yet 
implored mercy upon my family — he took 
every thing, and bade me depart in quest 
of more. Despair urged me to boldness ; 
I said, * My lord, every means is exhaust- 
ed, save the ornaments of the palace, 
and . . .' ' Enough,' replied he, ' what 
need we these trifles ? Begone ; give me 
gold, no matter from whence.' " 

** But to what purpose these riches.? 

Had 



72 £ D G A R. 

Had the governor a beloved wife, or chil- 
dren?" interrupted the Prince. " No, 
mighty sir," answered Perseus, chief of the 
household, " he had not a single relative that 
he could remember ; he rose up, it is said, 
-from low estate, and by great thrift, and a 
service rendered the King, came at last to 
be made governor; he had no relative ; happy 
perchance might it have been for us, could 
his heart have been softened by kindred ties ; 
but he had no one to love, and none loved 
him. In time, all the interior of the pa- 
lace was dismantled, and was reduced to 
its present poverty." ** But to what then, 
dost thou imagine, could have been appro- 
priated those vast hoards of riches ?" en- 
quired the wondering Viceroy. " Ample 
revenues," answered the man, ** he trans- 
mitted to the royal treasury, but the bulk 
he laid by. As his soul was bent upon ga- 
thering wealth, so love of money produced 
in him suspicion ; he mistrusted every man, 
and permitted no one to approach his per- 
son in his last days, save his minister, and 
at times, myself; his chamber was barred 
and fortified every night, ere he slept, and 

at 



BOOK xr. 73 

at his head hung defensive weapons."— 
<« Strange history !** said Atheling, " but 
where is even the minister ? or, where the 
treasures ? A man may carry nought when 
seized by death.'* 

The household chief went ghastly pale 
at the question, and again fell on his knees 
to earth. " Mighty ruler," answered he, 
*' I know not ; on the night that the go- 
vernor expired, the minister related to me 
the event j I had not seen the great Conrad 
for seven days. * Come,' said he, * and 
take a look at thy master ; he is just struck 
by death.' I gazed for a few moments, in 
silence, but not in sorrow, for past deeds 
rose betwixt me and grief. His minister, 
in deep affliction, bade me depart, that he 
alone might perform the last sad offices for 
his master, and I obeyed ; yet his tears, his 
grief surprised me, for he only of the vast 
population, mourned ; he alone stood si- 
lent, when the melancholy shout of joy 
burst from a suffering people, on the release 
from a relentless governor." 

Whilst Atheling listened, and revolved 
the tale, the old statesman, his councillor, 

VOL. III. E 5aid, 



7^ B D G A R« 

^d, in a low voice, " Please you, my 
lord, let further enquiry be made into the 
transaction. The late minister did not 
shed for nought his tears; I see treachery, 
sir." — " Let us not, however, be hasty," 
answered the Prince, " 'tis affecting to 
look upon the corse of even an enemy ; 
this lowly condition that all mankind shall 
partake, forces a tear, and unmans the 
stoutest soul.'* — " It may be, sir, in some 
cases," answered the other, " but in this, 
methinks, there could not be much sadness 
for so miserly and selfish a man. But per- 
mit me, my lord, two or three questions." 
Atheling bowed in acquiescence, and the 
old man, stepping forward, said, <* Where 
is then this minister?" — " He is, noble 
sir," replied Perseus, " coiistantly mourn- 
ing in the tomb of the governor. He be- 
sides fears the people's indignation, and 
stirs not from thence, but in the night, 
when he supplicates from me a little coarse 
food, hastens up with wondrous affection to 
my lord's chamber, and towards morn, de- 
, parts." — " What does he there ?" demand- 
ed the old man. <* I guess he mourns 



our 



BOOK XI. 75 

«ur master, for I once entered the chamber, 
and he was prostrate, since when I have 
never disturbed him." — ** Were these coffers 
once full, thinkest thou?" enquired the 
minister. " I guess they once were, my 
IokI," answered the trembling Perseus ; 
" but on the day that Conrad breathed hi* 
last, his mournful servant, raising the lid of 
one, said, * Alas ! where are the treasures ? 
I see nought is here. Oh, Perseus, a suc- 
cessor will come, and demand them of 
thee, and thou wilt be ruined.' * It matters 
not,' I replied ; * if truth stand not my 
friend, I will e'en resign my life of misery.' 
Four days after was the palace forced by 
the populace, in hope of stores, but none 
appeared, and they departed." 

" It is enough; " cried the Prince, " cir- 
cumstances challenge our suspicion. I 
charge you. Sir," said he to the captain of 
his guard, ** with a fev/ chosen men to 
watch the departure of this recluse from the 
tomb ; let him be seized and conducted to 
answer to the charges laid against him." 
And then turning to the chief of the house - 
nc'd, Atheling continued, *• first lead to 
E 2 the 



76 EDGAR. 

the sepulchre this band j and then order 
instantly to be slain six of the fat oxen, 
given us by the great Prince of Cyprus. 
Let them be divided into small portions 
and spread out at the palace gates by the 
dawn for the families of the poor, with a 
hundred bushels of corn. Let the trumpet 
sound through the city in proclamation, 
that all who want immediate relief, may 
find it. Let it also be made known that 
the new appointed governor is willing to 
purchase whatsoever grain, or necessary of 
life, may have been amassed by merchants 
or rich individuals, and so we will hasten 
to blot out the remembrance of want in an 
isle which nature has blessed with plenty. 
Haste then, Perseus ; take what provision 
thou mayst find among our laden camels ; 
satisfy thine own and thy family's want, 
and proceed to thine errand. For me, I 
retire till the morrow's dawn ; my soul dis- 
dains food, whilst fellow man pines with 
famine." 

The Prince so spoke and moved to the 
apartment of the late governor. Upon a 
heap of straw he threw his cloak, and 

stretching 



BOOK XI. 77 

stretching himself, was presently in a 
sound sleep. 

The words of the generous prince still 
seemed to descend to the ear of the assem- 
bly. The household chief had heard, 
looked up, had seen him depart, and yet 
spoke not. His children and his wife fell 
on his breast, the slaves stood transfixed 
with astonishment. The minister retreated 
a step, and with folded arms and wrinkled 
brow, looked on the ground ; but the royal 
guard, as if by one impulse, clashed their 
arras, struck the breast, and exclaimed, 
** well hath he spoken ; we will obey our 
generous governor ; let him command — 
our wills are his;" then calling to Perseus, 
they said, " to the tomb, lead, we will fol- 
low !*' The chief of the household now 
started, flung his arm round his infant, 
pressed its cheek ; then with vehement joy 
returned it to the mother, and with bois- 
terous exultation beckoned to the soldiery, 
and rushed forward with them, guided by 
the evening star. 

Meanwhile the ardent slaves drew to 

slaughter the bellowing cattle, which lowly 

E 3 submitted 



7^ EDGAR. 

submitted to destruction under the strong 

arm of man ; life rushed from the opening 

of the steel, and the carcase was speedily 

divided, and shares nicely poised in the 

balance of equality. The sifted corn was 

pressed in the measure and piled in heaps 

on a grass mound close under the palace 

walls. And now as the labours closed, and 

the vapours of night melted into the soft 

shadows of the crocus, the governor of 

Paphos sprang from his humble rest and 

hastened abroad, as the herald sounded the 

fii'st trump. 

The sounds echoed through the streets, 
and the wondering people starting, leaned 
pale and trembling on one another, to 
question what dire event might hang on 
the blast. The frightened female rushed 
to her husband's arm. The scared babe 
plunged its face under the tresses of its 
mother's head, or buried itself screaming 
under the fold of her drapery. The man 
himself perplexed, yet more cautious, es- 
sayed a smile of defiance whilst it withered 
on his lip, as he faintly said, " hush ! " 
Quickly followed in loud tones the edict, 

read 



fe O O K XI. 79 

re^d three distinct times ; and then ros3 
again, yet advanced, the trumpet's haughty 
note. 

" Oh mercy — wonder — dost thou heai% 
my love ? Let us haste; what angel has 
sent us relief?*' cried the female to her 
partner. ** Peace," again murmured he ; 
"let me go, that I may listen. Governors 
are not wont to be thus bounteous. Con- 
rad is dead ; but the world may hold other 
Conrads." " Oh cease the dreaded name," 
whispered the affrighted wife. " Oh if the 
wind should catch up the sound of thy 
bold words, and bear them to the new Vice- 
roy ! — thy head would answer— in pity, 
love, be silent, as yon marble fragment 
which sleeps at our threshold — be mute ;'^ 
repeated she, as her polished arms clung to 
the dark vest, and shewed the exquisite 
beauty of the Cypriot race ; but her bus- 
band indifferent, amidst a blaze of charms, 
and disdaining the sweet equality of sex, 
broke sternly away ; and with hurried step 
followed the lingering echo. 

The crowds at length half assured, ^th 

anxious gaze mount the hill on which the 

E 4 palace 



so EDGAR. 

palace reared its magnificent head ; a 
palace heretofore a temple, and dedicated 
to the Pagan Queen of Love.'"' With 
amazement they behold the vast prepara- 
tion of food. With dread they raise the 
eye, and mark the robe, the sandal, the 
sv^ord of the new Viceroy. Perplexed 
they gaze ; not ready to salute, not presum- 
ing to speak ; not willing to be silent. 
The Prince marked the confusion. Unat- 
tended by any but the steward, he ad- 
vanced and thus addressed them : — 

*' Inhabitants of Paphos ; subjects of 
the renowned King of Jerusalem and Cy- 
prus; give ear, whilst your appointed go- 
vernor, salutes you as his friends, his chil- 
dren, his equals. Listen ; and justice and 
plenty shall smile again upon you, and joy 
reign among your dwellings. Paphians ! 
stand up before your governor; is he not a 
man like yourselves ? Hearken to him, he 
offers you subsistence — protection. He 
commands you to banish public sorrov/ and 
despondence — for he will relieve you of 
oppressive duties. Return to the daily ex- 
ertion, and evening pastime, oh ! my 

friends, 



BOOK Xi. 



81 



friends, secure in the reward of industry ; 
and if neighbour trespass on neighbour; if 
man tyrannise over man, hasten to your 
governor, even to me ; I will defend, I 
will shield you, and redress your grievance 
with the arm of justice. The palace gates 
will stretch open wide, from the dawn of 
day till noon. In the great hall, seated 
among my people, will I see the orphan, the 
widow, the aged, righted ; and will hear 
with equal zeal the mighty noble or the 
lowly outcast. For the present, take this 
food, you that are sufferers from scarcity. 
Advance in order ; take the small supply, 
and be thankful to heaven. Meantime, if 
the embezzled stores can be regained — the 
residue shall be employed when the reve- 
nues are transmitted to your king, in pur- 
chasing corn which shall be distributed to 
the needy. Return then to industry, to 
virtue. Prepare to meet the just and mo- 
derate annual tribute for your king, and 
wdth the remaining fruits of your industry, 
purchase comforts, enjoyment, or recrea- 
tion." 

Athelin^ thus spoke, and beckoning to 
E 5 th(^ 



S2 EDGAR. 

the slaves who held back, commanded them 
to assist in the distribution ; he then with- 
drew ; but no welcome burst of pleasure 
encouraged his generous soul. Not even 
one cold word of approbation met his glow- 
ing feelings ; he re-entered the palace ; 
and continuing on, pursued his way to the 
gardens, which were teeming with noisome 
weeds and long grass — he waited — Perseus 
soon stood before him. ** My lord," said 
he, " oh be not angry with thy slave ; the 
food is dispersed — but I no longer know 
the people — they approached me with cau- 
tion — whispered — took up their portion, 
and hastened away." — ** 'Tis strange," re- 
plied Atheling, *' but enough — let them be 
filled; I am content. Public duty first 
thought on, let us now consider the dig- 
nity of the court. Artificers and persons 
wanting employment may be sought for, 
to arrange the gardens and repair and order 
the interior of this noble pile. Let the 
poor inhabitants be ofiered employment in 
easy distribution. I, myself, will discharge 
the debt from the ample allowance of the 
crown to my own wants. Perhaps,, have I 

beett 



BOOK XI. 83 

been hasty in forcing these good people to 
appear before me. Let me rather strive 
to win their confidence by gentle degrees. 
Hasten, Perseus ; see to thy duty, and 
thou shalt not long wait thy reward. Drop 
this in thy purse for the serrice of thy 
family and be vigilant." The household 
chief received the gold that the Prince 
offered him, and flung himself on the earth 
to kiss the massive fringe of his mantle ; 
but Atheling presented his hand, raised, 
and hurried him to his various duties. 

The Prince at the morning repast met 
Timon, and saluted him. The old states- 
man with coldness answered his enquiry. 
^* Thou art not well, good Sir," said Athe- 
ling ; *< yea, my lord," replied he. ** Thou 
dost not then," continued Edgar, " may- 
hap, think well of our embassy — the peo- 
ple are dispirited." " 'Tis not for me, my 
lord," cried Timon, " to speak." " Ob 
yes, my good friend ; I entreat so much of 
thee ; " said Atheling. " Well then, my 
lord, I think you have been hasty ; nay 
more— I think—" '' Proceed, my good 
friend,'' said Atheling, « speak freely — I 
E 6 dread 



84 EDGAR. 

dread not the truth— a Briton is accustom- 
ed to plain dealing, and can bear free- 
dom of speech." " Then, my lord," said 
Tim on, " I doubt you should not. Sir, 
have deprived yourself of stores for the 
people. You may never be repayed, and 
the people none obliged. Why, Sir, need 
we so much consider these beings, 'tis their 
lot, they must of necessity suffer — in the 
capital v^e never- heed these complaints, 
and people grow tired of preferring them." 
The fine damask of the Prince's cheek 
mantled deeper as he surveyed the minis- 
ter. *< We, Sir," said he, " in England, 
think differently. We are taught from our 
cradle to respect the voice of tlie poor, 
an3 to consider all men as our fellow crea- 
tures. I fear I have been too forward in 
speaking to the people entrusted to me ; I 
should rather have let my actions have ap- 
peared first. However, the words are gone 
and cannot be recalled. All my hope is, 
now, that the Paphians will not refuse me 
well-meaning intentions -, and that they 
will, in time, give me their confidence and 
regard. As for the trifle, respected sir, 

which 



B O O K XI. 85 

which I have caused to be distributed, I 
look not to payment — persons were in want, 
and I shared my abundance with them ; I 
claim no merit, and I look to no reward 
for having done a simple duty." 

Upon these words, the minister coldly 
bowed, and gave no reply — Atheling wait- 
ed a few moments, and then took the road 
to the tomb, to learn the progress of the 
night's inquiry. 

In vain had the centinels knocked for 
admittance in the sepulchral chamber, no 
voice sounded — no noise, not even the 
sigh of wind through the inward crevices, 
rose on the ear. Edgar gently struck the 
entrance, for he respected the mansions of 
the dead, but nothing stirred. Then he 
walked round, and surveyed the whole 
mausoleum, beautiful as it was, and form- 
ed from the relics of antiquity,'" which 
were scattered profusely round this favour- 
ed spot of earth. As he stood in deep 
reflection, an old woman approached him, 
and looking earnestly, said, " mighty Sir, 
will you suffer your poor slave to speak ; 
methinks I know your wishes." *' I lost 

willingly, 



86 EDGAR. 

willingly, good friend," replied Edgar. 
" Then, Sir," answered she, " there is a 
cave long, winding, vast, which extends 
down to the sea-shore, near my little hut — 
in time of the first crusades, a hermit lived 
within, and the opening is under yon crag, 
as I have heard my father say." "Good 
mother," replied Atheling, with animated 
eye, ** I thank thee — the matter is worthy 
of notice — truly I thank thee -, call at the 
palace, if I can do aught for thee ; and in 
the mean time, accept this trifle." " You 
have already served me," said the old fe- 
male ; " my only daughter lay stretched in 
sickness and want, and hastened upon the 
rumour of the governor's bounty, to take 
food and save her. I am now returning — 
'tis said, Sir," continued she, in lower 
tones, *^ that the old minister is hidden in 
this tomb — oh may you have success and 
find him, that he may suffer as we have 
suffered." " Hast thou any sons ?" inquir- 
ed Edgar. The matron drew round her 
scanty veil, fixed her dark eye, and said, 
" aye. Sir — sons ? aye — and a husband- 
but— hush, my lord, ask Conrad where 

they 



BOOK XI. 87 

they be now ? " and leaving the money that 
AtheHng offered, she moved slowly away, 
muttering — '* aye, Sir." 

The Prince affected by the manner, 
gazed long after the woman as she tottered 
down the slope. " I fear all is not well ; 
poor complainer ! " thought he ; " reason 
seems to be bending under the infirmities 
of age and the remembrance of misfortune. 
God help thee, what can make amends for 
the decay of intellect?" Then calling to 
mind her information, he proceeded to 
the captain of the guard. " Sir, I en- 
treat you," said he, ** station at the beach 
opposite the crag, a double sentry, that 
none pass that way. There is, it seems, a 
cave that is guessed to run up the land, 
perhaps, even to this edifice ; and if so, 
our prisoner may escape to sea with the 
treasure. It might be well to explore the 
passage. 'Tis an arduous task. Perchance 
the men may hesitate." " I dare answer, 
my lord, they will comply ; " answered the 
captain ; — whereupon the Prince again bent 
his way to the palace. 

Already was the long tendril that had 

insinuated 



88 EDGAR. 

iislnuated its course among the dark 
mould, dragged up with force ; and the 
strong weed rebounded from the hand to a 
distance, felt the sudden shock wliich stops 
circulation, and lets in decay. Sick to the 
core, the plant hung its dizzy head, and 
let fall in clusters the roots accustomed to 
be full-spread ; — whilst man, fastidious in 
the luxury of creation, was pleased to des- 
pise its make though delicate, its little 
blossom though sweetly tinted, its winding 
leaf though perfection. Many hands al- 
ready strove to clear the winding path of 
long corrosive grass, which audacious in 
uninterrupted sloth, resisted the strong 
effort, and enraged, turned a sharpened 
edge across the sw^elling finger, and receiv- 
ed in greedy joy the drops of red blood 
that streamed down to its bed; but the 
joy was momentary ; anger recoils upon it- 
self; and the polished steel soon levelled 
the tall head in the dust. Nor within the 
palace, was man less absolute ; some hands 
at one stroke tore the labyrinth of the 
cunning insect, or pursuing her from her 
web beat her down, and regardless of her 

submission, 



B O O K XI. 89 

submission, horror, or weakness^ drove her 
hapless under the outstretched foot, which 
in an instant, crushed her tender bones, 
stopped the beat of her Httle heart, and 
drew from her dehcate veins the fluid of 
Jife, with which a good Ahnighty had 
filled them. Some sweep down the drowsy 
chrjsalid, that as a sofl-haired moth had 
sought a security for the helpless days of 
torpor, which, from the admirable preci- 
sion of her instinct — Omnipotent gift ! she 
knew to be at hand. Oh spare her, gene^ 
rous man, spare her ! the silken ropes with 
which she fastened herself to the marble 
cornice, are snapped at thy feet ; help- 
less, unable, unconscious, she stirs not 
from before thee ; yet is she alive ; an in- 
visible power adds every day a finishing 
touch, and in the daily list of animated 
Nature is she registered. Spare her then 
— give her liberty, and God himself will 
add life — toss her from the casement, to 
the thick beds of jessamine blossoms near 
it — let her live and rejoice. 

The Prince sought the old secretary, and 
seating himself with smiling confidence, at 

his 



90 EDGAR. 

his side, opened his generous mind 5 de- 
clared the plans he proposed for his people's 
welfare, and with modesty, solicited un- 
reserved opinions and judgment. The old 
man frowning, desired time to reflect ; and 
Edgar respectfully placing before him the 
tablets and pencil, desired him freely to 
alter and arrange, where a further advan- 
tage might be secured to justice, order, or 
the general good, and then left him. 

Perseus now with downcast look and 
folded arms, met him ; he would have 
thrown himself upon the earth, but Athe- 
ling commanded him to desist. " How 
now, friend ?" cried he, " why this melan- 
choly ? Speak ; why dost thou hesitate ? 
If thou have done wrong, avow it ; if others 
have failed, why tremble ? Canst thou be 
responsible for all?" " My lord commands,'* 
said the terrified chief of the household, 
*^ yet, my lord, the people disdain the 
gift. Accustomed to receive aggravation, 
they mistrust kindness; they fear trea- 
chery. Report says the flesh is envenomed 
and . . ,*' — " Speak on, Perseus, and what?'* 
said the Prince. <' And, my lord, 'tis now 

aM 



B O O K XI. 91 

all committed to the waves." — *^ And the 
corn too ?'* said Atheling. " No, mighty 
sir ; the corn is devoured, having been pu- 
rified over the fire." — *' Well, and how 
matters it to me, Perseus, if the people 
love not the meat ? they only are the suf- 
ferers." The Prince would have ended 
with firmness, but he could not. A big 
round tear floated in his bright eye, as he 
essayed in vain to give pride the triumph, 
but his great soul swelled in the sharp sting 
of disappointed feeling, and his tender 
breast refused long admission to ignoble 
passions ; but conscious of rectitude, and 
beaming in universal love and benevolence, 
the suspicion and misapprehension pierced 
his manly heart. He turned away from 
Perseus, and as true feeling ever seeks to 
hide itself, he broke a wild flower from its 
stem, and with the semblance of amuse- 
ment surprised his steward, who hearing 
no further reply, bowled and retired. "Oh, 
people of Cyprus 1 unjust," thought he, 
** how little do ye know the upright inte- 
grity of an Englishman's soul ! how little do 
ye understand Edgar Atheling, the son of 

Mercia t 



9^ E D G A n. 

Mercia! Oh, sooner than practise upon 
ye one treacherous artifice, would I prefer 
that this heart in my bosom should suddenly 
stop, and vibrate no more ; my eye grow 
dim and dark, and my limb be palsied to 
every sensation. Oh Cypriots, I would 
freely give my life, amongst ye at danger's 
call; but mine honour — to suspect my 
truth ! — oh, people, 'tis cruel j nay, most 
unkind !" 

The Prince could not endure the thought; 
he walked hastily, and plunged into a moss- 
grown copse ; he flung himself on the 
ground, shook back the luxuriant curls 
that played over his irritated brow, and 
vexed to feel the rising swell of his bosom, 
plucked the delicate velvet of nature, and 
busied himself with its examination; but 
vainly did he look ; a growing spring flut- 
tered in either eye, and hung trembling on 
the oval edge ; his troubled heart flagged 
to the contracted movement of despon- 
dence, and a whole tide of grief combated 
with the rising disdain and anger of unjust 
accusation ; his respiration struggled in the 
contest 5 he lifted his hand and pressed it 

strong 



B o o K XI. gs 

strong on his chest for relief, determined 
to combat and conquer — but it was too 
late — the pearly drop fell, and bending his 
head into his supporting hands, he gave 
nature her demand. 

But in a moment he rose, calm and re- 
lieved. ** 'Tis well," said he aloud, ** 'tis 
well. God ! I thank thee, that by cutting 
short our fondest hopes, and secret designs, 
thou remindest us that this is not the rest- 
ing place of mortals. Should we not for- 
get that we are to die, that we are only 
men, if we were surrounded but by happi- 
ness here below, and if our fondest schemes 
were ever planned in the full certainty of 
being realized ? No ; 'tis well, that our 
best intentions be misapprehended, that 
suspicion rise on our unconscious integrity, 
that our words be distorted in their meaning 
from simphcity to artifice, and that the 
warm proffers of our souls meet coldness 
and repulse -, 'tis well ; a bitter lesson and 
hard to digest, but fraught with deep in- 
struction. Yes, they are wholesome checks, 
even to me, who am a prince, a noble, a 
governor, absolute over the lives and for- 
tunes 



94. EDGAR. 

tunes of thousands ; how easy were it to 
forget that I am but mortal dust, if I 
were courted, hailed, adored! Yes, dis- 
appointment befits me ; but thou, oh, Fa- 
ther of Heaven, thou who knowest and 
provest me, thou knowest wherein I fail, 
and wherein I may have one merit ; thou 
knowest that I am innocent of this crime ; 
*tis enough — I am content — I praise and 
bless thee/' 

The Prince gazed upward on the evening 
cloud; he looked around upon the wide 
world in this proud moment of appeal to 
the tribunal of eternal justice. His foot 
pressed the earth, and in confidence of his 
step, creation was hushed in reverence, as 
it felt that man had held silent conference 
with Supreme Majesty. ** What are ye 
now, ye cares? Where are ye, disappoint- 
ments ?" said Atheling, beaming the sweet 
smile of uprightness, " Come to me — 
seize me — overwhelm me — my God him- 
self supports me, his eye beams even down 
tame ; it beams in comfort, goodness and 
paternal love. 

" Oh, 



B K XI. 95 

** Ob, magnificence of religion! Oh, 
grandeur of piety ! When the whole world 
shuts us out, thou art ready to clasp U3 in 
an embrace ! My King! my God ! and my 
Saviour 1 Language fails — I am silent.'* 

Edgar entered the palace. The slaves 
stood by, and marked his placid dignity ; 
and confounded, they trembled and leaned 
behind a pillar; he observed them not. The 
aged secretary was advancing, he looked 
up, but, perplexed, turned away ; Edgar 
would have followed, but the officer of the 
guard respectfully bov/ed before him, " My 
lord," he uttered, and the cool grandeur 
of his auditor, abashed him; he cast his 
eye to the ground, and bowed. " Speak, 
sir, I pray you," answered Atheling, calmly, 
but with sweetness, for the ingratitude of 
the Paphians had chilled his ardour, " My 
lord," replied the officer, and hesitated, 
*' the men have discovered the entrance of 
the cavern, but they dare not — they like 
not the dark appearance. They — they have 
refused to advance, fearing a spectre."— 
*' Oh, poor timidity !" cried Edgar, with 

disdain ^ 



96 EDGAR. 

disdain ; ** a British soldier, did he even 
feel apprehensions, would swalloW them, 
and know no will but his commander's. 
What distance is the cave from hence ?" 
■— ** Perhaps of an half hour's walk, 
my lord," returned the captain. ** Be 
the task mine then, sir," replied Atheling ; 
" I fear no spectre ; darkness has no hor- 
rors for me. I will explore the cave." So 
saying, he tightened the breastplate that 
glittered on his proud bosom, girt on the 
shining blade of his beloved father, and 
swinging the furry-broidered mantle of the 
east around him, called for a thick taper, 
and crossed again the threshold of his 
palace. 

The evening had swiftly passed, and 
night triumphed. She wore a dark grey, 
but here and there a soft swell rose bright, 
and inclosed in its bosom a virgin mes- 
senger from the queen of heavenly constel- 
lations. Atheling reserved, passed tranquil 
on. The captain trod at his side in res- 
pectful silence, and the inquisitive Perseus 
Y?ottdering in the scheme, followed at a 
distance. As Edgar arrived at the beach, 

he 



B O O K XT. 97 

lie beheld the trembling sentries ; then he 
stooped for two pebbles and quickly struck 
them ; the tender sparks rushed out in 
every direction, fell upon the burnt cotton 
of the taper, and presently rose in a bright 
flame. " I imagine, Sir, this,'' said Edgar, 
advancing, " is the entrance ; be pleased 
all to wait here ; I trust I shall soon be 
with you — I will move forward and try how 
far the cavern winds." The men started 
back, and Atheling, with a fearless tread, 
entered the small aperture. All was still 
as death — he held in one hand the large 
torch, in the other, his sword. The vault 
soon widened, and the damps, pendant in 
dew or crust, reflected ten thousand bril- 
liant images. No sound escaped, save 
that from the bat, which flapped her wings 
and hovered in terror, sometimes close to 
the rays of light, and fanning, made them 
vacillate. Suddenly, the ground rose in 
the ascent^ and a rocky step now and then 
assisted his passage. At length he spied a 
thick wall, and as he arrived close to it, his 
progress was checked. Here the Prince 
stopped gasping for breath, for he had 
VOL. 111. F walked 



9S E D G A R. 

walked vyith precipitation. As he paused, 
he saw the flash of another light, he caught 
the sound of another footstep. Surprise 
dashed his cheek ; but his undaunted soul 
;was firm and recollected — in a moment he 
distinguished the captain, and Perseus. 
" Pardon me, great Sir," cried the first, 
" I could not endure to see so generous a 
master unattended by one arm, even when 
he might have commanded hundreds in his 
defence— and Perseus here would needs 
accompany me.*' " What, my lord ?" 
cried Perseus, " are you safe ? — little did 
your slave suspect your design, or he would 
have gone foremost in the danger — 'tis a 
vast cavern, long and dreary. I rejoice, 
my lord, in your escape." — «* I thank thee, 
Perseus ; and you also, kind Sir," replied 
Atheling, *' now let us not wait for any 
converse, but diligently search ; some en- 
trance there must be to the tomb ; assist 
to examine, and be cautious." 

The Prince immediately kneeled down, 
and lowering the torch, searched close in 
every recess ; he drew away a large solid 
stone from one spot, and groping, disco^^- 

ed 



BOOK xr. 99 

ed a small door ; the old hinge gave way ; 
boldly he passed into the opening, still 
sliding and holding the torch and drawn 
sword. The passage enlarged ; he could 
stand erect ; another door of wood faced 
him, he rushed against it, and in an instant 
he was in the sepulchral chamber. 

Atheling gazed around in wonder and 
surprise. He found himself in a spacious 
room of white marble, illumined by several 
waxen tapers. In the centre, was a table 
of marble, upon which, with the fragments 
of a repast, were raised heaps of gold and 
gems ; and round the apartment were piled 
caskets of the same stores. The Prince 
looked on every side for the minister. He 
called with a commanding voice, that made 
the echo swell among the arches, and mul- 
tiply his words. Again he spoke ; but no 
reply was made. He listened 5 when a 
hollow sigh burst upon his ear. Perplexed, 
he lifted the rich brocade of a sopha ; and 
lowering the torch, beheld the figure of a 
man prostrate. Edgar started, but imme- 
diately cried, ** Come forward ; stand up. 
I swear, on mine honour, Iw ill not touch 
T 2 to 



100 EDGAR. 

to hurt thee, if thou wilt deliver thyself 
— speak — rise — shew thjself ; thy wretch- 
ed life is safe at my hands." The authority 
of Athehng could not be resisted ; and a 
meagre ghastly figure crawled forward, and, 
appalled in the majesty of the prince, fell 
on his knee. ** Oh, abasement of human 
kind !" said Atheling, " is it then really 
possible ? Is he really a man ?'' — " Have 
pity, have pity," cried the abject minister, 
*' you have given me safety from the sword 
— give me my treasures — let me flee away ; 
darkness will hide me, let me depart." — 
<< And where, oh miserable ! wouldstthou 
flee to ?" asked Atheling, *' where would 
thy narrow soul find happiness ?" — " My 
life — my treasure — they are enough — I am 
content." — " What ! is life welcome to thee 
with shame, dishonour, disgrace — when it 
is a thousand times forfeit to justice ? — 
Amazing 1" said the Prince, "and thy 
treasure ? Think not so easily, and with so 
great impunity, the orphan shall be robbed 
of her patrimony, the hoary head pine 
wdth want, the tender mother weep over 
her child that cries for bread. No ; justice 

commands 



BOOK XI. 101 

commands thee to be stripped of thy ill- 
gotten treasures, and commands thee not 
only to stand by and see the restitution, 
but that thou thyself should appear and 
answer to the charges laid against thee. 
I have, on mine honour, told thee, that 
thy life is safe from my own hand ; but 
mark, it may be otherwise with an exas- 
perated people. Thy blood is secure from 
my touch ; nay, so far from putting an end 
to thy existence, I would even use my 
power to prolong it, as much as might be, 
to give thee time to humble thyself in pe- 
nitence for thy sins; but the voice of 
justice is imperious ; — yet will I befriend 
thee as I may." The wretched man kneal- 
ed at the foot of Edgar, and raised his 
hand to thank him. The Prince was turn- 
ing aside from a soul so mean, when in an 
instant he staggered ; the stroke of a sharp 
dagger flashed against his side, gashed his 
superb mantle, and entering a crevice of 
his unseen armour, drew forth a little stream 
of blood. Enraged, he looked round, and 
saw the weapon still in the hand of the 
assassin, whose countenance fell into des- 
F 3 . piir, 



10^ MD G A R. 

pair, as he felt the iron resistance — his eye 
glared, as he cried, " Ha ! have I then 
failed?" The Prince, e:Jjasperated, lifted 
his sword, and rushed furious upon the 
quivering traitor. *< Thou shalt die, per- 
iidious as thou art," said he ; and in a mo* 
nient he wrenched, with a powerful grasp, 
the dagger, and threw it far oif ; then 
would he have huried his bright sword in 
his breast ; but suddenly honour, sacred 
honour checked his hand. ** No, base as 
thou art," ciied he, "no, I will not stain 
my weapon with thy blood, though thou 
wouldst have shed mine, thou traitor ! but 
thy life is now trebly forfeited ; and as thy 
malice is so deep, I will warn others of 
thee, and preventthee from harming them.'* 
Whereupon, he seized the robe of the 
traitor with one hand, and holding with 
nervous arm, the resisting limbs of his 
mean adversary, bound his limbs firmly 
round, and then left him struggling with 
rage, malice, despair, and revenge. 

The Prince now called loudly, ** Perseus 
etiter ; your enemy is in bonds ; he must 
be transported to the palace. From my 

hands 



BOOK XI. 105 

hands be deserved death, but I have saved 
him for justice to punish. Come on — unbar 
the doors ; troops are posted without. You, 
Sir," said he to the captain, " you will be 
pleased to command two men to convey 
the prisoner to the palace ; meantime, we 
will shut up the tomb and secure its trea- 
sures on every side, till morning." Per- 
seus, with timid step advanced, started, 
and hastily passed the fallen minister. The 
abject miser shut his haggard eye and 
groaned, but attempted not to speak. The 
ponderous hinges soon grated in the mas- 
sive iron doors fronting the edifice, proof 
against the strength of man, excepting 
through the insinuating key. The astc- 
nished soldiers without, heard the sound, 
and started at the news. Two quickly 
entered and seized the offender. Athelinor, 
w^ith vast exertion, made sure the smaller 
doors, and then passing the outer ones, 
heaved them after him, and fastening, put 
the keys in his bosom ; then, hurrying on- 
ward, joined llie prisoner, saw him con- 
ducted to the state prison of the palace, 
and throwing aside his armour, staunched 
F 4 his 



104 E K G A K. 

his slight wound with some h'lien j theti- 
flinging himself on the humble couch, 
hastily prepared for him, endeavoured to 
bury in sleep the dangers and fatigues of 
the day. 



BOOK XII. 105 

BOOK XII. 
THE MORAL. 

Hail to thee, Morality ! thou beaming 
angel, which art sent on earth to bind man 
in links of harmony, as he pursues his vast 
or scant career ; thou, who, Proteus-like, 
but with sweet intent, canst change thy 
name, fashion, and form, to wdn a way to 
chaste bosoms, or to rush through to a 
boisterous soul. Thou, who with the timid 
art, Gentleness ; with the bold. Heroism ; 
with the pious. Religion ; with the brave, 
Honour ; with the delicate. Chastity ; with 
the dispassionate, Temperance ; with the 
prudent. Caution ; with the frugal. Eco- 
nomy. Thou, who canst shrink into a 
sentiment, or spread into a dissertation of 
volumes j who canst prattle to a babe's 
listening ear, or harangue a proud and 
haughty multitude ; who canst swell in 
solemn pulpit eloquence, or smile in the 
tender language of a child's tale ; who 
canst glitter in all the magnificence of law, 
F 5 that 



106 E D G A R. 

that shall bind the will of royalty itself, or 
that shall pass in the humble garb of a sim- 
ple national ballad. Thou, Morality ! with- 
out whom the ties of nature sleep despised, 
and the institutions of man lie disregarded. 
Justice needing a supporter, Truth being a 
deceit, Virtue a name, Religion a terror ! 
Oh Morality ! thou connecter of mortal 
and celestial, thou that standest between 
human and divine, and joinest both : I 
salute, I bless thee ! 

The Prince rose as usual with the dawn,^ 
and having commanded the great bell of 
the palace to sound, that the people might 
assemble as on particular occasions, 
vaulted upon his charger, and slowly ad- 
vanced to the sepulchre, attended by all 
the guards and persons of his train. The 
massy gates were thrown open, and the 
ten vases full of gold were lifted between 
thrice the number of the strongest men ; 
the treasures were piled upon an eminence, 
and as the people hastened forward, upon 
the rumour of passing events, Edgar thus 
spoke : 

" Inhabitants of Paphos, subjects of the 

King 



BOOK XII. 107 

King of Cyprus ! ye behold the fate of 
wealth unjustly amassed. Peace to your 
governor, for he sleeps in death ; whatever 
be his deeds, they have escaped the reward 
or chastisement of man ; but the minister 
is secured for a day of retribution, and 
waits in his prison the arm of justice." — 
" Give him, that we may tear him to 
atoms — that we may shred him in our ven- 
geance," cried the Paphians ; ** give him 
to our revenge." — " Hold 1" interrupted 
the Prince ; '* be silent yet awhile, and lis- 
ten." 

<* The amassed riches are ail before you, 
fiot a coin hath been touched ; I am ready, 
I am v/illing to restore part of it amongst 
you. One third I transmit to your King, 
one-third I place in the treasury, for public 
use, the remainder is your's." 

The astonished and delighted people lift- 
ed their hands, and murmured a burst of 
admiration. Atheling paused, and with 
dignity proceeded : 

" But promiscuous relief is hurtful : and 
I warn you, men of Paphos, that the mo- 
ney shall be distributed with judgment and 
F 6 care : 



108 EDGAR. 

care ; six persons of distinguished probity 
shall be appointed to go from dwelling to 
dwelling, to gather an account of your 
wants, and to administer to every neces- 
sity. A portion to the fatherless, a pension 
to the aged, food to the hungry, clothes 
to the needy, relief to the unfortunate, 
medicines to the sick. Besides these pri- 
vate succours, I will myself be ready to 
hear every grievance publicly, and every 
day ; and, if it be possible, to redress 
every WTong. Thus shall you be assisted ; 
and thus may you at length be convinced, 
that my wish is your prosperity, my aim 
your happiness. Be content — be generous 
— cast off every injurious suspicion ; none 
among you has reason to fear, but the 
guihy ; for as my w^ord is pledged for the 
satisfying of want, and the protection of 
innocence, so shall it pass for the punish- 
ment and detection of vice." 

The Prince ceased, and the vast people, 
impelled by his candour, his promise, and 
his truth, durst no longer doubt. The 
men shouted in exultation, the women ea- 
ger lifted up their infants, to view their 

generous 



BOOK XII. 109 

generous governor, who now raised his 
helmet, as he galloped back, surrounded 
by his guards, to the palace, amidst thou- 
sands of the exulting populace. 

The noble heart of Atheling would have 
been touched with the praise, but he recol- 
lected the ingratitude of the preceding 
day, and the emotion vanished. ** Oh let 
me not," thought he, " let me not be 
elated by a mere word which is offered to 
day, and may be retracted to-morrow ! 
Wretched, alas ! must be that man, who 
depends upon the caprice of a multitude 
for self-esteem. May that lot never be 
mine!" 

Days fled. The arrangements of the 
palace advanced with rapidity. Order 
quickly took her seat in the residence of 
the governor. Time was portioned for 
duties ; and with the revolving hour, was 
every thing by turns reviewed, attempted, 
or perfected. The confidence of the peo- 
ple arose and grew. They flocked every 
morning, to tell the chief their hopes, their 
disputes, their wants, their wrongs. Ele- 
vated in the spacious marble columned hall, 

upon 



110 E D G A R. 

upon a chair of state, he listened with un- 
wearied patience to the minutest detail of 
the accuser, and the defendant ; and so 
cautious was he in determining, that even 
he who lost his cause, moved from the hall 
satisfied in the strictness of justice — even 
he, as he passed the gate, had sometimes 
a small gratuity privately offered, to assist 
in the reimbursements he might have to 
make ; and this presented by the stationed 
officer, with an affectionate written caution 
against further intemperance. The poor 
were supplied from stores set apart for 
them, of apparel and food. Calamity was 
relieved as much as might be •, the ravages 
of conflagration, tempest, or inundation, 
were immediately repaired by the efibrts of 
the appointed artificers, and the contribu- 
tions from the public treasure. An im- 
mense edifice was arranged for, and appro- 
priated to the reception of the infirm and 
the outcast ; easy works of industry were 
assigned to the last, and the profits arising 
to all were a private reward. Thus, m 
time, when prudence authorized, the per- 
son might depart from his asylum,^ smile 

secure 



BOOK xir. Ill 

secure in his own cottage, and dare again, 
perchance, on a return to temperance and 
sobriety, to raise an eye of confidence ob 
the world. 

The Prince could not thus strive, and 
strive in vain. The people, ardent, impe- 
tuous, strong in eastern warmth, which 
knows no resting place between extremes, 
the people shouted, as he passed the gates 
to walk among them — they rushed forward 
— they knelt to embrace his mantle — ^they 
sang in boisterous joy; unlike, oh, how 
unlike ! to the deep-seated tenderness of 
British bosoms, which lies close in a throb- 
bing tumult, and starts in broken pauses t 
or to an averted eye speaking modest love 
and faithful pride. Atheling felt the dis- 
tance, for a delicate soul is touched only 
by delicate praise. Notwithstanding, was 
he grateful for the rough approbation of 
his deeds j and, resisting with diffidence 
the kind clamour, courteously bowed to 
his people ; and questioned those near him 
upon their well being, their family, their 
prospects ? occasionally he praised a duti- 
ful child, a generous neighbour, an indus- 
trious 



112 EDGAR. 

trious housewife ; or, he stopped before a 
threshold to admire the well pruned fig- 
tree, or vine clinging upward, or the neat 
simplicity of the interior of a dweUing. 
Then arose strong emulation, and hopes 
went round in loud whispers of like excel- 
lence and like praise. Every art of the 
husbandman was exalted, and prizes were 
offered weekly for the noblest tillage, and 
best fruits of the earth. 

And now the Prince revolving every 
change, ascended to the citadel in which 
the fallen minister passed his weary cap- 
tivity. Here, liberty was all the want he 
knew ; for his daily supply exceeded every 
wdsh of nature. The Prince demanded the 
keys and stood before him : — 

** Minister of the late governor of Pa- 
phos," said he with the dignity of reserve ; 
•* I at length stand before you, but think 
not that I have been unmindful of you ; or, 
that I have deferred till now, without a 
cause, your condemnation, or release. No, 
Sir, an Englishman holds liberty too sacred 
to lightly withhold it from a fellow mortaL 
His truth is dearer to him than life, and to 

this 



BOOK XII. 113 

this sacred pledge you now, perhaps owe 
your very existence. My soul disdains to 
accuse or argue, where I despise. I have 
promised you justice and protection j by 
the first, prepare to abide. My promise 
in the second matter, will only avail in 
securing you from the strong indignation 
of an injured people ; a people who have a 
thousand times demanded your blood, and 
who have scarcely suffered, from even me, 
the slight excuses of delay. I have 
waited, cautiously waited, and have gently 
led their minds from the point, till I should 
hold some influence in their bosoms ; for 
such I now dare hope ; and be it mighty 
or insignificant, I will make the exertion in 
your behalf. But remember ; I give you 
no hope. Prepare for your condemnation 
or acquittal, and endeavour to make up 
your accounts j for ere to-morrow's sun go 
down, 'tis more than likely you are no 



more." 



The long haggard visage of the prisoner 
shrank more ghastly at these words of the 
magnanimous prince : he essayed in vain 
to rise from his seat, but his trembling 

knee 



114« EDGAR. 

knee refused to support the towering yet 
shrivelled frame. The penurious jaw drop- 
ped downward ; the deep seated twinkling 
eye seemed, for once, fixed in steadiness; and 
the long fibred throat gulped in convulsive 
dread its fear and dismay ; whilst the boned 
and withered hands turning suddenly pur- 
ple from the nail upward, were expanded 
and smitten together, as in the last appre- 
hensions of nature. 

Atheling was retreating : he unclosed the 
door, and gave one glance— his tender 
breast was instantly touched with pity, he 
stopped, *^ have you then parents ? " asked 
Edgar, seeing his speechless horror. The; 
prisoner endeavoured to utter " no ;** but 
be failed, and shook his dishonoured head* 
** God be thanked 1 '* exclaimed Edgai*. 
** Would you see a friend?'*—" I have 
none,'' rephed the man, in a hollow mur- 
mur. " Alas I then art thou indeed to ba 
pitied," said the Prince. " Can I send 
thee aught; what wouldst thou ?"—" Send 
me the treasure," exclaimed the miser with 
a distorted smile ; " give me but half- 
give me back my gold." Atheling started 

—he 



BOOK xrr, 115 

— '^le gazed — lost in painful wonder. At 
length as he descended from the tower, he 
muttered, " is it really so ? Can such be 
really men ? and men too, gifted with 
breath from the Omnipotent, with reason, 
sense, faculty, and frame of such exquisite 
parts even under the homeliest ensample ? 
Amazing ! what perversion of blessings, 
what ingratitude, and what depravity ! Yet 
doubtless such hardihood of guilt has been 
the work of years. Is not every thing small, 
nay trifling in its beginning, and does it 
not increase but with time ? How small 
then may be the veiy first step into wicked- 
ness ? Do not I myself know and feel 
how easy, how trifling, how insignificant is 
the border of vice ; how smooth the very 
first path into impropriety j how gradual 
the first descent from right and wrong, and 
how rapidly we are hurried forward as soon 
as the line is passed. O that the guilt of 
another may but serve to shew me mine 
own imperfection, and the weakness of all 
human nature, without the assistance of 
divinity ! " 

The Prince, intent upon the business of 

justice^ 



Il6 E D G A Re 

justice, commanded preparation to be made 
for the appearance of the minister. A 
strong balustrade was elevated round the 
chair of state, with a small nook firmly par- 
titioned off in its centre. Across was 
fixed a large table, round which were 
benches ; to the right a double row ; and 
under the canopy a small desk with a sup- 
ply of parchment and reeds.* Report soon 
buzzed the preparation and the cause ; and 
multitudes flocked to observe ; whilst a 
furious joy flashed in every eye as the con- 
course rushed back to the city to declare, 
that the instruments of torture and death 
were preparing for the detested prisoner. 

Tlie morning scarc-e beamed, when the 
pakce gates were flung open, and the hall 
in a few moments was filled. Every one 
gazed in revengeful wonder, upon the ex- 
traordinary arrangements. One hoped to 
see the first stroke of the executioner ; 
another held up the kerchief to sponge the 
first gush of blood; a third boasted of the 
tauntings with which he would assail the 

ear 

» Used in the east as pews. 



BOOK XII. 117 

ear of the dying man. Thus all discoursed 
and horribly suggested during several hours, 
till the flush of curiosity was in a man- 
ner damped, and the clamour of novelty 
abated. 

Atheling had waited the moment, and 
now seized it. The trumpet w^as heard in 
long drawn strains. Presently twelve men 
of the city advanced two and two, and 
ranged themselves upon the benches to the 
right ; then came the six councillors of the 
Prince, clothed in their robes ; next ad- 
vanced the culprit with tottering step, sup- 
ported by two officers ; and close to him 
the Prince himself, superbly attired in long 
scarlet robes edged with costly fur; whilst 
upon his breast glittered the magnificent 
Venetian chain of diamonds, and from his 
uncovered head fell in immense and luxu- 
riant beauty his dark and ambient curls, 
which were thrown back from a visage, 
on which sat, enthroned, grandeur of soul, 
virtue, purity, and angelic sweetness. 

The Prince, looking round upon the 
amazed concourse with complacency and 
mild gravity, placed his hand on his breast 

and 



118 E D. G A R. 

and bowed. As he advanced to the cano- 
py, he ungirt the splendid sword from his 
side, and raising it to command silence, 
slowly spoke: — 

" Paphians ! subjects of the great King 
of Cyprus ) men committed to my trust ; 
my children — brothers — ^friends I — Attend; 
and if your kind breasts owe me one gene- 
rous feeling, interrupt me not, till I have 
ceased." — " We swear," burst from the 
astonished crowd. " Hold ! " cried Ed- 
gar, " 'tis enough." 

" Paphians, you here see at this tribunal 
one who is charged with high misdeeds. I 
say, charged, for as yet, who shall confi- 
dently declare that he is guilty ? I see, Pa- 
phians, I guess your thoughts— but attend, 

" Two of you shall be walking near 
together ; an assassin shall come suddenly 
forth, and kill one, notwithstanding his resis- 
tance and the aid of the other of you. The 
murderer shall flee away ; and the defender 
besmeared with the blood of the dead, 
shall remain by the corpse. Persons shall 
arrive and hasten to seize the single man, 
supposing him to be the murderer; in vain 

he 



BOOK xir. 119 

he pleads ; in vain he asserts his innocence ; 
his word is diregarded and he is thrown into 
bondage. So far justice permits j for a man 
shall be no testimony for, or against himself* 
But what then? Shall the man be exe- 
cuted without an inquiry ? Shall particular 
persons not be obliged by a solemn oath to 
speak truly, to answer to every question 
which may serve to throw any light upon 
the important matter? Shall it not be 
asked, whether these two men, the one 
who is murdered, and he who stood by his 
side as he lay dead — whether they had an 
enmity to each other? whether the deceas- 
ed possessed money, or aught that the other 
wanted ? Whether the living attempted to 
flee away ? or, whether he boldly advanced, 
and in the confidence of integrity demanded 
his trial? Whether, inline, with a mass of 
other enquiry, whether the wounds given, 
were apparently with any instrument 
thought to be, or actually in the possession 
of the prisoner ? All these, and more shall 
be answered, ere the life of a man shall be 
stripped from him. This inquiry, this in- 
vestigation, this patient ear to minute de- 
tail : 



120 EDGAR. 

tail ; this, my friends, is the true course of 
justice, that noble emanation from divinity, 
which man is authorised to hold with his 
fellow man. The sword is hasty and exe- 
cutes 5 but the word of justice is weighed 
in the balance ere it passes the lip. Retire 
then, my sword ; thou art glorious for the 
field— he who presides in the court of jus- 
tice, requires no other aid than conscience, 
and his sense of right and wrong." 

As the Prince spoke, he sheathed the 
bright blade ; and with inimitable grace 
hung it high over the canopy, and then 
continued : 

*' Paphians ; this man before you is a 
prisoner. You shall now see an examina- 
tion, begun according to the preparations. 
You would not, if you are generous, wish 
to see him die unjustly ; if he is guilty, 
you would not desire that he should escape 
some chastisement. Listen then j with pa- 
tience, listen ; and you shall be relieved of 
every doubt, inasmuch as mortals dare de- 
termine. One single charge, — and surely 
we may be satisfied with this one, if it be 
the offence itself?— one single charge shall 

be 



BOOK XII. 121 

be laid to the prisoner. He shall stand in 
your presence to hear what may be said ; 
this, my friends, we cannot refuse to any 
criminal ; to hear fully the accusation 
brought against him. Two of these wise 
men shall, in presence of you all, ask any 
question connected with this charge of any 
one who has, of his own knowledge, aught 
to witness against him. When they shall 
have ceased to examine the accusers, the 
man shall surely be allowed an answer, or 
a word to extenuate his fault. Yes j he 
shall speak, and we will hear him ; and 
if he tremble in the attempt, in so awful 
an assembly, I, myself, will depute, as 
being the head, and being desirous to give 
him the privilege of mercy, — I will depute 
another wise man to speak for him, and to 
say whatever may be said in his defence. 
Then shall you have he:..d all for, and 
all against the prisoner ; I will, whilst 
you balance between the accusation and 
the defence, recapitulate to you the whole 
subject. 

*' What will remain to be done, oh Pa- 
phians 1 to pronounce the word " guilty,'^ 

VOL. III. G or 



12^ EDGAR. 

or the words " not guiltj,"~but who slialt 
do this ? 

" I ? — no, my voice is the voice of^ 
only one man ; besides, in my own person, 
of judge, I warn you, I shall lean to mer- 
cy. Should you make the awful decision ? 
Paphians, 'tis your cause ; ye represent the 
injured^ — 'tis ye that prosecute.— On whom 
then, shall rest this vast responsibility ? 
Behold those twelve dispassionate men. 
Their rank in life raises them from the temp- 
tations of poverty ; their rank shuts them 
from the lure of riches. They are in happy 
mediocrity ; neit'ier enervated by luxury 
nor hardened by want. These are the men 
calm, temperate, disinterested ;— these are 
the men that shall listen to the whole course 
of justice ; that shall weigh well both sides 
fairly, impartially, justly, unanimously. 
They shall decide — they shall speak — and 
in the front of heaven, and the face of 
men, will we abide by their determi- 
nation." 

Atheling in the earnestness of the 
speaker, dropped the solemnity of the 
judge. His eye sparkled in a blaze of ani- 
mation p 



BOOK XII. 123 

mation ; his hand in the vehemence of de- 
clamation was strained high upward as his 
lip made the sacred appeal to heaven ; his 
cheek warmed by the flush of the noblest 
feelings, glowed to embrowned carnation ; 
the ruby mouth was severed by the ardour 
of exertion, not in the levity of a smile ; — 
and his stature expanded to fuller majesty, 
and lifted in huge folds the ample robe to 
partial negligence, as it clung about the 
fine-turned limb. 

He ceased. The people astonished, awed 
by his truth, his majesty, and his lofty 
words, gazed upon him for a moment in 
silence — but presently a hollow murmur 
arose, it advanced, it spread, it burst into 
acclamation. ** We are content ! We will 
abide by thy tribunal. Be it life or deatli 
to the prisoner, v»'e will rest satisfied ! '* 
cried a thousand voices. Tiie Prince bow- 
ed, and pressed his hand on his breast. 
He bent down to his seat ; and in sem- 
blance of arranging his robe, brushed off 
a swelling drop that filled round his bright 
eye ; another drop gushed to the lid as he 
clasped his hands together, looked up for 
G « aa 



■Ii4f EDGAR. 

an instant towards heaven, and sighed, 
" ob, my country ! land of liberty, of jus- 
tice, of mercy, of virtue ! who can un- 
derstand thy renown and not be moved, 
who can hear thy beautiful law expounded, 
and not be transported ? " 

Atheling waited till silence was restored, 
and then with solemn aspect, addressed 
the trembling culprit. " Sir : you are 
charged with the crime of embezzling, or 
putting aside for your own private use, the 
public money ; for this crime, you shall 
now be tried before this solemn tribunal, in 
the face of heaven and your country. Look 
you then to all that is preferred against 
you, that you may have the opportunity of 
making some reply, in defence, or miti- 
gation of your conduct. There are uten- 
sils ; there is parchment ; you are permit- 
ted to write that which you would recollect. 
Let the witnesses advance." 

Now the Prince proceeded to note down 

'every question and reply as the counsellor, 

who had been instructed by him, put and 

received it. The principal accusei^s were 

the chief of the household, the slaves of 

the 



BOOK XII^ 1^5 

the palace, with the persons who assisted 
in clearing the sepulchre of its treasures. 
During eight hours, the Prince with ad- 
mirable patience and zeal, directed this 
important solemnity ; he leaned upon every 
favourable point with hope ; and he listen- 
ed with profound attention to every mi- 
nute circumstance of the defence, which 
was deputed to the counsellor by the cuU 
prit. At length, this part of the inquiry 
was closed, and as the multitude stood in 
breathless suspense, Athehng turning with 
sweet dignity to the twelve men on his 
right hand, spoke thus : 

" Gentlemen : you have been assembled 
this day, for one of the most solemn of 
human purposes — to determine upon the 
guilt, or the innocence of a fellow-crea- 
ture. That you might not bear the preju^ 
dice of rank, or the envy of poverty, you 
are chosen from among the happy few of 
middling station ; that you may have full 
assistance in forming a judgment, every 
minute circumstance relating to the crime 
with which the prisoner is charged, or 
upon which he rests his defence, is laid , 
o 3, open 



l*2t) EDGAR, 

open before you ; that in declaring your 
opinion as to his guilt, or his innocence, 
there may not be a shadow of doubt ; you 
are required to be unanimous in your de- 
claration. Thus the coincidence of twelve 
men shall be a strong proof of the justice 
of the sentence ; and upon it shall none 
dare to raise a murmur. 

** The question you have to consider, is, 
whether the man did, or did not secrete 
the public money. Various evidence has 
been brought forward unfavourable to his 
general character ; if you think these suffi- 
cient, you will decide upon his actual 
guilt ; but if you conceive it likely that 
the vases of coin, which could scarcely be 
lifted by two strong soldiers, might have 
been transported to the sepulchre by other 
hands, at the governor's command, long 
before he expired j — if you conceive it 
improbable that such a collection could 
have been made unauthorized by his supe- 
rior y — if you see any reason to suppose, 
that as being the minister to a rapacious 
man he might dread the indignation of a 
suffering people, and endeavour without 

any 



BOOK XIT. 1^27 

aiiy other intent, to seek a strong place of 
shelter, then must you determine upon his 



innocence." 



Atheling paused. With tranquil aspect 
he leaned backward, to shew that his part 
was finished ; he looked round upon the 
gasping multitudes, who gazed with pro- 
found admiration and wonder on him, on 
the twelve, and then on the prisoner, who 
had swooned with terror as the decisive 
moment drew nigh, and was supported by 
two attendants. Atheling looked serene ; 
but his breast throbbed in strong beats 
against his robe ; and the whole exertion 
of his magnanimous soul was scarcely suffi- 
cient to crush every rising emotion, as he 
now and then observed the flutter cease, 
and preparation made for speech from the. 
right bench. 

At length, the eldest of the twelve men 
leaned forward ; looked full upon Edgar, 
and said in a loud, firm voice, " we find 
the prisoner not guilty, my lord." 

The Prince in a moment hastened to 
take advantage of the silence ; and imme- 
diately addressed, in a distinct, impressive 
G 4 tone. 



128 EDGAR. 

tone, the trembling minister, who had fal- 
len in extacy upon his knee. ** Sir," said 
he, " the word is passed. Your country- 
men have declared you innocent of the 
crime with which you were charged. Our 
sacred faith is pledged to stand by the deci- 
sion, and liberty is restored you. But re- 
ineiiiber, sir, tliat circumstances are reveal- 
ed through the course of this inquiry, 
that reflect dishonour, I might add shame, 
upon your general character. You will 
now do well, sir, in seeking a banishment, 
and in hiding your reproach in a corner 
where you may be unknown and unmo- 
lested ; and learn, that a really virtuous 
man rises from a public trial ennobled in 
public estimation j but that a vicious one, 
however he may be judged as to the prin- 
cipal charge, is in danger from the evi- 
dence to his misconduct, of losing even 
the small interest that pity has excited for 
him. You are free. See that you endea- 
vour to employ better the remaining few 
days that are spared you. Hasten to the 
fortress you have quitted ; put up a change 
of raiment; and know that in fewer than 

three 



BOOK xir. 1^9^ 

three days, we shall expect intelligence of 
your departure." 

Shouts now rent the high-storied roof. 
The people enraptured by the words, shout- 
ed, " Long live the governor, long live 
the Prince, who governs us by justice." 
Atheling rose and bowed to the vast con- 
course, and gently commanding two at- 
tendants to lead away the fallen minister 
through 3L private circuit, himself waited — 
again bowed, and desiring a tribe of slaves 
to bring into the hall, food for the half- 
famished throng, himself retired, beaming 
in grateful feeling at being spared the 
dreadful execution of a man, and joyful in 
having finished the arduous task of this 
day. He then partook of a slight repast, 
and watched the hour of midnight for the 
fulfilment of the last self-imposed and no- 
blest duty. 

Now the crowd dispersed to dieir homes^. 
all the way chaunting his loud praises. At 
length every murmur ceased. The household 
prepared for rest. Atheling raised his taper;, 
all was still. He gazed upon the heavens,, 
bright in stars and beautiful, as if pleased,, 
G 5 and 



130 EDGAR. 

and participating in the sweetest feelings of 
man. He once more ascended the room 
in which the minister reclined, now un- 
guarded 5 and he moved the taper towards 
the couch — it flashed on the sallow coun- 
tenance—the man started and awoke. — 
" Mercy !*' said he, on beholding Athel- 
ing, " oh mercy !" — " Unworthy old manl" 
cried the Prince, disdainfully, ** what canst 
thou fear from me ? did base designs enter 
my breast, I could take fuller vengeance 
than thou dreamest of ; but hearken. If 
life be in thine eye worth such preserva- 
tion, descend instantly ; choose, without 
delay, from amongst the fleetest of my 
steeds; escape with precipitation — the voice 
of one man is weak among that of thou- 
sands, and there is no law to ensure thee 
protection ; thy trial was only permitted, 
not enforced. Hasten then to the most 
distant port — embark, and land on some 
shore where thou mayst be unknown. 
There live thy little span, and humble thy- 
self for all thy past misdeeds ; hasten, for 
the night is already far advanced. To re- 
lieve 



BOOK XII. 131 

lieve thy wants, here is a purse. Eefonn, 
be honest, and dread to provoke a further 
indignation 1*' 

The minister stretched forth his hand, 
received the gold, pressed it to his heart, 
and looked up to the Prince — thrice he 
bowed ; thrice he endeavoured to speak. 
A long convulsed sigh burst from his hag- 
gard breast. " Oh, wondrous virtue ! What 
is he ? Such youth ; such awe !*' he murmur- 
ed. " Dost thou remember, my lord," 
asked he, with a ghastly smile, " that I 
sought thy life, even when thou gavest me 

mine? and now, and oh for relief to this 

labouring breast ! " and he wr>^ng his hand 
and struck it on his brow. '* Hasten, Sir,'* 
cried the Prince, '* seek the path of rec- 
titude, and my good wishes attend you." 
So saying, he led the w^ay, and the mi- 
nister striking his forehead, exclaimed, 
" Oh, wonderful, wonderful !" Atheling 
descended. The man trembling, pale, con- 
founded, tottered after him, bending low^, 
and repeating as he passed on, " Oh most 
wonderful !" The Prince led forth a pow- 
erful steed, and assisted him to mount. 
G 6 The 



13g EDGAR. 

The man clasped his hands, looked for a 
moment upon a pale beam of light that 
broke round the infant moon, and cried, 
" 'Tis too much— who shall reward him ?" 
and then suffering the reins to be put in his 
torpid hand, as his head drooped, Edgar 
quickly led the horse forward to a little 
distance, till he perceived the fresh air had 
restored the fugitive. Then he turned about, 
waved his hand, and in a few moments 
entered the palace doors, closed them, 
sought his chamber, and fell into placid 
rest. 

The following morning it was discovered 
that the minister had accepted his voluntary 
exile. The news was so grateful to the people, 
that they cared not to make any enquiry ; 
and Edgar dismissed for ever the ungra- 
cious ^vent from his mind, and employed 
himself daily more to the welfare of his 
people. The city increased in strength, 
beauty, and riches ; the country round 
about wore every luxuriance of cultivation, 
and the people, from being mournful and 
slothful from fear or despair, were now 
gay, happy, emulative, and incited to ex- 
ertion 



BOOK XII. 133 

ertion from the public reward and appro- 
bation of their deeds. 

Months rolled away ; the glory of Athel- 
ing increased,_and could the applause of his 
people give perfect happiness, then had he 
possessed it ; but other hopes fluttered in 
his breast. Like the prattling babe, whose 
eager eye is caught during a few moments 
by the caress, on the glitter of a stranger, 
but who almost instantly turns round its 
little anxious gaze for the nurse, and 
mourns if it see her not ; — thus Atheling 
amused, occupied, labouring in his duties 
of the day, had not the leisure to give his 
bosom vent; but, in the evenings, when 
relaxation gave him liberty of thought, he 
sought the solitar}^ beach or the grave, or 
perched upon a high cliff that overlooked 
the bay ; directed his tearful eye across the 
western shores, and sighed for his native 
home. *^ Brilliant sky of the eastern worlds 
thou voluptuous breeze, thou tender va- 
pour, thou soft peach-blossom tint of float- 
ing bloom, what are ye to me ?" cried the 
Prince, " I would change ye all for one 
varying day iu my native clime ! Oh, soft 

luxuriance, 



134 EDGAR. 

luxuriance, soft efFeminacy of all-tender 
nature, thou wouldst fain unman me ; thou 
wouldst enervate the strong purpose of my 
soul. I feel of what thou art capable ; but 
shall the firm sinews of my frame, which 
were knit so strong in the majesty of Eng- 
land's natives ; shall these be slackened, 
be rendered slothful and powerless by a 
soft air ? Oh never ! And how shall I toil 
over the rugged path, when I am permitted 
to trace it, that leads from this point to 
my paternal roof, if I preserve not my 
limbs vigorous and hardy for every diffi- 
culty and rough chance of a soldier's lot ? 
Alas ! 'tis not the dangers that intimidate ; 
but having combatted and conquered them, 
'tis the disappointment which I dread. My 
father— my loved mother — my friends — my 
Prince — my de Clifford — my country 1 — 
No intercourse, no intercharge of senti- 
ment ! — Oh that the half of my days could 
purchase one little sentence : — * All thou 
lovest are well.' Joyfully, most joyfully 
would I bid them rush from my allotted 
number, and command death to mark me 
down for an earlier day !"^ 

Such 



BOOK XII. 135 

Such were the meditations of AtheUng 
in his hours of recreation, when the sun 
buried himself in the glowing wave, and 
nature paused, listening to night's deep 
tread ;— then the Prince returned to the 
palace, and fearful of self-indulgence, per- 
mitted himself only a frugal meal. After- 
wards, he studied the few dusty parchment 
volumes left by the crusaders in the pa- 
lace library ; and, two hours before mid- 
night, stretched himself upon his homely 
bed. Temperance and health closed his 
eye-lid, whilst peaceful conscience gilded 
every dream. 

Meantime, while Atheling rested secure 
in the fulfilment of duty, the court of Cy. 
prus mistrustful, secretly marked all his 
proceedings ; and spies, who were mingled 
among his slaves, gave daily advice of 
his conduct. Edgar, ever unsuspecting 
and frank, gave to all free access ; and 
thoughtless of consequences, wore the 
open air of a man who means well, and 
acts upon the noble principles of inte- 
grity. With scrupulous fidelity he had 
himself arranged and balanced every ac- 

coun 



l36 EDGAR. 

count of his government, and transmitted 
one monthly to his court. Generous praise 
was returned to his first acts ; Atheling felt 
the glow, and with new ardour, strove to 
be worthy of the confidence of the court that 
employed him. On a sudden, the Cypriot 
Prince forgot to write, and deputed his 
secretary, and at length, this communica- 
tion also ceased, and during six months, 
the signature of de Lusignan, to formal 
state papers, was the only mark by which 
Atheling could judge of his existence. The 
son of Mercia, ever inclined to excuse, 
from time to time, continued to address 
the Cypriot Prince as his friend ; but at 
length, his high soul caught the affront, 
and he too disdained all intercourse. Deep- 
ly stung, and keen upon his honour, Athe- 
ling said, as his bright eye flashed indig- 
nation, ** Yet even this provocation shall 
not urge me from my post j I might resign 
it and depart, but who shall vindicate mine 
honour to the King of Cyprus, who is- 
every day expected ? No ; a breath shall 
not dim Atheling's honour in his absence* 
My term of exile is not yet ended, but 

should 



BOOK XII. 1S7 

should it expire to-night, yet would, I not 
stir till the King himself arrive, and do me 
justice. Sooner would I be enchained to 
yon rock, and feel the rushing weaves beat 
about my wasted frame^ — sooner be en- 
gulphed for existence in the palace dun- 
geons, or wind my sinewy arras round yon 
date, and grow to its bark, than stir but a 
single step from this little isle, and leave 
mine honour to the breath of calumny, or 
the whisper of doubt." Such were the 
thoughts of Atheling, but he locked them 
in his own breast, for he had no frieird 
with whom to uncharge his griefs, no ad" 
viser, not even the old councillor, for he 
had, long since, taken umbrage at the no- 
ble Viceroy, and feigned illness, that he 
might keep his chamber, and hide his dis- 
gust ; but he watched every action of Ed- 
gar, and secretly employed messengers to 
convey his treacherous papers. Atheling, 
whose tender bosom was warm to every 
sufferer, sent him daily the finest fruits he 
could gather, with his own hand, w^ith also 
the sweetest food. Day by day he dispatch- 
ed a kind inquiry, and the proposal of a 

friendly 



138 EDGAR. 

friendly conference ; but this was ever de- 
clined. The Prince respected the peevish- 
ness and infirmity of age, and forbore to 
molest him. 

Now the time of banishment drew near 
its conclusion, and Edgar, pensive, medi- 
tated upon the return of the King. He 
paced his regular rounds on the beach, un- 
mindful of the changed aspect of nature. 
A group of beautiful maidens of Paphos, 
hastily drew in the linen they had steeped 
in the wave, and piling it in orange-wood 
baskets, raised them on their flowing tresses, 
whilst the artful veil but half concealed the 
bright glaring eye, "^ the audacious rosy lip, 
that were interested in the manly grace, yet 
awed by the virtuous temperance of the 
young noble of England. The Prince, 
accustomed to the soft blandishment of the 
susceptible natives, steeled his breast to 
every look that admired, every word that 
caressed ; he passed in the midst of models 
for antiquity, and passed unmoved ; so 
now he heeded not the actions of the young 
Paphians 5 but the sky lowered, the sea- 
bird dropped his wing, screamed and fled ; 

the 



BOOK XII. 139 

the wave stood sluggish, as if in suspense, 
and the fisherman hastily cut the waves, and 
dashed forward to the port for shelter ; 
suddenly evening broke forward, as if to 
hasten the catastrophe ; and now the huge 
winds burst, and rushing from under the 
bed of waters, heaved up the billows in 
their circumference, and panting for a mo- 
ment, sank in the centre, and formed them- 
selves into numberless horrible chasms. 

Atheling now started, and strode to- 
wards the palace ; he essayed with one 
hand to fix the towering helmet on his 
proud head, and he struggled to grasp the 
military cloak round his majestic frame. 
Soon he gained the heights, and touched 
the marble steps, and there he loitered, 
listening, — for a sudden thought broke 
through his mind — he sadly smiled. '* On 
such a dreadful night as this may be, I 
rushed across the country on the faithful 
beast of my de CHiFord, to catch one look, 
one last look, at my beloved home. I 
risked mine honour to embrace parents, who 
thought my hfe without honour, worthless. 
I rushed from them whilst their displeasure 

rang 



140 EDGAR. 

rang on mine ear 5 all was safe, and I was 
again their son. Oh, my father, how fresh 
is this event in my recollection ! and caii 
even more than six long years have passed 
me by, since that portentous storm ! Sure- 
ly they are as a dream — how fleet — how 
short- — as time ; and yet how long, when 
reckoned as distance from the last embrace 
of those we love.'" 

A sudden shock opened heaven, and a 
red blazing stream of lightning darted for- 
ward in a crooked direction to the earth, 
and curling round the root of a bush, in- 
flamed, shrivelled, and scorched it to em- 
bers. Edgar beheld with awe, but without 
dismay ; he stood unmoved, whilst a crash 
of thunder roared across the firmamer>t, 
"was smothered in the hurricane, broke 
loose, died away, and burst afar in broken 
sullen peals till it expired. " How dreadful, 
how wonderful is the power of nature, but 
how much more vast and wondrous is He 
that commandeth nature ! The flame that 
scorched yon bush, may curl round my 
limb, drink up my flood of life, and leave 
jTie a heap of ashes ! Eut what ? Shall I 

flee 



BOOK XII. 14ti 

flee and hide me in the deepest vault of 
man's art ? Poor refuge ! If Omnipo- 
tence command, what will avail the deepest 
chasm of the thick earth ? The stream 
shall strike, and insinuating downward, 
leave vegetation fast slumbering in its seeds, 
to wither. Then how shall man resist the 
arm that letteth loose the bolt of thunder, 
biddeth it take aim against him? Vain, 
vain endeavour ! No ; I love thee, I love 
to contemplate thy majesty, when in arms, 
O Nature ! Howl, ye winds ; swell and 
dash the foaming spray, ye waves j brush 
across the firmament, ye big dark clouds j 
break from them, ye fiery streams, and 
pointing headlong downward, hide your 
fiery train in the hissing billow, and drag 
after, in your passage, the reverberating 
thunder ! I fear ye not — not a hair of my 
head shall ye dare to injure, if the Eternal 
forbid ; not a bone of my frame but shall 
crumble to dust, should the Almighty 
threaten 1" 

The Prince continued to walk the por- 
tico, resting from time to time, to mark 
the grandeur of the swelling tempest. ** Na- 
ture 



I4i^ EDGAR. 

ture is ever the same ; how like,** said he, 
•* is this storm to those I have gazed on from 
Restormal ! Man is ever changeable, and 
he only of creation is not fixed to one 
great and everlasting law. Of all study, 
surely that of himself is the most intricate 
and perplexing. How has my soul been 
confounded in the variance between the 
simple notions of childhood and boo^s, and 
the rugged reality of experience ! How 
altered in these six years are my views of 
man, my idea of things, my notions of my- 
self, my benevolence to all ! I considered 
every glory as centered in war ; now I be- 
hold the dreadful effects of war, and find 
the happiness of mankind to consist in 
peace. My veneration for age was nearly 
worship ; I considered a wrinkled brow as 
the supreme mark of honour ! and a silver- 
haired crown as a diadem of virtue. Now, 
alas ! I discover in the unhappy Leolf and 
the fallen minister, that age may have 
crimes, and silver hairs be foolish. I fan- 
cied that a man who gave himself the npble 
title of friend, was in heart and soul ready 
to expire forme. But de Lusignan, thou 

hast 



BOOK XII. 143 

has taught me that a man may call another 
friend, and yet shght him. If I ventured 
to Hft mine eye to a woman, I thought her 
smile that of an angel, and in purity not 
less, and now I dare even guess that a 
woman may tarnish her fame, and yet not 
expire with confusion and remorse ! Oh, 
unkind experience ! unwelcome knowledge ! 
Cannot we then say with nature, the lion 
is strong ; woman is virtuous ; age is wise, 
and the fox is subtle ! Alas ! knowledge 
then, but teaches man to disesteem him- 
self; for in more he sees, the less is he 
attached to life : and so it should be ; for 
we are to quit this earthly spot, and 'tis 
just that the ties of man be weakened ere 
they be snapped, and he view his native 
land no more." 

As Edgar thus mused, he fixed his eye 
upon a distance, and steadily he gazed ; 
for he perceived a long glare of light. Atr 
first he thought it a flash of the fiery 
streams j but it grew stronger, it spread 
rapidly upward, it widened, it seemed to 
draw nearer to the shore ; and now a vo- 
lume of smoke flew away in the gust, and 

a large 



144 EDGAR. 

a large vessel appeared for an instant, and 
then was lost in dark clouds. " Powers of 
heaven ! " cried Atheling, " a ship and in 
flames ! — the hurricane! — oh most dreadful! 
every soul will be lost in the main. He 
rushed into the palace stables; threw olf 
his mantle ; seized a steed and sprang on his 
back. " Follow me to the beach," said he, 
to the slaves whom he met ; " kindle lights 
upon the hills," and he darted forward, 
scoured down the heights, and in a few 
rninutes stood at the port. Several men 
were there, busily lashing tlieir little barks 
with double cabling. " Give me a boat," 
cried he, " any reward shall be yours, my 
friends, behold yonder vessel in flames, the 
people will all perish. Who will attend me 
to save a fellow man ? — haste ! — quick ! or 
all are lost!" " Sir," answered the first, 
trembling, ** the night is dreadful ; we dai'e 
not," and they drew back. " Cowards ! " 
retorted the Prince, " is my life of less 
value than yours ? Dastardly race ! oh ye 
are, 4ndeed, unlike to Britons. Away then ; 
give me the boat, I will assist them, or I 
will die in the attempt." So saying, he 

snatched 



BOOK XII. 145 

snatched the lantern from a hand, flung 
himself into a boat, tore off his armour 
and his helmet, and hanging high the lamp 
well defended by the transparent horn from 
the winds as a signal to the despairing ma- 
riners, seized an oar in either hand, and 
with all the energy of his courageous soul, 
and the perseverance of his nature, with 
daring and rapid strokes cut the foaming 
wave. 

And now, as if nature had smiled in pity 
in the magnanimity of her proudest work, 
and had been eager to relent, there sud- 
denly fell in tremendous drops the pelting 
rain, that-in a moment drenched the expos- 
ed ringlets and half-bared shoulders of the 
Prince. ** Welcome, kind drops ! extin- 
guish the scorching terrors of the poor 
hearts that vessel contains," cried Edgar ; 
" pour on, grateful floods, and let them 
be saVed,'*^ continued he, as he raised up 
an eye to the ship that he began to distin- 
guish. 

And now the winds' fury abated, three 

times had Atheling been half engulphed, 

and three times his little bark pointed 

VOL. III. H her 



146 E D G A K. 

her keel upward and recovered lier balance. 
Edgar held firm and undaunted, he feared 
not the storm — he dreaded not dea4;h. 
<* The wave,'^ said he aloud, *' shall in 
vain curl around ^nd endeavour to sweep 
me awa};, if my God protects me ; if I 
mvist now sleep in eternity, 'tis his will, and 
I submit." The confidence gave fresh 
ardour j and Atheling perceived with joy, 
that he was now within hearing of the 
vessel — he shouted. The cheer was re- 
echoed back. How sweetly did the sounds 
fall upon the ear of the Prince — his courage 
grew yet more vigorous — he brushed off 
from his brow the immense drops of heat 
that in an instant rose up again, and fell on 
his open breast ; he pushed back his drip- 
ping curls, struck the smoking oar with 
redoubled force; and now he was near 
to the ship which still reflected a vast heat j 
but the violence of the flames was lost in 
the kindly moisture. Several hands were 
busied with dreadful eagerness in pouring 
great casks of water over the deck to break 
the communication from the rigging, and 
the mast, half burned, was sawn across and 

thrown 



BOOK XII. 147 

thrown into the sea. The Prince called to 
the persons who stood by, and in various 
broken language endeavoured to make him- 
self understood. An Italian answered, 
** generous stranger, Vie have on board two 
noble travellers, take them in charge; by 
the mercy of heaven w'e shall conquer the 
flames and we ^lay be saved." — " Do not, 
Sir, run so dreadful a risk," replied Athel- 
ing, " what number have you^ on board ? " 
— " Oh, Sir, we have nearly fifty persons, 
an4 the boat we have is too small to accom- 
modate them. We wished to save our 
noble strangers^ but they declare they will 
perish with us." — " Generous souls," re- 
plied Edgar, " but here is room for half 
the company ;" — " Can your vessel hold 
twenty?"—** It can."—" Enough then j 
for see the flames rush fiercer from yoa 
side." The captain looked round and in- 
stantly gave his commands ; his boat was 
lowered — he flung himself below, roused 
some from despair, some from pious medi- 
tation. Amazement and varied joy seized 
on all. Numbers gathered on the deck j 
and whilst the labouring vessel heaved and 
H 2 bufleted 



148 EDGAR. 

buffeted with the dashing spray, every one 
grappled huge ropes and prepared with 
tottering step to slide downward. But 
there appeared amongst them, enveloped 
in dark wrappers, tw^o figures ; one of ma- 
jestic stature, the other less, the first sup- 
ported the second who lagged after him 
with a feeble step. 

Atheling unsolicitous to question, desired 
in Italian accents, other hands to steady 
the little bark ; whilst with a strong grasp 
he held cables to support the distinguished 
persons, the weaker he received in his 
strong arm, and respectfully placed on the 
bench 5 he stretched forth his hand to the 
other, who with big strides and undaunted 
action, soon swung fi^om the ship's side, 
and grasping the hand of Atheling, in 
silence put it to his breast. Atheling re- 
turned the grasp ; and instantly led him to 
the side of the other noble ; then receiving 
the remaining persons of his share, left the 
captain who was also embarked with his 
little company in the small skiff to follow. 

The Prince beaming in joy and gratitude 
to heaven, and anxious to check the tumult 

of 



BOOK XII. 149 

of grateful blanks, that echoed from the Ita- 
h'an crew, now craved their silence and aid 
to steer back the vessel to the shore. Appre- 
hension of danger urged the mariners, and 
several took an oar, whilst Edgar with all 
his strength dashed forward with deep and 
heavy strokes. The little bark low seated 
in the billows, rose up with effort, and sank 
with sudden and fearful motion. The foam 
splashed over, and deadly fear palsied every 
working hand, but that of Edgar. " Cheer 
up ! courage, friends ! " cried the hero, 
** we approach the island! — hark! — the 

^'^r\(] subsides. Exert yourselves— be brave^ 
Heaven is mercitul — we shall De savcu. 

These hopeful words buoyed up the fainting 

spirits. Again the oars played lustily. 

Again they advanced ; but on a sudden 

the rains ceased, A vast blaze curled 

affain ud ; the whole firmament was stained 

in deep vermilion. Flames rose dreadful 

from every part of the ship. The Prince 

gazed and shuddered for the remaining 

crew, but soon perceived it labouring on ; 

and though afar, yet not in danger from 

the burning wreck. " All is well ! " cried 

H 3 he. 



1^0 E D G A R. 

he, aloud to the sailors, " and to heaven 
be the praise!" a few now laughed in 
delirious joy at the rescue ; but again Athel- 
ing checked the transport, and entreating 
forbearance and patient toil, again pushed 
forward. 

The bark at length entered the haven, 
and the swelHng fury of the waves was 
checked. The lights kindled round by 
Atheling's command, now directed the 
sufferers ; and Edgar, who well knew the 
track, led up quite to the steps of the as- 
cent. In a few moments the seamen landed 

amidst the hundreds of Cypriots, collep*^^^ 
on tiie rumour ot the conflagration. Athel- 

ing advanced to raise the two strangers ; 
but one was senseless, and the other in im- 
perfect Italian, endeavoured to address the 
standers around. Atheling lifted and bore 
him in his arms ; the second noble stranger 
followed and they stepped on shore. 

Now every one crowded round the Prince 
for orders. His people and slaves, pene- 
trated with respect and wonder, at the 
grandeur of his courage, stood submissive 
to liis will. The one held his beautiful 

cpjurser •, 



BOOK xir. 151 

another presented other steeds 
from the royal stables, for the guests. The 
Prince ordered a Utter, to transport the 
sick stranger to the palace ; but he had re- 
covered, and moved a few steps towards 
him. Athehng then offered him a steed, 
and to the lesser stranger presented his 
own ; but suddenly, every one astonished 
observed, that the governor's beautiful 
courser reared up ; she pawed the ground, 
she foamed at the mouth, she struck out 
her foot to advance, and lashed her sides 
with her flowing hair. " 'Tis most strange ! 
what should this mean ?" said Edgar to the 
slave. " I know not, my lord," rephed he. 
** Let her," said Atheling, " have length 
of rein j what ails a steed, otherwise gen- 
tle as a lamb ?*' So saying, he held the 
rein slack, and in a moment the animal 
leaped forward, crouched down at the 
stranger's feet, neighed, looked up, and 
put her head submissive down to the 
ground — then knelt, and again snorted, 
kissing the mantle, and smeUing with un- 
bounded joy. The stranger put forth his 
hand. «* Whence," said he, in tremulous 
H 4f accents. 



152 EDGAR. 

accents, and in the Cypriot language, 
** whence came this animal ?" — " From 
the royal stables of Nicosia, Sir," quickly 
answered Atheling. " Philgah !" said the 
stranger ; " is it really my faithful steed ?" 
The creature, now more transported, at 
the sound of her name, put her head across 
the shoulder of her master, and closed her 
full eye upon his cheek. The stranger 
threw his arms over her swelling neck, and 
joined them ; " what, my Philgah, thou 
still lovest thy master?" said he; ** thy 
king is still dear to thee ?" and he buried 
his royal visage in her mane, and wept. 

Atheling started. The multitude fell 
back. " The King ! the King of Cyprus !" 
echoed round. " And who,'* cried Edgar 
in his native language, ** and who art 
thou ? Oh speak not, I conjure thee, be 
silent, if thou art not English-born, oh 
second stranger !" and he turned with 
trembling haste to the other noble. Asto- 
nished at the voice, unlike to any he knew, 
yet familiar with the language, the stran- 
ger replied, ** I am indeed of England, 
most generous Sir ; my name, Beauchamp, 

of 



BOOK XIU "loS 

of Warwick. And who art thou ? I might 
judge my countryman, by thy voice.". The 
Prince waited not for more ; he made a 
spring, and flung himself into the arms of 
the great Earl of Warwick, and hanging 
on his manly breast, could only say, ** I 
am Edgar Atheling." 

Beauchamp, whose natural gaiety only 
smothered, but did not extinguish the ten- 
derness of his great soul ; Beauchamp^ 
fearless of death, but whose late danger 
and deliverance had profoundly touched ;. 
Beauchamp, saved by his beloved charge, 
subdued by the noble action, and the re- 
collection of his own family, forgot his 
firm resolve ; he grasped close the sop of 
his friend ; he tried in vain to speak, not 
a word escaped. Again he strove — mois-^ 
ture started up, and gushed round his eye j 
he seized the hand of Atheling, wrung it^ 
and turned aw^ay, for in its efforts was his 
proud soul convulsed.. 

This action chilled all the blood of Ed- 
gar's frame. Dark thoughts shot across 
his mind — his cheek, before flushed in joy 
and admiration, now flitted to a ghastly 
H 5 paleness.— 



i^'^ EDGARS 

paleness — his kn^e tottered, his hands were 
clasped together; he opened his lips to 
speak, they remained severed; his voic© 
failed, and he stood motionless. The peo- 
ple near him observed with amazement, 
but immediately was Beauchamp himself; 
he approached with haste; ** Atheling,'* 
said he, with earnestness, *' art thou not 
well, what aileth thee ?" — " My lord — do 
they live — and well ?" said Edgar in a low 
murmur. " Who, the King of England ? 
he is well, my Edgar ; and the glorious 
Prince of Wales has now^ a wife and son." 
— " One word more," cried Edgar : ** Res- 
tormal — my father?" — ** He lives, and 
the Countess too. I left them well as usual 
two months since, and cheered by the hope 
of seeing thee return with me in a short 
time to thy native country ; for they have 
heard of thy being detained in the east, 
and know that thy term of banishment is 
nearly expired. They heard all from the 
Dauphin of France, to whom they wrote 
concerning thee ; for they have received 
but one of thy letters." — " Thanks, most 
kindSir," answered Atheling, with trans- 
ports 



BOOK xir. 155 

ports of joy. " Oh, most dear, most wel- 
come news ! did they give one little line to 
your care for me ?" — " The Countess,'* 
replied Beatuchamp, " sent thee a large 
packet — but 'tis there/' added he, point- 
ing to the wreck ; " yet," said he, raising 
his tone to cheerfulness, and shaking the- 
Prince heartily by the hand, " trouble not 
thyself concerning the writing; we shall 
soon, I guess, climb old Restormal ram-- 
parts, gaze on tlie waves round British 
land, and talk old times threadbare. So 
let us be thankful to heaven, and happy 
as Britons may be, away from their homes." 
Thus saying, the Earl of Warwick strode 
away to the King of Cyprus^ who had been 
questioning the persons near him of hfe 
son, his daughter, and of the stranger to 
w^hom lie was indebted for life. No sooner 
had he- learned the name, than he recol- 
lected it ; and meeting Atheling, who res- 
pectfully advanced and bowed, pressed him. 
to his heart in the warmth of honest gratr- 
tttde. 

Now the party, amidst shouts and tu- 
mults of joy, took the road to the palace. 
H. 6 The^ 



156 EDGAR. 

The King, mounted on his faithful steed, 
and weakened by exertion and late sick- 
ness, rode slowly on. The rain again fell ; 
and he commanded the crowd to retire to 
their habitations for shelter. Accustomed 
to submission, they obeyed. Beauchamp, 
Atheling, and the remaining persons fell 
back, not to outstep the monarch ; and 
Hugh de Lusignan arrived at the palace 
first, entered the gates, and stopped at the 
porch. No sooner had he rested, and pre- 
pared to alight, than a dozen guards rushed 
from the entrance, with sabres drawn, and 
seized the reins. " Yield thyself prisoner. 
Sir," said one. The King started— the 
company galloped close. " By whose 
authority ?" cried the King. " By that of 
the Prince of Cyprus ; yield, for thou art 
prisoner, and the new governor has orders 
to detain thee." — " And who is the new 
governor, I pray ye. Sirs ?" asked Hugh. 
«* Your late, minister, my lord," said one. 
The King now stepped, from his horse. 
Atheling, thunderstruck, leaped forward, 
and Warwick followed. " Lead on, and 
silence !" said he, as he observed the flash- 
ing. 



BOOK XII. 1.^7 

ing eye of the Prince, and his lip ready to 
undeceive the guards ; ^* lead on, I say." 
The soldiers, awed by the command, raised 
the tapers, opened a passage, and the mo- 
narch, closing the folds of his mantle, and 
gently motioning to Atheling to keep aloof, 
entered a vast chamber, illumined but 
faintly. At the further end was a high ca^ 
iiopy, and under it leaned, in disdainful 
listlessness, and clothed with magnificence, 
the old man who had so long feigned him- 
self ill and decrepid. The King, hiding 
his visage, advanced in the ciiamber, and 
stood ; then the new governor thus spoke : 
" You beho'd him, late your vassal, now 
your lord and master, haughty foreigner. 
I have power over you, even to life and 
death ; but the Prince of Cyprus will of 
needs see you ; and 'tis well to be relieved 
of spiUing blood, upon wearing young dig- 
nities, or else, traitor, thou shouldst die, 
for death is thy deserts. What mean those 
midnight walks of thine ? what now hast 
t'.iou been contriving, thus to rush out and 
hide thyself, when tempests roar over thy 
head ? Who art thou, to defy the power of 

elements ? 



ISS E D G A R. 

elements ? — but no — 'tis for a base purpose; 
The Prince is justly exasperated against 
thee, and to him I commit thy fate. Seize 
him, guards ; and wait with him till the^ 
dark terrors of. the night be passed, then 
to Nicosia, and so fare ye well." 

The soldiers stepped in, and lifted up 
the arm to drag aw^ay the captive. But 
Edgar could restrain no longer, and he- 
rushed to them ; *^ touch him not," cried 
he with rage and indignation ; " dare to 
raise a hand, and ye shall die ! And thou, 
traitor, most unworthy man," exclaimed 
he, looking at the terrified councillor, "be- 
hold !" and he raised the lamp, ** behoki 
the sacred head thou hast insulted." Hugh 
threw off his mantle. ** And thou, caitiff," 
said he, '* dost thou know me?" — ** The 
King 1 ye infernal powers ! then 'tis all 
over," cried the secretary, with a horrible 
smile : " no pardon — enough — be it so." 
Then he rose, drew from his side the glit- 
tering poignard, and in a moment struck 
it through his breast, and fell. Atheling, 
shuddering with horror, in vain darted to 
check, the impious hand— it had struck, and- 

tha 



BOOK xir. 159 

the man expired. Edgar endeavoured to 
raise him, and drew forth the dagger, to 
staunch the blood ; but life had flitted for 
ever, and the Prince, sick at heart, turned 
disgusted from the spectacle. ** He has 
then done himself justice,^' said the King, 
with calmness ; " soldiers, see that you 
depart by to-morrow's dawn, and report 
this news to my son. Bid him expect me 
and my friends.'* The guards prostrated 
themselves in obedience, and withdrew. 
** Let us quit this chamber, Prince," said 
Hugh, *' and crave thy hospitality." — 
** Your highness," replied Edgar, *« com- 
mands these realms, and we obey." — *< Not 
so," answered the King, " we are visitors 
here, where thou art governor ; at Nicosia 
thou shalt be guest, and ourself the host.'* 
Edgar therefore bowed, in silence ; for he 
pondered in sadness over the late event. He 
led on to the principal chamber, from, 
whence, after the repast, all retired to 
rest. 

But Atlieling in vain endeavoured to 
sleep. The surprising accidents of the even- 
ing agitated his bosom y whilst the Earl of 

Warwick, 



160 EDGAR. 

Warwick, who shared his capacious chamv 
ber from choice, was, in a moment, bu- 
ried in a profound slumber. Edgar lis- 
tened to the long drawn respiration of the 
warrior ; he raised the lamp that shed its 
little rays from a marble niche, and lean- 
ing near the simple couch of his father's 
friend, beheld him placid, calm, fearless* 
A smile relaxed the hardihood of the ve- 
teran's lip, and its dark honoiu's above and 
below, were relieved by the white line of 
ivory that just rose from under. The 
bright sword which had been wielded in 
Crescy and Poictiers, lay under his head ; 
and beside it, the triisty helmet which had 
repelled every blow. A large silken cover- 
lid of eastern fabric vvas thrown aside, and 
iyine cloak that had sheltered him in the 
ii eld, now curled in ponderous folds over 
th« warhke frame of Beau champ. " Sleep* 
on, proud bulwark of England's glory, 
most noble Warwick," cried Atheling, 
contemplating him with respect and love. 
" long may my country boast of such as 
thou ! — long may her nobles hold up t^ 
untitled headsj lofty examples of goodness, 

of 



BOOK XII. 161 

of loyalty, of bravery, of honour ; and 
long may they like as then art, be affec- 
tionate at home, magnanimous abroad, 
faithful in the cabinet, invincible in the 
field/' 

The following day the King accompa- 
nied by Edgar, rode through the city, and 
saw with pride and joy the prosperity and 
happiness of his subjects. The Prince was 
too modest to mention the changes; but 
Hugh questioned, and the answers of all, 
confirmed his suspicions. The King soon 
fatigued returned to the palace ; and Atlie- 
ling immediately made preparation to draw 
out a formal resignation of his government 
to the court of Cyprus. All the expenses, 
the public disbursements, the revenues of 
his province, the ti'easures discovered, — 
all were arranged, balanced, and signed by 
the respective persons who were concerned 
in^ or were privy to every transaction ; and 
these state papers were sealed and held 
ready for delivery. 

This important business finished, Edgar 
was most impatient for his departure, and 
ventured to press the Earl of Warwick. 

^ '* It 



1C5^ EDGAR, 

" It cannot be in the instant/' replied 
Beaucbamp, smiling; <« the King will of 
Jieeds shew us his court, — he will provide 
a vessel ; and withal I have to visit Jeru- 
salem, ere I return. Stay then here ; it 
will be w^ell, perhaps, that thou offend not 
the King, by a sudden resentment on his 
return. Of my engagement he is aware, 
'tis with the Sultan of the East." 

Edgar replied, " I respect in you, sir, 
my father, and I obey j yet — " and he 
sighed ^ " Yet," interrupted Beauchamp, 
** it seemeth hard 5 but time stands not 
still, Edgar , one month more, and we sail 
away for British land,' — and then — but thou 
shalt first see the young Prince ; the Black 
Prince has a son, named Edward, and his 
princess, the beautiful Maid of Kent, reigns 
in the heart of the grandest hero of the 
age— yes, Edgar, heaven permitting, we 
will surely touch at Bourdeaux, and see the 
dearest hopes of England." I'he blaze of 
animation that sparkled in Warwick's eye 
at the mention of this loved name, was 
instantaneously communicated to Edgar; he 
wrung delighted the hand of Beauchamp, 

and 



BOOK XII. 



163 



and joined in the sweet, the glorious praise 
of the best of princes, and the most exalted 
of men. 

The next morn tlie King was mended in 
health, and the company set forward to- 
wards Nicosia. They had not proceeded 
far, when a bund of soldiers and officers 
of state drew near, with the Prince de 
Lusignan at their head. Hugh embraced 
his son, who knelt at his feet, and com- 
manded him to rise and beg forgiveness of 
Atheling for his unworthy suspicion. 
Strong in his resentments, easily entangled 
by confidence or mistrust, Peter de Lu- 
signan with the ease of a man who sins 
and is absolved in a breath, presented his 
hand with a slight apology to Edgar, who 
coldly bent as he received it ; and Hugh 
immediately judging that all was again 
right between the Princes, embraced his 
son, and the party moved forward. 

The Earl of Warwick and Atheling left 
the King at liberty to converse with the 
Cypriot prince, whilst they rode at some 
distance, behind. The sun threw his 
fiercest rays downw^ard j and the heat in- 

creajs^d 



1 64 EDGAR. 

creased to oppression. Beauchamp lifted 
his helmet for a gasp of air, and then un- 
clasped his wide cloak, which he folded, 
and hung across the steed's neck. Edgar 
fixed his gaze towards the Earl's left arm ; 
through the joints of the coat of mail, 
was drawn in and out, and firmly tied in 
several knots, a discoloured brocade. It 
had been embroidered round the edges in 
gold, but the metal was broken and tar- 
nished. Edgar drew nearer to the Earl, 
his eye still riveted to the little remnant* 
Beauchamp turned his head suddenly for a 

reply to a question twice aekod, nnrl still 

gained no hearing. Atheling looked up, 
and the deepest carnation spread over his 
cheek. ** At what mayst thou be gazing 
so earnestly, Edgar?" said he, as he 
glanced upon his arm. " 1 was thinking, 
my lord," answered he, and he blushed 
deeper, " whether this brocade upon your 
sleeve, be not the scarf that— " — " Aye," 
interrupted Beauchamp, " my daughter, 
Julia, embroidered it nearly seven years 
since, and I preserve it for her sake. She 
is grown a sweet maid, Edgar ; hast thou 

ever 



BOOK XII. 165 

ever seen her?" " Yes, my lord/' replied 
Atheling, " I remember her a beautiful 
and lovely child, when she presented you 
with this same scarf." " What!" cried 
the Earl, whilst delight sparkled in his eye, 
" thou thinkest her a pretty maid ? " "I 
thought the lady Julia most beautiful at the 
tender age of eight years — if she is now 
only to the half as lovely as promise taught 
us, she — " Atheling stopped — for the sub- 
ject now confounded him. 

But Beau champ hastily spurred his steed ; 
then checked it — then abruptly rejoining 
Atheling : " Edgar," said he, *' my daugh- 
ter will be near to sixteen, when thou re- 
turnest to England ; I think thou hast a 
generous soul, and I will give thee my 
Julia for a wife, with a handsome portion. 
Thy father, I know, is a man of scruples; 
but I have heard him say, he should be 
glad that thou wouldst take a wife from 
among my daughters — some are already 
married, therefore, thou must make a 
choice amongst those that remain." 

Vast and powerful emotion throbbed in 
Edgar's frame at these words ; his fine 

countenance 



166 EDGAR. 

countenance varied every moment in its 
expression. Now he cast his brilliant eye 
on the earth : now lifted it audacious upon 
the Httle scarf; now he smiled full in joy 
upon the Earl, and again his long lashes 
rapidly shaded the deep carnation of hi^ 
ett\browned cheek. The Earl smiled, yet 
he seemed to wait a reply. <* If, my lord," 
at length, Atheling said, " if— your good- 
ness — " and he paused. ** If I am really 
in earnest, Edgar ? " said Beauchamp ; 
** to shew thee that I am, I will give thee 
this scarf as a pledge. Ask it of me to- 
night, thou shalt have it ; but — " conti- 
nued he, ** though I am willing, my litjLle 
daughter may not be ; and I will not re- 
strain her incHnation for she is a dutiful 
child." " That is what I would have said," 
cried Atheling with ardour, " I should not 
enjoy happiness if I caused another to 
grieve." " I believe tnee," exclaimed Beau- 
champ, " and 'tis in this belief that I offer 
thee my daughter j so ask me to-night for 
the scarf, and leave the rest to thy own 
good fortune and the lady's esteem for 
thee." 

The 



BOOK xir. 167 

The Earl of Warwick having with his 
native impetuosity of soul, broached and 
ended his business, immediately fell upon 
other subjects, and wondered that his 
young friend replied so ill to his questions, 
and made observations so ill timed. " Athel- 
ing, art thou asleep ?'^ said he. ** My 
lord,** answered the Prince, " Veiy/* 
*' Very what? I beseech you," inquired 
the Earl, " Very sultry ; did not your 
lordship say 'twas sultry ?" Beauchamp 
laughed outright. ** Come,*' said h^, ** I 
will leave thee to thy meditations, and join 
the King awhile ; I have mattei's to arrange 
with him,'* and galloped away. Atheling, 
half abashed, roused himself to converse 
with some of the gentlemen of the retinue ; 
but his eye caught the fluttering scarf up- 
on Warwick's arm, and his thoughts again 
dwelt upon the innocent and beautiful 
maid that was half his own. '' Let me 
recall," said he, softly, ** her action, when 
she presented the scarf to her father ; her 
blooming cheek was dimpled in smiles ; I 
recollect the swell of her graceful arm as 
^fee threw it over her jetty ringlets, and 

her 



1 6s EDGAR. 

her dark eye beamed underneath them up- 
on mine. I recollect full well her gliding 
step as she approached me, and whispered 
that she would make me too a scarf. A 
few years cannot have robbed her of her 
sweet smile, the beautiful tenderness of 
her eye, her winning softness, her enchant- 
ing playfulness, her angelic innocence. 
Educated by such a mother ; sprung from 
such a father as she has, the virtues of her 
mind must equal the graces of her person ; 
and thou, thou my own father, thou too 
hast even sanctioned the gift ! A whole 
month, Beauchamp I Oh England ! when 
shall I again see thee ? What obstacle now 
shall stand between thee and me? But 
what ! if she be given to another, and that 
I see her but to deplore my loss ?" 

So mused Atheling, by turns, impatient, 
fretful, fired by hope ; now anxious, doubt- 
ing, fearing, and now smiling in the mul- 
tiplied association^} of chaste and beautiful 
tertderness. " Yes/' cried he, ** I am as- 
sured that I could adore a wife. Could I 
gaze upon her angelic smile and not smo- 
ther the rising storm in my breast ? Could 

I see 



BOOK XII. 169 

I see this innocent being kneel to beg for- 
giveness of heaven for imaginary sins, and 
not fling myself upon the earth to suppli- 
cate mercy for my high misdeeds ? Could I 
behold the touching softness of her swim- 
ming eye, and withhold my sympathy and 
protection? Could I see every mild and 
heavenly virtue beaming in her soft coun- 
tenance, and glowing unboasted in all her 
actions, and not myself catch some of its 
influence ? Never. What companion so 
dear, what society so tender, what example 
so strong, what power so great as hers ! In- 
tercourse sanctioned by every tie of honour, 
of law, of virtue, of religion. Oh, may 
such happiness be mine !" 

Thus did wondrous love change in a 
moment the soul of Athehng. The power- 
ful affections, the exquisite tenderness, the 
strong enthusiasm with which nature had 
so prodigally endowed him, had now, on a 
sudden, an object. ' Virtue was not alarm- 
ed, for this object was innocence itself. 
Duty was silenced, for a parent approved. 
Honour was satisfied, for the birthright 
of Julia was princely descent, good- 

voL. III. I ness 



170 EDGAR. 

iiess and beauty. The warm affections of 
Edgar, from floating around, in search of 
some kindred ember to nourish and form 
them into consistence, were instantaneous- 
ly suspended and fixed to a centre, and a 
thousand little energies sprang from them 
and strung every motion. An arch audacity 
peeped from his eye j a ready smile sat on 
his lip J his step, when he leaped from the 
steed to walk by its side, was lighter and 
more rapid ; his speech varied ; now it 
was quick, now hesitating, now eloquent, 
but always cheerful, and even gay ; and 
his allusions, though unknown to him- 
self, had a perpetual reference to some 
happiness in prospect. A hundred little 
perversities of life, which before were tor- 
menting to human nature, he now beheld 
with indifference — he beheld and was 
amazed ; yet he sought not for the cause, 
rejoiced to feel life's current so strong, and 
its tenure so alluring. O hope ! how 
beautiful are thy visions ! what would be- 
come of mortality without the golden 
streak of thy promising finger I 

The King of Cyprus and his train en- 
tered 



BOOK XII. 171 

tered Nicosia, and proceeded, amidst the 
acclamations of the people, to the royal re- 
sidence. The Princess Berengaria was 
confined by indisposition, which obliged 
her father to visit her in her apartments. 
The King, who loved generous sports and 
magnificence, had it proclaimed, that he 
would hold tournaments, according to the 
fashion of England and France, ^^' and that 
he would bestow prizes on the best con- 
tenders at all the games known or intro- 
duced to his court ; but that he would give 
a month for preparation, and wait the 
Earl's return from Jerusalem and his daugh- 
ter's recovery, who, with her ladies and 
those of the nobles, should grace the di- 
versions with their presence. Upon the 
conditions of a speedy return only, could 
the King be prevailed on to allow of War- 
wick's departure. Then a vessel was or- 
dered to be in immediate readiness for his 
conveyance. 

Atheling saw his revered friend sail away 
with heavy regret, but he retained the pro- 
mised, the precious scarf. Jealous of every 
eye but his own, he drew the little pledge 
I 2 of 



172 EDGAR. 

of parental confidence from his breast 
when he was retired for the night, or that 
he trod an unfrequented path ; he then 
unfolded, gazed at, and held it in his 
hand, whilst pleasing images, soft delusions 
of fancy, amused and cheered the tedious 
hours of Warwick's absence. Once he 
looked even more eagerly than usual, when 
he perceived upon the border the remains 
of small letters ; they had been wrought 
in hair, and were partly effaced, but Athel- 
ing distinctly read, ** Heaven bless my 

f. ," father was intended. A smile of 

tenderness distended Edgar's lip as he read 
the words. " And heaven bless thee too, 
innocent maid," cried he ; and, as he look- 
ed upon the azure sky, he continued, — 
" How sweet are those affections, with 
which 'tis not a crime to mingle the sacred 
name of heaven ! Did I think upon her 
with less delicacy, less respect, less vene- 
ration, then I durst not look up and beg of 
heaven to bless her, even as she craved a 
blessing on her beloved father." 

But tim.e, which marches with the same 
pace for the ardent and the indifferent, at 

length 



BOOK XII. 173 

length led Atheling through the revolution 
of a moon, and to some distance beyond ; 
for the Sultan would not be denied, so de- 
lighted was he with the honour of War- 
wick's visit. He was at last persuaded, 
and having given to his English guest cost- 
ly marks of friendship, embraced, and saw 
him depart with deep regret. Edgar sprang 
with transport into Beauchamp's arm, and 
the King, who really loved him, sincerely 
rejoiced in his return ; and now all was 
bustle, preparation, joy, feasting, merri- 
ment and delight. The Princess was w'ell j 
and, with her ladies, was stationed so as 
to witness every sight to the highest ad- 
vantage. 

Fired by glory and animated by love, 
Atheling entered the lists^ and joined with 
ardour in every manly sport. Ever grace- 
ful, majestic, victorious, modest in tri- 
umphs, not an antagonist could refuse 
praise to his generosity. Not a soldier but 
spoke to his undaunted courage, and won- 
drous dexterity in arms ; not a courtier but 
was forced to allow him graceful address 
with the ladies j not a man but marvelled 
I S that 



I?'* EDGAR. 

that such strength of limb should be found 
united with such supple movement ; such 
grandeur of countenance with such mo- 
desty of demeanour ; such proud height of 
stature with such gentleness of speech. 
In a word, — that a prince endowed with as 
much virtue as grace, should seem so little 
to feel his own worth. Poor Cypriots ! they 
knew not that England's sons so much re- 
sembled Edgar in virtue, in grace, in ma- 
jesty, that the hero but felt himself as 
equal to others of his beloved country — 
country, most dear, most beautiful ; fruit- 
ful in every being, good and great ; laud 
pre-eminent in wisdom and in honour ! — 
In his love for thee, every native forgets 
all other interests — beauteous inspirer ! 
wrap an image of thyself in all my wishes, 
my hopes, my joys ; let thy praise be my 
sweetest theme, thy glory my proudest 
joy, and thy benefit the powerful motive 
to all my imperfect attempts ! 

The day, the glorious day that was fixed 
on for the departure of Atheling to his 
native shores, now arrived. His turbulent 
joy was scarcely to be concealed 5 yet from 

respect 



BOOK XTI. 175 

respect to the King who was downcast and 
silent, he endeavoured to stifle it ; but his 
sparkUng eye told a tale of eloquence. He 
kissed the extended hand of the Princess, 
who peevishly drew it away as she caught 
the lurking vivacity, which he vainly endea- 
voured to smother. Peter deLusignan, vex- 
ed to the heart with envy, had waved all in- 
timacy 5 he bowed, and offered his compli- 
ments ; Edgar returned them with equal 
indifference ; his heart was too elated to be 
hurt by trifles, but Hugh embraced Warwick 
and the Prince, and hung on the breast of 
each a cross of splendid jewels, and a ring 
of the same on both hands. Edgar affected 
by the grief and goodness of the monarch, 
knelt respectfully before him, and taking his 
hand, poured forth from his warm heart, 
every noble sentiment of gratitude and 
regard. The King raised and embraced 
him, again pressed the hand of Warwick, 
and left the apartment. The Britons, much 
affected, then mounted the car, and were 
swiftly conveyed to the port ; there they 
embarked, the wind blew fair, the anchor 
I 4 was 



17^ EDGAR. 

was raised, and the island of Cyprus was 
soon but as a speck in the vast ocean. 

Edgar could scarcely credit his felicity. 
" Oh, may I never grow proud in prospe- 
rity !" cried he, " yet my heart beats 
already high ; already, methinks, I could 
forget all my adversity ; let me gaze upon 
yon coast, still visible, and call over all 
tlie trials of my government in Paphos, all 
my endurance in other climes, and then 
surely these unruly transports will pass 
away.*' So reasoned Atheling ; and as he 
had been taught that entire idleness is the 
most inveterate foe to virtue, he constantly 
sought employment. Books there were 
none he could understand, for the vessel 
was bound for the Tagus, laden with eas- 
tern merchandize, and the company of it 
were chiefly Lusitanians, and the comman- 
der himself was an unlettered man and not 
fond of society. The Prince sometimes 
paced the deck with Beauchamp, and seized 
moments to inquire concerning relations, 
his country, and the long-lost de Chfford ; 
but Beauchamp was soon fatigued with 

talk, 



BOOK XII. 177 

talk, and Edgar instantly desisted; then 
the Earl had sometimes recourse to two odd 
volumes, which he kept in his doublet, 
the one part of Guy of Warwick's famed 
achievements, the other, the Commenta- 
ries of Caesar, and these were the only 
readino^ he took from his own castle. Ed- 
gar had perused both many times, yet he 
requested permission to read again ; then 
he craved leave to work the vessel, and 
during eight hours every day, he performed 
tlie regular duties of a seaman. Labour 
finished, he sprang upon his mattrass at 
night, and rejoiced in the reflection, that 
tiine was not given him in vain j his sleep 
was sweet, for it was the reward of exercise 
and temperance. " My father has taught 
me,'' said he, " that no man lives for him- 
self alone, consequently, he must have 
some employment ; nay, the very brutes 
help one another, and some of them spare 
ro pains for the good of the community. 
Shall man then be more selfish than a crea- 
ture without a soul ? — a bee, an ant, or the 
beaver ? — besides, do not I discover in 
profound idleness, a perpetual inclination 
1 5 towards 



178 EDGAR. 

towslrds foolish, intoxicating, dangerous 
thoughts? The fancy, long unrestrained, 
will be rebellious, and, alas ! what shall be- 
come of man, when his reason pines under 
the tyranny of ungoverned imagination I'* 

The voyage was tedious, and even Beau- 
champ began to complain. Atheling now 
soothed him, and led him to converse upon 
his beloved theme — the Monarch and Prince 
of England. ^* Do, my lord," continued 
he, with mild persuasion, " do, my lord, re- 
late to me concerning Edward's marriage, the 
birth of his son, the fate of John de Valois 
of France, all in regularity. You have but 
given me the events of several years by 
morsels — for once, dear my lord. I too 
love my King and my Prince, though my 
arm have not been like as thine has, lifted 
in all their battles by sea and land ; though 
my blood have not flowed like thine in de- 
fending their sacred rights and person ; 
though time have not planted me by a great 
monarch, and suffered me to grow, to blos- 
som, to rise up for his comfort, his pride, 
his stay, his glory— like as thou art. Yet, 
most noble Warwick, does my heart beatwith 

emulation 



BOOK XII. 179 

emulation of thy greatness and proud fide- 
lity. Tell me then of my King, my coun- 
try, and my Prince." Beauchamp cared 
not to shew how deeply he felt the ardent 
and generous homage of his young friend ; 
yet he forbore not to return the grasp of 
Atheling's hand, and with a half smile, 
said, " Why, Edgar, what wouldst thou of 
a soldier ? I understand not making his- 
tories ; however, to please thee, and to 
relieve the unvaried scenes around us, I 
will try ; but where begin ?" — " From the 
captivity of John of Finance," cried Edgar. 
*< What !" returned the Earl, " dost thou 
not know that the great Prince of Wales 
exhausted every means to induce the mo- 
narch to forget captivity ? — that he himself 
served, and gave him respect, friendship, 
and even veneration ? — that when he had 
done all he could do to hasten the treaty, 
and release de Valois, and when he was 
obliged to conduct him to England and to 
London, that he entered this metropolis, 
where a whole mass of people, mad with 
exultation, with transport, adorned their 
1 6 dwellings 



180 EDGAR, 

dwellings and windows with all theirriches?* 
— that the noble Prince fell back upon a 
small black palfrey, and sent forward his 
prisoner, who was mounted on a fiery white 
courser, richly caparisoned, in token of his 
sovereignty ? Thou noble, thou gracious, 
thou magnanimous Prince ! what tender- 
ness, what friendship, what modest zeal, 
hadst thou towards thy captive ! A whole 
people, the most generous upon earth, stood 
astonished in thy grandeur of soul. And 
when John was released and sent home, 
and that a peace was sworn to by all the 
nobles of both courts, upon the holy sacra- 
mentt itself, then the great Edward accom- 
panied his friend, and offered his services, 
not like a great conqueror, but as the most 
modest, as he is the most glorious of men." 
— " And," interrupted Atheling, " is John 
vmgrateful ?*' — *' No," said Beau champ, 
*' John has much generosity of soul ; but 
his son Charles the Regent, who was led by 
the wicked Charles of Navarre, objected 
to the terms of peace, and sent back the 

com- 

« Collyas's Life of the BlacU Prince. f Ibid.. 



BOOK XII. 181 

commissioners ; then John cried out, ' Ah, 
son Charles! you are led by the King of 
Navarre, who is too cunning for twenty 
such as you are!'* and Edward, greatly 
enraged, replied, * Ah, sir, your subjects, 
much against my will, force me to war/ 
Hereupon, immense preparations were made, 
and the English army entered France, car- 
rying victory in eve^ step of its progress. 
The King of England was crowned at 
Rheims ; and the French, at length hum- 
bled, sued for peace, which Edward, just- 
ly exasperated, for a time refused, but on 
a most dreadful sign of heaven's displeasure 
at this resolution, he resisted no longer, 
and France was saved." 

Beauchamp's voice faltered, and he stop- 
ped. Atheling remarked not the struggle, 
and incautiously said, " how% Sir, did the 
wrath appear ?" The Earl collected his 
firmness, and continued : ** in the most 
dreadful storm that ever raged — wind — 
hailstones — rain — lightning — thunder. Six 
thousand t horses perished in it, and near 

to 

« Collins. t Ibid. 



182 EDGAR. 

to one thousand men — and, alas ! my brave 
Guy, my eldest son, was of the number." 

Atheling was distressed that he had 
urged the subject, and he stood silent. 
Beauchamp was thoughtful an instant, and 
then forcing a sniile, and smothering the 
rising sigh, he went on : " then the peace 
was signed upon the holy sacrament. But 
I fear for Charles the Regent, for he lis- 
tened again, and was governed by the worst 
of men, the King of Navarre." Atheling 
burned with indignation at the mention of 
his name. " And is the lady Isabella," 
said Edgar with timidity, " is she still in 
Paris ?" — ** She is given in marriage to 
John de Visconti, for twenty thousand 
crowns. Atheling," cried the Earl sud- 
denly, " I can tell thee no more — I under- 
stand not the relating of events : thou shalt 
soon know all, when we arrive at Bour- 
deaux, where the most valiant Prince of 
Wales holds his brilliant court, together 
with his charming Princess, the beautiful 
Jane of Kent." 

Edgar inquired no further, but thanked 
his friend with warmth for his compliance. 

Now, 



BOOK xir. 183 

Now, to the delight of the two nobles, 
the vessel steered by the pillars of Hercules, 
and doubling the last point of land, rushed 
into the Atlantic. In a few days it gained 
the Tagus, and steering between its shoals, 
entered the rolling waters ; passed the 
bulky Moor's Fort, cut onward, and flung 
down the anchor in the vast basin of the 
city. The high quality of the strangers 
soon spread, and the Prince of Lusitania, 
attended by his train, advanced to welcome 
the English nobles to his country ; but 
they, anxious to depart, petitioned for a 
vessel to carry them to Bourdeaux. Dur- 
ing several days, that one was fitting, the 
son of the Prince of Lusitania became so 
ardently attached to the valiant Britons, 
that he resolved, if he might, to accompany 
them even to England. Beauchamp was 
pleased with the royal youth, and willingly 
took upon him the honour of the charge.* 
" He hath not received baptism, please ye, 
my lord," said the Lusitanian father, " and 
raethinks I should love thy name." — ** He 

shall 

• Collius's Life of the Black Prince. 



184 EDGAR. 

shall then be Thomas," cried Warwick j 
*' and I will answer for him,t at the font 
of St. Peter's Abbey, at Westminster, 
please heaven I live to see that venerable 
church again." Thus was the matter ar- 
ranged ; and when the vessel was ready, 
the Earl of Warwick, the lord Edgar Athe- 
ling, and the young Prince of Lusitania 
set sail for Bourdeaux. 

The throbbing breast of Edgar tried to 
burst his corselet, as the ship ploughed the 
deep waves of Biscay. Now a tide of blood 
rushed to his cheek, as he strained his sight 
to catch the first shadow of land ; for that 
land was the possession of England ; it 
contained England's subjects; it boasted 
Enghsh valour ; it gloried in the precious 
trust of England's dading hope, its beloved 
treasure, the magnanimous son of her lofty 
monarch, the virtuous Prince of Wales. 
Atheling spoke not, he scarce tasted food ; 
he rose up — he walked — then again threw 
himself upon a bench, determined to wait 
with patience for the signal 5 and then, 

upon 

• Collins. 



BOOK XII. 185 

upon a whisper — a word — he started up 
the tackle and ropes : and with a trembling 
agitation, yet silent, looked and strained 
his vision, till night quite obscured all 
prospect. At length, overpowered by ex- 
ertion and vigils, he fell into a profound 
sleep. " Land !" cried the commander to 
Beauchamp, for he saw faint lights of the 
beacons. " Most joyful news !" replied 
Beauchamp ; " yet waken not my lord 
Atheling, Sirs, I charge ye, lest he gain 
no more sleep this night ; for the city of 
Bourdeaux is yet far distant, and no wind 
stirs to favour us." 

The unconscious Edgar wakened not 
during eight hours. He started upw^ard — 
when lo ! the glorious sun had just begun 
to gild the palaces of man : and he saw, 
amazed and wild with joy, that the sails 
were filled, and drove on the ship with ra- 
pidity down the Garonne. " Can it be, 
dear my lord ?" cried Atheling, as he 
grasped his hand — *' is it a dream ? are we 
in truth so near?" — " Aye, Edgar," an- 
swered the Earl, " 'tis in truth Bourdeaux 5 
and I guess we may soon pay our homage 



186 EDGAR. 

to Prince Edward, as he is an early riser, 
and 'twill be pleasant news, I judge, to give 
him, for he is a most gracious prince to- 
wards his subjects." — ** Yes, it is indeed !" 
said Atheling : ^* yon trees I remember — 
the slope — the valley — the rising hills be- 
yond — oh heaven, thou art too good ! my 
joy is too strong ! Now to see my Prince — 
then my friends, my country, in a few days 
— 'tis too strong !" 

The vessel was anchored. Beauchamp, 
talkative and laughing, flung into a bark ; 
Edgar, pale and silent, followed. They 
land — they approach the palace— they are 
admitted — the Black Prince hastens to meet 
them — they kneel before him — he presses 
them both with ardour to his generous 
breast — pours forth to his faithful servants 
the warmest praise, and then himself leads 
on to splendid apartments, where his guests 
may refresh after the toils of the voyage ; 
invites them to come afterwards to his 
table, and then hastens to his Princess with 
the joyful tidings. 

The Earl of Warwick, charmed by the 
sight of the great Edward, and proud in 

his 



BOOK xir. 187 

his reception, gave loose to his pleasure, 
and talked with rapidity, and recounted 
the exploits of England's heir. Atheling, 
as a man who had exhausted the powers of 
nature, drew his respiration with labour ; 
gasping, he opened the casement, and 
loosened his armour. Beauchamp noticed 
him not, but paced in his own chamber, 
to and from that in which Edgar sat. 
** Prithee hasten, Atheling," said he, ** or 
we shall not be prepared for the repast.'* 
Edgar immediately began the ablutions ; 
and when ready, attended his friend to the 
saloon. 

There sat, in a blaze of beauty, the 
Princess of Wales, and in her arms the 
young child, Edward, her first-born son."* 
Near her was her noble consort, who led 
the guests forward, and presented them as 
they bent the knee ; when with sweet kind- 
ness she bade them welcome, and inquired 
concerning their travels, as she placed into 
their arms her infant son. Both nobles 
kissed the hand of the royal child, and 
Warwick then craved leave to present the 
young Prince of Lusitania, 

The 



188 EDGAR. 

The son of Mercia spoke little ; but the 
great Prince and his beautiful bride were 
pleased with his sparkling eye, his loyal 
devotedness, and profound and affectionate 
respect. They read in his ingenuous fea- 
tures that modesty, joy, gratitude, and love, 
only restrained his flow of words ; and by 
a sweet and touching attention and ques- 
tions, they encouraged him to conversa- 
tion. But Edgar was still as a man con- 
founded ; his food lay untouched before 
him, and vast oppression leaned over his 
forehead. In vain he tried to conquer, to 
rally, to avert, to subdue j a deathly pale- 
ness crept over his features, and he raised 
his hand to his head. The Princess first 
observed, and whispered to Edward. The 
Black Prince instantly rose, and approach- 
ed him ; " try the air, cousin, and take 
our arm — you suffer from the vessel's con- 
finement.*' — ** Your highness is too — -too 
condescending, too gracious," said Edgar ; 
and Edward, beholding his distress, called 
to a knight just by, and gave him in charge. 
Atheling reeled forward, and descending a 
few steps, sat on the staircase, and felt re- 
vived 



BOOK XII. 189 

vived by the fresh air, which blew sharply. 
A message was presently sent, to inquire 
of his health, from the Prince of Wales ; 
and Edward next came himself, and 
finding Athehng rather mended, gave 
him to his gentlemen, and hurried away 
with important advices to the council. Ed- 
gar thanked the knight for his kind cares, 
and was staggering away, when a messen- 
ger ran in haste, and loudly whispered, 
" the Lord de Clifford will of needs see 
you this morning." — " Is he then worse ?" 
said the knight aloud. " No, Sir," replied 
the messenger; " but he is very urgent, 
and will not be denied." — *' 'Tis most un- 
lucky," answered the knight, ** for my 
Prince hath charged me to remain in the 
palace the whole day, to wait an errand of 
importance. What should be done ? In 
truth, my lord is to blame, and I will con- 
ceal the matter no longer, for his highness 
will rebuke me, if any harm happen." 

Atheling seized a balustrade, and with a 
violent effort, said "what name?" — ** De 
Chffbrd--the Lord de Clifford," said the 
knight j "he is two miles beyond Bour- 

deaux, 



190 EDGAR, 

deaux, in a mean cot ; and though he is 
ahnost sick to death, yet he will not permit 
me to mention to my lord, the Prince, and 
I fear he will die/' — " Tell him," said the 
knight, turning to the man, *< that I will 
send for his commands ; and if it be possi- 
ble, I will myself see him before midnight.'* 
The man was retreating, but Atheling sud- 
denly burst his silence ; wildness glared in 
his eye, and he said, " wait ! I will go 
with thee." The man astonished, bowed 
and stood. Atheling in a moment rushed 
up the stairs, met Warwick in breathless 
emotion, mentioned de Clifford — and the 
word death — and cried, " tell the Prince." 
— " Yes, yes," answered Warwick, ** the 
Prince will excuse thee — I trust report may 
exaggerate when it asserts this brave cap- 
tain to be so ill. His highness surely knows 
not of the matter." Atheling heard not 
the answer, he had rushed down to the 
porch, and commanded the messenger to 
set forward ; he spoke not, but strode with 
phrenzied movement by the man, who in 
amazement ran by his side to measure steps 
with him. They passed the suburbs — en- 
tered 



BOOK XII. 191 

tered the fields — crossed a narrow path— 
the man pointed to a small habitation. 
Edgar sprang to it — drove up the latch- 
looked round — no one was there — a room 
was beyond — he passed to it and opened the 
door — he gazed. 

Upon a mattrass on the ground, with 
poor but cleanly coverings, lay stretched 
the figure of a man, pale, wan, emaciated; 
his hollow eyes were closed — but the sud- 
den entrance of the visitor opened them. 
Atheling gazed — " de CHfFord ! — most dear 
de Clifford ! " he uttered and dropped sense- 
less upon the earth. 

The sick man started up at the sound of 
the voice he loved ; but he could not sup- 
port the agitation of his exhausted frame, 
and he sank again on his pillow. Atheling 
strong and in the bloom of life, immediately 
recovered j stopped for an instant to smooth 
the current of his thoughts, and rush- 
ing to the bed, seized the hand of his 
friend, pressed it in his own, and then kind 
nature relieved his oppressed heart, and he 
spoke—" oh de Clifford, what has ailed 
thee — why art thou here ? Why, after so 

long 



19^ EDGAR. 

long an absence, do I thus meet thee 
estranged from thy prince ? Oh ! say what 
is thy illness — speak, that we may minister 
to thy wants — whence camest thou? Oh 
ever dear, my friend, speak ; and let me 
send for aid." 

De CUfFord pressed the hand that held his 
to his parched lip — then dropped it, raised 
the coverlid, and hid his visage. " Dear, 
my lord," said Atheling, «« wilt thou not 
speak to me ? Recollect, de Clifford — 'tis 
Edgar Atheling, thy once loved friend— 
speak then and tell him all thy grief — he 
has a heart to share it with thee, and an arm 
to punish, if any have wronged thee." 

" Oh, Atheling, cease so kindly to 
speak to me," cried de Clifford ; " if I re- 
collect thee ? Oh heavens 1 noble and 
magnanimous friend — if I recollect thee, 
my preserver ! " — " Cease those words — so 
to talk," interrupted Edgar, mournfully, 
*< if thou knowest I love thee, tell me only 
of thy illness, that we may hope and save 
thee." 

De Clifford raised himself up and for a 
moment leaned on his arm j then looking 

in 



BOOK XII. 19^ 

in the face of his friend, said, speaking low, 
*' 'tis too late — I must die — in the full 
prime of manhood ; and leave this world, 
and thee Atheling, behind. I have peti-^ 
tioned for mercy on my sins, and they are 
many ; I have seen the minister, and have 
joined in the last communion — and I now 
resign myself, with trembling hope, to 
another world ; but, oh Edgar ! 'tis a fear- 
ful passage to pass — 'tis so dreary when 
one approaches by slow, lingering, doubt- 
ing steps ! — in the field of battle 'tis sud- 
den, unthought of; but from the bed of 
sickness, ah awful contemplation." Edgar 
grasped his trembling hand j " tell me," said 
he, with a faltering voice, " tell me thy 
malady, and despond not — all may yet be 
well." 

" Ah no ; for Atheling I die by poison." 
" By poison!" cried Atheling with horror.. 
" Oh dreadful ! " de Clifford continued— 
*' it has been ravaging my frame, during 
more than two years— all that medicine can 
do, has been tried— I have languished long 
and suffered — what tortures, oh my soul! 
— agony has gnawed my vitals by .day and . 

VOL. in. K ^ . ; hy 



194 EDGAR. 

by night — my very bones pierce tli^ir 
shrivelled covering— my breast is hollow— 
last evening I was speechless — to-day I am 
a little revived — but now — thy presence, 
my Athehng say, didst thou recol- 
lect immediately all the remains that tor- 
ture has left of de Clifford ? *' 

Edgar could not reply— and his friend 
proceeded. ** I am rejoiced to see thee, 
and yet the grief of thy kind heart pains me, 
Atheling ; but I wish thee to hear my sad 
story— 'tis short; besides, my family will 
look to thee for my last moments ! Yes, I 
will speak; for 'th sweet to cast one's 
errors and sins before an ear that listens 
kindly ; and a tongue that will not magnify 
when it repeats again ! Listen, Atheling — 
joyful I am to be blessed with thee — to none 
other would I relate the unhappy narra- 
tion. 

*« Thou knowest the violient passions 
which nature gave me. These should have 
beiBti regulated, not extirpated, in infancy 
— but alas ! they were cherished in me till 
thiey mastered reason. I have heard my 
mother blame thine for neglecting thy 

study, 



BOOK XII. 195 

Study, and thinking only of thy disposition in 
early life ; but oh ! that mine had so acted by 
me ! I was taught in the earliest years from 
books and masters various matters that have 
never benefitted me ; whilst the culture of 
reason was neglected. Skilled in manly 
exercise, with much superficial knowledge, 
I rushed to the army of my King bold, 
fierce, undaunted, headstrong, furious in 
every passion, I returned from Crescy — 
was caressed at court — my mother exulted 
in me ; but growing up to man's estate, 
my violence broke around in a hundred 
injurious ways. Opposition drove me wild, 
whilst intemperance of various kinds irri- 
tated my vassals against me. One old man 
boldly remonstrated with me for assailing 
him in his parental interests — exasperated, 
I threw a shield at his arm and crushed it. 
In an agony of distress, I knelt for his for- 
giveness — he spurned me away — I snatched 
as much massive family plate as I could 
bear, and ran to his house with it as a com- 
pensation — ^he sent it back ; touched to 
the heart, I know not what step I might 
have taken, had I not been guarded by my 
K 2 mother. 



196 E^GAR. 

mother. Some time after this, I saw thee— I 
was struck with thy modest demeanour and 
the reason apparent in all thy actions. No, 
Atheling ; I will not pain thee by hinting 
at thy noble perfections — I loved — I feared 
— I esteemed thee — I wished to resemble 
thee — but I must hasten — my time is short. 

" Through my impetuosity, thou wast 
nearly ruined with thy father — how deep 
sank thy generous conduct in my breast ! 
we arrived in this city — I endeavoured to 
imitate thy temperate life — for sometime I 
succeeded j for I dreaded thy disdain. We 
fought at Poictiers — I, by my mad zeal 
was carried too far, and taken prisoner — I 
was dying and thou with generosity, never to 
be enough extolled, gave thyself into capti- 
vity to save me, though thou so well 
knewest thou should st be debarred from 
seeing thy beloved family." 

" 'Tis false! de Clifford," interrupted 
Atheling, with eager agitation, " 'tis false ; 
I knew not of it. I guessed I should be 
immediately ransomed — there was no merit. 
Oh, de Clifford, do not pain me thus by 
praise undeserved which my soul abhors !" 

** Ever 



BOOK XII. 197 

** Ever consistent, ever noble, ever the 
same ! oh that I had earHer known and 
made thee my model ! '* returned the 
friend ; " be not angry, Edgar ; they are 
ray last words ; a dyhig man hath no need 
to flatter." 

** Saved by thee, I was transported to 
the army — the wound in my head took 
much time to heal. I was not recovered, 
when the kind Prince orfered the few sick 
of his army to be conveyed by gentle 
stages to Bourdeaux, that we might want 
for nothing — the wound affected my senses 
— all seemed stupified within my head — 
still at intervals, I called loudly and fu- 
riously for thee — my attendants dared not 
tell me of thy sacrifice, lest I should have 
been raging mad — I called upon thee — I 
abused thee — but at length I recovered, 
the whole was revealed — I would have 
rushed to Paris — but Edward heard of my 
mad conduct, and commanded me to 
England upon a mission to the court. 
Edward with kind complacence, reasoned 
with me upon the little utility of such a 
rashness ; he declared that both he and 
K 3 his 



198 EDGAR. 

his royal father had resolved to me every 
means, and to offer the largest ransom to 
regain so brave a warrior, and so loved a 
peer. I listened softened by the assurance, 
and Edward himself went with me to the 
vessel — I embarked for England. Again 
all my passions rose^again I plunged into 
excess — alas ! Edgar, thine influence grew 
weaker ; — but again I was roused — Chau- 
cer, the venerable poet, was employed in 
an embassage to Venice ; — it was declared 
that I should accompany him as colleague ; 
I parted with my lovely bride — I sailed 
away — oh heaven 1 " 

" Stop — stop — I conjure thee,*' said 
Atheling, with trembling haste, as the talc 
drew deeper, — " Oh, de Clifford, thou wilt 
be exhausted ; — agitate not thus thyself 
by reproaches.'*—** Yes — 'twill be soon 
over ; " interrupted the sick friend — ** and 
what a lesson will my sad story present ! — 
but listen-— we arrived in Venice, I was 
gay, wild, thoughtless — oh for breath and 
words ! — I mixed in all companies. In a 
palace near me, lived a noble Venetian, 
who had married an Egyptian lady. She 

was 



BOOK XII. 199 

^yas — oh what colours shall I draw her in ! 
— she had an eye brilliant as light, and 
black as ebony — her dark tresses — but 
enough — 'tis all over. I forgive her — the 
husband was ill and confined — the lady — 
death snatched away the Venetian. She 
offered me her hand — I acknowledged my 
marriage — she dissembled — I drank uncon- 
scious the deadly draught — Nourrayah was 
revenged, and she fled. Oh 'twas a horri- 
ble story ! — it rouses up my blood — my 
brain — feel how it burns — my head — what 
dizziness ! — hush — be calm, thou throb — 
oh for mercy — and forgiveness — -Atheling, 
by our friendship — remember me in thy 



The cold blooded lip of Atheling qui- 
vered back the word, Nourrayah — it was 
not heard — he put his clenched hand to his 
temples — his brain too whirled around ; — 
his ear rang ; now and then a scream burst 
round it j — the arteries throbbed ; — a film 
covered his eye — his knee struck the other 
— a cold damp gathered round him, — and 
all was silence — deep — vast — awful — pro- 
found, for it was the stillness of death. 
K 4 A soul 



SOO EDGAR. 

A soul had just passed away, and Nature 
watched its exit.. — O tremendous crash! 
which separates life from death! — how 
short the step ! — 'tis passed in a moment. 
Earth recedes — Eternity begins — begins, 
never, never to end ! 

Stillness sat in the chamber of death, 
when the door turned on its hinge, and the 
venerable priest clad in dark robes, with 
noiseless movement stood by the bed ; his 
arms were folded across his breast — his 
devout look was bent to the ground — he 
perceived the speechless agony of Athe- 
ling, and judged him to be the friend of 
whom the penitent had often spoken. He 
stood — but no sound was heard — he raised 
his eye and saw that de Cliiford was a 
corpse. At this sight he bowed low ; lift- 
ed the small crucifix, and kneeling down, 
touched the forehead of the dead — the 
embers of life's flame still glowed — " his 
soul yet lingers near its late habitation ; '' 
said he, " in a low voice, let us cheer its * 
passage to realms of eternity." Then in 
a solemn and devout posture he began : 
" Arise ! soul of repentant man ! arise ! 

leave 



BOOK XII. 201 

leave this bed of dross and misery, leave 
this frame of sorrow, of suffering, of guilt j 
arise, and prepare to meet the Redeemer 
of the world. Prepare with humble hope ; 
for he has witnessed thy deep sorrow, thy 
long contrition, thine agonizing chastise- 
ment, and He will have mercy. 

*' Arise ! oh enfranchised soul and flee 
away. Thou quittest with the image of 
man, the dominion of sin — thou leavest 
the fragile and vain honours of a mortal 
world, for glory never-ending — thy exist- 
ence here has been but short ; but where 
thou art fleeing to, thou shalt find life ever- 
lasting. 

" Arise, with trembling hope, oh man of 
guilt, but sinner repentant ! If thy glory 
be not so bright as the righteous man^s 
shall be, yet, let us humbly trust, thy tears, 
thy prayers, thy supplications, have not been 
rejected, and that bliss may be thine, al- 
though not the highest — for as the cheru- 
bim excel the angels, so we humbly trust 
the guilty who forsakes his path, and is 
sincerely penitent, may be allowed to rise, 
and may be accepted. 

K 5 «« Ansel 



20^ EDGAR. 

** Arise 1 and flee away, soul of mortal 
man ! the struggle of death is passed by, 
and life is now to thee as a dream. Where 
are now the hot passions that fired thy 
breast ? — where the enjoyments for which 
thou couldst almost barter heaven ? — where 
thy mad hopes ? — thy wild desires ? Oh 
what avail thee now all thy pleasures — all 
thy triumphs ? — all that remains is a frame 
of dust, which corruption is, even now, 
standing near to call her own — the worm 
is gaping to embrace thee, and the cold, 
cold earth is opening to hug thee to primi- 
tive dust. 

" Arise, then, and mount to a throne of 
mercy ; cast thyself before it, and mayst 
thou be admitted — and, oh purified soul ! 
when thou art received into mansions of 
bliss, earnestly join in supplication for us, 
who are yet clogged with sin and morta- 
lity ; and if it be possible, intercede in thy 
beatitude ; that so in the last dreadful mo- 
ment, when nature starts, and death draws 
his cold hand over our brows, we too, and 
all mankind, may be strengthened by hope, 

and 



BOOK XIT. 203 

and cheered in the prospect of pardon, 
mercy, and acceptance." 

The minister ceased. Atheling had start- 
ed up on the first words ; and beholding 
his friend was no more, fell prostrate by 
the holy man, and with clasped hands and 
swimming eyes, listened to the solemn ad- 
dress to the dead. Both remained long in 
silent prayer. At length, Edgar bending 
low, and with eye cast downward, said, — ■ 
" Oh, reverend father, by the side of this 
corpse, this corpse once so dear, listen to 
my avowal — hear what a Providence hath 
done for me — listen, and teach me how to 
praise my God that I am saved — that I did 
not suffer and be now like him — like thee> 
my beloved de Clifford. Oh listen ; — for 
one temptation hath assaulted us both." 

The priest humbly bent with his arms 
again folded on his breast, as he heard the 
rapid and self-accusing story of Atheling's 
departure from home to his residence in 
Egypt. He wailed till the full and artless 
confession was ended, and then the hoary- 
headed man slowly replied : 
" Thy life* oh my son, seemeth as one 
K 6 perpetuated 



^04 EDGAR. 

perpetuated link in the great chain of Pro- 
vidence. Let us not with impious confi- 
dence presume to suppose, that the mere 
trifling circumstances of day and day are 
directed or ordered by Supreme Wisdom, 
but the grand, the leading design and 
events seem to be intended to give know- 
ledge for everlasting benefit, and to try to 
their foundation, and to add force to, the 
principles of man. 

" Hadst thou been destitute of princi- 
ple, hadst thou not had some foundation, 
thou wouldst surely have fallen in some of 
thy trials ; I mean not to insinuate that 
thou art perfect even as faulty man may be; 
I, sinner as I am, with one foot reeling in 
the tomb, and leaning over the bed of 
death, should I utter falsehoods when the 
young and the heedless seek assistance ? 
Should I presume to mislead ? No, my 
son ; I perceive in all thy movement, in all 
thy words, that in violence and strength 
of passions, thou art born equal to this thy 
faded friend. But blessings on the hand 
that trained thee ; but for the strong, the 
deep sense of duty to God and man, which 

the 



BOOK Xll. 20 ^ 

the parent or guardian of thine infancy 
and youth, must have instilled into thee, 
but for these,- thine excess had been as 
great, thy punishment perhaps deeper than 
his whom \ve now deplore. Impetuous and 
ardent, thy wanderings, thy crosses^ thine 
exile, have taught thee patience ; thy es- 
cape at last, from every peril, has taught 
thee, that all is possible with Him who 
directs the universe ; thy mad joy, which 
almost deprived thee of reason, has re- 
ceived a sudden check, to shew thee, that 
violent, ungovernable, intemperate happi- 
ness is not for man ; and finally, by this 
awful spectacle, thou art seemed to have 
been, as it were, waited for, to shew thee 
that end at which all must arrive at last, 
and to caution thee against any life but 
such as will secure thee from the cutting, 
dreadful reproaches of a bed of death. All 
the experience of thy life, seems directed 
to the quelling of thy passions. Oh, my 
son, my son, be wise \ thou knowest thy 
duty, thou hast been well taught. Trebly 
dreadful the guilt of him, remember, who 
acts wrong, and yet has a full knowledge of 

what 



W6 EDGAR. 

what is right; the Scriptures tell us that 
where much is given, much shall be re- 
quired ; if thou art blessed with good know- 
ledge apply it well, restrain thy passions ; 
be true to thy Maker, and live in honest 
fellowship with man ; be active, be faith- 
ful, be humble, be grateful ; so may hea- 
ven bless thee, my son, even as it hath 
already done, and so m.ayst thou taste the 
true, the only joy, reserved for man, the 
joy of a well-spent life, and a conscience 
without stain or reproach." 

The venerable man placed his withered 
hands on the head of Edgar, who pro- 
foundly affected and humbled to the earth 
in his own estimation, and the wondrous 
goodness of Providence, hardly dared to 
breathe, lest he should lose a word of the 
solemn warning of piety and virtue ; but 
the voice ceased ; and Athelirig, without 
daring to lift ?.n eye, respectfully took the 
hand that was not yet unstrung from the 
fervour of devotion, and pressed it with 
gratitude and tenderness between his own. 
The minister read the emotion which found 
110 words for expression j he returned the 

pressure 



BOOK XII. 207 

pressure still more affectionately ; whilst 
his countenance resumed its mild serenity. 

Atheling then fixed his lamenting gaze 
upon his departed friend — he feared to in- 
dulge a grief, yet it again swelled in his 
tender breast, and he averted his head to 
conceal it. ** Mistake me not, my son," 
said the observing priest, *' in checking the 
violence of passions, religion never intends 
us to arm our bosoms with apathy and cold 
indifference to the sweet feelings of huma- 
nity. Thou hast loved the soul which in- 
habited this clay ; ^tis natural that thou 
shouldst feel, and feel with anguish, the 
separation. Indulge a sorrow which is be- 
coming to man ; which humbles his pride, 
instructs his piety, and confirms his good 
resolutions. I will assist thee to perform 
the last offices, to bind up this drooping 
head which beats no more, to close the 
dim eye ; to stretch side by side the:e stiff- 
ning hands, and to smoothe these perished 
limbs. Thou shalt watch by the dead, 
whilst I hasten to prepare the vault, and 
let loose the deep vibration of the passing 
belL" 

Edgar 



g08 EDGAR. 

Edgar made no reply, and the kind mi- 
nister, accustomed to the melancholy du- 
ties of death, with tender delicacy and 
silent respect, prepared the corpse for its 
last and narrow habitation. Atheling too 
assisted, but he leaned from time to time 
on the wail, to hide his affliction, and re- 
lieve his aching heart. And now with 
soft tread, the minister was about to de- 
part, when the Earl of Warwick, accom- 
panied by tlie knight, suddenly appeared. 
They caught a sight of the corpse, and 
started back : the priest advanced to meet 
them, and relate what he deemed necessary 
to unfold, and with gentleness closed the 
chamber in which Atheling, unconscious of 
any footstep near, sat drooping by the 
dead. 

Beauchamp heard with sorrow the mourn- 
ful news of the warrior whom he had es- 
teemed and admired ; he respected the grief 
of Atheling, and silently measured back 
his steps to the palace. 

The tidings met Edward's ear; he grieved 
for a faithful subject and a valiant knight, 
and commanded that if it were not the 

wish 



BOOK XII. 209 

wish of the deceased to have a private bu- 
rial, that he shoifld be publicly and magni- 
ficently inteiTed ; but the priest waited on 
the generous Edward, and declared that in 
his last interview with the Lord de Clifford, 
he had esteemed himself unworthy the no- 
tice of his monarch, and earnestly prayed 
his bones might be laid in the sepulchre in 
privacy, and in the hours of darkness. The 
good Prince then yielded, but desired to 
defray the expenses. 

At the solemn hour of midnight, the 
Earl of Warwick, who requested to join in 
paying the last tribute of regard, attended 
by Edgar, followed the dead to the chapel 
of the Abbey, and saw the deep grave ready 
to receive the corpse. The priest in so- 
lemn and pious tone, read the funeral ser- 
vice, and the full voices of the choir 
chaunted, at long drawn intervals, the res- 
ponses. Atheling held his hand over his 
forehead till the moment in which the dear 
remains were to be hidden, when he strain- 
ed a look, but grief prevented his percep- 
tion — the earth dropped pitiless on the cof- 
fin — it was soon lost to the sight, and the 

Earl, 



£10 EDGAR. 

Ear], much moved, put his arm within Ed- 
gar's, and gently drew him away. A car 
waited at the gate; Beauchamp, kindly 
helping his friend, took the reins, and 
driving forward, soon reached the palace. 

Edgar remained several days in his cham- 
ber, for grief, for reflection, for solitude; 
but the minister, who constantly roved about 
on errands of charity, stood before him, 
and mildly endeavoured to cheer his spirit, 
and to divert his sorrow. The next day, 
therefore, he refused not to descend, when 
Beauchamp earnestly pressed him, but the 
late awful event had too powerfully usurped 
the feelings of Edgar to be forgotten. Tem- 
perate, patient, humble, Atheling was the 
same Atheling, but he had acquired stronger 
virtue, more profound principles, fuller 
submission to reason, and more mistrust of 
self, by the last awful lesson j and whilst 
his youth, his manly grace, his majestic 
deportment attracted the admiration of the 
whole brilliant court of Edward ; Edgar 
lived untainted by flattery, uncorrupted 
amidst riches and grandeur, and unmoved 
in the bright reverse of fortune. 

Mean- 



BOOK XII. ^11 

Meantime a fleet was prepared to sail for 
England, and the Earl of Warwick was 
invested as Lord High Admiral of Eng- 
land, with the command. The Prince of 
Wales embraced, with much affection, Athe- 
ling, and made him valuable presents ; he 
besides wrote with his own hand a letter of 
praise and regard to the Earl of Mercia, 
and to the King of England, and sealing 
them with the royal arms, delivered both 
to Edgar, who knelt to receive them j but 
the great and good Prince strained him to 
his breast, and presenting him to the Prin- 
cess, " We bid farewell to my cousin," 
said he, smiling, " we could fain wish that 
the marriage whereof my Lord of Warwick 
hath spoken, could be solemnized in our 
presence, but the King, our father, will 
have equal joy in bestowing the bride, and 
in uniting the noblest peerage of his realms." 
The Lord Beauchamp bowed low, and 
Atheling blushed ; but he paid with gra- 
titude his sincere homage for the distin- 
guished favour, and then hastening to the 
boat, which made its signals, quickly reach- 
ed the fleet, once more scaled the wooden 

bulwarks, 



S12 EDGAR. 

bulwarks, and in a few moraente the whole 
navy steered for England. 

The heart of Atheling beat high in his 
breast as prosperous winds blew him to the 
shores he loved ; but fears and doubt now 
tempered his joy, and he half trembled to 
indulge the powerful emotion. But how 
violent was the struggle between nature 
and reason, when the soft dove* coast of 
southern England first smiled upon him 
through the silver shades of distance ! " Oh 
my country, my country !" burst from his 
lip, whilst his swimming eye could scarce 
discern her lily forehead ; but the fleet ad- 
vanced with rapidity, it ploughed the chan- 
nel's entrance, and left Biscay far behind. 
Atheling, ever on deck ; silent, mistrustful, 
doubting, fearful of indulging excess of 
joy, lest another le^on of humiliation might 
follow, fixed his ardent gaze on the skirts 
of his beloved Cornwall. " Edgar, the 
fleet is bound for London," said Beau- 
champ, " but I Vvdll make thy excuses to 
the King—land thou in the Bay of Seton, 
'tis near thy paternal mansion. I will com- 
mand yon swift sailor to conduct thee, and 

afterwards 



BOOK xri. 213 

afterwards follow us ; 'tis but slackening 
our sail, and losing a few hours ; and, 
moreover, I was thus advised by the Prince 
of Wales, who judged thou wouldst be im- 
patient to meet thy family. I myself will 
join thee at Restormal, when I may leave 
my King." — " Kind and dear Beauchamp, 
most generous and courteous of princes 1'* 
cried Edgar, ** rejoiced will be my father 
to see thee ; if, oh, i[ I have yet one ! 
My lord, what think you ? How looked he 
when ye last met ? Is it likely that he now 
lives ? Oh, Sir, my heart misgives me.'' — 
" He looked, Edgar, well as usual," re- 
turned Warwick ; " thy fears are, I guess, 
ill founded. I trust we shall all meet, and 
meet in joy." Athehng smiled timidly, but 
caught at the hope; he pressed the hand of 
the good Earl between his own, and said, 
** My beloved, my respected friend, my 
second father, accept my gratitude, my 
thanks, for all the many benefits I hold 
from you ; they are, my lord, for ever en- 
graven on my heart ; and my respect and 
my affection, whijch I have not words to 
represent, will cease but with my life." 

Beauchamp 



^14 EDGAR 

Beauchamp wrung his hand. " Go, my dear 
son, for I love to call thee my son, and to 
class thee in my family, go — I scarce love 
thy father better than thee — on my breast 
is it besides for ever registered, that I owe 
my life to thee ; I cannot ever repay thy 
zeal, but with my daughter. When I have 
flung myself at the feet of the best of mo- 
narchs, I will hasten away and conduct my 
lady and child to thy mother, and deliver 
the message which the King gives me ; for 
sure I am he will rejoice to fulfil the en- 
gagement which the Prince of Wales, his 
darling son, has made in his name. Then 
will we all set forward, and join to do ho- 
nour to thy nuptials. Edward is a prince- 
ly monarch, and has no common favour 
towards thy house and Miine." The Earl 
now embraced Edgar, whose eye sparkled 
again in these encouraging words — the 
little vessel had grappled close, and Athel- 
img sprang forward to its deck — it then 
unmoored, and cut away for the shores 
which were at no great distance* On sig- 
nals made, a boat left the haven, Edgar 
in a few moments descended to it, when 

the 



BOOK XII. 215 

tli€ vessel instantly tacked about, and join- 
ing the fleet which had laid by, was soon 
wafted from sight in the breeze. 

Atheling, with trembling emotion which 
beat across his breast, in every shape of 
doubt, joy, and dread, looked at the two 
seamen who rowed the boat. " Oh I" 
thought he, ** that they could guess the 
question which I dare not ask ! — Is there," 
said he, with a careless lip, as if to give 
assurance to himself, " is there, my friends, 
aught of news in these parts ? Has any 
event — any particular event, happened 
lately ?" The man rested upon the oar, 
rubbed the open forehefad with artless eager- 
ness to consider ; then looking up, one re- 
plied, " Please ye, my lord, no ; we think 
not." — " Ah !" cried Edgar, w^ith joy, «' do 
ye then know me ?" — " No, Sir Knight," 
answered the man, " but methinks the 
master of the vessel called you my lord. 
You have doubtless been fighting in our 
battles. Sir, and welcome now to Old 
England's shores." — " Thank ye, my brave 
countrymen," replied Atheling, and he 
smiled in pride as he heard the naan^ly voice, 

the 



216 E D G A Re 

the tones of freedom, the sentiment of 
open warm hospitality of generous-hearted 
Britons. " No," said he aloud, '* there is 
no servile flattery, no humiliating debase- 
ment, no horror of the tyrant's frown, no 
unmanly subjection, or inordinate domi- 
nion here. A King here reigns the father 
of his people ; he desires no more than 
what they may give as men and as freemen 
— a whole nation looks up to him as chil, 
dren to a parent ; as the cementer, the 
fountain-head of all their interests, their 
hopes, their rights; they love him, they 
respect him, they pray for him ; his joys 
are their's, and not a grief has he which 
his people do not commiserate." — " That 
is true. Sir," observed the boatman, who 
had attentively listened, " for whatever be 
our humble life, we all love our King. I 
have six children, my lord ; and every one, 
to the youngest, mentions the King in his 
prayers night and morn." — " And may you 
be blessed for instructing them so welh 
friend," said Edgar. 

The boat was now pulled in, and the 
Prince stepped to the beach — on the beach 

he 



BOOK xir. 217 

he knelt ; grasped a handful of earth, 
pressed it to his lip, and with fervour, said, 
<« I bless thee, heaven, for thus permitting 
my return to the land of my nativity ; 
and thou, oh country most beloved, I 
salute thee !" He then poured coins into 
the sailor's hands, and hastened on, with 
breathless strides, to the town. Here his 
first care was for a horse ; he hurried to 
the post-house ; — with trembhng agitation 
he spoke. ** Surely," said the master, with 
honest diffidence, " I crave your pardon, 
but you resemble much my Lord of Mercia, 
who lives some leagues from hence.** — 
** Lives ! didst thou say ?*' cried Atheling, 
seizing his hand. " Aye, Sir," replied the 
man, " and I guess you are my lord, his 
son. I was at Lestwythiel fourteen nights 
since, '" and saw my lady on the ramparts 
with the lady visitors." — " Enough !*' cried 
the Prince, " enough 5 — thy best steed. — 
Come to Restormal — enquire for me, for 
my lord's son, I will repay thee." 

Full of delight, Atheling himself follow- 
ed to the stables— saddled the steed — 
vaulted on his back — plunged the dividing 

VOL, III. L river 



218 EDGAR. 

river — gained the frontiers of Cornwall, 
and rushed forward; whilst joy, thrilling 
joy, ran through every vein as he recog- 
nized haunts, trees, villages, clumps, 
streams. Panting, he stopped at Laun- 
ceston, to give breath to the foaming steed 5 
he saw an old vassal approach with hesi- 
tating and inquisitive look. Edgar sprang 
to him. "Yes, my friend, it is I; my 
lord's son,— -speak — my father? — quick 1" 
The old man started back with joy and 
wonder. " Oh, happy day ! — most joyous 
news ! — my lord was well as usual yester- 
day ; I saw him myself in Restormal Park, 
on his old steed." — " Thanks, good old 
man," exclaimed Edgar, and shook his 
withered hand, " my heart will misgive me 
ii^ spite of myself. Give me water ; let 
me wash the feet of the good steed ; ' 
moisten her foaming jaws ; give me straw 
to smooth down her ruffled coat ; give her 
a morsel of provender, and we fly ! — Tell 
not my name till I am gone, lest I be de- 
tained." Then Atheling, with vigorous 
strokes, brushed down the charger -, re^ 
fi:^db^ her e;^hausted spirit; patted her 

swelling 



BOOK xir. 219 

swelling throat, and springing on her back, 
lifted high his helmet to the crowds that 
had now assembled, and was out of sight 
in a few moments. 

Soon rose in solemn magnificence the 
wide battlements of Restormal Castle. 
Edgar gave a scream of joy, as he per- 
ceived them — his breath shortened — doubts 
again chilled his^soul, and curdled his vein 
from the head downward. " Oh why,'* 
thought he mournfully, " should joy be 
supportable to man only when it is mixed 
and alloyed v*dth fear !" Then he caught a 
nearer view — the river sparkled between 
trees j he rushed on — passed the hill — be- 
held the ramparts — the gate. The centinel 
gazed : '^ hail, friend !" cried Edgar, as 
he passed him ; the man knew the voice ; 
the cross-bow and spear fell from his arm- 
he stood silent. 'Twas nearly dusk. Athe- 
ling gallopped to the court-yard — flung from 
the steed — rushed among the bewildered 
domestics — stepped on the threshold of his 
paternal mansion — would have burst on, 
but prudence, dread, doubt, now held him 
back. The aged steward met him j " where 
L 2 is 



220 EDGAR. 

is my mother, is she well ? — and my father ? 
speak."—" Is it, then, my lord ?" replied 
the domestic. " Yes, good friend; but 
speak — happiness — I know not where to 
find words."-o" Sir — my lord — your lady 
mother still walks the terrace gardens, on 
the other side of the castle ; my lord is 
above with the chaplain."—" *Tis well," 
cried Edgar, ** I know my father's strong 
soul ; yet I beg thee to hasten and tell him 
I am arrived." The old man, loquacious, 
eager tottered to the Earl's apartment. 
Atheling followed close. " My lord Ed- 
gar — your son, my lord," exclaimed the 
old man, in a laughing and half weeping 
tcirie. " What doth he say, father ?" said 
the agitated Earl to the chaplain. " That 
I, oh my beloved parent, my father, my 
fiiend — ^^that 1, your son... — 'tis I myself, 
your own Edgar, oh my beloved father," 
cried Atheling, flinging himself upon the 
ground, and clasping his knee. 
• The Earl spoke not for an instant — yet 
his treiiftbling hands fell on the neck of his 
son. " My father !" said Edgar ; " oh 
speak to me— leX me hear my father's bles- 
sing ; 



BOOK XII. 221 

sing ; how is my own dear father, my pa- 
rent, and mine early friend ?" The Earl 
raised his head. " Oh kind and gracious 
Providence !" said he, with fervent devo- 
tion, " thou beneficent care, that hast 
watched over all my wants, my desires; 
thou, gracious heaven, that hast granted 
me every fondest wish, as a parent, a hus- 
band, a friend, and a man ; that deignest 
now, even now, that my trembling foot 
stands over the grave, to give me all I 
dared ask of thee on this side of eternity ; 
to giv^e me back my son, my child, my 
pride, my second existence — to me, insect 
as I stand before thee — how be grateful ! — 
how speak ! Oh, mine Edgar, my son, let 
me press thee to this aged breast; and 
then. Lord of heaven and earth, 1 stand 
firm and prepared for the lastgreat change." 
Thus spoke the old man, whilst he spread 
his venerable arms on his only child, his 
head bent down to his, and his silver locks 
fluttered on the bright studded mail of Ed- 
gar, and mingled with the fine auburn of 
youth. 

The servant wept, and the chaplain j but 
L 3 the 



222 EDGAR, 

the former slid away, to seek his lady. 
Again the Earl embraced and blessed his 
son. " Is my Beauchamp," said he, ** ar- 
rived ? how fares the Prince ?" — ** He is 
well, my father," answered Edgar ; « but 
Lord Beauchamp commands the fleet, and 
will be with us shortly ; I am alone." — 
*' Then haste, find thy mother," replied 
Mercia, *' she has doubtless heard the 
news, and is too happy." 

Atheling sprang forwai'd. A small foot 
slid along the corridor — the door burst 
open ; " where, where is he, my own Ed- 
gar ?" cried the sweet voice of maternal 
tenderness. Atheling would have kneeled 
to his charming mother, but she folded 
him in her arms, and imprinted on his 
glowing cheek the fond and tender memo- 
rials of her joy and love. *' Oh, mine 
Edgar, how art thou grown ! how risen 
into maturity ! Give us lights — let me see 
his countenance ; my son, my darling pride. 
Why was such happiness reserved for me ? 
and I dreaded never, never to see thee 
more ! How have we suffered in thy long 
absence! — and after every danger so well 

—so..." 



BOOK XII. 22S 

— so ....^' and again the lady flung her po- 
lished arm of ivory on the proud and happy 
young warriour, whilst a shower of chrystal 
tears fell down her soft cheek, even unto 
his. 

The Earl listened with complacent de- 
light to the effusions of his lady ; his 
breast answered in affection to her's; but 
he restrained the rushing tide of joy, and 
listened. Quickly were large tapers placed 
near the Countess. She brushed off* the 
lingering dew upon her dark lashes, and, 
sweetly smiling, raised the light to the fea^ 
tures of her blushing son. " Yes, 'tis mine 
Edgar, my own child — but infancy and 
childhood are fled away ; how embrowned 
thy cheek — how audacious — yes, thy father 
just so looked, when I first raised a glance 
upon his countenance ; the bright and 
daring eye — the winning smile — the luxu- 
riant ringlet — the majestic front — the mo- 
dest demeanour. How art thou expanded ! 
how improved ! Oh Edgar, my child, I 
could be too proud of thee." 

Atheling, deeply blushing, returned with 

filial tenderness the caresses of his mother, 

L 4j but 



^1^ E D G A E. 

b\it be stood confounded in the praise. 
The lady observed with increased delight 
his modest confusion. *« Come," said the 
Earl, *' let us attend our guests ; our joy 
in thy return, Edgar, confounds thy mo- 
ther and me, we know not how to give it 
shape; give me thine arm." Atheling 
instantly sprang to his parent, without a 
question ; he cast a look at the old man, 
and started to see the change of a few 
years. He felt too the arm, that clung to 
luiii for support, trembl'e within his ; the 
step was unsteady-^he observed, and he 
was silent. 

The Lady Elgiva hastened onward, to 
prepare the guests ; and presently Atheling 
seated his father in the salooua Hi^^ mother 
seized his hand, and led him to a lady, who 
rose to meet him. Edgar, with modest 
grace, bowed doubtful. The lady smiled. 
** Do you not recollect the Lady Beau- 
champ ?" said his mother. Atheling start- 
ed, and pressed her extended hand to his 
lip ; " and the Lady Julia, her lovely 
daughter?" added she, and taking the re- 

luctant 



BOOK XII. 225 

luctant maid by the hand, presented her to 
her son. 

Now the whole soul of Atheling mount- 
ed in his cheek, flitted away, and returned. 
He would hai^e moved to the lady, who 
bent her beauteous head downward, but 
his knee trembled, and stood fixed and 
motionless. The mother of Julia smiled. 
"I wonder not that you are suprised, my 
lord ; my daughter is altered since you 
visited our castle ; even her father scarce 
recognizes his child, after every campaign. 
'Tis some years since we met ; you have 
doubtless seen much warfare, and met with 
numberless events.'^ Atheling, grateful for 
the relief, shortly repHed ; and soon the 
company descended to the hall, for tlie even- 
ing repast. 

The news had spread. Dependants and 
vassals crowded to the hospitable board ; 
every eye sought the young chief, who 
bent and passed among a people that ador- 
ed his ripened virtues. To some he bow- 
ed — of some he grasped the hand — and 
the little cherubs, that had risen into life 
since his departure, he saluted and held 
L 5 by 



?!26 EDGAR. 

by turns in his arms, as the proud mothers 
lifted and offered them around him. At 
length, all was solemn silence. The noble 
guests at the elevated table in the centre 
stood up, and the Earl with impressive 
gratitude blesfsed heaven for the food and 
comforts of life ; he this night added a few 
more words, they were of praise for the 
safe return of his son 5 a thousand voices, 
trembling in joy and eagerness, pronounced 
fervently the single word of response-^and 
instantly all were seated. The smoking 
viands were in a moment divided ; all was 
joy, fulness, and plenty. The Earl threw 
up his hand — the trumpeter opposite watch- 
ed, and gave a blast. Again was death- 
like silence. The Earl arose ; " my 
friends," said he, *' this shall be a night of 
rejoicing ; first we will exult in the tri- 
umphs of our country — second, we will 
glory in the unrivalled majesty of Eng- 
land's throne, in the noblest of monarchs, 
the most exalted and magnanimous of 
princes — thirdly, I, as a father, you as my 
people, and my dear countrymen, shall be 
happy in the restoration of mine only 

child. 



BOOK ^11. ^^ 

child, ^after an absence of nearly eight 
years. Give the reins to mirth, but be 
temperate; let none steel his breast to feel- 
ing, but only to excess. All my stores 
shall be spread to exhilirate your breasts ; 
the dance— the song— the jest — the sport 
— are all yours. Only speak; and food, 
viands, the sparkling wine, the hissing 
mead, the fermented ale, meet every want, 
and anticipate every desire. Freedom is 
your birthright, for are ye not English- 
men ? but this night take double privilege 
— be joyful — but let harmony and temper- 
ance prevail." 

Acclamations burst and rang even to the 
vaulted roof, swelling in echo through 
every arch, as Mercia ceased. *' Music ! 
give us music," shouted the throng : ** give 
us the song of peace, the warrior's return 
— give us music ! " 

The harper waited the signal. A cold 
shiver crept through his frame. Sudden 
the boiling blood dashed impatient from 
his heart --his cheek glowed- — his eye 
sparkled in extatic rage — his lip trembled 
to pour forth the images that trampled o'er 
L 6 his 



^^S ED G A 11. 

his mind's eye — he snatched the harp — 
broke up the fervour of his soul in rapid 
modulation, and then sang :— 

I. 

Hark ! the battle rings no more, 

The clangour dies away ; 
Wash and cleanse the knotted gore, 
Couch the lance, and strike no more. 
The foes for mercy pray. 
Bind up the gash, 
The spouting vein ; 
A standing foe may rouse the ire, 
But fall'n, that ire were vain. 

II. 

Give the tear the comrade's due. 

O'er his slight simple grave ; 
Roll ev'ry deed round mem'ry's clew, 
Fair honour registers anew, 
And swells the banner's wave ! 
Now to the feast, 
And now the song ; 
When justice calls we fling the dart. 
And triumph o'er the strong. 

III. 

See I the goblet strikes the board. 

And nature pleads to day ; 
Each warrior girts his blunted sword, 
Collects his tattered, trophied hoard, 

And speeds his homebound way : 

Hope 



BOOK XII. 229 

Hope heaves his breast 

As home draws nigh ; 
But fluttering joy is mortal's hope, 
And smiles may veil a sigh. 

IV. 

Ah ! what transports thrill his soul, 

How all the man gives way ! 
When reach'd at length, the darling goal, 
Soft chrystal streams from beauty roll, 
And pledge love's gentlest sway. 
The rosy babe. 
His little pride ; 
Casts round a wond'ring, yearning glance. 
And nestles to his side. 

V. 

" Tell me, love," soft woman cries, 

And lifts her swimming eye, 
" How fares my life, my heart's besi ties ? 
Recount me all thy victories, — 
Speak, and I know thee nigh. 
What generous steel 
Turn'd sweet aside. 
And fear'd to scar my lord's lov'd breast, 
In pity to his bride ? " 

VI. 

The warrior clasps the velvet hand, 

And strokes his infant's cheek : 
In broken glee, old feats are scann'd. 
In smother'd rapture, listners stand, 

Whilst looks sweet credence speah» 

Hail 



2S0 EDGAR. 

Hail then the day, 

When discords cease ! 
When glutted honour breaks each spell, 
And gives back home and peace ! 

The whole company shouted for triumph 
in the song. The Lady Elgiva gazed upon 
her son as a bright tear of joy rose to her 
eye and gUttered, but feared to droop. The 
Lady Beauchamp held out her fair band to 
Atheling, and beckoned for the golden cup 
to pledge him ; he presented it to her; she 
touched the beverage with her lip, and as 
he received it back, he leaned over, and 
kissed the brim- -he raised one glance to 
the Lady Julia, his lip moved without a 
sound — her dark and sparkling eye, tem- 
pered with the soft curtain of angel's mo- 
desty, met his — it fell downward, but a 
thousand little graces gathered round the 
carnation of her tender cheek, and promised 
hope to virtuous love. 

The Earl rose, and smiling said, " thanks, 
good old man for thy music ; thou hast not 
so well sung since my son left Restormal. 
Thine is a wondrous talent, and I am proud 
to hear thee. Tarewelli my people, .ray age 

will 



BOOK XII. 231 

will excuse me ; my lady and my honoured 
guests will require repose, but my son shall 
stay awhile, and if you will he may join 
your festivities. But ere we depart, we 
will drink to the health and happiness of 
these illustrious ladies, wife and daughter 
to Thomas, the most noble and generous 
Earl of Warwick, who, my King and 
Prince excepted, is the most valiant knight 
of Christendom." 

In a moment, the enraptured people, 
headed by Atheling, whose glowing cheek 
bespoke his love, gratitude, and joy, shout- 
ed the name so dear to his heart. The 
ladies bent and would have retired ; but a 
number of old men led forward their daugh- 
ters, and making low obeisance to Julia, 
said, ** oh, madam, let us crave one favour 
— let us be allowed to say to our grand- 
children that the charming daughter of 
Warwick's noble Earl joined even with us 
in the dance — yes, madam ; we shall never 
forget the favour — only for one little hour.'* 
The Lady Beauchamp smiled on the blush- 
ing and retreating Julia, whilst Edgar bowed 
to the ground as he solicited her beautiful 

hand* 



232 EDGAR. 

hand. " Go, my love, we will wait for 
thee," said the mother of Julia. Edga^' 
respectfully took the half-extended hand, 
and led with a palpitating breast his blush- 
ing partner to the upper end of the hall^ 
whilst the proud concourse ranged them- 
selves for the dance. With sweet modesty 
the Lady Julia did the task, and amidst a 
thousand praises and blessings on the lovely 
pair, Edgar led her with respectful tender- 
ness to the ladies ; who bowed to the assem- 
bly, and withdrew. 

The following morning Edgar sprang 
from his couch, and with fervent devotion 
poured out before heaven's throne his grate- 
ful acknowledgments and praises for every 
blessing, and every merciful protection. 
Then he descended to his father's library. 
The old man was seated in his usual place, 
whilst his chaplain read from the holy book, 
and repeated a few prayers. Atheling 
attentively waited till the devout exercise 
was concluded, when the Earl extended 
his hand and his son met and pressed it to 
his breast. " I have been," said the Earl^ 
" a poor feeble mortal since thy departure^ 

my 



BOOK XII. ^3S 

my son ; and for some weeks my limbs re- 
fused to assist me. 'Twai on a sudden, 
that one whole side of my emaciated frame 
grew cold, stiff, and idle ; and then I was 
forced to desert the public service in the 
hall, and to have prayers read in my closet ; 
but thy mother attends to my wish, and 
joins in public duty with her people, and I 
require the same of thee, Edgar. We owe 
an example to every inferior, and let us 
give it." 

The Prince assured his father j and then 
with anxiety and pain observed, that one 
hand hung lifeless. Edgar touched it, slnd 
placing it between his own, deeply sighed. 
Mercia overheard, and said, ** place thy- 
self by me, my son; I must converse with 
thee — lament not for my useless limb, but 
rejoice rather with me, that I am spared to 
give thee my blessing ere I go hence, fo^ 
prepare thyself for a separation my child. I 
feel — I feel nature breaking fast under her 
burthen — my breast is hollow within, and 
proclaims the last stage of decay. Yet what 
of this ? shall we not all pass off as sha- 
dows — the day must come, when we shall 

bQ 



SS4 E D G A R. 

be aumbered with the dead, and be Seen 
no more. I bless my God for the hope he 
hath given me ; come when the time will, I 
trust, I humbly trust, I shall be ready to 
meet the summons. Now, Edgar, my pride, 
give me a faithful narration of every event 
that has happened to thee since we last 
parted — faithful and undisguised, let the 
son of Mercia relate ; nor fear reproach 
from the father and friend of his infancy." 

It was long ere Atheling could conquer 
his tender emotion, and obey his parent. 
At last, he cried, " oh, my beloved and 
respected monitor and friend! many and 
great have been my faults — most wondrous 
my escapes —yet have I remembered the pro- 
found lessons of truth — with all my errors 
I forgot not the first precept of thy lip — 
yes, I will lay bare my life's events before 
thee, and by my hope of meeting him here- 
after, so will I conceal nothing from my 
father." 

The chaplain had quitted the chamber. 
Atheling with a modest confusion bent his 
head, thoughtless that no eye could gaze 
on his crimsoned cheek. Then he unfolded 

every 



BOOK XII. QS5 

every occurrence, seeking neither pallia- 
tion nor excuse, but here and there season- 
ing every event with self-reproach ; not a 
single matter left he untold j but all was 
said, and he ceased. 

The Earl gave him no interruption. The 
speaker waited the judgment — but yet it 
was delayed. " Alas ! " said he at length, 
" alas ! poor de Clifford ! his idolizing mo- 
ther — poor lady — oli my son ! — why art 
thou spared ! — Edgar — I owe thee counsel 
upon thy narration ; let me ponder it in my 
mind — leave me awhile — yet listen. My 
noble friend of Warwick has it with me at 
heart, to unite our families. It is well that 
the lady we have fixed on is now here. 
Her mother kindly visited Restormal seve- 
ral weeks since, when thy mother wept in 
my illness. She brought hither her youngest 
and sole unmarried daughter ; and w^e have 
prayed her to wait the arrival of Beau- 
champ ; then shall thy wedding be cele- 
brated, that I may bless thee and thine 
before the world shut me out for ever. If 
the lady can like thee, and if she be so 
young and innocent thou mayst surely win 

her 



S36 EDGAR. 

her heart, she shall be thine. Improve 
therefore the moments; and when thou 
canst with chaste and tender persuasion 
urge her to acceptance, lead her to me that 
I may invoke blessings on my children, my 
house, and my name.*' 

Edgar with pensive step quitted his father, 
and moving on to the saloon, flung himself 
in a chair and sighing deeply, placed both 
hands over his forehead. He was roused 
in a moment, by the rusthng of a garment, 
and he suddenly raised his head. The 
beautiful daughter of Beachamp had risen 
from a recess, and now stood with sympa- 
thising inquiry near him. Athehng looked 
up, and gazing on her sweet face, caught 
the expression of pity, as it breathed 
through her countenance, with a half 
smile, he said, " oh madam, my soul is 
most grateful for the sweet kindness of that 
look — did you but know the solemn words 
just uttered by my father! he tells me, 
alasl that nature is half exhausted, and 
that I must soon be fatherless. Oh, ma- 
dam, 'tis hard to part with such a friend.'* 
^* Be comforted, Sir," answered the maid, 

** we 



BOOK XII. 237 

" we have seen our good friend much 
worse in health ; he is now in full strength, 
if compared to what he has been. Joy in 
your return overcomes his spirits ; please 
heaven he shall still meet my dear father 
in chearfulness and health." 

" Charming lady!" cried Edgar, bend- 
ing before her, ** how shall I requite thy 
goodness for the hope ? — yet — how to ad- 
dress her — ye angels of purity ! — yet, ma- 
dam — there is one — one matter that lays 
near his heart — condescend but to listen 
■ — suffer me thus to trespass on your gra- 
cious kindness, and to obey my father — 
only a few moments, and I ask no more." 

The solemn air — the respectful eager- 
ness of Atheling, affected the young Julia. 
Thoughtful, silent, doubting, and half ap- 
prehensive but of what she scarcely knew> 
she suffered Edgar to touch her cold hand, 
and lead her to a seat, he placed himself 
near ; and after a short pause began. 

" The matter which my father has com- 
manded me to lay before you, is concern, 
ing a favour, which the house of Warwick 
has alone the power to grant." " Oh, Sir," 

interrupted 



238 EDGAR* 

interrupted Julia, as she lifted her beaming 
eyes, " my father has ever loved yours, 
and can he now refuse liim any request ? " 
•' Lovely lady," cried Edgar, as a bright 
fire kindled round his features and drew a 
flash of vermilion upon Julia's averted 
cheek — " lovely lady, my father and thine 
have been from infancy more than brothers, 
so truly have they read each other's mind 
and lived in mutual harmony. Oh, ma- 
dam, the wish of both fathers is to cement 
this friendship in the children. Forgive 
my precipitance — my parent is feeble; 
heaven may not very long preserve him to 
his beloved family, his only hope is to see me 
united to the best, the loveliest of women. 
Oh, Lady Julia, long yet in secret beloved, 
our parents have given their sanction, and 
in their venerable behalf, let me plead. 
Give me, daughter of the noblest of men 
and dearest of friends next to my own 
parents, give me one little hope. Mine is 
not, most charming Julia, an affection of 
yesterday ; I was deeply impressed, even 
in early youth, with thy sweet promise. 
In distant climes, I met thy father, he 

spoke 



BOOK XII. 239 

spoke of thee as in the blush of life — my 
latent affection burst forth ; — he sanction- 
ed my hopes — he gave me a pledge of his 
truth which I have ever guarded as my 
life — turn not then away thy beauteous eye 
from me ; speak, oh loveliest of women, 
speak, have compassion on me, have pity 
on my drooping father." 

Edgar bent one knee to the ground, and 
drew forth the scarf from his breast. Julia 
glanced on the well-remembered work, 
and lifting her soft hands to her angelic 
face, tried to conceal the tears which crept 
down, and fell on the snowy folds which 
crossed her chaste bosom. Atheling, with 
sweet tenderness, cried, " Julia, most be- 
loved Julia, oh do not weep, that my 
breast be not wrung in anguish in the fear 
of having distressed thy graceful reserve — 
if a word have escaped my daring lip that 
could offend the purity of angels— here 
ViU I kneel be it for ever, till I have thy 
forgiveness. Speak then, beauteous Julia 
-^cease those tears. By my love and reve- 
rence for thy noble father — by my respect 
for thy charming mother — by my truth, 

and 



S40 E D G A 11. 

and mine honour as a soldier, and a man, 
I meant not to breathe a thought that 
could offend thee." — " Ah, my lord," said 
the trembling Julia — " Speak but one 
word," interrupted Atheling, " say, sweet 
Julia, say that thou believest mine asser- 
tion, and if thou believest my truth, give 
me hope ; suffer me to approach thee, and 
to think that one day, however distant it 
be, my father may bless and call us both his 
children. Nay — I will not urge thy lip, 
extend thy hand, one little hope* — 'tis all I 
ask." 

The maid continued silent — Edgar re- 
spectfully touched her hand; and as it 
made no resistance, he gently drew it for- 
ward and pressed it with ardour between 
his own, whilst he gazed delighted upon 
the blushing countenance, but half con- 
cealed under the lily hand. ** Now," said 
he, " one single word, say, dearest Julia, 
speak but one little word, that thou wilt 
permit me to hope — one word, my lovely 
Julia, one small word, and my soul, the 
soul of Atheling, shall owe thee gratitude 
for ever." 

Julia 



BOOK XII. $41 

Julia now withdrew her hand from her 
forehead, her beautifbl eye still swimming 
in the dew of modest emotion ; a soft 
smile played on her innocent lip as she 
gently said, ** my lord, I beseech you rise. 
I love my father — I respect his will — do 
not press me more ; but suffer me to re- 
turn to my mother, who is still in her 
chamber." The noble visage of AtlKiling 
flashed new animation ; he pressed his lip 
strong on the hand he held, and then re- 
spectfully resigning it, said, ** no, lovely 
Julia, I respect thy graceful dignity ; I 
will not now urge more — I bless thee for 
the hope I have. Thou art free to retire, 
most dear Julia, and mayst thoa be re- 
warded for the sweet joy thou hast shed 
over mine existence.'* Thus as he spoke, 
the lady rose, cast her modest glance on 
the ground, and permitted the enraptured 
w^arrior to lead her to the staircase — again 
he pressed her hand, and bowing low, turn- 
ed back his step, crossed the hall, and 
quelled the mingled emotions of his breast 
in the fine breeze of morning. 

The castle bell soon summoned the 
VOL. HI. M whole 



^42 EDGAR. 

whole family of Restormal to prayers and 
the morning repast— the lady guests sent 
excuses for not attending ; and the Coun- 
tess of Mercia, who had before embraced 
her son, after joining in the duties of reli- 
gion, hastened to finish the domestic ar- 
rangements of the day, and then ascended 
to offer her respects to the ladies. Edgar 
hurried over his meal and immediately 
sought his father, whom weakness obliged 
to call for food, when he rose from sleep 
at the dawn of day. 

Atheling moved gently in the chamber. 
" Is it thou, my son ? *' asked the old man. 
" Yes, my lord," replied Edgar; " I am 
come for my instructions, beloved father of 
my youth ; happy I, in being spared to 
hear the voice which never sounded before 
me, but for mine advantage and mine ho- 



nour.'' 



" 'Tis well j " replied the old man with 
trembling accents, " 'tis well, mine Edgar, 
thou hast been a dutiful child and good; 
and heaven will bless thee — and for me, 
my son, I have done no more for thee 
than should every parent for his child — and 

I am 



BOOK XII. 243 

. I am grateful— yes, 'tis a sweet consolation, 
when the eye is dim, the limb palsied, the 
breast fluttering in its last struggles, and 
Nature rallyin ground the last hope — oh ! 
'tis a sweet consolation then, to look back 
on one duty fulfilled ! Heaven made me 
a parent, and I have endeavoured to re- 
member my trust. But enough ; the few 
days that remain shall be dedicated to thee. 
I have much to say upon the new station 
which thou art to fill — the statesman, the 
peer, the husband, the master, the friend 
—they shall employ my last thoughts ; 
every other earthly account is closed ; my 
last sacrifice is made ; I humbly hope all is 
settled between my gracious Maker and my 
poor self 5 — I stand prepared for the signal 
that shall waft my soul from the habitation!? 
of man, and all that remains in me of life 
beats alone for my child." 

Atheling knelt before his father, and 
clasped in the strongest emotion his trem- 
bling hands. The Earl felt the warm tear 
of grateful affection, and paused for a few 
moments — then he continued. 

" I know thou hast tenderness of heart, 
M 2 my 



Q4fi< E D G A R. 

my Edgar; even, perhaps, more than thy 
countrymen, who are famed for the keenest 
feeling, which swells and throbs, and writhes 
out many a premature misery — I know, 
and early perceived this gift of nature ; 
and well it was, that I did so, and that I 
held ■■ back from shewing thee mine own 
weakness, for thou wouldst have been un- 
fitted to strive with rougher man in the 
harsh walks of life. I gave myself to thee 
as a friend ; yet I held little reserves in 
my own hand to keep thy passions in awe. 
When my soul has been swimming in de- 
light in the dawn of thy virtues, in thy 
humanity which shuddered to plant thy 
little foot on a harmless worm in thy path 
— in thy speech which v^^as spotless even 
to knowing not the meaning of untruth — 
when I have been thus rejoiced, I have 
bound my aflfections in adamant, fearing to 
injure thee. A smile woukl shew an ap- 
probation, and a smile I gave thee — thine 
eye beamed joy, and 'twas enough. Thou art 
not now to learn, my child, how dangerous 
is excess in any shape ; in a thousand ways 
are we frail mortals shewn that moderation 

alone 



BOOK XII. 245 

alone is enjoyment, and this enjoyment 
happiness — 'tis a slight repast for an ardent 
soul, but let such an one cast his eye 
elsewhere— Eternity alone shall give hint 
repletion. 

** The more I consider thy narration, 
Edgar, still more do I behold the gracious 
designs of Providence. Had I never before 
considered that an Infinite and All-wise 
Power lays down from beginning to end, 
laws, which further his own will, and work 
all things for the accomplishment of two 
purposes, — the justification of his wa};s to 
man in the reward of the good, and the 
punishment of the wicked — had I never be- 
fore given a thought to this awful subject, 
I should now stand amazed in the goodness 
and grandeur of the pow^r, which we call 
Providence — yes, thou hast suffered, Edgar ; 
but mark how different, how widely dif- 
ferent were thy pangs of affliction to 
those of remorse ! 'tis in tliis difference 
that the majesty of Eternal Goodness is 
asserted. Calamity may fall and cover 
young locks with premature silver, but 
affliction does not turn the eye of virtuous 
M 3 sorrow 



246 EDGAR. 

sorrow from the canopy of heaven ; on the 
contrary, every sorrow is a step planted 
towards everlasting rest, and a link broken 
in the chain of earthly bondage — affiction 
then is bitter, but it is also sweet. Not so 
remorse, the unhappiness that follows sin — 
'tis here that the prospect of heaven dimi^ 
nishes ; that the heavy eye drooping down- 
ward, wanders in vacuity ; that the throb- 
bing breast heaves at once to sorrow, to de- 
spondence, to conflict, to misery ; that 
retrospection is torture ; futurity hopeless« 
ness; that the soul deprived of her best stay 
and consolation, and stripped of the hopea 
with which she sprang from her Maker pure 
and spotless, and with which the Redeemer 
a second time clothed her, languishes, 
pines, fades, and rebukes not any sugges- 
tion of despair. Thus, unlike my Edgar, 
are the sorrows of guilt from those of 
affliction. 

" But if we trace back every calamity 
as we think it falls, doubtless for wise ends, 
up to its^ first spring and source, how 
often shall we not perceive the origin to 
have been in our own immediate actions! 

How 



BOOK XII. 247 

How often mightst not thou have seen this, 
my son ? Yet, for^some of thine errors, I am 
to be reproached — yes, they fall back even 
to me. When I educated thee, all my de- 
sire was to hold thy passions in awe, and 
still preserve thy heart tender ; 'twas a nice 
point. For the first, I gave thee Religion; 
for the second, I would not permit thee to 
hear of, much less behold, cruelties or 
crimes, and I even kept thee in ignorance 
as to the extent of wickedness in the 
world. On this account I trembled when 
thou leftst me — I feared designing men 
and artful v/omen — yet could I act other- 
wise? could I have steeled thy heart ta 
affection, sympathy, humanity ? should I 
have done well to bid thee beware of every 
noble countenance, and flee from every 
gentle smile ? — oh never. Cold suspicion, 
never lurked in thy breast ; 'twas time 
enough to mistrust when thou hadst been 
deceived — and yet if I could have given 
thee one hint to be cautious ! — I wished, 
ardently wished, but I said to thy mother, 
no ; to what intent have we implanted 
these strong principles, if they be not to 
M 4 resist 



S4i8 EDGAR. 

resist temptation ? Let him be Innocent, 
for he is young. Years will bring know- 
ledge — knowledge settles, and experience 
gradually rises to remind manhood of past 
escapes, and to give him caution for time 
to come. The fate of the old pilgrim 
shews thee the danger of nourishing suspi- 
cion in young breasts — the end of the 
brave and repentant de Clifford, shews the 
danger of cultivating art and scienc*?, 
whilst the heart, the mind, are neglected, 
and that the passions are allowed full 
growth ; and thy story displays fully, my 
beloved son, that there is a good Provi- 
dence, who is ever ready to grant a bles- 
sing on the virtuous endeavours of man. 
A Providence, that has visibly guided, di- 
rected, and preserved thee ; perhaps, in 
the shape of some guardian spirit, whose 
office it may be to watch over the virtuous. 
Oh, my child, my heart swells witliin me 
in gratitude ; words die away, and utter- 
ance expires in my feeble breath, in my 
joy. What am I, my Maker, that thou 
shouldst so bless me in mine offspring ? 
who am I that I should feel such hope ? oh 

Ed<^U!' 



BOOK xir. S49 

Edgar, child of miDe age, my pride, let 
me again embrace and bless thee ; by the 
t€ars which rush from these dim orbs, the 
last thy old father may shed, promise me 
to remember to thy dying hour this in- 
junction : that goodness alone is happiness. 
Yes, — 'tis the last weakness of nature ; let 
me strain thee to my breast ; let these 
frosted locks lean once again on thy 
shoulder ; and then, angels that surround 
the departing soul, and whisper comfort to 
the fluttering heart — then, bend your flight 
when ye will, and receive me." 

Thus spoke the Earl, wliilst a flush of 
joy like the golden ray of evening round 
a summer cloud, encircled his cheek, and 
hall scorched the tear that rolled over. 
He stood firm, animated, strong as a w^ar- 
rior ; one arm he forcibly pressed round 
his son ; the other in the strong effort of 
Nature, moved also. For a moment, all 
was forgotten in parental love ; but 
strength drooped ; the flush passed away, 
the palsied hand fell lifeless, the knee re- 
laxed, and the Earl sank again in his 
chair. Edgar took the revered bead, and 
M 5 supported 



supported it, drooping and exhausted, oi^ 
his breast— he lifted the useless hand, and 
chafed it in his own, whilst emotion choked 
his speech ; at length, as he again bent the 
knee, with half stifled voice, he said, 
" Most beloved of fathers, best of men ! 
i^i this posture before thee— in the, face of 
heaven, I promise to remember thy sacred 
injunction. My beloved friend, to whom 
If owe all under my heavenly Father, oh 
he^r and accept my warm, my deep ac- 
knowledgments and thanks for the thou- 
sand, thousand cares lavished upon me ; — 
and even now, for this last, this tender, 
this kindest blessing. My father, for all, 
for every uneasiness I have ever caused 
thee, pardon me ; forgive me every expres- 
sion not grateful, every look that did not 
acquiesce in thy will. I could recollect 
many replies not dutiful enough, many 
opportunities for expressing my obligations 
to thee, passed by. Talk not, then, my 
venerable parent, of death. I cannot — 
oh, rny father, my protector, my guide, I 
cannot part with thee." — ** Hush, my 
child,"' int^D'upteA the Earl, " 'tis not 

well 



BOOK XII. 251 

well to say so ; yet I know thy love for thy 
parents. Go, Edgar, thou hast nothing 
but fulfilled duty to look back upon. Nq 
son ever watched more his father's eye, or 
hung in more dutiful sweetness upon ai 
parent's will, than hast thou, from thine 
infancy upward. Leave me now, mine 
Edgar ; mine is a withered tree shaken to 
its foundation by every gust, and truly pas- 
sion becomes me not : flame riseth not in 
embers. Go, my son, and let me recal the 
modesty of age and decay." 

Atheling, ever accustomed to obey, once 
more embraced his father, and slowly left 
the chamber ; he turned to the chapel, and 
kneeling before the altar^ remained long in 
silent prayer for the author of his existence.. 

In the evening, Mercia had regained his 
placid gravity, but his limbs still trembled, 
and refused him support. For the first 
time, Edgar was commanded to take the 
seat of his ancestors, in the centre of the 
hall. The Prince was melancholy and 
thoughtful ; he forgot the duties of his sta- 
tion ; deep siglis rose in his breast. The 
musician watched his lord's eye, and struck 
M 6 a plain- 



^52 EDGAR, 

a plaintive air ; Edgar looked up ; Lady 
Julia sat near him, pale and dejected. In- 
a moment, Atheling endeavoured to rally 
Ms spirits ; he assisted the guests, called 
for-the golden vase, took it from the cup- 
bearer, and moistened his lip. " The 
toast, my lord,'* said an aged man, '^ we 
wait your command." Atheling rose, and 
in a faltering voice, said, as he again touch- 
ed the beverage, " My father — the Earl's 
recovery." All the numerous guests rose 
by one impulse, as the herald blasted the. 
words through the brazen horn.'^^ The 
Earl's recovery was shouted by every voice, 
aged and tender. Atheling bowed low ; 
and looked aside to conceal the struggle of 
affection. 

But in a few days, Mercia appeared to 
revive ; and Edgar, with the winning sub- 
tlety of man's persuasion, then drew from 
the blushing daughter of Beauchamp, that 
she would offer no obstacle to the plighting 
of her faith, when the Earl of Warwick 
should return. And now the joyful mo- 
thers permitted the young couple to breathe 
their cliaste sentiments together in the, 
. . park. 



BOOK Xli. €5S 

park, or on the ramparts. Sometimes they- 
strayed to the village ; and as the peasantry 
flocked in admiration around them, would 
smile, encourage babies' prattle and mo- 
ther's fondness, by their own queries; 
sometimes they roved on the banks of the 
Fowey, whilst they listened to the sweet 
warblers that skirted its banks, or watched 
the leaping fish as he wantoned in his oozy 
bed. 

One evening they bent tlieir step to the 
druid's monument. 'Twas a sweet spot,, 
where nature revelled in spring, and laugh- 
ed in summer. A grove of red-berried 
mountain- ash flourished on one side, and 
on the other, a silver stream which crept 
from a neighbouring rock, bounded over 
the long grass, and trickled between every 
loose pebble ; 'twas seated on a gentle 
eminence which caught in Restormal, and 
swept in the prospect, the distant ocean, 
and the flowing river. The illustrious pair 
had ascended the steep ; and Atheling 
pointed out, as they rested on the base of 
the vast Logan stones,'" objects skirted by 
clouds which half concealed them. Julia 

suddenly 



^54 EDGAR. 

suddealy stopped him. ** Hush, my lord, 
surely I heard a plaintive sound of dis- 
tress ?" Edgar immediately listened : " and 
it proceeds from the tombs in the little 
church yard; some unfortunate weeps over 
^ newly made grave." — " I will see, my 
Julia, wait here for me," said Edgar. 
" Nay, my lord," replied the lady, " some 
one may be ill ; I too will assist." Athe- 
ling smiled sweetly, and gave his strong 
arm to the support of the maid he loved ; 
they entered the enclosure, and gazing 
round, observed that the murmurs arose 
from two females, who appeared contend- 
ing for some point. The noble pair 
hastened to the spotj the elder female 
perceived Julia, and turning quickly, 
shewed a face pale as the new broached 
vein of alabaster j her mild azure eye was 
deep seated in its bed, and her long wild 
tresses were fancifully enwreathed with blue 
bells, excepting a few melancholy locks, 
which fell on her throat, snowy and down- 
like as the swan's, and hung midway ; her 
slender figure was robed in sable, and her 
delicate hands grasped a clump of flower 

roots y 



BOOK XII. ^^5 

. roots y she looked up in Julia's face, and 
layipg her cold finger on her hand, said, 
" They want to take me away, lady ; teU 
her to go— indeed, indeed, I will not be 
naughty.*'-^—" Poor unfortunate !" cried Ju- 
lia to Atheling, with emotion, " her reason 
is fled." Edgar fixed his sympathizing eye 
upon the faded form, whilst he listened 
eagerly to catch another sound of that voice 
so tender, so plaintive, so full of woe. 
*' Methinks, I ought to recollect her," said 
Atheling, after a pause, " yet I cannot." 
— " Speak then," answered Julia, " she 
may recollect thee." 

Now the poor wanderer gazed on Edgar, 
^nd then seating herself on the earth, be- 
gan quickly to plait her wild flowers, as she 
looked continually to see if the warrioi: 
gazed upon her. " What art thou doing, 
poor maid ?" inquired Atheling ; she started 
up, leaned, as if eagerly listening, and then 
sighing said, " I thought it had been my 
Alfred — 'twas like Alfred — but he is gone 
— I will plait the bluebells for thee, and 
wear them for thee, because thou hast a 
soldier's garb-r-Alfred was a soldier-r-he 

went 



§56 E D <; A R. 

went to battle with my Lord Edgar, and 
an arrow drank up his blood — then he fell, 
^nd they made him a little bed in the 
earth — and now they tell me, I may not 
sit by him, and talk to him. Lady, I will 
not be naughty — see, I will speakso soft, 
so low, that my love only shall hear me." 

Atheling now recognized the maid to 
whom his faithful Alfred had been be- 
trothed ; and he hid his face. " Alas ! 
poor Maud,*' said he, in a low whisper, 
** how deep are thy sorrows !" She caught 
the name, and a flash crossed her cheek. 
** I thought Alfred had called, but he is 
asleep in his little bed. Stranger," cried 
she, " I could tell thee more of Alfred, 
fox thou art kind to poor Maud, only I 
fe^r to waken my love — they tell me, if he 
wakes, he will be covered with cold worms 
— 'tis very strange ; but let us speak soft, 
and not disturb him — his father is gone to 
ask him to come back to me in his own 
dress, not in the soldier's mail ; but he will, 
not come because of the arrow, it had such 
a cutting point— oh, 'twas very sharp and 
keen to drink mine Alfred's blood." 

The 



BOOK xn. ^.'iy 

The Lady Julia melted into tears; Maud, 
exhausted with speech, sat on a stone, and 
again wound the flowers among her light 
tresses ; and now the young woman who 
had stood by the^^sufferer, modestly ad- 
vanced, and whispered her to come away. 
** Whose is that grave ?" inquired Edgar, 
when he could command his utterance. 
** 'Tis the father of Alfred, sir," replied 
she, ** he expired with grief, six months 
after the news of his son's death, and Maud 
has ever thought that both lie there — she 
would remain here for days, but that we 
entice her away." — " And who are you, my 
dear ?'* inquired Julia. ** I am her sister, 
madam," said the young maiden. ** Doth 
my Lord Mercia know this sad tale?'' said 
Atheling. ** Yes, sir," said she, •* and the 
Countess our lady, honours us often by her 
presence ; and her name is the only one 
she always heeds. Come, sister," said she, 
softly, ** come, my lady likes you not to 
stay so, on the cold earth." Maud in- 
stantly rose, and cried, ** Oh yes, for Al- 
fred loved my lady and my lord too, and 
be bade me love them, when he went away 

with 



^5S E D G A Rt 

with the good Prince Edgar. — Come, sister, 
drag me on j for my sandal is made of 
stone, thou knowst, and I cannot run -^ 
see, sister, my foot moves so slow ; drag 
me on, or my lady will chide." — " Let me 
assist the-e," cried Edgar, as he marked her 
feeble step. — " No, no," cried she, '* no, 
thou art a soldier — but thou art not Alfred. 
•—Sister, do not let him touch me."—- 
" Heaven forbid that I sliould aggravate 
thy griefs," said Atheling, mournfully, " I 
will not intrude upon — but we will all unite 
in trying to console thee : and thou too, 
ipy Julia, wilt be injured in the evening 
air ; let me hasten with thee to the castle ; 
qiir parents will wonder in our stay." Then, 
he placed her hand within his arm, and 
silent and thoughtful they took the road 
ho^e. 

" Alas I" cried Edgar, as they passed 
Restormal gates, " what is the guilt of that 
monarch, who, without just cause, but only 
to gratify revenge or ambition, leads his 
thousands to battle, and in the numbers of 
slain, creates for his realms such miseries 
as we have just witnessed! Thanks to the 

virtues 



BOOK XII. 259 

virtues of our native princes, to the grand 
and noble fabric of our constitution, war 
is never resolved on, without just cause and 
mature deliberation. Even were our mo- 
narch of sanguinary nature, yet is he so 
bound up in law^s, that he dares take no 
violent hostile measures till the council, 
the peers, and representatives of his people 
agree in its necessity, and furnish him witl^ 
the means- Happy and favoured nation 1" 
— " And happy I," said Julia, whilst h^? 
look beamed innocence, love, and tender- 
ness, " happy I to be spared the anguish 
of poor Maud. Oh, npy lord, every tongue 
around me sounded such praise of thy fa- 
ther, thy sweet piother a\>d thee, that had 
yoictiers' sword^ or noxious gales stopped 
thy breath, my young heart could hav^ 
pined in secret fpj: thy loss, like the uncon- 
scious leaf, which, for sympa,thy, drppps 
and withers on a crushed stem, and tkea 
lays its little head on the earth without a 
sigh."—" Dear, lovely maid," returned 
Atheling. " Ah, Julia ! can it be, that 
Edgar, a captive, a wanderer, an exile — 
can it be, that thy tender bosom ever 

heaved 



S60 EDGAR. 

heaved one sigh in his long absence ? Thou 
beauteous maid, to whom bowed the proud- 
est of England's peerage ? Oh, my Julia, 
how shall I thank thee — love thee — devote 
my soul to thy happiness ; how express half 
the afTection, the tenderness, the respect, 
my soul bears thee ; thy sweet smile, thy 
soft look, so secure in heavenly innocence 
insinuate through every beat of life, and 
make me to stand abashed in the grandeur 
of virtue's silence." 

Thus spoke the lovely pair, and entered 
the court-yard. " Horses are pacing yon- 
der," said Atheling to a domestic, ** what 
guests?"—** My Lord of Warwick," re- 
plied he. " My father !" exclaimed Julia, 
— '* oh joy; where, where is he?" — ** I 
am here, my cherub," said the great Beau- 
champ, who hastened through the hall, ** I 
have only embraced my lady and my friend 
—give me my child — my children." Julia 
flung her lovely arm round the neck of her 
parent, and hid her sweet face in his breast. 
Atheling blushed and stopped. " Come 
hither, Edgar," cried Beauchamp, *' art 
thou not my son ? Let me embrace my chil- 
dren. 



BOOK XII. 261 

dren. Our gracious King commands me 
to hasten the preparation that he may give 
thee thy bride, Edgar, ere I agam depart 
for Aquitain ; he must needs have the nup^ 
tials solemnized at Windsor Castle in less 
than one month. He has himself written 
to my cherub for the day, that he may 
command magnificent entertainments." — 
" Oh, my father !" said the blushing Julia, 
again concealing her lovely visage, — whilst 
Edgar, transported with delight and happi- 
ness, flung himself on his knee before the 
Earl of Warwick, who raised and pressed 
him fervently in his arms ; and as Julia 
slid aside, Beauchamp took her hand, and. 
placing it in Atheling's, said, " Heaven 
bless you, my children;" and then turned 
away to seek the letters which he bore from 
the King to his friend and daughter. 

In a few days the timid Julia gave a 
tacit consent to the time fixed upon by the 
parents ; and, with a trembling hand, she 
obeyed the command of her father, and 
copied the reply that her mother had penned 
to the monarch of England and France. 

The 



26^ EDGAR. ; 

The messenger waited to receive it, and j 

hastened away. j 

Now the joyful news of the union of the j 

two noble families took wing, and spread ; 

abroad. The people rushed from every i 

adjacent part to catch one look at the chief ! 

£ind his beautiful bride. The castle-hall was 

crowded with guests ; and whilst every eye I 

gazed on the modest pair who were seated \ 

at the central table, the aged bards, de- ; 

lighted and inspired, poured forth sweet \ 

sounds to match the eloquence of verse ; ; 

every heart rejoiced in the hospitable board, 

and every lip invoked blessings and praise i 

on the houses of Mercia and Warwick. 

Edgar's father would no longer be absent 
from the honest throng. He was supported , 
into the hall for three nights — he passed ] 
round the goblet untouched, but he gave i 
the healths his people loved. ** My Coun- j 
try and my King," shouted every guest, : 
whilst tears gushed from many an eye at i 
the loved words. But the Earl of Mercia's ' 
light Wavered in its socket ; and a whiff ■ 
made it tremble. He too shouted, as he ! 

pressed j 



BOOK XII. S63 

pressed his hand on his virtuous breast, 
'* My Country and my King," — but, on the 
fourth evening, as he uttered the words^ 
he felt senseless in the high enthroned seat 
on which he had been placed. Atheling 
sprang, swifter than the pinioned dove^ 
and truer to nature's call, and grasped his 
beloved parent in his strong arms. " Away ! 
— give me room — or he is gone !" cried 
he to the multitudes that pressed forw^ard. 
They divided ; and the son, with distrac- 
tion's step, rushed with his loved burthen 
through to the large apartment within. 
Lady Elgiva, pale as the statue of death, 
fled after him. *' Open the casement, dear 
Madam," cried Edgar. *' Oh, my father ! 
look up — look ; 'tis your son calls;— your 
own child, who has for so many years been 
absent — look but a little — but one word! 
Oh, angels of heaven ! — yet a little grace, 
a little respite of his happiness ! My father, 
my friend, desert me not so soon, so very 

soon after we have met ! — My father " 

Atheling thus spoke, as wild teiTor 
brushed away the carnation of his cheek, 

and 



264 E D Ct A K. 

and left it faded as the moonbeam. The 
Earl of Warwick now hastened to assist his 
beloved friend, whilst the Countess, with 
clapped hands and silent woe, raised her 
fine eyes from her husband to heaven, and 
from heaven to earth, in supplication — and 
the Lady Julia leaned on her mother's 
shoulder, and hid her tears in the long 
ringlets that fell round her bosom. 

The ministering angel of high order 
that had been charged to usiier upward the 
enfranchised soul of a just man, now light- 
ed with unknown step in the cliamber. 
Tliousandsof inferior spirits fluttered arourrd 
him in all the beauty of innocence, and 
beatitude of joy. '• To your charge, ye 
innocents," said the angel, ** I have given 
the signal. Duririg one hour administer 
every soothing balm ; cheer every droop- 
ing suggestion of his weak frame ; lighten 
in him an holy ardour ; give him love, 
tranquillity and joy, whilst I break av/ay 
the little holds of life so gently that I may 
approach and embrace the new-born soul 
without causing to its dust one sigh." — 

Quickly 



BOOK XII. 2Go 

Quickly the heavenly attendants obeyed, 
and gathered in sweet onier round the 
charge. 

The Earl of Mercia again felt the glow 
of life : his breast again throbbed — he 
opened his dim eye. " He lives ! oh hea- 
ven, I bless thee 1 — he hves, and ail is 
well!" exclaimed Atheling, and grasped 
his father's hand. " Hush ! my beloved 
son," said Mercia, with a sweet smile ; 
" if it be true that I am still on earth — 
but what — what change works within me ? 
How placid my frame — how bright my 
hope — how cheered ra}^ views ! Hark I 
methinks I could almost hear an angel 
whispering peace to my soul — yes, surely 
*tia death — ^"tis death creeping to rae so 
softly, so tenderly, that my spirit may not 
be cast down ; yes, 'twill be sweet to throw 
<jff this perished suffering cover of dust, 
and to be robed in immortality. Oh, my 
Maker, I bless thee that I have lived pre- 
pared to stand at thy tribunal with humble 
confidence! I feel that I dare hope — I feel — 
I thank— and I adore thee, for all thy ma- 
nifold, thy wondrous mercies ; but most— 
VOL. I] I. M but 



^66 E D G A R. 

but most — for tliis sweet comfort, in the 
trying hour of separation from the earth, 
to which I have so h)ng clung. Oh, if I 
, had not remembered my Great Creator in 
my youth ! — if I had now my hasty peace 
to make with heaven! what horrors! — 
Lord of my life ! what praise shall I render 
thee, or how speak of thy gracious bene- 
fits ! Oh hither, my son, whilst life is still 
warm — thou, Elgiva, my chaste, beloved, 
and faithful partner — thou, my own Beau- 
champ — my sweet daughter, my innocent 
Julia, come — let me enfold ye all, by turns, 
in these trembling arms, and then — and 
then, I will spring forward, and wing my 
flight hence for ever." 

Atheling, in agonies of woe, bent over 
his departing father, to catch a last em- 
brace. ** Oh, my father — ^my parent— my 
friend !" he uttered, and his voice, smo- 
thered in grief, w^as lost. " Listen, my 
beloved son," said the Earl of Mercia ; 
** Julia, give me thy hand ; v/here art 
thou, my sweet blossom, my daughter ?" 
The tender maid put her innocent knee to 
the earth, and placed her cold lilly hand in 

the 



BOOK XII. 267 

the hand of her second father. He pressed 
it to his paternal lip ; then, holding Ed- 
gar's, and joining them, *« this, my chil- 
dren, representatives of my family, and 
supporters of my name, this is mine only 
wish, my dying command : that ye both 
attend the gracious monarch of England, 
on the appointed day. Let my dust be 
returned to mix with my ancestors, soon, 
very soon after my spirit has fled. Then, 
however early, commence the preparations 
for the nuptials ; and so may heaven bless 
your union. Lift me now, my friends, I 
beseech you, high on the couch ; I have 
still a duty." 

Beau champ, whilst his great breast swel- 
led with grief, assisted in raising his friend, 
and stretched him at his length. Edgar, 
speechless, knelt on one side, and the 
Countess in silent suffering remained near 
her loved partner, and hid her beautiful 
visage in the folds of her robe. Mercia 
paused awhile, and then continued : " let 
a domestic, if one be present, return to 
the great hall, and command hither all the 
youth and children." 

N ^ la 



268 EDGAR. 

In a few moments, with respectful step, 
and scarcely daring to breathe, advanced 
two hundred young men and virgins, of 
different ages, and ranged themselves with 
trembling awe round the immense saloon, 
opposite to their dying patron. The Earl 
then again spoke : 

" I have sent for ye, my friends, young, 
blooming as ye are, and in the morning of 
life, to gixzQ on my wasted frame, and to 
^fvitness my departure from earth. This 
suffering body will soon be cold and inanl- 
jnate — my pulse will soon cease to beat — 
my limbs will stiffen, and my soul will have 
broken away from dust, to return to it no 
more. But now hearken, my friends : — 
this change has no terrors for me ; your 
patron and your friend dreads not death, 
for he has lived prepared for this great day. 
All his petition to heaven has been, to 
embrace his child, your new Earl ; this 
wish has, with tenfold blessings, been 
granted him ; the son, the fond object of 
his care, is now near to close his, eyes ; he 
is even favoured with a bright prospect of 
happiness for this son, in a lovely and vir- 
tuous 



BOOK XII. 269 

tuous bride, and the daughter of the dear- 
est friend, next to your kind and good lady, 
of his heart. Who am I, Lord, to be so 
rich in thy wondrous bounties ?" 

" And yet, oh my people, and my 
friends, I look back on many parts of my 
life with sorrow, for man is faulty in his 
best of days. But by the joy that insinu- 
ates through every vein, and buoys up my 
heart, I dare hope — I feel — I am assured, 
that my God has pardoned my errors, and 
accepts the humble confidence I have re- 
posed in Him from my youth. Yes, I dare 
hope. Behold then, my joy, my faith, my 
placid frame ! behold, and remember how 
a christian can die. All ye, that have for- 
gotten your Maker, and have refused him 
praise, turn again without delay ; for life 
may not, as with me, be prolonged to old 
age. Look at me — wait till my last sigh be 
drawn— 'twill be soft as a babe's sleep ; for 
pain has fled away, and my soul smiles in 
full and perfect tranquillity." 

The Earl again paused — not a sound 

rose, to disturb his last impressive words ; 

even of movement there was none, save 

N 3 that 



^70 EDGAR. 

that of the hands that rose to sweep off the 
big and trickling tear. 

Meanwhile, the Guardian Angel that 
had watched over Edgar from his youth, 
met and saluted the guardian of his father. 
" I salute thee," cried the superior ; *« I 
salute thee, blessed harbinger of virtue ; 
well hast thou performed thine angelic 
mission ; but the day is arrived— youth is 
passed away ; the father mounts to bliss, 
and I quit the father to lead the son. Thy 
mission is finished, beauteous angel ; and 
another virtuous charge shall be thine, till 
thy favourite be blessed in his own off- 
spring, then will I expect thine attendance. 
I now step aside to admit the angel of 
death.'' — ** I hail thee, angelic power !" re- 
plied the guardian of youth, ** I hail the 
sacred mandate, and obey." 

The dying man now felt a soft heaviness 
steal over his eye. The ministering spirit 
advanced, and pressed lightly on his fore- 
head. In sweet and unheard accents, he 
cried, " come, thou righteous soul, that 
art to hasten away — come, I charge thee ; 
the harps swell to greet thee — the gates of 

Sion. 



BOOK XII. 271 

Sion open to receive thee — hasten, beloved 
soul, to new life, and joys unknown before.'* 
The Earl raised his hands : " farewell, 
my family — my friends — I come ! Re- 
member the death of a christian !" This 
said, his eye closed— his immortal part 
sprang forward, and was released in an 
instant from its dust. Ethereal robes were 
flung around it, and the angels assembled 
bowed in sweet salutation. The innocents 
burst into songs of praise, and with hea- 
venly smiles the new soul beamed o'er jts 
loved friends, and then rose with perfect 
bliss to mansions of everlasting rest. 

" He is gone ! Oh, father of mine in- 
fancy — oh, my most beloved father! — 
People, never will ye again hear his loved 
voice! — Oh, my father, my father i" cried 
Edgar, and fell beside the corpse. But 
he heard his mother's groan, as it burst 
from her heart, and he rushed to her. She 
folded him in her arms, but neither word 
nor tear escaped her. The Earl of War- 
wick, full of grief, advanced and seized 
both their hands, and drew them to ano- 
ther chamber 5 the Countess permitted the 

gentle 



Tf% EDGAR. 

geotle violence ; but when Julia with 
streaming eyes knelt before her, to excite 
the backward tear, sighs burst from her 
breast, and she wept. 

The following day the venerated dust 
was committed to the sepulchral vaults, 
with honours befitting a princely race ; and 
in two weeks, the most dutiful of children 
and most perfect of men bent before the 
King, to receive from his hand his beauti- 
ful and virtuous bride. 



NOTES, 



273 



NOTES. 



KoTE liO.^ — Cyprus. — It is a singular thing to re- 
present to ourselves, that, in the middle ages, the 
temples of Amathus and Idalia were transformed into 
dungeons A French gentleman vras King ofPaphos, 
and barons, covered with coats of mail were quartered 
in the sanctuaries of Cupid and the graces. — (Travels 
of De Chateaubriand, vol. i, p. 343.) 

Richard the First, King of England, obtained the 
kingdom of Cyprus by conquest, and exchanged it 
with Guy de Lusignan, the titular King of Jerusalem. 
In the year 1423 it became tributary to the Sultans of 
Egypt, and was ceded to the Republic of Venice by 
the widow of the last king of the house of Lusignan. 
^-(Thorutons Turkey, p. 135.) 

Note 111.^ — Cypre. — Je vis de tous cotf s des fem- 
mes et de jeancs fili.s vainement parees, qui alloient 
en cliantant les louanges de Venus, se devouer a son 
tempb : la baautC; ies graces, la joie, les plaisirs ecla- 
toient egalement sur leurs visages ; mais les graces y 
Violent trop affjctees: on n'y voyoit point un 3 noble 
fiimplicite, et una pudeur aimable, qui fait le plus grand 
charm3 de la beaute. . en un mot tout ce que je 
vo^^ois dans ces femmes, me sembioit vil ct niepris- 
abie ; a force de me vculoir plaire, elles me degoii- 
toient. — [Ttlhuajue^ livre iv.) 

Note 112. j — Military Orders. The military diver- 
sions of tournaments are not, as they have been gene- 
rally imagined to be, the invention of these latter 
ages. They were even customary among th-- Britons, 
as they remained among their descendants of Ireland 
and Caledonia to the third century. Such schools of 
■yrar, therefore King Arthur found already instituted 
in the provinces. And he seem.s to have particularly 
encotjraged them. Hence after the great victory. 

whicii 



S74 EDGAR. 

which he obtained over the Saxons in the Caledonian 
forest, he seems to have celebrated a triumphal tour- 
nament in the field. And the small entrenchment 
which has its ditches within the rampart, and is po- 
pularly denominated Arthur's Round Table, still 
remains upon the spot a probable memorial of the 
fact. 

But this wasnotenoughto diffuse a spirit of gallantry 
over the kingdom, and Lindle a flame of heroism in the 
nation. For that something else was requisite, which 
should allure by the novelty of the establishment, and 
engage by the permanency of the reward. This Ar- 
thur sav/, and established a military order. It was the 
first that had ever been instituted in the island; and 
it has been since imitated by all the nations on the 
continent. By means of this association, Arthur 
mixed among the provincials a general glow of inge- 
nuous heroism, the first spirit of chivalry that ever 
appeared in Europe. The order naturally survived 
its founder. And the members of it were denominated 
the Warriors of Arthur, though the persons were 
born half a century after his death. — (Whitakers 2d 
Vol. p. 63, 64.) 

Note 113/] — The eldest son of the Black Prince 
was Edward, who died a child. The second was 
Richard, afterv/ards King of England. 

Note 114.] — Vestiges of the antient Saxon dialect 
and idiom continue amongst us to this day. The x)ld 
Saxons used to reckon a small space of time by the 
night ; and we now do the same. Sen'night, or seven 
nights hence; fortnight, or fourteen nights hence, ars 
"both of Saxon origin, and are both admitted in mo- 
dern calculations of time,^{See Rajoins England.) 

Note 115.] — There are in different antient churches 
several very curious horns, or the figures of them, 
carved on stone, some of which are richly embossed and 
adorned with fine images. These utensils were used, 
it is imagined, for three purposes : for drinking cups ; 
for the assembling of persons in the favourite amuse- 
ments 



NOTES. T15 

ments of the chase, or to join in public worship* pre- 
rious to the general use of bells ; and for the pledge 
or seal in the endowment and enfeoffment of lands, by 
princes or chieftains. 

Sir William Dugdale makes mention of a beautiful 
relic of antiquity of this kind, now in the great church 
of York, thus: — 

" About this time also, Ulphe, the son of Thorald, 
who ruled in the West of Deira, by reason of the dif- 
ference which was like to rise between his sons, about 
the sharing of his lands and lordships after his death, 
resolved to make them all alike ; and thereupon com- 
ing to York, with that horn, wherewith he was used 
to drink, filled it witli wine, and before the altar of 
God and Saint Peter, Prince of the' Apostles, kneel- 
ing devoutly, drank the wine, and by that ceremony 
enfebffed this church with all his lands and revenues. 
The figure of which horn in memory thereof, is cut 
in stone upon several parts of the choir ; but, the horn 
itself, when the reformation in King Edward the 
Sixth's time began, and swept away many costly orna- 
ments belonging to this church, was sold to a gold- 
smith, who took away from it those tippings of gold 
wherewith it was adorned, and the gold chain affixed 
thereto ; since which, the horn itself being cut in ivory, 
in an eight square form, came to the hands of Thomas, 
late Lord Fairfax, in whose possession I saw it in the 
year 1666."t 

Note 116.^ — These kind of stones, Mr. Borlase, 
in his antiquity of Cornwall, p. 170, says, " are in 
that part of the world called Logan stones, which he 
conjectures may come from Logan, v/hich in the 
Guidhelian (or Irish) British signifies a pit, or hoUov/ 
of the hand, because in such hollows this moving stone 
is often found, or it may be a corruption of the Bri- 
tish Llygatyn, bewitching, because the singular pro- 
perty of this stone might seem the effect of witchcraft. 
The first of these opinions has this against it, that all 

Logan 

* Vide Dr. Henry. 

t Dugdale's Hist. Account of rtie Catli. Church of Vork, p. / 
London, 1715. 



276 EDGAR. 

Logan stones are not found in hollows, which yet 
would be necessary to get this general name for them 
all. In the north of England they are mostly found 
on high situations, which, if I mistake not, this peo- 
ple chose as often as they could. The second seems 
a little far fetched ; and yet the name of Golcar, where 
the stone in question is placed, may be thought to 
favour it in some degree, if it be taken for a contrac- 
tion of Galdercar, for Erl&ejie in the Anglo-Saxon 
language means an enchanter or a foreteller of future 
events, the very character of a Druid ; and Eajrji is a 
rock. 

It is uncertain what language .the word Logan is 
derived from, which makes it more difficult to guess at 
its meaning. One would think that as the name seems 
peculiar to Cornwall, the etj'^mology of it should be 
fetched from the ancient language of that country, 
and if so, why may it not be a contraction of le, a 
place, and hogen, vile, and get the appellation of the 
vile or wicked place, when the inhabitants of that 
neighbourhood began to embrace Christianity, or le 
may be considered as a prepositive article, and the 
words stand thus — 

L'Hogen stones, the vile stones, alluding to such 
practices of the Druids there, as the following more 
enlightened ages held in detestation — {Rev. John Wat- 
son on Druidical Remains in or near Halifax, Archccolo* 
gittj vol. 2.) 



THE END. 



Pf jnttd by 0)x and Baylis, 
6r«rt Queen Street^ Lincoln'vli^-Wwa. 
