THE



WILD IRISH BOY.



I Got home on fire with emotions T did

not understand. No man, or woman, or child, knew less of love than 1 did. When I thought of her surpassing beauty, of the intolerable splendour of her wit and grace and manner, of attractions which annihilated the power of time, and almost that of humanity;- when no other thought w&s present to me for hours; when my senses seemed all absorbed in mental sight, and that sight had but one object; when every place I beheld was the drawing-room of iUontrevor-House, and in solitude and. society I only saw its brilliant enchantress

vOL. II. B





when amid the incessant and restless scintillations of her wit and her beauty, I still felt that she was unhappy, that her endless struggle for wit and distinction was too like a struggle to hide inward pain, and thought of it with agony and fondness, I still did not know that I loved. I owed this fatal ignorance to my inexperience of life, as well as inexperience of my own heart. I did not believe it possible seriously to love a married voman. Of the vices of society I knew but little, and there is a spell shed orer the higher duties of life by the indefinite sacredness of authority, which a young mind dreads to break. I abandoned myself to the fatal indulgences of thought. I believed there was no more of crime in fixing my whole soul upon her image than upon a picture or a statue, and as little danger. I knew not that I loved, till the knowledge was too late.

They who expect to hear of impurity paHiated and blanched by the ,pencil of sophistry, or the ties of society dissolved before the breath of sentiment, should read these pages no further. They will neither find guij t justified, nor wretchednsss exalted into fantastic and impossible felicity. I avow my errors, but I avow the in to deplore them; I exhibit them, but I exhibit them that their consequences may warn* not corrupt, and I exhibit them without fear, for they were errors of feeling, not of conduct, they therefore exhibit no op" portunity of seductive description, and topical vice, they were errors only of feeling, and therefore fatal as they have been to peace, 1 display them that the more terrible consequences of practical deviations may be inferred and deprecated from their display.





For many days I was immersed in a quiet delirium; I never uttered her name, though I loved to hear guttered by others, and was sufficiently feasted with the wonder, and censure, and admi* ration, and a thousand awkward expressions of mingled and singular feeling, such as she inspired among her starers, for they could hardly be called any thing else. For the first week I dreaded to see her; she was one only to be seen at intervals; a perpetual blaze is only productive of pain and blindness. But Masiseau, with all the adroitness of a Frenchman, procured admission among the higher servants of Montrevor-House, and then procured such information of the habits of its inmates as could only be interesting to a Frenchman or a lover. I suffered him to tell me of Milord's and Mesdemoiselles' (for there were two daughters) domestic habits, of which I do not remember one word; and he then proceeded without an inquiry from me to tell me that Miladi had never been visible to domestic or inmate, or visitor, since her arrival in Ireland, except the day I saw her, on which day, after declining Milord's intreaties (by message) that she would honor thy table be





her presence, she thought proper to rise just as the dinner-bell was ringing, and hurry down in her robe dechambre, hardly allowing Bennet time to pin on her veil. The time before and since that day she passed almost entirely in bed, suffering no attendance except from her own woman, who gave her her laudanum and coffee, the latter of which she took four times a day; and when Hennet, who was a woman of some merit and consequence with her lady, ventured to expostulate with her on such dangerous habits, her lady told her that she had no object in life but to sleep out the remainder, and that she only lamented she could not sleep away what was past as well as what was to come, "but that," said she, "neither , coffee nor laudanum can do for me now.'' The account concluded with lamentations by all the performers for the lost splendours and luxuries of London, where their lord and lady had outshone all that was splendid





o'r luxurious, but they comforted themselves by the observation that it was impossible that their lord, whose eldest son was 'of such abilities and consequence as tb be an embassador at the age of six and twenty, whose youngest son was one of tbe'most distinguished and popular officers of the day, and a peculiar favorite with royalty, and whose three eldest daughters were married respectively to the Premier, a'Scoteh Marquis, and a commoner of the first talents and influence, should be suffered with such an host of alliances and •bnnexions, to languish away life in banishment. To all other parts of the account X was deaf, but of Lady Montrevor. How was I witched by the caprice, and exalted by the magnanimity, and touched by the real and inward wretchedness! It was evident she knew nothing of domestic happiness; she could not love her husband: he was a man vain and insincere, and unprincipled; she did not love her





children, they were perhaps careless, perhaps unworthy of her affection; yet with all her powers of exciting and enjoyingadmiration, with her wit and her beauty yet blazing in their meridian, she had followed them into obscurity and solitude, though, the world would have detained and justified her, though she had neither consolation nor praise for the effort, though she lay down to lose in artificial and baneful sleep the memory of what she was, and where she was. Lost in thinking of her, I neglected all around me: 1 neglected the society of Hammond, and Cor-, bett, and my uncle, from the latter indeed I was repelled by the hints of Delorajpe, for L was jealous to a degree that at any time made me prefer the most obnoxious and ridiculous conduct to the pain of my own feelings. M You are an amazing favorite with the Chieftain,5' said, Deloraine: "you are certainly in for his acres and 'his thousands, and his castle, if it will hold up so long; and upon my soul I am heartily glad of it: a wild, dashing, careless fellow like me would scatter the whole system to the devil in a few years; but you are a sedate, sentimental youth, who will drain your bogs, and repair the old towers, and beget children to inhabit them, and live like a saint, and die like a Patriarch among them." This was very "tragical mirth" to me, I could not endure it, I writhed under it; this creeping, ingratiating, Joseph-Surface character, was the last in the world that resembled mine, or that 1 wished it to resemble. I struggled under a fictitious consciousness of mendicant duplicity, with a spirit that despised money, and that would not falsify its sentiments or habits for the wealth of the world. There was but one way to extricate myself: I entirely neglected my uncle, and though my own heart reproached me, and the querulous weakness of deserted age reproached me, I bore it





all, not without anguish, but without relenting; yet I wished I could be allowed to reverence dignity, and to love affection, without a suspicion of selfishness or aggrandizement. I attached myself much to Deloraine; I forced myself to bear and even to assume much of his coarseness of language and thought, that I might at least make him all the amends of friendship. Hammond saw my estrangement with surprize, but it was not in Hammonds nature to complain. But these things were to me as the visions of a dream, and the only reality of life had become a vision of but one bright and lovely phantom. I cannot tell the childish joy with which I saw the carriage and liveries of the Montrevors coming up the avenae at Lemon-Grove, though I knew that carriage did not contain her. Lord M. made it a point to accept every invitation from the company he had entertained, and every morning, while his Frenchman dressed him, execrated the wine and dinners, and Company, and country, in which his attendant joined with the utmost devotion, and then ruefully asked did they come among that gens barbare, pour mourir-la—" Non pour mourir," said his lordship, " mais pour vivre, M. Boivin; we must suffer here a little longer On Col. Montolieu's account; I have been always a man who made sacrifices to my children/' The Frenchman, out of humour at the delayj muttered something about his making sacrifices to his children-, and hasted awdy to tell Masseau of his despair. To my father's he came with less repugnance, they agreed pretty nearly in their judgment of wine, dinners, and life. The evening would have passed in the silent luxury of gourmands, but the Chieftain was there: he was no eater, no drinker, and the light topics that were hardly allowed to interrupt the pleasures of appetite, he would not join. He watc.hed for the conversation of the English peer; he heard nothing but the axioms of Apicius delivered with the spirit of a Petronius. He was disconcerted and astonished. The very dignity of Lord M. seemed to him like trifling; it was modern dignity, polished and pliant and accessible. The Chieftain had formed his own ideas on different modes of life.





Any man who withdraws his eye from a Gothic ruin to fix it on a Grecian palace will find the transition unfavorable. He will find in its very symmetry, and grace, and milder majesty, something mean and minute. Lord M. saw a venerable old man, of lofty demeanour, sitting in jealous and gloomy silence; he imagined that his reserve proceeded from a consciousness of superior dignity, and to dissipate it, addressed some trifle to him in the most flattering tones by the name of Mr. De Lacy.

B e





The Chieftain retreated. "I am not Mr. De Lacy."—" I beg pardon, I am unacquainted with your title; a physician, perhaps, I should have collected that from your costume." The scarlet cloak was frequently worn by foreign physicians, and there was something strikingly foreign in my uncle's air, independent of his costume.

He was too much provoked to let himself be mistaken any longer. He waved his arm. "I am De Lacy, my Lord;'' "my illegitimate children, (if I had any,) would be Mr.'s De Lacy; a designation borne, I suppose, by your Lordship's younger sons." His Lordship's retenue was never to be surprized or vanquished: he immediately recollected the modes of the Irish or Highland chieftains; observed that it was highly proper that primitive dignity should be marked by some striking and uncommon designation; that the peerage was too cheap a distinc





tion; that he, himself, though distinguished by an illustrious lineage, venerated his ancestors more for their virtues than their titles; he concluded by asking De Lacy to take wine with him, with a countenance of which the composure was easy only to him. The Chieftain was not so easily conciliated; he mixed the wine with water, and observed that the sentiments he had just heard his Lordship utter on the distinction of high descent, were, he believed, not common among the English peers." "Among all of them who possess the distinction 1 should hope," said his Lordship, who really was proud of his rank. "Men who cannot remember their grandfather's names, may be allowed to be indifferent to what those names might have been, but we may be allowed to improve higher feelings than memory in a review of an ancestry which extends to the Conquest.—You remember the date of the Conquest," said he, " addressing him*





self to my uncle, whom he intended to fell with his own weapon. The Chieftain sard it was easy to remember the dates of recent transactions. "Recent, my very good sir, do you call the conquest of England by the Duke of Normandy recent?" "My Lord," said the Chieftain, *' to a Milesian every thing is recent but his own pedigree.0 Whatever was the effect of this speech on Lord M. it was impossible to perceive. The Chieftain was too important a man in the country not to be included in his canvassing plans. He applied himself more closely to my uncle; spoke humbly of the English peerage, and the English cabinet and English measues; censured the patched and partyaided conquest of Henry the Second; execrated the memory of Oliver Cromwell; and spoke with respect of a work in which it was attempted to prove that Ireland was one of the first countries which was inhabited after the deluge. The Chieftain, whose notions of Irish antiquity were indefinitely romantic, seemed not perfectly satisfied with this limitation; and his Lordship, who was not incumbered with too much deference for the Mosaic system, proceeded to observe, that he had little doubt that there were nations of an antiquity which might make theology rather jealous if it were examined. H<re he was checked by the priest who always attended the Chieftain, who hinted that he would neither be pleased nor convinced by any thing that impeached the verity of the sacred writings. "At least, my Lord," said my father, who was amused by his dexterity, " it is not your fault if the Irish are not the first nation in the world." "Nor their own," rejoined his Lordship, bowing to the company. This was irresistible; and the Chieftain, in language which shewed he had neither forgot the feeling nor the habits of high-breeding, pressed his Lordship to honor the Castle with his presence so zealously that his Lordship could not refuse. He appeared to feel as little difficulty in passing over the stiff and outre manners of Miss Per<cival, and in praising the graceful timidity of Sybilla, to whom he brought a most flattering invitation from Lady Montrevor to a ball she purposed giving the following week; though his lady, just before his coming out to dinner, had positively assured him that he might give a ball, and dance at it if he thought it proper or wholesome; but it must be a pas seul if it depended on her, as no persuasion could induce her to witness the ass-race he was determined on.





His Lordship, who knew that to succeed in his plari, he must be all things to all men, as well as to all men, and that nothing could succeed better with females than a ball, solicited, and remonstrated in vain, till at length condescending to be angry, he told her Ladyship he might as well reason with a stone. "Very probably you are, my Lord, after my encountering the gorgon' faces of those country ladies to please you the other day." "To please me, Lady Montrevor, I beg you will not be so unjust to your own motives; it was caprice, it was whim, it was Lord Roschamp, or his dog, or a wish to exhibit your morning" dress, because I wished you to appear with splendour. As you make a merit of perpetual opposition, I do not wish to de-' prive you of the only one you can claim." "I am sorry your Lordship does not allow me an opportunity of doin^ you equal justice, but how shall I ascribe even on© to you." "Your wit or your anger, Lady M. are to me like the lightning playing on the' impassive ice;' you know me; you know I only came here to go away, to go with some trifling advantage, some accession of interest or consequence, that will change the scene on my return, and make people forget where I was, and why. In





these back-settlements, among the savages, I will not stay, that's flat." "Which- is flat, your Lordship's argument or your wit." "How is it?" said the peer, in the most soothing accents, " that whenever I wish to consult you on business, you always assume a face' of levity, and"—"If it is only a face of business you want* my Lord, I beg you will; let me summon Benuet, who had the busiest face you ever beheld a moment ago, you and she may consult vis-a-vis or tete-a-tete, or— Bennefc what business had you with that face you thrust in here just as my lord came in/* "I only wanted to see if your ladyship is. here or not." "Well, and now that you do see my ladyship is here or not"-— "I only wanted a book that madame said she had mentioned to your ladyship, that she wished to borrow for the young ladies." ** My compliments to the young ladies, and I fancy they might borrow for it themselves." "Dear mamma," said the





youngest, half entering, " so I would, but I thought you might not like it." "You were bid to say so, my dear, but even that is better than being bid to feel, as you would want to be, I suppose, if I did like it, and expected you to like it. Don't be afraid Ida, or ashamed, the heart is a part of the system that will spare us- many a blush, if we are without it: and now, my dear, to business. What book do you want?" 44 They are some French fairytales; mamma* I have forgot the name, but I'should know the book, for the cover is all gilt and varnished." "A French fairytale, and all varnished: sit down, my dear, on that sopha, and I will tell you a fairytale in English, and it shall be an unvarnished tale." The child wondering at the permission sat down. "Is it of me, or of the griffin-head you lean on, you are afraid, Ida?" The child was silent. "Always try to look at your ease, my dear, however you may feel, 'Am I on a bed of rosesF" Thechilchshd not understand her mother's wit, and vfcas impatient for the story: Lord Montrevor was impatient too, but not for the story. '' About a thousand years ago, Ida, when matters were very like what they are at present, there lived a giant, who inhabited a castle of which he had plundered some unfortunate caitiff, who had become, m wg are told, a knigh|errant in consequence, looking for his castle like a discarded knight at chess. This giant detained, among other prisoners, a lady of whom he had possession neither by right nor by courtesy, but by the most mean and unprincipled of frauds—I believe the language of romance would call it foul treachery, but I am not speaking the language of romance, am I, my Lord?" Lord Montrevor picked his teeth with great diligence. "In process of time, this castle was pulled about his ears, and the greater part of it fell on the poor lady's head, or her heart, no matter where. The





giant immediately carried her off to adesert country, all bog and savage dens and savage faces, and he proposed here, by feeding hogs and selling them, or their grunts, to recover all his grandeur." His lordship hemmed with visible uneasiness. "But he insisted upon his unfortunate lady feeding the hogs too, upon which she said— what did she say, my lord?" Lord M. muttered to himself between his shut teeth, " By G—d, there's no bearing this:" and then added, in the sweetest tone, " Is not your ladyship detaining Ida too long from her morning-walk?" "I must finish the story, my lord: the lady speaking with firmness for once, answered, I retired with you, because the dignity of retirement was all that was left us, but I never will degrade that dignity by a display of consequence I do not possess, and of promises never to be fulfilled, nor impoverish my son by the expenses of a doubtful struggle, nor confound my own selfish schemes with the interests of my family, that 1 may revel in worthless luxury again, and parade about in the shameless impunity of ostentatious wickedness." "Did the lady say all that to the giant, mamma?" said the child, who possessed something of her mother's wit. "Yes, my dear, she was at length provoked to s-*y it, for she was harassed and weary; she had no support, no refuge, no resource, none, none," said Lady M. striking the sopha with a kind of sorrowful impatience. "Had she no children, mamma?" said the child, looking earnestly at her mother. "Ida, my dear," send Bennet here, "I want some rouge, these odious turf fires flush one so." Lady Montrevor rose as she spoke, and put her hand to her cheek, she walked up to Lord M. who was calmly comparing his watch with a time-piece on a cabinet, without observing that the latter had stopt. "My lord, I have put on my face, of business, as you may see if you will condescend to





look at me, and—" "Pardon me, Lady M. I wish, I request you to be calm, to drop this busines. We will speak of it when we have forgot this explosion. You were warm, or perhaps I was warm; to hear the purity of my intentions mistaken was, perhaps, too painful for me." "Allow me, my lord, I have but little to say, I know this whole business completely; I know your heart, I beg pardon, your intentions I should say. You purpose to get this borough for George at the expense of a few good dinners and bad promises; you will charge him a most enormous bill of costs. He has no means of paying it either from his appointment or otherwise; you will take his bond for it in your kindness or your wisdom, raise money on it at at the expense of some deluded wretch, who will be ignorant of the colonel's privilege till it is too late, anTl you will have his ruin presented to you in the morningpaper as you swallow your chocolate, and, swallow them both avec le meme gout. This, or some such thing, happened on Aurelian's appointment. You see I understand it all, too well to take any steps, dancing or otherwise, to promote it. Now, my lord, the explosion is over; but remember that lava, when it grows cool, is the hardest substance in the world." "I am perfectly astonished Lady M. at your total want of retenite; I am really surprized and distressed to a degree that"— "So am I, my lord, suprized myself; you so seldom hear from me the language of a wounded spirit; it is indeed so useless to utter it, that you have perhaps mistaken the power of concealing my feelings, for a total extinction of them; the mistake was worthy of you, I am ashamed to have rectified it. Think me so still; I can bear it; I can bear any thing better than to be known by one who cannot know me, and pitied and pacified and managed by one who has no heart.'* "I am convinced,





Lady Montrevor, your cooler judgment will do me justice;" and he bowed as low as if retiring from the presence of majesty. Lady Montrevor flung herself on the sofa, and spread her handkerchief over her face; she remained quiet so long.that Bennet, who had come in with the rouge, thought she was asleep, and was retiring. "Isn't it the hour for taking my drops," said her lady in a low voice. "I thought your ladyship was asleep.'' The drops were brought. Lady M. slowly drew the handkerchief from her face. Traces of tears were on it. "Heaven bless me and forgive me," said Bennet, " what can be the matter with your ladyship?'I'll be hanged if this vile country will not be the death of us all. Will you take the drops, my lady?'' "'No," said Lady Montrevor,' in a tone which Bennet had never heard before, " it is no matter, it will be all over soon.'' She repeated these words three or four times. "Will your ladyship have

vOL. II. c





the rouge at least?" said Bennet, querulously. "Yes, yes, the rouge, give ine the rouge," said her ladyship, starting up. 'i Here, my lady,'here—Oh, bless and forgive my stupid head, this is not the rouge, this is the box with the Egyptian medal that was on your ladyship's toilet, and in my confusion I"—" Was it! Oh well— Benriet, I think I have heard you admire that medallion, take it and wear it, or bury it—but Bennet, never while you live, tell any one you saw me shed a tear." Bennet promised with her eyes overflowing; and then related the whole to Mr Boivin, by whom it was told to Masseau. But after this communication I strictly forbad Masseau to seek for or repeat any more; the sufferings of such a mind were no subject for the curiosity of a domestic. I could not endure to hear her spoken of as unhappy ; yet I thought of her unhappiness myself with approbation, even with delight. Her lofty impatience, her silent





unpublished struggles, the anguish of a mind too proud for complaint, and despairing of affection, were all indications that her present habits were all forced and unnatural, that her vanity, her levity, her dissipation, were all artificial and irksome; that she was formed for better things, and was conscious of it, that to other children she might have been an affectionate mother, and with another husband, an exemplary wife. <

Perhaps the reformation of a veteran woman of fashion by a boy of seventeen will be laughed at as the excess of moral knight-errantry, yet I fed my mind with it in delight, and when it seemed hopeless, I still thought how passing beautiful she was. Cards, however, were issued for the ball; the country was delighted with Lortl M.'s hospitality. No people are so easily summoned to festivity as the 'Irish. I went in hope and fear; she had declared she would not appear: but I should at least hear her name uttered, I should s«e the spot over which she had walked. I should see again the last place in which J had beheld her. Those who have not loved may laugh at this as they may.





Sybilla and I arrivtd late; the rooms were decorated with a splendor perfectly new to us; we were both just from s> liool; we had never danced on floors chalked with Mosaic devices, nor moved through groves of rose and geranium, relieved by walls of the lightest green and inters >ersed with lights, that gleamed like stars through the foliage.

Sybilla called it a place of enchantment, and I looked around for the Armida. The dancing had begun, and all eyes were attracted by the sylph-like form, and exquisite flight of Miss Montolieu through the dance; I have no other name for motions so light and rapid; ber limbs were like pinions, and her drapery like air; it was the first time I had beheld the fashionable costume, and upon another it might





have " altered my cheek with some thoughts lutirm;" but there was something so aerial and infantine about Miss Montolieu, so pure'in her snowy drapery and her complexion, that I gazed on her form and its fantastic undulations, as I would on the gambols of a fairy queen.

I resigned Sybilla's hand to Hammond, and was gazing on the orange tree which had been placed on a post of honor in the dancing-room, when Lord Montrevor, who Was bowing his way through a croud of young men, came up. He was passing on with the same gracious recognition, when he suddenly checked himself— "Mr. Bethel, is it possible you don't dance; I thought you were dancing with Miss Montolieu; I can't imagine by what mistake tiie ball has commenced without you: I assure you it is my wish to distinguish the relarive of my very respectable fr.ends at I/miou-Grove and the Castle, by every possible attention." This was flattering; and the delicacy with which he sunk my relationship to his respectable friends was to me still more so. I bowed and blushed, and uttered some inarticulate expressions of respect and pleasure. "I assure you, Mr Bethel, my expressions of regard are not trivial or commonplace" His lordship depressed his voice, and assumed an air of importance. "I consider you a very distinguished young man, there are few. very few, of whom 1 would say so much, or think so much; if you will accept the advice and directions of a man, whose influence and experience in life may be of no trivial use to you, it is probable you will make a very conspicuous figure; my plans, with regard to this county, which 1 shall communicate to you as soon as possible, will in their result prove highly advantageous to you. I cannot say more at present; I am not a man in the habit of committing myself: but I beg you will on no account suffer yourself to





be surprized into a discovery of the senti* ments I have communicated to you tonight—we will speak of these things another time.'' Here his lordship glided away to repeat nearly the same words to Hammond, whose father's numerous tenantry rendered him an object of nearly equal canvassing consequence. My eyes, as Lord M. Tetired, were again bent on the door, but no longer bent on vacancy; she was there, but her form enveloped again in a morning dress, was so dubious, that, till I heard her laughing loudly with Lord R. and Sir John, who stood lounging near the door, I almost looked on her as the vision of a longing eye. Motion is not always voluntary; I knew not where I was till I felt myself near her, and then I wished I was again at a distance, where to gaze was safer; for of such beauty the near presence was dazzling and oppressive. When I saw her most exquisite form, whose fullness appeared to have hardly reached an early maturity; her attitudes displaying an undulation of youth and a luxury of grace; her face so beautiful, that the eye which was raised to it, languished with its radiance, but could not withdraw itself; her sparkling and ambitious manner claiming homage from all, and sporting with the homage of all. When I saw her, this brilliant and bewitching creature, who - seemed formed for some peculiar world of splendor and pleasure, where vanity was no folly, and dissipation not a crime, when I saw her wretched, and concealing her wretchedness under the glare of her wit and beauty from every one but herself, my heart was wrung with love and pity. I would have shed its warmest blood to have served and saved her; but I was carried away like herself by her gaiety and facility, and forgot all pain in the sound of her voice. "This is vastly gay and ridiculous ; 1 protest my levee is quite crowded—my levee actually, I have but





just risen, if you wiJI believe me or my costume/'—" Damme I am just as I was all day, myself," said Lord R. "Just as you are every day, 1 dare say, my lord; but I protest I do this out of pure politeness; it is dreadful' to think of these poor people assembling from all quarters to stare at me, and going home quite disappointed. I was determined they should have something to stare at; Lady Montrevor in her robe du matin at midnight will last them all their lives, and probably add someyears to it; I can't imagine how I could have gratified them more, except by adopting the costume of Grannweal or the Castle-Spectre." I ventured to say that to submit to be gazed at, was only paying the tax on beauty, and was sorry the next moment I had said, any thing so foolish and flippant. "I beg pardon," said Lady M. putting up her glass, "I hope what you said will bear repetition, for I cannot for my soul attend to any thing but that very interesting figure in blue: she is the only creature I ever saw whom real timidity did not render awkward— who is she?'' I was too proud and delighted with her notice of Sybilla not to mention her name immediately, besides I was afraid Lord R. and Sir John might say something idle or impertinent. "At present I wish she would walk or dance away, for she is hiding a multitude of sins in the performer next to her; but that lady will not be hid I see. Look at her, my lord, she seems to say to her partner, like Lear to his pursuers, 'If you hare it you shall get it by running,' and now the poor deluded girl will go home and tell her friends she has been dancing. But, for Heaven's sake! who is that detestable personage who is rising to dance en masse, with a plumage like that in Otranto? She actually is, my lord, the picture of the Rees, don't you remember the Rees, her first Winter in London, when every woman in





the world, or out of it, went about with her hair disarranged and streaming like Parisot's in La Fille Sauvage. The Rees never could go any where unless capped and jewelled; actually when she entered the room with that fabric of gold muslin, and diamonds, and Ostrich feathers, she was completely a fore-shortening of one of her native Elephants with his castle on his back."

Lady M. was incessant in ridicule; she would hardly pause while I begged leave to introduce my sister, whom she received with a grace and dignity that seemed too evidently a determination to dazzle the timid rustic, who confessed to me that not even to behold such beauty would she encounter its whole aspect fixed on her again. "Miss Bethel, I am so charmed with your performance, you must dance again for my pleasure, and your own I hope. Lord Roschamp, won't you dance, Sir John wo'n: you V* No, damme, not T, no- 'pon my sou!, can't,dance, quite lame, quite exhausted looking on," was repeated by both loungers. I felt no small resentment at this inverted proposal, and insolent rejection, but Lady M. according to her own notions, was securing the highest advantage to Sybilla, by the notoriety of introducing her to two fashionables. "Don't be surprised, Miss Bethel," said her ladyship, " these men are not the helpless objects they appear; they have eyes, though they cannot see; and they have limbs though they cannot move, and they have ears, though they will not hear sometimes. They are at present spellbound by fashionj and unless the witch waves her wand again, they will probably remain in this melancholy state during the term of their animal lives: in the mean time, to alleviate their misery, I.give them as much employment from time to time as they are capable of. I gave your bror ther my ridicule the other night to carry,





but I believe I shall bestow it on Sir John —he is a much fitter object for it." "Oh, damme, then," said Sir John, who wished to make a hit, "you must take the perfectionnaire out of it, fur your Ladyship has such frequent occasion for it, that I never should be able to do it." "That you may understand Sir John, Miss B. (which is not always easy) you are to know that a perfectionnaire is a box containing compartments for rouge and fard, whichever you may want. Now I perceive by your blushing that violent and virtuous red, that you're determined to go home and tell jour grandmother of all the mischief Lady.Montrevor has said and done to you; by the bye, that very feeling or habit of blushing is one of the best arguments in the world for rouge; you, who don't use it, are obliged to blush for every one's enormities, while I who do, am never seen or felt even for my own." As she spoke, I thought her eye wandered towards me; my heart was throbbing to tell her there was one who felt she could blush and could weep, one who pitied,





who honored, who 1 dared not have

told her that.

A considerable circle had now collected round the door, those who were near enough, listened, and those who were not, stared; but the moment the heat became intense from the crowd, Lady M. declaring she was expiring with cold, and drawing her veil over her face, disappeared in a moment. I remained gazing on the spot where she had stood, and listening to sounds that I thought still floated on the air. I was roused by Sybilla's taking my arm as a kind of protection from the persecution of Sir John and the peer, who were applying their glasses within six inches of her face, and repeating to each other—" damn'd good faith— develish weil-limbed—-rather too flimsy though." I was withdrawing with my eyes fixed on their unmeaning faces with an expression they need not have misconstrued, for I was provoked by a long course of tacit insult, and a kind of tacit rivalry; but Hammond came up, for the last dance of the set was just commencing, and I again lingered near the door without a single motive, but that it was the last place in which I had beheld her. Sir John and Lord Roschamp lounged there still, tapping their ancles with short switches, and occasionally uttering oaths by way of interjections of ridicule or contempt, when Lady Montrevor again flashed on us, her whole dress and costume altered as if by enchantment. The robe de chambre was thrown off, her whole dress was a frock of the richest white lace over a pink silk vest and pantaloons; her arms, for sleeves she had none, were clasped at the shoulder with pearls, her bosom was hardly varied by a pearl chain, and her shining hair folded round her head was suspended in front by an ornament of pearls, while the richer ornament of her ringlets fell behind in a cluster as if accidentally escaping from the tuft in which they were collected. No language can convey the feelings with which I saw her approach; the first I will ingenuously confess was an almost painful sense of bashfulness: I was a boy, unused to the display of female attractions, and utterly unacquainted with that full and tempting developement that distinguished the modern costume; I turned away sick with desire and delight; at the second glance, I felt my eye more steady, and my cheek less flushed; at-the third, I knew not what happened, for I know not when it ceased. There was a pomp of allurement about this high and luxurious beauty, that inspired more voluptuousness than awe. I -approached her with less diffidence, every man approaches a woman drest as she was with diminished diffidence.— "Damme, you're equipped for dancing, am sorry I wore boots,'5 said the baronet and his peer, as she approached, viewing her with about the same intelligence of pleasure that they would an haunch of venison or a fresh bottle of Burgundy. "I ought to be much obliged to you or your boots," said Lady M. "but I have no intention of dancing." "But will you not look on the dancers? they had the good fortune to amuse you the last performance, and their powers or their zeal dou't seem at all diminished." Allthig was very silly, but I said it to withdraw her from the door. I almost ventured to touch her hand as I spoke. She did not withdraw it. "Really I am afraid to venture too near them, there is a kind of wild animation in their movements, that makes me strongly suspect they are all under the influence of Oberon's magic flute, and cannot help what they are doing; now I can, unless I venture within the spell, and then I should be compelled to gambol along with them, and then"—" And what then,"





said I, for her facility had made me bold. "Why then, perhaps, I might lay hold on you, and compel you to join me in poetical justice." "If that be the condition, I shall tempt you to the very verge of the spell—we are within its influence, do you feel it, or is it not enough in poetical justice that I should feel it?" "Oh, perfectly enough, but in civil justice I should inform you, that we are at the end of the set, and that I am the most capricious creature in the world, and that unless you can find some one who would rather see me dance than herself, which will be sufficiently hard, it is probable I shall be in my first sleep by the time you have succeeded to the head of the room." Sybilla was near the top, but the moment I hinted Lady Montrevor's wish, every one made room for her.' I led her to the head of the room; it was a moment of joy and pride, every eye was on us; to have touched her hand but in solitude was a dream that made me blush even in sleep; but to have and to hold it in the presence of multitudes who envied and wondered —was it a wonder that I was intoxicated with pleasure and vanity? Let my age and country, and constitution, be remembered. Lady M. 'saw the madness rise'—she felt that one of us was imprudent—no woman ever knew how to laugh off a thing with such levity. "This gentleman," said she to the ladies near her, "insists upon my teaching him the mode of dancing in fashion, in the reign when I first went to Court; he is so good as to dispense with the hoop and lappets, and minuet, and so he will probably with the rest of the ceremony—we had better go off as soon as possible." I will not attempt to describe her dancing, but by its effects; it was an exercise in which I was said to excel—I was at least sufficiently fond of it; yet all power, except that of gazing at her exquisite motions, forsook me; she moved like a genius moving his pinions on the''confines of light. An involuntary burst of admiration issued even from the insipid women who had collected about her with no other object than to wonder at her-dress. For a few moments I floated in the air, as she seemed to do; she had hardly glided through half the. set, when she ran abruptly out of it, declaring that she never would dance again "till a new comet appeared, or the Irish minstrel could play in time, or"—I followed her to catch the sentence, or her hand, which jshe had but half withdrawn } it was too much for me, her beauty and her dancing, and her facility, and she was one who never abated the lustrt of her perfections ; she passed-through the rooms, and 1 still followed her. bir John and Lord Rcschamp were in the gallery where refreshments were spread; a part of the entertainment to which they seemed to do justice with infinite satisfaction. "Was





your ladyship dancing? damme, I'd have gi"eu any thing to see you dance. You wii! probably see me dance, With the help of another bottle of Champagne, if I stay." She passed on quickly, as if with some intention or object. 1 followed her almost passively; she entered a recess at the end of the gallery, feebly illuminated, and almost fiiled with roses; she sunk in a seat, neither of ns spoke; my heart beat audibly; she was beside me so beautiful in silence and thought, so beautiful in partial shade and surrounding odours. I spoke first—my mind was burning, but my voice was trembling. I know not what I said —something about the roses, their fragrance, and their foliage, and the light that ;trembled through them, a shadowy and mellow ray like moonlight. "Yes," said she, absently, * able to chase all sadness, all sadness but despair." I was flushed, and daring with indulgence— "What a word is despair for such lips as





those to utter?" "It is the only one they are accustomed to utter in solitude." I caught at the last word—" This solitude was formed for other sounds—This place may seem for lovers' leisure made."— "Now, instead of pure description, shall we have a little sense," said she, hastily. "I brought you here, because in this shade your face bears a strong resemblance to a person, a friend, the only one I ever had— one whom I have lost for ever." Her voice was not lost in tears, but a wild and solemn break suspended the sound thai thrilled me through. Her beauty, her sorrow, her despair, for her face, darkened by the shade, was fixed by an expression of absolute despair, tore my heart with something above human passion; she seemed like a fallen angel sitting sadly on the verge of light, and viewing her "lost estate."

I thought she only wanted a tongue to so»the, an arm to shield, a bosom to shelter her, to be the most excellent of beings: I thought her one whom the world had depraved, and of whom the world was not worthy. Myriads would I have given to have restored her to the unblenched majesty of her rirst estate, to that creature which Nature and Heaven had intended her to be. My senses were inflamed with wine and voiuptwous motion ; my forehead was throbbing, and my heart too with wild and luxurious emotions of sorrow and love. I fell at her feet: I said all that passion, and solitude, and seventeen, suggested; 1 implored but "to be her slave, but lo be thought of as one to whom life was nothing, unless it might serve her as one whose heart could feel and bleed, and had felt and would bleed for her, as one whose silent homage never would offend her pride, whose breathless passion never would insult her purity.'' While I was speaking I did not raise my eyes, it was not necessary, the tone of her voice was enough; her whole character seemed to change in a moment: in a moment she was again the vain, volatile, dazzling Lady M. "Vastly well delivered, and not mouthed as many Of our players do; but Mr. B. I must beg you to act so no more, or if you are resolved on a moonlight scene, let it be Lady Randolph and Douglas, not Romeo and Juliet, it will be more in character for both of us." I was still kneeling, and still held her dress; I was touched uby her resentment, but her pride excited my own—" You know all now, I am reckless of the consequences; you may drive me from you, you may despise me, but you never can take from me the recollection of this hour, the daring hour when I knelt to you, and told you I loved." She was withdrawing her dress from my grasp, " Ah! pardon me: I know not what 1 say; do with me what you will, my heart, my existence, are in your hands, break or destroy them, or cherish them as you will; I don't ask for pardon; I know not what I say." "Very likely, but as it is necessary for one of us to know what we are doing, I know I shall quit this retreat immediately." This moment appeared to me decisive. I was intoxicated with love, and fear, and shame. If she went, and went in anger, I saw little that remained to me, but despair. . "Stay with me, only stay with me, and I will but gaze on, but worship you."— "Worship the moon rather, it is there lost wits are preserved, and I wish you a good journey on the next post-griffin." This cold and ludicrous contempt overcame me: I loosed my hold, the tears rushed from my eyes, the burning tears of passion and shame. "That you should reject me I couid bear, but to heap with contempt one whose youth you have blasted, whose heart you will break—you have made life hateful to me; 1 only knelt,





VOL. II. i>





and to kneel to you deserved despair."— She paused, she was touched, 1 felt it from her altered respiration. "Can this be possible? Mr. Bethel are you serious, and sober?"—"Are life and death serious?" —" Why then seriously rise and listen to me, for 1 can talk seriously. Your conduct, or misconduct, bitterly reproaches me with my own. From the levity of my manners you have inferred the levity of my heart. Many like you may have been mistaken, and many the mistake may have made wretched. Great G—d! what a life has mine been, a life of error and deception, and levity, and wretchedness! I thought the whole world contained not a heart, the whole world thought so of me. 1 repaid their insensibility with insensibility; yet I have an heart, a broken and con trite heart, this n ight."

She paused, she struggled to resume her levity. "No one has ever seen Lady Montrevor by moon-light or candle





light in her natural colours before: no one deserved to see her. They who could mistake her never shall hear me justified. I will carry the anguish of a proud heart to the grave: there it is bringing me fast, and not a soul will weep upon my grave, no heart will ache for, no tongue pity me; so much the better; I only asked for admiration, and that I will have till death. The vain, selfish wretches, with whom it has been my curse to live, thought that admiration was all I required; it was all I asked, because I knew that affection they had not to give, or, not to me.

"But I am talking of myself when you wish me to talk of you; I believe your tears, I believe yOur sensibility* but the. language of feeling is so new to me, and the language of fashionable insult so common, that I confounded them. If I could think I had not, I never could bear to see you again.- A yoting libertine is an horrid thing, almost as bad as an old one." I





attempted to speak. "I will not be interrupted; as you value my esteem, which perhaps is more valuable than some people think, never speak, never think of this again. Platonics are dangerous things, especially between young men and married women. I am a miserable wife, that I cannot help: I am a faultless one, that I can. If you will prove yourself worthy of my regard, you may, by cultivating your own, by suppressing a romantic fancy. I am no object of passion"—her voice failed—" "but no one ever shall know that. They who can be imposed on by the glare of manner, deserve to be imposed on. If they had the eyes of a mole they might see through it my misery, and my contempt for them; yet if I died tonight the world would pronounce me the happiest of women—I am the most miserable: I am a meteor, all glare and mischief; I might have been a fixed star, my light benignant, and my place in Heaven, now"—Her eyes were fixed on a point, and her voice became hollow; I could contain my fondness and sorrow no longer: "And you will, you will be a star in Heaven, and among the brightest there." "If ever we get there," said she, with a melancholy smile, "it will not be by saying fine things to each other, so we had better say true ones; I speak sincerely; if you have an heart, reserve it for some deserving object, for days of honorable and quiet happiness. 1 expect no pleasure from life, yet to see you happy and distinguished would certainly give me a sensation very remote from pain.





"If my good wishes can contribute to your happiness, you are welcome to them; my advice perhaps may be of more service to you—but remember the conditions." I attempted to kiss the hand she had not withdrawn—" No, no," said she, laughing* "that is not in the bond. This scene has left me fit for nothing but dropping the curtain, so you may tell every one that you saw me retire to my room; and now ' to dancing with what appetite you may.' She waved her hand for me to leave her: I could not disobey. As I crossed the gallery I met Lord M.—^he again regretted my not dancing with such perfect equality of tone, that nothing but time could discover. He had been liste ning at the entrance of the recess for the last half-hour—I thought not of him The remainder of the night was passed in protecting Sybilia from the annoyances of the loungers, who, repelled by something they did not like in my eyes or manner, amused themselves by pgain assailing the orange-tree, and sticking the leaves they tore from it on a patent lamp, which at length they overturned, and then laughed and lounged to the supper-room.





I will say nothing of the feelings with which I was occupied till I next beheld her; my intention is simply to relate facts,





and let feelings be inferred from then?; .i yet I fear that long after the language of her high and melancholy feelings had ceased to sound in my ears, the effect of her sight, her touch in solitude, remained. By what means her repugnance to the canvassing plan had been overcome I cannot conceive : I never enquired, but in a few days Lord M. announced his intention of giving another entertainment, which, to accommodate his numerous friends, or as his numerous friends said, to save his splendid furniture, was to be given in the public rooms of the neighbouring town. Lady Montrevor with her daughter were to honor this fete with their presence, and the humbler starers were gratified by the expectation of seeing what it was the boast or lamentation of the country to have seen, or not to have seen.

I have mentioned the perpetual altercations between my father and Miss P. ,—they often appeared to me to resemble the contentions of a man and wife, more than the relations in which they stood to each other, as the master of a familj' and a gouvemante. On this occasion they were uncommonly acrimoniftjus. No creature could lead a more secluded life than Miss P.-she appeared perfectly content with studying in the morning, and wrangling in the evening; but no sooner 'was the public baH announced, than Miss P. declared her intention of'accompanying us to it. My father opposed it strongly, but vainly; every effort at remonstrance drove Miss P. to reasoning, and her reasoning drove him out of the room. When the night arrived, Miss P. appeared prepared to accompany us. Her appearance I was little disposed to notice, till compelled to it by my father's fretful censures; I glanced my eye on her, and thought her dress perfectly simple and domestic. "I am sure you are dressed like nobody," said my father, peevishly. "Very likely,"





said Miss, with a vivacity which seemed borrowed from the occasion, " for you know we see nobody here.." We set out; this detail of balls and dinners may perhaps surprize some readers: in Ireland we have little else to tell of. In all other countries I ever visited or read of, to entertain is sometimes the amusement of life—in Ireland it is constantly the business. The middle ranks of life enter into the contest of dissipation with a vain and emulous spirit of expence, of which there is in England no resemblance. But there is always a balance for the defects of society—our commoners arelike nobles, and our nobles like commoners. It was an eventful night to me, yet I had no presages but of pleasure. Though the disclosure of my wild passion had produced little consequence, yet I was rejoiced that it was disclosed; I thought 1 should see something of mutual intelligence, somethinsr that recalled our communication—

O





something; that told me of the time when I held her hand, and knelt before her, and she listened with a countenance 'more in sorrow than in anger.'

The room was full when we arrived. My first care was to seat Miss P. who professed she had only come there to collect and exercise new ideas, u for, as Mr. Godwin declares" said she, "that an intellectual person can digest sagacious reasonings, and plan works for the benefit of mankind in the crowd of a street, it will be equally easy and useful for me to meditate in a ball-room." I assented to her reasoning; I would have assented to any thing at the moment. The Montrevor family entered the room; his lordship entered first, bowing on every side with all the humility of a Roman candidate: Miss Montolieu followed, looking pale and timid, and fastidious; 'and with them came a third of regal port.' No words can describe the majesty of appearance she had assumed





on this night: whether to gratify her own pride or her lord's, all the jewels of the Montrevor family blazed in her dress, and all its pride towered on her forehead; she was again the mother of embassadors and warriors, and the mother-in-law of statesmen and senators; there was no flutter of levity, no glare of gay wit about her; she walked slowly to the head of the room, declined dancing, and seemed content to sit and be gazed at by the assembly. Lord M.'s pride, though it had compelled his wife and daughter to appear in the assembly, would not suffer them to dance or mix in it. Miss M. tiierefore was stationed by her mother; the latter appeared like a captive queen following the train of her conqueror with sullen and reluctant state, the former like a little trembling prisoner shrinking from the procession she decorated. The loungers and I, and a few more, had formed a kind of guard of honor ab»ut the ladies, but the former were soon dismissed. They attempted to draw her out by laughing at some of the dancers. "I am not up to ridicule to-night," said Lady Montrevor; "if I attempt to shoot in the bow, the poisoned arrow will fall on myself or you, so go now and dance, I know ye are excessively fond of dancing, or go look in your dictionaries for the story of Philoctetes."





They strolled away, not knowing whether to be offended or not, but agreeing that the dancing-room was a damned bad lounge, and that they would try to get a set, with the help of Lord M. and the old one (as they called my father,) whom they allowed to be damned dashing better. The rest of the guard of honor were occupied by Miss M. who only listened to them with languid monosyllables and wandering eyes. Where her eyes were wandering I could not discover, my own were fixed on but one object.— "Badinage is thrown away upon those people," said Lady M. to me; " I am thrown away upon them, but admire my knowledge of human nature. I knew the good people of this country would not believe their senses if I appeared among them like a rational creature—an English peeress, and a woman-of fashion, a rational creature, impossible! it would be quite unreasonable, quite cut of nature, to have any thing natural about me. Besides, I have always observed, that when people's expectations are excited to observe follies, sooner than be disappointed they will give you credit for every vice in human nature, or below it, so 1 preferred playing the fool to playing the devil—that is, being thought to do so. My robe de chambre, my late appearancie, mon tout was only a tub to the whale, and the monster seems diverted by it. I say all this because I would not have you think me the ridiculous being I must have appeared to every one else." I tried to thank her condescension, but dared not trust myself with words like softness: 1 prized her penetration with a good conscience,and admitted that nothing could escape it. "No, notning; I can see every thing, except my own faults. I thought proper, tor instance to-night, to appear in a public character, very dull and diplomatique, as you see. As it is all acting with me, the oftener T change my part the more I amuse the world, and myself. This Roman-matron costume w»uld be tolerable if I had any jewels to embellish it, except those in my hair."— "You have a thousand," said I, ardently. "Have you discovered a diamond-mine on the estate." said she, laughing. "No, it is all personal property, all your own — beauty, rank, talents, virtues, children/'— "Some of them," said she, pursuing the metaphor, "are false, and some of them unfashionable wear." I tried to check her despondency; "No," said she, " no, there is a tide in the affairs of women as well as of men, which if once passed by— it has passed by with me; my time and my powers are gone; I can be nothing now but a warning, a beacon to tell of danger; yet while I last, I must blaze; no one shall see me decline, till I disappear for ever. I have assumed my part, no matter whether voluntarily or not, and I must go through with it, and I will go through with it; a full theatre and loud applause for me till the curtain drops, and the farce or tragedy ends. Besides, if I retreated now, they would call it cowardice, not virtue; no one would believe it real, the fictitious character was so well supported.'-' "What matter for their opinion or their applause," I spoke with energy; the necessity of suppressing my voice seemed to give me a kind of inward force; I told her what she might be; I told her of one whose advice, whose example might yet make her a wonder to the world and





8





herself. I spoke of Mr. Corbett, of his piety so exalting, of his life so conciliating, of a life lived on earth, yet 'commercing with the skies.' "This is all extraordinary enough," said she, "I wish I could see him; but, no, it is too late." "It is not too late," said I, fervently, "I will . pledge my soul it is not too late, he will tell you it is not too late; see him—only see him."

"Oh no, I have seen enough of parsons, I have seen my .lord's chaplains; they all drest the character so well, and acted it so ill, that I"—" But now you will see a Christian." "Well, if your Christian eats or drinks, bring him to dinner next Sunday, but tell him, entre nous, not to be too long saying grace, for my lord can digest any thing better than that at dinner. Now, as you can suppose me converted to all intents and purposes, you may, or must go, dance, for we have whispered,and which is^ worse, been seen to whisper, too long." I turned away to request some insipid girl to make me happy with her hand, when Miss M. whom I was passing, faintly articulated " again—this is too much," and fainted. Her fall was so sudden and helpless, that she actually fell into my arms. Lady M. flew to assist her; she recovered rapidly; Deloraine had rushed from the dance to support her; she opened her eyes, shrunk from him, and grasped me earnestly. Lady M. had detached a small essence-bottle from a chain on her neck, and sent Deloraine for water, with an agitation that became her more than any thing she had ever assumed.— Deloraine returned, but apparently repelled by Miss M.'s repugnance to his assitance, gave the water to me, and retired. Miss M. complained of the heat and the crowd, and the room, and every thing she could think of. "We shall go home, my dear," said Lady M. who looked thoughtful, " I believe my lord and the





company may spare us the remainder of the performance; I have sat here till T am tired, and you have sat till you fainted, and that is all that can be expected from us." "I wish I had not come," said Miss M. languidly. "I wish you had not, and I wish your ladyship had not," said Sir John, advancing to us with a foolish face of consequence: " by a most extraordinary liberty which some gentleman has taken, you have been introduced into company extremely unfit for you. There is a female in the room who is Mr. Bethel's mistress, who was Lord Roschamp's, who was any one's. Lord Montrevor has ordered the carriage, allow me to attend your ladyship and Miss Montolieu to it." The groupe looked aghast—I was thunderstruck. "What have you said, sir—what have you dared to say—my mistress?" "Your's, sir, or your father's, or both, perhaps." Lady M. with a face of horror and resentment, gave her hand to Sir John.





The sight drove me mad. I seized Sir John's arm. "Lady Montrevor may re. tire, but you shall not, till you have explained or retracted this falsehood.''— "Falseheod," said the baronet, his lips growing white-—" yes, falsehood; I have no mistress—my father has no mistress, or if he has, she cannot be here. Lady Montrevor, look not so indignantly on me —it is a falsehood, by heaven-" "Damme, you little impertinent puppy, it is well for . you the ladies are present, or"—" I renounce their protection; you fly to it yourself, because you need it; retract your words this moment." '• Oh ! for mercy, for heaven's sake, forbear," said Lady M. "Mr. Deloraine call my lord, or pacify these madmen, or let Miss Montolieu and me escape.'* As she spoke, Sir John had lifted up his cane: I struck it from his hand, and stretched him on the ground with a blow. He was considerably my senior: he was more than twice my





age, and an experienced pugilist; but my limbs, though singularly slight, were muscular, and my stature so much superior to his, that I felt shame at the violence I had exercised, and stooped to raise him. Lady M. withdrawing her train, on part of which he had fallen, retreated with Deloraine and Miss M. The whole room was now in confusion.

Hammond, who had been dancing with Sybiila, and had quitted the dance to defend Miss P. from the persecutions of Lord Roschamp, now joined forces with me to protect both the women from the ridicule and insults of the room, and we effected a retreat just as Lord Roschamp and Sir John were telling of the " damned famous hoax of old Bethel sending his cast-off mistress to matrimonize his son and daughter at an assembly of people of fashion; at least, where we were, damme, that knew her in London, and knew her here too, damme, in spite of her prim





dress, and philosophical jargon; dimme, it is the most famous blow, the most famous blow, by Heavens, in the world. That big boy will be whipt, and the girl locked up for suffering me to quiz my old acquaintance Sally Percival. Damme, I knew her as well as the pave in BondStreet.'' We returned home in perfect silence, only broken by Sybilla's sobs. Miss P. attempted to speak; I adjured her to be silent; I believe I stamped; 1 know my voice failed as I spoke; whether my vehemence or my grief moved her—she was silent. We arrived at Lemon-grove. My father was sitting up, and Masseau was reading Voltaire's Pucelle to him; He started at seeing us enter. Sybilla was weeping, and I was like a maniac. He demanded " What was all this for?" 1 could not answer him, yet a torrent of words was on my lips. 1 took Miss P.'s hand; I led her to him; 1 fixed my dry and flashing eyes on him. - My look asked but one question. I could say no more; my voice was choaked; my lips were parched with passion. My father ap» peared to shrink from me; I threw Miss P.'s hand from me; and taking Sybilla with me, left the room without uttering a word.





I led Sybilla to her room in silence; I felt as if it was my duty to watch her steps; at her door she threw her arms round my neck, and wept on it from shame and fear. Shame affected me differently; I hardly could bear to look in her innocent face, after it had appeared as the public companion of an harlot's, and in the presence of Lady Montrevor. I raised my head indignantly, wiped her tears from my burning cheek, and rushed into my own room, where I sat unable to sleep, yet unable to bear the thoughts which kept me awake. I had never inquired for my mother; I had heard that my father had many mistresses; that they wen dead; and i hoped she was dead among them: bur now the domestic habits of Miss P. ami tny father, the authority she assumed, and the infl ,ence she exercised over him and us—I grew sick with thought. My heart was an affectionate one, but it was not made to love vice; I knew 1 was the chiid of shame, but how horrid to be the witness, the contented and domestic partaker of parental shame! At length I slept; but my dreams were full of the preceding night. At a late hour in th« morning I heard a rap at my door. I had determined not to go down to breakfast; and I desired the person to enter in no very inviting tone. It was Deloraine; I was glad to see him; I wished for counsel, for I felt all the fluctuation of youth. Deloraine spoke promptly and decisively. "This is a dreadful situation," said he, "1 could hardly think your father would have exposed you to it. He deserves to have the whole consequences of it fall on himself. This Miss Percival, this woman whom he has made his daughter's governess, and the inmate of his house, has been his mistress, has been a woman of the most shame fuliife. Lord Roscbamp knew her too well; it cannot be denied, but you are perfectly innocent; you have nothing to say, or to do in the business." I fixed my eyes on him—" If that is all, if she be but his mistress, I will buckler her against a million. If I have nothing to do in this business, if she is no more than my father's mistress, she shall be defended or dismissed, or—all shall be well. I will excuse her, or fight for her, or any thing my father and the world may demand. But I ask one question more of you, Deloraine. I ask it solemnly, seriously, as a man of honor, as a son; remember your own parents, you know what I would ask—Oh G—d, I see anguish and shame in your face, I am undone, she is mine and Sybilla's mother." I dashed





myself on the bed ; I felt almost suffocated; I wished I were. I will not, I need not, detail my shame and sorrow. I could have loved a mother, could have knelt for her blessing, and wept on her honored hand—and that mother was an harlot, branded by the insulting and public recognition of the man I hated and defied, and in the affronted presence of the woman to shield whom from insult I would have shed my blood. and from whose presence the event had probably banished me for ever.

From this shock no being could suffer so much as myself. 1 was young, with all. the innocence, and ignorance, and pride of youth; I knew not how the world palliated those matters, I cared not how. Female infamy was loathsame to me; I felt blistered and leprous with its contamination; I could have said with Desdemona, " It loathg me now that I do speak the name; to do

vOL. II. E





the act that might the addition earn, not the whole world should bribe me"

I will not dwell upon this hateful period. Deloraine inflamed my resentment, and confirmed my resolution. He told me there must be a duel, but that I was scandalized for ever if I engaged in it. "Let him," said he, " who has humbled and degraded and injured you by his vices, be exposed himself to the danger of their consequences. There will be a duel, but let your father be the combatant. You must forgive me, Ormsby, but I never could regard as a friend or a gentleman a man whose life was staked for the defence of vice—a mere blusterer in a brothel. It is not impossible but this unhappy affair may be concealed even from Lady Montrevor's knowledge, if you don 't act an ostensible part in it; but if you do, the secret must be disclosed, for who but a relation, who but a son' would buckler the purity of his father's mistress against a million? Take my advice, I have seen





more of the world: as I value your character and your happiness, I charge you not to fight. Your father will not, perhaps, send A challenge, or if he does, it will not, perhaps, be accepted. He is as. invalid, and not young; for you no allowance can be made on either account; if you move in this business you are known, and if you are known you are undone. A man entangled in such a quarrel at the beginning of life, will never extricate himself from its consequences till its conclusion. Come with me; we will not stay here; we will not be seen here; and when we return, all will be tranquil."

I was miserable and feverous; I knew not what to do; I was ready to accept an omen from the right or left. I was struck with Deloraine's representation because it was the first I heard,and because itpromised that all might yet be concealed from Lady M. I would have sacrificed the world to hide my shame from her. I did more—I sacrificed myself. I went out with him, but soon drove him from me; for I could not bear to hear the very terms in which any allusion was made to the subject, and I thought his face, the face of one known to me, reproached me with the shame of my mother. It is easy to wander in solitude in Ireland; I strayed through field and fen, a long, dark, winter's day, drenched by rain, and parched frore by the wind, yet nothing could extinguish the burning of my cheek, or cool my dry and cleaving lips.





All day I wandered without meeting a creature whom I knew, or who knew me. Towards evening, I saw approaching me a figure resembling Mr. Corbett's. He was the last man in the world I could have

- borne to meet. I flew from him, and hid myself in a cottage. It was night when I ventured to return home. There was something in my return, in its hesitation

1 and concealment, that struck me with a





sense of guilt, and a presage of evil which I could not repel. My very step, slow and faultering, was like that of a criminal; the waving of the leafless trees, and the moaning melancholy wind, seemed to murmur to me reproaches and woe. I stopt in the shrubbery; I looked towards the house; it was all dark and silent. I would have given any thing for a sight of the meanest domestic in it, for the sound of his voice,, for a light twinkling in one of the win-; dows: I waited in vain, there was neither sound nor flight. I could-stay no longer in my concealment, my mind was feverous and fantastic; I began to mistake the audible throbbing of my heart for the respiration of some one near me whom I « could not see. I rushed from my concealment; I heard the feet of horses in; the avenue; I shrunk into it again. The surgeon rode past me. I knew him; he had attended me when I was wounded in the arm. I grew sick-; I wished a bullet





in my brain or my heart. I was faint with famine and weaigness; I staggered in an attempt to follow him, and fell senseless. I suppose I was found by the servant who was attending him ; but I recollect nothing till I found myself in my own room. Masseau was near me. I could not ask him a question; it was unnecessary; a Frenchman seldom waits to be questioned. He poured out upon me without mercy the whole intelligence: that my father had sent for me in the morning to send a challenge to Lord Roschamp; as to Sir John Orberry, he thought being knocked down was enough for him; that his astonishment at finding I had disappeared was feeyond all description; but the business could not be delayed; he was determined to fight himself, selon les regies de vielle Cour. They met: Lord Roschamp and he were both slightly wounded; but whether from agitation of mind, or motion, he had burst a blood-vessel, and was in the utmost danger.





I will not insult any man by telling what I felt. My first impulse was to fly to my father's room. Masseau attempted to hold me. I would not be held. Oh that I had thus contended with Deloraine! 1 knew all I had to encounter. My father was irritable and vindictive; and he was, besides, so immersed in the modes of his former life, that he could assign but one motive for declining a duel, and could have but one feeling and name for the man who could dare to decline it. I knew all this; yet nothing could keep me from his dying bed—the bed where I had laid him. I rushed to his door; it was shut against me; I heard something like a tumult within; I attempted again to enter: the door was but partially shut, yet it was not open enough to admit me. I thought no humiliation too low for the moment; I put in my hand at the door; I fell on my knees; I tried to supplicate; my voice was choaked. He appeared to hear me—" Is he here?" said he, iri^a Voice of inconceivable bitterness.—I answered only with a cry of despair and desperation.—" Drive him away, I cannot die in peace if a coward be suffered near me; drive him from the door—does he wait for my curse? He shall have it when I recover my breath—Oh this damned suffocation." "Oh, do not curse me," I groaned, I sobbed. "By God in Heaven I am no coward, no deserter of my parents: I will pursue Lord Roschamp to the ends of the earth; he or I shall perish to appease you. I will pour out my blood if it will stop the flowing of yours: only do not curse me. I had not a moment to think, or I would have died ten thousand deaths before this; you placed me on a precipice: if 1 fell from it do not revile me, do not curse me, it is horrible to die cursing, it is horrible to live with a parent's curse." He attempted to speak. I heard his throat rattle. 1 blessed heaven it was not





/ - .

his curse I heard; I had crawled into the room on my knees; I implored Sybilla, who was praying beside the bed, to pray for me, to intercede with him for me. My head grew giddy. I fell—but I have heard that he did not curse me as he died.. I remember nothing but that they all swam in blood before me.

I did not recover perfect recollection for some days: when I did, I exerted myself vigorously to shake off my despair: I determined not to be a coward in mind. I looked around me; the fair land of youth and life was a desert. I never expected to recover the blow I had received, I never wished to recover it; the imputation of cowardice in youth, the blasting of my feelings and of my character by one fatal instance of defection, admitted in a moment of hurry and weakness, I submitted to with a gloomy resignation that bore and braved its shame without wincing. L wished not to hear of consolation, to com





promise with misfortune or disgrace, to accept of remnants of clandestine and fugitive and worthless happiness; all happiness was beneath me. I took shelter in one line of resolution; I determined never to plead for my vindication; in pleading there might be deceit, there must be weakness and degradation. I resolved if the world ever lamented its injustice to me, it should only lament it over my early grave. I roused myself to act, and look those around me in the face, like a man who could retrieve himself by a word ; the thought of the world's contempt had little in it that was terrible to me, but had 'all my hairs been Words,' I would have compromised for the contempt of all to avoid that of one being—who that being was I need not say. My weak, violent, boyish conduct on that fatal night, she might have forgiven: but what woman can bear even a suspected coward?

I summoned Mr. Corbett, and one or





two others of the most respectable persons in the neighbourhood. I announced my intention of opening my father's will; and till this was arranged, I refused to see Sybilla, or my mother, or even Hammond. I had applied to my uncle; I expected his answer. I was proud of it; my own resolution had anticipated its purport. I knew the.'high and haughty spirit of the Milesian, who never brooked an insult, and who knew but one way of avenging it. My uncle had fought several duels, it was the habit of his country, his age, his profession. He could make no allowance; he had no perception for any other mode of expressing resentment, or adjusting differences between men. It was the principle of the Milesian, it was the habit of the soldier. I say this merely to exculpate his heart from a sanguinary or vindictive feeling; it was the gentlest that ever beat within an human breast. Yet, with this heart, my uncle





wrote to renounce all connexion with, all knowledge of me for ever, as one who had disgraced his family, and blasted his youth with eternal infamy, infamy never attached to an Irishman, the infamy of declining a duel, or declining the opportunity of a duel. "But I thank Heaven," the letter concluded, "you never bore the name of De Lacy." The lines were written with a trembling hand, and these quiverings of humanity and affection were a consolation, which my heart, chilled and rigid as it was, could not decline. The day arrived; every place was searched for the will; Masseau, Miss Percival, every one that knew my father or his habits, assisted in the search: no will could be discovered. In his'cabinet were only found some lines versified from some obscure French poet against the immortality of the soul.

When all search was allowed to be in vain, I addressed those who had employed themselves in it; I told them that I was perfectly acquainted with my late fathers intentions in regard to the disposal of his property ; that a circumstance had occurred which made property, or possession of any earthly thing, of little avail to me. My voice failed, but I extended a paper, entirely resigning my share of the property to Miss Percival and my sister, which I desired to be divided equally between them, in addition to the respective shares whieh the law would entitle a wife and daughter to in default of a will. This disposition, I was sufficiently confident, Sybilla (who was now the lawful heir) .would not dispute in relation to her mot ther, and I requested the witnesses of my declaration to sign and attest it as a legal and valid instrument. I tore myself from remonstrances, and inquiries, and amazement, and (Sybilla's) tears; it was not my object to have my resolution praised, or canvassed, or deprecated.





Ishutmyself up in my room, and thanked Heaven, like Jaffier, that I was not worth a ducat. I had determined to be alone, for there are frames of mind of which you dread the effect to be suspended by the sound of any voice but your own; but I had hardly retired when Deloraine broke into my room per-force, and cursed his officiousness, and deplored my obstinacy, and actually shed tears with such violence of honest grief, that afraid of being softened, and ashamed of being consoled, I swore. that the next allusion to the subject would drive me from the house to shelter myself in the grotto, or in the river that flowed beneath it. He was at length pacified, and then endeavoured to find out something of my future purposes of life. I preserved an utter silence, or answered only in monosyllables. I was proud of my secret, and wished, by my present tenacity, to compensate for my past and fatal flexibility. When he found I was neither to be soothed by kindness, o; iassisted by advice, he rose to depart, and





again, with a vehemence of affectionate grief, supplicated my pardon for the injury he had done me. "Deloraine," said I, "you have done me no injury: to advise me to act as a man of honor and a gentleman, as a man whose feelings instructed him to act

Beyond the fixed and settled rules

Of honor In the fencing schools,



was no injury, but an honor and a kindness; the consequences to me have been what the world would call unfortunate; but nothing can be a misfortune to a man which does not deprive him of his intellect or of his probity; yet at the age of seventeen, friendless and fortuneless as I am, this stern philosophy is so little the natural complexion of my mind, that I dare not listen to the voice of a friend, I dare not trust myself to hear a sound that would soiten me. I require to be 'settled and bent up'—I feel I require it much— Heaven knows what may befall me, it knows my heart—its only purpose is to wrest justice for myself from the world, to he remembered when I am gone with respect, perhaps with regret. The means are all indifferent to me means are always so to a determined mind, yet, that my determination may not be shaken, you





must leave me, D , and you must

see me no more. By heaven I cannot bear the sight of any thing I have ever loved, while the mark of shame is on my forehead still."

The very tone of my voice had acquired energy from the harsh and wayward scenes I had lately been hurried through. Deloraine retired sadly. 1 would not suffer myself to think of his kindness', yet there was a silent and unfelt consolation in it that I could not prevent from creeping about my heart; at all events I was consoled by the thought that my misfortune had restored him to the Chieftain's favor, and -fortune, who now openly declared that his next adopted heir should be a soldier.





Few men of my age, dashed at the openiag of my life from opulence, or » the expectation of fortune, to actual and abject penury, ever felt so little disposed to contemplate or comment on their fall. I was occupied by other feelings— • my reputation, my reputation'—I could have groaned with Cassio~ A thousand wild projects were in my head. When Marshal Schwerin threw his standard among the troops of the enemy, and determined to die before the eyes of the sovereign who suspected his courage or his fidelity, he did not feel the alternative, the qu'il mourut impulse more strongly than I did that night, when leaning my head against the window, as the passing clouds chequered the reflection on the floor with pale and fitful wanderings. I thought of her whose thought came.on my mind like the moon from behind a dark and stormy cloud, and dreamt that she might sigh when she heard of my being a fugitive and wanderer on the face of the earth; that she might regret I was compelled to seek hardship, and peril, and pain; that she might yet shed a tear over the grave of one who died because he would not be ail unworthy of her. I would have dreamt thus till morning, had not Sybilla rushed weeping into the room with a letter in her hand from my mother who had just quitted Lemon-Grove. Of Sybilla 1 had not yet thought: I felt at Lemon-Grove, with its present mistress, she must not stay; but this letter anticipated all my debates about her—I read it with difficulty, my eyes were dim and burning; it talked in the jargon which I execrated with more fervency than ever, of the freedom of the human will, and independence of human agency, and the necessity of consulting the general good in opposition to what were called domestic and proximate feelings; of her having felt





within herself ' the capacity of increasing the happiness of an human being,' and that this capacity might not be unemployed, that she had retired from LemonGrove with M. Masseau (with all the personal property they could collect) without the appellation or restraint of that odious and degrading monopoly called matrimony. All this was detailed in the cold physical style which writers of that school assume when they try to be profound without reasoning, and argumentative without logic, and sentimental without passion. I was used to this jargon; I understood it to be merely an apology for heads that cannot feel, a flimsy attempt to gloss over determined depravity by sophistry, to erect vice into a science and a system, and teach rampant and glaring corruption to assume the steady step, and talk the connected and consequential language of deliberate rectitude; like the day of the deification in Paris, which offered for the object of worship a harlot in the costume of a





goddess.

This letter almost drove me mad; it was a caustic in my fresh and burning wounds. The depravity of this unhappy woman seemed determined to persecute me through life and out of it— she is now dead, and I cannot speak of her with the bitterness of recent shame and sorrow. I wish to speak as little of her as possible—she was my mother; but I would only observe that her progress was perfectly accountable and obvious. She had lived many years in careless profligacy; in this state she had a temporary connection with my father, and bore him two children; the connection was afterwards dissolved; she lost her health. In the long hours of sickness and seclusion, the idea of reformation was obtruded on her, but she had no one to give stability to her purposes, or direction to her efforts. In this, state of mind the writings of the modern philosophers fell into her hands; she was delighted with a system that saved her the anguish of repentance, and the labour of reformation. Vice and virtue she learnt were merely habits acquired, not by h change of heart and principle, but of mode, rendered necessary, not by the will of Providence, and the interests of an immortal spirit, but by their tendency to the general good, and produced not by the auspicious agency of Heaven, but by the potent and plastic energies of man. Here she learned that to lament former depravity was foolish and unphilosophical, where reformation was so easy, where physical necessity, controlling all the actions, rendered vice no longer more culpable than voluntary, and where the exclusion of future responsibility deprived the mind of all solicitude for the event, even should its progress terminate in renewed vice. In this state of mind she again met my father, who hardly respiring





from the loss of his darling son, and viewing society with the spleen of a broken constitution, and a disappointed mind, proposed to Miss P. to retire to Ireland, and live in retirement with the children who yet survived, and who in the mean time had been educated at his expence. The consented, but in a manner characteristic of her opinions; she derided natural affection and parental ties, and determined to assume no influence, and avow no relation to us, but one merely abstract and intellectual; and asked, with ludicrous defiance, how the general good could be promoted by her being recognized as our mother?—Perhaps some lingerings of shame, which the new philosophy had not wholly extinguished, prevented her wishing to be known to her illegitimate children as their mother. Some such feeling, I am sure, operated with my father, when he consented to the plan of her becoming

her daughter's governess; but whatever the new school may teach, the habits of vice are not so easily exchanged for those of virtue. Miss P. grew weary of seclusion; she appeared in public, she was soon recognized, the consequences have been told. The barrier of public shame once surmounted, every succeeding step was easy; like the goblin in the tale, the brook once crossed, she assumed her former shape, and collecting all the property she could, she retired with Masseau, whom probably her money bribed to accompany her, and who intended to sustain the incumbrance no longer than he could remove her and himself to his native country. But this event suggested to me the necessity of speedy and vigorous resolution. I had at least learnt the importance and the habit of this from my late misfortune. Nothingteaches a man to think with more vigor than having an helpless and dependant female to think for.





Sybilla was left alone, and left to me: her father was dead, her mother was worse than dead; her wealth (for my father had left much more personal property than I imagined he possessed) was only a temptation, and her softness only an encouragement. The persons to whom LemonGrove had been disposed of, had given us notice to leave it. Her uncle's castle, only inhabited by men, and by men much averse from female habits, was no asylum for her. She had besides refused to enter it, since its gates were shut against me. The Montrevor family bad requested her to pass some time with them: from the humanitv of the invitation I was conwinced it came from Lady M., and I urged her to accept it, while I pursued my inquiries after Miss P. and her wretched paramour.





With some difficulty L discovered from the servants that fhey had taken the direction to Lord Itoschamp's, where, to my astonishment, I learned that Masseau intended to offer his services as his valet, till he had an opportunity of going 19 France. There was an inveterate and menial depravity in this that stung me to the soul: fallen as she was, I determined to perish before I would see her living in Lord R.'s house as his valet's companion. From any other place I might have supplicated her to return, and spare her unhappy children's shame, but in this I was resolved no force should detain her: my spirit rose to defy him, a thousand vexations and insults burned on my cheek and in my heart.





I waited with impatience for morning; when it arrived I desired Sybilla immediately to remove to Montrevor- House, and rode alone to Lord Roschamp's—I wished for neither attendant nor witness ; I knew I had but one part to act, and I determined to act that ^without'the presence of any one who might be expected or impelled to assist me. The roughness aiid danger (if there was danger) of a single encounter^ were better suited to my spirit at that mo

vOL. II. v





merit—I entered the house—no one was at home—this was not improbable. I knew Lord R. had recovered the slight wound he had received, but my object was not to meet hirn only. I walked steadily up the hall; 1 caught a glimpse of' Masseau's figure in a posture of observation at the upper end of it, I rushed forward and seized him in a moment; he resisted; the servants attempted to interpose: I could have grappled with Hercules at the moment; I shook my whip, it was loaded, land no contemptible weapon, and bid them beware of approaching me. I had not released my hold of-Masseau—" Lead me this moment to Miss Percival." The spirit of his countrymen never forsook Masseau; 'he declared, with contorsions of face and figure which would have been ludicrous at a^y other time, that a lady who had accepted his attentions should never be betrayed by him to the resentment of her family; such treachery would neither be





come l'homme galant, ni rhormne d'honneur. I was compelled to aggravate my resentment to conceal my laughter. I did not want to orive wav to ludicrous feelings, strongly as the object before me excited them; it was no time, no subject for mirth. I shook the little reptile almost to pieces; I foamed with fury, I swore I would be his death,'his instant death, if he did not bring me to Miss P—" Villain, vermin, I did not come to talk with you, to touch you; if you don't bring me where she is, I will spurn you round the house . like a ball till I find her." But though I threatened, I could not hurt him, for I felt him quiver in my grasp, and saw his face grow white: he was old, and feeble, and diminutive. I did not want to hurt him or even to parley with him. He found I would not be parleyed with; he threw open the door of a small room, from which he appeared to have crept on hearing me; Miss P. was there; she appeared





perplexed, and terrified, and abashed: I stept forward, I felt my spirits depress?d, and my eyes growing dim—it was a sight of sorrow, and shame, and degradation. I could have wept and howled, and knelt to, and spurned her—my wretched mother—I choked the big and mingled feeling that swelled my throat: it helped me to repress it when I saw the sneering scoundrels that had followed me from the hall. I drove them fiercely away; they were easily repelled; they saw my- eye was wild, and my motions desperate; they did not wish -to encounter me from mere curiosity. I went up to Miss Percival. I took her hand—" You must leave this place—I wish not to say or do any thing harsh—but you must leave it—this is no

place for my—my father's , The

words stuck in my throat.—" Come with me—there is much respect—much comfort for you yet in store." My voice unconsciously grew softer—she looked feminine and frightened. "I do not mean to talk with you, but to act for you—you have been misled—trust to your son for the future—do not break his heart—do not blast his life and youth—1 implore for mercy on yourself, on me, on Sybilla."





I could notsay more, I held her hand /still, I drew hex towards the door; Masseau stood trembling at it; I could not speak, I would not trust my voice with speaking, but I pointed to him. Hamlet pointing to the pictures was in my mind, and in her's too.

I led her into the hall, no one interrupted us, but as we entered the hall at one end, at the other entered Lord Koschamp, Sir John Orberry, and' grooms, and dogs en suite. There was a pause, not on my side, for I led Miss Percival on.—" Why, what the devil is all this tor? 'said the peer. " Mr. Bethel, or whatever is your . damned illegitimate name; what do you presume to come to my house for in this ruffianly manner, and steal out of it with whatever you can pilfer?"





I intended to have passed him without speaking. but he stood directly in my way, and the servants formed a kind of circle that confined me Lo a point. "My lord, it was neither my object to see nor to speak, with you : this is not a time for trifling and verbal altercation; my altercation with you shall neither be trifling nor verbal; you are theobjectof my implacable con tempt and aversion —I tell you so to your face—I am ready to prove it any and every way and every time —1 only bear to stay in this country to prove it—I only bear to live to prove it." Masseau interposed—" Ah, my lord, behold the most injured of men: this morning I thought myseJf as rich and as happy comrae le diable, and to-day this terrible and impetuous boy (ce garcon terrible et impetueux) has carried off the lady with all 1'argent which I had promised myself, pour consoler ma vie."

It drove me mad to be be leaguered and compelled to plead with this slave;





1 turned on him, and said in French, with an oath that made me tremble* "As to you, Masseau, if you but offer to extend an hand, or look, or thought

towards this lady, by there is not a

bone in your body, that I will not crush; I will trample you into dust, I will tread you to hell—slave of my father, dare you raise your eyes to the mother of his son!" Masseau fell on his knees; I turned towards the door; I was harassed and goaded; I felt that another provocation might be too much for me. "Damme if I understand this; damme if I understand at all, or will bear it,'* said Lord R.; "you come into my house, and you bully one of my servants, and you carry away another, and"—" Your domestic, my mother your domestic," I roared, foaming with passion; " unhappy and fallen as she is, I will make you kneel and ask her pardon for the word before I quit your house." "My domestic! aye,'my domestic, or, if





you don't like that word, my wh--re." "Villain and lyar," said I, striking him; he staggered with the blow, but instantly attempted to return it; the servants were between us, and I retreated a little to place Miss Percival out of the reach of hurt; the unhappy woman covering her face with her hands, sunk upon a seat.

Lord R. now came up vehemently, defying me to box him. "I spurn your vulgarity and your worthlessness; I am no bravo; I will fight you as a gentleman would a gentleman, you shall have every choice, every advantage, and damned be he that first cries " Hold, enough.'— "Damme but you shall box me first— damme but you must box. '* "Then damme but I will. I'll defy and annoy you any way; prepare yourself." He began to throw off his coat and waistcoat, and present himself in the usual costume of pugilists. I had thrown off my coat, but was told I must part with more. My





antagonist was flourishing his arms in the air; I felt shame and respect for my unhappy mother; my cheek glowed with something beside passion. I called out— "if there be a man among you, let him conduct that lady away, and take care of her; (Masseau don't approach her, remember what I told you) to her other insults it it is not necessary to add the presence of half-naked men mangling each other with blows." This excited some commiseration for one of us; a decent looking old man took charge of her.

Idon't want to repeat Lord R.'s vulgar defiance; hewasarobust muscular man,about thirty, and expert in the only science he had ever studied. I was a mere boy to him, either in age or proficiency; his technical and well-planted blows covered my face with blood in a few minutes; the sight of it gave me the fury of a tiger; it was an unequal combat of skill and strength against a feeling which was almost more than mortal; shame and rage were my right and left hands, and they fought for me. In a few minutes I stretched him On the ground with a blow which left him little inclination to renew the contest. I hurried ou my clothes; I was sore and staggering, it had been a terrible encounter in point of corporeal disparity and suffering; but my feelings gave me artificial and vehement strength. I took Miss Percival from her protector, who attempted to wipe the blood from me with his handkerchief; but whom I repelled, for I wished for no kindness there. Sir John was helping up his friend, who said, in an earnest and painful tone,— "Damme, Sir John, I don't wonder at that young fellow's dashing you to the floor in a moment." "Oh, damme," said Sir John, "where's the use of mentioning that now."





I was passing then with Miss Percival; the servants made a kind of confused movement of opposition, that said, " shall we detain them." "No,





no damme," said their rude and insolent, but not unfeeling master; "He has fought for her like a gentleman, and let him have her; by G—d it is more than she's worth; damme I like the young fellow's spirit; I see it is no flash with him; he set-to like a gentleman, and by heaven's made some of the fairest blows I ever saw, felt I mean, in my life." Masseau was now ordered to get me some wine in a moment; they saw my pale and bloody face, and the feeble steps which I could not make firm; I rejected it in silence, but without any insolence of gesture. "Stay for a carriage at least," said Lord Roschamp, "my rascals will get you a carriage in a moment, Masseau order a carriage, you cannot take her away without one." I felt this, and paused, still holding her hand, I thought she pressed it at that moment. Masseau- obeyed orders with probably the feeling of Haman when he accompanied Mordecai on his pompous tour through Persepolis, or Suzar. I leaned my head against a pillar of the hall while the carriage was getting ready; when it was announced, I put Miss P. into it, and mounted my horse to attend her. I determined not to enter a vehicle of Lord R.'s; my determination however was vain; I grew dreadfully sick and giddy; my scars and bruises grew sore and burning; I was weary of the harsh and violent part I had been forced to act; I longed to be near my mother; I dismounted and got into the carriage. I leant my throbbing head on her shoulder; the tears forced their way through my closed eyelids; I wept like a child.





We arrived at Lemon-Grove; I attended my mother toherroom; Iwasgladof theabsence of Sybilla—I wished to speak to her without restraint, and without painful recollection; hut i was too unwell to attempt it then. My mind and body were feverish and tveak; my struggles had been no common ones. I was compelled to throw myself on my bed, and there, to my astonishment, Sybilla appeared, with her tears and her tenderness, as usual. "Why are you not at Montrevor-House, Sybilla? I expected you to have been under the protection of that family in my absence."— She hesitated—she assigned twenty causes, and no reason. I thought of the stately and dazzling Lady Montrevor, and of Sybilla's timid gentleness, and recent sadness, and sought for no other reason.





I had now obtained something like satisfaction. The blow I had received was in some measure expiated, yet still I felt unmitigably a desire of perilous and sanguinary distinction, a pride of shame, an impatience of being known or even looked at till I filled an high and daring station which I was determined to reach or perish. My temper was much embittered; I had become jealous, and watchful, and fastidious. Some mischievous and mortal struggle, an invasion, a battle, would have been a relief to me, where I might have rushed forward a Beltenebros, and recovered my name and knighthood, or buried it in blood for ever. This is not the raving of a romantic or ferocious mind: mine was neither, but it was young, ambitious, and dishonored. The wound I had received, like that in the Grecian fable, could only 'be cured by the weapon that inflicted it. I had not much leisure for meditation, my plan required none; it had been determined on from the time of my father's death. It was now suspended, however, by the intelligence that Miss Percival had again disappeared from Lemon-Grove; in what direction no one could discover, but it was supposed not unaccompanied, as Masseau had left Lord Roschamp's.





I did not give myself time to breathe my passion; I again mounted my horse, alone, and in silence, and traversed the country for four days in every direction that afforded a chance of discovering them—all was in vain; it had been either so rapid or so seoret, that I might as well have pursued the wind. I returned goaded, inflamed, exhausted, my mind burning with shame, and my frame with fatigue, disposed to contend with every thing, and with myself, to beard every man, and execrate every female I met. I returned to Lemon-grove, which we had only a few days longer to occupy; I had charged my sister on quitting it, to put herself immediately. under Lady Montrevor's protection; I was again surprized, and even provoked, at finding her alone at Lemon grove. My notions in regard to women had- now become fastidious in the extreme. I dreaded disgrace in another shape. Sybilla's gentleness failed to pacify m&—I would not be pacified. I demanded, perhaps with too much harshness, the reason of her persisting in this silent obstinacy. She was easily intimidated. She told me Mr. Hammond had forbid her, and her face grew crimson as she spoke. "Mr. Hammond forbid you, on what pretext? by what authority? when did he see you? what right had he? what opportunity had he to dictate to you?" "Oh 1 don't be angry with me, dear, dear Ormsby; you look so wild and so weary, it terrifies me to see you; don't speak harshly to me; your kindness is. enough to make me disclose my heart and all within it to you, but I feared to add to your vexation.'' "You are adding to it, adding to it intolwably. Sybilla, I don't want to be harsh to you; I am worn and weary, you see I am, don't hang on me in this manner, I cannot bear it, I cannot bear much more, and from you, Sybilla."—" Oh ! -heaven," said the weeping girl, clinging to me, "if you shed a tear, it will break my heart: I deserve to have it broke if you shed one. Oh! my





darling brother, so brave and gentle, so manly and young, I would kiss the dust under your feet to pacify you. It was the folly of a weak woman to conceal a woman's folly from you. Mr. Hammond (young Mr. Hammond) was-so good as to come here when I was alone. He spoke of Lady M. He said she was a woman of fashion, too much a woman of fashioa for me. He told me it would be better for me to stay here til! you returned > and he spoke so earnestly, so—I am sure he loves—you; and I thought you conld not be displeased at my taking the advice of one who''—" Of one who, when 1 required advice, when advice might have saved me, never offered it, but stole to mislead a weak girl in my absence."t"Ormsby, I am not so weak. 1 would not have adopted Mr. Hammond's opinion if it had not been first my own. He would have advised you if you would have suffered him, but you drove him





from your door, which he staid at an hour in vain, in hopes of being admitted to you."

I was provoked and wearied beyond my strength: I was provoked at being reproached with my obstinacy to Hammond. His advice might have benefited me, if I would have listened to it.—* Weariness and anguish, and contradiction, and fear of aggravated shame, and the . suspicion which recent suffering teaches, stimulated me to a false and and impotent strength. I mistook mere severity for de« cision. I thought hasty measures and precipitate resentment were necessary for every future occasion. I told her indignantly that Mr. Hammond must be in-, debted for his justification to his own eloquence, not to her's, and with this hitter hint I quitted her. I heeded not her tears, nor her supplications, though she clung to me, and knelt, and promised to tell me all. 1 was insensible to her anguish: it seemed a tribute to my own firmness of mind, and I pleased myself with exerting an unnatural and tyrannical violence over her feelings and my own. She saw me depart with despair; she sunk from the sofa on the ground, wringing her hands, and calling me " Cruel," with a voice choked with sobs.





I was not cruel, but I was assuming an appearance of it from which my heart recoiled. I tried to believe that circumstances made it necessary, and to perform it without shrinking. I was like a defeated general, sullen and sad,andstern,till theopportunity of recovered honor. But at that moment I was actually delirious with incessant provocation and fatigue ; my wanderings, my disappointment, the shame of my mother, the fear of my sister operating on a frame slight and sanguine, festering with heat, and giddy with sleepless fatigue, had made me a9 wild and irritable, "as sudden and quick ia quarrel," as if every being who met me was the man who had injured me.





It was night when I got to Hammond's. I hate to tell of broils and quarrels, at least of those in which I behaved in a manner so senseless and savage. I was shewn into a room filled with company: male-company drinking after dinner, most of them officers quartered in Eyre-court. I declined a seat, I declined drinking, I declined speaking; I declined speaking apart with Hammond, which he proposed when he saw me look wild and inflamed. 1 began by inquiring, in a voice of constrained mildness^ h.s reasons for visiting at Lemon-grove; but my eyes flashed, my voice became hoarse and br< ken, I supplied the want of matter of accusation by vehemence and noise. I poured out reproaches and rpvilings on him; 1 upbraided him as i e cause of added shame and sorrow to an unhappy family, as the





despoiler of the unprotected, as one who tried to sink the fallen still lower By this wtak violence I exposed my sister; I eared not, provided 1 could expose him. Hammond attempted to answer me; I interrupted him. 1 hated his cool and steady manner; I thought it an insult on my irritation and my unhappiness; I urged him, by contradiction and reproach, into passion; I delighted myself with a conquest over his calmness. We both became outrageous. I had elevated myself almost to madness by the sound of my own voice. I denied and derided his most solemn and earnest assertions. I told him there was but one way of justifying himself, and that if he declined that way, it was fear and falsehood that prompted him. Hammond s father and the officers now interfered: they declared that my language had left him but one way to justify himself, whether guilty or not. Hammond, struggled for a moment with his prin





ciples; it was a short and painful moment. He told me he was ready to justify himself. All the company (but himself) were partially intoxicated; they could not have been more highly regaled than with the scene before them ; there was a general roar of mad bravery and Bacchanalian joy. Hammond's father swore he would notstirfrom the room till he saw his son behave like a gentleman.

Pistols were easily procured. The room was nearly forty feet in length.— Some one adjusted the distance. I cared not what it was: I cared not if it was muzzle to muzzle; my only wish was to be thought brave by madmen, and to perish. To such a state can 'the world's dread laugh urge a young mind, that lives jn a vicious fear of false shame.' I only remember when the gentleman who loaded my pistol gave it to me, I determined mentally if I killed the only man (except Mr. Corbett) whom I loved on earth, to load it again, and turn its .contents on myself. We fired: I missed. Hammond fired his pistol from the window, and demanded if I was satisfied. The whole room answered in the affirmative/ 1 loudly exclaimed, "No, I have fired at you, I will not be satisfied till you have returned the fire fairly and directly: 1 did not stand here to see you fire from a window."





The company now interposed, and informed me that the laws of combat were completely fulfilled: that I had a right, if I insisted on it, to fire again myself, but no right to force another to fire at me. Hammond demanded if I chose to avail myself of my right. The question, the circumstances, were too much for me: my head grew giddy: I uttered, faintly, " I am no coward," and recollect nothing further till I saw Hammond beside me, bathing my temples with water. When he perceived me recovering, he said in a firm tone, "I have complied with Mr. Bethel's request, it is therefore fair he should comply with mine; 1 request his presence alone for half an hour." The company retired to anbther room, and renewed their drinking, the father insisting that his son should be the first toast. "Damme," said he, "if 1 thought that man or woman could make Gorges act in so devilish spirited a style."





When we were alone, I sought no longer to restrain myself: my heart seemed to return to its own place; I threw myself

on him "Hammond! Hammond! thank

G—d you are safe! Hammond, I would rather have died, I would have died if I had injured you." 14 Bethel," said he, calmly, "if you had killed me, you would have killed the husband of your sister." He paused a moment. "It is terrible to speak of the depravity of a parent-" I groaned inwardly. "This is no roof to place my wife under; there is no protector, no parent for her here; I have no means of maintaining her independently, for my father's circumstances arc much involved. 1 could not endure to see my father distressed: I joined him in a mortgage of the principal part of the property which my consent was necessary to dispose of. He is relieved, but i am impoverished, nor have 1 any longer a right to call on him for the allowance of an eldest son, suitable to circumstances that no longer exist: I did not take him from the hands of his creditors to make him suffer by mine. I loved Sybilla, I trembled for her: she was in a situation the most 'dangerous to principle, and to female delicacy. Your father was an avowed libertine, a scoffer at religion, and a voluptuary in habit, and Miss P."—" Hammond," said I, u these are subjects which your narrative must spare me." "i speak of them not to wound you, but to justify myself: I will be justified. I have not acted lightly. I supplied Sybilla with books, I directed her studies, I endeavor. II. o





votired to preserve the balance of lief mind on the side of rectitude: had that been lost, had her mind imbibed the shade of her circumstances, as a Christian 1 would have compassionated, as a man I must have loved her, but never would I have wedded her. You will smile at my expressions of passion perhaps. Her name went up with every prayer I uttered; but I felt something more than even this was necessary. A female mind, destitute of - |hat stern stability which is the necessary aid of virtue, much assaulted and endangered, requires direct authority, and, positive and present influence. This <;ould only be attained by marrying her; I married her to secure her happiness and joy own. My purpose was, when I had bound her by .a tie , equally urgent on her principles and affections,, to go to the -English bar, to maintain myself there on the most moderate allowance, apply my'ielf diligentlyf.and vigorously to iny pfo





fpssion, and while my father applied himself to retrenchment at home, by our efforts, unequal as they might be, to ol> tain a subsistence for Sybilla, not extorted from the wants of a most careless, but most affectionate parent, and an home to which 1 should no longer blush to introduce my wife.

This was my plan, but this you have frustrated. Your precipitate (I will call it by no harsh term) mention of Syhilla's name among a number of strangers and men, has left me no choice in regard to my immediate and public declaration of our marriage. The name of my wife must not be uttered in the same breath with doubt or dishonor: she shall be no more suspected than the wife of Caesar. Whatever be[the inconveniencies pecuniary or otherwise which menace me, I shall publicly declare her my wife, receive her to my arms if I have no home to receive her, and labour at my profession





till I have extricated myself from the difficulties, which, though they encumber, do not depress me, for 1 have endeavoured to act with rectitude, and the consequences of such actions can bring nothing formidable with them."

How inferior did I appear to this noble iind upright young man! the creature of passion, chaff which the breath of every impulse chased and scattered, who consulted nothing but his heart, and whose heart, too, often led him astrav! I atrain supplicated his pardon with childish importunity; 1 knew not what to say, or how to praise or sooth him. , "My clear Ormsjby, it is I who should supplicate your pardon. He who deviates from established principles, he who suffers the great rule of life to be interrupted by accident, he it is who has erred, and it is lie who should ask forgiveness. When I showed you the despicable and depressing spectacle of a Christian shrinking from the laugh of fools-, and the*frown of the world,





and daring to violate his conscience, and lower the high standard of duty in the eyes of those before whom he should uphold it; when I showed you the spectacle of a Christian either shamed or scared into lighting a duel, I became the aggressor, and I require your forgiveness; I am humbled when I think of my weakness, for the courage of the world is the cowardice of a Christian."

I was content he should be thus exalted both in principle and in feeling above me; His virtue was the best security for the happiness of those he was connected with. But I was delighted to think that there was still a solid foundation for temporal comfort of which he vvasiguorant: I hastened to inform liiin of it. I told him, in my father's desk had been found notes to the amount of six thousand pounds, about eight hundred had been applied to the payment Of his debts, (I concealed Miss Percival's having taken three Uundjred more.) the remainder, I told him, was fairly and lawfully his wife's fortune, the interest of which would at least maintain him without indigence at the Temple. I was proceeding to evade his inquiries about myself by talking of romfort and happiness, when I saw Hammond's face shaded by incredulity. I paused : there was a question in my silence —He answered it. "There are some subjects you have forbid me to speak of, but you must suffer me to allude to them. A person who was in Tullamore (about twenty-two miles off) three days past, met there a man, who was evidently a foreigner, attempting to get change for large notes, none of them less than £300. He had a great number of them in his hand; he offered them, in his distress, to every one near him; the man, who is my lather's shepherd, looked over them in the stranger's hand, they were indorsed L. B. your father's initials. I will make no comments—1 fear the stranger was Masseau—





I fear you or Sybilla have been plundered." »' - .. < Til is last blow, lliis combination of vice and cruelty, almost distracted me. I would not believe it till I returned to I,emon-Grove, which I prepared to do instantly. Hammond forced me to swallow some wine, and accompanied me. When Sybilla saw us return together, she fainted; I wished her insensibility* to continue till I found myself mistaken. The first thing that struck me was the evident traces of violence on the lock of my father's door;: I went in; all was dark and silent; I trod' lightly and fearfully over the floor, with other feelings than those of recent solicitude. It was past midnight; I was in the room of my dead father; the wind was wild and high, and sobbed around the building in the tones of an human voice in anguish. 1 held the litrht low; the desk was in its usual place; I opened it; in one corner of it was a box where 1 had de^osited the notes in presence of Mr. Corbett^ my tuncle's agent, &c. &c. I saw paper lying at the bottom; my heart beat with delight; it justified my wretched mother; in a moment. 1 examined the papers; they were two debentures for £ 100 each. Sybilla's whole fortune was reduced to this. They had pillaged her of every thing else; they had left her with the bare means of subsistence if she were not the wife of the most honorable of men; they, had left her in a state that might have tempted indigence to resign her to shame and destitution. 1 hung in moody misery over this discovery; the light fell from my hand; Hammond rushed in, for he thought 1 had fallen. I did not seek to conceal it from him. I pointed to the empty box; but I could not bring myself to utter my mother s name in a voice of rage and bitterness: the voice of the moment. Sybilla entered timidly; she Knew not what- had. passed; I looked at him with a face o£ appeal and agony. He answered it like





Rimself, without the weak medium of words. He took hi* wife in his arms, and kissed her with the pure and honorable kiss of affection,, that was pledged to love and honor and cherish her- I was answered.

We sat up the remainder of the night; I listened to them talking of their plans, and revolved my own in silence; From a stock comparatively large, I might have condescended to borrow for an immediate exigency; I might have suffered the wealthy heiress to equip me for my expedition; but to live on the scanty pit' tance of an indigent sister; to resume my own gift—the ideas even in silence, oppressed my breath, and tinged ray cheek with fire. 1 determined to be first '' steeped in poverty toth' very lips." I determined that in preference "I would try to dig,1 and to beg won Id not be ashamed." After some deliberation, Hammond1 determined to remove his wife to an aunt's, who lived at some distance, a respectable woman, ■«*,«- a *





whose society was decorous, if not desirable. They then pressed, with jealous importunity, to learn my plans; I devised something like a plausible scheme, and turned aside to conceal the tear their affection wrung from me* I no longer opposed Hammond's repugnance to Sybilla's residing at Montreror-House; I had no longer any right to oppose it, and my pride recoiling from the idea of the haugbty family extending their protection to my impoverished sister, completely took part with his judgment.

Women havemore penetration than men. Hammond departed, satisfied with my arrangements and his own. Rut Sybilla was not deceived ; she hunj upon me with the melancholy fondness ofone who knew I had concealed my purpose, and that purpose was to leave her. In the morning a note arrived from Lady M. pressing, in polite, but not solicitous terms, her removal to Montrevor-House. Sybilla left the roqia to answer it in the negative. I was examining some papers relating to the mortgage of Lemon-grove, which we were to give up the following week, but the temptation of lines traced by that hand withdrew my eye; they were the last that I should probably see of her. I took up the note which Sybilla had left; I was alone. I kissed it; as I examined the. beautiful characters, I perceived the lines were uncommonly wide; it suggested a wild thought. I had read of letters written illegibly without the assistance of fire. I held it to the fire in hope and fear: other characters appeared. How I devoured these words: "A friend of Mr. Bethel's is -much concerned at the late unhappy circumstance of the family; she has heard ranch that she laments, and much tb'atah& refuses to believe; she entreats Mr. Be-*' thel not to adopt, in future, the wild and farouche conduct he has done. She is not acquainted with the circumstances enough





G €





to advise him particularly, but requests-him to consult his heait less and his safety more, if he values his own happiness—if he values- her's, which will be much diminished by any disastrous event befalling him. She fears-he has-some intention of quitting the country; should he require Portunatus's gifts for his adventure, the fairy Good-will can supply him, if he will, attend the spot which she visits by moonlight in Montrevor-Park." Precious, precioMs lines! I locked the door withchildish jealousy to read them undisturbed, I poured over them the first warm and gracious tears that had refreshed my searedeyes for many days-. To gain the sympathy, the solicitude of an human being, however remote, however interesting, i» balm to the wounds, and down to the weariness of a vexed and struggling spirit r but to be thought of. by her, whose thought had never quitted me, to have the heart of feeling heat, the cheek of beauty pale fot toe, I could, at that moment,, have borne^ have dared any thing. To a man not conscious of pusillanimity, the thought of a beautiful woman gives- more than the cou' ge of nerve or constitution : to a mannot humbled by vice, the regard of a beautiful woman give* resistless freedom and animation. I could not believe myself resigned to evil, while an angel hovered ever mer sheddiug light on my path, and hope on my heart. - • .





I resigned myself to> dreams of felieity and honor: see her I dared not; for I dreaded that it might look like a consent to pecuniary obligation at which she had hinted; I dreaded that hei* fears might prevent my quitting the country; above all I dreaded that she might know I was rushing into a world of hardship and adventure, friendless, unaided, unknown. I resolved she should never know it. I shrunk from the weakness of complaint, the degradation of assistanees; yet to> acknowledge my destitution would





be like complaint, like supplicating assistance; and if I saw her, it would be impossible to conceal that of all the children 01 peril and adventure, I was the most destitute.

There might be something romantic in this, but it was with me the age of romance, and the events in which I had been lately engaged had given an high and fastidious tone to my feelings. I was not formed for disgrace. I had been disgraced, but the very writhings of my impatience had contributed to shake off the burden. I was proud of my struggles; I was proud of my misfortunes. I would not



have been an atom less destitute if I might. But I did not expose my destitution; I hid it under my pride and shame, and an inward promise of a day of distinction.

I wrote to Lady M. I blush. to think of what I wrote: it was childish and proud and fantastic. •* The person whom Lady M. has honored by her notice, wiH never claim it till he has deserved it. He





was not formed for shame or for obscurity. We do not live in an age of romance; but it is still possible to acquire distinction by toil and danger, or if disappointed, it is easy to die. If I am remembered, it shall not be by shame, by the weakness of youth, or the madness of passion. Think no more of me. I am not worth a thought; if ever I shall be, it will be from the impulse caught from your parting wish. He* can hardly be deemed unfortunate who has obtained what will arm him for the s'ruggle of lift, ov soothe him in the hour of death."

When I had folded this, and requested Sybilla to send with it her note,' as being of the same purport, I felt my mind 6rmerthan it had been for some time past. I determined not to eat my sister';* bread another day: I had so litde preparation to make, that the night which was approaching seemed as welcome and obvious as any other opportunity. When I bid Sybilla farewell for the night, I tried to prevent my voice faulteringrin vain; but she was weary and heavy w ith many daysof sorrow, and did not perceive it. I was glad of it: it was no moment for softness. If I had resisted Lady M. why should I yield to human being?





I sat up in my room till all was still. I then mounted my horse, whom I had saddled iu the evening with: my own. hands, and escaped unobserved. I will not mention, my plan, it was too wild for sober contempt. 1 will not even mention my finances, it would make my narrative appear like fiction.

I had not proceeded farv when I saw a figure approaching met the moon shone faintly at intervals; I tried to avoid him: it was in vain. The road was direct, and he came on expeditiously. Breathless with expectation, I perceived it was'Air! Corbett; I attempted to rush past him; he recognized me with a shout of joy; he seized my bridle: I could not repel him with violence, yet I was half distracted by this discovery and delay. "Mr. Corbett, you must pardon me, I cannot be detained; this delay is distracting, and impossible, and"—He could hardly say "I am faint and spent; I wish I may have breath to tell my message, it is of such consequence, of such joy."





He was breathless, his hold was weak, I snatched my bridle from him—" No news can be of any joy, of any consequence tome: I am. a forgotten man; I adjure you never to acknowledge you saw me." I broke from him, and spurred my horse. Between weakness and supplication he fell to the ground: he called after me; I would not hear him; this discovery was so like a vile collusion, a plan to be brought back, and consoled and prevailed on to stay; the thought gave me wings, yet still I heard his voice at intervals.: it pierced my heart. "Oh ! don't be cruel to your weary, affectionate old friend, who has wandered so. many dark, lone miles." In the pausesof the I wind, I thought I heard bin; mention my uncle, and twice I heard him say " You are cruel to yourself—to yourself;''—bat I was soon beyoBd all reproaches but my own. The incident had compelled me to change my direction: I fumed from Montrevor-House, from which lights twinkled through the trees. The last look at the walls which inclosed heri the lingering neaf her window while light lingered there, the guessiDg at a shadow, aad blessing the spot where its last trace had disappeared, all that I had fed parting love and melancholy with, was now impossible.





In this direction I was again encountered by a figure which was moving rapidly in the road before me. I trusted to the darkness of the night to conceal me, but it could not coDceal it from me. It was the remarkable figure I have before mentioned, the inhabitant of the solitary tower. I had heard wild tales of him: I heard that he





wandered about the country all night, like 3ome unhallowed and restless thing. His appearance seemed to realize all that could be told or imagined or him. It was with a strange and unknown sensation that I felt myself checked when I attempted to' pass him. "Stop," said he, in a hollow tone, "I know you, and must speak with you: there is mischief doing to-night----; there is perhaps scarce time to prevent it—follow me." "Where must I follow ?r> said I, " and what must I prevent?5* "Murder!" said he, in a terrible voice. I shuddered. He appeared a being more ready to perpetrate than prevent a mischief. We were proceeding; I stopt—I dread your appearance-—I dread your language. This is a strange hour, and I feel myself disturbed by the sight of you: tell me what I am to do, or to expect if I follow:you." I had checked my horse. He looked up, and half withdrew the covering from his face—" Are you willing to save the life of your uncle?" I involuntarily





spurred my horse. There was something: about this strange being, that while it inspired terror, inspired confidence, lie appeared to hold on his melancholy way through life, as he did when I met hhnr alone and in darkness, without a purposeof evil to any thing human, with nothing, human in his purposes. 1 did feel my spirits quelled.

This strange and lonely greeting, thetime, the place, the language he held, deepened the melancholy shade of my mind, almost into terror, yet I prepared to follow him more passively under its influence. "You are mounted,'' said he: "all the speed I could make on foot might be fruitless; fly to the castle, and save your uncle's life." His last words relaxed the spell of terror which wastreeping over me. There was an earnest impulse like humanity in his words, that dispersed all the visionary shadows that flitted round us. One strong feeling fought within me as I rushed along—ta -enter those doors which I was told never to enter, and perhaps at the suggestion of a madman. But every thing vanished at the idea of my uncles danger, for once I was not the victim of false and vicious shame. '





The castle was about half a mile distant; that distance I had passed as a step. As long as I could see any thing-, I saw the figure following me. All around the castle was still and quiet: I heard nothing but the sighing of the trees that waved to a pale, and wintery moon, and the croak of the raven from the shattered turrets. I crossed the court-yard; the dog, whom I remembered to be uncommonly fierce, did not stir. 1 was surJ prized at this, but as I passed him, I observed he lay motionless, and was wallowing in his blood. As f approached, '»0r light appeared any where but in Father Cusacks window; it was a narrow Gothic casement. I saw the light streaming through a few stained compartments in it:





it was his oratory window; the Chieftain had assigned him that apartment, because the window was coloured with the figure of his patron saint. His own apartment was just below the confessor's, but from 'that there was neither Jight nor sound.— The great door I found shut; I ^'as obliged to go round the building, to enter by another, which, commuuicating with the servants' apartments, was frequented by stranger, and traveller, and mendicant, and always open.

The passage was completely dark; it ended in a narrow spiral staircase that led to my uncle's room. I as. cended it lightly; the perfect silence made me feel almost unwilling to proceed. There was no trace of danger or disturbance. As I paused at the arched door that led to my uncle's room, I began to feel shame at the passiveness with which I had undertaken this strange commission, and cast a glance of vacant inquiry into the room,—it was large and darkj the light burning on a black marble tablet scarcely showed the book and crucifix on it. and utterly Failed to penetrate the recesses into which the extremities of the room were hollowed.'





As I still looked, I thought a shadow seemed to be projected from one of them: it was the shadow of a man. I looked intently; it was withdrawn, as if it observed me; I withdrew too; it was the light of shadows. Our motions (if the figure had moved) were accompanied by no sound, and scarcely visible, as dim and flitting as the light that struggled faintly with the darkness around us; but in the next moment deception was impossible. The tall dark figure of a man visibly crossed the room, and stood by my uncle's bed. My breath forsook me. It was like the gliding of a spectre. I advanced into the room. rfhe figure seemed to pause a moment, and then forcibly, but silently* threw itself on the bed* J heard my uncle 3





groan. I was beside him in a moment. He was scarce awake, and wholly unable to resist. The ruffian had grasped him by the throat with the force and fury of a fiend. The struggle must have terminated in a few moments. His face was black, and his eyes prominent, and his breatli suspended already. I had no time for de1 liberation-, I threw myself on the man; I seized him by the throat; I tried to drag him from his victim. The danger of suffocation made him relax his hold, but he turned on me in a moment. He had the strength of Hercules. He fastened on me with the fangs and fierceness of a tiger.— By the quickness with which he turned he had completely the superiority. I had not consulted my own safety in the posture 1 had assumed when I threw myself on him->-I was entangled in the curtains. I fell; he had me under him in a moment, one knee on my -breast, his fingers half on my lips, half on my throat: his giant





limbs so twisted in mine, that I thought I felt my bones crushing with the weight and motions.

The struggle was now for life, but I had no means of struggling. I could not heave his enormous weight from me; his purpose was evidently to strangle me; It is an horrid termination of life.— I did not lose my faculties: I did not lose my horror of the death; I felt all its bitter-' ness—the suppression of my breath, the. labouring and convulsions of my chest, the bloody flashes that seemed tc dart from my eyes, and lastly, every object of the night swimming before me, and every one with blood-streaked and glaring e3'es that stared on me; and my tormentor changed into a fiend, whose bulk was like that of a mountain, whose talons were tipped with burning iron, and whose mouth and eyes breathed flames into mine—it was an horhible agony.

Long after I was rescued from him,

Vol. Ii. a





and felt that it was my uncle and Father Cusack who were holding my hands, and blessing, and thanking, and weeping over me, I still tried to twist myself from them, and sti.il, though I knew their voices and their touch, I implored them to take their fingers from my throat It is difficult to tell of the confusion of joy and terror, and inquiry and wonder. I could hear or tell nothing distinctly.— !My uncle, though alive, was speechless, and unable to assist himself or me. Father Cusack, who was at his devotions, had been alarmed by the noise of my fall, and had hastened down. The ruffian, scared by steps and a light, sprung from me when he had almost accomplished his purpose, and escaped before the servants were roused to pursue him. The first object was to revive my uncle and me. I was convulsed and speechless. An hour had rlapsed before either of us was restored to recollection, and every one thought rather





of alleviating the mischief, than inquiring how it had been caused. I could only answer my uncle's sobbing and passionate cries by faint pressures of the hand, when the stranger entered, and all the terrible scene of the night was explained. It was a solemn time—the dark and ancient room in which the lights, brought in haste, burnt dimly ; the shuddering listeners, who at every pause of the story threw their eyes round the room to discover was a murderer lurking in its shadow still —the voice of the stranger pouring out a wild and solemn stream of sound, not unlike the wind that at its intervals moaned round the old castle. I never recollect listening to a narrative with more awe and anxiety; it was' not merely local; my struggles had been terrible, and my deliverance extraordinary. He spoke in a singular and solemn manner. I cannot now retain the peculiarities of his language, but I perfectly recollect his narrative^ ,





He said he bad been visiting an aged female who was lying sick near the castle. He was in the habit of frequently affording her relief, but when he called on her the preceding evening, he found her almost dead with anxiety and apparent fear. She motioned that she had something extraordinary to communicate. He made a child who attended her quit the cabin.— She laid her cold hand on him—" I was just sending the gossoon for you: life could not leave me till I saw you, or somebody who could be sensible of what I have to tell. The De Lacy is to be murdered tonight, but God spoke first, and kept the breath in me to save his blessed life.

"You know my grand-daughter that married that cursed bastard of Murtagh's. S!ie told me there was something bad in his heart this long time past, and what things he'd be saying in his sleep; and I bid her tell the priest, but she said it was all in vain, for he neither minded his -priest nor his soul, and this evening, though he





never kept minding me these four years past, he came in all of a sudden, and asked where my son was. I said he was at the fair of Eyrecourt. "And," says he, "does he not always keep a musket in his place here?" "He does,'' says I, and then my heart misgave me, and a thought came across my heart like a flash of lightning, and I thought best to tell a lye for God's honor, and says I, " he lent it to my lord's game-keeper last week." "That's a lye," says he, " for I see it in the loft;'' and with that, being a tall clevcs man, he reached up his hand, and took it out where it was in the thatch of the loft. I sat up in my bed: '.' Murtagh," says I, "listen to a dying woman; I know you have something black in your thoughts." "How do you know that?" says he, turning his back to me. "Ob," says I, "the dying always know the truth, for they don't look into this world, but into the other, and an innocent man would not handle a gun as you are handling that now." "You fool," says he, " it is not this I want, but the thing off it to defend myself." He was unfixing the bayonet from the end of it; " Murtagh," says I, "if there's nothing bad in your heart, look me straight in the face." "To be sure I can," says he, still fixing himself with his J>ack to me. •' Do it then," says I, " while the turf is bright, and I can see you," He turned half round upon me; and, Oh Chr—st! his lips were whiter than any corpse, and the sweat was on his forehead as if he had been digging turf in the bog all day. I clapped my hands together this way; " Murtagh, Murtagh, there is murder ia your face." " By hell it's a lye,'* says he, clapping up his hand, just as if he was wiping oft'the blood, " no one can see it in my face, for nothing's murder but killing a man with a weapon, and Pll strangle him in his bed, and they'll say he died in a fit."





I tell back in my bed; I felt as if all the hands in the world were on my





throat. "Oh," says I, "my child's husband will be hung for my murder, and I never will rest in my grave if I was buried in St. Kevin's bed, and had the holy stone laid over my head, and the pope himself to bless it." "I'll not be hung," says he; and then he up and told me how he was to escape, and by that I knew where he was to go, but I did not seem to know, because I was afraid of him, and I alone, and the gossoon in the cabin with me, and be dkl not know he had told me, for he was talking just like a man in his sleep, and his e\'es all staring, and his nostrils so wide, he was like a working horse, and I praying to the Virgin to strengthen me. When he was gone, I was sending the' gossoon to call you, and now I know the name of the man that set him on; and that never will I tell but to my priest, if he will give me absolution fur all the mischief it will do when k is known; but as ever you tliiwk to go to glory, and as you fear the





curse of a dying woman, go and save the De Lacy's life, for if he dies to-night, ray soul will never get rest." She fell back exhausted; it was late and dark, but the Stranger immediately set forward for the castle, he met me on his .progress: the rest has been told. The assassin escaped, and with him the name of his employer.

The Chieftain was utterly ignorant of his enemy: he declared he did not koow that being on earth to whom he bad given cause of hatred or revenge, and in the simplicity of his heart ascribed the attempt made on him to frenzy. "It was not one of my own people," said he, shaking his white locks, " that wished to take my life away; the father of that mis-begotten ruffian Murtagh was an Englishman, who was hung foj robbery at Philipstown Assizes, and his son for pride took his mother's name. I much doubt if even her family was Milesian. No Irishman would lay his hand on the last of the De Lacys."





When he had sacrificed to his nationality, 'he sacrificed to his gratitude;, lie poured out a torrent of the eloquence of gratitude and affection. I still felt jealous and doubtful of my reception; I did not wish to owe the recovery of his favor to a mere casual act of humanity, which, under the same circumstances, might have been performed hy a stranger.

He felt it all. He felt my broken words, my doubtful looks, my solicitude to be gone, though I was yet scarce able to stand from the violence of the striiiTMle. "I know all that is passing in your heart, but set it at rest, it is not because you have saved an old and worthless life that I hang upon you this way, and swear that we never shall part more; no: my heart was never in its own place since I tried to ihrust you of~it. I went about those walls like a ghost, I wished they might fall on me, for I felt there was no one to. come after me, no one with whom the name or' the spirit of my father's house would be retained or remembered. I forbad my people to speak of you, but the whole county talked of you; they said, when they did not think I heard them, that you had the heart of the De Lacys, aye, and the arm too; they said, any one that looked in your face might see your heart was breaking within you for your mother's shame, yet how bravely you bore it up, and put on a sad and manly countenance that made their hearts ache to look at you. My heart warmed to the thought of you, when I heard you had made yourself a beggar for your mother and sister, and the tears ran down my face though I thought I was hiding them. They were so pleasant to me that I would not deny them. But when I heard how you had knocked down that paltry English peer, and fought young Hammond for looking at your sister, I went to jny oratory and kissed *he cross upon it that you should have all





I have in the world; for it was not fear, but the high feeling and proud blood that I feel and have myself that made you decline to fight. So to lose no time, for your spirit was so high I did not know where it might drive you, I sent for your friend Mr. Corbett to tell you that the gates of my house were open to you, and that no man can shut them again no more than the gates of blessed St. Peter. Then my heart felt as light within me as if I was a boy again, or marching to my first engagement, or getting the first glimpse of my father's house after my wanderings were over. I lay down to rest, and little did I think that the first sight I should see would be you struggling to save the life of one who had disinherited and cast you off". My generous, gallant boy, so young and brave, that never murmured against my cruelty and injustice, but entered my doors to save the life of him who had shut them in your orphan face. The blood of De Lacy is red on your cheek, the blood of De Lacy is warm in your heart, and while mine beats, every vein of it shall quicken to you as its joy and desire."





When we had leisure to observe indifferent things, Father Cusack remarked how providential my presence had been, as Delcraine had been absent fiom the castle on a visit for the last week. He then, though it was not yet morning, declared his intention of visiting the dying woman, and learning the name, which she had refused to disclose but in confession. With him went the stranger, whom, when his tale was told, no importunities could detain even for a moment. He declined them, and the gratitude of the Chieftain, to whom his person was unknown, with a kind of sullen civility, a melancholy abstraction of mind that seemed to take no joy in any thing earthly, that paused from ts dark progress but for a moment, and then renewed it in silencq. " .:i





The remainder of the night was passed by the servants of the castle in raising the followers and tenantry to scour the country, and in examining the passages and doors of the castle through which he had probably entered unperceived in the evening, and concealed himself for an opportunity of murder: they were dark and winding, and the servants passed along them fearfully even by day. The Chieftain and I sat up the remainder of the night; overpowered by his affection, the sullen reserve which pride and shame and^omantic distress had taught me, vanished. I told him all my wild purpose I told him I was going as a private soldier, to recover the character of courage and spirit which, though I had lost, I felt I could not live without. JHts eye kindled while he listened. I told him I was going without friend or money or recommendation; among a people who knew nothing of Hie; who were unfavorable to strangers,





and among whom I expected to undergo all that could be suffered from ignorance and poverty and suspicion. He wept. But when I told him (as I told him the truth) that hardship and poverty and pairr and labor severe to a youthful frame, and discipline hateful to a proud and fastidious mind, were all as the dust of the balance when weighed against the hope of acquired honor, or, at least of vindicated courage; that I could bear to fight in the ranks, that I could bear to perish in them, but could not bear to te thought a coward; when I told it to a mind congenial to my own, a high, romantic mind, on whose originality the world had not been suffered to encroach, in whom age could not extinguish the love of courage, and solitude and pride had fed the wildness of its spirit—he smote his old and trembling hands together, and in the language of a part of scripture with which all catholics are familiar; exclaimed "The L—rd do so to me, and more also, if aught but death part thee and me."





With the morning arrived the priest and Mr. Corbett: the sick woman was dead before the former had reached her cabin; the latter, who had received a commission from the Chieftain, had set out on it that eventful night; his affection would not suffer him to delay it till morning. He feared the wild and restless spirit that was working within me; he feared what the night might produce, after my shaking him off so roughly. He had proceeded to Lemon-Grove, to rouse the servants, and tell them the direction I had taken. There SybibVs distress detained him till the intelligence of the Bight, which was dispersed over the country by the servants who were in chase of the ruffian, had reached and soothed them.

With the morning, too, came Deloraine, and Hammond, and Sybiila, Jrt the face of the former, though unconscious of any wrong I had done, him, 1 blushed to look. The wavering favor of the Chieftain, the misery of a man suspended between vicissitudes of opulence and indigence, and plunged into the latter by a concurrence of accidents working in favor of one who appeared remote from all competition, touched me to the heart: yet when I raised my eyes to his face, I saw such a cheerful and unfeigned greeting there, an honest surprize without any exaggerated expression of joy, but neither darkened by suspicion nor malevolence, that I could hardly forgive myself for the injury I had done in suspecting such a mind of selfishness and reluctanee.





That day and many days were devoted to domestic fondness so long interrupted^ so marvellously renewed. Sybilla was the mistress of our little circle; Hammond liad suspended his movements for a few days, that her absence might not diminish *urjoy, and my uncle appeared- well pleased with his nephew as he could with one whose grandfather he remembered to have been an English settler, and steward to the gentleman whose property he had purchased. My uncle, my sister, Hammond, Deloraine, Mr. Corbett, whose tempered manner, and humble and monitory joy, threw a chaste and holy light over the warm groupe of love and triumph, and congratulating—what a circle—my heart, chased and wounded a9 it had been* expanded its plumage, and smoothed its down, and warmed its breast among them.





Two days past I was a wanderer, friendless and destitute, struggling for hopeless distinction, and desiring only to be Justified and die. I was now the acknowledged heir of an ample fortune, surrounded by all that affection and liberality could procure; softened by affection, exalted by praise, my path strewed with wealth, and my prospects bright with distinction.

It would be absurd, it would be false to represent myself as unmoved by this spFenw did vicissitude; I was not. I was almost giddy with my elevation, I looked down and saw in early youth, all that ambition toils for, and age reposes in, spread at my feet. With the ardour of youth I looked on my promised wealth only as the means of procuring happiness to those who needed or who valued it more.





I resolved to compensate largely to Delorarne for the injury I had done him. i resolved to assist the firm and prondminded Hammond, and I debated by wliat expedient best to combine munificence with secresy, and divest my benefactions of ostentation and invidiousness; but when I had scattered wealth and happiness around me, when in my mind's- eye I saw every face flushed with joy, and' every heart laughing with plenty, I first began to feel my own misery; my real and utter misery. For me there was no happiness ; I had no 'partner to take by the hand; no companioa to sit myself down uftder my vine and fig-tree; no bosom to lean my head on, and whisper the secret of communicated happiness.





I was now almost eighteen; I had arrived at the age when it is impossible not to love: that I loved, I felt too well, but I did not dare to whisper to myself whom I loved. A romantic and unhappy passion unacknowledged, unexplored, and unextinguished, threw a sombrous and visionary hue upon all the colours of life. The bright hours of youth were sicklied over with the pale cast of love; yet still it was rich and lovely, and wild as the moonbeam stealing through a cloistered window, and tinging the haunt of solitude and melancholy with lights and forms more vivid and glorious than any thing reality could show—as the fairy light which the traveller follows for joy of its solitary beauty along the waste, and to the precipice. I knew the precipice I was approaching; yet still I told myself there was no danger, or if





there were, it was more than balanced bf the pleasure. I tried to assume confidence in my own resolution; I tried to haveconfidence in Lady Montrevor; her dignity, her purity, her sudden change of voice and mind and character, her easy vindication of herself, her natural assumption of real and inherent virtue, all came to my mind, and along with all came her beauty. I struggled and debated, and at last wearied by a struggle, which showed me too much the weakness of my mind, determined it would be savage and ungrateful to quit the country without thanking the only one who had thought of me with compassion; that I must at least foffer my thanks or the consideration with which she had honoured me, and if she to whom I was thus indebted was more beautiful than any thing I had ever beheld; it waa no. crime in her, nor in me, if I gazed on such beauty, when admitted into her presence- .., .-..





The opportunity was not long delayed; Lord Montrevor, the moment he heard of my restoration to my uncle's favor, drove his splendid equipage to the castle to express his sincere pleasure at the happy termination of the late events, &c. &c.&c. and ever attentive to forms, her ladyship's and Miss Montolieu's tickets came to visit my sister as Mrs. Hammond. Even this circumstance, as if " all the social powers had shed their influence o'er us," seemed to assume the most favourable auspices.

Hammond's father, whose fault was not indifference to women, and was captivated by Sybilla's softness, loudly declared his approbation of his son's choice, and swore no marriage ever prospered that there was not a duel or two about it. My uncle had announced his intention of giving an entertainment on declaring me his heir, to which even the English peers were to be invited; but this was anticipated by an invitation from Montrevor-House. The interval, till its acceptance, was a restless time with me—a time of reproach and congratulation, and hopes and fears. On the eve of it a circumstance occurred, that did not diminish my agitation,;;





There was a girl at the castle, whom I had often observed not mingling with the rest of the domestics, nor appearing to have any employment but that of sitting in one of the turrets and reading all day. She had all the beauty of youth and nature, a warm tinge on her cheek, and dark sunny eyes, and a wild animation of expression, such as health and spirits, and incultivated intelligence give to a face not " taught to look by rule." I was interested by her appearance, and more by her studious habits. I inquired who she was; I learnt she was an illegitimate daughter of one of the chieftain's younger brothers. This description of persons are usually employed as servants in the families to which they belong. The Chieftain, however,





liad other notions of family pride, or female delicacy. I approached her with more respect, I inquired into her studies; I wished to learn the effect of books on a mind left so much to its own choice and direction. Her answers, in spite of the gaucherie of tone and manner, indicated a mind of no mean powers, wild and playful, and fantastic; but with something of delicate and ambitious and recherche, that marked the sex of her mind. A pursuit of fine and fastidious elegance, a pining for something which she had not yet found in the books ox conversation she could procure; an aspiration after the beau ideal of a picturesque and plastic mind, made this forlorn girl appear to be more interesting than her beauty could have made her. Her style of books was wretched; some tawdry volumes of Romish lives and legends, some of the luscious poetry of Charles the Second's time, a great many plays, and no history, no biography, n? travels, &c. &c. I lent her some books, which Mr. C. had supplied me with, and of which I requested her to give meanaccount. I was anxious for her improvement— I knew not what I was doing—she was too grateful to her instructor. I was utterly unconscious that she preferred my company for any reason but that which made me choose hers. Vain men are easily persuaded that they are beloved ; but I could not be vain, for what would have caused vanity to others, was only vexation of spirit to me.





My father, who had been eminent for personal advantages in his youth, was eminent for his jealousy of them in age, and any allusions to my rapid growth or my stature, were sure to tinge his mind with spleen for the rest of the day. When we went out he had always some pretext for recommending me to wear boots; I could not cross the room, or lean aecainst the wall,, or sit in any posture, without some allusions to an Hercules Farnese, or an Apollo Belvedere; and at dinner I was always desired to remove tny chair, and not amuse myself by contrasting those fine formed limbs, of which I was so vain, with limbs shrivelled by disease. This persecution, though it often made me feel as if I was seated on a chair of hot iron, had at least one beneficial tendency, no one could be more unconscious, or more contendedly so of advantages whose mention was always accompanied with pain. I say this merely to account for an insensibility which might otherwise appear unaccountable





I dreamt not of any girl's falling in love with me because I spoke to her in a voice of softness and complacency, because I pitied her solitude, and because that solitude was uninterrupted but by me. There was another security for my indifference; I believe, from experience, I believe that nothing can exalt the mind more

vOL. II. I





*bove the ordinary solicitations of sense, than a concealed attachment to some object lofty and remote, like.mine: something that renders the feelings fastidious by its exquisiteness, and purifies desire by its dignity.

Such was the state of my affections; and when my pupil would repeat to me passages from poetry I supplied her with, I never noticed her preference of the impassioned ones, nor the warm and speaking comment of her eye and her lip. On the night of ray intended departure, she disappeared from the castle, and was four days sifter discovered returning voluntarily, silent* and dejected ; she gave no .account of her absence or its motives, and all notice of it was forgotten in more important things. Several days after, when my mind had respired from its late struggles, in passing through the castle, I saw her seated .in .the lUtle turret, reading as usual, but nokas^usvwl blooming, and wjld, and





warm: my heart smote me with the selfishness of my neglect; I went in; she was. much altered, her hand shook as it held the book; she did not raise her head as- I? entered^ but' said in a low voice, "You have deserted me this long while, and I am glad of it.11 She inclined her head still more as 'she spoke; I took the hand that was hanging listlessly beside her; it was cold and damp; she tried to withdraw it; I saw a tear fall on the book at which, it was evident, she was not looking.- "I have not deserted you-, dearest Mary; 1 have been unpleasantly circumstanced ; I have had much to struggle with, almost too much for me, but now"—She looked earnestly at me, and said-—" Have you—1 heard you had—Oh Clir-st! vvhat hearts they had that could make you suffer—if it was such as me, they would have been welcome to it a thousand and a thousand times; but did you suffer much?" said she, her voice growing tremulous with earnestness; »' not too much I hope, yet every one praised ycu so and called you so brave and noble-hearted, that I cried with joy and grief to hear it: I love to hear of a man so brave, so young." "If I am to talk the language of truth, I will acknowledge 1 suffered as much, almost as I could well bear, but if," and I tried to smile, " 1 am to speak the language you love to read, I will say it is all overpaid by your solicitude—your kindness."— "Oh! do not, do not," said she, shaking her head mournfully, '' do not talk that way to me any more; do not speak that soft, fine language to me, it breaks my heart." Her tears burst out, " When! think of you 1 try to think that you are angry with me, and cross with me, and I try to be so with you, and that helps me, and I bear it better than—if it was in reality at least."





She continued to weep; I was touched





and surprized; 1 sat down by her; my arm stole round her waist—" What is the meaning of these tears, of this language, Mary—I don't understand them; how have I been so unhappy as to give you pain.' "You don't understand—so much the better," said she, wiping her eye?, with a voice of firmness, yet you would understand, or you would not be easy till you did, if the fine, great lady at Montrevor-House cried for you."

My eyes flashed at the name, the allusion; mv cheeks throbbed with the blood that rushed into them; the arm that was round her trembled—she felt it. "Mary, 1 do not understand you; if you felt compassion for one so unhappy as I have been, you should feel joy that I am no longer unhappy. Look up, Mary—dear Mary, why this sobbing? this perverse holding down your head." "I will—I will, if' you will promise to take your eyes from me, and not to call me dear Mary, not in that voice, for that was the voice you spoke to me in—before—when."





She paused for a moment, as if to recollect herself, then witbdrew her hand frommine, and said sorrowfully. as if on some inward comparison, "1 am a poor creature, ignorant, and all beneath you; I am no way fit for your company; my very hands are so red and bard, and yours are so white and warm, and soft, that 1 ought not to touch them." "Dear Mary, what childish language. What matter for the texture of a man's hands: if mine were delicate, they would soon have been bard and blistered enough with a musket. You must not speak to me as if I were a girl, or vain of girlish distinctions." "I wish, I wish," said she, and she .checked herself. "What do wish, Mary }" "I wish you were a girl —no, I would not wish you were a girl either: I love too well to hear of your high spirit, and of your fighting, when it is over I mean, and you are safe; yet if you were a girl, I would not wish you a bit altered—those eyes, and that white, white forehead, -and those lips'—" and these whiskers," said I, laughing. "I deServe to be laughed at," said she, as if starting from a dream% " but I can't bear it from you, yet,—I may come in time not to mind it—a little while ago, and I thought I would have died before I could bear what I did—and yet I did—and—Oh! my heart is an hard, hard thing, as hard as your own, but not the same way."





No stupidity could misunderstand her, yet I could not quit her: I wished to stay by her, to soothe her, to give her all the mitigation of friendship and confidence. I hesitated, I knew not what to say; I was unable to approach; I was unwilling to quit her. I took up a book vacantly; I began to reads ome lines from " Blair's Grave." She was standing at the window with her back tb me. "I love that poetry," said she; "I repeat all the lines of it I can think





of when I walk alone, by myself at night." "And >#here do you walk by yourself at night, Mary?'' "Down by the ruined church yonder," said she, pointing to the Tuins of a building which had once been a chapel attached to the castfe, and which was still used as a place of interment. '' There I wander at night : not quite at night, but while I can see some light through the broken arch, and distinguish between the ash-tree jind the pillars of the window; I love that light, ana" it does not make me afraid; and when I am tired, 1 sit on the Do Lr.cy's mother's stone, and sing all the songs I can thmk of, and think of the time when 1 saw the priest and all the followers running after the last body that was buried there: and I think 3 am listening to the cry as it came along the moor; and I start, and it is the wind shaking the weeds on the wall above, and'5 "My dear Mary, you should not expose your mind to 4hese melancholy objects;





you dwell on them too much." "Melancholy," said she, " Oh, that is the only moment of joy for me. I'd give away every other hour of life for that one hour just about the time the sun goes down, and all in mist and rain: when I can but just see the castle, and this little turret that looks like my only home. I love the mist and the dimness. I would not like the broad summer light half so well, for then I would be seen, and be laughed at by all the servants.'' '-i The servants dare not, should not laugh at you, Mary: such a mind as yours shall never be persecuted out of its feelings; but let me warn you not to indulge yourself in this melancholy luxury; it may be a matter of mirth to the vulgar, but it will probably be a matter of dejection to you, and those who love you." "And who are they;" said she, with quickness. "No matter, no matter, I had better neither know, nor not know it; and you would not laugh at me if you saw me there?" "No, 1 think I should rather weep," said I, for I was touched by this soft, wild melancholy. She trem* bled violently; she turned from me to conceal the flushing of her cheek* and then said, in a voice of forced strength and mirth, "Oh come, Come, and see me there, and you will see me sitting on the tomb-stone, singing as merrily as any bird. Did you ever hear the birds sing in winter?" "I have sometimes heard a melancholy note from them like a farewel} to the summer." "That is just like mine, only my heart is sadder than any bird's for the summer. And will you come? 1 will repeat that poetry for you, and 1 will sing all you can think of for you. I have no voice I know; it is very foolish of me to pretend it. They say the beautiful* grand lady at the castle, sings like an angel. But any thing of a winter's evening, in a church-yard, where we are alone, is sad and pleasant—will you come?*'





I could not resist her importunity ; I promised I would. As I left the turret, she said," If you should hear me talking to myself as you come, don't listen to me."

The day was a restless one to me. 1 believe there is no man with the feelings of one, to whom an innocent girl confesses her love for him, that does not feel pain from the discovery; the difference of rank and habits, a thousand circumstances contending with affection and gratitude, inake it almost impossible to act at once like a man of honor, and a man of feeling. That -whole day I dared not repeat the narhe of Mary to myself; every eye that I met seemed to read my mind; the very consciousness of being loved gave a glow and a flutter to my frame, that would have been ridiculous in any one, but one Who was told for the first time that a woman loved him. Few men retain either their modesty or their timid and boyish respect for females- till my age. I had i 6 ■"'





-both these qualities in most painful perfection, and a trembling inexperience of danger in w hat I was doing, that almost obstructed my breath as I reached the ruins. It was evening, the pale light that Mary Joved: she was sitting on the tombstone; she was not singing, not a sound issued from her lips; she leaned hgr cheek upon one hand, the other, from which her book had dropped, hung listlessly among the weeds that sprung through the crevices of the stone; she pulled and scattered them to the wind. I had intended to speak to her—to speak to her tenderly and firmly, to reason with her if possible, and if not, at least to sooth her. J had strengthened my mind by the recollection ©? Hammond's example, and of Mr. Corbett's principles; I had in some measure collected my ideas; I had made something like a speech, but this sight scattered it. When I saw a sweet and innocent girl wasting with unhappy passion, becoming melancholy and pale, and wild, haunting the house of the dead in-her sadness, and almost like one of them herself, a gush of pity and sorrow filled my heart and my eyes; I sprung to her side, to her feet— '* Mary, dear Mary, if you love me, overcome this melancholy, this dejection, it is destroying you, it is making me wretched; what can I do to vanish \t% tell me, what I can do? and raise your head, and smile on me as you used to do." I spoke from my heart, and from the moment, at that moment, I would have thought no sacrifice too great to obtain tranquillity for her: to diffuse over her face one of the smiles with which it was lit in her happy hours of health and quiet. The action and the impulse were so unexpected, they must have surprized her; yet her mind was so intently pursuing the thought that occupied it, that she did not answer me, but herself. "Are you angry with me for reading plays?" "I am glad you have spirits to amuse yourself by 2





reading, my love, but there are few plays which I would recommend to you: they represent the passions in such exaggerated language." "Particularly love," said she; * they talk as if there was nothing but love in the world, and I believe there is very little—very little true love I am sure, don't you think so?" "I—I know nothing of love yet, Mary; we are too young for love." '"But may'nt we speak of it?" "Certainly.* "Well, then, do you think it possible that a woman could die for love, as the plays say? Here is a book which was borrowed frOm the servants at Montrevor-House, and it tells such a story of a poor girl, a pool- ignorant humble girl, who went mad for love, and followed her cruel-hearted love for many a mile, and just came up when he Was married, and a king, and great and miserable, for he had been fond of her when he was young, and not proud or high, and his heart smote him when he found his weglect had killed her." She took up the book; it was Miss Bailie's plays; she turned to the tragedy of " Ethwald," and began to read some passages from it with the wildest vehemence of manner tnd voice. "See here what she says, poor Bertha, and yet, though he was cruel, she followed him—followed him, and knew him in Spite Of madness and sorrow—see what she says: 'I've seen thee on the gathering clouds of eve, ride with the stately spirits of the storm; I've heard thy voice sound from the dark hill's side, and followed thee.' Yes, I followed you through night and darkness, when I heard you wete going I followed you. I cannot speak like Bertha, but I have as true ah heart, and I followed with love1 Tike her; and if 1 could have met you, I Would have begged to be your servant, and I would have served you with such true and humble love, no one should have Reproached us, or said a poor girl could





not have an high heart. -And when I heard you were come back, and in the castle again, though 1 felt it like the blow of death on my heart, I never shed a tear, or said a word; for though-I would have kept near you in your distress, I shall never go near you now that you are the heirof the great De Lacy: and I came home again, and would tell no one why I went away,for fear it would bring shame to you."

Every word she utttered was (to use her own words) like a blow on my heart. I knew not what I said; coldness would have been a crime. I soothed, I kissed her: my tears fell warm on her cheek—" Mary, I am not worthy of this tenderness, repress it, for both our sakes-, it tears me to pieces to think I can make no return, but this kiss; but these dangerous, dangerous indulgencies—Mary, spare me, let me go, let me die, but spare me your distress—your affection—. they injure us, they may injure us beyond reparation. lean make no return that they deserve, and,"—" No, no, I know you can make no return, no more than the king when Bertha came and found he was going to be married to a great princess." She laughed and wept bitterly. "When Bertha saw the princess on her weddingday, skting on a throne, and looking like a star in heaven, she says, 'thou art a fair dame, and a gay'—she was obliged to, praise her beauty, but then she says she had such a proud and haughty look, and bids her take her eyes off her; that's just like me; many a day I watched on the road for her carriage, and watched—and watched till I was cold and shivering with the wind and rain, and still my heart burning within me like a coal of fire; and at last, when 1 saw her carriage coming, 1 fixed my eyes upon it till they were dim again looking for her, but when I saw her—, blessed Virgin—she is the most beautiful, creature the sun ever shone on: her





Cheeks-ate like "the first roses that blow if) tfhe garden; and heY'sweet, proud smile, and 'her glorious look, oh! she looked like a tjupen on toer throne, and I could have shrunk into the turf L stood on, and I felt like a withered weed on it; yet she has a proud look; she would not tell her love I am sure to any man ;. I am sure slie could not love truly, nor patiently, nor hide a broken heart, if it pleased hin she loved to break her heart; no, she can make no return. That fine lady yon follow; and the princess in the play did not make the king happy though he forsook his first love to follow her; but some men will not be warned.5'

Her words distracted me. It was the pride of my heart that its secret was unknown; every man who loves truly is thus proud and afraid of his secret. Her name I never uttered myself: I could not bear that it should be uttered by ordinary mouths. An hint I could not have borne; a jest I





could never have fo/given. 'iter image \Vas mingled in my mind with every idea of dignity, and purity, and jealous trembling privacy; and all was disclosed to a^jealonsy which nothing could escape, and a vigilance to which love had given solicitude. I knew not what to say; I would not dishonour Lady M. by intreating her mercy—I would not dishonor myself by concealing the truth. 1 was proud of my feelings, though I trembled at their d'fscove'iy. H Mary, you perplex, you distress me, by allusions which neither of us understand. I cannot be in love, where t cannot hope. I do <not love Miss Montolieu; 1 ought not to love Lady Montrevor." "Why?" said she, simply— H She is a married woman." '' And can none love but those who are married? I have heard my father Was never married' to mv mother." She was leading me to a dangerous explanation; but the feelings it awoke preserved me from dange*. I





remembered my parents—-she heard me groan—she saw my eyes roll in anguishshe felt what 1 felt—she threw herself on me with the penitence of a generous heart. "I am a foolish, wicked wretch, 1 know, to talk this way to you; forgive me, forgive me; but when you are bumble and sad, you are nearer my heart. We are both destitute, and fatherless and motherless; why can't we sit down and comfort each other? I would not heed the whole world if I had you. I would have enough if we lived under these ruined walls for ever. But they will take you from me, and never, never love you as I do."

She was sitting. I knelt beside her; I pressed her cold wet cheek tomine; I wiped away her tears; I could only utter inarticulate sounds of soothing and affection.— "This, this," said she, in the softness of the moment, "this is what ruined me. The firfct time you spoke to me with that soft, rich voice, was the last I ever knew peace. I used to dance pleasantly in the hall of the castle, but after you touched my hand one day giving me a book, I could touch no one else's; after you spoke to me, all other voices were harsh; I could not bear to speak to my equals. I saw you walk here one H night, I have walked here every night since. Oh! it is cruel, cruel for men to look at us, and to speak to us with such eyes and such voices, and faces like the faces of the angels in the pictures over the altar, and then, and then to leave us to cry our eyes away, while they are following those who never will care for them as we do.'' "It is very cruel, Mary, if they are guilty, if they are conscious of such cruelty." "Is it not a curse to have ever,ever met such a man?*" said she, sobbing with unrepressed passion. "It is a curse,' said I, struggling to withdraw myself from the madness of the moment. "Then stay with me and curse me," said she, hiding her head in my breast, and pressing, me to her. She was an orphan—under the roof of my beaefactor. She loved- me with a passion whose purity was inferior only to its force. I tore myself from her, and believed at the moment that the cutting off a right hand would have been less painful.





The traces of emotion were visible yet on my face, when we prepared to go the next day to Montrevor-House. Our party consisted of Hammond, his wife, Deloraine, and myself. I am ashamed to say that at this moment there was a coolness between me and Hammond. He had dwelt much and frequently on his reluctance to let his wife visit a woman of Lady M.'s character and manners, and his motives for such reluctance. Whenever lie mentioned the subject, 1 had quitted the room; I could not hear her accused, and I could not defend her. The peculiar state of her mind, a state of high feelings and strong powers, unwillingly and un*





W&jrtbjty abused, yet submitting to the abuse, despising the triumphs of vanity, and the applause of fools, yet living only for such triumph.and applause, shaking in indignation and despair the chain that binds, it to the world, and then pacifying itself by gilding over the fetters, whose "iron has entered into its soul." All this I could imagine, and could believe: Hammond could not, or would not. He abhorred vice; he was impatient of folly; he made no allowance; he had no compassion for the deviations of a mind that wanted nothing of virtue but stability, and had eveiy thing to tempt it from stability. A woman who could be impelled to the disregard of domestic duties, a wife who could be indifferent to her husband, a mother who could neglect her children, whether hopeless of their affection, or outraged by their neglect or indifference, Hammond had no mercy for. When she was brought out in the circle of conversar tion, he was always ready to cast the first and weightiest stone at her. He had submitted, however, to this visit; -for strongly aristocratic in his principles, he thought proper to shew himself pleased by the respect of his superiors. But all that had ever given me pain vanished as I approached the house—to see her, merely to be permitted to see her, I would almost have undergone all that had befallen me since I last saw her—but to hear her speak, and remember that she had spoken or thought of me with something like compassion, and something like regret, when the whole world had renounced me, to be permitted to remind her of it, to bless her for it- with my eyes, at least, to feel, whatever form her pride or her levity or her melancholy might assume before strangers, that her heart had once beat *or me; to know this, and know it in her presence—I pronounced myself overpaid for all I had suffered, and forgot that the pleasure which was to repay me was more dangerous than all the evils it was to balance.





I sprung lightly up the stair-case: most of the company had assembled in the principal drawing-room, where Lord M. surrounded by a group of wandering listeners, was informing them that nothing but his extreme impatience to express his satisfaction at the late happy events could induce him to have introduced his friends into rooms so wretchedly defective in accommodations. His friends, who saw around them nothing but splendor, chairs on which they were afraid to sit, and carpets on which they were unwilling to tread, received his apologies with some confusion. "No house can be habitable,'' pursued his lordship, "where the apartments are not arranged after Hopes exquisite system of decoration. Every thing there is appropriate, and selon le costume. I have just got the work from

VOL.II. K





London, and»-I purpose immediately to ^bring persons from England to arrange these rooms and furniture after his designs. Whatever flatters me with a longer stay among my Irish friends, and forms an additional attraction to their society, must be peculiarly gratifying even in speculation to Lady M. and me. This room; for instance, which commands a view of the Shannon, must be completely aquatic in its costume: draperies of pale green silk must be suspended from branches of coral and sea-weed, and wild water-flowers; a broad cornice shall be diversified with bull's heads, as the bull was formerly the emblem of a river, and urns, and Naiads; mirrors placed opposite the windows shall multiply the reflections of the water; the pedestal shall represent the fluctuation of waves on a silver ground, to intimate the sparkling sands of your native river; the chairs shall assume the form of shells and conches; the tables shall be of verde an





tique, to harmonize with the complexion of the subject. I have a capital chimneypiece, representing the combat of Hercules and Achelous, in my dressing-room, which I shall remove here: every thing shall be quite in Hope's style."

His lordship had just reached the cieling inHopeJsstyle.when our names, which had been repeated from the hall up the wide stair-case and gallery by twenty voices, reached his ear. He instantly turned; and dismissing shells, mirrors, and Naiads, received us with such flattering distinction, that all but myself forgot they had not yet seen Lady Montrevor. Through the spacious folding doors I saw her enter the adjoining room, in which some of the company were dispersed. They were females. She turned to speak to them. Her back was turned to me when I entered. Lord M. who had accompanied me, said, "Your ladyship has not heard Mr. Bethel's name announced, I believe." "Impossible/' said she, turning round, "impossible to live without hearing Mr. Bethel's name, or hearing any thing but his name. Mr. Bethel, you would have conferred eternal obligations on the country by giving them something to speak of, if you had given them any thing else to do but to praise. However, if silence can be eloquence in love, your friends and lovers have done you ample justice. As for me, nothing can make ine silent but the want of language adequate to my feelings—a want which is the first I ever acknowledged with pleasure/'





Let any man imagine himself assailed by such language from the lips he loves; language so rich with pride and pleasure; and her countenance so radiant with beauty and benignity, kindling into eloquence; every glauce of her eye, every sound of her voice might have made an hero. My heart was filled with awe and animation, as if at the sound of a trumpet. I would





have knelt to her, I would have kissed her hand. Lord M.'s voice awoke me from a dream of madness and delight—" No one was more deeply impressed with a sense of Mr. B.'s distinguished conduct on the recent occasion than himself, but he knew that " on beauty's tongue dwelt accents pleasing to the brave and bold," and he consigned the pleasant office of eulogist to her ladyship."

The entrance of more company was useful to us all. As I mixed among them to pay my respects to Miss Montolieu, I was struck by the change in her appearance; always pale and pensive, she now resembled the princess in the fairy tales, whose heart was buried in a mountain ot snow; so languid, so abstracted, she scarce seemed conscious of the words that stole, like the breathings of the Eolian harp, from her half-open lips, and the unmixed and bloodless whiteness of her skin painfully contrasted the rouge which, since she





appeared in company, she thought it propre to assume.

It was late; and as only the Argand lamps on the chimney-pieces were lit, the groups that filled the room were indistinct; I hardly could believe my eyes when I saw among them Mr. Corbett. I confess the truth, I did not see him with pleasure. I had devoted my feelings to an indulgence which his presence checked and interrupted. I was ashamed he should witness, I was afraid he would discover it. I was in a fairy-land of pleasure, aa Island of Calypso, and I wished for one night to be without a Mentor. I dreaded him; for with apostolic simplicity of manner, and purity of mind, he combined a knowledge of the human heart, a power of observation deep and accurate, beyond what his opportunities or his attention to life seemed to allow. "You are surprized to see me here; I was equally surprized myself when I first received a re





quest to visit Montrevor-House. I knew how a Parson Adams usually fared at a squire's house, but when I heard that the request had originated with you, I no longer declined going, and my first reception wa3 such as to make me consider every succeeding visit a duty." The shade concealed the flush of pleasure which mounted into my face while 1 listened to him. I did not wish him to know how deeply, too deeply, 1 was interested in his account. We were now behind an enormous candelabrum, whose height would have concealed Saul. He spoke without reserve—" I entered this house with little hope but of preserving myself from contempt, and retiring; I conceived it my duty, however, for perhaps I was the only one who would represent to his lordship the necessitous and deplorable state of the greater part of his tenantry. I knew the liberal and public spirit of many of the English nobility; I knew many of them were then gloriously bent on improving the human soil of their country; I knew if there were men on earth intent on cultivating the morals and minds of the lower orders, and providing for the temporal and spiritual " comforts of the poor," they were the great people I have mentioned. I hoped one of them might have " wandered heaven-directed' to us. I fear I was mistaken. Lord M. is a man of the world, and I believe merely a man of the world. His whole heart and soul seem immersed in the mighty littlenesses of vanity and grandeur. I fear there is still a darker depth in his character. Few men are so fond of the reputation or ostentation, I should say of virtue, that did not feel it necessary to pacify the world or themselves. He wishes to be considered as a man equally splendid in rank and taste and morals. He showed the utmost impatience when I mentioned the subject to him first: we





were alone. The next day there was a large party at his table; Ldined there; he made me repeat my whole detail again, the result of many years melancholy experience; interrupted me with comments that at least displayed the whole theory of benevolence; listened to various plans for the relief of the general state of the poor in this country; then proposed his own, which really displayed the perfection of sagacity and munificence; and when all the company were breathless with repeated praises of his understanding and his heart, he observed, with tones as harmonious as those of a ministering angel, that such language was painful, that there were some subjects best discussed in solitude, and rewarded, if they deserved reward, in the silence of conscience; that he was ashamed of having exposed his crude ideas on a subject of so much importance, but requested to defer it till he should have the pleasure of seeing Mr.





Corbett in his closet, to prosecute his inquiries, he felt foot interesting fop general discussion. Whether he felt it too interesting for private discussion too, I know not, but from that moment, though invited to his table every day, I have never been admitted to his closet; and whenever I attempt to renew the subject, with (I had almost said) effrontery unanswerable, he entreats me not to oppress him by a mention of the trifling efforts he has made, and presents me visibly with some small sum, which he begs me to apply to the object about which we are so much interested. I conceive it to be merely a bribe for silence: however, I reflect that when " vanity relieves in bounty's stead," we may still be thankful for the effect, though we cannot congratulate ourselves much on the cause, and I apply his paltry donation to the objects he is so much interested in. Thus \ am still retained about him by the hopes of partial good,





and though I am convinced he never will do any thing great in this country, never import any English improvements in the art of humanity, yet still such is the misery I am compelled to witness, that I am glad of the temporary relief I extort from Lord Montrevor's vanity. There is a worm I am sure at the root of the tree, but I will place my pilgrims under its shadow while I can.1'

This long detail might have given me breath, yet I could hardly utter the name of Lady Montrevor at the end of it. "She is a most extraordinary woman," said Mr. Corbett, and was silent. silence was ever more unwelcome. All who love delight to listen to the name of the object from every lip but their own.

"What makes me fear," said Mr. Corbett, " that I never shall succeed with Lord M. is our having no common interest, no alternate power of serving each other. When two men of the world meet, they have nothing to do but to compare their several objects, and if their alternate points coincide, the indentures are complete, and the engagement good. But there is nothing like this between me and Lord M. When he first saw me, he inquired into my preferment, lamented its mediocrity, and censured the establishment for its neglect of the inferior clergy. He then talked of his own interest and views for me; of his present object being to get the county for his son; that his wish was to engage the most respectable characters on his side, and particularly to conciliate the divines of both communions; that those who assisted his views (which were entirely for the benefit of the country) should find he was neither ungrateful nor incapable; that his eldest son Mr. Montolieu's tutor at Cambridge was now an English bishop, &c. &c. &c. In short, he was canvassing as completely as if his dressing-room was the hustings. When he permitted me to speak, I informed him





that I had nothing to lament, and no one to reproach; that the religion I professed had not promised me wealth, but peace of life and tranquillity of conscience, and I was satisfied, richly satisfied, with the compromise, that from the established church, of which I was a minister, I had no direct assurances of preferment, and therefore no reason to complain of disappointment, for if it was supposed to be administered on worldly principles, I had little chance of success, and if on principles purely spiritual, those principles certainly would never lead it to reward its ministers with wealth.

He tried to discover if this was the language of sullen and querulous pride. He found it was not. Not to justify myself to him, but to my own feelings, I spoke of them at length. I told what were my hopes and fears,, my struggles and my ambition. I told him that a Christian whose hair was white, and whose feet trembled on the verge of the goal, who looked back on a course of threescore years run in weakness of flesh, but willingness of spirit, and forward with a confidence which his retrospect had augmented, that such a being would not be bribed by a crown, to pause or to turn, except to bid those who offered to throw it aside, and join him. I might have spoken with too much vehemence: I was vehement. My heart was hot within me, the fire had kindled, and I spoke. But I spoke to him in vain. He regarded me first as an hypocrite, and then as a madman. There is no madness more desperate than that which gilds the straws and paints the walls of a squalid cell to the eye of the lunatic: such is his. We parted, I believe, with feelings for each other nearly the same. He finds I am unfit for business. But as he is not wholly unfit for mine while he continues to make me his almoner, I submit to be exposed in full canonicals in a drawingroom before all who please to see a live parson, a situation to which I should otherwise prefer the pillory, provided I did not deserve to be put there." To the' shame of my better feelings, I only listened that I might again inquire his opinion, his feelings about Lady Montrevor.





At this moment, however, dinner was announced, Lord M. never waiting later than seven; and I thought with vexation that I might have employed the interval in gazing on her by the shadowy light, which if it but half revealed her, but half revealed me.

The dinner party, which amounted to near sixty people, was almost arranged, when Lady M. observing Mr. Corbett retire to the second table, called to him to sit by her. (* I am afraid to face this* immense pillaw without your assistance; my lord says we are to have every thing in the classic costume, and' you shall instruct me in the laws of augury, and tell me, do these birds omen well." I took the Omen of her attention to Mr. Corbett as a favorable one; almost all her conversation was directed to him, yet still, from its flutter and gaiety, all appeared too much intended to distinguish herself. Her vanity, from an impulse, had become an habit. She could say nothing without a determination to be admired; but never was her beauty more splendid, or her wit more playful than on that day. Every one remarked how amazingly delightful Lady Montrevor could be when she pleased—that is, when she was pleased to be in spirits.





The first course was nearly over as usual, when Lord Roschamp and Sir John were announced. "Oh! sit close to me, for heaven's sake," said Lady M. " They are all in the majesty of mud, I see, and if you stir my train will suffer without benefit of clergy." Lord Roschamp immediately strode up to her—" I'll give your ladyship twenty guesses, and I'll be damned if you tell where Orberry and I are come from." "If you gave me an hundred, I never could guess any place but the stable; but as vou cannot sit on the back of mv chair, had not you better take a seat by Miss Montolieu, unless you prefer a table to yourself and boots and dine seul like a Chinese." "Oh damme, now that's all wit, and I don't understand it all—'pon my soul, I'll punish you, and go tell my lord. My lord, by heavens it was the highest thing you ever knew, Orberry and I have spoiled a junketting party most famously." "I beg your lordship will sit down first; in this house it is not necessary to be on your legs in order to be heard.'' "But I must be on my legs, for I must shew you how it happened with my whip. Orberry and I were corning to dine with you at a good moderate hour about seven, for we had been out shooting*, and came home to dress, and fell fast asleep, and just jumped up in our boots as we were,





and came off to you; and just on the road before us there was an immense caravan of aunts, and grandmothers, and cousins, going to some infernal party or other on one of those damned cars that the savages here use; and an half starved, half blind Galvvay garron dragging them along a road that was up to the nave of the wheels. But my lord, the most knowing thing of all was, that the road was all full of drains and holes across it—damme if ever I have a road mended near my house, it's so famously funny—and so, my lord, whenever they approached one of these, and could neither wade nor swim, by heavens the whole troop dismounted, and the driver just cracked his whip, and the old spanker leaped completely across with the empty car on his back, and they got round, and so on—so by heavens says I to Orberry I'll put them up to an amazing knowing touch, and he and I rode up, and tl»e very next slough they came to, just as they were alJ loose in their seats, Orberry and I gave a famous crack with our whips, and damme but the old hero obeyed the word of command, and gave such a plunge attempting to leap with the car on his back, and the whole congregation were as flat in the mire as Dr. Slop was that I was reading the other night when I had nothing to do—wasn't it amazingly famous my lord?" ** And, of course, your delay wag' owing to the assistance you afforded the unfortunate ladies." "No, damme, it was owing to my staying to laugh at them; by heavens I thought I'd have dropped from the saddle, and the fellow was damned saucy and devilish impertinent to and cracked his whip at us when he saw us laughing." "1 hope he did not knock you down, Sir John," said Lady M. with most ludicrous gravity. "No, curse me, but I rode away and left Roschamp to get out of the scrape himself; it was his frolic, not mine."





Lord M., weary of this etourderie, or of any thing that interrupted his display of himself, again took occasion to lament the defectiveness of his rooms from the celleret not bearing the insignia of Bacchus, "and the chimney piece," said he in a tone of despondency, " the chimney-piece of an eating-room disfigured by the loves of Cephalus and Aurora, instead of appropriate groups of genii, with the tributes of Pomona and Ceres, and"—" and Comus and Circe, my lord," said Lady M. who immediately directed the whole force of her ridicule against the appropriate system. "Nothing can be conceived so fortunate in a dearth of ideas as the new system ; I hope to see it entirely supersede conversation, and answer all the purposes of Mexican history painting; by emblematic allusions, drawn from our furniture,





we are entirely saved all trouble of thought or of employment. To finish a room with busts of writers, and wreathe the frieze with the ancient scrolls instead of books, will answer every purpose of a library, and save reading, for want of which poor Lord R. the other night, was obliged to look into Tristram Shandy. In a short time, I am convinced it will be equally gratifying to the goute to sit in a. room furnished as an eating room with every thing but a table, as it was formerly to sit in one; and as for sleep, where Mr. Hope strews poppies, it is impossible not to sleep. Every function of life will be performed by the help of imagination, and nobody will have occasion to live in the vulgar sense, but the artists of our furniture, if Mr. Hope does not exterminate them with his pen. We shall know the employments of life by the names of our apartments, as Lucullus did the value of his entertainments.

"I think the plan only admitted one im





provement; that the decorations of the different rooms should be emblematic of the company, as well as of their employments; it would save an immensity of time in enquiring who and what people are, es well as the disappointment when we do know. There could be no mistake, such as imagining you were in company with grooms, and finding them only peers of the realm. The idea might be expanded most charmingly—would not you be highly delighted, Lord R., to have no objects ever near you, except dogs and horses, provided they were not classical, and you obliged to explain their pedigree?" "'Pon my soul I should, except it was your ladyship." "Oh no, no, dogs and horses, my lord, or an Acteon and hounds, Sir John (this was unmercifully true), and your apartment, Mr. Hammond, should be decorated with a Juno Pronuba, or Juno when she borrowed thecestus from love, and yours, Mr. Bethel, with a Roman piety."





She paused, but her eye spoke a fatal language. To be praised by her was too much for me, it made me giddy with delight; I had been accustomed to view her from such a distance; her rank, her beauty, her high and married state, had poured such awe into my love, that now that she condescended to lavish on me such an excess of feeling, and praise, and honour, now that I saw her eyes kindle as they turned on me. and her angel-smile brighten when she perceived I watched to meet it; now that she seemed to sacrifice her dignity taher friendship, and avow me as one whom eloquence burned to praise, and beauty delighted to honor (me to whom a transient smile, a casual word of softness would have been the treasured secret of a life's remembrance)—she was resistless.

Who was there whom such praise, from such lips, would not intoxicate' And she had remembered me in solitude, and in suffering; she had remembered me when every one else forgot me. Her friendship had been the single star that beamed on me in darkness, and which no darkness could quench; and now that 1 had emerged to light, its blaze poured on me ' intolerable day.' The whole splendor of her talents, and ardor of her vanity seemed to concentrate their rays to make my name and memorial luminous and white. She never looked so perfectly, so humanly lovely in my eyes as that night. I thought dinner would never be over; it might have raised the ghost of Apicius, had its flavor reached him; but all my senses were absorbed in sight.





I was detained and persecuted, when the ladies retired by a kind of general conspiracy to distinguish me. I was taught to feel that to be the heir of De Lacy was to fill a conspicuous station in the eyes of the country; no one would have ' borne thejr faculties more meekly,' had I been suf





fered; but I was assailed with a thousand inquiries and congratulations, and condolences; my whole story was told to my face, my uncle's age accurately ascertained, and every acre of his estate mea- sured and estimated in spite of my stubborn silence and visible confusion.

Lord Roschamp, who had drank wine with me at dinner, at length interrupted the declamation by demanding whether I had taken lessons from Belcher, or some other boxer, whose name he mentioned. I answered in the negative. "Why then, damme, but you have a famous notion of it; I wish you would come to RoschampHouse every morning, and I'd spar a little with you for practice, and I have abilliardJable, and a damned good stud, and cold meat and Madeira on the table every morning at one o'clock, and I shall be devilish glad to see you." This was meant for courtesy, but I could only answer it by a bow; certain unpleasant recollections

VOL. II. L





flushed my cheek at the moment, and made me bow unusually low to conceal it. "Damme, now, you must not be sulky, I hate that most infernally; there's Orberry, whom you knocked down, and you see he looks, by heavens, just as he always does." "Why what the devil Roschamp, what are you always talking nonsense for?" "Why, damme, Orberry, I believe you feel sore still." "No, but one always forgets those things as soon as possible."— "I admire Sir John's conciliating habit, and hope Mr. Bethel will follow so good an example," said Lord M. who loved to be an umpire, and to magnify his office.— "Oh, 'pon my soul, I never expect to be cordial with Bethel, now that I recollect the offence I have given him. My lord, do you know I have not left him a place to say his prayers in nearer than Clonfert Church, and damme if I know where that is yet, though I am here every shooting season. Why, my lord, is it not devilish





hard that my servants cannot have a room to dance in of a Sunday evening? They told me the church was condemned or ruined, or something of that kind, and so they brought a heap of forms into my hall,.and turned my porter's chair into a reading desk, and there Mr. Corbett and Mr. Bethel used to read prayers to each other, and the hall was quite useless for the remainder of the day. Now I always like to see my servants pleasant of'a Sunday evening, so I kicked all their lumber to splinters.5' "Lord Roschamp, I beg you to remember that the Established Church and its ministry must always be spoken of with respect at my table." "Lord Roschamp, allow me to remind you' that Mr. Corbett must always be spoken of respectfully in my presence." "Hey, why what the devil, I shall be schooled famously between you; damme but I'll say what I like at any table; I'd say it at my own. I think the establishment, and all that damned nonsense, cursed folly, 'pon my soul; maintaining a parcel of people just to do nothing in the world, and" —>" Don't say so, my lord," said Mr. Corbett, whose lips never uttered asperity before, "you know we are to pray that the nobility-may have grace, and wisdom, and understanding." "I shall be happy to hear the establishment defended by so able an advocate," said Lord M., who delighted himself with exposing the venerable old man to the tumult and roughness of such an antagonist as Lord R.—" I myself have heard some trifling objections made to its existence and utility, which, I make no doubt, Mr. Corbett will refute with equal skill and facility." "If your lordship will have the goodness to enumerate them, I shall at least undertake the refutation with facility."





This was making Jiis lordship the objector, the very thing he was wishing to avoid; his desire was to expose the establishment to obloquy, and its advocate





to contempt, and when his rancour was sufficiently gratified, he proposed to act the moderator, and ridicule the weakness of a cause which could only be preserved from disgrace by the courtesy of hospitality, by "his lordships wish that the establishment should be treated with respect at his lordship's table."

He hesitated, and declined,and evidently waited to give the blow under some one's buckler; but though the company were by no means distinguished for religious feeling, the universal respect for Mr. Corbett had silenced them. He paused for a moment, and then said in his usual nervous simplicity of manner, I am not to understand any of these objections are levelled against Christianity itself, but merely against that mode of professing and administering it which the Established Church adopts. If I am, the ground of contest is changed, and I doubt not but your lordship's valuable library abounds with books which would render all that I could say superfluous.





"With regard to the establishment, no one who admits the truth of religion, will deny that religion must be taught and enforced by ministers and ordinances, for if he takes his system from Scripture, I think he will find that Scripture prescribes positive rites, and individuals set apart to solemnize them; and if he takes his system from his own mind, (exclusive of its being vague and irrational, to wander from authority to impulse) that mind must be strangely constituted to whom its principles and duties never required to be recalled and unfolded ; that needed neither monitor nor counsellor, whose devotion was intirely independent of externals, whose hopes never sought support, and whose doubts never needed illumination. The establishment has been accused of aggrandizing itself, yet it is known that many of its





members are not wealthy; it has»been accused of neglecting those who are not, yet if they are contented with their obscurity, where is the cruelty of neglecting them? They should be supposed to have a consolation from the very nature and exercise of their profession, that acts as a balance to all its inconveniencies. If they want it they should not have entered into a profession without the spirit of it; if they have it, they hardly need any other. J have been always what the world calls poor, but t have never been dissatisfied. With regard to the general character of the establishment, and the persons who compose it, if we seek for perfection of principle and discipline, we must seek it among an 'Hierarchy of Angels;' if we admit that they are men, we must also admit that the weakness of man will sometimes appear in their conduct. I have heard of a man who blinded himself by attempting to reckon the spots in the sun. Had he enU





joyed its light, it would have been better* That system is to be praised, if not as perfect, at least as excellent, which admits the fewest opportunities of that evil which it cannot entirely exclude, and that mode of worship, which, retaining a form of prayer, cannot be abused by the corruptions or weakness of man, which allows the distinction of eloquence in a public address, and preserves the reading of the Scriptures in a popular language, a part of worship by much the most important, and by much the most neglected or defaced in other institutions. Such a mode of worship may at least be retained till the wisdom of the age, which explodes it, shall have suggested a better."

In the midst of the praises with which this defence was received, for all are pleased with the spirit of a manly and moderate defence, 1 retired, leaving Lord Montrevor concluding his loud and sincere commendations, like Vinosus in Cowper, " I glide and steal along with heaven in view, and —pardon me, the bottle stands with you."





In the drawing-room the ladies were employed in admiring, and Lady M. in laughing at, their admiration of a splendid edition of Hope's splendid work on household furniture. Equally amused by their exaggerated praises, and their ignorance of the Pagan mythology, she poured out the whole Pantheon on them, and traversed the whole range of antiquity, from the height of the Acropolis, to the depths of Herculaneum. Her knowledge was really extensive, and her wit and spirit would have made it appear so, if it had been even superficial. But nothing could simulate her to exertion but the pleasure of vanity; she conquered only to triumph, and she was satisfied to triumph equally over strength and weakness. Yet, while my heart ached for powers so distinguished L 5





and abused, and wretchedness seeking: relief from the indulgence of vanity, I was dazzled like the rest, and like the rest listened and looked till I forgot every thing.

"Oh, Mr. Bethel," said she, pausing from her career, and depressing her voice, "the fairy Good-will is the most placable of all the fairy tribe, or she would have punished you for slighting her favors." As she spoke, she moved from the table where the company were standing, " This lamp wants trimming/' I followed her: I faultered out " I was sufficiently punished by being compelled to decline her favors. I was unhappy—unworthy of them. I only desired to be forgotten—but not by all. I wished my heart to be frozen and hard, except in one warm and bright recess." I had involuntarily raised my voice. "So you cannot trim an Argand's lamp, without giving a long lecture on heat and light—Oh, I hate sciolists—





No more of that if you love me." I understood her address. I depressed my voice, " If I could but speak to you alone, , but tell you what I have felt, what I yet feel."

"Aurora'," said she, catching a word from the group at the table, " Oh, you have got into the Aurora apartment, of which the decorations are all to be suggested by Flaxman's fine design of Cephalus and Aurora. Well, do all those orange draperies, and black marble chimney-piece, and roses and stars en suite, throw light 'of darkness visible on your imaginations? Apropos of Aurora, Mr. Bethel, I must shew you a portrait of my eldest daughter, Lady Castle Wycomb, in the costume.of Aurora; 'tis in the next room; I have just got it from London." '1 followed her. We were alone.—I trembled with love and gratitude.—We were alone—it was the moment, that had the whole choice of life been allowed me, 1 would have selected as





its brightest one. Yet, when it arrived, I lost all power of language, almost all power of feeling. "I have wished for this opportunity, and now that I enjoy it, its pleasure has taken from me all power—all words—What shall I say?" "Nothing, nothing in the world, except to tell me why you give me such pain and pleasure. Your conduct is so strange, and your heart so good, that 1 have been crying and laughing at you alternately since I have known you. Your success, however, has determined the strife between "a smile and a tear," and left the first in lawful possession of my countenance—How can you bear all this badinage from me?" "I can bear any thing, every thing but this softness, this condescension. I can bear all the blaze of your wit and your beauty, but when you are thus, it is too much for me—too much for man—don't be displeased with me, if I stay I shall offend you. I cannot, no I cannot contain the





feelings with which you have filled me— My voice is lost when I attempt to speak— See how you have made me glow and tremble—Feel how you have made my heart beat!" "No, no, no:'' (she withdrew her hand) " I have nothing to do with hearts—I have no heart, at least, I think not, till some such character as your's makes it ache with agony and pleasure. I was born to be a different being from what I am. No one ever loved the theory of moral principles so much that deviated so much from the practice. I am a riddle to myself and the whole world, which never will be solved till I die, and give them a greater to puzzle themselves with, How Lady Montrevor came to die of a broken heart? But don't be afraid, Mr. Bethel, I shall live long enough to admire all the great actions in the world if I live only a year. In this vile world, to meet with any thing like a heart or soul reconciles one to it for a time, and animates the





spirits, such spirits as mine at least; a few more such characters as Mr. Bethel's would lower the price of laudanum amazingly. I really cannot contain my admiration. I could not even indace myself to spare your feelings by withholding my public and ardent suffrage in your praise. You made me feel, and it has been of use to me; you have interested me, and I am grateful to you. I wish to show my gratitude. You must make a distinguished figure in life. I have some interest yet; it shall be exerted for you. Though I have retired to a desert island, I have not buried my book and wand/' I whispered something of an Ariel directing and soothing my progress with 'airs from heaven.1 "There must be no more of this; you are always giving the apple to Venus, instead of Juno or Minerva. Remember the consequences of the preference.—I wish to consider you as my son, or grandson if you will, and you must consider me as—





I thought I heard a noise.' "I can hear nothing bat you." "Absurd." "Don't take your hand from me—I will listen, and 'mark the music'—Is it a crime to love the ' touches of sweet harmony?' Oh, if you knew, if you but knew how I devoured the lines this beautiful hand traced, when I thought they were the last I ever should see of its forming!" "So they will, if you devour the beautiful hand too." "Laugh at me, but leave it with me. I was that moment, that very moment, preparing to leave the country, yet I lingered to read them, and when I was pursuing my dreary way, it cheered me to place them next my heart." "Oh yes, I know you were on the wing, quite a Mercury, with every thing but his purse. But all this is very foolish and 'improper; desist, I beg, I command. The fairy Good-will herself may be banished by We must return to the

drawing-room—we have been here too long—Enthusiast, release me. An enthusiast is of all animals either the most dangerous or the most safe—it is for you I fear, not for myself, ' Honi soit qui mal y pense,' as Mrs. Freke says in Belinda." "A Freke will not always excuse deliberate impropriety," said a voice as we quitted the cabinet. I heard it. She did not. She immediately mixed in the company, which the gentlemen had now joined, with her usual facility, resumed the broken chain of her ideas in a moment, and even those whose weakness she was exposing declared, that it was the most charming evening they had ever passed, and that Lady Montrevor had the most delightful wit and spirits in the world.





As we separated, I had but just time to ask what she thought of Mr. Corbett. "He is a most extraordinary man," .was tbe answer, Their mutual similarity of feeling was singular.

I found it was a kind of etiquette among people of rank in the country or in Ireland, not to resort to the usual modes of entertaining company: there were no cards, no music, no dancing proposed; it was fashionable to appealto feel a total dearth of amusements. Lord Montrevor declaimed as usual on the splendid improvements he intended to make at Montrevor-House. Her ladyship as usual tried to turn every tiling ho said into ridicule, and succeeded too well \ but neither her wit nor her contradiction could discompose his lordship's inflexible politeness. Elevated to the frozen region of apathy, he saw the lightnings flash beneath him. "When it is your father's pleasure," whispered Lady Montrevor to her daughter, " to play Le Ion Mart for his own benefit, nothing can make him the Provoked HusbandP This scarce extorted a smile from Miss Montolieu, from whom even Sir John Orberry failed to draw a smile by shewing her what seemed to be a penciled caricature, which he had shown toeveryone in the room except Lady Montrevor and me. "I must see that Sir John," said Lady Montrevor, " I know it is intended to make one laugh, and your intentions that way seldom fail of success."





He led her with an appearance of secrecy to a part of the room where a bronze figure stood with lights near her untouched harp. "Your ladyship must not mention it," said he ; " I just sketched it under the table while Mr. Corbett was giving us a sermon after dinner, one word of which I do not remember." '' You need not be afraid,'1 said she, glancing her eye on it, and moving away, "I shall neither expose it nor the author." It was, I understood afterwards, a caricature of Mr. Corbett in the attitude of preaching, and of me as his clerk giving out a psalm. "My Lord, if you have any intention of decorating your rooms, I beg you will summon Sir John Orberry to your





assistance; don't be afraid, Sir John, I said I would not expose you ; you can't conceive my lord any thing like his taste, except his execution. T think it was Michael Angelo that stabbed a man to finish a subject for his picture. Sir John is more heroic, for he exposes his own person to danger to complete his design. But, Sir John, though you only think of reputation, we must consider your safety, audi cannot think of a better way of securing it, than bycommittingthis paper to the flames."

As she spoke, she took the paper from Lord Roschamp, who was twirling it about, and evidently anxious that I should see it, and threw it into the fire. Hammond, Mr. Corbett, and I, were collected round to examine some Egyptian antiques with which it was decorated. Many of them were originals, and had been collected in Egypt by Col. Montolieu during the expedition. .She appeared to feel that she had said or done 4





too much in resentment of Sir John's paltry libel, and she immediately caught another subject, which she followed with her usual facility. "Can you conceive, Mr. Hammond, how those horrid Egyptian figures ever became popular, or at least so popular as to exclude the Grecian? it was a tribute to our military honors, but the balance of taste I think never should be adjusted by the sword. I suppose all our rooms will now be shaded with the planes of South America—only observe," said she, taking a cameo from the bosom of her robe, "observe the differenc^belween that black, shapeless Egyptian figure of memory on the chimney-piece, and this Grecian one on my broach. I am convinced Prometheus was a Grecian statuary. One is the work of the chissel, the other the work of the mind." She placed herself in the attitude of the figure as she spoke; everyone rose to gaze; a murmur of praise ran through the room j she





enjoyed it too much; she assumed other attitudes—a tragic muse, a Grecian mourner, a Roman actress (Arbuscula) in the attitude of declaring she preferred the applause of Caesar to that of the whole theatre. No one in the room but one felt the Caesar to whom she pointed. My eyes grew dim with passion while I gazed.— "But there are some tolerable figures in the Egyptian costume too; an Isis seated is not ungraceful. Miss Montolieu, have the goodness to bring your cymbals or your - tambourine; there is something Egyptian in their form, at least they will do better than a sistrum that we have not. Mr. Bethel, I had almost lost my memory; put it here, just above the zone."

I would sooner have undertaken any of the labours of Hercules. I knew it was an office which fashionable men perform about fashionable women without any emotion, but to adjust that broach, just above that zone—it was impossible. Penelope's web was never more tedious— my hands shook—my very eyes failed. "You are amazingly tedious. I might have sent to Egypt for a sistrum, if some of the company could have asked for it by name." Her robe was bordered with flowers: I entangled the broach in them. "There now, you have torn my wreath; but I suppose you set no value on any wreath but a civic one. Lord Roschamp was not a civic wreath awarded by the ancients to the man who saved the life of another in battle? Don't attempt making any apologies; I am sure it was malice propense, because they were orangeblossoms, and I wore them merely to harmonize, as the French say, with this robe of orange crape—there keep it," said she, for I had desisted from any further at^ tempts to adjust it. "It is a memory you see, and whenever you touch the gem, (he genius shall attend yon, and all the other slaves of the gem." This was said





in the depressed tone that a tumult of voices easily concealed. Miss M. now approached with the cymbals, and her mother taking them, assumed the attidude of an Egyptian figure playing. Miss M. attempted to assume a dancing attitude to accompany her, but after a struggle with timidity or dejection, burst into tears, and retired.

The company was too numerous to be disconcerted by her absence. I will speak no more of the dangerous indulgences of this night. I looked at her, I listened to her, I spoke to her, or I felt her presence in silence; and when I returned home I dreamed a dream so passing sweet that

night The next morning I had a visit

from Mr. Corbett. I have mentioned his powers of observation: I have mentioned his strong affection for me. Our interview lasted nearly for an hour; the result of it was that I determined immediately to quit the country. His representations were so strong, his fears my own heart interpreted to be so just, my dejection, when the intoxication of local pleasure had subsided, was so deep and hopeless, my passion, though I never concealed it, avowed itself with such remorse and despair, that I had no longer any power of resistance He told me I mnst go, and I was willing to go, for no where could I be more miserable than I was.





When the feast, with which my uncle honored our reconciliation, was over, when LadyM. honored it with her presence, and when I had again been guilty of a thousand extravagancies, I felt myself that I must go. My uncle toowas anxious that his heir should live some time in the capital of the country where he was to reside, and to me Dublin was as indifferent as any other place. My uncle, with his usual munificence and simplicity, appointed me a large income, and Delorainefor my companion. I tore myself from Hammond, from my sister, and Mr. Corbett; the latter said, "I am only reconciled to the danger you are about to.encounter, by reflecting that you. avoid greater by your flight." I could not answer him. I sought not compassion or counsel from living thing; I wished no ope to look into my heart; I wished no one to look steadily in my face —it was flushed with the shame of a guilty and concealed passion. Poor Mary's fate was an emblem of mine: the relation which she bore to me, I bore myself to the object I loved; we were both too distant for hope, though not for desire—we both loved, and dared not tell—loved, and dared not hope—loved, and never must attain.





I went to Dublin, and Delorai'ie was my companion. I wished 1 could be here permitted to drop my pen—A young man, a boy of violent passions, and unrestrained opportunities, whose despair was the despair of passion, and who sought to intoxicate his senses to

vOL. II. M





appease his heart, accompanied and assisted by one whose whole existence seemed to be the spirit and pursuit of pleasure, placed in one of the most relaxed ant! voluptuous cities in the world, such a one—need I say more_I cannot, I will not. The very luxury by which I was surrounded, fed with rich and fatal temptation the passion which, amid distress and danger, had been a solace—feeble, and lambent, and remote—I was like young Claudio; at first 1 I looked upon her with a soldier's eye that loved, but had a rougher task in hand; but now I am returned, and that war-thoughts have left their places vacant, in their rooms come thronging soft and delicate desires, all prompting me how fair she is.' Yet my residence in Dublin cannot be entirely passed over. The manners of the place had a large share in what I did or suffered there. The habits of society there differ essentially, 1 believe, from any





;ether metropolis in the world. In all other cities the spirit of pleasure, both with inhabitants and strangers, is supported by the public entertainments, and the place, gay or dull, as these are, brilliant and varied.

In Dublin, a number of places of entertainment would be an indication that the natives had quitted their residence there, or at least their national character. The few places of public entertainment there are wretchedly conducted, and, except on the appearance of some local phaenomenon, wretchedly attended; bu* this cannot be imputed to any discoverable defect either in their love of pleasure, or their taste: when present at them, they feel with all the vivid sensibility of their character, and criticise with a taste which has not unfrequently dictated to a Londou audience in the choice and merit of performers. But in public places the Irish are not at home. They have no room for the display of that mingled hospitality and splendour, and profusion and vanity, that mark their entertainments and their disposition. If it be possible to imagine a kind of unselfish pride, a cordial and generous vanity, a pomp that desires as much to warm as to dazzle, such is the spirit of an Irish entertainer and his feast. The number of private engagements, the perpetual intercourse of what are called parties, at which persons of moderate fortunes, or fortunes that in England would be taken out of the proprietor's hands on ft commission of lunacy (for such a line , of conduct) conceive the eclat quite diminutive, unless two or three hundred people are dispersed through all the rooms in the bous3, of which every one doth " blaze with lights, and bray with minstrelsy;'' unless high play,dancing, and music by the first professional artists diversify the evening, a,«-dj it conclude with a supper, where f\l the , wreaths; of spring blush, on the





table, which is in general covered with exquisite provisions, and wine such as you would seek in vain, unless at the first tables in London. Is this the mode of living universal ?—It is. The Irish, like the Vicar of Wakefield, appear to have a passion for a number of cheerful faces illuminated by pleasure and festivity, and they gratify their human virtu at any price. This is not always to be ascribed to a mere and desultory love of expense and dissipation. The professional men of Dublin, whose success must depend in a great measure on their popularity, are obliged to court that popularity the Irish way; and if reputation be acquired in one eity by the character of sober indulgence, and frugal moderation, and in another by that of gaity, facility, and splendor; the object is the same, and the mode, if practicable, much more pleasant. The entertainments of the legal and medical profession* even of those who are by no





means distinguished in either, exceed those given, or expected to be given, by the first class of either in England.

I have been told acircumstance of one of the first physicians in London. Immediately after dinner, at which there had beefr no transgression of abstinence, after a slight apology for his absence, he ordered his carriage to attend his patient, and on his return, spent the remainder of the evening in study. Such conduct in a Dublin, physician would probably fail to procure him, the reputation of either talents or practice,, and would certainly depriye him of the reality of the latter. But in Ireland we are excited to employ professional people,, not merely from the report of their talents.. JWe seldom have mere report to trust to— In England professional men are not often seen, but by their own light, where all objects appear most bright, and in their own sphere, where their movements are certainly most observable—but in Ireland





they are pleasant, convivial men, whom we have met every where, and whom we have liked to meet: men who dine with us, and with whom we dine, between whom and us the facility of frequent intercourse has probably added friendship to professional respect, and the suavity of whose manners conciliated us before the reputation of their talents were known.

So much may be said iu defence of the splendid modes of professional life in Dublin, if to strangers it require defence; but it must be acknowledged that the habits of vague and desultory expense, and of loose, domestic dissipation, have reached other parts of life where they cannot be defended. The Irish must entertain, in whatever station of society they are placed. Nothing is more common in Dublin, than for a number of people, without any connexion of habits from business or accident, or any ties of regard, to live together in an alternate circle of entertainment, where * night nods at night, and each supper has its brother,' and drag out their winters and summers too in a joyless and sleepy repetition of expense without equivalent, and amusement without variety—without the communication of a single idea, or the improvement of a single feeling, or faculty, or moment of their time. All exertions must be proportioned to the powers that make them, or must over-strain them. The resources which supply this perpetual jet d'eau of pleasure must be deducted from the general fertility of the ground. There is not much wealth in Ireland. The elegantly-dressed, and sometimes accomplished and intellectual daughters of the middling, and even of the higher families, have seldom such fortunes as a diminutive London trader would think himself bound to acquire for his daughters.





In Dublin there is much of speculation in business, much struggle in profession.





much emulous splendor in families, and much misery among individuals. There are still many points in which the Irish, as individuals, differ from the English. Au Englishman at sixteen is a more sober, selfish animal, with more desire of his own indulgence, and more skill in combining that indulgence with his interest, than ar» Irishman at any age of the world; yet an Englishman is a better family-man. The Irish are more ardent lovers, the English better husbands. The Irishman is more

r

exhilarating in society, the Englishman's comforts are more domestic. One is formed to give more delight, the other more tranquil and rational happiness to life. The Irishman approaches you with facility, and attaches himself to yon with; ardor; the Englishman it is difficult to conciliate as an acquaintance, and more difficult to obtain for a friend, but ortce obtained, the prize is beyond all labor. In talent the Irish are not deficient, but





their national talents form a loose and confused mass, without analysis and without momentum; it is matter not without spirit, but without 'form and void:' in. some classes it is depressed by poverty,, in all classes it is defaced by indolence, and exhausted by dissipation. He whose talents can promote conviviality, seeks for them no higher use or object; he who can, please without study, never wishes, by study, to convert pleasure into utilityHe who delights the circle among whom' he lives, never dreams of extending his sphere, or enlarging his powers.. The visiV ble horizon bounds his mental view. Like the first men ia Goldsmith's Apologue, he knows no higher mountains than those he has looked up to from his birth; beyond, them he thinks of nothing, or thinks all is vacancy; and this is not from want of knowledge, or want of ambition, it is an insensibility of the mental growers produced by the perpetual use of the most





exciting stimulants. To a philosopher, the ,world from a distance, or the world for a moment, may be viewed as an object of curiosity and observation, but if once in passing through the fair, he finds a pleasure or a demand for its joys, he ceases to be a philosopher. An Irishman's habits of reading are temporary and superficial; his efforts of talent are desultory and eccentric; his study is a banqueting-room; and the presidents of the feast are always the Graces and Venus. . He may be excited to exertion by pride, but Jie reposes again in pleasure. The giantj in the fable, acquired new strength every time he touched the earth; the Irishman seems to derive fresh strength from what would depress and debilitate any other mind: he can assume the port of Hercules when he will, but it is his pleasure to be the slave of Omphale.

The peculiarities of the Irish character «re at least eminently favorable to strangers. In London, or in any other city, unless you adopt the expensive and unsocial resource of public amusements, or are domesticated with a few private families, you may pass in your utter solitude. In Dublin, with the mere advantage of the exterior and habits of genteel life, you may pass every evening in gay and polished society, where, if the mind is not much enlarged, the senses at least are amused; if useful connections are not formed, facility is at least acquired; and men forbear to acquire that cold, selfish, solitary, tavern-haunting, woman-hating life, of sober intoxication, and comfortless indulgence, in which many Englishmen, married and unmarried, wear out existence.





I need not speak of the distinguished advantages of thelrish in the society; it is easy to suppose, that men so anxious to please, must be peculiarly anxious to please those on whom so much of the pleasure of life depends. The fact is well known': W€Tmen universally prefer the society of Irishmen; they are better acquainted with the modes of pleasing, their minds are more plastic and pliant, their manners are more striking and animated, they flatter with more facility, and trifle with more grace. But such success must be attained by some sacrifice: the Irishman, who lives in pleasure, and who lives to please, must have less dignity, stability, and force of character, than he who lives for other purposes. He is more attractive among women, but less eminent among men. The ardor, the levity, and the ductability of the national character, appear in the greater as well as the lesser parts of life. In Ireland we marry for love, struggle vigorously against indigence, and when wealth is attained, squander it; adopt extensive plans of improvement; run in debt at the commencement of them., and leave both obligations unfulfilled. In literature we have' more orators than men of learning,





and more wits (more men of sparkling minds, and ambitious conversation,) than authors, in society more splendor than wealth, and more dissipation than amusement'—yet with all tlieir errors, the Irish are an amiable people, and will yet be a great one. I have heard a man of high intellectual powers say of them, 'The Irish are a people who have never had their day, but when they have, what a a people will they be >'

Of the College, the only seminary in Ireland except the Catholic one at Maynooth,I must again express my dissatisfaction. lr is not calculated to answer the great purposes of national improvement. The system,: was constructed at a time when learning was the privilege of a few who were not willing to communicate it to others, when philosophy was not brought down from colleges to dwell among men. There is too much of the old, monastic, unprofitable^ inaccessible spirit in the system. I do notspeak of the discipline—the discipline of a- college cannot be too strict: I speak, of their literature. T.hev are eminently skilled- in its more abstruse parts; they must be drstinguished. mathematicians, &c.&.c.&c.in order to acquire a fellowship. But of these sciences the principal use is in the application to certain parts of life with which, the fellow, of a college has no concern. A skilful mathematician may for instance make some improvement in mechanics, to which I believe no fellow dreamed of applying bis mathematical, knowledge. Cut they are certainly, not distinguished by classical erudition, which, adds much to the elegant and subtle spirit of research in literature, or by their attainments rn English literature,, on which depends, in a great measure, its facility, extension, and use in life. A. mathematician is rarely wanted, but life always requires historians, civilians, poets,, and orators. I know that these depart





ments, and what should belong to them, are not neglected in the University of Dublin, but I knew the attention paid to them is secondary and unproductive, and must be so when distinction in them is rewarded by occasional premiums, and ths great pri«e of a fellowship is reserved for scientific eminence exclusively. I may use the term, when it is remembered that of the four days appointed for the examination for the fellowships, the three first are consumed in a range of sciences, while Greek, Latin, Hebrew, History, Chronology, Antiquity, &c. &c. &c. are com. pressed into the four or two last hours of the competition. I speak of the University with reverence, for its defects are jn the institution, not in the individuals who compose it, who, under happier auspices, might and will be ' the illustrious men, and ingenuous youths,' which Mr. Grattan, the lover of his country and of its institutions, once hailed them, (but





innovation is not to be lightly undertaken, or easily executed, it is always difficult, sometimes dangerous.) But I speak of it also with earnestness, both of feeling and conviction, for I believe in the present, or indeed in any state of the country in the hands of the national instructor youth, are the issues almost of national life and death.

I again recoil from the remembrance of my mode of life in Dublin. It is, I am afraid, too justly represented in the letters which precede my narrative. They speak 6f me indeed 1 as I am, and if they set down nothing in malice, they certainly do naught extenuate.' They represent me justly as impelled in a course in which I might otherwise have hesitated by Deloloraine's example and praise, (and most powerful of all) his ridicule. I had rushed into dissipation, seduced by the novelty of the scene, and solicitous to forget one on whose thought it was madness to dwell;





but when novelty had ceased, and I found' no efforts of mirth or spleen could teach' me that' hardest science to forget,' I was still forced to rush on, and t6 forget myself.

At the termination of my winter in Dublin, I was seized with a violent fever: my constitution was poisoned, my mind was corroded; no one believed I could live— I did not wish to live. When I thought how I had acquitted myself to society, to my uncle, how I had lavished the wealth, and defaced the name I was to honor, how I had blazed the meteor of a season, and' how soon my blaze was exhausted, and I was hastening to darkness, I felt my blood glow even beyond the heat of fever; but when- I remembered how little life had fulfilled its promises tc^ me, that I never could be happy, that to me but one spot on the earth was Eden, and from that I was driven, I took refuge in the danger which they no longer concealed from me.

I retain but few traces of my feelings at that time, till 1 was roused to feeling as by an electric shock. I recollect grasping, even through sleep, the gem which I always wore in my bosom. I recollect imploring them to conceal the cause of my death from my uncle; after that I recollect nothing till a voice said to me, "Your uncle, the De Lacy, is arrested, and in Eyre-court jail for your debts;'' I started up; the words were repeated by Delorainers servant. What would in any ©ther circumstance have killed me, restored me to sensation, to life, at that moment: yet, with my recollection perfectly awakened, I acted as if under the impulse of delirium, in the rage of fever; I threw on my clothes—I sprang into a carriage. I travelled in the depth of winter to Connaughl; I had barely money to defray my expenses. My intentionwas to implore them to confine me in his place, to let me die in the prison I had' deserved. Long before I had arrived,- h&





had been liberated on the security of half the county. It was the event of a moment, but it was a moment, my uncle never forgot, and never recovered.

It had been an error in my uncle, but 3 deliberate intention to stab his feelings mortally on the part of the creditors. He had been accustomed to supply me by drafts upon an house in Dublin. Indolent and averse to business, and believing, like many others who have attained sudden wealth, that that wealth can know no bounds, I committed the management of our finances to Deloraine, who contrived to exceed our ample income, and went deeply in debt for a new curricle and horses, of which, when I learned the value, I sent them back to the owner's stable, and ordered the money to be deducted from the price of a carriage which I had bespoke for my uncle. The bill was brought to him at the time when he had divested himself of most of his ready





cash to furoish my half year's allowance. He was told this debt was contracted by 5Slr. Bethel. He answered that he supplied Mr. Bethel by drafts on a bankinghouse in D ublin. He was told in a jargon be did not understand, that that would not do, &c. &c. He desired time. He vyas told that his creditor was in distress himself. He applied to his steward: his steward had just collected his rents, and closed the accounts for the quarter, but offered to raise a temporary supply by distraining the goods, and driving the lands of some insolent tenants. My uncle weni to prison.. The whole country rose in* anger and shame. re-Court was thronged with the first gentlemen in the country, offering security for his liberation. The tenants who would have defrauded, but not distressed him, came in with rents which had been withheld year after year by them, declaring, that if he pleased he might take the turf1 from their little bit of

7..- -' '..- .- / clamp, and the potatoes out of the children's mouths, and the little rag of clothes off their backs, for they had nothing else to give. My uncle was attended to the castle by hundreds of the gentry and tenantry, and his towers shook with the acclamations of half a county— but the blow was struck. The people who arrested him could have bad no intentions of seriously injuring a man whose property was extensive, and whose temporary distress must be the result of a combination of fraud and accident: their only object was to arrest him. The consequence of debt to him must be trifling and brief; the consequences of the indignity they hoped would be fatal.





It is not from a contempt, or a savage and wilful blindness to the utility of jurisprudence, that its exercise is an indejible insult to a Milesian, it is from a rooted belief of native and necessary aristocracy of character and station, a belief that the conquests of the English have not reached him, that be is yet a sovereign in his own -territory, and accountable only to himself for his actions. The forms of modern policy, -that equal distribution of justice Which extends to every part of society, he does not despise, or defy, but he does not understand, or imagine how they can affect him. He hears of them as if they were the laws of another country—hears of tbem, and rejoices that he is a Milesian, and exempt from &\\ restraints but those ,of his own spirit. Such were my uncle's feelings, and such therefore was bis despondency. The malice of the transaction was so obvious, that it was with difficulty the persons who had executed the writ escaped, A Connaught mob have but indistinct notions of political justice. The event was however eminently favourable to my uncle. He was compelled to look into the state of his affairs. He found them much more favorAble than he had been allowed to believe by his steward who had hitherto been entrusted' with their sole inspection. He had been constantly in the habit of receiving fees from the tenants^or-abatement of rent, and representations of their distress, when no,distress existed. Thus the poor wretches confessed themselves in the penitent agony of the moment, when they say their Chieftain going to a. sight, which they swore by the immaculate mother of the L--rd they, had lived :too long to see, and they the cause.of it.- "We are, the biggest villains that ever stood on God's earth, except Neal Gahagan (the steward), and he, would cheat the devil himself, for be cheated us and you. If yen had sent your dog for the eyes out of our heads, you should have had them— turn - back,, turn back, for the love of Christ, and you shall have it all, and why not, and our hearts' blood upon the back of it?-:-turn baqk, De La;cy> turn back, or





the stones will leap out of Eyre-Court wall, before they will shut you in."

Such was the cry of hundreds, whose affection (with the true Irish levity, and want of principle) submitted to defraud the man, at whose prison door they swore on their knees they would have them sogers heart's blood upon a stone, and the cry of the widow in the house, before morning. When the whole train of fraud and peculation was unfolded, my uncle exclaimed, he never could have believed any evidence but that of his senses, of Gahagan's villainy. "He was my fosterbrother/' said he; " we were nursed by the same milk; I never could have believed it."

AH had been adjusted before I reached Connaught. 1 was only detained a few minutes on the road by Deloraine, who had i followed and overtaken me, and locking the door of the room into which he had pursued me, adjured me to preserve him from the resentment of his

vOL. II. N





uncle, and the odium of the business.** *' You know, Ormsby, it was my regard for you that tempted me to exceed your expenditure. I thought it scandalous that vour spirit and indulgences should be checked by such paltry limitations. I never could have checked vou, Mv affection for you betrayed me intb folly— into extravagance. I thought my uncle's wealth much greater than it is. He has deceived mc—he has deceived us both he deserves the consequence." I was leaning my head on the table, my face was buried in my handkerchief. I only raised it to say, "Deloraine, if you would have me listen to you—not a w.ord of"—I could not utter my uncle's name. He retracted, he entreated, he remonstrated. I was too wretched to wish to extend the wretchedness I felt. I promised, if ever I was admitted to my uncle's presence, not to accuse him but myself. 1 was careless of resentment, for 1 was careless of life. I wished only to be forgiven and die.





At that time it was indeed prdbable that *1o solicitude cotild preserve my life: my strength was exhausted, and my fever increasing; the pain and confusion in my head were almost intolerable. I recollect, as in a dream, crossing the court of the castle, not speaking to any of the servants who crowded about rhe, for I had a con* fused idea that every one wanted to impede me; and placing myself silently at my uncle's door, and sinking down upon it, when I could stand no longer. I would not permit any one to approach or touch -me; and they could not make me underst? ud that he was asleep. In a few moments . Deloraine came up; to the tones of his voice I was always sensible. "Ofrrisby," said he, "you must come away—you will die if you remain here in your present state." I smiled when he spoke of death.' "Yonr uncle will not see you; why do you distress him, and exhaust yourself by this obstlnaoy?"' I was silent. but djtl





not move. "Ormsby, dear Ormsby, listen to me, let me prevail with - you." He knelt down beside me—I lay on the floor. "Your blood is heated, your temper is impetuous; so is De Lacy's—if he comes out, and sees you here, he may be provoked to some violence; you may be provoked by what no man can resist. If he should spurn you away, you will do some rash thing, you will hate yourself for it ever after. Don't stay here to expose yourself to usage which will degrade you if you don't resent it, and which you will repent all your life if you do."

Some of the servants who pitied me, interposed. They declared the De Lacy would never do good till he saw me again: that his heart would warm to the sight of me— that when he lay down the night before, he pronounced my name twice, and they heard him sigh heavily after his curtains were drawn. I heard every word with the clearest perception. I clung to the door





with all my strength, and repeated my own name in a voice which, though wild with delirium, he had. not forgotten. He came out. He bent over me as I knelt at' the door. He fell on my neck and wept.

For some months neither my health nor my intellects appeared likely to recover the shock they had received. To travel seventy miles through a bleak country in the rage of a fever, was a violence to nature from which no force of enthusiasm? eould protect it. I believe in any other state of minJ it must have been fatal: even in mine it was neatly so. And when I recovered my faculties, it was only to look on life with disgust—it had nothing good for me. The sting of early and disappointed passion throbbed and rankled in my heart's core, yea in my heart of hearts. I became listless- and dejected. The deep melancholy of passion baked ray blood, and made it heavy and thick. The dark red spot that burned for ever on my cheek, was no sign of health. I listened to no one. I was interested by ppthing, except when a message of inguiry arrived from Montrevor House. I had no companion. Mr. Corbett had been removed to a small living at a distance; JIammond and his wife were in England. With Dejoraine I took no counsel. J}elojaine's power was merely that of exciting the spirits in health, and adding to the festivity of mirth. I loved him—loved him unreservedly. I had given but too Strong proofs of my confidence in him, but there is a species of confidence high, and delicate, and sad, which J never could rejjeose in Deloraiae.





. It was during this melancholy period of 3 struggle with ill health, in which I hardly Ivished to overcome, that my uncle, whose Penetration I thought I had eluded, told me, sjjmost in the language of a neglected writer, that I L could not hide my purpose from my





narrow-searching friend/ It was the'first time he ever mentioned, ever alluded to his own passion. I am not going to detail the melancholy confidence of posthuflious affection, and of hopeless affection. There was little language in our short dialogue, but much intelligence. Neither importunity nor affection however drew from me the name of Lady Montrevor. I still retained my dread and shame-of,a guilty passion. I acknowledged I loved— loved without hope, loved I believed todeath, but acknowledged no more: till touched by my uncle's solicitude, and' firmly believing I had secured myself by the condition, I told hiin I would disclose the object when I had found mysel* sufficiently benefited by an excursion to the neighbourhood of the sea, to advert to the subject without an emotion which I then felt too much for me. He consented to the condition, and hurried my departure. 1 went to the rock on the sea coast,





in the neighbourhood. Deloraine was .still my companion: it was necessary he should be, for my lassitude had rendered me unfit for the commonest business nf life. But in Deloraine's society there is no longer any danger. To me the name of pleasure was loathsome—I had never known more than the name*

I have now been here some weeks, and have felt under every change of place that 'the mind is its own place, and where can make a heaven of hell, an hell of heaven;' in mine both are so much mingled, the guilt of passion is soothed -by such dreams of pleasure, and that pleasure so shadowed by fear and self-reproach, that if I were confident of ease in death, I would not wish to live.

Such was the account 1 gave my invisible correspondent; I will pursue it for you without interruption. From this state of apathy I was roused by a letter from my uncle. To pacify him I had sent him





flattering assurances of my health. He. believed them, and claimed my promiseson it. I was confounded, but could not retreat: with a faultering hand I traced these words at the end of a letter, in which I deprecated all assistance, all consolation-—" The cause of my dejection, the cause, I believe, of my death, when £ die, is to be sought in Montrevor-House. I never have said or written so much to man before—I never will say or write? more,". Yet, when I- had written this- it felt relieved, gratified ; compassion is soothing to the miud in every state; I deserved compassion, I was sure of my uncle's, I was sure of more—of his sympathy^

While I was consoling myself for my; -confession, I received a letter, desiring my immediate presence at the castle. The expressions were remarkably strong. "I have worked wonders in your favor, come down immediately, you will not believe the joy that,is preparing to welcome you; I \vfll tell you no more; come immediately to your affectionate uncle. M. I>e Lacy/' If was written, as usual, by Father Cusack, but signed by the Chieftain:'





'1 will not tell the state of mind in which I travelled; a state of solicitude and -hope tc<>' wild and exquisite for description; in tne wide range of possibility, what room was there for either? What couTd be done for' me by man? But the visions that floated before me were sweeter from their shadowy and indefinite forms, from their wanting a local habitation and a name, frpm their actual impossibility, and fantastic reajity. I arrjved at the Castle, it was a dark autumnal evening, in the elpse of October: as long as light remained, I read artd {harked every character in my uncle'sletter, and' expounded it by every art in the cabbala of fancy, and held it to my heart tji still its beatings, when I could ri.ad no longer.

4 1 sprung out of the -carriage; I asked





for my uncle; lie had not expected me till the following night; he had set out for Montrevor-House, and had left ordejs that Deloraine and I should follow him, in the event of our arrival, which, however, he hardly expected.

With all the impatience and restlessness of my feelings, I yet could not avoid wishing to spare her the spectacle of my wasted figure—all ' travel-stained,^ and I spent some moments at the Castle endeavouring to compose my feelings, and my appearance, which were almost as wild as Gar* denie's, his rags excepted. We proceeded to Montrevor-House; it was now night, and Deloraine could not see the red spot in my cheek, which burned hotter than ever. He was silent—unusually silent; I spoke to appease my own agitation, but my words were almost inarticulate. The circumstance of my urtclebeing at MontrevorHouse gave a kind of domestic confidence to my feelings, which were again disturbed by the singularity of his being there; he had never quitted the castle before, except on an invitation to Lemon-Grove.





We arrived; the servants appeared to expect our arrival. We were shown into the drawing-room; the family, who had not yet dined, were collected in it. The lights were blazing when we entered, and the company rose to receive us; my uncle advanced first. The sudden transition from darkness and cold, and confinement in a narrow vehicle, to the glare of light and splendor, and the confusion of figures and voices, scattered the little recollection 1 had struggled to obtain.— Lord and Lady Moutrevor were advancing slowly across the wide drawing-room to say those conciliating nothings that nevertheless give the stranger breath and time; but my uncle, his. natural impetuosity increased by his arfection and triumph, exclaimed—" This is no time for forms, we are too happy for them; Ormsby, you are.





the first Irishman whose diffidence ever Obstructed his happiness; but no English peer need blush at his connection with my heir, and you may be proud of a prize which it reflects honor on Ireland, that one of her native sons should win." As he spoke, he drew Miss Montolieu forward,, who appeared sinking to the earth, and placed her cold and trembling hand in mine* I stood motionless for a moment. Had he been pronouncing a spell that converted both into stone, the effect could not have been stronger. At length* Miss Montolieu, who had vainly struggled to speak, tottered from us, and attempting to reach Lady Montrevor, sunk into her arms senseless. Nothing but this, and the tumult it caused, could have restored me.

Lady M. and the gouvernante assisted Miss M. My uncle accused his own vehemence, Lord M. made a speech suitable to the occasion, and I leaned on Deloraine, unable to speak, unwilling to think. Ue - whispered to me eagerly— "For God's sake behave more like a marf, a man of honor, a man of feeling; can you see a girl, a lovely delicate girl, who has avowed her love for you, sinking into , the earth with her timidity at the avowal, and disconcert, and distress, and degrade her by this girlish waywardness yourself ?** During the whisper, a thought like the consciousness of this dreadful mistake rushed on me. I remembered the doubtful expressions of my letter, I remembered my having said that my affections were engaged by an object who resided at Montrevor-House. With that weakness of the mental eye which the contemplation of one object causes, I never dreamed that this expression could be interpreted of any other than Lady Montrevor, while my uncle, putting the more obvious construe, tion on it, had applied it to Miss M. young, and lovely, and disengaged; had believed my expressions of despondency





to be merely the fantastic despondency of passion, had pleaded my imaginary cause with all the ardor of affection, and succeeded too well.

Miss M. was conveyed from the room, and my uncle's solicitude took another direction; he observed my pale and speechless looks; he approached ine, and gave me some breathing time by lamenting his precipitation, and talking of the fatigue of travel, and the hurried spirits of an invalid. I permitted him to speak without interruption. lie attempted to loosen my waistcoat; his hand touched the ribbon to which the cameo that I always wore in my bosom was suspended. I felt it; I was roused; I recollected myself; I uttered some faint words of assent. At this moment Lady M. in accompanying her daughter, passed me; I turned; 1 touched her veil; she passed on, but said in a voice perfectly distinct—' Volto sciolto, i peri' siort strclti.' It seemed as if she was





addressing her daughter. Her voice was- a sound that my feelings obeyed almost instinctively.

Lord M. now recalled his lady to inform her he heard tlie Bishop of Clonfert'scarriage, and whispered something, about the ceremony being performed as soon aspossiblet that all the disagreeables- might be terminated before dinner. "We need not waste the evening in sentiment and swooning; Miss M. had better try to com* pose herself and stay." Lady M. whispered something to my pale bride, whoy after a moment's struggle, returned to her seat, leaning on her mother's arm, and when Lady M. attempted to resume her chair, she still held her hand, and motioned her inability to be without her.

I knew there was nothing extraordinary in t'lis ; that fashionable marriages were usually conducted with an expedition which was meant to exclude all intrusion from feeling. I felt it was on this occasion, it was welcome, it was necessary ; I could not* retreat, and the only mercy that could be now shewn me, was in a precipitation that did not compel me to speak, that did not allow me to think. I had no means—no time—I dared not think.





In the tumult of my thoughts something like a gleam of pleasure quivered fitfully. I was about to become a relative, an inmate, to see her daily without interruption and without reproach; and something like a security in the solemn event that was about to take place; something that seemed to place me beyond the reach of danger, but within that of indulgence, pleased, if it did not tranquillize me. >

The bishop entered, a man in whose presence it was not easy to feel restraint. His address, blending facility with professional gravity, and his conversation displaying felicity with elegance, made his appearance a relief welcome to all. While the license was examining,





my uncle, who appeared to feel the benevolent disappointment of one who had purposed to heighten pleasure, and only obtained pain, said to me in a voice of constrained cheerfulness—"I perceive I am too much of a veteran to meddle with manoeuvres; these light modern weapons don't fit my hands at all; I am too old and too awkward for them. I thought I had prepared a surprise for you that would have reflected honor on my generalship, and instead of that I have only surprised Miss M. and you out of your senses I think. Immediately on receiving your letter,'' he continued, drawing me to his chair, " I proposed to Lord M. a match between Miss M. and you; I had liitle fears that he would decline it, though you were so full of fears about it." I sighed, but he set the sigh down to the error-side of the account again; " Lord M. assented, the lady assented"—and Lady Montrevor, said I tremulously, "Oh, she assented too, though she seemed somewhat more sui





prised than I could have expected at so natural a circumstance as your being in love with a very beautiful girl, and amia-' ble and interesting: too, though she is the daughter of an Englishman. Every thing was soon adjusted ; fortune was not my object, I knew, it was not yours. In the triumph of my heart I wrote to you, but concealed the extent of your happiness, for I wished to pour it on you in a flood of joy at once. I have been unskilful, or unfortunate, I believe I must say with Lear—/ am old and foolish. I have only disturbed and distressed where I meaned to—to make too happy. The feelings of a female and an invalid are materials too delicate for me to deal with. Bt;t, Ormsby, you should remember that blushing and trembling is the privilege of the bride, not the bridegroom."

I struggled to recover some composure; yet there is a kind of solemn and inarticulate pantomime performed on those occasions, that intimates all is ready, though no one knows how to say so; in preference to which I was anxious to encounter the ceremony itself. We stocd up, Lord M. supported his daughter with pompous politeness; Lady M. drew her veil over the lower part of her face, and stood at some distance, in an attitude whose ambitious elegance spoke too much ease. The ceremony went on; I had no ring; my uncle produced one, a large, costly, oldfashioned one, into which two of Athanasia's fingers might have gone, and gave it with a whispered wish that it might be an auspicious omen; it was the ring he had prepared for his own marriage.





As the fiat words were pronounced, Lady M. dropped her veil, her eyes werefixed on me, but their expres -on was calm and searching. I could have said with Eloisa, " Not on the cross n?y eyes were fixed, but you."

I remember nothing till 1 heard-the mur





*nur of congratulation about me ; my pale shrinking bride was consigned to arms that as they enfolded her trembled like her own. I led her to her father's feet with sufficient ,composure to spare us the repetition of the attitude; Lady M. advanced as we knelt before her lord; something between a prayer and a compliment was murmured by both. Lady M. extended her hand to her daughter, I pressed it; there was agony in the pressure; it was the last impulse of passion that I obeyed.

The examination of papers, &c. protracted dinner till past eight. I was impatient for it—I was impatient for wine, which I swallowed in large quantities. I gradually acquired a kind of false and heated courage; I was wounded by the easy hauteur of Lady M.: from the moment the ceremony concluded, she had become herself again; her conversation arid maniere were unusually sparkling; Ihe determined and incessant blaze of her





wit was like a feu d'arti/tce; she talked of the classics with the hishop, and of the ancient regime with my uncle, who listened to her with delight, and declared she reminded him of the brightest ornaments of the vielle cour in its brightest period.— "There was certainly much more dignityin the appearance of women in those times in particularly that of matrons. It is really melancholy to see the distress of our antiquated belles at present, who imagine they can renew their youth like the serpent, by casting off their coil. They have received some comfort, however, from the construction of the modern corsets, which envelope the whole person, and now, in complete steel, they revisit the glimpses of the moon, making .night hideous. A woman d'un certain age, grows so glaring in , her dress, they will not remember that the ancients made the dove, not the peacock, the companion of beauty. My lord, (addressing the bishop) does not your





-favorite Homer give the epithet of venerable to Hebe? Good G—d! how ridiculous a venerable Hebe must be. But we never know how to remit our claims to admiration; we lose the substance of respect attempting to retain our title to vanity, even when no more than its shadow remains."

I knew well what all this meant; it was said to the company, but at me. I continued to sit with the gentlemen as long as they remained in the dining-room. It was late when the bishop and my uncle retired. From that time Lady M. seemed to think exertion no longer necessary. Lord jVI.'s.maniere diplomatique was of use to us ; he provided cards, as we were a partie quarree, and as it was en famille, and we could not be too moderate, mentioned guinea casino. Athanasia and I lost sixteen guineas-; as she paid her debt to her - father, he drew a beautiful antique from his finger, worth double that sum, and put it on the hand she extended to him, declaring there was a spell in it that ensured success. Lady M. as she rose, said " Mr. Bethel, you play extremely well, but you shuffle a little too much." I found it wa& arranged before my arrival, that we should remain a fortnight at Montrevor-House.





The mode of living was perfectly without restraint, and the establishment uncomfortably splendid. Breakfast remained on the table from eleven till three—generally untouched, for Lord and Lady M. who occupied separate apartments, breakfasted in their dressing-rooms, and Miss Montolieu seule with her governess at an earlier hour; an habit that Athanasia and I, weary of breakfasting in pompous solitude among a suite of attendants, adopted in a few mornings. Lord M. occupied the whole morning in receiving and answering letters from England—had hardly time to swallow some ham pie, and half a bottle of champagne, before he .sent to request





her ladyship would have the goodness to accompany him in an airing. Her ladyship, for what reason it was difficult to discover, never presumed to decline his requests, though her compliance she endeavoured to make as painful to him as it was evidently to herself. She never rose till this summons, and then hastily throwing on her morning dress and pelisse, and enveloping herself in her veil, she flung herself into the family cage, as she called the carriage, insisted on his lordship's keeping on the perch opposite to her-, took a book always with her to prevent the least appearance of attention to her' companion, and then declaring that she was ready to act her part in the comedy of ' False Appearances' to the whole county, in the true Thespian itinerant style;—sat back in the carriage, and amused herself, eluding the gazers as the splendid equipage passed along. Lord M/s object was evidently to gain the

TOL, II. o





respect of the country by appearing the best and happiest of husbands and of men. His lady's was evidently to defeat that and every other object as far as she dared; for he appeared to hold over her a secret and powerful influence, with which she struggled only to shew all the will of resistance, but oply the power of submission. »

The excursion terminated only when the light failed to show Lord and Lady Montrevor in the same carriage to all that pleased to see, and when the familycage dismissed its unsocial turtles. About three hours were allowed for dressing for dinner, which made its appearance about seven, to a company of never less than twenty persons, for without company Lord M- could not exist.

He had contrived to render existence tolerable by finding, to a range of about thirty miles, families such as may always be found in Ireland, to whom the most exquisite wines are necessary, and high play welcome; 'these orgies, usually protracted the entertainments till three or four in the morning, unless when a certain set were assembled, and his lordship determined by any means to please all, was suddenly converted, like Comus, from a late wassailer into an admirer of "heavenly harmony;" and her ladyship and her daughter exhibited in song and attitude and recitation till all power of admiration was exhausted, and the family of Montrevor were pronounced the "most charming, the most amiable, the most happy family in the world."





Our marriage, which was immediately announced, produced a new display of pomp and felicity in the entertainments given at Montrevor-House, and by the neighbouring families, in honor of the event. Lord M. insisted on the propriety of accepting them all; Lady M. contended and complied; and I was cono %





gratulated and envied, till I almost began to believe that he whom all the world pronounces happy, ought to try to think himself so. The feminine and fairy beauty of Athanasia,, the timidity with which she hung on my arm when oppressed by the gaze of admiration, her helpless and appealing looks, her silence, that spoke to my heart and told me it wanted love for her, and certain sources of pleasure and confidence which our new state had put us in possession of, filled me with melancholy and delicious sensations towards her. I pitied her, and my pity was melting into love; yet my anguish was at times insupportable. To be under the roof with Lady M. had yet given me no opportunity of speaking to her; I could only look, and to look was more dangerous than ever: for, either in honor of her daughter's nuptials, or from some other cause, her beauty was at this period more rich and





resplendent than I had ever seen it with bodily or even mental eye before.

A few days after our marriage, I had returned from visiting my uncle, and depressed by the effort I had made to hide my depression, I was hastening to beg Athanasia "with a kind and favorable hand, to whisper music to my weary spirit." I knew her harp stood in her dressing-room, and that she was accustomed with a voluptuous indolence to touch the chords from time to time while extended, reading, on the sophai I passed through it;. I entered the bedchamber; through the half-drawn curtains I had a glimjiXe of a female writing, with her back to me; it was Lady M. "Hush," said she, pointing to the bed, "there sleeps Titania, (a favorite diminutive by which I called Athanasia, when I wished to teach my heart tenderness for her,) she is tired of all this tumult; you

must dine at without us to-day,





and we will try to be stupid and comfortable in my dressing-room." She paused a moment, and then apparently wishing to account for her presence there, said "As Mrs. B. did not come at the usual hour to my dressing-room, I came at an unusual one to her's; she told me she was trying to get a little rest, and when I found she was asleep, I feared to disturb her by attempting to quit the room, and as there were writing materials here"

I begged I might not disturb her. She resumed her writing. I seated myself opposite her, repeating her excuse for not quitting the n>'in. I had hardly heard what she said. I only thought of the opportunity, and that it might never return: even had my passion been extinguished, I owed an explanation to my honor. But it was not; and while I gazed on her lovely forehead and brows, which were all I could see as she bent





over the table, and the motion of her white fingers, I felt an agony of passion that almost made me incapable of reason. I had rather have been permitted to gaze on her thus for ever, than to have folded in my arms all the beauty of the earth. My despair gave me courage. After some ineffectual attempts, I at length articulated "Lady Montrevor—will you— can you listen to me for avmoment?" She laid down her pen, but without raising her eyes, and seemed to read what she had been writing. I drew near the table. "Is this attention ? —but no matter—I deserve—no I do not, by Heaven, I do not deserve it." I leaned on the table; I covered my face with my hand; the tears burst from my eyes; they dropt on the paper. She raised her head, "Mr. Bethel, what am I to understand by this?" "That I am miserable." "You are at least quite inexplicable." "Is it possible you can believe, you can think I am—What circumstances ?— Have you so little knowledge of the human heart; of mine, whose inmost recesses you knew"—" I know nothing— What can I know—What can I think? I thought "when first I saw Alonzo's tears, I knew their meaning well," hut when I find them shed for my daughter, and when I find them wiped by the fairest hand in the world except my own, what am I to think? you know I had no hand to give to dry them with." Her softness gave me breath, gave me composure. I begged her to listen to me. "No, no, no—not now; it is no matter. I cannot listen, I ought not to listen." "You ought, you must, in justice, in mercy, by Heaven you shall listen, or you make me wild." "Hush, you will waken Athanasia." "No matter; she must be awakened some time or other." "But not by me; farewell." I grasped her hand, I held her by force, I told her





all in a voice of suppression and agony. "Now mock me with your pitiless contempt if you will, but listen to me; though my thoughts of you are as pure as if I were your brother, your son, yet without your compassion, without something more soft, more favorable, in your feelings towards me than bare complacency than that cruel politeness of which you are too much a mistress, I will not, will not live—I feel I cannot."

A long pause ensued, "This is all very extraordinary," said she, averting her head; "but I have an implicit, an involuntary dependance on you; 3 ou have never deceived me; I-must believe you, I must pity you; but I believe I must not tell you so. But we must think of this no more—never more—it is impossible, and horrid, and never to be mentioned, never thought on again. You wish for my regard; you may rely on it: the regard which I felt for you as a





stranger, will not be much diminished by your becoming a relative; a relative so domestic—so—as my daughter'6 husband." I attempted to kiss the hand I held, she withdrew it. "There must be no more of this; I have gone too far already. No woman ever had less of - false prudery about her, perhaps too little, but there is a length to which neither false nor true delicacy will suffer one to go. I was too much pleased with you, perhaps; if I was I am sufficiently punished for it. But, remember that our present situation does not exclude any thing that could reasonably have existed between us."

As she spoke, she resumed her seat, and examined the paper as if to recall the ideas my intrusion had broken off. I sat down beside her, her motions instinctively prompted mine. "Don't be afraid," said she, "as I see you may be trusted. I will venture to tell you that





this sleep is produced by laudanum, and will not be easily broken; her nerves are in a wretched state, they frightened me into giving her my drops, and the effect has been this deep lethargic sleep. I -was writing, when you came in, to Mr. Corbett; my mind is in a strange state; we, I mean my lord, has just received the intelligence which directly and indirectly he has been expecting since our banishment to the Siberia of the British dominions. A splendid appointment has been made out for him, and he is to be recalled in a few days to England, and to wear all his blushing honors thick upon him again. He has been struggling for this I know ever since his arrival in Ireland. Getting the county for George, and fixing the reign of his popularity here, were, I knew, merely devices pour tuer le temps, for time is always a formidable thing to a man of fashion. I really imagined, that after the blow we had received, all his castle-building, his plans, and elevations, as the architects say, was the baseless fabric of a vision; but affairs, I find, have taken another turn. My eldest son, Mr. Montolieu, a man whom, if ever you know him, as I hope you will, you will love and revere; a man of the first integrity and talents, has acquitted himself so ably in a ve*y difficult negociation with a certain northern court, that he is become highly consequential as a political character, has made the first essay of his consequence by informing the ministry that he will retain his present situation only on the condition of his family's restoration to their late distinguished situation. Now Lord Castle-Wycomb, by his present dispatches, endeavours to prove that it has been all his doing; Lord Castle-Wycomb is precisely the man to avoid doing anything, and to take the credit of doing every thing. But, " Aurelian's word for a thousand pound/' I am convinced we owe it entirely to him, if it can be called an obligation, to be precipitated again into what I wish, I wish (said she with energy,) I had never, never





been impelled to the verge of 1 have

told you my mind is in a strange state; for this strange confidence I expect to be repaid by your regard, your respect. I have done nothing yet to forfeit yours; I wish I could say so of my own. I am writing to Mr. Corbett. That man has attained a great influence over my mind, merely from the circumstance of my believing that he would exert it exclusively for my best interests. I am .telling him what I hardly dare to tell myself—that I long, with all the perverse longing of a woman, to return to London, to blaze out once more with a splendor that shall strike envy and enmity blind, shall blast them with excess of^ light; and then, if he thinks proper, re





tire for ever. My mind is intolerably depraved. I acknowledge, I feel it; it astonishes me. Yet I cannot conceal it from myself: I mean all my better feelings are gone. I am now only alive to the wish to charge once more through the whole host of foes that have had time to cluster and collect together, to scatter them to all the corners of the drawing-room, to overwhelm them with my contempt and their own, and then to do whatever Providence and Mr. Corbett please. I know I am a lost creature, I know you ought to despise me for every thing except my confidence in you. But to triumph once more over Lady Delphina Orberry, and the Rees, and all the rest, once more to turn ther own weapons against the wretches whose praise and whose ridicule have alike destroyed me, and then to " put out the lights and then" —be forgotten for ever, or only remembered as the Lady Montrevor whose last struggles flashed the most splendid radiations, like the fish of the Roman banquet—to do that, I would lose my own applause, that could he lost more than once in one's life—I would almost lose Mr. Corbett's. I know it is the ambition of a mind depraved by fashionable folly and vice, and so is mine; I know it is the ambition of a miserable mind, and so is mine—till my next winter in London I mean."





I was silent in my astonishment and compassion. "You are wondering now at the difference between my lord and me. He did nothing but talk of these things, I . only felt them—it is the difference between a strong and a weak mind; but both our minds are inveterately abused by the world. However I will write to Mr. Corbett, and I will read his answer, and that is engaging for a vast deal, for when he writes, "conviction closes his periods."

4





i

The day was insufferably tedious: Lord M. always declamatory, now actually raved of the vindication of his honors, and character, &c. &c. hinted that by this time he believed the cabinet had felt their want of him, that no inducement could prevail on him,-to quit retirement but that attachment to his country and zeal for her interests, which would not permit him to withdraw his services at a time that his recal testified their importance. "But we must all," said his lordship, " sacrifice our inclinations to our duty, and mine unfortunately forbids my remaining in a country which I shall ever remember with affection and regret." This solemn sadness affected the whole companj'; they really regretted the loss of splendor and festivity, such as they had witnessed at Montrevor-House, and such as they believed had been exhibited purely from regard for his Irish friends. Not even in the carriage returning did his lordship forbear, "bestowing all his tediousness upon me." And I listened to his public spirit, and sufferings, and sacrifices, till the step of the carriage was let down, and then he paused to finish his last sentence, ore rotundo, before he alighted.





No circumstances ever induced Lord M. to violate decorum, and he repaired to the drawing-room, to hope her ladyship and Mrs. Bethel found themselves better, before he retired to his closet to examine and answer a variety of important letters, he had received that morning, " with the purport of which I shall have the honor of acquainting you, Lady M. when I have in some measure arranged the multiplicity of business, which compels me to deny myself the pleasure of your society this evening." Her ladyship was looking over some letters as he spoke. "Stay, my lord, stay I beg for one moment, this is a letter from LadyCastle-Wycomb,



i





and the contents are such as you ought to he apprized of immediately. Mr. B. there is no occasion for your quitting the room, you are one of us you know. As Major O'Flaherty says in the play, we 9hall all be related presently. Your daughter. my lord, is going to bemarried-" "What daughter?" " Your only daughter unmarried, except Ida, who is in the nursery, for some time; your daughter Miss Montolieu, who is in London with Castle-Wycomb, and who is shortly to be Countess of Westharopton, a title which your lordship may remember, I bore unworthily for some years. Upon my word Lady Castle-Wycomb seems to inherit all the diplomatique talents of her family. She must have managed like the match-making Mrs. Steinhope in Belinda." "Lady M. I beg you to recollect, this is no time, no subject for badinage." "There is a better reason, my lord, which is that I am in no humour for





badinage; marriage is with me, un sujet plus triste pour faire badinage; there is the letter, satisfy your incredulity or credulity, for if you can helieve Lady Castle-Wycomb to have effected it as she says, it would be hard to call you incredulous. Mr. B. have the goodness to trim that lamp, and assist in flashing conviction on his lordship." "This is very extraordinary and very desirable—and very, very extraordinary," said his lordship to himself, as he read the letter. "Among a packet of congratulatory epistles that I got from my dear five hundred friends," said Lady M- "on the late arrangement, my daughters thought proper to send me forms of thanksgiving suitable to the occasion, which I thought proper or pleasant not to read, till Mrs. B. looking over them perceived t!ie intelligence extraordinary of this marriage, which is to take place in a few days, and which they hope will be honored with our presence, &c. &c. &c. I wish to Heaven there were printed forms for family occasions. I have not Lady CastleWycomb's happy art of combining a brazen style with characters as fair as wax." This allusion to the classic mode of writing was entirely lost on his lordship, who entreating leave to peruse the letter in his closet, retired with a profound - bow to the ladies-, and a recommendation of them to my attetition for the evening.





Lady M. was in extravagant spirits, she sprung from the sopha, and trod the room with the lightness of a sylph. « Well, Mr. B. I have determined every thing, as I always do, in a moment, it was vastly lucky, I had time to determine for you in the same interval; you must go to England, we must all go to England, to London I should say, for as London stands for the whole world in some vocabularies, it may be allowed inclusively to stand for England. J will





not write to Mr. Corbett. I will not trust myself to read his answer, till I am determined to quit England, (that is the world) finally, and then he shall have all the credit of fixing my resolution. I must go—I ought to go to be present on this occasion, and a thousand other occasions that may occur. I must go to witness, or to increase Lady Westhampton's blushes—it was the classic costume for mothers, you know, to bear the torch or the train at their daughter's nuptials, and for once I am content to take an omen for my expedition from Hope."

Athanasia was listlessly examining the impressions of the seals of letters that lay out the table. I approached her, "Should you like to go to London, my love?" "I fear I should not be able, my spirits are in a wretched state, and I dread the sea at this time of the year." "Oh you must not talk of spirits," said Lady M. whom nothing, when she pu*sued a favorite object, could resist, "we can call spirits from the vasty deep you know." "It is those spirits I dread," said Athanasia. "Oh dread nothing in the world. You see I fear nothing., not even myself, whom of all beings I have most reason to dread. Mais n'importe, where there is no danger, there is no glory.'' She paused a moment; as she was walking rapidly along the room, she struck her forehead. "And there is danger, and such danger?" Her voice became hollow, but in a moment she burst out jn a voice of struggling gaiety, "qual pollor, qual tema—son regina, son guerriera. Yes I must sing, "Son Regina>" before a London audience once more, and you must accompany me, Athanasia. Bravura was always my forte. Allons mes enfans a la gloire; you see I know the difference between allez and allons, which was said to have lost a French general a battle once." "And will the effort terminate in





* la pace del core/said I, adverting to the ,words of Catalani's celebrated song; she did not appear to hear me. "Now, Mr. B. that I have convinced myself at least of the absolute necessity of my going to London, I must convince you, which I shall immediately do by argument, which I always reserve for the service of my friends. I decide on my own measures, and deliberate on theirs. Mr. B. you must go to London, it is the place for you, the place for every man of talent, there is nothing done here, a kind of mental absenteism pervades this country. If you expect to distinguish yourself among your countrymen, or to be of service to them, you must first make yourself of consequence to the leading men; there is a great deal in being on the spot, as Lord M. I suppose can tell you. There is a kind of respect, a kind of expectation, and room, made for Irishmen of talent by the union; they are brought into





/

closer contact with the first men in England, the comparison has been favorable to them in the very point in which it has been made; they certainty possess move oratorical powers than the English speakers. If you get into the house, you must distinguish yourself perhaps if you do not, you may distinguish yourself still more. At all events, in or out you can only be distinguished in England this is a most important juncture for you and for the country; the ministry has just been changed, the present premier avowed his disapprobation of the union, and is known to be fond of this country, and of every thing belonging to it. I need not tell you that there is even some idea of petitioning under his auspices for a repeal of the act of union; this is the time for an Irishman to make himself conspicuous, on one side or the other, no matter which, to me I mean. Principles I know are very pretty things for those who





have them, they should always he the foundation of the political structure, and always be kept out of sight. Now Mr. B. that I haye placed you in the very centre of the political world, let me congratulate you and myself on your distinction, and warn you, to render yourself of general consequence. Do not confine yourself to one limited direction, do not appear to be looking for a place, let men be compelled to look for a place for you. If you stoop in your course, to pick up the gilded fruits of profit, you will infallibly lose the race. And now that every thing is arranged, let us call for supper, for though politicians may resemble the cameleon in. their hue, they cannot be said like them to live upon air, as you will one day be convinced by all your senses at a ministerial dinner, especially, if you sit near my Lord Montrevor."

There was so much matter mixed with madness in this whimsical speech, that I

VOL. II. v





listened as to sober and deliberate advice. I determined to go to London. I possessed wealth and rank and connexions; my mind -wanted an object; that which Lady M. had pointed out was one capable of filling the most enlarged one. That she had pointed it out, magnified its importance, and palliated its improbability. She too was going to the great theatre where of distinction, if I ever became conspicuous, she would witness it. She had suggested it. "Ah si ma dame me voyoit," was the cry of an ancient knight of chivalry, on rushing into an engagement—it is the cry of ambition and love. I had exercised some research, and collected some materials during my residence in Ireland, such as were not unworthy the notice of a public-minded man; my melancholy had made them worthless to me, but I determined to review and recover them. I der termined yet to do—to be, something worthy of myself, of my uncle, of Lady MoHtrevor.





In a few days we were to have concluded our engagements in the country by passing a month at the Castle of De Lacy; this period was hastened by the evident impatience of Lord M. to quit "this cursed country," of which he had now no motive to conceal his contempt. I was standing at the drawingroom window, looking at some new horses which were drawing the carriage round the lawn in training for the expedition to Dublin, when Lady M. said to me abruptly, "Have you been at the Castle?" th« name by which the ruinous tower inhabited by the stranger went in the neighbourhood. I assented, " And seen the Castle-Spectre?" said she. I told her I had, and mentioned the extraordinary /circumstances under which I had twice met him; that I frequently since endeavoured to obtain a sight of him, but in vain, though I knew that he still inhabited his solitary tower, and still





visited the poor of the country for a range of twenty miles.

The conversation plunged her into a reverie; it was interrupted by dreadful intelligence; my uncle, under whose roof we were to have passed that night, was no more! He had been found dead in his bed by his usual attendant; he appeared to have died placidly in his sleep; there was no appearance of struggle or violence in his departure. A small black circle was said to be visible round his throat, but the appearance was such as usually attends those who die in a fit.

Lord M. after some formal expressions of concern, advised me immediately to go and examine his papers to discover the will, as he feared the deceased was by no means, in the habit of regular arrangements in business. I listened to him with an apathy of distress, which at last impelled him to undertake the commission himself, accompanied by





legal attendance. His suspicions were groundless, the will was found. I was sole heir to a property whose immediate amount was nearly 50001. per annum, but which his lordship pronounced might be nearly doubled by proper management. My first object was to make amends to Deloraine, for the wealth of which I had deprived him by appointing him, my agent. I settled an annuity on Father Cusack. Nothing is more insipid than the detail of the disposal of wealth, except to those on whom it is bestowed. I did many things rashly, and neglected much that I ought to have done. For many days I could only weep on my uncle's grave.

With a singularity that marked his character, he had requested that his heir would not assume his name. To be the first or the last of the De Lacys, he said was an equal honor. Lord M. who saw, and Lady M. who felt my dejection, united in a request that Athanasia and I would remain at Montrevor House, instead of visiting the melancholy castle, till we were enabled to join them in London, where we purposed following at the beginning of December.





After the interval of aweek had enabled LordM-toobserve all the decencies of grief, thev left Montrevor House. On the eve of their departure Lady M. was unusually thoughtful; Lord M. had retired to his closet to give orders, her ladyship was sealing some notes, Athanasia was reclining on the sofa, listless with an indisposition on which the sufferer is usually congratulated,, there was no sound except the joyful officiousness of the servants, who felt scarce less delight than their superiors at the repeal of their banishment. I had taken up the seal which Lady M. had been employing, " Do you admire it?" said she, looking up at me. A foolish speech was on my lips, I checked it, and observed soberly thai the execution was beautiful. If you admire it, have





the goodness to consider itasyourown, but not gratuitously, you must give me for it one which I observe you wear in your bosom." "I will never give it to human being." " Except me, you must give it to me—the loss of memory is no injury when it only revives things that ought to be forgotten, and I have made you a much more auspicious present in that seal, if you will examine it, which I perceive you have not done yet, though you have admired it." Her manner was mild, but absolute. I took the seal, the impression was a figure of time plucking the pinions of love, with the quaint sentiment of some French writer for the motto. L'amitie est 1' amour sans ailes."

During the interval that Athanasia and I past alone at Montrevor House, I had more leisure to observe her character"and disposition; it was marked by an indolent and voluptuous melancholy, that seemed the result of some cause, deeper than I had yet discovered. That she loved me I could not doubt, for why else had she yielded to the solicitations of my uncle to marry me? Yet my love appeared insufficient to satisfy and to sooth her. I ascribed this to a female fastidious exquisiteness of feeling; I ascribed it to my own, perhaps visible, defect in ardent tenderness; I ascribed it to a situation which distressing to. every part of female life, has unusual distress for a novice of fifteen. I could not suspect Athanasia of want of affection, for I had seen her lavish the most exaggerated marks of it on her governess, a woman who appeared to me of the most worthless character, but who managed the affections of youth with





t

all the address of her country, and I had seen her dissolved in tears, and almost dying in her mother's arms, on the eve of her departu.e.

- Too fond still of hearing her name repeated, in a moment o£>- confidence I observed to Athajiasia my sur





prize at the affection, which on my admission, into the family I perceived to exist between her and her mo her, of which not the slightest mark could be observed by a stranger, or in public. She told me it was her mother's pride to suppress her feelings in public, she dreaded the impeachment of her fashionable character, she dreaded the suspicion of affection or duty, she inverted the ancient maxim, and was not depraved, but wished to appear so. "I was the fifth daughter, and never recollect seeing my mother for more than a moment at a time, till we lived in Ireland; my three elder sisters weremarried; the fourth, who is I suppose by this time Lady Westhampton, preferred remaining in England with my sister, Lady Castle-W'ycomb. I preferred coming to Ireland, I wished to be known to my mother, and to be loved by her. I had read Genlis's beautiful works," (she had formed her ideas exclusively on the French writers) I longed for an opportunity of being near her, when her heart was softened bv solitude, when her mornings were no longer tilled up with lounging in Bond-street, or dashing through the Park, when she must have her children about her, because the loungers at her morning levee were Ho more. My amusement when we came to this dreadful country was listening to Bennet, my mother's femme, in the intervals of her attendance on her lady, telling of former grandeur and festivity, and of out sudden fall into the horrors of Ireland. I who lived in the nursery, a) Lady Westhampton was but just come out, could hardly perceive any difference, except that 1 was no longer called your ladyship, and the term Miss sounded shockingly to my ears at first. The stories she told me of my mother interested me deeply, in spite of the artlessness of the narrator who only wished to magnify her





latiy's grandeur I could see her lady was miserable in spite of her grandeur. One day I prevailed on Bennet, to let me sit in her lady's room while she was asleep; she awoke, but her head was confused with laudanum, and she did not perceive a different voice answered her when she called for her coffee, which she took as often in the day as Bonaparte. I brought it to her, and withdrew her curtain, trembling for the success of ray attempt, she saw me. "Miss Moutolieu, is that you?" "Yes, mamma—it is Athanasia. Are you surprized, are you displeased at my attending you instead of Bennct?" Tears, which I could not repress, were in my eyes. She was affected or surprized, or—she gave me permission to visit her every morning—not like the cold dressing-room visits we used to pay. But she charged mc never to let any one know this concession, and directed me to behave -with the same ease to her before





strangers, that the rest of her family did. "I wish for nothing more now," said she, "and if I did, 1 could not obtain it.?' ,''

The conversation affected Athanasia too much; she was formed for tears and softness, she wept alike for grief and joy, and tenderness, but wiped her tears. "I wish," said she, " you could hear Bennet with her naivete tell of the terrible night as she calls it, when we quitted London." "1 should much rather hear you, my: love." .She assumed the maniere of -the narrator with a dramatic facility that astonished me.- "Now you must imagine me Bennet, and now you mustimagine me Miss Montolieu," said she.—" Provided the latter be only in imagination," said I.

"If you will really tell it to us, Bennet, put out the candles, for I love to listen to what iuterests me by a dim dying firelight, on a winter evening, while the wind is moaning low and distantly. "'My -story is melancholy enough without. darkness, but I will tell you all I recollect. Oh it was a terrible time, so sudden, so like a thunder-bolt, yet I remember every thing as distinctly as if it took up years in happening. •





You saw my lord or my lady very seldom I believe, Miss Montolieu. You were kept principally with the younger children at Richmond. But you must have known what all the world knew, that my lady was the greatest dasher in the world. Oh nothing was ever like her wit and beauty, and fascination. No, no lady was ever like my lady. "But we want to know how your, lady came to be what she is now?", "Nothing ever was so sudden, Ma'ani; it: was just after the great entertainments on Mr. Bellamy's marriage, and people had not half done wondering at my lady having married three of her daughters,1 and being the first fashionable belle in the world herself, when, it was one day th«tt there was to be a private dinner





party in Curzon-street, and the}' were to go to the opera, and then—to an hundred place*. I shall never forget, the first hint of it, I was just going to my lady's dressing-room hefore dinner, when I heard Mr. Gcale, my lord's gentleman, say to one of the footmen, "Did he say he must see my lord?" "He did, he said he would call day or night, or morning, but he must see my lord, for the business was indispensable." "And what did my lord say?" "He said he must dine with the club, but if possible he would return about one o'clock." "Then the businessmust be indispensable," said Mr. Geale. I heard all this, but how little I thought of it! My lady was in high spirits dressing, and put on an immensity of rouge ; I asked her if Lord Rosehamp was not to be one of the party. "Yes," said she, "and another, and another, and another, and the last fool is welcome as the former." But I was so used to hear my lady talk poetry, I did not mind her. I





sat reading in my lady's room till it was late, and then I went down to order some exotics to be removed into her dressing room, that she had spoken about, but the moment I entered the servants' hall, I saw there was something extraordinary, there was whispering, and murmuring, and such looks cast on me, as if every one was afraid, and longing to tell some terrible thing.

I had not power to ask a question, but glided away just like a poor moping ghost; but just as I was crossing the corridor, I saw Mr. Geale going into my lord's dressing room to light the lamp that Stood on the chimney-piece, for it was near one o'clock, and the person was to meet my lord there.

"So I thought I would follow him and hear something, but he was so sullen and shy, and appearing to be very busy, but not looking in my face when. I spoke to him. At last, he comes up to a map of the grounds in Cumberland, that had just been sent up by some prospect maker to my lord, and says he, "My lord will be spared the trouble of any further im-. provements here." "What do you' mean by that, Mr. Geale?" said I; so he turned away very short, and began cutting off the gilt edges of some paper, that had not the coronet on its corners, as my lord had ordered, and so he had given it to his gentleman. "After all," says he, "this may do for my lord, well enough." "Dear Mr. G." says I, "what do you mean?" "Mrs. B." says he, "I dare not tell you." "Oh then," says I, " you must tell me." Just as he was beginning' to look a little complying. a tall, dark, mil filed figure stalked into the room. I retreated in a moment. But I was soon to hear more than Mr. G. couldhave toldme.





My lady returned as usual between four and five. She was in high spirits still, and looked long at herself before she let me take off her dress. "The reflexion of this glass is remarkably good/' said I. "Yes/' said my lady, "it assists me to bear my own." Just as she was in bed, a message came from my lord requesting my lady's company to breakfast in the morning. I thought this a terrible sign, I had never known it happen before, inthe eighteen years I lived in the family. However I gave my lady the message. "Tell my lord I shall be unwell," said my lady. "Then he will request leave to breakfast with you, my lady." "Then tell him I shall have a select dejeune tomorrow, and cannot have him." "Can I give him both these messages, my lady?" "Aye and any thing more you will," said my lady. I was going to argue, but my lady bid me give her the laudanum, and hold my tongue. So I gave Mr. G. as sensible a message as I could, which in five minutes was answered by a sealed note from my lord. I gave it, my lady





read it several times, holding her hand over her profile, and then told me, she would see my lord at twelve. "Here are the drops, my lady," said I. "I do not want them now,'' said my lady. I went to my own room, and my heart felt strange and heavy, it seemed to me as if I had but just lain down, when I heard the bell ring violently.

I got up and hurried to my lady's room, I could not believe my eyes, there was my lady completely dressed without a living creature to assist her, and it scarce ten o'clock. "Get breakfast in my dressing room," said she speaking very quick, "and let my lord know I am waiting for him, admit no one while we are together, nor come near me till I ring."

I was so amazed, that I looked I suppose like an oaf, for my lady smiled. "Stay," said she, "a moment, and do not walk in your sleep, for I perceive your eyes are scarce open."





My lord and my lady were together several hours—the servants whispered, and I wondered: Mr. G. was the only person I could communicate myself to, and he would not communicate any thing with me. "Come Bennet," said my lady, when she rung for me, "dress me in a moment, they dine horridly early at the Duke's, they might call it a dejeuner a la fourchette." I dressed her with trembling hands. It was so usual for my lord and lady to dine at different places, that we never minded it. But my lady had not been gone two hours, I was just laying out her ornaments against she came home, to go to a party, when twenty thundering knocks came to the door in the same moment, and in the next I heard Mr. G- calling me to come to my lord directly. I ran down, talking all the way 'to Mr. G. who did not answer me one word, but wrung his hands distractedly. I followed him to my lord's dressing room, he was tossing over some? papers, he looked like a demoniac. "Is your lady ont?" said he. I could not speak. "Tell her," said he, in a dreadful voice, "to return no more, tell her she is without a title, a fortune, a name, an husband." He started up, I thought he was going to kill me. I caught hold of Mr. G. and fell into fits. I do not know how long it lasted, but when I recovered, I thought I was in a new world. Oh the ruin,' so sudden, so utter, so desperate that I saw in a moment that all was ruined, and my lady and I ruined for ever. All the servants were scattered, every one grasping at what they could get. All the , great rooms dark and empty, or rilled with horrid gruff-looking fellows, that put me in mind of all I had ever read of jails or inquisitions; all the rich furniture taken down, and oh the dismay, and the darkness, and the hurry, and the tumult! The porter had gone, and all the lamps in the





fiall and corridor were gone-, and ten tall fellows as big and as black as the great bronze figures that used to hold the tripods on the stairs, were stationed in the hall, scowling at us as if they could kill us with a look. And then the horrid jargon they talked, and the distress of the lower servants, and the French servants who knew nothing of what was passing, oh I never! never shall forget it.

In vain I asked for explanation, or for patience, or for mercy; all I could hear was, that my lord was ruined and fled, and my lady was ruined, and was at the concei t, and the children were ruined, and knew nothing about it. And that there were executions on the furniture, to four times its value, and with their castles and seats, the family would not have an house by morning to cover their heads. As soon as I could stand, I ran up to my lady's apartments, before the rogues thought of it, and every thing of value that could be secured about the person, I secured for my lady. Just at this time Mr. Bellamy ran breathless into the hall; he had come from Chelsea where he and Mrs. B. were, upon the first intelligence. Oh I clung to him as I could to my own brother, and we asked each other fifty questions in a breath. "Where is your lord?" "He is gone to Richmond," "And your lady?" " She is not come home." "And the children?" " They are at Richmond too." "And are there none of the family in this ruined house, are you sure there are none?" "Oh yes, yes, said Mr. G. ". there is Lady Invermay, (she was then on a visit with us) but she never rises till midnight, she is not awake yet, and her woman is crying in her antechamber." "Let her be immediatelyawakened, and conveyed from the house," said Mr. B. " my carriage can take her to her sister, whom I left almost in convulsions." "And, oh! what will my poor lady





<hv?"^aid I. "I will wait for her/' said Mr. B. "I will attend her myself, we will conceal the carriage if possible from these rascals; but let Lady Invermay leave this house directly, it is no longer her father's." I still sobbed out, " My lady, my lady;" but Mr. B. pushed me away, and called me-fool.

In a few minutes, Lady Invermay came from her room, muffled in her pellice, she held her handkerchief to her face, and seemed very much overcome as Mr. B. led her to his carriage, which was still waiting; they whispered a good deal together in French, and she and her woman went off

I suppose to Mrs. B y. Mr. B.

walked into the library, Mr. G. and I followed him, the ruffians looked surly at us, but did not ofl'er to molest us; all the rest of the servants had gone, or were scattered in remote parts of the house. There was a dead stillness all around us, which none were disposed to break. At





last Mr. B. said, "If your lady on her arrival should be dragged from her carriage by these ruffians, between her fear and her anger, she will expire. For Heaven's sake Geale try to confound them with drink, and B. and I will watch for your lady's return." Mr. G. in his great goodness consented, though I am sure he would rather have been drinking with Satan than with one of the greasy wretches. Mr. B. paced quickly up and down room, and I stood sobbing in a corner.

At last we heard the roll of wheels to the door, we ran out together in a moment. The servant had let down the step, and my lady was preparing to alight. Mr. B. caught her in his arms, and prevented her. "Fly, Lady W." said he, in a low voice, "all is lost, all is discovered ; you cannot enter here, you cannot stay here, go to Lady W. or come with me to Albina." My lady seemed thunder-struck. "Hide your diamonds," said be leaping after her into thecarriage. "Hide them, the hell-hounds are on the scent, you have not to the value of a shilling, that has not been seized.'' She took the diamonds from her head and neck. All this while I was making the footman quench his flambeau under, the carriage, lest the ruffians should see the cypher and coronet.





"Whither shall I go? Where is Lord Westhampton?" "He is at Richmond." Then drive to Richmond. "Good Heaven, can you think of going to that place, at such an hour of night?" "If Liord Westhampton is there, it is the onlyplace for me to go to; drive to Richmond. Is there not one of my people left in the house?" "Oh yes, I—I—I, Bennet, my lady, is here. Let me go with you. I will follow you to the end of the world.*' "You shall go with me, Bennet, come into the carriage, farewell Mr. Bellamy, go and console Albina—feel if the hand

Vol. Ii, o.





which I hold out to you, perhaps for the last time, is damp or trembles ?'*

The carriage drove on, it was a dreary journey. My lady never spoketill she entered the Villa at Richmond, The servants, the house, every thing was in confusion, a wretched twinkling light burned in the hall. I snatched it bp. "Get me a bed, Bennet," said my lady, " if there be a bed left in the house." I attended my lady to her usual apartment, when she was at Richmond; it was the little room off the library that was furnished with , nankeen and black velvet. My lady, when I put her in bed, bid me give her forty drops of laudanum, and silence the timekeeper on the chimney-piece, and not disturb her till six o'clock the next evening.

Oh then there were such heaps of lawyers, and such odd-looking people, coming to Richmond, and at last, at the end of a fortnight, my lady had an interview with my lord; and I was at the





door with my ear and eve to the key-hOle for two hours, and nothing could I hear but one French sentence, and one English one that my lady spoke in the pleasantest tone that could be, just as if she was laying out a pleasure-party with my lord, or any other gentleman. My lord said, cursing and swearing in a most heathenish, horrid manner,, "What the devil in hell shall I do, if I go to that damned infernal country ?" said my lord. "II fant cultiverlq jardin, comme Candide," said my lady as pleasant as possible. "Damn the gardens," said my lord, for he swears dreadfully before my lady and the servants only. "I had rather go to hell, than go to Ireland." "You may do both, my lord," said my lady in a voice as sweet as an angel, so my lord did not seem to hear her> and says he, "And is it possible you will go with me to that cursed country?" " Yes sure," says my lady, "or to Botany Bay, or wherever else it may be necessary for





us to go, and I rather imagine a domestic arrangement will be the least troublesome one in the present state of your finances, as I am told your English mistress insists on a settlement for life., and your French mistress laughs at the proposal of accompanying you to a country of savages."

This was all Irecollectof the conversation, but my lady was dreadfully ill when it was over, and still nothing would make her confess it, she had always such a charming high spirit, and she went the verv day before her new beautiful baron-: he was sent to be sold, she went in it to London, and visited every one and left her poor dear acaeus, which I am sure nobody in London was worth, at all their doors, just to vex them, and shew that nothing could subdue her: and so then we came to Ireland, and when my lady is in company, I think she is just the same as ever, but alone, Oh Miss Montolieu, she has dreadful hours, and I am sure there is something heavier at her heart, than the loss of all the wealth and grandeur in the world." „





Athanasia, who saw I was interested in these relations, but did not see how much, proceeded to tell me that her mother had once given her a sketch half as a monition, half as a caricature, in her own manner. "I wish," said she, "I could recollect the very words she employed, it was one evening that she had sent word she was unwell, and could not see company; we were sitting in the dressing-room, and I was reading one of Lewis's plays, Adelgitha, yes Adelgitha, to her, not the whole play, for she never could endure to hear the whole of any thing, but passages that struck me. She started from the sopha, and said, " Thank you, thank you, that is enough, or too much rather, now you shall have the fruits of a single error related by me in turn, and as your heroine dies, and mine





ii unluckily for herself alire, and as there is much more instruction in life than in death, I expect you'll be vastly edified." She proceeded to relate to me passages of her own life, in her own manner.



END OF VOL. II.



Printed by J. D. Dewick, A!dcrsgate-Street.





