PREFACE. 



In again presenting an Irish novel to the 
public, I hope I am not doing a foolish thing : 
and yet I feel, that as far as my own interests 
are concerned, I am not doing a wise one. To 
live in Ireland and to write for it, is to live and 
write poigna/rd sur gorge; for there is no country 
where it is less possible to be useful with im- 
punity, or where the penalty on patriotism is 
levied with a more tyrannous exaction. Called, 
however, to the ground by the sarcasms of 
A 9. 



VI PREFACE. 

enemies, and by the counsels of friends, I 
venture forth once, more, with something less 
perhaps of intrepidity, than when I " fleshed 
my maiden sword " under the banners of " The 
Wild Irish Girl ;" but in the full force of that 
true female quality, over which time holds no 
j urisdiction — perseverance. 

I anticipate upon this, as upon similar occa- 
sions, that I shall be accused of unfeminine 
presumption in " meddling with pohtics ;'* but 
while so many of my countrywomen " meddle " 
with subjects of much higher importance; — 
while missionary misses and proselyting peeresses 
affect to " stand instead of God, amongst the 
children of men," may not I be permitted, under 
the influence of merely human sympathies, to 
interest myself for human wrongs ; to preach in 
my way on the " evil that hath come upon my 
people," and to " fight with gentle words, till 
time brings friends," in that cause, which made 
Esther eloquent, and Judith brave ? For love 
of country is of no sex. It was by female 



rUEFACE. Vll 

patriotism that the Jews attacked their tyrants, 
and " broke down their stateUness by the hands 
of a woman ;" and who, (said their enemies,) 
*' would despise a nation, which had amongst 
them such women ?" 

The epoch I have chosen for illustration, has 
in the present state of exhausted combinations, 
one great recommendation to the novelist — it is 
untouched. It has also a deep interest in a 
national point of view — it embraces events which 
prepared the Rebellion, and accomplished the 
Union. An epoch of transition between the 
ancient despotism of brute force, and the dawn- 
ing reign of public opinion, it was characterized 
by the supremacy of an oligarchy, in whose 
members the sense of irresponsible power en- 
gendered a contempt for private morals, as fatal 
as their pohtical corruption. 

The portraiture of such an epoch is curious 
from its evanescence, and consolatory by com- 
parison with the present times, — times the 
most fatal to faction, and favourable to the 



Vlll PREFACE. 

establishment of equal rights, which Ireland 
has yet witnessed. It may also serve as a 
warning to a large and influential portion of 
the public, which has yet to learn, that to advo- 
cate arbitrary government, is to nourish moral 
disorder. In the ranks of intolerance, are to be 
found many, who make the largest pretensions to 
purity of principle, and to propriety of conduct. 
Should any such deign to trace, in the following 
pages, a picture of manners, far below the pre- 
valent tone of refinement now assumed as the 
standard of good company, it may diminish 
their confidence in their favourite political 
maxims, to remark, that all which has been 
thus gained for society, has been obtained by a 
progressive abandonment of the system they 
advocate. 

The personages introduced on the scene, are 
those which belong to the times described. 
They are alike necessary to the vraisemhJance 
of the story, and to the fidelity of the portrait : 
ai^d " I beseech, very heartHy, at my desires. 



PREFACE. IX 

my requests, and my petitions," the zealots of 
party spirit, and the purveyors of private 
scandal, to refrain from the application of my 
characters to their own purposes ; and from the 
fabrication of false " keys," by which their 
petty larceny has heretofore attempted to rob 
me of the little merit of that *' fearlessness" 
with which I have held the mirror up to nature, 
without subterfuge and without evasion. May 
I be permitted here to observe, that with the 
exception of those public characters, whose de- 
lineation was almost a plagiarism, and whose 
peculiarities arose out of the political state 
of Ireland, and were necessary to the dis- 
play of its story, I have drawn none but such 
as represent a class, or identify a genus. Even 
my Ladies Llanberis and Dunore were illustra- 
tions, not individuals. They were intended to 
represent the spoiled children of high society 
in all ages, from the charming Duchesse de 
Maine, with her inimitable il n'y a que moi 
qui ai toujours raison, to the modern mistresses 



X PREFACE. 

of supreme hon ton, — all alike the creatures of 
circumstances the most unfavourable to moral 
consistency. However I may have fallen a 
main basse on popes and potentates, — taken the 
field against Austria, to '' hang a calf's skin on 
those recreant limbs,*" and put forth my pro- 
tocol against the Holy Alliance, I have held 
private life sacred, and have religiously ab- 
stained from bringing forward a single anecdote 
or circumstance incidental to the life of any 
private individual. The only " key," there- 
fore, that I acknowledge, is that which is to 
be found in the great repository of human 
nature. 

Au reste^ I grieve, that in self-defence, I 
must wound the self-love of those " walking 
ladies and gentlemen," who affect to tremble 
lest " Lady Morgan should put them into 
her book," — by dropping into their " unwil- 
ling ears" the secret that tovt hois n'est pa^ 
hon a Juire Mercure. Like Macbeth, " I 
cannot strike at wretched kernes;-' and not 



PREFACE. XI 

even for the benefit of a puffing " key" 
would I transfer to "my book" the obscure 
insignificance and flippant pretension that bore 
and worry me in society. I also take this 
opportunity of averting the wrath of half the 
fair Burcaucratie of Ireland, roused by my 
palpable hit at a certain red velvet gown, in 
Florence Macarthy (for of the genuine aristo- 
cracy either of rank or wit, I have no cause to 
complain), by informing those whom it may 
concern, that the said red velvet gown belonged 
to a person, with whom I had every right to 
take every liberty — even to the libellous extent 
of *' putting her into my book,"" when, where, 
and how I pleased, — that is, to myself. 

SYDNEY MORGAN 

Kildare-street, Dublin^ 
Oct. \st, 1827. 



THE O'BRIENS, 



AND THE 



O FLAHERTYS. 



CHAPTER I. 



CORRESrONDENCE. 



Look into the chronicles. We came in with Richard Conqueror. 
Therefore, paucas pallabris. Let the world slide : Sesta ! 

Taming of the Shrew. 

Avocat ah ! passons au deluge. Let Plaideur*. 



Letter I. 



To General Count Sir Malachi O'FJlaherty^ 
of the Hy-Fflaherty, Tanist, or Chief of the 
Hy-Tartagh, or West Country, or Tar Con- 
naught, in the province of Connaught, Lord, 
or Prince of Moy Cullen, hereditary standard- 

VOL. I. B 



^ THE O BRIENS, AND 

hearer of the Bally-hoe of Conmacnamara 
(vulgo Cmmemara), Knight of the order of 
Curaidhe na Croibhe Ruadh or Knights of the 
Red Branch, Chevalier de St. Louis ^ Gentil- 
homme de la Chamhre de S. M. le Roy de 
France, and Colonel of the 9.nd Regiment of 
the Irish Brigade. 

A Son Hotel, 

Rue de VUniversite, F. St Germain, 
a Paris. 
Per favour of Major O'Gara, ^ 
of said regiment. j 

St. Grellan, Barony of Tar Connaught, Co. 
Galway, April \st. 177 — 

Sir Malachi OTflaherty, 

I TAKE leave to address you by your 
unalienable title of hereditary knighthood, since 
neither the law of the land, nor the degendered 
customs of present times, will bear you out in 
taking the title or captainship of your tribe or 
sept ; — the same having been renounced, dis- 
claimed, and surrendered for ever, with all the 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 3 

Irish customs to the same name incident, by 
your ancestor, Murroch ne Doe O'Fflaherty, (to 
the moan and shame — then and long after — of 
him and his) by his writing, signed with his 
signet, bearing date the 30th. Ehz. 1609: at 
which time, it is notable here to mark that the 
said Murroch ne Doe 'coming in,' as the phrase 
is (or was), did surrender, give, grant, or con- 
firm to the said queen, in her chancery of Ire- 
land, his principality of Hy-Tartagh in Conne- 
mara, belonging to the sept, family, or sir name 
of the O'Fflaherties, together with all manner 
of manors, castles, demesnes, messuages, lands, 
tenements, rents, reversions, services, mills, 
meadows, feedings, pastures, forests, woods, 
underwoods, houses, edifices, granges, dove- 
cotes, fisheries, warrens, watercourses, ponds, 
loughs, lakes and turlochs, patronage of ab- 
beys, churches, chappels, chauntries, presenta- 
tions, advowsons, oblations, obsentions, tithes, 
pinsions, portions, courts-leet, views of frank 
pledge, together with all perquisites and profits 
of the same, and all other rights, possessions, 
commodities, uses, liberties, and hereditaments, 
B 2 



4 THE O BRIENS, AND 

as well spiritual as temporal, with all and sin- 
gular their members, rights, and appurtenances 
universal in your principality of the Hy-Tar- 
tagh, viz. in Moy Cullen,* Both-Cowna, Bally 
Cowark, Ballynonaghe, Cornevecaghe, Bog 
Moy, Ballyslattery, &c. &c. &c. &c. with the 
ancient township, burgh, or bishoprick of St. 
Grellan, the chief town or burgh of the barony 
of Moy Cullen, in Connemara, county of Galway, 
province of Connaught; which was a manor 
exempted from all taxes, enjoying privilege of 
market or fair, SenechaPs court to determine 
litigations, &c. &c. 

The said Sir Murroch ne Doe, having so 
come in, and surrendered with the intent, (and 
no small blame to him), to receive back the 
same, by letters patent, from the said queen, 
under the great seal and signet of the kingdom 
of Ireland, she did give or grant to him, the 
said Murroch ne Doe, Knt., his heirs and as- 
signs for ever, the said demesnes, castles, lands, 
tithes, signories, reversions, &c. &c. &c. &c. 

* At Park, in the Barony of Moy Cullen, was born the 
celebrated author of «' Ogygia," Rod. O'Flaherty, An. 
Dom. 1630. 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 5 

with all and singular their appurtenances ; — he 
receiving the same (though his unalienable 
right from the year of the world 2000, — as 
may be seen in the annals or green book of St. 
Grellan, now in my possession) of the queen's 
special grace, certain knowledge, and mere mo- 
tion. "But to be holden" (saith the patent) 
" of us, our heirs and successors, by part of a 
knight's fee, &c. &c. : provided always, that 
these our letters patent, or any thing contained 
in the same, shall not exonerate or change any 
rents, customs, duties, and services, to be per- 
formed to us, our heirs and successors, &c. &c. : 
provided always, that this our grant do in no 
wise extend to the damage, hurt, or prejudice 
to the rights of any one or more of our subject?, 
except such pretended rights and titles as 
any of them shall or may claim, by the name of 
O'Fflaherty, the head, captain, or thane of 
that name ; which name we here extinguish 
for ever^ by this grant: provided lastly, not- 
withstanding, that if, hereafter, it shall suffi- 
ciently appear that we, our heirs or successors, 
are entitled, or have, or ought to have, any 



6 THE 0"'bRIENS, and 

right on the said premises, or any parcel thereof, 
or any of the rights, profits, or services issuing 
out of the same, that this our present grant, 
and these our letters patent for such of the 
premises as we, our heirs and successors are 
entitled, or have right unto, shall be void and 
of no effect against us, our heirs and successors ; 
any matter above expressed to the contrary 
notwithstanding." 

N0W5 Sir Malachi, you will little marvel if 
this patent turned out Talagh-hill talk,* as we 
say in Ireland ; for little cause was wanting to 
shew that her majesty, her heirs and successors, 
were entitled to have rights and estates of or 
on the premises ; so that cantred after cantred, 
liberties and hereditaments, spirituals and tem- 
porals, went one after the other ; the queen and 
her successors paying off services done them 
with the lands of the " popish O'Fflaherties," 
granting, at one slap, the barony of Bog Moy, 
and the lordship of Bally slattery to the Mac 
Taafs of the Fassagh, who had come in and 

• An Irish phrase for words that mean nothing. Talagh 
Hill, near Dublin, is the site of the Archbishop's palace. 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 7 

reformed, of which them slapper-sallaghs,* my 
sisters-in-law (devil squincet the relationship), 
the ]Miss Mac Taafs are seized at this day. 

Then came the Cromwellians ; then prisals, 
and reprisals, and forfeitures, and reclamations ; 
and then the act of settlement, which unsettled 
every thing ; and then your grandfather, Sir 
Bryan Ruagh O'Fflaherty, having little left 
but the estates of Moy Cullen and Ballynonaghe 
in Barony Ross, County Mayo, and some 
chief rents, went to Chichester house, to make 
good his rights before the court of claims, giving 
himself out for an innocent papist. But a par- 
ticular time having been given to examine these 
claims, and the numbers being so great, that 
when the commission was closed, seven thousand 
gentlemen were still unheard, of whom one was 
Sir Bryan, an act of explication was passed, 
forbidding all who were unheard ever to prefei 
their claims again (|) So Sir Bryan returned 

• Draggletails, f Query, Devil quench. 

X ** Mais la prorogation ayant ^te refusee par Clarendon, 
la cour Stabile pour Texamen des pr^.tensions des innocens* 
fut obligee de cesser ces fonotions, et de se s^parer. 



B THE o'bRIENS, and 

to his property in Tar Connaught, living, and 
holding his patrimonal heriditaments, as it were, 
by stealth ; placing part in trust with a pro- 
testant neighbour, and holding the rest suh rosa. 
Then came the penals ; and a bill of discovery 
completed the ruin of the family of the Hy- 
Tartaghs; and then it was that your father 
abandoned the fine old abbey, that had been 
fitted up as a mansion house, and retired to a 
small castle, hard by convenient, the first stone 
castle raised in Connemara. But them that were 

Clareadon cr^a alors un nouveau tribunal, compost des 
gens, dont la plupart avoient usurpe les terres, dont les 
legitimes propri^taires sollicitoient la restitution. Les 
premiers ainsi devenus juges et parties ; quelle esperance 
restoit-il aux derniers ? Pour leur rendre a jamais la 
justice inaccessible, le parlement fit un nouvel acte cTex- 
plication^ que leur interdisoit toute demarche ulterieure a 
cat egard." Histoire d''lrlande, par VAlbe Geoghegan, 
*• Voila," says the author, ** les lepons de morale, que ces 
reformateurs donnoient aux Irlandois:" and such has ever 
been the morality which has presided over the proconsular 
government of that people, down to a secretary's last 
unblushing assertion, that the treaty of Limerick was only 
available to those who were within its walls at the time j 
as baseless a subterfuge as "the equivocating fiend" of 
intolerance ever rested upon. 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 9 

to flourish by his ruin, missed their mark. For 
few tenants were there to till the land, or take 
it ; and rack rents, and cottiering and short 
leases ruined all; and great emigrating — tne 
poor to America, the gentry to foreign parts. 
So rents fell rapidly : and lands were pilled and 
polled, and the protestant discoverers themselves 
began to quake, and the hereditaments of the 
O'Fflaherties, which had brought thousands to 
the original proprietors, brought not hundreds 
to the usurpers. Meantime the beautiful barony 
of MoycuUen became as it were a desart, the 
land wasted, the turloughs* spreading, the rivers 
overflowings their banks: mills, mansions, and 
castles crumbling to the earth, and the roads, 
mamsjt passes and bridle ways, filling up by the 
falhng in of rocks, rubbish and earth. But for 
all that, there are those in the present day, who 
are willing to purchase the abbey lands of Moy- 
cuUen at any price. Nor need I tell you that 
this abbey was founded by Beavoin OTflaherty, 

• Marshy grounds. 

t Mam — defiles ia the mountains — nearly synonymows 
with " pass." 

B 3 



10 THE o'bRIENS, and 

daughter of Earva, King of West Connaught, 
Anno 944, lineal descendant from Duaeh Tean 
gumha, or the silver tongued^ fifth christian king 
of Connaught. This Beavoin was mother of Brian 
great monarch of all Ireland, called Brian Borru, 
and in her native mountains did Beavoin OTfla- 
herty ny Brian, queen of Ireland, retire after the 
death of her royal husband, and found this same 
abbey, for nuns of the order of St. Brid£:et, and 
under the blessed invocation of Mary, John, and 
Joseph ; and with her of blessed memory began 
the alliance of kith, kin, and kindred of the 
O'Fflaherties and the O'Briens ; and, from that 
hour to this, they have ever been engaged in 
love, or in war, and ever will to the end of time, 
until the prophesy be fulfilled. 

And be it known to you, that the person who 
now addresses you, is yournear kinsman and first 
cousin, once removed, the son of your first cousin, 
Onor ny Fflaherty,of the Fflaherties of BalHnsor- 
beagha, county Mayo, and -iRory Oge O'Brien, 
the descendant and representative of the 
O'Briens, Clan Tiegs, princes of the isles of 
Arran, and lineal descendant of Brian Borru : 



THE O^LaHERTYS. 11 

which royal race of the O'Briens of Arran were 
by the O'Fflaherties in the reign of Queen 

Ehzabeth expelled from ; but of these 

more hereafter. To take up the thread of my 
narration, 1 say, there are them, who would 
purchase the abbey lands of IMoycullen at any 
price, from their present supposed proprietor, 
Archdeacon Hunks of St. Grellan, son of the 
discoverer ; which lands, though let below their 
value, and at a short lease, to a Midhain,* 
who again parcels them off at rack rents 
to poor scullogst and beggarly tenants, who 
ruin all, the archdeacon refuses to dispose 
of — assigning no reason but that he fears 
them would take them at so great a price, 
came not well by their means ; and would fain 
turn the fine old ruins of the abbey, tower, chaun- 
try, and castle, to some popish and superstitious 
uses ; some saying that the talk was, and is, of 
the nuns of St. Bridget, now lodged over Paddy 
Blake's shop in the Claddagh of St. Grellan, 
that they were to be restored to their ancient 
premises ; and others, having it that the old 
• Middle-man. f The lowest description of Irish farmers. 



12 THE o'bRIEJJS, ANU 

church or chapel, which stands in good preserva- 
tion in the abbey, is to be fitted up for popish 
service (the wooden chapel serving for eight 
parishes having been burnt) and what not ; 
and surely it would be well worth restoring that 
ancient, old, and beautiful abbey, if it was only 
for the honour and glory of the country. For 
though founded for the nuns of St. Bridget, yet 
it being no place for faimales, in regard of the 
troubles, the septs of Connemara fighting through 
other after the old fashion, the chiefs of the 
Hy-Tartagh took it into their own hands ; and 
from the twelfth century to the reformation, the 
abbot was ever an O'Fflaherty. In 1542 Abbot 
Hugh surrendered by indenture, covenanting to 
furnish the king with sixty horse, sixty kerns, 
and a band of gallow-glasses, whenever the Lord 
Deputy came into the province. On this con- 
dition the abbey was insured to him for life ; and 
after his death, his nephew, Malachi OTflaherty, 
continuedseizedof itstemporahties, in despite of 
the king and deputy, being upheld by his sept : 
and when Malachi died, it was granted, as hereto- 
fore mentioned, by Elizabeth to your immediate 



THE o'flAHERTYS. 13 

ancestor Murroch ne Doe, for ever, in free soc- 
cage. 

Now this Abbot Malachi, after whom you 
were named, was a mitred abbot, and a peer of 
parliament under Queen Mary ; and preyed 
more cattle, and kept up more hospitality than 
all the Tanistsin Connaught; and governed his 
monastery with sovereign controul ; and had his 
choral monks from Italy, and his church organ 
from Amsterdam ; and his wines from France 
and Spain ; and kept his almoner, and his pit- 
tancer, his chamberlain, and his cellarer (and 
troth that was no sinecure), and lived as well as 
the protestant bishop of St. Grellan at this 
day, as by law established, every taste. 

Be that as it may, there are them do suspect 
the truth to be that the archdeacon cannot make 
a title to the property ; and there are who will 
engage to restore General Count Sir Malachi to 
his rights and hereditaments in the barony of 
Moy Cullen, commonly called the abbey lands of 
themonastery of St. Bridget, provided alwaysthat 
the Count agrees thereunto, and backsby his pre- 
sence, influence, and interest (the thing being to 



;14 THE O^BRIENS, AXD 

be brought before the House of Lords) his law- 
agent, champion, and advocate, who, without 
fee or reward, or any consideration of lucre or 
gain, but being as it were employed by the count 
in the said causes, and acting under his, and 
counsel's instruction, hereby undertakes to pur- 
sue the claim, and signs himself the count's 

Humble servant, friend, cousin, and kinsman, 
Terentius Baron O'Brien, 
of the Clan Tiegs of Arran. 

P.S.— It will be needful to obtain from the 
Miss Mac Taafs leave to look through some 
papers in the old box of the Brigadier Mac Taaf, 
called the brigadier's cofFre:-a word through the 
Abbe O'Fflaherty, P.P., who arrived here lately 
from France, will suffice. The inclosed case 
will more fully explain your situation. It shall 
be submitted to counsel for approval, on the 
receipt of your order to that effect. 
Case. 
The father of the defendant Hunks was 
decreed, as aprotestant discoverer, to the benefit 
of a statute staple taken by a papist. It can be 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 15 

proved that this discoverer was of papist parents 
of the old Enghsh stock ; and that, though be- 
coming a protestant, he had never filed any cer- 
tificate of his conformity ; and therefore that his 
claims as a discoverer are void and null. It can 
be proved that the said father of the defendant, 
having been till the age of discretion a papist, 
had never received the sacrament, nor subscribed 
the declaration, nor taken the abjuration oath, 
nor filed a certificate thereof in a court of justice; 
and it is submitted that according to the — th 
statute Anne, § 14, he cannot be deemed a pro- 
testant, within the intent of the act, notwithstand- 
ing that the person so professing himself a pro- 
testant shall have procured a certificate from the 
bishop. And it is submitted that the claims of 
Count Malachi O'Fflaherty, the lineal descen- 
dant and heir of Sir Bryan OTflaherty, on 
whom the discovery had been made, are avail- 
able against said defendant. Hunks. 



16 THE o'bRIEXS, and 



Letter II. 

(Inclosing the foregoing.) 

To the Ahhe O'Fflaherty, Post Office, SLGrellan, 
Galway, Ireland. 

Paris, Rue de V Universite, 177 — 
MoN Rev. Directeur et cher Cousin, 

What do you think of the inclosed? and 
what do you know of the writer ? Is he of 
your communion ? Is he compos mentis? and. 
for his sins or for yours, is his conscience in 
your keeping ? 

.•« Car il m'envoye un parchemin escrit, 
Oil n'y avait seul mot de Jesu Christ ; 
Mais oil il ne parloit que de plaidoirie, 
De conseillers, et d'imprimerie." , 

It appears from the plaidoirie of this Con- 
naught Mons. Chicaneau, that you are arrived 
at your living in the wilds of Connemara, 
to which, by divine indignation, and the favour 
of your uncle, the titular Archbishop of Tuam, 
you have been appointed ; where a catholic 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 17 

priest is a felon by law, and a martyr by choice ; 
and where you are destined to the full enjoy- 
ment of all the pains and penalties annexed in 
Ireland to that perilous calling. Cela m'echauffe 
la bile. — That a man of your force of intellect, 
your condition, your philosophy, (all priest as 
you are), with your Port Royal morality, your 
Jansenism, and above all your tastes and habits 
— but I have not time now to fight the ground 
over again. I have been sous les armes all the 
morning. For Abbe Hussey and O'Leary break- 
fasted (fasted) with me on a pate d'anguilles 
d Amiens, and a flask of mousseuoc dAi; and 
their fanaticism about Ireland, is at least equal 
to your own. Like you, they pant 

D'aller a Domfront juste ville de malheur. 

Oil Ton est accuse a midi, et pendu el une heure. 

I write le pied sur Vetrier, Mons. le Due de 
Lauzun waiting to accompany me to Marli, 
where we are going for a particular purpose, 
en polls soil [not being ''' du voyage).'' Here is 
more English than I have put together on paper 
these twenty years ; and you will discover, that 



18 THE o''bRIENS5 and 

like Arlequin, ^'je ne suis pas fort sur loriho- 
graphie!''' I dare not trust r/iyself on the sub- 
ject of the inclosed papers, till I hear from you ; 
lest I should give myself a ridicule ineffor. 
^ahle. " Principalities and advowsons ! spirituals 
and temporals, depar tous les diahles I ! ! celajait 
venir Veau a la bouche. What think you of 
Abbot Malachi the second ? music from Italy, 
and wines from France, '' Jigurez-vous IT 
The lance and the crozier have ever quartered 
well together. St. Ignatius and a hundred 
other saints were " des braves milUaires,'''' and 
fought their way to Paradise sword in hand. 
Hugues Caput, le Grand Capitaine, was called 
Hugues r Abbe. The council of Henry the Third 
of France proposed to erect all the abbeys in 
France into secular commanderies, and to be- 
stow them on the officers of his court and 
army. Are there not at this moment des 
pauvres peres spirituels in Germany, who com- 
mand a regiment of guards? and am I not 
already a military lay-monk as knight of the 
holy order du Saint Esprit ? — " Persuade me 
not, Sir Hugh ;" my probation is already made! 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. IQ 

Was it not the abbot of Cluni that was called 
" Tahbi des abbes?" but what was he, or all the 
abbes of the earth, compared to the abbot of 
Moycullen, with a noviciate made in camp 
and court, and transported from Marli and Ver- 
sailles, to the mountains of Connemara ? What 
new lights I shall bring with me, in addition to 
the efficient graces of the abbots Malachi and 
Hugh. En attendant^ I shall not take my 
vow till I have further heard from you on the 
subject, nor resign my colonelcy and my charge 
de gcntilhomme de la chambre, with all privi- 
leges and immunities of that alhambra of cour- 
tier's wishes, " les petits appartemens^^^ until 
assured by you that my spiritual vocation has a 
chance of being backed by a competent portion 
of the good things of this world. 

Write to me immediately en large et longuemcnt. 
Egoist as I am by habit and by necessity, there is 
one green spot in my heart, over which the world's 
blast has not passed, nor the chill of exile (which 
withers all) withered. It is sacred to the impres- 
sion of early ties and of passed associations; for 
I too have my lay vocation to the land of my 



20 

birth, if I had the folly to indulge it. But I 
keep down the brute instinct, and still believe, 
or endeavour to believe, that " le pays oil Ton 
doit vivre est celui ou Von vive le mieux^^ and in 
this heresy I subscribe myself, your penitent in 
the confessional ; et partout ailleurs. 

Your affectionate friend and kinsman, 

The Count O'Fflaherty. 

P.S. If you do not approve of the inclosed letter 
for my cousin the baron, who is, I take it for 
granted, some black letter barrister of the Chi- 
chester House* school, write what you like better 
in my name. Also, if the whole be not a day- 
dream of the baron^s^ wait on the ladies of 
Mac Taaf, the slapper-sallaghs ! (Delia Cm- 



• Chichester House, so called, after the Chichester family, 
who erected it, was, in 1641, the residence of the famous 
Lord Justice Borlase. Parliaments were afterwards assem- 
bled there ; and the couit of claims being opened in it, it 
became the constant resort of the old Irish families, who, 
ruined by forfeitures, had always claims to make. That 
magnificent and beautiful fabricthe Parliament House, now 
the bank of Ireland, occupies the site of Chichester House. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 21 

scans ! et vous les quarante ! find me in your 
dictionaries a word comparable to that in sound 
or sense,) and see what is to be done about the 
brigadier's coffer. I direct to you at hazard, 
not quite certain whether your nearest post 
town is in Nova Scotia, " or our own good city'' 
of St. Grellan. I send this under Lord Stair's 
diplomatic cover, with the English dispatches ; 
so I reckon on its arriving safely. Write, write, 
write ; and direct always to the F. St. Germ. 
If it is not felony for a priest to ride, pray mount 
your horse, and pay a visit to my dominions, 
temporal and spiritual, of Moycullen, that you 
may report on their condition. Once more, sans 
adieu. 

Yours, M. OT. 



22 THE o'bRIENS, and 



Letteii III. 



A Mons. le General Comte O" FJLalierty ^ a son 
Hotel, rue de V Universite, F. St. G. d Paris. 

MoN CHER General, et beau Cousin, 

I thought to have dated ray first Irish letter 
from " wretched Dublin, in miserable Ireland," 
to use a phrase of Swift's, as applicable now as 
when it was first employed. Many causes, how- 
ever, have urged my immediate departure from 
the capital. My poor brethren of the Augus- 
tinian Friary, in St. John's-street (consisting 
only of the old prior and two regulars), where 
I intended to lodge, en chemin/aisant, had been 
obliged to fly from the rew persecution against 
all the regulars in Ireland. My friends and 
travelling companions, also, the Lord and Lady 
Clandillon, who, after their long exile, were 
returning to purchase estates and settle in the 
land of their fathers, have stopped short in 
London ; where letters met them with an 
account of the prevalent intolerance both of the 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. ftB 

laws and system of government, and of the dis- 
turbances in the south. So they mean to return 
once more to the continent, and with sad 
hearts to resume their foreign habits, and breath 
their last in a distant chme. Thus it is that 
Ireland is deprived of its capitalists. Many 
families who have acquired large fortunes on 
the continent, and in India, and who were dis- 
posed to bring back to their native country 
their wealth, their enlarged views, and industri- 
ous habits, are driven back from its shores, by 
those barriers to all national prosperity and 
moral improvement, the penal laws, and the 
state of society arising out of them. My brother, 
too, my excellent brother, to whom my untra- 
velled heart returned with such hopes of a per- 
manent intercourse, he is gone. I had only 
time to embrace him, after a separation of twelve 
years. He has closed his partnership with the 
house of Mahony and O'Connor, resolved to 
place the little he has saved by twenty years 
labour beyond the reach of those penalties and 
forfeitures, to which his unfortunate caste daily 
exposes him. 



24 THE o'briexs, and 

At the present moment, all commercial inte- 
rests are suffering deeply under the common 
affliction of the country — the monopoly enjoyed 
by the merchants of the established church. 
The laws which favour them with superior 
influence, credit and early information, expose 
their less orthodox brethren to injury and de- 
pression, and greatly prejudice the trading 
community at large. It is in vain ; that we 
strive to extricate ourselves from these toils ; on 
every side, new suspicions are to be allayed, 
new mortifications are to be endured ; and, 
distrustful of the present, as hopeless of the 
future, we are reduced to the choice of acts alike 
abhorrent to our natures, apostacy or treason. 
What then is left but flight ! And yet this is 
a sad alteiTiative I The horrible system pur- 
sued for a century, to degrade and pillage the 
Catholic population, has worked its end. The 
peasantry appear morally and physically to be 
reduced to a state, to which, that of the beasts 
of the field is preferable. The spirit of the few 
gentry, now to be met with in the capital, is as 
broken, as their whole condition is fallen. 



THE o'flahertvs. 25 

Nothing like a political sensation exists among 
them, for though O'Connor of Ballinagar and 
others, whose smuggled education has given 
them a moral existence, have endeavoured to 
get up a committee ; yet the Catholics are still 
satisfied, with being permitted to carry a slavish 
address to each successive viceroy, which is 
treated with all the contempt it deserves. 

The frightful shock, the utter dislocation of 
society, given by the revolution, is still felt in 
faint and remote vibration, though at the end of 
a century. The displaced classes are not yet 
shaken down, into their permanent positions. 
Many of the gentry have melted into peasants, 
many of the lowest persons have risen into 
sudden wealth ; while consideration is confined 
to power and office, and all distinctions are 
ill defined, save those conferred by legis- 
lative influence, or church supremacy. A 
third insurrection since 1759, has recently 
broken out. With names as wild* as their ven- 

* In 1759, the white boys directed their vengeance 
chiefly against tithe proctors, but the church and the 
chapel, the priest and the parson, were usually attacked 

VOL. I. C 



26 THE O'BRIENS AND 

geance, the wretched peasantry, maddened into 
violence by want and injustice, have beset their 
petty local rulers, with such arms as nature ever 
lends the oppressed. They overrun the park, 
and trample down the meadow ; they assail the 
glebe, and lay waste the farm. Clustered in 
numerous array, under the shelter of darkness, 
for the purposes of midnight depredation, they 
spring up in by-ways and lone places, and 
avenge their wrongs with a cruelty, propor- 
tioned to the barbarous policy by which they 
are oppressed. 

You will not wonder then, that I hastened 
ray departure from Dublin (which is still * 
the same, ill built, filthy, and badly policed 
city, I left it twelve years back), and that even 
the wilds of Connaught appear preferable to 
the moral desolation of that disgusting capital. 

on the same night, with unsparing impartiaUty. In 1763 
the hearts of oak boys, and in 1770, the hearts of steel 
boys were abroad. A commission appointed by govern- 
ment to inquire into the disturbances, reported that the 
authors of these riots were of different persuasions, and 
that no marks of disaffection to his majesty's government 
appeared in anv of the people. 

* Anno 177 — 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 27 

I accompanied my venerable maternal uncle, the 
titular Archbishop of Tuam, as far as his resi- 
dence ; and then proceeded, by Galway, to my 
parish in lar-Connaught ; a parish, in point of 
extent, equal to an English bishoprick. Its 
duties extend by land and sea, bog and moun- 
tain, over a surface of some thousand Irish acres ; 
as it partly lies in the great isle of Arran (Ara na 
Twaimhi, or Arran of the saints) and partly 
among the southern mountains of Connemara ; 
that is to say, in your ancient fief of Moy Cullen, 
of which Arran-Moreis the half barony. 

I have just returned from my ocean parish, 
after a delightful sail of three hours ; and peu 
ienfaui^ that I do not make it my domicile, and 
send my coadjutor (who at present officiates 
there, in a ruined monastery, founded by St. 
jEngus) to Moy Cullen. Are you aware that 
the isles of Arran were royally governed by the 
clan Tieg O'Briens, up to the time of Ehzabeth ; 
when, as the old records of Galway attest (for 
the Clan Tiegs, and the town of Galway were 
always in mutual alliance, offensive and defen- 
sive), Murroch Mac Turlogh O'Brien, chief of 
eg 



J28 THE OBRIENS AXD 

his sept, lord of the isle, and in full possession 
of his lawful inheritance, " was by the usurping 
power of the O'Flaherties thence expulsed?" 
But upon information being received by the 
queen's government, the O'Flaherties of lar- 
Connaught were in their turn expelled ; and the 
queen issued a commission, declaring "that the 
islands belonged to her majesty in right of the 
crown," This was ever the old way of settling 
disputes between quarrelsome neighbours, in 
Ireland. Since that time, these most romantic 
islands, the foyer of druidism, of Christianity, 
and of all antiquarian research, have passed 
through various hands. In 1641 the Clan Tiegs, 
who to this day claim them as their inheritance, 
surrounded and attacked them on all sides (so 
numerous and powerful was this sept) ; and they 
were only frustrated in their designs by the 
Marquis of Clanrickarde, at the head of an En- 
glish army. Even at the actual moment, a new 
claimant to this property has arisen, in the 
person of one Baron O'Brien (one of our barons 
by courtesy, I take it,)* a profound Seanachy 

* " Of the title of barons (not lords) there are several 
families that yet remain in this kingdom. Many are ex- 



THE O FLAHERTYS. »9 

antiquarian, and Irish philologist; who, to 
fulfil a prophecy " that the sept of the Clan 
Tiegs will never regain their dominions in the 
islands, till one of the direct line be born in the 
ruins of Dun ^ngus," (a most curious remain- 
der of Irish military architecture), has twice car- 
ried the baroness from her snug brick-house in 
St. Grellan, to give an heir to the head of the 
" quinque familiae"* in their ancient fortress. 
Unluckily, a fausse couche has twice proved 
that the star of the Mac Tiegs does not hold its 

tinct, and some are advanced to higher degrees of honour. 
Of old, we had in this country (Westmeath) the baron of 
Moynshell, (Tuitt). The family remains in good reputa- 
tion and port, although the title be almost obsolete. The 
baron of Rathconrah (Owen), the family now reduced to 
one poor brogue-maker, the chief of a few mean cottiers. 
In the county of Meath, the baron of Navan (Nangle), the 
baron of Galtrim (Hussey) ; in the county of Kilkenny, 
the baron of Burnchurch (Fitzgerald) j in Munster the 
baron of Loughmoe (Purcell), and several other families in 
this kingdom. This honour is hereditary in the several 
families, though the style (I know not by what neglect) be 
almost worn out everywhere.'' — Survey. 

* The " five families of free ejentlemen," descended from 
Milesians, were the O'Briens, O'Connors, O'Neales, O'Don- 
neU, and O'Kevanaghs. 



30 THE o'bRIENS AtfD 

ascendant. But the Irish have great faith in 
odd numbers; and the third voyage of this 
future mother of the Irish Gracchi has been just 
undertaken. I passed the royal barge, " big 
with the fate of Cato and of Rome," on my 
voyage home. Thus all here tends to the 
past ; 

" E di memoria nudrisi, piii che di speme." 

I have obtained this Shanaos, partly in Irish, 
partly in bog Latin, and partly in Connaught 
English, from Shane na Brien, the son of a wierd 
woman, or Benicd of the Isle of Arran-more ; 
one of the sept, and who moreover " wears a 
girdle,"* Mor-nv Brient is to be the JunoLucina 
('' according to the prophecy," says Shane) and 
the fosterer of the young prince of the isles. 
Shane himself, the son by a former marriage of 

• For an account of the consecrated Irish girdle, and its 
miraculous power, see Walker's History of the ancient Irish 
dress. 

t Ny, " the daughter;" the female prefix, answering to 
the O', or titular distinctive of the males. ** O' " properly 
applies only to the chief family; " Mac," signifies the son 
of; and " Na," the genitive case of the article, is appro- 
priated to the humbler followers of the clan. 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 31 

this Sybil of the Isles, is a fine specimen of the 
mere Irish animal, in its highest physical perfec- 
tion. A young giant in structure, he possesses all 
the qualifications of that race, whom the English 
army of Henry Fitzempress " hunted through 
the woods, but found it impossible to take, while 
the leaves were on the trees." With senses as 
keen as a beast of prey, he sees and hears, when 
neither sound or object meet more civilized 
organs; yet is he obtuse and dull, to all subjects 
that do not reach him through his local interests 
or his hereditary attachments. He is one of the 
last representatives of the true " green born rap- 
paree" of the early part of the century. His 
immediate ancestors, gentlemen of high descent, 
had been among the victims of revolutionary 
rage ; and being I'educed to the alternative of 
" Hell or Connaught," chose the latter, as a 
mezzo termine, and gradually degenerated among 
the savage regions of that remote province, from 
loyal gentlemen (martyrs on a good principle, 
to a bad cause), to desperate outlaws. They 
were in one generation, the fierce bog-hunted 
tory ; in another, the predatory rapparee ; and 



32 THE O'BRIENS AND 

in the nejdt, were broken down to the mere wood 
kern. Shane leads a genuine green wood life, 
fishing, fowling, climbing, diving, and paddling 
his canoe round the isles. His powerful me- 
mory, and more powerful imagination, (the one 
stored by his mother, a celebrated Scealuidhe, 
or story teller of Arran, and the other fed by 
the fantastic superstition of the Arranites,) are 
proofs of his true Irish organization; which 
bad laws and institutions may have degraded, 
but have not destroyed. I should hke to 
educate and lure him into the lines of civiliza- 
tion : at present he follows the perilous and pic- 
turesque profession of a clifter, or Puffin hunter ; 
and I doubt not he will be the Chiron of the 
future Achilles of the west. 

What a contrast between the scenes and as- 
sociations of this island, and my entresol in the 
Rue de Bac, entre coiir et jar din ; or even be- 
tween its romantic solitudes and the " priest's 
house " on the main land, surrounded on all sides 
by objects of squalid misery, and physical and 
moral disgust. By a strange anomaly, the 
deeper you go in Ireland, within the boundaries 



THE o'flahertys. 33 

of civilization, the more you are struck with the 
degradation of society. 

This moment, " Paddy the post," a red 
shanked runner between the town of St. Grellan 
and the mountains of Connemara, has brought 
me your welcome letter, and its curious enclo- 
sure. Its odeur musquee, transported me at 
once to the boudoir au pavilion^ rue deVUni- 
versite, and the sight of your writing, gave me 
the first thrill of pleasure I have experienced 
since my arrival in this land of suffering and 
sadness. What a curious coincidence between 
your inquiries and my historical notices of the 
Clan Tiegs. I shall dispatch your letter to the 
Baron by an Arran sunfish boat this evening, 
and immediately pay my respects to the Miss 
Mac TaafTs of Bogmoy. The expression of 
your friendship touched me sensibly. Never were 
feelings and habits more at variance than 
yours. " C'est un hon mauvais svjet," said la 
Duchesse de Coigny^ speaking of you the night 
before I left Paris, and I have often thought 
that you illustrated the dogma of Porphyry 
that the souls of men were angels, who in the 
c 3 



34 



THE O BRIENS AND 



great conflict between good and bad spirits, 
were doomed to corrupt bodies, to try their 
sincerity ; and never was angelic soul more tried 
by the appetites and passions of a worthless 
body, than your own. I leave however to time, 
that great reformer of life, and director of 
conscience, to effect that for you which I have 
failed to do ; not for want of zeal, but means : 
and in the interim, must love you for the virtues 
you have, in expectation of those that as yet 
" you know not of." 

Your vocation to the monastic life is quite 
en regie, for you have long since qualified for 
givfng more joy in heaven by your repentance, 
than the ninety and nine just persons who have 
never erred. I have seen many such as you, 
desabuses sur tout, digging their own graves at 
La Trappe, or treading the snow at St. Bernard, 

Car li^las! les plus aimables 
Sont souvent les plus coupables. 

Among the lingering recollections of your boy- 
hood, can you not recall an old dreary building, 
which stood on the edge of the Fassagh, on the 
road from ^loy CuUen to St. Grellan, between 



THE o'flahertys. 35 

shore and mountain ; and which with the name 
of Bogmoy house, presented in its composite 
order of tower and gable, bawn and barn, 
thatch and shingle, " fair limestone house, and 
wicker-work edifice,'' a monument of the pro- 
gressive history and vicissitudes of the country ? 
In our times, it was the domestic fortress of a 
certain brigadier Flavius Mac Taaf, who vo- 
lunteered, with many other Irish gentlemen to 
follow George the Second to his German wars, — • 
who as gallantly defended himself against an 
host of besieging creditors at home, as he had 
defended his king against his enemies abroad ; — 
and who having fought, and tippled away his 
limbs, health and temper, continued to the last 
to swear like a trooper, drink like a fish, to run 
his own claret into the smuggling caves of his 
own Fassagh, to distill his own poteen in the 
security of his own bawn, and to claim half the 
titles and all the estates of the province, on the 
testimony of his own Connaught Shanaos. 

This Shanaos, with his bogs, barrels, still pots, 
and lawsuits, he bequeathed to the Miss Mac 
Taafs, his three nieces and co-heiresses, the sole 



36 THE O'BRIENS AND 

re presentatives of their acute, w ary and pugnacious 
sept. As they are of an old protestant family, ac- 
customed to look down on the new converts, and in 
alliance with all the catholic families in Connaught, 
they have all the toleration towards our unhappy 
cast, which is wanting in the more modern sec- 
tarians. The parish priest has always a duplicate 
key of their gardevin, and a cover at their Sunday 
dinner table ; and he is a never faihng adjunct 
to their party, at " five and forty" and cribbage. 
Although I have not yet availed my self of these 
privileges, which my predecessor (I hear) did not 
permit to lie idle, I have left ray card at their 
door, and have received an invitation to dine with 
them next Sunday, written on the back of a dirty 
knave of clubs, which I suppose, in the words 
of their favourite game, has been, " thrown out 
for the rob."" 

You shall hear from me as soon as I have 
made the necessary inquiries touching Terentius 
and his claims : meantime 

and ever, I remain, 

Your's, &c. &c. &c. 
Abbe O'Flaherty. 



THE o'flahertys. 37 



LETTER IV. 

To Gen. Count Of Flaherty, 

6fc. S^c. SfC. 

My Dear Count, 
I have delayed writing, that I might write to 
some purpose ; and finding that it was possible 
to combine my temporal agency with my spi- 
ritual mission, I have rendered each subservient 
to the other. In penetrating into tlie remote 
wilds of my diocese, and making the personal 
acquaintance with the poorest, as well as the 
wealthiest of my flock, I have obtained the 
requisite information respecting both your 
interests and my own. All this I have 
done under the guidance, and with the full 
benefit of the advice, information, and su- 
perior knowledge of our kinsman and legal 
champion, the Baron O'Brien ; with whom I 
have visited your castle, abbey, and feudatory 
domains, under circumstances that have put 



S8 



THE O BEIENS AND 



me perfectly aufait to his character, views, and 
springs of action, both with respect to himself 
and to you : — for you are not to suppose that 
all his exertions are ^^pour V amour de vos heaux 
yeux^"" No, there is an outstanding prophecy 
to be fulfilled. The sacrilegious crimes of 
Murrogh O'Brien, Lord Inchiquin, Cromwell's 
apostate general, are to be redeemed through 
his descendants. But above all, there is a long 
account of vengeance to be paid off' to the Arch- 
deacon Hunks: "a true Irishman (says the 
baron) never forgives an injury nor forgets a 
kindness."" 

Now, who do you think this Terentius Baron 
O'Brien turns out to be — this head of the 
" quinque familiae,'"* this living representative of 
the ancient Brehons and Seanachies of the land, 
whose professional success has enabled him to 
purchase estates in the dominions of his ances- 
tors, and to drive a carriage emblazoned with 
the royal arms and supporters of the O'Briens ? 
" Devinez sHl vous plait. Je vous le donne en 
guatre, je vous le donne en cent ; jetez voire 
langue aux chiens ;" you will never guess ; what 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 39 

do yoQ think of little Terneen na garlach* the 
noistroiHc of the mass cave in the old abbey 
of Moy CuUen, the supposed illegitimate ofT- 
pring of your cousin Onor ny Flaherty, who as 
the '* Callecn dhas dliii'X of Turlogh Carolan's 
amatory muse, and as the possessor of the Ab- 
bess Beavoin's cross, obtained a sort of poetical 
and pious celebrity, which has not yet passed away 
in her native district ? But I forget that your 
early expatriation, and the world through which 
you have passed, and which effaces every thing, 
must have obliterated these early recollections ; 
which my frequent visits to Ireland, peculiar 
situation, and professional habits, have preserved 
in all their original freshness. Well, then, to 
suit my narrative to your jucunda oblivia of 
Irish life (for what is there of Irish misfortune 
which it is not pleasant to forget !) you are to 
know that Onor ny Flaherty was the only and 
posthumous daughter of one of those gallant 
officers, who after the capitulation of Limerick, 

♦ Trrneen na garlach. Little Terence the base-born. 

f l>acristan. 

X Call', en dhas dhu — The pretty dark girl. 



40 THK O'BRIENS AND 

assembled amidst the ruins of the abbey of 
Quin, to make their election between remaining 
in Ireland, or going into exile. Of this deli- 
beration, a voluntary expatriation was the result ; 
and the English government saw with dismay 
and mortification the flower of the Irish no- 
bility and army, headed by Sarsfield, Lord 
Lucan, march to the coast, from which they 
embarked, to the number of four thousand, to 
give to Europe her most gallant soldiers, and 
most skilful leaders. 

The death of Col. O'Flaherty, who fell at the 
battle of Veletri, left Onor an houseless orphan, 
and enlisted her of necessity, into that legion of 
poor cousins, who then billetted themselves on 
the few of their own caste, who had rescued any 
portion of their property from the general pro- 
scription. Poor Onor, condemned by her in- 
solvent, but proud gentility, to lead an idle and 
wandering hfe, continued (in the phrase of the 
day) " to walk up and down the country 
among her fosterers and kindred/' with no 
earthly means of support, but " the run of their 
houses," and the little revenue derived from the 



THE oVlAHKRTYS. 41 

Abbess Beavoin*s cross, an hereditary relic, like 
the Cathach of the O'Donnels :* the country 
people coming far and near, in all their petty 
litigations to swear upon it at a tester the oath. 
Onor was wont upon these occasions to throw in 
a prayer gratis ; for Onor was a great voteen, a 
sort of unprofessed nun, (when none other was 
permitted by law,) who had moreover vowed her- 
self to the Virgin, and v/as of the confraternity 
of the blessed rosary. Onor, too, had the voice 
of an angeJ, and whoever once heard her sing 
Carolan's " Gloria in excelsis^'' or the '^ Miserere ^"^ 
with Irish words, will never forget those heart- 
breaking tones ; tones which are so peculiar to 
the plaintive and melodious organs of her coun- 
trywomen. 

* The lower Irish in general esteem no oath as binding, 
which is not made on a crucifix, or something in a shape 
of a cross. The crosier of St. Monalagh (Dr. Warner 
obsen'es) is still preserved with great care. It is called the 
boughal, or stick, and is of curious workmanship. It is 
held in such veneration, that oaths are taken on it with 
great solemnity, and a shilling is paid for its use, to a poor 
woman who gives it out to the applicant, and it travels 
safely from cabin to cabin.— See Statistical View of the 
County of Clare. 



42 THE OBRIENS AND 

It happened, however, that while Onor was 
enjoying the odour of sanctity, ere her vow to 
the Virgin was yet dry in the records of heaven's 
chancery, there arrived in St. Grellan, to the 
peril of all vestal vows, one of those " idle 
young gentlemen of this kingdom," who (in the 
words of the statute) " having nothing to live on 
of their own, will not apply themselves to labour, 
but doe live idly, and inordinately, coshering 
upon the country, and cessing themselves, their 
followers, horses, and greyhounds upon the poor 
people and gentry." Yet in spite of all acts 
and statutes, when this " idle young gentleman"* 
came galloping' down the main street of St. 
Grellan, with his follower trotting after, and his 
greyhound running beside him, every hat was 
touched and every eye smiled ; for all knew it 
was Rory Oge O'Brien, of the Clan Tieg 
O'Briens of Tromra, once lords of the lies of 
Arran ; whose name was a passport to the re- 
verence, respect, and good will of the whole 
province. His father, Colonel Daniel O'Brien, 
to avoid the act of prcemunire then held in ter- 
rorem over such papists as either taught their 



THE O FLAHEllTYS. 4sJ 

children at home, or sent them abroad for edu- 
cation, having fled with his youngest son while 
yet a child, to the continent, fought in the 
service of the King of Spain and the two Sicilies, 
and in the Commandery of Calabria, and fell at 
the battle of Cremona. His young son was 
thus left a pupil in the Jesuit College of Naples, 
(and is the now celebrated ex-jesuit Abbe Igna- 
tius O'Brien). Meantime, Rory Oge, the heir 
and Tanist of the sept, remained in Ireland, 
and preserved the old influence of clanship, and 
the old habits of gentlemanly idleness ; literally 
" coshering upon the country, and cessing him- 
self, horse and greyhound" upon friends, rela- 
tions and neighbours. But as there was no 
penal statute for maiming, or otherwise defacing 
the person of an handsome papist, nocent or 
innocent, Rory Oge contrived to prey the coun- 
try, as his ancestors had done before him : not 
indeed, carrying away herds, but hearts; and 
breaking more vows to the Virgin, than the 
Iconoclasts ever broke images. 

Now, it happened that Onor ny Flaherty 
stood telling lier beads and looking at the kiss- 



44 THE o'briens and 

ing and quarrelling of the market people in the 
main street, from the Spanish bay window of a 
kinsman's house, when Rory Oge rode into the 
town of St. Grellan. Eory was an experienced 
watcher of windows on a market day ; and he 
saluted the lady with a flourish of his Ramilies 
hat, as, riding up to the porch, he claimed his 
coshering with " Eanaght and Kdraugli^ " after 
the old prescriptive fashion. There he not only 
cessed himself, horse, follower, and greyhound, 
for one calendar month upon Onor's hospitable 
Connaught cousin, but lodged himself for life 
in that sanctuary which the Virgin, till then, had 
exclusively occupied — poor Onor's tender heart- 
O'Brien, who, like Madelon, was of opinion 
that ^^ne f aire V amour qii en faisant le contrat 
de marriage^' ^ was ^^ prendre le roman par la 
qaeue^' had as yet no inclination " de venir de 
but en hlanc a Vumon du mariage;'' but Onor 
was a gentlewoman born and bred, and though 
Rory Oge was as ardent as all the Rory Oges 
ever have been, and ever will be to the end of 
time, yet Onor was as pure, though not as frail, 
* See Statute of Charies II., against coshering. 



THE o'flahertys. 45 

as her own vow to the Virgin. The result, as 
mio'ht be expected, was a compromise between 
love and conscience. One fine morning Onor 
mounted en croupe behind Rory Oge, accx)m- 
panied only by his horse-boy and greyhound, 
took the road to the mountains of Moy Cullen, 
by the then desolate and unfrequented pass of 
Glen-murrogh, and presented themselves at 
the cell of the titular Bishop of St. Grellan, 
(a persecuted prelate, who, under your 
father's protection, and at a great risk, took 
shelter among the ruins of the Abbey of St. 
Bridget, whence he addressed his letters to his 
exiled friends abroad, " ex nostra ultimo re- 
fugio)r* 

The jealousy of the statute book against 

* About this time a proclamation was issued by tiie 
privy council of Ireland, for the detection of catholic 
priests, by which, in addition to the rewards offered by 
acts of Parliament, the informers were promised, on the 
conviction of an archbishop, bishop, or vicar general, the 
sura of f 150 ; for every priest or other person exercising 
ecclesiastical jurisdiction £50 •, for every person, having 
property to a certain amount, and entertaining, concealing, 
or relieving a priest, £200. 



46 THE o'briens and 

holy wedlock then ran so high, and the pre- 
miums on catholic concubinage were so much 
above par, that it was perilous for a catholic 
priest to celebrate the forms of marriage between 
any parties whatever ; and notwithstanding the 
two ancient catholic names that now presented 
themselves to be indissoiubly united, the bishop 
hesitated. There was, however, something in 
the air of Rory Oge (to say nothing of the ides 
of May, and the solitary pass of Glen-murrogh), 
that induced him, for Onor's sake, to risk a 
compliance. But when the sacrament of mar- 
riage was over, and the bishop proposed the 
celebration of a still more solemn ceremony, 
O'Brien started, hesitated, and at last confessed 
that he was by accident, and without his own 
knowledge or consent, a member of the church 
as by law established, having been converted by 
a process of persuasion then very prevalent, 
which saved the soul and the property of the 
proselyte by the only means deemed security for 
either. To recover a very small estate, Rory, 
who was no bigot, had undergone a temporary 
conformity ; with the mental reservation of re- 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 47 

lapsing as soon as he should have sold his few 
acres so recovered, and placed his money in 
safety in some foreign security.* For this act, 
he boasted at the time that he had good grounds; 
and he declared that he would rather trust his 
soul with Providence for a few months, than 
leave an acre of his land for one day at the 
mercy of the statute book. 

On this avowal, which struck poor Onor to the 
heart, the bishop made no observation ; but coolly 
taking down a book, read aloud as follows : — *' If 
a catholic clergyman happens, though inadveri- 
ently^ to celebrate marriage between a catholic 
and a protestant, not previously married by a 
protestant minister, he is liable by law to suffer 
death '' Onor, already feeling the penalty of 
her breach of one vow, by the fatality of another, 
swore at the feet of the crucifix, before which she 
had just pledged her faith to O'Brien, never to 
reveal her marriage during the life of her revered 

» •'Necessity that makes a man ten times forsworn," 
rendered this a very common practice in Ireland at the 
epoch alluded to, when every species of demoralization was 
forwarded and protected by the law of the land. 



48 THE o'briens and 

pastor ; while Rory swore " by all the books 
that ever were opened or shut," not to betray a 
secret which, under any circumstances, it had 
never been his intention to disclose. 

Shortly after Rory left the country, never to 
return ; and poor abandoned and betrayed Onor 
remained to stand the brunt of his desertion and 
of her own disgrace. She soon lost not only her 
fine spirits, but what was worse, her fine form. 
No longer the welcome guest of even Connaught 
cousins, she was looked coldly upon by all. A 
superannuated court lady, then sheltering her 
titled head in Castle O 'Flaherty, who had in her 
fair youth wooed the smile of the Duchess of 
Portsmouth, or courted a nod from Sedley's 
profligate daughter, now turned her eyes 
askance when poor Onor came in her way ; and 
when, deserted by all, she gave birth to Terence 
O'Brien, in the cabin of a poor cotter in the 
mountains of Moy Cullen, she had the mortifi- 
cation of hearing the sobriquet of " Terneen na 
garlagh"*'* bestowed upon the legitimate descend- 
ant of Brien Borru. In a short time afterwards 
• " The illegitimate." 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 49 

Onor and her infant son disappeared from the 
neighbourhood of St. Grellan, and nothing was 
known of her for some years, except that she 
was living in the isles of Arran, and had been 
occasionally met by wayfaring people, wander- 
ing lonely in lone places, in the mountains of the 
Hy-Tartagh, with her son in one hand, a pil- 
grim's staff in the other, and her hereditary cross 
in her bosom. There she was revered as a saint, 
by the title of " Onor na Croise^^* and indeed 
was regarded as a martyr also; for, while 
making a pilgrimage to St. Patrick's purgatory, 
she was caught in the act of praying at the holy 
well, and thus incurred the penalty of a fine ; 
which as she had not the means of paying, she 
suffered the punishment of a whipping, de- 
nounced against every person, " who shall 
attend or be present at any pilgrimage^ or meet- 
ing at any holy well, or reputed holy well." 
To this punishment, some say she submitted, as 
a voluntary penance ; but this is not probable. 

The death of the persecuted bishop, for whose 
sake she had undergone so much ignominy 

* Honor of the Cross. 
VOL. I. D 



50 THE o'bRIENS and 

and suffering, released her from her vow of 
silence. 

The castle of your father, limited as were 
his means, was at that time the rendezvous 
and asylum of a number of unfortunate 
cathoHc ladies and gentlemen, reduced from 
rank and opulence to houseless poverty, by the 
proscription which followed the revolution. 
There was in those dark times, an affectionate 
party attachment, the relic of the old feudal 
clanship, which new associations of mercantile 
and metaphysical ideas, together with distrust 
of all, felt by all, have now abolished. It hap- 
pened, that on the Christmas eve, which fol- 
lowed the death of the titular bishop, the party 
of the castle had assembled for midnight mass, 
in the cave under the chauntry in the abbey, 
which still bears the name of " the mass cave, 
or priest's chamber.'" Mac Cabe* had just played 
on the harp, the fine " Gloria " of Carolan, and 
had struck up the Miserere, when a voice of the 
most heart-breaking pathos, that drew tears from 

* One of the last of the composers and harpists of the 
old school, who played in the halls of the nobility and 
gentry of Ireland. 



51 

all eyes, issued froQi a remote part of the cave. 
The voice of poor Onor was never to be forgot- 
ten ; and when the service was over, the vision 
of her former self was recognised, advancing to 
the altar, her child in one hand, and a paper in 
the other, which she presented to the officiating 
priest. She was wrapt in the old Irish mantle, 
and her long hair, no longer the raven locks of 
the Calkcn dJtas dhiu but white as snow, hunir 
round her fine tall figure, and with her up- 
raised eye, recalled the Magdalen of Guido. 
The priest read the paper she presented aloud, 
from the altar. It was the bishop's certificate 
of her marriage. All knew his seal and signa- 
ture affixed to the instrument, that restored her 
to her fair fame ; and all were willing to make 
the amende, for all were sensible of poor Onor's 
pious sacrifice. But Onor, with the double vin- 
dictiveness of female, and of Irish pride, wounded 
l^eyond all solace, did not forget, and could not 
forgive. She had vowed, never to sleep beneath 
"the shed of a shingle roof ;'' and she would 
accept of no hospitality, but from that humble 
class, which had never deserted her. She con- 
tinued, however, for a short time on Sundays 



52 THE o'briems and 

and holidays, to frequent the mass cave, where 
she sang the Miserere in Irish, while her little 
boy, pranked out in a tattered stole and cinc- 
ture (for she had devoted him to the church), 
served as Noistreoir or Sacristan. I was then 
a boy ; but I see him now, as I saw him at the 
time, walking barefooted and barelegged, after 
the officiating priest, with his bell and book in 
either hand, bowing to the right and to the left, 
according to the forms; snuflBng with his fingers 
the tallow candles, that lighted up the rude 
rock altar, chaunting out the responses, and 
tingling his little bell, with a low and muffled 
vibration, as if he feare d its prohibited sound 
should be borne on the blasts, that rushed 
through the secret mass cave, to the ears of 
the bishop, " by law established." Oh ! my 
dear O' Flaherty, these are the scenes, and these 
the recollections, which render the catholics of 
Ireland, the most catholic of any in Christen- 
dom ; which array the heart and fancy, on the 
side of a persecuted religion, and bind both of 
them to forms and creeds, which I much fear 
are losing their influence over every other part 
of Europe. 



THE O FLAHF.RTYS. 5b 

It was just before I was sent to Douai, that 
Onor, returning to her hovel in the Isle of 
Arran, was found on a spring morning dead 
among the ruins of Dun Engus, " with wander- 
ing spent and woe" ; and poor Terry, the little 
descendant of the heroes who raised that great 
military fortress, having wept himself asleep on 
his mother's body, on the night of her inter- 
ment in the family vault, set out the next day 
on his travels in the quality of a poor scholar. 
With '' the world before," and a satchel of books 
behind him, and with the Abbess Beavoin's cross 
for his sole inheritance, he continued to lead 
much the same wandering and precarious life 
he had led from his cradle, (alas f there were 
many of the sons of the proscribed Irish gentry 
who had then neither so certain nor so honest 
a means of subsistence). It happened that 
Terence, no longer Terneen na Garlach, but 
Terence na Librach*, was pursuing his voca- 
tion one Sunday in the cemetery of St. Grellan's 
cathedral, and was reading out the ^' Seven wise 

* Terence of the book?. 



54 THE O'BRIENS AND 

maisters^'* for a circle of less learned auditors, 
at a halfpenny a head, when he was suddenly 
seized by Prebend Audley Hunks, under the 
statute, which " impowers a protestant minister 
to pick up any stray child receiving charity in 
the parish, and to bind the said child to a 
substantial protestant as a menial servant till 
his twenty-first year." 

Now one of the most substantial protestants 
in St. Grellan town was GeofFry Hunks, an 
old black letter conveyancer, who, at his bro- 
ther's, the Prebend Hunks's suggestion, wil- 
lingly availed himself of the letter of the law ; 
for little Terence had become accidentally known 
to the reverend prebend as the expounder of 
many old Irish and Latin inscriptions on the 
tombs and monuments of the cathedral of St. 
Grellan. You are aware that at this period, 
while the natural resources of the soil were 
abandoned to neglect and waste, and bogs were 
gradually overspreading rich vallies, and fertile 
tracts, the intellectual and moral resources of 
the nation were alike doomed to sterility and 
uncultured wildness. 



THK o'flaiiertys. 55 

One of the ends pursued in the early part of this 
century, with httle regard to the means, was the 
impolitic measure of compelhng catholics to edu- 
cate their children in protestant schools, and to 
force on the cause of proselytism by tlie very 
modes which have always tended to retard it. 
The result was the degradation of the lower classes, 
(till nothing was left but their powerful instincts 
and vehement passions) and the driving away 
the youthful catholic gentry to foreign countries, 
(as in the instance of yourself) from whence 
they seldom returned ; or if they remained at 
home, remained only to flourish like the wild 
slirub of the desert, sending forth their vigorous 
shoots of intellect in luxurious disorder, and 
frequently in mischievous strength. A few 
gloomy and concealed convents still indeed 
existed (and still exist) in the provinces of Con- 
nauglit and Munster, where a sort of smuggled 
education was perpetrated (in defiance of the 
law, because unknown to it), by some simple, 
ignorant, and bigotted friars, who taught their 
bare-footed scholars to translate the poetry of 
Homer and the eloquence of Cicero into bad 
Irish, and worse English. There, too, some 



56 THE O'BRIENS AND 

dreaming old annalists or antiquarians (such as 
initiated Geoffry Keating in those fables to 
which he has given the name of history), still 
taught the " hard Irish," and affected to trans- 
late the branch Ogham into versions which 
none could dispute, since none could understand 
them. 

In such seminaries, led by his wandering 
mother, had little Terence acquired that sort 
of learning which rendered him as precious 
an assistant to the old black letter conveyancer 
of St. Grellan, as the young heaven-born states- 
man, Jonathan Swift, was to Sir William 
Temple. All Hunks's business lay exclusively 
among those litigious Connaught gentry, who, 
dissatisfied with the judgments of successive 
suits, spent their last doubloons in asserting 
claims involved in all the obscurity of parch- 
ment and of pedigrees, which, both for their 
Irish and Latin, might have puzzled even 
Geoffry Keating himself. 

Even still these '' bondsmen of the law," backed 
by counsel's opinion, as given by Counsellor 
Hyacinth Daly of Galway, or Counsellor 
O'Sullivan Bere of Kerry, continue to urge and 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 57 

to boast of claims merged in the successive for- 
feitures of ages, with all the pertinacity of igno- 
rance worked upon by pride, the refuge — vice, 
or virtue of the oppressed and degraded of all 
countries. 

The success of Terence in deciphering these 
hieroglyphics, and above all his version of an 
old inscription in Runic Ogham (as he called 
it), found on a stone in the Abbey (said to 
be the very stone on which the annals of the 
Ballyboe were first began), induced old Hunks 
to change his indentures of menial servitude 
into a patent of professional gentility, and to 
create Terence a gentleman by law, as he was 
by blood, alliance, and descent. For this, how- 
ever, a preliminary act of regeneration was ne- 
cessary ; for, saith the statute, " whereas, by 
experience, in this kingdom, it hath always been 
found that papist solicitors and agents have 
been the common disturbers of the peace and 
tranquillity of his Majesty's subjects, his most 
excellent Majesty, for the remedy thereof, by 
the advice and consent of the lords spiritual and 
temporal, has decreed that none can practise as 
D 3 



58 THE O'BRIENS AND 

attorneys or solicitors who do not declare against 
all interpretation of the gospel, but such as the 
existing hierarchy of the land promulgateth." 

Terence, from the hour of his birth the predes- 
tined victim of statutes, who, under their influence 
had one parent exiled, and the other dishonoured, 
— who had seen his mother flagellated, himself 
bastardized, the rites of his rehgion celebrated in 
midnight mystery, — and who moreover trembled 
at the name of Hunks, could not be supposed 
to possess that sort of moral courage which gives 
the church its martyrs. As his ideas of the 
" hierarchy of the land" were Friar Pat and 
Father John, and as the Gospel was imaged to 
him by the little leather bag (so named), tied 
round his neck by his mother, to keep off" the 
chin cough, he had little hesitation to agreeing 
to any interpretation of it proposed to him ; and 
when called on to avow if he believed the thirty- 
nine articles, he himself replied, *' Aye, troth, 
and more if your honor plases.*" Thus docile 
to the existing influence of the time, the de- 
scendant of Brien Baroihme, the sacristan of 
the mass cave, became an indented attorney, and 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 59 

a member of the law church; while solicitor 
Hunks was eulogized to the skies for having 
rescued a soul from that " danmable heresy" 
which turned even the professed conservators of 
the law into " common disturbers of the peace 
and tranquillity of liis Majesty's subjects." 

The age and indolence of the unlettered 
Hunks, the diligence, learning, and activity of 
his apprentice, soon gave the younger and more 
vigorous limb of the law the dessus. Old 
Hunks finally admitted him to a share of that 
business of which, in fact, he had long done the 
whole; and Miss Deborah Hunks, his only 
cliild and mature daughter, who for thirty years 
had flirted through the entire chapter of St. 
Grellan, cracked the voices of more vicars cho- 
rals, and disappointed the hopes of more aspir- 
ing young choristers than any Connaught heiress 
of the day, at last disposed of her heart as her 
father had done of his affairs; and when 
Terence had completed one indenture, he entered 
unresistingly into another; doubtful whether 
there was not some penal statute by which the 
comely young apprentice of an old solicitor was 



60 THE O'BRIENS AND 

obliged to marry the plain, elderly daughter of 
his master by " the advice of his Majesty's 
council, spiritual and temporal." 

The death of old Hunks in the fifth year of 
Terence's marriage, left him in full possession 
of a good country business ; and there was not 
a more painstaking and protestant attorney in 
the province of Connaught, when the sudden 
appearance of Terence's uncle (the expatriated 
younger brother of Rory Oge), superior of the 
Jesuit convent of '' Le Gesu,''^ at Rome, gave 
a new colour to the story and circumstances 
of his nephew. 

The Abbate Don Ignatius O'Brien, whose 
restless and zealous character has since come 
out with such force, in his public struggles to 
prevent the suppression of his order, and secretly 
to perpetuate its influence ; and whose active life 
has proved that " Cuculus noii facit mcma- 
chum^^ had come over to Ireland ostensibly to 
find out his nephew, and to establish his legi- 
timacy according to the statute book, as it was 
already proved according to the law of God. 
Rory Oge, who had died an officer of the Pope's 
guard, and a brother of the " PenitenW to 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 61 

boot, had, it appears, left a certificate of his 
having returned to the catliohc church before 
his marriage with Onor; and confessing the 
supercMrie of having concealed the fact, be- 
queathed a sum of money to his long abandoned 
son, with all his nominal rights, privileges, and 
immunities in the isle of Arran. The ambitious 
marriage of Rory with the indigent widow of 
an insolvent Roman principe, a representative 
of the S. P. Q. R. of ancient Rome, during the 
lifetime of his first wife, had rendered illegi- 
timate the birth of his only child by this mar- 
riage; and at the early age of sixteen, the 
daughter of the Italian princess and the Irish 
prince, took the veil in an Irish convent at 
Rome, supposed to be under the special protec- 
tion of the Jesuits. 

Such was the ostensible motive for the Abbate 
CBrien's visit to his native country. The au- 
thorities of St. Grellan, however^ looked upon 
his mission as governed by other views. An 
ex-Jesuit, superior to the richest house of that 
|X)werful order in Rome, who travelled in his 
own carriage, who had removed the remnant of 



62 THE o''beiens and 

the order of St. Bridget from their retreat in 
a garret over the shop of a grocer in the mar- 
ket-place to the old monastery of Mary, John, 
and Joseph, in another part of the town, 
who expended considerable sums in charity, 
and who in his progress through the wilds 
of Connemara and the Isles of Arran was 
followed like another St. Patrick, could not fail 
to excite suspicions in times when nothing was 
talked of but " popish banditti spirited up by 
agitating friars, and Roman missionaries sent 
over to sow seduction, and spread heresy and 
rebellion among the people." The charities of 
the Abbate soon furnished an excuse for his 
persecution, in a land where charity was made the 
pretext for open and forceful robbery.* In a 

* It is laid down, not only by the statute concerning 
superstitious uses, and other English statutes, but also gene- 
rally, that the King, as head of the church, and as en- 
tmsted by the common law to see that nothing is done in 
maintenance or propagation of a false religion, is entitled 
to all grants and gifts made for such purposes, so as to 
appropriate them to other uses that are held lawful. This 
principle of general policy, which may be pushed to any 
extent that to a chancellor may appear necessary, applies 
equally in the law of Ireland and England. The com- 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. 6S 

little time he found himself the object of an 
infinity of petty intrigues, the victim of the 
most absurd calunniies, the subject of a pro- 
tracted correspondence xoith the castle ; and on 
the point of being arrested by a secretary of 
state's warrant — I know not under what ridi- 
culous charge — was at length compelled in self- 
protection to retire from a scene and country in 

missioners of charitable bequests form a board expressly 
appointed to hunt out catholic charities, and dirert 
them to protestant uses j and their zeal and activity in 
the discharge of their ungracious functions, completely 
frustrated every attempt to provide a permanent main- 
tenance for the catholic ministers of worship, their places 
of education, and other pious and charitable foundations. 
It may, by the bye, be remarked, that this same dictum of 
the common law, appointing the king to the supervisor- 
ship of religion, is another of those gratuitous inventions 
by which the judges manufacture laws for whatever suits 
their convenience. The common law of England arose 
in the woods of Germany, when the religion of Woden 
was *' by law established;" and it grew up to maturity 
under the catholic kings of England. The ne quid detrU 
menti authority must therefore be two steps removed from 
protestantism ; and the seizure of property to protestant 
uses, a direct infraction, instead of a fulfilment of common 
law : at least, so common sense would say. But what 
has law to do with common sense ? 



64- THE o'briens and 

which, though his existence was not recognized 
by the law, his life was embittered by its odious 
and persecuting enactments. Thus a man, 
whose bigotted ambition, haughty character, 
and temporal views for the supremacy of ultra- 
montane principles, and above all for the main- 
tenance of his own pernicious and enterprising 
order, was the least calculated to succeed with 
the Irish catholics, (whose national notions re- 
sembled in independence those entertained by 
the Galilean church), was elevated to the 
glory of sanctity and martyrdom ; and his 
sudden departure from St. Grellan will be Jong 
commemorated as their Hegira by the natives of 
Connemara and the isles of Arran. Yau will see 
in these animadversions what you call the dernier 
rejeton de Port Roy ale and the leaven of Jansen- 
ism — but let that pass. 

The persecution of his uncle rendered Terence 
more protestant and loyal than ever. He even 
carried his subserviency to the length of sub- 
gcribing to the " black petition"" against the 
catholic claims;* for^ the more unmeasured the 

* See Harding's Galway. 



THE oVlaitertys. 65 

oppression, the deeper is the dissimulation it de- 
mands. But though all cried out that " O'Brien 
was a pretty name to open a pew* door with," 
all were pleased to see the legitimized son of 
Mr. O'Flaherty drive to the cathedral porch 
with the arms and supporters of his family in 
his — one-horse chaise, and his " boy" in the 
crimson livery of the O'Briens. The death of 
his elderly wife, and an open breach with her 
dictatorial and intolerant kinsman, the prose- 
lyting prebend of St. Grellan, released O'Brien 
from the tyranny of a family, which, in making 
his fortune, had, in his estimation, risked his sal- 
vation ; and which, in forcing him under the pro- 
tection of the statute book, could not place him 
beyond the persecutions of his own conscience. 
" And now, Abbe O'Flaherty," said the 
Baron CBrien, in touching upon this part of 
his story — for I am giving you a brief abstract 
of his own biography, as we wound through the 
almost impassible pass of Glen Murrogh, on the 
way to Moy CuUen, — " and now, being no 

• Pews are peculiar to protestant churches. 



66 THE O'BRIEN'S, AND 

longer a slave, nor an indented apprentice, but 
feeling myself one of the five free gentlemen of 
Ireland, and at liberty to dispose of my heart 
and person, without the fear of act or statute ; 
and it having pleased Divine wisdom to take the 
firstBaroness ©""Brien, alias Miss Hunks, to itself; 
I begun to look about me for the ould blood 
flowing in good protestant veins, that the mother 
of the future representative of the tribe of Dal- 
gais (founders of the Irish monarchy under Cas 
son of CoNAL of the swift horses,) should not 
throw a Jlan deargh* on the scutcheon of the 
family ; and so I consulted my late ould clients, 
Brigadier Flavius Mac Taaf, of Bogmoy, and 
he offered me his oldest niece and co-heiress, 
Miss Mable Mac Taaf, and said if he had an 
oulder he would give her to me. But, Abbe 
OTlaherty, I resolved to be a Hussian,-f- and 
fight for pay no longer; and though Miss 
Mable Mac Taaf is a comely fine woman, and 
in her prime, as I may say, — likewise Miss 

* A term in Irish, signifying in heraldry a standard or 
colour; used also as a disgrace or blot in an escutcheon, 
t An Hessian. 



THE o'l'LAHERTYS. 67 

Monica, — yet, do ye see, I had a vocation to- 
wards the cadette. Miss Bridget, who was the 
Cinderella of the family, and who was often sent 
to slip down to our office in St. Grellan with a 
bond to be signed, or a deed to be executed. 
So, having slipped in, one fine day, she forgot, 
the cratur, to slip out, till she was Baroness 
O'Brien, and then she wrote to her uncle for 
pardon, a letter that would mollify a stone ; in 
which I enclosed the grey mare to Miss Mable, 
to soften her heart : but all would not do. Well, 
Foghal Foh ! wait a while, but to this blessed 
hour Miss Mac Taaf hates the ground I walk on. 
So much for the history of your cousin, law 
agent and hereditary foeman. With respect 
to his character, it is a study; and is combined 
in a singular degree of the temperament of his 
sept, and the qualities of his social (or rather 
anti- social) position. It is evident that Terence, 
physically brave as the fiercest of his family, is 
morally timid, as the most degraded of his caste. 
Always ready to risk his life on a point of per- 
sonal or of national honour (and I am told that 
he fought a duel with an English officer who 



68 THE O'BRIENS, AND 

had observed that the legs of the Connaught 
ladies and the Connaught heifers were formed 
on the same model) ; yet he shrinks from legal 
infliction, however remotely threatened, and is 
ready to prostrate his opinion to any constituted 
authority, from a king to a constable. Courting 
the notice of the great, even in the party he 
hates, he enjoys himself only in the intimate 
familiarity of the lowly and oppressed. Secretly 
attached to the popular party, without one po- 
pular feeling, or one constitutional idea, he is 
ready to restore, but unwilling to reform. With 
thoughts ever retrospective to the glories of 
' ancient ould Ireland,' with its green banners, 
and harps, and collars of gold, — and with that re- 
ligious tendency to passive obedience with which 
we catholics are accused, he is a rebel and a 
royalist on the same principle. These conflicting 
opinions he veils under an exterior of the most 
unlimited submission to the powers that be ; 
giving no further vent to his fears and his hopes, 
than may be safely expressed in his favourite 
adage of Foghal Foh, or " wait awhile." Dis- 
trusting all, and not confiding even in himself, 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. (J9 

he lives in perpetual fear of becoming, without 
his own consent, that thing " hated of gods and 
men I" a irlapsed papist,— as he became at the 
direction of others, a protestant proselyte. In a 
word, he is not only a " brief abstract " of a 
large class of his countrymen, such as six cen- 
turies of degradation have made them ; but is, 
in his own person, with all his contrarieties and 
inconsistencies, a part and parcel of the law of the 
land, a leaf torn out of the Irish statute book, a 
comment on that code written in human blood, 
which stands accountable for the perversion of a 
national character, as gallant and as good as 
was ever checked in its progress to improvement, 
and driven back disgracefully and disgraciously 
to the starting-post of civilization, by a system 
that renders legislation a bye-word, and govern- 
ment a crime. 

With respect to O'Brien's professional cha- 
racter, he is, that 7'ara avis in terris, an honest 
attorney. His high calling in the profession, forced 
on him by circumstances, has given him a sort 
of historical dignity in the suits he undertakes. 
He brings up evidences, as Hecate called up 



70 THE O'BRIENS AND 

spirits, and marshals a dozen of Irish kings in 
sad array, to scare the wits of Scotch adven- 
turers, and extinguish the claims of protestant 
discoverers ; giving to his causes a sort of bardic 
interest, and making his suits the very poetry of 
litigation. 

I pause for a moment at this recollection, 
struck with the different destinies of two men, 
each representing the story of their country in 
different ways. The chief of the O'Flaherties 
driven into exile, to fight on foreign grounds 
for foreign interests ; but by so acting, recover- 
ing his " simple state of man," and shining out 
in all the original brightness of hereditary en- 
dowment, — elevated by rank, distinguished by 
titles, loaded with honors obtained through qua- 
lities which ever find their own level, where no 
partial institutes impede their progress, and con- 
vert all talent to misery or to abuse. The de- 
scendant of the supreme monarchs of Ireland, 
was on the contrary chained by a concatenation 
of evils, to the stake of disqualifying persecution ; 
dragging his historical name through the mire 
of sordid poverty and debasing dependence, and 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 71 

jiredestined before his birth to inevitable degra- 
dation. With a spirit doubtless as brave, 
energies as active, and feelings as vehement, 
as the most high minded of his forefathers, yet 
with the sources of all these ennobling gifts 
]X)isoned at their spring, he is beaten down by 
statutes, into a disgraceful subserviency, which 
settles, after some ineffectual struggles between 
nature and fate, into a suppressed indignation 
and profound duplicity, and leaves the individual 
victim, who represents so large a portion of his 
fellow countrymen, an heterogeneous particle of 
an heterogeneous mass. Secretly devoted to one 
religion (for Terence, live as he may, will die 
''' ferme cathoUque''), but affecting to uphold 
another, — a patriot, loving Ireland '' not wisely 
but too well," he is more calculated to injure 
than benefit its cause, and that by the very means 
he would resort to for its redemption. Au reste, 
he is the finest possible specimen of his caste and 
class; speaking, like all the old catholics, and 
protestants too, in Ireland, the English of Queen 
Anne's days, with the accent of Queen Elizabeth ; 
and, evidently dressed by the statute book, no 



72 THE o'briens and 

reformed chief of Harry the Eighth''s time, who 
had saved his head by cropping it, and pre- 
sented himself to the lord deputy unmantled and 
unbendelled, glibs closely cut, and Crommeale 
closely shaven, was ever more loyally and guard- 
edly habited.* Still he looks the very personi- 
fication of a recusant or nocent papist ; and 
though tall and comely, like all the O'Briens, 
effaces the original nobility of nature, by an air 
cowering and servile, which marks the moral 
degradation of his position. 

O'Brien has met my advances on your belialf 
with the most enthusiastic ardour : and the opi- 
nions of two eminent lawyers are so clearly in 

• The jealousy of Irish manufacture was as keen in the 
middle of the last century, as in its commenctment, when 
Dean Swift, having published "a proposal for the univer- 
sal use of Irish manufactures," it was by the men in oflfice 
construed to be " a seditious and factious pamphlet." The 
printer stood his trial for its publication ; and the jury 
persisting in finding him not guilty, the chief justice sent 
them nme times back, imtil, tired out, they left it to the 
mercy of the judge by a special verdict ! The chief justice, 
laying his hand on his heart, solenmly declared that a pro- 
posal to encourage the manufactures of Ireland was a 
design to bring in the pretender. 



THE o'flahertys. 73 

favour of the case, that I have no hesitation in 
urging you to proceed. 

I conclude abruptly, though (for your pa- 
tience), not briefly; having just found means to 
dispatch this, via Bordeaux, through the 
Frenches and Blakes, whose argosie now rides 
at anchor within view of my window. I shall 
write again to-morrow, for I willingly take re- 
fuge in your affiiirs from the sad impressions of 
pauperism by which I am surrounded, and from 
the daily mortifications here inflicted upon all, 
who, for worshipping their God, in the form 
once practised throughout Europe, are the pros- 
trate victims of an intolerant and impolitic code, 
that renders them ahens in their native land. 

Adieu I I commend your spiritual welfare to 
the Husseys and to the O'Learys, and for the 
rest, Ciira id valeas. 

Yours, &c. &c. 

The Abbe O'Flaherty. 



VOL. I. 



74 THE o'bkiens and 



Letter V. 
To Count MalacU O^ Flaherty, S^c. S^x. 

MON BEAU COUSTN, 

Vos ciffaires vont leur train. The inclosed 
will convince you that your cause, already 
bruited about (for our Baron is tres-demonstratif) 
is popular, and that the old feeling to the old 
family anticipates its success. The Hunkses, (the 
delegated authorities of the Proudforts, the reign- 
ing toparchs of the country) are, for their inso- 
lence of office, detested by all sides and parties. 
D'ailleurs, a change is ever a sensation ; and a 
lawsuit in Connaught is always a ben trovafo. 

I have had audience of the Misses Mac Taaf ; 
audiences, alas ! where, for two mortal hours, I 
was " sole auditor."" Des memoir es cont^^e le 
genre humain, with six centuries of wrongs at 
their finger's ends, and the '^ abductor of that 
simple omadaun, the cadette, that turn-coat 
papist, Terry O'Erien,"" for the refrain of all. 
All this too, in a sustained drone, the fluent 



THE o'flaheutys. 75 

monotony of which, if you have never lis- 
tened to Connaught Shanaos, you cannot con- 
ceive ; though the drone of tlie Scotch pipes has 
some resemblance to it. Meantime the Briga- 
dier''s cojfre is ours ; and a sort of treve de Dieu 
has been patched up between O'Brien and the 
heiresses of Bog Moy, who have even consented 
to see the mother of the young chief of the isles, 
on her return from her accouchement. " And 
let the Count know. Abbe O'Flaherty," said 
Miss ^Viable, " that I have done for him what I 
would not do for the thirteen tribes of Galway."" 
The fact is, O'Brien thinks that both as evidence 
and as authority, they can be of infinite use ; 
" and will, I'll engage," says O'Brien, '' and 
have their own raisons for that same, Abbe 
dear; and what was the heart and person of 
Baron O'Brien, in comparison to Count Sir 
Malachi OTlaherty ? and Miss Mac Taaf is a 
comely fine woman to the fore, and has fine acres, 
townland and turloghs, stretching up to the Pass 
of Moy Cullen, if they were well worked. And 
it's herself would not throw a good offer over her 
shoulder, as the saying is of the priest and the 
E 2 



76 THE o'briens and 

poteen." Indeed, from certain hints of both 
ladies, I rather suspect O'Brien's surmises are 
well founded, and that you would find no diffi- 
culty in quartering tlie arms of the O Flaherties 
with those of the Barons of Bally Slattery and 
the spurs of the Green Knight. 

On my visit to Bog Moy (where I found 
every thing in statu quo, as in the Brigadier s 
time. — even to the ruined roof, which fell in 
during the great storm of 42, leaving one-half 
of the fabric uncovered). Miss Mac Taaf ob- 
served, " You see here is a fine place. Abbe 
0' Flaherty, if there was one to keep things 
together, and make the most of it ; and hopes, 
before the Count arrives in the country, to see it 
another thing ; for myself and Monica have it in 
contemplation (a favourite word with her uncle 
for thirty years before his death) to raise that 
roof this spring, plaze God, which covers the 
great dining-room, and to Jlure (floor) the new 
parlour built by my grandfather Sir Columbus ; 
and whenever the suit is terminated with Martin 
of Dangan, and gets lave to work the quarry 
claimed, by the Darcys and Blakes, and to 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 77 

wliicli wc have every right in Hfe — which Terence 
O'Brien, the poltroon knows, if he would spake 
out like a man — manes to build up with Con- 
nemara marble the great gate pillars of the 
bawn, and has had it long and late in contem- 
plation to drain the turlogh and plant the de- 
mesne, (an unreclaimed bog,) but would be 
glad to have the binefit of the count's ad- 
vice.'' Thus you see ''if the dial speak not, 
yet it makes shrewd signs."" 

As for O'Brien's own views in urging on the 
promotion of your interests, it seems to me that 
your suit once gained, he wishes to become the 
purchaser of the abbey lands, ruins and all, 
(which are magnificently picturesque, and in 
wonderful preservation,) either for himself, or 
in trust for others. I think I can detect the 
intriguing Jesuitical spirit of the Abbate O'Brien 
under all. Since the suppression of his order, 
(which never has been suppressed) the Pope has 
given him several missions, and participates 
more than ever in his views. AVith all the imper- 
turbability of a narrow but zealous mind, he is 
acting upon principles, w^hich however operative 



18 THE o'bRIENS AXD 

in the days of the La Chaises, and the TelUers, 
and of their credulous dupe and victim, Louis 
le Grand, are as inapplicable to the spirit of this 
age, as they have in all ages been injurious to 
the interests of society. As a proof he has sent 
over his Italian niece, Rory Oge's daughter by 
the Pi'incipessa, and O'Brien's half sister, to pre- 
side over and to reform the order of St. Bridget, 
now represented by the poor sisters of Mary, 
John, and Joseph at St. Grellan (for female 
orders in Ireland have held their ground, when 
the abbeys and monasteries have lost theirs.) It 
was in vain that in the religious vicissitudes of 
three centuries, the sisterhood had been fre- 
quently driven from their altars, by the reform- 
ing halberds of Elizabeth, and the pious pikes 
of Cromwell ; that their holy houses were laid 
bare, and that deeds were perpetrated within their 
consecrated walls, which made " the shrines 
all tremble, and the saints grow pale." The 
nuns fled for shelter to their orders in Spain and 
France, or lay hid in the castles and fastnesses 
of their friends at home. It was in vain that 
the government sent orders to the mayor of St. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 79 

Grellan, " to keep a strict eye" upon the nuns 
of Mary, John, and Joseph, (four old ladies, the 
wreck of the order, which had suffered persecu- 
tion from Cromwell to William). Though 
twenty times exiled, they had twenty times re- 
turned ; and when in the year 1740, the last 
inquisition was taken of their house, and when 
the mayor reported that he had searched it and 
only found ten beds, in which it was " appre- 
hended that the reformed nuns lay before their 
dispersion," the old ladies still held their ground 
perdues under the beds, where the mayor had 
forgotten to look for them. 

From that period, government gave up 
the unequal contest, tired out, and convinced 
that the double pertinacity of the church 
and the women was too much even for the 
penal laws; and that the different fate of the 
brotherhood and the sisterhood of St. Do- 
minic, St. Bridget, and St. Augustin, proved 
that " ce que femme veut, Dieu veut.'''' In spite 
therefore of the law of the land, which makes 
monastic vows felony, the venerable sisters have 
preserved theirs ; and have still received the 



80 THE o'bRIENS and 

VOWS of others, at the altar of Mary, John, and 
Joseph, as if no such law existed. The life 
they lead is as pious and useless, as prayers 
and idleness can make it. The house they 
occupy is as comfortless, dirty, and unwhole- 
some, as time, poverty, neglect, and the want of 
all ventilation, has left it. Still the poor nuns, 
though maintained by charit}^, are objects of 
veneration and respect, and the little well in 
their narrow garden, dedicated to the blessed 
Virgin, and to St. John the Baptist, is still 
visited with faith and unction, and still per- 
forms as many miracles, as the celebrated 
virgin of the Rosary, in the Abbey of ]\Ioy Cul- 
len, mentioned by John Heyne. 

To reform or rather to revive this order, the 
Abbate has translated his niece from her convent 
a coton on the Corso (one of the mignon esta- 
blishments at Rome, under the special govern- 
ment of the Jesuits), to the convent of St. Brid- 
get in the Cladagh of St. Grellan. Imagine 
this Italian nun (who, by the by, is Italianis- 
sima,) with the true temperament and organi- 
zation of her country, brought up amidst the 



THE o'fLAHEIITYS. 81 

splendid ceremonies of her church, fed upon 
sofp sounds, and brilUant hghts, not speaking a 
word of English nor of Irish, and suddenly 
dropped among the bonnes grosses meres (of 
St. Bridget's), who speak nothing else. Of 
course, as others have done in the same situa- 
tion, she will return in disgust, by the first 
opportunity to her own country. Meantime 
slie is drawing crowds to her cha])el, even pro- 
testants, by the singular beauty of her voice and 
person ; and so far, the Abbate has not hit u})on 
a bad expedient for bringing papacy into 
fashion. For, says O'Brien, who worships his 
new found sister as a thing inskied, " with 
woman and music, Abb^ dear, you might pro- 
selytize all Ireland, far better than by all the 
j:)eynals, and all the persecutions that ever were 
invented : and wonders but the government 
never hit upon it." 

On the first of the month we move to Dub- 
lin, to take the field, under the standard of 
Messrs. Ponsonby and Egan. As soon as you 
are wanted, we shall write for you. 

En attendant, do the lionours by the Baron, 
E 3 



8% THE O BRIEXS AXD 

and the Miss Mac Taafs. I enclose Miss 
Mac Taafs envelope to me, with her letters for 
you : it is as characteristic as its enclosure. — Vale. 

Yours, &c. 

Abbe OTlaherty. 

ENVELOPE. 

To the Rev. Abbe 0' Flaherty. 

The Miss Mac Taafs (Mable and Monica), 
of Bog Moy, present regards to the Abbe 
O 'Flaherty. Take leave to enclose him a letter 
for his cousin, General Count O'Flaherty, not 
knowing the Count"'s present abode in Paris. 
The Miss Mac Taafs (Mable and Monica) 
forgot to remind the Abbe, that they had the 
pleasure of making his acquaintance, when they 
were slips of girls, at the Mayor of Gal way's, 
Patrick Lynch ; more betoken it was a drum 
(dry), not all as one, as in the old times, as I 
hear tell, by my uncle the Brigadier, when cho- 
colate, rosolia, and usquebagh, were served 
round, more plenty than cathbhruidh* may be 
* A sort of curds and whey. 



THE o^'flahertys. 83 

had in Gal way town now. And for all that, as 
my sister !Monica pleasantly says, there was as 
much pride as poverty there ; the Bells, Blakes, 
and Bodkins, and the rest of the thirteen tribes, 
being as high in the instep, as if they had ever 
an acre of land in the province, barring what 
they got by trade ; not all as one as the ould 
residcnters and ancient proprietors of the place, 
since the flood and before. 

P.S. It gives the Miss Mac Taafs the greatest 
of pleasures to learn the probable success of the 
OTlaherty cause ; and wonders but the Abbe 
would employ Counsellor Costello, who does the 
Miss Mac Taafs business to their entire satis- 
faction, and would, with the Miss Mac Taafs 
assistance, make a far better hand of it than that 
Terence O'Brien, who got what proofs he has 
out of the Brigadier's bureau. For it is your- 
self, Terry O'Brien, that had the plunder of it 
and us, when you had the run of Bog Moy 
house, as the chartered school apprentice of old 
Hunks. And a poor creature you were, with 
scarce a skreed to your back, though you ride 
in your own chuy now ; and were glad to truck 



84 THE o'bRIENS and 

the Brigadier's old black camblet coat for ten 
masses for your mother^s soul, to poor Father 
Blake, for all your going to church on Sundays, 
like any kiln-dried protestant in St. Grellan. 
And it is a pretty return you made us, abduct- 
ing and preverting that unfortunate cratur, 
that was but a child in the eye of the law. To 
say nothing of her being seduced and disgraced, 
to ally herself to one every way below her, an 
attorney ; for which, if God forgive you, Terence 
O'Brien, the Miss Mac Taafs never will, and 

I am, 

Abbs OTlaherty's 

Humble servants, 

Mable and Monica Mac Taaf. 



THE oVlahertys. 85 

Letter VI. 
To Gen. Count OTlalicrUj, 6^0. 4'C. 

The Count O'Flaherty will surely be plased, 
witliout being surprised, that the Miss Mac 
Taafs, (liable and Monica), nieces and co- 
heiresses of the late Brigadier Flavins ]Mac 
Taaf, of Bog INIoy, (which is but a mole hill to 
tlieir estates on both sides the Shannon, to 
which the Miss Mac Taafs are entitled, setting 
aside the male tail, if every one had their due), 
should take up the pen to wish the Count every 
joy in life, on the probable success of his cause 
against the Hunkses ; the Miss Mac Taafs 
having themselves, from documents purloined 
out of their uncle the Brigadier's coffer, by his 
attorney, Terence O'Brien, (now Baron, as he 
has proved on the evidence of an old tombstone*; 
contributed thereto; and moreover, as bein^r 
near relations of the Count ; no two families 
in the province being more nearly related by kin 
and kindred, gossipry and alliance, than the 

• The Roscommon Peerage, now before the House of 
Lords, is claimed on a similar testimony. 



86 THE o'bjiiens akd 

Mac Taafs and the OTlaherties, the Count and 
the Miss Mac Taafs, (Mable and Monica), 
having one common ancestress, Mabiha, sole 
daughter and heiress of Mac Oge IlUvan 
O'Mailly. By the said Mabiha^s second marriage 
with a Geraldine, the Count and the Mac Taafs 
claim kindred with the Fitzgeralds of May- 
nooth, or Leinster family, the Talbots of Mala- 
hide, the Barnwells of Turvey, and most of 
the great Pale families, — to say nothing of the 
celebrated Granuaile,* or Grace O'Mailly, (re- 
markable for having had six husbands), daughter 
and sole heiress of Duondarragh, son of Cormac, 

* This celebrated lady, when wife of Mac William 
Oughter, was so determined and persevering in her hos- 
tility to the English, and committed so many acts of 
depredation, that it was found necessary, (1579), to send 
troops from Galway, under the command of Captain Wil- 
liam Martin, to besiege her romantic castle of Carrick na 
Uile, in the county of Mayo. The expedition sailed from 
Gahvay on the 8th of March ; but so spirited was the de- 
fence, that the English troops were obliged to retreat on the 
26th,having very narrowly escaped being made prisoners, a 
circumstance which wou'd have been followed by the 
instant death of the entire party. The names of the men 
sent are entered on an old MS. formerly belonging to Sir 
Ed. Fitton. 



87 

the son of Owen Omailly, chief of his name. 
Her daughter IMargaret became the wife of Sir 
^lurrogh na Doe O 'Flaherty, of Aghnanewer ; 
and the Count is surely apprised that the Earl 
of Carlingford, dying in 1730 without male 
issue, (my cousin, Rodolphus, Chancellor of the 
German Empire, Lord of Ballymote, having 
only succeeded to the Ballymote title, a ba- 
rony), the Carlingford branch is represented by 
^liss ^lac Taaf, who would bring the earldom, 
together with the Barony of Bally Slattery, 
into any family she might chance to marry into ; 
also the Green Knight, which she is in the 
female line : for that title, (which my uncle the 
Brigadier often proved was more ancient than 
the three Knights of Desmond, viz. the White 
Knight, Knight of Glin, and Knight of Kerry), 
would in right belong to the heiress of Bog Moy's 
husband, if he plased to make claims thereto. So 
that whenever the eldest Miss Mac Taaf plases to 
change her situation, (as m}' sister Monica says), 
she will bring as her dowry, undisputed claims 
upon the earldom of Carlingford, the Barony of 
Bally Slattery, and the most ancient knighthood 



88 THE o'brtexs and 

in the country, which she can herself prove in 
any court in Christendom : and should Count 
O'Flaherty be inclined to make a visit to Ire- 
land, she would point out to him a way of 
recovering the greatest part, if not all of the 
O'Flaherty country under which the Mac Taafs 
held vast tracts of land, by Fearon AUod ;* 
(for far be it from me to dispute that we were 
only Rigli begs or petty kingsf under the OTIa- 
herties) ; and the aforesaid lands were re-granted 
to 2is under the great seal on coming i7i, with 
other grants, in lieu of services done ; and a 
non obstante for life to the Brigadier's great 
grandfather. Sir Daniel Mac Taaf, as in the 
grant of Sir Thomas Cusack : all of which we 
should be reprized in, (the same being for- 
feited,) should Count O'Flaherty recover his 
property of the Hy Tartagh, particularly a 
moiety of the Suck and the parish of Kilfar- 

* MiUtary tenure. 

t The chief of each noble family in Ireland was styled 
king, the only title in use among the Irish to distinguish 
the nobility from the inferior gentry, until the arrival of the 
English, who introduced the title of earl. — See Keating's 
History. 



THE o'FLAIIERTYS. 89 

boy, anciently given by your ancestors to found 
tlie abbey of St. Bridget, to which you have 
every claim and right, and might distrain for 
tithes to-morrow if you plased. It is well 
known that the adventurers in Charles the 
Second's time did willingly deliver false certi- 
ficates to the Court of Claims at Chichester 
House, which I can prove from the Brigadier's 
papers, and which, if proven, saith the act, 
'"• such adventurer or his assignee doe forfeit the 
rents, profits, &c. &c. thereofF." But all now 
standeth at stay, in regard of the Count's ab- 
sence, who could, if present, rejust all, (the 
Miss Mac Taafs aiding and abetting thereunto). 
For it is an old Irish saying, that " the elm 
tree is not to be cleft but by a wedge of its own 
timber ;" and the presence of General Count 
O'Flalierty would surely set all to rights, and 
show the Hunkses and Proudforts who was 
who in the province ; and have the honour to be 
the Count's humble servants and kinswomen. 

Signed for self and sister, 

Mable and Monica Mac Taaf. 



90 THE OBRIENS AND 

P. S. There were three of us, as the Count 
well knows, and will marvel to hear no mention of 
the Cadette, which is a great heart-break ; hav- 
ing disgraced herself by marriage with one re- 
puted to be a base-born of a cousin of the Count's, 
and worse than that, an attorney, now employed 
in the O'Flaherty cause : and hopes the Count 
will have no raison to repent, Counsellor Costello 
being the man. 

P. S. Miss Monica Mac Taaf takes lave to 
notify to Count O 'Flaherty (of which she re- 
minded her sister last night, as forgotten by 
her), that in case the Count recovers Bally na 
Umhal (the owl's country),he will find by papers 
in Miss Mac Taaf s possession, that same is en- 
cumbered with certain tributes to the Mac Taafs, 
in heu of services done by them for the O' Fla- 
herties during their feuds with the Mac Tieg 
O'Briens of the Isles — yearly, ten cows, fifty 
hoggs, two barrels of corn burnt in the straw, 
fifty oaten bannocks, and ten bandals of ratteen 
dyed in the wool ; and often heard tell by my 
uncle, the brigadier, that it was an old custom, 
that with the tribute came in the making of two 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 01 

clever mantles a-piece for the ladies of the 
family of Bogmoy, a great courtesy on the part 
of the gentlemen of the O'Flaherty family, one 
of which, but little the worse of the wear, hangs 
up in the ould tower to this day, only faded by 
lying bye ; it is of two colours, after the Spanish 
fashion, and my sister thinks it was a Spanish 
mantle of Sir Gioil O'Flaherty, Knight of the 
military order of St. Jago, for services done to 
the King of Spain, and has it in contemplation 
to get same scoured this spring, plase God, as 
a great relic. 

P. S. — Takes lave to inclose a letter from 
Turlogh O'Flaherty, a follower of the families, 
and an honest poor cratur as breathes the breath 
of life, now a scullog* on the Ballyslattery 
estate. 

(Letter inclosed in the Miss Mac Taafs.) 
To General Count O'Flaherty, 

Plaze your honour. Sir, I'm the boy who has 
the so ward, with which your honour's grand- 
father, Sir Bryan, fought for Shamus at the 
* Scullog — a small farmer. 



9^ THE O'BRIENS AND 

battle of the Boyne ; the curse of the crows on 
him day and night, I pray Jasus, for its himself 
sould the Pass. And plaze your honour, Sir, 
the soward was found in the black bog, near 
your own place in Moy Cullen ; and if it had a 
blade would be a good soward, being the same 
ancient ould trusty that the great OTlaherty 
More, would flourish when he declared war 
agin the toun of Gal way.* And would go to 
your honour every step of the way, and fetch it 
to you in France myself, if your honour's glory, 
long life to yez, would order Baron O'Brien 
Torney of St. Grellan to give me eighteen 
thirteens to pay my journey over say and land ; 
and would make it on my bare knees, truth I 
would, for your sake and the family's, and think 
little of it. Your honour, it's well known, and 
Father Festus, of the Dominicans, will prove 
the same, that I am of your honour's oun kin 
and blood, though never tould it to any sowl 
living or dead, out of respect to your honour 
and the family ; and never will, barring Father 
Festus and the Miss Mac Taafs : and hopes 

♦ A tradition of the family. 



TIIK O'FLAHF.RTYS. 93 

vour honour will spake a good word for nie to 
Mr. O'Brien, in respect of a bit of grazing 
ground in a luib of the mountains, when ye get 
back your own — which was my father's before 
me, time out of mind ; and wont sell it over my 
head, being of the family; and would be 
sorry to see Darby Lynch, a notorious sae 
Pirate, put above me, which is what I will never 
be reduced to submit to, cost me my life or his. 
So no more at prisint, only the greatest of joys 
at your honour's success ; for the heart of me 
was too big for my bosom on that day, I heard 
tell that the downfall of the Boddah Hunkses 
was coming — and long may yez reign, which is 
the last prayer of now and ever more amen, 

Your loving friend and kin, 

his 
TuRLOCH K^ O Flaherty. 
mark 



94 THE O'BRIENS AND 



Letter VIL 

To the Miss Mac Taafs, St. Grellan, 

Fer favour of the Abbe 0^ Flaherty. 

Count O'Flaherty begs to offer the expression 
of his homage to the Miss Mac Taafs. He is 
quite sensible (it is impossible to be more so) of 
the honour conferred upon him b}'^ their gracious 
and amiable letter; and he assures them that 
among the many very interesting details it con- 
tains, nothing touched the Count more pro- 
foundly, than the privilege granted him of 
claiming kindred with ladies so amiable and 
accomplished. The invitation held out to the 
Count to visit his unhappy, but always loved 
country, is a reason the more for doinsj that 
which he has long desired and intended. He 
looks forward at no very distant period to offer- 
ing to the Miss Mac Taafs the expression of 
his gratitude for the kindness they have 
shown in his favour, and the still greater kind- 
ness they may yet confer on him. Touching 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 95 

his claims on the Abbey of St. Bridget, he has 
every possible desire to establish them ; and 
trusts he will find no very obstinate resist- 
ance on the part of the ladies of that venerable 
order, which he understands now flourishes 
under the control of the reverend Mother Ab- 
bess O'Brien. With respect to the tribute 
offered by the cavaliers of the Hy Tartagh 
family to the fair ladies of Bog Moy, it is a token 
of fealty which the Count will be charmed to 
renew with other marks of his homage. In the 
mean time he begs their acceptance of a piece of 
Lyons silk (cuisse de la reinc'), and a Flanders 
coiffure a la Du Barry, which are at present 
making the rage at Paris — they will be sent via 
Bordeaux by the Count's wine-merchant to 
the care of French and Blake, Galway. The 
Count has no doubt that these foreign com- 
modities, like Spanish wines, will improve by 
the voyage, and acquire new graces from the 
amiable wearers, to whom they are destined 
with sentiments of the profoundest respect and 
derotion. 

Paris, Rue de Bac, 177—. 



96 THE o'bRIENS and 



Letter VIII. 

To the AhU 0' Flaherty, St. GreUan. 

Cher Abbe, 

Ploijce aux dames ! Inclosed is a note for the 
heiresses of Bog Moy. I have rubbed up my 
old Irish, or rather, done my French gallantry 
into English to answer them. They are impay- 
ables. The importance attached to the dignity 
of our respective dynasties, by these well-pre- 
served specimens of other times, is delicious. It 
reminds one of Mademoiselle Montpensier's 
remark on the liaison of Mademoiselle Rohan 

and the Chevalier De (when such things 

made up the soul of French government and 
society) — " Cette affaire entretient toute la terre 
durant Vhiver.'''' What is most ridiculous in all 
this, is, that I am myself infected by the very 
absurdity I laugh at, and have been actually 
seeking over an old map of O" Flaherty ""s country, 
for some of those atrocious names of town-lands 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 97 

and Bally-boes, which have the same charms for 
me that Versailles and Fontainbleau have for 
the priviUgies of the French court. The me- 
mory of early impressions is that which sur- 
vives all others ; it is the memory of the 
heart. All that I have since seen, struggled 
through, suffered, or enjoyed, has passed like 
shadows over the surface ; while all I saw, and 
heard, and shared in, before I left the rude 
mountain fastnesses of my forefathers, is graven 
in deep and graphic images on my mind. I 
see even now that grosse masse de bdtimens, the 
stern and gloomy hold of the chiefs of my 
sept ; and the beautiful ruins of the adjacent 
abbey, reflected on its own still lake, as distinctly 
as when I saw them for the last time, the 
morning we sailed for France. How strongly 
the parting scene of that eventful day rushes to 
my recollection ! Even now the tearful faces and 
grotesque figures that filled up the fine old arch- 
way of the court gate, as we issued forth after 
parting with my mother in the black oak room, 
old M*Cabe seated on the stirrup-stone, with 
his harp on his knee, playing tremulously, ** You 

VOL. I. F 



98 THE O'BRIEXS AND 

take the summer along with you," — a poetical 
farewell to two Irish youths, heirs to six hun- 
dred years of misery and oppression, driven by 
national adversity into a foreign land. My 
father too, (I never saw him or my mother 
after!) with fixed eye, compressed lips, and 
clenched hands, keeping down the emotions of 
parental sensibility by a sort of muscular 
resistance. The venerated titular bishop of 
St. Grellan, with his mild and martyr looks, 
had come forth from his hiding place in the 
abbey, to give his parting benediction to the son 
of his protector* You too, my dear Abbe, with 
your pale, thoughtful, but boyish countenance, 
already mounted on your little Connemara 
poney, giving a hand to one and a smile or a 
sigh, as it happened, to another : even my 
grandfather's old greyhound, and the great 
chained wolf-dog, (the last of the breed I be- 
lieve), are prominent figures in the picture. 

There is one heart-rending circumstance con- 
nected with my departure from Ireland which I 
did not then know. The difficulty of giving a suit- 
able education in Ireland to the representatives 



99 

of an ancient and noble family, the barbarous 
English then spoken, and the bog Latin then 
learned by the young gentry of Connaught, 
were the pleas urged by my father for sending 
me to a foreign seminary, and permitting me to 
enter a foreign service. But his most cogent 
reason was, as I have since learnt, that atrocious 
and inhuman law, called the gavel act, which 
tempted the sons of the catholic gentry in Ire- 
land to betray their own fathers, and which, 
by the law of the land, gave to the child a 
power over his parents, in defiance of the law 
of God. My father used to call this clause a 
law against the fourth* commandment. 

By what a variety of ways did the penal code 
of Ireland attack those morals which are founded 
in the affections ! I shall never dispute that the 
English might not have acted wisely in ex- 
terminating the Irish at the time of the revo- 
lution, and thus getting rid of a race which they 
looked upon as armed in the cause of despotism 
and bigotry ; (for we, " of the Irish na' lon^'' who 
have seen these things de prts, have other no- 

• The fifth in the protestant decalogue.' 



100 THE O'BRIENS AND 

tions on these subjects, than those entertained 
by our brethren, who have staid at home to 
brood over their misfortunes, under the lash of 
actual inflictions, and to mix up their wrongs 
with their opinions). 

Having, however, permitted the Irish to live, 
they should not have deprived them of all the 
rights which give life its moral dignity, and 
alone raise the human above the brute animal. 
What madness too, on the part of the Irish 
catholics, to refuse the offer of the Prince of 
Orange.* But when have we acted with con- 

♦ " The Prince of Orange was touched with the fate of 
a gallant nation, the victim of French promises, and who 
had ran headlong to ruin, for the only purpose of advanc- 
ing the French conquests in the Netherlands. He (Orange) 
longed to find himself at the head of a confederate army, 
with so strong a reinforcement In this anxiety he offered 
the Irish catholics the free exercise of their religion, half 
the churches in the kingdom, half the employments, civil 
and military, and even the moiety of their ancient proper- 
ties. These proposals, though they were to have had an 
English act of parliament for their sanction, were refused 
with contempt. They had no confidence in the pro- 
mises of a country, which had already broken her public 
faith with respect to the articles of Limer-ck." — Sir Charles 
Wogan's Letter to Swift. 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 101 

sistency, with unity, or under other influence 
than that of vehement aftections and impetuous 
passions, and (I must say it) personal, or if you 
will, national vanity. How often do the agree- 
able singes-tigres, among whom I live, recall 
you Irish to my mind ! Still, however, driven 
back as you have been to the infancy of society, 
and kept there, your governors, (like those of 
Other children,) and not yourselves, are account- 
able for your follies and your faults. 

Do you know that your last letter quite un- 
fitted me for Versailles, where I was just going 
to risk a few louis on the cards of the pretty 
duchesses, when your gros paquet QxrwQdL. Onor 
na Croise, however, takes the pas of the superbe 
de Grammont, and Rorie Oge, and Terence 
O'Brien are objects of more importance to me 
than even that troop of " Marquis charmans, 
poudreSy et embaumes ^"^ who from the height 
of their seven quarterings and red heels, look 
down upon the rest of the human species, as the 
canaille of the creation. I write by this post to 
O'Brien, acknowledging the relationship, in a 
manner that will flatter his genealogical pride ; 



102 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and with respect to his poetry of litigation, Je* 
le laisse Jaire, ana have given him carte blanche 
to act as he pleases. 

Pleasantry apart: — I have just now a 
strong vocation towards Ireland ; and should I 
be reinstated in some of my droits de seigneur, 
as Tanist of Moycullen, I am not quite sure 
that I shall not re-edify the old abbey, and 
quit the w^orld before it quits me ; like other 
" 'pieux fameans^'' who have nothing to do but to 

*♦ Chanter les Oremus, faire les processions, 
Et r^pandre a grands flots les benedictions." 

But of that hereafter. 

For a man, hlase sur tout, Ireland is the 
place. But if we fail, and I am forced to yield 
before the Hunkses, then I will abduct you 
vi et armis, and carry you back to France. I 
prophecy that, with your talents and moral cou- 
rage, you will inevitably expose yourself to that 
jealous irritability of power which bears no 
resistance, and you will incur that personal pro- 
scription which has banished all the talent of the 
land. Here, at least, we have blue skies, and 



THE o'fLAHEIITYS. 103 

we have not an Irish penal code. The re- 
morseless zealots, whose sanguinary policy pre- 
ferred extermination, to the prolonged agonies 
of legalized torture, have in France for ever set 
at rest the question of religious differences. You 
shall still have your old gHe in the Bice de 
Bac, and your taudis in the pavilion of my 
garden of Bretigny ; and as we grow old to- 
gether, we will gather with our own hands the 
grape, whose juice " fait danser les chevres.'^ 
There, instead of making dreary pilgrimages to 
Patrick's purgatory, or incurring a flagellation 
by hanging a rag at an holy well, we will light 
a taper to Rabelais at his presbyter e of Meudon, 
or commemorate the classic fetes of Jodelle and 
Ronsard among the vineyards of Arcueil : and 
when at last we shall suddenly find ourselves 
^' un de ces viellards quon appelle heureux, dont 
le honheur consiste a ne pouvoir jouir d'aucun 
plaisir de la vie," we will die as we have lived, — 
you, as a saint ; and I, as one who, long the 
sport of uncontrollable events, desire only, with 
Rabelais, " qu'on tire le rideau, la farce etant 
jouee,''* 



104 THE O'BRIENS AND 

I shall certainly go to Ireland, as soon as I 
can obtain a semestre from the Due de Fitzjames ; 
for which, however, I must wait the return of 
Colonel Eugene Macarthy, of Spring-house. 
Commend me to the prayers of the abbess of 
Mary, John, and Joseph. Dio huono I what 
a reformer. Oh ! ye Calvins and Luthers ! 
Women and music! Those Jesuits are like 
Madame La Duchesse de Ferte ;— " /Zw'e/ a 
qu'eux qui ont toi0ours raison.'" Adieu I write 
frequently. Nothing but letters from Connemara 
can amuse les peu amusables, tels que 
Voire tres qffectionne. 

The Couxt OTlaherty. 

P. S. Pray give a guinea on my account to 
my cousin O'Flaherty, of the sword ; but do not 
give him " the eighteen thirteens " for travelHng 
charges ; lest he should put his threat into prac- 
tice, and visit me at Versailles. 



THE oVlahertys. 105 



CHAPTER 11. 



ST. GRELLAN. 



'' Cela m^rite bien qu'en oyer un motelet, Jivftnt que venir k inon 
prlDCipal discourc." 

Satire Menippee. 



Among the variety of evils which distracted 
Ireland, at the period of the revolution, and 
for nearly a century afterwards, one of the most 
perplexing and least remediable, was " the con- 
fusion worse confounded," in which a large 
portion of the landed property was involved. 
Five hundred years of successive forfeitures, — 
jxjssessions held for ages by prescription, won by 
the sword and reconquered by the sword, — tenures 
obtained by force or usurped by fraud, — parti- 
tions of the soil carelessly made over to succes- 
sive " adventurers, soldiers, patentees, and po- 
lalines," in grants, regrants, debentures, pa- 
f3 



J06 

tents, commutations, and reprisals, gifts of 
'* mitre land," consecrated by his holiness the 
Pope, and now conferred, by our sovereign 
lord the King, — with trusts perpetually violated, 
and discoveries nefariously made, — had rendered 
the laws a chaos, producing a series of contra- 
dictory decisions and ludicrous statutes ; which, 
(to borrow the language of the legislature itself) 
*' had long puzzled both executors and regu- 
lators." 

Down to the middle of the last century, a 
feeling of insecurity in all classes prevailed 
through this anomalous condition of things ; 
which, while it kept capital out of the country, 
paralyzed industry, and, misdirecting the restless 
energy of the people, awoke a spirit of litigation, 
that has long been a ridicule and a reproach 
to the national character. The small but as- 
cendant party of protestants, scarcely less ha- 
rassed than the victims of their own oppression, 
suffered through their fears of the disabilities 
they had themselves imposed ; and largely par- 
ticipated in the insecurity of property, which 
they had inflicted on their catholic opponents. 



THE o'flahertys. 107 

An agitating though suppressed emotion per- 
vaded the whole population ; and whatever 
brought the question of property into debate, 
was sure to throw the community into ferment- 
ation : insomuch, that at one epoch, the govern- 
ment had ordered the Irish bar not to defend 
the revived claims of an Irish noble of the old 
caste.* 

While, however, scarcely one of every hun- 
dred claims was justified by law or equity, and 
the fabric of many a litigious vision fell before 
the inquiry it courted, the issue of a cause be- 
tween a protestant ecclesiastic, (supported by the 
Proudforts, one of the most powerful families 
in the kingdom,) and a catholic gentleman in the 
service of the King of France, excited, when 
known to be in favour of the latter, a consider- 
able anxiety and alarm. The coffee-houses of 
the capital, then the centres of all the political, 
literary, and legal gossip of the day, rang with 
the intelligence; Lucas's (once Cork-housef) 
was then exclusively the resort of the protestant 

* Lord Clancarty. 

t Built by the celebrated Earl of Cork and Orrery. 



108 

and official gentry of Dublin ;~the catholics 
rarely appearing in public, and (when they did 
come forth in church-time on Sundays,) herding 
at " The Globe, " in Essex Street. 

It was in the long room at Lucas's, where 
the Boyles, the Burlingtons, and the Orrerys 
had held their statesmen-circles, and literary 
coteries, that the triumph of Count OTlaherty 
was announced by one of the habitues, who read 
aloud the decision of the court, from the columns 
of Faulkner's Journal. The news was heard 
by the descendant of many a protestant disco- 
verer with fear and trembling ; and not a few 
doubted, what it was so painful to believe : for the 
measure of men's faith generally lies in their 
interests ; and Bramah and Mahomet, at least, 
owe as much to rice fieJds and green tur- 
bans, as to pure conviction and disinterested 
assent. 

" I will venture to swear,*' said a rival editor 
of old George Faulkner, who was present, 
'* that this turns out one of George's blunders ; 
like his own house in Parliament Street, which 
he has built without a staircase ; or his yester- 



109 

day's erratum — for her grace the Duke, read 
his grace the Duchess.'* 

The reperusal of the paragraph was called 
for, but it afforded no refuge for interested in- 
credulity. " So, here is a pretty precedent es- 
tablished,"" burst forth a little gentleman, whose 
clerical hat and cassock detected his calling 
(the learned professions then still retaining their 
distinctive liveries in Ireland). But though 
evidently of the church, there was a certain 
pendulous movement of the shoulders, an ap- 
proximation of the knees, a squaring of the 
elbows, and a poking of the head, which indi- 
cated another vocation, and pointed him out as 
one better qualified to run for the cup, than to 
start for the mitre. He was a noted character 
of the day : by some deemed mad, by none 
deemed wise ; he was cherished and upheld 
by the party who committed their interests to his 
absurdities; while his folly and his ambition 
went so well together, that all who listened to 
his ravings and knew their true object, might 
have exclaimed — 

" Ma foi ! c'est d'etre sage, que d'etre fou comme lui." 



110 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" We shall now have the papists," he continued, 
'' rummaging out old claims, and proving their 
rights to all the landed property of the country ; 
and his Majesty's protestant subjects of Ireland 
will have nothing to expect but poverty and 
persecution, the overthrow of the church, the 
murders of forty-one, the massacre of St. Bar- 
tholomew, the dragonades of France, the in- 
quisition, the popish plot, Guy Faux, and 
Bloody Queen Mary I We shall have the scar- 
let old woman of Babylon holding levees at the 
Castle, papist archbishops celebrating high mass 
at St. Patrick's, and all our church lands, tithes, 
glebes, and parsonage-houses, fox-hounds, hunt- 
ers, and old Bordeaux, passing into the hands 
of monks, abbots, and friars." 

This prophetic threat, including all the bug- 
bears of terrorism, and all the images of ruin 
then conjured up in Ireland with unfailing effect, 
was heard with approving nods and affirmative 
exclamations. The laying down of newspapers 
and coffee-cups, the resting of chins upon gold- 
headed canes, the turning of all eyes to the 
place where the speaker sat, indicated a wish that 



THE o'rLAlIERTVS. IH 

he should proceed with the subject ; when a per- 
son, from a distant box at the remote end of the 
room, observed, that " he hoped the government 
was too wise to hsten, and too poKtic to give heed, 
to such unfounded insinuations as had been then 
broached. "Whatever a few interested persons 
might think, or rather circulate, to the contrary, 
and the catholics of Ireland, whose property had, 
every acre, been twenty times confiscated, and 
changed its owners alternately in favour of ca- 
tholics and protestants, were neither so ignorant 
nor so mad, as, by the revival of obsolete claims 
and the questioning of established settlements, to 
involve such of their own estates as by the con- 
nivance of the law they were yet permitted to 
hold ; most of which had been purchased on the 
faith of forfeitures. The interests of men are 
ever the strongest security for their peaceable 
demeanour ; and the rev. gentleman may 
depend upon it, that no danger can reason- 
ably be apprehended either to church or state, 
from the claims of the few representatives of 
Milesian proprietors still unsettled. The case 
in question,"' he continued, " is one of a singular 



112 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and, indeed, unequalled description; and any 
other decision than that given, would have ren- 
dered the laws a jest, and the statute book as 
idle, if not as amusing as Joe Miller, or Jona- 
than Wild : for it would have proved that for 
cathoHcs there was no justice." 

" Catholics, forsooth !" exclaimed the little 
advocate of ascendancy, '* Where are they ? 
Who are they ? Where do they burrow ? Where 
do they roost ? Where do they earth ? Shew me 
their marks, and prints ? Trot me out here an 
Irish papist, and I'll take the odds, I shew you 
sport for a week ! An Irish catholic ! who ven- 
tures to acknowledge that such a thing exists ? — 
not the laws of the land : the chancellor has 
settled that point. He has given it from the 
woolsack, that a papist only breathes by the 
connivance of the government." 

" And yet," said the mild but emphatic 
speaker from the remote box^ " it does happen, 
that by a dictum, superior even to that of the 
Lord Chancellor, a connivance paramount to 
that of the government, four millions of Irish 
catholics are at this moment breathing as health- 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 113 

fully and as vigorously, as though no acts of 
parliament, to deprive them of their being, were 
on the statute book." 

*' A connivance paramount ! a dictum supe- 
rior!" re-echoed, somewhat incoherently, the 
man of lungs. " Where is it, I beseech you, 
my voice from the Vatican ? Is it ould infalli- 
bility the fisherman's ? or the Council of Trent's, 
or the Lady's of Loretto ? or — '* 

*• No,*" interrupted the party appealed to, in 
a tone of deep and firm emphasis, " it is the 
connivance of a power above all prelates, princes, 
and potentates: a power. Rev. Sir, of which 
you, I take it, are the minister on earth ; a power, 
that has upheld the persecuted for conscience' 
sake, in all ages, and in all climes — the power of 
a just and beneficent providence !^' 

Silenced for a moment, by the appeal made 
to his holy calling, the champion of ascend- 
ancy soon recovered breath and spirit ; and, 
flattered by the circle that had gathered thickly 
around him, set to for another round, ex- 
claiming, " Now, my hearties, you all know that 
I am no Jesuit, in, or out of disguise ; I thank 



114 THE O'BRIENS AND 

God for it ; I have none of St. Peter's logic at 
my fingers' ends ; and I can neither dogmatize, 
nor prevaricate, nor double, nor turn, nor break 
cover, as it suits the purpose. Nor shall I stop 
to strip off the foliage of Italian drapery from 
any defender of the faith, who may please to 
start up. But this I will say, and let me see 
who will deny it, that his present Majesty, like 
his predecessors, is imposed upon ;* and if the 
government of this country, that is, the ignorant 
cabal of his Majesty ""s council, and the weak 
men at the head of it, do not change their tune, 
and listen to wiser heads than their own, (the 

* The two first Georges, like the gallant William of 
Nassau, were friends to religious toleration, but were 
obliged to truckle to the ail-powerful oligarchy, who though 
then sharing the prejudices of the English people, were as 
independent of them, and as much the main spring and 
moving souls of the government, as they are in the present 
day, in which the minister can neither give liberty to an 
Irishman nor bread to a Briton, but according to their good 
will and pleasure. The first sovereigns of the House of Han- 
over relaxed as far as they dared, the penalties annexed to 
the catholic worship ; and George the Third, began his 
reign by following in their footsteps, till " Hanoverian 
toleration" had passed into a by-word among the ascen- 
dancy party. — See O'Connor's Life, 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 115 

chancellor and archbishop of Dublin, always 
excepted) there is an end to church and state ; 
and Luther and King William, may go and 
hunt hares together. Mind my words, my 
worthies, if this new conciliation system, as it is 
absurdly called, goes on, the ouldest amongst us 
will live to see the repeal of the whole penal 
code— we shall see papists riding blood horses, 
and the first protestant gentlemen in the land, 
not daring to seize a hair in their tail — we shall 
have papists purchasing land, and bequeathing 
it by will — teaching publicly in schools, and 
speaking publicly in places where a few years 
back they dared no more show their faces, 
than in the castle-yard — we shall have papists 
called to the bar, admitted to the king's inns, 
allowed to marry protestant wives, and edu- 
cate their own children in the catholic faith — 
we shall have Jack priests stalking about, as if 
they were not felons by the law of the land, — 
and emissaries of Rome and Spain, prowling in 
our very coffee-houses. In a word. Gentlemen, 
we shall have papist barristers, papist attornies, 
papist constables, papist watchmen, papist ladies"*- 



116 THE O'BRIENS AND 

lieutenant holding drawing-rooms in the castle ; 
and to climax all, we shall have papists enjoying 
the elective franchises, and in due time we shall 
send papist members to a papist parliament, 
and live to see our protestant House of Com- 
mons perverted into a conclave of cardinals." 

The lighted torch thrown by the Pope among 
the congregation at St. Peter's on Maunday 
Thursday (after the Coena Domini), and ima- 
gining the thunder of his own anathemas, never 
gave more alarm to the conscience of the timid 
sinner, than the denunciations of the little pro- 
testant pope of Lucas's, now excited among his 
prejudiced, ignorant, and self-interested audi- 
tory; when the ^^ imperturhahle^^ of the remote 
box, whose fine and characteristic head only was 
visible above the high oak screen-work, behind 
which he was deliberately taking his chocolate 
and dried toast, coolly observed, that " all that 
the Rev. Gentleman had predicted, with the 
exception of a papist parliament and conclave 
senate, would eventually come to pass; and 
that too, at no distant day. It is in the order of 
things," he added, " that, as the intemperate 



THE oVlAHERTYS. 117 

times, which occasioned the infliction of penal 
statutes pass away, the impohtic laws should 
pass with them ; together with the petty and 
personal vexations, which grow out of them, to 
the destruction of those social pleasures, which 
the Irish, beyond all other people, are calculated 
to enjoy.* To inflict civil punishment, where 
no civil crime is committed, to make men's 
private creed the measure of their public prin- 
ciples, to vindicate the Deity by fires, and mulct 
faith by forfeitures, are expedients that belong 
only to an age in which the nature and end of 
legislation are either totally unknown, or are 
forgotten or set at nought, amidst the conflict 
of contending factions." 

The advocate of toleration then arose, threw 
down the amount of his bill, and courteously 

• So far back as the year 1725, Swift alludes ia one of 
his letters to Sheridan, to the " glorious and immortal 
memory," being a party signal, occasioning many quarrels. 
The Bishop of Cork, Dr. Peter Browne, wrote a pamphlet 
called, " A Treatise against drinking to the Memory of the 
Dead." Cumberland also gives an account of the fatal 
effects of unnecessary insults heaped on an oppressed and 
persecuted people, by the ascendancy party. 



118 THE O'BRIENS AND 

bowing to the company, withdrew from a con- 
test, forcibly illustrative of the jargon of the 
times. He was a person of distinguished ap- 
pearance, with a countenance full of intelligence, 
softened down by an expression of melancholy. 
He was scarcely middle aged ; and his dress 
and tournure recalled, to those who had travelled, 
the French ecclesiastic of rank, so frequently 
found in the highest circles of Parisian society. 
His accent was, however, perfectly Irish, though 
with something of a foreign rhythm. As he 
passed through the hall of Lucas's Coffee-house 
to his chair, the crowd of link-boys, coachmen, 
and chairmen, who then usually thronged in 
such places, took off their hats, and cheered him 
with " Long life to your Reverence Abbe 
O'Flaherty ! — Connemarafor ever ! — the O'Fla- 
herty cause, and long may they reign !— Hurrah 
for ould Ireland !" 

The information communicated by this voci- 
feration of the populace ex«s'jted a general sensa- 
tion. Some wondered at the courage of the 
Abbe, others swelled with indignation against 
him, as one whose existence was denied by the 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 119 

Statutes, and who thus, like the Genoese gaU- 
rien, bore the word lihertas upon the chains 
which galled him. All considered this unwonted 
boldness in a papist, a priest, and a regular, as 
a bad omen ; and many prophesied the resuh of 
that temporizing system, which, though they 
themselves might not live to see the evil conse- 
quences, would, they said, throw their children 
upon " evil men and evil times." 

The striking of the castle clock now sounded 
the tocsin for the evening's occupations and 
amusements. Some adjourned from the coffee- 
room below to the private apartments above ; 
where cards and hazard assembled the legitimate 
predecessors of the future members of Daly's 
and Kildare-street. Others ordered their chairs 
to the Parliament House, or to the theatre in 
Smock-alley. The habitues of Lady Brandon's 
private box, at the new theatre in Crow-street, 
hastened, in obedience to lier ladyship's morn- 
ing commands, to support her " dear Mr. 
Mossop;" and all who were of the musical 
faction, (the " coin de la re'me^'), the Leinsters, 
Conollys, Belmonts, and Westmeaths, proceeded 



120 THE o'bRIENS and 

to the Italian Opera in Capel-street ; where the 
bewitching Sestini, in " La huona F'lgliuola^'' 
and Pinetti, in the " Isola d' Alcina^'' elicited a 
rapturous, but judicious applause, even from 
the gallery, which it would now be vain to look 
for from the most refined audience that Dublin 
can supply. 

But if the issue of the O 'Flaherty cause had 
excited some sensation in the capital, there was 
a spot where it was deemed of no less magnitude 
than the acquisition of Silesia had been to 
Prussia, the dismemberment of Poland to Russia, 
or the results of the war of the succession to the 
House of Bourbon. This spot was the remote, 
romantic, and venerable district and town of St. 
Grellan ; the former a long and winding tract, 
between sea and mountain, indented with pic- 
turesque harbours and beautiful bays, lying in 
all the still repose of sheltering rocks ; — the 
latter, like all old Irish towns, consisting chiefly 
of along, narrow^ rutted main street, intersected 
by the market cross, and terminating in a ruin- 
ous, over-peopled suburb, called the cladagh;* 
* Cladagh, literally — the dirty place. 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. -flSl 

which, with a few diverging lanes, passages, and 
courts, leading " up to the mountains, or down 
to the sea," made up the whole of its straggling 
circumference. 

With all its defects, however, St. Grellan, 
^when viewed from a distance, had still a vener- 
able and imposing air. Its picturesque ruins 
of monasteries and towers, and, above all, its 
Spanish-built castles, or castellated mansions, 
raised round narrow courts, and opening to the 
main street by ponderous archways, recalled, on 
a diminished scale, the Stradas of Seville and 
Badajos. Upon these models they had been 
evidently built, by the burghers of the town, 
who, in times of turbulence, had found such for- 
tifications necessary for the preservation of their 
wine cellars and counters against the inroads 
of the toparchs of the Milesian race ; when, on 
pretence of claiming *' connowe and meales, due 
to them by the testimonial of many auncient, 
ould, and credible persons,''' the native chiefs 
were wont to come down upon the town, from 
their raths and forts in the mountains, in utter 
contempt of the impotent by-laws of the good 

VOL. I. G 



122 THE o'bJIIENS A\D 

mayor and corporation, which decreed, that 
" Ne Mac, nor O, should strut, ne swagger, in 
the streets ; nor ne Irishman brag ne boast upon 
the town." 

But in process of time, when the chiefs of the 
old race dropped into the lines of civilization, it 
became their pride to rear their mansions also 
within the town wall, and to sculpture over their 
massy portals their ancient armorial bearings, 
and expressive mottoes, which distinguished them 
from the plebeian residences of the '•'' gailohh^^^ 
or tribe of merchants. Many of these patrician 
edifices still remained, though fast falling to ruin ; 
and were no less revered by the natives of St. 
Grellan, than the palaces of the Massimi, with 
their imperial arms and cardinal hats, are by 
the modern Romans. Few of them, however, 
were in the possession of the descendants of the 
ancient proprietors, whose name they still bore. 
Almost all were in litigation ; and some were 
claimed as the estates of two or three different 
families : the first story being held in fee by an 
O, the second by a Mac, and the rez de chaussee 
being possessed and inhabited by some pains- 



THE o'flahertys. 123 

taking tradesman of the Cromwellian stock, who 
proved his right in the premises by " a deben- 
ture of Colonel Stubbers,'*' or a grant of some 
other of Cromwell's Connaught governors. A 
stone staircase, and two dark closets, were 
claimed in Mac Taaf's Court (an old house in 
the Cladagh), by the Miss Mac Taafs, who 
were still carrying on the suit, begun in the year 
forty-five by their uncle the brigadier. 

All beyond the coast and plain of St. Grellan, 
called the Fassagh, and the lower range of hills, 
which formed its land boundary, had become 
terra incognita to its indolent and unenterpris- 
ing inhabitants; and the river Pactolus, Gol- 
conda, or the ruins of some ancient Irish 
Palmyra, might have existed in the interior of 
the mountains of Connemara without awakening 
their curiosity, or stimulating their research. 

The military passes, made through these ro- 
mantic mountains by the Lord Deputy Clan- 
rickard, and his rebellious kinsmen, the Clan 
Earla,* were long blocked up by the caprice 
of torrents, which yearly changed their course, 

* The Earl's sons. 
c 2 



124 THE O'BRIENS AND 

or by the fall of rocks, which yielded to the 
fierce storms engendered in the surrounding 
ocean. The bridle tracks still cut through in the 
gorges of these stupendous hills were but little 
known or frequented, except by smugglers, 
passing from the coast, to the interior of Mayo 
and Galway, or by other lawless persons, the 
successors of the Rapparies of Queen Ann's 
and George the First's day. 

At the distance of five Irish miles from the 
town of St. Grellan arose the castellated domes 
of Beauregard, like a fairy structure in a desert, 
backed by inaccessible mountains and dreary 
wastes. The object of its noble owner in chus- 
ing this site, was to oppose and conquer the 
country physically, as he had already succeeded 
in doing in the moral sense. But the riches, 
the magnificence, and the extent of this almost 
royal palace, were in vain opposed to the deep- 
rooted prejudices of the people in favour of their 
ancient chieftains. The power, the influence, 
the measureless expanse of estate were all on 
the side of the Proudforts; but the chiefs of 
the Hy Tartagh, the forfeited and abdicated 



THE o'flahertys. 125 

O'Briens and OTlaherties, with their " gestes et 
fails'^ in th' ould times, held their supremacy 
in the public imagination. It was in vain that on 
the head-stone of a ruined arch of one of the 
town gates of St. Grellan, might still be read the 
timid invocation, "From the ferocious O'Fla- 
herties deliver us, O Lord !" it was in vain that 
the marks of a ring were still pointed out in 
the fragment of an embrasure of the town walls, 
as the place where a chain had been drawn 
across the western suburbs, to prevent the 
O'Flaherties from rushing down from the moun- 
tains and gallopping through the town, to plun- 
der the honest burghers, the descendants of a 
company of English merchants ; — it was in vain 
even that the O'Flaherty of the day was 
branded with absenteeism ; and that for thirty 
years he had given no other proof of his recol- 
lection of such a spot, than his annual demand 
of the few chief rents which still remained to 
him : in spite of all these " damning proofs," 
there was yet a magic in the name ; and while 
the gallantry and misfortunes of the brave sept 
were st'dl sung in many a merry planxty, or 



126 THE o'bRIENS and 

chaunted in many a doleful cronan, the faults 
and ferocity of its turbulent chiefs with their 
cuttings, and cosherings, and black rents, and 
other barbarous exactions of their feudal power, 
were all forgotten. All the recollections of these 
Alpine districts were associated with the names, 
fortunes, and fate of that fallen but revered 
dynasty ; the recent triumphs of whose repre- 
sentative, now conveyed such general satisfac- 
tion to the mere Irishry of the Bally-boe. 

General Count Malachi O'Flaherty, the hero 
of the day, was of the highest order of Irish 
exiles, whom the misrule of their own country 
had driven to become the ornaments and defend- 
ers of another. With considerable talent, cou- 
rage, and great personal beauty, he was less 
indebted for his rapid, but late, promotion in the 
French service, and his favor at the French 
court, to these superior natur^il endowments, 
than to the degrading accident of his relation- 
ship, being claimed (not proved) by the pro- 
fligate Count Du Barry, and to the condescen- 
sion with which he permitted the king''s mistress 
to call him cousin in the circle, where cringing 



THE o'flahertys. 127 

peers and crouching priests received their appoint- 
ments, and canvassed their promotions from the 
smiles of the royal concubine. Previous to this 
mortifying distinction, he had only won unpro- 
fitable honours, in a service which afforded to the 
Irish exile no prospect, but that of growing 
more unhappy as he grew old in it ; but from 
tliis epoch his military promotion was rapid, his 
illustrious Irish descent was acknowledo-ed in his 
patent of French nobility, and he had his " charge 
a la cour^''' and the '' entree des petits apparie- 
f?ie?is.''^ If in the first era of his favour, his 
high martial spirit^ his sense of family honour 
and hereditary glory, had to struggle against 
privileges and distinctions, so degraded by the 
source from whence they flowed ; yet long ab- 
sence from his native land, his habitual inter- 
course with a nation of slaves, in a country 
where there was no public opinion, no private 
morals, had gradually blunted, though it had 
never extinguished these feelings. An indignant 
remorse in the midst of his good fortune, would 
frequently rise to embitter the present, and lead 
him to regret the dignified adversity of the past. 



128 

This mood of mind was not peculiar to Count 
OTlaherty. The unfortunate and exiled 
catholic gentlemen of Ireland, dependants 
abroad, as slaves at home, carried about with 
them a dark repining temper, which rendered 
them not les3 suspicious of favours conferred, 
than they were jealous of distinctions withheld. 

In pohtics. Count OTlaherty, as a feudal 
aristocrat, was a stern upholder of the divine 
right of kings ; but though upon principle a 
Jacobite, he was, by sentiment, a contemner of 
the despicable family in whose cause his own had 
suffered ruin, almost to extinction. In rehgion, 
he was a Roman catholic, upon point of honour; 
but while he regularly (in the Irish catholic 
phrase), ''attended his duty,'' and assisted a la 
messe du roi, at Versailles, he was, at Paris, in the 
" coterie d'Holbach^* and of the prevailing faith of 
all the esprits forts^ and fashionable philosophers 
of the day ; who admitted no infallibility but in 
the wit of the patriarch of Ferney, who borrowed 
their texts from Rabelais, and who took their 
epigraphs from the Lutrin of Boileau. A man 
of pleasure, in the truest sense of the word, but 



129 

" en Jtomme comme iljaut^ always in love, rarely 
out of debt, addicted to play, and spoiled alike 
by his mistresses and his creditors, he was 
scarcely accountable for a character, to which he 
had been predestined by the history of his coun- 
try ; nor answerable for irregularities, into which 
he was hurried by a vivacity of constitution, the 
temperament of his nation. Unrestrained by 
those wholesome ties, which men placed under 
the control of public opinion in their own 
country, acknowledge and obey, still handsome, 
and still " en bonne fortune ^"^ the Count had yet 
attained the age, when the tide of life is on its 
ebb — when the vain are vainest, and men of 
gallantry most gallant. Touchy and jealous of the 
triumphs which once sought him, but which he 
was now obliged to seek, he was the more dan- 
gerous, as he was less passionate. The penalties 
of time were paid off from the treasury of ex- 
perience ; and the ambition of supporting a re- 
putation, which had placed him in the ranks of 
the Lauzuns and the Lauragais, left him ready 
for any adventure which circumstance and situa- 
tion might throw in his way. 
g3 



130 THE o'bRIENS and 

Such was the man, whose recovery of a small 
part of his patrimony excited so strong a sen- 
sation in St. Grellan. The event was exa«:- 
gerated, as all such events are in Ireland. It 
was considered as " the happy prologue of a 
swelling theme/' in which the Irish pentarchy 
was to be restored, according to the imaginings 
of those whose forefathers had been all kings. 

The Count O 'Flaherty only arrived in Dublin 
in time to witness the completion of his hopes, 
and to go through the forms which the law re- 
quired. He then set off on his royal progress 
to St. Grellan, with a suit of two carriages, and 
accompanied by his champion and kinsman, the 
Baron O'Brien, by the Abbe O'Flaherty, and 
by two young French noblemen of his own school 
and caste, who had visited Ireland in a frolic. 

The eyes of the protestant ascendancy of the 
town, as they glared from the balcony of the 
episcopal palace, beheld with amazement the 
multitudes who followed the chariot of the 
victorious client of Baron O'Brien. At the 
Cladagh, the horses were taken from the Count's 
carriage, and he was carried to the Proudfort 



THE o'flahertys. 131 

Arms on the necks of liis sept. The Baron too 
was chaired through the town, to his own house, 
by a party of '' fsie of Arran boys," led on by 
Shane, whose mother, Mor-ny-Brlen, in her Arra- 
nite costume, stood in a window, with the young 
diief of the IVIac Tiegs, the Baron's only son, in 
her arms; and the Miss Mac Taafs in their 
coiffures ala du Barri, from the bay window at 
which Onor OTlaherty had formerly saluted 
Rory Oge, on his visit to St Grellan, waved 
their white kerchiefs to the Count as he passed ; 
whose gracious smile, and graceful bow, gave 
them full assurance that " le coiL]pfut parti,^' 
and that he had already made up his mind to 
the Green Knighthood, and Barony of Bally- 
slatterie, as Miss Mac Taaf, the elder, had 
made up her's to be Countess OTlaherty, of 
MoycuUen. 

As the evening advanced, preparations were 
made for the old Irish demonstration of all 
sorts of joy, and triumph — a bonfire. The 
whole town and Ballyboe were in movement. 
Children came bounding down the moun- 



182 THE O'BRIENS AND 

tains, with their tributary brasneeiis ;* the 
old folk were busied in collecting turf, mold, 
bones, and sea-weeds, to heap up in particular 
stations ; and the fishermen of the Cladagh 
marched up the main street, in a sort of con- 
fused procession, carrying bundles of reeds on 
poles (as on the eve of St. John), to con- 
tribute to the general conflagration. Young 
females, carrying small brooms of dock stems, 
touched the passengers with their rustic fasces, 
with the simpering request of " honour the 
bonfire," " honour the bonfire of the O'Flaher- 
ties and the O^Briens ;" and those who refused to 
comply with this demand by moving the hat or 
bending the knee, did not withhold their ho- 
mage with impunity. It was to little purpose 
that the Honourable and Right Reverend the 
Lord Bishop of St. Grellan fulminated a bull 
from his ecclesiastical residence, against bon- 
fires and riotous assemblies ; that the mandate 
was proclaimed by the beadle with bell and staff, 

* Bundles of underwood and brambles, picked up in the 
hedges. &c. 



THE o'flahertys. 133 

and with three " Uaishts; *'* that it was repeated 
by the verger in pontificalibus ; echoed by two 
squeaking choristers, and intonated by a bass 
vicar choral — the brasneens still came in, and 
the fires blazed out. It was to as little pur- 
pose that the state came in aid of the church ; 
that old justice Hunks, brother of the arch- 
deacon of St. Grellan, rummaged all the statute 
books, from William to George, to find some 
act " for the better putting down of seditious 
and popish bonfires :"" the evil had escaped the 
attention of the legislature, the law had pro- 
vided no penalty ; and had not the great oli- 
garch of the town and county, the Lord Viscount 
Proudfort (brother to the bishop, uncle to the 
dean, and cousin, or kinsman, to half the rich 
rectors and prebendaries in the diocese), in bis 
quality of governor of the town, ordered out a 
military party to suppress the incendiary symp- 
toms of insurrection, (which under the simple 
name of bonfires, were in fact the houtes fetioo of 
incipient rebellion,) there is every reason to 

* ** Uaisht;' listen : the " Oyez^'' or rather " O yes," 
of the Connaught town criers. 



134 THE O'BRIENS AND 

suppose, that the bonfires would eventually — 
have gone out of themselves. 

As it was, a riot ensued ! a life or two 
were lost, some half dozen, half naked, turf- 
cutters and bog-trotters, were incarcerated in 
the cells of the town-jail — some few limbs 
were fractured, some few heads were broken, 
and some few brave English soldiers, (worthy 
of a better cause,) were wounded by that un- 
failing missile, a well-directed stone, thrown by 
a well-practised hand. Thus, before midnight, 
the social order of St. Grellan was restored ; 
but, lo ! as the grey dawn broke upon the silent 
town, the bonfires were found blazing higher 
than ever, from cliff to cliff, from rock to rock, 
along every high point on the coast ; as if the 
sun, as he rose from behind O 'Flaherty's moun- 
tains, had kindled them with his own celestial 
rays. It was thus in ancient times he was wont 
to light up the fires of the god Samhuin, at the 
same high places, and at the same season ; while 
druid priests sang his praise, and sold his dis- 
pensations. 

There were many in St. Grellan who when 



THE o'flahertys. 135 

they heard of this phenomenon of the cjucnch- 
less fires, crossed themselves. Some there were 
indeed who could account for the fact upon 
very simple principles; but the majority pre- 
ferred the belief, that the whole was a miraculous 
interposition of Heaven itself, in testimony of its 
special protection of a family and of a church, 
which, in spite of these occasional proofs of 
celestial favour, were still prostrate before hu- 
man power, and subjugated by human events. 



136 THE O'BRIENS AND 



CHAPTER III. 



THE REVIEW. 



Beauty, and such a stock of impudence, 

As to the playhouse well might recommend her. 

Etheridcb. 

The warrior. Liberty, with bending sails 

Helm'd his bold course to fair Hibernia's vales ;— 

Firm as he steps along the shouting lands, 

Lo ! Truth and Virtue range their radiant bands; 

Sad Superstition wails her empire torn. 

Art plies his oar, and Commerce pours her horn. 

Botanic Garden, Canto IJ. 

Time went on ; and in less than a quarter of 
a century, " nay not so much," from the epoch 
of the OTlaherty cause, the force of circum- 
stance, bearing down, as it ever does, the sys- 
tems of human policy, effected changes in 
Ireland, which the legislatures of centuries had 
deemed impracticable, and which the bigotry of 
interested ignorance had shunned, as ruinous. 
Within this " brief and petty space,**' the shock 
of opinion (first felt in America) had vibrated 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 137 

to the remotest regions of civilization ; and 
wherever the deep and awful convulsion had 
passed, the long-during edifice of despotism had 
crumbled under its influence. Even Ireland, 
the cul de-sac of politics and of society — inert 
and stagnant as she had long lain, under the 
pressure of the penal code — participated in the 
movement. The Irish — or to give the people 
of Ireland a more definite designation — the 
Irish Catholics, though excluded from all pri- 
vileges, were reluctantly acknowledged to exist 
as citizens ; and were allowed to pray, as con- 
science dictated, without incurring the penalties 
of felony. They were permitted to hold their 
own estates in their own hands, without fear of 
the treachery of their children ; they could ride 
blood horses, worth fifty pounds, without the 
risk of being obliged to part with them for 
five ; they might fill the state offices of watch- 
men, and constables, and enter into the liberal 
professions of attornies and notaries, without 
being considered as disturbers of the peace and 
tranquillity of his Majesty's subjects ; they 
could raise their timid voices in coffee-houses, 



138 THK o'bhiens axd 

and shew their proscribed faces in the castle 
yard. Yet with all these long-dreaded innova- 
tions — these bugbears to loyalty and ascendancy 
— the isle was not " frighten'd from her pro- 
priety." No civil war of 1641 was rekindled, 
no massacre of St. Bartholomew ensued ! Every 
wise concession had served but to strengthen 
national confidence, and to develop the na- 
tional resources. The fearful alternations which 
had agitated the community for more than a 
century, the vague and wasteful exertions of 
delirious strength, the troubled sleep of ex- 
hausted violence, were gradually subsiding in 
the enjoyments of rights obtained, and the consci- 
ousness and foretaste of rights to be conceded. 
America had revolted ; and England, in her 
hour of peril, fearing Ireland, as the oppressor 
in times of danger always fears the oppressed, 
reluctantly abandoned a part of that all-per- 
vading and comprehensive system of tyranny, 
which had hitherto paralyzed the energies of 
the nation ; and by this " premier pas"""" ren- 
dered the ultimate emancipation of the people, 
morally, and almost physically, inevitable. 



THE o'flahertys. 139 

It was not, however, until a French fleet rode 
triumphantly in the Irish seas,* that the 

• To what purpose, it may be asked, are these bitter 
recollections revived? Certainly neither to irritate nor 
insult the English nation, from whose justice and good 
sense Ireland has so much to expect. The fact, how- 
ever, being as it is, it is neither unfair nor unwise to re- 
mind the party in England, who are perpetually vociferat- 
ing, both in and out of parliament, '* we won't be bullied," 
and who endeavour, by alarming the timid, and by arous- 
ing the passions of the people, to seduce them into no- 
popery fanaticism, that the Tory faction (calling itself the 
State) has been d ull ie d a.nd mai/ he bullied: and that as it 
never has granted any thing to justice or to generosity, the 
turbulence of the Catholic agitators is not quite as ground- 
less, or devoid of policy, as their opponents affect to imagine. 
It should not be forgotten, that though a brave and high- 
spirited people can never be threatened mto a tame submis- 
sion to wrong, nothing is more common than for the most 
powerful to be forced into a concession of rights. There 
is an inevitable efficiency in moral propriety, from the mere 
constancy of its action : accident, at some time or other, 
must conspire with it ; and small circumstances are enough 
to render it irresistible. The outcry against being threat- 
ened into toleration is, therefore, mere empty declamation. 
A reasonable apprehension of the natural consequences of 
moral wrong is prudence, not fearj even though the argu- 
ment be advanced in the spirit of hostility. But, after all, 
what has the conduct of the agitators to do wiih the 
policy of the main question? 



140 THE o'bRIENS and 

attempt was made to bribe Ireland into tran- 
quillity, by relaxing her chains. Then indeed 
the experiment was made ; and England found 
that the people she had so long oppressed, were 
not quite debased. Permitted to arm in their 
own defence, the Irish stood forth with all their 
ancient valour, and with more than their ancient 
unity, to protect their native land from foreign 
aggression ; and to realize that splendid dream 
of political philosophy — a national army — self- 
associated, self-organized, self-paid ; each and 
all having an interest and a property in the 
land they had risen to defend. 

Such were the Irish volunteers, whose bril- 
liant, but short-lived story, forms the only illu- 
minated page in Ireland's dismal annals ! Such 
was that gallant band of patriots, who, during 
the short epoch of their existence, rescued their 
country from bondage, and redeemed it from 
disgrace. Attracting the attention of other 
countries, and winning the veneration of their 
own, the Irish volunteers made daily acquisitions 
of strength by an alliance with all classes. 
Nobles sought the distinction of becoming their 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 141 

officers ; men of boundless wealth were proud of 
being enrolled in their ranks ; all sects and all 
relioions united under their banners; and the 
moral dignity attached to the service created 
prepossessions, which its imposing exterior was 
not calculated to diminish. A race, which had 
ever been deemed comely, became improved by 
military discipline. The use of arms, while it 
rubbed oft' the uncouth awkwardness of the lower 
orders, gave energy to the languid movements 
of the highest. Volunteering became a vogue, 
as well as a principle- The women (and Ireland 
was then deemed the Corinth of Europe) took 
them under their special protection, presented 
their banners and dictated their devices. Gal- 
lantry and patriotism were nev^er in a more strict 
alliance ; and national vanity, occasionally sup- 
plying the place of national feeling, enlisted 
many in the volunteer corps, whose natural 
vocation, by birth and caste, la}^ all another 
way. 

To defend the land from foreign invasion 
had been the original motive which armed the 
volunteers of Ireland; but this was onlv a tern- 



142 THE o'beiens and 

porary remedy, applied to a temporary evil. 
The result, the important result, was an effor|; 
to emancipate the nation from six centuries of un- 
mitigated sufferingj and to re-open those sources 
of national prosperity, which had so long been 
dried up, or turned aside. The impulse gave 
a new spring to the spirit of this military body ; 
and an armed association of thirty thousand 
citizens, assembling by their representatives, 
struck terror into minds inaccessible to the sug- 
gestions of sound policy, or of fair dealing. 
The eloquence of men, with arms in their hands, 
was not to be resisted. A free trade, the re- 
jected prayer of ages, was conceded ; Ireland's 
legislative independence, the long, but hopeless 
aspiration of millions, was acknowledged, and 
the government consented to abandon pretensions 
which it was no longer in a condition to assert. 

When, however, America triumphed, and peace 
was proclaimed, England — punished but not 
taught — returned to her old policy ; and having 
no further occasion for that flame she had per- 
mitted to kindle, she resolved to quench it. 
But the Irish spirit, like a long compressed 



TnE o'flaiikrtys. 143 

spring set free, though somewhat too rapid and 
irregular in its movements, was still too forcible 
and vigorous to be readily reduced to its former 
subjection. The volunteers still continued to 
debate in their convention, and the highest in 
rank and talent presided in their assemblies, and 
took a frank and approving part in their de- 
liberations. They continued to hold their mili- 
tary reviews in all parts of the kingdom, and 
their graceful movements, performed under the 
rewarding eye of beauty, were executed to the 
exhilarating sounds of their national music. Such 
meetings were considered as historical epochs by 
the people, and such reviews were regarded as 
national festivals. 

A military institution, so singular in its na- 
ture as to include the several gradations of nobles 
and commons, merchants, yeomen, and me- 
chanics, always prompt to combat the views of 
an unfriendly government, and make head against 
the corrupt influence of a banditti of dictators,* 

• " Three of four grandees had such an influence in the 
Irish House of Commons, that their coalition commanded 
a majority upon any question." 



144 THE O'BRIENS AND 

soon became to the state, which had eulogized 
its first organization, an object of amazement, 
and a source of vexation. In their infancy, the 
volunteers might have been suppressed — in their 
present state, to resist them was difficult ; to con- 
troul them, vain ; to disband them, impossible ! 
But to disunite, to undermine, to sap, to slander, 
and to vilify, w^ere always practicable in Ireland. 
Corruption, the old medium, was again resorted 
to. Religion, the old state engine of English 
policy, was again brought into play. Ridicule, 
under many forms, launched by the witty and 
the profligate, the hireling satirist and the pen- 
sioned buffoon, was set to work to raise " that 
dread laugh," against which even virtue is not 
always proof. The volunteers themselves, like 
all sanguine reformers, and like all Irishmen, 
overshooting or deviating from their mark, oc- 
casionally furnished their enemies with arms 
against themselves; and divisions, industriously 
sown between the leaders and their corps, were 
rapidly breaking up their unity, when the French 
revolution broke forth — a brand from the altar 



THE O FLAHERTYS. 145 

of American independence — an event that ter- 
minated the struggle between kings, and began 
the contest between governments and nations. 

The French revolution, at its dawn so splen- 
did and so temperate, produced in Ireland an 
effect the most powerful and electric. Reor- 
ganizing in their legislative assembly a new 
empire from an old despotism, breaking the fet- 
ters of ages, and calling forth a national army 
to replace their liveried and foreign forces, the 
French had obtained the suffrages of the wise 
and good of all parties ; but in Ireland their 
proceedings awakened more than admiration — 
they aroused a powerful sympathy, and a deep 
and self-reflecting interest. They gave an ex- 
ample of which Ireland had but too much 
reason to avail herself; and the Irish volunteers 
boldly, though not prudently, commemorated 
the great event of the revolution by the most 
public demonstration of opinion. It was then 
that the government, taking new alarm, re- 
solved upon the destruction of a force, which, 
if it had no other demerit, must have been 

VOL. 1. H 



146 THE O'BRIENS AND 

at once odious and suspicious, because it 
was — national. Yet, ere the hand of power fell 
with an annihilating weight upon the devoted 
bands, while public opinion yet suspended the 
coming blow, the volunteers continued to ex- 
hibit to their partial fellow-citizens that admirable 
discipline to which they bad so long and so 
cheerfully submitted; and their reviews con- 
tinued to embrace all classes, either as actors or 
spectators, from the viceroy to the lowest popu- 
lace. 

It happened that while the army of Ulster 
were celebrating, in their province, the anniver- 
sary of the French Revolution, the army of 
Leinster, with less ostensible motives for re- 
union, were summoned to a grand review in 
the Phoenix Park. The reviewing general, upon 
this, as upon every other occasion, was the 
great Earl of Charlemont, the general of the 
volunteer army of Ulster, the father of the 
volunteer army of Ireland ; one of those men 
who hallow a whole people, and lift up all who 
live in their time. Presiding over a great army 



THE o'flahertys. 147 

for j^ears without reward, he had assisted to 
establish a revolution* without blood. The 
Earl of Charlemont was then advanced in years, 
and suffered under their consequent infirmities ; 
yet still at his post, he gave to his country what 
age in its usual egotism requires for itself — his 
health, his time, his tastes, his repose, and it is 
melancholy to add, his peace. 

On the evening previous to this review (one of 
the last and the most splendid), the several corps 
were seen marching into the capital from various 
directions. They were met by the cordial inha- 
bitants, who accepted their billets with cheerful- 
ness, receiving them with boundless hospitality, 
and entertaining them with emulous profusion. 
In the morning (and it was a bright May 
morning) Dublin was all bustle and movement. 
Military music was heard in every direction. 
The carriages of the nobility and gentry, colonels 
and commandants of the various provincial corps, 
came rolling into town from the seats and villas 
of their distinguished owners. The different 

• In 1782, well denominated "Ireland's lifetime.'' 
H 2 



14-8 THE O'BRIEN'S AND 

corps assembled to beat of drum, or sound of 
trumpet; forming themselves into brigades in 
the most spacious streets, or along the noble 
quays of the LifFey : and by eleven o'clock the 
arm}^ of Leinster, led on by the Dublin Volun- 
teers, headed by the Duke of Leinster, were all 
marching to the scene of action. A multitude 
preceded, followed, and surrounded them ; and 
all who did not, or could not accompany them 
to the field, hailed and cheered them as they 
passed, from the windows, balconies, and roofs 
of the houses. 

The Phoenix Park — the old manor of Fionne 
uisge^* gallantly translated by Lord Chester- 
field into '^ phoenix^'' — once the domain of 
the powerful priors of Kilmainham, now the 
" hel respire''^ of the anglo-Irish officials, from 
the viceroy to the chamberlain, from the ' se- 
cretary of state to the clerk of the kitchen — 
the Phoenix Park is, perhaps, one of the most 
beautiful suburban pleasure grounds that any 
city in Europe can boast. Since the Union it 
has been deserted by the dispirited citizens of 
♦ Fair water. 



THE oVlAHKUTYS. 149 

Dublin, and wholly abandoned to the temporary 
residence of the English members of the Irish 
government. At the epoch here alluded to, it 
was not only the site of many villas belonging 
to the nobihty, but the Hyde Park and Ken- 
sington of the Irish metropolis. It was the 
daily resort of the rank, beauty, and fashion of 
ihe capital, where the corso was performed witli 
all the punctuality of an Itahan town. It was 
the weekly promenade of the lower and middle 
ranks, who assembled there, not only for health 
and amusement, but to witness that emulous 
display of splendid equipages and numerous 
cavalry, which it was then the vanity, and some- 
times the ruin of the Irish gentry to indulge 
in ; and above all, it had been the site of all 
mihtary exercises, from the '^joustes etjetes'' of 
those belligerent monks, the knights templars of 
Kilmainham, to the reviews of the Irish volun- 
teers. 

Its diversified scenery, the vast variety of 
its surface, and the accident of a broad and 
uninterrupted plain, called the "Fifteen Acres," 
admirably calculate the Phoenix Park for mili- 



150 THE O^BRIENS AND 

tary evolutions. Rising from the banks of the 
Liffey, in a succession of gentle eminences, it 
commands an exterior view of that embellished 
landscape, which swells on the opposite side of 
the river to the base of a ridge of mountains, 
whose bold and daring outline forms the back 
ground of the whole. Within the park innu- 
merable swellings of the surface and shaded 
glens, intersected by the gleaming waters of 
small natural lakes, diffuse an air of rural 
beauty, even over the pleasure grounds of a 
court ; while groves of luxuriant hawthorn, of 
large and venerable growth, spread their shades 
over many *' an alley green, dingle, and bushy 
dell," in whose recesses groups of deer- repose 
undisturbed, and add a touch of wildness to a 
scene at once romantic and cultivated. 

On the occasion of the volunteer review, now 
alluded to, the park was all green and gold, 
verdure and sunshine. The LifFey reflected 
skies blue as any that ever tinted the waters of 
the Arno ; and the rich bloom of the hawthorn, 
pushed forth by a mild winter and an antici- 
pated spring (so common and so delusive in 



tHE oVlahertys. 151 

Ireland), already clothed the trees with beauty, 
and loaded the air with perfume. The Dublin 
mountains, cutting darkly against the purple 
lights of their horizon, gave relief to the city, 
which exhibited, as it spread down to the port, 
many a spire and steeple, mingling with the 
flags of vessels, which then rode into the very 
heart of the metropolis. Tents, for the enter- 
tainment of the lowly, and pavilions of every 
colour and kind, for the repose of the great, 
were pitched among the glens and defiles, so as 
not to impede the movements of the troops. 
Some few, upon well selected eminences, at- 
tracted attention, by their peculiar elegance, by 
the guards that sentinelled their draped and 
curtained entrance, and by the banners that 
floated on their summit. One of these, with 
the royal flag over it, was the vice-regal banquet 
tent, reserved for his excellency, the Lord 
Lieutenant, and his party. Another was a 
gallantry, on the part of the Dublin Volunteers, 
to their illustrious commander. Its scarlet ban- 
ner, with the motto of Cromaboo, denoted that it 
was reserved for the Leinster family. 



152 THE O'LEIEXS AXD 

All the several gates of entrance to the park 
were thrown open to receive the multitude, 
which poured in from the capital and its en- 
virons. For the Irish, always prone to pleasure^ 
or to what they deem pleasure, are the people 
in the world 

" De vivre heureux — s'ils avoient de quoi vivre." 

Towards mid-day, the tide set in with great 
force. Parties of men, women, and children, 
escaped from the foul air of the " Liberty," or 
" Partrick's Close," already seated upon various 
hillocks, and covered with dust, were, in their 
own language, " moistening their clay," by a 
recurrence to that resource, which rarely fails 
the lower Irish, even in the worst of times — 
whiskey. Groups of bare-legged spalpeens, 
with their ragged jackets on their arms, their 
brogues on their shoulders, and their short 
sticks in their hands, came trooping over the 
green heights ; their brawny breasts exposed to 
the sun, and their staring eyes, searching for " a 
place to see the Review," where they might 
admire the manoeuvring of their own village or 
county corps, and be thus enabled on their 



THE o'flahertys. 155 

return, to relate the prowess of the heroes of 
Pucks Town, or Hazle Hatch, County Kildare, 
or County Cavan. 

The pedestrian spectators, who *'took time 
by the forelock," were followed by the 
humbler order of vehicles of all kinds; the 
old Irish Tim ichiskeij, the Chaise marine^ 
that capacious Irish family vehicle, and pre- 
decessor of modern jingles ; the Noddy I that 
humble, unpretending, public carriage, which 
placed the driver, his horse, and his companion, 
in such intimate, close, and social contact ; the 
Dublin hackney coach, that short process to 
dislocation ; \hepo chay^ from Castle Knock, or 
Castle Dermott, from the "Black Bull," or the 
" ^lan of War;"" with the one-horse chair of the 
Dublin cockney, or the new-invented ** Duchess's 
ffig,^ the unpopular novelty, sported by an un- 
popular corporator, who, as the pasquinade of 
the day had it 

■ " Set up his gig 

With the money he got for sticking a pig."* 

• The vaudevilles of Dublin were then as much a vehicle 
for giving vent to public discontent, as those of Paris in 
the time of Cardinal Richelieu, 
n 3 



154 THE O'BRIENS AND 

all jumbled, jostled, shambled, and shattered 
along, with emulous rapidity. The " Judys^' 
and '' Juggys," from Bally-bough, or Bally-tore, 
from Glassneven, or Glassmanogue, mounted 
en croupe upon the stout lean garrons * of their 
husbands, displayed " their broad beaver hats, 
and red cloaks all so fine," to the envious eyes 
and invidious sarcasms of their less opulent 
pedestrian neighbours. 

Last, and late, and long after the plebeian 
spectators were assembled, came the splendid 
and numerous equipages of the aristocracy ; the 
greater number drawn by four, and some by six 
horses ; with liveries that sparkled in the sun, 
like cloths of gold, and out-riders mounted on 
steeds, that looked like chargers. Driving up 
the most perilous sites, and " seeking glory, 
even in the cannon's mouth," came rolling on, 
the female charioteers, supreme above all in 
splendour and attractions ; some of whom, 
mounted in lofty phaetons, and guiding their 
fiery coursers with more spirit than discretion, 

* Garron, a lean horse. 



THK o'flahertys. 155 

seemed like the spoiled child of the sun, only 
to have " obtained the chariot of the day, to 
set the world on fire.'' These splendid per- 
sonages were, however, as few as they were 
conspicuous ; for high phaetons and female 
charioteership, were then alike novelties in Ire- 
land ; and were exclusively confined to those 
great female oligarchs who governed society, as 
their husbands governed the state, and ruled 
in the coteries of the capital, as their consorts 
ruled the country, in all the insolence of exclu- 
sive privilege, and all the lawlessness of un- 
limited power. 

Conspicuous amongst the most conspicuous 
of these stars of the ascendant, was a lady, who 
took the field with an eclat^ a brilliancy, and 
bustle, which for a time fixed the attention of 
all upon herself. Although a fine woman, in 
the strictest sense of the term, and still hand- 
some, though not still very young, she was even 
more distinguished by her air of high supremacy, 
than by her beauty. She sat loftily in a lofty 
phaeton, which was emblazoned with arms, and 
covered with coronets ; and she played with her 
long whip, as ladies of old managed their fans^ 



156 THE o'briens and 

with grace and coquetry. She was dressed in a 
rich habit, whose facings and epaulettes spoke 
her the lady of the noble colonel of some pro- 
vincial corps of volunteers. A high military 
cap surmounted with a plume of black feathers, 
well became her bright, bold, black eyes, and 
her brow that looked as if accustomed " to 
threaten and command.'' The air had deepened 
her colour through her rouge, as it had blown from 
her dark, dishevelled tresses the mareschal pow- 
der, then still w^orn in Ireland — (the last hngering 
barbarism of the British toilette, which France 
had already abandoned, with other barbarous 
modes, and exchanged for the coiffure d'Agrip- 
pine and the tete a la Brutus). Her pose, 
her glance, her nod, her smile, all conscious and 
careless as they were, proclaimed a privileged 
autocrat of the Irish bon ton, a " dasher,' ' as 
it was termed, of the first order: — for that 
species of effrontery called dashing was then in 
full vogue, as consonant to a state of society, 
where all in a certain class went by assumption. 
The lady had arrived rather early in the field, 
for one whose habits were necessarily on the 
wrong side of time and of punctuality. She 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 157 

came bowling along, keeping up her fiery steeds to 
a sort of curvetting gallop, like one deep in the 
science of the manege — now deranging the order 
of march of the troops, by breaking through the 
ranks, in spite of the impertinent remonstrances 
of the out-posts and videttes, at which she 
laughed, at once to shew her teeth and her power ; 
— and now scattering the humble crowd, " like 
cliafF before the wind," as giving her horses the 
rein, she permitted them to plunge head-long 
oir, while skilfully flourishing her long whip, 
she made on every side a preliminary clearance. 
Many among the multitude announced her as 
the famous Kitty Cut-dash ; and nodded know- 
ingly as she passed them ; but the greater 
number detected in the beautiful charioteer, the 
equally famous Albina Countess Knocklofty, 
the female chief of that great oligarchical family, 
the Proudforts — a family on which the church 
rained mitresj the state coronets, and the people 
—curses. 

Beside her, sat, or rather lounged, another 
dame of quality; bearing the stamp of her 
class and caste as obviously, yet less deeply 



158 THE o'briens and 

marked, than her companion. More feminine 
in her air, more foreign in her dress and entire 
bearing, her faultless form, and almost faultless 
face, had all the advantages of the new demo- 
cratic toilet of Paris (adopted by its court, 
when more important innovations were still 
fatally resisted) ; and she appeared in the 
Phoenix Park, dressed much in the same cos- 
tume as Marie Antoinette and her female 
favourites are described to have worn in the 
gardens of Trianon, or in the bowers of St. 
Cloud, — to the horror of all old dames d'atours, 
and all the partisans of the ancient regime of 
whalebone and buckram ! The chemise of 
transparent muslin, or robe a la PoUgnac, 
chapeau de paille a la bergere, tied down with 
a lilac ribbon, with 

" Scarf loosely flowing, hair as free," 
gave an air of sylph-like simplicity to one, wliose 
features, though beautiful, were marked by an 
expression foreign to simplicity, evincing that 
taste, not sentiment, presided over her toilet, and 
that,"c^^^ elle, un beau desordrefut Veffet de VarU 
This triumphal car was followed, or sur- 



THE o'flahertys. 159 

rounded, by a host of beaux ; some in military 
uniform, and with true Enghsh faces and figures ; 
but the greater number in the civil, though un- 
civilized, dress of the day, and with forms and 
pliysiognomies as Irish as ever were exhibited in 
Pale or Palatinate, to the dread of English settlers 
and Scotch undertakers. Ponderous powdered 
clubs, hanging from heads of dishevelled hair, — 
shoulders raised or stuffed to an Atlas height 
and breadth, — the stoop of paviers, and the 
lounge of chairmen, — broad beavers, tight buck- 
skins, the striped vest of a groom, and the loose 
coat of a coachman, gave something ruffianly to 
the air of even the finest figures; which assorted 
but too well with the daring, dashing manner, 
that just then had succeeded, among a particular 
set, to the courtly polish for which the travelled 
nobility of Ireland were once so distinguished. 
Such, in exterior, were many of the members of 
the famous Cherokee Club, and such the future 
legislators of that great national indignity, which 
had procured them a contemptible pre-eminence 
in the black book of public opinion, by the style 
and title of " the Union Lords.''' As they now 



160 THE o'bRIENS and 

crowded round the cynosures of the day, there 
was something too ardent and unrestrained in 
their homage, something too emphatic in their 
expressions and gestures, for true breeding ; 
while in their handsome, but " hght, revelling 
and protesting faces," traces of the nigh t'*s orgies 
were still visible, which gave their fine features 
a licentious cast, and deprived their open and 
very manly countenances of every mark of 
intellectual expression. 

The volunteers had now nearly all marched 
into the park, and awaited only the arrival of the 
Lord Lieutenant (the Duke of Belvoir), and of 
the reviewing general and commander of the 
forces, before they commenced the usual opera- 
tions. Meantime it was curious to observe the 
interest excited by these native legions among 
the spectators, as each corps, bearing some well- 
known standard, passed the groups and parties 
stationed in various positions. Each body was 
hailed with cheers and plaudits, according to its 
own popularity, or the popularity of its dis- 
tinguished leader. Even the smallest company, 
from some little hamlet in the vicinity, had its 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. 161 

partisans, and was named with pride by friends 
and townsmen. One of these, the spokesman on 
the occasion, was an old Fingahan, as great an 
amateur of volunteer reviews, as George Selwyn 
was of executions ; and he continued to announce 
to his party each company and its " great cap- 
tain," as it marched beneath the little hill on 
which he was seated. The appearance of the 
Duke of Leinster, at the head of his own corps, 
drew forth one continuous cheer of universal 
approbation ; for at this epoch, the old prejudice 
in favour of the Geraldines was in full force, 
nurtured by the active patriotism, which was 
deemed the inalienable inheritance of the Fitz- 
gerald family, and which some of the illustrious 
members too soon afterwards shed their blood to 
prove. 

As his Grace passed beneath the hill alluded 
to, which was studded with joyous faces from 
base to summit, the cries of " the Leinster lads 
for ever !"" — " Success to the Maynooths !" and 
'• Crom aboo to the ind of time, and long after !" 
were heard on every side, from crowds led up 
by the Fingal oracle, Tim Doolin of Port-ran, 
who, in expectation of the arrival of the corps 



162 THE o'bhIENS and 

of his own townlands, liberally did the honours 
by every other. 

'' Now, boys," cried Tim, '•' up with your 
heads, and off with your hats! Here comes 
the Malahides and the Coolocks — Talbot's 
own fencibles for ever, with three cheers, 
boys, hurra ! And now look to your lift, 
marching from Stony Batther gate to the 
tune of Langolee ; thim's the Balruthries ; 
and close on their traheenSy in scarlet and blue, 
comes the Portrans,* my cuishla they are, and 
Captain Hampden at their hid. Now, boys, 
jewels, up with your hats, and off with your 
bids ! Oh ! by the powers, here's the raal 
things, any how! the " Dublin Indipindints ! " 
Hould your whuiskt now, every sowl of yez ; 
the Volunteer's March, do ye hear that ? There 
they go ; three cheers for the great and grand 



* Fortran, a beautiful peninsula, darting out into the 
Bay of Dublin, at that time the seat of Hampden Evans, 
now the residence of his son George Evans, Esq. a good 
landlord, a liberal politician, and one of the few who still 
hold by the country which gave them birth and subsist- 
ence, and reflect back upon it the high benefit of enlight- 
ened and well-directed patriotism. 



THE oVlahertys. 163 

Dublin Indipindints, and Counsellor G rattan for 
ever, huzza !'" 

This popular corps, one of the finest and first 
raised in the Leinster army, was this day headed 
for the last time by one of the greatest men 
that Ireland ever produced ; and as the Irish 
Cicero rode on, amidst deafening acclamations 
of popular gratitude and enthusiasm, there was 
something in his eye and air that might well 
recal to the classic mind the liberator of Rome, 
the father of his country. Grattan had lately 
merited and obtained a similar title, and his elo- 
quence was daily raised to oppose the corruption 
of more than one Verres, and to put down the 
conspiring audacity of more than one Catiline. 

While the cheers of a grateful people were 
hailing the name of their champion, other public 
characters succeeded to elicit popular applause. 
The officer next in command to the immortal 
colonel of the " Dublin Indipindints" was, like 
him, of the " true antique mould." With the 
head of a Brutus, and the figure of a Hercules, 
yet with the air of one practised in the gi'aces 
of a court, Archibald Hamilton Rowan, received 



164 THE o'briens and 

the cheers of admiration with all that peculiar 
suavity and cordiality, which, springing from the 
heart, still survive, with principles that never 
varied, and spirit that never quenched. 

Other corps followed, each hoisting colours ex- 
pressive of the tone and feeling of pub he opinion. 
On one was inscribed, " The five free nations, 
America, France, Poland, Great Britain, and 
Ireland ;" on another, " The nation, the law, 
and the king ;" on a third, " The asylum of 
liberty ;" and on a fourth, " Unite and be 
free." The leaders of all were remarkable for 
their manly bearing and intellectual counte- 
nances; and the "long lives" wished to them by 
the populace (the Irish, as it was the Jewish 
benediction), seemed rather a promise than a 
vow. Yet in a few short years many of those 
young lives were offered up upon the scaffold, a 
sacrifice to sincerity in that cause, which, wrong 
or right, was by the victims deemed the cause 
of their country. These victims were then all 
full of youth, life, love, and hope, surrounded by 
admiring compatriots, and gazed on by eyes 
whose smiles were immortality — by eyes soon to 



THE o''flahertys. 165 

be dimmed with tears which time has not even 
yet dried up. 

Several provincial corps succeeded, only less 
distinguished, because less known .to the people 
of Dublin and its vicinity, than their own imme- 
diate companies ; until one approached, which 
seemed to challenge a species of feeling beyond 
all vulgar admiration. On the silken flag of 
emerald green which preceded it, was woven in 
gold letters, " The Irish Brigade," with the 
Irish harp, and the motto of" I am new strung." 
On the reverse was inscribed, *' Fait ce qiie doit, 
arrive qui pourra^'' an old epigraph, adopted by 
a peculiar branch of the O'Briens. There was 
something bold, and it might seem perilous, in 
such devices ; but they were the fashion of the 
day, and as yet unreproved (though not unno- 
ticed) by government. The corps had been 
recently raised. The dernier rejeton of the old 
stock of the Irish volunteers, its last vigorous 
offset, not numerous, but select, — it was almost 
exclusively composed of the tlite of the youth 
of the capital and the university. A certain 
brilliant petulance of look and movement, with 



166 

a gallant and military bearing, not always found 
in the best disciplined home-bred troops, distin- 
guished this band of boy-citizen-soldiers ; and the 
eclat of their appearance, well became their age 
and vocation. Martinets in dress and disci- 
pline, their elegant and highly ornamented green 
uniform, of a foreign cut and novel fashion, 
gave them the air of Polish hussars, enlisted 
under the free banners of some gallant Kos- 
ciusko ; and a few striking novelties in their 
exercises, introduced by their young captain, 
(who, it was understood, had seen foreign ser- 
vice), gave them advantages, personal and mili- 
tary, which had obtained for them the sobriquet 
of the " Ladies' Own." Preceded by a fine band, 
and headed by a youth whom nature in her 
partiality had called out of the common roll of 
men, they presented, as they marched into the 
park, in quick time, a splendid image of preco- 
cious patriotism, gaillard as the " Jeunesse 
doree" of the French Revolution, and honoured 
as the '^ gioventu armatcC^ of the best days of 
Florence. 

" Why, then, who are they at all, Tim, dear.^" 



THE oVlaHEUTYS. 167 

demanded a Skerries fisherman, who had during 
the day consulted Tim Doolan, as his oracle. 

" Why, then, I couldn't tell you thruly, bar- 
ring I'd lade yez astray, Pat Doran," replied 
Tim, " for 'bove all the volunteer throops, in 
the Phanix, this day, thims the boys I don't 
know nothing about at all, at all ; but thinks to 
the best of my behef, they are Lords'* sons, or 
the College boys." 

*' Why, then, I wouldn't wonder," said the 
Skerries man. The question, however, repeated 
to another bystander, was suddenly, and it 
should appear, oraculously, answered like the 
druidical oracles of old, from the top of a tall 
and magnificent oak, which, rooted at the base 
of the acclivity, overshadowed its summit Avith 
thick and lofty branches. " O'Brien aboo," 
shouted with an echoing yell the respondent; 
and the cry, long, loud, and shrill, was taken 
up by Tim Doolan, repeated by Pat Doran, and 
reiterated by the imitative multitude. While 
yet but half pronounced, it had caught the 
quick ear of the young leader of the Irish 
brigade. He started— threw his eyes up to the 



168 THE o'brifns and 

oak, whence the cry had issued ; then cast them 
suddenly down, and reddened, and grew pale — 
and gave the word of quick march ! to his com- 
pany. But when the cry of " O'Brien aboo," 
found an echo from the popular voice, he seemed 
proudly to apply its meaning to himself, and 
saluted the multitude with his sword, and smiled 
with all the popular grace of a young Roman 
tribune. 

^' What does O'Brien aboo mane?" asked 
Pat Doran, hoarse with shouting it. 

" Why it manes the same as Crom aboo,* to 
be sure, what else would it mane ;" replied Tim 
Doolan, " and often heard tell by my gossip in 
Fingal, that it was w^id that same watch-word, 
that Brien Borru diffinded the great pass of 
Bally-bough bridge agin the Danes, at the 
battle of Clontarf.^' 

* " O'Brien aboo," the cause of the O'Briens. 

Aboo ! the war-cry of the ancient Irish, was adopted by 
the Norman or English settlers, as— Butleirach-abti, the 
cause of the Butlers, 

Crom-a-boo, the molto of the Geraldines, is literally 
the cause of God, -" Crom" being one of the many names 
of the Deity in he Irish language. 



THE o'flahertys. 169 

" Why, then, I wouldn't wondher if thai 
comely young chap at their head there, was 
Mr. Brien Bore-yous own son, Tim Doolan, 
for he looks like a lad would head a ruction, 
bravely, as the father that bore him."" 

" Whooh, man ! that's mortally unpossible/* 
replied the antiquarian of Fingal ; '' sure that 
battle was fit in th' ould times, afore the battle 
of the Boyne, or Aughram, fifty years! aye, 
troth, a thousand (and more,) out of the me- 
mory of man, Pat Doran, dear." 

" Why, then, sorrow ache, their hearts ache, 
that fought at that fit, any how, Tim." 

'^ Oh, thrue for you, Pat; sorrow ache, and 
never did, not all as one as now ; for th' ould 
times was the fine times, and will be ever more, 
amen, plaze Christ." 

It was not, however, from the clients of the 
Portran oracle, that the Irish brigade alone 
attracted notice, and awakened inquiry. Many 
bright eyes followed, and many bland smiles 
shone upon the elite of " the Ladies' own." But 
none so bright or so bland, as those which ema- 

voL. I, I 



170 THE o'bRIENS and 

nated from the fair occupants of the splendid 
phaeton, already described ; which had drawn 
up parallel to the halt made by the Irish 

brigade. 

" O'Mealy,*' exclaimed the fair and noble 
charioteer, with a prettily lisped, but tech- 
nical, " steady, now; steady, I tell you;" ad- 
dressed to her horses--" O' Mealy, what corps 
is that with the green standard and uniform?"" 

" What corps is it, Lady Knocklofty ? why, 
then, give you my honour, I don't know a corps 
in the Volunteer army ; 'pon my honour I don't! 
We, reglars^ never know any thing of the train 
bands, and more partickilarly, we cavalry make 
it a point ; besides, there are some ugly custo- 
mers among them, such as one's tailor, or shoe- 
maker, upon my honour !" 

This answer was made by a handsome, flashy 
looking person, in military uniform, w4th large 
features, scattered at random over a broad face, 
with a leering smile, good bold eyes, high co- 
lour, and a perfect chevaux-de-frize of powdered 
whiskers. He had long been sidling his horse 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. 171 

up to the phaeton, and had obtahied, with 
some difficulty, a position which he maintained 
with some effort. 

" What a very fine young fellow that is,**' con- 
tinued Lady Knocklofty, not attending to the 
assertions of O 'Mealy, and keeping her magni- 
ficent eyes steadily fixed on the face of the young 
leader of the Irish brigade; who, perhaps, not 
quite unconscious of the gaze, either in the con- 
^ fusion of vanity, or under the oppression of 
heat, removed his phimed cap: as he dis- 
placed and scattered the dark unpowdered 
locks (then a mark of singularity, if not of dis- 
loyalty) which clustered round his high and in- 
tellectual temples, he exhibited one of those 
heads, which painters love to copy, and sculp- 
tors to model. 

" What a handsome head, and what a singu- 
lar one I" said Lady Knocklofty to the lady be- 
side her, 

" Yes, I have seen many such at Paris, this 
winter," was the reply; ''it is caWed tete a la 
victimey 

" Do, like a good soul, O'Mealy,"' (cried 
I 2 



172 THE O'BRIENS AND 

Lady Knocklofty) " find out who he is ; I am 
sure it is some one I ought to bow to, for he 
seems to canvass a salute. Can it be one of the 
Carrick, or Mount Garret Butlers." 

" He is one of the mount garrets^ I dare 
say/' replied Lady Honoria, laughing. "Many 
of these volunteer heroes, I believe, descend 
from their altitudes to take the field ; and ex- 
change their leather aprons for their leather 
belts.' ^ 

" What eyes !" continued Lady Knocklofty, 
keeping her own fixed ; " those are what Hamil- 
ton, the painter, calls Irish eyes, large, dark, 
deep set, and put in, as it were, with dirty 
fingers ; O' Mealy, do find out who that boy with 
the eyes is.*' 

'^ Is it the chap with the squint?'' demanded 
the captain, "that's my boot-maker, of the Golden 
Leg, in Ormonde Quay. If your ladyship ever 
wears top-boots, I'd take the liberty of recom- 
mending him to your pathronage and protection." 

" I suppose. Captain," said the other lady, 
" vou infer that her ladyship occasionally wears 
top-boots, because she sometimes wears the — ;" 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 173 

and the most beautiful Jips in the world boldly 
pronounced a word that would now shock even 
ears, which do not pique themselves on being 
ears polite, to listen to. 

Captain O'Mealy raised a horse laugh, which 
shewed his large white teeth from ear to ear. 
"• Bravo ! Lady Honoria, I will make it a point 
to report that at mess to-day ; give you my 
honour I will. " 

** I am sure you know who he is, O'Mealy, 
if you chose to tell,"^ said Lady Knocklofty, 
|x?ttishly ; " there, I mean that tall boy, with 
the eyes — " 

" Tall boy,' (repeated Lady Honoria) '*do 
you call him ; he looks more like a console, 1 
think."* 

"Oh, the young captain there, in green," 
aaid O'Meally, conceitedly, " that's a young 
journeyman tailor, one of Roger Sweeney's men, 
who himself commands a corps here to-day." 

"A tailor!" said Lady Honoria, " Oii les 
beaiuv yeux vonWils se nicker !''' 

• Two fashionable pieces of furniture, the ar moire and 
tripod of the day. 



174 THE o'bRIENS and 

" A tailor ! nonsense ! impossible !" said Lady 
Knocklofty, haughtily. 

" Give you my honour, Lady Knocklofty, if 
I'm not grately mistaken, and I take it for 
granted I am not, he is a tailor. If your lady- 
ship wants a habit, I'll ingage that's your man." 

"A habit!" said Lady Honoria, " a fancy, 
you mean." 

"Bravo! again, liady Honoria; 111 report 
that at mess to-day, give you my honour I will; 
and what I shall report would have no credit, 
were not the proof so high, as the immortal 
Shakspeare says.'' 

"•What is the meaning of that Irish motto on 
that green flag.?" asked Lady Knocklofty, 
wholly preoccupied with her subject ; "at least 
it looks like Irish." 

" That, Lady Knocklofty ? — never had one 
word of Irish in my existence." 

" Nor two of English," (muttered Lady Ho- 
noi-ia). "Now, upon your honour, Captain 
O'Mealy, of all tongues, living or dead, which 
is your favourite V 

"Why, then, upon my honour and con- 



THE OFLAHERTVS. 175 

science,"" replied Captain O'' Mealy, emphati- 
cally, throwing round his large eyes, and pulling 
up his black stock, anxious to observe if his in- 
timacy with the two great ladies was noticed ; 
" and what's more, upon the honour of a soldier 
and a man. Lady Honoria, I have no choice." 

" But Hobson's," said Lady Honoria, gravely, 
and both ladies burst into an immoderate fit of 
laughter, with very little consideration for the 
feehngs of the object of their mirth ; who, to 
evince that he had none, joined in the laugh 
also, — too happy to keep his enviable station, at 
any expense. 

" Lady Honoria takes horrible liberties with 
your parts of speech, O'Mealy,'' said Lady 
Knocklofty. 

" Her ladyship may take any liberties she 
plazes with me, Lady Knocklofty," replied the 
Captain, with an impudent leer; "and the freer 
the welcomer, 'pon my honour; so, I'll beseech 
you, let her will have a free way, as I said last 
night ai the private thayathricals, in the Moor of 
Venice." 



176 THE O'BRIENS AND 

" The Moor of Ennis," said Lady Honoria, 
in allusion to the Captain's strong county of 
Clare accent; — *' apropos, Captain O'Mealy, 
what did you mean by refusing the part of Cap- 
tain O' Blunder, as Lady Ely cast it for you 
the other night at the Attic ?'' 

" Lady Ely ? why, I mane Lady Honoria, I 
never could lay my tongue about the ' Irish 
brogue, give you my honour; and besides, 
O'Blunder is intirely too low for me.'' 

"Do you really mane that,'' asked Lady Ho- 
noria, broadly ; and both ladies again laughed 
in his face, while he again joined them, though 
a little less heartily than before ; adding, " 'Pon 
my honour, I am highly delighted to see your 
two ladyships in such charming fine spirits to- 
day, considering the bating the countess got at 
the brag-table last night, or rather this morning, 
after the private thayatricals at Lady Ely's." 

" O'Mealy," said Lady Knocklofty, yawning, 
" what have you done with Miss Macguire ?" 

" What have I done with her, Lady Knock- 
lofty ? why, as any young lady would like to be 
done by ; as your ladyship will own, when I 



THK O'FLAHERTYS. 177 

tell you that I have left her with the whole staff, 
riding along the line in the Fifteen Acres." 

** Well, now, do go like a good man, and 
stay by her, and see that she don't play tricks 
with my mare ; Kitty Macguire would spoil any 
horse in Ireland. She has left Rowdelam not 
worth a shilling, and ruined the mouth and gait 
of Mrs. Slamikin beyond cure. Do go,"* con- 
tinued her ladyship, impatiently, as the Captain, 
flanking her to the left, impeded the view of 
everything but his own sprawling person. 

" Certainly, Lady Kuocklofty ; born for your 
use, I live but to obee you ;" and he was back- 
ing out, when again turning round, and pulling 
up his stock, he demanded, affectedly, " I hope 
I am to have the honour of meeting your lady- 
ships at the small, leetle, private paurty at the 
Castle to-night?" 

" Oh, y(yu are asked, are you ?'" said Lady 
Knocklofty, with a look of insolent surprise. 
'^ I suppose you are on guard at the Castle, to- 
night." 

" Why, I shaul be on the Castle guard, I 
believe," said the Captain, " that is, I take it 
I 3 



178 ^ THE O'BRIENS Als^D 

for granted, I will ; but whether or no, Lady 
Knocklofty, I assure your ladyship, I would be 
asked ; as it has long been her excellency's polite 
intintion to have me at all her small, leetle, 
private paurties." 

" Oh, if you would be asked, there is not a 
word more to be said," observed Lady Honoria 
gravely, " so, cm revoir.^' 

'^ Aye, au revoir,'" added Lady Knocklofty, 
impatiently nodding him off; *' and mind you 
return to Kitty Macguire, and look to the 
mare." 

The captain again backed out and flourished 
off, making way for a heavy dragoon, (who had 
long and patiently waited for the reversion of 
his place) ; and continuing to repeat to himself 
as he trotted on his mission, " O rewoir^ O re- 
woir ; that's not in the grammar as far as I've 
got, but to be sure T am not further than Jay^ 
I have, tu zvah, thou hast. O rezvoir, well to be 
sure !" and the captain added, *' au revoir,'^ or 
something that sounded like it, to a vocabulary 
he was industriously composing, from the crumbs 
which fell from the rich man**? table. 



THE o'flahertys. 179 

Suddenly and unexpectedly introduced into 
high life by the very absurdities which should 
have kept him out of it, he felt that as la nature 
n'apprend pas I orthographic^ some aid from art 
was necessary to supply her deficiencies ; and 
beheving that learning, like a " wise-bearing 
carriage, is caught as men take diseases one 
from another," he had put himself through a 
course of education, to which all his great friends 
unconsciously contributed, in conjunction with 
" the immortal Shakspeare," whose acquaintance 
he had recently made by acting in the singing 
characters, and filling up that useful range of 
parts included in " mutes, guards, attendants, 
and others," at the Countess of Ely's attic 
theatre in Ely- place. 

" How that vulgar fellow gets on,'** said Lady 
Knocklofty, cutting dead the heavy dragoon by 
turning her back to him, and addressing her 
companion. 

'* Get on ! to be sure he does," said Lady 
Honoria ; " il est fait pour cela. With his im- 
maculate brogue, his pushing manners, and 
divine voice, how could he fail .^" 



I 



180 THE o'bRIENS and 

" Oh ! his brogue and manners are detes- 
table ; but what would he do, if he lost his 
voice ?" said Lady Knocklofty. 

" Do?" said Lady Honoria, " why, do with- 
out his dinner very often ; unless you appoint 
him to the etat of dry- nurse in perpetuity to 
Kitty Macguire." 

" I am tired of them both," said Lady 
Knocklofty, yawning ; and, for want of excite- 
ment, just then tired of every thing: " I wish,'' 
she continued, still cutting the dragoon, " they 
were married to each other." 

"What! the Hon. Kitty Macguire, with 
her high blood' and her (sometimes) high airs, 
married to Barney O'Mealy, the son of an inn- 
keeper at Ennis ! Oh ! la mesalliance r 

" I wish then Lord Knocklofty would not 
bore me with his hangers on and poor cousins, 
if he has no means of providing for them."" 

*' He has provided for the Captain,'' said 
Lady Honoria. 

'• He ? not a bit. It was Captain Macheath 
that made a Captain of Barney O' Mealy. The 
Duke was so pleased with him at Lady Ely's." 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 181 

" Yes, but who introduced him there to please 
the Duke? But as for young Kitty, soyez traiu 
quilk. Kitty will provide for herself, some how 
or other. In the mean time, she is the most 
useful bit of furniture in Knocklofty house. 
She talks to the bores, flirts with the boys, takes 
a hand with the dowagers, fills the beau-pots 
with flowers from the country, and sings slang 
songs to amuse Lord Knocklofty, when he re- 
turns from the house, badgered into an ill temper 
by the pathriots of the opposition, with their 
eternal refrain of places, pensions, penals, and 
all the old list of Irish grievances. By the by, 
where is your husband to-day, my dear ? I 
don't see him upon the ground." 

The question was asked with a carelessness, 
too careless not to seem studied. 

" Lord, child, I have enough to do to mind 
other people's husbands, without looking after 
my own," rephed Lady Knocklofty, laughing : — 
'•but I really thought he was with you this 
morning when I called to take you up in Ste- 
phen's Green ; I thought, at least, I saw a frosted 



182 THE o'bRIEXS and 

head between the Venetian blinds in your dress- 
ing-room." 

" Oh ! that was my deary ""s head, tete de mari 
au naturel, que cependant J'ai bien coiffe before 
I left him, for we were going over the old 
ground — " 

" What old ground ?'" asked Lady K., who 
had now fairly shouldered out the dragoon. 

''Want of money, simply that, my dear,^' 
said Lady Honoria. 

" The only want I cannot complain of," said 
Lady Knocklofty with a sigh ; "but by-the- 
by, I heard the Duchess ask Lord Knocklofty 
to join her "awkward squad,'' as she calls the 
household. You know the ministe rials have 
sent her over a new consignment of younger 
sons to provide for. Oh ! here she comes, the 
vice-reoal Venus." 

" A Venus in brass, (said Lady Honoria, 
spitefully), as old Lady Slipslop (Hislop, par 
parenthese) names the * Diana in bronze,' when 
she undertakes to shew off her husband's 
museum. O dear, I forgot she was your aunt, 
child!" 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. \Sti 

" Oh ! never mind that ; spare my friends, 
and do as you please with my relations. But 
you should remember every one has not tra- 
velled like you," said Lady Knocklofty, sharply. 
" Yet you have your nickname, as well as my 
aunt, Hislop."" 

" Oh, I have, have I ? and what do they call 
me .f*" 

'• Madame de Polthogue, (said Lady Knock- 
lofty, with a pretty little malignant smile that 
always became her) ; from your constant use of 
French phrases, and, as they pretend, from your 
patriotic preservation of the Munster accent."" 

^' And what does polthogue mean.'^" asked 
Lady Honoria, biting her lips. 

" In Irish, a thump, or blow, I believe." 

'' VV^ell, I do give them some hard knocks, 
now and then, that is certain. I hold them all 
(the set or clique excepted) in utter contempt. 
To my French phrases, I plead guilty : for the 
phraseology of the mere bel-air of Dublin is so 
baroque, so anti-European, that of necessity I 
take refuge in the French. But I deny the 
Munster brojrue ; I deny the coach horses, Sir 



184* *rHE o'eriens and 

Peter. And now draw in, for Heaven's sake, 
or we shall be run down by your friend, the 
vice-queen." 

Lady Knocklofty tightened her reins^ and the 
next moment the low and splendid phaeton of 
the Lady Lieutenant — small, light, and elegant 
as the biga of the Vatican, — came sweeping over 
the ground. It was drawn by four tiny steeds, 
which looked as though some such fairy god- 
mother as Cinderella's had recently converted 
them from white mice into white ponies. They 
were whimsically driven by two little, jet-black 
postillions, turbaned and draped in eastern cos- 
tume ; and they strongly contrasted their 
moorish visages, and ebony countenances, with 
the pretty fair faces of two little boys, who sat 
sur le devant, and who might have passed for 
loves, if they had not been loaded with the 
military finery of viceregal pages. Alone in 
her triumphal car, surpassing all, even those 
who " surpassed the passing fair,'' sat the 
fairest representative of royalty that ever was 
delegated by foreign policy, to win over a re- 
fractory people, by means which might have 



THE OFLAHERTYS. 185 

succeeded, when weightier measures failed. 
But party spirit is not gallant ; and politics 
and chivalry have ever stood aloof. It hap- 
pened therefore that her Excellency, the idol 
of her court, formed to " engage all hearts, 
and charm all eyes," was not a favourite with 
the people; who confounded the gaiety of her 
drawing-room with the impolitic measures of 
her husband's cabinet. And though, whenever 
she came forth into public, a sudden burst of 
admiration, which nature sent from the hearts 
to the lips of all parties, hailed her approach, 
yet it was too frequently chilled by prejudice, 
or checked by misdirected indignation. She 
appeared at the review in a habit of Rutland 
blue, faced with scarlet, and embroidered in 
gold. Her faultless face was too much shaded 
by the broad leaf of a white beaver hat, sur- 
mounted by Si panache blanche, which, like that 
worn by the best of the Bourbons, was the 
oriflamme of many a devoted heart. As she 
passed along, she bowed gracefully to all ; and 
familiarly, and with a significant glance and 
smile, to the ladies in the phaeton. Her splendid 



186 THE O'BRIENS AND 

appearance extorted involuntary homage from 
every eye — and voluntary sarcasms from many 
lips. " There she goes," said Lady Knocklofty, 
"the ' queen of hearts,' with St. Leger, and St. 
George, and St. John, and all her train of saints 
after her." 

" And sinners," said Lady Honoria, signifi- 
cantly. 

" I hope you don^t count my lord in the 
number, poor man," said Lady Knocklofty, " for 
he is close upon her chariot wheels, you see." 

" Yes !"" said Lady Honoria, with humour, 
" she is at alPm the ring." 

" If she is at him, it will be love's labour 
lost,-' said Lady Knocklofty, " or coquetry's ; 
for if I know any thing of Lord Knocklofty, he 
is not to be taken, alive or dead." 

" Well !" said Lady Honoria, " 'sur ce cha- 
pitre on pent se rappoi'ter a vous^ as Ninon 
says; and it is as well to be put upon one's 
guard at once." 

" I don't mean to say that Lord Knocklofty 
is not to be won," said his wife, coolly ; *' but it 
will not be by a woman, who, Uke the Duchess, is 



THK o'flahkrtys. 187 

neither actuated by passion, nor by avarice ; and 
who, spoilt by flattery herself, never thinks of 
offering it, where flattery alone will take. Lord 
Knocklofty must be wooed, and not unsought be 
won. He has no time to make love. A clever 
woman might do any thing with him, who would 
take that trouble off* his hands. As for the 
Duchess, she, you know, means nothing by her 
conquests but the pleasure of making them." 

"Humph!" ejaculated Lady Honoria ; *' I 
am not quite so sure of that." 

Here the flourish of trumpets, the roll of 
drums, and the striking up of the English na- 
tional anthem by the several bands, announced 
the arrival of the Lord Lieutenant, General and 
General Governor of Ireland. In the prime of 
life and manly beauty, gay, careless, and spirited, 
splendidly attired, and numerously attended by 
a brilliant cortege of young English military of 
rank and fashion, he came, not pompously, but 
dashingly on, smiling and bowing to the host of 
beautiful women, who hailed him as he passed ; 
while, -among the multitude, but few "threw up 
their caps, and cried, ' God save King Richard ! ' " 



188 THE O'BRIENS AND 

The reviewing general (the Earl of Charle- 
mont), and his staff, immediately followed. 
Then the popular voice swelled into acclama- 
tion to the remotest confines of the multitude ; 
hats were waved, and handkerchiefs flaunted, 
and the old national air of " Patrick's Day" 
honoured the progress of the father of the 
Irish Volunteers. He rode on slowly, as if at 
once to spare and gratify the people, who 
crowded closely on him, and almost under his 
horse's feet ; his venerable head uncovered, his 
white hair contrasting with his dark impending 
brows, and with a certain severity of look, softened 
down by a beneficent smile. As he passed the 
Knocklofty carriage, the ladies bowed coldly, 
but respectfully ; while to the Lord Lieutenant, 
who seemed disposed to stop and speak to them, 
they nodded familiarly, and smiled sportively. 

" How handsome he looks P' said Lady Ho- 
noria. 

"^ Yes ; but he wants expression,"*' said Lady 
Knocklofty, " a certain sentimental ardour of 
look, without which there is no beauty for me." 

" Oh, pooh !" interrupted Lady Honoria, im- 



THE o'flaiieutys. 189 

patiently, " I am half inclined to exclaim with 
Charles Surface, ' curse your sentiment ;' hut 
how unpoyjular he is; — only observe.'*'' 

" I am sure I don't know why/' said Lady 
Knocklofty ; "he does every thing to please 
them : he scarcely ever goes to bed sober, and 
he bespoke tabinet furniture the other day to 
an immense amount"" 

" It is the ^ pathriots^ as they call themselves, 
that are doing it. What do you think of that 
insolent fellow, Curran, talking something about 
' a paltry viceroy'' the other day in the House ? 
However, we have all made a party to go to the 
gallery with the Duchess, to witness the putting 
down of this young patriot by dear Fitz; we 
are to have an exhibition by command.''* 

" It was at my house that it was arranged,'' 
said Lady Knocklofty. 

" One would think,"" added Lady Honoria, 
" that the Duke was the very beau ideal oi an 
Irish Lord Lieutenant, made on purpose for 
them. But there is no knowing where to catch 
the dear Irish, and * I xvill be drowned, and 



190 THE O'BRIEKS AND 

nobody sJtall save me,' as it is their own gram- 
mar, should be their motto." 

Here the subject of her animadversions, at- 
tended only by one aid-de-camp, rode up to the 
phaeton, (having hastily acknowledged the mi- 
litary honours with which he was received). 
His Excellency was evidently aux petits soins 
with Lady Knocklofty ; and Lady Honoria, like 
a true woman of the world, left them to their 
chuchoteries, and turned her whole attention to 
the carriage of the Lady Lieutenant, which was 
a little in advance. Humming the then popular 
French air of " Je suis Lindor^"' she observed 
through her glass, with an involuntary sneer of 
pleasure, the cold, phlegmatic deportment, which 
Lord Knocklofty preserved, while among the 
crowd of servitors with whom he was confounded. 

The observations of Lady Honoria Stratton 
(a woman of the world, in all the force of the 
term), with respect both to the chief governor, 
and the country he governed, or misgoverned, 
were not unfounded. If Ireland ever did pos- 
sess the true " heau ideaV^ of a popular Lord 
Lieutenant (to use her Ladyship's phrase}, it 



THE o'fLAHERTYS 191 

was in the person of liim, who now seemed espe- 
cially marked out by popular prejudice for 
aversion. Young, beautiful, generous, and gal- 
lant, — but too much addicted to social pleasures, 
and but too prone to convivial indulgence, — this 
semi-Hibernian chief governor epitomized in 
himself the leading traits of temperament and 
habits, ascribed to the Irish character. In his 
early youth, he had been distinguished in the 
English house of peers, as the apologist for 
the popular disorders in Ireland, by judi- 
ciously and courageously ascribing them to 
their true causes; yet it belonged to the 
anomalies of the most unfortunate of all coun- 
tries, to consider its early friend as a present 
enemy ; to make him answerable, on his first 
arrival, for the errors of the administration 
he came to replace; and to hold him ac- 
countable for measures over which he as 
yet had no controul. Impatient, (as the 
long-suffering always are,) occasionally unjust, 
(as those to whom all justice has been denied 
frequently will be), the Irish acted upon the 
impulse of irritated and hasty feelings; and 



192 THE o'bkij:ns and 

received with a whoop of insult, the man who 
had long sympathized with their sufferings. In 
the petulance of wounded self-love, and the 
hauteur of high rank, the offended chief go- 
vernor suffered every prepossession in favour of 
Ireland to yield to unconquerable disgust. Love 
of ease, with the sense of unmerited indignities, 
combined to withdraw the votary of pleasure 
from the drudgery of business ; and, hastily and 
imprudently yielding up the reins of the state 
to more interested and less safe hands — to 
hands long used to direct it, by the whip and 
curb— he abandoned the cabinet for the ban- 
quet hall, changed the council " into merry 
meetings," turned his sceptre to a thyrsus, and 
braiding 

'* His brows with rosy twine, 
Dropping odour.% dropping wine," 

he converted the strong hold of an ascendant 
faction into the court of a Comus, and hke 
Beuvron, the faineant couAier of Louis the 
Xllllh, '^ il Jit ires-bien sa charge, quaiid il 
ny avoit rien dfaire.^'' 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 193 

The troops to be employed in the sham fight, 
were now assembling near the fifteen acres. Pi- 
quets of cavahy, supported by infantry, were 
distributed in various directions ; some concealed 
in the luxuriant bushes near the great ravine, 
and others in the knolls and clumps of the re- 
servoir. A few videttes remained on the skirts 
of the back woods, their arms glittering through 
the foliage; and aids-de-camp and orderlies 
scouring across the intervening plains, gave to 
the scene the air of a field of battle on the eve of 
a great engagement. 

The spot chosen for this display of calculated 
evolutions, was called the Star Fort, the attack 
and the defence of which formed the principal 
features in the manoeuvres of the day. It 
appeared the ruin of a strong and ancient 
hold, covering a regular polygon, of consi- 
derable dimensions ; but was, in reality, of 
modern construction. It was raised by the 
celebrated Earl of Wharton as a retreat iov 

VOL. I. K 



194 THE o'bkIENS and 

safety in the event of an insurrectionary move- 
ment in the capital— some symptoms of such an 
event having manifested themselves in an attack 
upon the statue of King William the 3d, on 
his lordship's arrival in the country, to take 
the reins of its government. But the appre- 
hensions it had awakened proved groundless; 
the Fort, ere it was quite finished, was per- 
mitted to fall into a picturesque and pre- 
mature decay, (presenting to the eye the image 
of a once impregnable place ; and adding to the 
fine scene, it dominated, a feature of character- 
istic interest and great effect,) and it continued to 
be lonoj identified with the reien of him who 
erected it, by the name of " Wharton's Folly." 

The defence of this place had been assigned to 
the Dublin volunteers, who occupied a position 
extending along " the Nine Acres ;" with their 
right resting on the Fort, which they had strongly 
garrisoned, and their left upon the first bridge, 
which, at a short distance from the approach to 
the vice-regal lodge, is thrown across the piece 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. 1 Q^ 

of water, wliich runs in a parallel direction to 
the road leading to it. The second bridge, 
equally well guarded, served as a key to the 
centre of their well taken position. The as- 
sault was reserved for the '' Irish brigade," and 
the manner of conducting it was left (with 
the exception of the usual sketch of a "project 
for a field day ") entirely to the skill and dis- 
cretion of its youthful leader. There appeared 
to be two ways only of approat^hing the 
Fort, which he was appointed to attack, and 
both were equally disadvantageous. He must 
either carry the bridges upon which the 
enemy were posteJ, or enter upon the rear of 
their position, by making a long detour to the 
right, or to the left. The leader of the enemy 
was aware of his own strength, and was equally 
prepared for his antagonist's adopting either of 
these alternatives. The first, he knew, would 
be difficult to accomphsh ; and the second would 
occupy so much time that it could hardly be 
K 2 



106 THE o'bBICNS AXD 

accomplished at all. There was, however, one 
advantage which the Irish brigade possessed: 
they had a full and complete view of the whole 
of their opponent's position, and could see, dis- 
tinctly, any movements that they made; whilst 
their own motions were concealed from the ob- 
servation of the enemy by the thickness of the 
foliage, with which their part of the park was so 
luxuriously shaded. 

Shortly after, within view of many thousand 
spectators, and under the eye of many veteran 
officers, the Irish brigade commenced the action, 
by a spirited and simultaneous attack upon both 
the bridges. For these attacks, the enemy was 
well prepared, and the defence and assault were 
conducted with equal obstinacy and skill. But 
while the enemy's attention was exclusively 
directed to the defence of these important points, 
the leader of the Irish brigade, putting himself 
at the head of his light infantry, and taking ad- 
vantage of the inequality of the ground near the 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. 19t 

Royal Military Hospital, proceeded in double 
quick time, made a detour to his left, and keep- 
ing close to the south wall of the park, succeeded 
(unobserved by the enemy) in establishing his 
columns among the thorn bushes, which lay 
scattered irregularly between the wall and the 
Star Fort. Here, with the eye of a lynx, and 
the patient vigilance of a young tiger ready to 
spring on its prey, he awaited the result of the 
operations of the other part of the brigade. The 
bridge on the enemy's left, after a persevering 
defence, fell at last before the skill and ardour 
of the assailants ; w ho instantly passing their vic- 
torious columns over it, wheeled short round to 
the left, under cover of the ground which slopes 
down towards the water, and proceeded rapidly 
to attack the rear of the enemy, employed in de- 
fending the bridge in the centre. This bridge 
had held out long and obstinately, in consequence 
of the fire of a twelve-pounder having been 
directed to check the progress of the assailants. 



198 THE O'bRIEXS AXD 

Meantime the leader of the besieged had per- 
ceived the last skilful movements of the be- 
siegers ; but not suspecting the presence of an 
enemy in the immediate vicinity of the Fort, he 
drew out of it a large body of his troops, and 
led them to the support of his centre. Upon 
this movement, the young chief of the Irish 
brigade had calculated ; and allowing the enemy 
to advance beyond the possibility of a recal, he 
rushed forward, sword in hand, at the head of 
his light infantry, scaled the unprotected ram- 
parts, and, forgetting for a moment the unreality 
in the ardour of the attack, forced the artillery 
men from their guns, and amidst cheers and 
shouts of the excited and anxious spectators, he 
planted the colours of the Irish brigade in the 
centre of the Fort. 

The Reviewing-General who had watched 
with much interest, the progress of the fight, 
and to whom this last movement was as unex- 
pected as it was to the enemy — observed to 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 199 

his Staff, that by all the rules of war the Irish 
brigade had conquered ; and ordering the bugles 
to sound for a cessation of hostilities, he rode 
up with his staff to the youthful and spirited 
leader, smilingly congratulated him upon his 
victory, and seriously commended the skill which 
he had displayed in achieving it. 

The young man received commendations thus 
flattering, from one whose praise was fame, 
with head uncovered, with eyes flashing beneath 
their downcast lids, and with a face glowing 
with a deeper flush than that which the acti- 
vity of his recent feats had kindled. The 
veteran general, and the youthful soldier, as 
they stood in contact and in contrast, exhibited 
the splendid representation of the men of 
Ireland's best days. 

The great body of the army of Leinster now 
proceeded to the Fifteen Acres ; the vanquished 
party taking up its ground, in contiguous 
columns, on the spot where the chief Secre- 
tary's lodge now stands : while the victors 



^00 THE o'bRIENS and 

diverged to the left, and passing on the rear of 
the Hibernian military school, halted and piled 
their arms on the rising ground which over- 
looks the white houses and ivy-covered church 
of the village of Chapelizod. 



THE o'klahkrtys. 201 



CHAPTER IV. 

THE REVIEW. 

Sr, Tou Lave wrestled well, anJ overtiirown more Uian your 
eneuiiet. 

As You Likt it. 

Heated and animated, with the strong ex- 
citement of the combat still fluttering in every 
lieart, and throbbing in every pulse, the Irish 
brigade and their leader stood at rest along the 
liighest ridge of the acclivity — the gaze and 
admiration of the multitude, w ho were crowded 
along its base in vehicles of all sorts, public and 
private. It was to this spot, where the mock 
combat had terminated, that Lady Knocklofty 
urged her restless steeds, though the ascent wa> 
steep and the way encumbered. She had followed 
the progress of the sham fight with the eye, 
if not with the science, of a practised tactician. 
K S 



^02 THE o'bUIEXS and 

The conspicuous form of the young assailant 
had seldom eluded her observation, through all 
the evolutions of the corps : and she had per- 
ceived that while, with downcast looks and 
crimsoned cheek, he stood modestly receiving 
the eulogies of Lord Charlemont, his furtive 
glances had more than once been directed towards 
the spot she occupied. The sight of the lynx, 
and the scent of the hound, are dull instincts 
when compared with the rapid perception with 
which a vain woman detects the admiratior) she 
has awakened, and the interest she excites. 

She now halted, and drew in half way up the 
hill, flanked to her right by the line of the 
Irish brigade, and to the left by a confused 
mass of gigs, noddies, cars, and private car- 
riages, so as to have all approach cut off' on 
that side where Lady Honoria Stratton was 
placed. Evidently out of spirits and out of 
temper, silent and sullen, that lady sat enve- 
loped in a white satin cardinal, which she had 
drawn round her fine figure ; her pouting 



THE oVlahertys. 203 

pretty face just peeping above it, like that 
charming picture of Miss Farren, in a similar 
costume, which was once the ornament of every 
dressing room. The fact was. Lady Honoria had 
not during the day been fortunate-— the Lady Lieu- 
tenant had kept many of her own particular men, 
and one in particular, in constant attendance on 
her vice regal progress; and while several young 
military and some of the household contrived 
to squeeze their horses between the wheel of 
the phaeton, and the acclivity fringed by the 
Irish brigade, for the purpose of paying their 
homage to Lady Knocklofty, all Lady Honoria's 
prospects were bounded by an old shattered 
carriage, whose hind wheel had got fast locked 
in that of Lady Knocklofty's phaeton — a most 
ludicrous mesalliance ! 

" This is a capital position," said Lady 
Knocklofty, throwing a batterie (Tenfilade of 
smiling looks along the line of the Irish brigade, 
every one of which hit its man. '^ This is a 
capital position, is it not, Honoria P'** 



204 THE OBRIKKS AKD 

" Cest selon,'' said Lady Honoria, dryly ; who 
as usual, preferred speaking the language she 
had acquired in the best circles of Paris, to the 
dialect she had learned in her native moun- 
tains. 

" How sehn f demanded Lady Knocklofty. 

" Why, according to the object you have in 
view.' 

" Oh ! my object," replied Lady Knocklofty, 
laughing, " is to see the manoeuvres in the Fif- 
teen Acres to the best possible advantage ?" 

*' The best manoeuvres are not those gone 
through in the Fifteen Acres," said Lady 
Honoria, with a humour in her tone that did 
not escape her friend's penetration ; wlio, look- 
ing in her face, demanded, in the drawling 
French accent, acquired in her paternal castle in 
Connaught, from her mother's Swiss maid, 
'« !^nr quel-Jieur avez le vans marche, ma chere ?" 

" Sur une pensee^^ was the quick reply, with 
the true grasseyani tone of the Faubourg St. 
Germain. 



THK u'l-LAHr.RTYa. 205 

'' Apparently ,"" said Lady Knocklofty, Avith 
that acrimony which dear friends in high hf« 
vfill sometimes feel towards each other, ** ap- 
parently your ^' pensce"^ is not '' heart's ease.''"' 

** No," said Lady Honoria, throwing up her 
meaning eyes to the Irish brigade; *' neither is 
my pensee, (or, as the Irish call it, my pansee), 
a Xarciscus.'''' 

** Vou are a greater adept in the language 
of flowers, as in every other,'"" (said Lady Knock- 
lofty coldly), " than I am ; and I confess your 
meaning escapes my comprehension. ' 

^' I wish I could escape from this atmosphere 
of bad smells,"" said Lady Ilonoria, looking 
round with disgust ; " pah ! we have got into a 
pretty mess here !" 

" What the devil, Albina, could have drivtii 
you to take up this position ?" demanded an 
authoritative voice from behind the carriage. 
Both ladies started, and turned round. A gen- 
tleman, for whom the two outriders had backed 
to make way, had got his horse between the 



206 THE O'BRIENS AND 

hind wheels of the phaeton. He was a tall, 
fair, slight, cold-looking person, with a phleg- 
matic countenance and haughty demeanour ; but 
more distinguished by his splendid volunteer 
uniform, and his blue ribbon and star of St. 
Patrick, than by any other mark of exterior 
supremacy. It was Lord Knocklofty. Lady 
Honoria stood up, and leaned over the back of 
the phaeton, with a face, from which every trace 
of ill humour was banished, and was succeeded 
by radiant smiles. Lady Knocklofty carelessly 
turned round her head, and without noticing 
the conjugal inquiry, addressed her steeds with 
" Steady now, dears, steady," continuing to tip 
their ears with the whip, in a manner to pro- 
duce a very contrary effect from that her words 
directed. Lord Knocklofty pressed significantly 
the fair hand presented to him by Lady Ho- 
noria, with the murmured observation of " How 
beautiful you are looking to-day !"" Then ad- 
dressing his wife, he added, " I say, Albina, 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. *207 

do get out of this as soon as you can — what 
could induce you to drive up this hill ?" 

** To show my learning, as your Lordship's 
coachman calls it,"" said Lady Knocklofty, play- 
ing with her whip, and smiling archly at " a case 
of coxcombs,'* who were in waiting by the side 
of the phaeton. 

" Your pedantry you mean," said Lady 
Honoria pointedly. 

" Exactly," said Lord Knocklofty, " you 
are a witty creature." 

" More witty than wise,"" said Lady Honoria, 
laughing, " or I should not trust myself with such 
a neck-or-nothing driver as her Ladyship here." 
" Why did you let her scramble up this 
hill ?'' added Lord Knocklofty, while his lady 
was talking to one of her cavalieri serventi. 

" Needs must," (said Lady Honoria, shrug- 
ging her shoulders), '* when the — " she paused 
and laughed. 

" Devil drives, of course,"" added Lady 
Knocklofty, sharply, and suddenly turning round. 



SOS THE o'bRIEXS and 

" But observe, my dear, your coming with me 
to-day was your own proposition." 

Lady Honoria looked mortified, as if her pro- 
position had been her alternative, between com- 
ing in Lady Knocklofty's phaeton, or not coming 
at all. 

*' Well, at all events get out of this as soon 
as you can," said Lord Knocklofty ; " and 
pray don't tease your horses so, Albina." 

" Why, I'm only tipping them the silk," 
said Lady Knocklofty, " just to keep them 
alive." 

'* I'll be d d but they'll throw you." 

" I'll be d if they do," said Lady Knock- 
lofty, not with Lady Townly's ' gulp,' but 
with such a look, and such a smile, and such an 
accent, that the coarseness of the imprecation 
was almost neutralized in its utterance, and its 
very profaneness almost turned into a grace by 
the dramatic simplicity and archness with which 
it was given. Such were the manners of the 
day in Ireland ; not so bad, indeed, as in the 



THE oVlahertys. 209 

days of Queen Elizabeth, when fine ladies were 
wont to ^'Jurcr leur Grand Dieu,'' at every 
word ; nor yet so coarse as when the prettiest 
lips uttered the broadest douhle-entendres in tlie 
time of the Mary Wortleys. Still they were bad 
enough ; en arriere with the age, and even in 
Ireland peculiar to the domineering and minis- 
terial oligarchy, whose lawless power was thus 
well illustrated by manners as licentious. All 
the men laughed vociferously at the playful non- 
chalance of Lady Knocklofty's imprecation, who 
added, in a coaxing tone, to her cold and sullen 
Lord (himself occupied in listening to some 
muttered ^ntticisms of Lady Honoria), 

•' \Vell, don't be angry. Lord Kr , and 

'pon honour, and, as O 'Mealy says in Macheath, 
' may me meer slip her shoulder,' if I don't 
escape out of this, as soon as I can extricate my- 
self from this file of carriages." 

" Why, then, long life to your honour. Mar- 
ram, I hopes you soon will, plaze Jasus, with 
the help of God ; and that your ladyship's 



210 THK O'BRIENS AND 

honour will just let go my bit of a hind whil], 
Marram, which you have kotched here behind 
to the rare." 

This prayer, which produced a general laugh, 
was uttered by the postillion of an old-fashioned 
and cumbrous vehicle that seemed of foreign 
build, except that it was unemblazoned with 
arms ; and as its blinds were drawn up, and the 
glasses were down, it was probably unoccupied. 
The ragged postillion, and the miserable 
cattle he drove, justified all that ever was said, 
written, or sketched in the broadest spirit of 
caricature of the genuine Irish posting of the 
eighteenth century. He was a short, thick- 
set, sun-burnt person, with an old hat on one 
side of his shock head, and a broken pipe in 
one corner of his arch mouth. His eye was sly, 
liis visage shrewd, and his attitude, as he sat 
]ack-a-daisically, that of a person, in whom 
" patience per force, with wilful choler meeting," 
was very humourously obvious. He had pre- 
ceded his appeal for the emancipation of his 



THE o'rLAIIEUTYS. 211 

liind wheel, by many a supplicating look, first 
at the captive wheel, and then at the captivating 
lady, and by many a true Irish " Och hone !" 
though he was evidently neither an unamused 
nor an unwilling auditor of the superior beings 
with whom he was thus accidentally brought 
into such close contact ; and when he now 
audibly made his petition, with a look and 
gesture correspondent to the words, he heard the 
very general laugh with which it w^as received 
by the grandees with the same unaltered air of 
plaintive supplication which he had all along 
asi-umed. 

" Famous, by Jove! capital,*" exclaimed a 
pretty boy officer of the Prince's Own, on the 
watch for Irish fun, expecting a wit in every 
peasant, and a hon mot in every word uttered by 
the common people. " Capital ! come, we shall 
have some vastly good fun now. Do draw him 
out, Lady Knocklofty — now pray !" 

" So, friend," said Lady Knocklofty, ^' I see 
I have got you into a predicament."" 



S12 THE o'bRIENS and 

" Perdicament ! och I you have, plaze your 
ladyship ; and am'nt the first, I'll engage," 
looking archly round at the gentlemen. 

" Capital !'' said the Prince's Own ; " but I 
say, why don't you take your pipe out of your 
mouth, you rascal, when you address a lady ?" 

" Is it the dhudeen, plaze your honour," 
taking out the black stump of a pipe, looking at 
it complacently, and then placing it back, be- 
tween his large white teeth ; " och ! then, Sir, 
so I would, only sorrow puff in it, nor won't till 
I get back, for want of a spark ; barring I might 
light it at her ladyship's eye." 

" Bravo !'' exclaimed the officers, *' bravo ! 
excellent !'' 

'* Very well, indeed/' said Lady Knocklofty, 
with whom the coin of admiration was always 
current, pass through what hands it might. 
" Come, that's a compliment worth paying for. 
Oh, Kitty Macguire has my purse. There she 
is, St. Leger, with Captain CMealy," pointing 
to a fair, fat, fashionable looking girl, in a faded 



THF. o'fLAHERTVS. SlfJ 

green riding habit, and mounted on a magnificent 
horse. " But, stop, who will lend me something ? 
— Lord Knocklofty, Lady Honoria ?" 

'' You know I never carry money," rephed 
Lord Knocklofty. 

*' You know I never have any to carry," 
>aid Lady Honoria. 

A hundred purses bad now ** leaped from 
their" waistcoat pockets. Lady Knocklofty 
took Colonel St. Leger's (one of the most distin- 
guished members of the Irish court). 

'* Oh ! there is nothing here but gold," she 
said, looking into the purse as she drew the 
strings. *' Stay, here is a seven shilhng piece," 
and she flung it to the driver, adding, " there, 
friend, that's to drink your mistress's health." 

" This is paying for flattery a poids d'or,'' said 
Lady Honoria to Lord Knocklofty. 

" 'Tis just like her," he replied ; and then 
whispering to Lady Honoria, took leave with a 
" goodbye till this evening ,-" for an aid-de-camp 
had called him off to the Lord Lieutenant. 



214 THE O'BRIENS AlsD 

The driver looked at the bright coin thus 
cai'elessly thrown at him, and then in the bright 
eyes of his generous donor, as if he doubted 
his good luck. " Sure I a'n't to keep it all, 
my lady," he said, dropping his pipe from his 
mouth, and throwing an expression of gratitude 
and delio^ht into his mobile countenance. 

" Yes, yes," said the lady, laughing, '^ I 
don't expect any change." 

" Why then, may I never live to have a 
happy death, if ever I drive the Castle Knock- 
garrons again, oncet T get rid of my load." 

" Your load !" exclaimed the ladies and the 
beaux, fixing their eyes on the close blinded 
carriage, " Why, have you any one shut up 
in that old chaise ?"" 

" Is it in the cbay ?''' (said the man, rubbing 
his head with a slight contraction in the muscles 
of his face), ''sorrow, christian, how would 1 ? 
Sure thims returns," (pointing to the horses), 
'' fresh as they look and nat a hair turned, 



THE o'flaiiertys. 215 

the animals — "" and he stroked down the necks 
of the blind and broken-winded beasts, which 
had scarcely an hair left to turn. 

*' What do you mean then by getting rid of 
vour load?" said the Prince's Own ? 

" What do I mane is it, plaze your honour ? 
Wliy then, what would I mane (scratching his 
head in evident perplexity), but my own self, 
Sir ? There is many a man would be glad to 
^get rid of himself; and ^vhaihether way could I 
do it than in drinking long life to her lady- 
ship's honour there." 

" You mean then," (said Lady Honoria), 
'* you will get beside yourself as soon as you 
can." 

*' That's just it, long life to your ladyship, 
mind, and body;" and looking back at his 
locked wheel with an expression of anxiety, and 
an evident desire to extricate himself and be 
off, he added, " and hopes it's no offence, only 
just if your Ladyship would back a taste, sure 
I'd get off in a jiffey." 



216 THE O'BRIENS AXil 

" No, no, pray Lady Knocklofty don't let 
him go," exclaimed the Prince's Own ; " he is 
worth any thing, he is by far the best fun we 
have seen since we arrived. I say, Paddy — " 

" That's not the name that made a christian 
of me, plaze your honour." 

" AVell then, come, do tell us what is your 
name, my worthy ?" 

" Barny Hougloghan is the name*'s upon me, 
Sir, off you plaze." 

" Well, Barny Orlegan, if you are so impa- 
tient to be off, what brought you here may I 
ask .?" 

" What brought me here is it. Sir ! — the 
cattle did,'' said Barny dryly, and smacking 
his whip. 

" Capital !" said the young officer, chuckling ; 
" and so your horses came to see the review, 
did they.?" 

" Och, plaze your honour, they are not such 
asses as that any how, nor myself neider; we 
have something else to be doing, nor to be look- 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 217 

ing after divarsion at this hour of the day, 
Sir !" 

" Then how did you get into the scrape, 
Bawney ?" 

" Och, I didn't get in at the scrape at all, 
but in at the Castle Knock gate shure ; to cut 
across the Phanix, and to shirk that divil's own 
Knock-maroon hill on the low road; and just 
made down to the Fifteens, to see if I could 
not catch a taste of the Castle Knock infantry 
doing their revolutions, when one sentry driv 
nie here, and another driv me there; and th roth, 
if they'd been army soggers instead of our own 
volunteers, I wouldn't have been driven out of 
my own road by any of them : and so they kip 
driving me here, and driving me there, till I 
was fairly driven in amongst the quahty; and it's 
how I came by the great honor of being kotched 
fast by her ladyship; many a bether man's luck 
afore me, and will again, plaze God." 

A general laugh followed this allusion, which 

VOL. I. L 



218 THE O'BRIENS AND 

gained much, by the leer, the look, and the 
accent, in which it was uttered. 

'' Well," said Lady Knocklofty, throwing 
round her eyes, and drawing out Barney, much 
less for the amusement of the English beaux, 
than for the crowd in general, and for the corps 
of young brigades in particular — " Well, now 
I have kotched you, I shall keep you, you may 
depend on that." 

" Oh, very well, my lady, your honour will 
do as you plaze with me, and troth I'd ax nothing 
better, than to stay wid yez all day, only — '"' 
and he looked back at his chaise, and then at 
his wheel, " as one perplexed in the extreme;" 
when suddenly elevating his eye to the Fifteen 
Acres, and resting it on rather a rustic troop, 
who were going through their evolutions to the 
left, he cried out — " Oh, by the piper that played 
before Moses, if thim an't the Castle-knocks, 
and Master Thady, the master's son, at the 
head of em, in his new regimintals ; oh, thim'g 



THE o'fLAHERTVS. 219 

the boys ! I'd back thini, afore any corps in the 
Phainix ;" and seating himself, he continued 
to follow every movement of his native troops 
with intense admiration and scrutiny; uttering 
at intervals exclamations of delight, and shoulder- 
ing his whip, and following the movements of 
his friends, with a precision, which evinced that 
even the postillion of Castle Knock was in heart 
an Irish volunteer. He was observed, and 
laughed at, as long as he amused; and then, 
sharing the fate of other tumblers, in other 
places, was dropped and forgotten. 

Meantime, Lady Honoria was still excluded 
from the agreeable pastime of flirtation, by a 
blockade of carriages, and her old flanker the 
Castleknock ; and Lady Knocklofty continued 
running through her " tricks of singularity,'' 
fixing every eye, and arresting every ear, within 
the sphere of her operations. She had missions 
and commissions for all her patiti, civil and mili- 
tary ; who were all addressed by name, with a 
L 2 



220 THE O'BRIENS AND 

levelling familiarity, which shewed no respect 
for titles and dignities, hereditary or professional. 
''Edward Fitzgerald" was sent to his brother 
Leinster, to beg he would put off the private play 

at Carton ; as she had got the Dean of 

to play Filch, who had to preach at St. Patrick's 
on Sunday ; so that his private vocation might 
not interfere with his public duties. Kilcolman, 
a young Tipperary Earl, (and descendant of one 
of Charles the Second's playfellows and ministers), 
was sent on an embassy, such as his ancestor 
had occasionally undertaken, at Whitehall — with 
a single violet to the Lord Lieutenant. He 
hesitated. " Go, go," said Lady Knocklofty, 
significantly ; " he will understand it." The 
Tipperary Earl rode off, with the nobility of 
six hundred years on his back. An hand- 
some young page was dispatched to the Earl, 
his papa, to procure tickets for a concert at 
^he Rotunda, at which the noble amateur 
was to take the lead. Colonel St. Leger, 



THE o'flahertys. 2'2l 

the " rose of fashion," with " Freddys," 
« Franks," and " Phils," " all honourable 
men,"*^ were expedited on various missions; while 
Manser St. George, (one of the last and best of 
the Irish fine gentlemen in Ireland's most bril- 
liant day,) was sent to the Duchess, begging per- 
mission to bring Lord Charles Fitzcharles, of 
the Prince's Own, to her grace's petit soupcr and 
blind-man's buff that evening. 

All flew to execute her " infinite deal of 
nothings," with a zeal and readiness which 
proved that the *' age of chivalry was not yet 
imssed," in Ireland. Neither was it. The Irish 
gallantry of that day had indeed the true smack 
of tlie chivalry of the old times. A mixed 
system of devotion and brutality ; in which 
women, alternately treated as sultanas and a« 
slaves, extorted all homage but that of respect ; 
and Qxcited all feelings, save those of tenderness. 
Adored to-day, (Ulaisstes to-morrow, fashion or 
jjassion ruled their momentary ascendant ; and 
the old parts of the rouQS of the French court 



ooo 



THE O BRIENS AXD 



were played to the life by the i^oiies of the Irish, 
who were all little Richelieus and De Gram- 
monts in their way. 

A long-drawn inspiration, as the last of her 
noble estafettes galloped off, indicated that their 
liege lady was not sorry to get rid of them. 
The two great ladies and dear friends, in evi- 
dent guignon with each other, sat dos a clos. 
Lady Honoria, again enveloped in her cardi- 
nal, was sulky, and self-concentrated. Lady 
Knocklofty with looks and spirits all abroad, 
hummed an air from the Beggary's Opera ; and 
playing her very pretty foot against the side of 
her phaeton, slipped it in and out of a Httle 
zebra shoe, which was the fashion of the day, 
and an exact type of a slipper, from the se- 
rao'lio of the Grand Sic^nor. 

This movement, conscious or unconscious on 
the part of the exhibitor, had attracted the 
eyes, and caused some confusion along the line 
of the Irish brigade. It more particularly at- 
tracted the young leader, who stood in advance 



THE O FLAHERTYS, i2^3 

of the corps, and who watched the tvvinkhng of 
the Httle foot with such a glance as the hawk 
gives to tlie fluttering of a young bird nestled 
near his eiry. The slipper (as might be ex- 
pected) at last fell to the ground ! and tlie 
young volunteer, springing from his post, 
pounced on his pretty prey with a rapidity 
that distanced all other competitors for the 
honour of picking it up, and restoring it. With 
the slipper in one hand, and his cap in tlie 
other, he stood beside the phaeton, presenting 
it gracefully ; his colour deepening, and his 
eyes raised with a look, not confident but in- 
tense, to the face of its distinguished owner. 
Finer eyes might be forgotten ; but such eyes, — 
eyes that awaken emotion, by emitting it, once 
met, are remembered for ever ! 

Lady Knocklofty, instead of taking the shoe 
so respectfully and gracefully offered, looked 
round for a moment, then putting out her foot, 
seemed to say by the motion, and the smile 
more cordial than coquettish, which accompanied 



S24 THE o'BRIE^S AND 

it, " there ! you may put it on for your pains f" 
The look was understood, as it was meant, and 
the shpper was put on ; but with an air of such 
rehgious respect, as pilgrims give to the conse- 
crated slipper of St. Peter, when first permitted 
to kiss with " holy palmer's kiss'** the toe of 
infallibility. 

The enviable office performed, the young 
volunteer bowed, was thanked with smiles, 
backed, and resumed his post: from that mo- 
ment, orders ran along the line, and fuglemen 
figured in vain. 

" Ma belle,''' said Lady Honoria, who had 
witnessed this silent intercourse of eyes, (a 
drama, whose unities were included in an instant 
of time), " Ma belle, avec un id langage on 
se passe de paroles V Lady Knocklofty (still 
pre-occupied,) started, coloured through her 
rouge, and asked coldly, " what do you mean, 
child?" 

" Mean, child ! why I mean that ycu seem 
to think those ' eyes right' there, which you 



THE o"FLAIIKETYS. SS5 

have been endeavouring to set wrong all clay, 
are * d'asscz beaux i/eu.v, pour dcs tjcu.v dc' 
province.' *' 

"Yes/' said Lady Knocklofty, flirting lier 
wliip and smiling, " tlicy are terrible eyes, that's 
the truth of it, llonoria. Ho is altogether a 
very fine lad ; much superior to the creatures 
lie is liustled among. I wonder who he is?'' 

" Poll ! what docs it signify who he is ? Of 
course, as O' Mealy said, he is some young 
tradesman. If he were ani^ hodij^ we could 
not fail to know him. But, be he who he 
may, gentle or simple, 3'our permitting him 
to put on your shoe in this public place, was 
very foolish. We shall have it all in i\\v 
" Freeman's Journal" to-morrow, with an e);i- 
gram from Curran, or Lysaght ; or it will be 
sung as a ballad about the streets, with " the 
Duchess's gig ;'"' and I am sure we are unpo])ular 
enough already with the swinish multitude." 

"Nonsense!" said Lady Knocklofty; "it 
l2 



^26 THE o'bRIENS and 

was all the thing of a moment, and nobody 
saw it." 

" Every body sees every thing ; but my dear 
Albina/' said Lady Honoria in an affectionate 
and admonitory tone, " I must say you are the 
most indiscreet person in the world ; for you 
not only take the oddest fancies, but" 

'' Oh, come, this is too pleasant," said Lady 
Knocklofty, piqued, " as if you never had your 
fancies, as you call them." 

" Yes, to be sure, I have,'' said Lady Ho- 
noria, laughing ; " but as Mrs. Peachum says, 
' not with a highwayman, you hussey.' Ob- 
serve, it is as a matter of taste, and not of mo- 
]'als, that I consider these affairs; I am no strait- 
laced censor, D'leu le salt ; for with me, as with 
the world, it is the rank of the parties, not the 
nature of the contract, that stamps it with in- 
discretion." 

" Why, yes,'"' said Lady Knocklofty, point- 
edly, *' you are tolerably aristocratic in your 



THE OFLAHERTYS. ^Ji / 

fancies, and none under nobility approjichcs 
Mrs. Kitty." 

" To be sure," said Lady Honoria, '* Iqvc 
has no better child's guide than the red book ; 
and the Exchequer is your true Paphos, aftei 
all : see, who has governed France for the last 
fifty years." 

" Do you call that love? I call it calculation,'^ 
said Lady Knocklofty, significantly. 

" Call it what you please," said Lady Ho- 
noria, colouring slightly, "but 'tis good taste, 
pour le vwins; and that is precisely what yon 
mere home-bred Irishwomen of fashion are pt r- 
])etually sinning against." 

" We home-bred Irishwomen ! And pray, 
what are you, my dear, pretty, Honoria O'Cal- 
laghan, with all your county Cork kindred — 

'• Pat O'Daisey, 
And Mistress Casey, 
All blood relations to Lord Donoughmore." 

" Why, my dear, to answer you (with a little 



2>28 THE o'brieks and 

variation in the text) from Paddy O Carrol in 
the ' Register Office,'' — It is true, that as ill 
luck would have it, ' I conied over to Ireland to 
be born,'' but I was never dipped in the Shannon 
for all that ; and, thanks to ray father, have 
lived too much abroad^ not to be fully aware of 
the absurdities of my native home, since, by 
divine indignation, I have returned to it. It is 
a sure sign of barbarism when women make a 
parade of the vices they have not, and even ex- 
hibit more of the virtues they have, than is con- 
sistent with decency and hienstance. You 
Irishwomen are all, by temperament, cold and 
vain ; you love display, and there is frequently 
in your flirting manners and unmeaning allures, 
an absence of taste and a want of keeping, which 
would in other countries put many a woman 
in keeping, out of countenance. You look, and 
you sigh, and permit innocent liberties,— all 
meaning nothing at all, — and then, are rather 
startled some fine day, when a disappointed ad- 
mirer turns, heigh presto, into an inveterate 



THE oVlahertys. 2f29 

enemy ; and you find you have lost your repu- 
tation, without gaining any thing by the sacri- 
fice. For instance, you have been playing oft' 
this foolish boy, merely for the pleasure of 
turning his head ; as Mrs. Colonel OGallagher 
got her husband broke for throwing his regi- 
ment into confusion, at a review in Kilkenny, 
through her coquetting with the fugleman." 

" Well, and how do you think I have suc- 
ceeded ?'' asked Lady Knocklofty, sportively. 

" Oh, I dare say you will send the boy back 
to his school or his shop,- utterly unfit for book 
or business."" 

"1 believe," said Lady Knocklofty, "even 
if he is what you suppose, it would be difiicult 
to make him now think 

" A shop with virtue is the lieight of bliss.'' 
*'0h, I grant you," said Lady Honoria, 
*' that politics and patriotism, and the French 
revolution, are upsetting all, and playing " the 
devil among the tailors." But, again, to quote 
from your prologue, (which, by the by, Mrs. 



SSO THE o'bEIEXS and 

O'Neil did not give last night with her usual 

spirits)— 

To check these heroes, and their laurels crop. 
And bring them back to reason and the shop, 

•would, for the present, be difficult, while such 
eloquent demagogues as Curran and Grattan are 
working on the folly and passions of the lower 
orders. Pray, however, do not you bring liberty 
and equality into fashion by your looks and smiles, 
lest you should, some day, have such a youth as 
that with the 'terrible eyes,' taking liberties which 
your quality would not stand ; ' car c'est le plus 
grand petit poUs'Son,' or I am much mistaken. 
Pray remember, Albina, that there is some one 
on the ground, and not far off (whose glass is 
now pointed at you,) worth all the Irish volun- 
teers that ever raised the flag of rebellion, or 
brogued vulgar nonsense in their factious con- 
vention — to the edification of their earl and their 
bishop;* and recollect, that for one of those 

* The Earl of Charlemont, and the celebrated Earl of 
Bristol, and Bishop of Derry, who took a leading part in 
these conventions. 



THK O'FLAHERTYS. 531 

cciUades that you are throwing away upon that 
cliit with the eyes there, you might command 
a place in the revenue for your butler, make a 
captain of the battle-axe of your groom of the 
chambers, or obtain a pension on the concor- 
datum for tliat sprig of pauper nobility, your 
right honourable and ever devoted, but just now 
not very popular friend, the Lady Ilonoria 
Stratton/' 

" Poh ! my dear Honoria, you know you 
may have what you please ; for if I command 
the viceroy, you may command one who ' is 
viceroy over him,' one over whom I have long 
ceased to have any influence,'"' and her Ladyship 
sighed. 

'* I see what you allude to," said Lady 
Honoria, " but upon my honour you are wrong. 
I amuse Lord Knocklofty, and I aim at no 
more ; and aim at that only, as it gives me the 
more opportunity of being with you, dear Al- 
bina.*" The ladies looked in each other's eyes. 



THE OBRIENS AND 

tenderly, and pressed each other's hands senti- 
mentally. 

" I love you very much," said Lady Knock- 
lofty, fondly ; *' but you are so severe, so sar- 
castic with me ; you would rather at any time 
sacrifice a friend, than lose your hon mot.''^ 

" To act otherwise," observed Lady Honoria, 
laughing, " Lavater says, entitles one to canoni- 
zation ; and you know, dear, I am no saint. 
But seriously, you mistake mc, dearest Albina ; 
I am only vexed to see your romantic imagina- 
tion perpetually getting the better of your judg- 
ment. Now, tell truth, haven't you conjured 
up that young volunteer into a regular hero of 
romance T'' 

" He has the air of one,'' said Lady Knock- 
lofty ; '-' surely you can't deny that ?" ^ 

" What, because he is tall, has impudent eyes, 
and wears no powder ! But you are always dans 
les hautes aventm^es. You know you once fan- 
cied your black footman was Prince Le Boo, 



THE o'flahertys. 283 

which produced that ridiculous scene at tlie 
castle, and committed you beyond "* 

" I have, at least, never so committed myself 
as to forfeit my own esteem," interrupted Lady 
Knocklofty, her temper risings in spite of her 
friendship, at the allusion to Prince Le Boo — a 
sore subject. " And allow me to tell you 
frankly," she continued, raising her voice with 
most unsentimental vehemence — 

" Tell me what you please, and as frankly as 
vou wilV said Lady Honoria, in a muttered 
and rapid tone, " but don't tell it to me quite so 
loud, for I suspect we are overheard.'" 

"Heard, by whom— there is no one near," 
said Lady Knocklofty. 

" Don't be too siu*e of that," said Lady Ho- 
noria ; '.' I much mistake if we have not some 
close auditors in that old chaise ; for I have 
more than once caught something hke a bright 
eye glancing through the fracture of the old 
blind." 

While Lady Honoria was still speaking, a 



^4 



THE O BRIEXS AXD 



sudden jerk was given to the chaise, which 
occasioned one of the old Winds to drop down ; 
and the chaise itself was immediately thrown 
into rapid motion by the wild gallop of the 
bare-boned, ill-trained steeds, excited by the 
smacking whip of Bamy Houloghan, who dash- 
ing on through thick and thin, overturned a 
noddy, upset a tim whiskey, threw down an old 
barrow woman, and extricating himself from all 
obstacles, as he continued his rolling, rattling, 
jolting, and serpentine course across the park, 
cleared his way to the gate, and then disap- 
peared ; but whether, according to the phrase of 
romance, " in the haze of distance,"*' or in the 
first ditch that presented itself outside the Park 
wall, reste a savoir ! 

During the few minutes that the two ladies 
had been so closely and intimately engaged in 
their '* coloquy sublime," Barny, crawling be- 
tween the two carriages, had contrived to extri- 
cate his wheel; and taking advantage of an 
opening in the file of vehicles, made by the 



THE o'FLAHliRTYS. ^35 

drawing off of the Lady Lieutenant's phaeton, 
" which had stopped the way/' he seized the 
first moment of possible escape, and drove, as 
the drivers of Irish chaises still drive, in utter 
contempt of consequences, and a total for- 
getfulness of the frailty of all sublunary 
things— wheels, springs, traces, and bridles 
included. 

He was almost out of sight before Lady 
Knockloft}^ drawing breath, observed, in al- 
lusion to the discovery made by the dropping of 
the bUnd, " How very extraordinary ! Did you 
ever see such figures ?'' 

'• I suspected there was some one shut up in 
that old chaise from the beginning," said Lady 
Honoria. 

" There is something very mysterious in this,"" 
said Lady Knocklofty, whose imagination was 
easily mounted. " I wish Lord K. had seen 
them. You know there is 5001. offered for the 
taking of Captain Right; and I should not 
Asonder if he was one of those strangely 



236 THE o'brieks and 

disguised figures — for disguised they certainly 
were." 

" No, no,*' said Lady Honoria, " there was 
no Captain Right there ; I saw distinctly the 
far off figure, who sat more prominent than the 
muffled one next to us. If not the ghost of St. 
Dominick come down in his character of Grand 
Inquisitor, to reform his own order in Ireland, 
it is some intriguing monk from France or Spain, 
some Abbe Hussey, whom my father and I left 
digging his own grave in La Trappe, and who, 
the year after, was figuring away as an in- 
triguing diplomatist, between half the courts in 
Europe. You perceived the old man was ton- 
sured.'^ 

" Yes ; and what a countenance !'' said Lady 
Knocklofty. " It just met my idea of the monk 
in the Castle of Otranto ; but the other creature 
looked like a female ; though it was so veiled and 
muffled, it was difficult to make it out Who, 
and what could they be ?" 



THE o'FLAHERTYS. ^7 

" Be they who they may,'* said Lady Ho- 
iioria, " they have heard all we said, and the 
frate may turn our auricular confession to some 
account. These papists are on the watch for 
every thing, and would like to have the shewing 
up of one of the Proudforts, their most power- 
ful and inveterate enemies — to say nothing of a 
squib at a ' privy counsellor's wife,' or a hit at a 
' certain beautiful and witty member of the 
beau monde,^ as the Dublin journal calls me ; 
for it has elected me as it's ' arch wag,' and 
lays all its trash at my door." 

Here the tete-a-Ute of the inseparables (as 
they were called) was interrupted by the ac- 
cession of some new beaux of the second order, 
who not being of the official c6te?ie, were tole- 
rated, but not distinguished ; and who, for want of 
something else to say, not being initiated, offered 
the usual common places discussed upon such 
occasions : " A fortunate day for the review — 
magnificent spectacle — all the evolutions well 



THE O BKIENS AND 

performed, in good time, and with life — men 
carried their arms well, marched, wheeled, and 
formed with exactness — the volunteers performed 
their manoeuvres but too well ; it was no joke, 
arming factious citizens," &c. &c. Their ob- 
servations, military and political, were cut short 
by the arrival of a young officer in the Prince's 
Own, for whom all made way, and who was 
received by both ladies with significant smiles, 
exclusively reserved for him, and such as him. 
It was Lord Charles Fitzcharles, the second 
son of an English Duke, whose eldest brother, 
the Marquis of B., w as a lunatic, subject to fits, 
and likely to go off in one of his epileptic pa- 
roxysms, l^ord Fitzcharles, with all the advan- 
tages of so distinguished a position, was ordinary 
fin his person, and brusque in his address. He 
approached the ladies in a familiar and un- 
ceremonious manner, with, 

** See what a pretty pickle I am in." 

He was covered with dust and spattered 



THE OFLAIIEIITVS. 239 

with nuul. " Did you ever see such a figure, 
Lady K. ?" 

'* You look as if you had fallen into the hands 
of the non-importation confederates, and were 
tarred and feathered after their most approved 
fashion," said Lady Honoria. 

" I had a narrow escape indeed," said Lord 
Charles; " for just as I was turning short off* 
by the Phoenix, to escape the four eternal Miss 
Roistrums, who came galloping down on me 
full charge, and flanked by four heavy dragoons, 
my horse took fright, and I was all but ditched 
and dished by an old ramshackled carriage with 
a mad driver and mad horses ; I believe the 
devil was in the chaise/' 

** Well, we have some reason to think he 
was," said Lady Honoria, " either the devil or 
a monk." 

" By the by, Lord Charles," said Lady 
Knocklofty, '•• I have engaged you to the Duch- 
ess for this evening; and pray get off your 



MO THE O'BRIENS AKD 

regimentals, and put on a romping frock ;* we 
are going to play blind-man's bufF at the Castle, 
in opposition to the Provost's kutch-a-kutch-choo 
parties, who is obliged to have innocent pastimes 
for the fellows and their left-handed wives. You 
must come." 

" I can't indeed ; first we cannot go in plain 
clothes when in garrison, you know, and the 
chief there; besides, I am particularly engaged 
this evening.'' 

'' Nonsense! I know there is nothing going 
on in town this evening. The Duchess expects 
you, and I command you." 

*' Don't signify, I can't to-night, indeed. 
Lady Knocklofty. I'm in for a frolic, that's 
the truth of it, a regular set to ; the whole 
party made this week back, expressly '', 

" Where, what party? I hope not another 

* A simple coat of pepper and salt mix lure, worn to 
conceal the impression of powder, by the members of the 
haut ton in Ireland about this period, when romping waa 
the order of the day. 



THE o'flahertys. 241 

drunken bout at Lord Kilcolman''s, with those 
odious Cherokees, who broke all poc r Lady 
Dunshaughlin's new furniture, the other night 
in Merrion-street." 

" No, I assure you ; none of us English 
belong to that set." 

" Then where can you be engaged this even- 
ing ? Are you going to play at Daly's ? Has 
the old Marquis got in his rents?'' 

*" Don't know at all ; but the fact is, we are 
going to....'"* Here his lordship lowered his 
voice, and advanced his head ; " but you won't 
'peach, either of you, now will you ?'* 

"Honour bright and shining!" said Lady 
Honoria, laying her hand on her heart ; ^' but 
you must not tell us any thing naughty, mind ; 
you must not do like the man in the gallery, 
the other night, at the theatre, who put the public 
into a particular confidence about our viceroy, 
which it was not good manners to allude to." 

" No, no," said Lord Seymour, " it is only a 
frolic, which the lads of ours have entered into, 

VOL. I. M 



?A2 THE O'BRIENS AND 

en esprit de garnison. You know that one of 
us was knocked down by a tavern keeper, the 
other night ; so we are going to take a dinner 
with him to-day, at the Stragglers, to see fair 
play, and pay off old scores." 

" The Struggles ! what Struggles ! where is 
that ?" 

" Why, the Strugglers in Wine Tavern-street; 
a sort of Hole-in- the- Wall, where the Duke 
and the Chancellor, and some of us, used to go 
last winter to eat beef-steaks, and drink whiskey 
punch." 

*' Oh, yes! I remember,"" said Lady Knock- 
lofty, '' and where some of you got into a sad 
scrape ; what was it all about, I forget now ? ' 

" Why, our host of the Strugglers is one of 
your public spirited tapsters, a captain of vo- 
lunteers; a legislator, with a musket on his 
shoulder and a sword by his side ; a papist ; a 
defender of the faith, and a leader of the tar 
and feathering bands ! By the bye. Lady Hono- 
ria, he was of the party by whose pathriotic 



THE oVlahertys. 24S 

efforts your brother's London-built carriage was 
si bicn cmplume last winter. '"' 

'* The wretch !'* interrupted Lady Honoria, 
" and who broke poor dear Madame Tournon's 
windows, in Dawson-street, and carried off her 
cargo of Lyons' silk and soufflet gauze, because 
it was not Irish poplin ; well ?" 

"Well, but really I ought to get O'Mealy to 
tell you the story ; we English always spoil 
your Irish stories, like the dull fellow in Joe 
Miller ; and the long and the short, you know." 
" No, no, go on,"" said both ladies, who 
loved gossipry, ''plus que vepres ou sermon.'" 

*' Well, it happened, that this host of the 
Strugglers abandoned the spiggot and fosset for 
a review at Drogheda, was billeted upon some 
house where the guest^ were more numerous 
than the couverts ; so that the captain, more 
hungry than ceremonious, after a long march, 
was caught helping himself, by such means as 
were resorted to before the invention of knives 
and forks." 

M 9, 



244 THE o'briens and 

" Oh, the nasty beast f * 

" But here comes the best of it. The supreme 
council of volunteer ban ton (for the volunteers 
are all gentlemen, by Jasus, and use knives and 
forks like other folk, while acting (that is ating), 
under the eye of all Europe, as the Belfast 
manifesto has it,) after a court-martial presided 
by the only officer who is a private gentleman 
in the corps, pronounced sentence of * ungentle- 
manlike conduct at table ' on the primitive gtis- 
iateur ; and he was forbid to bear arms for ten 
months, for not having borne them at a dinner, 
taken aic bout du banc. Meantime, as the cap- 
tain's politics and politesse had nothing to do 
with his excellent beef-steaks, we had a scramble 
there a week or two ago ; and the captain's wife, 
who always serves up the first dish^ happening 
to be ' as pretty a piece of flesh,' as the man in 
the play says, as any — '* 

'' In her own larder," interrupted Lady Ho- 
noria, " and quite as mangeable as her own 
beef-steaks, I suppose." 



THE o'flahkrtys. 245 

*' Exactly," said Lord Seymour, laughing; 
** and it did happen, that one of us stepping 
down to the bar for a glass of Tokay — for 
the fellow keeps choice wines — and being, I 
rather believe, something more gallant, than 
this Brutus of the Strugglers thought right or 

proper , I don't know how it was, 

but in the struggle, the Struggler knocked 
one of us down. A row ensued, in which the 
Struggler had the best of it ; and when a com- 
plaint was made to the colonel commandant of 
his corps, not only no notice was taken of 
the insult, but the fellow was restored to his 
company, and permitted to figure away here 
to-day in the face of the lord-lieutenant, and the 
very noblemen and gentlemen he had so grossly 
insulted. Now it happens, my valet has be- 
spoke a dinner at the Strugglers, to which 
a few friends are invited ; and, as I rather 
think there will be some, fun, I suspect we 
shall not be in a plight for her Grace's party 
of blindman's buff, afterwards." 



246 THE o'*BRIENS AND 

" No," said Lady Honoria, " for I dare say 
many of you would have the advantage of us, by 
seeing double, instead of not seeing at all." 

" Take care, though,'*"' said Lady Knocklofty, 
" you will, I fear, get into a scrape ; I hate 
xhose frolics, in which the common people are 
concerned.'' 

" Oh, my dear," interrupted her friend, " there 
is no interfering with public duties ; and, truth 
to tell, a little summary justice aftei the manner 
of the ' tarrers and featherers ' themselves, is no 
bad thing. It is just as well to meet them 
sometimes on their own ground." 

"Exactly," said Lord Charles; "Lady Ho- 
noria is quite right. Lady Knocklofty, do your 
horses stand fire ? We shall have the thirty- 
six rounds before these heroes have done. 
— Aye, there they go ; now for it, tenez 
Jerme.'' 

Her ladyship's answer was lost in the first 
volley which was fired ; the horses stood it well, 
but with a little pricking of ears, and curvetting 



THE ©""flahertys. 247 

of hcxifs. The firing now continued by com- 
panies, by grand divisions, by subdivisions, ob- 
liquely, advancing, and retreating, then by files 
and in squares, and finally concluded in one 
tremendous volley, which burst with a crash 
that resembled the explosion of a volcano. The 
too spirited steeds of the reckless Lady Knock- 
lofty, overfed and underworked, were startled 
by the shock, and plunged forward, breaking 
the traces. Loosely reined, wild, and unma- 
nageable, they dashed down headlong among 
the troops, with a fearful velocity that scattered 
all before them, till they were lost in the dense 
smoke of the artillery, which left the fate of the 
two ladies in doubt. None of their cavalieri 
serventi had the presence of mind to go to their 
rescue, till their interference was too late ; and 
when the smoke cleared off, the anxious specta- 
tors of this fearful accident were relieved by 
seeing the horses at rest in the plain below, 
panting and foaming, but quiet ; their heads held 
by the leader of the Irish brigade, who was 



^8 THE o'bRIENS and 

coolly directing the groom to adjust the traces. 
He had sprung down the acclivity, at the first 
plunge made by the unruly animals, had thrown 
himself before them in their wild career, and 
had all the success in his efforts to save the 
ladies, which such skill, courage, and presence 
of mind rarely fail to obtain. 

The two ladies, though frightened into a mis- 
prision of hysterics, had not fainted. They had 
firmly and wisely held their seats ; and as nerves 
were not the order of the day, and dashing was, 
they exhibited a fearless contempt of the danger 
they had escaped, which was ill borne out by 
their pale faces and quivering lips. The peril 
over, the phaeton, (whose gaudy panels 
were either broken or disfigured), was sur- 
rounded by gentlemen. Among others, the 
Lord Lieutenant, and Lord Knocklofty were 
in anxious attendance, the latter on his wife's 
friend, and the former on his friend's wife. 
After a due application of Eau de Luce and 
Sal Volatile, provided from the sumptuary 



THE oVlahertys. 249 

pocket of Miss Macquire, (who with Captain 
O 'Mealy and a party of horsemen and horse- 
women had ridden up to the heroines of the 
catastrophe, with sympathetic looks and smelling 
bottles), the two ladies were conveyed to a 
chariot in waiting belonging to her Excellency, 
who had driven up to make her inquiries in 
person. The carriage drove on, accompanied 
for a few paces by the Duke and Lord Knock- 
lofty; each with a hand on the window near 
which they rode. 

" Lady Honoria," said Lord Knocklofty, 
"you had better go to Knocklofty House with 
Albina. The sooner you get some hartshorn 
and water the better." 

*' Had they not both better go to the lodge ?" 
said the Lord Lieutenant, with equal solicitude 
of manner. 

" No, no," said Lady Knocklofty, *' pray let 
me go home. But first, T beseech you. Lord 
Knocklofty, go to that gallant young gentleman, 
who is still standing at the horses' heads, and 

M S 



250 THE o'bhiexs akd 

thank him for the service he has rendered us ; 
and pray get his address ;"" for (added her 
ladyship, who like Maritornes, had occasionally 
some sketches and shadows of Christianity about 
her), "under God, I do believe we owe the 
preservation of our lives to his timely and 
courageous interposition." 

" Yes, yes," said Lord Knocklofty, without 
turning his head towards the spot where the 
gallant young gentleman stood, "Yes, yes, I'll 
see to that ; but get home as soon as you can, 
you know we dine at the castle. To Knock- 
lofty house," cried out his lordship, authorita- 
tively, to the postilion. 

^' Farewell," said the Duke. " till this even- 
ing ;'' and the gentlemen rode oif. 

As Lady Knocklofty passed her dismantled 
phaeton, she pulled the check- string violently, 
and called out " O' Mealy," with a shrill and 
commanding voice, that was instantly obeyed 
by the Captain, who was following Lord 
Knocklofty. 



THE o'flahertys. 251 

" O' Mealy," she said, " go after that young 
gentleman in the green uniform, who is now 
walking towards the striped tent ; don't fail to 
get his address, and tell him Lady Knock- 
lofty is fully aware, that she owes her life to his 
gallant interposition, and that she hopes he will 
give her an immediate opportunity of expressing 
her gratitude de vive vo'ix.'''' 

"/ shawl, Lady Knocklofty," returned the 
Captain. 

The carriage drove on. 

" De v'lv zc'atc?," repeated Captain O' Mealy, 
removing his large cocked hat from three hairs 
on the left side of his head, to three hairs on the 
right (a motion that always expressed the Cap- 
tain's perplexity). — " De viv waw : well, the 
women of quality are the * very queens of the 
dictionary,' as Sir Lucius says ;" and looking 
round, he found to his infinite satisfaction that 
the " young gentleman" had disappeared. 
Anxious to sidle into the suite of the Lord 
Lieutenant, by following in the wake of his 



252 THE o'bKIENS and 

patron, Lord Knocklofty,he gallopped on to over- 
take the party, and insinuated himself between 
two young aid-de-camps. As he rode along the 
quays, wholly forgetful of his protegee. Miss 
Maguire, he pulled up his stock, shifted his 
hat, and threw a reconnoitring look, to discover 
if his brilliant position did not render him the 
observed of all observers. Occasionally as he 
rode along, he repeated to himself, " de viv 
waw — I shall thank him de viv waw — I suppose 
that's Frinch for getting him a place or a pin- 
sion, for saving her life. Well, to be sure, what 
luck I had, to be sent foostering and gostering 
after the honourable Kitty, when if I had been 
left alone to mind my business and stay where 
I was, I might have been thanked de viv waw, 
and sent down a brigade major to Ennis ; or 
made collector of St. Grellan, at laste ; who 
knows .^" 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. St5S 



CHAPTER V 



THE ROW. 



Sa jcunesse fait tant de bruit qu'il n'entend pas. 

Mad. db Skvignb. 

Now, Master Shallow, you'll complain of me to tlic king. 

Merby Wives. 

In the year 1770, when the penal statutes 
were in all their fearful force, Dublin (some of 
its aristocratic palaces excepted) was a city of 
lanes and alleys, of cribs and dens ; whose filthy 
avenues swarmed with a squalid and mendicant 
population ; and whose trading streets exhibited 
but few images to cheer the eye, or to exhilarate 
the heart. From the year 1782, however, the 
city rose from its rubbish, and the hovel of mud 
became a palace of marble. It was from this 
period, that the partial amelioration of the terri- 
fic code, the influence of national independence, 



254 THE O'BRIENS AND 

and the establishment of a free trade, awoke the 
spirit of the people. The ancient capital of 
*' one of the most beautiful countries under 
heaven,"" as Spencer designates it, then began 
to acquire the aspect, and to exhibit the splen- 
dour of a metropolitan city. Then its dark 
lanes and narrow courts gave way to spacious 
streets and beautiful quays, where the air of 
heaven was permitted to circulate, and its 
blessed light to shine. Then edifices in the best 
taste, at once noble and simple, were erected for 
public use, or for individual enjoyment. The 
change w^as not operated by the despotic wis- 
dom of some sagacious tyrant, but by the par- 
tial abolition of bad laws, and the limited intro- 
duction of enlightened principles. 

While, however, the north and east shores of 
the beautiful river which winds through the 
Irish metropolis, became crowned, as if by 
magic, with all the pomp of architecture, the 
west (or that part of old Dublin which once 
was enclosed by its fortified walls, including the 



THE o'flahertys. 255 

castle, law courts, cathedrals, and the houses of 
the few gentry who anciently possessed man- 
sions in the capital), remained but little changed. 
Here were yet to be found the wrecks and 
relics of the houses of the Geraldines, the 
Pettys, the Boyles, the O'Briens, and such of 
the chiefs of English and of Irish descent as 
had dropped into the lines of fealty. Even 
within view of the attic saloons of Moira House, 
(then the Montague House of Dublin), might 
still be seen some of those ancient edifices of cage 
work and timber, covered with tiles and shin- 
gles, whose high pointed gables and pending- 
balconies threatened destruction to the pedes- 
trian passing beneath, — while they ri vetted the 
eyes of the antiquarian, and furnished the pages 
of the modern Stanihursts with some of their 
most interesting items. 

One of these houses, a mansion of some ex- 
tent, still stood upon that " voyd piee<8 .of 
ground" then called Lord Galway's walk, and 
now denominated the military road. Old and 



^6 THE o'bRIENS and 

dilapidated as it then was, a more delightful na- 
in urhe could scarcely be imagined, than it must 
have been in former times. It hung over the 
banks of the LifFey, commanded a long sweep 
of river scenery, with the rising and wooded 
grounds of the beautiful park on the opposite 
side. From its casements in the rear, it looked 
upon the mountains of Dublin, which gradually 
break down into the green and fertile plains 
that lie at their base. 

If its rural beauties were many, its town 
advantages had not been few. It lay in the 
neighbourhood of the metropolitan cathedral 
and of the old law courts, — a spot which the 
litigiousness of the age rendered the focus of 
the vital interests of the land. It was at no 
great distance from the Tliolsel or Toll-stall, 
the tribunal for petty delinquencies and small 
litigations, where all tolls on provincial com- 
modities were paid. The edifice itself was 
not lofty, but lengthy ; resembling the old 
black and white frame workhouses of old 



THE o'flaiiertys. 257 

English towns. It was roofed with tiles, spot- 
ted with little casements, and was entered by 
an arch-way, disproportionately low and nar- 
row. Alonfj the breadth of the buildino was 
inserted a stout broad beam of Irish oak, on 
which was cut an inscription with armorial bear- 
ings perfectly legible, save where an upright 
piece of timber being mortised in the wall, had 
received the drippings of a projecting spout, 
fixed in the roof, and consequently was some- 
thing rotted. The inscription was, " Victoria 
MiHi, Christus ;" and an escutcheon of arms 
followed, with the date 16 — , and the united 
initials of M.M. O. B. 

The house had been called, time immemorial, 
O'Brien's Inn, nobody knew why; but every 
one supposed, that some one had kept an inn 
there " in the ould times," at the sign of the 
O'Brien Arms : for none but the learned knew 
(and they were then fev;), that in7i (the transla- 
tion of the French hotel), was the designation 
of all noble houses in former days, both in 



^S THE O'BIIIEXS AND 

England and Ireland. O'Brien's inn had, in 
fact, been the residence of that branch of the 
O'Brien family, of which the celebrated Mur- 
rogh. Lord Inchiquin, a General in CromwelPs 
ai'my, was the last lineal descendant. He was 
stigmatized by the name of Murrogh an To- 
thaine^ or the incendiary, by the sect, family 
and party he had deserted. Here Lord Inchi- 
quin retired after the battle of Cashel, where 
he had earned his infamous agnomen ; and the 
venerable mansion had been constantly inhabited 
by some one of the O'Brien family, until about 
a quarter of century back, when it had fallen 
into litigation between two claimants. Since 
that epoch, the sturdy old fabric had, for the 
most part, remained uninhabited; save by an 
old crone, who occupied a dark room on the 
ground floor, and who (with the shelter of its 
roof for her hire) acted as housekeeper to 
the desolate building, and lived by the men- 
dicity of her little grand-child. 

While modern buildings rose on every side, 



THE o'flahertys. 259 

O'Ericn's inn stood, in its solitary and anti- 
quated pride of gables and casements, like an 
old dowager in her lioop and tete de mo2iton, 
in the midst of a group of young beauties in 
adhesive draperies and braided tresses. In 
spite of the pious inscription, the premises 
had a bad name. There existed against it, 
and against the old woman who kept it, that 
natural prejudice, which is usually felt against 
all old women and old houses. 

The old woman was asserted to be (on the 
authority of a Kilkenny carrier), no other tlian 
the famous Alice Ketyll, the traditionally cele- 
brated witch of that ancient city, where 

Fire without smoke. 

Air without fog, 
Water without mud, 

And land without bog, 

certainly do indicate the influence of some 
supernatural agency. 

As, however, tradition does not trade in dates, 



260 THE O'BRIENS AND 

no one knew the precise period when Alice had 
flourished ; but every one knew that she had 
been cited and condemned by a Bishop of 
Ossory, for heresy and sorcery ; that she had a 
certain attendant spirit called Robin Artyson ; 
that she had killed " in a certayne fourward 
way," nine red cocks — had swept the streets of 
Kilkenny with besoms, " between complin 
and curfew ;'"* and that two of her accomplices 
had worn the devil's girdle about their bodies, 
for which they were burnt, by order of the 
bishop and council ; while Alice, mounted on 
her cowltre (an anointed stick), made her way 
without let or molestation. 

From that time Alice Ketyll was never heard 
of, till more than a century or two afterwards, 
when she was deterree by the Kilkenny carrier, 
who passed O'Brien's inn every Monday, on 
his way in, and out of town ; where he had seen 
her sweeping the path-way with a besom, after 
the old fashion, " between complin and cur- 
few." The hue-and-cry, once raised against 



THE O'FLAHERTYS. 261 

the old woman, had a deathless echo in the 
neighbourhood of Watling-streel, and Lord Gal- 
way's walk ; and persecution again raised its 
bloody arm, not indeed to light brands and 
erect stakes, but to throw rotten eggs at the old 
woman, and pelt stones at the casements of the 
old house. It was in vain that Alice's ex- 
groom of the chamber, Robin Artyson (a poor, 
half-starved, naked little boy), declared that his 
name was Denis Mooney, and that Alice Ketyll 
was old Molly Mooney, his grandmother, for 
whom he had begged half-pence at the Tholsel 
steps every day. Whenever Alice put out her 
squalid head " between complin and curfew," 
eggs were pelted and stones were thrown : and 
if she was no longer cited before deans and con- 
demned by bishops, to be burned alive, or driven 
as a last resource to her cowltre, it was because 
public opinion had taken another direction ; 
and because the current of prejudice, which once 
had set in so strong against heretics and witches, 
had turned into another channel, and was, with 



262 THE O'BRIENS AXD 

equal wisdom and policy, directed against pa- 
pists and popery. For the last ten years, how- 
ever, Alice and her grandson Robin, had lived 
peaceably in the service of the lord and occu- 
pant of the old mansion, its triumphant claimant 
and present owner. 

Lord Arranmore, an old nobleman, of the old 
Irisli stock, was of recluse and singular habits. 
Much more celebrated than known, he had dis- 
tinguished himself by the pertinacious pursuit 
of a title (long gone astray in his family, and 
recently revived in his person), and by some 
ingenious antiquarian papers, he had contri- 
buted to the transactions of the Royal Irish 
Academy, of which he was the most learned 
and indefatigable member. For the rest, his 
lordship led much such a life as Seneachys and 
annalists of old — buried in the past, unconnected 
with the present — the world forgetting, and 
long since by the world forgot. His habits 
of seclusion were indeed so ascetic, as to be 
bevond even what a taste for studious solitude 



THE oVlahkrtys. 263 

might inspire; and it was probable that this 
retreat from the world was superinduced by a 
recent mortification, publicly inflicted by order 
of the Herald at Arms. His armorial supporters 
N% ere effaced from the old vehicle he sometimes 
exhibited in the streets of Dublin, though his 
claims to the peerage had been allowed by the 
House of Lords. As, however, he had been 
accused of being a relapsed papist, the insult 
was neither unprecedented nor extraordinary. 

It was on the evening of the great review at 
the Phoenix Park, and some time after the corps 
had all been dismissed, and the crowd which 
this brilliant and national spectacle had collected 
fov the last time had been dispersed, that the 
young leader of the Irish brigade, the victor of 
the Star Fort, presented himself at the door of 
the old edifice of Lord Galway's walk. It was 
slowly and cautiously opened by Robin Artyson 
in propria per sojia, wlio, but for his gorgeous 
crimson livery, oddly contrasted by his naked 



264 THE o'briens and 

legs and feet, might have passed for the evil 
sph'it, whose name he still bore. 

" Is my father returned ?" was the question 
put to him, as the young volunteer, striding 
rapidly up the broad, low, creaking stairs, 
entered a dreary, comfortless chamber in the 
attic. 

" My lard's not at home," was the drawled 
out and mechanical answer. 

The intelligence seemed not to displease the 
hearer. Making a somewhat hasty and partial 
ablution, (a necessar}'^ refreshment after the heat 
and dust of the day), he drew the costly robe, 
appropriated by the university to its noble 
members, (the fiUi nohilis,) over his volunteer 
uniform ; and exchanging his plumed helm for a 
square and tasselled cap, gave one glance into a 
ponderously set mirror, and was just issuing 
forth, when he suddenly turned back. 

" Where is your mother, Robin ?" he de- 
manded. 



THE O FLAIIERTYS. !2o5 

" My moder ! Is it my granny ? Sure she^s 
in bed." 

" She is not ill, I hope?" was the kind in- 
quiry. 

*' Och, she is nat ; only a weight at her 
heart." 

" Robin, you need not mention my having 
dressed here for the review this morning, except 
the question is directly put to you." 

*' I will nat," said Robin, shaking his heaa 
importantly. 

" And should Mr. Emmet inquire for me — 
You know Mr. Emmet, Robin ?'* 

*' I do nat," said Robin. 

" Well, should any gentleman inquire for me 
this evening, say — but, stay;" and not daring 
to trust to the stupidity of one. whose intellect 
had been only awakened to extortion, and whom 
indigence had almost stultified to idiotism, he 
tore off the back of a letter and wrote — " In 
my chamber till nine— at the historical society 
till ten ;" and giving the paper to Robin, he 

TOL. I. N 



^66 THE o'bRIENS and 

desired him to give that to any young gentleman 
who might inquire for him. 

" And mind, Robin," Jie added, putting his 
finger upon his smiling lip, " not a word of the 
review." 

" Nae, nae," said Robin, with a grin, meant 
to be significant, but which was only ghastly ; 
and eagerly pocketing the shilling slipped into 
his hand, he hastily slapped to the door. 

With the rapidity of a shooting star, the 
student of the Dublin university, and cap- 
tain of the Irish brigade, hurried back to his 
Alma Mater. He had already proceeded more 
than half way, when his sword, by impeding 
his movements, and nearly throwing' him on the 
pavement, betrayed the hurry of thought, which 
had led him to commit so palpable an etourderie, 
as to retain it. He was returning with incredible 
velocity to deposit, in the attic of the old house, 
an implement so little suited to his academic 
exterior, when his steps were retarded, and his 
curiosity was attracted by a tumultuous assembly 



THE oVl-'xhertys. 26T 

round the porch of an ancient and popular tavern, 
called the Strugglers, 

The house stood on that old up-hill part of 
Dublin, which, opening on the Quays of the 
Liffy, still preserves its antiquated name of 
Wine Tavern- street. The host of the Strug- 
glers, to whose private room the College boys 
sometimes stole to indulge in furtive potations, 
was a noted character, and had all those claims 
to popularity with one party, and to persecution 
from another, which then gave celebrity to in- 
dividuals even of the humblest class. The 
moment also was one of great excitement. While 
the Irish senate was the scene of contention to 
the most stormy passions, the arena where the 
most powerful intellects were drawn out in the 
fiercest opposition, — while the walls of either 
house re-echoed to the eloquence of the most 
eloquent men that Ireland or any other country 
ever produced, — the people wanted no factious 
tribune to plead their lowly cause, or express 
their vulgar wisdom. Associated for the pre- 
n2 



^68 THE o'bRIENS and 

servation of interests, then misunderstood by all 
classes, the manufacturing part of the com- 
munity added to this general ignorance, a deep 
and irritating sense of suffering, which is apt to 
lead a?tray the best informed. Goaded by want, 
and by the heart-rending conviction of the im- 
possibility of finding employment for their skill 
and industry', they occasionally exercised a sum- 
mary vengeance on those whom they deemed the 
violators of the national interest ; and these 
violences rendered an association illegal, which 
in its formation was intended for the most 
legitimate purposes of self defence.* The me- 



• In the general depression of the manufacturing inte- 
rests, the people then looked (as many, not of the people, 
still look for relief, to what is called the encouragement 
of domestic manufactures; — that is, to the voluntary or 
compulsory preference of dear or bad articles, of home 
manufacture, to better or cheaper goods brought from 
abroad. The non-importers, in the pursuit of this mis- 
cidevous chimera, destroyed the foreign-made dresse?, 
equipage?, &c., which appeared in the streets of Dublin, — 



THE o'fLAIIERTYS. 2()9 

lancholy feature in this case was, that tlie 
government secretly fomented the very intem- 
perance it affected, by unconstitutional means, 
to restrain. If, at least, no preconcerted phm of 
getting up a tumult can be brought home to the 

msulted and outraged the persons who used them,— and 
attacked the houses of the great impjrthig merchants. 

The causes of the depressed state of Irish manufactures 
are multifarious; of which, the wicked and execrable 
destruction of the Irish woollen manufacture, a sacrifice 
to English jealousy, if not the chief, is perhaps the ori- 
ginal. In compensation for this act of violence, various 
experiments have from time to time been made by Go- 
vernment and by the upper classes, for introducing other ma- 
nufactures, which would spontaneously have found their own 
way into existence, had the circumstances of the country 
been adapted to their exercise. Such attempts, therefore, 
have at best had but a partial success; by which numbers 
of starving struggling wretches have been called into 
being, where there were no permanent and assured means 
for their support. Bad governments are never so mis- 
chievous as when they turn sentimental, and interfere 
with the private and pecuniary interests of the subject, 
under the notion of relieving distress. 



270 THE O'BRIENS AND 

door of the executive, it is notorious that the 
riots were aggravated by the imprudence of what 
was significantly called the Castle party. Mili- 
tary force, too often substituted for the civil 
power, irritated the popular resentment; and 
widened a breach which had for some time 
existed between the English soldiery, and the 
Irish populace; w^hile it gave a sanguinary 
character to disturbances, which of themselves 
would have been bloodless and unimportant. 

The contests between the populace and the 
military, were now of daily and fatal occurrence ; 
and even the officers of some of the crack regU 
ments, quartered in the garrison of the capital, 
had been known to mingle in the popular 
broils, and in more than one instance to have 
found no unequal opponents in the students of 
the Dublin University, — a body which for more 
than half a century, had composed a very for- 
midable branch of the social order of those 
dislocated times. 

The actual riot at the Strugglers was one of 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 271 

those outrageous frolics, in which the idle, the 
powerful, and the dissipated of the Irish capital 
were, at this period, wont too frequently to in- 
dulge. 

Originating in the licentious gallantry of 
the noble cornet alluded to by Lord Fitzcharles, 
in the morning's conversation with Lady Knock- 
lofty, it was not a little increased by the part 
which the host was well known to have taken 
in a recent broil between the military and a 
party of the non-importation confederates. 

As yet the mob without (consisting chiefly of 
tradesmen and artizans returning home from 
their work) appeared much less interested than 
amused with what was passing in the house ; 
and the spectacle of flying bottles and broken 
decanters, in a combat not very unequally carried 
on between the " familiars" of the Strugglers 
and its military guests, excited less wrath than 
merriment. When, however, the handsome 
hostess, with dishevelled hair and clasped hands, 
appeared at an upper window, and with true 



27^ THE O'BRIENS AXD 

feminine and Irish eloquence called for aid and 
protection, declaring to God and upon her 
honour, that that honour had been insulted by 
the impertinent gallantry of the English offi- 
cers, who had incarcerated her husband in his 
own cellar, and were reducing his property to 
ruin, because he was a volunteer and a non- 
importation man — then a new impulse was 
given to popular feeling, a portentous movement 
was visible in the crowd, and the cry of " Shame ! 
shame !"' resounded on every side 

" Shame on those who stand hy to xvitness 
such an outrage T exclaimed ihe young col- 
legian, who had pushed his way to the very 
heart of the multitude, and who, rushing for- 
ward, sprung through a breach made in the bar 
window by one of the rioters within. His ex- 
ample had an electric influence. The mob 
w^anted but an individual to lead them to the 
attack. The outworks were soon carried ; and 
the assailed, who had thrown themselves in the 
entry to defend the keep (the cellar, where the 



THE o'l'LAHKKTVS. S*.*) 

host lay, confoanded among his own broken 
bottles), were driven from their posts in various 
directions ; the host was liberated by his young 
brother volunteer, and a skirmish took place 
between the combatants, (at first more ludicrous 
than serious;) as the " rank-scented people"" 
engaged hand to hand, and breast to breast, 
with tlie trim and perfumed heroes of the 
" Prince's Own." " No military murderers !"' 
" No English importation men !" " Trinity boys 
for ever 1* and other party watch-words, inap- 
plicable to the event, but not to the spirit of thi' 
affray, filled the air and enlisted new partizans. 
Still the efforts of the mob and of its young and 
gallant leader, went no further, than the most 
decided manual endeavours to clear the premises 
of the dashing Tarquins, whose deeds of vio- 
lence the Lucretia of the Strugglers had scarcely 
exaggerated. 

Dislocated chairs, shattered glasse?, and 
smashed windows, broken-headed waiters, and 
screaming bar-maids, denoted the feats of these 
n3 



274 THE O'BRIENS AND 

military " brise-7naisons^'''' who, ripe for a row, 
and primed with claret, gave, by their shouts of 
laughter and ill-timed pleasantries, the character 
of a frolic, to what was in fact becoming a very 
shameful outrage. At first, they had received the 
allies of the Strugglers upon the equal terms of 
animal strength ; and clenched fists, and squared 
elbows, a well flung bottle, or a better directed 
blow, rendered the combat as yet both fair and 
equal ; but when the brute force of the unwashed 
artisans began to prevail over the science of the 
patrician " eleves" of Mendoza, then it was 
that the temper of the higher powers wholly 
gave way. Taking close order, and making a 
desperate rally, at the moment when they were 
nearly ousted, they imprudently and intemper- 
ately drew their swords on the unarmed po- 
pulace ; and a sanguinary and unequal conflict 
instantly began, which threatened the worst con- 
set}uences. 

The young collegian, who had hitherto stood 
** a keen encounter" with manv a well directed 



THE O^FLAHERTYS. J^75 

fist, and returned every attack with interest, 
now remembered the sword which had hung 
forgotten at his side ; and throwing himself at 
the head of the mob, he stood in the gap of a 
door-way, and kept at bay more than one well 
armed assailant, until the populace effected their 
retreat into the street. Unfortunately, at that 
precise moment, when the enraged and bleeding 
people were preparing for a renewed attack, a 
non-importation confederate company, returning 
from a '* tar and feathering" expedition, fell in 
with the combatants. No preliminaries were 
necessary to the making a common cause — 
" Rebellion lay in their way, and they found it ;'** 
and the new allies, reeking from their recent 
triumphs, were about to bestow the beaux 
restes of their unsated rage on the English 
party, when a military guard, accompanied by 
a strong civil power, who had been sent in search 
of '* the tar-and-featherers,"" overtook them at 
this precise spot and moment. The soldiers 
saw at once the danger of their officers, and in 



276 THE O'BRIENS AUD 

a natural esprit de corps, though as yet un- 
attacked themselves, fired without orders on the 
uproarious multitude. One of the populace fell 
dead ; a few were wounded ; some fled, hotly 
pursued by the military ; others stood their 
ground, and in their turn were again forced to 
retreat. In amount twenty times the number of 
the military — savage with rage and indignation, 
and " all smarting with their wounds'' — they 
tore up the pavement, and pelted the soldiers 
with that favourite missile, with which the Irish 
have ever done so much execution. Again the 
soldiers fired, and the echo of their shots was 
answered by shouts of execrations, and by 
showers of stones. The civil power interposed 
in vain, and confusion and carnage reigned on 
every side. 

One conspicuous figure, towering above the 
rest, still kept the devant, and by his savage 
shouts and Irish cries served as a rallying point, 
giving spirit and force to the popular party, 
which however he appeared to have rnly acci- 



THE FLAHERTYS. 277 

dentally joined. In external appearance, he 
resembled none of those by whom he was sur- 
rounded, and was evidently a stranger from 
some remote district of Connaught or Munster. 
Wild, wierd, gaunt, bloody, half naked, and 
apparently half mad, he continued to move 
steadily on towards some given point. With 
wondrous strength and dexterity, he whirled a 
tliick, long, twisted pole above his head, and 
occasionally let it fall with a fatal force on 
whatever opposed his way. He shouted in Irish 
as he moved along, " Faere ghem I — Faere 
ghem '.^' — " O'Brien aboo !" — *•' Lamhlakler 
aboo r — ^'' Faere^ faere, mi cuishleen !'' * — and 
other incoherent exclamations, sometimes ad- 
dressed to the mob, and sometimes to the young 
collegian, towards whom, with all his strength 
and agility, he was in vain endeavouring to make 
his way. 

• " Watch, watch, the cause of the O'Briens, the cause 
of the strong hand, &:c , watch, my heart's vein," 



S78 THE o'briens and 

The collegian himself, (the next prominent 
figure in the conflict.) stood in the foreground of 
the fight, grappling hand to hand, and breast to 
breast with the officer who had been the pri- 
mar}' cause of all this tumult, and who, having 
lost his own sword, was endeavouring to wrest 
that of his opponent from his firm and nervous 
grasp. Between these combatants there was 
no disparity, they were well and gallantly op- 
posed. Each had insulted and struck at his 
adversary in the beginning of the affray ; and 
as they now in their youthful strength and 
passionate vindictiveness wrestled for life or 
death, they appeared like two young vultures, 
intent on tearing out each other's hearts, from 
the breasts in which they panted. Heads tossed 
back, teeth gnashed, eyes fixed, with fury in 
their glances, pain unfelt, danger despised, the 
instinct of carnage in full and fearful develop- 
ment, would have given the conflict a poetical 
character, on another site, and in another 



THE o'flahertys. i279 

cause, than those, on which such courage and 
such energies were now so uselessly and per- 
niciously displayed. 

This singrle combat in the midst of more 
vulgar conflicts, attracted the attention of all, 
who were not deeply engaged in their own de- 
fence. Such tranquil spectators were chiefly 
composed of the occupants of windows, and of 
ilie old projecting balconies, suspended in front 
of the cage workhouses, then still standing in 
Wine Tavern-street. 

Inuuediately next to the Strugglers (itself 
a very ancient edifice), stood a formless build- 
ing, which but for its waving gables above, and 
its bricked- up arches below, might have passed 
for the high, dead wall of a state prison. One 
small jjrated casement alone diversified its 
gloomy surface, behind whose iron bars some 
restless object seemed agitated with a perpetual 
motion, like that of a wild animal in his cage. 
The figure was not only human, it was female ; 
ii!Mi ai th'j dreary masure was the rear of a 



S80 THE o'bRIENS and 

convent of Franciscan nurs, and the casement 
(the only one which looked on the " busy haunts 
of man") belonged to the Abbess's own apart- 
ment, she probably was the pious and restless 
spectatress of this sanguinary fray. Her curiosity 
was well repaid by the evidence it must have 
furnished of the wisdom of her retreat from a 
world, vdiere human passions were still in such 
baneful and reckless activity. 

Meanwhile, an hundred voices continued to 
cheer the collegian ; and the champion of the 
military party had, by an effort of great dex- 
terity, nearly wrested his sword from his grasp, 
when the protecting demon of the Irish cause 
reached the spot on which they contended. 
Whirling his long pole over his own head, he 
was about to let it fall on that of his destined 
victim, when the generous collegian, perceiving 
the treacherous attack as it was made, summed 
up all his strength, and throwing back the 
officer into the porch of the house, saved his 
life, and permitted the pole to fall in noxiously on 



THE o'flahkiitys. 281 

the resounding pavement. Shouts of plaudits 
followed ; and reiterated cries of " The college 
boys for ever," " Long life to the Trinity, and 
the glorious Volunteers," filled the air. 

At length the civil force, which with many of 
the chief authorities, had been involved in the 
|:)ell-mell confusion of the first heat of the riot, 
began to prevail ; owing to the courage and 
influence of one of the principal and most po- 
pular magistrates of the day. He had thrown 
liimself between the military and the people, at 
the risk of his life ; and by his eloquence, his 
promises, and his exertions, finally succeeded in 
checkinrr the further progress of a tumult, which 
might otherwise have terminated in an insur- 
rectionary movement. The soldiers, who had 
mingled in the affray, were marched back to 
their barracks ; the young officers, whose frolic 
had began it, were put under an arrest ; a gene- 
ral dispersion of the mob followed ; and the 
ring-leaders only, who iiad mingled in the row 
from the beginning, were pointed out by spies 



282 THE o'briens and 

of the police, and taken up, to be reserved as 
examples of justice. At the head of these was 
the collegiate captain of the Irish Brigade, who 
had led on the mob, at the commencement of 
the combat. For him was reserved the dis- 
tinction of being arrested by the sheriff in per- 
son, as he stood carelessly before the porch of 
the Strugglers, wiping the blood from his 
wounded forehead with one hand, while panting 
and heated, he leaned on his sword with the 
other. 

" That is the young collegian that was the first 
to enter the bar window, plaze your honour," 
said a policeman, in the train of the sheriff. 
" Sorrow stir the mob stirred, till he led the 
way, your worship." 

" You must give up your sword, young gen- 
tleman," said the sheriff, addressing his prisoner. 

" To you, Sir, certainly;" said the youth, 
coolly presenting it. 

" I am sorry," said the sheriff, " to see the 
sword of an Irish volunteer so used, and the 



THE OFLAHF.RTYS ^MJ 

dress you wear, and the rank it bespeaks, so 
disgraced." 

" Disgraced !'* reiterated the collegian, turn- 
ing round indignantly. 

" Constables, take your prisoner to the watch- 
house,'" said the sheriff coolly, and walked on 
to a spot, to which he was summoned by the 
springing of a legion of rattles ; where he found 
one of the guardians of the night struggling in 
the fearful grasp of a gaunt and gigantic figure. 
At the approach of the sheriff and his party, the 
savage let go his hold, and dashing down his 
prey upon the earth, fled with a velocity, that 
distanced all pursuit. 

While the young student was gathering his 
torn robe round him, and stepping forward to 
proceed with his guard, his military antagonist 
was led forth from the Strugglers, under an 
escort. Their eyes met. 

" Lord Charles Fitzcharles, Prince's Own, 
Royal Barracks," whispered the latter. "Mur- 
rogh O'Brien, Trinity College," was the reply 



284 THE O'BRIENS AND 

of the former; and both passed on, the one 
over Queen's-bridge, to his quarters, the other 
along the quays, to that " durance vile'' of 
heroic spirits, a watch-house. 

It was now a dark and foggy twihght ; the sun, 
which sets with so fine and picturesque an effect 
behind the last bridge over the Liffy, had sunk 
portentously in black and lurid clouds. A pre- 
mature obscurity had already involved the worst 
lighted city in the empire. The shops and 
houses in the neighbourhood of the riot, had 
been shut up at an early hour, and the mob and 
military, spreading consternation in their flight 
and pursuit, as a shout was raised, or as a 
musket w-ent off, had so completely cleared the 
streets of pedestrians and carriages, that the 
capital at nine o'clock had the desolate and 
deserted aspect, which it was wont to assume 
in troubled times. In the previous morning 
the volunteer review had furnished an excuse 
for recreation to the most pleasure-loving citizens 
of any capital in the world. All had been bustle. 



THE o'flaiiertys. 285 

light, and life : now all was glconi, silence, and 
apprehension. The great bell of the university, 
tolling out the ninth hour (that hour in the 
Irish university over which care holds no con- 
troul*), swung its deep tones over the still and 
etnpty streets, as solemnly as if it were the 
vesper bell of a convent of the blessed Virgin, 
pealing through the silent cloisters of the mo- 
nastery of Hogges-green.f 

Tlie youthful prisoner, (who had so acted, as 
inevitably to place himself under the ban of that 
rigid institution, whose discipline that bell an- 
nounced.) heard not its warning voice. He was 
now insensible to all external imp/essions. " The 
tempest in his mind " solely occupied him. 
Agitated and pre-occupied, his heart fluttering, 

• This bell fonnerly summoned the students of the uni- 
versity to the October cellar, where a potation, equal to 
the far-famed Trinity audit ale of Cambridge, was distri- 
buted. 

Hogges Green, now called College Green, from being 
the site of the University, was, down to the commence- 
ment of the 17th century, strewed with religious houses. 



286 THE o'eriens and 

his chafed blood all on fire, he paced on, in the 
centre of his guards, with a firm and rapid step. 
His arms were carelessly folded in his tattered 
gown, and his square cap was worn over his left 
eye, as if in defiance ; but in fact was so worn, 
to check the drops which oozed from a scar in 
his temple. There was nothing in his bearing 
that corresponded with an appearance so piti- 
able, and a position so perilous ; and it might 
have been supposed, to judge by his air and 
motions, that a triumph, and not a prosecution, 
awaited him. A flashing eye— a distended 
nostril — an occasional haughty toss of the head 
— and a tone of voice, which, whether replying 
to, or demanding a question of the guard, who 
almost *' toiled after him in- vain,'' had some- 
thing scoffing and disdainful in its accent, — 
spoke one worked on by powerful excitements, 
and intoxicated by that exaltation of the mind, 
which raises its subject above all sensible im- 
pressions, and leaves even physical pain un- 
heeded if not unfelt. 



THE o'flAHERTYS. 2^7 

The day, in truth, with all its uncalculated 
incidents and adventures, was a day big with 
consequences to him, on whose head it had 
risen, (as spring days arise upon the young and 
hopeful,) in light, in lustre, and in joy. He 
was one, whose generous enterprize and reck- 
less daring bespoke a temperament, which leads 
men from tlie beaten track, through ways of 
danger, to fame and glory, — rarely to happiness. 
The circumstances of times so stirring and so 
consonant to the aspirations of the brave and the 
imaginative, had contributed to the early deve- 
iopement of passions, which in the ordinary 
progress of nature, might still have slept ; and 
the incidents of a day had thus probably de- 
cided the destinies of a life. 

The peace officers who conducted the pri- 
soner, had nearly reached one of those horrible 
dens, where folly and crime are so injudiciously 
incarcerated and confounded together, when to 
their surprise and consternation, a shrill and 
savage shout burst upon their ears ; and a mob, 



288 THE o'briens and 

led on by the same uncouth figure as had 
already attracted the attention, but evaded the 
vigilance of the poHce, came pouring forth in 
dusky groups, and in great number, from one 
of the many dark alleys which then opened on 
the quays. The contest that followed was so 
unequal, that an almost immediate rescue was 
effected, in spite of the spirited resistance of the 
police, and even of the remonstrances of the 
young prisoner himself. The populace (now 
masters of the field), raised the hero of the 
evening on the shoulders of the stoutest of their 
party ; and at the peril of him, they had sought 
at such risk to protect, ran with an extraor- 
dinary velocity along the banks of the Liffey ; 
till their strange and uncouth leader halted 
before the antique and solitary edifice, from 
which his protege had issued a short time before, 
unconscious of the portentous events in which 
he was so soon to be involved. Three tremendous 
shouts announcing the arrival of the party, 
were echoed by the falls of a ponderous brass 



THE o'flahektys. 289 

knocker ; while the cries resounded of " suc- 
cess to your lordship''s honour. Here's your 
ihgant fine son, Sir, brought safe home to you, 
plaze your honour, th' Honourable Murrogh, 
glory be to his name ! Open the door if you 
plaze, my lord, afore the powlice comes down 
upon us and murders us intirely, plaze your 
honour." 

To this appeal, no answer was made. A 
window in the gable had, indeed, been opened, 
but it was as suddenly closed. The whole house 
seemed barricadoed, as if ready for a siege ; and 
all was utter darkness, save when the moon, 
appearing for a moment through the massy 
clouds, fell with peculiar effect on the lofty figure 
and upturned head of the collegian. It was 
evident that, in the strong relief in which he 
stood, he must have been fully recognised by 
the person who had so immediately and timidly 
withdrawn. After a short pause, therefore, he 
addressed the mob to induce them to retire, and 

VOL. I. o 



290 THE o'briens axd 

to secure their own safety, without indulging 
any fear for his. 

He spoke not so much to the point, as to the 
passions of his hearers. Little practised in ad- 
dressing a multitude, his eloquence arose out of 
the exigency of the moment ; and coming fresh 
from the mint of an heated imagination, it 
abounded in those watch-words of Irish feeling, 
which are the clap-traps of natural vanity ; they 
had their wonted efficacy. 

The account of the rally and the rescue had 
been rapidly communicated by the fugitives of 
the discomfited party to one of the patrols, 
which paraded the city ; who instantly bent their 
steps in the direction in which the rioters were 
supposed to have halted. They had reached 
the ascent of that very ancient bridge, whose san- 
guinary name* still attests the conflicts, of which 

* Bloody Bridge, supposed to be so called from a battle 
fought upon it between the Irish and Danes j but more 
probably from the circumstance of several lives having 
been lost by the fall of a bridge on this site. 



THE oVlahertys. 291 

its narrow pass was once the scene, when the 
mob, as they were still listening to the harangue 
of tlie young orator, caught the -glitter of the 
bayonets ; and suddenly dropping the object of 
their triumpli from their shoulders (contented 
with having left him at the paternal threshold) 
dispersed in various ways. One alone remained, 
moving like a strange phantom in the foggy 
distance ; beckoning, by uncouth gestures, the 
object of his evident protection to join him ; and 
waving his long pole through the misty air, with 
a faint exclamation of '^ Faere gliem, Faere 
gliemy 

The phantom, however, produced a far dif- 
ferent effect on the object of its protection, from 
that which it appeared desirous to operate. It 
stunned, it stultified him. As often as he had 
caught a view of the huge, dark, and shadowy 
outhne of that figure, he doubted the fidelity of 
his senses ; and as he Hstened to those strange 
accents, deep and guttural as they were, he 
paused and shuddered. But as the military 
o 2 



292 THE o'bRIENS AVD 

approached, the voice and figure faded away. 
The collegian alone remained to stand the brunt 
of the encounter. He had cast up his eyes to 
the window, where he thought he had seen his 
father. But no light or sound gave evidence 
that his fate excited further attention. The 
paternal door was evidently closed in wrath 
against him, — a heart-chilling event in the life 
of the young and the cherished. Still the dark 
defiles of Watling-street, with its blind alleys, 
might have afibrded him covert> To the right, 
and to the left, lay the open fields and burying 
ground of the Military Hospital, and all that 
swampy wilderness of desolation, of ruin and 
of wretchedness, which the trim military road 
now bounds along the Liffey's banks. The 
foot-fall of the approaching patrol fell quick 
upon his ear. Flight was still in his power. 
Flight! from what? from justice I Flight 
would have confounded him with the vulgar, 
timid, and capricious multitude. Far, there- 
fore, from retreating, he advanced boldly to 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. 29S 

meet the military. He had already been ob- 
served ; and one of the soldiers sprung forth to 
seize him, when his carbine was knocked from 
his grasp to a considerable distance, by an unseen 
but powerful blow ; and the man reeled back on 
his steps from the violence of the shock. 

The student, stepping before him, presented 
himself to the commander of the party, touched 
his cap courteously, and said — " To save all 
further trouble, I think it right to inform you, 
Sir, that / am the person in whose favour the 
rescue has been effected, and of whom I suppose 
you are in pursuit. I surrender myself volun- 
tarily, and am ready to accompany you where 
you please." 

" Then march we to the castle guard-house,'* 
replied the officer in a tone and manner but little 
suited to the occasion ; while his party sur- 
rounded the prisoner. 

" Soldier, have you recovered your piece ?^' 

*' No, plaze your honour, Captain O'Mealy, 



294i THE O'BRIENS Als'D 

I have not : shure, it's the devil himself has ran 
ofF with it, I believe, captain." 

As he spoke, a shot was fired at the party, so 
well aimed, that it took off the feather in the 
officer's hat, as it whizzed bj him. He instantly 
commanded a*halt. 

" Upon my honour, this is too agreeable,'* 
he exclaimed, as he picked up his damaged 
plume, " My bran new Captain Absolute's fea- 
ther, that Fm to wear at Lady Ely's." 

'' The shot was fired. Captain, from my own 
carbine, as sure as a gun," said the soldier, who 
was still groping for his piece. 

"Then the bloody-minded rebelly papist 
cannot be far off," said the Captain. 

A figure was, at that moment, dimly seen, in 
a creeping, crouching attitude, to pass along 
the walls of a ruined and dilapidated house. ~ 

" Fire !" said the Captain. 

" Hold ! " exclaimed the prisoner, earnestly and 
passionately ; but his voice was lost in the noise 



THE o'fLAHERTYS. S95 

of the volley, while a loud wild laugh, with the 
cry of " Faere ghem, faere cjliem^' followed by 
a blast of a horn, was distinctly heard. 

The next moment, a tremendous plunge in 
the Liffey disclosed the escape of the assassin, 
by means that seemed as perilous, as the fire 
from which he had so narrowly escaped. 

*' The villain,'" said the officer, "has escaped, 
after all ; well, boys, leave him to his fate, 
which is not to be drowned, I'll ingage, any 
how." And now, resuming his hat, he gave 
the word to march. 

Surrounded by the military, the prisoner 
followed in the party, headed by the gallant 
Captain, and proceeded on his way to the 
castle. 

END OF VOL I. 
