CLAN-ALBIN: 



A NATIONAL TALE. 



A natiou fam'd for song and beauty's charms ; 
Zealous, yet modest; innocent, though freej 
Patient of toil ; serene amidst alarms ; 
Inflexible in faith ; invincible in arms. 

Beattie. 



IN TOUR VOLUMES. 



VOL. II. 



LONDON: 

TRfNTED FOR LONGMAN, HURST, REES, ORME, & BROWN, LONDON; 

MACREDrE, SKELLY, AND MUCKERSY, EDINBURGH \ 

AND JOHN CUMMFNG, DUBLIN. 

1815, 



John Molr, Mater. 



£Z3 

CLAN-ALBIN, 

A NATIONAL TALE. 



CHAP. XIX. 



" Fair to no purpose, artful to no end." 

Pope. 

JVIonimia kept her promise to the unfortu- 
nate old man. She took the child to her 
bosom with maternal fondness. Montague 
was at first sullen, but as he was not ill- 
natured, the gay temper, affectionate manners, 
and beautiful form of the little exile, won 
even his good-will. The little Irish girl was 
indeed a general favourite ; but with the 
Piper she threatened to supplant all the chil- 
dren in the district. 

The shooting season now brought many idle 
strangers to the Highlands ; the time of Mon- 
tague was occupied by what he called his 

VOL. II. B 



2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

quality friends, and the peaceful domestic 
hours of Monimia were continually invaded 
by an influx of female visitors, who, com- 
pelled to live for some months in the country, 
without talents either to improve or embellish 
retirement, were glad to transfer to another 
the burden of their own inanity. 

The Highland moors were become so very 
fashionable, that many gentlemen annually 
travelled North ; and immediately the ladies 
were smitten with a taste for the picturesque, 
the sublime, and the dreary. But it was im- 
possible to gaze for ever on huge rocks, dark 
lakes, foaming torrents, and mountains in 
endless expansion. " A Northern Meeting," 
was now the word : and the good motherly 
ladies of the country, who had never been 
able to travel South, were delighted with a 
cheap opportunity of showing their grown up 
girls a little of life, and teaching them some- 
thing of manner. The plan had grown in 
general estimation ; for the idle and the 
young found amusement ; the vain a field for 
display, and the designing a theatre of action. 
Two rustic coquettes, by the aid of fine com- 
plexions, high spirits, novelty, and the High- 
land fling, had already obtained what were 



A NATIONAL TALE. 3 

called, — " most advantageous establishments," 
— and all the clever, sensible mamma's de- 
clared the countries, — " infinitely indebted to 

the public spirit of Her Grace of .'* 

These rural meetings were no doubt inferior, 
both in substantial luxury and elegant taste, 
to the brighter assemblies of London or Bath ; 
but they had their own charms ; — the same 
vanity, dress, gaiety, scandal, envy, and 
delight. The higher class, for one week, were 
unrivalled ; supreme over fashion and man- 
ners ; and the inferior orders busy in acquir- 
ing anecdotes, airs, and graces, at second- 
hand, to excite the astonishment of country 
neighbours, and amuse their winter solitude. 

Neither Norman nor Flora had visited much 
at Dunalbin for some weeks ; but a series of 
rainy weather had relieved Monimia from her 
troublesome friends, and the little circle had 
again resumed the habits of their former life. 

One morning they were seated at their 
usual studies, when a party of ladies on horse- 
back were descried sweeping through the 

defile, which separated Strath from Glen- 

albin. 

" There they come," said Monimia, some- 
what peevishly, — " I know nothing so teasing 



4 CLAN-ALBIN, 

as the affected regard of troublesome people. 
Two of these ladies are become so very fond 
of me, that I believe they will soon make me 
loathe myself." 

Norman and Flora rose to go home, — 
u Nay, I insist that for one day you share 
my penance : surely you are too gallant to 
fly the ladies \ and for your encouragement, 
my dear Flora, let me assure you that this 
fair covey indicates a flight of gentlemen as 
certainly as the screaming of the gull does 

bad weather.'' The young friends smiled ; 

and walked to the window, to view the fair, 
and still distant riders. 

" These are the Gordon's, and Miss Sin- 
clair, the relation and humble companion of 
their aunt. Of course you know how high- 
blooded, and high-bred they both are. Yet 
they are essentially different. Miss Gordon 
is stately, proud, perpendicular, insolent; 
using the privileges of her birth to excuse 
her breeding. You Norman, must adore her, 
but at a humble distance ; she will no more 
pardon your indifference than your presump- 
tion. Flora must not dare to look at her." 

" Then for Heaven's sake let me go home." 

" Oh no ; — her sister will atone for that. 



A NATIONAL TALE. S 

he will crave your friendship in half an hour, 
and vow you her own on five minutes acquain- 
tance, — if it strikes her. Maria is little, pretty, 
good-humoured, vain, capricious ; and the 
animal at least is lively. You must flirt, and 
if you please, you may romp with her. Should 
Flora snatch out a pearl comb, or pull off a 
glove opportunely, and so display the most 
beautiful flaxen tresses, and the fairest arm 
in the world ; — even she may hope for par- 
don. — How I loathe affectation ! 'Tis woman's 
easily besetting sin ; — but I am sure if ever 
it do appear in me, it must be the affectation 
of being natural." 

Flora smiled and shook her head, — " But 
is not this rather, rather, " 

" Severe ?" — replied Monimia, returning 
her smile, — " Perhaps so. But really it strikes 
me as both silly and idle to weep, and wail, 
and gnash my teeth at the follies of half the 
world. I do not wish my acquaintances to 
have faults and follies j but since they are 
there, if they do not make one laugh, I am 
sure they are good for nothing else. How- 
ever, my dear Flora, be not afraid ; morals is 
a grave word, — we won't use that , but good 
taste will keep me from troubling you very 

B 2 



6 CLAN-ALBIX, 

# 

often with the amiable qualities of my 
friends." 

" But pray let us have our cues," said 
Norman, — " you have forgot Miss Sinclair." 

" That is odd enough, for I am sure no 
lady has a more lively rec llection of herself. 
I cannot give you a cue to Mis Sinclair. She 
is a chameleon, and somewhat more ; for she 
takes not only colour, but form, from the cir- 
cumambient air. Au reste she is a maiden 
lady, well born, and of very elegant senti- 
ments ; whom my brother, though not remark- 
able either for one or t'other, could persuade. 
— But hush ; they approach ; — she is depends 
ent on Lady Gordon." 

The door was thrown open, and Miss Gor- 
don slightly bent her towering neck to Mr?. 
Montague, overlooked Flora, but saw Nor- 
man young and handsome ; and, complaining 
of fatigue, threw herself on a sopha as ele- 
gantly as possible. Maria ran with open arms 
to embrace her " dearest Mrs. Montague," 
and only gave way to the inquiries and caresses 
of Miss Sinclair. 

" My dearest creature, how have you con- 
trived to exist for the last week ?" cried Maria, 
— u Positively we embraced the first glimpse 



A NATIONAL TALE. 7 

of sunshine to see that you had not hanged 
or drowned yourself; — did we not Sinclair." 
Miss Sinclair confirmed this statement, pro- 
bably forgetting that Miss Gordon's industri- 
ous maid had heard Sir Archibald tell his 
friend and visitor, Mr. Mansel, that as their 
sport lay towards Glenalbin, they would 
spunge on the pin-man and his elegant sister. 

Monimia was as graterul for all this kind- 
ness as politeness required. Miss Gordon ex- 
amined Norman with haughty, yet earnest 
attention, and stared at Flora with well-bred 
rudeness. Maria ran across the room, admired 
the plants, the birds, and the prospect ; 
worked at Flora's frame, and snatched up 
Norman's book. It was a volume of Gaelic 
poetry, which Monimia had been reading. 

" Good Lard ! Mrs. Montague," cried she, 
— " let me hope you that you dt>n't convulse 
your organs of speech with this savage 
dialect ?" 

Monimia made a gay reply. She was as 
unfond of trying to reform the world, as of 
weeping and wailing over its follies. 

"But what," said Maria, in an affected 
whisper, — " if I should tell Sir Archibald of 
your elegant language-master ?" 



8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

The heart of Norman throbbed violently, — 
his breath came quick; but Monimia did not 
deign to reply : she looked haughtily dis- 
pleased ; and Miss Sinclair chid Maria for a 
giddy-brain, while she expatiated on the 
amazing fondness Sir Archibald had concei ed 
for the country, the love his tenants felt for 
him, and the various good qualities with which 
she was pleased to endow him. 

Montague at length entered to pay his 
respects to the ladies. Maria flew forward, 
and seized him by both hands, while he stood 

like a dancing bear with a pole. " My 

dear good man, you must positively give me 
a morsel of dinner; I am not able to ride 
other ten miles," cried she. 

" Indeed ladies I was just come to press 
you to pot-luck," said Montague, half terrified 
by the impetuous spirits ot the young lady. 
Sir Archibald and Mr. Mansel have just sent 
Monimia a present of game, and invited 
themselves to a late dinner. They are noV 
on Machrymoor ?" 

" Lard ! then we won't stay," said Miss 
Gordon, her eyes brightening ; — but Miss Sin- 
clair was peremptory; — and Miss Gordon 
" knew there was no peace with Sinclair unless 



A NATIONAL TALE. 9 

she had her own way ; — so it was useless to 
contend." 

Again Monimia was " obliged and ho- 
noured 5r and she turned her dark eye, full 
of arch meaning, on the face of Norman. — 
" Odious customs of the world, 1 ' thought he. 

Till the hour of dinner Maria rattled, sung, 
laughed, and caressed her dear Mrs. Mon- 
tague : Miss Gordon languished ; and Miss 
Sinclair, who s eemed a very managing per- 
son, attended Mr. Montague to view his pigs, 
poultry, dairy, and wool-loft. 

At a pretty early hour for a fowler Sir 
Archibald was announced ; and Norman saw 
the man who had first made his young heart 
throb with anguish. He was a man between 
thirty and forty ; of fashionable appearance, 
and formed manners. In England he affected 
the Highland Chieftain ; in the country the 
man of fashion, — one who knew life, and 
loved to enjoy it. His history and character 
was that of hundreds in England ; in the High- 
lands it was summed up in few words ; — " He 
has put out fifty smokes" — His attention was 
solely directed to Monimia, yet he found time 
to examine her friend with the eye of a critic 
in female beauty ; and Flora's meek face 
sunk under his undaunted gaze. 



10 CLAN-ALBIN, 

At dinner the rustic Norman found that 
what we shall eat, and what we shall diink, 
were objects of very great importance. Sir 
Archibald was eloquent in praise of veal, 
mutton, and poultry, of Montague's rearing, 
and fattening; and forgot even the attractions 
of his lovely hostess, while he pounced upon 
moor-game, " cruelly spoiled by a beast of a 
cook." Mr. Mansel displayed equal science ; 
but Miss Sinclair, though she agreed that the 
mutton was most delightful; the veal enchant- 
ing ; and the turkey, quite a wonder of a tur- 
key ; begged to be forgiven, if she owned, 
that after all, for a family dinner, there was 
nothing to her taste " like a plain, substantial 
roast joint." — Norman involuntarily smiled 
as she turned to see the effect of her observa- 
tion on her host. 

" Gad Sir Archy," whispered Mansel, — 
that is a good hit at the pin-money. Do give 
poor old Sinclair a hitch." 

Montague had now got his mouth empty, — 
" You are quite right Ma'am, — nothing like 
it, — Will you chink a glass of wine with me 
Miss Sinclair? — Upon my honesty you are a 
very sensible sort of a person. And don't you 
think now, that for supper, — instead of your 



A NATIONAL TALE. llf 

pastry and fruit, — a slice of cold meat left 
from dinner, " 

Monimia saw and pitied the dilemma to 
which he was reducing the politic lady, and 
smilingly interrupted him. — " I shall not 
trouble Miss Sinclair to decide against me," 
said she, — " I plead guilty : at least I own it 
is much better to those who think so." 

Montague was not in the habit of taking 
much wine, and the gentlemen soon entered 
the drawing-room. They found Miss Gordon 
reclining ; Maria fluttering about, and charm- 
ing with all her might ; Flora with a tam- 
bourine, and Monimia quietly seated at the 
piano-forte. Miss Sinclair hung over her 
chair, as much enchanted with her rondo, as 
with her brother's plain joint. 

Miss Gordon was reported as a wonderful 
performer : and the possessor of a wonderful 
voice ; and after an abominable affectation of 
reluctance, she played and sung. The other 
ladies followed ; and the vanity or ill-nature 
of Monimia was engaged to display the 
talents of her neglected friend. Flora sung 
Scottish airs with uncommon sweetness, truth, 
and feeling : she had learned as much music 
as to be able to accompany her voice ; and 



12 CLAN-ALBIN, 

glad to escape the pain of being solicited, 
she sat down, though her eyes reproached 
Monimia. She sung the " Lone Vale ;" and 
Mansel, — a good-natured coxcomb, whom 
the smart uniform of a dragoon regiment had 
transformed into a hero, — Mansel declared 
himself charmed. He had both a heart and 
an ear for music, and his taste, by all who 
pretended to taste, was allowed to be ex- 
quisite. 

" Aye," said Monimia, beaming with tri- 
umph, — " We scientific folks are fairly 
eclipsed here ; — the woods breed nightin- 
gales." 

" Faith Belle," said Mansel, turning to 
Miss Gordon, — " you must throw all your 
music into the fire. This is a million times 
better than your flourishing bravura." — Miss 
Gordon had sung a fashionable bravura song. 

Miss Gordon, and her sister were portion- 
less ; but they had beauty and blood ; and 
their aunt in her zeal to extend and strengthen 
the family connexions, by their establishment, 
had speculated on accomplishments to the very 
bottom of her purse. Their music-master 
was the most fashionable in London. It was 
not wonderful that Miss Gordon pouted. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 13 

" Pray who is this little siren ?" said Man- 
sel, in a loud whisper to Miss Sinclair. Flora 
lost all the brief reply, but — " of a poor 
school-master ; — but Miss Gordon has dropped 
her glove." — The glove lay for Mansel. 

"Whew I" whistled he,—" Blood !— who 
cares for blood now, but in a horse. Youth 
and beauty are all in all." — This respectful 
observation explained the speech of Miss 
Sinclair. 

" What charming spirits l" said Miss Sin- 
clair, — " I wish our sweet Bella could share 
in them. Poor dear girl she is just pining off 
her feet ; — oh you men ! you men (" 

" The stale farce of falling in love," 
thought Mansel. But still secretly flat- 
tered with the conquests of his eyes, he 
looked to the sweet love-lorn Bella, and 
would have probably returned to his alle- 
giance, had he not been haughtily repulsed. 
He entreated Flora to sing, and Miss Gordon 
ordered her horse. She was " already too 
late, and to remain for the night was impos- 
sible ?" 

Sir Archibald remonstrated, her sister 
fretted, the perennial smile of Miss Sinclair 
fled, and Mansel, in the hope of remaining, 

VOL, II. c 



14 CLAN-ALBIX, 

was all humility ; but the lady was inflexible. 
Sir Archibald could not permit his sister to 
go home unattended, but as he strode past 

he whispered in her ear. u Miss Gordon, 

if you fancy ill-humour will promote your 
interests you are damnably wrong. Learn to 
control that imperious temper... Believe me 
you cannot afford to keep it." 

The eyes of the lady flashed, and her 
cheeks glowed; while her sister and Miss 
Sinclair — who quickly repaired her smiles, — 
tried to engage Mrs. Montague to return the 
visit. Monimia formed many excuses, but 
Montague promised for them both. 

The eyes of Maria discoursed eloquently 
to Norman, Mansel kissed the glove of Flora, 
Sir Archibald bowed on the hand of Monimia, 
and, to the joy of all three, the party were at 
last mounted and out of sight. 

The spirits of Monimia rose as their figures 
lessened. She locked up the piano-forte, 
tossed away the music books, and by greater 
softness of manners than slie had ever dis- 
played, sought to indemnify Norman for the 
chagrins of the day. In their twilight saunter 
he found her arm within his own. When 
they parted her hand slid into his. Sir 



A NATIONAL TALE. 15 

Archibald indeed had taken, and held that 
hand •> but he fancied her look more soft and 
touching, her manner more quiet ; and these 
observations began to be interesting. With 
a short quick sigh he saw her leave the beach, 
where he embarked with Flora. 

It was now the latter end of August ; the 
weather was uncommonly fine, and the pre- 
ceding rains had preserved the lively verdure 
of early spring. Norman requested Hugh 
to call him by sunrise next morning, and 
proposed a very long excursion among the 
hills. 

" We shall see darling," said Hugh ; and 
next morning he found that the Piper and 
the skiff had both disappeared. All day he 
was kept an impatient prisoner on Eleenalin. 
About six o'clock Hugh appeared, seemingly 
so satisfied with himself, that Norman knew 
not how to be otherwise. 

" If the Lady would have no objection that 
I should row herself and the family to the isle 
of the Druid," said Hugh, " the night is so 
lovely." 

The lady had no objection ; and attended 
by Moome, Flora, and Norman, she entered 
the skiff, without perceiving the knowing 
looks of the Piper. 



16 CLAN-AUBIN, 

The isle of the Druid, or as it was some- 
times called, the isle of the Beal-tien, was an 
islet in the mouth of a bay of the lake. It 
was very small, but finely wooded, and 
adorned with a strand of beautiful white 
pebbles. 

Many ancient superstitions have now 
dwindled down into infantine observances. 
Beltane is not kept in any part of the High- 
lands ; but on May-day the children light 
fires in sequestered spots, and cook little 
feasts of eggs, with which they treat each 
other, and which they proudly spread before 
their friends. Eggs are dressed in every 
form, and every good woman in the country 
contributes to the long gathered store. In a 
lawn recess of the isle of the Druid, Norman 
in his boyhood had annually lighted his fire, 
and spread his fairy banquet before the Ladv, 
Moome, Mary, his nurse, and other friends. 
The great stones still lay scattered about, 
which had formed their seats. 

On this islet Monimia, who had never ven- 
tured to invite the Lady to Dunalbin, pro- 
posed to receive her visits. By the assistance 
of the Piper, and her servant, a little hut had 
been reared of birch and willow twigs, inter- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 17 

woven with fresh heath. It was in the form 
of a rude pavilion, open to the side of Eleen- 
alin, and supported by pillars of silver-barked 
birch, the foliage of which was not yet faded. 
Hugh had worked late and early with the ar- 
dour of a brownie ; the seats of wattled work, 
covered with skins of wild-deer, were the 
labour of his hands, and the whole was 
happily accomplished in profound secrecy ; 
for Norman, who had viewed its progress, was 
too good-natured to see any thing. The 
Piper had laid in a store of turf, lighted a fire, 
and left Monimia and Mary Fitzconnal mak- 
ing tea, coffee, and spreading their rustic 
board with cake and sweetmeats. 

A blue smoke was discovered rising among 
the wood in the isle of the Druid, and as the 
boat approached a fairy Naiad was seen to fly 
from the strand. Hugh feigned ignorance, 
the better to enjoy the raptures of his friends ; 
and when the grand discovery was made, the 
exclamations of Moome, the delight of Flora, 
the benevolent smiles of the Lady, and the 
laughing eyes of Norman abundantly repaid 
the effort which silence had cost. 

" This is charming !" cried Flora, — " it 
reminds one of the Elysium at Clarens. We 

C 2 



18 CLAN-ALBIN, 

only want lovers to sigh in that sylvan bower, 
and nightingales to sing among the bushes." 

" Lovers we do not want," said Monimia 
gaily, — " I am certain we are all very sincere 
lovers ; only instead of sighing we shall laugh ; 
and my kind Moome shall be our nightin- 
gale." ' 

" That I will ; darling creature," replied 
Moome, — u you shall have the whole of * The 
Maid of Duart,' this night, in this sweet 
shealing." 

" Apropos !" cried Flora, — " what shall we 

call it?" " The Grotto of Calypso," said 

Norman. 

" And whether will the Piper or you be my 

Telemachus ?" " I must not be judge in 

my own cause," replied Norman smiling. 

She looked to Hugh. " With your leave 

darling, I'll be any thing you please," said 
the good-natured Piper, who knew nothing 
about Telemachus. 

" I am sure Hush that is very kind of vou : 
and when I turn Calypso you shall be my 
Telemachus : — but what savs Flora r" 

" The Temple of Friendship," replied Flora. 

" Grot'oes and Temples !" cried Monimia, 
— " Nonsense ! I dislike fictions of sentiment 



A NATIONAL TALE. 19 

of all kinds. Why not love a ' heath sheal- 
ing,' as well as a pompous temple, or a sen- 
timental grotto. When the eloquent enthu- 
siast, to whom Flora alluded, makes his Julia 
parade her Elysium, her Saloon of Apollo, 
her Burgundy, and her Rhenish, I think he 
is guilty of a capital sin against the simplicity 
he professes to adore. I could call my birch 
wine Madeira, nay Imperial Tokay, but I 
am certain Hugh would love it much better, 
called merely what it is, — the birch wine of 
Glenalbin." 

" Yes, by Mary, and that I would darling," 
said Hugh, — -" sweet it is, and good no doubt 
for women and childer ; yet, by your leave, 
for my own taste, " and he hesitated. 

" Aye !" said Norman, smiling significantly 
while he turned to Monimia, — " Well, the 
conclusion is, that a man of simplicity, and 
unsophisticated sentiment, prefers whisky to 
the birch wine of Glenalbin." 

" Most lame and impotent conclusion," 
cried Monimia, protesting against the unfair- 
ness of this inference. 

" Don't heed their laugh my love," said 
Lady Augusta, — " You were quite right. 
Among all your amiable qualities, I must ad- 



20 CLAN-ALBIN, 

mire the cheerful good sense which distin- 
guishes your manner of thinking. I like to 
hear things called by their true names ; it i.s 
no inconsiderable proof that they are esti- 
mated by their real value, we shall adopt 
Moome's name ; — ' Monimia' s Shealing,' — 
and prize it, because it is hers, beyond all the 
temples and grottoes in the annals of senti- 
ment." 

Every one could appreciate the delicate 
kindness to which this sylvan hut owed its erec- 
tion. " Monimia has triumphed 1" cried 

Norman, as he placed her at the head of her 
rustic board, more lovely than all the god- 
desses of story ; her eyes beaming kindness, 
her cheeks glowing with rosy confusion, and 
her young heart throbbing with innocent plea- 
sure. 

At table the conversation again reverted to 
Rousseau. In France Lady Augusta had seen, 
admired, and pitied, that " wise wretch." — 
Insensibly she began to speak of that period 
of her life ; the party became thoughtful and 
sad. 

" Let us dismiss this topic," said the Lady, 
— M my Monimia deserves to be more power- 
ful than the Eastern Seged. He commanded, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 21 

but she invites, her friends to be happy. On 
some future evening I will tell my young 
friends the story of my early life. The time 
may come when it will be useful, — but it can- 
not be twice told." 

Moome, who had listened with intense 
anxiety to these observations, saw that a cloud 
was gathering on the spirits of the party. 

" Now darling, with your leave, I shall 
sing you l The Maid of Duart,' " said she to 
Monimia, — " and as I am fond to suppose the 
Piper will be thinking of digging the roots of 
the water-lily for my own dying, I will not 
begin till he goes." 

Hugh, who had been the attendant on the 
party, smiled as he laid down his pipe, and 
repaired to the strand, to make war on the 
lovely flower which adorns " the mountain- 
circled lochs." 

" Then I will follow," said Norman, — " and 
St. Peter to speed ! bring you trout for supper 
more exquisite than that of the Lake of Ge- 
neva." 

" If you are cruel enough to catch it, you 
may" eat it," cried Monimia gaily, — " for I 

will not be your Julia, " and abruptly 

stopping, she blushed the deepest crimson. 



22 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" Well l M said Norman, pursuing her 
meaning and her downcast eyes with a smile 
of tender archness, hut a palpitating heart, — 
li You will not he my Julia ; — what then ?" 

" I mean that I cannot understand the 
superfine sentiment of permitting a harmless 
creature to be catched and tortured for amuse- 
ment ; and then, but I am sure you re- 
member the sentimental scene to which I 
allude." 

" I have often heard ladies accused of 
catching and torturing harmless animals for 
mere amusement," replied Norman laughing. 
— " But you would kill them outright, — would 
you r 

" O ! you know what I mean ; — but High- 
landers are privileged to dream dreams, and 
use similitudes," cried Monimia, with her 
usual vivacity, — " but I have a plain English 
understanding ; and my brother, to whom you 
promised the fish, a plain English stomach. 
So march ; — trout is better than senti- 
ment." 

He went away ; Lady Augusta smiled, but 
a melancholy idea entered her fancy, — " I 
must tell them my story," thought she. 
Moome seated herself on the turf at the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23 

feet of her ancient lady, and resumed the 
distaff, which accompanied all her walks. 

" With your leave, my darling, the Lady 
herself will explain the deep Gaelic of the 
song. Many in the countries themselves do 
not understand that dearest j so no fault to 
you." 

In the Highlands there is but one sort of 
literature (if it may be so called) for the 
vassal and his Lord. Every class utters the 
same sentiments, clothed in the same words, 
and expressed in the same accent. There 
are no Milton s and Popes for the tasteful and 
■educated ; and ballads, " Proverbs," and 
" Seven Champions," for the vulgar. Hence 
an identity of tastes and attainments, which, 
however lowly the condition, elevates the in- 
tellectual being to the level of the highest ; 
and induces the ennobling consciousness of 
equality with all that is really exalted. 

Though the beauties of Gaelic poetry are 
by no means quaint, or metaphysical, they 
do not always lie on the surface. In fine 
perception, and lively sensibility to a feli- 
citous image, or a delicate trait of sentiment, 
the vassal may indeed excel his Lord, from 



24 CLAN-ALBIN, 

having studied more profoundly that figura- 
tive, bold, and epithetical language, technically 
termed deep Gaelic, which Moome now re- 
quested her lady to explain. 

" And my little Mary will, I hope, be per- 
mitted to listen ?" said Monimia, — " She has 
given a noble proof of strength of mind, in 
keeping the secret of the Druid's isle ; and if 
she did tear all her frocks carrying heath to 
the Piper, the wish to oblige is always 
amiable ; and I am certain she will mend 
them very neatly." 

" Indeed, indeed she will," said Moome 
u A warm-hearted darling creature she is ? 
God bless her I" — and Moome began her 
descant, which is thus translated. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25 



THE MAID OF DUART, 



A BALLAD. 



PART I. 



List ! Ladye list my roundelay, 

A tale of love, a tale of woe, 
While sad I tell what erst befel 

The blue-eyed maid, and young Lochawe. 

The merry barge-men raise the sail, 
Light bounds the bark from Oban's bay, 

And dancing in the summer gale, 
Skirts the grey rocks of Kerrara. * 

" With sounding horn and sweeping harp, 
" With vassals shout and pibrochs blow, 

* The places alluded to in this Ballad form a fine tract of 
mountainous scenery, stretching along both sides of the 
Sound of Mull. 

VOL. II. D 



,2G CLAN-ALBJN, 

" The Duart hails thee at his (rate, * 

n Thou gallant Chief of green Lochawe.-} 

" Peace dwells m blue-eyed Moina's bower, 

u The battle's din has ceased afar, 
ct With dark-haired Fillan's hardy clan 

f No more w r e wage the mountain war. 

" Strike ! strike the harp thou aged bard, 
" Till floats his war-fame high in air, 

u Welcome to Duart's bannered hall 
M Brave Chieftain of the raven hair." 

Sweet Moina, Duart's lovely heir, 

Sat lonely in her bower, 
Swift she descends, and graceful bend>, 

As Fillan reached the tower. 

<c All hail! all hail, thou Lady bright."— 

" All hail thou Chieftain bold, 
" To Duart's lulls from far Lochawe, 

" Has Fillan's war-fame rolled." 

Loud swells in hall the wassal roar, 
Young Fillan brims the goblet high, 

To pledge the lady of his love, 
Sw eet Moina of the dark-blue eye. 

* Castle Duart was formerly the residence of the Chiefs of 
the Clan of Maclean. 

f Lochawe was Uio ancestor of the present family of Arevle. 
The traditionary account of the beautiful expanse of water so 
named, is one of the finest fictions of the bard of Selma. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 27 

3 Twas brighter than the bright blue heaven, 
That eye which on the Chieftain rolled ; 

'Twas softer than the gale of even, 
That sigh which Moina's passion told. 

That bosom, heaved with infant love, 
Was lovelier far than Appin's snows, 

That beauteous cheek of changeful dye, 
Than pale edge of the mountain-rose. 

'Twas morn ; — the sun in glory blazed 
O'er hill, and rock, and castled piles. 

And far in ocean dimly gleamed 
The dark Hebrides' misty isles. 

From smoking hamlet, airy sheal, 
Sped many a war-worn mountaineer. 

To join the Duart's hunting train, 
To rouse again the bounding deer. 

The blue-eyed maiden graced the throng, 
Light from her shoulder hung the bow ; 

A lovelier pair had ne'er been seen 
Than Moina and the young Lochawe. 

Her hunting garb was silken sheen, 
And waved amid her glittering locks 

The mountain bonnet's snowy plume, 
As wild she bounded o'er the rocks. 

'Tis sweet to see that Highland mai^, 
Through breezy scene so frolic glide, 



28 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Like hovering sprite on mountain's brow, 
Or fairy by the green hill's side. 

'Tis brave to see that mountain-chief, 
So proudly dight in hunting trim, 

While joy beams in his eagle eye, 
And life beats wild in every limb. 

Of horn, and hound, and hunting train, 
What boots it here for me to tell, 

Of bugle's blast, and whizzing shaft, 
And many an antler'd head that fell. 

Mine is alas, a simple lay, 

A tale of love, a tale of woe, 
List while I tell what erst befel 

Sweet Moina and the young Lochawe. 

The chace is o'er, — the blithesome train 
All jovial seek the Duart's tower, 

In festal mirih and chural strain 
So gaily sped the wanton hour. 

The feast is high in Duart's hall, 
Flows swift the brimming shell, 

But Fillan roves with the maid he loves 
The wild sequestered dell. 

Deep, dark, and. narrow, was that glen, 
Huge rocks athwart their shadows flung, 

And shifting lights of magic glare, 

On crag, and copse, and summit hung. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 29 



Soft fdlls the eve, — the air is balm, 
And devious onward still they rove, 

Sweet Moina's sigh, and kindling eye, 
Confess the hour and power of love. 

O sweet the hour! the feeling sweet, 

That whispering woods and streams inspire, 

As if the minist'ring sprite of love 
With angel wing had swept the lyre. 

O sweet the hour ! thou blue-eyed maid, 
When screened beneath the quivering bough, 

Wiih soul attuned to love and joy, 

Thou trembling heard'st thy lover's vow. 


















PART II. 



Alas S that aught so sweet as love 

Should ever work a maiden woe, 
That lovely woman's yielded charms 

Should quench the flame they gave to glow. 

Nine times in dark Loch Etive's cave 
Yon moon has dipt her quivering horn, 

And nine times wheeled her silver orb 
High o'er the misty hills of Lorn. 

D 2 



30 CLAN-ALBIN, 

O pale! pale now ihe rosy cheek 
Where Fillan's lip had fondly hyng ; 

O woful oow the gentle heart, 
That yielded to his guileful tongue ! 

Matured is Moina's maiden shame, 
And deep, and deeper ii her sigh. 

More pallid yet the faded cheek, 
And wilder still the dark-blue eye. 

" Now say, now §ay, thou Lady gay/* 
(Thus spake her ancient Moome) 

" Why heaves that sigh, why fills that eye, 
" Why gone thy maiden bloom. 

" Why hast thou doffed, thou lovely maid, 

" Thy girdle of silver sheen, 
" That late embraced thy slender waist ; 

" And robe of the velvet green. 

" Why loosely wave the golden locks, 
" That glittered in pearly braid, 

" Oh why a wo-worn lonely ghost 
" Dost roam in the murky shade." 

No word she spake, no sign she gave, 
Her looks were fixed on heaven, 

But her deep deep sigh, and glaring eye, 
Have fearful answer given. 

She's turned he. to the rampart high 
To wail her virgin shame, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 31 

From Ardtomish hall, and castle wall, * 
There blazed a bickering flame. 

It tinged the Lady's storied rock, f 

Glimmered on ocean blue, 
And far on Lismore's holy isle, J 

A magic radiance threw. 

" Come tell to me my aged Moome, 
Why from Ardtomish tower 
A lovely light thus blazes bright, 
And from Bragela's bower. 



K 
tt 

tt 



" The warder winds a merry blast : — 

" Hark ! now I list the swell 
* Of festal throng, of choral song, 
And joyous chapel bell." 



tt 



" God give thee peace thou Lady fair," 
She said and shook her head, 
To night the dark-haired Chieftain there 
Does proud Ikagela wed; — 



tt 



* Ardtomish is a ruinous castle in Morven, nearly oppo- 
site to that of Duart. 

f " The Lady's storied rock," is a bleak crag in the Sound 
of Mull, at no great distance from Duart, too much cele- 
brated in the feuds of the contending clans of Maclean and 
Campbell to require any description. 

\ Lismore, literally the great garden, is a fertile little isl- 
and near the mouth of the Sound, where the Koman Catho- 
lics have still a sort of college. 



32 CLAN-ALBIN, 



4< 



To night sleeps in Bragela's bower — >? 
But that Lady shrieking fell, 
While her frantic cries and her agoni* - 
The guilty secret tell. 

Shivered and shook her tender frame, 

All as she bended low, 
With a mothers pain, but.a virgin's stain 

Gave a keener mental throe. 

They hied them to an ocean-cave, 

Loud blew the wind and high, 
O the tempest's rave, and the wild sea wave, 

Drown'd Moina's wailing cry J 

The sea wave drown'd her wailing cry, 

And her sireless babe was born, 
While his false father's bridal blaze 

Ruddied the hills of Lorn. 

" O list, O list thou sad Ladye, 

" Thine infant's feeble cry, 
" O look on Fillan's raven hair, 

M On Muina's dark-blue eve." 



" And this to me, thou hoary wretch ! 

° I boast the Duart's blood, 
" And by Mary's might, this infant wight 

"Shall sink in the roaring flood! 

" How should I tame my haughty soul 
" The vassal scorn to bear, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 33 

" How shrink beneath the scowling glance 
" Of low-born Lowlander. 

" How should I blanch thine aged cheek, 

" Thou brave grey-headed man, 
" How live accursed the foul reproach 

" Of bold Clangillian. 

" Not mine to lower a guilty eye, 

" To bide the brand of shame, — 
" Oh God ! to brook the taunting look 

" Of Fillan's wedded dame !" 

" Christ give thee peace thou sad Ladye, 

" Anol thy soul to bless redeem ! 
" Oh Fillan's blood with the Duart's good, 

" Rolls here in a mingling stream." 

- 

" Nay stint thee, stint thee prating nurse, 

•' Or dread my maddening ire, 
" Would that the hated infant heaped 

" False Fillan's bridal fire ! 

" Then turn thee, turn thee feeble wretch, 

" Hurl it into the wave ; 
" False Fillan's hair! — nay, stint that prayer, 

m Not Heaven itself shall save." 

" O kiss thou first his baby lip, 

u O cross his baby brow ; 
" And bless him in our Ladye's name, 

" So keep thy desperate vow." 



34 CLAX-ALBIN, 

She clasped the baby to her brea 

They were for aye to part, 
And the flood-tide of a mother's love 

Came rushing o'er her heart. 

O who may trace the emotions wild 

On that pale face which play, 
As lustres in a northern sky 

Flash, — flicker, — start away, 

" Son of my love ! son of my hate, 

" My pride, my curse, my joy, 
" Die all that may, live all that can, 

" My child, thou shalt not die I 

" A long farewell my aged Moome, 

" My blessing's all my fee, 
" Sweet Heaven thee speed in the hour of neecf, 

" As thou hast done by me." 

She's clasped the baby to her breast. 

And as spirit swift she past 
From that eerie cave, where the wild sea wave 

Sung to the midnight blast. 

O short her flight, at the beacon height 

She sunk on a mossy stone, 
Her last to gaze while morning's rayi 

On Duart's castle shone. 

" Farewell ! farewell ! .my father's hall ; 
" Farewell my mother'* bower, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 35 

'* My lofty hopes, my mountain joys, 
" My maiden pomp and power. 

** No more in Duarl's festal halls 

u Shall Moina's steps be found, 
" Oh never shall thy echoing walls 

H Ring to my wild harp's sound!" 

Weeping and wild the vassal train 

Search cave, and cliff) and lonely grove; 

Bui vain, — 'twas said the blue-eyed maid 
Had wandered with a fairy love. 

By moonlight from the haunted hill, 

A magic harp was heard to moan, 
And starts the lated mountaineer 

At fleeting wraith, and ghastly groan. 

Three times was heard the fated din, 
Fleet Ewan's charger thundering past,* 

Three times the sprite a cronach yelled, 
Then shrieking fled in rattling blast. 



* " Fleet Ewan's charger;" this superstition is connected 
with the family of Maclaine Lochbuy, rather than that of 
Maclean Duart. Ewan-caen-beg, or " Hugh with the little 
head," is supposed to be an ancestor of the family of Loch- 
buy. Before the death of any of his numerous descendants 
he is still heard thundering past their dwellings about mid- 
night. The noise of Ewan's horse is easily distinguished, as 
he is shod with iron, a formality which is never observed with 
the small horses of the islands. 



3C CLAN-AIOJIN, 

The Seer has seen a phantom train, 

Where round Inch-Keunrth breakers roll ;, 
Iona's monks have masses said 

Three times for JMoina's parted soul. 

Now sad ihe Duart takes the field, 
Reckless the hero bownes him home, 

What eye shall watch his far approach, 
O, who to give him welcome come ! 

Fled, ever fled the joyous days, 
When blooming beauteous Moina ran, 

To hail her Chieftain's glad return, 
To swell the triumphs of her clan. 

How proudly heaved her maiden breast, 
What glories filled her flashing eye, 

When sweeping down the mountain's bent, 
That conquering clan would homeward hie. 

Her heart leapt to the targets clank, 
Her foot sprung to the pibroch'* swell, 

How richly glowed her lovely cheek, 
The triumphs of her sire to tell. 

Now sad the Duart seeks his tower, 
No daughter smiles the loved reward, 

Where hovered late the aerial form, 
A sullen warder rounds his guard 



A NATIONAL TALE, 37 



PART III. 

O who is she, that frantic maid, 

Skims over moss, and moor, and dale> 

Hark ! as her shriek of wild despair, 
Rung the grey rocks of Scallasdale. * 

A currach rocks in ocean-cave, 

Desperate she starts the glancing oar, 

Lists but the impulse of despair, 
And madly rushes from the shore. 



v > 



O softer yet thou southern breeze, 

That flitt'st through Morven's green fwood bowers, 
O smoother yet thou cresting wave, 

That bear'st the maid of Duarf s towers. 

Where hast thou wandered, woful maid, ( 

Where do thy tears in secret fall, 
Whose beamy glance, and frolic dance, 

Were late the joy of Duart's hall. 

Deep in Glen Billart's dreary glen, 
The hunter views an Arrie low, 

* Scallasdale is a romantic pastoral spot on ,the coast of 
Mull, where the Sound, only two miles in breadth, divides 
it from Morven. It is the paternal farm of Captain JL. . M. 
who fell so bravely in the field of Maida. 

VOL. II. E 



3& CLAN-AXRIN, 

Oh, there her sireless babe she tend-, 
Poor victim of the false Lochawe. 

Gloomy and ghast, an eerie wild, 

The hill-fox howls round Moina's bower, 

The yelling- eagle rears its brood, 
With her, the heir of Duart's tower. 

Poor wretch ! how tamed thy maiden pride. 
How haggard wild the dark -blue eye, 

The blasted heath thy couch — thy board. 
The berries of the hill supply. 



* O softly sleep my baby boy, 
, fi Rocked by the mountain wind, 
" Thou dream'st not of a lover false. 
" Or a world all unkind. 



a 



<c 



O sweetly sleep my baby boy,. 
" Thy mother guards thy rest, 
Thy fairy dasp, my little joy, 
" Shall sooth her aching breast. 



" Wake ! wake a»d smile, thou baby boy, 

" My heavy heart t© cheer, 
u The wintry blast howls on the hill, 

" The leaf grows red and sear. 

" O tell me ! tell me baby boy, 
" How shall I hear thy cry, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 3$ 

" When hunger gnaws thy little heart, 

" And death lights on thine eye. 

• 

"*' Oh, was it meet my baby boy, 

" That thou such icierd shouldst dree,-— 
Sweet Heaven forgive thy false father 
" His wrongs to thee and me." 



*i 



Thus wild and sad that Lady sung, 

All alone in the eerie den, o1 J L 

When dark-haired Fillan's hunting train, 

Dash down the echoing glen. 

Startling she flies,, and shrieking cries, 

" Welcome my fated hour V* 
And as arrow fleet her trembling feet, 

Have borne her to the shore. 

She stands where round the Calliach's head, * 

The booming billows wildly play, 
With sweeping dash, and roaring crash, 

Rebound, heave on, and burst in spray* 

* The point of Calliach, or of the Beldame, is a bold, 
an 1 very precipitous headland, the most westerly point of the 
island of Mull. 

Inch- Kenneth, is a delightful little islet, the burial place 
of the Chief.-; of Maclean. 



40 CLAN-ALBIN 

With dirge and knell, and cronach's swell, 
The princely Duart's found a grave, 

Sweet Moina and her baby boy, 

Unheeded float on the broad sea wave. 

And that broad, broad sea has waves enough 
To wash her honour's deadly stain ; 

Thus may'st thou deem thou gentle maid, 
Who list'st my legendary strain. 

So may'st thou shun the insidious wil 

Of lovely woman's direst foe, 
The fate of Duart's blue-eyed maid, 

The treachery of a false Lochawe. 



Moome received the thanks of Monimia for 
her performance, and as it was now getting 
dark, Mary summoned Norman and Hugh 
from the shore. Mary wished to sleep in the 
shealing, and to live there for ever ; Mrs. Mon- 
tague promised that she should visit it very 
often •, and, having put the Lady and Moome 
ashore at Eleenalin, Norman attended them 
home to Dunalbin ; Montague was from home, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 41 

and he did not enter ; but on the threshold 
.Mary enjoined him to come and hear her les- 
sons to-morrow, that he might judge if she 
did not deserve to visit the isle of the Druid. 

" Not to morrow, but next day," said 

Monimia, and Norman bowed, and de- 
parted. 

Norman did not forget the request of Mary 
Fitzconnal. On entering the castle he met 
Mr. Montague puffing, blowing, wiping his 
brows, and exhibiting every symptom of awk- 
ward passion. 

" So Macalbin, I hope you are come to 
talk reason to Mrs. Montague ; — such cross 
grained perversness ! — because, forsooth, I 

wont suffer her to ruin herseif with her own 

- 

two hands. Sell her lute indeed!— she puts 
me in a passion fifty times a day; and Tin 
sure there is net a sweeter-tempered, patienter 
man in existence, when I get my own way of 

nngs. ..... 

In testimony of this amiable temper .ha 
violently flung open the drawing-room door, 
and discovered Monimia rattling over the 
keys of her pianj-forte, and singing tuat 
lively song of Burns, 

£ 2 



42 CLAN-AL11IN, 

" O for ane and twenty Tam, 
I'll learn my kin a rattling sang 
Gin I saw ane and twenty Tam." 

The feelings natural to a delicate mind 
made Norman reluctant to enter, but the 
good-humour of Monimia reassured him ; 
and after a few minutes spent in reproach on 
the part of Montague, and in happy retort 
from his sister, he learned that she had not 
only refused to attend the Northern Meeting, 
but spent the money intended for dresses 
in the purchase of wool! — This wool was to 
be fabricated into coarse stockings ; and spin- 
ning and knitting was expected to afford an 
humble domestic employment to the women 
and girls scattered over the district. Monimia 
protested that she had not been, nor would 
she be a farthing out of pocket by this little 
scheme of industry, — that time was all it 
tequired from her, and that she had to bestow. 

Montague was not so to be satisfied. — 
" Had she spent the money in making her- 
self smart," said he stumping about, — " or 
getting things like her quality ; I would not 
have mmded \ — but to throw money away on 
every idle fancy !" 

" This scene must be wonderfully enter- 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 43 

taining to our guest," cried -she, " but I must 
still the tempest," and she again began, — 

" Hey for ane and twenty." 

There was something so irresistibly comic 
in the whole scene, that Norman could no 
longer keep from laughing ; Monimia caught 
the infection, and could scarce go on with 
her song. The provoking song, and this ill 
timed mirth, brought the indignation of Mon- 
tague to a climax. 

" Mighty fine Madam ! — Mighty fine ! — \ 
Laugh away 1" 

" I am sure if it would do any good to spoil 
my eyes, after you have spoiled your temper, 
I am ready to cry to oblige you." 

" Your eyes ! yon perverse baggage," said 
Montague, in a tone half sulky, and half 
tender,—" You know I am too fond, and too 
proud of yourself and your eyes j and you 
take advantage of that." 

" There is kindness in this though," said 
Monimia, rising and taking his hand,—" I 
am sure tuat I also am very fond of myself, 
so why dispute ?" 

" it is all along of yourself Monimia. You 
know that I am one of the best tempered men 
alive, when you don't contradict me." 



44 CLAN-ALBIN, 

u Exactly my own case. Well, let Mr. 
Macalbin witness our reconciliation. Two 
gentle-tempered beings like us can never 
again quarrel." 

" I hope not : but at any rate it wont be my 
blame ; and to prove that I forgive you about 
the wool, I shall advance you fifty guineas, — " 

" O, I shall wait till the money is due me. 
I deserve to suffer for my indiscretion." 

■' To fit you for the Northern Meeting I 
mean ; you know I have set my heart on that ; 
and my Lady Gordon " 

" Is a very prudent lady, no doubt ; but a 
truce with that odious meeting. It won't 
arrive these two months." 

" Then you go; and don't sell your lute?" 

" I have never heard of selling my lute but 
from yourself. I was sending it to the isle of 
the Druid for a litile concert to-night ; to 
which, if you are harmoniously disposed, I 
now invite you." 

" 1 ou perverse gipsey I said Montague, 
pulling her ears, — " Why did you suffer 
me to put myself in a passion about it. But 
you shan't send it to-night ; you know who 
says you play like an angel." 

" I am going to a scene which angels might 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 45 

gaze on," cried Monimia, eager to divert the 
discourse ; — " I think the country never was 
so beautiful. I am quite enraptured." 

u Then what would you think of a husband 
in this fine country — eh ?" cried Montaguey 
winking to Norman, who would gladly have 
been spared this mark of confidence ; — " I 
think we had best leave you in it. Go, get 
on your best becomes ; who knows what this 
afternoon may produce." l 

" Fair weather I hope, for my little jour- 
ney," replied Monimia carelessly. — " Wil- 
liams, order my gondola ; and should you 
reach Eieenalin before me, Mr. Macalbin, tell 
Lady Augusta I mean to take my chance for 
a welcome, and a share of her chicken." 

Norman, who felt as if a load was suddenly 
taken off his heart, bowed in silence, and 
retired; while Montague's sweet temper again 
failed him. 

" Surely Monimia, you will not be so cross- 
grained as leave home, when you know I 
expect Sir Archibald ; just after I have for- 
given your follies about the wool. There is 
a good girl now ; don't provoke me. You 
know how indulgent I am, and desirous of 
your welfare." 



46 CLAN- ALB IN, 

U, I am quite sensible of that." 

** Then what reasonable objection can you 
have to Sir Archibald ? Is he not a fashion - 
able man ; and will he not make a most in- 
dulgent husband : — whatever little faults he 
may have, his aunt says, that a prudent, hand- 
some girl like you, might make what she 
pleased of him. Besides, he is to reform the 
moment he marries." 

" He cannot do better," said Monimia, 
laughing. 

" If you wished for a town house, equi- 
pages, parties, and all that, he would indulge 
you in every thing." 

" Perhaps he might." 

" Then, if you chose to live in. the High- 
lands all the year round, I am sure he would 
never contradict you ; nor make the least ob- 
jection." 

" I cannot doubt that," answered Monimia 
laughing, — " provided I was contented to live 
alone." 

u And for poor people to visit ; — I do be- 
lieve there is more on his other estate than 
this; — so you would have that pleasure." 

" In perfection, I believe. But if you 
have any other advantage to mention, I beg 



A NATIONAL TALE. 47 

you would make haste ; M and she looked at 
her watch. 

" Now Monimia, you shall not stir. Come 
now, be reasonable. I know you have too 
much both of sense and spirit to throw your- 
self away, or refuse a fashionable man, whom 
all the ladies are dying for. And only think 
to be called my Lady, my Lady at every 
word. Why, your title will be the same as 
the Lady of a baron." 

" Delightful ! and then you to be, " Mr. 
Montague, my Lady Gordon's brother." 

" Go, you wheedling creature," said the 
pin- maker, with a complacent simper, — "I 
suppose Lady Gordon would be nothing the 
poorer for having Miles Montague for her 
brother, if she behave herself. So dress 
yourself for dinner, and give Sir Archibald a 
kind reception ; — you kuow how much my 
heart is set on the match." 

u Then I wish to Heaven you would marry 
him yourself," cried Monimia peevishly, — (i I 
am sure he would like you ten times better, 
for your fortune is ten times larger." 

Montague could not help laughing. — " But 
the heir to the family honours, Monimia," said 
he ; — " you don't consider that old Lady Gor- 
don has set her heart on him." 



48 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" So, out of her sovereign pleasure, she 
would choose me for heir-loom to her superb 
family ! Insolent old woman ! — Pray don't 
speak another word ; I have no patience to 
hear you, or to think of these people." 

Montague, who now saw that she was 
seriously offended, tried to soften her displea- 
sure, and to reason with her, as he called it. 
After going over the same ground a dozen 
times, Monimia begged him to drop the sub- 
ject, and assured him that all the titles at- 
tached to the name of Gordon, did not sound 
to her ears half so pleasantly as " Montague. 1 ' 

" Or Macalbin perhaps ?" cried Montague, 
in a peculiar tone. Monimia coloured vio- 
lently at this rude insinuation, and provoked 
to defiance, haughtily replied, " perhaps so." 

" Oh, mighty fine Madam !" cried he, 
stumping about in rage, — " mighty fine ; but 
J shall know what to think." 

" Then I shall afford you leisure to do so ;" 
and she opened the door, but suddenly 
changed colour, and started back, exclaim- 
ing in a faint voice, — " Macalbin, good Hea- 
ven !" 

It was indeed Norman, who more embar- 
rassed, if possible, than herself, was attempting 



A NATIONAL TALE. 49 

to explain why lie was by the door, when 
Williams came down stairs with some pamph- 
lets, going to Eleenalin, and apologized for 
having detained him. 

Monimia instantly retired to her chamber^ 
covered with the blushes of ingenuous shame ; 
the pride and delicacy of her woman's heart 
upbraiding the rashness of her behaviour. 

Montague, much alarmed at the advantage 
the young man might be disposed to take of 
what he had heard, was now eager to do away 
the impression, and affected to treat the whole 
as a jest. 

" He ! he ! he ! Macalbin," said he, — " so 
you overheard Monimia and me t if ting a little* 
She has a rare spirit of her own ; but I have 
always my own way in the end : though we 
make believe to quarrel for a while, she 
takes my advice in every thing. To hear 
how the saucy hussey will talk of those she- 
loves best! — for she has abundance of pride, 
I'll assure you : as my late brother used to 
say, when we heard of girls making foolish 
marriages, below their station ; S I am sure my 
Monimia will never disgrace her family, or 
her judgment by such a choice.' " 

u No confidence could be better placed,'* - 

VOL. II. F 



50 CLAN-AT.RIN, 

said Norman, half disgusted, and half amused 
by the petty cunning of the pin-maker, and 
he moved as if to withdraw, for he had entered 
the room. 

" Well, you may tell Lady Augusta that 
Mrs. Montague will see her soon ; but that to 
day she expects a particular friend. 

Norman went home indulging feelings he 
durst not venture to analyze, and anxiously 
expected Monimia to Eleenalin. When 
the afternoon advanced, and she did not 
appear, he became much more distressed than 
the occasion seemed to justify ; and began to 
fear tha.t Montague possessed all the power 
over her mind which he boasted. Lady Au- 
gusta requested him to read " The Task," her 
favourite poem : he began, then closed the 
book, went to the beach, returned, and dis- 
covered by his confused manner of reading, 
every symptom of a wandering mind. 

" Norman is for the first time seized with 
ennui," said the Lady smiling, — " There are 
two kinds, the acute, and the chronic, which 
attack different constitutions. Norman's will, 
I foresee, be the acute. Its symptoms are 
restlessness, fidget ting ^ an inability to com- 
mand the attention to any present object ; a 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 51 

desire of perpetual change, though change 
brings no relief?' Norman smiled, — " Its 
cure is produced by gaming, love, war, and 
politics." — Norman felt his colour change as 
he met the eye of the Lady, — H But these are 
violent, and often dangerous remedies. Men- 
tal and bodily exertion, or a combination of 
both, are not only better, but more safe." 

This lecture was no sooner delivered than 
the maid announced Mrs. Montague's boat at 
the landing place, and Norman flew to assist 
her in landing. She did not mention the 
affair of the morning, yet her fluctuating co- 
lour, and averted eye declared that it still held 
a place in her memory. 

To Norman her manners had never been so 
interesting, so " beautifully shy." 

" I think Lady Augusta," said Flora, laugh- 
ing, — " you ought to have mentioned the so- 
ciety of Mrs. Montague among your cures 
for en?iui." 

" Was she not included," answered the 
Lady, looking at Norman. 

" O no !" cried Flora, sparing him the pain 
of reply, and without understanding that look. 

Lady Augusta, on a former evening, had 
promised to gratify her young friends with the 
story of her early life. 



'V ill/ 



£2 CLAN-ALBIN 

" We will not disturb my Monimia's happy 
isle with a tale of sorrow," said she cheerfully. 
— " Long may it be the retreat of innocent 
pleasure. The young and the happy hava 
long haunted the isle of the Druid ; — I cannot 
be the first to awaken its echoes with the voice 
of sadness." 

They agreed to remain for that 'evening in 
Eleenalin ; and Lady Augusta, who had many 
latent inducements to relate her story, entered 
on the narrative of her sufferings with the 
dignified tranquillity of one who has risen 
above the airy nothings of mortality ; and, in 
contemplating more elevated concerns, ob- 
tained a portion of their sublimity. 



A RATIONAL TALE. 53 



CHAP. XX. 



'" A little while, 
Wa* I a wife : A mother not so long." 

* * * * * 

" And yetmethinks when wisdom shall assuage, 
The griefs and passions of our greener age, 
Though dull the close of life, and far away 
Each flower that hailed the dawning of the day ; 
Yet o'er her lovely hopes that once were dear, 
The time-taught spirit, pensive, not severe, 
With milder griefs her aged eye shall fill, 
And weep their falsehood, though she love them still," 

Camtbell. 

lou already know the story of my family ," 
said Lady Augusta. Of eight children I was 
the youngest, and the only female. I was 
the twin sister of Norman. I was conse- 
quently the idol of a large and happy family ; 
the little divinity of a numerous and devoted 
clan. 

" My mother was descended from that house 
which gave kings to Scotland, a circumstance 
she was unwilling to forget. My brothers 

r 2 



54 CLAN-ALBIN, 

were devoted to the service of the exiled royal 
family, and when I had attained my fifteenth 
year, it was resolved that I should be sent to 
France for the completion of my education. 
Three of my brothers were already in that 
country, and I was accompanied thither by 
my twin brother Norman." 

" Alas, alas [" cried Moome, — " "Well can I 
remember that day ; while you rode down the 
glen with the Chief, your four gallant bro- 
thers, and all the gentlemen of the clan. Still 
do I see you as you looked then, taking the 
bowl of cream as you passed my door. — l You 
will soon forget Glenalbin Lady,' said I weep- 
ing, as great reason I had. — l Oh no, never [' 
said you, looking round the glen so lovelily. 
And no more you did ; — though it is the 
wound of my own heart, that far, far from 
Glenalbin lie those that loved Glenalbin as 
truly, and as dearly." 

Lady Augusta seemed greatly affected by 
this allusion to her brothers. Yet she con- 
quered her own feelings, to sooth her vene- 
rable friend ; and when the curiosity of Moome 
had predominated over this burst of sorrow, 
she resumed her story. 

" We embarked in a little smuggling vessel 



A NATIONAL TALE. 55 

on the coast, and had a very favourable voy~ 
age. In France we were welcomed by many 
friends of my mother's family, who had fol- 
lowed the fortunes of him they esteemed their 
prince ; and caressed by many of the French 
nobility, who remembered that Britain had 
been governed by a Stuart, and now saw a 
probability of that family again recovering 
their lost sway. We were then on the eve of 
the fatal 1745. 

" Norman joined his brothers in the army ; 
and distant, very distant from my mind were 
the rival interests of the houses of Stuart and 
Brunswick; for with all the ardour of juvenile 
feeling, I was rushing into the vortex of Pari- 
sian folly. Charmed by the fascination, and 
elegance of the French nobility, their taste, 
their vivacity, their genius ; bewitched by 
that mixture of splendour, chivalry, and fri- 
volity, so intoxicating to high-toned, but in- 
experienced minds. I enjoyed the pleasures 
of that gay society with an absorbing delight ; 
and fancied I had never lived but in France. 
Moome ! I forgot Glenalbin : but I was 
punished for forgetfulness. That society still 
existed, which I fancied contained every 
charm, and every grace } but I out-lived the 



£6 CLAN-ALBJN, 

capacity of enjoying its pleasures : — I have 
out-lived its very existence ! — In one short 
year I beheld that structure demolished which 
it had taken ages to rear, to polish, and to 
decorate ; and learned amid the fluctuation of 
all I once admired, that the things which are 
to come, alone are real and stable : — the re- 
ward of virtue, — the hope of immortality. 

u The generous folly of my family now 
tempted ruin. The period of 45 was arrived. 
The fate of my father you all know ; my mo- 
ther did not long survive him : in the same 
perilous enterprize I lost my elder brothers. 
Let me hope that a time will come when 
beings of the same nature, and the same des- 
tiny, will no longer destroy each other, and 
desolate this fair earth, which was given them 
to inhabit, in settling the mere question whe- 
ther this man or the other shall be called their 
king. 

" My situation was now greatly altered : 
of my feelings I will not speak. I was de- 
pendent on a lady related to my mother, who 
is well known in the history of those times as 
a woman of political intrigue, and a partizan 
of the house of Stuart. She was a zealous 
Catholic, without the feelings of devotion j— 



A NATIONAL TALE. 57 

tenacious of appearances, yet destitute of 
reason, or sound principle. I had the misfor- 
tune to be regarded with a sentiment of pre- 
ference by the heir of a powerful French 
family ; but my heart nearly broken by the 
misfortunes of my family, was then first 
soothed and charmed by the affection of him 
who afterwards became my husband, and I 
afterwards rejected the addresses of his rival. 

" My patroness, who had negotiated this 
marriage treaty with infinite dexterity, un- 
known even to the family of this infatuated 
young man, was enraged at my folly and 
presumption. That a destitute girl of seven- 
teen should have a will, nay, assert that will, 
and reject a splendid alliance, which was cal- 
culated to promote the interests of her native 
prince, seemed truly astonishing ! — I was then 
of the age to admire kings ; but I even then 
thought the happiness of a whole life too much 
to sacrifice to loyalty. 

" I was sent to a convent, that in solitude 
I might learn to bend my will to my interest, 
and the wishes of my friends. De Valmont, 
for so was the man who became my husband 
called, joined his regiment. He was alto- 
gether dependent on his family, and we could 



,')8 CLAN-ALBIN, 

only hope for better times. Meanwhile I wa* 
contented, for I had the consolation of 1. 
letters, and a solitude where I could weep in 
peace. 

" 1 had lived three months in the convent 
of English Benedictine nuns, when I was one 
day surprised by a visit from my patroness. 
She took me home with her ; she was all cour- 
tesy and kindness, and instead of renewing 
the old topic, assured me that my charm5 
were worthy of a more brilliant destiny. 

" Next day was Sunday, and after her 
public morning devotions were over, she pre- 
sided at my toilet with anxiety as trouble- 
some as to me it was inexplicable. When 
my dressing was finished to her satisfaction, we 
d. ove to Versailles, and on the way she informed 
me that she had obtained a place for me in the 

household of the Duchess De ; and 

that I was on this evening" to thank the king 
for my appointment in his private cabinet. 

" I had no ambition of becoming a cour- 
tier, yet desolate and dependent as I was, I 
could not be insensible to the advantage I 
must derive from the patronage of the Duch- 
ess. I was however, overwhelmed and over- 
awed at the idea of encountering the splen- 
dours of majesty. 






A RATIONAL TALE. 59 

" I had been presented at Versailles, and 
I was afterwards seen by the monarch, when 
the court hunted at Fontainbleau. My High- 
land garb had attracted attention, and a tran- 
sient compliment afterwards repeated to my 
patroness, made 4»e see the king at my feet, 
and at her own power, wealth and honours. 
A party that was become disgusted with the 
insolence of the reigning favourite, whom 
they at once hated, despised, and courted, 
were anxious to have a counterpoise to her 
power ; and after many intrigues, the impor- 
tant audience was obtained. I alone was 
ignorant of its nature. I thank God that I 
was born in a country where the sovereign 
has no patronage to tempt the luxurious and 
needy to become unprincipled and base. I 
had been educated in innocence and honour, 
and was slow to believe in that debasing pro- 
fligacy which characterised many of the no- 
bility of France. It seemed a libel on human 
nature to think that mothers, husbands, and 
brothers, had waited the issue of an interview 
like mine, trembling lest the daughter, the 
wife, or the sister, had not the good fortune 
to captivate the king. Yet it was true as 
strange. 



60 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" When the terrible moment arrived, my 
patroness, as much agitated as myself, ex- 
horted me to exert all my talents to captivate 
the monarch, and assured me that if I suc- 
ceeded in interesting him, the De Valmont 
family would receive me with open arms, and 
my brothers obtain any rank they chose. 
Truth now flashed on my mind ; tears of in- 
dignation started to my eyes, and I was about 
to upbraid her for the treachery she had prac- 
tised, when the king was heard to approach. 
As she flew out, clasping her hands, in the 
attitude of supplication, he entered by a pri- 
vate door; and unable to articulate, I threw 
myself at his feet, to entreat his protection 
and pity. He raised me up, seemed to com- 
passionate my alarm, which I doubt not, he 
imputed to the awful ness of majesty, ami said 
a few words to sooth me. An awkward silence 
ensued, while I sat pale and trembling, only 
kept from insensibility by my peculiar situa- 
tion. 

" The king had little of the gallantry of a 
Frenchman. He was accustomed to be wooed, 
and I had neither the inclination nor the 
power to captivate. Some very silly ques- 
tions on his part, answered by monosyllables 



A NATIONAL TALE. 61 

on mine, ended the interview. He graciously 
saluted me, and retired, saying I should hear 
from him in the following week. 

" Indignation restrained the tears which 
offended delicacy had drawn to my eyes. I 
joined my false friend, who judging from my 
sullen appearance that all her expectations 
were frustrated, loaded me with abuse, and 
bitterly accused me of folly and ingratitude. 
I heard her in silence. 

" After midnight, the person who, next to 
herself, was most interested in my success, 
arrived from Versailles. He had seen the 
king at his couche. The king had found me 
naive but charming ; — he sent me his picture, 
and appointed a second interview. I will not 
disgust my young friends with the indecent joy 
of this profligate pair. I was now as much 
flattered and caressed, as I had been up- 
braided and reproached ; and every supposed 
objection was over-ruled, by a solemn assur- 
ance that my honour would be saved, by an 
immediate marriage with any young nobleman 
about the court, who was so fortunate as to 
meet my approbation. Such conversation 
was unworthy of reply. Next day I commu- 
nicated my situation to De Valmont, who for- 

VOL. II, G 



62 CLAN-ALBIN, 

tunately was in Paris. His feelings I need 
not describe, for he was a lover, and a man of 
honour. My brothers were in very distant 
places. I had no friend on whom I could 
rely but himself ; yet I could not consent 
to the union he urged, certain as I was that 
it must ruin him with his family, and draw 
upon him the displeasure of the court. Yet 
the necessity of taking some decisive mea- 
sure was every moment more urgent : I 
resolved to seek shelter and safety in my 
native glen. England did not war on women ; 
and I determined to throw myself on the 
generosity of my countrymen. We escaped 
from Paris, and De Valmont accompanied me 
to the coast. Now came the moment of per- 
haps an eternal separation ; hitherto I had 
resisted his impassioned pleadings, and the 
no less powerful importunities of my own 
heart. But now that the time for resolution 
and fortitude was come, I was dissolved in 
tenderness and tears. Seldom, my dear 
voung friends, are the bands of ardent attach- 

ml O ' 

ment entwined by the finger of prudence, yet 
the objections which opposed our union, the 
very necessity of renouncing our ill-starred 
love, determined our choice, and hastened 



A NATIONAL TALE. 63 

the consummation of our fate. Deeply did 
we expiate our mutual error. The moment 
of separation became that of destiny. De Val- 
mont had escorted me to Dieppe, as the wed- 
ded partner of his life, — I returned with him 
to Paris. 

" My husband was the younger son of a 
very powerful French family. His rank was 
as far beyond my hopes, as my wishes ; for I 
loved him for himself. His mother, the 
haughtiest woman of her time, was a native of 
Spain. In both kingdoms his connexions 
were equally powerful, and there was no rank 
in the army, the cabinet, or the church, to 
which, through their interest, lie might not 
have aspired. His elder brother had already 
succeeded to the titles and estates of the family, 
but the Chevalier was expected to raise him- 
self to fame by his sword, and to fortune by 
a lucrative alliance. He had even been the 
favourite of his mother. The future for- 
tunes of her eldest son had never excited 
either fear or hope. He was born a noble- 
man, and was likely to descend to the grave 
the same privileged and negative character ; 
but De Valmont's was another destiny : he 
was the man whose heroism and talents were 



64 CLAN-ALBiy, 

to reach those heights of ambition round 
which her haughty spirit continually hovered. 
The Count was the representative of the family 
honours, but the Chevalier was her son, the 
instrument of her ambition. 

Eagerly had she watched the developement 
of his character, assiduous to cultivate his 
talents, and stimulate his ambition ; with 
pride she observed the masculine energy of 
his mind, with pleasure the athletic form, and 
lofty deportment of a Spanish Cavalier. All 
her intriguing talents were exerted for the 
advancement of this much loved son ; I was 
fated to thwart plans interwoven with the very- 
constitution of her mind, and on me was ex- 
hausted her remorseless vengeance. 

" Her connexion with the court of Madrid 
rendered her a very useful agent to the cabi- 
net of Versailles : she directed the force of a 
masculine intellect to advance the oblique 
designs of an intriguing statesman, and her 
success, like her influence, was unbounded. 
The enchanting softness, and fine sensibilities 
which adorn the feminine character, were lost 
amid the dark intrigues of faction. The con- 
templation of suffering, cruelty, and crime, had 
blunted her natural sympathies, while the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 65 

perpetual necessity of mean compliance, and 
the substitution of political expediency, for 
honour and justice, had debased a mind once 
lofty in its principles, and generous in its 
feelings. 

" My husband was but too well acquainted 
with the violent character of his mother, and 
he anxiously concealed our rash union, till 
time had gained him friends who might pro- 
tect us from her power and her vengeance. 
He conducted me to an old and tenantless 
chateau, in the Upper Limosin, and gave me 
as much of his society as military duty, and 
the mandate of his mother (who soon remarked 
his frequent absences) would permit. This 
fleeting period was the short, bright noon of 
my existence. The visits of my husband 
abundantly repaid the splendour and gaiety I 
had abandoned ; and reconciled me to the 
solitude his society alone enlivened. 

" The chateau, and the domain on which 
it stood, belonged to a friend and brother 
officer of DeValmont's. The grey-headed 
concierge who managed the domain, and in- 
habited the chateau with his good old wife, 
were my sole companions. They amused 
me with stories of their former masters ; and 

G2 



6(5 CLAN-ALBIN 

I delighted to think them the Moome, and 
Piper of a Highland family. The good cure 
of the adjacent parish was my only visitor. 
Though our religions differed, he was mild 
and tolerant. He delighted to amuse us with 
little stories of his bees, his plants, and his 
children, — for so he named his parishioners ; 
or to elevate and sooth our minds with the 
consolations of his faith. Such were my com- 
panions ; but when De Valmont arrived, how 
forcibly, in those halcyon days, did I feel, that 
solitude, shared, enlivened, brightened by the 
object of our dearest affections, excels all the 
society the world can afford. 

" You have all heard of the singular beauty 
of the province which I then inhabited. France ! 
gay region of my youthful hopes ! Still does 
my heart cling round thee. Still does the 
eye of memory linger on the dark magnificent 
chesnut woods which crowned the chateau 
St. Mar ; the vine-clad slopes ; the beautiful 
stream sweeping round the steep lawn, and 
winding through meadows of the richest 
verdure. Still do I pause with complacent 
feelings on the variegated landscape of that 
lovely land, where the loadened vine-branch 
twines round the olive, and the pomegranate ; 



A NATIONAL TALE. 67 

and the ripening corn rustles the apple- 
blossom. 

" I had been married about six months, when 
in a bright evening towards the end of autumn, 
I strolled along the avenue which led from 
the chateau to the high way, expecting the 
arrival of De Valmont. Insensibly I wan- 
dered on, attracted by a group of lively 
peasants, engaged in the primitive labour of 
treading out the corn. They were all talk- 
ing of the arrival of a stranger, who for some 
days had remained at the little auberge of the 
neighbouring village, and who seemed anxious 
for concealment. I became alarmed for the 
safety of my husband, yet I knew not what 
to fear, and hastened home, torturing my 
fancy to every form of evil. When old 
Blanche entered with lights I requested her 

to take them away. ■ I will not suffer you 

to make night till he come,' said I. — His 
coming brought endless night ! 

" By the light of the moon-beams, that 
quivered through the mingling honey-suckle 
and jessamine which embowered my casement, 
I spread the supper table with wine and fruit. 
I placed DeValmont's chair opposite my own. 
Fond fool ! my idol was made the instrument 
of my punishment. Midnight came without 



08 CLAN-ALBIN, 

De Valmont. On that calm night, and at 
that still hour, I listened with that intense, 
agonizing anxiety, which converts the throb- 
bing of the heart, and the beating of the 
temples, into distant voices, and approaching 
feet. At times I struggled with these over- 
powering feelings. I tried to beguile the time 
with singing; and to sooth down my feelings 
by the nameless arts to which the unhappy 
have recourse. 

" ' When I have sung, Och och ma rhami, 
he will surely be arrived, 1 thought I. Eter- 
nity cannot efface the terrible association 
formed in my mind with that sorrow-breath- 
ing melody. I heard a distant noise ; it was 
not my own heart, yet that throbbed wildly, 
— I heard the trampling of horses, the angry 
voices of men, and the clash of swords. 

" I flew towards the place whence it pro- 
ceeded, the wood echoing to my screams. I 
found my husband supporting in his arms the 
bleeding body of a gentleman. His clothes 
were covered with blood ; but when he had 
hastily assured me of his own safety, and con- 
jured me to retire, I became more tranquil, 
and the courage of humanity made me eager 

to assist the dying man. He was my tuin 

brother I 



A NATIONAL TALE. 69 

m With the wild shriek that accompanied 
this fatal recognition, sensibility left me. — 
Had that stupor been the sleep of death, I 
would have died ere I had known mortal sor- 
row, for till then I was a stranger to remorse. 
But I was reserved for the evil to come ; — I 
learned that the wedded, loved, idolized, part- 
ner of my heart, was the murderer of my 
brother ! — Still I lived. 

" When the efforts of Blanche, and the 
unhappy De Valmont had recalled me to 
maddening recollection, I burst from them, 
and flew to my brother. I threw myself before 
him. I prayed him to pity me ! to pardon 
me ! to live for me ! — Life was ebbing fast, 
but the strong passion of his soul gave his 
countenance a ghastly energy. Contempt, 
hatred, and scorn, shot from the dim eye : 
revenge and indignation pointed to me its last 
withering glance. He tore himself from my 
embrace with supernatural violence : with the 
effort his wounds burst out, and muttering 
curses on me, he expired in agony. 

" My errors are renounced, repented, and 
forgiven," continued Lady Augusta mildly, — 
" I feel the blest assurance of Heaven's peace, 
in the serenity of my soul ; but memory 



70 ( LAN-ALBIN, 

shudders as I still behold the curse that 
lurked in the dying eye of Norman : — an 
eternity of moments like that might realize 
the dread punishment of the reprobate of 
God ! — This was but the prelude to mv 
misery ; — for he who sympathised in my grief, 
and my remorse, he who soothed my anguish 
for the loss of my brother ; — he was that bro- 
ther's murderer. 

H At the commencement of this fatal period 
I retained my senses. This was my direst 
punishment. Horrible state 1 when a creature 
endowed with the best attribute of an immor- 
tal mind, welcomes madness as a refuge from 
misery more extreme. Yet mine was mad- 
ness, but it had method ; — mine was despair, 
but it had activity. Every faculty of my 
mind, with new and overpowering vehemence, 
administered to the frenzy of my soul. My 
heart was divided against itself. The blood 
of nature rolling through my veins thirsted 
for vengeance. Now I could have plunged a 
dagger into the heart of my brother's mur- 
derer ; and in a few moments my wild feel- 
ings, exhausted by their internal struggle, 
would subside into softness and pity. I would 
turn and weep on the bosom of my husband. 



A NATIONAL TALE, 71 

" Thus love and hatred, revenge and com- 
passion, fondness and remorse, predominated 
in my soul with agonizing alternation, till 
the powers of nature shrunk from the dark 
communing of my distracted spirit. I sunk 
into lingering disease. 

" De Valmont was comparatively guiltless 
of my brother's death. I gave the wound 
which struck deepest. Norman had never 
seen my husband. Our letters had not reached 
him. He was made acquainted with my elope- 
ment by the distorted, and false representa- 
tions of an artful woman, panting for ven- 
geance. He discovered my residence, watched 
the arrival of my husband, compelled him to 
defend himself, and fell the first victim of my 
rash imprudence. 

" De Valmont's confidential servant was 
alone acquainted with the manner of Nor- 
man's death. He religiously kept the secret 
we thought not of enjoining, and when won- 
der and curiosity had exhausted themselves, 
the murdered Englishman was forgotten. 
Religion forbade his burial in consecrated 
ground. He was buried in the wood of cha- 
teau St. Mar. Terrible days, and nights more 
dreadful, did I sit on that grave, cursing the 



72 CLAN-ALBltf, 

hour of my birth, and invoking the indignant 
spirit of my hrother. At this time I allowed 
myself to cherish the idea of suicide. I 
brooded over the time, the place, the manner, 
of my catastrophe, with gloomy delight, and 
savage resolution : — When I had given birth 
to my infant; — at the hour of midnight, on 
the grave of Norman, I would seek a refuge 
from despair in death. " 

A slight spasm contracted the features of 
Lady Augusta as she spoke ; her audience 
were drowned in tears : she seemed in mental 
prayer : then clasping her hands, she ex- 
claimed, — " O proud and rebellious wretch! 
who thought to elude the punishment of error 
by throwing off mortality, — to escape the 
dread presence of that God who filleth all 
space, by madly * rushing on the thick bosses 
of his buckler.' — This I must ever consider 
as the guiltiest time of my life, — I have since 
lived long ; and Heaven has given me forti- 
tude to say, — ' All my appointed days will I 
wait, till my change come.' 

" I was spared for repentance. The habi- 
tual image of death, and all its attendant cir- 
cumstances, by amusing my attention, recon- 
ciled me to life. I thought I had strained my 



A NATIONAL TALE. 73 

courage to the sticking place, and the suffer- 
ings I had the resolution to terminate, I found 
fortitude to endure. Thus did I presump- 
tuously reason. But the smiles, the helpless 
innocence of my new-horn infant, soon in- 
spired me with more humanized feelings, 
and awakened in my heart a new sense of 
enjoyment. Slowly I became tranquil ; happy 
I could never be. At least I hoped so ; and 
every emotion of pleasure that lightened my 
mind, I bitterly dismissed as incompatible 
with the endless useless grief I owed to the 
memory of my brother. 

" The manly sorrow of De Valmont far 
exceeded mine : his was the contrition of a 
pure and tender heart, — the deep, lasting, 
hidden regret, of a well-regulated, but keenly- 
feeling mind. Mine was the impotent rage 
of vengeance, the gnawing of remorse, and 
the uncontrolable effusion of nature's bleed- 
ing sympathies. After the death of Norman 
my husband never left me. Time, the mighty 
magician, to whom all things are possible, 
assuaged our sorrows. We wept our mutual 
misfortune together ; and the blood of Nor- 
man seemed even to cement our union. 

" The serenity in which our days now 

VOL. II. H 



74 CLAN-ALBIN, 

flowed on, aided by pensive regrets for an 
event which time could never remedy, deter- 
mined De Valmont to abandon all his splendid 
prospects, and to choose a life of retirement. 
I was fond to enthusiasm of this plan. It pro- 
mised all of happiness I could now hope to 
enjoy, — the constant society of my husband. 
He alone could share the sentiments which 
filled my heart, and would accompany me to 
the grave. It was necessary that l)e Val- 
mont should make a journey to Paris in fur- 
therance of our intended scheme of retire- 
ment to my native land. An unaccountable 
absence of nearly two years could not fail to 
excite the astonishment of his friends, and 
the anxiety of his mother, though he had 
often assured her of his welfare. His pre- 
sumption in raising his thoughts to a woman 
the ' king delighted to honour/ was whis- 
pered in Paris, and it, was a matter of course 
in that country, to conclude that he was ex- 
piating this crime in some distant Bastile. 
His mother alone knew better; though the 
fidelity of his friend, and the obscurity of 
our retreat, made it impossible for even her 
arts to discover us. But now he was seen in 
Paris. Dearly as he loved his own child. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 75 

could he leave his country without once 
seeing, — once seeing the mother who had 
carried him in her bosom ? He was transmit- 
ting his property to England. The suspicions 
of the Countess were roused, her toils were 
round us ; — letters were intercepted, servants 
were bribed ; and it was discovered that he 
had a wife and a son in a distant province. 
The rage of the haughty woman was scarcely 
equal to her disappointment. But I was a 
stranger, friendless, a Protestant, — and con- 
sequently not the legal wife of her son. Hope 
again sprung up; the Countess * trampled on 
impossibilities,' and ordered her carriage to 
the minister's. Imitating the caution of De 
Valmont, she studiously concealed the infor- 
mation she had so meanly acquired, till her 
plans were matured, and her vengeance com- 
plete. Perhaps some remaining goodness 
made her anxious to retain the respect of her 
son : while she plotted his misery and dis- 
honour, she wished to retain his regard ; and 
suffered him to leave the capital unmolested. 

" He flew to me on the wings of affection ; 
we had met, never, never to part again. A 
little week would place us beyond the reach 
of violence, if any were intended, and with 



7(5 CLAN-ALBJ>, 

endearing confidence we arranged the mannci 
of our future simple life. Hope again shed 
her soft, but bright tints, on the picture which 
fancy drew. We spoke of this glen, of this 
isle, of a life of domestic pleasure ; elegance 
without wealth, plenty without profusion, re- 
tirement, without gloom ; humble, but faith- 
ful friends, affectionate and aminbie chil- 
dren. 

" ' My mother will pardon me when she 
knows our story,' said De Valmont, and he 
retired at an early hour, fatigued by a long 
ride. With our little Norman slumbering on 
his bosom he sunk to quiet repose. The per- 
turbation of spirits, occasioned by his arrival, 
took from me all inclination to sleep, and I 
sat by the bedside, gazing on the treasure of 
my doting heart. 

" The rattling of carriage wheels, hoarse 
voices, and a loud knocking at the gate, filled 
me with great alarm. My prophetic heart 
told me all ; five of those legalized ruf- 
fians, whose grim visages are the index to 
their dark character, — those brutal execu- 
tioners of a despot's mandate, entered our 
chamber. De Valmont started up, and seized 
his sword. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 77 

•' A lettre-tk-cachet announced his fate. He 
was the king's prisoner. Lifeless was I torn 
from his arms. I never saw him more ! 

-" Returning sense restored me to that 
mental agony which I blessed as the welcome 
assurance of approaching death. When a 
few minutes had elapsed, I remembered my 
child. I had last seen him in the arms of 
De Valmont, clasping his little hands, and 
imploring the hard-hearted ones for " Graces 
pour Martian" It w 7 as the prayer I had taught 
him to repeat at the grave of his uncle. I 
longed to take from his little lips the linger- 
ing kiss of his father. My child also was 
gone ! And now was my misery complete as 
the remorseless cruelty of my destroyer. 
Joy has its limits ; but the human mind, the 
young mind, knows not its own capacities for 
suffering. I fancied that mine touched on 
the utmost verge of mortal endurance at the 
death of my brother. But now 1 — Oh, the 
deep, deep overpowering agony of those mo- 
ments when the distracted mind has wandered 
from the enjoyment of reason, and not yet 
reached the bliss of madness ! — When no tear 
cools the burning eye, when no sigh relieves 
the suffocating bosom : — when sorrows crowd 

H 2 



78 CLAN-ALBIN, 

round the heart in overwhelming concentra- 
tion ; when frightful visions gleam on the 
sight, — when the brain grows dizzy, while 
intervals of hideous sense deepen its horror 
This state was mine ; this wild, indescribable 
state, in which the mind feels, if I may so 
speak, all the excruciating pangs of the soul's 
thirst. . > 

" You are greatly affected, my kind young 
friends. It is a proof of the excellence of your 
natures. Yet I would relate, not my suffer- 
ings, but the punishment of my errors. I 
had led a son from his mother's arms, per- 
haps I deserved to lose my own. I still cleaved 
to my idols, so I was permitted to sorrow for 
their loss as one who had no hope. Do not 
weep for me, my sweet Monimia : you now 
see me calm, soothed, confiding ; and able 
to say, — ' It is good for ine that I have been 
afflicted.' 

" As the paroxisms of mental suffering 
abated, I began to form some plans for the 
future. I was still surrounded by the emissa- 
ries of the Countess, who informed me that 
the Chevalier was in the hands of his family, 
till measures had been taken to dissolve his 
illegal marriage. Adversity had now emptied 



A NATIONAL TALE. 79 

her quiver against me. I was not only 
wretched, but dishonoured. Money was of- 
fered me, on condition of retiring from 
France. Though my heart was broken, my 
spirit was still lofty and unconquerable. I 
vindictively spurned the mean-souled agent 
of the woman who dared to calculate the price 
of my honour, and to offer a sordid, beggarly 
compensation for my husband's, and my in- 
fant's love. 

" Hitherto I had retained some feeling of 
respect for the mother of De Valmont, but 
every evil passion of my nature was roused 
by this attempt to dishonour me ; and my soul 
was filled with the most malignant hatred, — 
the most uncontrolable desire of vengeance. 
Alone, and moneyless, I jo urn eyed- t-p Paris. 
With the wildness of a maniac I forced myself 
into the saloon of the Countess ; — my fears 
were lost in despair, — my timid soul was 
armed with nature's strongest instincts. I 
raved like a lioness robbed of her young. I 
was nerved by those powerful energies which 
rouses the feeblest animal to attack the most 

* 

ferocious. What had a mother to fear who 
pleaded for her child, — a wife who entreated 
for the husband of her heart. For a few mi- 



80 CLAN-ALBIX 

nutes all was confusion. I touched, nay I 
shook, the guilty soul of that merciless wo- 
man, but I confirmed her cruel purpose. On 
this evening, as it happened, her hotel was 
splendidly illuminated for an entertainment 
in honour of the royal mistress. The com- 
pany were beginning to arrive ; repeatedly 
she ordered me to begone. Whither could I 
go, — I threw myself at her feet, I humbled 
myself before her. I entreated to have but 
my child restored, and I would renounce my 
husband. O the obduracy of that heart which 
could resist my prayer ! But my upbraidings 
still rankled in her's. She furiously struck 
down my supplicating hands, while she ex- 
claimed, — c No ! not if the little wretch could 
save your soul from perdition.' — At the same 
instant a group of company entered the bril- 
liant saloon ; and she called loudly to her 
servants to force out the mad woman. Surelv, 
surely I was indeed frantic, ere Heaven per- 
mitted me to raise my desperate hand against 
the life its mercy had bestowed. With super- 
natural energy I burst from the servants, and 
snatching a gentleman's sword from its scab- 
bard, aimed at her heart. Daily, hourly, do 
I thank Heaven that my soul was spared the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 81 

guilt of blood. My uncontroled passions 
had hurried me towards a dreadful goal, but 
my arm was held back. 

" From long deep midnight of the soul I at 
length emerged. As reason returned, I re- 
membered that I had been a wife and a mo- 
ther. But four years had elapsed : my child 
was no more ; my husband was married ! A 
written instrument, which announced the dis- 
solution of my marriage, confirmed the latter 
statement ; of the former I had painful con- 
firmation. With De Valmont I renounced 
the world. I ought to say it forsook me. I 
was still young, but I sickened at life. My 
earthly destiny was already accomplished. 
The world had been to me a vale of tears ; 
and I was forced to turn my eyes on the 
bright vista that was opening beyond it. I 
hoped that I had not long to live; and that, 
when I died, De Valmont would pity and 
regret me. Long, very long, did these bitter 
and perverse thoughts cling to my mind ; but 
I lived to subdue them. 

" The dark period of mv life was passed in 
a large gloomy building among the moun- 
tains of Catalonia, belonging to the Spanish 
estates of the Countess. As I began to re- 



82 CLAN-ALBIN, 

cover, I found that I was watched more and 
more strictly, and this alone I believe inspired 
me first with impatience of restraint, and then 
with the desire of liberty. I acquired as 
much of the Catalan tongue as enabled me to 
converse with the solitary Pyrenean shepherd 
1 sometimes met in the course of my per- 
mitted rambles through the sublime solitudes 
around me. 

" A countryman of ours has said that High- 
landers, pipes, blue bonnets, and oat-meal, 
are to be found in the mountains of Auvergne, 
Suabia, and Catalonia ; and I shall add, that 
wherever Highlanders are to be found, there 
are warm affections, good faith, and genero- 
sitv. 

" Why should I occupy your happy hours 
with the story of my life's vicissitudes : — 
Long, very long, I prayed for 

r A lodge in some vast wilderness/ 

and at length I obtained my wish. Poor, and 
a heretic as I was, my sorrows affected the 
mountain shepherd, and he assisted me to 
escape. I got to Barcelona, and from thence 
to England, to Scotland, — to Glenalbin ! — 
What a change awaited me there." 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 83 

Moome here seized the hand of the Lady 
with all the q-;ick sensibility of youth ; and 
weeping over it, bitterly exclaimed, — " Ah 
Lady ! Lady ! that God himself should per- 
mit such suffering to you !" 

" It was for good ; my tried, kind friend," 
said Lady Augusta. — " It led me to trust in 
Him, and that trust relieved me." 

11 I took up my sepulchral abode in Eleen- 
alin. I was very poor, but my friends were 
of the kindest. At first my life was gloomy 
and desolate. I experienced the hopeless, 
cheerless solitude of that heart, ' which has 
nothing to love, nothing to care for ; nothing 
to dream about, and be happy.' — I was often 
wild, visionary, and superstitious ; for my ill- 
regulated sensibility was still painfully acute. 
But I fought the good fight, and I was enabled 
to conquer. Time and reason subdued im- 
proper feelings ; faith opened a heavenward 
prospect to my forlorn hopes ; and even on 
earth blessed me with that humble hope, 
which is the pledge of immortal peace. 

" As I conquered selfish feelings, my heart 
again began to own the kinsman's, the clcuus- 
man's claim. Year after year made me more 
poor, and more rich ; for I lost another, and 



84 CLAN-ALBIN, 

another brother. And at last all were lo 
To meliorate the condition of my humble- 
friends now became the pleasant duty of my 
life : so again 1 numbered days of usefulness, 
and nights of serenity; and I became recon- 
ciled to life, for I felt that I did not live in 
vain. 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 85 



CHAP. XXI. 



" Ah me ! for aught that I could ever read, 
Ceuld ever hear by tale or history, 
The course of true love never did run smooth." 

Shakspeare; 



1 shall not attempt to describe the power- 
ful and various feelings to which this narrative 
of Lady Augusta gave rise. She alone who 
had been the sufferer was calm, yet at times 
memory would burst the flood-gates of sor- 
rows long past, but never forgotten ; and her 
mind would sink under gushing tenderness, 
or overwhelming grief. 

Lady Augusta's was a story which could 
bear no commentary. In few words she 
pointed out its moral ; — the fatal effects of 
passions, however laudable, indulged in de- 
fiance of reason and prudence. — Her young 
auditors thought her judgment severe, but 

VOL. II. I 



8t> CLAN-ALBJN, 

they were silent ; and Moome uttered only 
her usual ejaeulatory, M Oc/i hone, och hone" 
Long silence ensued ; every one absorbed in 
reflection. Norman, who in spite of the in- 
terdiction of reason, clung to the hope of 
alliance with his venerable friend, began to 
fancy that he might be the son, the nepbew, 
or the grandson, of one of her brother*. 
Moome thought the same thing ; and as her 
foster-child was the favourite, she made him 
the grandson of Donald. 

In a few minutes more the horn was sounded 
from Kenanowen as a signal for the boat ; 
and the feelings of the party were relieved 
by the arrival of Montague. 

" So, so," said he, " you all look glum. 
Well, 1 have brought you some news to 
brighten yoor faces." 

" What new impertinence from Castle- 
bane, 1 ' thought Monimia. 

" You see Ma'am, there is no man more 
friendly than your humble servant, when I 
can serve a good neighbour, without harming 
niv own family Ma'am. So, as Minia'i ad- 
inirer, Sir Archibald, dined with me to-dav, 
6ays I, — \ Sir Archibald, — pray what think 
you of my young friend Macalbin r — Is he 



A NATIONAL TALK. 87 

not a fine, tall, good-looking fellow ? — Don't 
you think a pair of colours would become 

him?' So Sir Archibald asked farther 

about him ; — his inclination for the army ; 
and all that; — and said it was a pity he should 
waste his days in retirement. — And added, 
that, for his own sake, and my recommendation 
Ma'am, a pair of colours were very much at 
Norman's service. — In the meanwhile he 
would be glad to see him over to Castelbane 
with me, Ma'am ; and — " 

" And so the whole was concluded," inter- 
rupted Monimia ; who fancied she saw the 
purport of this manoeuvre, and felt as indig- 
nant at the patronage of Sir Archibald, as at 
the officious impertinence of Montague. 

" It was, Monimia, very much to my satis- 
faction ; — and if Lady Augusta should need 
a small sum advanced for the equipment of 
our young friend, she would oblige me 
much." 

Lady Augusta was scanning the eloquent 
features of Norman. They were strongly 
expressive of distress and anxiety. 

* I am certainly very much obliged by 
your well-meant kindness," said she, — " but 
I have other views for Norman." Norman 



88 CLAN-ALBIN, 

raised his radiant eyes to her face, and pre>-» 
ing her hand, whispered, — " Bless you for 
that." 

H Other views Ma'am ! — Other views !" 
cried Montague, rising, and sousing down 
again. — " O ho ! — Pray let me ask what these ■ 
views may be ? — But let me tell you too 
Ma'am, I can see as far before me a< another. 
Two words to a bargain all over the world 
Ma'am !" 

Lady Augusta could not perceive whither 
all this pointed ; but the glowing cheeks of 
Monimia, and the resentful eyes of Norman, 
indicated more information. 

" My views are neither very ambitious, nor 
very romantic," replied the Lady mildly ; — 
" but I shall spare him as long as I can the 
most painful of all obligations, — gratitude to 
a man he can neither esteem nor love." 

Monimia looked up delightedly, while 
Montague sulkily said, — " Meaning Sir Archi- 
bald no doubt, Ma'am ?" 

" My meaning cannot easily be mistaken," 
replied the Lady, smiling softly ; — " you are 
right in believing us very poor people Mr. 
Montague ; and you know it is imprudent in 
poor people lightly to increase their debts. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 80 

Bat we cannot be insensible to your kindness. 
And now, if you please, we will call another 
question." 

" O, whatever you please, Ma'am. — To be 
sure I might have known what thanks to ex- 
pect from serving a gentleman; — for High- 
landers must all be gentlemen ! — All gentle- 
men, though they want shoes to their feet." 

Monimia, colouring with indignation at 
this rude speech, was about to make a very 
smart reply? when Norman, with a good-na- 
tured smile said, — " It would be a sad thing 
to want both good shoes, and good manners." 

" Well, well, I have no fault to find with 
your manners," replied Montague, somewhat 
softened ; — " and I am sure you must all 
know I could have no possible motive for 
wishing Norman off the country but his own 
good; — and no more could Sir Archibald.' 7 

Montague said too much ; Monimia, in a 
glow of youthful generosity, turned round 
and replied, — " I am sure you ought to have 
none ; — when that time does come we shall 
all regret it." 

" Aye, aye," said Montague ; — " but you 
see a mist is rising on the lake ; — so you 

had be$t come home." Monimia rose, and 

l 2 



X 



90 CLAN-ALBIN 

inviting the party to what she called her 
concert, to-morrow evening, in the Druid's 
isle, went away. 

After attending them to the boat, Norman 
began to pace along the pebbly beach, rumi- 
nating sweet and bitter fancies. That he 
loved, — ardently loved, he could no longer 
conceal from himself ; and his spirits being 
wasted with the melancholy recital of the 
Lady, he gloomily pictured a life of obscure 
and fruitless toil, embittered by^ hopeless 
affection, — hopeless, because honour, pride, 
and the generosity of pure attachment, for- 
bade even the desire of hope. He already 
saw that Montague, with the sordid calcula- 
tion peculiar to gross minds, suspected not 
only himself, but Lady Augusta, of designs 
as degrading as base. His spirit revolted 
from even the unmerited imputation of selfish 
baseness, and he tasked his reason to the 
control of his growing love, — not to its ex- 
tinction ; for like most other philosophers of 
twenty-one, Norman saw no propriety in 
eradicating a passion his reason could com- 
mand. 

" I must deny myself the witchery of her 
society," thought he ; and resolving to resolve 



A NATIONAL TALE. 91 

to-morrow, (unless something made his ab- 
sence remarkable) to be absent from the 
Druid's isle, he was joined by Hugh. 

" So Gordon was wishing to commission 
yourself dear ?" cried the Piper, breaking 
at once into what occupied all his thoughts. 

M So it seems," replied Norman, who never 
now heard the name of the baronet without a 
mental spasm. 

" But the Lady faced Montague for it, as 
Moome understood. — The Gordons had al- 
ways impudence enough to take any thing 
upon themselves : — that they should dare to 
offer us their commissions ! — No, no, darling, 
you shall be the King's soldier rather than 

Gordon's officer." " I hope so ; — but let 

me assure you the Lady's reply was very civil. 
— I don't know what you call facing" 

" O, too civil by half, I daresay. — Thank 
God however, it is herself has the true spirit 
of Macalbin's dochter ; or, ill as it would be- 
come me, I would h&\e faced even herself; — 
seeing there are few of my name now left to 
know what a Macalbin should feel for a Gor- 
don.— — Painting and papering at Castle- 
bane too, as I am told, — for I scorn to ask, — 
for Mrs. Montague. But, as Moome says, 



92 CLAN-ALBIN, 

she has more sense and pride than stoop to a 
Gordon. — She has taken my own advice be- 
fore now ; and I shall not be slack myself to 
tell her of the Gordons. — They must not 
think to take every thing from us either ; — 
black whigs !" 

* 

Norman laughed outright at the angry 
violence of the Piper, and the influence he 
possessed with Mrs: Montague ; and asked him 
what he would say to her. 

" O, I shall say, — * Sure there is no haste 
for your own marriage darling, that I can see. 
You are not ould yet ; and who knows what 
God himself may turn up forus, I know him 
myself who loves you better than his own life. 
He is not to be named with a Gordon : — so 
I hope, and trust — " 

" Meaning yourself Hugh r" said Norman, 
trying to smile, while a thrill of delighted 
consciousness ran through his frame. — " No, 
meaning yourself, Norman. 

" Ah Hugh, Hugh," cried he, shaking his 
head, while a sweet, sad sigh burst from 
his bosom, — " you forget that poor Norman 
is a beggar, — if even otherwise he durst lift 
iris thoughts." 

" A beggar I" cried Hugh, reddening. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 93 

" A poor man perhaps ; — but thank God, no 
Macalbin ever was a beggar." 

" I — I am not even a — " Norman, was un- 
able to finish the mortifying sentence, and the 
Piper, eagerly clasping his hand, exclaimed 

in a quivering voice. " You are, you are 

a Macalbin, dear darling Norman, — and if 
I were a lady myself, as young, lovely, and 
rich, as herself, — which however I am not, — 
I would—" 

" You would be in love with me," cried 
Norman laughing. And placing his hand on 
the lips of the Piper, to stop the farther effu- 
sion of his affectionate folly, he softly added, 
— " Though neither very young, rich, nor 
lovely, your love is very precious to me ; — 
so don't wish yourself a lady ; — I like you 
better as you are Hugh." He walked hastily 
away, while Hugh murmured blessings on 
him. 

Norman saw that Moome and the Piper 
had already, in the abundance of their love, 
bestowed Monimia upon himself. He could 
not quarrel with a gift so desirable ; and he 
knew that when the heat of their displeasure 
against the Gordons was abated, innate de- 
licacy would restrain the advice of which the 



94 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Piper was now so lavish. Wben he returned 
to the cottage, and again beheld the mild, 
pale, penetrating countenance of his all-en- 
during friend, beaming with kindness on him- 
self, with cheerful benevolence on all around, 
his own trivial griefs appeared but as dust in 
the balance, and he blushed that he had felt 
them such. 

The proposition of Montague naturally led 
the conversation at supper to the future pros- 
pects of Norman. The Lady lamented the 
necessity which compelled her to receive 
Montague's friendly offices so ungraciously ; 
and felt somewhat surprised that Norman, 
whose young heart was so ardent in gratitude, 
seemed insensible to his coarse, but well in- 
tended kindness. 

" Whatever be the fate of my soldier of 
fortune," said she, smiling kindly on him, 
" I can never regret that he has attained the 
mature age of. twenty-one, before he enters 
on his perilous profession. Often with deep 
compassion have I seen young boys trans- 
planted from *he bosom of their families to 
the army, and made responsible as men and 
officers, for all the follies of children. If 
these young creatures are pleasing and ami- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 95 

able, they are sure to be initiated into pre- 
mature libertinism by the pernicious indul- 
gence of their seniors, — if they are petulant 
and assuming, it is equally certain that the 
dawning spirit of even generous ambition will 
be crushed by perpetual sneers and mortifi- 
cations ; and often a foundation laid for 
future bad temper, and malignity of heart." 

" But, — but, — " cried Norman ; and the 
rapidity of his ideas out-ran the powers of 
speech. The Lady again smiled on him. — 
" Aye ; you would no doubt tell us of your 
hero. A splendid exception I grant ; but 
had he been a common officer, he could not 
have been Norman's model. Besides, you 
cannot forget the education of this illustrious 
soldier, and his extraordinary father. In our 
age, rich, and various talents go to the forma- 
tion of a great military character ; — and 
splendid indeed are the talents military glory 
attracts. Would that more useful glory were 
as alluring. But that time will come," added 
Lady Augusta cheerfully; for she who trusted 
in God, could not despair of the happiness of 
man. 

" And do you think then war will ever 
cease Lady ?" said Norman. 



96 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" I hope it will, in a great measure. Society 
advances with slow, but sure progress. Hu- 
man passions too often retard its march, and 
sometimes make it retrograde ; but still it 
gains ground. When I see how much man 
has gained even during my span of life, I 
rejoice with sanguine hope. I have seen 
slaves emancipated, tortures abolished, edu- 
cation diffused, laws ameliorated; that dark 
tribunal which long filled Europe with terror, 
nearly swept from the countries it enfeebled 
and disgraced. Many evils no doubt some- 
what counterbalance these blessings ; and 
nations, like individuals, are apt to pause 
upon the calamity, and to overlook the bene- 
fit ; though I trust the former will be tempo- 
rary, and the latter permanent. In the last 
twenty eventful and perilous years, though 
Frenchmen have lost, and Englishmen suf- 
fered, I trust mankind has gained." 

"It would be misery to think otherwise/' 
said Norman. 

" Then good night Norman. May all your 
young hopes be fulfilled ; for I am sure you 
can never be other than the soldier of free- 
dom and your country, — the soldier of de- 
fence.' 1 



A NATIONAL TALE. 97 



CHAP. XXII. 



" Full sixty years the world had been her trade, 
The wisest wretch much time had ever made." 

Pope. 

f So these very extraordinary persons have 
declined our intended kindness," said Lady- 
Gordon, leading her nephew, Sir Archibald 
to the far corner of her dressing-room in 
Castlebane ; and speaking in a low tone, as 
if she remembered that " walls have ears," — 
an excellent maxim, whether in national or 
domestic diplomacy. 

" Nay, rejected it Madam, and rudely too," 
replied the baronet angrily, as if he wished 
to resent to his aunt the offence of these ex- 
traordinary persons. 

" Matchless ingratitude ! — They must be 
convinced that my offer proceeded from no- 
thing but the purest generosity : — but such 

VOL. II. K 



98 CLAN-ALBIN, 

are the returns benevolence may expect. 
Lady Augusta, poor woman, lias lived so 
long among low people, that she has con- 
founded all received ideas of proper and im- 
proper. — I am told the young man is rather 
tall, and well-looking too, for one in hii 
way r 

" Tall enough," returned Sir Archibald, — 
" I believe there is no end of him. I know 
nothing about his looks, — he looks insolent 
enough, I think.*' 

" I daresay. — Apropos, how goes on your 
affair with my little favourite, the pretty Mon- 
tague ?" 

Sir Archibald saw nothing very apropos in 
this question ; but after muttering somewhat 
like, " Confound her !" he more articulately 
added, — " I think very little about the pretty 
Montague." 

" I fear so," sighed Lady Gordon, — " Per- 
haps too she insists on being cruel a little 
longer. Well, — my nephew is too gallant to 
wish to shorten a young lady's day of power ; 
and indeed, indeed, I sadly fear her desire 
corresponds but too much with his own ; — I 
foar he is, at least, as unwilling to abridge his 
own day of freedom r" 



A NATIONAL TALE. 99 

This obliging construction had all the effect 
on the mind of Sir Archibald it was intended 
to produce. How Mrs. Montague presumed 
to reject the addresses of a man of his 
figure and consequence, was as unaccounta- 
ble as provoking ; and his self-love was gra- 
tified in believing that her affected coldness 
proceeded from his real indifference, and 
reluctance to surrender what he called his 
freedom. 

" Who dare question your penetration 
Madam," said he, with a smile, which indi- 
cated returning good-humour. 

" Sad fellow 1" sighed Lady Gordon, affect- 
ing to suppress a smile ; — " I am willing this 
should go a certain length ; but you know 
how very, very anxious I am for your mar- 
riage. She is really, after all, an exquisite 
creature ; very much admired, as you know, 
and possessed of every quality that can do 
honour to your family and choice. No doubt 
her youth and beauty makes her assume a 
little in her day ; but your masculine sense, 
and knowledge of the world, teaches you to 
overlook all that ; and even, I see, sad fellow! 
to find amusement in the pretty airs she gives 



100 CLAN-ALBIN 

herself with the man to whose authority she 
must ultimately bend. Alas, our poor sex ! 
But my nephew is too generous to punish the 
dear haughty creature for errors which are 
rather to be imputed to her age than her- 
self." 

Sir Archibald, thus invested with power, 
forgot that he was the man who in a parox- 
ism of rage had sworn never to re-enter Dun- 
albin, — that he was the same person whom 
Mrs. Montague had, as she said, fina-tly re- 
jected, — whom she avoided by leaving her 
home ; and to whom she perhaps preferred 
a needy, obscure, and nameless adventurer. 
His pride", his vanity, his revenge, triumphed ; 
and in spite of the generous pleadings of his 
good-natured aunt, lie secretly vowed to 
punish — severely punish the "dear haughty 
creature," he longed to obtain ; and whose 
beauty, fashion, fortune, and fine qualities, 
were to illustrate himself and his family. 
Lady Gordon saw all this, and in another 
apropos question, — she understood that he 
meant to be the way of Dunalbin ; and hoped 
he would take charge of some music for Mrs. 
Montague. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 101 

This brought to recollection the last scene 
at Dunalbin, and he sullenly replied, — " I 
don't know that I shall be that way to-day." 

" Will you not," said the Lady carelessly ; 
and she perceived her ground was again lost, 
" A servant will take it. Perhaps you are 
going by Loanbane : — by the way, I am told 
Buchanan's girl is grown up a prodigious 
beauty. What does the judge say ?" 

" That she is indeed extremely lovely," 
exclaimed Sir Archibald with great animation. 

" O, — you have already discovered that, 
have you ? — I know you have a hawk's eye 
for beauty: — but let me conjure you — I am 
serious now nephew — to be merciful. The 
father is a decentish sort of man; and her 
mother was a person of family ; — besides, if 
the fair Montague take it into her pretty little 
head to be jealous, — Lord have mercy upon 
us!" And the lady held up her hands, and 
threw up her eyes, ludicrously deprecating 
such a terrible consequence, while her grati- 
fied nephew smiled in conscious power. But 
he resolved to be merciful to Flora, at least 
for the present ; for though a jealous mistress 
is nearly as amusing and gratifying as a jea- 
lous wife, the jealousy of the former may 

K 2 



102 CLAN-ALBIN, 

lead to very troublesome consequences, and 
Lady Gordon made another " apropos" re- 
mark about a certain mortgage, called in the 
family the " Marshall mortgage." 

" These rupees are certainly very charm- 
ing things Sir Archibald ; and the dear crea- 
ture has such immense expectations from that 
overpowering person her brother-in-law ; be- 
sides, I should not wonder if the fortunes of 
her own family centre in her. Her cousin 
was always a puny thing ; and I had a_ letter 
only yesterday from my good friend Dr. B — , 
for I can be indifferent to nothing likely to 
affect the interest of the dear girl." 

" And I should not wonder if Miss Sinclair 
thwarted her a little," said Sir Archibald, 
who now, that his hopes revived, began to 
resent the double game that lady was playing. 

" Who, Ursy ?" said Lady Gordon, with a 
smile of calm contempt, — " You have nothing 
to fear from poor Ursy." 

But Sir Archibald recollected that at the 
age of seventeen the matured charms of Miss 
Sinclair, and her still more matured talents, 
had nearly deprived him of the freedom he 
now valued so highly; and he secretly blessed 
the memory of his vigilant tutor, while he 



A NATIONAL TALE. 103 

thought Ursy no contemptible rival even to 
his aunt. 

" Pardon me Madam, but in cunning and 
meanness Miss Sinclair is nearly equal to 
any body I know." 

Lady Gordon coloured at this ill-con- 
structed sentence, while, she hastily returned, 
— " She cannot deceive me however; — she 
dare not. I disdain all cunning and mean- 
ness ; but I trust penetration and honesty will 
be sufficient to traverse all the arts of Miss 
Sinclair. God help a person of my candid, 
unsuspicious temper, when opposed to low, 
artful people !" and the Lady sighed deeply ; 
but seeing her nephew about to depart, she 
quickly recovered. 

" Have you seen Macpherson about the 
farm of Loanbane ? — I think he offers very 
handsomely. — He is really an industrious 
kind of person — well deserving of encourage- 
ment ; — so I presume you do not hesitate 
about warning the Loanbane people ? — but it 
is for you to decide." 

" Surely Madam ; but they make a cursed 
whining about crossing the Atlantic, and tra- 
velling in winter, — " 

" Foolish creatures ! they would be ready 



104 CLAN-ALBIN, 

to begin work against the season," inter- 
rupted Lady Gordon. 

" So I don't care if I indulge them," con- 
tinued Sir Archibald, — " as it will not be 
convenient for Macpherson to enter till Whit- 
suntide." 

" O, pray do indulge them, poor creature^ ! 
The storms of a winter passage must needs 
be terrible. — By the way, how does your 
friend Mansel like (Jastlebane ; — I hope he 
finds it agreeable ? — I assure you I would 
wish our Belle no better fortune ; — he is really 
a very pleasant young man. — I suppose I am 
not to be let into gentlemen's secrets ; but 
yet I should like to know how that lady stands 
in his good graces. I would be far from ad- 
vising a breach of confidence, but we are all 
friends, — all have the same interests, — " 

" Then I believe Maria has the best chance 
in the end,' 7 cried Sir Archibald bluntly ; for 
now that his own affairs were discussed, he 
cared very little about his sisters. — " She has 
him all to herself for six weeks to come ; if 
she does not make him in love up to matri- 
mony in that time, she does not deserve the 
opportunity I have given her." 

" O fie ! fie ! nephew," cried Lady Gordon. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 105 

— " But you think it is Maria he is partial 
to ? — Dear creature, all frankness and viva- 
city, wearing her soul in her face, — '•' 

" Poh ! you forget that I am only her bro- 
ther," cried Sir Archibald ; and Lady Gor- 
don was so much accustomed to puff off the 
beauty, talents, and fine qualities of her 
nieces, that she had indeed almost forgotten. 

" A sad saucy brother," said she smiling, 
" but see who comes yonder." 

" That fat soul Montague ; souse, sousing 
on his horse like a package of his own pins: 
pray let me escape by the back of the house." 

" Do ; and take a dinner with the minister, 
for if you are at home he will stay till he 
sicken us all, good man. But don't you 
esteem that young lady very fortunate, who 
throwing off her wild falcon in a pet, finds a 
good, convenient fat man, to spare her pride, 
and ' lure the tassel -gentil back again.'— 
Go, go, coxcomb," added the lady, smilingly 
pushing him into a closet, which opened to 
the passage ; — " I shall promise for you." — 
Sir Archibald kissed her hand, and escaped, 
as Montague entered by the other door. 

" Well my Lady, I am come to learn your 
commands, as you sent a second time," said 



106 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Montague, — " though I have no very agree- 
able news, I can tell you — " 

" Hush ! hush, my dear sir ; — I will not 
hear a single word till you have taken refresh- 
ments after your long ride ;" and looking 
into the closet to see if the coast was clear, 
she found that important post already occu- 
pied by Miss Sinclair. — *' So Ursy !" said she, 
and turning to her guest, — " How miserable 
will Sir Archibald be at missing you ; but if 
I hope to be forgiven, I must send to the hill 
in search of him. — It was but this morning 
he made us almost expire laughing at your 
excellent joke on Macpherson. — Poor Ursy 
got such a fit of coughing, as raised her 
asthma and wheezing, — I was sadly afraid, I 
can tell you, for the good creature wears 
apace." 

" Miss Sinclair wheezing !" cried Monta- 
gue, — " I thought she was too young for that 

yet." 

" O, she is not old sir ; — not much beyond 
your own years I think ; — I have heard her 
called more ; — but I don't think she can be 
much above fifty." 

" Fifty 1" cried Montague petrified, — " I 
would not have thought her thirty -live." 



A NATIONAL TALE. 107 

u O dear sir !" replied the lady smiUng, — 
u I am sorry I let out seen ts, if that be the 
case ; but you know maiden 1. dies nave many 
little ways of preserving their bloom; — and 
very pardonable it is sir." 

" Aye, aye," said Montague, shaking his 
head, and breathing a most important disco- 
very through his nose, while he pressed his 
lips together. — " But now my Lady, as I am 
here, I must just say, once for all, shake 
hands, and part friends. Monimia will not 
hear of Sir Archibald ; and I am worn out 
with pouting and sulking at her. We who 
used to be so agreeable, like father and child, 
— never to meet but to tease each other, — I 
can't bear it, I can tell you. — I may say I 
have not had a peaceable comfortable meal 
this fortnight." 

" Then you shall to-day, my dear sir. Nay, 
I will take no refusal. We have uncommonly 
fine potted moor-game, and excellent five 
year old heath mutton. As you are a breeder 
y urself, I must insist on the opinion of so 
good a judg^. So pray drop all these odious 
matters. — O my dear, worthy Mr. Montague, 
what anxiety d^ these young foiks give to us! 
— Were Sir Archibald to become the dupe 



108 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of any artful, needy girl, — and there are many 
such persons, both men and women, let me 
tell you, — 1 would die of shame and mortifi- 
cation. — By the way, that young man would 
not accept my nephew's offer. Was not that 
very strange sir ? — I am quite at a loss, I pro- 
fess, to account for his reasons. Does it not 
seem very strange sir r" 

" Rather ; — but I have done what I could 
my Lady, to see Monimia happy, and settled 
in a proper station ; and if she does continue 
obstinate, what can I do more ? I would be 
glad to see Sir Archibald at all times, were 
it only that he is a good neighbour ; but if 
she will be displeased, what can I do ? — How- 
ever, as you insist, I will give my opinion of 
the mutton, though I am but a poor judge, 
for all vour flattering." 

" I never flatter, Mr. Montague." 

" No more you do my Lady, or I promise 
you I would not have the opinion of you I 
have." 

" Allowing I could flatter sir, — an art I 
detest, — I should be very cautious how I 
employed flattery with a person of your pene- 
tration." 

M Aye ; — it would be a poor thing, if at 



A NATIONAL TALE. 109 

my time of life I could not see through a 
flatterer. I only wish my Minia could see 
some folks with her brother's eyes." 

" I wish she could," said Lady Gordon, 
very sincerely. 

" Now I should thank you, I believe, Pyliss 
Sinclair," said Montague, as that, lady en- 
tered, with refreshments, " for the syrup you 
sent for my cold, and your ciyil card, — I as- 
sure you a fine business-like hand she wrires, 
Lady Gordon." Lady Gordon darted a very 
gracious look at her humble companion. 

" I have orders to look on every thing 
in this house as belonging to the family at 
Dunalbin," said Miss Sinclair, ana 1 Montague 
gave thanks where thanks . were due; and 
though Lady Gordon had never before heard 
of the syrup, and the business -like card, — she 
rejoiced at the good effects it had on, Mr. 
Montague's cold, and ordered Uvsy to, send 
other two pots to Dunalbin. 

When Montague had ate of the grouse, and 
the heath mutton, and given his opinion, he 
found himself so comfortable, and in such 
good-humour with Castlebane and its inmates, 
that he resolved to make another attack on 
his invulnerable sister, and at least compel 

VOL. II. L 



110 CLAN-ALBIN, 

her to attend the Northern Meeting, which 
the ladies painted in colours so attractive. 
But he took leave, without once inviting the 
baronet to Dunalbin. A person less fruitful 
in expedients might have been somewhat 
disconcerted with this oversight ; but as Lady 
Gordon, with her own honourable fingers, tied 
a silk handkerchief over the cravat of the ci- 
devant pin-maker, she whispered in his ear, 
" Now, my dear sir, I am going to do a very 
silly thing ; — I believe there is some truth in 
what you men accuse us of; we cannot keep 
a secret, — at least from those we esteem. If 
you tell tales, I shall be sadly rated. Our 
young men are resolved to have a fishing- 
tent pitched in Glenalbin. They have laid 
out a delightful week in angling, shooting, 
boating, and giving rural entertainments to 
the ladies. The girls know nothing of it, 
and you must be equally secret with Mrs. 
Montague, till you lead the dear creature to 
the tent, and give her a gay surprise. Now 
be secret, or I am a ruined woman, — but I 
am sure I may depend on your prudence." 

Montague was delighted with the idea of 
gay society without expense, entertainments, 
secrets, surprises, and his implied superiority 



A NATIONAL TALE. Ill 

over the clever Lady Gordon ; for Montague 
did not know that most women, like most 
men, will very vigilantly guard a secret, when 
they have any interest in doing so. He pro- 
mised perfect secrecy, and rode off with very 
complacent feelings towards himself, Lady 
Gordon, the heath mutton, and the projected 
alliance. And the discovery too, into which 
his cleverness had betrayed Lady Gordon, was 
subject of self-congratulation ; for the house- 
wifery talents of Miss Sinclair, her business- 
like hand, and above all, her unremitting, 
but unobtrusive attention to his comforts, and 
his opinions, were beginning to sap some of 
the outworks suspicion had reared round his 
bachelor heart. 

When Mrs. Montague first appeared in the 
circles of Bath, Lady Gordon resided in that 
city. The birth, fashion, and above all, 
reputed fortune of the young beauty, at- 
tracted the attention of her Ladyship, who 
was looking out for a wealthy alliance for her 
nephew. Sir Archibald, who for reasons no 
less cogent than endless debts, mortgaged 
estates, and the wishes of his aunt (who was 
ill-natured enough to refuse to advance ano- 
ther shilling, even for what he called his most 



1 12 CLAN-ALBIN, 

necessary occasions) was obliged to think of 
marrying, graciously said, " let this be the 
woman." It was sooner said than done how- 
ever; but after the death of Mr. Montague, and 
the report of Monimia' s pecuniary disappoint- 
ment, matters* assumed a more favourable 
aspect; the love of Sir Archibald was now 
perfectly disinterested, and this circumstance 
could not fail to influence a young, open, and 
generous nature. 

Mr. Montague, who left his beloved charge 
exposed to the many perils attending the high, 
but dangerous gifts of bea ity and talent, was 
anxious to save her from the still greater evils 
attracted to the head of youthful inexperi- 
ence, by the uncontrolled possession of great 
wealth, and the real disposition of his fortune 
was to remain a secret, even to herself, till 
she had reached her twenty -second year. If 
this secret was to remain such, it was neces- 
sary that it should be kept from the family of 
Monimia, and Montague alone was acquainted 
with the romantic, but well-meant project of 
his dying brother. When Monimia recovered 
from the first agony attending her irreparable 
loss, she was surprised, and even hurt, at the 
neglect her deceased friend had shown. Her 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 113 

whole fortune consisted of six thousand 
pounds, vested in her own name, when Mr. 
Montague first judged it necessary to fix her 
private income. This appeared a very paltry 
sum to one accustomed to indulge in un- 
bounded expense, and unbounded expecta- 
tions ; but Monimia felt the unkind neglect 
which left her poor, much more than her 
actual poverty ; and the selfish rapacity dis- 
covered by her relations, who loaded the me- 
mory of her benefactor with the most illiberal 
abuse, by rousing her generous energies to 
his defence, soon restored her to juster, and 
happier feelings ; and she saw that she was 
still rich, if she chose to consider herself so, 
for she still possessed the power of doing 
good. 

u How much is done with incomes even 
narrower than mine,'' thought she, — u How 
many clergymen, and well-born, well-edu- 
cated men, rear families to respectability, and 
even to fame, on more slender incomes. How 
many persons, nurtured in all the habitudes 
of polite society, and addicted to its most 
humanizing, and deligiitful pursuits, live, 
and give pleasure, and enjoy it, with far less 
command of money." 

L 2 



114 CLAN-ALBIN 

Thus happily reasoned Monimia, while her 
active fancy portrayed a life of cheerful so- 
litude among the peasants of her heloved 
native country. She saw her sober, maidenly 
board, sometimes embellished by the pre- 
sence of the refined and enlightened; while 
around her education was diffused, morals 
improving, habits of industry forming, and 
the taste for order, comfort, and decencv, 
rapidly followed by their existence and en- 
joyment. 

Meanwhile Montague gave her the warmest 
assurances of kindness and protection, and 
as she firmly refused all pecuniary obliga- 
tions, he could only contribute to what he 
thought her happiness, by expensive and 
useless presents, and by throwing around her, 
as far as he could, the same appearance of 
splendour which had distinguished her during 
the life of his brother. These, and some 
other circumstances, excited suspicion in her 
mind ; she formed conjectures not very far 
from the truth ; and anticipated, with bene- 
volent malice, her future triumphant refuta- 
tion of the calumnies of her relations, and 
the pride she would feel in showing them, 
that he who had made her rich, had also made 
her happy by well-judged concealment. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 115 

Lady Gordon was not less penetrating. 
That a man, so dotingly fond as Mr. Montague, 
should leave the bulk of his fortune to an ille- 
gitimate brother, already rich beyond all his 
capacities of enjoying wealth, while he left 
the lovely young creature for whom he had 
lived and died, dependent on that coarse- 
minded brother, seemed impossible ; and by 
her peculiar industry that lady soon arrived 
at the truth. But when an inquest of dowa- 
gers and matrons sat on the character of the 
deceased nabob, and loudly declared him 
guilty of injustice, Lady Gordon said, " that 
his fortune was his own, and no doubt he 
had his own reasons." 

These ladies could have easily overlooked 
his neglect of Miss Glanville, but that he 
had neglected her who had been for a few 
hours his wife, and who was consequently 
his widow, roused all their sympathies ; for 
many ladies, not much younger than their 
husbands, are haunted and tormented by the 
melancholy idea " what shall become of them 
when deprived of the dear good man they 
cannot survive." — Now, every body knows 
that " what shall become of me," means, nine 
times out of ten, " what shall I do for 
money." 



116 CLAN-ALBIN, 

The desertion of the world, and the un- 
kindness of her own relations, who never saw 
her, but to traduce the memory of her 
husband, and to exhor. her to cultivate his 
brother, made Mommia feel, with li. ely gra- 
titude, the little, name's, sooth ng attentions, 
of Lady Gordon, who had admired her when 
prosperous, and now that she was otherwise, 
said she loved her ; and she eagerly accepted 
of Dunalbin as a temporary residence. It was 
described as remote, solitary, inaccessible to 
strangers, and never visited by the family of 
Gordon. Monimia found it all, and more 
than she had anticipated ; and here she re- 
solved to abide, and carry into practice her 
scheme of benevolence. So Montague took 
the castle, and a farm, in lease from Sir 
Archibald ; and Lady G ;rdon seert tly blessed 
the romance of the " dear creature," which 
permitted her to enjoy her town parties, and 
push the interest of ner nieces with tlie least 
possible detriment to interests more impor- 
tant. 

But when she h ard of a tall, handsome, 
young man, who had dropped as it were from 
the clouds, to become tne daily, and hourly 
companion of her neice-elect, when she un- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 117 

derstood, from the correspondence of her old 
and faithful servant Macpherson, that the 
fine dark eyes, and rich, and ever mantling 
bloom of this Adonis, were conveying unut- 
terable things to the young solitary, she re- 
solved to push northward with all convenient 
speed, and to renew the disinterested addresses 
of her nephew. 

Monimia was now enlightened as to the 
real views of Lady Gordon. She had often 
heard her characterized as an heir and heiress 
hunter; one of those persons, by no means 
uncommon in high life, who, to the utmost 
indifference about their relations, unite great 
attachment to their family, and restless am- 
bition for the aggrandizement of those they 
do not even love. The family of Gordon was 
her Ladyship's own family, and Sir Archibald 
was the son of her sister, as well as the 
nephew and heir of her husband. She had 
intrigued as violently for the honour and 
glory of the husband she hated, as she now 
did for the aggrandizement of the nephew she 
despised, and for the same reason, — they 
were her's. 

By well-timed, skilful employment of flat- 
tery, threats, reproaches, and promises, Lady 



118 CLAN-ALB JN, 

Gordon bad led her nephew to acquire some 
knowledge of those sciences attempted by 
men of fortune, and she now employed the 
same means to rouse that perverse, obstinate, 
something in his character, which made him 
slight every good in his power, and pant after 
whatever seemed unattainable. Her Ladyship 
had seen a horse, a dog, a groom, or a mis- 
tress, in the possession of another man, con- 
vert her indolent nephew into a little Alex- 
ander; and when the prize was gained,^ the 
satiated hero would sit down, and yawn that 
that there were not more admired dogs, horses, 
and mistresses, to struggle for, and win. No\t 
Lady Gordon rightly concluded persevering 
ambition an infallible means of success, whe- 
ther in the pursuits of the schoolboy, or the 
grown gentleman, and she hoped Sir Archi- 
bald would yet yawn as heartily over the 
possession of the haughty Moniiiiia and her 
fine fortune, as he now did over Highflyer, 
and " LaPiquante." 

When Sir Archibald and his friend returned 
from the hill, on the day that Montague dined 
at Castlebane, her Ladyship, using the pri- 
vileges of her age, joined them in the little 
parlour, where they devoured their late dinner. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 119 

'* Mr. Mansel, I have to beg that you will 
give Maria no more of your verses. They 
absolutely turn the girPs head. She has sung 
and played me deaf, trying to set them, and 
really she has been very successful ; but the 
cadences are remarkabty harmonious and — " 

" She does me too much honour Madam/' 
interrupted the poet, smiling complacently, 
— " But I shall certainly obey your Ladyship's 
injunction." 

" If you wish Maria to keep her senses you 
must. — Apropos, we have been talking all day 
of your charming idea of the fishing tent in 
Glenalbin. There is poetry in that too. 
Landscape, boating, music, shooting, — it is 
really delightful. Pray where did a town 
beau like you acquire that rich fancy, and 
elegant invention ?" 

Mr. Mansel smiled, and bowed, while he 
disclaimed these high gifts, — " but really the 
idea of the fishing-tent had escaped his recol- 
lection. It might however be very pleasant." 

" It was certainly your idea ; but Maria is 
perhaps more tenacious of these things than 
yourself. You know the love of romance is a 
little pardonable at eighteen. So I must in- 
dulge the girls ; — therefore arrange your plan, 



120 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and as the idea was your own, let the execu- 
tion be the same. Command us all ; — you 
are master here." 

" I value the honour of your commands too 
much, not to exert myself to the utmost Ma- 
dam," said Mansel, bowing on the Lady'f 
hand, as he flew to give orders. 

" We shall be a gallant little society,' 1 re- 
sumed the lady, — " Sir Archibald, and his 
sisters, the charming Montague, and her 
Macalbin beau." 

" Her Macalbin beau !" cried Mansel, 
laughing, and looking back, while Sir Archi- 
bald angrily raised his eyes from his plate. 

" Oh! — you thought Sir Archibald was the 
happy man r" replied the Lady, — " I assure 
you I was equally deceived — till very — very 
lately. Poor Sir Archibald is fairly cut out, 
for all his pretensions, and knowledge of the 
sex. Mrs. Montague is beyond Sir Archi- 
bald's reach I fear." 

" Still your kind fears, Madam," said the 
baronet, with a resolute fierceness that de- 
lighted his aunt, — " Mr*. Montague is as 
much in Sir Archibald's reach as he choo>< 
to make her." 

" Hey day ! — here is boasting Mr. Mansel. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 121 

Wellj if the vain wretch do not make good his 
threats, we shall certainly enjoy a laugh 
against him." 

Mr. Mansel retired to change his hunting 
dress, a ceremony he had not used for the 
last week, and Lady Gordon followed him up 
stairs. As his chamber door stood open, he 
heard her Ladyship exhorting Maria to leave 
the grand piano-forte, which that young lady 
refused to do. 

" Maria, I command you to come and make 
tea for me; — I shall really lock up these 
verses." 

u Well, if I must, I must," replied the 
young lady ; who used the pretext of her 
frankness and vivacity to declare violent ad- 
miration for many young men of a certain 
fortune. — " But is he returned ? — What a 
charming fellow ! — Oh heavens !" 

Maria did not know that she was over- 
heard, but her aunt believed it was possible, 
nay, she hoped it; and she chid her frank 
niece, not so much for her feelings, as the 
giddy avowal of them. 

" Fond little pug," thought Mansel, — " so 
she is in for it too ;" — and he brushed down 
his hair in a thicker shade over his forehead 

vol. II. m 



122 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and eyes, and hastened to the drawing-room ; 
and the new air was played and sung twenty 
times over, if an air may be called new which 
was newly written down from the singing 
of an old Highland-woman. 

Mansel continued to dance, sing, flirt, and 
romp with Maria, and to give her verses ; 
Bella was jealous and sullen, a circumstance 
very propitious to the duration of his love ; 
Sir Archibald was as determined to gain Mo- 
nimia from the obscure Macalbin, as he had 
ever been to obtain " La Piquante" from the 

Duke of ; and Lady Gordon thought 

herself a woman of no mean talents. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 125 



CHAP. XXIII. 



** After all, I very believe that your Lordship and I 
are of the same religion, if we were thoroughly understood by 
one another j and that all honest, and reasonable Christians 
would be so, if they did but talk enough together every day, 
and had nothing to do together, but to serve God, and live in 
peace with their neighbours." 

Pope's Letter to the Bishop of Rochester* 



About this time Buchanan returned from 
the low country. He had most conscientiously 
raised the cry of u No Popery," but no one 
responded ; and he complained loudly of a 
general deadness of public feeling. Greater 
personages have uttered a similar complaint 
but with less reason, for Buchanan's " Baby- 
lon Exposed," remained unsold ; and what 
was worse, no Catholic priest, no shadow of 
a priest, for that would have been enough, 
disturbed the grateful tenants of Craig- 
gillian. 

Before returning home with her father, 



124 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Flora went from Elcenalin to spend a day of 
happiness with her friend. It was the day 
after Montague had given his opinion of the 
heath mutton at Castlebane. 

" Most opportunely come," cried Mon- 
tague, as she entered the breakfast parlour, 
— " you will see my brother sublime ; — in hii 
third manner, as the painters say." 

Mr. Montague seemed indeed very much 
disturbed, and Flora fancied his bad humour 
extended even to herself. Instead of the fa- 
miliar chuck under the chin, and the kiss 
with which he sometimes met her, accompa- 
nied by a friendly caution not to form extra- 
vagant hopes, as he was not a marrying man ; 
he sulkily replied to her inquiry after his 
health, and without looking up, continued his 
breakfast. She also thought Monimia more 
gay than cheerful, and she was right, — for 
Monimia, ashamed to feel that a person who 
possessed so little power to confer delight, 
should be able to interrupt her tranquillity, 
strove to conceal, beneath the thin guise of 
artificial gaiety, the uneasiness she could not 
banish from her mind. 

Montague had much of that hard peremp- 
toriness, which often adheres even to a good 



A NATIONAL TALE. 125 

natured man, accustomed to no society save 
his own menials ; and whom neither interest, 
duty, affection, nor good breeding, have 
trained to habits of gentle compliance, or 
graceful yielding to the feelings of others. 
But Monimia was neither his shopman nor his 
kitchen-maid, and she was indifferent about 
being his heir ; therefore, with her, his power 
was powerless, and his persuasions vain ; and 
he became importunate. He however wanted 
that cool, obdurate, mulish pertinacity, with 
which the domestic tormentor continues the 
ceaseless, meaningless importunity, which 
often enables a weak mind to wear out a 
stronger and more amiable one, and trium- 
phantly to wring forth the half-angry, half- 
disgusted, — " For God's sake do as you 
please;" — and whenever he became angry, 
or, as he said, lost patience, Monimia with- 
drew, and by prohibiting all conversation on 
the subject, escaped solicitation till another 
visit to Castlebane stimulated his vanity to a 
new attempt. He possessed another agree- 
able quality, in common with many persons 
who pride themselves on a greater share of 
sincerity than their neighbours ; under pre- 
tence of " telling his mind," and abhorring 

>I 2 



126 CLAN-ALBIN 

every thing that savoured of deceit, he vented 
every suggestion of a narrow, vulgar spirit, 
and covered his offensive rudeness with the 
specious veil of superior honesty and frank- 
ness. The implied threat of employing this 
amiable quality against the family at Eleen • 
alin, and another, nearly akin to it, though 
of less pretension, which lie called being 
— " as plain as pleasant,'* had obtained from 
Monimia many little compliances, alike re- 
pugnant to her judgment and inclination. Jt 
is somewhat unfortunate, that persons whose 
sincerity is thus uncontrollable, should oftener 
have occasion to offend the feelings of others 
than to discover any thing very candid or 
amiable in their own transparent minds. Now 
this formidable class of persons, prove very 
troublesome companions, when offended with 
those whom delicacy or good-breeding will 
not permit to usurp similar privileges and 
Monimia often felt it so. Tne stale and un- 
generous threat was again held out, as she 
firmly refused to attend Lady Gordon to In- 
verness. 

" So you wont go — wont you ? — You wont 
•go } — Well, I shall be tit the bottom of this 
before I eat or sleep, — I shall see who take 



A NATIONAL TALE. 127 

upon themselves to advise you, and deceive 
you, for their own wicked ends — I shall tell 
some folks a piece of my mind.'* 

Monimia, too angry to fear, indignantly 

exclaimed, " Surely! — and welcome. Tell 

what you please sir. — But let me first tell you 
that I have no adviser, — in this affair I need 
none. I can see whither all this altercation 
tends, — you do not even seek to conceal it ; 
and as ' telling minds,' is the order of the day, 
let me now tell you — I will never be more to 
Lady Gordon than I at present am. Now go 
to Eleenalin, if you can do it, disgrace your- 
self and me, and insult Lady Augusta Macal- 
bin by the most unworthy suspicions. Long 
have I tried to save you the shame of outrag- 
ing the feelings of that excellent lady — more 
I ought not to do. But I will tell her the 
truth— the whole truth, — and she, who is all 
candour and indulgence, will acquit me of 
intentional error, — of the wish to offend her, 
she never can suspect me, for she knows that 
/ at least have been bred in the habits of a 
gentlewoman." 

Monimia had never said any thing so harsh, 
and the benevolence of her nature was shocked 
at the momentary violence of her resentment. 



128 CLAN-ALB1N, 

" So I suppose the habits of a gentleman 
teaeh folks to say what they don't think r — 
Well, thank God, I am no gentleman," said 
Montague sulkily. 

" Not so," said Monimia, — " The habits of 
a gentleman sometimes restrain the expres- 
sion of offensive thoughts, but they still 
oftener prevent illiberal surmis. s from pollut- 
ing the mind itself. A gentleman speaks 
delicately, because he thinks nobly." 

Though Montague was displeased at heat- 
ing his frankness and sincerity represented in 
their true colours, of rudeness and ill-breed- 
ing, he was more alarmed at the high tone 
his refractory sister had assumed ; and he 
began to deprecate the indignation he had 
excited. Many are the advantages the calm 
and the firm possess over the passionate. 
Their patient forbearance is as certain to pro- 
voke, as their firmness is to overawe, and 
every way they triumph. Even the puny 
malice of the lesser imps of evil, when com- 
pelled to minister to the gracious being they 
hate and obey, affords momentary amusement 
to the benevolent master-spirit. Monimia, 
though not ill-natured, was often entertained 
with the whimsical irritation her good temper 



A NATIONAL TALE. 120 

and forbearance produced in her brother-in- 
law, who chafed the more loudly, that nothing 
opposed him. 

In this state of things Flora entered. Mon- 
tague, alarmed at the open defiance which 
met his threat, — at seeing the hobgoblin which 
frightened the naughty child discovered to be 
a man of straw, and contempt succeeding 
terrified obedience, thought all was lost, and 
kept a sullen, plodding siLence. 

Monimia, who was reluctant to entertain 
her friends with her domestic broi-ls, found 
employment for Flora, till breakfast was over, 
in taking a sketch of a particular scene oppo- 
site a distant window. When some minutes 
had elapsed in the same inauspicious silence, 
she approached her sulky brother, and taking 

his hand, said, in a coaxing voice. " Why 

my dear sir, should you wish that poor, ten- 
der /, should be the first dish served up to the 
gossips at Inverness. I am quite sure they 
will find Miss Sinclair and yourself much 
more substantial fare." Monimia knew, that 
though Montague resolved against marriage, 
nothing pleased him more than to hear it was 
possible he might marry and have children, 
and so disappoint all expectants, herself in- 



130 < LAN-AJLBJN, 

eluded ; tor, Q.ueen-Elisabeth-like, he showed 
abundant caprice with regard to his successor. 
)£he smiled feebly, and she added, — " You 
know turtle and venison always precede sweet- 
meats." 

" Meaning yourself for the sweetmeats, no 
doubt ?" 

" Certainly/ 1 

" Aye, you are sweet, God knows, — very 
sweet!" — and he shook his head and twisted 
his thumbs, pleased to fancy himself a very 
ill used man, whom a vigorous e.fort of pru- 
dence enabled to conceal his just indignation, 
lest its expression should drive its object to 
measures still more desperate. Tl e sullen 
fit however went o.\\ and he was desirous to 
speak, though he scorned to make advances. 

u Oh, sister Anne, see you any body com- 
ing," cried Monimia al length, as Flora still 
gazed through the casement. — " Yes, yonder 
is Williams*' 

" And the letters," cried Monimia, — " Now 
for a rise of stocks, or a tender billet from the 
dear one ; as I hope for smiles and good 
humor. r, the first, my husband, when I get 
him, and he gets into Parliament shall daily 
and nightly repay with his vote, and for the 
last, Miss Sinclair " 



A NATIONAL TALE. 131 

M Don't Miss Sinclair me Madam, — Though 
it 's hard to say what I may do if heartily pro- 
voked, — I am but fifty years myself." 

" Or, by'r lady, inclining to three score." 

No, fifty-six only ; — make it a day more if 
you can. But if perverseness make me do a 
foolish thing, it sha'nt be with a Scotchwo- 
man, I can tell you, — So let me hear no more 
of that Miss Sinclair ; — there's too many 
rings in her horn for me." 

" So marriage is the foolish thing — and a 
Scotchwoman too — and then the elegant 
figure borrowed from your grazing trade, — O 
gallant Englishman I" 

" Have done now Monimia, I won't be 
made a fool of I say : let me hear no more of 
Miss Sinclair." 

" Flora," said Monimia, " you know Miss 
Sinclair is justly proud of the Celtic blood 
that flows in her noble veins, pure and un- 
mixed since Julius Caesar made her ancestors 
retire to the mountains. Now I fear my bro- 
ther thinks her of Pictish origin, for every 
little child in Scotland knows that short race 
had very long arms." 

" And painted faces too Monimia, had they 
not?" inquired Montague, who, in common 



132 CLAN-ALBTN, 

with many persons educated in humble life, 
entertained a sort of religious horror at a wo- 
man who painted her face; and not contented 
with despising it as a folly, regarded it as a 
vague undefined crime, deserving execration 
and abhorrence. 

" Oh no — she is no Pict in that sense, — I 
must do her that justice, for she once did as 
much for me. 11 

C( I am sure," said the bewildered Monta- 
gue, " Lady Gordon told me as much." 

" Aye, she daubs pretty freely herself — ii\ 
the dark style. So she wishes to spoil poor 
Miss Sinclair's preferment ; — I suppose she 
added rings to her horn too — did she r — Her 
Ladyship is somewhat of a jockey I know. 1 ' 

" Truly I can't say, but I should think 
Miss Sinclair does not look nearly so much 
as fifty. However, women are a mystery to 
me, and to any plain man, as I take it ; — so 
the less one has to do with them the bet- 
ter, I believe." 

u Your very humble, and thrice obliged 
servant," cried Monimia, curtseying ludi- 
crously, as she retired with her friend, who 
had agreed to remain at Dunalbin for that 
day, and on the next to accompany her to a 



A NATIONAI/ TAM. 135 

fair in the neighbourhood, and afterwards to 
visit a cascade in a distant valley, which Nor- 
man had represented as a scene of unmatched 
beauty. 

Gaily anticipating the same pleasure from 
this little excursion which they had often ex- 
perienced in similar ones, the young friends 
rose with the bright sun of the following 
morning. Horses were ordered ; and in a 
short time they were joined by Norman and 
the Piper, the latter carrying a basket of cold 
provisions, that they might make their mid- 
day repast in any pleasant spot among the 
hills. It was the delight of old Moome to 
fill this basket with several dainties, and her 
pride to be told that no low-country cook 
nearly equalled herself in curing v mutton 
hams, and making Highland sausages. When 
Monimia's servant had added some wine to 
the contents of this basket, and a hunter's 
bottle of brandy for the sole use of the carrier, 
they set out, Norman on foot, attended by a 
favourite wolf-dog, the ladies on horseback, 
and Hugh closing the procession. After 
emerging from Glenalbin, and ascending for 
some time by an unformed mountain path, 
they entered the elevated, wide, and dreary 

VOL. II. N % 



■ 



:r 



134 fcVUS'-ALBlN, 

moor on which the fair was held, and which 
was regarded as the most centrical point in a 
district of nearly fifty miles in circumference. 
Monimia attended at this fair, that her pre- 
sence might encourage the rude manufacture 
she had endeavoured to establish. She had 
no hope of any purchaser save herself, and 
when die young and hitherto unemployed 
girls gathered round her, triumphantly dis- 
playing the gay patterned gowns and shawls 
just ohtained from the low-country pedlars,- 
in exchange for coarse woollen stockings and 
caps, — her eyes sparkled, her cheeks glowed, 
the habitual benevolence of her nature rose 
to momentary rapture, and she eagerly ex- 
claimed, — -"-Ah, this is delightful! — this is 
something like a developement of the prin- 
ciple of industry, — feeble and imperfect 
indeed, — but it is still something. — Yonder is 
Mr. Buchannan advancing with a preaching 
face, to tell us of the influx of luxury and 
vanity ; but I really think the pleasure these 
good girls derive from their novel finery, is a 
very honest pride in their conscious efforts. — 
I am quite sure," added she, in her imper- 
fect Gaelic, — " I am quite sure, Catharine, 
you are as proud of winning your gown as 
wearing it r " 






A NATIONAL TALE. 



H That I am lady," replied- the Hig 
girl, to whom this inquiry was addressed, — 
" Any body might wear a gown." 

" Aye indeed, Catharine, but you have 
wonit," said tbe mother df the girl, pressing 

forward,- " And God bless herself who 

taught you how to do that ;— many might have 
given you a gown, but that is once and away, 
and an obligation to the bargain, — where that 
lady has put you on earning, when you please 
and what you please,— And don't think the 
worse of Kate lady, because it is put out on 
herself, for she would have put all out on us, 
had we allowed her, — but her father would 
not suffer her till next fair.^' 

" You are a good girl Catharine, — a very 
good girl, and I love and honour your affec- 
tionate spirit," said Monimia, kindly looking 
on the blushing girl, — " And your mother is 
quite right — nothing can do us any permanent 
good but what we do for ourselves. To assist 
and direct you all, how you may best struggle 
for yourselves, — if I were able to do it,— 
would be my dearest pleasure." 

She then entered into conversation with 
the humble merchants at that remote fair, and 
was rejoiced to hear that if the goods were of 



136 CXAN-ALBIX, 

equal quality, they could not fail to find 
purchasers, and even an increasing demand, 
while they were afforded at so cheap a rate. 
Norman having gallantly presented his fair 
companions with rihhons of the " Macalbin 
tartan," to tie down their cottage straw bon- 
nets, was honoured with permission to fix 
them on; and Hugh was made equally hap- 
py when the considerate bounty of Monirnia 
permitted him to treat all the women and chil- 
dren with fyiringSy and to carry home a shawl 
for Moome, and gaudy glass beads for little 
Mary Fitzconnal. 

" You rob yourself Hugh," said Monirnia 
— " Now, since you treat every body, and 
reserve nothing for yourself, I must be per- 
mitted to treat you ; — tell mc what you love 
best r" 

" Yourself, darling," replied Hugh, gal- 
lantly lifting the old ribbon Norman had 
just displaced ; — " and this is all I will take — 
if with your leave I may; — proud I shall be 
to tie it to the chanter of my own pipe." 

" You are as gallant as disinterested," 
returned Monirnia — " so your's be the tro- 
phy, dear Hugh." Hugh bowed when 

thus endowed, with all the courtesy of a 



A NATIONAL TALE. 137 

knight of chivalry. " It shall i.ot leave 

that, darling, till the day you marry, when! 
you shall give me a new streamer with your 
own hands — of the Macalbin tartan too — 
for that is my darling colour." 

The cheeks of Monimia glowed with rosy 
confusion, her heart throbbed with strange, 
new, and delighted feelings, her eye so ght 
the ground, while that of Norman for a mo- 
ment triumphed in her emotion, and a quiver- 
ing sigh burst from a heart surcharged with' 
bliss. In a moment she recovered and turned 
away, affecting to laugh while she said, — 
" Truly you are a gallant Piper ! And I pro- 
mise you, we shall never quarrel about the 
chequer of a ribbon." 

" I hope not, dear — I hope not," replied the 
Piper, rubbing his hands, and regarding Nor- 
man with an arch look, which Monimia fortu- 
nately did not perceive. 

Monimia sprung lightly on horseback, 
afraid at that moment to receive the least 
assistance from the man who I ad a.vaktned 
the fearful beating of her heart ; and followed 
by blessings and adieus from all the poor peo- 
ple gathered at the fair, the young party pro- 
ceeded to the " Cascade of the Goshawk," 

N 2 



. 



138 CLAN-ALBIN, 

so named in the language of the country, from 
one of these rare birds having long frc quented 
the lofty cliffs that overhang the waterfall. — 
After rapidly crossing the dreary and far ex- 
tending moor, they ascended other mountains, 
and at length entered a deep, narrcw, un- 
peopled glen, the haunt of the eagle and the 
roe ; and beheld a landscape of wild and pic- 
turesque beauty, not the less attractive that 
it had hitherto escaped the vigilance of tour- 
ists — never been visited by tittering parties, 
peeped at through opera- glasses, nor copied 
into red morocco porte-feuilles. 

When they had long lingered round this 
enchanting scene with that heart-felt, and 
nearly silent admiration which precludes the 
necessity of conjuring up raptures, and turgid 
bursts of wonder and enthusiasm, Hugh 
turned the horses loose to graze, and spread 
the contents of his basket in a sweet recess, 
sheltered by fantastic rocks and shrubs, and 
preserved in the livliest verdure by a clear 
brawling stream. As they reclined round 
their mossy board, the joyous spirits of Moni- 
mia broke forth without restraint. A light, 
versatile, and fugitive charm pervaded her 
manner, and her conversation j playful grace 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 139 

marked every -movement, and fascination 
lurked in every smile : and at times the 
blushing softnesses of new-born passion threw 
round her a spell yet more dangerous and 
irresistible. Norman forgot all his wisdom 
and resolutions, and his heart tenderly echoed 
her romantic wish — " living for ever under 
these shades with those she loved" While 
Flora mingled her sweet full voice with the 
sound of the rushing stream, singing many 
snatches of old melodies, Moniinia amused 
her companion with rearing a ^little ideal 
cottage on every picturesque pointy and at 
the head of the glen the mansion of him 
who was to rule in love, and diffuse through 
his sylvan territory, industry and intelligence 
— all the lowlv virtues, and all the blessings 
that follow in their train. To Moniinia no 
scene was so lovely as the picture of human 
happiness — the felicity of mankind was the 
most attractive of all sights, and the ac- 
companiment of blue smokes rising among 
the trees, domestic animals browsing on the 
slopes ; — the mill, the smithy, the hamlet- 
school, and the fairy group paddling in the 
stream, were all wanting to complete her 
favourite landscape. While, with the magic 



140 CLAN-ALBIN, 

of fancy she created these, and imparted 
warmth and cheerfulness to the lovely void, 
Hugh came forward ; and as he had done 
every thing the most vigilant affection could 
suggest for the accommodation of his young 
frien Is, — u Wondered how the market would 
be going r' 7 — Norman easily understood this 
hint, for he well knew the Piper's fondness 
for markets, and after a courtly affectation of 
reluctance to leave the party, Hugh went 
back to the fair. 

They continued to stray through these 
romantic solitudes, at every advancing step 
catching some enchanting feature of the 
landscape, till gaiety, subsided into that 
soothing and tender complacency, ever 
awakened in feeling minds by the tranquil 
and minute contemplation of beautiful na- 
ture. From soft and indulged reverie, — the 
visions of the painter, and the raptures of the 
poet, — they were suddenly roused by the 
baying of dogs, the cheering of huntsmen, 
and the thick beating of approaching steps; 
and a hunted deer, plunging through a 
thicket, threw himself in despair among the 
party, as if from them it sought protection 
from its enemies. 






A NATIONAL TALE. Ill 



t 



01 Oh, save it, save it!" cried Monimia, in 
great alarm; while Norman called off the 
dogs, which had now nearly come up with 
the exhausted animal. He was joined hy 
the huntsmen, who, though somewhat dis- 
satisfied at the loss of the game which their 
dogs had accidentally started, assisted him 
in calling them off from pursuit, and ere 
their masters approaciied, the panting deer 
had darted down the steeps, crossed the 
stream, and bounding up the opposite heights, 
sought his mountain haunts. The strangers 
were Sir Archibald Gordon, Mr. Mansel, and 
some other gentlemen, with a long train of 
servants and dogs. Monimia would gladly 
have spared so many witnesses to her roman- 
tic expedition, but it was now too late to 
escape, and she quietly listened to the apo- 
logies offered for the late alarm, and congra- 
tulations on so fortunate a rencontre. 

Motives of curiority had led the strangers 
to a Highland fair, and there they had been 
informed by Montague that his sister and 
another young lady were visiting " the casr 
cade of the goosehawk" The same idleness 
and ennui which brought them to the fair,. 
made them follow Sir Archibald to a glen, a 



JU2 CLAN-ALUIX, 

water-fall, and two young ladies. But a 
rarer sight rewarded their toil, and Sir Archi- 
bald encountered an object which infinitely 
surpassed the young beauties,* who, now in 
the height of agitation and alarm, appeared 
in a blaze of loveliness ; — this was the wolf- 
dog of Norman. This animal was uncom- 
monly large, handsome, and docile;- and a 
very great favourite with Norman and the 
family of Eleenalin, for he was the last gift 
of the emigrants of Glenalbm, who, from 
respect to their chiefs, had preserved the 
national breed when it was nearly extinct in 
every other part of the Highlands. 

The family of Gordon was not originally 
Highland; but Sir • -Archibald, when in Eng- 
land, affected the Chieftain, as that character 
procured observation, ii not distinction ; and 
he kept a piper, two or three fierce looking 
servants in the Highland garb, which he 
sometimes at balls and masquerades asMimed 
himself, the better to assert and keep alive 
his feudal dignity. Now the possession of a 
Fingalian dog was a most important element 
in the composition of .a Cuieiiain, and was, 
besides, a quite new thing, calculated to ex- 
cite interest, envy, and curiosity, — long de- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 143 

nied to the vulgar acquisitions of Arabian 
horses, Irish hounds, Italian singers, curious 
wines, and Spanish jennets. He therefore 
accosted the dog's master with great polite- 
ness ; expressed surprise that he had not fa- 
voured him with a visit at Castlebane, and 
unbounded admiraiion of his fine dog. Nor- 
man, though gratified hy the praise bestowed 
on his favourite, was deaf to the baronet's 
plainest hints, and when Sir Archibald de- 
clared a vehement desire to possess such 
another dog, and inquired whether it were 
possible to obtain one, answered that he 
feared it was not possible — " my poor Luath 
is the last of his race, 1 ' said he, caressing 
the animal which recalled so many soft recol- 
lections — •" he was bestowed on me as a pledge 
of parting friendship; — he is all that remains 
of what was once very dear to me." 

Sir Archibald said no more, but he secretly 
resolved to obtain the dog, by whatever 
means. 

As the party before their departure stood 
to admire the cascade, its glittering arch of 
foam reflecting every bright, changeful, and 
splendid colour, in the beams 1 of the even- 
ing sun, the wild birds were seen to flutter 



144 CLAN-ALBIX, 

round, and brush the spray as they sought 
their aerial dwelling. The elegant species of 
falcon from which the cascade took its nam .-, 
was become so extremely rare, that bir 
Archibald was instantly fire I with the desire 
of becoming the envied possessor of a gos- 
hawk. The wish to oblige, and to render 
happy every sentient thing that he met, was 
one of Norman's strongest principles, and 
most cherished habits ; and to console the 
baronet for the want of the wolf-dog which 
had captivated his fancy, he determined to 
procure him a young gos-hawk. He knew 
that no one could with such ease and safety 
as himself, scale or descend the steep and 
fearful prscipices where the falcons nestled ; 
and stealing away unperceived, he entered 
on his perilous enterprise. 

Surprised at this abrupt absence, Monimia 
looked anxiously round on every hand, and 
through the boles of the tangled underwood 
perceived the daring adventurer suspended 
in mid-air, by the frail support of the shrubs 
which sprung from the ledges or crevices of 
the rocks. Her colour faded, and a sicken- 
ing horror seized her heart, but distressing 
consciousness held her silent, while Flora, to 



A NATIONAL, TALE. ll> 

whom she pointed out the appalling spec- 
tacle, wildly proclaimed her fears, and ear- 
nestly intreated her to turn back. The whole 
party p used for an instant, but Sir Archi- 
bald, affecting to treat the enterprise as in no 
wise hazardous, urged them to proceed, his 
servants having already found the ladies' 
horses. Flora however refused to advance, 
and ran towards the base of the cliffs, whe- 
ther Monimia, secretly blessing her, gained 
courage to follow, and the gentlemen thus 
compelled, also turned back. 

Norman had now attained the object of his 
perilous pursuit, and bowing and smiling from 
the dizzying height where he stood, to re-as- 
sure Flora, he quickly descended the cliffs, 
and darting down the tangled steeps, joined 
the party at the foot of the cataract. With 
a side-long glance Monimia tenderly re- 
proached his temerity, and expressed her 
joy at his safety. 

" I little thought to alarm you so much, my 
dear Flora," said he, — " I imagined that you 
were going on, and that I would soon over- 
take you ;" — and he gracefully presented the 
young gos-hawk to the now delighted ba- 
ronet. 

VOL. II. O 



146 CJ.AN-ALBIN, 

Sir Archibald's pride in this desirable ac- 
quisition lasted only for a moment. When he 
had admired the bird, and felt it was his own 
beyond the power of chance, he turned to 
Norman, spying — " What pity sir, — as you 
were at the nest, — but you had taken the 
whole." 

" Though I feel little remorse for taking 
one member from the family of the * Rock 
Pirate,' " replied Norman smiling, — " these 
ladies would never have forgiven me for 
robbing a poor bird of all its young." 

It had been well if the affair had dropped 
here, but Sir Archibald, piqued at the indif- 
ference Norman showed to his implied 
request, prepared to scale the cliff himself. 
The more he was dissuaded from so dangerous 
an exploit, the more obstinate he became, 
and it was now evident that to gratify his 
spleen he was determined to hazard his neck. 
H.ving an idea that the best cure for this 
very common species of noble daring, is 
entire indifference to both the danger and the 
glory, Monimia affect d total unconcern, and 
proposed going on, concluding that tlie self- 
willed hero wouid care little for a solitary 
triumph. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 147 

" Oh, no, no !" cried Flora, and with all 
the simplicity of innocent inexperience, she 
implored him to desist, not aware that the 
htroism of some men owes its origin to the 
fears of women, and that when the latter 
cease to he cowards, the former forgvt to 
be brave. Imputing her humane concern to 
a softer reason, the baronet graciously 
soothed this " amiable and very Mattering 
alarm;" and without attempting to allay her 
fears, by lessening the danger, made light 
of encountering it. Though tempted to 
luugli at the simplicity of her friend, Moni- 
mia pinched her arm, and attempted to drag 
her away, but Flora would not stir, and had 
every one deserted the hero, she would have 
remained alone to watch for his safety. — 
Her fears added a new motive to the desire 
of obtaining a bird, opposing the entreaties 
of iriends, and spiting, (us he imagined) the 
man who had just hazarded his life to oblige 
him, Sir Archibald sprung forward. 

Norman had hitherto kept very quiet, but 
he now begged the baronet to oblige him, 
by waiting tili to-morrow, as the ladles .%ere 
so desirous of getting home. Sir Arcnibald 
would not wait a minute, and was certain 
the ladies would excuse him. 



148 CLAX-ALBIX, 

"Then I must get the birds fur you," 
said Norman, very gravely, — " I cannot suf- 
fer you even to attempt it." 

" Not suffer me!" exclaimed the baronet 
angrily, — " and why not?" 

" Because you cannot go with safety ; — 
all my life I have been accustomed to range 
among these cliffs — and when on them my 
head and my footing must be steadier than 
yours." 

Instead of admitting the truth of this 
probable statement, Sir Archibald answered 
only with a look of disdain and proceeded, 
and Norman followed him. Monimia, who 
had now lost all desire to leave the cataract, 
heard this altercation in an agony of fear — 
the more distressing that delicacy and timid 
consciousness forbade its expression, and for- 
bade her to assume the mein of indifference, 
while every nerve was on the rack. But 
when she perceived that Norman was rapidly 
following the headstrong baronet, she bit- 
terly repented her silence, and wislxxl that 
she had used the entreaties that her heart 
whispered, and to which it also promised 

success. " And could my cold pride hazard 

a life su precious, rather than speak one little 



A NATIONAL TALE. 149 

word," thought she ; while she gazed in that 
awful suspense which arrests every function 
of life, and keeps the soul fixed in the agony 
of intense expectation. 

For some time Sir Archihald ascended 
with great agility, proudly declining all aid 
from him whom the pure spirit of benevo- 
lence attracted to his steps, and rudely com- 
manding him to go back. Norman disobeyed 
in silence. They had now reached a consi- 
derable height, and Sir Archibald looking 
down on the yawning chasm, and upward on 
the impending rugged cliffs, became giddy, 
staggered, and grasping the foot of Norman, 
they fell together, breaking down the branches 
that shot over the abyss with a tremendous 
crash. 

A deep groan burst from every bosom, and 
after an agonizing pause every one sprung 
forward, the strangers to Sir Archibald, an4 
Monimia to find the mangled body of her 
friend, while Flora sunk nerveless on the 
grass ; — forgotten was the woman's delicacy, 
forgotten the strangers' presence, as Monimia 
in distraction threw herself by the insensible 
Norman, clasping him in her arms, and by 
wild starts pouring forth all the eloquent 

O 2 



150 CLAN-ALB1N, 

ravings of passionate tenderness, and vehe- 
ment grief. 

As if her voice had power over death, 
Norman opened his eyes, to see her he loved 
hanging over him with undisguised tender- 
ness ; and pressing the hand on his late still. 
but now delighted heart, he feebly smiled, 

while he whispered " My blessed Moni- 

mia, compose yourself; — I am not hurt." 

" Are you not, Norman, my own dear, 
dear friend r" cried she incoherentlv, and 
streaming tears relieved concentrated agon\ . 
— " Oh ! I fancied you murdered in my pre - 
sence; — merciful God, what a blessed pro- 
vidence !"-±- and her heart shivered within her 
at the immensity of the danger he had escaped, 
and from which she could scarcely yet believe 
him free. 

Even at that solemn moment the heart of 
Norman throbbed with transport, and a sweet 
delirium involved every sense, as he dropped 
his wounded head on her shoulder, and whis- 
pered his ardent thanks. His next idea \\. 
Sir Archibald, but Monimia was prevented 
from answering his inquiry by one of tlu 
gentlemen who came to his assistance. 

" I see sir," said he, pointing to Norman** 



A NATIONAL TALE. 151 

clotted hair — " the innocent have come worst 
off;" — Monimia started and turned pale — 
" but thank God it is no worse with us." 

" It would be foolish in a man to complain 
of a broken head, who has just escaped a 
broken neck," replied Norman smiling; — 
" and I am truly glad Sir Archibald has 
escaped so easily, — these blessed branches 
saved us both." 

Monimia was not easily alarmed, where 
pain only, without danger, was apprehended; 
and exerting her spirits, she cut off the clotted 
hair, and assisted the stranger to wash and 
bind up the wound, which though long, was 
not deep. 

When the stranger returned to his party, 

Monimia still hovered round her patient. 

" Who would not choose to be wounded every 
day to engage the cares of so sweet a phy- 
sician," said he tenderly. 

Monimia had now recovered all her self- 
command, and though she smiled on him 
with great softness, she replied with some 
gaiety " There is more chivalry than wis- 
dom in that wish ; but chivalry has long been 
the excuse of folly : — and tell me how could 
such a prcux chevalier enter on any enterprise 



152 CLAX-ALBIN, 

without the sanction of his lady ? — Flora for- 
bade " and starting, she for the first tune 

recollected Flora " My poor Flora !" 

cried she, running to meet her, and lavish- 
ing on her all the kindness of an overflow- 
ing heart ; weeping and laughing, chiding 
and congratulating, Flora threw herself into 
the arms of Norman, whom she kissed with 
all the innocent familiarity of their early days ; 
and they walked together towards the bank 
where Sir Archibald was seated, surrounded 
by his friends. They congratulated the 
baronet on his fortunate escape, and he coldly 
returned the same compliment to Norman ; 
and again thanked Flora for the very flatter- 
ing interest she had manifested in his safety. 

u You owe me no thanks indeed," replied 
Flora, with simple earnestness — " I could not 
help feeling the same anxiety for any human 
creature in the like danger." 

Sir Archibald by no means relished this 
rustic declaration. To be refused a dog, to 
fail in the attempt of climbing a rock, to lose 
a nest of birds ; and, above all, to be levelled 
with — " any human creature,"— might have 
ruffled his temper even in his calmest hours, 
and now excited the deepest displeasure. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 153 

He sullenly persisted iti escorting Monimia 
to her home, though from the moment they 
emerged from the glen of the Goshawk, and 
the strangers took leave, he exchanged not 
one word with the remaining patty. There 
are few minds that can discharge themselves 
from the restraint and uneasiness produced 
by the ill-humour of companions ; and the 
young friends, if not equally angry, were at 
least as silent as himself. 

When they reached Dunalbin he alighted, 
and, uninvited followed Monimia into the 
house ; while Norman took leave, and has- 
tened to the Piper, who was waiting his arrival 
on the beach. 

Hugh had heard from the servants of the 
alarming accident at the cascade, and after 
demonstrating his joy at the escape of hid 
beloved young friend by a very cordial shake 
of the hand, he gently chid him for venturing 

his life for a Gordon -" Had he broken 

his neck it is little more than he deserves ; — 
I wonder myself who would mourn him f" 

" I would," said Norman, " had I not en- 
deavoured to prevent it. 1 ' 

" It is a pity !" replied Hugh sarcastically, 
— " And he wants our poor Luath too, I'm 



154 CLAN-ALBIN, 

told ; — but you would surely see him cursed 
first : — coniounded Wliigamore !" 

" 1 am fortunately reduced to no such alter- 
Dative," returned Norman laughing ; and to 
end the discourse he inquired tue news of the 

fair. " Oh, little but Mrs. Montague's 

marriage with him ; — all full of that 1 ' — and 
Norman perceived the cause of Hugh'* bad 
humour. 

" People must talk of something," said 
Gorman, with affected CoYi lcssness. 

f* Aye, so they must ; — so you don't believe 

it dear? — No more do I, — 1 Jactd every one 

who said it. — He attended her home though." 

When tliey lauded they were met by 

Moome, eager for news from the market. 

" O, nothing but buying of low-country 
round hats and trowseiv," cried Hugh indig- 
nantly — " scarce a bonnet or philabeg to be 
seen now ; — an ill meeting to them! throw- 
ing off the gaib of fathers they will never be 
like. — What will the countries come to at last 
I wonder ? — Even our own Lady, — and 1 no t r 
went over the cords with her but tuen, — severe 
frost and snow it was, I grant, — the very win- 
ter you went first to Bally i "nag. ' My good 

Piper,' says she, ' let me beg of you to wear 



A NATIONAL TALE. 155 

irowsers and a hat to defend yourself from 
the cold ; at least till summer ; — poor crea- 
ture, I shiwr to look at you.' — Norman Mac- 
albin, I cannot tell you whether I was most 
grieved or angry to hear Macal bin's doc titer 
speak to me in the manner. ' She who should 
have known better than to affront any of my 
name by calling him a poor creature/ and sup- 
posing that I — unworthy as I am of those I 
come off — would shrink like a Saxon slounge 
from a blast of cold, or a whirl of snow 
drift ; — but I faced her for it, and told her, 
that with her leave, divil a low-country com- 
fort, or a breeches should ever go on my 
Highland' limbs. To be sure I did get the 
rh umatism that year; but what signified tiiat, 
Moome herself took it very ill of my Lady." 

" Mary yes ! that I did," cried Moome, — 
" part with your philabegi — turn a low-coun- 
try mongrel ! — you could not be such a dog. 
Och my heart, that her father's dochter could 
advise you i — but she was not long of that 
minJ I warrant ; — no, Hugh Piper, Mach- 
piper, sooner would I lay a stone to your 
cairn, than see you disgracing yourself and 
your clan with a lo/.-country breeches." 

Norman smiled at the imaginary insult 



15G CLAN-ALBIN, 

offered to the bipod of Macalbin, and left 
his a [fronted friends to condole with eaeb. 
other, while he hastened Lo amuse his other 
solitary friend with the adventures of the 
day. More t.ian usually silent in mixed so- 
ciety, it was in the little domestic circle his 
social feelings found utterance. For the en- 
tertainment of the Lady did he treasure up 
every trait of individual character, generous 
sentiment, or playful wit: to strangers he 
was known only by the good-humoured faci- 
lity, and open smile expressive of pleasure, 
at their efforts to hs wise or witty ; to her 
by great powers of observation, and those 
delightful conversational talents which amuse, 
gladden, or improve the circlex>f the parlour 
fire, but languish and fail to charm when 
transplanted to the colder atmosphere of the 
drawing-room. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 157 



CHAP. XXIV. 



" I know thou canst never be mine, 
I knew even hope is denied, 
Yet it 's sweeter for thee despairing 
Than aujrht in the world beside." 



•&' 



Burns. 



r lor a was now returned to her home, 
and in the following weeks Norman had 
abundant' opportunity to act on his honour- 
able and wise, though painful resolution, of 
avoiding the society of her who occupied so 
large a share in his thoughts. As if she un- 
derstood and approved his motives, Monimia 
also visited Eleenalin less frequently ; and 
except on the Sunday evenings, when she 
was in the habit of reading the Church ser- 
vice to the Lady, they seldom met, and never 
but in company. 

The gay pennons of the fishing tent were 
now seen streaming among the cliffs of Ken- 
anowen, and the romantic swell or dying 

VOL. II. P 



158 < I.AN-ALBIN, 

murmur of distant wind instruments were 
undulating in every breeze ; while the inha- 
bitants of Kleenalin devoted themselves to 
more than ordinary seclusion. From boyhood 
one of Norman's greatest pleasures had been 
the cultivation of a little garden, which he 
had enriched with many rare plants from the 
mountains; and while the gay patty occupied 
his solitary and favourite haunts, he divided 
his time between his books, music, and the 
management of this spot, where he gave 
Hugh a very beneficial example of industry, 
neatness, and arrangement; and almost shamed 
him out of the half-lazy, half-proud — " I 
can't be troubled," — the national reproach 
from the banks of the Tweed to John o'Groat's 
House. 

Yet Norman often delighted to listen to 
the enchanting melody flung back from the 
rocks and hanging woods, or trembling oh 
the wave, from which it stole new sweetness. 
Still oftener did his eyes wander round the 
walls of Dunalbin, and seek " the dweller of 
his secret soul," among the gay throng that 
daily resorted to the tent : for Mansel, by 
diligently studying the useful hints of Colo- 
nel Thornton, had united good cheer, and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 159 

comfortable accommodation to more sports- 
man like pleasures, and thus attracted all 
the ladies and officers froir the neighbouring 
fort. Meanwhile, Hugh's daily interchange 
of news-papers, books, and notes, was all the 
intercourse between the castle and Eleenalin ; 
and his sarcasms on " gentlemen hunters 
afraid of wetting their feet," the only intel- 
ligence between the islanders and their fashion- 
able neighbours. The character of the pre- 
sent dwellers in Glenalbin, did not harmonize 
with the Piper's ideas of society and neigh- 
bourhood, arid he daily felt greater impa- 
tience for their departure. 

The sporting party had remained ten days, 
when the Piper landing one evening in 
Eleenalin, — joyfully accosted his young 
friend, 

" Well ! the gentlemen hunters are to de- 
camp at last — joy go with them, and with her 
who sent them away." 

" How do you mean?" enquired Norman, 
somewhat anxiously — " O ! only Miss JRi 9 
run off wit \ the Lieutenant, Mis> Ursy's 
cousin, — that's all. Pretending to be going 
the way of Glenalbin, and set off for Glen 
Moriston ; where the chaplain of the regi- 



160 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ment married them in her nurse's. But every- 
body says lie had oaths of her long since, 
though her aunt wanted her to deny it. 
When two days were gone, news came to 
Castlebane were there was a strong party of 
ladies and gentlemen. The Lady was from 
faint to faint, crying out her eyes ; Gordon 
raging, and swearing, calling for Lis pistols 
to shoot the Lieutenat ; and Mansel quite 
affronted and in a high passion, setting < 
whatever the lady could do : — for she would 
marry him to Belle or herself rather than 
lose him, they say." 

" That is all very wonderful," replied 
Norman, — " But in the meantime, where is 
Luath ? " 

" Luath I" exclaimed Hueh, — " is he not 
with yourself? — My good Father! the 
Gordons have stolen him. Did I not tell 
you dear, how I stopped a few minutes at the 
New Inns to hear the news of Castlebane, 
and taste one glass with Gordon's groom ? — 
since, I never saw him." 

The wolf-dog was indeed lost, and his 
master nearly inconsolable ; though, in pity 
to the anguish and self-upbradings of Hugh, 
he suppressed his feelings, and Bp of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 161 

hope. All the evening was the shri 1 whistle 
of the Piper heard among the dells nd hills 
of the glen ; hut Luath was far from Glenal- 
bin, and at midnight Norman forced his 
disconsolate attendant to return ho:t e. Next 
day the search was renewed, and taking dif- 
ferent courses they traced a wide tr ct of 
country, but with no better success ; and ex- 
hausted and forlorn, Hugh again returned to 
Eleenalin exhibiting a very ludicrous picture 
of distress, as he went and wrung his hands, 
exclaiming — " My Luath, my darling, my 
dog of dogs ! a bad meeting to them that set 
their evil eyes upon my darling !" 

Norman would not permit himself to think 
that any person, pretending to the name of 
gentleman, could stoop to so base an action 
as stealing a dog, yet his regret for the fa- 
vourite animal was not the less poignant ; 
and the remembrance of Luath was only 
effaced by more important interests. On 
reaching home he saw Monimia's fairy shal- 
lop anchored to the decayed willow, and with 
a thrill of joyful expectation hastened to the 
cottage. He found her in earnest conversa- 
tion with the Lady ; trembling and agitated, 
her face wearing the glister of newly shed 

P 2 



162 CLAN-ALBJN, 

tears. He could have instantly withdrawn, 
but starting up, she pressed the hand of t! 
Lady to her lips and her bosom, emphatically 
pronounced the word "Remember;"' and. 
while tears streamed down her face, gave him 
her hand in silence, and then hurried from 
the room. Norman rose to follow, but the 
Lady called him back and made some frivol- 
ous inquiries about Luath. 

" I see your eloquent eyes are imploring 
explanation," said she, at length — " V* 
are doomed to lose our amiable friend — at 
least for sometime." Norman covered his 
face with his hands, and leaned his head od 
the table, while he faintly uttered — " I a 
sorry to hear it." — " It is impossible that her 
family could remain insensible to her main 
virtues and fine qualities. They have claim- 
ed her from solitude, and the improper pro- 
tection of Mr. Montague ; to introduce her 
to that society she was born to benefit and 
grace." The Lady could not fail to per- 
ceive the overwhelming distress of Norman. 
Her heart felt every pang she was forced to 
inflict, and warmly sympathized in the suf- 
fering she could not remove. She saw the 
stifled heaving of his bosom, and withdrew 



A NATIONAL TALE. 16$ 

afford his young grief the relief of tears 
and sobs. Still concealing his convulsed 
features, he also rose, and rushing to his boat 
pushed off to the middle of the lake, where 
abandoning it to the waves, he gave himself 
up to momentary despair. Monimia lost to 
him for ever was the overwhelming sug- 
gestion which tore off every disguise, and 
discovered the fearful extent of her power, 
and of his misery. How easy till now had 
been the practice of a delusive self-denial — 
till now, unseen, he could hover round her, — 
at sun -rise brush the dews from the path 
where she had wandered at twilight ; and 
inhale the fragrance of the wild- flower which 
-prung beneath her steps. At sun-set he 
could gaze on the distant blazing windows of 
aer chamber, and lover-like, imagine to him- 
self her successive studies, pleasures, and oc- 
cupations. But the unknown dreaded future 
was to be a dreary blank from which fancy 
could draw no image to cheer or to solace. 

When he had obtained the ascendancy of 
his tumultous feelings, he steered for the 
Isle of the Druid to indulge the gentler mood 
of his sadness, and seek its antidote amid the 
lonely scenes of recollected felicity. A 



164 CLAN-ALBIN, 

volume of Shakespear lay open on the table 
of the little rustic bovver ; for in the woes of 
her favourite female character, — the tender, 
trustful, and all-enduring Imogen, — Monimia 
had been trying to forget her own peculiar 
griefs. The leaf was folded down at that 
beautiful passage : 

" I did not take my leavp of him but had 
Most charming things to say ; onu I could tell him 
How I could think on him at certain hours 
Such thoughts, and such, or have charged him 
At the sixth hour of morn, at noon, at midnight, 
T' encounter me with orisons," &ic. 

While Norman run his eye eagerly over 
these pathetic lines, still wet with the sympa- 
thetic tears of Monimia, and placed this pre- 
cious volume in his bosom, something re- 
sembling hope sprung up in his heart, and 
the Lady had the satisfaction to see him calm 
if not contented. 

Norman did not sorrow alone. The re- 
ported departure of Monimia was the can 
of universal regret ; — Moome lamented, and 
Hugh mourned ; Montague by turns fretted 
and expostulated ; and the Lady of Castle- 
bane forgot Maria in concerns more mo- 
mentous. — " Do I owe this stroke also to 



A NATIONAL TALE. 165 

Ursy?" thought she, when intelligence was 
brought that a superior female domestic had 
arrived from the Glanville family to escort 
Monimia to England. — " She must have 
found means to inform these mercenary crea- 
tures of the supposed fortune, either from 
pure malice, to thwart my family plans, or to 
facilitate her own design on that grinning idiot 
Montague — probably both." Her Ladyship 
almost stamped witi the fury of impotent 
passion. For Miss Sinclair was now beyond 
her power, having established herself for the 
winter in the house of a clergyman to whom 
she was related ; and Monimia. having yield- 
ed her own secret feelings to a sense of pro- 
priety, and gratitude for the tardy, but still 
welcome kindness of her family, was not like- 
ly to be influenced by the desires of the 
Lady of Castlebane. Finding herself thus 
out-witted by her own creature, her Lady- 
ship could only resolve on hastening to Eng- 
land to support, by her own presence, the 
report of Monimia's engagements with her 
nephew, though in doing so she left the 
" pin-man's'' fortune exposed to the ma- 
chinations of Miss Sinclair. 



IGo CLAN- ALU IN, 

As the kind letters of her relations urged 
Monimia to an immediate journey, she had 
bidden farewell to her maternal friend on 
her late visit to Eleenalin. In the overflow- 
ing tenderness of that parting moment her 
inmost feelings had been repealed, and amid 
tears, sobs, and all the agonies of a delicate 
mind, she had, in broken sentences, poured 
the confidence of ru r I ursting heart into the 
indulgent bosom of the Lady ; and was be- 
trayed into that confession so terrible to a 
female nature — that her happiness, — her 
peace was in another's keeping. 

" To you, dearest Lady ;*' cried she, still 
burying her face in the bosom of ^Lady 
'Augusta, — " to you I confide all my weak- 
ness — to you give up the conduct I can no 
longer orovem ; — vet, dearest Lady, do not 
despise me. I could not have been so mean 
had I not sometimes imagined that his ten ler- 
ness invited and sanctioned my — my esteem. 
Oh, no! all good, all amiable as he is, I 
could have died sooner than given my un- 
sought heart even to him." 

" Daughter of my affection !" s:iid the 
Ladv, pressing the tear-swoln lace of Mo- 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 1G7 

juinia still closer to her bosom — " May- 
Heaven accomplish all your sweet hopes ; or 
should its wisdom require a sacrifice so pain- 
ful, give you strength to renounce them, and 
find happiness in obedience to its will. Did 
the fate of both rest with me, it would be the 
blessing of my age to unite two hearts al- 
ready united in one. — But I must not talk so 
idly — your ingenuous avowal, my dearest love, 
though very precious is, also very alarming to 
me. Young — unconnected — without a pro- 
fession. — My best Monimia, respect the 
honourable struggle of the man, — since it 
must be said, — to whom you are most dear." 

" Ah, Lady Augusta, were I so happy as 
to believe that •" cried Monimia, while for 
a moment every obstacle, every fear, every 
doubt disappeared, and her heart beat with 
the rapture of being beloved — " But I do, 
I do sincerely respect him — even for trying 
to forget me. And now, dearest Lady^, I 
throw myself on you — you are my friend, and 
my sexes friend ; conceal the fatal extent of 
my weakness ; — and yet, dearest Lady Au- 
gusta, should you ever see the anguish of a 
parting, doubting hour like this, say I will 
never, — no never, never forget Eleenalin ;— . 



168 t LAN-ALBIN, 

say you are sure I never will/' Lady Au- 
gusta gently smiled over this unconscious 
artfulness — this tender compromise between 
the maiden's delicacy, and the maiden"^ 
love ; and soothed her with the promise of 
watching for her good : and as Monimia 
could see nothing of good but what compre- 
hended the interest of her affection she was 
soothed, and the sunny smiles of hope dried 
up the bitterest tears she had ever shed. 

The Lady recommended that they should 
not meet again, anxious to spare them the 
pang of a separation. " I will not seek a 
meeting," said Monimia. " But forgive me 
dearest Lady, if I cannot seem so unlgnd a>> 
to avoid him should he wish to see me." The 
Lady smiled in token of acquiesence ; and at 
the same instant Norman entered, and Mo- 
nimia hurried away as has been related. 

On the following day Flora came to Elee • 
nalin on her way to pay a farewell visit to 
her friend, and insisted that Norman should 
accompany her to Dunalbin. He faintly 
refused while he consulted the eyes of the 
Lady as if he wished her to bid him go. " If 
you wish it my dear Norman," said his in- 
dulgent friend. — " Can you doubt that : " 



A NATIONAL TALE. 169 

replied Norman, in a tone of tender re- 
proach, while he vailed his moist eyes with 
his hand ; — " Can yon doubt it indeed ?" cried 
Flora, in a voice of astonishment, — " It would 
be very extraordinary should he not wish to 
see Mrs. Montague before she goes;" and 
she placed his hat on his head, and pulled his 
arm within her own. 

A glow of pleased surprise overspread the 
face of Monimia when Flora entered so ac- 
companied, and her betrayed heart felt more 
than its wonted flutterings, when she saw the 
pale face, and deep calm dejection which 
evinced her triumph, and awakened all her 
latent tenderness. u Oh that I durst speak 
peace to that warm and noble heart;" thought 
she, — " bid it repose all its cares on me, and 
seek their oblivion in my true regard." 

When Flora had for some time endeavoured 
to support a continually decaying conversa- 
tion, she rose and went to the piano-forte. 
" I think," said she, — " it was prince Eugene 
who preferred music to bad company ; -I am 
quite of his mind. If you won't speak you 
shall sing ;" and she handed Norman his 
favourite Scottish song, " Here's a health to 
ane. I lo'e dear" inviting him to accompany 

VOL. II. Q 



170 CLAN-ALBIX, 

her playing. — " Not to-night, Flora," *aid 
he, — " I cannot sing that to-night." — " You 
must, and shall sing it," replied Flora, — " after 
I have been so civil as to tumble over all the 
books to find your favourite." 

" Aye, come do let us have the song till 
the candles are lighted," said Montague, " to 
cheer us, for I am fit to go to cry." 

The air was Jacobite. Norman sung all 
these airs, and sung them well ; and when 
thus urged, the associations he had formed 
with that song, made him fancy farther re- 
fusal indelicate. The eyes may be cast 
down — the countenance averted, but the 
lover's voice is the immediate and uncon- 
trollable organ of his soul, vibrating to its 
every movement. Yet Norman got over the 
first stanza of his song with little difficulty, 
though the allusion was even then beating at 
his heart ; but at that beautiful and im- 
passioned exclamation, u Its sweeter for thee 
despairing," — every nerve thrilled, his voice 
shook, and its passionate intonations uttered 
the language of his soul. As he stood leaning 
on Flora's chair, his downcast eye caught 
the wandering, agitated, glance of Monimia. 
Blushing and trembling she shrunk beneath 



A NATIONAL TALE. 171 

that wild, sad, but momentary gaze ; and 
unable to support himself he sat down, lean- 
ing his forehead on his arm. — " Bravo !" cried 
Flora, — " you have excelled yourself — go 
on." Norman durst not trust his voice at 
that moment with a denial, and in a low and 
fluttering tone he murmured, 

" I can guess by the dear angel smile, 
I can guess by the love melting e'e, 
But why urge the tender confession, 
'Gainst fortune's fell, fickle decree." 

There was one stanza in this song, beauti- 
ful though it is, which the delicacy of Nor- 
man's nuture forbade him to hazard in the 
presence of any woman, — far less in her's 
whom he loved. So his painful task was 
finished ; and he never once looked up, till 
he heard the footstep of Monimia steal- 
ing over the carpet. He saw her face 
streaming with tears, and quickly averted his 
eyes. 

In a few minutes she returned with ap- 
parent composure. Nor hud any one, save 
Norman, perceived her absence; for blora 
was still playing, and Montague had gone to 
sleep. 



172 CLAN- A LB IN. 

a I can never hear that last exquisite ei- 
fusion of unfortunate genius, "and think 
of the scene which so soon followed, without 
very painful feelings;" said Monimia, trying 
to apologize, or rather account for her emo- 
tions. — " Besides, my feelings have been so 
variously agitated these two day; — with the 
bustle of preparing for travelling I mean, — 
that I am sadly nervous : — which is rather 
unfortunate too, for hitherto I have been al- 
most as lucky as the old lady who was born 
before nerves came into fashion." 

" Eh ! nerves," said Montague, rubbing his 
eyes, — " I assure you I am become nervous 
myself; — and no wonder, considering what I 
have suffered, and still must suffer; left alone 
in this horrid countrv. \\ ere it not for 
one thing — that vile farm, — one post- 
chaise should take us all, I can tell you :" 
and he almost wept at the thought of his for- 
lornness. 

" T shall soon return you know;" said Mo- 
nimia, with affected cheerfulness, — " and 
then you will all have learned to value me, 
and prize me as you ought." 

16 You need not go for that," rcph 
Montague, in a husky voice, — u you need 



A NATIONAL TALE. 173 

not go for that, I say ; — we all love you 
enough already. But don't tell me of 
your coming back, — who would leave Lon- 
don for this poor place after knowing it, 
unless they had a farm going to ruin." — " Or 
a brother they love," said Monimia ; and she 
added, turning to Norman, — " You perhaps 
recollect the interesting anecdote of the 
Otaheitean so generously received in Eng- 
land, when about to leave it for a dearer 
land. * No horse there, no cow,' said 
poor Omai, — ( no pippin, no dish of tea ; — 
I always so content there though.'' I am like 
poor Omai." — While Monimia related this 
little anecdote, with tearful eye and a shaking 
voice, she had involuntarily turned to Nor- 
man. Her words spoke hope and comfort to 
his heart, and he ventured to press the snowy 
hand extended towards him as the pledge of 
sincerity ; and then alarmed at his own pre- 
sumption, turned away. With woman's quick 
intuitive sense of propriety, or rather with 
that rapidity of reasoning, which arrives at 
just conclusions without appearing to travel 
over the preliminary steps, — with that ad- 
dress which in the artful is art, but in the 
ingenuous seems the simple instinct of mo- 

Q 2 



174 CLAN-ALBIN, 

desty, — Monimia had laid her hand also in 
Montague's, while he blubbered, — " Well, 
we shall see that. I never yet knew you worse 
than your word ; though it is not in nature 
to prefer this wilderness to England, I feel 
that by myself." 

Twilight was now gradually advancing, 
and it became necessary to cross the lake ere 
darkness set in. Flora withdrew to adjust 
her dross for the voyage, and Montague was 
called out to speak with his shepherds. 
Leaning on a distant casement, Norman stood 
trying to summon the fortitude necessary tore- 
peat that little word " farewell." The footstep 
of Flora was heard descending the stairs ; 
he abruptly advanced, and bowing, murmured 
— -« Then Farewell ! " " God bless you !" 
said Monimia, stretching out her hand, and 
averting her overflowing eyes. " God for- 
ever bless you ! " repeated Norman in an 
emphatic voice, as bending on one knee, he 
for a moment rested his lip on that precious 
little hand — and then springing up, he again 
bowed, and precipitately fled towards the 
beach. 

Before Flora joined him he had regained 
♦he mastery of his feelings; but when she 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 175 

talked of seeing Monimia again on the mor- 
row, he felt that he would never, never see 
her more ; and his heart sunk into that chill, 
dark void, which overwhelms the stunned 
spirit when those we yesterday saw bloom- 
ing in health, sparkling with vivacity, and 
glowing with generous affections, are to day, 
swept from our sight, cold, inanimate, and 
hidden in the earth. 

But the mind of Norman habitually in>- 
fluenced by a lively sense of its immortal 
and accountable nature, could not long re- 
main in prostrate imbecility. He had lost, 
probably forever, the dearest hope which 
ever taught a young heart to thrill with rap- 
ture ; but he still had duties to perform, 
faculties to improve, and affections to cherish; 
and in their unremitting exercise he sought 
peace, and gradually recovered happiness. 

The arrival of a servant from Dunalbin, 
on the following morning, with a variety of 
books and papers which Monimia had left in 
charge to the Lady, announced her depar- 
ture, and condemned her friends to sorrow. 

" Och hone, och hone ! " cried Moome, 
raising her apron to her eyes, — M We are not 



176 CLAN-ALBIN, 

alone who shall regret her ; and that heigh- 
tens my own sorrow." 

" Hers was the heart to call down the bles- 
sing," said the Piper, coughing to conceal his 
tremulous voice. 

" She is indeed an admirable young crea- 
ture," said Lady Augusta, — " So feeling, yet 
so reasonable, so indulgent, yet so just ; 
blending the gaiety and enthusiasm of youth 
with the wisdom of age ; — never have I met 
with a young character so happily tempered, 
— so many useful virtues adorned by so many 
fine accomplishments : — pity, indeed, that 
Monimia should waste her sweetness in a 
desert. The world has need of her;" 

" And so tender, so sweet ;" added Flora, 
weeping, — " her heart overflowing with sym- 
pathy to every human thing. — Ah ! we shall 
never, never see her like again." Norman 
alone was silent. 

" And hers was genuine unaffected sympa- 
thy," said the Lady. " Softness and hu- 
manity are so peculiarly the attributes of re- 
fined women, that delicacy and affability are 
become as necessary appendages to a modern 
fine lady, as a mistress and a squire were to 



A NATIONAL TALE. 177 

the knights of chivalry. They are to fashion- 
able females what religion was to the fanatics 
of the past age. As it is impossible for any 
creature to exist in eternal fervours of devo- 
tion or of feeling, canting was the supple- 
ment in their times, as whining is in ours. I 
loved Monimia because she was pious with- 
out cant, and tender without whine. She 
possessed the reality, and needed not the 
counterfeit." 

" Are there then two kinds of pity," said 
Flora, — " or is there any harm in weeping at 
a tale of distress ?" 

" None, my dear girl, provided nothing 
better can be done : but the genial shower is 
uselss, my dear Flora, unless industry has first 
prepared the soil, and deposited the seed. 
You ask if there are two kinds of pity ? I shall 
tell you a story — for I should like to see you 
compassionate without weakness, selfishness, 
or affectation. — I knew a little soft-hearted 
girl who shed abundant teais over the shock- 
ing details of the man-trade. I told her how 
she might befriend the poor Africans ; and 
though a lover of sweets, she heroically ab- 
stained from sugar, and exhorted all her com- 
panions to do the same." Flora smiled and 



178 £LAN-ALBJN y 

blushed, for she was that little girl. " It was 
little," continued the Lady, — u but it was aU 
she could do, and it proved her compassion 
genuine and unaffected. Engaged in that 

trade was a Captain , said to be one of 

the most humane men concerned in it. One 
day, in the middle passage, he heard a poor 
African bewailing her captivity and misery in 
a song of such heart-rending pathos, that his 
feelings were powerfully affected, and he was 
compelled to have her flogged into silence. — 
Here was feeling Flora. He could drag that 
miserable mother from all that affection holds 
most dear, consign her to unheard of cruel- 
ties, and finally sell her for a slave — but his 
feelings could not stand her song ; the lash 
compelled silence. Was not that man hu- 
mane Flora?" 

" Oh no ! a base hypocrite," said Flora, in 
a glow of youtliful indignation. 

" Surely no hypocrite," returned the Lady, 
smiling at Floras heat. " vVell, akin to 

Captain 's feeling, is that fine-lady 

sensibility which recoils from the misery it 
would rather forget than remove — that bar- 
ren, sickly, squeamish humanity, — begot in 
weakness, fostered by affectation and caprice, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 179 

— which banishes real wretchedness from its 
sight, and seeks out elegant distresses for 
the indulgence of its natural selfishness." 

The good sense, benevolence, and active 
spirit of Monimia had shed sweet influence 
round her, during her short residence in the 
country, and never was the departure of even 
a native Highlander more deeply regretted. 
Her humanity neither dwelt in sickly nerves, 
a watery eye, nor a squeamish ear. It was an 
active, animating principle; grounded in 
reason, uniform in its operation, resolute in 
its purposes, not soon disgusted, and never 
dishearcened. The character of the High- 
landers, influenced by great respect for rank, 
and habitual confidence in the wisdom and 
goodness of their superiors, had been consi- 
derably favourable to her views ; yet even 
among them, there was prejudice to remove, 
ignorance to instruct, and many serious diffi- 
culties to obviate. The proud were jealous 
of whatever savoured of interference, the 
suspicious saw selfish design in every attempt 
to serve them ; and the most numerous class, 
the lazy and the idle, still debased by the 
dregs of ancient feelings of vassalage, chose 
rather to depend on their talents for flattery, 



* 



180 CLAN-ALBIN, 

tl an on industrious exertion. But when u 
vas perceived that no system of troublesome 
interference was meditated, and that th< 
only who assisted themselves, were perma- 
nently benefited, half the difficulty vanished, 
and time promised the removal of all that 
remained. 

The generous elevation which character- 
ized the mind of Monimia, her strong sen 
of the natural dignity of man, and of his 
original equality in every noble attribute and 
privilege of humanity, made her intercourse 
with her lowly neighbours depend on princi- 
ples widely different from those which some- 
times regultte the charities of very respecta- 
ble persons. She had hitherto fortunately 
escaped that rage for legislating, controlling, 
and directing, which frequently seizes on 
the best minds, and too often counteracts 
their benevolent designs, by exciting that 
pardonable jealousy which impels an un- 
taught, but honest spirit, to spurn even a 
good which is forced on its acceptance. The 
phrases, — " My good woman, 1 must have you 
do this; — Lady 's poor do it; — tin- 
Society recommend it;" — had never yet been 
found on her lips ; nor had she ever disco- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 181 

vered the puerile impatience of a child, who 
plants a bean, drenches it with water, hovers 
continually round it, calls on his companions 
to admire, and the next half hour digs it up 
to see — " why it is not growing ?" 

A limited command of money had taught 
her extreme caution in its distribution ; and 
called into exercise that vigorous penetration 
which enabled her to comprehend the great 
interests and the minute details of a life very 
remote from her immediate condition, and 
to appropriate her benefits with a discrimi- 
nation which doubled their nominal value. 
It would, however, be too much to expect 
that a young and gentle- hearted woman 
should have studied Smith and Turgot before 
she ventured to open her purse, and obey the 
spontaneous impulse of compassion, warming 
at the appeal of misery. Yet was Monimia 
much less the giver of gold than the redres- 
ser of wrongs, — less the patroness than the 
friend of her neighbours. 

She had been told by him who formed 
her mind to goodness, and her heart to love, 
that nothing is better calculated to pauperize 
and degrade the spirit of a free people, than 

VOL. II. R 



182 CXAN-ALIiJ.N, 

wresting from tlicm in taxes, and giving the 
back in charity ; so she was happier to s< 
education training to habits of industry, cau- 
tion, and foresight ; and good laws securing 
to the working man the entire enjoyment of 
his hard-earned gains, than charitable esta- 
blishments and casual benefactions however 
splendid and liberal. 

But the wretchedness she could not re- 
move she sought to alleviate; and as her 
conduct was actuated by the purest and sim- 
plest motives, discouraged every expression 
of that spurious gratitude which money 
excites at the peril of destroying the native 
independence which Monimia admired as 
the peculiar charm of the Highlander, and 
valued, as the surest pledge of all his lh.rdy 
virtues. Disdaining from her inmost soul that 
cringing homage which marks the sordid 
compact between affluent Yfrnky, and indi- 
gent baseness, she endeavoured to knit the 
social band which links the ditVerent classes 
of the same great family in a manner more 
wise and generous : and her gifis were the 
reward of merit, or the offering of friendship, 
not the humiliating boon which abject misery 



A NATIONAL TALE. 183 

extorts from revolting, contemptuous, dis- 
gusted pity. Often, with satisfaction, in- 
finitely greater than was ever derive I from be- 
ing hailed the oenefactre.-is, the Lady Boun- 
tiful of a whole tribe of those lazy and im- 
portunate sycophants who hate the giver 
while, with insatiable avidity, they sieze the 
gift — often had Monimia gazed on the sun- 
burnt face of a young Highland girl as it 
glowed with the honest exultation of nature, 
when on coming to the castle to gather the 
first-fruits of industry, her heart bea^ with the 
united pleasures of usefulness and generosity. 
Heedless, almost forgetful of the person who 
bestowed a reward, which was chiefly valued 
as it was due to her merit, the young High- 
lander appeared only to anticipate the joy 
of relieving the wants, or contributing to the 
comforts of an aged mother, a widowed sis- 
ter, or a beloved kinswoman — a joy enhanced 
by the ennobling consciousness that personal 
independent industry was its source. 

For the aged, the orphan, and the infirm, 
Monimia had a small but undecaying fund. 
Yet even from these she received little grati- 
fying services, rare plant*, varieties of heath, 



184 CLAN-ALB1N, 

rude dye-stuffs, or wild-berries; for like 
Yorick, she never dropped nsou into the hand 
of a poor man without taking a pinch from 
his box, — and like Yorick's, her last act was 
more esteemed than the fir^t 



A NATIONAL TALE. 185 



CHAP. XXV. 



M When sorrows come they come not single spies 
But in batallions." 

SllAKFSFEAR. 

1 he approaching winter was the last which 
Norman was to spend in inactivity, and he 
diligently applied to study, for the double 
purpose of forgetting the past and preparing 
for the future. But even in the most ab- 
stracted pursuits the master-feeling of his 
soul found scope, and a thousand lover-like 
devices multiplied around him the idea of 
Monimia. The letters composing her name 
were employed instead of the A's and B y s 
used in demonstrating mathematical proposi- 
tions ; and whenever he took up his pencil 
to form a diagram involuntarily he traced her 
features with the exquisite delight we feel 
when the images hid in our hearts spring 
tip under our creative fingers. 

R 2 



186 CLAN-ALB1N, 

u I am truly at a loss to know what pro- 
perty of the triangle you find in the waving 
lines of Mrs. Montague's face," said Lady 
Augusta, one day as she looked over his 
shoulder. 

" One must always be scratching at some- 
thing you know," replied Norman, blushing 
like a girl, and rubbing out the sketch. — 
" And I have often so lively a recollection of 
that face. Yet I often forget it too," added 
he hastily, — " and the more I think of it the 
more confused my ideas become." Lady 
Augusta could easily believe this. 

"That is, I presume, what artists call a 
study" said she, in a tone almost ironical. — 
" It is one eminent advantage of mathema- 
tics, that they lead to no confusion of ideas." 
Norman lowered his head, and again began 
to prove that the triangle M. O. N. was equal 
to the triangle N. I. A. 

Youthful ambition owns no stimulant more 
powerful than ardent attachment, and when 
the devoted mind catches its impulse from, 
superior excellence in the beloved being, it 
can feci none more pure. It is this that 
creates and fosters that generous and gallant 
spirit which may be called the chivalry of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 187 

nature, — more reasonable in its origin than 
what flows from heroic institutions, as lofty 
in its tendency, and altogether exempt from 
its manifold affectations and fopperies. Lady 
Augusta wished rather to modify than eradi- 
cate the ambitious aspirations of Norman, — 
rather to discipline than subdue that rapture 
of love which, in his mind, seemed identified 
with the enthusiasm of excellence. 

Notwithstanding her salutary warnings 
against " distraction of ideas," reveries of 
glory and distinction insensibly mingled with 
his severest' studies^ connecting the labori- 
ous present with the happy future, and sof- 
tening the toil they promised finally to re- 
ward. He would recal the bright short 
gleams of intelligence which he had enjoyed 
with Monimia. Her smiles had been rapture, 
but her tears still glittered to the rays of hope 
like the arch of Heaven's promise. Thus 
did love colour the illusions of imagination 
till Monimia appeared the leading star of 
his destiny, and all became possible and 
easy to him who aspired to her regard. 

For some weeks Monimia wrote frequently, 
short but very affectionate letters, and some 
slight notice or inquiry in " the Lady's post- 



188 CLAX-ALB1N, 

script" showed that she still remembered Nor- 
man. Hearing extracts read from these let- 
ters formed one of his dearest pleasures, and 
insensibly the time flowed on till the month of 
December ; when the sudden and violent in- 
disposition of Lady Augusta banished e\( 
other consideration, and plunged her family 
into great sorrow and alarm. 

Flora hastened to Eleenalin on the first 
summons, and shared in every filial care and 
tender solicitude of Norman. 

The life of Lady Augusta was protracted 
as if to reward their affection and assiduity. 
She gradually recovered health, and to ap- 
pearance, cheerfulness ; but Norman fancied 
he saw more deeply. He could not help 
connecting her illness with a letter which she 
had received, and as Monimia had since been 
silent, a vague fear took place of his late 
blooming hopes, and his mind still agitated 
by the danger of the Lady, sunk into the 
despondency natural to a sick-chamber, 
caught its gloomy hue from dim-seen evils 
which threatened it. Yet he suilered in 
silence ; and the absence of no care, attenti- 
on, or solicitude ever evinced that his thoughts 
strayed beyong the apartment of his sick 



A NATIONAL TALB. 189 

friend. Often while supporting the Lady 
across the chamber in her first feeble at- 
tempts to walk, would Flora gaze with glis- 
tening eyes on the interesting pair. The tall 
and finely formed figure bending with the 
most lively filial solicitude, the blooming 
youthful countenance now expressively re- 
vealing watchful tenderness, and now ener- 
getically denoting the varying emotions of 
fear, hope, and joy; or mantling with an 
animated glow when quick-sighted affection 
had anticipated any latent wish, — heightened 
by contrast the mild, pale, sorrow-fixed fea- 
tures, and ruined grandeur of form which dis- 
tinguished her who fondly leaned on his arm, 
sometime pausing and gazing on him with 
a melancholy look of blended love, pity, and 
anxiety. Norman had seldom seen the meek 
serenity of that countenance displaced by 
any emotion save that of benevolence or 
compassion. The former brightened her 
features with the tempered joy of a superior 
being, and the latter moulded them to that 
celestial expression which might eharacter- 
rize the guardian spirit of tlie just. The 
mind of Lady Augusta had long been the 
organ of all her wants and the medium of all 



100 CLAN-ALBIN, 

her enjoyments. Its tranquil elevation placed 
her far beyond those trivial cares and petty 
necessities which harrass the selfish and the 
grovelling, Exempt irom cares, hopes, or 
anxieties for herself, she was still vulnerable 
through her affection fur others. Her regard 
was fixed on the child of her benevolence, 
and for him she now trembled. 

Norman could not fail to perceive her feel- 
ings and even to trace them to himself, — " She 
scans my thoughts," said he, — " she antici- 
pates the punishment of my presumption. 
She pities me, and I have need of pity ; though 
even from her I know not how to receive it." 

It was on one of those evenings she in- 
formed him that Hugh was to make a journey 
to the low country about some trifling busi- 
ness. A journey undertaken by Hugh in the 
depth of winter could be about no trifling 
business. He immediately connected it with 
the letter, the illness of the Lady, the anxiety 
which sometimes suddenly knitted her brow, 
and the pensive looks she cast upon himself. 
He ventured to inquire farther, for in this 
little family there had hitherto been no mys- 
teries, but the Lady evaded his question, and 
he went to Moome's hut to interrogate the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 191 

Piper. Hugh sat forlorn and melancholy, 
leaning his head on his hands, and resting 
these on the hed. 

" Norman darling," cried Moome, who 
was trying to scold Hugh out of his intended 
journey, — " did you hear the folly of the 
Piper ; — going to the low-country and the 
ground covered with snow ; — I helieve myself 
he is inad." — Hugh was ever sufficiently com- 
municative of his own affairs, but on this oc- 
casion he was obstinately s dent, and Norman 
impelled by very powerful interests, urged 
him to unfold his business, and skilled in 
touching his kind spirit, gently reproached 
this unfriendly shiness. 

" Will you be so cruel to myself?" cried 
Hugh, coughing to conceal his emotion. — 
" Have I not to hide it from herself? Has she 
not enough to grieve her already, and you too. 
Why will you kill me, — and me dying of this 
bad cold already ;" and he coughed again to 
suppress his sobs. 

" My dear Hugh," 'said Norman, pressing 
the hand of the Piper between his own, — " I 
am sorry your cough is so painful, yet it be- 
comes you ; — now forgive me, and I will ask 
no more questions." 



J 92. CLAN-ALlil>, 

" Well don't, for it would go to my o 
heart to refuse your dog, if you iiad one ; — 
my poor Luath too would have been my com- 
panion," and Hugh was seized with another 
fit of coughing. Norman spent this evening 
with the Piper, making a generous effort to 
inspire him with the hope he wanted for him- 
self; for though Hugh concealed the cause 
of his distress, its effects were painfully con- 
spicuous. 

Since the indisposition of the Lady every 
trifle awakened the anxiety of Norman ; and 
when he retired on this night he perceived 
that she was not yet gone to rest, as a light 
gleamed below the door of her chamber- 
Alarm, or perhaps a slight feeling of curiosity, 
made him peep through the glass of a locked 
up door, which had once connected their 
sleeping rooms, and he saw her writing. Sel- 
dom had he seen her so engaged, and now 
her hand shook as much from the tremor of 
her mind as the weakness of her nerves. From 
time to time she stopped and raised her eyes 
to Heaven as if imploring its aid in the per- 
formance of a p inful duty, and then recom- 
menced her employment. 

When she had finished her writing, sheun- 



A NATIONAL TALK. WS 

locked an ancient cabinet which stood in her 
chamber, and from its most secret compart- 
ments took ont a small box, on which she 
gazed for a few moments, as if fearful to 
look on its contents. Her eloquent features 
swiftly conveyed her feelings to the unseen 
spectator ; and when she drew forth the glit- 
tering relics of her former splendour, Norman 
had already anticipated the event. Among 
several antique trinkets he perceived the mi- 
niature portraits of a gentleman and a child. 
Many years had rolled by since the Lady had 
trusted herself with the sight of these loved 
resemblances ; even yet a single tear slowly 
trickled down her furrowed cheek, as the dim 
images of past times stole over recollection. 
" I shall go to them but they cannot come to 
me," whispered she, as for the last time sfte 
indulged the melancholy luxury of gazing 
on her husband and her child. Norman 
started at the unexpected sound of her voice, 
and when he looked again he saw her quietly 
disengaging these portraits from their rich set- 
tings. She made up a small packet of the 
jewels scattered about, addressed it to some 
unknown person, and laying it calmly aside, 
proceeded to the performance of her cus- 

VOL. II. s 



194 CLAN-ALllIN, 

tomary devotions. In the elevated sentiment 
of glorious immortality, which at this mo- 
ment stamped the countenance of Lady Au- 
gusta with a divine character, in the enthusi- 
asm of devotion which beamed from her eyes, 
Norman beheld heaven revealed, and the 
pure and holy spirit returning to the bosom 
of its Creator. With a slight sensation of 
trembling he threw himself on the bed. 
While his soul caught the inspiration of ber's, 
he shrunk from intruding on the hallow »d pri- 
vacy of her sublime piety. 

And now came the hour of bitter retros- 
pection, for Norman now comprehended the 
motive of this sudden journey. To admi*. 
nister to the necessities of a friendless orphan, 
whom her benevolence had rescued from 
ignorance and reared to an existence destined 
to imbitter her own, Lady Augusta surren- 
dered the last vestiges of her family magni- 
ficence ; and sacrificed all the nice and in- 
scrutable affections which consecrate and en- 
dear even the inanimate symbols of our de- 
parted happiness. The mind of Norman re- 
volved round this single idea till the exag- 
geration, naturally produced by violent emo- 
tions, made him see the suffering of Lady 



A NATIONAL TAtE. 195 

Augusta extreme, and himself its cause. The 
ease in which he had hitherto been maintain- 
ed abridged then the comforts of her he would 
have died to serve ? He supinely counted over 
the idle hours of an ignoble life, and basely 
beheld her stripping herself of those me- 
mentos of affection preserved amid all the 
vicissitudes of time and fortune ? 

The musing of many sleepless hours was 
followed by a rash project of leaving the 
country on the following day. The generous 
perversion of a fervid mind found consolation 
only in its voluntary sufferings. Norman 
longed to expiate the errors he could not 
remedy. 

His little chamber seemed too bounded for 
his violent emotions. He sought a wider range, 
and gently stealing down stairs wandered 
over the island. — It was a clear frosty night. 
Myriads of stars were sparkling in a deep 
blue sky, which no vapour stained, and the 
thinness of the atmosphere gave a brilliancy 
to the planets, and a lustre to the moon which 
might have rivalled their resplendence in a 
tropical climate. The surrounding scenery, 
now shrouded in universal white, was sweetly 
sleeping in the moonlight, save where a heavy 



iOti CLAN-ALB1N, 

mass of shadow marked the abrupt outline 
of the breaks and defiles of the mountain- 
Fantastic frost-work pendant from every rock 
and shrub, glittered in the moonbeams like 
the enchanted creation of oriental fancy. 
This romantic scene was beautifully reflected 
in the lake ; and Norman, looking above and 
beneath, seemed to stand in the c< litre of a 
transparent globe. On such nights the in- 
numerable wild-fowl, driven from northern 
regions by the severity of the season, de- 
lighted to plunge through the sparkling tide 
in wanton gaiety, as if shunning the eye of 
man they threw themselves on the protection 
of nature. Their lively cries, as they dashed 
out into the lake in pursuit of each other,- 
were all that disturbed the dtep repose of this 
.mM landscape. But the mind of Norman 
was neither in unison with the images of re- 
pose, nor of enjoyment. Restless and agi- 
tated he wandered about, while the very 
necessity of forming an instant resolution de- 
prived him of the power. He at lai>t btcaa 
so cold that he was forced to take refuge in 
Moome's hut, — for he saw that she was not \ « I 
gone to rest. 

Surprised, but pleased with so late a visit. 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 197 

she courteously presented him her favourite 
stool of bent ropes, fashioned somewhat in 
the form of a bee-hive, and lighted a torch 
of the last wrecks of the Sylva Caledonia. 

" You see dear, the way I sat was to finish 
the worsted ere Hugh went. It would be a 
poor thing if he went so far empty-handed. — 
So I send a blue cheese, and this to poor 
Morag at the cotton mills, for stockings to 
herself and the childer." 

" You are always a kind considerate 
Moome," said Norman. 

" Sure darling, you know Morag is a 
Macalbin ? " replied Moome, astonished to 
hear so simple an action pompously rated. 
" But did you hear, darling, how Miss Ursy 
is at the castle ? She is a fine maker of good 
things you know, and they say the churl is 
very good to himself." 

A person at once gluttonous and inhospit- 
able seemed in Moome's estimation, to touch 
on the very acme of vileness. — " A poor 
creature indeed, to fill the place of the dar- 
ling who was before her ; — God forgive me ! 
she is a country-woman of mine too. But 
did you hear, my jewel, what the sweet crea- 
ture said to myself in the letter ? Sure we 

S 2 



(C 



198 CLAX-ALBIN, 

shall get another soon, — but I have known the 
low-country spoil as warm a heart as ever 
beat. How long is it now Norman darling : 

Four weeks," replied Norman, sadly. 

Aye, so it is; — the very day Hugh tore 
his cassock helping the Altlarich people with 
the cow that bogged. When I began to scold 
he held up the letter, poor Hugh ! — But is it 
not very long dear r" Norman rose, and un- 
able to answer walked to the door, where 
Moome courteously followed. 

The moon was sunk, and the night was now 
cloudy and dark ; but on turning to the 
North-west what a spectacle of grandeur met 
the gaze of Norman ! The wavy coruscations 
of the Northern Aurora were undulating over- 
half the hemisphere. Quivering, flash- 
ing, uniting, and again starting away in 
every fantastic shape, and tinted by every 
aerial hue : — now blazing forth in vivid 
flame, and now swallowed up in darkness — 
their rapid transitions mocked the eye of the 
gazer. Wrapped in silent admiration, Nor- 
man contemplated these magnificent fire- 
works of heaven, while Moome drew pre- 
sages of the weather. 

The " Merry Dancers," afforded her little 



A NATIONAL TALE. 199 

amusement, — but she oracularly predicted 
very good or very bad weather after so bril- 
liant a display of the Northern Lights ; — for 
the experience of fourscore years had taught 
her to admit no medium, and she trembled 
for her " poor Hugh." 

" Do you remember dear, — but sure you 
cannot, — when a little babe you cried to catch 
the streamers, and would not sleep till we 
promised to give them to you to-morrow ?" 

" Always the fool of to-morrow," said Nor- 
man, shaking his head, — and at the same in- 
stant he started at seeing the shadow of a 
man gliding along the waters of the bay. 
The figure, as if alarmed at the sound of 
voices, retired behind a cliff, whither Norman 
ran fearless and impatient. When darting 
round it, a man suddenly advanced, and Nor- 
man saw and recognized " Hector the Hun- 
ter!" 

" Norman of Dunalbin 1" exclaimed the 
spectral figure, and fixing on the youth an 
eye whose terrible expression spoke fear, 
doubt, horror, and astonishment — he stagger- 
ed and fell into the arms of Norman. As he 
recovered, his features gradually relaxed, he 
withdrew himself — and looked as if his 



200 CLAN-ALBIN, , 

vision was turned from Norman to contem- 
plate what was passing in his own soul. 

Moome, though greatly alarmed, gained 
strength from fear, and following Norman — 
now stood trembling by his side. 

" You are Unah of Bruachrua," said the 
Hunter, sternly ; — " Tell me who this is I " 
and he pointed to Norman. 

Moome dropped a very low curtsey : though 
she often talked very familiarly of the visi- 
onary hunter, she by no means relished so 
abrupt an interview. 

" That, with your leave, is Norman," said 
she, — " our own Norman, who has great re- 
spect for yourself." 

The hunter folded his arms on his bosom, 
slowly walking along the beach, and then en- 
tered the hut whither Moome and Norman 
followed. 

" Oh ! darling, I am all of a shake," whis- 
pered Moome ; — " Poor soul, God help him ! 
but don't dear, make him angry." At an- 
other season Norman could have smiled, — 
now all his faculties were employed in ex- 
amining the spectral figure which stalked 
before him. The features of the hunter 
were almost obscured by his matted hair and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 201 

neglected beard. His eye alone was visible. 
— And what an eye ! Norman had never met 
a glance so powerful. It emanated at once 
the wildness of the maniac, the ferocity of 
the savage, and the grandeur of that spirit, 
which having subdued itself, counted on the 
subjugation of all nature. His stature, seen 
in this dubious light, was almost gigantic, and 
he was distinguished by a gloomy severity 
of aspect, and a loftiness of deportment, 
which spoke the habit and the consciousness 
of authority. But the deer of the wild, and 
the eagle of the rock were all the subjects of 
Hector. This savage figure was poorly ha- 
bited in skins of dear, and his feet were 
covered with the rude buskin formerly worn 
in the Highlands. 

" Alas, alas!" said Moome, curtseying as 
he again advanced, — " that he could not live 
like another Christian. Christ save him from 
those who have power over him ! " 

" This is the son of Norman?" said the 
Hunter, bending towards Moome ; — " Nor- 
man of Dunalbin ! my soul knew him." 

Moome durst not presume to contradict, 
and dropping another curtsey she replied : — 
" With your leave, the same, — and great re- 



'202 CLAN-ALB TN, 

gard, and a warm heart he has to yourself, 
and all of your name." Hector placed hrs 
hand on the shoulder of Norman. 

" My blessing rest with thee, son of my 
friend — Norman of Dunalbin!" and leaving 
the hut, he sprung into a rude boat of wicker- 
work and skins, and pushed into the lake. 
Norman made a motion as if to follow, but 
Moome held him back, and Hector waved 
him to be gone. With the rapidity of a bird 
the frail vessel cut the waves, and the hunter 
disappeared. 

" Poor soul !" exclaimed Moome ; — " But 
did he not say you were the child of Nor- 
man ? Who but he should know. Does she 
not tell him all ? Did he not call you clans- 
man ? — Oh, that it were day to give her own 
heart the delight of knowing it!" and Moome 
wept over the hand of Norman. Momen- 
tary visions of distinguished birth danced 
before his eye?, and banished even the singu- 
lar being he had just beheld. 

u I must be of her blood," thought Norman, 
— " but 1 will die and never know how related. 
The hunter perceived the resemblance. Oh, 
the happiness of having a legitimate claim to 
the affection of my best friends," 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 203 

After assisting Moome to convey into the 
hut the tributary deer of the hunter, Norman 
retired to his chamber. In a few minutes he 
heard Moome tapping at the door of the 
Lady's bed-room. — " Lady dear, are you 
awake ?" cried she, — " I hare such strange 
things to tell you.'* The Lady invited her 
in, and she began the story of the hunter and 
Norman. " I am neither a prophet nor a 
prophet's dochter" said Moome, — " yet I al- 
ways said he was no stranger to Macalbin's 
blood, and I knew that by the way my own 
heart warmed to him from the first. For these 
arms received him from her who is now in 
the presence of the Highest. And did she 
not say to Ronald — t I am going to Dunal- 
bin V knowing no doubt there were friends 
before her ; and that there was/' The Lady 
sighed deeply. 

" Surely he does resemble my family," said 
she ; — " but I am contented, I could not love 
him more." 

" Oh, my Mother ! " cried Norman, run- 
ning in, and throwing himself by her bed-side. 
He burst into tears of gratitude and tender- 
ness. — " What should that love leave me to 
wish for. 1 " 

" My dear son," said the Lady, placing her 



204 CLAN-ALB1N, 

hand on his head, and gently stroking it, — 
" Why are you up so late ?" Norman thought 
at that moment, with shame and self-re- 
proach, of his insane project of abruptly 
abandoning his friends and his home; and 
now secretly vowed to her service that life 
her generous and vigilant affection alone had 
rendered valuable. 

Hugh was in a few hours to depart, and 
Moome renewed her entreaties with the Lady 
to use her authority in preventing the journey. 
During this conversation Norman looked on 
Lady Augusta with something so conscious 
and sorrowful that she perceived her secret 
was divined, and with a grave smile said, in 
French, — 

" I am not so cunning as I fancied. In 
truth, secrets were always painful to me, so 
my dear young friend send Hugh to me, and 
when you return from escorting him so far, 
you shall be my confident." 

Norman hastened to obey, and when the 
Piper had taken a melancholy leave of his 
friends, they walked together to the Ivy-ci 
here they paused. 

" Am I never to cross this fatal barrier ?" 
said Norman, while his eyes filled. 

" See," said Hugh, " how lovely the blue 



A NATIONAL TALE. 205 

smoke of our own home rises among the hare 
trees this still morning. Ah ! Norman, did I not 
leave you to comfort them, you whom they 
love so much, it would break my poor heart 
to go on, so go home darling ; the Lady will 
be waiting breakfast, and Moome scolding 
myself for taking you so far." 

It was in fact so. The Lady sat by an un- 
touched breakfast, comforting Moome by 
carelessly remarking the hardy constitution 
of the Piper, and his excellence in walking. 
She was more than serene, she seemed ani- 
mated by the consciousness of some conceal- 
ed happiness, and Norman could only sup- 
press his anxiety by reflecting — " well, I shall 
soon know." 

When breakfast was ended she addressed 
him thus : — " My dear Norman, I am about 
to give you the greatest proof of my esteem. 
I use no preparation in acquainting you with 
a recent misfortune, for I rely on your edu- 
cation and your principles. You know ad- 
versity is the test of character. — Nay, I per- 
ceive you apprehend some evil much worse 
than the reality. My slender fortune is for 
the present lost — that is, the whole; — but 

VOL. II. T 



206 CI.AN-AI.B1N, 

your health, your talents, your affection is left 
me, and I still am rich, — ah, how rich !" 

A load was removed from the heart ot 
Norman : he threw himself on his knees, and 
while his tears fell in the bosom which had 
cherished him, breathed out vows of never- 
ending gratitude and devotion. Lady Au- 
gusta tenderly kissed his forehead, and when 
his emotion subsided informed him that — 
Many years before she had withdrawn her 
money from the public funds to increase the 
capital of a young man, a native of the High- 
lands, who had belgun business in Glasgow as 
a manufacturer, that he might be able to 
educate the orphan family of his father. For 
a long period his success had been equal to 
his enterprise and good conduct, but exten- 
sive and unfortunate speculations to South 
America had lately reduced him to bank- 
ruptcy, i 

" I am confident," said the Lady, — 
" poor Mc — * feels it more on my ac- 
count than on his own. If the commercial 
interests of the country prosper, I hope every 
thing from his skill and perseverance — if not, 
the world will learn to value, as it dughtj the 



A NATIONAL TAUK. 20? 

talents and integrity of my Norman ; and 
that God whose mercy is over all his works, 
who feeds the young ravens and clothes the 
lilies of the field, will not, at old age, forsake 
those who humbly trust in Ifim." Lady Au- 
gusta raised her eyes as if in mental prayer, 
and then proceeded. 

¥ You know the sanguine folly of our poor 
friend Buchanan led him to borrow a sum of 
money from Macpherson. The motives of 
that artful man are now revealed. The youth 
and loveliness of Flora have prevailed over 
his avarice, he demands from the Unhappy 
father the sacrifice of his only child, or the 
alternative of prosecution and a jail. Poor 
Buchanan ! the ridicule attending his ill- 
advised scheme, his shame, remorse, and dis- 
appointment, embitter his life ; and will soon, 
I am afraiuV, deprive Flora of her natural pro- 
tector. When I understood these circum- 
stances, I endeavoured to satisfy that bad 
man Macpherson ; for 1 wished to spare the 
gentle nature of Flora the shock of learning 
that at such a time a proposal had been made 
on which, I well knew, she would never 
hesitate but from adecnon to her .auier. 



208 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Flora is no wife for that man j — that glowing 
cheek confirms my opinion. Mora shall not 
be the victim of her virtues. When Hugh 
has disposed of the few valuables I possessed, 
we will get rid of the importunity of that 
merciless man, and pour balm into the wound- 
ed heart of our poor friend. We shall also 
then be rich enough to wait for better for- 
tune. In this little territory we may live 
very cheaply. We have plenty of fuel in 
the wood and the mosses, — we have our gar- 
dens, our grazings, and the treasures of the 
lake and the moors. And Hugh is so deli- 
gent when inspired by affection ! Then the 
letters of my sweet Monimia and our young 
soldier will so cheer our loneliness*, — for you 
will be gone then my dear Norman, and that 
is the only evil which admits of nu consola- 
tion/' A tear trembled on the eye or Nor- 
man ; but a smile dimpled his cheek, for 
fairy visions of what he could achieve uhen 
stimulated by gratitude and affection, danced 
before his eyes, and for a moment, blinded him 
to the poverty and desolation which bung 
over the aged inhabitants of Eleenalin. He 
kissed the hand of the Lady in silence and 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 209 

withdrew, while the habitual sentiments of re- 
spect he cherished for his venerable friend 
rose almost to adoration. 

Next morning he visited Buchanan. Flora 
perceived him at a distance and ran to meet 
him. Her first inquiry was for letters from 
Monimia, and when Norman returned a 
melancholy negative, she affected great anger 
and grief. Yet hers was not a grief that 
deeply touched the heart, and he wished that 
she had kept silent 

" How neglectful !" said she, — " among her 
balls and her beaux she never, I daresay, 
thinks of such a poor lonely place as Elee- 
nalin. — But I am so happy for all that. My 
father has given up the Prophets and the Re- 
velations, and all his stupid books, and is be- 
come so social. He sent, yesterday, for 
Craig-gillian, they conversed long in private, 
and parted the best of friends. Oh, how 
good a man is Craig-gillian ! and I am so 
happy ; — though my poor father has a very 
bad cold too." — Norman suffered her to run 
on ; but when he heard that her father had 
sent for Craig-gillian, and saw poor Buchan- 
an, pale and emaciated, striving to support the 
appearance of health and vivacity, his feel- 

T 2 



210 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ings were dreadfully shocked, and he feared 
that the worst apprehensions of the Lady 
were but too well founded. 

To be brief, the feelings, and perhaps the 
pride of Buchanan, had sustained a shock 
from which they never recovered. The un- 
common severity of the season seemed to 
shake his exhausted frame to dissolution. For 
some weeks he languished in almost imper- 
ceptible decay, till he was at length confined 
to his bed, and Norman remained constantly 
with him j and shared with the weeping Flora 
the task, pleasing though sad, of smoothing 
the pillow of sickness, and soothing the en- 
feebled mind. The visits of the benevolent 
Craig-gillian were now peculiarly comforta- 
ble to Buchanan. In these awful momenta, 
when time mingles with eternity, the poor 
distinctions of Papist and Protestant were 
lost, and the last breathings of Buchanan 
were those of a mild and truly catholic spirit. 

One morning he found himself a little bet- 
ter, and intimated a desire to get up. 

" I think I should like once more to look 

on Ben — '■ ," said he, faintly smiling, and 

Flora prepared for his rising with the alacrity 
of renovated hope. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 211 

It was a clear day of keen frost. His chair 
was placed opposite the window, and the 
beams of the wintery sun seemed to cheer 
him. He pressed the hand of Norman, who 
hung over him in the absence of Flora, who 
prepared his drink. 

" When you remember him who was the 
friend of your childhood, you will not forsake 
her who was the idol of his age," said he ; — 
M be a friend to my poor orphan girl when her 
father is no more." 

" Witness for me thou bright sun," ex- 
claimed Norman, while his eyes overflowed ; 
— " let yon grey heap be the testimony of 
my covenant, that while life warms my veins, 
I will watch over the beloved pledge of your 
confidence, with the honour of a man, and the 
love of a brother." 

" It is enough," sighed Buchanan ; and call- 
ing Flora towards him, he leaned his head 
on her bosom, and in that attitude quietly 
sunk to eternal repose. 

I shall not attempt to describe the grief of 
Norman or the despair of Flora, on this me- 
lancholy occasion. When the last offices had 
been performed to poor Buchanan, Norman 
led the orphan to Eleenalin, — to the soothing 



212 CLAN-ALBIN, 

comforts of sympathy and protection ; and 
then only did he recollect the silence of Mo- 
nimia, and also the lengthened absence of 
Hugh. 

Another and another week of that cheer- 
less winter glided on, Monimia was still silent, 
and Hugh came not; and Macpherson made 
a harsh and peremptory demand for his 
money, for Buchanan's property had been 
already seized by other creditors. Regret 
for the dead was now swallowed up in inex- 
pressible alarm for the living, and Norman 
earnestly entreated permission to go in quest 
of the Piper, which the Lady at last reluc- 
tantly granted. On the evening of the last v 
day which they had agreed to wait, the joy- 
ful sound of Hugh's horn was heard, and 
Norman flew across the lake, while Moome 
and Flora waited on the beach. He hugged 
the Piper to his breast with unrestrained t* mo- 
tion, but his joyous feelings were chilled 
when he perceived the sunken, spiritless eve, 
the squalid features, naked feet, and tattered 
garb of poor Hugh. 

" Hugh, dear Hugh, — " said he, but he 
was unable to finish the question ; and wring- 
ing the frozen hands of the Piper, he led him 



A NATIONAL TALE. 213 

to the boat. Hugh blew on hi$ fingers and 
took an oar. 

" Nay, you shall enjoy yourself to-day," 
cried Norman, seizing the oars — " this is a 
jubilee to us all, we have so pined for your 
return." — Hugh burst into tears, his hitherto 
unconquered spirit seemed completely bro- 
ken, — he threw himself on the neck of Nor- 
man, and sobbed convulsively. " Oh, my 

own Lady," cried he, — " tell me is she well ?" 
Norman assured him of her welfare — " and 
your Moome too ;" added he, " and your 
pipe ; — Moome has kept it at the foot of her 
bed every night since you went from us." — 
Hugh smiled mournfully ; and when he saw 
the black habit of Flora he looked in the face 
of his companion as if he already knew her 
loss. 

The sudden alteration of Flora's counte- 
nance shocked Norman nearly as much as the 
miserable figure before him. The words of 
congratulation died on her lips, and she 
abruptly turned away, unable, in the weak 
state of her spirits, to witness such wretched- 
ness. Fortunately Moome was not so quick- 
sighted. After a cordial embrace she wiped 
her eyes, remarking there was few now left 



214 CJLAN-AJLBJN, 

of his name j and then inquired for Mora 
and her children. Norman insisted on the 
Piper swallowing a douhledose of his favour- 
ite Fairntosh ; and Moome also administered a 
dram of the same liquor, in which she had 
infused some medicinal herbs, and which she 
regarded as a sovereign remedy in all diseases 
of the body, and a cordial in all troubles of 
the mind. 

When Hugh arrived at Glasgow to dispose 
of the jewels of the Lady, his office, so much 
at variance with his appearance, excited sus- 
picions unfavourable to his honesty ; which 
were increased by the perplexed account he 
gave of himself; for he firmly resolved, at 
whatever hazard, to conceal from the Low- 
landers the impoverishment of his Lady, who, 
he was quite sure, all the world knew. The 
man to whom he applied h d him conveyed 
before a Magistrate. Unacquainted with the 
forms of justice, secure in conscious inno- 
cence, and above all, zealous for the dignity 
of his clan, Hugh's answers had an air of in- 
consistency which might have perplexed a 
clearer intellect than that of the good Magis- 
trate, who was at least as intent on discovering 
a rogue, as in distinguishing the truth. Poor 



A NATIONAL TALE. 21^ 

Hugh was easily discovered to be an old of- 
fender. One was sure he was an Irishman 
(which of itself was a sort of crime) another 
had seen him whipped for stealing off a cart; 
and from the shop of a third he had stolen a 
cheese. He was finally committed to the 
House of Correction as a vagrant ; and the 
jewels were lodged in a place of security, to 
be given up when claimed by the rightful 

owner, and all expences paid. " But I 

vowed, if they should kill me, never to tell 
your name Lady, 1 ' said Hugh — " though 
every drop of blood in my body was boiling; 
and I tried to curse them in English, but the 
words came faster than I could utter, and I 
cursed them in Gaelic ; — and they are cursed.' 1 
— Here Hugh wiped his brows, and then con- 
tinued, — " Well, they read papers over me, 
and scolded me, and saw I was a rogue all by 
my face (though there never was an honester 
face in Inverness-shire, or else it belies me) 
and sent me to prison. Thank God they 
never knew my name though!" 

Conscious innocence, though the sweetest 
palliative of unmerited suffering, is hardly 
able to sustain even an educated and well-re- 
gulated mind in a situation degrading to the 



216 CLAN-ALBIN, 

pride of vinue ; and the ardent feelings of 
the Piper were strained to desperation. Nor 
was he more affected by his ignominious 
punishment, than by the distress and embar- 
rassment his ill success, and long absence, 
must occasion to his Lady. When these 
thoughts rushed through his mind he became 
so wild and frantic, that the keeper of the 
prison judged it necessary to give him an op- 
portunity of escape ; and naked and starving, 
he hastened to Eleenalin. 

" Yes ! yes you all love me !" cried Hugh, 
on witnessing the deep sympathy of his 
friends at the relation of his cruel wrongs, — 
" yet I was thought a liar and a thief; — oh 
my God it sticks here ! — I will never get 
above it — a thief!" — and he smiled with bit- 
ter irony. The Lady gave way to the first 
violence of his emotion, and Hugh, exqui- 
sitely susceptible of kindness when thus sur- 
rounded by the caressing attentions of all 
he loved, gradually recovered a gentler tone 
of mind ; though he could not soon forgive 
the Magistrate who presumed to question the 
virtue of a Macalbin. 

But the joy of the Piper's return was 
speedily obliterated, for next day Macpher- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 217 

son made another insolent demand for pay- 
ment, and when the Lady, with some effort, 
in treated him to have patience with her for a 
few days, lie informed her, with considerable 
circumlocution, that the time, and even the 
liquidation of the debt, depended on his suc- 
cess with Flora, with whom he craved her 
good oifices. 

A faint momentary tiush tinged the cheek 
of the Lady, while she coldly replied — " I 
think you are a stranger to me sir ; and you 
greatly mistake my character, if you imagine 
that I will even mention your proposal till 
our business is at an end ; when that time 
comes Miss Buchanan is at liberty to decide 
for herself". 

" Then the sooner it is at an end the bet- 
ter," — cried Macpherson, flinging off; and 
the threats he durst not utter in her venerable 
presence were vented on Hugh, who stood 
on the beach. It were impossible to describe 
the almost frenzied rage of the Piper when 
any thing that even threatened insult assailed 
his Lady. In a transport of indignation he 
fiercely and scornfully defied the power of the 
innkeeper, while he bitterly cursed his inso- 
lence ; and when the threats of execution 

VOL. II. u 



218 CLAX-ALlilN, 

and imprisonment were repeated, without 
much ceremony he knocked him down. — 
" There you dog !" cried Hugh, shaking his 
fist over the prostrate lover, — " and I pro- 
mise you twice as much the next time you 
dare to set a foot where her scullion would 
be." 

Just then Norman, who had seen Mac- 
pherson land, hastened forward, and eagerlv 
inquired the meaning of this scene, for Mac- 
pherson was still on the ground. — " Only that 
tawny-moor dwarf would marry Flora ;^ 
that's all," — cried Hugh contemptuouslv. 

" Surely, Mr. Macpherson, you have not 
presumed to offer any insult to Lady Augusta 
Macallan," — said Norman, colouring. 

" Oh no,"' answered Hugh, — " Macpher- 
son, — if a Macpherson he be? — crouches in 
her presence like the dog he is." 

A livid hue overspread the features of Mac- 
pherson, who had now risen, and with a dia- 
bolical laugh, and a look of the blackest 
malice, he whispered — " Before long vou 
shall feel who I am ;" — and he stepped into 
Montague's boat, which was waiting for 
him. 

The last insulting speech of Hugh was in 



A NATIONAL TALE. 219 

that country a more deadly injury than the 
blow which preceded it; for Macpherson's 
right to the name he bore was very ambigu- 
ous. The scarcities often felt in the Highlands 
before the introduction of potatoes were dread- 
ful, and indeed hardly credible. The natives 
still point out seven different sorts of roots, 
such as earth-nuts, wild-carrots, &c. which 
their ancestors used to eat ; and so extreme 
was the famine attending bad seasons, that, 
on the coast and in the isles, infants were not 
unfrequently landed from boats, and exposed. 
Though these foundlings received the com- 
mon name of the clan among whom they hap- 
pened to be thrown, their origin was never 
forgotten ; and many poor families are still 
exposed to the dreadful imputation of spring- 
ing from an unknown stock, and having no 
legitimate claim to that name which is the 
chief pride of their compatriots. Hugh then, 
had wounded the self-love of the inn keeper 
beyond all hope of forgiveness ; and Nor- 
man, unable to blame the honest resentment 
of his warm nature, was for some minutes 
overwhelmed with the appalling perspective 
before him. All that he had ever felt was 
bliss compared to the excruciating agony of 



2^0 CLAN-ALBIN, 

that moment, which pictured Lady Augusta 
torn from her home, — her grey hairs insulted ; 
— imprisoned, starving, and himself denied 
the power of averting or softening her fate. — 
* Oh! I could roh or murder;" cried he in 
anguish, as with a desperate step he hurried 
along the beach. 

But this was a time for decision and action, 
not for barren lamentations ; and conjuring 
Hugh to observe the most profound secrccv 
on what had passed, he ordered him to con- 
vey himself to Dunalbin. Had Craig- gillian 
been at home, Norman's trial would hav» 
been light, but he was gone to England to see 
an only son, who after spending many years 
in India, was ordered to Sicily without being 
permitted to visit his family. 

Were he to goto the low-country to retrieve 
the error of Hugh, might not the vengeful 
and mean-souled Macpherson take advantage 

of his absence to drag to prison . He 

shuddered, and could not even mental lv finish 
the sentence. Monimia now rose to his dark- 
mind like a beam of hope : — true she had 
been forgetful — at least she appeared so, — 
but now when informed of the evil which 
menaced the Ladv, and through her a devot- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2*21 

ed family, could he who adored her, doubt of 
her zeal, her activity, her enthusiasm in the 
cause of virtue and misfortune. 

To solicit Montague's friendly offices with 
the implacable Macpherson for a short res- 
pite, and also to obtain the address of Mo- 
niinia, Norman visited Dunalbin where he 
had not been for many weeks before. His 
wo-struck features and anxious eye, too fully 
explained his errand. The petty pride of 
Montague enjoyed the humiliation of that 
" wonderful folk" who had so often excited 
his jealousy, and though indifferent to the 
society of Norman, self-love was disposed to 
resent his seeming inattention. 

" What wind has blown so mighty a stranger 
this way," cried he, as Norman entered ; — 
"to inquire for my rheumatism no doubt? 
— Well, as I was saying, our friends will come 
to see us when they want any thing of us : — 
hey Miss Ursy ? and he winked very signi- 
ficantly to Miss Sinclair, who bowed and 
smiled in return. Norman coloured violently, 
and after a mental struggle replied. 

" If I have not been able to do myself the 
honour of inquiring for you so often as I 

u 2 



222 CLAN-ALBIN, 

wished, you know how sadly I have been en- 
gaged of late.'" 

" Aye, true; Buchanan poor man. I was 
greatly shocked at his death myself, for he 
was just ahout my own time of life I think.' 1 
This was said in a grave tone, hut he briskly 
added, — " Well, hut I hope you found your 
Christmas vension good ? Thank you too for 
the haunch that came to Dunalhin ; — hey, 
Miss Ursy ?" and the lady, with whom he had 
so good an understanding, forced a laugh at 
this master-stroke of wit. 

" Is it possible ! " exclaimed Norman ; but 
he checked himself and replied ; — " The 
Christmas feelings of Eleenalin have been 
little in unison with festivity Mr. Montague." 
This was said in a tone of such heart-felt 
grief, that his " plain and pleasant" host ap- 
peared somewhat softened, and as dinner was 
just then announced he invited Norman to 
take a place at the table ; but as if fearful of 
being too gracious, he added — " Though I 
can promise you none of them wild-geese 
about the lake." 

" You know I was always happy to be your 
game-keeper," replied Norman mildly,— 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2>23 

" till compelled to take a more sorrowful em- 
ployment. But I hope you will again com- 
mand my services, for I am very idle, and 
have no pleasure so great as fowling." 

" O dear ! — I am only joking," cried Mon- 
tague ; — " but as we are so far from mar- 
kets ." Norman made the necessary re- 
ply, and when they sat down to dinner he had 
the additional pleasure of seeing Miss Sin- 
clair occupy the place of Monimia. 

When the lady withdrew, Montague, as 
usual, turned the conversation to his own af- 
fairs; and while the subject nearest his heart 
hovered on the lips of Norman, he shrunk 
from disclosing his feelings to a being so 
gross and open in his selfishness. 

The smoke of tobacco which so much an- 
noyed Mrs. Montague, was fragrance to 
Miss Sinclair. The drawing-room of Mo- 
nimia had, with laudable economy, been 
converted into a wooUloft ; and the gentle- 
men found her successor in the smoking 
parlour, knitting stockings for Montague as 
busily as if her bread depended on her la- 
bour. 

" Ha ! never a moment idle," cried Mon- 
tague, measuring her work on his own leg ; 



224 CLAN-ALB1N, 

and Norman turned away in disgust from a 
scene of antique tenderness. 

In the beginning of winter Montague had 
been seized with rheumatism, and Miss Sin- 
clair, who was waiting till some good angel 
should trouble the w.aters, flew on the wings 
of love to Dunalbin. 

Montague was formed to be the slave of 
any one who could stoop to govern him ; and 
the arts which the high spirit of Monimia 
disdained, were successfully practised by 
Miss Sinclair. When she had for two 
months 

" Sauced his broth, 
And cut his roots in characters ;" 

watched, and wept, and nursed, and fondled, 
and used all the cajokrie interest dictates to 
cunning, Montague became delighted with 
homage so new, so flattering, and at length 
so necessary ; and kindly invited her to re- 
main mistress of his family ; though he never 
dreamed of marriage. But this was no part 
of Miss Sinclair's plan. She sighed, and 
blushed, and covered her face. Though it 
was death to go she could not remain. When 
sick, and abandoned by his relatives, she had 
been unable to resist the impulse of friend- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 225 

ship. She had sacrificed the decorums of 
her sex, and drawn on herself the malicious 
eyes of the world, &c. &c. &c. 

Montague cared very little for all this, but 
her management, her nursing, and above all, 
her cooking, were nearly indispensible ; — and 
then he was so used to her. Besides he was 
by no means displeased to understand that he 
>vas still young enough to be the hero of a 
tale of scandal j and common decency pre- 
scribed some atonement for the injury done 
to the reputation of the lady. But even to 
the hour of his marriage he was haunted by 
suspicions of design, and was much less the 
dupe of Miss Sinclair's arts than the slave of 
his own appetites and habits. 

Norman would probably have left the castle 
without introducing the subject which led 
him thither, had not Miss Sinclair, with her 
usual fulsome affectation of fondness for Mrs. 
Montague, began to speak of her. Admira- 
bly skilled in the polite art of " speaking dag- 
gers," she gave a very lively account of en- 
tertainments at which Mrs. Montasrue was 
present, of the admiration she met with, 
her expensive dresses, and her love of gay 
society. 



2'26 ' CLAN-ALB1N, 

u Dear creature ! " ended she, — u 'tis no 
wonder her little head is turned, rushing at 
once, from the extreme of obscurity into the 
-» very centre of London dissipation." 

She was then in London, her address was 
still the same, but the task of intruding on her 
gaiety, with the distresses of the friend she 
teemed to have forgotten, became every mo- 
ment more formidable to Norman. When 
about to take leave, he made a desparate ef- 
fort to interest the humanity of Montague, 
and the pin-man glad to hear no demand was 
made on his purse, promised to beg a few 
days from his friend Macpherson. 

Meanwhile Lady Augusta had drawn from 
the Piper (who was not a little vain of the 
coxcing he had given Macpherson) an account 
of the quarrel. She could not torture Hugh 
with hinting lu r fears, in consequence ( f his 
ill-timed zeal, though she apprehended every 
suffering a vengeful and vulgar nature could 
inflict. She wished to prepare Norman for the 
worst that could happen, but he would not lis- 
ten with patience to any expression of the very 
foarshisown fancy was perpetually suggestrn 

" Whatever that wretch were capable of," 
said he, — " would he dare in defiance of pub- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 227 

lie opinion to Oh ! I cannot think of it." 

But when he reflected on the character of 
Macpherson, sprung from the very dregs of 
the people ; originally an errand-boy in the 
kitchen of the Gordons, boasting of wealth, 
acquired in its first stage by the petty savings 
of a cringing waiter, increased by the 
chicane and sordid calculation of one who, 
with the command of a trifling sum of ready 
money, lurks on the watch to seize every ad- 
vantage from necessitous poverty : — when he 
thought of him who never cast his baleful 
eyes on the little possessions of a poor man 
without trying to rob him of his household 
gods and his happiness, — who enjoyed what 
had been the means of life to hundreds of 
exiled Highlanders ; and who, lately appoint- 
ed a magistrate, was now particularly active 
in punishing those ejected vagrants who 
lingered round the scene of their vanished 
joys — all hope fled, and he yielded to mo- 
mentary despair. 

He locked himself into his chamber, and 
with a few transient fears, but a strong hope 
of success, began for the first time to address 
Monimia. His letter was very short, but it 
breathed the eloquence of deep and powerful 



228 CLAN-AL.BIN, 

emotion ; and its lines were blistered with the 
tears of that personal sorrow he durst not 
venture to disclose. When he had given 
this letter to Hugh to convey to the nearest 
post-office, he threw himself on his bed, re- 
volving the many dreadful probabilities his 
fancy painted. All at once it struck on his 
mind that by an uncommon exertion of speed, 
he might reach Glasgow and return before 
the necessary forms of law could enable Mac- 
pherson to execute his threats. He started 
up, resisting the idea of a fruitless journey, 
hastily changed his dress, and having left a 
note for Lady Augusta, ran towards the lake ; 
and before the hour expired, as he rather 
flew than walked, was some miles from the 
home of his infancy. All night he journeved, 
lighted by a brilliant moon, and all the next 
day he never once halted but to slack his 
thirst at some spring, or for the simple re- 
freshment of a draught of milk, pressed on his 
acceptance by some hospitable countryman. 
On the evening of that day it rained very 
hard, and he felt so sleepy and fatigued, that 
he for a moment hesitated on the kind offer 
of a mountain shepherd, who courteouslv in- 
vited him to take his potatoes and milk, and 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 2*29 

straw couch in his clay-built hut. " And 

will men for some idle wager perform such 
wonders, and I, with a motive like mine, be 
thus overcome ?" thought he, and springing 
up, he thanked the good shepherd, and again 
bounded on, almost unconscious of fatigue. 

On the evening of the second day he 
reached the place of destination. He imme- 
diately applied to the unfortunate merchant 
who had unwillingly caused the ruin of Lady 
Augusta; and, after the most provoking de- 
lay, succeeded in getting back the jewels. 
That moment repaid all his sufferings, and 
while the honest bankrupt tried to dispose of 
them, he endeavoured to obtain a short re- 
pose. But Norman could not sleep. The 
dream of broken slumbers represented Lady 
Augusta torn from her family, — dying in 
prison, or Flora shrieking and flying from 
Macpherson. 

When the merchant retnrned, he found him 
up and dressed, impatient to depart. The 
money he had got was considerably less than 
was expected, but he said the bargain was 
not final, and more might be afterwards ob- 
tained. It was more than enough for Mac- 
pherson, and in spite of the entreaties and 

VOL. II. x 



230 ( r,AN-\ijiiN, 

remonstrances of liis new friend, he set off at 
a late hour in the evening. For the first three 
>tages he rode, hut after that no horse could 
he procured, and he pushed en, his Magging 
strength, supported by the cordial hope. 
The sight of the prison, as he passed through 
the county town, lent fresh stimulus to his 
exhausted spirits. For a moment he paused 
to gaze on its walls and grated windows, and 
from the gloomy contemplation caught a new 
impulse of activity. 

Nearly sinking under incredible fatigue, on 
the fourth day Norman reached Glenalhin, 
and found Hugh's skiff moored among the 
rocks which skirted the burying place. While 
his shrill whistle rung among these rocks, the 
Piper was seen hastening down the hill ; and 
half his inquiries and congratulations were 
not made when they landed in Eleenalin. 
His arrival was indeed critical, for on enter- 
ing the house he found Macpherson surround- 
ed by his servants and the officers of the law, 
Flora kneeling at his feet and imploring his 
compassion, Moome in the fixed attitude of 
unutterable despair, and the Lady, borrowing 
strength from misfortune, alternately soothing 
her friends, and struggling to attain the cou- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23 L 

rage which might enable her to submit to her 
fate with the chastened dignity which became 
her character. What a scene was this for 
Norman ! — who, springing forward, snatched 
Flora from her degrading posture, while his 
flaming eye sought an explanation. But he 
already knew all ; and taking from his pocket- 
book the precious reward of unparalleled ex- 
ertion, he tossed the bills to Macpherson, 
haughtily telling him that in a few minutes he 
would be at leisure to speak with him. He 
conducted his female trieuds into another 
apartment, leaving Hugh to do the dishonours 
of the house to the innkeeper. 

The suppressed feelings of Lady Augusta 
now burst forth, and her first-felt weakness 
seemed to fly for protection to the newly dis- 
covered strength of him on whom her age 
was henceforth to repose. " Oh my Nor- 
man ! was not yours a cruel kindness," said 
she, — " still it was kindnesss, and my heart 
triumphs in your goodness." — Flora hung on 
his neck, bedewing him with tears ; while 
Moome vented her powerful feelings in 
mingled sobs, thanksgivings, and blessings. 

It was not for some days, and even until 
this alarming affair was finally settled, that 



*>. 



232 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Norman felt his excessive fatigue, though 
even then he refused to confess it. Stretched 
on a couch in the Lady's little parlour, Hugh 
leaning over him, Flora hovering around, the 
Lady seated by his side, and Moome at hei 
feet, Norman, on this happy evening, forgot 
for a few hours, that Mdnimia had not yet 
written, — that she had heard, with apparent 
indifference of the sorrows of Flora, and the 
threatened sufferings of the Lady. 

" Perhaps she is ill," thought Norman for 
many weeks, but even this agonizing con- 
solation was taken from him ; for after the 
birthday, the morning prims were daily re- 
cording fetes embellished by the presence of 
r he beautiful Mrs. Montague, or announcing 
her arrival in town, or her departure from it. 
— " Glittering before the eye of the public," 
thought he ; — " Is this the delicate retiring 
Monimia, — so jealous of her sex's honour — 
of her own dignity ?" 

The Lady, remarking the strong expre>sion 
of vexation which marked his features as he 
one day hunted after these odious paragraphs, 
inquired if he had met with any bad news. 

" The departure of General for 

Sicily," said he, — " so ends all my hopes of 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 233 

perferment. You see, Lady Augusta, I am 
destined to succeed solely by my individual 
merit ;" he attempted to smile. This was the 
gentleman through whose interest Lady Au- 
gusta hoped to obtain a commission for her 
young friend^ and while she returned the 
smile of Norman she confessed that it seemed 
so ; and to Ins earnest entreaties to be allow- 
ed immediately to join the regiment, as 

a volunteer, she yielded a reluctant consent. 

In the meantime Lady Augusta lost not a 
day in retrenching her expenses, and in con- 
forming her style of living to her now im- 
poverished fortune. Those little personal 
sacrifices, which she performed with cheerful 
alacrity, were bitterly felt by Norman, and 
loudly lamented by Moome, whom the Lady 
in vain attempted to deceive. When Moome 
sorrowfully inquired why she had given up 
the use of wine and tea, and other foreign 
luxuries, she would cheerfully reply : — " Be- 
cause I like a crogan of Maolod ban's milk 
better." But even this compliment to her 
favourite cow could not satisfy the impor- 
tunate affection of Moome ; and running into 
her hut, she brought forth the precious hoard 
— the little sum of many years savings, which 

X 2 



234 CLAN-AT.BIN, 

decent pride had taught her, in common with 
all her race ; to accumulate for the celebra- 
tion of her funeral ; and entreated the Lady, 
if she did not wish to see her die on the spot, 
to accept of it and to use it. 

Lady Augusta well knew the value of this 
sacrifice, and could feelingly appreciate the 
motives which induced it. 

" Who would not welcome the poverty 
which makes such goodness known to them ; 
said she, gently closing the hand of Moome ; 
and she consented to retain the money, and 
to use it when she saw occasion. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 23.5 



CHAP. XXVI 



u Enough f it boots not on the past to dwell, 
Pair scenes of other years a long farewell ! 
Rouse up my soul ! it boots not to repine, 
Rouse up, for wortheir feelings should be thine ;. 
Thy path is plain and straight, that light is given, 
Onward in faith^ and leave the restto Heaven." 



South Ev. 



XT was now the middle of April, and a mild, 
season had rapidly advanced. Already were 
the woods, to which Norman paid many fare- 
well visits, bursting into foliage,, and the shel- 
tered recesses round which he lingered, 
clothed with the primrose, the violet, and the 
snowy blossoms of the wild-strawberry. 

" Who shall gather the fruit of these sweet 
blossoms," thought he ; but the feelings and 
reveries indulged in Glenalbin were heroi- 
cally combated in Eleenalin ; and the day, so 
dreaded by every body, was seen to approach 
with greater composure than might have 
been expected. Hugh's strong inclination to 



230 CLAN-ALBIN, 

have " one skitch of the world, and one speli 
at the French," had long been subdued to the 
necessities of his Lady ; while his divided 
heart vibrated between Eleenalin and his 
young friend, no murmur indicated his 
latent wish ; and when interrogated by the 
Lady, while tears filled his eyes, he indig- 
nantly replied — " Sure you cannot wish that 
I should leave you." 

When the sad morning at last arrived, Nor- 
man rose very early from his sleepless bed, 
and having long wandered over the island, 
returned to a mournful breakfast. That me- 
lancholy constrained cheerfulness, which is 
perhaps more distressing to the feelings than 
indulged grief, was feebly supported on all 
sidfs, till Hugh entering, in a doleful toi 
said, — ?♦ NokV dear, all is- ready." 

" I suppose these are the very words, and 
that the tone used to a criminal going to be ex- 
ecuted," said Flora, forcing herself to be gay ; 
— " And is his horse ferried?" inquired she 
hut riclly. " Yes darling," replied the Piper. 

" My father's mule, which thou mayest 
sell at Salamanca for ten or twelve good pis- 
toles, and live upon the money till thou shalt 
Ve " 



A NATIONAL PALE. 237 

"All! Flora," cried Norman, interrupting 
her ; but when he looked up he perceived 
her swimming eyes and quivering lip. She 
caught his glance, and threw herself sobbing 
into his arms. 

" Bless you ! bless you ! my father's friend, 
and mine own dear friend," cried she, while he 
pressed her to his quick-beating bosom* 

She flew to her chamber, while he flung 
himself before Lady Augusta, exclaiming — 
" When I was a little boy I could not sleep 
without your blessing; — Bless me now, — Oh \ 
my Mother ! — let your blessing go with me, 
and I will go in peace." 

H My blessing rest with thee Norman, my 
dear, dear child !" said she, — " The power of 
the Highest be around thee ! " she bent 
downward, and pressed her lips to his fore- 
head ; he kissed the hands stretched over 
him, and rising in great agitation, left his 
home. 

Flora ran to her window as she heard him 
leave the house, and saw him seated in the 
boat with Moome and the Piper ; and the 
maid-servant beating back his grey-hound, 
which was whining to follow. Anxious to 
spare him this last pang, she called back the 






238 C LAN-ALBIN, 

animal, and seating herself on the floor, 
threw her arms round it, and wept hitterly. 

When they lande i at Dunalbin, Moome 
stopped at the burying-ground to take leave. 
" Should you never see me more you will 
find me here," said she ; and calmly added, 
— " Had it been the will of the Holiest, I 
hoped that you darling, would have laid my 
own head there, between Koban and my 
child ; but it was not good for me !" a single 
tear started to her eye. " Comfort yourself 
for this my dear love, though you are fur 
away I shall not he forgotten, and when I am 
called to your Father and my Father 1 will 
tell your dear Mother how you revered her 
memory, and were a blessing and a joy to all 
that loved you ; — if the power is given me." 

Moome spoke very calmly, but a slight sen- 
sation of terror and awe possessed the mind 
of Norman at the solemn import of this me- 
sane ; he leaned his head on her shoulder, 
and softly repeated — " Tell my dear Mother," 
and after a shuddering pause, he whispered — 
" Now let your prayers follow me, my dear 
kind Moome." 

" My blessings and my prayers, beloved of 
mv heart," cried she, fervently embracing 



A NATIONAL TALE. 239 

him ; and seeing the wandering agitated 
glance he sent round the glen, she hastily ex- 
claimed — u Thus did he look whose name you 
bear, on that sad morning ; — but oh ! — c to the 
stones be it told !' * — not so looked Glenal- 
bin ! — It is the wound of my own heart well 
to remember that day. We were then at a 
shealing at Inishchomhraig (the field of con- 
tests) and the black-spald had seized all the 
cattle of the glen ; — we came all down to old 
Ronald's house in Bealach-nan-creach (the 
pass of spoils) to make the forced fire f, and 
there first heard what I shall never cease to 
remember." 

Moome was now in the vein of lamentation, 
but checking her feelings, she again repeated 
her cordial benediction ; and Hugh, gently 
touching the arm of Norman, led him for- 



* When relating any thing calamitous, instead of a direct 
address to the person with whom they are conversing, the 
Highlanders tell it as an apart, exclaiming—" To the stones 
be it told!"- 

f When the cattle of any district were seized with this 
fatal distemper, the method of cure or prevention was to ex- 
tinguish all the domestic fires, and rekindle them by forced 
fire caught from sparks emitted from the axle of the great 
wool- wheel, which was driven furiously round by the people 
assembled. 



240 CLAN-ALKIN, 

ward. u She will always be talking ot' her 

own death," said the Piper, glancing at the 
saddened countenance of his companion ; — 
<c But I am sure one who has lived so decent 
a life must have a decent departure ; — 
don't sorrow about that dear. — As our own 
Lady says — our people are more occupied 
about how they are to leave this world, than 
how they are prepared to enter the next; — 
though not my aunt Unah — God forbid!" 

Norman could not seem insensible to this 

intended comfort ; he tried to smile and to 
converse ; — but as they slowly proceeded 
down the glen, he often stopped to look 
back, and at length relapsed into total 
silence. 

In the mean time Moome was loitering 
anions: the ruins of the hamlet. In the course 
of the morning she picked up a fairy -hammer, 
and gathered-a four-leaved clover * from one 

* Faity-hammcrs, are pieces of green porphyry, shaped 
like the head of a hatchet, and which were probably vised as 
such before the introduction of iron. They are not unfre- 
.juently found in the isles, and are preserved among other 
relicks with which the Highlanders medicate, or rather charm 
the water they drink, as a remedy in particular diseases. A 
tour-leaved clover in called in Uie Highlands,---" The sham- 
rock of powers, or virtue?." The finder uf cither of these is 
'st< euird very lucky. 



A NATIONAL TALIS. £41 

of those gently swelling and verdant mounds 
called in the language of the country Tvm- 
shee, or the " hillock of fairies." The finder 
of such things is esteemed very fortunate, 
and Moome had a lively faith. Soothed, con- 
fiding, and almost happy, she hastened to 
Eleenalin to impart her good fortune to the* 
Lady. 

" Are they not tokens of good?" said she-; 
— and the Lady lgoked on every thing which 
gave comfort to a tender and afflicted heart, 
not only as a good omen, but a certain bless- 
ing. 

Hugh had resolved to give his young friend 
an escort for fifty or sixty miles, which, with 
true Highland liberality with regard to lati- 
tude and longitude, he reckoned a very trif- 
ling distance. With the local and tradition - 
ary history of the romantic country through 
which they journeyed he had a perfect ac- 
quaintance, and Norman felt no mean plea- 
sure in listening to his stories, rhymes, and 
traditionary anecdotes ; and in beholding the 
wild scenes of those fabulous, but inspiring 
narratives, which had charmed his childhood. 

On the second day of their march they di- 
verged a little from the road to visit the cele- 

VOL. II. Y 



24 J CLAN- ALAIN, 

l)i*ated Glcncoe, — so well known to European 
the scene of unparalleled atrocities — to High- 
landers as a region of wonderful sublimit 
inhabited!)}' a brave and gentle race; who. 
were distinguished, even among the tuneful 
tribes of their poetic country, by superior 
enthusiasm for music, song, dancing, and 
heroic story. 

" How humiliating, that the same Prmce 
who gallantly resolved — ' to see hi^ country 
free, or to die in its last ditch/ — should, at 
least, have sanctioned the monstrous crueltit 
of Glencoe," thought Norman ; — " for the 
eve of St. Bartholomew, or the Sicilian vc 
pers, there was, at least, the excuse — a poor 
one — of mad zeal, and wild enthusiasm ; but 
here cool, cruel, perfidious !" He recollected 
what he had often heard Lady Augusta sav 
of the pernicious influence of the profession 
of arms on human character; and recalled 
a quotation she often repeated. 

" Man in society is like a flow 

Blown in its native bed,'' 6tc. inc. 

Bands leagued " against the charities of do- 
mestic life" were melancholv ideas for a 
young soldier. Norman chose rather to listen 
to Hugh who was zealously whistling that 



A NATIONAL, TALE. 243 

Jacobite air known in the low-country by the 
name of " Awa Whigs awa" as he led for- 
ward the horses ; and to amuse himself by 
translating a rhyme which Hugh had chaunt- 
ed when they entered the glen. It exhibits 
but a faint picture of that night of blood 
which will never be blotted out from the me- 
mory of Highlanders. 

THE MASSACRE OF GLENCOE. 



Broad set the sun o'er wild Glencoe, 
Red gleamed the heights of drifted snow, 
And loud and hoarse the torrent's flow, 

Dashed through the drear domain. 

Bright shines the hearth's domestic blaze, 
The dancer's bound in wanton maze, 
And merry Minstrels tune their lays 

Blythe o'er the mountain reign. 

Yon level sun sinks down in blood, 
Lowering o'er dark ingratitude, 
It warns the guileless and the good, 
Glencoe's wo-fated clan. 

Each smiling host salutes his guest, 
" Good night," . . . that hand so kindly prest 
Shall plunge the dagger in thy breast 
Long ere the orient dawn. 



Ji4 (XAN-ALBIN, 

All's still ! . . . but hark \ from height to heig 
Comes rushing on the breeze of night, 
The startling shriek of wild affright, 
The hoarse assassin yell ! 

Is there no arm on high to save 
From foulest death the trustful brave ! . . . 
. . . Each by his thresh-hold found a trr** , 
Or where be slumbered fell I 

Hcd rose the sun o'er Tone Clencoe, 
fVhat eye shall mark that crimson'd snow, 
What ear shall list the torrent's flow 

Dashing the dreary wild. 

Round sheal and hamltt's she'tering rocK" 
High soars destruction's vol timed smok- , 
But hvuhed the shriek which maddening broke 



■= 



From mother, maiden, child. 

All's still !— ■ save round yon mountain*! hc»4 
'Where men of bU>od the snow-path iitaJ, 
Startling lest voices from the dead 

A deed of hell proclaim. 

Wo ! for thy clan thou wild Glencot ! 
Whose blood dyes deep the mountain sue* ; 
But deadlier bale, and deeper woe 

Glenorchy on thy name. 

On the morning of the third day Norman 
took a melancholy adieu of his last friend, 
and on the evening of the same day, read 
the borders of the Lowlands. He had seen, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 240 

not looked at this country, on his late hasty 
journey ; but now as he finally emerged from 
the mountains, the first glimpse of the region 
of commerce was very favourable ; for it 
comprehended the beautiful vale of Leven, 
and the banks of the Clyde; studded with 
towns, and towers, and villages; rich in all the 
graces of cultivation, and smiling with plenty ; 
while every soft image stole new beauty from 
the sublime back-ground of the distant High- 
lands. 

All his pre-conceived i ieas of the pomp 
and magnificence exhibited by a great city 
were sadly disappointed in Glasgow. It was 
associated in his mind with nothing splendid 
or interesting in story ; and a taste, fashioned 
amid the sublimities of nature, found little 
to admire in the puny efforts of art. 

Yet he was sensible that the fault lay in 
himself, and hastened on saying, — " I shall 
learn to admire fine cities." And when the 
landscape was no longer broken into irregu- 
lar valleys, or bounded by retiring mountains, 
but spread far, far around, in an endless flat 
expanse of tame cultivation, through which 
lagged a dark and lazy river, — " How fa- 
tiguing," he exclaimed, — " eternal hedge- 

y 2 



240 CLAN-ALB IN, 

rows, square-fields, sleek cows, and straigi 
ridges ; — and this is the boasted Lowlands !" 
But in skirting the upland parts of the 
shires of Lanark and Peebles, he again met 
with scenery more agreeable to his most 
cherished associations. Among the pastoral 
hills of Tweedale he again saw the narrow 
vale haunted by its wizard stream ; the un- 
cultured slope, gay with broom and wild- 
flowers, and blossoming furze ; the hill-side 
farm-house, of primitive construction, shel- 
tered and adorned by a tuft of trees, rendered 
conspicuous by surrounding nakedness. But 
he was still more interested in observing 
many little traits of the staid and simple 
manners, and serious and kindly feelings, 
which mark the unniingled low-country 
peasants. To the Poems of Burns, and the 
exquisite descriptions of that excellent man, 
whose least praise was poetical genius — to 
the writings of Grahame, and to the conver- 
sations of liis own tutor, Norman owed a 
more intimate acquaintance with the Lowland 
peasantry than most native Highlanders 
could boast ; and this had produced great re- 
spect for their virtues, and a warm smypathy 
iu their feelings and enjoyments. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 4 247 

It was, when travelling through this upland 
district, that Norman first heard the chime " of 
a church going bell," with the rapturous feel- 
ings that blessed symbol of civilized life, is 
calculated to produce in minds constituted 
like his. Often, during the days in which he 
leisurely wandered through this pastoral 
country, would he dismount on reaching a re- 
mote Kirk-toun, and gaze with soft compla- 
cency on the House of God, and the last 
dwelling of man ; on the scattered hamlet, 
the smithy, the rude shed of the rustic 
carpenter; the — "thrifty house-wife at the 
burn-side green ;" — and the Little children, 
paddling in the mill-stream. And often 
would he listen, with earnest gratified atten- 
tion, to the busy dwelling whence education 
was diffused through the surrounding parish^ 
and *\ith it all that blesses and benefits hum- 
Lie life ; and gives to Scotland its truest, 
proudest superiority. 

These contemplations recalled a dearer 
land, and Norman would wander onward in- 
dulging fairy visions of future happiness; 
for though he seldom built castles, he often 
constructed cottages — aud he peopled them 
too, — they stood in Glenalbin — Highlanders 



248 CLAN-ALBJN, 

were their tenants ; — and Monimia, — she who 
delighted in promoting the happiness of her 
kind, who partook of his own indifference to 
mere ladies and gentlemen — of his own he*- 
nevolence and veneration for the great and 
majestic family of man, — IVIonimia was in 
London, running the hackneyed course of 
fashionable frivolity. However the rever 
of Norman commenced, it was thus they ter- 
minated, and a half-hour of enchantm. nt 
was usually succeeded by a whole one of hard 
riding. 

Norman now descended to a beautiful and 
luxuriant country, and in another day was in 
a new kingdom ; surrounded by unknown 
modes of life, a stranger amoii" strangers. 
Here he saw a wonderful iulhix of "wealth pro- 
ducing many artificial wants; ingenious in- 
dustry bnsiW supplying them, and a degn e 
of accommodation descending to the lowest 
ranks, which he had fancied incompatible 
with conditions so humble. Sometimes too, 
when the spontaneous benevolence of his 
social nature was repelled by the uncouth and 
repulsive manners he perceived, and when 
his native enthusiasm, damped b\ the pre- 
judice, coldness, and suspicion which ew 



A NATTONAL TALK. 249 

where assailed him, a strong sense of forlorn- 
ness, and dissimilitude to all he saw would 
lead him to lament, that what increased the 
external comforts of man should degrade his 
intellectual nature, narrow his capacities, and 
lessen his enjoyments. 

As he looked round on the numerous smoky 
manufactories which rose in this prosiac re- 
gion, and saw every stream polluted hy the 
dirty puddle of some dye-vat or fulling mill, 
and regarded the " Ma?ige-rotis" of the 
plains, as at the warning of a bell they marched 
to labour or refreshment, — a Highland feeling 
of contemptuous pity took possession of his 
mind. — "Man cannot live by bread alone!" 
was his indignant exclamation ; and he recalled 
»ill he had heard of the " division of labour,'* 
and the " Wealth of Nations," with an as- 
perity which succeeding years softened down 
but never removed. 

The evening of this day proved remarkably 
beautiful. Towards sun-set Norman entered 
a narrow lane, winding through steep banks 
shaded by fine trees, among the openings of 
which he caught many transient views of ,a 
rich and charmingly diversified country ; and 



250 C LAN-ALKIN, 

he began to feel that England did contain fine 
landscapes. In a lew minutes he o . -k a 

train of waggons which completely blocked 
up the unsocial path, and as the • ner, 

acting on the principle of Montague, would 
not step aside to permit the king to pass, un- 
less he chose to be agreeable, and evidently 
enjoyed the inconvenience he occasioned a 
person having the appearance of a gentle- 
man ; Norman resolved to make the best of 
his situation, and dismounting, attempted to 
begin a conversation. When the waggoner 
had nee-hoed and Doblnned for some mi- 
mites, without noticing his question, he 
deigned to ansvver, but in so strange a dialect, 
and in so repulsive a tone, that the young 
Highbinder shrunk back, half amazed, and 
half disgusted, at that perversion of mind whit h 
mistakes surly and disobliging manners, and 
fierce defiance, for sincerity and indepen- 
dence of character. While musing on this 
national trait, a middle-aged, desolate look- 
ing woman came up, murmuring a plaintive 
song. It was in the language of Scotland ; 
Norman started with pleased surprise, ami 
listened with deep attention. 



A NATION At, TALE. 2 ■"> 1 

" When I think o' my ain green glen, 
And the hame that anco was mine. 
The salt tear dims my weary e'e, 
And my wae heart 's like to tine. 

O, why think o' my ain green glen, 
Where the biiks bend o'er the burn, 

Or the happy days that I have seen 
For alas, they '11 ne'er return ! 

Sad, sad and weary still I roam, 

I have wandered mony a mi'.e, 
But my heart i? in my father's home 

Maug the hills of dear Argyle. 

Now a wide wide world is a' before, 

And a wider roaring sea, 
But the farther I roam from my father's home 

The dearer it seems to me. 

The feelings expressed by this rude song, 
were very congenial to those which now 
swelled the heart of Norman, and he kindly 
greeted this poor wanderer in her native lan- 
guage. A sudden gleam of joy brightened 
her emaciated features, while she exclaimed 
in Gaelic — " Macalbiu's come home ! — Do I 
indeed see a countryman ?"* 

And a clansman," cried Norman, spring- 



<c 



* The common exclamation of surprise used by the people 
«f Mull still is, " Maclean's come home," though that clan 
ha9 long bad no chief. 



252 CLAN-ALKIN, 

ing forward, and catching her hand with joj 
equal to her own ; for the exclamation she 
used declared her kindred. The waggoner 
now fairly stopped his horses, and addressing 
Norman said, — " If so be master as how you 
want to pass do it now, as the honest woman 
will be passing at any rate." Norman re- 
spected the motive of this tardy and churlish 
kindness, and he thanked the blunt waggoner, 
who replied to hi* acknowledgments by say- 
ing, — " It made no odds, as the woman was 
passing at any rale." 

This forlorn woman was a poor widow who 
had formerly lived in Glenalbin. As her 
family was large she had not been able to 
cross the Atlantic with her neighbours, and 
at the time of the emigration she had gone 
to a cotton-mill in the Lowlands. When Nor- 
man had answered her numerous questions, 
he ventured to inquire for her children ; some 
of them had been his play-fellows. 

" Ah !" cried this unhappv mother, burst- 
ing into tears, — " you know not what I lost 
in losing my share of Dnnalbin. You know- 
how the first years of my time of suffering 
were spent : — how much I endured, how hard 
I I toiled, — -but my children w ere with in*, and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 253 

I was happy, — I was so for some years after I 
came to this : but they grew up among the 
crowd of yon mill, without the benefits of edu- 
cation, and corrupted by evil example. My 
youngest son fell in Holland ; his brother, who 
bore the name of his father — my dear Donald!— 
returned blind from Egypt. My daughters — 
would that they too had died !" The poor 
woman wept the conclusion of her Gaelic sto- 
ry, and Norman shared the grief he knew not 
how to console. When he spoke of Glenal- 
bin, it reminded her of past happiness ; when 
of America, she lamented that her children 
had not been able to accompany their friends, 
that, like them, they might still have enjoyed 
the pride and the peace of. virtue. 

The evening was now far advanced ; and 
Norman, compelled to seek a shelter for the 
night, shared his slender purse with his clans- 
woman, and received her eloquent thanks and 
adieus. He who had ever been approached 
with courteous frankness and respectful inte- 
rest, — who had ever been accustomed to reci- 
procate friendly greetings, and all the name- 
less kindnesses of polished life, — was peculiarly 
vulnerable to the offensive roughness, or chil- 
ling reserve ,of the people he now encounter- 
ed ; and he gnsjed after Morag, exclaiming, 

VOL, 11. 7. 



254 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" Ah, when shall I again be greeted by the 
graceful and heart-cheering felicitations of 
my beloved country, when soothed by its lin- 
gering and tender adieus I" 

This period was not so distant as Norman 
then imagined - 9 for, on reaching the town 
where he understood the regiment he meant 
to join was quartered, he learned that it had 
just been ordered to Ireland, — a kindred land. 
This was a misfortune for which he easily con- 
soled himself; and accordingly, having cross- 
ed the country to Liverpool, he sold his horse, 
and took a passage to Dublin in a merchant 
vessel. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25J 



CHAP. XX VII. 



I saw Gaul in his armour, and my soul was mingled with 
his, for the fire of battle was in his cyej. 

OSSIAN. 

An extensive encampment was to be formed 
during the summer in the south-west of Ire- 
land ; and when Norman landed in Dublin, he 
found that the regiment he sought had already- 
gone thither. He followed it ; and his social 
nature, which had languished in the chilling 
climate of English inns and manufacturing 
towns, was again refreshed and invigorated 
amid the smoky warmth of .the mud cabins of 
Ireland. Here he found the same language, 
the same manners, the same graceful frank- 
ness, and open-hearted hospitality^ that dis- 
tinguished his native land The resemblance 
was striking, but it was not complete. The 
sterile hills and gloomy valleys of the High- 
lander had never tempted the rapacity of the 



256 CLAN-ALBJX, 

stranger. " lie dwelt among his own people, y> 
under the fostering protection of that recog- 
nized and patriarchial leader it was his pride 
to aggrandize, and his privilege to obey ; — no 
unknown tongue grated on his ear;--ne\ 
had the rites of a strange faith usurped the 
place of his national worship ; — nor had fo- 
reign domination roused the fierce passions of 
his nature, and inflamed a spirit keenly aiive 
to kindness and to unkindness : — and the 
Highlander was wiser and mere gentle than 
the Irishman, only because he had been U 
unfortunate. 

On a tine evening in the latter end of May, 
Norman reached the encampment. It extend- 
ed for some miles along a level sea-shore, on 
which the soldiers were now performing the 
exercises. A green plain, mettled with srbitc 
rents, gay with banners and pennons, and 
groups of females, and of military, formed a 
very animating picture; and as Norman ap- 
proached, his heart throbbed faster and faster. 
The regularity of the evolutions, performed 
throughout the far-extended line, next at- 
tracted his attention ; and the perfection of 
discipline, which pervaded * very d< partmeofe, 
filled him with pleased astonishment. Hi' 



A NATIONAL TALE. 257 

to he had heard only the rolling of drums and 
the firing of musquets ; but now a full regimen- 
tal band struck up, and that inspiring march, 
" In the garb of Old Gaul," burst forth in a 
tide of overwhelming harmony, and awakened 
all his patriotic enthusiasm. It was the first 
time he had ever heard military music ; and as 
he advanced along the line in a kind of mea- 
sured step, the beating of his heart increased 
almost to suffocation, and his tears burst forth 
in an agony of pleasure. At length the music 
ceased; and, heartily ashamed of his inflam- 
mable fancy and unintelligible feelings, Nor- 
man began to think of the future. Perceiv- 
ing a very soldier-like young man, in the dress 
of an officer, walking near him, he approach- 
ed, and begged to know where he might find 

the colonel of the regiment. The officer 

answered with much civility, and also said, that 
as he was walking that way, he would do him- 
self the pleasure to point out the tent. As they 
went forward together, they discovered that 
they were from the same country ; and the 
young officer ventured to inquire if Norman 
was the new ensign they expected from Scot- 
land. A feeling of mortification seized the 
mind of the young candidate for arms, as he 

z 2 



258 CLAN-ALBIN, 

rrplied, " I am not so fortunate; I mean to 
offer myself as a volunteer in his regiment, if 
Colonel Grant will accept of me." — " A vo- 
lunteer for glory !" exclaimed the other, with a 
smile half incredulous and half satirical; but 
Norman looked so grave, that he added, "You 
do well to join the ranks, if you wish for the 
society of gentlemen. I have at present the 
honour of serving under the son of a tailor, 
and of seeing in the ranks the only son of an 
Irish chief." This young man had an appear- 
ance of manly frankness, which found ready 
access to the heart of Norman ; and he ven- 
tured again to speak on the subject round 
which his mind was ^fluttering. " If vou are 
really resolved, and anxious to be accepted as 
a volunteer, I am the very man to do your bu- 
siness. Were General here, he would be 

so rejoiced to hear that the age of chivalry is 
not quite gone, and that something is left on 
earth to resemble himself, that you would be 
received with enthusiasm ; but mv uncle, Lieut. 
Col. Grant is the stiffest old soul alive. Unless 
you can shew a line from your father and your 
mother, your old aunts, and the parish minis- 
ter, stating that they do not forbid the banns 
between, whom ? — " Norman Macalbin,' 1 said 
Norman, smiling,—" Norman Macalbin and 



A NATIONAL TALE. 25Q 

Dame Glory, he will have nothing to do with 
you, believe me." Norman briefly informed 
his companion that his intention was approve 
ed by his friends, and that his situation deter- 
mined his choice, not of the military profes- 
sion, but of the rank he must for some time 
hold in the army. He then hesitated, his heart 
swelled, and he added, in a faultering voice, 
"The sentiments by which I am actuated must, 
to my own mind, dignify my obscure rank." 
The young officer felt for what he imagined 
the pride of fallen greatness : He said some- 
thing kind and complimentary, and added, 
•' Had you not best stop till I speak to my 
uncle. It might put you to your blushes you 
know, to hear all I have to say in your favour." 
Norman gladly consented to this considerate 
arrangement; and he had not walked many mi- 
nutes before the tent, when he was rejoined by 
his new acquaintance, who immediately intro- 
duced him to the colonel of the regiment. This 
was an elderly, keen, rigid-looking man, who 
examined the young stranger with a degree of 
worldly earnestness which made the colour 
deepen in his clieeks ; but quickly averting his 
eyes, the colonel apologised for his rudeness, 
by a compliment to the handsome figure of his 
young counLryman, whom he afterwards re- 



26b CLAN-ALBIN, 

ceived with the most flattering politeness. 
Highland imaginations have still some myste- 
rious idea of inseparable union between lofty- 
stature and a commanding character, strength 
of body and generosity of soul ; and the small 
share of imagination that Colonel Grant had was 
quite Highland. The hero of the multitude is 
indeed generally six feet high. Colonel Grant 
had a paternal pride in the size and beauty of 
his officers and soldiers, and a very imperfect 
conception of that intellectual superiority 
which places in the mind of one man the force 
and the fortunes of thousands. He was therefore 
highly pleased with this new acquisition. After 
a few minutes of general conversation, he re- 
commended the stranger to the care of his ne- 
phew, and informed him, that on the ensuing 
day a person would wait on him to instruct 
him in the duties of his profession. 

Norman was charmed with this termination 
of what had weighed so heavily on his mind, 
and he warmly thanked his new acquaintance, 
Captain Drummond, for his good offices, as 
they retired together. This young man made 
a polite reply, and added, " The old hero did 
did not ask us to sup with him. He is oblig- 
ing enough to consider my weariness of the 
talkee, talkce^i his lieutenants; and my anxiety 



A NATIONAL TALE. 261 

to hear how the Highland hills and the High- 
land lasses are looking. I hope you will not 
be less kind r" — Thus invited, Norman attend- 
ed Captain Drummond to his tent ; and in a 
conversation of four hours the young men made 
very great progress towards intimacy. He 
found the young officer polite, animated, and 
friendly, fond of his profession, and full of 
pleasing recollections of their common coun- 
try. 

When they parted, Norman added a few 
lines to his Eleenalin journal, and on this night 
slept more soundly than he had done since he 
had left his home. 

Next morning, as he walked about the en- 
campment, he found himself the object of 
general attention ; and half ashamed, half of- 
fended, at the scrutiny he underwent from the 
officers of the different regiments scattered 
around, he was about to return to his tent, 
when he was accosted by Captain Drummond. 
" Do you know, 1 ' cried the latter, after the 
compliments of the morning, " that though 
but a dozen hours in the camp, you are already 
the occasion of as many bets, and, for aught I 
know, of as many challenges. We are dying 
to know what the devil you are, or where the 
deuce you come from. Whether the Count 



202 CLAN-ALBIN, 

-, or one of the French princes, — the son ot 



a royal duke, — or a descendant of the man with 
the iron mask. My uncle says, mysteriously 
enough, that he is not quite sure himself. One 
tiling we all know, and that is, you are no fit 
associate for us, so keep your own counsel, and 
no one will venture to intrude upon you. Bred 
in the armv as I have been, I have small merit 
in being acquainted with the composition of a 
a mess-room. Though it is somewhat singu- 
lar that a man clothed in scarlet, and trained 
to glory, should be a little minded un manner- 
ed creature, such wonders are daily to be seen. 
Let me therefore beg of you to allow us the 
pleasure of discovering who you are, without 
at all assisting our conjectures." 

Every species of deception was painful to 
the mind of Norman, and he was about to pro* 
test against this tacit deceit, when a party 
of officers lounged up, arm in arm, who were 
evidently examining the graceful stranger 
with respectful but anxious attention. Drum- 
niond immediately bowed very low, and res- 
pectfully took leave, while with an air of vexed, 
displeasure Norman slightly returned his bow. 

" Pon my soul, my doubts are solved," cried 
one, " see with what hauteur he treats Drum- 
mond. He is a man of the first rank, depend . 



A NATIONAL TALE, 263 

'upon it; and I believe you'll allow that I know 
a little of these matters." Norman overheard 
this affected whisper as he passed. It was in- 
deed intended for his ear. His cheek flushed 
with shame and confusion, and turning hastily 
round, he exclaimed, " Gentlemen let me beg 
of you to believe that I am exactly what I seem, 
a Scotish Highlander, — a soldier of fortune, — 
for such is the simple truth." He slightly 
touched his hat and moved on ; while Drum- 
mond and his thunderstruck companions bow- 
ed profoundly, almost overwhelmed with the 
unexpected honour done them, and each vow- 
ing that he had never presumed to form a dif- 
ferent opinion, though each was now perfectly 
convinced that the new volunteer was a person 
of very great distinction. 

The belief continued for some time to dis- 
tress Norman and delight Captain Drummond, 
who enjoyed the double pleasure of quizzing 
his brother officers, and saving, as he fancied, 
the pride of his countryman. Wherever Nor- 
man went, the glance and whisper of curiosity 
followed, till at length he al most confined him- 
self to his tent. When Captain lJtrummond 
was interrogated, he always answered, " Let me 
beg of you to believe he is just what he seems, 
*— a soldier of fortune." "Well to be sure 



264 CLAN-ALBIN, 

that is one proof," said the major of the regi* 
merit; "hut after all would a man of such rank 
live as he does, without servants or horses ; 
with the fare and accommodations of a common 
soldier, — 'tis damned strange." — " My dear 
major," replied Drummond, " I could have 
forgiven one of these raw lads such an obser- 
vation, but a man of your knowledge in the 
world and standing in the service, fie, fie ; ac- 
quainted too as you are with the history of the 
Alexanders and the Caesars, the Czars and 
the Charleses, to wonder at a hero following 
their steps." 

The major was pleased to think that his 
standing in the service gave him a right to 
know,by intuition, all that human sagacity can 
discover. He remarked that he had been the 
first to find out that Macalbin was not what lie 
spelt himself, and Drummond readily conced- 
ed this honour. The major bowed lower and 
lower, whenever he casually met the soldier of 
fortune beyond the precincts of the camp ; 
Drummond laughed louder and louder; and 
Norman became convinced that it was as welt 
to join in the laugh, since bad humour did bin 
no good. 

This foolish jest lasted till Sir Archibald 
Gordon, whose regiment was attached to the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 26S 

encampment, came to Ireland, and divulged 
the mighty secret, by declaring the young vo- 
lunteer an over-educated adventurer from his 
estate in the Highlands. The good-natured 
among the officers enjoyed another laugh at 
the discovery of their own credulity, and Nor- 
man easily consoled himself for the altered 
looks of the mortified and the sullen. 

The general officers belonging to the en- 
campment were most rigid disciplinarians^ and 
their proximity had excited a spirit of rival- 
ship which made the camp-duty very severe; 
and which completely banished the idleness 
and frivolity that is too often found in such 
situations. The soldiers were usually in the 
field with the rising sun, and it often went 
down before they had quitted arms. 

Norman entered on the business of his new 
profession, with all the enthusiasm for excel- 
lence which marked his character; and though 
he was often tempted to think the toil he un- 
derwent useless and vexatious, he was compel- 
led to acknowledge that it had the happy ef- 
fect of banishing, for the time, those gloomy re- 
collections and perplexing doubts which too 
often haunted his mind. 

The letters he from time to time received 
from Eieenalin possessed a soothing charm ; 
vol. II. A a 



166 CLAN-ALBTN, 

and little anecdotes of Moome, Flora, the Pi- 
per, and even the grey- hound, were perused 
with the delighted interest those only can 
feel who have wandered from the pleasures of 
a happy and far-distant home. Lady Augus- 
ta had not yet heard from Monimia ; but she 
had that just confidence in herself, and in those 
she honoured with her friendship, which for- 
bade all doubt or anxiety. " We do not de- 
serve to be neglected," said she, in writing to 
Norman. " Monimia is herself too amiable 
to forget Eleenalin ; but we must allow for 
some slight abatement of enthusiasm ; we must 
give her time to call us to memory, — in her 
heart we shall always dwell." 

Norman endeavoured to think in the same 
manner ; and, during the first part of that long, 
long, though busy summer, he heroically strug- 
gled against enfeebling recollections ; and in the 
leisure afforded him by the indulgent kindness 
of Captain Drummond, applied, with great per- 
severance, to studies connected with his pro- 
fession. About this time, his kind friend was 
ordered away on the recruiting service, and 
Colonel Grant went to attend a trial in an- 
other part of the island : — a trial most inte- 
resting to military persons, and most afflicting 
in its terrible consequences, not only to the 



A NATIONAL TALE. 26? 

family of the gallant officer whose fate it in- 
volved, but to the whole army, as well as to the 
population of the Highlands of Scotland. 

The absence of these gentlemen proved 
critical to Norman ; for at this time an event 
took place which was to colour his future des- 
tiny. 

Every person acquainted with the two coun- 
tries must have remarked a strong resemblance 
between a certain class of old Irish families- 
and those families to whom Scotland owes her 
bravest officers : — both are alike poor, gallant, 
well-born, and possessed of the pride of birth* 
Young Irishmen of this description formerly 
found honourable employment in the service 
of foreign princes ; but these times were gone, 
and lamentable prejudices had now fated them 
to an inactivity as pernicious to themselves as 
alarming to their country. While the High- 
lander entered life with the most inspiring 
hopes, and directed the energies of youthful 
ambition to the promotion of his country's 
welfare, mutual distrust and aversion condemn- 
ed the unfortunate Irishman to find happiness 
in carousing with the ragged peasants who ac- 
knowledged his imaginary superiority ; to em- 
ploy his talents in cultivating the arts of vul- 
gar popularity j and to place his ambition in 



208 CLAN-ALB1X, 

beading brawls at fairs and funerals. Nothing 
but wisdom and conciliation can, for any 
length of time, be " retentive of the strencr 
of spirit;" and itjs not very surprising if such 
persons sometimes displayed their prowess in 
enterprises even more desperate than beating 
excisemen and tythe farmers, and carrying oft' 
young women. 

Roderick Bourke lived in the province of 
Connaught, in a decayed house, which, by the 
courtesy of Ireland, was called Castle-Bourke. 
The heir to a barren sceptre, he was accustom- 
ed to hear himself addressed by his loving kerne 
in a style which the Heralds' office decrees to 
a very different person. The same devoted 
people had often ventured life and limb in his 
service; and Roderick, who had the true spirit 
of an Irish prince, could not, in requital, do 
less than spend his last acre in regaling them 
with whiskey and tobacco. Roderick died, af- 
ter a short and tumultuous, but, on the whole, 
a glorious reign, and was splendidly buried by 
voluntary contribution ; and his only son, whose 
immediate ancestors had been general officers 
in the service of all the catholic princes in 
Europe, was now a private soldier in the regi- 
ment of Sir Archibald Gordon. 

This young Irishman had entered the nrm-y 



A NATIONAL TALE. 26Q 

at the age of seventeen 5 in three quarters of 
the globe he had proved his bravery ; he was 
now in his twenty -seventh year, and in all the 
pride and strength of manhood. Gaiety of tem- 
per, drollery of manner, genuine Irish humour, 
and an exquisite talent for mimicluy, extending 
to mind as well as manner, rendered him the 
favourite of the whole camp. The drunken 
sailor, swaggering officer, strutting martinet, 
and awkward recruit, of Phelim Bourke, were 
the highest comic treat to the soldiers, who 
gathered round him ; and the officers of the 
different regiments, when over their wine, of- 
ten sent for this graceful buffoon, delight- 
ed with his jovial chanson a boire, and the sin- 
gular brilliancy of his repartee. Phelim also 
played finely on several instruments, and in 
manly exercises excelled all his companions. 
These fine qualities were all heightened by a 
warm and open spirit of military comradeship, 
and set off to the best advantage by a figure 
uncommonly handsome, even in Ireland, a 
gay, gallant air, and a countenance so intelli- 
gent, in its saucy archness, that no one could 
look on it without being. tempted to smile, even 
at its quietest expression. Every man was the 
friend of Phelim, and Phelim was the friend 
of every Irishman ; every woman admired 

A a 2 



270 CLAN-ALBIX, 

" handsome Bourke," and Phelim adored the 
whole sex. 

Such did Phelim Bourke appear to the dull- 
est observer whom his wit quickened or hi* 
gaiety enlivened. But to the watchful scrutiny 
of Macalbin, he presented something far more 
striking: — a mind of the loftiest order, dally- 
ing with its own conscious powers, and mock- 
ing at its petty purposes, — hanging loose on 
life, — and turning, in half-affected scorn, from 
that high prize of virtuous achievement, which 
it despaired of attaining. Norman could per- 
ceive, that the laughing Carlini of the camp 
had very serious moments ; at which times he 
treated those who depended for amusement on 
his wit or his scenic excellence, with caprice 
equal to any spoiled actress of them all. It 
could not be doubted, but that, with the blood 
of his ancestors, he inherited that proud hate 
which, for centuries, they had cherished against 
those whom boyish folly had made his mas- 
ters ; — circumstances alone could reveal whe- 
ther this principle was extinguished, or only 
smothered in his bosom. But, in his darkest 
moods, if the trumpet sounded, or woman 
smiled, the intruding phantoms fled, and glory 
and gaiety reclaimed their slave. 

The cureless laugh of this young Irishman. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 271 

and his frank and graceful salutation, had ever 
been peculiarly exhilirating to the spirits of 
Norman, for whom he performed many little 
offices of kindness, and whom he treated with 
all the respect a nature so gay and familiar 
could shew to any one, especially since he un- 
derstood that Norman was neither a prince of 
the blood nor of the half blood, but, like him- 
self, " an unfortunate gentleman." They spent 
many of their leisure hours together with much 
pleasure, and some improvement. 

At this time there was a little black-eyed 
girl, a kind of toast among the heroes of the 
camp, to whom Phelim was paying his devoirs, 
and who had also attracted the regards of his 
colonel. That a soldier should presume to ri- 
val his colonel, was a thing almost unexam- 
pled in military annals, and for sometime Sir 
Archibald was lost in astonishment. But when 
Phelim, though well apprised of the intentions 
of his superior, shewed no inclination to give 
up the pursuit, a favourite serjeant was sent 
to admonish him of his duty. Phelim would 
not believe that the articles of war forbade him 
to make love to'Dora Tracey ;— so he laughed 
at the messenger, ridiculed the message, and 
was more than ever determined on conquest. 
Sir Archibald was equally resolved. His va- 



272 CLAY-ALfrltf, 

nity, and other bad passions, were now power- 
fully excited ; from a lover by proxy he con- 
descended to woo in person ; and both officers 
and soldiers anxiously watched the progress of 
the contending rivals. 

Nature and habit had conspired to ac- 
complish Phelim for enterprizes of this kind ; 
— his gallantry had ever been found resistless, 
but he now also contended for the honour of 
victory, — and he proved the happy conqueror. 
Phelim was not altogether insensible to his 
triumph ; some of the officers ventured to ral- 
ly Sir Archibald on his disappointment ; and 
all saw the tempest grow darker and darker 
round the head of the thoughtless soldier. 

A portentous week passed over; and Phelim, 
who neither foresaw nor dreaded danger, had for- 
gotten every hostile feeling, and even the oc- 
casion of animosity. On a fine summer's even- 
ing, he sat by the door of his tent, with some 
of his comrades, gaily tossing off bumpers to 
t( Love and war," and carolling his last new 
song : 

** Such is the love of a true Irishman, 

That he loves all the lovely, he loves all he can r 
With bis slips of sbilelahj" &c. 



A NATIONAL TALE. 273 

Sir Archibald happened to pass. It was the 
anniversary of the battle of ; and the offi- 
cers had taken a holiday to themselves, and 
given a fete to as many of the soldiers as had 
been engaged in that affair. Sir Archibald 
knew nothing about this battle ; but he felt his 
heart boiling with ungovernable rage against 
Piielim Bourke, whom he instantly assailed 
with a torrent of military rhetoric, command- 
ing him to remove from the spot where he sat, 
and threatening punishment for the excess he 
had already committed. Phelim disdained to an- 
swer; and some of the men having explained the 
occasion of the festivity, Sir Archibald thought 
proper to walk on. "I see I'm a prodigious fa- 
vourite," said Phelim, smiling scornfully, and 
continuing his song. In a few minutes the drum 
beat for evening parade, and Phelim hastened 
to his place. He had been under arms all the 
morning; the day had been remarkably sultry, 
and he was still warm and fatigued. When 
standing at ease, as it is called, Phelim took 
off his grenadier cap, and began to fan him- 
self ; and as he (vas expected to do nothing like 
sober people, in performing this operation he 
displayed all the coquetry and languishing airs 
of an affected lady. Sir Archibald Gordon was 
now walkingalongthe line, and the moreenrag- 



274 CLAN-ALBIN, 

r 

ed that he durst not vent his anger ; he sternly 
commanded the soldier to put on his cap, en- 
forcing his command with the usual accompa- 
niment of oaths, and Phelim oheyed ; but, still 
supporting his assumed character, threw in- 
to his fine features so exquisite an expression 
of mawkish languishment, that his compa- 
nions burst into stifled laughter. This was 
throwing the last drop into the cup of Sir Ar- 
chibald's wrath. Transported with mingled 
anger and mortification, he repeatedly struck 
the soldier, while, as fast and as coherently as 
he could, he cursed what he was pleased to call 
" his damned Irish impudence/' It was not 
easy for Bourke to bear a national reflection 
from this man ; yet he stood with the coolest 
indifference till he saw himself struck a second 
time. Phelim was a saucy privileged offender; 
his birth and his fascinating qualities had al- 
most dispensed him from the slavish subordi- 
nation of a soldier. He still, however, moved 
neither limb nor tongue to defend himself;, 
but, with a look of withering contempt, slight- 
ly blew on his arm, as if tc pull away the 
puny stroke. The full force of that emphatic 
look fell on the exasperated spirit of the baro- 
net, and again he furiously showered his blows 
on the soldier. Phelim had great command of 



A NATIONAL TALE. 275 

temper ; he also knew the pains and penalties 
of his condition ; yet thus provoked, he haugh- 
tily bowed to Sir Archibald, saying, " Thank 
you, brave Sir ; this is the more generous, as 
you well know I cannot pay you back these 
eight good years." The rage of Sir Archibald 
was, if possible, redoubled ;— he rushed upon 
the soldier ; and Bourke being a large and very 
powerful man, grasped him firmly in his arms, 
threw him down, and spurned him with his 
foot! 

The officers immediately gathered round ; 
Phelim was surrounded, disarmed, and escort- 
ed to prison by a guard of Englishmen, and 
followed by many of his countrymen. 

" What has he done, Pat Leary ?— * What has 
he done ?" was the universal cry. " What the 
<levil has he done, think ye ?" answered the 
Irishman who was following Phelim : " Sure it 
was no great matter to forget he was an Eng- 
lish soldier and remember he was an Irish gen- 
tleman." — " But, Bourke, they say you put off 
your Irish impudence to the Colonel," cried 
another soldier.* " Pray what sort of impu- 
dence may that be ?" — " Pat will tell you, v re- 
plied Phelim, " he has had most experience." 
" Aye, do tell us," cried all the soldiers, laugh- 
ing aloud.— " Is it me?" said Pat; "Why, 



276 CLAN-ALBIN, 

faith, I fancy it's much the same as your Scot" 
ish soberness, and not very different from your 
English sincerity.''' — " Right, Paddy !" cried 
Phelim, smiling in his turn. " All national 
virtues ! Poor Ireland has her impudence ! 
Well, England calls her sister ; — the sister 
kingdom !" 

Pat, who had been anxiously watching his 
opportunity, pressed up to Phelim as they 
drew near the prison door, whispering, " Pnel- 
im, jewel, if you would take leg-bail for it now, 
we make you as welcome as ever you was to 
your mother's milk — White be the place 
of her rest ! By the holy — its ourselves would 
compass our ould shister's boys, and by the 
same token we have done it before. Don't 
ye mind them." Phelim thanked his country- 
man, buthe scorned to fly ; and besides, he had 
more good principle than to purchase his 
own safety by the horror and blood which so 
wild a scheme might have occasioned to its 
good hearted though inconsiderate projectors. 
When they had seen him lodged in prison, they 
gave him a farewell cheer, in which they were 
joined by both the Scotish and English sol- 
diers, to the great joy of Pat Leary, and the 
infinite indignation of Sir Archibald Gordon. 
Bourke was a great and general favourite 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2?7 

but in a military court the colonel of a re- 
giment must needs be fearful odds against 
a private soldier. Anxiously, therefore, did 
Norman await the return of Colonel Grant and 
his nephew. 

But they were both very distant, — and the 
sentence of a general court-martial condem- 
ned Bourke to expiate his offence by suffer- 
ing five hundred lashes ! His cheerful and 
manly spirit was at first completely overwhelm- 
ed by the idea of an ignominious punishment ; 
he reminded the court of his birth, — he plead- 
ed for honourable death. But he soon appeared 
to have recovered his customary gaiety ; and 
when Norman visited him in prison, on theeven- 
ingafterhis trial and previous to his suffering,he 
found him gaily whistling, and caricaturing Sir 
Archibald Gordon, who atthismoment was seen 
from the window exercising the drum-boys in 
flogging a large stone. He was working on the 
prison walls with a piece of red chalk, which 
he had ingeniously fixed in his handcuffs ; the 
figures he had sketched possessed great spirit 
and force of expression, and the explanatory 
sentences all the point of Phelim's wit when 
in his happiest vein. 

" You are an universal genius, Bourke," 
said Norman, looking with sincere admiration 

VOL. II. b b 



27& clan-albix, 

on this bold caricature : " But this display of 
your talents will do no good, so you must 
pardon me if I efface it ;" and he began to rub 
out the lines with his handkerchief, while Phel- 
im looked on smiling. " Mr Macalbin," said 
he, at length, in a grave and earnest tone, 
" you are most kind ; I have ever found you all 
the soldier and the gentleman, and with my 
whole heart I love and honour you. Were it 
not for these damned bracelets," and he clash- 
ed his handcuffs together, " I hope you would 
permit me, condemned as I am, to shake your 
hand, and to bid you think kindly of me, when 
all is over with me !" Norman clasped the 
fettered hands within his own, saying, "That 
shall not thwart our purpose." He perceived 
the sunny eyes of Phelim glisten for a mo- 
ment, — but he again began to whistle with his 
usual thoughtless hilarity ; and Norman ven- 
tured to allude to his punishment. " I am not 
only happy, but proud to see you bear yourself 
so manfully," said he; " You know how much 
you are beloved, — you may count on every pos- 
sible indulgence." Phelim made an involun- 
tary start, — his features changed with fearful 
celerity, and he replied, u Ye*, I know that I am 
beloved, — I have a stout heart too, — yet many 
a stouter has dishonour broken, — mine, I trust, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2JQ 

will bear me out bravely," — and he struck 
his fettered hand on the seat of that manly 
heart ; and then, as if ashamed of his" emotion, 
added laughing, " I am sometimes obliged to 
knock it up, and to ask it how it does." 

In a few minutes Norman left him ; and 
when locked up for the night he was still 
whistling and caricaturing. 

Next morning Norman heard with indes- 
cribable concern, that Phelim had attempted 
suicide during the night, by opening the jugu- 
lar vein, but that he had been discovered, and 
that strong hopes were entertained of his reco- 
very. Night and day he was watched in his 
cell, and he did recover. 

At this time Colonel Grant returned to the 
camp, much dispirited by the result of the trial 
on which he had been witnessing. Norman 
knew his abhorrence of that horrid species of 
punishment, which is alike disgraceful to those 
who decree and to those who suffer, and he 
ventured to plead for Phelim, as he knew a 
second court-martial was to be held, at which 
the Colonel was, likely to be present. Colonel 
Grant knew the temper of Sir Archibald 
Gordon too well to give Norman much hope ; 
he also knew that vulgar minds cannot sepa- 
rate the idea of authority from the person in 



280 CLAN-ALBIN, 

whom it is vested. To render the one con- 
temptible was to degrade the other. " Poor 
Bourke must suffer,' 1 said he ; and Norman 
withdrew in bitterness of spirit. 

On the day of the second trial, he hovered 
round the tent in which it was held, with Phe- 
lim's young mistress and her father, a veteran 
serjeant belonging to his own regiment. 
When Colonel Grant left the court, the old 
man accosted him, saying : " Is tnere any hope 
for that poor fellow?"—" None, Tracey, 
none 1" cried the Colonel in great agitation : 
" We have ordered him an additional hundred 
for his second sally,"— and he hastily passed 
on. The poor girl fell into the arms of her 
father ; and Norman hastened to the sea-shore 
to vent his feelings in solitude. 

Phelim was now declared able to bear the 
punishment he would have died a thousand 
deaths to avoid ; and as the day drew near, 
Colonel Grant sent him a private message by 
Norman, bidding him be of good heart, as his 
punishment would be very lenient. " Does 
he think it is pain that / fear ?" cried Phelim, 
indignantly tearing open his waistcoat, and 
exposing his honourable scars. When this was 
reported to Colonel Grant, his features suffer- 
ed a sudden contraction 5 and when the hour ar» 



A NATIONAL TALE. 231 

rived which was to expose the lacerated shoul- 
ders of Phelim to the eyes of his countrymen, 
the Colonel contrived to be absent himself, 
though he could not extend the same kind- 
ness to Norman. He was compelled to at- 
tend. He saw the man, for whom his soul was 
ill agony, brought out, heavily ironed, more 
dead than alive, and brutally stripped to un- 
dergo the most horrid of punishments. Nothing 
could make him witness more of this revok- 
ing spectacle. He closed his eyes, but he still 
heard the soldiers muttering around him, — 
u That is the wound he got in Egypt," said one. 
" I tell you no," whispered another, u it is the 
sabre cut he got defending the colours at Mai- 
da." Though sights of this kind are unfortu- 
nately but too common to be much regarded, 
an awful stillness marked the strong sensation 
experienced by every individual in the little 
army when the signal was at last given, and 
when the leaden bullet * which he indignantly 
rejected, was offered to Phelim Bourke. A 
death-like coldness crept through the veins of 
Norman ; he leaned heavily on his musquet ; — 

* In suffering this punishment, a leaden bullet is kept in the. 
mouth, that the strong exertion of the teeth on this substance 
may deaden the sensation of excruciating pain. 

B b 2 



282 CLAN-ALBIN, 

in the next moment the rocks of the sea-shore 
were resounding to the strokes of the lash ! — \ 
he became dizzy and sick, and heard and saw 
no more. 

When he recovered, he found himself sup- 
ported in the arms of a soldier, and at a dis- 
tance from the circle. — " Bourke is taken 
down, Sir," said the man, who was pleased to 
see so great sensibility to the sufferings of a 
soldier : " He got two hundred, and theflogo- 
meter said he must get the rest afterwards." — 
" What mean you ?" said Norman. " Oh, the 
surgeon, who holds a man's pulse, to see how 
many lashes he can take at a time, Sir ; poor 
Bourke invented that name for him. Well, 
thank God, he never uttered one groan, nor 
shrunk a bit. Had he shrieked we never could 
have borne it, — he was always such a merry 
fellow." — " What ! do they then shriek }" 
cried Norman. — " Dreadfully, Sir, dreadful- 
ly!" replied the soldier, evidently shocked by 
personal recollections : " Can you doubt but 
they must." 

At this moment some soldiers were seen 
bearing the mangled and almost inanimate 
body of Phelim Bourke across the field to the 
hospital tent. A few days back, and Norman 
had seen this gallant fellow so wild with life, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 283 

so full of talent and enjoyment ! — " My friend, 
I am faint again/' said he to the soldier, and 
he hid his face in the grass. 

For three succeeding days Phelim shroud* 
ed his head in the bed-clothes, refusing to look 
on the light which had witnessed his disgrace, 
and obstinately rejecting food. While in this 
condition, Norman knelt by his bed-side, im- 
ploring that he would speak to him, and take 
nourishment and comfort; but Phelim conti- 
nued inflexibly silent. Only once did Nor- 
man catch a glimpse of his face ; and oh, how 
changed were the once fine features and radiant 
eyes of Phelim ! He sadly recollected of Cap- 
tain Drummond holding a dispute with the 
daughter of Colonel Grant on the colour of 
Bourke's eyes, and of that young lady saying, 
" they were the colour of gladness/' - 

Norman, though somewhat astonished to 
so find any thing make so deep, and, above all, 
so lasting an impression on bis light and joyous 
nature, still persisted in attending Phelim, and 
in attempting to sooth a noble mind writhing 
under unmerited dishonour. One evening, after 
having exhauste'd every argument to console the 
poor sufferer, who continued dumb and sul- 
len, his head wrapt in the bed-clothes, Nor* 



284 CLAN-ALBIN, 

man tried to work on his generous temper by 
reproach and upbraiding. 

" This cannot be that gay, good-natured 
Bourke," said he, " whom every one loved. 
He would not thus sullenly reject the sympa- 
thy of his friends." 

" Oh, no, no," exclaimed Phelim, in a heart- 
piercing tone, " I am not that happy soldier \ 
— A dishonoured wretch, insulted, degraded, 
mangled by a scourge, — all that is man in me 
brutally violated. Why, then, should I live ? 
Why, if you love me, do you look on me r" 
He immediately relapsed into silence, sul- 
lenly turned round, and told Norman to be 
gone. Recommending him to a catholic priest, 
who kindly attended him, Norman, withdrew, 
much grieved, and even alarmed, at the strange 
perverseness and ferocity which a brutal pu- 
nishment had wrought in the generous mind 
of this gallant Irishman. 

Next morning Phelim Bourke was missing. 
The whole encampment was for some hours in 
dismay and confusion, but the unfortunate sol- 
dier was never heard of. His comrades con- 
cluded that he had thrown himself into the 
sea, — a catastrophe which had sometimes hap- 
pened in similar cases. At high water, Nor- 
man wandered along the shore, with Pat Lea- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 285 

ry and some kind-hearted Connaught-men, in 
hopes of finding the dead body of their friend. 
The sea rolled in with a heavy wave, but no- 
thing was to be seen. u Ah I" cried Norman, 
" many a brave heart lies under thee. — Poor 
Phelim I" 



266 CJUN-ALB1N, 



CHAP. XXVIII. 



Yet, ah ! why sh mid they know their fate, 
Since sorrow never comes too late, 

And happiness so swiftly flies : 
Thought would destroy their paradise : 
No more ; where ignorance is bliss, 

*Tis folly to be wise. 

Gray. 



Our cadet had brought into life that inflam- 
ed fancy to which every scene is picture, every 
image poetry; that romantic enthusiasm which 
expected to rind a hero and a knight in every 
soldier, and in every female the immaculate 
damsd of old romance, or the dignified ma- 
tron of Roman story. Three short months spent 
in the work-day world did more to reduce his 
mind to the standard of sober thinking, than 
all the grave counsels of Lady, Augusta, or the 
playful raillery of Monimia, who had made 
much greater progress in the science of life 
than our young soldier. But, though now fairly 
disenchanted, he ever cherished that generous 



A NATIONAL TALE. 287 

prepossession in favour of his species, and that 
benevolent indulgence for their failings which, 
if not wisdom, is happiness. His first disap- 
pointment had been, to find that a Highland 
regiment^ — a name consecrated to glory, — was 
composed of English, Irish, and Lowland 
Scots, and these not always the free-born, 
lofty -minded Englishmen of his fancy; and 
still seldomer the quiet, intelligent, and a- 
miable peasants that Graham, and Burns, 
and Buchanan, had taught him to expect. It 
was in fact like many other regiments, — a 
promiscuous horde, shaken from the encum- 
bered lap of society, and mingled with the 
overflowing scum of her morbid ebullition. 
But his companions were still beings possess- 
ed of human feelings and affections, and all 
of them were highly gifted with the first vir- 
tues of private soldiers, — skill in arms and cou- 
rage in the field. With the powerful aids of 
imprisonment, flogging, and piqueting, they 
were kept in tolerable order too ; and with this 
state of things Norman strove to be content- 
ed ; and, till the death of Phelim Bourke, he 
had been not very unsuccessful. 

When he returned from wandering on the 
shore, the glories of a replendent sun-set 
were streaming over the picturesque encamp- 



288 CLAN-ALBIN, 

ment, and flashing in a thousand radiant lines 
from rows of flickering spears. Every soft 
and every martial form caught new grace or 
grandeur from the rich tint6 of evening. — 
Groups of females and of military were every- 
where gliding around, and children, born to 
war, frolicked about with the airy grace of 
their happy age. At a considerable distance, 
a body of men, under arms, were still perform- 
ing their evolutions, and sometimes marching 
across the plain, in motion, measured by a 
lofty strain of martial music. In its pause was 
heard the round, full toned voice of the com- 
mander, or that soothing hum of mingled 
sounds which fluctuates on the summer air in 
a still -evening. Norman gazed on this fine 
picture with a cold, practised eye ; and of all 
the sounds that wooed his ear, he heard only 
the faint murmur of the heavy wave which roll- 
ed over Phelim Bourke. 

"'Tisa disenchanted scene !" thought he, 
as he leaned on the entrance of his tent. " Will 
they drill these poor fellows all night, because 
they presumed to lament their countryman ? 
to play the march he loved too — cruel !" 

He stood wrapt in musing sadness, when 
darkness had come on, and the camp-fire* 
ruddied the field, which was still graced by 



A NATIONAL TALE. 289 

female and enlivened by infant beauty. His 
comrades, gathered around these fires, were 
enjoying the passing hour with all the happy, 
and thrice happy thoughtlessness of their pro- 
fession. 

" Who would wish a soldier to be a think- 
ing creatur* :" sighed Norman : " Poor Phe- 
lim ; already is he forgotten ! How was he wont 
to fling round his jests at an hour like this ! 
Lady Augusta was right in saying, the world 
would soon apply the fairy -ointment to my 
eyes. Short, bright illusions ! — all gone I" 

Norman was recollecting a wild story, still 
told by the people about the braes of Balquhid- 
der, which the Lady often applied to himself. 
A highland woman was stolen by the fairies, 
and in their enchanted clime found every 
thing as bright and lovely as poetic fancy has 
feigned : 

11 'Twas merry, 'twas merry in fairy-land, 
Where the fairy-birds were singing." 

But this did not long last. The happy, be- 
cause enchanted "woman, one day saw some of 
her fairy friends anointing their eyes with a 
particular composition, and, on their turning 
round, foolishly applied it to one of her own 
eyes. The quick return of her companions 

VOL- II. c c 



2Q0 CLAN-ALBIN, 

prevented her from touching the other eye. 
But what was her astonishment to find, that 
while to the enchanted eye every thing still 
wore the charms of fairy-land, to the other the 
same objects seen in their true light appeared 
filthy and loathsome. 

u 'Tis a disenchanted scene \" Again the 
enthusiast began to ruminate bitter fancies. 
" Poor fellows ! defenders of their country ! 
How dearly is its defence purchased, if this be 
the price ! A soldier, — a being degraded be- 
low the level of humanitv a man who has sur- 

rendered the high privileges of his nature, and 
placed his freedom in another's power; — a so- 
litary part of a vast machine, estimated only 
by its aggregate force, — subservient to every 
impulse of perverted power, — the blind instru- 
ment of pitiful intrigue or lawless ambition ; — 
an unfortunate, thrust beyond the pale of so- 
cial life, almost proscribed the intercourse of 
his species, — the limits which separate him 
from the citizen so obtrusively pointed out, so 
rigidly maintained ;--a creature placed beyond 
the influence of those salutary restraints, im- 
posed by the customs of society, and the ob- 
serving eye of the world, wjth personal re- 
sponsibility, losing all chanoe, all desire of ac- 
quiring the esteem of his fellow men. Poor 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q1 

fellow ! cruelty and force alone employed in 
enforcing that blind submission, and exciting 
that animal ferocity, which seem to compre- 
hend the whole of his duties, — duties which 
are perhaps incompatible with moral influence, 
since I never, never saw it tried !" 

Norman now repeated, at full length, the 
quotation he had banished from his mind when 
passing through Glencoe : 

M Man in society is like a flower 

Blown in its native bed. 'Tis there alone 

His faculties, expanded in full bloom, 

Shine out ; there only reach their proper use* 

But man associated, and leagued with man, 

By regal warrant, or swarming into clans, 

Beneath one head for purposes of war, 

Like flowers selected from the rest, aud bound 

And bundled close to fill some crowded vase. 

Fades rapidly, and, by compression marr'd, 

Contracts defilement not to be endur'd." 

So ended the soliloquy in a tent- door; for it 
was now near midnight, and no sound was 
heard but the low voice of a centinel, who, af- 
ter his day's drilling was over, was carelessly 
humming : 



2Q2 CLAN-ALBIN, 

u Why soldiers, why ? 

Why be melancholy, boys : 
Why soldiers, why ? 
Whose business is to die.'* 

as he paced his guard before the colonel's tent. 
" Ble»sed, blessed thoughtlessness !" cried 
Norman, throwing himself on his hard pallet, 
and trying to sleep, and to forget the portraits 
of Cowper, the Botany-bay Eclogues of Sou- 
they, and the mortifying train of images which 
haunted his fancy on this gloomy night. 

Towards morning he fell into an uneasy 
slumber, from which he was roused by the en- 
trance of the serjeant who had charge of the 
tents. 

The friendship of Captain Drummond had 
procured for Norman the luxury of a separate 
tent. Though his fare was as coarse as that of 
any soldier in the regiment, he enjoyed the quiet 
and security of a home, and that without en- 
croaching on the few remainingcomfortsot Lady 
Augusta. Here he had arranged his few books 
and drawings, and some specimens illustrative 
of natural history, which he had collected on his 
journey. Here he could pursue his studies un- 
disturbed, and, what was still better, gaze for 
hours without interruption on the only trea- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q3 

sure his small bureau contained, — the portrait 
of Monimia. It was a rough, light sketch, exe- 
cuted by himself; but full of genius and inte- 
rest. Monimia personified the lovely Malvina, 
the tenderest theme of Ossian ; but by a very 
pardonable anachronism, she was represented 
as leaning on his tomb in the vale of Glenal- 
mond. She was arrayed in the appropriate cos- 
tume of the mountains ; at her feet lay that 
broken harp, whose magic sounds mortal hand 
might never again dare to awaken. The likeness 
of Monimia was striking and animated : It was 
more ; the genius of the painter had penetrat- 
ed the soul of the loveiy object he portray- 
ed ; and, in the soul-illumined countenance, 
was displayed all its high-toned feelings 
and fine sensibilities. The upturned, ardent 
gaze, seemed to pursue the wild visions of po- 
etic enthusiasm, and to reveal the triumphs of 
conscious inspiration.: — u He is not here, he is 
risen /" was the idea suggested to Lady Au- 
gusta by the sight of this beautiful figure, and 
the rude tomb on which it leaned. This pic- 
ture was to Ncrman an exhaustless source of 
stolen enjoyment. 

But we have forgotten who stood by Nor- 
man's bed-side, — the serjeant, — who thus ad-^ 
dressed him : 

cc2 



294 CLAN-ALBIN, 

" I have orders, Sir, to see this tent got in 
order for Ensign Boyd — the Major's orders; I 
am very sorry for it, but you will require to 
leave it immediately, and lodge, till we go into 
quarters, with some of the men." Norman 
heard this extraordinary message with surprise 
and vexation. To be not only deprived of his 
peaceful refuge, but also consigned to the so- 
ciety of the common soldiery, was a shock he 
could not for a few minutes surmount. He was, 
however, able to command his feelings before 
this man, who had done his duty as civilly as 
circumstances permitted, and at length replied, 
" It is very well : Tell me where it is proper that 
I should go, and in an hour I shall be ready. — 
" I see no cause of haste," said the man, " on- 
ly, Sir, the Major : — If you were to apply to 
the Colonel, Sir, I'm sure you might remain." 
" I do not think it necessary to trouble Co- 
" lonel Grant."—" May be, Sir : Well, I hope 
you do not blame me nor any body ; 'tis only 
the Major, — he is such a crony of Sir Archi- 
bald Gordon's, who, you know, since handsome 
Bourke" — " My good friend, I am not curious," 
interrupted Norman, M only tell me when and 
where I must go. — " I shall, Sir, as soon as I 
learn ; hut I believe he was more anxious to 
have y ou turned out, than to provide a place 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q5 

for you." — " Very well, that's enough," said 
Norman ; " you will call as soon as possible." 
The man went away ; and he immediately rose, 
and began to pack up his books and papers. 
" This was poor revenge I" said he, sitting 
down when his business was ended, while a 
smile of calm contempt for a moment stole over 
his features. 

In the evening of that day he was placed in 
a tent with a number of soldiers; and he found 
that Sir Archibald Gordon had reckoned with 
considerable accuracy, in imagining that this 
kind of society was likely to expose him to 
much disgust and uneasiness. Some of his 
new companions were good-natured and oblig- 
ing, and, for the first few days, tried to save 
appearances ; — but, can the Ethiopian change 
his skin ? While their degraded condition pal- 
liated some of their vices, it could not lessen 
his abhorrence of the brutal depravity, the a- 
vidity of wickedness, which characterised his 
rude companions. His pure nature shrunk 
from the communion of beings who, in ceasing 
to be men, had become soldiers ! 

For some days he spent all his leisure hours 
in solitary rambles on the sea-shore, and in 
proud uncomplaining despondency. But Nor- 
man had learned better things than to sit down 



2Q6 clan-albin, 

and bemoan himself in listless apathy, because 
he could no longer follow his favourite studies 
undisturbed; or to sink without an effort into 
gloomy misanthropy, because his situation 
happened to be irksome, and his companions 
disagreeable. " I must make the best of it," was 
his reflection at the end of three days ; and he 
resolved to lose no more time. 

The dignity, moderation, and gentleness of 
his character, had always commanded the re- 
spect of his companions ; and they were dis- 
posed to overlook the stately reserve of his 
manners, when they found that, though seem- 
ingly cold, he took a very kindly interest in 
their prosperity, and promoted their real wel- 
fare by every means in his power. They had 
also sagacity enough to understand the species 
of persecution which had driven him among 
them, and sufficient good-nature to form many 
vague wishes of disappointing the malice of 
the enemies his humanity had made. If they 
were thus forbearing, Norman was equally 
indulgent. Man, the plastic being of circum- 
stance, whose opinions are caught, whose man- 
ners are too often formed by unfortunate imi- 
tation, destitute of any strong bias to goodness, 
and deprived of that cultivation of mind which 
leads to its practice, had his tenderest pity ; 



A NATIONAL TALE. 2Q7 

while his indignation was directed against the 
pernicious system which propels his vices, and 
takes its measure of iniquity from the dreadful 
extent of the moral degradation it seems cal- 
culated to produce. He could not forget that 
a few years back, and the most vile of the un- 
fortunatebeings around him had been smiling in 
innocence on a female bosom, the object of the 
softest affections and the fondest endearments; 
— that a few years more, and this frail and er- 
ring creature would have gone to the mercy of 
his God i To have lived in a state of hostility 
with his fellow-creatures, would have been to 
live in positive misery ; and such reflections 
gave a tone to his feelings as happy for him- 
self as indulgent towards them. 

A soldier, even on the closest duty, has far 
more leisure than any ordinary mechanic ; and, 
a child of larger growth, mere activity of spi- 
rits often leads him to devote his spare mo- 
ments to folly and mischief, from the want of 
something pleasant or profitable with which to 
occupy his vivacious mind. 

When Norman returned from his eventide 
meditations, withthe vv se resolution of mak- 
ing the best of his condition, he found some 
of his comrades half-drunk, others half-asleep; 
and the rest, who had been playing at Pitch- 



2Q8 CLAN-ALB1N, 

and-toss, till prevented by darkness, still quar- 
relling about their game. Those philosophers 
who contend that happiness is nearly equal in 
all conditions, might have mentioned that the 
soldier who holds the sixty-fourth share of a 
lottery ticket, or hazards his day's pay at Pitch- 
and-toss, experiences the same powerful sen- 
sations, the same agonizing alternation of hope 
and fear, joy and despair, that distract the 
young nobleman who stages half his revenue 
in a fashionable gaming-house. A sort of sul- 
len constrained silence followed the entrance 
of Norman. " We all seem melancholy," 
said he : " Come Ellis, you are an old soldier; 
tell us your adventures in Egypt. 1 ' Thus chal- 
lenged, Ellis would have belied his profession 
had he refused to give a history of his cam- 
paign, and he began forthwith to relate tales 
of war and wonder. His account of the voy- 
age, — the landing, — and the various move- 
ments of the army, was very correct ; but he 
wanted language to describe the face of the 
country; and Norman carelessly taking up a 
book which lay beside him, re.ad a short but 
striking description of Alexandria, Rossetta, 
and Damietta, — of the inundation of the Nile, 
and the appearance of Egypt at that season. 
Ellis was delighted to find his own rude con- 



jl national tale. 299 

ceptions so clearly unfolded by the language 
of another. The book formed a text on which 
he expatiated, and the soldiers were greatly 
amused with the new and picturesque images of 
this singular country which were rising in their 
misty minds, and highly interested in the for- 
tunes of the war of which it had been the scene. 
At a late hour they reluctantly ended the con- 
versation, after agreeing to assemble earlier 
on the following evening, to hear the conclu- 
sion of Ellis's adventures. 

Several of these soldiers had been in the 
East Indies, some of them in the West India Is» 
lands, others on the continent of America, and 
one or two in Gibraltar, Sicily, and Holland $ 
and for many nights Norman contrived to oc- 
cupy them in hearing or relating personal ad- 
ventures, intermixed with strange and con- 
fused accounts of the countries they had seen, 
which he compared with short passages from 
geographers and travellers. The soldiers were 
sometimes gratified to find their testimony a- 
gree with printed books, and to learn that they 
possessed such treasures of knowledge ; and at 
other times mortified to discover that so much 
was to be seen which they had not perceived. 

While these evening amusements lasted, a 
pack of cards, in which no eyes but those of 



300 CLAN-ALBIN, 

a soldier could have distinguished the brilli- 
ant queen of hearts from her sable majesty of 
clubs, had been laid aside, and very few visits 
had been paid to the drinking-houses. But, 
unfortunately, every one had now told his 
story. 

" As it is thought we are to be ordered to the 
Cape," said Norman, " what think ye of learn- 
ing what like it may be ? Why should we not 
know what to look for when we go abroad, as 
well as those fine fellows we have been read- 

" That's impossible !" cried every one,though 
few thought it altogether so. " I can't see the 
impossibility," replied Norman : " You recol- 
lect the little story I was telling you last night, 
of ' Eyes and no eyes.' " " Aye" sighed a 
Scotsman, " A wise man's eyes are in his head, 
but a fool's are in the ends of the earth." 
" Ogh," cried Pat L' ary, we will learn ; 
Marshal gives scripture for it." " Come, 
then," said Norman, smiling, " here is the 
map, and the book, and a pretty picture of 
Cape-town." The soldiers crowded round ; 
their rout was traced, and every one trium- 
phantly pointed out islands, promontories, and 
bays he had formerly seen; and often insi>ted 
on new situations for them, which Norman, 



A NATIONAL TALE. 301 

happy to see that their curiosity was at length 
roused, and their attention fixed, did not think 
it prudent to dispute. 

The readings were begun. Norman had previ- 
ously marked the book, and every thing tedious 
was passed over. Accounts of minerals and 
plants, grave reflections, political and philolo- 
gical disquisitions, were uniformly neglect- 
ed, and his rude audience were bewildered 
in a gay tumult of lions, Dutch girls, Caffres, 
Hottentots, Bushmen, Steinboks, and ostrich 
feathers. Only once did he venture to dwell 
on any serious matter. It was a sweet picture 
of the little Hottentot settlement, formed by 
the apostolic labours of a good Moravian mis- 
sionary. Yes ! there is something good in 
man ! " Long life to him 1" cried Pat Leary. 
u He is a damned honest fellow," said Ellis. 
" Though a Moravian, he seems to have had 
the root o* the matter in him," said Marshal, a 
sad backslider, who had been religiously edu- 
cated; and Norman, smiling at these national 
praises, softly added, " He is a disciple of that 
blessed faith, which teaches i peace on earth 
and good-will towards men.' He is a Chris- 
tian, my good friends." He had never be- 
fore hazarded any observation so grave j amo- 
TOL. II. D d 



302 CLAN-ALBIN, 

mentary embarrassment followed, ami with a 
serious smile he recommenced his reading. 

Whenever the hero of the adventures got 
into any danger or difficulty, from which cou- 
rage or sagacity alone could extricate him, 
Norman stopped, saying, " What's to be done 
now, Ellis ?" When every one had given his 
opinion in this important crisis, Norman read 
on, his comrades triumphing to find that the 
contrivances they suggested were exactly simi- 
lar to those adopted by the traveller. 

With exemplary patience did Norman bear 
much occasional coarseness of remark, and 
many a brilliant joke on the charms of the 
Hottentot beauties ; and when the travels at 
the Cape were ended, he ventured to read se- 
lect stories from the Cheap Repository, the 
Evenings at Home, and the Popular Tales of 
Miss Edgeworth. He also employed Maishal 
to read, and contrived to make his comrades 
converse on what they were hearing. Pat 
Leary made admirable criticisms; Marshal was 
very acute at discovering faults ; and though 
Ellis seldom spoke, whatever he did say was 
found well worthy of being attended to. Be- 
sides adopting the expedient or Scheherazade, 
to keep alive curiosity, the least indication of 
yawning from Ellis, or whistling from Pat Lea- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 303 

ry, (who sometimes forgot his manners,) was 
warning to Norman to shut his book for the 
night. 

Insensibly did these rude soldiers begin to 
acquire better habits and tastes. New sources 
of pleasure were opened to them, — quiet and 
good order became the inmates of their crowd- 
ed abode ; the turbulent were either awed 
into submission, or compelled to live in a state 
of proscription ; and every one felt himself 
happier, richer, and more respectable than he 
had ever before been as a soldier. Yet many 
transient deviations from the narrow path were 
unhappily made, for which there seemed no 
remedy but time. For instance, they often 
wandered from home in search of some learn- 
ed clerk to write their letters. These letters 
were necessarily written in drinking-houses, 
and the scribe rewarded with spirits, which his 
employer did not always refuse to share. 

One night Marshal was reading the tale of 
Rosanna, while Norman amused himself with 
his pencil, though secretly fretting at the ab- 
sence of EUjs and Leary, who had gone in 
search of their secretary. Leary's last epistle 
had cost hiin a week of riot and a night's im- 
prisonment, after a month of good behaviour; 
so it was not without reason that Norman now 



304 CLAN-ALBI.\, 

felt alarmed. Id about an hour the sol- 
diers returned, and, to hi* astonishment, 
both were perfectly sober. Ellis quietly sat 
down, His strongly- marked features express- 
ing a strange mixture of obstinate endurance, 
sullenness, grief, and disappointment ; but 
Learv would have been no Irishman could he 
have felt either joy or grief, anger or satisfac- 
tion, without sharing it with his friends. " So, 
there you are going on with that sweet crea- 
ture, Rosv Gray, without me," cried he.— 
" Really, Master Leary, its a pity indeed but 
we had waked for you," said one. " Yes, vou 
might. — Confound that fellow, Barton ; here 
have we hunted him up and down this hour, 
and found him at last rioting, and drunk as the 
Baltic. What a beastly tiling it is to see a man 
drunk, Mr Macalbin r" 

Mr Macalbin laughed, and so did Leary ; 
and Marshal repeated the proverb about Sa- 
tan reproving Sin. " Well, it does not signi- 
fy for my letter ; but what if poor Ellis's wife 
take it into her head to lie-in without his half- 
guinea ?" — " Pshaw ! never mj,nd," cried El- 
lis, gruffly. " Indeed," said Norman, smiling, 
" I believe such cases do not admit of delay. 
So, suppose you employ me to-night, and 
learn to serve yourselves to-morrow. I'm 



A NATIONAL TALE. 305 

astonished to see fellows so clever, submitting 
to run up and down, imploring people to ask 
how their wives or their mothers do, when they 
could, with a little trouble, do it so much better 
themselves. Why, Pat, man, your fingers are 
not all thumbs any more than Barton's." Pat 
laughed heartily at this homely figure. " Bless 
your soul," cried he, " is it we learn to write ? 
I had a smack of it once though. But, you see, 
they wanted me to get the Protestant cate- 
chism, (he became grave and earnest,) so I was 
took from school, being Catholic, and that put 
the devil on my edication.'* 

Norman began to write the letters. Leary 
had so copious a rlow of eloquence, and so 
much to tell his friends, that it was found ne- 
cessary to put an abrupt termination to his 
epistle, by crowding in loves and remem- 
brances to the whole generation of the Learys^ 
and to half the population of his native pa- 
rish. Not a word had Ellis to say, but that he 
was very well, thank God> and did not stand in 
need of nothing ; so not to mind him." — In 
dictating his letter, Pat had been dissolved 
in tenderness, and English Ellis, if possible, 
more stern than usual ; but when he reached 
over the solitary half-guinea, Norman fancied 

D d 2' 



300 CLAX-ALBIX, 

that he saw his hand tremble ; his voice be- 
came husky, and he went to the tent-door. 

" Poor fellows !" thought Norman, melt- 
ing into womanish softness. " They all have 
hearts, — human hearts ;" — and he could love 
any thing which had a heart, however rude or 
uncouth it might otherwise be. Norman 
had never felt the want of money so painfully 
as at the moment he folded up Ellis's solitary 
half-guinea. He put his hand into his pocket, 
then drew it hastily back ; — he knew that if 
he hesitated he was lost; for, though "be just 
before you are generous" is an obsolete max- 
im, it was a living statute with Norman. 

The letters were franked and despatched, 
and materials for writing collected. Leary and 
another Irishman began with all the eagerness 
of childhood, and Norman placed a seat for 
Ellis, and put a pen into his hand, saying, 
" Come' now, Ellis." Everv one went to work. 
To avoid the appearance of officious inter- 
ference, Norman continued to draw, at the 
same time attending to his pupils, and Mar- 
shal went on with the story of Rosanna. 

" But we will be ruined out of house and 
home for pens and paper," said Leary. " The 
price of a single glass of whiskey would keep 
us in paper for a week," replied Norman. Pat 



A NATIONAL TALE. 30? 

laughed, but he blushed also, — a wonderful 
sign of grace ; and Ellis likewise coloured, 
with a look hesitating between a smile and 
frown, till sympathy, with Leary' s mirth, turn- 
ed the balance. 

By the time the tale was ended, Ellis had 
made many stout and pretty fair strokes ; and 
Pat, to shew his learning, had scrawled, fifty 
times over, wan tudaye es wrth tu toynorows— 
praktis mekes perjit, pa trick leary. Norman 
professed himself very much pleased with 
their efforts ; and many succeeding evenings 
were spent in the same manner, till Pat Leary 
was able to send home a letter that might be 
read, and Ellis a very excellent one; in which 
the strong affections, which his proud and re- 
pulsive temper shrouded from the eye of stran- 
gers, flowed forth without fear or shame. The 
next books which these soldiers heard read, 
were abridged historiesof England and of Rome, 
and biographical sketches of eminent military 
characters, intermixed with short attractive 
stories. 

The spark of improvement was now spread- 
ing on all sidfes, — from tent to tent, — from 
regiment to regiment, — slowly indeed, and ai- 
most imperceptibly, but still gaining ground ; 
and Norman began to hope, that, were it care- 



308 CLAN-ALB1N, 

fully fanned and cherished at this important 
crisis, something better might be expected 
than had ever yet been seen among soldiers. — 
But his evil star was again predominant. 

Sir Archibald Gordon had injured Phelim 
Bourke too deeply ever to forgive those who 
had dared to shew him kindness while living,. 
or to regret him when dead. He had origin- 
ally disliked Norman from no very intelligible 
motive, but he nowabhorred him for many good 
reasons : First, he had presumed to save his 
life at the cascade of the Gos-hawk ; secondly,. 
he was the real owner of a certain wolf-dog ; 
thirdly, he had been taken for some very great 
personage *, fourthly, he presumed to lament 
Phelim Bourse ; fifthly, he was very popular 
among the soldiery ; and, lastly, he dared to 
be useful to others, and happy in himself, in 
spite of the wrath of Sir Archibald Gordon. 

One day that the regiment of this gentle- 
man and that of Colonel Grant were in the 
field together, the regiment of the latter, ow- 
ing to a mistake in the orders, fell into some- 
blunder, which had the most unhappy effect 
on the violent temper of their commander. 
He was standing, swearing at their stupidity, 
when Sir Archibald rode up, anJ, with the most 
provoking sneer, said, "My dear Colonel, com- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 30Q 

pose yourself; how should scholars and philo- 
sophers condescend to observe the trifling mi- 
nutiae of regimental orders. Leave those things 
to my ignorant brutes, and do you console 
yourself with commanding politicians and 
readers, — if they are not too enlightened to be 
commanded." — " Curse their reading," cried 
Colonel Grant, affronted for himself and hit 
men, and enraged at his insolent admonisher, 
who, with another sneering laugh, rode off. 



I 
\ 



310 CLAN-ALBIN, 



CHAP. XXIX. 



It will be proved to thy face that thou hast men about thee 
that usually talk of a noun and a verb, and such abominable 
words as no Christian ear can endure to hear. 

Cade. O monstrous ! 

Smith. We took him setting boy^ copies. 

Cade. Here's a villain ! Come hither, sirrah, till I examine 
thee : — Dost thou use to write thy name ? or hast thou a mark 
to thyself like an honest, plain-dealing man ? 

SflAKE'fEAai. 

v^olonel Grant was a brave man, and, as 
far as regarded the details of regimental duty, 
a bustling and skilful officer. His chief am- 
bition was, to supply what he imagined defi- 
ciencies in the military code ; and so violent 
was his fondness for regulating every action, 
from the most important manoeuvres down to 
the blacking of shoes and the whitening of 
belts, that, if it had been possible to fix the 
precise angle at which his men 'should look at 
each other, at a serjeant, an pnsign, &c. &c. 
he would have formed a scale, and assigned 
punishments corresponding to its degrees. But 
though rigid and severe, he was perfectly de- 
void of caprice, — lull of respect for the cha- 
racter of a soldier, and placing its perfection 



A NATIONAL TALE. 311 

in a tall, square figure, fierce whiskers, a smart 
uniform, deliberate bravery, and exact observ- 
ance of the laws he was daily enacting. He 
was convinced that the existing institutions of 
the army were the most perfect work of man, 
and his own regiment the most complete ex- 
emplar of their consummate excellence ; and 
still indulged a vague belief, that one of his 
soldiers could beat five Frenchmen, but, some- 
how, they never had a fair opportunity. In 
him vehement passions were sometimes mista- 
ken for energy of mind, and opinionativeness 
for promptness and decision of judgment; and 
there were many subalterns who pronounced 
Colonel Grant a very figorous character, when- 
ever he gave flagrant proofs of being a very 
furious man. Now, it sometimes happens, that 
this species of vigour is not quite concomitant 
with justice and wisdom. Yet, it must be con- 
fessed, that Colonel Grant's summary way of 
judging was attended with its peculiar advan- 
tages. It saveo* a world of time, hesitation. 

Of ' ' 

and inquiry, toldeclare whatever seemed bold 
or new in theory, " damned nonsense-" and 
whoever differed from himself, either in spe- 
culation or practice, " a damned fool" But, 
let it also be recorded, that whatever savoured 
of meanness irjTcpnduct, or baseness in mind, 



312 CLAN-ALBIN, 

was most emphatically pronounced IC a most 
damnable shame." The same rigid ideas of 
discipline, that guided his conduct at the 
head of his men, were carried into the bosom 
of his family : — an imperious master, — a stern 
husband, — at once the lawgiver and the judge, 
making his own free-^ill the infallible stand- 
ard of opinion and manners,— and all the while 
led, if not absolutely governed, by an only 
child, a lively girl, whom he intended for the 
wife of Captain Drummond. Yet he was es- 
sentially humane, in a strange, rough way of 
his own. For instance, though hating all in- 
novation, and abhorring every change, he of- 
ten protested against military flogging. It was 
by no means timidity which made the Colonel 
thus fearful of improvement or innovation ; 
nor were his apprehensions at all general ; — 
though he perceived mutiny, desertion, and 
rebellion, as the certain consequence of per- 
mitting his soldiers to learn what sort of men 
Marlborough and Nelson were, be would, with 
great pleasure, have gone at the' head of these 
same soldiers to disperse a setiof impertinent 
persons, who, because they are< entrusted with 
the necessary power, do, on hare occasions, 
presume to interfere with the internal affairs of 
the army. It is true, he was ijot" quite satisfied 



A NATIONAL TALE. 313 

to see improper influence (if such a thing can 
exist) setting boys over heads grown grey in 
gallant service ; and he sometimes took the li- 
berty to apply his favourite appellation to very 
exalted military personages : But then he was 
altogether enraged at the insolence of those 
whom the country has empowered to correct 
faults and provide remedies, as often as they 
dared to express a similar sentiment, however 
decorously worded. 

On the day in which Colonel Grant's regi- 
ment committed the unpardonable blunder of 
hearing one thing when another was said, he 
dined by previous engagement with Sir Ar- 
chibald Gordon, and endured so much covert 
reproach, so many sneers, and sarcasms a- 
gainst politicians, and philosophers, that read- 
ing and performing military exercises badly 
were almost identified in his mind; and he de- 
termined to adopt the most vigorous measures 
to put a stop to it among his soldiers. 

Norman's comrades were employed on this 
evening in tAeir usual manner ; Marshal in 
reading the memoirs of Marlborough, Nor- 
man in drawirig, and the rest in writing on 
their slates,— when the Colonel put his face 
within the tent-poor, exclaiming in a very vi- 
gorous tone : "*nO ho ! The school of Athens 

VOL. II. \ e e 



314 CLAN-ALBIX, 

assembled ! Wonderfully great scholars, truly, 
but damned bad soldiers ! Mr Macalbin, will 
you please to speak with me a minute." Nor- 
man bowed in silence, and followed him out. 

" Old Muly seems in a big passion to-night," 
said Pat Leary : " I'm afraid Gordon's wine 
has soured his stomach." The Colonel was 
known among the soldiers by the name of that 
amiable person, Muly Moluc. " What does 
he mean by bad soldiers ?" said Ellis, frowning. 
" Never mind," replied Marshal, " His bark 
is worse than his bite." — " He is Scotsman any 
way,'' cried Leary ; " and by the same token 
you would have something to say for him were 
he the devil himself." 

When Norman had followed the Colonel a 
few paces, that angry gentleman turned abrupt- 
ly round, saying, " Is it Jacobins or Metho- 
dists you intend to make these fellows ?' 
" Neither," replied Norman, smiling: " I can 
make them nothing ; but I hope they intend 
to make themselves better and happier men." 

" You hope, — and they intend. — And were 
they not quite good and happy^enough before, 
pray ? [ 

" I trust they may be betterjmen and equal- 
ly good soldiers," replied Norman : " That 
surely is their first duty." 



rl . 



A NATIONAL TALE. 315 

u I am thinking it is. Come, come, Macal- 
bin, I once took you for a good sensible fel- 
low, — you see we must give up all this. 1*11 
have no whining and canting about me, I'm 
resolved. Was I not tormented out of exis- 
tence once before with their praying clubs ? 
— cold, pitiful, sneaking rascals." Norman 
very modestly ventured to observe, that in this 
case the soldiers were only spending their idle 
hours in miscellaneous reading. " Well, read- 
ing be it, — I'll have no reading: Let scholars 
read, and get knowledge, and virtue, and all 
that, — we have no use for these things in the 
army. Soldiers must obey and fight ; that is 
all we care for ;— and if mine can't learn that 
without book, damn me but I'll find a way to 
teach 'em." And the Colonel struck his cane 
forcibly on the ground, by way of clinching 
the argument. Norman, with great modera- 
tion and softness, began to explain the occa- 
sion of the blunder into which the men had in- 
advertently '/alien, and paid them many hand- 
some and wAl merited compliments, proudly 
resenting theiimputations of ignorance or ne- 
glect of dut\|. This was a grateful topic to 
Colonel Graix ; and when he was somewhat 
conciliated, ^(orman ventured to insinuate that, 
he could percaive no necessary connexion be- 



3l6 CLAN-ALBIK, 

• 

tween courage and ignorance. But the Colonel 
hastily lifted his hand, moving it as if to close 
the lips of the speaker, and crying : " Not an- 
other word. The soldiers are still good, as you 
say ; and it is my business to keep them so.— 
I'll have no new philosophy, — I made up my 
mind on all these matters forty years ago. — 
Reading and writing [-^damned nonsense I" 
And he walked off in a high passion, expecting 
Norman to follow ; which, however, he did not 
think necessary. 

Grieved and mortified, he returned to the 
tent. rt The Colonel thinks it improper for us 
to read," said he, with an air of vexation which 
he found it impossible to conceal : " Put aside 
your book, Marshal, — Ellis, I'll hang up your 
slate for you." 

The brows of the Englishman contracted 
into a most portentous frown, while Leary ex- 
claimed : " So Muly thinks it better sport to 
see us amusing ourselves as formerly, does he?" 

" I must not hear Colonel Gr^nt so spoken 
of," said Norman : " He may ljlive good rea- 
sons for what he does. At any /rate, it is our 
duty to obey ; and I hope we sKall do so man- 
fully and cheerfully."~-Och, surely, Sir," said 
Pat Leary : " My own idleness and bad 
manners be all on his own he/ivi, and Til be 



A NATIONAL TALE. 317 

merry any way ."--And so, for the present mo- 
ment, ended a scheme which had cost Norman 
much labour, and afforded him much enjoy- 
ment, — and with it all hopes of a peaceful 
home or reasonable associates. 

So forcible is habit, that for three whole 
weeks these soldiers lounged about in a kind 
of listless harmlessness. At the end of that 
time, Pat Leary, who was too generous to hoard 
his gains atPitch-and-toss and the black cards, 
treated his comrades in the drinking tent. A 
man who ceases to cherish self-respect, seldom 
hasmuch regard to the feelings of others. When 
the natural rudeness of these soldiers was in- 
flamed by ardent spirits, they insulted each 
other, quarrelled, and fought ; and Norman 
was the indignant spectator of a scene of bro- 
ken heads and bloody noses, too humiliating 
to be described. Colonel Grant is not the on- 
ly legislator who has found it much easier to 
punish than to prevent crimes. The soldiers 
were sent toihe guard-house ; and after under- 
going a due touantity of punishment released, 
to run the saiVie wretched circle of folly, guilt, 
and suffering! The situation of Norman was 
now extremeVy comfortless. He was thrown 
into the intiplate society of men, whose vices, 
taking the starjp of their characters, were gross 

E e2 



1 . 



318 CLAN-ALBIN, 

and brutal ; he had losteveryhope of usefulness, 
and, with that hope, the powerful motive which 
had enabled him to overlook many causes of 
disgust and mortification. He relapsed into his 
former cold and forbidding reserve. Captain 
Drummond, after an absence of three months, 
was now returned ; but instead of receiving his 
young countryman with his former frank and 
encouraging kindness, he was barely civil 
when they chanced to meet, and seemed de- 
sirous to avoid all occasions of meeting. 

Norman had lost his caste ! He had antici- 
pated life so fondly, and found it so barren, 
— the past, the present, and the future abound- 
ed with so many dark images of blasted hopes, 
and frustrated ambitions,— the world appear, 
ed so cold, so cheerless, so void, — that he be- 
gan to feel himself unfit for its pursuits, too 
fastidious for its common enjoyments, and for 
ever cut off from those he was formed to relish.. 
Again he haunted the sea-shore, indulging the 
most melancholy and enervating reveries ; 
brooding over his sorrows, till, iiv'spite of his 
natural good sense and cheerful lone of mind, 
he was in danger of yielding to that voluptu- 
ous and seducing sadness, that" strange and 
morbid delight in powerful misery, which is 



ri . 



A NATIONAL TALE. 31Q 

too often the easily besetting sin of the highest 
order of minds. 

• Musing alone in his tent one day, he hap- 
pened to turn over the leaves of a book which 
presented this sublime burst of creative ge- 
nius : 

u Be hush'd my dark spirit, for wisdom condemns 

When the faint and the feeble deplore ; 
Be strong as the rock of the ocean that stems 

A thousand wild waves on the shore. 
Thro' the perils of chance, and the scowl of disdain, 

May thy front be unalter'd, thy courage elate 5 
Yea, even the name I hare worship p'd in vain, 
Shall awake not the sigh of remembrance again : 

To bear, is to conquer our fate." 

" Blessed be the lay which comes home with * 
consoling power to the bosom of sorrow," 
cried Norman : " Thrice blessed that which 
rouses the spirit of a man to struggle with ad- 
versity, and to subdue misfortune by bravely 
bearing it."./-The lines he had been reading 
struck on rta raised fancy like the encou- 
raging voice Af heaven ; and while they float- 
ed in mists btjfore his eyes, their strength was 
throbbing at l\s heart, animating it to a noble 
combat ; and [communicating dignity to his 
mind and hrmpess to his purposes. But this 



320 CLAN-ALBIN, 

haughty and stoical mood was only another 
symptom of the same disease ; — five minutes 
afterwards, and Norman felt how far inferior 
this gloomy, heroic, grandeur of soul, was to 
the calm, deep, equable flow of soft affections ; 
— how poor, compared with the soothing kind- 
ness of one true friend. Captain Drummoinl 
hastily entered the tent, making many hurried 
apologies for his apparently inconsistent be- 
haviour, protesting that he had been greatly 
imposed on, and eagerly craving pardon and 
reconcilement. Norman was too noble-natur- 
ed ever to have felt any resentment at the un- 
accountable alienation of his friend : — He 
thought he had been deceived in Captain 
Drummond, and he wished to cherish as much 
reasonable pride as should place his tranquilli- 
ty beyond the influence of any man's caprice; 
but now his heart melted into tenderness, and 
had he followed its impulse he would have 
clasped that friend to his bosom, whose hand 
he warmly pressed between his oWn, exclaim- 
ing, " Oh, I never was displease/;. If I was a 
little grieved to find you so coldf'and changed, 
I sought the cause in my own situation, and now 
this more than repays it all." 

" You are the best of fellowr," said Drum- 
mond : " And, * setting my nmhhood and sol- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 321 

diership aside/ I could almost cry ; your ladies 
of the creation are too boastful of excessive 
emotion ; your lords too much ashamed of it : — 
But we, however, have the privilege of cursing, 
which will answer me every whit as well just 
now." 

After a sweeping preamble, Drummond 
went on : " We have all been confoundedly a-' 
bused by that — son of a tailor ! — I won't call 
my major a worse name. But my heart is 
bursting with a thousand matters. You know 
I was applying for a long promised justice. 
'Tis a fine thing, let me tell you, to be connec- 
ted with an army tailor. They used to say, 
1 better a friend at the court than a penny in 
the purse,' — they were quite wrong ; begging 
Chesterfield's pardon for quoting a proverb. 
A well-filled cellar, — a well- stored purse, these 
are brave things, — tangible excellencies, — 
come home to men's business and bosoms,— 
great men's. What signifies a poor fellow be- 
ing of the '/pure breed, purer than milk/ if 
he can't ' put money in his pocket.' What 
though he btf brave as the sword he wears, if 
be can't * pm money in his pocket.' Nay, 
what although he were the dignified heir of a 
Highland chit If, whose ' chateau avoit une porte 
et des fenet rcs\ without money in his pocket." 



322 CLAN-ALB1N, 

Norman laughed, and so did Drummond, 
who then resumed : " I hope now, Macalbin, 
you will give up your old position, and ac- 
knowledge that ail mankind, — at least on this 
side of the Forth and Clyde, — are a set of poor, 
paltry, degenerate scoundrels ; bad from the 
first indeed, but now run to the mere lees.— 
Men? — manikins i' faith. It began with giants, 
and has ended thus. Well, I suppose when I 
have been marched about a few more years, 
and have got a few more bullets lodged in my 
bod} 7 , I may go home to the Highlands with a 
captain's half-pay, — take a farm, and Mary 
Grant; and so turn shepherd and shepherdess 
in our old days ! That would have done ex- 
cellently well ten years ago. 'Tis devilish cold 
quarters, though, to repose under the shade of 
laurels, with half a dozen naked children. 
But even that poor comfort is denied me, (for 
I am a brave fellow, willing to run all risks,) 
for that old cross Colonel of your's won't 
suffer poor Mary to kiss off my i^ars, till I am 
a major, forsooth ; that is, till V'have none to 
shed. Admire the carefulness off fathers ! Not 
that I am a puling lover, Gom forbid ; but 
every man has some foolish sclrame of happi- 
ness, fashioned as pleases him bpst. Mary was 
educated by my mother ; arm I can still re- 



A NATIONAL TALE. 323 

member the time when I was as great a fool as 
any other boy of seventeen ; that is long since 
past. I have been in and out, and out and in, 
of love, a hundred and fifty times since that, 
in every comer of Europe, with the most love- 
ly women. But that little cock-nose is knit to 
my Highland heart by so many small links, 
mingled with so many wild recollections that 
hang on deep glens and roaring streams, fine 
sun-rises, and sweet songs at the evening fold,— 
for I was vastly poetical once, — that somehow I 
could never forget her; she still kept her place 
in the inmost sanctuary, nestling among the 
Penates, I presume : My idol gods, Macal- 
bin." Drummond seemed as much affected 
as any soldier chuses to appear. He walked a- 
bout a few minutes, and then continued : " But 
I have forgot the major. I am a vile egotist, 
—so are we all. Grant me, then, that you ad- 
mire a downright, bold-faced, honest liar, a 
thousand degrees beyond a sneaking, Jesuiti- 
cal, equivocating slave. A liar only imposes 
on the world, 3 * but these scoundrels would also 
cheat the dev% and their own consciences, by 
" " I believe without the confirmation of 
an oath," inteVupted Norman, laughing.-— :i I 
crave your parlon. I do believe you are al- 
most as deiic«cOBs many a lady— pretends to be. 




324 CLAN-ALBIN, 

Well, the major contrived, — or permitted, — 1 
hate harsh words, — that Colonel Grant should 
believe you voluntarily herded with the com- 
mon soldiers to teach them jacobinism and in- 
subordination, to the imminent danger, at 
some future time, of liberty, property, and 
social order. Pat Leary explained the matter 
to me. Now do forgive the good old soul, and 
me likewise. You see he was born just in time 
to remember the ghosts of the Pope and the 
Pretender, and the protestant succession, and 
all that ; so he is haunted by a double number 
of bugbears. Do you know he lives so much 
in the past time, that when drinking a male- 
diction on the great Napoleon he some- 
times forgets, and mentions our good friend 
the Grand Monarque. This comes of living too 
long. When I am an old woman, besides the 
last new fashion of alarm, I shall always be 
tormented about jacobinism and social order. 
— Pray do forgive my uncle." 

" Were there any thing to lie forgiven, I 
could forgive much to Colonel/Grant," said 
Norman. " There's a brave fellow," cried 
Drummond : " Well, all is pait, and you re- 
turn- to your old quarters ; sinpe you are so 
dangerous among the men, your doughty- 
major must approve of that srtfely. Though 



A NATIONAL TALE. 325 

I am sulking at my uncle just now, because 
he won't suffer Mary and me to be happy in 
our own waj~, I must forgive him by and by, 
I suppose. Gordon is off for Dublin, crowd- 
ing all sail after a wonderful widow. His faith- 
ful Achates will soon follow, and we shall all 
be happy, — you with your geometry, and I 
sporting my new boots." 

" Whither has Sir Archibald gone/' inquir- 
ed Norman, in a faultering voice. 

" To be married, Sir ; — redoubtable alike 
in love and war ! — Pray God, Phelim's ghost 
stand at the foot of his bridal bed. Yet if an 
angel can protect him, she is the heavenliest 
creature ! I was in love a whole month with 
that virgin widow ; — wild, raving, making wo- 
ful ballads to her eye- brow; — and if it had 
but pleased her to shew a little more good taste 
— Mary Grant I give you fair warning — c Who 
could with fate and two dark eyes contend.' 
5 Pon my honpur I believe Gordon is safe in 
Monimia's 8>rms after all, for Phelim's must 
be a gallant ^host." 

While Cajitain Drummond delivered this 
rhapsody, he ^ f ood adjusting his neckcloth at a 
piece of brigh; tin-plate which Pat Leary, who, 
like the gor?d. bid Scotswoman, took what he 
had and neverhvanted, had stuck up by way 
VOL. II. \ r f 



320 CLAN-ALBIN. 

of a looking glass. That done, he turned round 
and beheld Norman leaning against the can- 
vass of the tent, which was died with blood, 
and blood still gushing from his mouth and 
nostrils. 

After uttering an exclamation of grief and 
alarm, Captain Drummond laid his friend on 
a bed, and flew for assistance. In a few mi- 
nutes several surgeons were in the tent. Nor- 
man had burst a blood-vessel. The usual 
remedies were applied, — and the usual prog- 
nostics made. As it was founds dangerous 
to remove the patient in this alarming state, 
Captain Drummond dismissed the soldiers 
from the tent, and also sent to, his uncle's 
lodgings, in the neighbouring town, foe seve- 
ral articles requisite to the comfortable ac- 
commodation of his friend ; by whom he 
watched, in silent anxiety, till the hour of 
evening parade. One of the surgeons took his 
place till public duty was finished, and then 
he resumed his post, Norman, ill, very ill, in 
mind as well as in body, could /only press the 
hand of this kind friend, and raise his expres- 
sive eyes, lull of gratitude, — df sweetness, — 
of patient suffering. 

Late in the evening, Pat J.eary, who had 
been his nephew's servant, tof k the liberty to 






A NATIONAL TALE. 32? 

trouble his honour, the Colonel, for leave 
to attend Mr Macalbin. Colonel Grant was 
now undeceived in many particulars respect- 
ing his young volunteer, and he had also a 
sympathetic regard for any one the Major dis^ 
liked.. 

" I would willingly grant that, Leary ; but I 
think he will prefer Marshal. " 

" Och, is it he ?" cried Leary, " If I should 
never stir out of this bit now, the last words he 
said were these to Captain Drummond, when 
he made offer of Marshal — devil a word of a 
lie I am telling your honour — says he, * Com- 
mend me to Marshal for my stewart, — Ellis 
for my butler, — but Paddy Leary for my nurse, 
I thank ye,- — barring a woman.' — I allow he 
did say, ' barring a woman.' " 

" You base liar !"' cried Colonel Grant, lift- 
ing his hand, "the man that has not been able 
to speak a word to-day." Leary moved his 
body and arm,— at the same time shrinking 
back as if to avoid an impending blow ; but 
when he perce'ved that the Colonel could hard- 
ly refrain from laughing, he quickly seized 
the advantage, and again renewed his plead- 
ing. 

'* Get along, you dog," cried Colonel Grant, 
" and see that you take good care of him." 



328 CLAN-ALBItf. 

" God bless your honour for that now, and 
long life to you ! And sure if he did not say 
it he thought it, — so its all one in the Greek/' 

Leary had other difficulties to obviate ; for 
Captain Drummond, fearing that some of his 
fooleries might tempt Norman to laugh, and 
thus renew the effusion of blood, refused to 
admit him within the tent, till he had sworn by 
all the saints in the calendar, " that Mr Mac 
albin had never smiled at any thing he had 
ever said or done, and never would while he 
lived or breathed. " 

Captain Drummond could no longer with- 
stand the kindness of Leary. He was admit- 
ted into the tent, and continued to discharge 
the arduous duties entrusted to him with <rreat 
tenderness and fidelity. 



END OF VOL. U. 



Jvhn \Rtir, l'tinur, 
Fdiuburgb, IB 1 5. 
