OWEN CASTLE; 

OR, 

WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 

IN FOUR VOLUMES. 



BY 

MARY ANN SULLIVAN, 

LAFE of the theatres royal, LIVERPOOL, MANCHESTER 
NEWCASTLE, BIRMINGHAM, AND NORWICH. 



Know Ihen this truth, eno'.^gh for man to know, 
Virtne alone is happiness below. POPE. 



SECOND EDITION 
VOL. IIL 

LONDON: 

PRINTED FOR 

A. K. NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENllAI L-STREET. 



1823. 



Edward Hodson, Printer, Ij, Cross Street, Katton Garden. 



V.3 



OWEN CASTLE; 



OR 



Which is the Heroine? 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Lady liizowen to Omphale Carlton, 
''My BELOVED Friend, 

'• The state of health 
under which Sir Matthew labours wear 
TTie with suspense of the crudest nature, 
for still his life continues in a state of un- 
certainty. Night and morning do I de- 
voutly address the throne of all mercies, 
and implore his recovery with the most 
fervent sincerity ; but I fear the affection 

LOV. Ill, B 



-5 OWEN CASTLE ; 

due from a wife does not prompt my 
prayers; for there is another whose suffer- 
ings on my account have made him dear 
to my lacerated heart. Oh! my friend! had 
I been less conscientious, he had been 
blest in honour and repose; as it is, I have 
driven him from his happy home, a dis- 
graced u^anderer, a prey to ill requited 
love, and with the unjust thought that I 
regard not his wretchedness. My hus- 
band has been informed by some unwor^ 
thy spy upon my actions, that I bear too 
strong an interest in my heart for that 
wronged and noble youth ; this fires his 
jealousy, which vents itself in the sorded 
language of his avaricious soul. I am per- 
petually the object of his cruel taunts 
and persecuting violence: capricious from 
doubtful health, fatigued by confinement^ 



OR, WHrCH IS THE HEROINE? 3 

and tenacious of attention, he wearies all 
around him; he has, with brutal asperity 
confessed his design of never allowing me 
on his recovery, the least intercourse with 
the world ; denies my request of permit- 
ting you, my friend, to reside with me, 
which would enable me to undergo with 
content the harsh usage I am compelled to 
endure. Yes, my friend, though bought 
by the loss of liberty and joy, I have 
not a home wherein I can shelter the 
sister of my affection. — I am a gaudy 
prisoner in a stately edifice, shackled by 
a doating tyrant, whose only pleasure i& 
his captive's pain. How will you pity and 
sympathize in my afflictinn, when I dis- 
cover to you that I have been the help- 
less dupe of the vilest deception; encom- 
passed by arts woven into the impenetra- 
K 2 



4 OWEN gastle; 

ble web of treachery and falsehood. Oh 
relentless enemies! You have blasted my 
youth with corroding anguish and repen- 
tance! But why do I thus lament? My 
sorrows find no redress in cries of woe, 
no redress awaits me but the 'peaceful 
grave! 

'^ It appears that Sir Matthew has 
looked into the accounts of my dear lost 
aunt*s steward, and by them confuted the 
agent of the hated Mrs. Wallace, as the 
debt of the two thousand pounds has been 
proved a false one, and the dreadful busi- 
ness that involved me in entanglements 
the most destructive to my peace, is now 
clearly adjusted. How do I lament my 
weakness, that could not combat the de- 
signs of my destroyer; but ignorant of 
b3 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE f 5 

tlie base craft then practising against me, 
exhausted by fatigue, harrassed by per- 
plexity and grief at my aunf s misfortunes, 
how could I detect so cruel a device to 
ensnare me r Alas! I fell a devoted victim 
into the toil prepared to enthral me. I 
should not murmur, were my \vant of 
fortitude only felt by myself, but to have 
involved another being in my misery is 
a load of grief from which I never can 
emerge. I have endeavoured at atone- 
ment, and a faint hope gleams through 
the darkness of despair. Theobald Ray- 
mond, commissioned by me, has seen the 
bishop of the diocese^ explained the pro- 
vocation his impassioned friend had given 
him, when he rashly challenged Sir 
Matthew ; his uniform moral conduct, his 
respectable family, his youth, all have 



6 OWEN CASTLE ; 

been fully analyzed and proclaimed by his 
ardent friend, in the colours of truth and 
virtuous friendship ; he has been indefati- 
gable in procuring the most eligible 
vouchers for the purity of the forlorn wan- 
derer's life. The divines have been pleased 
to take the young ecclesiastic's character 
into consideration, and give us reason to 
^ hope the former uniform conduct of the 
offender (should Sir Matthew live) will 
mitigate the wrath of the church. Heaven 
soften and incline the heart of the bishop 
to mercy ; guard the dear wanderer from 
every peril, and finally restore him to tran- 
quillity and the consideration of the world* 
All our efforts to gain tidings of him hi\\e 
proved ineffectual. His friend Theobald 
Raymond is now in search of him, angels 
prosper his kind endeavours, for until I 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 7 



hear he is in safety, sleep will never weigh 
my swollen eye- lids down, or peace attend 
my tear bedewed pillow. 

"Accept, dearest sister, the enclosed 
bill for present use, nor blush to let me 
know your wants, for ever will you retain 
the sincere affection of your friend and 
sister, the unhappy, 

" Grace Fitzowen.' 

Rufus had just finished the melan- 
choly epistle of his beloved Grace, which 
filled him with gratitude to her and 
Theobald for their anxiety and exertions 
on his account, when a tall figure with a 
sallow countenance stalked into the room, 
and making close up to him, cried, " Art 
thou the persetuted man, suspected wrong- 
fully." 



S OWEN CASTLE; 

" I am friend," returned Rufus, with a 
look of surprize, yet respectful composu re, 
for he perceived in the uncouth figure 
before him the formal manners of a starch 
quaker, a sect of people for whom lie 
entertained the greatest veneration. 

" Thou art innocent I learn, and known 
unto the woman of distant clime, who was 
robbed and lay e'en at the door of death ; 
yea, verily, friend, I say unto thee, that 
wicked one was prime agent of Belzebub, 
and the men of justice should lay hold on 
him, that he might hang by the neck like 
unto a dog, a frightful example to evil 
doers." Here he raised himself on his tip 
toes, and after heaving a sort of long 
$igh, he again addressed himself to Rufus, 
" I am come by the request of the maiden 
V 5 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE** 9 

Sarah Fairfield, to make enquiry into the 
state of the abused woman called a mu- 
latto ; and to give unto her the advice 
and assistance that she may stand in need 
of." 

The benevolence of the quaker was so 
strongly conspicuous in the midst of his 
singular gestures and rigid habit, that 
it excited in the beholder reverence, and 
banished risibility. Rufus bowing, left 
the room, and sent Chloe to him; she 
drew back at the sight of the stranger ; 
the quaker regarding her with complacen- 
cy, walked straight up to her, and placing 
his hands upon his breast, and drawing 
his meagre body erect with a face intended 
to express kindness and encouragement^ 
but so far was it from obeying the owner's 



10 OWEN castle; 

design, that it seemed more in ridicule 
than gentleness to gaze on the sable aspect 
of the intimidated Chloe. With a preach- 
ing and discordant strain he began — '•' Thy 
black face proclaims thee of African race, 
and a slave to usurpers of freedom ; yea, 
verily ! woman, thou art come out of the 
land of avaricious men to one of liberty ; 
then let thy heart Uft up in thankfulness, 
for thou art amongst christians that will 
keep thee from bondage and all cruelty ; 
the lash of unkindness shall smart thy 
back no more ; yea, verily ! I say again 
unto thee, thy trouble passeth away like 
unto a summer's storm, and a sky clear 
and calm will succeed, yea ! it will succeed 
in lasting brightness." 

Chloe stared at him in wonder, not 
b6 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 11 

comprehending the drift of his address ; 
bondage and Hberty were words that im- 
pressed her with a fear of some new disas- 
ter, and with a tremulous voice she 
returned ; '^ you come to take me, I no 
go, no leave my missy, for you ugly 
man's." 

He smiled at her reflection on hi>s person, 
and cried, " It is not the comely form 
and blooming face that doeth good, evil 
springeth from such empty pride, and 
the beauty of the body is like unto a 
tempting peach, it often hideth rottenness 
of heart ; but thou art a ivoman, and 
vanity is thy birth right, yet thou should- 
est not prize fairness of skin, nor the 
redness of roses, being as thou art blick ; 
were I to judge thee from thy colour, 



IS OWEN castle; 

I should say satan were busy with thee, 
and no good abideth in thy mind; but 
I am more merciful, and will look for 
deeds ere I do give ray opinion of thee ; 
yea, verily ! beauty is like unto a slender 
and showy garment, soon falling to decay, 
and slighted by every beholder." 

'^ Me no understand vat vou talk of /^ 
said she, •• vat you vant ?** 

" Vat you vant !" echoed he, screwing 
his lank cheeks, wide mouth and sharp 
nose, into an imitation of her round full 
face, and staring widely with his small 
grey eyes, in return at the fiery glance 
of her full black ones, " Thou art an 
lingraciolis person, anger is in tliee, yea! 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 15 

the wicked one is now tempting thy spirit 
to wax wroth." 

" Me in vexations," cried Chloe in a 
passionate accent stamping her foot, ^' me 
no vant you." 

" Yea !*' returned he, " the evil one 
worketh in thee with mighty force, and I 
will shake him out," so saying he laid 
his hands upon her shoulders, and shook 
her violently, she screamed with fright, 
anger and madness ; he endeavouring to 
correct her impetuosity^ cried, " thou art 
rebellious, and fighteth with the spirit 
that possesses thee, but I will convert thee 
to meekness, and drive him out; yea, 
verily! he cometh out with exceeding 
fury," She burst into tears, and sobbed 



14 OWEN castle; 

with passion, — " when the rain falleth 
the storm abateth" said he, relinquishing 
his hold. 

She joyfully made her escape, and hast- 
ened lo make her complaints to the land-^ 
lady, who informed her, he went by the 
name of the good quaker, and often 
spoke at the meeting, and executed the 
commissions of the young heiress, Lady- 
Sarah Fairfield, who had abundance of 
benevolence, and was always seeking for 
objects of charity, and she dare say would 
be kind to her mistress." 

Charity was a word Chloe had never 
heard applied to her lady before, and she 
was very indignant at her mistress being 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 15 

brought so low as to be supposed in need 
of relief. 

*' But why for," said she^ " he shake 
me so?" 

'^ Oh!' returned the landlady " he only 
wanted to convert and make you a quaker ; 
he is odd in his ways to be sure, but he 
means no harm, you had best go to him.'* 

" Me would no go for the plantation of 
my master; me wish him go." 

" I am going,*' cried he, ascending a few 
of the stairs, and popping his head over 
the bannister, " I will not abide in thy 
dwelling; here is a note from the maiden 
Sarah, give it unto thy lodger, for 1 will 



16 OWEN CASTLE; 

not deal henceforth with her handmaid, 
she hath vexed me^ yea! vexed me much." 

** Ah! sir/* said the simple woman, "she 
is a foreigner and knows no better." 

" She] is foreign ! very foreign to gentle 
ness,'* said he. 

" If you good man me like you very 
great much, but me have pity for my 
lady who once rich, but now she sick 
and poor, in stranger country, no body 
love and fret like Chloe." Here the ho- 
nest black let fall a shower of tears, and 
strove to apologize to the quaker in the 
following strain, while the woman of the 
house went to deliver the note to Om- 
phale, " Me mean no harm to any, me 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 17 

sorry me offend, me feared you come to 
take away my mistress, or de parson." 

"What parson," asked the quaker, 
melted by her weeping, *' I saw no 
parson.'* 

"Oh yes/ he is no like himself, but 
he be parson for all dat, me know him very 
well, so sweet he talk ; he love missy 
Fitzbeauchamp, he fight for her, but now 
she great lady of big castle ; she loved my 
lady well, but cross old chum-chum no 
let her live in castle she say in letter ; she 
be sorry, my lady sorry, I sorry too/* 

" Did the parson fight ? (said the qua- 
ker, shaking his head and exalting him- 
self on his toes, ) nay, he should not be 
a fighting parson." 



IS OWEN CASTLE; 

" When love be in de heart cle brain 
be hot, he was so cruel cheat by old 
chum-chum^ who steal bis love from him." 

" Thou talkest of love like unto a 
turtledove, yea! like unto a turtledove 
dressed in crows feathers," cried he, smil- 
ing at her conceit, and looking at her 
face. 

" Ah! me know love be sad thing, 
(sighed she, casting her eyes on the 
ground,) me like to die when Zampy go 
away with massa, but me would not leave 
my lady ; he no good lover like de parson, 
he no fight for Chloe, him and massa both 
bad and tit go together." Resentment 
kindled in her eye, and she wiped awaj 
her tears. 



©R, WHICH rs THE HEROINE? I3 

"" Thou 5peakest in parables unto me, 
and thy tongue knoweth not English; 
be faithful unto thy mistress, and friends 
may arise in her time of need ; (he stalk- 
ed out of the doo", then turning round, 
said) thou art possessed of virtues, 
fidelity is a mighty one, nor is the face, 
though black, unpleasing to thy sight.** 
(Chloe smiled.) *' Thy teeth are as 
snow upon my beaver, and showeth to 
advantage ; thou art also young, but skit- 
tish, I fear, in sundry ways; thou criest 
one instant and titterest in another. Wilt 
thou come to our meeting and be 
admonished, and listen unto many good 
things which I will unfold to ihy igno- 
rance?" 

*^ Me will go if you good nature, but 
no shake me." 



20 OWEN CASTLE; 

'^ Yea, I shook thee in friendliness, 
but will iio more offend in the like man- 
ner. Wilt thou come?" 

" Yes^ yes, me come, if my lady better/' 

" I shall make thee keep thy word. I 
will convert thy Saracen notions unto 
pious meekness. Yea ! I will perform a 
work ! a crreat work !" He turned sud- 
denly on his heel and departed. 

The note from Lady Sarah ran thus : — 

^' Hearing from the mouth of report, 
that thou art in trouble, and much abus- 
ed by a wicked robber ; I do proffer unto 
unto thee my good will and assistance ; 
and desire to know by my trusty messen- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 21 

ger Jonathan, how I may render service 
to thee. Thou art a stranger injsi foreign 
chme, and entitled to the considerate pro- 
tection of every christian. 

" Thine in friendship, and sisterly love^ 
'' Sarah Fairfield." 

*' Fairfield! (said Omphale, looking 
on the signature) my benefactress speak 
often of one Fairfield, who was friend to 
my father; me wish to see her ladyship 
very much." She wrote a letter in return, 
to the following effect ; 

" Madam, 

" For the kind intentions 
contained in your letter, I return you my 
grateful thanks ; and should request a 
few moments conversation, on a very in- 



22 OWEN CASTLE; 

teresting subject, if I did not fear in- 
truding too much on your condescending 
goodness to an unknown invalid. My 
late benefactress, Mrs. Milbourne, was 
known to Mr. Fairfield, who may not im- 
probably be related to you, madam. 
Were I not confined by a severe wound, 
1 should beg leave to attend you at your 
own house, bat relying on the bene- 
volence that prompted your address to a 
defensless stranger, I for once intreat 
the honour of a visit from you, an obliga- 
tion e\er to be remembered by your 
grateful, 

*' Humble Servant, 
'^ OxMPHALE Carlton." 

The exertion of writing, (though sup- 
ported by Chloe) proved much greater 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 23 

than she expected ; and she sunk ex- 
hausted in her bed while seahng^the letter. 
It was dispatched by the lad of the 
house, who brought word that Lady 
Sarah would call earl}^ on the following 



24 OWEN castle; 



CHAPTER XXIV 



X^FUS remained wrapped in melan- 
choly abstraction ; the future was indif- 
ferentj since his beloved had become the 
wife of another; life possesed no charms 
for him. After his flight from Owen 
Castle^ he concealed himself in the wood- 
cutter's premises, though so near his pur- 
suers, had escaped detection ; when the 
serch became more distant, he reached 
London in security; from whence he wrote 
to his frther, who assured of his safety. 



on, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 25 

and joined in the efforts of his friend 
Theobald to restore him to his home; 
but forbore to inform him of their endea- 
vours, least the malice of his enemies 
should couteract them, and their hopes fell 
fallacious to the ground. Rufus quitted 
London, and took up his abode at a 
lone cottage, in a bye road near Hornsey. 
The depression of his spirits enxireased, his 
food was untouched, his appetite forsook 
him ; he would stray in the wood for days 
together ; his shelter the branches of a 
spreading oak, his pillow the damp 
moss that gathered at its root. He had 
been wandering desolate and absorbed in 
the feverish abstaction of one bordering 
on insanity, when he was surprised by 
those who were in search of Augustus^ 
and was committed to prison. 

VOL, II r. C 



26 OWEN CASTLE; 

Omphale entreated him to remain in 
her lodgings until she should recover;, 
to which he readily agreed, hoping to hear 
frequently, through her means, of Lady 
Fitzowen. Anxious to dispel her fears 
on his account, he wrote under the name 
of friend, and expressed his everlasting 
gratitude for the solicitude she so warmly 
evinced in his fate ; the precaution he 
used to shield her from the jealous dotard, 
to whom cruel destiny had given her, 
marked the delicate strength of his attach- 
ment; every line glowed with the effu- 
sions of a devoted heart, and betrayed 
the ardent lover struggling with a forced 
resignation of his happiness. When 
Grace received this letter, couched as it 
was, to avoid the prying eye of the baro- 
net, her heart beat high with pleasure, 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 27 

for the character of the writing was well 
known to her; the style, though confined, 
was^ fervent, respectful, and painted art- 
fully the emotions of a breast burning with 
more than friendship could dictate. She 
shuddered at the villainy of Augustus, 
and wept at the sufferings of Omphale. 
The watchful spy that hovered over eacii 
action of the youthful Grace, soon brought 
word to her tenacious lord, that a letter 
had arrived which illiunined his ladv*s 
eyes with pleasure ; she was immediately 
commanded to surrender it to his inspec- 
tion. Bowed to the earth by the weigiit 
of his tyranny, and dreading the effect a 
burst of passion might have on his pre- 
carious life, she resisted not the demand, 
but gave it into his hand. After a strict 
perusal, he pondered on its contents with 
C 2 



28 OWEN CASTLE; 

gloomy dissatisfaction. His hanging brow, 
surcharged with gathering anger ; his white 
cheek flnshing, and his skinny iip quiver- 
ing with the workings of his breast, fore- 
told a rising storm, ready to fall on the 
trembler before him. " Come hither, 
madam, and raise me up, I want to speak 
to you," cried he. The timid beauty 
obeyed and upheld in her delicate arms, 
the a«ed destroyer of her youthful 
joys. Not the downy pillows that softly 
propped him round, could equal the po- 
lished softness of his supporters, or vie 
v/ith the rounded shoulder and Venu*» 
bust that received his withered head. 

" How dare you, Lady Fitzowen, act 
in opposition to my decree, by seeking 
to reinstate that vagabond desperado in 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 29 

his former rank and estimation, as I 
find yon have been doing by the answer 
of your romantic friend ? You ought ta 
resent his daring attack upon my hfe ; 
instead of mitigating the crime, you 
should blazen it to the destruction of the 
offender. Zounds ! madam, do you sup- 
pose I will submit to be abused, and my 
name stigmatized by the fancied love- 
heroism of a silly girl, who knows not 
how to respect her husband, or guard her 
reputation from the assaults of a design- 
ing villain ? Where, madam, comes this 
wonderous interest ; if love did not 
prompt it ? Yes it is plain," continued he, 
rage firing his eye, and giving strength 
to his voice and weakened frame — *' It is 
plain you can love. You were, awhile back, 
drowned in tears for William JMurray* 
c3 



so OWEN CASTLE; 

you can now banish his fate from your 
remembrance ; a husband's authority re- 
strains you not, and be ready to fly into 
the arms of a wretch that aimed at his hfe, 
my very hfe^ madam ! But be not im- 
patientj madam, I shall not trouble you 
long ; you w^ish me dead, I know. — Nay, 
restrain those indignant glances that 
threaten I know not what on him that 
dares suspect your virtue; but hear me 
declare, that I not only suspect your 
wavering honour, but openly accuse ** 

" Dare not proceed. Sir!" cried his 
abused wife, her meek spirit roused to 
resentment by the slander heaped upon 
her ; " dare not ruin my name, my un- 
blemished name, as you have i my happi- 
ness. Oh! why, just heaven, am L thus 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 31 

t 

•persecuted?" she continued, raising her 
'ey«s ; "Is it not enough that I am mi- 
serable, fettered by dotage, a victim to 
treachery, and robbed of all earthly com- 
^fort ; must I be stigmatized with infamy? 
Oh ! aged man, remember thou mayest 
be on thy death-bed ; repent, or dread to 
meet the awful summons of thy Creator." 
Her lovely eyes swam in tears, which, as 
she finished the sentence, diffused them- 
selves over her pallid cheek. 

The Reverend Mr. Maskall entered the 
chamber, and enquired minutely after the 
irritated Baronet's health. " Worse, 
worse," muttered he; then turning to 
Grace, bade her quit the chamber. She 
gladly rose to obey him. Mr Maskall 
shook her hand, and begged she would 
c 



32 OWEN CASTLE; 

not give way to grief on Sir Matthew's 
account. She coldly drew it back, and 
quitted the apartment. 

The visit of the clergyman, whether 
spiritual or otherwise, tended to calm the 
perturbation of the invalid; and they con- 
tinued in close conversation many hours, 
none daring to iptrude on their privacy. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? S3 



CHAPTER XXV. 



j^T the appointed time. Lady Sarah. 
Fairfield and her uncle arrived at the 
lodgings of Omphale. 

*' I am come, according to thy desire^ 
friend ; and have brought my uncle, who 
was anxious to see thee,*' her ladyship in- 
troducing an austere looking man, dressed- 
in the costume of a quaker. When they 
were seated beside the invalid's bed, he 
thus addressed her : ** Thou speakest of 
one of the name of Fairfield,- who was> 
c & 



S4 OWEN CA^f LK ; 

friend, to thy patroness ; was he one of 
the faithful?" 

^* Me very ignorant of my family ; all 
me know, that my mother was a hlack 
"ivoman, mistress of a plantation in St. 
George's, Jamaica, who love an Eng- 
lish man of the name of Carlton; 
he leav^e her, and she poisoned her^ 
self; then the good madam Milbourne 
take me, and very kind ; she reared me as 
her own/' A heavy sigh escaped her 
lips, as she mentioned the name of her 
patroness. 

*' Who took the plantation then in 
hand ?" asked he. 

" Mr. Milbourne, he managed for me^ 



OR, WHIGH ISTHE HEROINE? 3d 

me believe, but me never know how 
that was.'* 



*' He had a son, had he not ?*' 

" Oh ! yes, me know that to my sor- 
row ; Augustus his name." She here re- 
lated all that had passed since her arrival 
in OEngland. 

" Was no portion given thee, from the 
produce of thy mother's plantation ?" 

*^ None; my beloved patroness gave 
me jewels of great value, that's all." 

"** I much fear the man called Mil- 
bourne was not a faithful steward unto 
the dependant orphan which be took 
. c 6 



S6 OWEN CASTLE; 

charge of. Thy father's name was Carl- 
ton ; what station in Hfe did he hold ?" 

'^ Mrs. Milbourne say he was great 
man in England ; and was anxious to tell 
me more, but she had a sudden faint, and 
die." 

" There is a man called Lord Orkley, 
whose family name is Carlton/' said the 
gentle Sarah. 

^* He no be my father, impossible/' 
eried Omphale ; *' me am not so for- 
tunate!" 

** There is a great mystery I do per- 
ceive in thy history, and much I do fear, 
that thy birth-right hath been wrested 



6R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE i 3T 

from thee unfairly, but rest thee content, 
I will be industrious in thy b-nalf, Novr 
say unto me truly, did not this female 
friend, Milbourne, tell thee her private 
history ?" 

** Never,** said Omphale ; *^ yet she 
melancholy, and often weep when alone, 
which would hurt me much; and I tried 
in vain to comfort her." 

" She was an abused woman, though 
exalted above many ; riches, beauty, and 
titles are but vanity of man's creating, 
and cannot shield him from surrounding 
dangers. One thing I have to ask of 
thee, did the man Carlton wed thy mo- 
ther ^ 



3* ©WEN GASTIiE; 

A deep blush glowed on the cheek of 
Omphale as she answered, " My mother, 
though black, was virtuous." 

" I am glad to hear it," said he, " for 
thy sake. Hast thou no friends to whom 
I can make application ?" 

" Me have no friends but one," said 
she, " but she not able to befriend me 



'** What dost thou mean ?'* asked her 
ladyship, smiling at the simplicity of Om- 
phale ; who answered, " When she was 
poor, Miss Fitzbeauchamp, she my best 
friend; but now Lady Fitzowen, she have 
no power." 



OR, WHICH IS THE tf EROINE ? 3 J 

^^ Fitzbeauchamp didst thou^ay!" cried 
the quaker, fixing his eyes on hers."— 
« Yes." 

" Is her mother living?" — *' No, long 
dead she tell me." 

" 'Has she a brother ?" — *' No — yes, mc 
remember, he was lost." 

" 'Was there no account of him af- 
ter ?*' — " No, they never hear any." 

" Poor Eliza, she was a suffering wo- 
man,*' said the gentle Sarah, with a pity- 
ing sigh. 

'^ She was," cried he ; then turning to 
Omphale, said " When I have looked 



40 OWEN CASTLE ; 

into thy perplexities, I will inform thee 
of thy friend's story, which will much 
amaze thee. I was known unto thy 
benefactress, and for her sake will do my 
endeavours for thy service. Thy father 
is a man of power, if I mistake not, but 
imperiously minded ; thou wilt find it a 
bard task to make him own thee; but do 
not despair, from trouble cometh happi- 
ness, and malice often turneth to good- 
will. Thou shalt be removed into my 
kinswoman's dwelling, and abide no more 
in thy ill accommodation." 

The heart of Omphale was full ; gra- 
titude, wonder, and surprise; all conspired 
to transport her. A father was found, as 
sudden as unexpected, whose neglect had 
thrown her a defenceless claimant on the 



•R, WHICH IS THE HEllOINE ? 41 

•ompassion of strangers. Afte** pouring 
forth the strong emotions of her agitated 
bosom to the benevolent quakers, she 
related the situation of Lady Fitzowen, 
and the subsequent misfortunes of Rufus 
Marmaduke, who was included in the 
invitation of the quaker, and brought at 
the same time with Omphale to Lady 
Sarah^s mansion. 

Mr. Stanley was informed of all that 
had occurred to Omphale, and warmly 
united his efforts to those of the humane 
quaker*s, in procuring authentic proofs of 
my Lord Orkley*s marriage with her mo- 
ther. The former guardians of Augustus 
were resorted to, the will of his father 
examined, and many documents brought 
forward, that proved the property of the 



^45 OWEN CASTLE; 

mother of Omphale had been embezzled, 
-and the deserted child wronged of her 
due. 

The kind Mrs* Milbourne's design to 
filiate the crime of her husband, by 
^giving Omphale possession of what was 
vOriginally her own, if refused by Augustus, 
was, by the rash generosity of a moment, 
influenced by passions far different to 
those of self-preservation, rendered abor- 
tive. 

The motive of Lord Orkley, in never 
laying claim to his wife's property, was 
unknown and singular ; his lordship had 
married again, but having no children, 
and much cause of complaint against the 
light manners ^of his lady, a separation 



OR, WHrCH IS THE ITEROINE .'' ^3 

was obtained, and she banished his pre- 
sence for ever. 

The worthy qiiaker, and ever kind Mr. 
Stanley, proceeded to the seat of his lord- 
ship, which lay in Scotland, in order to 
prepare him to receive his newly found 
daughter ; during their absence the amia- 
ble Lady Sarah endeavoured to lighten 
the time, and satisfy the ardent wish of 
Gmphale and Rufus, by a recital of the 
intricacies that surrounded the birth of 
her friend and his beloved Grace, in 
which the private history of her benefac- 
tress was also involved. 



4A OWEN castle; 



CHAPTER XXVL 



Captain Stoughton of the navy, had 
lost his wife in the third year of his mar- 
riage and was left with the charge of two 
daughters, the eldest named Mary, the 
youngest Eliza. The property of Captain 
Stoughton was very small, and having no 
male heir, descended to a distant relation 
at his death, by whom his daughters were 
protected during his frequent absence. 
The residence of this guardian was in a 
retired part of Wales ; he was elderly and 
unmarried, and being recluse in his mode 
of living, and of a gloomy disposition. 



^R, WHfCH IS THE ftEROlNE .^ 54 

they had no opportunity of being fami- 
liarised in the gaiety of city nianiiers, or 
of enjoying even the society of the 
few scattered «eats the neighbourhood 
might have afforded. Their education 
was useful and refined, their accomphsh- 
ments only consisted of drawing and fine 
needle work. The aged harper of the 
village instructed them in the govern- 
ment of his instrument, on which they 
were great proficients, they were in 
simplicity and open ingenuousness of 
iieart, the chiWren of purity and inno- 
cence. Mary was less animated than her 
sister, whose spirit was hght and aiiy ; 
and freely sparkled in her beauteous eyes, 
the flowing ringlets of her waving hair 
streamed on her slioulders in wanton 
playfulnes, as she bounded o'er the moun- 



46 OWEN CASTLE; 

tain or paced the entangled vale; a Ilehe 
in blooming beauty, whose laughing dim- 
pled face seemed to bid defiance to care 
or sorrow. It was one evening in the. 
early spring, when the tender leaves were 
budding forth, and the face of nature 
wore a cheering aspect, that Eliza and 
her sister sallied forth to enjoy a scene so 
replete with pleasing sensations. " Let 
us go towards the narrow brook," cried 
Eliza, " and rest ourselves upon the 
sloping bank, we can then see the great 
house." 

^' Why would you wish to go that 
way,'* returned Mary, " we don't ^know 
the inhabitants ; then what avails our gaz- 
ing at a fine house?" 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 47^ 

*' Liid, sister/' cried the lively Eliza, 
'* yx)u always want a reason for every 
thing." 

" I should hope, sister,'* said Marv, 
" you would never do any thing without 
one." 



" liideed, but I often do," said she, 
** but not now, for," she suddenly turned 
her liead, and exclaimed, pulling her 
sister hastily forward — "There he is! there 
he is!" The delight pictured in her animat- 
ed face surprised her sister, who following 
the direction of her eyes, beheld an elegant 
ydun]g man, dressed in the uniform of a 
naval officer, springing over a distant 
stile, and evidently pursuing them. " Run 
sister," cried Eliza, *' or he will catch us." 



4S * OWIIN CASTLE ; 

*' Restrain this wildness, Eliza, what 
will he suppose; this is encouragement 
not a repulse, how came you to know 

him ?" 

*' I can't answer any thing now, only 
that I think him the handsomest, as well 
as the most presuming man in the world ; 
but run, for I am determined to escape 
him.** — She dragged her sister along, re- 
gardless of her entreaties to stop, but the 
officer outstripped their speed, and catch- 
ing the corner of Eliza's muslin cloak, 
compelled her to stand still." ** Whither 
away, my wood nymphs ; does the sight 
of a man alarm you, that you shun him 
thus ? By heavens ! such beauty never 
met the eye of man before, and 'tis cruel 
to deny his gazing o» it." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 49 

Eliza laughed and whispered to her 
sister, '' How he talks, look at his white 
teeth/' then turned her face full upon 
him, but meeting his eyes let her own 
fall on the ground ; her cheeks crimsoned 
with confusion : '^ If you are the gentle- 
man your dress bespeaks, pray let go 
your hold, sir," caid Mary with displeasure, 
" our guardian will wonder at our stay.** 

^* I cannot part with my little Thalia/* 
said he, looking wistfully in Eliza's face, 
^* we are old acquaintances, my fair run- 
away/* 

** No! indeed, Mary, I never saw him 
till yesterday, just hereabout/' 

^^ And the time has appeared so tedious 

VOL. HI. D 



50 OWEN CASTLE; 

since then (returned he) that I longed for 
the same hour to arrive, when the felicity 
might be renewed; allow me to intrude 
a moment on you time, and to ask, if you 
know the habitation of a Mr. Browne, I 
have letters to deliver to him from Cap- 
tain Stoughton. '' From my father/' cried 
Eliza, joyfully. 

'^ Is Captain Stoughton father to such 
fair creatures ?" asked he with surprise. 

" Captain Stoughton is our father, sir,'» 
said Mary, ^* and if you will give the let- 
ters to our chai-ge, you will greatly oblige 
us. Is he in health?" 

" I have the pleasure to assure you he 
is perfectly well. I have the honour to 



OR, WHIck IS THE HEROINE ? 51 

serve under his command ; but our ship 
putting into Portsmouth, I procured leave 
of absence, to give a flying salute to an 
uncle of mine, who lives in this neigh- 
bourhood, so he stowed my luggage with 
these letters, and a present for each of his 
darlings, as he calls you ladies ; and I am 
extremely happy at meeting with you so 
unexpectedly.*' 

'' The happiness is ours, sir," returned 
Mary ; " to hear of the health of so tender 
a parent as we boast, is indeed a great 
gratification." 

" I should have arrived at vour abode 
early on yesterday, if I had not, by 
the luckiest accident, met an old school- 
fellow on the way, who is on a visit at 
D 2 



52 OWEN CASTLE; 

yonder house. In the evening I en- 
countered this charming Hebe, whose 
pardon I now entreat, for the hasty chase 
I gave her ; hkewise for my presumption 
in snatching a kiss." 

" Oh;* cried EHza, '' if I had known 
you had come from my fathers ship, I 
would have given you one wilhngly, so 
say no more about that. But come be- 
tween us/' so saying, she Hnked her arm 
within his, her sister did the same, and 
they proceeded homeward. ^^ Now tell 
us how my father looks ; what he said ; 
when we are to see London ; and what 
present you have brought us. I long to 
see my dear father. I wish he would 
leave that frightful man-of-war and 
come and live with us. 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 53 

The innocence of her beaming coun- 
tenance, her playful manners, open ac[- 
dress, and simple, though affectionate 
expressions and inquiries about her father, 
filled the polished tar with admiration. 
" Surely," thought he, '' this is the most 
lovely and unsophisticated child of nature 
that ever inhabited the earth ; what would 
appear forwardness in another, is in her 
native purity, unL>hackled by frigid art; 
in her, all that is desirable in wo- 
man unites — beauty, youth, and inno- 
cence." 

'^ Do you know, sir, it is two years since 
I saw my father; and I've grown so 
much, he'll be surprised when he sees 



D 3 



^4 

*' Who would not/' sighed he, ''-at so 
much lovehness Y* 

Mr. Browne received the young heu- 
tenant with every respect, and invited him 
to remain a few days with himself and fair 
wards. The invitation was readily ac- 
cepted. 

The Honourable George Frederick 
Fitzbeauchamp was highly extolled for 
his virtues as a man, and his bravery as a 
British sailor. The good opinion of the 
parent was in unison with the predilection 
of his daughter, who beheld in the manly 
form of the young officer every charm that 
could adorn the human mind and coun- 
tenance; nor was he less sensible of her 
advantages. A mutual passion was im- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 55 

bibed by both, and the consequences as 
suddenly followed : about a month after 
his appearance, Eliza became his bride. 
Mr. Browne approved the match ; because 
the rank and expectations of the hasty 
lover were much greater than a girl, 
without fortune or interest^ could expect; 
and never dreamed that a decision so 
rashly made by an impetuous youth, was 
likely to teem with future distress to the 
then happy Eliza. Imperious duty called 
the bridegroom away, and she was left in 
all the sorrow so early a separation might 
be supposed to create in a bosom so ar- 
dently attached. The reason he gave for 
not disclosing his marriage to his family, 
was the displeasure of his father, the Earl 
of Northerland, on whose influence he 

D 4 



56 OWEN castle; 

depended for promotion in his profes- 
sion. 

Captain Stoughton was uneasy at the 
clandestine union that had taken place, 
but hoping all would turn out well, for- 
bore to express the fearful bodings of his 
parental bosom to his favourite son-in-law. 
In an action wherein he greatly distin- 
guished himself, the brave captain fell, his 
last breath wafting a blessing on his 
children. 

On tlie return of the Honourable 
George Frederick Fitzbeauchamp to his 
beloved Eliza, he found a smiling cherub 
reclining on her bosom, that awoke the 
new and delightful sensations of a father 



. OR, WHICH IS THE HERfOlNE ? 57 

in his breast. The infant boy was, in- 
deed, a beauteous likeness of himself, and 
he caught him in a transport of joy in 
his eager arms. 



B b 



58 OWEN castle; 



CHAPTER XXVI, 



j\xARY, the gentle and elder sister of 
Eliza, had married a Captain Milbourne, 
of the Guards, whom she first met at her 
guardian's house, who was his relative, 
and to whom lie paid several visits, under 
the name of duty, but enticed by the 
unassuming virtues and placid beauty of 
the gentle Mary, who yielded to his so- 
licitations, and followed him while in his 
unsettled profession. The death of their 
tender parent was severely felt, nor did 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 59 

his name ever pass their lips without a 
sigh of regret for his loss. 

After a short stay, the Honourable Mr. 
Fitzbeauchamp again was obhged to quit 
his lovely wife, to obey the summons of 
glory and honour. In the second year of 
her marriage, Eliza gave birth to a lovely 
daughter, whom she named Grace, and 
anxiously wished to present to her hus- 
band, but duty prevented his appearance ; 
his letters had not been so frequent as 
formerly, his remittances irregularly kept, 
and often wholly withheld, and had not 
frugality been used, she would have se- 
verely suffered for the neglect. 

Mr. Browne being taken unexpectly" 
ill, departed from the world, leaving the 
D 6 



bo OWEN CASTLE ; 

hapless Eliza without home or friend. The 
-sordid son of the late Mr. Browne took 
immediate possession of the premises, 
bringing his wife and children to dislodge 
the unprotected Eliza, who with her babes 
was compelled to seek another shelter at 
a neighbouring farm. The newspapers 
were eagerly perused by the timid Eliza, 
who dreaded to discover the death of her 
husband in every brilliant action of the 
Enterprize man-of-war, in which he 
served. In looking earnestly over one, 
a paragraph engaged her attention, and 
filled her with amazement and misery. 
It ran thus ; — -" We understand, that on 
the fifth of next month, the Right 
Honourable George Frederick Fitzbeau- 
champ, second son of the Earl of Nor- 
therland, and Captain of the Enterprize 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r* 6l 

man of war, will lead to the hymeneal 
altar^ the beautiful and accomplished 
Lady Amanda Woodburn, the only 
daughter of Lord Woodenborough. The 
amiable disposition of that highly de- 
scended young lady gives promise to the 
heroic captain, of every enviable bless- 
ing in the possession of her lovely hand." 

The neglect she had so long and patient- 
ly suffered under, was now accounted for. 
It was clear the once charming Fitzbeau- 
champ was determined to abandon her 
and his helpless infants, for the advan- 
tages a great alliance might give to his 
ambition ; the blow was severe, but it 
did not deprive her of energy, and she 
determined to seek justice for her children, 
t^pugh she despaired of ever tasting hap- 



6? OWEN castle; 

pines?; herself. With the resolution cruelty 
had awakened in her once affectionate 
heart, she prepared for her joum^^y to 
London ; the innocent gaiety that once 
sparkled in her heavenly eyes, and bright- 
ened every feature of her blooming face, 
fled instantaneously, and left a settled 
dejection^ that never was removed. 

On the evening of the day she had 
seen the fatal paper^ she and her children 
were seated in the stage coach, with her 
only attendant, a Welch girl, whose at- 
tachment and honest simplicity had 
recommended her to her notice. Tafliline 
could not speak English sufficiently well 
to be understood far from home, but her 
love for the children made up for all 
defects to i.the youthful mother. In the 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 6$ 

evening of the second day, Eliza entered 
London, the bustle and hght ■ of the 
brilHant shops roused her from her medi- 
tations, and for the first time she reflected 
she had not a place, wherein she might 
tind shelter or protection for the night ; 
she remembered that a letter from her 
sister during her short stay in London, 
was dated from a lodging in Half- moon 
Street, Piccadilly. 

The coach stopped at the Saracen s head. 
Snow-hill ; she desired the book keeper 
to take care of her luggage, as she would 
send for them ; then bidding Tafiline take 
George in her arms, who was delighted 
with the glitter of the jeweller's shops, 
and lisping his pleasure to the equally 
pleased Taffline, continued wakeful and 



04 OWEN CASTLE; 

good humoured. The infant Grace was 
warmly folded in the mantle of Eliza, 
who proceeded with hasty steps along the 
crowded streets, according to the direction 
of the book-keeper; after straying greatly 
out of her way, by repeated enquiries, 
she at length found the street, and eagerly 
knocked at the door of a genteel house. 
A broad squab uncouth figure of a woman, 
with an unprepossessing visage, and sulky 
voice, opened it, and demanded her . 
business. 

" You have apartments to let, may I 
see them ?" said Eliza. 

Mrs. Blunt appeared more inclined to > 
shut the door in her face, than throw it 
back to receive her ; her eye had caught 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 65 

sight of the children, they were in her 
opinion only prognosticators of trouble, 
and she felt no desire for letting her lodg- 
ings to the lady to whom they appeared 
to belong ; she returned in answer to 
Eliza's request, that she was sure her 
lodgings would not suit her. 

" You must allow me to judge of that, 
(said Eliza, advancing into the hall, for 
the wind blew keen through her mantle,) 
my business lies in this part of London, 
and I think the situation would answer 
my purpose/' 

^^ Answer your purpose,** interrupted 
Mrs. Blunt, *^ but I rather thinkihey wont. 
Howsomever, I will just give you a sight 



66 OWEN CASTLE j 

of them ;" so saying she proceeded to- 
wards the stairs. 



" Taffiine, (said Eliza) remain below 
with the infant and George, until my 
return ; go my love to Taffline/' she con- 
tinued, lifting up her veil to kiss the 
ruby lips of the pouting boy. 

Mrs. Blunt beheld her lovely counte- 
nance, and could not conceal her admi- 
ration of her ; and rudely exclaimed " are 
you the mother of these children ; such 
a young creature as t/ou their mother ?" 

" I have that happiness/* cried Eliza. 

" Then (said Mrs. Blunt) you must 
have married very young," 



OR, WKIOH 19 THE HEROINE? . 6^ 

'' I did indetd ; I was little more than 
fifteen ; and blush when I own how incon- 
siderately I took the oath of wedded failh." 

" Inconsiderately, truly, (murmuring, 
said Mrs, Blunt) why the action was down- 
right forwardness ; but the boldness of 
young women now a days is shocking, 
down right pertness, and shameful con- 
duct ; thanks to my own wisdom I did 
not marry until forty, a very proper age, 
let me tell you, for a woman to take upon 
herself the heavy and toilsome duties of 
a wife and family/* 

" I cannot say ('said Eliza) that my 
duty was ever toilsome, or that my dear 
children caused me to think their neces- 
sary and due attendance a trouble." 



6s OWEN CASTLE ; 

They had reached the apartments 
during these few words, when Ehza agreed 
to Mrs Blunt's demand for them, though 
exorbitant, and every thing being agreed 
to proposed she to sleep in them that 
night. " I ask pardon, madam, (cried Mrs. 
Blunt) for being obliged to beg you will 
give me a recommendation concerning 
your character, and such like things, 
because the times are dangerous for house- 
keepers to take in strangers, robbing being 
so common, and downright murder com- 
mitted oftentimes, so that honest folks 
can scarce sleep in peace in their harmless 
beds o'nights. If you will give me a 
character of yourself, ivorth having, you 
may and welcome come here to-night; 
but if you can't, I must beg you without 
no fuss to be off at once " 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 69 

Eliza was surprized and perplexed, and 
returned. " I am sorry tosay I am unknown 
in London^ and^ consequently cannot refer 
you to any one for a satisfactory account 
of me. I arrived this day from Wales^ 
and not wishing to sleep at an inn, I went 
instantly in search of a lodging ; it is now 
late, and as I am a stranger, sure you will 
suffer me to remain one night in your house, 
or a couple of days, and letters shall coA- 
vince you of my respectability,** 

" No, IcarCt ;' abruptly, cried the land- 
lady. 

'^ Wait till to-morrow, and you shall 
have my character from a gentleman of 
the first family and fortune/' 



fO OWEN CASTLE; 

" A gentleman V cried Mrs. Biunt ; 
" aye, aye, I begin to smoak a little. Is 
your husband with you ? tell me that ." 

" You are a strange woman," said Eliza, 
" and if I knew where else to go, I would 
not condescend a reply. My husband is 
not with me, but I daily expect his ar- 
rival. I have come a long journey for 
the purpose of meeting him in the me- 
tropohs ; give me one night's shelter, and 
in the morning '* 

*^ Heaven forbid!" exclaimed Mrs. 
Blunt ; ^' No, no, I am safe now, and will 
keep so. I tell you what young madam : 
your husband, as you calls him, ought 
to be with you. Travelling alone, with 
a family, looks mighty^queer, having no 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROIXE ? 7^ 

recommendation, no friend of repute with 
you neiiher, all is very odd/V Here she 
gave a squint of her eye which she meant 
should express contempt, and sln-ug^ging 
up her shoulders, adued, " I understand 
it ail very well, and am sorry my decent 
hoube won't answer your purpose, I can't 
let my dwelhng to get a bad name." 

*' A bad name, (returned poor Eliza in 
astonishment) I do not conceive your 
meaning." 

" You don't, dont ye, madam (brid- 
ling with insolence.) Perhaps you thinks 
I was born yesterday r Perhaps I can't 
see that you are a madam. Your tale of 
St husband is very fine, but it won't do, 
and 1 will be plain with you. Take an 



72 OWEN CASTLE ; 

honest woman's advice before it's too late. 
Go to the country again^ and earn an honest 
penny ; you are handsome, yo^ng and 
healthy now, but roses fade, and so will 
beauty. I can guess what you are. A fine 
gentleman indeed! Forsooth you know 
what you are about ; but times are hard, 
young women love finery, men have oily 
tongues, all that sort of thing is enticing? 
I guess and pity what you are, I can feel 
for my own sex.-^The vile villains, what 
they have to answer for ! to leave the un- 
happy babes, and their deluded mothers, to 
the wide world. 

^* You ciinnot in this inconsistent spaeoh 
allude to me?" said Eliza, indignation 
kindling in her hitherto mild eye. 



OR, WHICH IS THK HEROINE? 73 

" Mayhap I <iid, and mayhap I did'ent, 
(said she) people can't hang one for think- 
ing, and folks must have a fine share of 
impudence to come to genteel people's 
houses for lodgings for themselves, and 
nobody knows whose children." 

'• Silence your base insinuation, nor 
dare for one instant to couple my conduct 
with suspicion?'* There was a tone of 
liignity and superiority in her voice that 
struckdumbthe landlady. The deportment 
o.f Eliza was graceful yet haughty, insul- 
ted virtue called forth her native pride, 
she looked for a moment with strong con- 
tempt on the person before her, and cried, 
" You are beneath my notice, insulting 
woman! and I will leave your house in- 
stantly. . Were it in my power by the mos^ 

VOL. HI. E 



74 OWEN castle; 

flattering recommendation to re-enter it, 
I would not. [Alone! without protection, 
oh! Providence be careful over me and my 
babes! She burst into tears, her feel lings 
overcame all restraint to conceal her emo- 
tions ; she drew once more her black veil 
over her face, and hastened into the hall, 
where Taffline met her with the children. 
The unhappy mother caught the babe to 
her bosom, little George snatched the 
corner of her mantle and followed her out 
of the door. "Where will the affliction 
of my soul end?" cried the youthful mo- 
ther ; " Where shall I go, what can I do ? 
Woe to my husband's cruel neglect. Alas! 
alas! I, helpless, am driven on the unfeel- 
ing world.'* Taffline saw the agitation 
of her mistress, and with true aflfection 
enquired the cause of her grief. " One 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 75 

only resource remains," exclaimed Eliza, 
and I must not delay. " Want a coach?" 
cried a voice hoarsely from a stand. " Oh 
yes/' said Ehza, anxious to escape from 
the bustle of the streets. The man whip- 
ped up his horses, and let down the 
steps, Eliza and lier little family were 
soon seated in it. "Whereto?" said the 
coachman. " To the city, good man." 

*^ But what part of the city ?" 

'^'^ Good heaven (returned she) what 
will become of me!" She opened her 
pocket book, and in fearful uncertainty 
searched forher husband's last letter. "The 
<lircctioii I want is not here (she cried 
in agony); perhaps you, good man, can tell 
me where- Mr. Stewart, a merchant, lives?" 
E 2 



7^ OWEN CASTLE; 

" I knows, (returned he) that you are 
a Welch woman just oiFthe mountains. 
Do ye think London is like your own 
village, where every body knows his neigh- 
bours r" 

" Hur knows, (cried TafEine in anger 
at his rudeness to her mistress) that kind- 
ness is in hur mountainj but not here; 
Cot bless the day hur sees Wales again.'* 

A person who stood by, heard their 
conversation^ and asked what difficulty 
they laboured under. 

" Why, (sneeringly returned the coach- 
man) these country ladies want a Mr, 
Stewart in London, and because I can't 
without witchcraft drive them to his 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 77 

house without a proper direction Tm un- 
civil. If by her tongue I did'ent knows 
her to be Welch, I could swear she was 
a Paddy^ for none but an Irish woman, 
could blunder in this here manner.'* 
''Faith, (cried another voice) you area 
surly thief to distress the poor cratures 
in the monner you do; sure if they make 
blunders in Irish, you ought to help them 
out in English when they are in a strange 
country, you slang dog ye. "And is it 
Stewart you want my sweet cratures," 
said a man advancing to the door, who 
by his brogue was the person who had 
spoken last. 

" Yes, (eagerly answered Eliza) he is a 
great merchant." 



e3 



78 OWEN CASTLE; 

" A marchant honey, (returned the 
man) sure it's I that can tell you his 
warehouse, for dident I carry goods there 
this morning before day light blinked her 
eye on me.'^ 

*^ Oh, if you can, fsaid Eliza) you will 
save me from much perplexity and dis- 
tress, worthy man ; I will reward you 
thankfully for your service." 

"Why then, my jewel, in the Borough 
is Stewart's warehouse, at the corner of 
Tooley Street, But take advice, silver 
tongue ; you must get rid of your mis- 
takes and your blunders, in this English 
town, or by my faith you will stick in the 
mud ; for of blundering they enjoy greal 
mirth, and the unfortunate soul who 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? JQ 

makes them, be they in distress or joy, 
is all one to their hard hearts: the saints 
be merciful to them for it, I say, and 
learn them to pity the stranger." 

" Here is half a crown, take it for 
your intelligence, and consider me in 
debt for your kindness," said Eliza. 

"Then joy be with the minute I gave 
you the paltry information ; sure I am 
glad of the half crown, for Maurice O'Dris- 
cal is thirsty, wet, and cold, waiting for 
employ in the street, for my tender heart- 
ed cratur I am only a porter and carry a 
load for a trifle." 

" Hold your Irish blarney," cried the 
coachman, shutting to the door. 
£ 4 



so OWEN CASTLE; 

" Och! then good luck to you (svery 
day you see a paving stone/' exclaimed 
the iiibernian as the coach wheeled oiF. 

^^ Oh! Cot pless that foreigner for his 
good wish, (said TafflinC;) hur has got the 
kindheart." 

Eliza pressed her infant to her breast, 
saying *' thou speechless innocent, plead 
with thy angel smiles against the injuries 
thy father harbours in his perverted heart. 
Oh! with th}'- feeble hands encompass 
his neck ; cling to him, and let paternal 
love kindle in his soul, as thy pure lip 
presses his; plead tor thy deserted mother, 
thy helpless brother ; Oh ! my George ! 
(here she drew the little boy who sat with 
Taffline close to her knee,) tell your 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 81 

father, you are defenceless, without 
friends, without any home but his heart ; 
touch his soul with repentance, and, ere 
too late, remind him of thy broken-hearted 
mother." Her tear^ fast fell on the uplifted 
countenance of her son, he stretched 
forth his little arms in playful fondness, 
and chid his mother for weeping. *^ Aye 
(lisped lie.) I tell my father how you cry, 
and then be won't love mamma, who is 
naughty." 

The coach stopped, and the coachman 
informed them that a great press of car- 
riages prevented his proceeding for at 
least ten minutes or a quarter of an hour, 
«nd that they must be content to wait that 
time. Ehza's mind was not in a state for 
delay, anxious for an account of her hus^ 
E 5 



82 OWEN castle; 

bandj which if she saw Mr. Stewart^ she 
was sure of gaining. " Howfar are we from 
the borough ?'' enquired she. '' Not three 
minutes walk from this street," was the 
reply. " Then said EHza I will walk thi- 
ther immediately, if you will direct me.** 
'' Keep down this here street, go over the 
bridge, and you are then in the borough 
in five seconds from this moment/' His 
demand was paid, and Eliza with her 
infant close pressed in her clasping arms, 
descended from the coach, follov«'ed by 
Taffline, who carried the smiling George. 
Her mind was instantly engaged on her 
husband and her recent misfortunes, nor 
did the uproar around awaken her to notice, 
until she found herself pent in the midst 
of a vast crowd of rabble. She pushed her 
way by several, calling to her servant to 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 83 

follow her example ; thus did she inconsid- 
erately involve herself in the very centre of 
the mob ; the noisy tumult sounded fear- 
fully in her ear; confused, impatient at 
the delay, she made every effort to get 
forward but in vain ; fixed without pow- 
er to'move, amonorst so large an assemblage 
of persons; terrified, she looked round 
for her maid and blooming ; boy neither 
could she discern; she called on Taffline ; 
a shriek, which fancy distorted by fright 
like to the shrill voice of Taffline in dis- 
tress, answered her; desperate she now 
sought to save her child from destruction ; 
at that instant a mail coach drove rapidly 
by, each desirous to save themselves rushed 
towards the pavement, the crush was 
dreadful; Eliza was taken off her feet, 
and hustled amongst the crowd. '^ Oh! 
£6 



84 OWEN CASTLE J 

pity the agonies of a wretched mother !'* 
she exclaimed, holding her child in her 
extended arms ; she reeled and fell upon 
the pavement. "My child, my child! (she 
groaned) save it though I perish." A heavy 
foot trod upon her arm, it bioke beneath 
the pressure, a convulsive sigh burst from 
her bosom, and with the other she grasped 
with almost dying firmness the garment 
of a man, and sunk insensible. Her pite- 
ous groans and firm hold were both felt by 
him ; she had in speechle:-s agony implored 
him to protect her; he raised her in his 
arms, and by his loud cries for help, aud 
his strength in restraining the multitude, 
kept the rash and unfeeling from injuring 
her further : shortly after the crowd dis- 
persed and left the helpless Eliza to his 
sole care ; a circle of spectators gathered 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 85 

round, all pitying a being so lov-ly and 
forlorn. Several parish officers appeared 
to take her to an hospital, for her arm, 
broken and bruised, lay motionless by her 
side. " And shall a being so lovely, so 
superior, be taken to a receptacle of that 
sort, and perhaps be mingled with the 
dregs of society; oh! no, it shall not be. 
I will succour and befriend her." He 
told the officers that the lady was under his 
protection, when the crowd hemmed 
them in, and violently separated her from 
his side; a coach was procured, into which 
he put her and followed himself. When he 
was seated, he thought for the first time, 
how he was to dispose of her : " Oh ! if I had 
but a sister to whom I might confide thee, 
unhappy woman ! Is there not one fe- 
male, who regardless of the abrupt and 



86 OWEN CASTLE; 

strange appearance of my bringing her, 
even uninformed of her name and family, 
will receive her into their house for a tem- 
porary shelter :'* He meditated, and after a 
pause, cried, " JTes, Susanna is the artless 
girl ; Mrs. Moreland isfrom home, the house 
rat he command, and full liberty allowed 
her generous nature/' He ordered the coach 
to Finsbury Square ; when it stopped at 
the house of Mrs. Moreland, he sprang 
into the hall, and was well pleased to find 
his amiable Susanna at home. With the 
most touching pathos he depicted the 
forlorn and mutilated state of Eliza, the 
uncommon interest he had taken in her 
fate, and his anxiety to restore her to 
her husband and family, for the ring on 
her finger proclaimed her married. For- 
tunately for the poor sufferer, he spoke 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 87 

to a heart as tenderly alive to the calls of 
humanity as his own. Susanna sent im- 
mediately for a surgeon, who after exa- 
mining the fractured arm, bound it up, 
and ordered her to be put instantly to bed; 
she was accordingly conveyed to the cham- 
ber of her kind entertainer, and a soporific 
administered to lull her pain and banish 
the remembrance of her agonizing loss. 
Susanna by Henry's desire searched in her 
pockets for some clue to her residence, 
name^ or connexion. A letter in her poc- 
ket book was found ; the direction was 
to the Honourable Mrs. Fitzbeauchamp, 
Woodmore Cottage, near Abergavenny, 
Monmouthshire. Although this letter af- 
forded little satisfaction, it was such that 
could not be passed unheeded. 



88 OWEN CASTLE; 

^' Royal Hotel, Portsmouth, 
" My dearest wife, my beloved 
Eliza, I am safely arrived at Portsmouth, 
and take my command oh board early to- 
morrow morning. How comfortless ap- 
pears every thing around me. A bustling 
inn and crowded streets are very melan- 
choly substitutes for my darling wife and 
beauteous child, whose smiles are still 
before my eyes. I have received a letter 
since my arrival here from a friend of 
mine, a Mr. Stewart, an eminent mer- 
chant in the city, whom you have so 
often heard me speak of. He it was who 
encouraged my predilection for the glo- 
rious and honourable profession I so ar- 
dently embraced. Part of his friendly 
letter contained a pleasing account of my 
noble family interesting themselves for 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 89 

my promotion ; and most fervently do I 
pray for their success, for ihy sake and my 
boy's, for well I know it is not my fame 
or glory that they seek, in endeavouring 
to exalt me, but their own unbounded 
pride for the honour of the noble house I 
belong to. Patience a little longer, my 
beloved, and concealment will not shade 
thy virtues from the world. Farei^el, 
the waves will soon bear me to glory or 
death, for we anticipate a most vigorous 
engagement with the foes of Britain Me- 
thinks I see you turn pale with fears on 
my account, but banish them as absurd, 
for England will ever prove victorious. 
To the care of heaven I commit -thee and 
my boy, and am^ 

" Your ever affectionate husband, 

" G. F. FiTZBEAUCHAMP/* 



go OWEN CASTLE ; 

The date of this letter proved it to have 
been written more than a twelvemonth 
back. " There is no information to be 
gained from this/* said Henry, disappoint- 
edly folding up the letter. " Mr. Stewart 
appears to be the only person likely to 
give any intelligence of her family, and I 
will instantly go in search of his residence, 
which being a merchant's, I shall find in 
the London Directory." The directory 
was brought, and Henry found his resi- 
dence was in Fitzroy Square; there he 
resolved to go, and on his way, to make 
every effort to learn the fate of the child- 
ren he had heard Eliza say were torn from 
her; but ignorant of their age, dress, or 
persons, how was h? to advertize them 
with a reward for their appearance. He 
soon reached the house of Mr. Stewart; 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r" Qi 

an old porter answered his knock at the 
door, when Henry enquired for his mas- 
ter; the answer was, that he had gone 
that mornincj into the country, but that 
his sister was at home, and if he had any 
letter, or business of importance to relate, 
she probably could give him every in- 
telligence. Henry, on reflection, resolved 
to see her, and was ushered into an elegant 
anti-chamber, and wrote the following 
note to Miss Stewart : — 

'^ Henry Elwyn, son to the Rev. Sam- 
uel Elwyn, begs permission to speak a 
few words to Miss Stewart (having been 
informed of her brother's absence) on a 
particular subject, that he trusts will ex- 
cite her kindness and attention." He 
then sent it by a servant in waiting into 



02 OWEN CASTLE; 

sdjoining room. He heard a female voice 
utter surprise ; anoilier laugh and say, " on 
my honour smitten^ smitten to acertainty." 
The voice repeated with burlesque pathos, 
these words of his note! " on a particular 
subject that he trusts will excite her kind- 
ness and attention." " I cannot look on 
it in the light you do, (returned the other) 
and indecorous as it may appear, will ven- 
ture the interview.'' ^' Then I am determined 
to be present, unless you have a previous 
intimation of this event, and wish to be 
alone (said the former speaker), for I shall 
enjoy the disappointment his face will 
exhibit when his project of catching you 
alone is defeated." '' T.he gentleman is a. 
perfect stranger to me^ and I cannot think 
he would thus unceremoniously announce 
himself, unless urgent business demand- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 9-3 

^d the sacrifice of good bret^ding ; desire 
him to walk in." The footman appeared, to 
conduct him to the ladies. Heniy felt 
disconcerted at the convtrs jtion he had 
heard, and with pleasure would .uve left 
the house, deferrmg his business nil the 
morning', but therms was no retreat, and go 
he must. 

An elegant female advanced to re- 
ceive him, whom the footman announced 
as Miss Stewart, and withdrew. 

" You have business with me, sir, and 
unless it be of a private nature must beg 
you to relate it before my friend and 
visitor." 

Henry bowed, and thought by her 



94 OWEN castle; 

youthful appearance and arch glance slie 
cast on him, that her's was the idea of his 
being a lover. 

With ease and elegance, but with some 
preface, he opened on the distressing af- 
fair that had brought him, and produced 
the letter to the Honourable Mrs. Fitz- 
beauchamp, wherein her brother was 
mentioned as her husband's friend. Miss 
Stewart took it with much interest; the in- 
stant her eye fell on the writing, she called 
her friend and bade her look on it. "Good 
heavens! (she exclaimed) 'tis the character 
of my lover !" She read the letter ; her 
cheek was red and pale by turns, when 
she had finished, she cried, " How w^ou- 
derfullyextraordinary! The hand is without 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 95 

doubt that of my George; he speaks of 
his profession and of his noble family.'* 

" I wish my brother was in town, 
(said Miss Stewart) he might solve this 
inconceivable riddle." 

^' Would to heaven (replied the lady) 
it was unravelled, for a dreadful foreboding 
presses on my mind, as horrible as I hojie 
it is unjust." 

" Do not alarm yourself unnecessarily, 
(said Miss Stewart) but compose yourself, 
and let us see and learn from the unhap- 
py lady, who and what her husband really 
is. I will take every means (since my 
brother has some knowledge of their 
father) to preserve the children." "1 



96 OWEN castle; 

cannot compose myself miless I see her 
to-night, (cried the lady). How my friend, 
is it in the power of a woman so circum- 
stanced to be calm ; to sleep with my 
imagination thus distorted with doubt, 
fear, and love? Rest is incompatible with 
my feelings, that are in a tumult." She 
then addressed Henry — '' The author of 
this letter by name is known to us; if you 
will conduct us to the place where this 
female is sheltered, we will endeavour to 
exert our power to serve her. Henry 
wouM has^e excused himself from the 
office, the evening being so far advanced ; 
but the young lady seemed so ardently 
solicitous, that he could not deny her 
request. The carriage was ordered, and in 
a few minutes, they and Henry were in it, 
on their way io Finsbury Square.'* 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? §7 

The friend of Miss Stewart was evi- 
dently disturbed and uneasy; her com- 
plexion was dark, and her features though 
expressive and regular, not what the mul- 
titude would call handsome, yet extremely 
prepossessing; her figure was above the 
middle size and very majestic. Susanna 
was surprized at so large a party, and 
after an introduction to the ladies, in- 
formed Miss Stewart, that Eliza had re- 
cently awoke and was overwhelmed with 
grief, when she heai^ that her children 
were not found. 

Miss Stewart bee^cjed Susanna to intro- 
duce her to Eliza, since she was become 
more tranquil. As she entered the cham- 
ber where she lay, she said, *'• Forgive, 
madam, my thus breaking in on your 

VOL. III. F 



QS OWEN CASTLE ; 

sorrov/, and I( t me beg you to believe that 
a sincere zeal to serve you in the occasion 
of it." 

*• The all merciful Creator, though he 
chasteneth our multiplied offences, sends 
comfort in our hour of severest pain ,'* 
exclaimed Eliza^ gratefully regarding 
them. 

" You appear extremely unfortunate, 
{said Miss Stevvartj seating herself by the 
side of Jthe bed); may a person curious, 
from .humanity alone be instructed in 
what may be of benefit and relief to your 
situation ? From the direction of the 
letter found in your pocket book, I con- 
clude you are a native of Wales, Do you 
constantly reside in that part of the world, 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 99 

or were you, when arrested by the dis- 
astrous accident you have experienced, 
on your way to your friends^ home, or 
business." 

'* I was seeking my liushand, madam, 
and was then blest in the possession of 
my children, that are now snatched from 
me." Here she burst into tears, and bit- 
terly deplored their loss. The ladies en- 
deavoured to comfort her with a hope of 
their restoration. 

After many efforts at composure, the 
wretched Eliza satisfied the curiosity of 
her fair intruders, by relating her simple 
story ; but when she came to the para- 
graph that had occasioned her fatal jour- 
ney, her feelings entirely overcame her 
F 2 



100 OWEN CASTLE; 

and she exclaimed. " Oh ! God ! what 
were then my sensations." 

" Not so distracting, so horrid as mine!" 
said the yoiig lady, starting from the bed, 
and rushing madly from the chamber. 

^' Stay, lady Amanda Woodburn, stay 
I entreat you/' cried Miss Stewart, 
quickly following hen 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE .•' 101 



CHAPTER XXVIL 



JLiADY Amanda, seduced by her un- 
bounded love for the Honourable Mr. Fit^- 
beauchamp, had fallen a victim to his 
insidious arts, and stained the honour of 
a noble race, of which she was the last 
descendant. Maddened by the develope- 
ment of his black deceit, and her own 
disgrace, she sought him out ; upbraided 
him with scorn and indignation, and 
finally banished him from her presence* 
He endeavoured to persuade her to 
F 3 



102 OWEN CASTLE; 

perform the contract entered into ; by 
that means to save her fame, and 
live in unblemished honour with the 
misled world. But her noble soul dis- 
dained the sordid views that governed 
his despicable heart. V/ealth and title 
could not repair the loss of conscious 
rectitude, and she resolved not to join 
wilh him in the trampling his unoffending 
wife's peace for ever beneath her feet, bj 
going through an unsubstantial ceremony, 
merely to link estates, when mind and 
Jieart were alienated. The reason for break- 
ing off" the marriage was never known to 
either of the fathers, who looked upon 
the matter as some quarrel between the 
lovers that would be comprociissed at an 
early period. 

The unfortunate Eliza was blest wilh 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 103 

the recovery of her infant daughter, by the 
unremitting search of the active Henry ; 
but her son was irretrievably lost. The 
cruel conduct of her husband, a husband 
once so ardently loved, with the privation 
of her adored boy, threw her into a violent 
fever which caused her sudden death at the 
age of twenty. The innocent babe was taken 
from the cold bosom of its mother, and 
received into the arms of her sister, Mrs. 
Milbourne, (who had been summoned to 
town by Miss Stewart) and reared by her 
with tenderness and care. 

LadyAmanda's father, exasperated at her 

^refusing to marry Earl Northerland's son, 

and being secretly informed of her sitiuaton 

bade her never appear more in his injured 

«ght. He gave her a small plantation in 

F 4 



104 ©WEN CASTL&; 

Jamaica for her only portion, and accom- 
panied by a Mr. Fairfield^ one of the 
faithful^ she bade a long adieu to an in- 
exorable father^ and her native shores. 
She had been but three months on the 
plantation, when she gave birth to dead 
infant. Mr. Fairfield returned to England, 
and she remained on the plantation as a 
widow whose husband had died in Bri- 
tain. After the lapse of tw^o years she 
became the wife of Mr. Milbourne, an 
English gentleman whose circumstances 
were on the decline, and eagerly sought her 
property as a fresh hoard for speculation. 
His temper was opposite to her ladyship's, 
and not bei:ig blest with children, she 
continued to hnger through hfe a dis- 
appointed and humble woman. 



OR, WMICH I? THE HEROINE? 105 

In the third year of this ill assorted 
marriage, Mr. M«lbourne brought home, a 
beantiful boy, apparently about five years 
old. He declared his intention of adopting 
him for his own, as no parents were alive 
to claim him. He had been found by a 
sailor at Deptford, playing in the docks 
amongst the limber, almost starved to 
death, who took him on board his master's 
ship, fed him, and was so enticed with 
his beauiy and playful prattle, as to neg- 
lect seeking for its parents. A fair wuid 
springing up, he sailed the next day tor 
Jarnaira wuh his little captive, Mr. 
Mil bourne bein^ st.ruck with the loveli- 
nee» of ihe boy, gave the sailor a sum 
of money to part with iiim, and brought 
him to his home at Jamaica. 



F 5 



106 OWEN CASTLE; 

The feeling bosom of Lady Milbourne as 
she looked on the child, pictured the agony 
his loss must have occasioned hisparants^ and 
resolved by her care and kindness to make 
the injury the helpless stranger liad sus- 
tained, less afflicting to his tender years. 
There was something in his dimpled cheek 
and laughing eye, that awoke most won- 
derfully her love^ and interest in his 
fate. 

When the adopted son of Mr. Mil- 
bourne was eight years old, the wife of 
Mr. Carlton, (a black woman from the 
East Indies ) in a rash instant committed 
suicide, and left her daughter Omphale, 
a child of four years old, to the mercy of 
Mr. Milbourne^ whom she suddenly elect- 



OR; WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 10/ 

for her sole guardian, her request being 
found on a scrap of paper left on the 
table in the chamber of that unfortunate 
woman. 

Lady Milbourne with delight took 
charge of the prepossessing orphan, edu- 
cated and reared her as her own ; hence 
arose the cultivated mind and refined 
manners of the beautiful mulatto. 

About this time Mr. Milbourne found 
it necessary to remove^ the better to 
conceal his designs on the property of the 
little heiress. 

A mutual passion glowed in the bosoms 
of the adopted children, which Lady 
Milbourne encouraged^ and urged her 



lOS OWEN castle; 

husband to repair the wrongs he had done 
the orphan heiress, by uniting her in 
marriage to his adopted heir, thereby 
securing a partnership of the property 
he had embezzled to the right owner. He 
was touched with the force of what she 
cahed the justice of the act, and imme- 
diately contracted them, and thus healed 
a wounded conscience ; the marriage w'as 
intended to be performed on Mr. Mil- 
bourne's arrival in England, his native 
countr}^, where he intended to remove 
his wealth and family; but an epidemic 
disease then raging in Newcastle County, 
(where he had removed for the last ten 
years) took him off in the blossom of his 
long promised joys of splendour in En- 
gland. Lady Milbourne fearing the dis- 
ease might be infectious, lost no tjme in 

F 6 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I09 

settling every arrangement for the depar- 
ture of the affianced pair to England ; but 
fearing the mutability of man's heart, she 
had a clause drawn up to the will of her 
husband, which she consigned to the care 
of Omphale, strictly charginoj her never 
to resign or destroy it. The purport of 
this instrument has already been explained, 
and the ill-judged generosity of Om- 
phale fully punished. 

The diamonds of lady Amanda were the 
sole portion of the unfortunate orphan, 
who had the inexpressible sorrow of seeing 
her patroness snatched away by the relent- 
ies disorder that had hurried her husband 
to his unexpected grave. 

The stranger's arrival in this country. 



110 OWEN castle; 

with its result, has heen seen ; but the 
mystery of the birth of Augustus, is yet 
to be explained. 

"Ah! (cried Omphale,) he know 
not, when he boast of being the true 
claimant of Mr. Milbourne's riches, that 
the sti^anger of charitij, as he called 
me, had equal right." ^, 

" Thou art wrong in dwelling on his 
ingratitude ; leave him unto repentance, 
and turn thy mind unto different prospects ; 
thou art amongst what is called the nobles 
of the land ; thy father will seek out some 
partner more worthy tby merit and thy 
birth," said Lady Sarah. 

*^ Me never mairy," sighed she. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? Ill 

^' Thou art not at thine own choice ; 
thou hast a proud parent to obey ; if he 
should acknowledge thee, thou art bound 
to yield unto his command. — Dost thou 
not know that wealth and titles are but 
vanity, not solid possessions, and that the 
owner thereof must be of consequence 
uneasy ? It putteth me in mind of a sim- 
ple parable.—*" There was once a shep- 
herd of humble degree, who was peace- 
fully engaged in tending his small flock, 
but he was not contented, and prayed for 
riches ; in time it so fell out that this 
shepherd found a golden treasure; he then 
bought flocks and herds in great store, but 
he then could not tend unto them all 
himself, therefore was compelled to en- 
trust many of whose good intents he wa$ 
doubtful ; hence he was uneasy, watchful 



112 GWEN castle; 

and discontented , lie often punished the 
guiltless for t'le guilty, misKd h" evil 
flatterers, and becan^e unjust; he hoyrded 
gold and silver, and the dread of 1 ..ing 
the filthy lucre made lam sleep in treinD- 
ling fear ; he was proud and unchari able 
of heart ; he forgot in his prosperity his 
Maker, and revelled in iniquity. His chd- 
dren were in dread of his cruelty, and 
flew From him, yea he was a scourge to 
all that he had power over, his heart was 
set on this world, and he was a mighty- 
si luier." From the life of tlie shepherd 
we iiiay draw a po'o moral. Let no man 
be eager to till tht- ijlaoe Providence has 
not allotted to hiaj, ncr repine at being 
humble; there is a power who knoweth 
vv^hat best befits Ub. There are many minds 
that cannot bear indulgence, or struggle 



OR;, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 113 

with temptations and are far happier 
when withheld from their desire/' 

" Your ladyship is an amiable moralist, 
(said Rufus, ) and I agree with you in be- 
lieving, that ambition in a weak mind is 
attended with great danger to the posses- 
sor; but when strengthened by a sound 
judgment and correct heart, it is the 
shining quahty of man's soul — the parent 
stem from whence his honours flourish." 

" Thou wast designed by nature for 
the frightful profession of war, (said her 
ladyship, looking with surprise on his 
glowing cheek and kindhng eye, that shot 
forth a glance of heroic fire as he finished 
his sentence) and not for the meek service 
of thy Creator.'* 



114 OWEN CASTLE ; 

" I confess your ladyship to be in the 
right, had I better known myself, I 
shouldhave been asoldier. Ohmadam!(he 
exclaimed) can a man behold the noble 
feats atchieved by a Wellington and our 
brave defenders, and not desire to throw 
off slothful inactivity, to follow their 
glorious example?" 

*^ It was an injustice to thy martial 
spirit to make thee leader of a pious flock^ 
but it also shewed affection, for thou art 
now in peace in thine own country^ secure 
from slaughterous swords. The pomp and 
din of war and martial music, enticeth 
many unto their end ; the aspiring and 
impatient longings of the youthful hero, 
never tell him, that in smiting his enemy, 
he may perish himself." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1 15 

" And if he should, madam, he falls in 
honour; his grave is bedewed by the tears 
of beauty his ; memory venerated by his 
brothers in arms, and crowned with ever- 
lasting laurel. Oh for such a death! (con- 
tinued he, a pang of blighted love cross- 
ing his breast) and my last breath would 
be nobly given." 

*' Why talkest thou of death, thou art 
not unhappy now ? Thy friends will, I dare 
be bound reinstate thee in thy former 
consideration." 

*' Perhaps they may, madam. To you 
and them I am ever bound in strongest 
gratitude; but life has lost its charm, exis- 
tence contains no joys forme.*' 



Il6 OWEN castle; 

Lady Sarah appeared pensive, and witli 
a downcast eye, said " I am concerned to 
hear thee say so, friend^ and much blame 
thy despondency," 

'^ That gentle bosom is, I am sure the 
shelter of every tender passion, and can 
pity though it may condemn my weak- 
ness, if an attachment to a deserving ob- 
ject may so be called." 

" I do blame thee friend, for a useless 
regret, and pardon my freedom on so deli- 
cate a point, if 1 say unto thee, that in 
coveting the wife of another, thou com- 
mittest a great sin, and payest but a 
poor compliment to all female kind." 

" As how, madam?" 



O'R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1 If 

" By supposing there is but one worthy 
woman in the world." A vivid bhish over- 
cast the prepossessing face of the gentle 
quaker. 

" Pardon me, madam, I revere the 
whole race ; but we have our predelictions, 
and our hearts will not always yield to the 
sober voice of reason." 



118 OWEN CASTLE; 



CHAPTER XXVI 11. 



J.N about three weeks after their depar- 
ture, Mr. Stanley and the good quaker 
returned from Scotland, to take Omphale 
to London, to meet his lordahip, who 
when a lieutenant in the army, had been 
stationed with his regiment in Hindostan. 
There he saw the mother of Omphale, 
and being dependant on his father, 
formed the hasty union to enrich himself. 
He had been married about two years 
when his regiment was ordered to Jamaica^ 
and from thence home, leaving his wife 



on, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 119 

in the island. About this time his elder 
brother died: this sudden occurrence made 
him repent his ha-^ty marriage, and he 
gladly obeyed the welcome summons. On 
his arrival in England, he found his 
father had also died in grief for the loss 
of his eldest son, which left hiin in the 
sudden possession of his title and estates. 
Immerged in import transactions^ he 
wished to forget his Indian marriage, and 
no demand being made on him from his 
wife, he concluded her dead, or that she 
had consoled herself with the sole govern- 
ment of her riches, for she was thedauo^h- 
ter of a wealthy Gentoo, and sought ano- 
ther partner. He knew not the desperate 
act she had committed, nor that an infant 
daughter was at tlie mercy of a design- 
ing Qian, who purposely forbore to acquaint 



120 0WEN CASTLE; 

the father of her being deprived of her 
mother, lest he shouW demand her 
inheritance. 

He now felt how much sorrow his 
juvenile disposition had heaped upon his 
child, and waited with impatience to 
embrace her. 

This was indeed a turn in life, that 
had never entered the mind of Omphale> 
and the exaltation gave but little pleasure 
to her timid breast. Lady Sarah consented 
lo accompany her to London, and see 
her settled in the favour of her father. 
Mr. Fairfiield positively forbade the 
intended departure of Rufus, who had 
modestly declined intruding longer on 
the hospitality of Lady Sarah. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 121 

The day that was to take the now per- 
fectly recovered mulatto from the mansion 
of her new found friend, was unwelcome ; 
the different sphere she was about to 
move in, filled her with a thousand name- 
less terrors ; she trembled to approach 
Lord Orkley, though assured of his kind 
intentions ; the glitter of greatness had 
no delight in her eyes, and she beheld 
the splendid equipage that arrived to bear 
her to her father's mansion in London, 
without the triumph or transport incidental 
to her age ; she considered it only as the 
gaudy conveyance that was to carry her 
to unknown trials. Chloe was nearly 
frantic with joy, she skipped about the 
hall, danced and sung, and gave way to 
every extravagance of pleasure. Jonathan 
beheld her with a serious aspect, and ad- 

voL. in. G 



122 OWEN castle; 

monished her with all his powers of rheto- 
ric to be calm. " Thou art light. Yea! 
exceeding lighf ; thy feet are quick-timed 
to lewd sounds, thy tongue to laughter, 
and thy head is hke unto a whirligig that 
goeth round continually, and will at the 
end bewilder thee with giddiness, and thou 
wilt fall, yea^ thou wilt fall even ^to the 
earth/' 

" Me get up again, you cross man, you 
never no please," retorted Chloe with 
great quickness. 

'^ Yes, thou hast said it, it doth not 
please me; the maiden Sarah is taken with 
a liking for emptiness, and goeth abroad 
to be tempted by various enticements ; the 
cloven foot of Belzebub hath been seen even 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 123 

in this house of former righteousness ; the 
thrumming of gilt wire, the hollow reed 
of dulcet voice, and piebald instrument, 
upon which the fingers of the damsel 
Sarah beat like profane bobbins, hath 
lured even the wicked one hither, and my 
spirit doth rejoice at thou, and thy mis- 
tress taking leave, for she and her follower 
hath perverted the mind of this liouse- 
hold.'' 

" Music pretty make merry de heart, 
if you play fiddle too, we dance in de 
hall, concert sweet, de Lady Sarah sing ; 
my misse leach play, Massa Marmaduke 
blow flute, make me listen all night at 
door." 

" My ears are pierced with loud sounds, 

' G2 



124 

but never will Jonathan join in gambols^, 
iji vented by evil mi^iisters." 

Lady Sarah passing through the hall 
with Omphale and Rufus, smiled graci- 
ously upon Jonathan and bade him farewell. 

*' Fare tbee well, Sarah !" he answered, 
" turn not thy thoughts on hallsy mas- 
querades^ and the abominations of the 
ereat town. I do behold thee as a lamb 
leading to the slaughter; thou art surround- 
ed by manifold dangers; there art traps at 
thy feet, and breaking roofs over thy 
head/' 

She gave her hand to Rufus, who handed 
her to the carriage, and smilingly received 
his adieu. 



OK, WHlt:H IS THE HEROINE? 123 

'^ Thou listeneth to false words, Sarah, 
and thy lieart delighteth in one, not of 
the faithful," cried Jonathan in an angry- 
strain. 

The crimsoned cheek of her ladyship, 
and her instantaneous frown, with an order 
to the postillion to proceed, surprized- 
Omphale, who thought she had read in 
the eyes of the gentle quaker an un- 
authorised love for Rufus. Knowing 
the obstacles to their ever being united,, 
she pitied her from the inmost recess of 
her sympathetic bosom. 

Portman Square was the abode of Lord 
Orkley, and when the carriage stopped at 
the portico, Omphale had need of all the. 



G 3 



126 OWEN CASTLE; 

encouraging support her kind friend ad- 
ministered. 



In the saloon they were met by his lord- 
sbi])j who embraced his daughter with the 
most cordial affection^ and was profuse in 
his acknowledgements of gratitude to the 
kind Lady Sarah. His air was dignifiied, 
and his person retained the striking re« 
mains of beauty ; his silver hair (more 
from constitution than years) dressed in 
the former mode, shewed a lofty temple^ 
arched brow, and full eye ; the carnation 
of his cheek proved that a temperate 
youth had given health and good humour 
to the decline of life ; active and light he 
seemed to shame insolent loungers of toji^ 
and by his polite gallantry to the fair, 
threw reproach on the modern boxers and 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE.- 12/ 

nolle coachmen that adurn the present 
court. 

Oinphale beheld her new Pound parent 
with dehghted pride, and c<^uld not for- 
bear contrasting him in her mind with 
the emaciated Sir Mattlievv Fitzowen. 
After 5^he had gaind composure, his lord- 
ship thusr addressed her: ^* We will not 
now my dearest child, L idy Oin|;hale let 
me now : di you, dweil on the past mis- 
demeanours or misfortunes, but unite 
our efforts to banish disagreeable retro- 
spection. You are no.v shielded from 
every former difficulty, chat arose from 
neglect or indignity, assurtd of my perfect 
approbaiioQ and protection. You are the 
daughter of a North Briton, whose noble 
descent is only inferior to that of roy- 
G 4 



12S OWEN CASTLE; 

al ty. Bear the honour of the house from 
\vhence you pprang in remembrance; and 
it will teach you how to hold yourself 
a«? befits elevation so exalted. This man- 
sion is at your command ; a suitable esta- 
blishment has been hastily formed, that I 
hope will meet your approbation until 
another of equal rank and eligibility be 
offered from a juvenile candidate for your 
ladyship's hand." He kissed her cheek, 
and bowing with grace to Lady Sarali> 
left the saloon. 

" Oh ! madam !" saidOmphale, " me the 
most happy creature in the world, in such 
a father." 

" Thou art, indeed, much changed for 
the better ; thy father is noble and good. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 1 29 

but I fear he will expect obedience in the 
tendere>t point. Didst thou not mark the 
l)int he dropped of future alliance ? Thou 
must think no more of Augustus, of one so 
imdeserving. 

" Me know how much duty demands/' 
said Ouiphale, '* but me sure have choice' 
to live alone, and offend none then.'* 

Lady Sarah and Omphale were con- 
ducted by Chloe and another attendant 
to her bouiioir, and a suite of apartments 
prepared for the reception of herself and 
friend. The forepart of the day was 
spent in confidential conversation, the 
inspection of their libiary, and dressing 
for dinner. 



g5 



ISO OWEN castle; 

His lordship waited to conduct them 
to the saloon, where an introduction took 
place with the assembled company. The 
easy^ yet retiring elegande of the beautiful 
mulatto, was the universal theme of the 
beau monde ; her novel appearance and 
distinguished rank, made her an object 
of universal admiration. His lordship 
was surrounded by admiring candidates, 
whose daily overtures were so numerous 
as to fatigue his patience ; he was deter- 
mined not to give the hand of his daugh- 
ter but to one whose ancient dignity of 
title and property might cope with his 
own. 

The generous mind of Lady Omphale 
felt in the midst of splendour for the ill 
fated Lady Fitzowen, and her unfortunate 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 131 

lover, for whom she interested her father, 
whose influence at court might serve and 
add to his promotion in the church. The 
youthful ecclesiastic was summo"ned to 
town by the desire of his lordship, who 
exerted himself greatly for his eman- 
cipation from the disgraceful dilemma into 
which his rash conduct had thrown 
him. 

The letters from Lady Fitzowen were 
filled with fears for the life of her infirm 
husband, and still recounted his petulant 
cruelty to her. She lamented the impos- 
sibility of accepting the gratifying invi- 
tation of my Lord Orkley, and sincerely 
congratulated her friend on her now happy 
prospects. 



g6 



132 OWEN castle; 

Sincerely did Omphale mourn the fate 
of her lovely friend^ doomed to waste her 
youth and beauty by the bed side of a 
cruel and aged husband. She would fre- 
quently say to Lady Sarah, that she felt 
herself far inferior to Lady Fitzowen, and 
could not forbear repining against Pro- 
vidence for its partial care of hey\ while 
one so amiable lingered in miserable bon- 
dage. 

" She has her reward in stored' re- 
turned her friend meekly, " heaven 
never sufFereth its creatures to fall 
through the wiles of the wicked^ or 
goodness like her's to sink unhap])y to 
the grave." 

The mind of Lady Omphale was fiir 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE: 133 

from at ease, as her father had lately bade 
her receive the addresses of the yo'ng 
llord Merioneth^ a Cambrian of high 
birth, to whose person or manners 
she could make no reasonable objection, 
at least none that would satisfy his lord- 
ship. 

Her passion for Augustus, he treated 
with disdain, "Where is your pride, ma- 
dam, he would say, on viewing her sad 
countenance. The son oi di planter might, 
when ignorant of your descent, have had 
power to charm ; but methinks his con- 
duct (of which I have been informed) 
should have driven him for ever from your 
heart, and left it free to obey an indulgent 
parent's commands." 



134 OWEN castle; 

" Me confess it, my kind lord," returned 
she, abashed and at a loss how to act ; " but 
me have no inclination to marry; me have 
no heart to give the nobleman you wish 
me to encourage/' 

*' I do not intend to be a harsh father, 
by forcing on my child an engagement 
contrary to her inclination," said he 
soothingly, '' but I must point out the ro- 
mantic folly in yielding to a depression 
of spirits, you vainly strive to con- 
ceal from my observation ; to repine at 
his desiprtion, is the height of madness, 
and iilmosi: unnatural, for what apparent 
good quality do you regret this retrograde 
wretch ? Is it for abandoning you in a 
strange country ; is it for stripping you of 
your only possessions ; and lastly stabbing 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 135 

you, that you hang on his remembrance 
thus fondly, and are thus obstinately blind 
to the perfeetion of one so eligible ? How 
mean a spirit must you possess, when so 
lost to sense and pride? If you cannot 
take the man I have selected, you must 
retire to Scotland, and for the future live 
in private in the gothic castle of your an- 
cestors, unworthy the line of honour 
from which you boast your blood." The 
anger of his lordship had gathered 
as [he went on, and greatly alarmed 
his trembling daughter^ who hesita- 
tingly implored him to send her thi- 
ther. 

" No, no, Lady Omphale, (he returned 
somewhat calmer) I will give you a little 
time to consult your own judgment ere 



13b OWEN castle; 

I banith yon my presence; reflect rny child 
on my wishes, and you will find nothing 
severe or imposini^ on your acceding 
lo them. You are my sole heiress^ take 
that into consideration, and how much I 
ought to expect from your grateful com- 
placency." 

" Oh ! my lord^ (said she, throwing^ 
herself at his feet) my duty is yours ; the 
duty of a daughter^ you have so nobly 
taken by the hand, and raised to rai!;j<'and 
splendoj-r far above her desert, is the least 
she can give in return for all your great 
benefits so lavishly heaped upon her,-^me 
all obedience." 

His lordship was softened, and folded 



" OR WHICH IS THE HEROINE? IS? 

<?r n in his arms. " It was for your real 
happiness, my sweet daughter, (said he) 
that I spoke so touch i ugly to your 
eehn^s; the wretch who exposed you to 
danger and death has insensibly thrown 
you into an affectionate father's arms, who 
may yet meet him and revenge thy inju- 
ries on his head." 

'^ Oh my dear lord! (cried Omphale, 
weeping on his shoulder) do not condemn 
him ; he was deluded by bad woman, he 
never cruel before ; I know he even now 
often repents and sigh for my forgive- 
ness." 

" It m.ay be so, but beware my child, 
your innocence is not equal to the shifts tg 



138 OWEN castle; 

knavery of our sex, you must think of 
him no more/' 

She drooped her head and promised 
to obey. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROIXE ? J 3 9 



CHAPTER XXIX, 



JLHE following day Lord Merioneth 
called to take her an airing in his phseton ; 
she durst not refuse his gallant attention, 
and immediately prepared to accompany 
him. They drove to Hyde Park and ming- 
led amongst the different equipages that 
were there ; his lordship was extremely 
entertaining, and described many as they 
passed. That barouche iu which you see a 
lady singly seated, is a strange equipage 
( gaid he, directing her attention with his 
whip) I have seen her face somewhere. 



140 OWEN CASTEEr 

but cannot now recollect either her name 
or rank/' 

Omphale had cast her eyes the way he 
pointed, and to her astonishment beheld 
Mrs. Wallace in widow's weeds ; a crape 
veil shaded one side of her face, which ap- 
peared more lovely and seductive than 
ever. As the barouche quickly approached, 
she observed Omphale, and in recogni- 
zance smilingly bowed. 

Lord Merioneth judging they were 
acquainted, instantly drew up. 

'^ I am sensibly gratified to see your 
ladyship look so charmingly well, (said 
Mrs. Wallace with composed assurance, 
and a polite bend to his lordship, whose 



OR, WinCH IS THE HEROINE? 14l 

»6yes were ri vetted on her) an* I hope all at 
Owen Castle are happily in health." 

Omphale was amazed at this daring 
approach and remained silently indig- 

UdLllt. 

'" 1 have been in Paris these last six 
months, (continued Mrs. Wallace) with 
my hufhand, who was ordered there for 
his health, but nothing saved him, and I 
am compelled to mourn his loss for ever ;" 
here she took out a cambrick handkerchief 
and wiped J or pretended to wipe away a 
tear. 

" So fair a mourner I never saw, (said 
his lordship in a whisper to his compa- 
nion) who is she^'" 



142 OWEN CASTLE; 

*^ I wish you a good morning/madam,'* 
said Mrs. Wallace, and bending with a 
fascinating grace to his lordship, ordered 
the postilions to j^roceed. 

" Is your ladyship indisposed ?' en- 
quired his lordship, observing the pale lip 
and tremor of Omphale. 

" Ves, — 710,'' returned she abstractedly. 

*' Will you allow me the pleasure of 
driving once more round the ring, the air 
may revive you, or would you please to 
return home/* 

" Home,'' answered she. 

His lordship knew not what to make of 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 143 

the visible change in his companion, but 
anxious to gain some information respect- 
ing the handsome unknown, he continued 
to teaze her by perplexing questions. 

" By the pannel of the barouche, I judge 
your acquaintance is a Baroness of Ger- 
man line? 

" Perhaps ; me cannot tell." 

" You knew her when at Owen Castle, 
the seat of a baronet who was wounded 
by a young clergyman of the name of 
Marmaduke, in a duel ? I think she en- 
quired for the family." 

«'She did! She did'/' said Omphale, 
with horror and abstraction. 



144 OWEN CASTLE; 

" She was on a visit there, probably at 
the same time with yourself?" 

''She was, she was, indeed!" deeply 
sighed Omphale." 

'* I thought so, (cried he) your father 
informed me that you, on your arrival in 
Enoland, became an inmate of Owen Cas- 
tie, but he forgot -to say under whose pro- 
tection you made the voyage.'' 

His words were probes to her f thing 
heart ; the reasons for her father's silence 
on the degrading circumstances that had' 
occurred, before her exaltation, were ob- 
vious ; and not wishing to contradict her 
kind parent's intents, she returned no an- 
swer. 



©R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 145 

*' By Jove/* cried his lordship, '• here 
comes your lovely friend, returning with 
my old acquaintance, Theodosius Ormin- 
stead. If his wife could see him now, she 
would not feel very easy at the engaging 
widow's being with her lord. 

" Is he married?" asked Omphale, alarm- 
ingly. 

'' He is/' 

*-Then me pity the lady who is his 
wife,** expressively returned she. 

" So do I, upon my soul (laughingly 
said he.) His lordship appears in danger : 
see how attentively he listens to her soft 
accents. Where was it that I first saw this 

VOL. III. H 



146 OWEN castle; 

sweet and playful face?'* said he musing for 
awhile, then suddenly smacking his whip 
in triumph at having recollected, he ex- 
claimed, " I have it ; she was the beautiful 
Mrs. Milbourne, wife to the rich West 
Indian, who made a most brilliant dash at 
Brighton and in town here, but was un- 
expectedly smashed. By heaven she has 
wit at will, and will throw all behind her 
in the race of fashion ; but if she be wi- 
dow to the West Indian, what means the 
arms on the pannel of the barouche ? Per- 
haps some relation she is with." He in- 
quisitively looked on Omphale's face for 
her to speak, and satisfy his curious anxie- 
ty, but she was returning a salutation from 
a lady and gentleman in a plain carriage^ 
whose cheerful bows and youthful coun- 
tenances caught his attention. 



OR, WHICIf IS THE HEROINE? 14? 

" Stop, John," cried the young gentle- 
man, thrusting his head out of the car- 
riage window, and stretching forth his 
hand to Omphale, said, " Lord, madam 
Omphale, how pleased I am to see you. 
I haven't met a single creature that knew 
me since I came from Wales." 

" Mr. Swithin, me am very glad to see 
you," said Omphale, not displeased by 
his famihar address, as a conversation with 
him prevented her being obliged to look 
on Mrs. Wallace, who^ with Lord Qrmin- 
stead, was close by them. Lord Me- 
rioneth greeted his friend by a warm 
shake of the hand. 

*•' Do you know I have left Rusty Hall, 
madam ?'* 

H 2 



148 OWEN CASTLE; 

" So me perceive." 

'' Yes, and I have got married too ;'* 
here he tittered and looked foolish. 
'' This is Miss Sabina, that ivas, now 
Mrs. Swithin, at your service/' pointing 
to his pretty wife, who blushed exceeding- 
ly at the notice of Lord Orminstead, who 
seemed determined to stare her out of 
countenance. " I was resolved to give the 
old lady the sHp, and see a little of Lon- 
don ; so we came off in a hurry, and have 
seen every thing ; but we are very dismal, 
don t know a soul. Will you come and 
dine with us ? 

Omphale declined the honour, pleading 
a pre-engagement. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 149 

" Well now, I declare it is the most 
provoking thing (cried he, in disappoint- 
ment) I can't get acquainted with any 
body." 

** I pity your case,*' said Lord Ormin- 
stead, with a demure look at him, and a 
sly side expression of ridicule to his friend, 
Lord Merioneth, " and should be proud 
to do myself the pleasure of dining with 
you, if agreeable." 

Tobit appeared overjoyed, and ex- 
pressed himself greatly obliged. 

" But what says the lady of Rusty 
Hall,** cried Mrs. Wallace, '' is she a vo- 
tary for Welch hospitality as well as her 
lord ?*' 

H 3 



150 ewEN castle; 

" I am no lord, madara," said Tobit^ 
in angry recognizance of his old torment, 
" and did not expect you were so near/ 

*' I thought not,'* replied she, " or you 
would have honoured me with an invita- 
tion also ; you know I am an old friend 
of yours," 

** As to friends, madam,'' said the Cam- 
brian, firing at her easy carriage towards 
him, who had heard of her elopement 
with Augustus ; " I shall take care Mrs. 
Swithin keeps company with none but 
respectable persons/' 

" Undoubtedly," said Lord Ormin- 
stead ; " and I assure you I am very re-» 



OR, TVHICH IS THE HEROINE? 151 

spectable, and fit to keep Mrs. Swithin 
company." 

" I am sure of that, sir," returned he_, 
" and she will be proud to make you wel- 
come. But won't you take a seat^ sir, in 
my carriage? here is plenty of room be- 
tween Mrs. Sw^itliin and me.'* 

" Foregad ! you have the greatest luck^ 
Theodosius/' cried Lord Merioneth in a 
whisper, " of any man in the kingdom* 
That countryman of mine is a perfect 
idiot — do have mercy on the simple gen- 
tleman." Lord Orminstead gave his 
horse to his servant, and seated himself 
according to his request. 

'' I vow, Mr. Tobit,'* cried Mrs. Wal- 

H 4 



152 OWEN CASTLE; 

lace, " you have used me very ill to treat 
me thus as a stranger ; and for his Lord- 
ship to take advantage of jour rudeness, 
in refusing to escort me, is aUogether the 
most overpowering affair I ever witnessed. 
If I had a defender here, he should de- 
mand satisfaction for the affront.'' 

" I can always see through your round- 
about jeers, madam," returned he, " and I 
don't care for them ; and as for satisfac- 
tion, I can fight with any one, when I see 
proper occasion, but I don't choose to 
waste my valour in a bad cause.*' 

" You have not left your wit behind 
you, Mr. Tobit," cried she ; " but as it lies 
in a small compass, there was little incon- 
venience in taking it with you.." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 15^ 

'' I don't pretend to have the wit you 
have, madam/' returned he; " mine is of 
the harmless kind, and will hurt no- 
body." 

" That I'll been sworn," said Lord 
Merioneth ; " and if you could say as 
as much, it would, I fancy, be more agree- 
able to your acquaintance, madam." 

" Pray what are the arms belonging to 
the Swithin family;" asked Mrs. Wal- 
lace ?' 

" You need not look far, madam/' 
cried he, putting his hand on the highly- 
polished pannel of his carriage, with gra- 
tified pride* 

H 5 



154 OWEN castle; 

" Oh yes, I see/' cried she ; '' the crest 
is a stag's head, with the finest branch- 
ing antlers 1 ever saw — extremely hand- 
some !" 

" Yes, I flatter myself it is very pretty, 
and I had the horns gilt on purpose to be 
conspicuous." 

" You need not have been at that trou* 
ble, for I will venture to say " said she, 
archly glancing at their lordships, ^' your 
horns will be observable to every one." 

" Yes/' said he, " the Swithins have 
had them in their family arms for a hun- 
dred generations, and were always proud 
of them, for I assure you they have 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 165 

brought many of my fore- fathers into 
great notice.'* 

" I can well imagine it, from the speci- 
men of the family I have now before me," 
said Lord Merioneth, bowing to Mr. 
Swithin ; who gratified by what he took 
for a compliment, bent in return, and the 
carriage moved off. 

When Omphale arrived in Portman 
Square, she quickly retired to her dressing 
room, there to ease lier agitated bosom by 
a .alutary shower of tears. The presence 
of Mrs. Wallace had recalled the transac- 
tions of Owen Castle, with all her suffer- 
ings, in their strongest colours, to her 
mind; and it was with difficulty she 
could assume spirits to elude the penetrate 
H 6 



156 OWEN CASTLE; 

ing eye of her father, who pressed her to 
accompany him with a party to the 
opera. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 157 



CHAPTER XXX, 



VV HEN Augustus had been settled a 
short time in Paris, he assumed the appear- 
ance of former gaiety, and mingled with the 
English company that thronged to that 
city of elegant dissipation. The seductive 
smiles of Mrs Wallace, lured many a rich 
prize to her hotel, while at the gaming 
table they fell a sacrifice to their superior 
and conjoint skill. The reputed gallan- 
tries of the syren for whom he had given 
up wealth, honour, and the blessings of 
an undefiled conscience, at first stung him 



158 OWFN castle; 

to the soul with jealous anirer, and bitterest 
vindictives were reciprocally exchanged. 
The self accused murderer knew not a 
moment's respite from the horrid recollec- 
tion of his crime. The ghastly form of 
the inj-^red Omphale at night hovered 
o'er his pillow, and pursued him through 
the day. Loathing himself and detesting 
his seducer, he refused to act longer in 
concert with her designs, and openly 
ovowed his intention of returniifg to En- 
gland, to acknowledge the robbery and mur- 
der he had comnjittedjand accuse her as his 
instsgaior. Alarmed at his frantic threats 
and frequent fits of phrenzy, she had him 
seized and taken as a lunatic to a receptacle 
for insane persons. H<iVing thus disposed 
of her rej)entant victim, she formed a con- 
nexion with a German baron of distinc- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 159 

tion, who decoyed from an amiahle wife 
and children, fled with her to England, 
where he privately supported her in every 
extravagance.'* 

She masked her enormity under the 
guise of apparent modesty, and hoped 
to be again amidst the circles she had 
moved in, when living with Augustus, 
by appearing amongst them as his loidow. 

The noise the handsome and highly- 
descended mulatto had made in the 
elevated sphere of rank and fashion, soon 
reached her ears; she inwardly rejoiced at 
not being actually present at the foul 
deed of murder, and therefore was determin- 
ed to be seen in her company, which would 
establish her in the modish opinion as no 



l6o OWEN castle; 

inconsiderable object. She knew Ompbale 
was ignorant of her having urged the 
wretched Augustus to the dreadful attack 
made on her, and judging by the base 
mutability of her own heart, supposed 
her unexpected change of situation had 
banished him from her mind, and that 
she wished to bury in oblivion all that 
had passed. Regardless of the reception 
she might meet with, she resolved to 
sieze the first opportunity that presented 
itself of speaking to her. After fulfilling 
her design in Hyde Park, she accidentally 
encountered Lord Orminstead, to whom 
she related a fictitious account of her 
adventures since her marriage. He in- 
formed her of her son, (whom she had 
never enquired after or seen for a year 
and a half;) and that he intended to 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I6l 

send him at an early age to the naval 
academy. She coolly thanked him for 
the information, but spoke of him no 
more ; the chilling air, and not to be mis- 
taken abhorrence with which Omphale 
beheld her, filled her satanic soul with a 
determination to be, if possible, revenged; 
she had heard of the treaty between her 
and the young Lord Merioneth being near 
its conclusion, and that it was the darling 
wish of her father to see it speedily ratified : 
to frustrate this union she called forth all 
her spells, and had the malicious plea- 
sure of perceiving she had gained Lord 
Merioneth's attention. How widely did 
she mistake the feelings of Omphale, 
when she concluded a defalcation on his 
lordship's side would affect her. 

Omphale's bosom bled in secret for 



l62 ow^N castle; 

the miserable Augustus, of whose fate 
she could get no clue ; at the opera she 
turned her eyes fearfully round, hoping, 
yet dreading to catch a distant view or 
him, but she was disappointed; on cast- 
ing them heedlessly before her, she 
encountered those of Mrs. Wallace, who 
immediately bowed and smiled upon 
her. 

"Who is that ladyr" said her father, 
who had observed her familiar bend* 

" Mrs. Wallace/' replied Omphale. 

*' What amazing effrontery ! and wha 
is he that is talking to her?" 

" Me do not know, my lord.** 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? \6^ 

" Is it Augustus, Omphale ? dem^nd- 
her father, in a serious tone. 

" No ! Me assure you me do not knovr 
an individual of the party." 

" I am glad of it, for her friends cannot 
be fit associates for i/ow." 

The gentleman his lordship alluded 
to, turned quickly round, and a mutual 
exclamation of suprize from both at the 
same instant revealed them to each other. 

" George, (cried his lordship, giving 
his hand to the stranger,) is it true ; can 
I believe my eyes ? 

<^ Carlton ! I am happy to see ; you hov? 



164 OWEN CASTLE; 

well you look ;" returned the stranger^ 
grasping his proffered hand. 

"I am hurt to see you so altered George, 
but it is no wonder ; the dead alive *^ 

" Rather the prisoner at large,'* replied 
the stranger i they then apologized and 
withdrew a little from the observation of 
the company. 

Omphale had persuaded Lady Sarah to 
join her party for the opera, and indulge 
her refined taste in music, and in hearing 
the celebrated singer, Madame Catalani. 
She did not appear as a Quaker in the 
gay assemblage, but in compliment to 
rigid friends, put on a simple white robe, 
and by removing the close cap, discovered 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? l65 

her waving tresses which were adorned 
by a illy of the vale. 

" Your ladyship, (cried Lord Merioneth) 
may be said to be steahng the pleasures 
of the evening. What objection can the 
friends have to music, that they shut it 
out from their houses and meetings? In 
my poor opinion, nothing can equal the 
melodious voice of Catalani, but the cry 
of a pack of hounds in full chace, or 
the huntman's bugle.** 

" Thou art a sportsman then," said her 
ladyship, 

" The first on the list, madam." 

*^ The discordant yell of a pack of 



1G6 oweN castle; 

hounds is an ill comparison to the en- 
chanting melody of that prized singer's 
voice." 

'' Not to my ear, madam, I have little 
relish for scientific singing, but attend 
the opeia because it attracts so much 
beauty (said his lordship, bowing to Om- 
phale and the rest of the ladies). Not for 
the delight the buffa gives, or the sym- 
pathy a distracted heroine may create iii 
the fair bosoms around me.'* 

*• To me, the scene is altogether en- 
chanting, (said Lady Sarah) and I must 
differ from my friends, in pronouncing it 
an innocent and pleasing pastime. Many 
blame me for my unfettered senti- 
ments, as not in unison with my persua- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 16/ 

?ion, but being satisfied that my princi- 
ples are just, I regard not the too rigid 
doctrines of my forefathers^, 

" Your ladyship may be called a ivei 
'Quaker, as Col man says/' ret irned his 
lordship g^ii'y; '' but \\ho has the blest re- 
formation of your sentiments to account 
for: It must have been a powerful orator/* 

The fair Quaker's heart answered, love 
"was her enlightener ; this self conviction 
vermiliioned he delicate face. 

'^ If I may presume to interpret that 
lovely suffusion on your cheek, I should 
pronounce Cupid the traitor who has 
robbed the faithful of so amiable a disci- 
ple. Do not deny the charge, madam, for 



l6S OWEN CASTLE; 

the little rogue has overturned mighty 
empires by his powerful arrows, we all 
feel the weight of his tyranny. The heart 
is a great truant, it will not hold within 
its proper bounds.'* As he said this^ he 
looked on Mrs. Wallace, a mutual plea- 
sure lightened in the eyes of both as they 
met. Omphale could not forbear no- 
ticing this transient interchange. 

Lady Sarah felt hurt at the free man- 
ner in which his lordship had attempted 
to rally her, and was so overpowered by 
the consciousness of having deserved it, as 
to be unable to defend herself against him. 

The former injury her enemy inflicted, 
made Omphale quick to detect her pi-e- 
sent designs on his lordship. The malign 



GR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 169 

nity of heart displayed in aiming this 
pointless blow at her peace, inspired her 
with contemptuous abhorrence and indig- 
nant scorn. Her pride was wounded at 
being made the feigned object of his 
addresses, though her bosom escaped the 
jealousy of love, and she turned from 
hmi with disgust so marked, as to sur- 
prise the party, who were ignorant of the 
strong occasion that called it forth. 

Lord Orkley begged pardon of his 
friends, and excused himself from further 
attendance on them, on the plea of accom- 
panying an old friend home, whom he 
had not met for twenty years. He 
consigned the care of his daughter to 
Lord Merioneth, and the ladies to th*? 
other gentlemen of the party. 

VOL. HI. I 



1 TO OWEN CASTLE ; 

*^ Stay, my lord, (cried Omphaie) me 
Tvill with your permission, go home with 
you :*' then apologizing to the party for the 
indisposition that forced her away, rose, 
and conducted by her father, who judging 
it was some unpleasant liberty from Mrs. 
Wallace that drove her from the opera, 
readily acquiesced in her wish, and she 
left the house to the extreme mortifica- 
tion of Lord Merioneth, who was so pub- 
lickly slighted by his elected bride. Lady 
Sarah followed her example, and gladly 
accompanied her to Portman Square. 
The examination of her heart, which the 
gaiety of Lord Merioneth had forced upon 
her, filled her with terror, and banished 
the pleasure she had hoped to have en- 
joyed during the evening. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I7I 

On their arrival at home. Lord Orkley 
introduced his daughter and Lady Sarah, 
to his friend Earl Northerland, whose 
countenance, though overcast with a 
sickly hue, and hearing the marks of 
hardship and care, was yet prepossessing ; 
his figure was worn and thin, but of a fine 
height. He was evidently much depressed 
in mind and spirits, and the cheerful 
conversation of his friend seemed to 
increase the dejection under which he- 
laboured. " The unexpected turn in 
public affairs (said Lord Orkley) must 
have given you great joy. To revisit your 
native country, after twenty years absence, 
must be a great fehcity." 

*'The triumph of England and its allies 
over the common enemy, must be a 
I 2 



172 OWEN CASTLE ; 

gratification to the heart of every Briton; 
but^ independent of that swell of exult- 
ing ardour, I feel no pleasure in this 
country : I have no relations livings not a 
friend (yourself excepted) to greet my 
arrival. The last twenty years has been 
a gap in life, never to be retrieved — the 
blessings then within my reach are not 
•to be recalled. I have been pent up in 
ignoble captivity, my honours tarnished in 
their bloom, my spirits broken, and my 
prime manhood vvhithered in the shade." 

" Do not say (cried Lord Orkley) that 
your honours were tarnished, for the 
brilliant valour you so nobiy proved in 
the glorious action before your supposed 
death, will ever live in brightest fame. 
If not encroaching too much on your 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 173 

time and exertion, may I request your 
account of that extraordinary event, which 
has so long suppressed your appearance ':" 

** The circumstances preparatory to my 
last leaving town are known to your 
lordship ; and 1 need not awaken the 
repentant anguish that has since gnawed 
at my heart, by repeating them to you. 
We had left England about three days, 
when we fell in with the enemy, whose 
superior force is never heeded by British 
seamen; we gave immediate chace, and 
began the attack with a well -directed fire. 
In boarding the French man-of-war, when 
we attempted to grapple, I received many 
desperate wounds. Just as 1 was about to 
leap on her deck, a random shot struck 
my right arm, my sword fell, and I dropped 
13 



1^4 OWEN CASTLE; 

motionless into the enemy's power, bathed 
in blood, and to all appearance dead. I 
learnt afterwards, that my brave country- 
men had taken, destroyed, and sunk all 
but the one in which I was an insensible 
captive, and which had, though shattered 
and in a mutilated condition, made her 
escape in the confusion and thick fog that 
obscured her. On our putting in at 
Brest, I was sent to confinement, my 
wounds examined, but the expectations 
for my life were but slender, as I had re- 
ceived a deep gash in my head, which 
affected the brain so violently, as to dis- 
order my senses for three years. When I 
recovered from my malady, I cared not to 
write and inform my family of my being 
in existence. The degradation of my 
being made a prisoner in the height of vie- 



OR, WHICH ISTH£ heroine? 17^ 

iory, preyed upon my mind and energies. 
Reflection too was dreadful ; enervated, it 
became misanthropical, and I was shunned 
by my fellow-prisoners, as a man devoted to 
solitude and despair. The breaking up 
of the prisons, inconsequence of the peace, 
set me at large, without a wish for so- 
ciety, or a taste for enjoyment. Neces- 
sity compelled me to write to England 
for the means of makino: a tour on the 
continent, the only wish that I indulged 
in. I received for answer, that my father 
and brother were dead, and that a distant 
relation had succeeded to my estate and 
titles, the world being deceived by a 
statement of my death in the action 
wherein I was made prisoner. I gave my 
agent and lawyer sufficient proofs of my be- 
ing the rightful heir, and with indifference 
I 4 



17^> OWEN castle; 

commenced my tour through France and 
Italy, before I compelled myself to return 
to England to take possession of my title. 
During the short stay I made in Fontain- 
bleau, I procured there an humble friend,, 
by the following singular adventure. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? I7f 



CHAP. XXXI, 



X Was wandering in the outskirts of 
the beautiful town of Fontainbleau^onc 
evening, when I was suddenly accosted 
by a youth of disordered , but superior 
aii*. He addressed me in EngUsh, and 
implored my charity. There was some- 
thing in his manner and deportment that 
struck me with pity and surprise. I saw in 
his haggard look, emaciated form, and 
rent habiliments, a noble mien shine 
forth that inspired me with a desire to 
serve and know more of him. I was on 
I 5 



178 OWEN CASTLE; 

the point of leaving Fontainbleau early the 
next morning, and invited him to partake 
of part of my postchaise, if he was not 
desirous of staying where he was. He 
mused on what I offered; then, with a 
modest unwillingness to intrude on me, 
was about to take his leave ; but I was 
strongly and singularly interested for this 
uncommon beggar, and reprehensible as 
it may appear to the cooler caution of 
one more prudent, but less feeling, I 
forced him to comply with my request. 
I took him to my hotel, and changing his 
tattered clothes for a neat suit of mine, 
w^as surprised to see the alteration a few 
moments made. The wildness and dis- 
order he wore when he accosted me was 
entirely removed ; a heavy gloom, how- 
ever, overspread an aspect which I thought 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1^9 

had once been open and bright as the 
dawn of day ; the case with which he wore 
his new garments, and the elegance that 
marked each movement, convinced me 
that I had saved from famine, and perhaps 
crime, a young man of no mean extraction. 
I voluntarily took his hand on his en- 
trance to supper, and begged him to share 
in the repast. 

*' You are kind and noble, sir," he re- 
turned, respectfully withdrawing it, " but 
I am not worthy to be thus honoured." A 
deep drawn groan escaped his bosom, and 
a deadly paleness spread quickly over his 
face. A shocking apprehension now 
darted across my mind, that the youth 
before me was faint for w ant of sustenance. 
I poured out a glass of Madeira, and 
i6 



180 OWEN CASTLE; 

gave it into his hand. ^^ You are humane/ 
sir/' he cried, putting it to his parched 
Ups ; "1 have eat but one apple, or drank 
but of the rivulet, these two days, and am 
very much exhausted.*' 

*^ After he had slightly partaken of my 
supper, he became better, but was slow 
to converse. 

^' You are English, I presume ?*' said 1. 

" I was born in Jamaica, sir,^ but my 
parents were English.'* 

" You have been in England r" 

'^ Yes, sir, I have been there, to my 
despair." 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 181 

" Where is your present destination ?" 

" England, sir." 

" I was surprized at this apparent con- 
tradiction, and said, " Do you wish to 
return to the place you have cause to 
lament ever visiting r" 

" I go to the place of my undoing,'^ 
(cried he) to make atonement for a crime 
into which I was hurried while encom- 
passed by a demon's arts ; but poverty 
prevents my contrite offering, and I 
linger here a miserable wretch, despair- 
ing to reach the promised haven of ex- 
piation and death !"* He rose, and with 
hurried step paced the room, his coun- 
tenance undergoing dreadful changes. 



182 OWEN castle; 

proved the tumult of his souh I resolved 
to see the end of this adventure I had 
embarked in, and informed him that it 
was my intent to return immediately to 
England, and to take him with me. 
Gratitude sparkled in his full eyes, as he 
turned them on me, but the expression 
was transient, he then cast them on the 
ground, and said in a mournful accent ! 
" You will be sorry for the charitable 
impulse, that prom.pted your kindness to 
a wretch like me,'' 

" I have learnt from your 'own words, 
that you are a penitent ; that you long to 
make expiation, and gain forgiveness for 
your errors, I am too great a sinner 
myself to wish to prevent so pious an 
intent." 



OR WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 183 

" Errors /" he exclaimed, striking h\% 
forehead, " Oh ! sir, they are crimes, 
such as call for vengeance on my guilty 
head, I will not burden you by a recital 
of them, but promise, solemnly promise,^ 
continued he falling at my feet, '* to quit 
you when arrived in London, that mart 
of villainy, that sphere wherein the fiends 
of temptation and distinction dwell, 
that no blush may stain your cheek for 
him you brought to suffer !'* I was sen- 
sibly affected, and before he had risen 
from his humble posture, I made him 
swear not to leave me, unless necessity 
and contrition demanded it. He took the 
oath, embraced my knees with reveren- 
tial gratitude, and became more com- 
posed, though ever gloomy and absent. 
He had never informed me of the pre- 



184 OWEN CASTLE ; 

vious distresses that brought him to the 
very low state I found him in, and 1 for-, 
bore to press him on the subject. 

"We commenced our journey at sun- 
sise the next morning: when seated in 
the carriage, my companion broke out 
into an exclamation of gratitude, " How 
sir, all noble and generous as you are, 
how shall I express my thanks for your 
bounty ?" 

" By confidence, and a respectful reli- 
ance on my word to befriend you, if not 
wholly undeserving my protection." 

" I will confide my wretched story to 
your compassionate breast f returned he) 
when in London, until then spare me^ 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 185 

noble sir, spare the confession.'* I 
promised. On our arrival yesterday 
at the hotel, I took up a paper, and acci- 
dentally read to him a paragraph concern- 
ing your daughter, the lovely lady Om- 
phale*s beauty and brilliant appearance at 
a late fete. I was alarmed at my compa- 
nion's falling on his knees, and ejaculating, 
" Thank God!" in the most devout and 
fervent manner ; then springing on his 
feet, and snatching the paper from my 
hand, in his trembling hold, he read with 
haste the paragra[jh ov^r and over again; 
then wiih an hysterical laugh, bur^t forth 
into a transport of frightful joy; '- I am 
guiltless, he cried, I am guiltless of her 
death," and immediately fell to the ground. 

^^Omphale held the arm of Lady Sarah, 



186 OWEN CASTLE; 

and listened nearly breathless to the recital 
of the earl. 



^•' When the young man recovered, I 
entreated an explanation, but he excused 
himself from the disclosure until he had 
gained more composure; business has 
prevented my hearing the long promised 
narrative, but in the morning I expect 
the communication." 

Omphale revived. 

" Did you know the persons abroad, my 
lord, (said lord Orkley,) with whom I 
saw you at the opera. 

^^ The baron Judenburg'vvas introduced 
to me in Paris, (answered the earl,) and I 



©R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE r 187 

€ould not with politeness neglect him, 
though I did not approve the company 
he was in, nor did my young companion ; 
for I had scarcely answered the congratu- 
lations of the baron when he started, as if 
a basilisk had fixed its eyes on him, and 
fled with precipitation from my sight. 
The conduct of the youth is mysterious, 
but I trust I shall have no reason to repent 
my having befriended him." 

" I hope not, (said Lord Orkley,) but 
how he can know any thing concerning 
my daughter, I am at a loss to conceive, 
unless he were the confederate of a villain 
who once attempted her life. To-morrow 
morning I will inform you of the circum- 
stances that once endangered the life of 
my now happy daughter ; you will repose 
here to-night, my friend, and accept of no 



188 OWEN castle; 

other asylum during the preparation niacle 
for your reception at your own mansion. 
You will not deny, I am sure, your old 
friend the pleasing honour." 

Earl Northerland declined remaining 
for the night, but promised to comply 
with the hospitable invitation of his 
friend. " One thing, said the earl, I 
had forgot ; you must, (if you expect me,) 
permit my protegee to partake of your 
politeness. I would not force him on you, 
were I not sure he is a gentleman in 
mind and manners, though misfortune 
has obscured him." 

Lord Orkley replied with his usual 
good humour and grace, that any one 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 1 89 

SO highly favoured by his lordship, must 
be also agreeable to him. 

Oh the following morning, as Lord 
Orkley, Lady Sarah and Omphale were 
assembled at the breakfast table, thie 
Earl of Northerland and his protegee were 
announced. His lordship rose hastily to 
receive them. 

The palpitation of Omphale's heart, 
on hearing of their arrival, was scarce to 
be borne; but v/hen they entered, all the 
self command she had been strivin^^ to 
collect g;ave wav, and utterincr the name 
of Augustus, with a feeble cry, fell 
senseless into Lady Sarah arms* — In an 
instant he was at her side. 



190 OWEN castle; 

ic If^refch that I am ! am I doomed to 
destroy thee! Must my hated presence 
ever blast thy sight! Oh! depart not» 
angel of mercy, depart not, ere you for- 
give your assassin," cried Augustus, 
distractedly falling at her feet, and 
looking on her death-like face with all 
the agony of a too late repentance. 

Lady Sarah, loth to call in the servants 
to witness so peculiar a scene, procured 
a decanter of cold water from the side- 
board, with which she sprinkled the 
temples of her friend, and with her 
smelling bottle endeavoured to restore 
her. 

*^ Whence comes this bold, this daring 
intrusion on the father of that injured 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? I9I 

female," said Lord Orkley, proudly 
advancing to Augustus, and inflamed by 
anger and insulted dignity, bade him 
leave her, and instantly quit his pre- 
sence. 

" I dare not have entered beneath your 
roof, had I known vou were the Father 
of this injured angel (answered he). I 
should have shrunk into the blackest ca- 
vern rather than have blighted by my 
baneful person the life of her I reverence 
and homage. Oh ! had you known how 
many nights of anguish, of phrenzy, and 
contrition, I have spent in the dungeon 
my tempter threw me into, you would 
pitijy you would lament my sufferings. 
I broke desperate from the trammels the 
sorceress had wound around me, and fled 



192 OWEN CASTLE; 

the horrid prison of direst cruelty, to 
make expiation for the dreadful deed I 
thought I had committed; to offer my- 
self up to justice as a robber and a 
murderer, I endured fatigue, famine, and 
every hardship, to reacli the spot of suf- 
ferance and atonement; but when ar- 
rived, I found heaven had snatched my 
victim from the jaws of death. The trans- 
port I then felt, no power can express, 
no tongue can speak, and you would drive 
hence before my guilty soul had tasted 
the celestial blessing of forgiveness, I 
implore of those cold lips. Give me but 
that, Almighty powers! and let a father's 
vengeance trample on me — Let agony fill 
each fibre of my lacerated heart. Oh ! 
1 have been punished ; a broken oath was 
hanging over my houseless head ; every 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 193 

misery I Invoked has fallen on me ; then 
glut yoar wrath, year just anger by my 
desolation. I shall expire, joyfully ex- 
pire, by this angel's side, and bless the 
hand that deals the fatal blow/* His en- 
ergetic action, wildness of eye, and grief- 
wrought transport, inspired all with pity 
;aid surprise. 

Rufns ?Jarmaduke suddenly entered the 
apartment; he started at beholding Au- 
gustus extended at the feet of the still 
insensible Omphale, and thegroupe around 
tliem — lie exclaimed, ''- Can this be! Au- 
gustus Miibourne, the once happy Mil- 
bo. jrne an assassin, and a penitent. 
Who has wrought this deplorable de- 



gradation 



VOL. III. 



194 OWEN CASTLE; 

" A icoman /'* cried Augustus, spring- 
ing on his feet : an abandoned woman ! 
Who is the cause of husbands deserting 
their children, and of virtuous matron's 
tears ? Who lures the headstrong youth 
to poverty, fraud, and murder ? Why 
an abandoned woman! The primary 
foundation of all evil, as a virtuous one 
is the foundation of all good. Behold in 
me an example of a truth ; that shame and 
misery will ever overtake the follower 
of the former i every smile is a snare to 
his soul, every caress a bitter token and 
earnest of eternal agony, remorse^ and 
deaths Overcome by the strength of his - 
feelings, he sunk into a chair. Om* 
phale slowly recovered. The first object 
ghe sought was Augustus ; their eyes met^ 
their melting softness radiantly implored 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 195 

and gave forgiveness. " Oh ! gentle crea- 
ture! (he exclaimed) confirm the pardon 
those mild orbs of beauty have shone 
forth, by your heart — your lips, and 
I will instantly fly your presence. Oh ! 
my abused, my once loved Omphale ! did 
you see the v/orkings of my penitent 
soul, you would not deny the balm I covet 
to healthe wounds it bleeds with. Nightly 
has your form haunted my sleepless couch, 
and driven me forth to wander in de- 
spair, a prey to a guilty conscience ; but 
I have returned to throw myself in hum- 
ble contrition before you, to invoke your 
mercy that never yet was withheld from 
those who sought it, and will not, now— 
that the once loved Augustus entreats it. 
Oh ! Omphale, Omphale ! while I look 
on thee, past scenes of innocence and joy 
K 2 



196 OWEN castlk; 

rush on my mind; I see with affright 
what / ;///o/// have been, and vvliat 
lanir 

He I) id his face in the folds of her 
dress, and sohbed aloud. 'I'lie tremor of 
her frame, the gusliing tears that flowed 
from her eyes, the angelic brightness of 
lier face, as she pronounced hev forgive- 
ness, all conspired to soften the spec- 
tators of the scene, and every eye was 
dewed with pity. The Earl of Norther- 
land remained mute with astonishment. 

" Ilarmouloiia sounds!" he cried, joy 
illuminating his sinking eyes. "Catch them 
ye seraphs, and bear tliem swift to 
heaven : (tlien holding her to his beating 
hearty he continued,) thio ecstatic moment 



OR, WlilCd IS THE HEROINE? 197 

repays me for all the suiTerin<js I have 
endured." He relinquished his hold, and 
fled hastily away. The of Earl Northerland 
and Rufus followed. Lord Orkley, un- 
able to control his emotions, retired as 
quickly to the library, leaving the gentle 
Lady Sarah to calm and restore her trem- 
bling friend, who did not leave her own 
apartments the remainder of the day. 

Lord Orkley gave up every engage- 
ment for the evening in order to enjoy 
the company of his friend exclusively. 
The Earl of Northerland made every apo- 
logy for having brought Augustus into his 
presence, being now perfectly aware, from 
the disclosure of that unfortunate young 
man, how irksome his company must be 
to his lordship, lie had given him over 
K 3 



198 OWEN castle; 

to the care of the young parson, who 
promised to see him comfortably lodged 
until he could procure him some ehgible 
employment, 

" I can offer nothing, my friend, (said 
Earl Northerland,) in extenuation of his 
crime, but youth 2ind inexperience, their 
common but not less Jorcihie plea for 
juvenile misdemeanours. He is a severe 
sufferer for the traitorous infatuation he 
imbibed for a designing and deceitful 
woman, and makes one amongst the 
many victims of those impure connexions 
that scourge the virtuous inhabitants of 
this great city. Did we know the bles- 
sings a well spent-youth gives to age, 
none would consume it in tumultuous 
debauchery, or madly yield to the in- 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? igj) 

toxicating passions that drive them head- 
long dov/n the gulph of ruin and de*^ 
spair. How bitterly do the infirmities of 
helpless age appear when invaded by the 
scorpion stings of repentance, and the 
reproaches of all around them ; no lisping 
cherub climbs the profligate's knee. — Of 
children, wife, and friends, he never 
knew the joys. — What has he obtained for 
giving them up for riot and intemper- 
ance? A premature decline and a de- 
spised grave. Such is the end of many 
who laugh at the celestial rays Religion 
sheds on its votaries ; bul find too late, 
that without that solace, they have w'an- 
dered in the darksome paths of perdition. 
The young man I have patronized, has 
time for reformation, and where the heart 
is not wholly coiTupt, a hope appears that 

K 4 



20O OWEN CASTLE; 

a new life may cancel the transgressions 
of his onset. Consider, my friend, he had 
youth, strong ])assions, wealth, and a dan- 
geroiis syren, who seduced him to the 
rocks whereon his ill prepared bark of 
happiness was wrecked. These are pow- 
erful excuses, though light in their ap- 
pearance^J ^^^^ deemed inexcusable by the 
slow blooded censnrers and rigid moralists 
<~)f the present day. 

"I perceive (replied Lord Orkley,) that 
your lordship's partiality labours to throw 
in palliatives for his (to me) unpardonable 
conduct ; but as I trust I have seen the 
first, as well as the last of him, we will 
never mention the subject again. I rely 
on you honour to keep him from my 
daughter's presence, as 1 fear her weak- 



OR, WHICH ISTHE HEROINL? 201 

ness in his favour may render obedience 
to my will, a more severe task than I 
would otherwise hope to experience/' 

'' I promise/* returned the earl. 

" Enough, my friend, I am now mere 
satisfied.'* 

" During my short stay at Paris^ 
(continued Lord Northerland) I saw in a 
jeweller's shop a picture that attracted my 
attention, from the striking likeness it bore 
to one, who in my days of error I liad 
used in the most cruel and traiterous 
manner. I went into the shop, and en- 
quire d the price which he set on the n)i- 
niaiure and the other ornaments attached 
to it, and how they had fallen into 
K 5 



202 OWEN CASTLE; 

his hands. He said a Portugese jew 
brought them to him, who he supposed 
had got them from an English lady of 
quahty, who had lost her money at the 
gaming table, or found Paris was not so 
cheap to abide in as her own country. 
*' Ah! su', (said the jeweller) the English 
come full, but return empty." I could 
not refrain from a smile at the significant 
look that followed the Frenchman's sen- 
tence, and entered freely into conversa- 
tion with him. He informed me how 
crowded the city was, and how dearly 
the English paid for the vilest accommo- 
dations, and that he had his drawers 
stored with valuables that necessity forced 
them to part with, to take them home. I 
wondered at his finding fault with what so 
much enriched him, and openly confessed 



OR WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 203 

my surprise. He answered, that he was 
a Frenchman by birth, and had formerly 
traded for his nnr;]e, when he was taken 
prisoner by the English, and that the 
lenity and kindness he had met with 
there, was impressed most gratefully on 
his mind, so that he could not bear to see 
them squander their substance, and be 
the dupes they were to the most glaring 
impositions his countrymen avariciously 
forced on them. 

^' I with pleasure paid his demand for 
the miniature and left the shop, well 
pleased with the regard he had shown.'* 

His lordship then gave it into his 
friend's hand. " Take it to your daughter, 
(said he) Augustus by me restores it to 
k6. 



204 OWEN CASTLE; 

her, I cannot keep it from her, knowing 
the affection she bore to the ori£inal of 
that miniature, the wronged but noble 
Lady Amanda." 

His lordship heaved a profound sigh, 
and remained silent for some time; at a 
late hour the friends separated. 



•R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE t 205 



CHAPTER XXXIL 



X HE next morning Omphale received 
a very long letter from Lady Fitzovven. 
It gave her infinite pleasure to- hear from 
her. though she lamented the intellioence 
it contained. 

^ My dear Omphale, 

'' I'he tedious suspense 
under which 1 liave so lon^ laboured, is at 
length ovi r. Sir Matthew is pronounced 
out of danger, and ib so far restored to 



20S OWEN castle; 

hepJth a^ to bear a journey to town, where 
he is ordered for advice more to be relied 
on, than any V¥ales can produce. I can- 
not perceive the service this sudden plan 
will be of to him. as he labours under no 
complaints, since the healing of his wound, 
but those incidental to his infirm time of 
life, unless the spirit of contradiction, 
which is strongly interwoven with his 
other qualities, prompts his design in order 
to thwart me, who have no inclination 
to move to a place less in unison with 
the depression of my mind, than the som- 
bre and romantic woods around my stately 
residence, I have besought Sir Matthew 
to leave me behind, as the spring is very 
forward, and solitude amidst its ripening 
beauties is the coveted wish of my bosom. 
For answer to my humble petition, he said 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? ^0^ 

^ he could not do without his nurse/ You 
see, my friend, the light in which I am 
held by my hoary master ; that obedience 
and patience is the task his tyranny and 
fractious temper teaches, to one docile 
from her love of peace. Mr. Stanley, that 
worthy and kind agent for all our wants, 
has taken a house in Park lane, where we 
are to reside until Sir Matthew goes to 
Bristol Hot Wells. I am certain your af- 
fectionate heart will anticipate a meeting 
with your poor recluse, and the delight 
will be mutual, the only sensation of 
pleasure my bosom has been cheered with 
since my marriage, left as I am entire- 
ly to the mercy of my husband, whose jea- 
lousy is ever alert, and vents itself un- 
sparingly and in the most cruel and cause- 
less aspersions on my fame. Yesterday 



SOS OWEN CASTLE; 

morning after attending in his chamber 
to his being eot up and dressed by his 
servants, I descended to the breakfast 
parlour, to prepare his restorative medi- 
cine and pour out his chocolate, settle 
his easy chair, and see that nothing wjis 
about the room that might give cause of 
offence, for it is trifles, my friend, that 
with him create the most serious alterca- 
tions. After he was, by the aid of the 
serv^ants, seated to his mind, I with sin- 
cerity said, I was glad he was so much 
better, as to be able to occupy his easy 
chair ' Humph" grumbled he, swallowing 
the medicine 1 handed to him, and fling- 
the spoon on the floor, ' I like that, wheiv 
you would as lief see the devil as my face. 
It is a provoking tning, is'ent it, madam^^ 
that 1 don't dae/ 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 209 

" ' Why do you use me thus, sir! is it 
unnatural that I should be glad to se^ yoa 
so well after a doubtful illness/ 

" * No, it is not at all minatural, (re- 
turned he, with a savage derision,) that 
i/ou should be glad I am able to come 
down, since it saves the life of a certain 
you?ig reprobate/ 

**' I am rejoiced on both your accounts/ 

'^^ I dare say, madam; but a lady of 
your modesty, methinks should not 
openly avow her adulterous love, even to 
the face of her injured husband.' 

" The inhumamty, as well as injustice 
of his defaiuation, deprived me of all 



glO OWEN CASTLE; 

self control, and I could not refrain from 
saying, in the bitterness of my feelings, 
that neither gratitude for my duteous 
attentions or youthful sacrifice had power 
to touch his callous heart. ' Had I sl father 
or a hroiher, you dare not use me thus." 
Tears of sorrow and wounded virtue sprung 
to my eyes and stopped my utterance. 

•^ ^ Aye, cry away, madam, cry away ; 
since you have neither father or brother 
to call upon, I dare say the engaging 
parson would be your champion. Now 
could not you contrive to mix a little lau- 
danum with ray sleeping draught and 
commence a widow; you might then be 
blest in your lover*s arms ere I was wound 
in my shroud.' 



©R, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 211 

" ' I will not bear these vile stigmas to 
be thrown on me, sir, in this cowardly 
and taunting style. If you doubt my 
rectitude, have recourse to the law, and 
let me openly defend myself against the 
enemies who have poisoned your suspi- 
cious mind against me.' 

" ^ A divorce, madam ! Aye, aye, I 
see it now. Ha! ha! ha! a good hit in- 
deed!* — His unfeeling laughter sickened 
me with disgust, and I fear a hatred 
crept over my heart never to be removed. 
I sullenly retained my seat, while he 
uninterruptedly went on, * You shall not 
remain here, madam, while I remove to 
town ; 720, you shall not have leisure or 
opportunity to abuse me. Mr. Maskall 
shall take guardianship of your movements. 



212 OWEN castle; 

When in London, I sliali partake of no 
diversions, have no female gossiping at 
home, or racketing abroad, as you, per- 
haps, expect. An invalid is not to be 
disturbed by the follies of the town. You 
will say, that a baronetess of your youth 
and fortune, though incumbered by a 
husband, should launch into gaiety ; but 
/, who ivUl exert my prerogative, forhld 
it, ?>inci\y forbid it, madam ; nor shall a 
servant open a door to any living being, 
without my order or concurrence. This 
fresh specimen of cruelty was to shut out 
the only friend I had, whose sympathy 
or company could lighten the heaviness of 
my imprisonment, but I answered only 
with a deep drawn sigh : my silence 
disappointed him, and he tauntingly- 
cried, ' Whac vou choose to be obstinate ; 



X)Rj WHICH IS THE HEROINE ." 213 

??llence is to be the order of the day, as 
best calculated to teaze and torment me. 
A faultless creature like you, m.adam, 
might, I think J refrain fr;>ni such practices. 
What! you are sulky, madam. You would 
wish to live wilh the ncv made lady and 
her father, whose polite invitation I made 
you reject.' Finding he had finished his 
breakfast with an uncommon appetite, I 
ordered the equipage away, and began 
to trim a favourite geranium tree, that 
stood on a stand in an alcove of the room. 
' David,' cried Sir Matthew, ^ bring back 
the things. Lady Fitzou'en has not tasted 
a morsel yet.' ^ I beg pardon, my lady,' 
said the honest creature with a pitying ' 
look. 'It is of no consequence, David,'* 
returned I, ' I cannot eat, so take away.' 



214 OWEN castle; 

"^ What you've had your breakfast be- 
fore I suppose, madam.' 

" ^That she has not, Til be sworn (mut- 
tered David), if you was near.' 

^^ I was astonished at the boldness of 
my once discreet servant^ and by a look 
of displeasure conveyed my wish for him 
to leave the apartment, 

^' ^ What's that, sirrah ?' cried my angry 
lord» 

*^ ^ Nothing, sir (returned David) ; I only 
beg pardon, and leave to ask why your 
lady should wish to discharge me from 
her service. I thought the good madam 
Milbourue said in her illness^ God bless 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 215 

her, that I should always attend her, I and 
\yinifred, your honour.* 

" I was surprised and hurt, and denied 
any knowledge of the order. 

"^ I thought so, hang me if didn't. I 
thought your sweet laydship would not 
send poor Winifred and I away without 
no cause.' 

*' ' You have been impertinent, sirrah ; 
you have dared to use my name freely 
amongst your fellow-servants, and I for 
that reason command you to leave the 
castle.' 

<f « Well, sir (said he), I don't care a 
whif about leaving the castle ; I am only 



Sl6 OWEN CASTLE ; 

grieved to leave lier dear sweet ladyship 
amongst a nest of enemies, as she vvil] 
find. A lid as for what I said in the ser- 
vants' hall, your honour, Til say again, 
and to the face of that sly backbiter;, Mr. 
John, who is a fit servant to a fit master; 
he is like a wolf in sheep's clothing, creep- 
ing up your honours sleeve. All I said 
was, that aii old gentleman like you, 
ought for to be proud of so beautiful and 
sweet tempered a lady, who was the 
kindest of nurses, and deserved a better 
husband, for to my mind you was a tor- 
ment, and so, your, lionour, there is the 
truth ; but I did not mean it should come 
to your ears, that was certain ; hut the 
rogue has done his worst, and so I go ; 
but meet him where I may, I'll make 
him feel the strength of my Welch fist. 



OR, WHiCH IS THE HEROINE? 21/ 

God bless you, dear sweet lady, be careful 
of the set that are about you, and — and 

' here the honest creature, struggling 

with his feelings, stopped a moment, then 
recovered a little, and said, * poor Wini- 
fred can't take heart to bid you good-bye, 
your ladyship, and I was to do it for her, 
but my heart swells so in my throat, that 
1 can't, indeed 1 can't, and so (iod bless 
you — God bless you a thousand times, 
sweet lady.* David cast a respectful look 
of sorrow on me and quitted the apart- 
ment. 

" I was extremely hurt at the departure 
of my faithful servants, and solicited Sir 
Matthew to recall them, as I protested I 
would admit none in their stead as my 
own attendants. 

VOL.111. L 



21S OWEN castle; 

^ They may return to the castle, when 
we are gone, madam, not until then.' 

" I was forced to be a passive witness 
of their ill treatment, and after making 
the simple Winifred a present for her 
fidelity and attention, reluctantly bade her 
adieu, with more concern than perhaps 
was common on such trivial occasions ; 
but they were humble and kind creatures, 
whose disinterested affection had shewn 
itself in a hundred nameless services. 

" I am now in an unpleasant situation 
indeed. Not one around me, but I fear 
are spies or misintepreters of my conduct. 
But conscious rectitude is the bestpalliatiye 
to guard off evil designs on a defenceless 
woman's fame, and on that I rely. The 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE :* 2\^ 

hint that honest David dropped with 
respect to our visitor, the Rev. James 
Maskall, is very clear to me, and I must 
confess, that his behaviour has been such, 
as to create my disgust and uneasiness, 
though never arising; to more than looks 
and sighs, which have forced my notice 
and contempt from their frequent repe- 
tition. I will not affect to misunderstand 
the drift of these mockeries, though it is 
with a blush that I confide them even to 
your breast. John was liis servant, 
whom he particularly reconmiended to 
Sir Matthew, and of whom I have strong 
suspicions, not very favourable to his 
honesty, and that he is the instrument 
of that unworthy member of the church, 
who conveys secret intelligence of 



220 ©WEN CASTLE ; 

every movement that I make to Sir 
Matthew. 

^< Alas! my friend, how am I beset in 
this dearly-purchased abode! But I will 
not cast a melancholy over your mind, by 
repeating the many disagreeables daily 
occurring at the castle. I will leave all 
my complaints until I have the delight of 
beholding you, which will not be before 
the end of next week, as Sir Matthew 
travels slowly, and intends to rest where 
any thing worth notice may attract his 
curiosity. 

" Heaven send this journey m?y be 
fraught with a happy result, for I feel as 
if it were the forerunner of gom.e won- 



OR^ WHICH IS THE HZROIN^E? 221 

drous event. London will afford me little 
delight ; the fate of my loved mother, the 
innocent Eliza, will cast a dark shade over 
eveiy nevv or pleasing object. I cannot 
but reflect, that in that world of luxury 
and misery my father's proud relatives 
exist. Where is now that unkind fa- 
ther? — ah! dead! at least, to me. The 
solitude of my late revered aunt shut out 
all intercourse with the busy throng, and 
I am ignorant of the fluctuations that 
occur in the great mart of England, where 
I shall shortly be transported to. 

" Till we meet, my friend, adieu. The 
fretful and ever- dissatisfied disposition of 
my husband, gives me no leisure to add 
more, and I fear I have already tired 
your patience. The packing of many 
L3 



222 OWES CASTLE; 

books having displeased him, I am called 
to assist in the new arrangement he is 
making for their safe conveyance. Fare- 
well, and ever believe me, 

'^ Your dtvoted friend and sister, 

" Grace Fitzowen.'" 



OR, WHTCH IS THE HEROINE? 223 



CHAPTER XXI. 



OmPHALE was determined that the 
honest attendants of Lady Fitzowen should 
be near their mistress, and sent by re- 
turn of post a desire for their presence in 
town, as she intended to j)rovide for them 
in her father's household. They joyfully 
obeyed the summons^ delighted with the 
thought of again seeing their beloved 
mistress, though not under her immedi- 
ate protection, but with her sincere friend 
whose s'lavity of manners had gained their 
respectful regard. 

L 4 



224 OWEN CASTLE; 

The humanity of Lord Orkley, refused 
to urge his child to an hasty union with 
Lord Merioneth, much and earnestly as 
he desired it. Seeing with pain the im- 
pression the unfortunate Augustus had 
recently made by his penitential suppli- 
cation for his pardon ; and he resolved 
to give her time to banish him from her 
tenacious heart and memory. 

Earl Northerland grew daily more and 
more attached to Augustus, who, relieved 
from his imagined crime, had become less 
gloomy and reserved, and gratefully ac- 
knowledged the many obligations he owed 
to him. 

The company of Rufus Marmaduke 
was a consolation and a compliment he 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE: 225 

highly prized^ he was the confident of 
many past crimes and follies, and well 
knew the pure love, that phenix like, rose 
with double force from its hidden ashes, 
only to shine again with renewed bright- 
ness. Rufus informed him of every thing 
that had occurred in his absence, and the 
impending alliance between the young 
Lord Merioneth and Omphale. 

" I have no rig^ht to murmur. I threw 
the jewel from me, and one more deserv- 
ing has found it ;" said Augustus with 
a forced smile. *' I am punished, she is 
exalted; thus it ever should be with virtue, 
while vice should sink degraded to its 
loathsome dungeon/' He paced the room 
with agitated step. Rufus Marmaduke 
stopped with him until Earl Northerland'* 
L 5 



^26 OWEN CASTLE; 

return which was not till a late hour. 
When his Lordship entered, he seemed 
much depressed in spirits, and little dis- 
posed to converse. Rufus perceiving 
his disposition, took his leave; and 
Augustus attended Earl Northerland to 
the door of his chamber, who took his 
hand and said, " No wonder that you 
fell. 1 have seen the arch seducer that 
drove you to min. She has now entangled 
in her web a Imsband and a father, the 
deluded Baron Judeuburg ; but I will 
snatch him from her, and end if possible, 
a career that carries dej-truction in its 
train. The afflicted baroness is in En- 
gland, and witii her children seeks her 
ensnart'd lord ; the fair ni-nster that de- 
coys him from ber arms shall not glory 
in her iniquitous triumph. In the bare- 



OR, WFIICH IS THE HEROINE:' 227 

tie.ss I see a picture that awakens dread- 
ful emotions ; and the form of a mur- 
dered wife flies before my eyes. By my 
desertion was she destroyed But enough 
now/' exclaimed his lordship, observing 
the surprise painted on the features of 
Augustus. " Enou:J[h ; I can now pity you 
a thousand times more than I did at first, 
I see how your senses have been daz- 
zle<h and can pardon all '* He again 
P'-essed his hand, and hurried from the 
door. 

Augustus was at a loss what to suppose 
from the extraordinary manner of his 
lordship; and could only conclude that 
he had seen and conversed with Mrs. 
Wallace, from the incoherence of his 
l6 



22S OWEN castle; 

speech. He retired to his chamber ab- 
sorbed in retrospection. 

Rufas hastened to the supper room, 
where he found Lady Sarah waiting the 
return of Lord Orkley and his daughter; 
he drew a chair^ and enquired where they 
had been engaged. 

A slight blush spread over the cheek of 
the fair quaker, as she answered him. 

" Why was not your ladyship with my 
kind friends t" 

*^ I find no pleasure, friend, in late 
hours.'* 

" Yet you attend the opera, madam ? 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE." 229 

" There, friend," she returned, with a 
gracious smile, " my ears were feasted 
with sounds of harmony ; hut where my 
entertainers are gone, I should see only 
cards, dice, brilliant lights, and crouded 
rooms ; and my ears gain neither melody 
or information, I have trespassed too 
much already on my indulgent uncle's 
lenity, I dare not try it farther/' Here 
a sudden sadness dimmed her eyes, and 
«he cast them on a book of poems she 
had been reading. 

" Surely, madam," said Rufus, observ- 
ing the alteration in her countenance, 
you are oppressed with some sorrow. 
Would to heaven I could remove it." 

^* Wouldst thou mourn with me, were 



230 OWEX TASTLE; 

I in troublr^?" said ^he. raising her eyes 
timidly, and looking on his. 

*^ Would I mourn with thee, Oh ! be- 
nevolent Lady Sar^hr" he exclaimed with 
fervor, "Would 1 not risk my life to guard 
it from you?" 

"I thank thee sincerely, friend," said 
she, passmg her delicate hand for a mo- 
ment over her face to hide the strong 
emotions his intimation of regard conveyed 
to her bosom. 

" Instruct your servant^ purest creature, 
in the manner he may best pro\e the ar- 
dent grraitude you have created in his 
breast ; and he will with transport fly to 
perform the command." He respectfully 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 231 

took lier hand, and in token of his reve- 
rence for her virtues, pressed his devout 
lips upon its velvet surface. The tremor 
that shook her frame at this impulse of 
his grateful esteem surprised him; his 
vanity had never interpreted the modest 
esteem and gracious condescension of her 
ladyship toward him into more than feel- 
inor of benevolence for one involved in 
distressing circumstances ; but her pre- 
sent embarrassment, crimson cheek, and 
whole deportment, betrayed her cherished 
secret ; he relinquished the trembling 
hand he had taken, she leant against a 
marble bracket, and in an instant became 
as white as her insensible supporter. 

Rufus was alarmed, and was flying to 



235 OWEN CASTLE; 

her assistance, when her uncle Fairfield 
appeared at a folding door. He looked 
on Lady Sarah with a mixture of pity 
and reproach, and advancing to the 
young clergyman addressed him with aus- 
terity : 

" Why hast thou deluded that maiden ? 
Didst thou envy her her pure life, and 
wished to embitter it with a vain love?" 

"Oh! uncle, uncle!" said the gentle 
quaker; "thou art in a mistake, he is — *' 
Her confusion and modesty struggled with 
her utterance, and she scarce audibly ar- 
ticulated,*' he is ignorant ; he knoweth not. 
what thou wouldest accuse him of." 

**Art thou turned to untruth? Oh! 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 2o^ 

Sarah, how art thou fallen from thy for- 
mer self!" 

Rufus was amazed and concerned at 
the severe and clouded aspect of Mr. Fair- 
field. 

" No, no!" said she, *^I will not involve 
him in mine own folly. Uncle, thou 
didst discover my affection for the stran- 
ger that was taken into my dwelling, ere 
I knew it myself. I promised thee to 
let it remain hidden in my bosom. I have 
kept my promise, but this hasty entrance 
of thine, has discovered what I have ear- 
nestly endeavoured to conceal." She hid 
her face with her white hands and drop- 
ped into a chair. 



234 OWEN CASTLE; 

"Then why art thou thus communingr"^ 

Rufus assured him his intrusion on Lady 
Sarah was entirely without design. Let me 
not see her under your displeasure, to 
whose charity and benevolence I owe shel- 
ter and commiseration. Her balmed words 
have fallen like manna on my starved, 
isolated soul, and is this the repayment 
I have made? Have I embittered her spot- 
less life with secret pain? Oh! had I 
early known this flattering, but too great 
honour, I had fled the fostering angel." 
Here he was greaily affected. 

" Would thou hadst, friend, for then 
had she been happy. Sarah thou hast 
sinned with thine eyes open ; the young 



GR^ WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 235 

man til ou lovest, loveth another. What 
hope hghteth the unhallowed flame in 
thy unhappy bosom ? Thy faith is not 
entire ; thou art a quaker only in out- 
ward form; thy heart yearneth for the 
preacher of another creed. What wilt 
thou answer unto the elders of thy per- 
suasion ? Thou must say that thy mind 
is perverted, thy principles dissolved by 
the doctrine of one who careth not for 
thy disgrace amongst us. Oh ! Sarah, 
Sarah ! I see thou art like a tender slip 
torn from thy paternal stem and blown 
about with every vagrant breath; thy faith 
I fear is inwardly renounced, though thou 
hast not courajie to declare it." 

"Dear Uncle, thv words strike to my 



236 OWEN castle; 

heart/* said Lady Sarah, her face still con- 
cealed. 

" I am glad of it, Sarah, so I would 
have them, that thy wandering heart might 
return, like a stray lamb, to the friendly 
fold that will enclose and shut out danger 
from thy weakness." 

He had scarcely finished, speaking 
when the door suddenly opened, and Lord 
Orkley with his daughter entered. Om- 
phale on seeing Lady Sarah nearly faint- 
ing in her chair ran to her aid, while 
Lord Orkley regarded the distress and 
confusion visible in the expressive coun- 
tenance of Rufus, and the solemnity of 
the worthy quaker, with astonishment 
and regret. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HrROINE : 23/ 

*' I am glad thou art come," said Mr. 
Fairfield," for I have been in need of a 
friend to counsel nie. Thou seest that 
maiden whom I love as a dauc^htcr. She 
hath given her heart unto a man of dif- 
ferent persuasion, who regardeth another, 
who is poor, and not without rashness ; 
which hath disgraced him amongst his 
brethren and fellow-preachers. Must I 
cast out this maiden from amongst us, 
a contaminated lamb ; her, who was so 
lately the meek and faitliful follower of 
virtue; is not her heart turned to folly, 
and am I not compelled to be se- 
vere y 

" Rufus Marmaduke, (said Lord Ork- 
ley, seriously y) how do you feel under 



239 OWEN CASTLE; 

the accusation of haviiip^ brought on Lady 
Sarah the severe displeasure of her 
uncle/' 

" Feel, my lord, (said he) as a man 
whose bosom labours with sorrow for an 
unintentional crime. If my life could 
save that fair excellence a momentary 
jjang, it should be instantly sacrificed to 
her service." 

'' You are sensible of her heavenly 
qualities^ of the honour her favourable 
opinion confers on you?" 

'^ Perfectly, my lord." 

^* You would marry her ?'* 



DR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE ? 23y 

Lady Sarah hid her blushing cheek in 
the bosoin of Omphale. 

'' I have not fortune or a character in 
the world, tliat would deserve or counten- 
ance so grv^it a bk'S^^ing." 

** Suppose I were to tell 3^ou, that Sir 
Matthew is pronounced out of ddU-er, 
tiiat the bishop of the diocese has been 
pWased ^o restore you to your former 
rank m the church, and that /will also 
present you with a valuable living; 
would you, when assured of all this, 
endeavour to repair the injury you have, 
done the amiable Lady Sarah, by sohciting 
her fair hand, provided her uncle, my 
worthy friend here, consents, and a 



240 OWEN CASTLE; 

lurking passion for her, who is now the 
wife of another, and 7iever can be your's, 
impede not the wishes of your friends?" 

'^Oh! my lord, (cried Rufus,) how 
have I deserved this unbounded genero- 
sity, and this heavenly treasure, (approach- 
ing Lady Sarah). Will you, fair excellence, 
heighten the many obligations your 
bounty has showered on my unmerited 
head, by confirming what I have heard, 
and make me the most enviable of men ? 
You know the story of my heart, I have 
unfolded every secret to your soothing pity, 
and like a compassionating angel, while 
striving to subdue my disease, you were 
yourself infected. Oh! let my devoted 
life atone for the uneasiness I uncon* 
sciously have given that pure bosom." 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE .'' 241 



*' My uncle! I abide by his decision/' 
$he faulteringly returned. 

" I see, (said the quaker, heaving a long 
sigh,) thy inchnings, and though greatly 
loth, I do give my reluctant consent." 
Then turning to Rufus, said with a solemn 
▼oice, " I do beseech thee, young man^ 
to behold this maiden, her virtues, her de^ 
scanty her fortune; then to look into thjne 
heart, and see if it doth lean lovingly unto 
her, and not unto the Mammon of riches, 
and gaudij title ; then to ask thy con- 
science if thou canst affectionately perform 
the duties of a husband, and be unto 
her a recompence for the friend she has 
forsaken in me. Yea, verily! Sarah, my 
soul feeleth tribulation in thy loss." The 

VOL.. III. M 



242 OWEN CASTLE; 

feelings of the good quaker nearly 
choaked his voice, he looked on Lady- 
Sarah with parental fondness, and >vith 
earnestness towards Rufus. 

''I see the hounty of my Creator in this 
rich gift, and trust I shall fulfil my duty 
punctually/' returned Rufus, with an air 
equally serious and impressive. 

"Then Heaven prosper this sacred 
compact now entered into!'* cried Lord 
Orkley, joining their hands, and while 
Lady Sarah sunk on the bosom of Rufus^ 
the humane quaker gave a silent suppli- 
cation to the throne of grace, and his 
meek sanction on the couple before 
him. 



OR, WHICH IS THE HEROINE? 243 

The sudden scene, and its consequences, 
had so overpowered Lady Sarah, as to 
compel her immediately to retire to her 
own apartments, attended by her friend 
Omphale. 

The gentlemen were then left alone, 
when it was agreed that the marriage 
ceremony should take place that day 
month, and Lady Sarah conform to the 
established church. This was long opposed 
by the quaker, who however yielded, but 
insisted on an ample settlement upon his 
niece. The estates were settled con- 
jointly on herself and hu«band, and their 
heirs male, and in default on the female 
branch. 

Rufus Marmaduke heard of the arrival 



244 OWEN CASTLE ; 

of Lady Fitzowen with some remains of 
emotion ; but the amiable Lady Sarah 
amply rewarded his virtuous cpntroul over 
a oace fervent passion. 



END OF VOL. III. 



