Edric the forester: or, The mysteries of the haunted chamber: an historical romance
EDRIC, THE FORESTER, ~----^>«<4------- CHAPTER XHL Elgiva pursued the direction so minutely given by Agatha, but found she had much difficulty to gain the garden; for the stairs Agatha men¬ tioned were situated at the extremity of a very long winding passage, soli¬ tary indeed ; and when she found her¬ self in the garden, it was in such a remote part, that she could not easily tell where she wa», as she' had* no
recollection of the ptaee where ihe Baron one day led her and her mother, at least the present appearance bore no resemblance to the garden she had been iu before. However, as it was a most delightful evening, she pursued her solitary walk, hoping Agatha would not be long before she joined her. Every rustling of the leaves oc¬ casioned her to start in expectation of her wished approach ; as also for fear of the Baron, for whom she endured so much terror, that she could not re¬ ject the idea of secreting herself in some remote part of the Castle, till by some chance of Providence, the news .might arrive of; the safety of her mother. Absorbed in melancltoly reflections,
she wandered a considerable time, amazed to think what could occasion Agatha's long stay. The reason was, the Baron grew enraged when the servant delivered Elgiva's message. " She shuns me!" said he—" she shall have cause to repent her want of confidence. This girl penetrates deeper into my designs than I wish or imagined. 1 see she acts with caution, but her stubborn and perverse will shall yield to my superior arts, or 1 am not Fitzosric. So young and so full of such romantic notions of honor and sensibility. Who would have supposed a country girl like her possessed of such ideas? And her mother, with all the pride of con¬ scious nobility, attempts to awe me a a
with her frown. Is this a return for my favors? When I brought them here I thought their only pride would have been to oblige me. Hitherto I have been mistaken, but they are in my power." Hastily quitting the parlour, he darted up stairs to the apartment of Elgiva, bis heart swelling with anger and offended pride; and, finding only Agatha, began venting his rage on her, insisting also on knowing where Elgiva was. Agatha, terrified and at a Joss to know what to say concerning her ab¬ sence, lest he should suspect that Elgiva had been looking over any part of the Castle, w^ obliged lo owu the
truth, that Elgiva said she wished to walk in the garden, as she was much troubled with the head-ache, and that Agatha w T as to follow her. " As you value your life,'* said Fitzosric, " I charge you go not to the garden—I have something particular to say to Elgiva, and desire you will not intrude," He then quitted the chamber. Agatha was terrified at his menace, and dreaded his meeting with Elgiva. She observed him descend the great stairs —the anxiety she felt for Elgiva made her hope to meet with her, if she pursued the way she had directed Elgiva to take; she therefore hurried through the apartments towards the a4
garden, but could not perceive any one. Remembering the Baron's stern prohibition, and mindful ef her own preservation, she returned to Elgiva's chamber, ardently wishing her return. Fitzosric hurried up and down the walks with the greatest perturbation and rage, and wondered why he could not meet Elgiva: his heart heaving with agitation, impatience, and disap¬ pointment, roused his temper every step he proceeded. " She was ill/* said he, " and could not attend my in¬ vitation—deception all. She was well enough to walk in the garden, though she chose not to come to me. Design¬ ing creature! but it shall be the last time she has reason to triumph in de¬ ceiving me." Then he hastily renewed
his search, every moment venting new threats and imprecations on the hap- hss Elgiva. About half an hour elapsed in vain search, when he thought he perceived tlie form of Elgiva glide through an avenue of trees that led to a distant part. He increased his speed, at the same time endeavouring to quell the turbulent emotions that possessed his soul, and appear tranquil in her presence, as if he had suffered no alarm. " My sweet Elgiva!" said he, coming up, and taking her hand, u Why do you fly me? I came to chide you."
a 5
*/ Fly you, my Lord!" she replied, *•' and can I merit your anger for walk¬ ing in the garden, in hopes of re¬ lieving my heart or a weight of anguish." " Certainly not," said the Baron ; " but I tax you with unkindness. I sunt for you. I would have attended you here, had I known you had a wish for walking. You sent me a frivolous excuse. Why did you walk without me ?" <c Alas! my Lord! 1 am only fit company for myself. You are happy, but I am sinking to the earth with a weight of distresses. Why then should my unhappiness cast a gloom over your more joyous hours ?"
" Unkind Elgiva," said FitS50sric, " yet if you are fea,rful of infecting ms with unhappiness, as you call it, you have no pity on poor Agatha; she was to have been your companion, I find." c * She kindly offered to walk with me, my Lord, or I should not have required her. Alone, I can give vent to my sorrows, which increase by being suppressed, and I wish not to wound the tender feelings of Agatha, or any one else/* replied Elgiva. " You puzale me, my dear girl," said the Baron, forcing a smile, " when you talk of sorrows, and unhappiness —I should like to know the cause," a6
**Oh! my Lord Fitzosric!" ex¬ claimed Elgiva, in great distress, "too well—too well vou know the cause.** " Well, well," said Fitzosric, " the cause will be removed in a day or two. I suspect yoe have a very bad opinion of me, I mm** wed& tell you so. But I value oot wfe anv one savs or thinks -—and you, Elgh'a, will hereafter speak of me as you find me. Come, throw this romantic melancholy from your mind—be cheerful. I came to have a little talk with you ; but you look »u Military, that I am quite vexed to sec you." " My Lord, you do me honor," said she; " but when the heart is heavy,
the behaviour cannot be light—and as it is growing late, t think I sliall re¬ turn." ** No, no," replied Fitzosric, *' I prohibit thai—believe me, I shall not so soon part with you ; so reconcile yourself to an hours walk in the gar¬ den, and consider it will be of gre|it benefit to your health. Your head aches, and the air vvill remove it So 1 was told by Agatha, in excuse for your going without me." Then taking her arm under his, he led her up and down several walks, and at length seated himself in an harbour imme¬ diately under a high watch tower, and made Elgiva sit down also. Here again he began discoursing
of love, and vowed unalterable affec¬ tion to Elgiva; but as he was an ob¬ ject of her aversion, his soothing blan¬ dishments and tender caresses, which she could no way disengage herself from, gave her infiuite distress and concern ; and which she repulsed with a becoming disdain, as she was alarm¬ ed at the freedom of his speech and behaviour. And being at such a dis¬ tance from the Castle, began to trem¬ ble with dread. Fitzosric, observing her uneasiness, promised he would return with her to the Castle; but first insisted she should bestow on him a kiss, in token that she forgave him, and was not offended. Then he begged another, that she would think no more of what he had
said. As he drew her reluctant and averted cheek to his lips, a deep and distressing groan, as if uttered by some one in agony, issued from the watch-tower, and caused Fitzosric to start, and cast his eyes up to the tower. Elgiva's heart was torn with anguish. She seemed to recollect the sound, and, clasping her hands to¬ gether, as she rose from her seat, ex- claimed, " Merciful God! whence is that afflicting sound ?" " Do not be alarmed," said Fitzos¬ ric ; " I believe it was only the wind whistling through the leaves of the trees." "Ob! no, Fitzosric, delude me not with false arguing—the voice is fa-
miliar to mv memory—it was no wind —think not to impose on my credulity." Again a deep groan pierced her ears, and ihe souud continued long and dreary, as if uttered by some one in great distress ; while Elgiva lis¬ tened attentively, till the agony she endured drove her almost to madness ; and she could not disengage her thoughts from the object of her con¬ cern and dread. Fitzosric, fearing the alarm she apparently suffered might be an im¬ pediment to his views, took her hand, and drawing her near him, threw his arm carelessly round her waist, say¬ ing, " Come, come, Elgiva, you suf¬ fer such romantic notions lo get the
better of your good sense, that I shall certainly chide you. and use my au¬ thority in endeavouring to suppress such idle fancies." Elgiva struggled, and with diffi¬ culty disengaged herself from his hold, and indignantly replied, " Your au¬ thority I despise!"—and she turned awav from him. «/ " Return to the Castle," said Fitz¬ osric ; " let me conduct you," " Oh! unhappy wretch!" said she, raising her eyes to the tower, unheed¬ ing also what the Baron said, " that ever I should enter the detested Castle of St Egbert! where misery, oppres-
sion, and all its attendant train of horrors dwell" Fitzosric, seemingly astonished, replied, " What can give you such an aversion to the Castle of St Egbert?" " Yourself the greatest!" exclaim¬ ed Elgiva angrily. " Peace has been a stranger to my breast ever since the moment I first beheld you. Return to tbe Castle!—1 shall go alone—better to pass through a desart, where innu¬ merable wild beasts inhabit and prowl about iu search of prey, trusting to the mercy of Providence for my safety, than put myself under the protection ofa tyger, who promises to guard me safe, for no other reason but to watch an opportunity to devour."
Without waiting any reply, she hastily turned away, and left Fitz¬ osric petrified with rage and amaze¬ ment " A tiger!—a tiger!" he ex¬ claimed. " How could she dare to rouse my rage by such a comparison? But as she honors me with that title, and entertains such ideas of me, it will be my fault hf I do not act up to it. The purpose of ray soul was ^ot re¬ moved, it was only disarmed in her presence, to be renewed with greater fury. I shall be in the Castle before she can reach it. Severely shall she repent her rashness. The voice too. Vengeance is mine/' lifting his clench¬ ed fist towards the watch-tower; " and it rejoices my heart to, think that in this impenetrable tower Edric! the valiant Edric, the Forester, pines in
anguish! No more shall thy detested name carry terror to an host of ene¬ mies, nor insult my ears with thy con¬ quests. No more the victorious chief exult and triumph in the smiles of his sovereign and country. No—nor of Elgiva! My ambition first was wound¬ ed by thy conquests. Thee I hated; but Elgiva's scorn pronounced thy doom, and if she is not mine, she never shall be EdricV Having shot this spark of fury from his soul, he retired towards tbe Castle,- meditating by the way how he should dispose of Elgiva ; for he had determined *he should not return to her own chamber. He blamed him¬ self with having indulged her in too much liberty, by allowing her to walk
about the castle at pleasure ; and was considering what part of it should be her prison ; enjoying a savage exulta¬ tion in the thought, that she would be then more immediately in his power; and whatever good she received, she must acknowledge it to him, as he was determined to trust no one with the secret but himself. Pleased with the idea, he soon reached the Castle, and, putting off his cloak, and helmet nodding with white plumes, as he usually wore, to be less encumbered when the devoted Elgiva arrived, he put on a clos^ kind oi cap, and a servant's large coat, the more effectually to disguise him¬ self, and enjoyed the idea of Elgiva s
distress, when she discovered into whose hands she had fallen. Providence interposed to save the unhappy Elgiva. She fortunately dis¬ covered the path that led to the door by which she eame into the garden, and was rather surprised to see a light coming at a distance from a passage on the right hand, at the foot of the stairs. In a moment she perceived Ethelwald coming towards her. Her heart shuddered with dread—she fear¬ ed to speak to him j and imagining he had been to her mather, was deter¬ mined to ^eek that part of the build¬ ing, as ,A gat ha very justly remarked* it was a part of the Castle she knew nothing of.
Ethelwald passed her without tak- ing any notice, and she flattered her¬ self he had not seen her. One desire she had, was to discover her mother; another most powerful, was to conceal herself from the angry Baron, whom she knew she had highly offended, and dreaded meeting with while his rage continued. Pursuing the passage, which was dark, long, and narrow, for a con¬ siderable way, she came to a staircase similar to that which she had descend¬ ed. At the top wasawmdcfw, for the silver light of the» moon shone 4 bril- liautly, and illumined the stairs. Once more the flatterer, Hope, began to cheer the almost desponding heart of Elgiva. She nimbly ascended the
staircase, and ran swiftlv along a gallery, on each side of which were several chambers. As she stood before the door of one, she thought she heard a low female voice, as if in prayer. She listened, hoping it might be her mother, but felt tbe horror of a disappointment Still the person seemed praying, and in more audible accents. She dis¬ tinguished these words, u Father of mercies ! I beseech thee desert me not after so many years of trial. Lord, hear the prayer of thy poor supplicant. Preserve and protect my child, if yet he lives " The continuation was in so low a voice, that the sound died away in distance.
" Who can it be?" said Elgiva mentally; " is it another unfortunate being imprisoned by the cruel Fitzos¬ ric ? Oh ! she will forgive me for in¬ terrupting her orisons, when I acquaint her with the horrors of my situation. She may inform me of my dear mother. She may tell me how I may escape this horrid Castle, and the more detested Baron." Unable to quell her impatience, she opened the door, and rushed for- viard. The room had a lamp in it, and at a distant corner she perceived a female just rising from her knees. The sound of her entrance caused the stranger to look round, when to her infinite amazement and terror she be¬ held the form of Lady Jane Fitzosric. VOL, 11. B
And so overcome was Elgiva by the contending emotions that swelled in her bosom for pre-eminence, that she continued gazing on the phantom as it advanced towards her, till by insen¬ sible degrees she was so overpowered that she sunk senseless at the feet of Lady Jane, j ust as she stretched forth hor arm to save her. Lady Jane—for in realify it was Lady Jane herself!—first secured the door, to prevent intrusion, then has¬ tened to relieve the unfortunate object before her, which she soon accom¬ plished, raising the feeble and aston¬ ished Elgiva in her arms, and con¬ ducting her to a couch to repose till she was sufficiently restored; Elgiva cast a tender grateful glance on the
kind Lady, and said, " Angel or mor¬ tal, to whom I am indebted for this goodness, accept my thanks ; it is all the unhappy being who has drawn your attention has to bestow." »■ " Be comforted," replied the Lady, with a benignant smile, " and do not alarm yourself; tell me if I can any way serve you." " May I know to whom I am in¬ debted for this kindness?" said El¬ giva. " Perhaps, you have heard men¬ tion made of Lady Jane."
" I have." b2
** I am that unfortunate woman," said the Lady; " thirteen years have elapsed since it was reported 1 was dead, (at more leizure I will inform you); and from that time 1 have in¬ habited this chamber and the adjoin¬ ing rooms. This is the north, usually called the haunted chamber. Some of your story I have been informed of by one faithful servant. Tell me the rea¬ son that brought you here," Elgiva replied, " I had a mother, the only comfort left me in this dread¬ ful place. Three days ago the Baron took her from me. He says she has left the Castle. Oh! that 1 never can believe. She would not have left me behind her, surrounded by dreaded evils, without so much as saying she
was going. Fitzosric strives to ap¬ pease my fears. To avoid him I went into the garden: thither he followed me, wounding my ears with declara¬ tions of love. I have offended him, and to avoid his rage I flew—I know not whither. Chance conducted me to your Ladyship's abode—for when the fear of the Baron had subsided, my thoughts returned to my mother, whom I have sought for, but in vain. I have examined every room in tbe north gallery in hopes to find her, and hesitated whether I should not open the door of the haunted chamber. This, my Lady, is briefly what I have to relate now." u And you suspect your mother is still in the Castle?" said Lady Jane— b3
" if so, make your heart easy—a few hours will enable me to learn some¬ thing concerning her. At present it would be dangerous to venture in search; for if the Baron is offended with you, he may continue watching, in hopes of gratifying his wicked in¬ tentions," Elgiva shuddered at the mention of his name, and the tears trickled down her cheeks as she cast her eyes towards the ground, to conceal them from ber kind auditress, " Fear not/ 5 said Lady Jane, ten* derly taking her hand, " I promise you protection; with me learn to fear no ill. This chamber is sacred ; even the wretch, Fitzosric, dares not enter here :
dauntless as he is in all other enter¬ prises, his soul shrinks with dread and horror, whenever he presents himself before the supposed inaccessible door of the north chamber." Elgiva raised her timid eyes to* wards her kind protectress, and en¬ deavoured to speak her thanks, which Lady Jane perceiving, put her hand to her lips as a token for wishing her silence; then whispered, " who knows but the Baron, hurried by rage and disappointment, may have trespassed on the north gallery. If he has, the sound of your voice may be distin¬ guished. Follow me-—I will lead you to a remote closet, where we may speak more freely."
b4
Elgiva arose and silently followed her conductress, as much now over-- come with astonishment, as a few minutes before she was with terror. Lady Jane led her through two or three rooms before she reached the one which she thought most secure, aud desired Elgiva to remain there while she continued at the Castle, as there she would be free from the Barou. But perceiving Elgiva still appeared very low, she prevailed on her to take some refreshments, and make herself easy, as she was beyond the reach of barm. Elgiva complied, so kindly press* ing was Lady Jane; aud a short time enabled her to compose her spirits.
She then requested Lady Jane would indulge her with the account of how she came to reside there, as every body in the Castle believed she had been dead many years.
95
CHAPTER XfV.
" I will gratify your curiosity, which no doubt must be excited," said Lady Jane; " and your seeing me, must certainly have greatly amazed you." " I was the only daughter of Arthur, Earl of Devon, and was married at the age of seventeen to a most amiable young nobleman, Albert, Earl of Wallingford, for whom I had an ex¬ treme affection, and by whom I was
tenderly beloved. Dear ill-fated youth! I never think of or mention his name but the tears will flow in remembrance of the once happy hours I enjoyed, and of his miserable end, (t In his childhood a friendship commenced between him and Ber- trand Fitzosric, son to the late Baron Fitzosric. They were educated together, and their friendship increas¬ ed with their years. " When Lord Wallingford mar¬ ried, Bertrand Fitzosric would fre¬ quently visit us, and stay with us two or three months together; his conduct and manners appeared so amiable that he engaged every one's esteem. His person was truly elegant, his beha- b 6
viour noble, and apparently disin¬ terested ; he seemed to rejoice that his friend was so happy in his marriage: in ft word, he was every thing a person should hope to find in a friend he valued above all others. Yet, under this external semblance of every virtue* a heart was veiled of the black¬ est nature, and deceit and villany bad ehosen to fix their abode in a person, who for external beauty had no equal, except my Wallingford. " As Lord Wallingford seemed never so happy as when Fitzosric was one of our party (though he loved me most affectionately), therefore he was the oftener with us; and his behaviour was always so very respectful to me; so entirely remote from giving me any
offence; his whole soul appeared so truly devoted to Lord Wallingford; so solicitous for his happiness; and studied in every circumstance to prove himself bis friend, that he gained my esteem also. " We had been married twelve months, a time ever to be remembered with regret, as during that period I enjoyed every earthly felicity, blessed with the tender affection of the amia¬ ble Lord Wallingford: our happiness was augmented by the birth of a lovely boy. Need I mention how dear he was to me? Lord Wallingford's joy equalled mine; but this addition to our happiness was severely embit¬ tered by tbe report that the Danes bad lanued, wheu every Lord assembled
with his vassals to oppose them. My son was only three months old wheu this miserable event happened. " The Baron Fitzosric had lately died. Bertrand now bore his father's title ; and, collecting his forces, joined Lord Wallingford, and went forth to oppose the incursions of the common enemy. " When Lord Wallingford bade me farewell in the morning of that fatal day, a deadly shivering seized me. My prophetic heart dreaded ap¬ proaching ill. I sighed to think Lord Wallingford might perhaps return no more—that in the field of battle I might lose all that was dear to me. 1 could not conceal my tears at the bare
imagination. Lord Wallingford caught the soft infection, and struggled to suppress his feelings; then endea¬ voured to appease my apprehensions, and bade me welcome him with smiles, as he had not a doubt but he should return victorious. " He embraced me, and, sighing, parted. " I gazed after him till I could no longer distinguish him from the rest ; then turned from the window and wept Alas! I saw him no more; and treachery deprived me of every comfort when Lord Wallingford died. " In thc evening, while I was
sitting attending my son, a servant brought me a letter. It came from Fitzosric. He expressed his sorrow, and his inability to appear before me, as he was the herald of most distress¬ ing news; and pathetically lamented the loss of his friend, whose body had been pierced by an arrow, in a skir¬ mish which had unfortunately taken place, No more I read—my senses seemed overturned, I sunk to the floor, whence I was taken by my maid.** to my chamber, and for three days was insensible to every thing, being totally overcome with grief. 14 On the fourth day I appeared more composed, and recollected the miserable loss I had sustained. I wished to te-^ve my chamber, and won-
dered why my attendants wished to detain me there. My pressing in¬ quiries were at length complied with. I was informed Lord Wallingford was going to be buried, and they feared the sight would be too great a shock. " I requested I might see him, as¬ suring them I should not be happy if they prevented me. They consented. 1 saw my beloved Lord! kissed his dear pale cheek, cold in death; pressed his dear insensible hand to my break-* ing heart, while I uttered a farewel, till we met in the realms of bliss eternal. " As I spoke, the Baron Fitzosric entered in deep mourning. He ap** proached me with respectful awe, and
begged me to retire, gently chiding me for indulging the mournful sight, as he feared it would be too much for my spirits to support, and thereby re¬ new ray grief. I thanked him for his care, and the kind concern he took in my sorrows, and the loss of his friend. He told me his heart would not acquit him, if he did not pay every regard to bis friend on this side the grave, and said he was going chief .mourner, de¬ termined he would not forsake him to the last. " Again I thanked him. I was re¬ quested to retire, as they were going to remove him, I obeyed, as my grief was distressing; but, anxious to be¬ hold my Wallingford to the last, I walked the gallery, supported by two
of my maids, till I saw the mournful procession commence ; and after they were gone I turned awayj and found relief in tears. M This was a melancholy period of my life. My son now wanted a father's support; he claimed a double share of my tenderness, and, but for him, I could have wished to have shared the grave of Lord Wallingford. He was a most engaging child, and oftentimes, when I have wept for hours the loss of my beloved husband, I have turned for comfort to the innocent caresses of my adored boy, " Fitzosric often called to inquire after our health, always speaking with the deepest a^'l most heartfelt coin
eern for the loss of his earliest friend. His visits were short; but I felt a con* solation in seeing any one who had been the friend of my worthy husband, or who could talk to me about him ; an inexpressible pleasure seemed to possess my mind when conversing of one so tenderly beloved, so truly esteemed, and sincerely lamented.— Fitzosric still appeared the same generous friend; he seemed to love my son for the sake of Wallingford ; be paid the greatest attention to all my concerns: my steward had not been faithful; he detected him in op¬ pressing my tenants, and generously offered, for the sake of his dear la¬ mented friend, to see that my son and I were not imposed on.
" Lord Wallingford had been dead ten months^—the poignancy of my grief had abated: but, alas! there was not any thing that could erase it A ealm had succeeded, as 1 knew the loss was irreparable; but his dear memory I loved to indulge in secret Fitzosric now tenderly ventured to de* clare his affection for me, entreating that I would not reject his suit, but consider him not only a lover, but a sincere friend—-urgingthe great esteem Lord Wallingford had for him; and that he was confident, if it were pos¬ sible his spirit could know I had made choice of him as a second husband, he would be happy. " I assured the Baron it was not my intention to marry again; I felt it
impossible ever toforget Lord Walling¬ ford ; that my affections were buried with him in the silent grave ; and all that remained in my disconsolale heart, were devoted to my child, from whom no power could estrange them. He seemed entirely satisfied, and for¬ bore mentioning any more on the subject. " But though Fitzosric declined speaking to me, he made his affection known to my father, his uncle, and several other of his friends, as also to some of Lord Wallingford's, who, knowing the great friendship that existed between them, highly approv¬ ed of his addresses; and in less than & month 1 had all my friends impor¬ tuning in behalf of Fitzosric. I gave
the same reply that I had before given to him; they persuaded me to give over lamenting for bim who could not he recalled. My father, particularly, strenuously entreated I would accept the addresses of the Baron, and hoped to see me happy again. " By repeated entreaties I found it difficult to refuse them; my resolution was often argued out of the question, and my absurd notions, as they were called, were deemed opposition to my best friends. Fitzosric at times hinted how happy I should make him, if I consented to his wishes, and those of my family. Three months rolled away in this manner. I was heartily vexed that my father should join the con¬ federacy in tormenting me, and not
suffer me to indulge the ardent pro¬ pensity of my mind, that of mourning tony irreparable loss, and the affection I bore my son. u Tim Baron now became an ar- tlent lover. He took every care to acquiesce in every thing I wished—he apparently adored my son. His un¬ remitting attention certainly increased my esteem. It was not Fitzosric alone that I had to contend with ; but every one of my friends ; for he had been de¬ signing enough to gain them over to his interest I valued Fitzosric fur the sake of Wallingford ; and, led by their persuasions, my consent was extorted, and in the space of another month, unhappily, I became the wife of Fitzosric, who vowed eternal love,
and that it should never know a change. " I soon perceived the dreadful error I had committed, from which there was no retreat. The Baron's vowed love and constancy was of short duration. He soon began to treat me exceedingly ill. Oh! how unlike my Wallingford, from whom I never received a frown; nor did I know what a harsh reply was till I was united to Fitzosric. Lord Wal¬ lingford never called my conduct in question; now, alas! I could do nothing to please. My child, too, was neglected, and his little heart felt the reverse from the former atten¬ tion and fondness the Baron bestowed on him. During Lord Wallingford's VOL. II. c
life, when we had much of Fitzosric's company, I always thought him a mild peaceable temper; but now he gave way to sudden starts of passion, that terrified me, and every domestic ia the Castle felt the effect of it; thereby he was as much disliked by all my servants, as Lord Wallingford had been beloved, " In this disagreeable, dissatisfied manner passed away a year, most se¬ verely felt by me. Fitzosric's harsh, unkind behaviour was not calculated to make me forget my ever-to-be- regretted Wallingford. Oh! how often have I blamed my folly for en¬ tering into this unfortunate second marriage. It was not my own fault; I was so powerfully persuaded by all
my friends, that I found almost all would be offended if I refused their solicitations. Dear-bought experience! transient illusion! ruining one's own happiness to please others. Scarcely a day passed that did not witness my tears; and bitterly 1. have had cause to repent my fatal compliance, that made Fitzosric Lord of*the posses¬ sions of Wallingford. " Two years moved on with leaden wings—uncomfortable indeed ! Fitz¬ osric gave w r ay to every passion, and his will was as a law. My beloved child had now no parent but me. Fitzosric, who once appeared to idolize him, now totally disregarded him ; and he seemed angry whenever he saw me c2
take any notice of him. At this period, however, I was doomed to experience the most poignant distress a mother can feel. " The Baron came hastily to me one morning, and bade me prepare for a short journey, on a visit to a rela¬ tion's ; * arid we will take the boy with us,' said he. My heart expe¬ rienced a ray of pleasure, and 1 fondly flattered myself that my dear child would regain his favour. We were soon ready: Ethelwald and Bernulph, two of the Baron's servants, were to go with us in another carriage, as he was proud of his attendants. " The day was passed very agree-
ably, and I was superlatively happy to observe the fond attention which the Baron bestowed on my child. " When we quitted the company, Fitzosric requested a lady, who was there, would accompany us home, and spend a few days at St Egbert's Castle. She readily agreed; aud, on our return, the young lady went in our carriage, and my child returned with Ethelwald, to accommodate her. " Our carriage was at home long before thc arrival of Ethelwald. Full three hours of agonizing affliction did I experience lo know what could de¬ tain them. Fitzosric endeavoured to appease my fears; and I insisted on sending some of the servants to d» s - c3
cover the cause of their long stay; for I was certain some accident detained them. At length he consented that some one should go; and, not long after, I, heard the sound of a carriage enter the court yard. Oh ! how my poor heart beat with apprehension! I flew like lightning to the hall: there I saw Ethelwald and Bernulph, who looked at me, and quickly averted their faces, which seemed to express every thing dreadful. ' Where is the child V I exclaimed, not seeing hirm A sigh escaped from the bosom of Ethelwald ; but Bernulph walked away, without deigning to give me an answer. 1 was almost frantic ; neither seemed willing to satisfy my inquiring doubts and fears.
" At length Ethelwald replied, e My worthy Lady, pardon the wretch that is obliged to speak distressing news; for the reason that he cannot speak good : but you must know the misfortune that has befallen us, which grieves my heart to relate. Our young master sat on my knee, looking out of the carriage window ; I was rather sleepy, and fear it was that which has caused the dreadful misfortune which I shall for ever lament — I started, as from a dream ; Bernulph was fast asleep by my side ; but the child was gone !—1 called to the driver to stop, as I feared the child had fallen out of the window, and might have received some hurt; the driver was greatly alarmed; he turned the horses, and cl
we jumped out of the carriage to dis¬ cover where the child was. Alas! my Lady, about a quarter of a mile back we had crossed a brook, which was running rapidly; we got into the carriage to cross it, and out again wheu we reached the other side; where we continued looking and searching, in vain, far beyond those places which I remember the child had observed by the way. *« * Finding how fruitless our .search was, we determined to pro- teed to St Egbert's Castle, unknow¬ ing what to say, or how to act, as we could not discover our young Lord any where ; and my fears point to the Week; I dread lest he should have
fallen out of the window into the water. In fact, it must be so, or we should certainly have seen him.' " Unable to hear this distracting account, 1 fainted away and was car¬ ried in a state of insensibility to my chamber, where I continued several weeks, so much had the shock of the loss of my only heir to the estates of Lord Wallingford affected my spirits, ar*d (dunged rne into an abyss of grief and despair, such as exceeds all des¬ cription."
>**- c o
CHAPTER XV.
'* When I recovered, Fitzosric ap¬ peared rather more kind than 1 had seen him for a long time. He con¬ gratulated me on my recovery, and told me I had been ill nine weeks. * During which time/ he said, c I have made every possible inquiry for Lord Wallingford, either dead or alive; and I much fear he fell into the brook, and unfortunately was washed away by the stream.'
" My tears flowed abundantly, when I learned that so loug a space of time had elapsed, and no intelligence could be gained of what was become of him. The Baron entreated me not to grieve for what was unavoidable ; and, since it was impossible to sup¬ pose that he existed, to endeavour to resign myself to the will of Heaven. By the death of my son, Fitzosric be¬ came possessed of all the estates of Lord Wallingford. My recovery was very slow, and Fitzosric's behaviour was much as formerly: sometimes tolerably kind ; at other times severe to the extreme, without assigning any cause why he should be governed by such tumultuous passions. My grief grew into a settled melancholy; for I never could forget my son. Yet I was c 6
often obliged to assume a cheerfulness, foreign to my heart, in the presence of the Baron, lest I should offend him. However, I could not estrange my me¬ lancholy thoughts from the mysterious loss of my child: the more I reflected, the more there appeared something so singular, that I feared it was not alto¬ gether accident, though I checked the dreadful thought, being unwilling to harbour unjust suspicions of any body; but these ideas, instead of being rooted from my mind, obtained a firm footing there. " In this unhappy manner six years passed away, when the time drew near to a very extraordinary crisis cf my fate. I bad often been informed that Lord Fitzosric was a great liber-
tine; but his ill treatment to me had taken away all ray regard ; and I felt no kind of jealousy, when I knew he was on an excursion to a favourite mis* tress, as I was sincerely happy at his absence. 1 never then could account for it; but though he was by every body allowed to be a very handsome, engaging man, there was a sensation of horror always playing round my heart, whenever I saw him, which made me shudder. Yet I often wished I had the abilities to make him act with justice and honour. Alas! the natural inclinations of the Barou were far wide from either. " One day, after the Baron had been absent about a week, my «maid informed me an old man wished to
speak to me. I ordered him to be ad¬ mitted. He with tears related the cause of his distress — l Dear Lady/ said the venerable mourner, ' I have a daughter, the only comfort and support of my age; her name is Birtha; she is admired and beloved by all the good people of the village, and my Lord the Baron has stolen her from me. I hope your Ladyship is not offended, but 1 cannot help speaking as I do:'—and the tears flowed down his aged cheeks, which made my heart ache to behold. *' I begged him to proceed, that I might know how to serve him.—He continued— " * The Baron called at my cottage about a month ago, being rather fa-
tigued with riding, and asked to rest a little till his carriage arrived, which he had sent for. My Birtha placed before him the best refreshments our poor house afforded ; 1 could easily discern that he took more notice of Birtha than pleased me. After he was gone, I hinted to her my thoughts; her ideas were the same as mine, yet she did not suspect that he intended any ill. However, I grew more sus*- picious, and Birtha more on her guard, when he came for some frivolous pre¬ tence the next day. " * Almost every day he visited us. It was too great an honour for such poor folks as we to expect. But I feared to offend him by mentioning my thoughts. At length he made Birtha
a great offer, if she would consent to live with him a life of infamy.— Birtha's heart is honest, though poor ; and would despise an action that should bring the blush of shame upon her cheeks—and though a Lord, she dared to tell him, that she felt herself highly affronted, and degraded by such an infamous proposition ; and desired he would never call there again if he came on such a black errand. " * The Baron declared he would not leave the house till she had for¬ given him—but Birtha said, she never would—m*r should ever forget the insult he offered—and he went away seemingly much displeased. " ' Birtha informed me of it, and
declared if he ever came again, she would not see him. Three or four days after he came, but never saw Birtha, nor did he ever inquire after her ; so that I thought he only made the offer in a joke, to see how far poor people's honesty may be tempted.— But woe to the man who can trifle vvith the feelings of innocence, and, screened by his greatness, disgrace the elevated station he holds in life, by perpetrating the worst of crimes!— My child !—my only hope!—went to the market and never returned. Some of her companions informed me thejf saw her in a carriage with the Barou. My almost broken heart could account for her absence no other way. I de¬ termined to ask the Baron ; I thought if he was a gentleman, he weuld not
deny the truth. He saw my grief un¬ moved—he protested he knew nothing of Birtha; but I began to doubt his solemn assertions; though he was a rich man, 1 fancied he spoke false. He seemed angry at my suspicions, and I left him ; but in my mind I was re¬ solved to watch him wherever he went, and get some of my neighbours to do so likewise. " ' Vain was my search for nearly a week, when I accidentally discovered that he went to a house about seven miles off; there I found the Baron had carried Birtha I rushed into the bouse, and demanded my daughter. The Baron was surprised , but he could not now disown his knowledge of where she was.—My poor dear girl
sat at the table—she looked shock¬ ingly—' Oh ! my dear father,' said she, ' take me, take me hence.' ' It is my desire, my love/ I replied. * Well/ said the Baron, ' since I see how re¬ luctantly you quit your father, and how severely he feels for your loss, I will restore you to him. Siward, rely ou my honour and veracity, your daughter shall be with you before sun-set; but as you are fatigued, and you have a long way to go, take one of my best horses, and go home ; provide an en¬ tertainment suitable for our arrival; I will bring Birtha safely home in a car¬ riage ; for as she has not been very well, and almost every body it seems knows about her having left you; so 'tis for her sake I wish to return her, aud to have as few people staring at
her as possible. Nay, before your arrival, I had determined in my own mind to bring her home to-day; for she seems so melancholy, I heartily repent the folly I have been guilty of, and sin¬ cerely ask pardon.' "' Birtha fell on her knees; 'thanks, thanks!' she exclaimed, * let me re¬ turn to my father, and I will forgive every thing.* To which the Baron re¬ plied, 'Ifyou will believe the faith of an honest man, and I call Heaven to witness to my sincerity, you shall be with your father to-night' •' c Well, my Lord/ said I, ; I must believe you after you have made such a solemn promise; let me embrace my daughter, and then your orders shall
be obeyed. I pressed my dear girl to my sorrowing heart; and, fearful of offending him by seeming to doubt his honour, I took my leave. " ' I travelled leisurely home ; my heart was very heavy, and well it might. I reached home two full hours before the time the Baron appointed to be there. I busied myself in pre¬ paring what my cottage could produce, expecting his arrival. Then again my heart misgave me, and I doubted his honour. Night came, and no Baron nor Birtha. I watched—I went out to listen if I could hear the sound of any carriage—all was still as deafh—and so, to shorten my sad story, I remained all night till my mind became almost distracted.
(< i As soon as it was light, I mount¬ ed the horse the Baron had given me, and rode to the place. There, to in¬ crease my woes, I found the Baron had quitted the house, and took Birtha with him about half an hour after I left it. " e Mad with rage, grief, and dis¬ appointment, I returned to my cottage. It remained undisturbed , the wicked gentleman who had called Heaven to witness to the faith he vowed to me— had broke his awful oath—and had now entirely deprived me of my daughter. Unknowing where to seek or what to do, I have ventured to lay before your Ladyship this dreadful story, beseeching you, if you have any influence over my Lord, to entreat he
will restore me my daughter—and if he will—I will study to forget all that has passed, and bless the goodness that brought Birtha back to me.* " Shocked to the greatest extreme to think my husband should be capa¬ ble of such a villanv, and that he re¬ garded not oaths, however sacred, but prophaned tbem in the awful face of Heaven—too late I found by woful ex¬ perience, that his heart was of ada¬ mant—compassion could never melt it —shame could not controul, nor justice awe—nor piety restrain him. Kind¬ ness could never win, nor gratitude bind him.—What then was to be done for the poor Siward ? Alas! I could only partake of his sorrows without a hope of alleviating them. I never
shared the Baron's confidence, and if I should venture to mention the suf¬ ferer's complaint, he would vow ven¬ geance for daring to pry into his secrets. " So situated, how could I soften the poignant feelings of this afflicted father? To appease his anguish, I promised to exert every endeavour, and to give him the earliest intelli¬ gence as soon as I ctmld possibly as¬ certain where his unhappy child was. " The poor man thanked me pro¬ fusely and went away—leaving me a prey to the most afflicting thoughts that ever harassed a human frame.
CHAPTER XVI.
" My mind was so absorbed in me¬ lancholy reflections, that I wished to be alone; and therefore I dismissed my servant from attending me, that I might grieve unobserved. I had no in¬ clination to go to bed ; but as it was now a fine moonlight night, I opened the casement and looked into the in¬ terior court About midnight I thought I heard a private gate that leads into the Castle open. Curiosity prompted me to look who entered at that late hour. vol. n. D
My window was in the shade, so that, as I had wrapped myself up, they who were below could not perceive me. " My surprise was considerably increased by seeing the Baron and two men leading what appeared to me to be a woman; and as they passed beneath my window, she groaned two or three times, and the sound vibrated on my agonized heart She seemed to require assistance, and they moved slowly along, till I lost sight of them under the arch that separates the building. " I knew not how to act I could have gone towards the door that opened from that place, and met them : but then I considered it would be of
no use, as I, alas! knew too well the savage disposition of the Baron when roused, or detected ; and I feared for myself, without being able to assist the stranger. " It is needless for me to say, that 1 passed the night in extreme anxiety, a dreadful terror (as if a presentiment of the future) prevented me from clos¬ ing my eyes. When morning came I determined to seek, that I might dis¬ cover who and what the person was ; but my labour vvas lost, although my mind was full of curiosity to learn what to me seemed a mysterious affair, for there was something very singular in the circumstance. Why did Fitz¬ osric, Lord of these domains, bring a person privately, and to all appearance d 2
unwillingly, into this Castle, when he could have done so in the face of day if he pleased, and no one have asked him why he did so? I sometimes thought of Siward's daughter; but I could not suppose the Baron would be so wicked, and so cruel, -as to bring her home. My conjectures were very busy, and I very unhappy; and I often thought, that whoever the person was, they had been only brought there for a temporary affair, and after a week or so I persuaded myself, that the person for whom I felt so uneasy was not now in the Castle. " Months, however, rolled on, and yet I could not banish this mysterious circumstance from my mind. The Baron went out on a hunting party,
and I, more than usually full of the recollection of what had passed five mon ths before, strolled about the Castle, scarce knowing why or whither: for my heart was sick of many sorrows, and not the smallest ray of hope ap¬ peared for it ever to feel comfort 14 Beyond my chamber was a pas¬ sage, that led to a part of the Castle rather remote from that which we principally inhabited. The melan¬ choly which I wished to indulge in¬ duced me to look into these rooms, one of which I knew was kept for lumber ; another had been an ancient handsome apartment As I advanced towards the door of the latter, I heard a piteous groan, and, as it were, the voice ofa person complaining. i>3
" I was greatly alarmed. The door was secured with bolts. I soon drew them back, and, entering the apartment, saw a poor thin female, of youthful appearance, though the whole of her looked an assemblage of misery and despair. I was startled. Her astonishment equalled mine. c Oh! Oh!' said she, clasping her hands ia deep anguish, ' You are Lady Jane; pity an unhappy wretch, torn from every comfort—every hope.' " c Tell me/ said I, c are you Bir¬ tha Siward?' for my heart imme¬ diately presented me with the recol¬ lection of that unfortunate girl. " * I am/ she replied; the cruel Baron, envying the innocent happi-
ness I once enjoyed, and determined on my destruction, has robbed my aged parent of his only child, the com¬ fort of his declining age, and me of honor and peace. Oh! Lady Jane! sorry am I to wound your gentle heart with a detail of your husband's guilt: but spare to treat me with anger or resentment; the fault is not mine ; the Baron is alone to blame, and the time will come when his cruel heart will se¬ verely feel for the woes he has caused mine, and the excruciating pangs of a guilty conscience for his injustice.' " Thc tears rushed down her face, which was extremely beautiful amidst all her affliction, I could not help mingling mine with her's. I strove to comfort her, told her how I came to d4
be acquainted with her name, and promised to form some plan for her release in the course of a few davs. I ventured to ask her some particulars concerning the Baron Fitzosric, and if she could judge why he detained her a prisoner? " * Alas! my Lady, there is the misfortune. The Baron, I am sure, hates me ; and if he does, why does he not release me ? My aversion to him has been from the moment he took me from my father's; and well he knows it But now, as I am unhappily with child, he refuses to let me go til! I have recovered ; but he treats me with such cruelty and anger, that unless that release comes soon, I shall not live to be a trouble to him. O Ladv *t
Jane! you cannot form an idea of the distress of heart I suffer.' " ' 1 will tell you, Birtha/ said I; * perhaps it will be better for you to continue here a short time longer; for if yon was to go to your father's in your present situation, it might be too much for his feeble age to sustain. I vvill let him know that you are alive and safe ; and since your misfortunes can¬ not be remedied, suffer with patience and endeavour to compose your mind. Of this rest assured, you shall find a sincere and attentive friend in me. 1 will, if possible, prevent your wants; but say nothing of what has transpired to the Baron ; I would not wish him to imagine that I have any knowledge of your being here, for fear he should d5
remove you, by which means I should be deprived of the power of serving you.' " She thanked me fervently, and said she would do as I thought best. I promised to see her the next day as soon as Fitzosric went out, and took my leave of her for that time. " It will be impossible for me to describe my feelings ; yet my mind at that time was somewhat relieved by finding the true situation of the unfor¬ tunate Birtha Siward ; and I flattered myself I should be able to serve her* My next object was to endeavour to seek ^ome place where I could remove her to remain till she lay in. But as I could not hastily conclude how to act, I was
obliged to delay my project till I could find an opportunity favourable to my wishes* w But the next day my mind was doomed to endure a more severe afflic¬ tion than any I had ever yet suffered. 1 dreamed a most dreadful dream, which pointed out Fitzosric to be the murderer of Lord Wallingford ; and before night I was convinced of the truth, and made completely wretched.. " I endeavoured now to shun Fitz¬ osric, for I hated him for his crimes, and an awful terror and shivering seized me while in his presence. He imputed it to indisposition;and, to add to my uuhappines.s, his behaviour rather altered; lor, seeing me suffer d6
such dejection, he seemed more atten¬ tive, which attention 1 could have been superlatively happy if he had spared, for I really could not help trembling when he touched me. <c The severity of my grief did not exclude my thought on the wretched state of the unfortunate Birtha I con¬ tinued to visit her secretly every day, endeavouring to console and support her drooping spirits, while my own sad heart was breaking with unutter¬ able anguish. Near three months past away in this deplorable inanner. At length the period of poor Birtha's fate and mine drew nigh. " I had been to see the poor hap¬ less girl, and in sympathizing with
her sorrows, and endeavouring to dis¬ pel her grief, had created a transient hope, that triflingly re-animated her woe-worn features. Unfortunately the Baron returned home unexpected. Perhaps prompted by the fear ofa dis¬ covery, occasioned his immediately coming to Birtha's apartment He started at the sight of me. Terror was depicted in his countenance ; at tlie same time it was with difficulty he could conceal or suppress his rage; and in anger he said:— " ' Pray Lady Jane, how dare you enter this apartment, or attempt to pry into any secret of mine ?' " I looked at him with contempt, and replied, < Secrets that we are not
ashamed of can be of no harm: but your conduct to that hapless girl can excite no other sensation in your breast but shame and contrition. 5 "' Leave me this instant/ said lie, in a commanding , accent " < I shall not leave vou, I haughtily replied.«Allow me Birtha Si ward, that I may restore her, wretched as she is, to the arms of her afllicted father, and then I will leave your presence, ------not without'--------- " * You are a fool, Lady Jane.! « « Yes' --------- " ' And shall, severely repent your
present insolent behaviour. Am not I Fitzosric ? and who shall dare oppose my will ?' " 'You are a villain—and it grieves me that I have lived to tell you so.' " ' Retire/ said he, putting his hand on his sword, c or, by my soul, I swear'--------- " * Hold, Fitzosric! hear my resolve. I shall not retire, till my request i& granted.* " * Oh! Lady Jane/ exclaimed the poor suffering Birtha, terrified to see him now draw his sword, ' let not your kind compassion to an unfortu¬ nate wretch involve your safety. Cruel
man!—your wickedness will one day meet its reward;' and she fell on my bosom. " The Baron walked hastily too and fro, loading me and Birtha with the most bitter repioaches. Unable to bear such infamous treatment, I ventured to tell him he had acted basely by the poor creature, now the object of my pity, and the victim of his seducing arts ; but as I had been a long time convinced he never loved me, and had only married me from interested motives, I did not feel any way hurt by the supposed loss of an affection that had been only feigned, whatever he might be vain enough to think; and that his own heart must accuse him of having used me cruelly;
and that it was insulting both Birtha and myself, in adding cruelty to in* justice. " ' How, Madam!' said he, again lifting his sword. I put Birtha from me, for I was determined to speak* My life I did not value—I was really tired of it, and was in hopes that pity¬ ing Heaven would have ended my miseries, and taken me from a world of affliction; I therefore opened my bosom, and said, ' Be merciful, Fitz* osric—Strike!—let the same accursed hand that murdered the generous, the unsuspecting Wallingford—the same that planned the destruction of my adored child, end all my sufferings at once—1 court the blow.' vt * Perdition seize thy tongue, and
choak thy utterance!' said he, aiming to pierce my bosom ; which the unfor¬ tunate Birtha perceiving, rushed be¬ tween us to prevent the blovv ; and received the fatal point of his sword in her breast—She sunk into my arms. " * O Fitzosric !' I exclaimed, * when will the measure of thy guilt be full?' " He drew back—his dastard soul sunk within him, when he perceived the effect of his rashness. Poor Birtha, struggling in the agonies of death, seemed to fear only for me. ' Save yourself, dear, dear Lady, and heed not me ; the cruel hand that inflicted my miseries puts an end to them. Trea¬ cherously thou hast dealt by me Fitz¬ osric. Think not, thou guilty wretch,
to escape punishment; Heaven, sooner or later, will avenge my------wrongs. Father of Mercies, comfort my poor afflicted father------and forgive me.' " The poor sufferer expired, while Fitzosric stood appalled. " I lifted the bleeding victim to the couch, and laid her thereon. I was so much shocked that I could not utter a word; but the Baron could read in my eyes what passed in my heart I expected he would not suffer me to quit the place, for fear of my telling it. My attention was taken up with the lifeless form of Birtha. I wept The wretch perceiving my tears, denied me that solace to my woe.
" ' You must quit this place, Lady Jane/ said he haughtily. " Once more I cast a distracted look on Birtha, and suffered him to lead me from that dreadful place. He conducted me into the drawing room, where he left me to the tortures of my situation, and anxiety for the future, and secured the door. ts He returned in about half au hour : but during his absence, it will be in vain for me to endeavour to describe my thoughts — the anxiety and apprehension that tortured me every moment can be only imagined. " He affected to be very sorry for what had happened, and declared it
"\vas not his intention to do either of us any injury—it was merely acci- • dental. " ' And a very lucky accident/ said I, disdainfully ; for I could not conceal the horror and aver¬ sion my poor mind felt at that time; 4 perhaps some people might think— to be free from a mistress vou were tired of, and did not know what to do with; and a child which you could not with honor own.' f< ' From some expressions which you have this day uttered/ said he,' if you believed there was any truth in them, it must have occasioned your aversion; and that, I fear, has been long privately indulged, though I
never heard you mention such things before as you have just hinted. But that aversion (I may almost suppose amounting to hatred) has, in all pro¬ bability, been the reason why I have not had an heir to my estates that I might own with honor. I certainly have behaved very ill; my heart has often accused me of injustice towards you: I have been much to blame, without one cause to assign for my conduct' " I was silent; for indeed his be¬ haviour to me had long since chilled my heart, though he never could per¬ ceive it But I must own I really hated him ever since poor old Siward made me acquainted with his infa¬ mous conduct towards his daughter.
" Oh! how agonizing were my thoughts at this moment! I could not refrain tears. Now I thought of the wretched Birtha, and shuddered with horror at the idea of being witness to her murder, by a man whom, before the Almighty, I had acknowledged my hiihband ! Then I thought of my for- ever-to-be-regretted noble Walling- ford!.. .. my son ! Oh ! these pres¬ sing recollections tortured my brain almost to madness I 1 involuntarily uttered their names—repeating them at intervals, insensible of any thing else, even my own perilous situation. Fitzosric observed the emotions that swelled my bosom. I could not rest I was innocent, and yet my mind was distracted! — What then must the guilty suffer ?
" Fitzosric entreated me to calm the tumult of my spirits, and appeared sorry for what had happened. Night advanced, and the supper was served in. Fitzosric took my hand in order to lead me to the table ; but I shrunk with hofror from his touch* and looked Hvildly*round for protection. " Ethelwald came in with some wine ; he looked scrutinizingly at me; his looks chilled me with terror. The Baron ordered him to stay—I was more wretched by having him there to witness my anxiety. I asked for my maid Agatha; but he refused her attendance. He begged I would eat; and, as if to pass off my apparent dis¬ tress before Ethelwald, very kindly told me he was sure I should feel much
better after I had eaten. I attempted it ; but I could not swallow any thing. He pressed me to drink a little wine. With the hopes of being better, I did taste a small quantity. He wished me to finish the glass ; but I refused. I had scarcely swallowed it, when my head grew giddy-»-my eyes dim—and it immediately occurred to my fleeting !>enses that I was poisoned! I could just utter, in great agony, * Oh! Fitz¬ osric ! cruel, cruel man! the measure of your gilt is complete! traitor that you are P I sunk from the seat, as if bereft of life, and do not remember what followed for a length of time,"
VOL. II.
E
CHAPTER XVII.
" I do not know how long I lay in that state of insensibility. When I recovered I found myself in an un¬ known apartment, laying on a bed. I gazed with astonishment; for every thing was new to me. At a distance was a table, and a lamp on it; and I could perceive a man there leaning on his elbow, apparently watching me. " The occurrences of the preccd-
ing day at this moment rushed on my recollection, and I seemed as if awak¬ ing from a frightful dream. I saw the man was not Fitzosric; but I trem¬ bled, fearful it was one of his emis¬ saries. He observed me stir, and rose from his seat, advancing towards me. I then discovered Ethelwald! Surprise increased the terrible alarm my heart had experienced when first I beheld him. I rose up; my head felt disordered; and, almost overcome with dread, I asked for Agatha. He in¬ formed me she could not attend. " ' Be not alarmed, Lady Jane,* said he, respectfully advancing, ( when I inform you, that if you wish to live> you must accept the poor imperfect services I can render you.* e 2
, " * Live!' I exclaimed. * Had the Baron really a design against my life V " ' Dear Lady, seek to inquire no further; you are at present not in a state to hear a relation of what has happened; pray be persuaded that I am anxious for your safety; therefore do not venture out of these apartments till I see you again. I have attended by you fourteen hours, and I greatly feared you would never more awake. Nine hours previous thereto you drank a stupifying draught, and I, for these three hours, have been tortured with dread for its consequence. Thank God ! you are restored. I have con¬ veyed every thing for your use ; fire, provisions, books, and all other neces-
varies. Compose your mind, and be resigned till I see you again. I must now leave you.' " I thanked him, aud be left me. However, he took the precaution to secure the door; and I was glad in one aense he had, for I dreaded the ap¬ pearance of the Baron. " I walked about to examine the apartments more minutely, for I could not imagine where I was. Though I had been so long used to the Castle of St. Egbert, I could not form a conjec¬ ture in what part of it I was now situated. Sometimes my sinking heart trembled with the apprehension that I was con~ signed a prisoner to the care of Ethel¬ wald: but the respectful manner in e 3
which he behaved, wheu I recovered from the stupifying slumber, con¬ vinced me I did him wrong in sug- gesting the injurious thought. But the distracted state of mind in which I wa% often created unjust suspicions. —-Yet Ethelwald was one of Fitz¬ osric's creatures!—How strange, then, that this man should seem concerned for my life! f 1 I opened a closet; and, to in- cre&se my surprise, found it plentifully supplied with provisions, dried fruits, cakes, wine, and every thing I could wish: of fuel there was a sufficiency ; it only required my attendance to keep the fire up. I resigned myself to the will of Heaven, and trusted to that beneficent Creator for strength
and protection against all the evils I had reason to dread. " I did not see Ethelwald for thf%e days, during which time I grew com¬ posed. The Baron was my only ter¬ ror ; and now, absent from him, I had an opportunity of comforting my sad soul with the cheering rays of religion, which I was determined to pursue, as I had experienced the fallacy of all sublunary things; and thus my spirits grew tranquil. ". In the evening of the third day Ethelwald entered the apartment Having secured the door to prevent being discovered, he expressed him¬ self happy in seeing me so well, and apparently composed. e4
" I entreated he would inform me in what place I was; for I could not discover what part of the Castle I was in. " c Lady Jane/ said he,' you must first answer me one particular ques¬ tion, which I am going to ask. You know the report that prevails in the Castle, that the north chambers are haunted. Do you sincerely believe there is any truth in the report?' " ' I cannot say/ I replied; £ I have always been led to believe so; and I believe Lord Wallingford and his father thought the same. It has been a report of many years' duration, and I should naturally imagine there must have been a reason for so sup*
posing; or why were the north cham¬ bers locked up and entirely disused?' " * What now is your conjecture ? You have been three days and nights in the north chamber; have you been disturbed by any thing?* " I assured him I had not,—■' Why the question V " < On the night,' said Ethelwald, * that you tasted of the poison, I brought you here. But to be particu¬ lar, I must return to the events of the clay. " i About noon the Baron came to me, and said, that an accident had happened, that for his own preserva- e 5
tion it would be necessary to put you out of the way. 6 Lady Jane, 5 said he, * has discovered many things of which I have been guilty. You are acquaint¬ ed with some of the circumstances. We shall not be safe while she lives. I will not suffer her to leave the draw¬ ing room, for I really fear her ; there¬ fore we must be secure. At supper mix a glass of wine with a strong opiate, and I shall be released of all my fears at once/ " * I promised him I would, and be left me. I did not know how to warn you of your danger; for though 1 had been accessary to many ill deeds of the Baron, yet my soul was har- towed at the thought of premeditat-
ingly taking your life. I found the Baron kept you close in the drawing- room, and I could not obtain ah op¬ portunity of letting you know the dan¬ ger that threatened you. " ' At length the dreadful hour arrived ; I entered the drawing-rooni. The Baron desired me to wait: but I was determined to counteract his schemes ; therefore did not put so much in the wine designed for you as he expected. You took the fatal glass —fortunately you drank but tittle— but the Baron sat watching you with the greatest anxiety and expectation. " * Its stupifying powers soon seiz¬ ed you. Yon suspected it, and taxed Fitzosric with the horrid design of b6
poisoning yon. Soon you became in¬ sensible, which, the instant he per¬ ceived, he exultingly exclaimed — * My troubles are at an end—so perish all I dread or dislike! Convey her instantly to some secret place, and dig- a grave at the bottom of the gar¬ den, near the watch-tower, and bury her immediately ; then, Ethelwald^ all my fears will be buried with her/ He then left the room. " * What to do I knew not; but there was no time for deliberation. I however carried you into your own room, and locked you in there ; for I feared to leave you in the drawing- room, lest some of the servants, com¬ ing to remove the things, should dis¬ cover yon.
" * I then went into the garden, and there I met the Baron. * Now, Ethelwald/ said he, c I will shew you where I will have the grave—bring a spade, and follow me.' I did as he ordered me, and soon dug a grave; but he stood by me all the time, giv¬ ing me directions how he would have it I knew not what to do; for I had not the least intention of burying you, and 1 found it impossible to prevail on the Baron to leave that place. * No,* he said, ( he would see you buried, that he might have the testimony of his own eyes; for he would have no trick put ou him,' " * Now I was entirely caught—it being so sudden, I could not frame any device how to preserve you.
" ' I left him. The thought then occurred, that I could conceal you in the north chambers. I had discovered an entrance to them without enter¬ ing the door that was so strongly locked. " ' I went into your chamber, and was happy to find you breathe, as in a serene sleep. Some of your apparel lay on a chair. I rolled it up for my purpose ; and lifting you, carried you along the north gallery, down a few steps, winch winding again, I soon entered the north chamber, and laid you ou the bed, where, according to supposition, the Noble Dane was murdered. This was the only place where I could hope to secure you: for 1 was sure tbe Baron would not veil-
ture here. He always speaks of this place with chilling terror. " ( Now how could I deceive the vigilant eagle eye of the Baron ? Had he quitted the garden, I might have said his wish had been accomplished. But he had resolved to witness the interment. I knew also, that, if I was detected in imposing upon him, my life would be sacrificed to his revenge. However, I determined to trust to the event: if I succeeded, it would be well; if on the contrary, I could but die. " ' I therefore drew tbe bolster from the bed, and placed your head, insen¬ sible as it vvas, easy upon the pillows ; the clothes I brought from your chain-
ber I dressed it up iu, and wrapping what might be supposed to be the head with the long veil I took from your's, which, by some accident, was all over blood, I wound the supposed body round with a sheet, and, dragging it along, soon reached the grave. " c The Baron started as I ap¬ proached. He knew the veil, which flowed loose; and it seemed to create much terror: I deposited the body, and the Baron assisted me in filling it up. His heart exulted when it was closed.—* Now I am convinced,' said he ; ' and there is an end of Lady Jane/ plunging his sword into the body, while I continued to level the ground. When all was finished, we returned to the Castle.
" ' We past most of the night in consultation, and I did not retire to rest till morning dawned: previous thereto I came to see how you was. You slept easy—I left you, and went to bed for a few hours, " < Anxious to watch your waking, and not knowing how to do it, I asked the Baron's leave to go out for the day ; he allowed it, and then went out him¬ self. I then came to the north cham¬ bers, where I sat the remainder of the day; and as the Baron staid out all night, I had a further opportunity of watching you till you awaked. " * In the morning, when Baron Fitzosric returned, he made your death known; but would not permit any of
the servants to see you : Agatha, with tears, requested it; but she was pe¬ remptorily denied. And last night it was reported you vvas buried ; but he would not say where. " ' Bernulph died suddenly the night before last; and as he was the person who used to light the lamp in the north gallery, I made a voluntary offer of lighting it, as it would prevent any intruders here. Your Ladyship knows the fear every one of the do¬ mestics entertain of these chambers <• •—even my Lord himself is terrified at this place, " * I was very happy this morn¬ ing to see you open your eyes. And now, my Lady, if you can content
yourself here for a short time, I may have the blessed opportunity of liberat* ing you from this Castle; or, if you will wait, a favourable turn of your affairs may arrive, when you can regain your right. At present, if you discover yourself, your life will be in danger, and mine will thereby be involved/ " f Never, Ethelwald! never shall vour good intentions to me meet with such an ungrateful reward. I am con- tent here to await the event, if it will not give you too much trouble/ u Ethelwald then shewed me a secret spring which opened a small door i ? imediately by the side of the large one, that was locked, and barred, and bolted 5 and all the bars and bolts
locked down; and I saw it led direct¬ ly into the north gallery. I drew back with amazement; and it immediately occurred to me that this supposed haunted chamber had been designed to answer some purpose for imposing on the superstitious and the credulous ; for any one could go out, or come in, without opening the great door, which was> externally as well as internally, so strongly secured. " I learnt also, from Ethelwald, that Fitzosric declared he had seen me, and expressed a belief that my spirit haunted him, with no small degree of terror. " To shorten my narrative, I must tell you that three months passed away j
and Ethelwald continually supplied me with every thing 1 wanted, except clothes, and that I was obliged to ven¬ ture out one night to procure. " I was seen by some of the ser¬ vants. They fled from me with terror; by which means I was enabled to col¬ lect what I wanted. Sometimes I have ventured out in the north gallery for a walk. I have accustomed my¬ self to sing a pathetic verse to a mourn¬ ful melody, the better to prevent any one discovering me. I have often seen Fitzosric; but he flies me—his guilty soul starts aghast when we meet, and his terror so far overcomes him, that he has not the courage to interrupt me, ** By Ethelwald, who continues to
visit me every day, I hear of whatever passes in the Castle. Often I have saved the distressed by my presence or my caution. I have been happy in rescuing you three or four times. And thus has time passed on for nearly fourteen years. I feel contented*—nay, happy; because I am separated from the worst of wretches : and I flatter myself the time will come when 1 shall yet be happy. " A short time previous to my supposed death, I had a singular dream, which prompted me to obey theinjuction I received; and, before night, as I was walking with Agatha in a wood near the Castle, I met a person who assured me Lord Walling¬ ford had been murdered by his friend
Fitzosric; that person presented me the dagger which was taken from the body of Wallingford, and which I well knew to have been worn by Fitzosric when a friend of my husband. After this, you will easily imagine and be¬ lieve how hateful every attention of Fitzosric was to me. " Since here, I have learnt that the person who met me in a strange dis¬ guise was Ethelwald, who had taken the dagger from my husband's body, and had preserved it; but declared, that, by a dream he had had that morning, wherein he was commanded to give it me, that 1 migi>t kuow who was the murderer, he had obeyed, and, disguised, met me in the wood. About seven years ago he entrusted another
secret of great importance. He as¬ sured me of the Barou's base art to and he were to kill him. Their re¬ ward for so doing was very considera* ble. " Ethelwald feared to- trust Ber¬ nulph with his design, lest he should betray him. But he told Bernulph, that the guilt should be all his own ; but, nevertheless, he should share the reward. On returning from a visit, Bernulph waited in the carriage while Ethelwald took my son, who was asleep, in bis arm, and, making his way into the forest, where their car¬ riage waited, laid him down be¬ neath a tree, wrapped up from the dews of the night He had previously
written a paper to fasten on his breast, in hopes to succeed in his design; of » . .whichJb# k&pt-a-copy^which, Jwhen -he told me, to satisfy my fears, he gave me. It was— " «This child is of noble parents, though villany deprives him of them for a time. But the time will come when this unfortunate and now de¬ serted child will be owner of a vast estate, and be able to reward whoever protects him : the two hundred pounds which is left with him will be a trifle towards his support; and before that is expended, he may be restored to his friends. His name is Edric.'" Elgiva sat listening in mute atten¬ tion during the time Lady Jane recited VOL. II. F
the contents of the paper, till, by de¬ grees, her senses were overpowered, and she fainted away. Lady Jane hurried to her assist¬ ance, alarmed to the extreme at her sudden indisposition. She soon suc¬ ceeded in restoring her. " For Hea¬ ven's sake!" said Lady Jane, " what is the cause of this sudden illness." " Dear youth! beloved Edric !" exclaimed Elgiva, clasping her up¬ lifted hands, almost regardless of the surprise of Lady Jane; then, sudden¬ ly recollecting, she seized that Lady's hand, and, in impassioned accents, said — " Thy Edric lives! — thy Edric lives, dear Lady! — he is great! — is happy! —is. .beloved! ~ is all your
Fondest hopes Can wish!-*-The va¬ liant Chief who has struck terror into his foes — the victorious Edric the Forester!. .is. .your son !" " How ?" said Lady Jane, with energy. " Have you never heard of his conquests ?" said Elgiva, with rapture. Has Ethelwald never mentioned the youth that for two years has been the astonishment of England ? Edric and Fitzosric have ever been mortal foes. Edric has often driven him from the field of battle. Great is his aversion to him, as if prompted by instinct." " I have heard of him," Lady Jane replied, witb rapture ; " but never sus- f2
pected my Edric was that aspiring youth.—Oh! how 1 long to press him to my heart! My impatience to learn all about him prevents my listening to the joyful intelligence as I ought But speak; inform me all you know of Edric — that I may learn to thank Heaven for his preservation, and you for welcome news my heart has long been a stranger to." " The time will not permit," said Elgiva, " me to relate the narrative of my family. Suffice it to say, my father, who lived in that forest, was going out early jn the morning to attend to his employment , I have heard my mother say that he returned in about an hour, bringing with bjui a most lovely boy, wjko.seenasd, to be, between three and
four years old: his dress and the jewels with which he was adorned spoke him to be of superior rank. My father said, as he was walking among the trees, he found him laying fast asleep under a spreading tree, with a paper fixed on his breast. The words, my Lady, are exactly those which you have related to ine; for I have read the paper—I can repeat the word's by heart—and the discovery occasioned my illness. " My mother took thc sweet Edric, and as she had no children, deter¬ mined to bring him up as her own— possessed of sufficient to support him. She preserved the dress and jewels he was found in, hoping thereby fo discover to whom he belonged. In f3
less than a year and a half after this incident I was born. 1 have remem¬ bered Edric ever since I could remem¬ ber any thing. My brother, my friend; and blame me, who have been used to love him so long, if you think I am too partial, when I say he is most amiable, good, and just. He was my father's pride; he instructed him in the arts, first of agriculture, since then of war. " Edrie was presented by the re¬ commendation of a friend of my fa¬ ther to the King, who admired his military talents, his noble aspect, his apparent courage, and, perhaps, the condescending sweetness of his man¬ ners. He honoured Edric with the second command of an army to op-
pose the confederate Barons; and chose to give him the sirname of* The Forester/ because he was brought up h\ a forest Many ridiculed the King's *J o ill-judged favour, as it was supposed, for choosing one so young for such an important station: but Edric soon convinced all England how much they were in an error; scarce twelvemonths were elapsed, and the chief com¬ mander being dead, Edric was raised to supply his place. Several battles were fought, and Edric was victorious. He had nearly quelled the rebel lords, when, unfortunately, Shrewsbury was besieged, near which we dwelt We were obliged to abandon our dwelling, and flv to a little cottage near this Castle. Edric conducted my mother and me from the ravages of war to f4
that place in safety, and left us, that he might return to his army, ready to engage at day-break. " Soon after, the Baron seized my mother and me. and by force brought us to this place. Since then I know nothing of Edric ; but I trust Heaven will be his preserver; and I may live to see the dear companion of my ear¬ liest years again in safety." Lady Jane clasped her affection¬ ately to her bosom, thanking her a thousand times for her welcome re¬ cital. How ardently did she long to meet her beloved son, and to restore him to his native rights ! After the first transports of her joy
were a little abated, she asked if Edric knew she was not his sister? " After the JRing gave him his commission," said Elgiva, " and he returned with my father to take leave of us—I never shall forget the time ; for he has been a dutiful and affec¬ tionate son, and dearly loved my mother; and our hearts were grieved at parting with him, though it was so greatly for his advantage; for we knew not that we might ever see him again; then my father related what I have told you. " The surprise nearly overcame* me; for I greatly valued my supposed brother. But Edric, on the contrary, appeared happier. * Thank God!' h& e5
exclaimed,' I am not criminal!—I can love my adored Elgiva without being guilty. My amiable mother, such I shall always call you, allow me to offer my heart to where it first owned alle¬ giance. 1 have long loved Elgiva; but the belief that she was my sister, and that I was cherishing a criminal at¬ tachment, has caused me many dis¬ tressing hours. I was happy to em¬ brace the toils of a military life, in hopes of avoiding the error I so much dreaded, as 1 still found my beloved sister had too powerful an ascendancy over my heart My honored and re¬ spected father, you know not what a weight of anguish you have taken from my mind by this delightful dis¬ covery/
" My father caught him in his arms, and pressed his dear adopted son loJiis breast He turned to em¬ brace niy mother; nor was I forgotten ; but my feelings at that moment I cannot describe. " I was charmed to see him appear so superlatively happy. He entreated my parents to sanction his affection, as so many years had rolled over, and he knew not that he had any other parents to please or offend. And my parents so entirely loved him, that he immediately gained their consent to pay hife addresses to me My heart, from earliest infancy, had been in¬ clined to admire—to adore him ; nor would I pretend to deny how tenderly f6
I was interested in all his concerns: but Edric declared he would not aspire to my hand, till he had done some¬ thing to deserve it " When he left us to join the army, my poor heart sickened with dread.— His victorious return chased away every uneasy sensation. Every inter¬ val of time he could spare he hastened on tbe wings of love to us. Happy days!—never more to return !—never to be remembered but with regret, ta think they are past! And Heaven only knows when I shall see Edric again." " My sweet girl/* said Lady Jane, " you have encouraged me to hope for
the restoration of my long-lost son. Let me endeavour to inspire you with one cheering gleam. Accept for your¬ self and family ten thousand thanks, for your affections and tender care of my beloved Edric. The time, I trust, will come, when I shall see you happy, as I sincerely believe you to be deserv¬ ing ; and 1 feel a pleasure in being any way serviceable to a person esteemed. by my beloved and long-lamented Edric." Much conversation ensued, ami morning in soft radiance peeped in at the casements, when Lady Jane re¬ quested Elgiva to retire to rest, assur¬ ing her that she might rest in safety,. and that the next night she should endeavour to find her mother.
Elgiva thanked her, and retired to a small apartment adjoining; and the fatigue she had undergone soon plunged her into a profound sleep.
CHAPTER XVIIf.
Lady Jane's mind may be easier conceived than described. She did not retire to rest till she had offered up her thanks to the Supreme Father of Mercies, for the miraculous preser¬ vation of her beloved child, whom she had so long mourned as dead. St. Egbert's Castle had now a lawful owner existing; and her heart, which once had no value for life, now fondly longed to fold her beloved son to her bosom, to reinstate him in his rights,
and assist to drive the usurper from his ill-obtained possessions. She com¬ mended him and his cause to Heaven, and then retired, to strive to gain re¬ pose, though what Elgiva had related to her chased sleep from her eyes. We will leave Elgiva enjoying a sweet repose, and Lady Jane revolv¬ ing in her mind those mysterious events which prevented her from ex¬ periencing the balmy aid of sleep, and: return to Fitzosric.
Positive in his own mind that Elgiva had not returned to, nor en¬ tered the Castle, he stood, in the dis¬ guise before mentioned, just within the
gate, in order to seize her when she arrived. He had previously set a door open that led to a vault under the Castle; for he much feared, if he suf¬ fered her to ascend the stairs, her sur¬ prise would alarm Agatha, and he should have a difficulty in securing her, that he might have it in his power to reek his vengeance on her; for all his boasted love was fled, and only hatred and rage supplied the place. Happy it was for Elgiva that she escaped falling into his hands. After waiting near an hour, every moment of which seemed to be an age, in the impatient and turbulent state his mind then was, he began to imagine she had reached the Castle
before him, unobserved) and therefore might have arrived at her own apart¬ ment The instant the thought sug- gested itself^ he llew, rather thau walked there ; but, to his great asto¬ nishment, found only Agatha; who with great anxiety asked what was become of Elgiva ?, Fitzosric, franticly tearing off his. disguise, (which had alarmed Agatha,, when she discovered him so attired) declared he knew nothing of her, but supposed she did, and insisted on her informing him where Elgiva was. " Oh ! my Lord," said she, " who should know, if you do not—as yoit have been walking with her in the
garden. You forbade me to follow, you know you did, I have not seen, her since." " My vengeance shall overtake her," said he, foaming with rage;, " my disappointment shall fall with treble force, and she shall have rea¬ son to curse me to the latest hour ofi her life. Lights!—lights!—follow me —I will find her if she is alive." Agatha, trembling, took up a lamp to obey him. His noise alarmed the domestics, who came running about in great confusion. Among them, was Ethelwald, who earnestly de¬ manded the cause of the alarm. Fitzosric explained, as well, as the
fury he was in would enable him. Some were ordered to proceed into the garden to search for her, while others attended him to examine the Castle ; ahiohg the latter were Ethelwald and the affrighted Agatha. Having sought every apartment he deemed proper to enter, and return¬ ing after a fruitless search, he deter¬ mined to enter the gallery leading td the north chambers, having once dis¬ covered Elgiva there; but just as he was pushing open the door, his eye fell first on the terrified countenance of Agatha, and then on the rest of his servants, who were at a greater dis¬ tance, on all of whom the strongest symptoms of terror were powerfully depicted.
" What is the matter with you all, and why do you stare so ?" exclaimed Fitzosric. " Oh! for Heaven's sake!—Oh! for mercy!" screamed out Agatha. —" Let me go back—pray let me go —I cannot—I dare not go into that horrid gallery." " Art thou mad ?" he replied ; " Why are you so stupidly alarmed?" " Oh!—oh !—oh !" sighed Agatha, and fell down in a strong fit A few violent execrations fell from the lips of the Baron ; he then ordered some of the rest to advance, regardless of the almost lifeless form . of poor
Agatha; but they all stood petrified with terror One only ventured to reply to his despotic master. " In¬ deed, my Lord," said he, " I cannot —command any thing else, and it shall be my duty to obey you ; but iu this I must be excused.—I saw the ghost of our dear and ever-revered Lady not three hours ago, and it vanished just at this very place." u What!" exclaimed Fitzosric, clapping his hand on his sword, while an unusual terror crept over his whole frame —" Dare you say this in my hearing ?" " My Lord," replied the man, " the shock I felt at the cruel sight obliges me to speak; and for worlds I
'would not follow you into that gallery. Yes, I saw Lady Jane ; I am M>rry to say those eyes ever saw a sight so full of horror. She had the same clothes on that I san her in the dav she died ; they were covered with blood, and she held a glass iu her hand to which she often pointed," Fitzosric shuddered^—his counte¬ nance changed to a deadly paleness*— his heart was appalled—and he leant for support (and to conceal the various tumults of his agonizing sensations) against a column. During the man's relating the above, some of the servants ventured to assist Agatha; and as she came to herself, the Baron scornfully com-
manded them to take the fool to her chamber. Ethelwald, seeing his Lord's irreso¬ lution and terror, began in his turn to exclaim at the folly of his fellow ser¬ vants, who he would fain persuade had imagined all this ; then pressed his master to enter the gallery. Fitz¬ osric not being willing to go, Ethel¬ wald said he had no fear on the occa¬ sion, and he would go alone. Every one present were happy to be excused, though they all summoned courage to wait with the Baron at the door, watching the course of Ethel¬ wald, who made a diligent search in every part of the gallery, and returned without success.
The attendants were then dismiss¬ ed, and the Baron, leaning on Ethel- wald's arm, once more repaired to Agatha's chamber, to see if Elgiva had returned there; but, to his great mortification, she vvas not; and was ho where to be found, as the return of the servants from searching the gar¬ den fully explained. Fitzosric thought it now time to give over a fruitless search, and he retired, dissatisfied, and much terri¬ fied, to his own chamber; where a long conference took place between him and Ethelwald, on the subject of Lady Jane, though the very mention of her name at this time had horrors in it, which the guilty soul of Fitzosr ric had never felt before. vol. ii. a
" The fellow certainly speaks true," said he; " there has not been a night for this fortnight past, but that horrid vision meets my eyes. Here, in my chamber, last night, she sung her usual melancholy song. Oh ! I have kept my heart up bravely for several years; but must confess, and that with sincerity, these repeated tor¬ ments at times affect me." "Last night?" said Ethelwald. " Here, in my room," he replied, " at the foot of my bed, with the cursed glass of poisoned wine in her hand—she sighed most piteously, and blood seemed flowing from her breast. 1 knew her clothes were stained by an accident, but I gave ber no wound upon my soul."
" Oh, yes, my Lord," said Ethel¬ wald, " if you remember, while I was filling in the grave, you plunged your sword through the earth into the body. Indeed, it was well you did> for Lady Jane was not quite dead ; she stirred and breathed as I brought her along. Yes, my Lord, that wound was cer¬ tainly given by jou ; but whether your sword touched her breast, or any other part, that is impossible for us to tell." <c Bless me! how strange," said the Baron ; " she startled me, I must confess, last njght:—I jumped up in my bed, and, snatching my sword to endeavour to strike at the phantom, an irresistible something arrested and unnerved my arm. I repeatedly at¬ tempted to strike; but the blows were g2
vented on air, or fell with languid force on my bed. It was not fear !— Fitzosric never feared a mortal being! What was it then ?... .Oh, Ethelwald! the exulting spirit of the lovely crea¬ ture I once so much adored, and, to obtain her, plunged my soul into guilt, with a voice melodious, and as sweetly persuasive as I ever heard her when she was the charming, happy wife of # ,... .of......Ohl the name of my friend sticks in my throat, and almost denies me utterance........Yes !.. 'Pity the fate of Lady Jane'..were her words, and then she vanished!" Fitzosric paused a few moments, striving to stifle the agonizing sensa¬ tions he endured ; then, as if in deep thought, he said—" Yes..it was the
spectre of that beautiful Lady Jane, whom once I loved—whose gentleness 1 returned with cruelty and. .murder! .... She pursues me still! — Years have not effaced the deed!.... Oh! Ethelwald! summon all the power we are told of, to rid me of this torment¬ ing evil—even the half of my fortune I will bestow, that my future life may enjoy a ray of ease." Ethelwald endeavoured to comfort him, telling him he supposed it was equally in the power of the clergy to confine the spirit of Lady Jane, as it had formerly been in respect to the Danish Lord; bat yet, added he, the difficulty may be more disagreeable to you, Lady Jane being your wife; and her strange appearance plainly proves g8
she was murdered; by whom, at present, none knows but your Lord¬ ship and myself. But every one in the Castle remembers her sudden death and mysterious burial. There¬ fore we ought to consider very minutely before we put ourselves into the hands of the clergy; we shall confess our¬ selves, and"-'—- " Plague me no more!" hastily in¬ terrupted the Baron— c * every way I shall be equally tormented. Bring me wine—I will silence the upbraid ings of Conscience that way, and give way to every passion of my soul! If I can¬ not be at ease myself, it will be some comfort to me to be a plague to every body else. My very name shall carry terror in the souud of it Oh I t\m
Elgiva! this......But I swear she shall be found ! — somewhere in the Castle she certainly is, and she shall not escape." Wine was brought -*- Fitzosric drank plentifully ; but became so sul¬ len, that he did not change another word with Ethelwald that night At length he grew tired, and went to bed. But, by the gloom that was depicted on his countenance, Ethelwald con¬ jectured he had some desparate pur¬ pose at heart. He ardently wished to enquire what was become of Ellen, for he had missed her; and wherever she was conveyed to, it was so secret, that ihe Baron had never once hinted any thing of it to Ethelwald, nor mentioned her name since she was missing. g4
After the Baron was in bed, Ethel- wald wished him good night; but thc haughty and sullen soul of Fitzosric scorned to answer, though to the man who had been his instrument in many crimes, and in whose power he was as much as ever.
CHAPTER XIX.
Morning conveyed Ethelwald to {he chamber of Lady Jane. She had not slept during the night; for various emotions filled her bosom Elgiva, on the contrary, having endured many restless nights, enjoyed a serene re-* pose, and was still in a profound sleep, which Lady Jane did not venture to disturb. Ethelwald related the whole of what had happened the preceding G O
night, and the fruitless search made after Elgiva. Lady Jane informed him that that young lady was safe under her pro¬ tection, and hoped he would conceal her from the fury of the Baron. She then (her eyes sparkling with joy) re¬ lated that Edrie was still alive, and was the leader ofa conquering army £ Ethelwald started with surprise, and exclaimed—" Is it possible that the victorious Edric the Forester rs the child I left exposed ? Blessed be all- ruling Providence for his preservation! And was it the sweet captive that told you this ?" u The persecuted captive Elgiva,"
replied Lady Jane: "her mother brought up my sweet boy as her own. Tell mc, Ethelwald, and tell me truly, what is become of that inestimable mother ?" " Alas! my Lady, that is a secret to every one but the Baron. Her mys¬ terious absence has much alarmed me ; as few occurrences in the Baron's life are without my confidence. But this is a subject on vvhich he has always observed a profound silence. She may be gone from the Castle for what I know; and yet I sometimes miss him for an hour or more at a time." " The task must be mine to dis¬ cover that," said Lady Jane ; " for the unfortunate Elgiva is distracted on her g6
mother's account I have relied on your sincerity for many years. To you, Ethelwald, I owe my life, and every thing: you have acquainted me with many circumstances, vvhich, with¬ out your information, I should have been entirely ignorant of. I beseech you be secret as to the retreat of Elgiva ; for I know the Baron's resent¬ ment will fall heavy on her, if, by any chance, she should again fall into his power." " I will protect her at the hazard of my life," said Ethelwald ; " so pray do not harbour a doubt to my disad¬ vantage. I will make diligent search during the day: if I discover the lady, I will let you know ; if not, the task must be reserved for night—Farewell."
He then quitted the chamber, and Elgiva, soon after awaking, arose to a comfortable meal, and passed the day in a degree of tranquillity, when com¬ pared to those she had lately expe¬ rienced : during the course of which, Elgiva, ever ready to converse of her dear mother, at the request of Lady Jane, related to what family she be¬ longed : and though her Ladyship did not interrupt her narrative, yet she felt sensations difficult to conceal or des¬ cribe ; for the artless Elgiva gave the simple unvarnished tale of her family in nearly the following words. " Till within these last two years, I vvas unacquainted with any of my parents' family concerns; when my dear mother thought proper to relate.
to Edric and myself the strange vicis¬ situdes of her life. " Ellen Bertram (for that was my mother's name) was the only daughter of the Baron of Raby: she was the idol of her mother; but her father never had any particular tenderness for her. His mind was too ambitious and too avaricious lo think of any thing but obedience from his daughter. In the family was brought up a distant relation of the Baron, named Edgar de Rosenberg, for he was of Norman des¬ cent. Some imagined him to be the Baron's nephew, and some a youth brought up by his bounty. Edgar's person and manners were every thing that the most polished education, or highest gift of nature or fortune could
bestow. Lady Bertram loved him as her son; and being brought up with Ellen, their partiality increased with their vears. " The Baron of Raby, from whom his Lady bad never experienced much attention, was absent on an embassy to Normandy for nearly two years. About three months after he left England, Lady Bertram died. Ellen was then in her fifteenth year. Tbe kindness she received from Edgar dur- ing her father's absence—his grief for the loss of her mother—his unwearied attention to every wish of ber heart— the long affection she had received during many years—created a passion beyond friendship. She loved Edgar with the most ardent tenderness;
while Edgar's bosom reciprocally felt the same power, though he feared to lift his thoughts towards the lovely and accomplished daughter of his friend aud patron. " Dear Lady, be not surprised, nor imagine me guilty of flattery, when I speak of my beloved parents, and say my mother is lovely. You will ex¬ cuse the partiality of an affectionate daughter—Ellen is beauty itself; nor did I ever see in all my life so much beauty, grace, and dignity, as Heaven has profusely blended in the sweet form of my angelic mother, whom I lament and seek," Lady Jane bowed, and Elgiva pro- ceeded*
" By the time Lord Bertram re¬ turned, Ellen was turned of sixteen years of age; and Edgar and Ellen had enjoyed the pleasing hope of being united (as they had exchanged their hearts) at his arrival. But, alas ! his return was the beginning of their mis¬ fortunes. Ellen avowed her love, and Edgar preferred his suite, being at that time insensible of the Baron's real character, or the motives that actuated his bosom at that time, only conscious of their own affections, and contem¬ plating ideal scenes of visionary hap¬ piness ; which, my Lady, I am told is the customary thoughts of young peo¬ ple ignorant of the world, and, flatter¬ ing themselves they shall be happy. A stern denial vvas the result; and Edgar vvas ordered to leave the house that very hour*
" Obedience was all Lord Raby expected, whatever were the feelings of his unhappy daughter; and Ed¬ gar's he d d not regard; it was in vain to expostulate with one, whose heart was callous io every tender thought Suffice it to say, that Edgar had only time to write a few lines ex¬ pressive of unalterable affection to his adored Ellen, and left the house im¬ mediately, with scarce three hundred pounds, the gift of Lady Raby to him at her decease, for his future support The Baron did not know he had-a shilling in the world. " Ellen was confined in her cham¬ ber, and the Baron suffered no one to visit her but himself. At each visit he did not spare loading her with the most cruel aud unjust reproaches, and
strove all in his power to depreciate Edgar in her esteem. To account for the Baron's harsh conduct, I must say what I have often heard my dear mo¬ ther remark and lament, that he, while abroad, had contracted a friendship for an old Swedish Lord, immensely rich, to whom he had promised his daughter in marriage, and had given such accounts of her beauty, that the Swede returned with him to England for the purpose of espousing the fair Ellen. < 4 Disappointed in his hopes by the mutual affection which Edgar and Ellen had both avowed, he had no re¬ source but what has been related— turning Edgar out of doors, and im-
prisoning Ellen till the hour he deter¬ mined she should marry his friend. " Ellen was thunderstruck with astonishment and grief, when she re¬ ceived her father's commands concern¬ ing his friend, which was not till within two days of the time appointed for the wedding. So great was her love for Edgar, aud such an aversion to the Swede, that she determined to escape the sacrifice, even if she was reduced to beg her bread. " To elude suspicion, she feigned compliance vvith his wishes, and beg¬ ged to be permitted to adjust every thing for the approaching day. Lord Raby vvas pleased with her acqui-
escence, and gave her her liberty. Her composure and attentive preparations obliged him ; and convinced him bow ready she vvas to obey his wishes. u On the evening* preceding that day which was to unite her to the man she detested, she dressed herself in a plain suit of one of the women ser¬ vant's unknown to her; for whieh trespass she left a sum sufficient to purchase half-a-dozen such; and tak* ing only a handkerchief full of her plainest apparel, and what cash she had, silently quitted Raby Castle with¬ out any one's knowing who she was, leaviug all that was rich and magnifi* cent behind her. " Where to direct her course she
knew not Edgar had left the Castle ten days, and she had not heard from him, All was uncertainty. .she walked some miles undiscovered ; and, faint with fatigue, arrived at the door of a poor cottage. Her heart shuddered for fear of detection ; for after she had knocked at the door, she recollected to have called at this cottage with Edgar, sometimes for refreshment, when he had escorted her on a ride, which he did every day, during the absence of the Baron. " She was soon admitted, and craved a reception for the night; hap¬ py also to find her disguise entirely excluded her from the knowledge of the old inhabitant. She received the welcome it was in her power to afford;
and apologizing for its indifference, by wishing it was better — adding, ' So it should be; but I have a young man here very ill, and sick at heart I may say ; he has been here some days, being too ill to go farther!. .Ah ! Lord help us! such it is to be dependant on a great man's bounty. He was turned out of doors at a minute's no¬ tice ! and I verily believe his poor heart would have broke if I had not pitied him. Ah! thank God! though I am but a poor old woman, I know bow to be grateful to ray friends; and he, dear youth, has often been a friend to me when he was in prosperity.' H The old woman wiped a tear from lier eye. Ellei felt for the unfortunate stranger, and begged to know who he
was, if it was no secret ' Secret !* replied the woman; * no secret I dare say..Master Edgar, of Raby Castle ; every body knows Lord Raby has turned him out of doors..and, poor creature ! he takes on so, I am afiaid he will soon break his heart!' " « Master Edgar?' exclaimed Ellen, endeavouring to conceal her emotions, ' tell him, Maude has also been turned away, and if she could see him, could say something that would be a comfort to his poor afflicted heart!' " The old woman repaired to Edgar, informing him of Maude's dis¬ missal, Edgar, hoping to hear some¬ thing concerning his dear Ellen, re-
quested Maude might be admitted to his apartment <f The good woman introduced Maude, and retired. But Edgar soon discovered the supposed Maude was no other than his dear Ellen Bertram in disguise. " She hastily ran over what had transpired since he left the Castle; and concluded with hoping for some conveyance to a distant part of the country, before it was likely to be,pur* sued. The danger to which Ellen was exposed, roused Edgar to the dreadful idea of her loss, and marriage with another ; the bare supposition of such an event taking place, added tortures the most distracting. His indisposi- VOL* II. H
tion was more of tfae mind than the body; he arose, and hurried to procure horses, that he might convey her he loved more than life beyond the reach of falling into the Baron's power ; which he well knew would make her for ever miserable. " Ellen partook of a slight refresh¬ ment, while Edgar went to procure some conveyance. The old cottager was alarmed to see Edgar at that hour leave his bed, and strove to persuade him to delay till morning. But Ed¬ gar's impatience would not brook delay. " Heprocured a horse, and, though none of the best, deposited a good sum for its safe return. Then Jiurrjing to
Ellen, he mounted her behind him, well satisfying the cottager for her hos¬ pitality, and, aided by the light of the moon, journied near thirty miles be¬ fore morning, unknowing, and not caring, whither Providence directed their course. " About six o'clock they arrived within sight of a large town. Edgar left Ellen about a mile before they reached it, and rode there alone for fear of being discovered. There he sold his horse, and procured refresh¬ ments for his companion. Fearful of pursuit, he purchased a better disguise, and chose the habit of pilgrims for himself and the unfortunate Ellen. u Thus he returned to the object u 2
of his adorarion and cares; and they soon after entered the town unknown by any one, where the weary Ellen ob¬ tained a bed to recruit her strength and spirits, and rested three hours ; during which time, Edgar was busy in inquiring many things which materially concerned them both. " Ellen awoke much refreshed, and comparatively happy to what she was the day before. They then pur¬ sued their journey, first providing re- freshmeiits, lest the uncertainly they were in of reaching any town with safety, might reduce them to hunger. They also determined to pursue their journey c}n, foot, lest accidents might discover them if they ventured to take a horse.
" In this manner they passed se¬ veral fatiguing days and nights, avoid¬ ing the high road as much as possible. At length their provisions were ex¬ hausted, and they walked two days and two nights without tasting food, or, had not accident brought them to a spring* any thing to allay their thirst At which time, Ellen, overcome with fatigue of many days journey, and great anxiety of mind, fainted away.
h ^
CHAPTER XX
" Edgar de Rosenbero was dis¬ tracted ; be saw bis beloved Ellen al¬ most expiring with want and fatigue. The powers of Nature were almost extinguished in his breast, for he also was oppressed with the same wants, though he had been more able to con¬ ceal them from the dear object of his care. But now the sad situation to- which Ellen was reduced, roused him, to a sense of all his wants and misery at once* u Frantic with grief aud despair,
he poured forth his complaint and prayers to Heaven, while be held the unfortunate object of his coneern to his breast He feared she was dead. He accused himself of being the author of her woe ; and in all the bitterness of anguish, lamented their wretched destiny. " The night was dark, and, to in¬ crease his distress, the angry Heavens presaged a storm. No habitation ap¬ peared, to which he could convey the unhappy wanderer.. he looked round ..and looked in vain..yet one ray glanced on his distracted senses ..be saw a trickling stream issue through thc bank near which Ellen had fallen, from which he hastily procured some water, and restored her to her senses.. H 4
" Ellen, although restored to life, had not power to move a step further. ExhWtf&ed and sick at heart as they b&th were, they sat down to bewail their mutual misfortunes. " It was in the excess of their prayers and complaints, that they be¬ held a venerable man standing before them. His beard w&s white as snow, and fell on his breast. < My children/ said he, * embrace the cheering con¬ solation of hope; you are wicked in ddubting the iriercies of the Supreme God, atod in thus giving way to des¬ pair.— Nay, let me certainly speak conviction to vour hearts. In the midst of your distresses—even in this solitary wild, where scarce a human footstep passes in the course of a week, I am
here to assist you, and cherish ex¬ hausted nature. Murmur no more, for Heaven's decrees are infinite; but follow me; I will convey you to a sim¬ ple but wholesome repast, and where you may repose your weary limbs in safety.' <c Edgar and Ellen fell on their knees before their benign and vener¬ able visitor, pouring forth their grate¬ ful acknowledgments. But as they arose to follow the benevolent man, Ellen again sunk to the ground for want of strength, as her long journey and want of food had so far enfeebled her, she was not able to standi " The good man observing her hapless situation, kindly assisted Ed- n5
gar in raising her ; and, lifting her m their arms, they in a short time reached his dwelling; though not without much difficulty, as they had to climb a steep ascent-—his dwelling over-hang¬ ing where they were, whence he had heard their complaints. " Bread, milk, and fruits, were all he had to set before them; but they enjoyed in them a rich repast. " The Hermit (for such he was) resigned his bed, which Ellen gladly accepted, as she stood in great need of salutary repose. So indeed did Ed¬ gar ; but he remarked to his kind pre¬ server that his unfortunate companion was not bis wife; aud therefore he could not enjoy the balmy aid of sleep
till she had risen, if he had no otber convenience. The Hermit bowed, and, scraping together a few dried leaves, threw over them a mat, on which be and Edgar sought repose till morning. " Ellen, from, the few hours' sleep she had received, awoke blooming as the morning: and although the couch of Edgar was hard, yet youth and a good constitution, as well as the na¬ tural want of rest, made him rise refreshed and happy; especially as he perceived Ellen wore her accustomed serenity. " At breakfast their narrative was related to the Hermit; who, in return, related the reason which made him embrace a recluse life. He had been h6
a clergyman, but had met with so many things to disgust him with the wdfld, having out-lived all his friends &n& relations, he determined to devote tft&femainder of his days to piety ; and having fixed on that remote part for his dwelling, the Lord of the Manor, when he discovered his residence, kindly presented him that spot, to live in during his life. " Here, at the request of the Her¬ mit, Edgar and Ellen passed several days, to recruit their strength and spi¬ rits ; and here also, by this worthy man, they were married : and, agree¬ able to his request, they remained with hinr several weeks, as he seemed to derive a great pleasure from 1 their society, and enjoyed great satisfaction
in making two unfortunate young people happy. " Here Ellen learnt domestic eco¬ nomy, preparing the frugal meal to set before her beloved husband and her father (as she called the heavenly man). And here Edgar was taught to des¬ cend to low estate, and labour for sup¬ port, as he well knew he must under¬ take something for a livelihood, as the sum he had would never support him in affluence, and he thought it best to begin in time. " The Lord of the Manor was very good to the Hermit; and, having seen Edgar and Ellen, deigned to take some notice of them. The forest-keeper of that noblemuu had lately died, and he
mentioned to the Hermit his want of some one to supply his place. Edgar humbly ventured to offer himself for that situation ; who; recommended by the Hermit, soon obtained it, and were removed to a comfortable dwelling verv near the good man's habitation, near Ellesmere. " The beneficent Lord of tlie M&«- nor (Lord Somerville) often visited them, always happy to see Edgar's attentive care to ail his concerns. lie once ventured to enquire their origin, seeing, from their behaviour, that they were far above the common.rank of people. Edgar acquainted him they were of noble parents, more especially his wife; but that some circumstances required their situation and residence
should be a secret; and politely re¬ quested he would not wish to know more than was in his power to explain. Lord Somerville being a man of real beneficence and humanitv, wished to know no more than was agreeable to relate. He was a great friend to Ed¬ gar de Rosenberg, and, by every en¬ deavour, strove to make his dwelling and situation as easy and profitable as a reasonable man could desire* 4f They had not lived in this calm retreat above three months, when my father found our dear Edric. I have before related how happy they were with their charge; but they would have been trebly so, had they known to whom the dear boy belonged, to have restored him to his lawful parents,
In a year and a half afterward, I was born, and, if it were possible, increased their happiness. " Ellen de Rosenberg had by this time forgot all grandeur, though born to shine in the highest spheres of life ; yet love and esteem for my father ren¬ dered every situation of life easy, and with joy she descended from the proud Castle to share the humble dwelling, and be the companion of the man of her heart,.to superintend his little dwelling and tender family, .to cheer his heart when oppressed by toil, with the smile of content and delight, .to make labour easy, and the frowns of malignant fortune lose some of her envenomed shafts. Her domestic duties never soured her temper, nor
took from her that dignity of manners or elegance of conversation which used to be her peculiar grace when the ad¬ mired heiress of Bertram and the beloved inhabitant of Raby Castle. On the contrary, her whole soul cen¬ tered in my father, and his affection equalled her's. " Thns happily was our dear Edric brought up with us, Lord Somerville, ever solicitous to make our situation more comfortable, as he admired the unwearied assiduity of my father to his employments. Edric, when sup¬ posed to be seven years of age, used to accompany my father, and was very diligent and attentive to every thing he was ordered to do, and was very industrious according to his tender years.
" My mother had several children, beside myself, who all died young. Thus our time passed away. Edric being brought up to my fatheris em¬ ployment,, aud I to assist ray mother, till within these three years, when Edric suddenly evineed such a pro¬ pensity for arms, that it was difficult to restrain his impetuosity. My father ex¬ postulated with him, and endeavoured to convince him of the small hopes of advancement a young man in tlie humble sphere of life he was could expect;. but Edric seemed fixed, how¬ ever he concealed his real sentiments for a time. " About this period, Lord Somer- ville,from whom he had received much kindness, took my father more into favour, telling him he was very cezr
tain he rather suffered life than en¬ joyed it; and for his long-tried inte¬ grity in the concerns lie had hitherto © *j undertaken, offered him a situation at court of great consequence. My fa¬ ther could not, without ingratitude, decline an offer every way so advan¬ tageous ; though time had convinced him his situation could not admit of an increase of happiness, as domestic life with my mother was his highest ambi¬ tion. However, he accepted it; and, though his business called bim to court, he chose my mother to remain where she was; for indeed he still feared the resentment of the Baron of Raby, and thought it most prudent for her to remain concealed in the con u try. *' Edric was with us; but often«p-
peared thoughtful, and was unwilling to reply to the tender inquiries of my mother and myself, as to his health. My father often visited us, and per¬ ceived some anxiety lay ia Edric's heart Rosenberg had been in his situation about a twelvemonth, and being much respected^ he flattered him¬ self he could obtain sufficient friends to procure some situation for Edric ; ie made his thoughts known to Lord .Somerville, who kindly took upon him¬ self to conduct Edric to London in his carriage* But wishing pleasantly to surprise my father, and unknown to bim, he first presented Edric to the King as the son of Edgar de Rosen¬ berg. The King was pleased with his manners; and through the solicita¬ tions and friendship of Lord Somer¬ ville, the King gave him a captain's
commission, as there was an insurrec¬ tion raised against him ; and Edric was appointed to thc army that was sent against the rebels. Edric had only time to see my father and declare the favours received, when he joined the army. " He acquitted himself with such honour, that the King vouchsafed to bestow on him a token of his favour to wear ; and he rapidly advanced to be the commander of a powerful army. " Victory flew before our beloved Edric's conquering sword ..the fa¬ vourite of the King..the favourite of his country. And so satisfied wjas the King with the conduct of Edrie and my father, that he also received a sig-
nal mark of hts favour, for his great care and attention in the important situation of bis affairs; and therefore he created bim Baron Rosenberg. u And thus my mother and myself were situated, when the rebel army in¬ vested Shrewsbury. Lord Somerville, Who was an attentive friend, was in London ; and we had no where to fly to, my mother compelled to be secret for more reasons than one, and assume a cheerfulness now foreign to her heart; for I must acknowledge the joys we used to experience were much abated by my father and Edric's ab¬ sence ; and although they held situa¬ tions of the highest honours, they did not compensate for domestic felicity, when with rapture we used to prepare
the frugal meal to set before them, as they returned from their daily labour; and with anxious and aHectionate eyes, watch the approach of those so dear tons. Oh! now we, had nothing to look forward to, to make us happy; for all our comforts were destroyed by the supposition, that my father would re¬ ceive great emoluments, and, being honoured with a title, some silly peo¬ ple might think that an equivalent for happiness; but I am sure those that think so, will be greatly mistaken in the end. " In fine, our dear protectors thus many miles distant from us, we were obliged to fly, when the armies met to engage, and therefore fell into the hands of Fitzosric# We have scrupu-
lously concealed who we are, fearful of augmenting our distresses, if the Baron ^hpuld be one of Lord Baby's friends; by which reason, we should perhaps suffer more than if it were really known who we are. And my father being a favourite with the King, the Baron, who was one of the rebel Lords, might enjoy the cruel power of detaining us. 17
CHAPTER XXI. " No, my love S" s$i4 !#4y J^ e # clasping her to her bosom, " yo¥ shall not be cruelly detained; I will seek for your beloved and amiable mother* my affectionate youthful friend. .Ellen Bertram shall not be forgotten or neg¬ lected in St. Egbert's Castle! ♦ .and I find cruel fortune has left me some¬ thing yet to lovel something for which, after so many years of misery, 1 wish to live!. .Ellen Bertram was ray earliest friend, and Jane was equally beloved by her!.. oh! what v^rioun emotions I have experienced during your recital!. .my Edric I my friend J at once discovered!. .he, whom I have so long mourned as dead!. .and that dear friend, the kind protectress of vox*, ii. i
ray then deserted child !"...... Lady Jane could say no more, but burst into a flood of tears. Much conversation ensued, as soon as her Ladyship was able to quell the tumults of her throb¬ bing heart; and many inquiries con¬ cerning those dear to her; and Elgiva gave a succinct account of every inci¬ dent she could call to her recollection during the last seven years, partly concerning her father and mother, and partly of the conduct of Edric, that Lady Jane apparently grew quite happy, and longed to experience that felicity in the meeting with those she held most dear, which her fluttering heart fondly anticipated. Towards the'close of the day, they were interrupted by Ethelwald ; who came to inform Lady Jane he bad not
been able to discover any thing con¬ cerning the fate of Ellen. He bowed to Elgiva and retired. Elgiva felt a tremulous shock at the sight of him, being still apprehen¬ sive of the enraged Baron; but Lady Jaue bade her be comforted; she would venture out of the chambers a* night, and hoped she might be more successful than any yet bad been. Leaving the ladies to their conver¬ sation and conjectures, to wait the ap¬ proach of night—let us return to the Baron Fitzosric. Having drank pretty freely, be en¬ joyed a sound repose; and determined, when morning came, to visit Ellen
again, in hopes to bend her to his Wishes ; for he really felt a strong par¬ tiality in her favour. Though at the same time his heart burnt with resent¬ ment towards Elgiva. He visited Ellen every day to carry her food, and repeat the declaration of his passion; though tbe dignity of her manner prevented bim from offering her any insult... Sometimes she would not vouchsafe him an answer ^ at other times she would converse with an agreeable free¬ dom) as if she had been void of any suspicion ; but it was merely to elude bis inquiries, and prevent him from forming any idea of who she really was. H$ softly unlocked the door of Ellen's chamber, and discovered her on her If pees at prayer before a cruci¬ fix. So entirely were her thoughts
engrossed .with devotion^ that the Baron stole on her unperceived. Her attitude, and the fervency of her prayer, raised the admiration of Fitzosrie> and struck his heart with an irresistible awe; so much, that be did not dare to interrupt her. At lerigth be heard ber request Heaven's protection for her husband and daughter! At the word husband, be started ; and doubted whether he clearly to** derstood what she said. And Ellen soon perceived her unwelcome visitor, who so rudely broke dta her orisons. " Why this early intrusion, my Lord ?" said Ellen, rising from her knees,
* " Madam ♦, madam .." said he, hesitating, ** I come to offer you my haad and fortune; to remove you from this temporary confinement. .and lead you w T here pleasure courts and af¬ fluence awaits you 1 Will you accept me as a husband ?" <* it ts>dn honour, my Lord; I do not wish, nor can I accept" u And why not accept, since it will relieve you from all your present difficulties?" " It is not generously done, my Lord, to force an unfortunate woman into difficulties, whom malicious fate has cast into your power. And if you thus arbitrarily treat me, for no fault whatever; what am I to expect, if it
were possible for me to accept your offer?" " Every thing in my power to atone for my past conduct, and the in¬ quietude I have caused you...." " It is not in your power to atone for the misery you have caused me! and to prevent any further requests of a nature that distracts me to think of ... .know, my Lord.... I am already married!".... " Married!" said Fitzosric, recol¬ lecting she named husband in her prayer; " and pray, madam, why was I so long kept in ignorance of it ? " " Because, my Lord, I did not see there was any necessity for acquaint-
ing you with it For 1 am certain it is no concern of yours, whether I an* married or not!.." " Disappointed again!" said Fitz¬ osric mentally, " but I will obey the dictates of my soul..she shall not escape me.... ^ and attempted to take her in his arms. But the haughty Ellen de Rosenberg eluded his grasp, and with a scornful frown, bade him know his distance, .nor dare presume to add insult to the wrongs he had already heaped on her. " Cruel, wicked man !" said she, " have you hot basely forced me and my child into this abhorred Castle ; distanced from all my friends .. unjustifiably de¬ tained a prisoner by your tyrannic power. .divided from my Elgiva. .and torn frbm every earthly comfort? You
may punish me with imprisonment • • invent new torments to aflliet my heart and body! but my mind is free..my soul is above you! and know, proud Baron, it disdains you! and despises vour malice!" Fitzosric stood motionless with as¬ tonishment, to think, how she, in her defenceless situation, should dare to reject his solicitations, and avow her contempt so boldly. He was hurt to the soul to hear her declare she des¬ pised him. .him,.whom he proudly and vainlv imagined no woman could look on with indifference. Yet Ellen had said she disdained and despised him! this to a mind so haughty and despotic as he possessed, sunk deep into his heart, with an intent to medi- i 5
tate new mischief L. yet awed by the determined manner she spoke, and fearful of exciting her anger, he chose to silence his intended requests ; but the fury that raged in his breast, and laboured to vent itself on the unfor¬ tunate object of his resentment, he could ill conceal. Certain that he should not gain his point, by expressing what he felt, he very submissively entreated her par¬ don, if his words had in any manner given her offence; assuring her, it was most distant from his thoughts to cause her either uneasiness or anger; and that she must have greatly miscon¬ strued his sentiments, in receiving his declaration so unkindly. He apolo¬ gised for his treatment of her, laying all the blame to the ardour of his ex-
treme affection for her; and assured her, he would not do her any wrong; hoping also she would entertain a more favourable opinion of him, than to harbour any suspicion to his disad¬ vantage. « My Lord !" said Ellen, " I en¬ tertain no idea of the kind., my cause is committed to the Almighty Ruler of the Universe! in his goodness is all my hopes.. in his merciful protection all my trust. I have no dread of what is in your power to inflict on me!. .a superior power shields me from your injustice, and supports me through all the evils you would fain doom me to suffer!. .leave me, my Lord, 1 entreat you!. .that I may conclude the tribute of a grateful heart, to the beneficent i 6
and ttll-^r^ious Beihg who hae sus¬ tained me in the wekry pilgriniage of lifeI.iSo sliall you be entitled to my thanks." Ellen then turned from him with a degree of composure; and Fitzosric, awed By the mention of that Supfieme Being which conscience accused him of having repeatedly offended, dared hot interrupt ber further; but left the chamber, carefully securing the door. When he reached his own apart¬ ments, be threw himself into an arm¬ chair, and gave vent to the turbulent passions of his heart, which burst \vitft greater violence, because, in the presence of Ellen de Rosenberg, he had suppressed as much as possible his resentment He now had an op-
porlunity of giving that resentment utterance: he loaded her with every unjust and insulting ep!thet,and vowed he would not be talked out of his rea¬ son, or the dictates of his passions, by the preaching of an insolent woman-— one so totally io his power, that he taxed his senses with a singular weak* ness for giving a hearing to what she said.— Ci To dare," said he, u to reject my passion !—to resist my importuni* ties!.. ..but then she is married, she says... .to whom ?.. .that I neglected to ask... .Why then she shall be mine! At dead of night I can, against her will, steal softly to her apartment— my love and my revenge shall be gra¬ tified by possessing her^—her proud heart will be humbled, and it will be my turn to triumph!—No more shall haughty Ellen tell ihe she dkdams me.
She shall find my heart as hard as her own, steeled to every sentiment of pity or remorse!—Oh ! how I glory in the thought! But if I should not succeed, the scornful beauty shall not triumph over my purpose. She sliall no more see her husband — her Elgiva — no 1 nor the light of to-morrow's rising sun I My sword shall lay her dead at my feet, and my heart shall exult to be¬ hold her in the agonies of death!—Oh, all ye passions that possess my soul! be firm, shrink not, nor waver from my resolution l" Thus, in fury and resentment, the Baron passed the morning, meditating and devising new schemes to torment the afflicted Ellen; rejecting some, and admitting others which he imagined would wound her feelings the more.
After dinner he rode out for the remainder of the day with some friends, and did not return till after supper; and then he was so much intoxfcated, that he went directly to bed. Ellen at that time had no share in his thoughts: indeed he was incapable of thinking of any thing* At midnight Lady Jane ventured from the north chambers, in hopes to discover where Ellen de Rosenberg was concealed. Elgiva had previous¬ ly informed her where she had been searching — the gallery, the chapels, the various apartments leading there¬ from, the lumber room, and that where the body of Birtha Siward (for sq it was) lay; therefore it was useless for Lady Jane to examine then*. She therefore boldly determined %o search
th6 chaihber of Fitzosric ; for in it was a closet large enough to conceal any body. She entered at the private door, which she often did when she went into that room; and, to her great satis¬ faction, found him in a sound sleep» from the effects of his wine, which made him snore very loud. She opened the closet^—but, alas! no Ellen was there, She then determined to search his pockets, to see if he had any key; for Ethelwald assured her he knew no¬ thing of the matter: and, to lier infinite joy* she found therein a key, which she knew opened the stair-foot door, lead¬ ing to the turret in the south tower. Swift ais lightning were the foot- <sfe|m of t^dy Ja»e> till fche reached
that place: having locked the door after her, she ascended the stairs, and perceived a light iu the chamber above, the effect of Ellen's lamp. Lady Jane's appearance was, as hat been before described, sufficient to ter¬ rify the beholder. This night she was more particularly so, in case of ett- counteriBg Fitzosric, or that he should have been awake when she Entered his chamber. Ellen he&rd the door unlock, and dreaded the approach of the Baron: unable to avoid him, she commended herself to Heaven, and fervently im* plored protection. Just at that moment Lady Jane entered the room,
EHfn started as the mysterious visitor entered; and an irresistible something, allied to fear, stole insen¬ sibly over her senses so much, that it rendered her unable to move or speak. She perceived it was not Fitzosric; and as the alarming object approached more near, she saw the clothes were spotted with blood! She gazed in fixed astonishment, and, recollecting the countenance of her beloved friend Lady Wallingford, exclaimed " Mercy, Heaven!—what dreadful vision is this? —who has been guilty of so foul a deed?.. ..Jane !.... ray dear Jane! say.... who?".....and she sunk on her pillow, overcome with amaze¬ ment. " Fear not," said Lady Jane; " rise instantly; let not dismay over-
come Jour spirits—rise and follow— say not a word—-be quick, or all is lost. I will conduct you safe, where yon shall see Elgiva,and all your heart can wish/* Ellen, without answering a word, hastily wrapped her apparel round her while Lady Jane waa speaking, and silently followed her awful con¬ ductress. They descended the stains, Lady Jane closed the door; then proceeded down the next stairs, aud continued along the great gallery, passing swiftly by the door of Fitzosric's chamber. They then entered the north gallery, and hurried along to the north cham¬ ber, the door of which Lady Jane easily opened, and bade Ellen enter, which she did, Lady Jane then left her, that
she might return and replace the key in Fitzosric's pocket, whieh she fortu¬ nately did unperceived, and quickly repaired to the north chamber. Astonishment tied Ellen's tongue, as she saw what she imagined the mysterious vision depart; and she threw herself on her knees in humble thanksgiving to the Almighty for her miraculous escape ; when Elgiva ap¬ proached, who, sinking also on her knees, equally thankful, clasped her beloved mother in her arms, and em¬ braced her with the warmest affection. At this happy ifcoment, Lady Jane returned, and secured the door to pre¬ vent intrusion. Her appearance rathe* alarmed Ellen de Rosenberg; but Lady Jatie immediately threw aside
her habit, and appeared in a plain white vest; saying, " Be not alarmed, my dear long-lost friend! Providence has concealed me a long while, happily to relieve you from imprisonment.,and every evil which the ungoverned pas¬ sions of the Baron might inflict on you. Oh! let me bless the day that secluded me from the world, if I have b^en in¬ strumental to your safety and deliver¬ ance... Your once-loved Jane is not dead!, .she lives, to press her amiable friend to her breast; and to thank ber for all the tenderness she has bestowed on her dear son Edric!" Ellen and Lady Jane flew into each other's arms> and embraced with transport. Elfon de Rosenberg's sur¬ prise being sojaewtet abated, and her mini restored to fti*»<pajity by the
presence and joy of Elgiva, requested an explanation of the mysterious cir¬ cumstances she had heard and seen; and also expressed her astonishment to imagine how her dear Edric was discovered to be the son of her long- lost, though much-esteemed, friend. il - Your curiosity shall be gratified to the utmost," said Lady Jane ; " but suspend it a short time till I lead you to a more remote and secure part of the Castle, .distant from the intrusion of that base and unworthy man..I have the unhappiness to say, is my husband. .though he has believed me dead for several years ..... Oh! when I relate my sufferings^ dear amiable Ellen, your tender heart, I am sure, will pity me...Years of unutterable anguish IJh»r^ euiurerf sl«c# I saw
you...Death has deprived me of my idol..Wallingford! and my beloved child was also mysteriously torn from me. Great has been my affliction'for his sake ; but your sweet Elgiva has relieved me of a weight of sorrow.. has renewed ray desire for l^ife. .in the sweet hope that I shall one day see my son, and press to Iny beating heart, not the sweet child as when I lost him, but the noble, the aspiring leader of a victorious army!" Lady Jane took one hand of Ellen de Rosenberg and Elgiva the other, and led her into an interior apart¬ ment. They requested her to retire to rest, and strive to compose her agitated spirits; but Ellen's anxiety to inquire all she could learu of Lady Jane, chased aw&y every sensation of
the want of rest from her eyes. She entreated Lady Jane would so far oblige her, as not to suffer her to con¬ tinue in suspense; but be particular in letting her know every circumstance that had befallen her since last she had the pleasure of seeing her. Lady Jane, finding she could not prevail on Ellen to seek repose, and suspend her curiosity till next day, readily gave her a brief account of every thing that had happened. Mu¬ tual explanations took place, and it was eight o'clock in the morning before either thought of retiring to rest. END OF TKE SECOND VOJ-UME. r t i*M ty D. N. SUVRY, Bgrvitk StMtt &*h Lnto*
