STANDARD 

NOVELS. 

N CXVII. 



" No kind of literature is so generally attractive as Fiction. Pictures of 
life and manners, and Stories of adventure, are more eagerly received by 
the many than graver productions, however important these latter may be. 
APULEIUS is better remembered by his fable of Cupid and Psyche than by 
his abstruser Platonic writings ; and the Decameron of BOCCACCIO has out- 
lived the Latin Treatises and other learned works of that author." 



TALES 

OP 

THE PEERAGE AND THE PEASANTRY. 



COMPLETE IN ONE VOLUME. 



LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREET ; 

AND BELL & BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH. 
1849. 

LONDON : 

SPOTTISWOODB* and SHAW, 
New-treet.Square. 

TAILIES OF THEE FEEIRACE 
TM3E IPBASAHTPIRY., 

Vm ; 
tv RuhartL BtntU* 18*9 

TALES 

OF THE 

PEERAGE AND THE PEASANTRY 

EDITED BY LADY DACKE. 

LONDON: 
RICHARD BENTLEY, NEW BURLINGTON STREE 

AND BELL & BRADFUTE, EDINBURGH. 
1849. 

NOTICE. 

THE Proprietor, of CUCUHTWQ L,,^ Ertt in ^ 

A PENALTY OF TN POUNDS. 

W These measure* will be rigidly enforced. 

PREFACE. 

THE authoress feels much diffidence in sending forth to 
the world a tale which by its title gives promise of treat- 
ing not only of history, but of Scottish history ; an act of 
presumption from which she is anxious to clear herself; 
and at the same time she wishes to re-assure those 
readers who may not like historical novels from a woman's 
pen, that she has entered no farther into public affairs, 
than as they may have influenced the fortunes and feel- 
ings of the one admirable woman who forms the subject 
of the following memoir. 

Since in the human heart the same passions and the 
same emotions are found in all ages, she hopes she has 
not trespassed beyond the limits assigned to one who is 
conscious that all she writes bears the stamp of feminine 
authorship, in attempting the development of a female 
character, the firmness and tenderness of which may be 
gathered from Lady Nithsdale's own beautiful letter to 
her sister. 

The foundation of the story of the Hampshire Cottage 
is strictly true. The appearance, the characters, the 
sentiments, and the death of the old couple, are entirely 

vi PREFACE. 

from nature. Their very Christian names have 
preserved; and the circumstance of the blind old man 
feeling too low for the head of the little girl, who had 
outgrown his recollection, actually occurred to the au- 
thoress, when visiting the cottage after a long absence. 

For reasons which perhaps may be understood by her 
friends, she adds, that the tale of Blanche was writi 
the year 1832. 

London, 

June *. 1S35- 

CONTENTS. 

Page 

WINIFRED, COUNTESS or NITHSDALE - 
THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE - 
BLANCHE 

TALES 

or 

THE PEERAGE AND THE PEASANTRY. 

WINIFRED, COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 

CHAPTER I. 

My father stood for his true king, 

Till standing it could do nae inair ; 
The day is lost, and so are we, 

Nae wonder mouy a heart is sair. 

Jacobite Song. 

THE sound of the organ pealed through the chapel of the 
English Augustine convent at Bruges : a bright gleam of sun- 
shine, streaming through the painted window to the south of 
the altar, shone upon the clouds of incense which arose in 
silvery folds from the censers ; it shone upon the white-robed 
assistants, upon the priests, and upon the calm brow of the 
young nun who had that moment taken the irrevocable vows 
which separated her from the world a world of which she knew 
but little ; but which, from the circumstances in which her 
family was placed, offered not to her the temptations it usually 
holds out to youth, beauty, and rank such as hers. 

The Lady Lucy Herbert was the fourth daughter of William 
Marquis of Powis, who, having devoted himself to the cause 
of James the Second, and accompanied his queen in her flight 
to France, received from the exiled monarch, as a reward for 
his uncompromising loyalty, the empty titles of Marquis of 
Montgomery and Duke of Powis. 

James afterwards appointed him steward and chamberlain 
to his household offices which, although of small advantage, 
may have been gratifying to his feelings, as proofs of the 

WINIFRED, 

estimation in which he was held by the master to whom he 
had sacrificed everything. 

Upon the Duke of Powis's death, which took place in 1696, 
his widow placed her two youngest daughters in the English 
Augustine convent at Bruges ; while the three elder remained 
with her at the melancholy shadow of a court still kept up at 
St. Germain's. 

It was no grief to the widowed mother when she found that 
the bent of the young Lucy's mind was sincerely and enthusi- 
astically directed towards a religious life. Although the at- 
tainder had been reversed, and her son had been restored to the 
Marquisate of Powis, it was not till some years afterwards that 
she had ventured to return to England ; even then she lived 
in retirement and privacy. The widow of so zealous an ad- 
herent to King James could not be regarded without suspicion ; 
her means were scanty; her elder daughters had not then 
made the advantageous alliances which they afterwards formed ; 
and joyfully did she hail the vocation which she hoped would 
secure, to one of her children at least, a peaceful and tranquil 
existence, secure from any farther vicissitudes of fortune. 

But to one person the decision of the Lady Lucy Herbert 
was a matter of deep and unmixed sorrow. Her younger 
sister, the Laxly Winifred, loved her with all the devotion of 
a fresh and unpractised heart. They had been early separated 
from the rest of their family. At the period of their father's 
death, when their childish hearts had for the first time been 
made acquainted with grief, they had been thrown entirely on 
each other for support and consolation. 

Though $any years had now elapsed, the moment was still 
fresh in their memories, when their mother, in her mourning 
habit, with pale cheek and streaming eyes, delivered them over 
to the care of the friend who was to convey them to Bruges. 
The sad countenances and black garments of their sisters, and 
of the few domestics who still remained of their former esta- 
blishment, coupled with the vague, ill-defined feeling, half 
resembling fear, half shame, which children experience when 
they witness grief more intense than their young minds can 
comprehend, had left a deep impression upon both the youth- 
ful pensioners. When first they found themselves in the con- 
vent, with none but strangers around them, the timid Winifred 
clung instinctively to her sister; while Lady Lucy, forced, as 

COUNTESS OP N1THSDALE. S 

it were, to become the prop and stay of one younger and 
weaker than herself, acquired at an early age the habit of seek- 
ing strength and support from above. 

Loving and admiring her sister as did the Lady Winifred, 
it may excite wonder that she did not imbibe her strict re- 
ligious notions ; that she also should not have looked forward 
with joy to the idea of devoting herself to pious seclusion, and 
thus, at the same time, preserving the society of the being she 
most loved on earth. But it was not so. On the contrary, 
she felt her sister's vows as a barrier of separation between 
them. 

Although she had no wish to wander beyond the walls of 
the little convent garden, though she seldom even went to the 
parlour grate, and never wished to avail herself of the occa- 
sional opportunities which occurred to the pensioners of mix- 
ing in society, still she felt an instinctive horror of irrevocable 
vows, to renounce they knew not what. It was with a feel- 
ing amounting to despair that she witnessed the funeral rites, 
that she heard the service for the dead, that she saw the black 
veil dropped between her sister and the world, of whose pains and 
pleasures they could form no idea. Moreover, these vows for 
ever precluded the possibility of her seeing their native country 
in company with that beloved sister ; and in the heart of the 
Lady Winifred there existed the strong instinctive affection for 
the land of her forefathers, which the coldest and the most 
hardened are not wholly without, but which in minds of a 
more ardent temperament amounts almost to a ruling passion. 
She had never beheld the British shores, she had never breathed 
British air, and yet she felt as if England was her home her 
natural resting-place. 

When first the young girls had been sent to Bruges, an 
old and faithful servant of the name of Evans had accompanied 
them. She was a native of Wales, and had been born in the 
neighbourhood of the ancient seat of the Herbert family, 
Poole Castle, in Montgomeryshire. 

Loyalty to the family of Herbert had grown with her 
growth and strengthened with her strength, and was only 
balanced by the attachment to her country, which is generally 
more enthusiastic in the inhabitants of mountainous districts 
than of any other. 

The young girl had listened for hours together to old 
B 2 

4 WINIFRED, 

Evans's glowing descriptions of the cloud-capped Snowdon, the 
green mountains, the smiling valleys, the rapid streams, the 
wreaths of mist, all the varied beauties of her own Wales. 
From the windows of their convent they could descry nothing 
but the flat and uninteresting country which surrounds Bruges: 
but when the clouds formed themselves into a thousand fan- 
tastic shapes, old Evans would point out to them how one mass 
resembled such a mountain near their ancestral castle how 
another was the very picture of Snowdon when he wore his 
white cap of clouds, as she familiarly expressed herself. She 
would describe to them the peculiar customs ot Wales the 
snowy caps, the small black hats, of the women, would ex- 
patiate on the light form and airy step with which they trod the 
mountain paths would picture to them how beautiful were the 
white sheep dotting the soft green of the steep and swelling 
hills, till the youthful Lady Winifred's heart would burn 
within her to flee to the home of her ancestors. 

Nor, though Evans afterwards returned to her mistress, the 
duchess, when she established herself in England, did these im- 
pressions fade away. 

The nunnery was all composed of English, most of whom 
had been driven into exile by the adherence of their families 
to that of Stuart ; thence it naturally arose that all their ideas 
of prosperity, happiness, splendour and gaiety, were blended 
with the memory of England. These recollections also par- 
took of the colouring thrown around them by the joyousness 
of youth ; so that perhaps in no spot of earth had patriotism 
a firmer hold on the human heart than in the English Augustine 
convent at Bruges. There also did King James the Third, as 
he was ever styled, reign without a rival To every inhabitant 
of the convent was his cause endeared by the sacrifice of 
friends, of property, of rank, or of situation ; and all those 
whose age or disposition inclined them to hope, rather than to 
despond, looked forward with superstitious confidence to the 
time when " the king should enjoy his own again." 

It was an additional grief to the Lady Winifred that her 
sister's vows would prevent her ever witnessing die glorious 
restoration which was to take place at some future and un- 
known period ; and it was with a feeling of desolation keener 
than any emotion she had experienced since the grief of child- 
hood at her father's death, that she retired for the first time 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 5 

to her solitary apartment as one of the pensioners; while her 
sister her friend, her companion by day and by night was 
now a professed nun, immured within her narrow cell, and 
henceforward subject to all the rules and regulations of the 
order. 

The Lady Lucy's vocation had been so decided, and her 
only surviving parent's consent so unhesitating, that her 
noviciate had been shortened ; and it seemed to Lady Wini- 
fred a sudden and violent separation. 

During the next year, her thoughts, which could no longer 
be communicated as they arose in the hourly companionship of 
sisterhood, turned more frequently than ever towards her 
native land; her studies were all of the glorious deeds of 
England ; she read none but English poets ; she carolled 
none but English ballads ; and she hailed with joy the intel- 
ligence that her eldest sister, the Lady Mary, was united to 
the eldest son of Carril Viscount Molineux, and that an al- 
liance was in treaty between the Lady Frances and the Earl of 
Seaforth, for she hoped her mother might wish for her society 
when her sisters were honourably disposed of in marriage. 

Since she had taken the vows, the Lady Lucy had un- 
avoidably been not only less her companion, but moreover the 
constant practice of religious forms and exercises occupied her 
mind as well as her time. She was unable to sympathise with 
Lady Winifred : her lot was cast within her convent walls ; 
and she would have considered it a vain and sinful indulgence 
to let her thoughts wander towards scenes or pleasures, which 
she had renounced. At the age of fifteen, therefore, the Lady 
Winifred's mind had been thrown back upon itself ; and it 
gradually acquired a gentle reserve, a mild thoughtfulness, 
which suited well the cast of her features. The placid brow, 
and the full white eyelids, the rounded cheek, which, except 
when some sudden emotion called up an evanescent bloom, 
was pale as the white rose consecrated to the Jacobite party, 
were not calculated to strike at first sight ; but any one who 
had once looked upon her, could not choose but look again. 
The dove-like eyes, the lips so full of expression, the whole 
form so aristocratic in its mould, so feminine in its move- 
ments, so delicate, so fragile, all were rather like a poet's 
dream, than a being formed to encounter the chances and 
changes of this rough work-day world. Her slender throat 

B 3 

f) WINIFRED, 

gleamed white from the close, narrow mantilla of black silk 
edged with lace, which, according to the fashion of the time 
and country, was closely fastened down the front; her soft 
brown hair was smoothly parted off her brow, and tucked 
under the little white cap, enclosing the back of the head, 
which is still worn in the Low Countries, and which formed 
part of the dress of the young pensioners. 

The character, the countenance, the features, and the habit, 
all seemed in unison with each other. 

CHAPTER II. 

Hail, Childhood ! lovely age, In thy short race 

Too oft we know our only happy hour*. 
With what fond yearning later we retrace 

Each several step in thy sweet path of flowers. 
The spirit bounding wild, unknowing why, 
And still expectant of new ecitacy 
The little sorrows that to memory seem 
As 'twere joys undefin'd in some fair dream. 

UnpuUuked Poenu. 

ONE evening the Lady Winifred was alone in the small and 
simple apartment of which she was now the sole inhabitant ; 
the fading light had obliged her to relinquish her employ- 
ment, and she gazed through the narrow grated window as 
the sun sank behind the bank of purple clouds which, in low 
flat countries, so frequently accompany the decline of day. 
She thought on old Rachael Evans's descriptions of her home, 
and she remained lost in fanciful imaginings, conjuring the 
masses of vapour into the forms of mountains which she had 
never beheld, when she was roused from her meditations by 
the entrance of the sister porteress, who came to announce to 
her that a messenger from England had arrived, and to sum. 
mon her to the parlour grate. 

What were her joy and surprise at recognising old Evans 
herself, who, with a trusty servant, was sent to convey her in 
safety to London, where she would meet her mother, the 
Duchess of Powis, as she was called by all her immediate de- 
pendants, although the title conferred upon her husband by 
James the Second was not allowed to her son at the court of 
Queen Anne. 

COUNTESS CF NITHSDALE. 7 

The Lady Winifred listened with even fresh delight to all 
which Rachael Evans could impart respecting her family and 
her country, though she could not but express her surprise 
that her mother should so suddenly command her to her pre- 
sence. 

" Your lady mother may have her reasons,' replied the old 
woman, with a mysterious and important air ; " and it is 
likely his gracious majesty himself, (Heaven bless and re- 
store him to his own !) may also have his reasons for wish- 
ing you should not follow your sister's example. 

" The king ! He cannot surely take any thought of what 
my fate may be ! " 

"It is not for me to make so bold as to dive into a 
king's counsels ; but it would not be fitting for all the 
heads of noble Catholic families and true Jacobites to be in- 
termarrying with the daughters of crop-eared Whigamoors, 
as many of the young lords have done of late. If all the 
beautiful young ladies of loyal families were to take the 
veil, as the Lady Lucy has done, it would not be the better 
for the true cause. Your fair sister, the Lady Anne, is 
about to be married to the Viscount Carrington ; and there 
may be other nobles as great, or greater, whom King James 
may also wish to see attached to his cause, rather than 
withdrawn from it, by the lady whom they may chance to 
marry/' 

Lady Winifred was half alarmed at Rachael Evans's in- 
sinuations. Love and marriage were topics of conversation 
interdicted by the elder nuns, and subjects on which she 
had never wittingly allowed her thoughts to dwell. Yet she 
could not but collect from various expressions which Evans 
let drop, that some alliance, by which the Jacobite cause 
might be strengthened, was in contemplation for her. 

Her thoughts were all duty, submission, and obedience, 
both towards her mother and her king; but her pure and 
ardent soul recoiled from the idea of being condemned to 
love and honour one of whom she knew nothing. She 
questioned Evans more closely, and extracted from her that 
Colonel Hook had been despatched with credentials from the 
court of St. Germain's, for the purpose of ascertaining the 
situation, numbers and ability of King James's adherents in 
Scotland ; that he had reported the Earl of Nithsdale to be 

B 4 

g WINIFRED, 

a nobleman of much weight and consideration in me southern 
counties, and the head of a Jacobite family ; and that he was 
considered by the Chevalier de St. George as a person whom it 
was of great importance to attach firmly to his cause, by 
uniting him to a lady of undoubted loyalty. 

The Lady Winifred received this intelligence with tears 
and sorrow. The notion of resistance to the wishes of her 
superiors never crossed her mind as within the scope of 
possible events ; but the prospect which unfolded itself be- 
fore her seemed to her simple, yet ardent imagination, 
awful in the extreme. 

" Have you ever seen the Earl of Nithsdale ? " she timidly 
inquired, after the long silence which succeeded llachael 
Evans's developement of the views entertained with regard to 
her. 

" No, my sweet young lady," replied Evans ; " but you 
need not harbour a fear that he is other than a good and a 
noble gentleman. There never was a Whig nor a traitor 
among any of the Maxwells of Caerlaverock. Was it not 
his ancestor, the noble Sir Eustace, who was as true to 
King Robert Bruce, as your own blessed father was to his 
king ? and rather than that the enemy should have a chance 
of turning it into a garrison for themselves, did he not, 
with his own hands, assist in demolishing his fair castle of 
Caerlaverock ? The king gave him twenty-two pounds in 
money for this piece of service; and though that sounds 
little enough in these days, they say it was then thought 
a great sum of money. It was his ancestor, Lord Robert, 
who was killed at the battle of Flodden, fighting by King 
James's side. They always were a noble family, and true 
to their lawful sovereign. It was the first earl who spent 
all his princely fortune in the wars of King Charles the 
Martyr ; nor would he surrender his castles of Caerlave- 
rock and Thrieve, till he had received his majesty's own letters 
commanding him to do so. It may be a bold speech for me 
who am but a servant though, I am proud to say, a trusted 
one but I think a young lady should esteem herself honoured 
to ally herself with one descended from such worthy parentage." 

The Lady Winifred sighed : she also set a high value upon 
an honourable and noble lineage ; that a woman should match 
herself beneath her' station appeared to her a shameful degra- 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 

elation. The idea of a Jacobite intermarrying with a Whiga- 
moor was as revolting to her imagination as to Rachael 
Evans's ; yet she would fain have learned something more of 
her future husband's character, his age, and his appearance. 

" But, Evans," she replied, " it sometimes happens that 
persons of noble birth are mean and sordid in their minds, 
and such that it would be difficult to love and honour them, as 
a wife should love and honour her husband, and as I have heard 
you say my mother loved and honoured my father. Oh ! I 
could tell you a sad tale which one of our nuns has often told 
to me, how a friend of hers was married to a great duke, 
who was of the oldest and noblest family in France." 

" And was he not noble in mind, as such a great person 
should ever be ? " 

" I will repeat it all to you, as sister Margaret has so often 
told it to me, and you will not wonder at my fears : She 
was brought up in the same convent as Eugenie de St. Mesnil : 
they were friends from childhood ; and when Eugenie was 
removed to her father's house, previous to her betrothment, 
she begged that her friend might be permitted to accompany 
her. One morning they were all dressed in their most bril- 
liant apparel, sister Margaret says that poor Eugenie looked 
more like an angel than a woman, the relations were as- 
sembled, and in the adjoining apartment waited the notaries and 
the family of the bridegroom. The folding doors opened : 
sister Margaret kept close to Eugenie, who stole a fearfid 
glance towards the gentlemen at the farther end of the room. 
She whispered softly to sister Margaret * she only hoped it was 
not he who wore the blue and silver ! ' The future bride and 
bridegroom were now summoned to sign their names to the 
parchments. Eugenie advanced, and from among the gentle- 
men she indeed saw him who wore the blue and silver step 
forward, and it was he who signed his name with hers. Sister 
Margaret says, that to her dying day she shall never forget 
the expression of despair in poor Euge'nie's countenance. At 
that moment she resolved she would profess herself a nun ; 
and the very day which saw Eugenie become a miserable wife, 
sister Margaret returned to her convent. She was soon after- 
wards removed hither, that she might take the veil among 
others of her own country. Alas! alas] how often have 
1 wished to see my native land ; and now how much rather 

10 WINIFRED, 

would I embrace the fate of sister Margaret, than that of 
Euge'nie de St. Mesnil, if I could do so without failing in duty 
to my mother !" 

" My dear young lady, you should not listen to these love 
tales ; they are almost as bad for young people as reading idle 
romances and songs." 

The Lady Winifred could not suppress a smile. " Nay, 
dear Evans, I do not think my tale has been a tale of love," 
she replied. 

" I dare say sister Margaret's French friend was very happy 
after a while, when she became accustomed to the strange 
duke." 

" Alas ! I believe not " and the young Winifred shook 
her head. " Sister Margaret never would tell me any more of 
what befel her. She says poor Eugenie is at rest, and bids me 
ask no farther of her history. It was a very sad one, she 
always adds ; so sad, that she rejoiced when she heard of her 
friend's death ! " 

CHAPTER III. 

You call thi wrakncsi ! It is itrength, 
I ay ; the parent of all honest frcllng ! 
Who love* not hit country, cun love nothing. 

The Tiro Futcari. 

DEAR as her sister had ever been to the Lady Winifred, never 
had she seemed so dear as at the moment of parting from her 
for ever : never had she so loved the convent garden, which 
had hitherto been her only place of recreation ; the cloisters, 
through which she had so often wandered in the twilight ; the 
chapel, where she had so regularly joined her companions in 
devotion. It was with a sensation resembling awe, that she 
bade adieu to the tranquil retreat where she had passed a youth 
unruffled by any grief, if not enlivened by many pleasures, to 
enter upon a career which was destined to call forth feelings as 
pure and as ardent as ever informed mortal clay ; feelings 
which, whatever might prove their intensity in after years, 
now lay dormant under an exterior almost child-like in it* 
placidity. 

To her unpractised eyes every object was new, every sight 

COUNTESS OF NlTHSDALB. 11 

interesting. The very streets of Bruges were not familiar to 
her, for she had seldom passed the portals of the convent. 
The town appeared to her interminable. So many houses, 
with their high roofs and their pointed gables ; the innumer- 
able people, who hurried past each other in every direction, 
intent on business or on pleasure ; the various vehicles which 
crowded the streets ; all confused her, and she forgot for 
the moment the grief of parting from her sister, the joyful 
prospect of seeing her mother, her curiosity concerning her 
native land, and even her dread of the husband to whom she 
was destined. 

Uninteresting as was the country between Bruges and 
Ostend, she looked with pleasure at the fields so brightly 
green, at the hedgerows of willow, at the luxuriant crops ; at 
the industrious peasant who still toiled at his daily labour, or 
at the noisy boors who were enjoying the relaxation of their 
favourite game of bowls ; at the stout and active boys, who 
almost excited her mirth by their antics as they ran with 
incredible speed by the side of the carriage. 

The extreme flatness of the country prevents the traveller 
from becoming aware how near he is to the ocean, till he finds 
himself almost upon the shore. Though overpowered, her 
first emotion was mixed with disappointment. When stand- 
ing on a level with the sea, the eye embraces so much smaller 
a range than when placed on higher ground, that she did not 
receive that impression of its boundless expanse which she had 
anticipated. Yet the sight of the ocean awakened other emo- 
tions. She almost felt as if it were part of her native country. 
She had imbued and fed her mind with the history of Eng- 
land's glories of England's triumphs. She felt as if the 
waters were all tributary to the Island Queen ; she knew that 
the navies of England maintained the empire of the sea, and 
she hailed with a feeling of love and reverence the waves 
which washed the white cliffs of Albion the waves which 
bore the British fleets to conquest and to glory. 

It was not till on board the vessel which was to convey her 
to her long-loved though stranger home, and that the first 
surprise had in some degree subsided, that her thoughts were 
again able to dwell on her own future fate. 

After a long and thoughtful silence, she thus addressed 
Evans: 

J2 WINIFRED, 

" It would be impossible that a person who was good 
should fail to love her husband, would it not ? " 

" A woman's first duty, madam, is towards her husband." 

" Then I trust I shall assuredly love the Earl of Niths- 
dale," she replied with a brightened countenance; " for when 
my confessor parted from me, he bestowed on me this little 
crucifix, which was brought from Our Lady's holy convent at 
Einsiedlin, and giving me his benediction, he told me I had 
been ever a good girl, and that he felt confident I should 
prove myself a virtuous woman. I have felt happier from 
th^t moment ; for since Father Albert says so, I suppose I 
must prove virtuous, and fulfil my duties, whatever they may 
be." 

" I wish her grace, your honoured mother, were present," 
answered Evans, " to hear you speak so beautifully and so 
properly ! " 

" But if I should not love Lord Nithsdale, I shall be sin- 
ful !" exclaimed Lady Winifred with a look of terror. 

" Young ladies' minds should not be turned upon such 
subjects as love : it is a word which does not befit a maiden's 
lips," replied Rachael Evans, with an expression of severity 
in her countenance. 

The Lady Winifred was silent and abashed. She feared 
to have been unmaidenly in her questions, and she buried 
within her own bosom the emotions which she could not 
subdue. 

It was long before she again ventured to address her com- 
panion. She found that years had not softened the old 
woman's character. She was faithfully devoted to the objects 
of her loyalty the Herbert family, the exiled Stuarts, and 
after them the mountains of Wales ; she did not imagine that 
any doubts or scruples could lawfully interfere where duty to- 
wards either of the first-mentioned objects was in question. 

The Lady Winifred sat watching the waves as they dashed 
one after another against the side of the vessel ; she wondered 
within herself to find that the accomplishment of her constant 
and early wish the prospect of so soon setting her foot on 
British land should not give her more pleasure. She wished 
she had remained in ignorance of her mother's intentions re- 
specting her, and she felt a certain awe of that mother stealing 
upon her, from finding old Evans so much more s^rn and 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. IS 

serious than when she had parted from her. Since that period, 
Evans, who was a privileged person, had been entrusted with 
many of the secrets of the Jacobite party, and had occasionally 
been of service in conveying intelligence between the Duchess 
of Powis and her friends. She had consequently become more 
and more devoted to the cause, and would have resented any 
difficulty thrown in the way of a Jacobite plan as an injury 
offered to herself. She feared Lady Winifred might not 
blindly submit to the decrees of her mother, and she felt al- 
most displeased with her for even wishing to know to whom 
she was destined. But the Lady Winifred was so thoroughly 
imbued with the principles of submission and duty, that resist- 
ance to parental authority seemed to her impossible : yet her 
submission would have been that of a mind in which the sense 
of duty was stronger even than the warm and ardent feelings 
of which she in after life gave such signal proofs, not the 
submission of weakness or of indifference. 

At length the white cliffs of Albion actually greeted her 
eyes, and she once more forgot herself and all that might 
await her. What a strange and strong tie is that which binds 
the soul to the land of one's forefathers! Her heart went 
forth towards the very earth : strange as it was to her, it 
seemed familiar : and as the vessel glided up the stately river, 
and passed the ships which bore the riches and the arms of 
England to every region of the habitable globe, she exulted in 
the power and the wealth of her country. 

They passed the Tower of London ; and little did the fair 
young creature, who gazed with youthful curiosity upon the 
antique edifice, anticipate what she would one day endure 
within those walls ! Little did she think, when the Traitor's 
Gate was pointed out to her awe-struck and wondering eyes, 
that he in whom her own existence was wound up would one 
day mount those dreary steps, and pass that ominous portal. 

The duchess's coach was in waiting to convey the Lady 
Winifred to her mother's presence the Duchess of Powis 
having undertaken a journey to London purposely to receive 
her daughter : she usually resided in retirement at her son's 
castle in Wales. She did not wish to excite suspicion by 
openly refusing to attend the court of Queen Anne ; yet she 
could not bring herself to pay the accustomed homage ex- 
pected of one of her exalted rank, when, in truth, She was 

I }, WINIFRED, 

devoted to the cause of the Chevalier de St. George when 
she looked upon Queen Anne as an usurper, though, as many 
others at that time did, she looked upon her in the light of 
an unwilling usurper. 

Queen Anne was known to speak with kindness and pity of 
her exiled brother ; and she was not regarded by the Jacobites 
with the same horror they had entertained towards Mary, 
whose want of filial piety afforded her enemies a never-failing 
topic for eloquent invective. 

As the heavy coach, with its ponderous horses, conveyed 
Lady Winifred to that part of the town where the Duchess of 
Powis had for the time established herself, her feelings were 
too much excited to remark upon the long, muddy, and un. 
paved streets, which contrasted so strangely with the extreme 
brilliancy of the shops, and which usually called forth the 
astonishment of those who visited London for the first time. 

At length she was ushered into the presence of her who 
was at once a parent and a stranger. She knelt at her feet; 
it was her mother's hand which was placed upon her head 
it was her mother's voice which pronounced a blessing over 
her. The venerable lady embraced her, while a tear shone 
beneath her eyelid. She looked with tenderness upon her 
child her youngest child, but it was a tenderness mixed with 
reserve and with habitual stateliness. Her mind had been of 
late years turned to matters of secrecy and importance, and 
her countenance had acquired an expression which, while it 
did not amount to sternness, was nearly enough allied to it to 
awe her young daughter rather than to attract her. Her silver 
hair was parted smoothly from her forehead, while a black 
silk hood, from beneath which appeared a close cap of the 
finest lace, formed her head-dress. Her stature was tall, and 
remarkably erect. She moved and looked the daughter of a 
long line of ancestors the widow of the true and loyal Duke 
of Powis the mother of a race of nobles ! 

The Lady Winifred was presented to many of her relations; 
and to her sisters, the Ladies Seaforth and Carrington, and 
the Lady Mary Molineux. 

All were delighted with the timid and graceful girl, whose 
heart was so ready to receive them, as if she had ever been 
nurtured among them ; while the freshness of her mind, her 
wonder at all she saw, and her determination to love and to 

COUNTESS OF NITBSDALE. 15 

admire eveiy thing English, rendered her as interesting as she 
was attaching. 

The Duchess of Powis did not devote many days to making 
her daughter acquainted with her kinsfolk, but shortly set 
forth upon her journey to Wales; and at length the Lady 
Winifred's ardent desire to gaze on real mountains was likely 
to be gratified. In the agitations of the last few days, and 
the anticipated delight of visiting Wales, the destined husband 
had been forgotten. Her mother had not alluded to the sub- 
ject ; and with the natural buoyancy of early youth, she gave 
herself up to the enjoyment of the moment, and would not 
look beyond the present happiness. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Peace, brother, peace ! Speak not Inherently 
Of maiden bashfulness ; it were to slander 
The breath of morn the dew-drop on the bud 
The thousand, thousand evanescent sweets 
That mix in Nature's earliest incense. 

Unpublished Pocmt. 

FOR the first few miles of her journey every step of the way 
called forth from the Lady Winifred fresh expressions of de- 
light ; at every inequality of the ground, she inquired whether 
these were yet the mountains of Wales, although at the same 
time she would have been disappointed had she received an 
answer in the affirmative, for her imagination had pictured 
something far more wild and sublime. 

By degrees her questions became fewer, her exclamations 
less frequent. It was not that her wonder, or her delight, 
decreased ; it was not that her mother was unkind ; but there 
was no sympathy between the artless child, (for she was 
scarcely more than a child in experience,) and the aged and 
serious women, who had arrived nearly at the end of a career, 
in which they had witnessed the overthrow of the monarch to 
whom they were attached, the destruction of the religion they 
professed, and the blasting of the hopes of youth. All that 
remained of warmth of feeling in the Duchess of Powis was 
concentrated in the desire of once more seeing a Catholic king 
upon the throne ; all the energies of a lofty and commanding 
spirit were devoted to that one object. 

]6 WINIFRED, 

The innocent wonder, the simple delight ot* her young 
daughter, would have afforded to many a subject of pleasing 
interest : but her thoughts were upon weightier matters ; and 
to a person engaged in secret negotiations for the restoration 
of a dynasty, such artless graces possessed no charm. The 
Lady Winifred's personal attractions were such that there 
was no reason to fear the Earl of Nithsdale would not gladly 
fulfil the engagement which was desired by his king ; from 
the gentleness and duty of her child, no resistance to her 
wishes could be anticipated, and she was satisfied. 

The duchess journeyed with her own horses, and from the 
state of the roads in those days there was leisure during their 
progress for much reflection. By the time the dark blue out- 
lines of the mountains became visible, the Lady Winifred had 
learned to subdue her raptures, and to resume the staid and 
sober demeanour which had been usual to her in the convent, 
but which had in some measure given way under the excite- 
ment of her first arrival in England. 

When once established in the castle, of which Lord Powis 
considered his mother as the mistress, and where he himself 
only occasionally resided, the Lady Winifred found her life 
nearly as monotonous as it had been at Bruges. She had the 
pleasure of looking upon the beauties of nature, it is true; but 
it was only from a distance. The duchess would have con- 
sidered it improper and undignified for her daughter to have 
strayed beyond the terrace which surround ed two sides of the 
castle, or the pleasaunce, which, having been neglected during 
the years that the Herbert family passed in exile, now rather 
resembled a straggling orchard, and, although superior in 
extent, was very inferior in neatness and cultivation to the 
trim garden of the Augustine convent at Bruges. 

There were moments when the Lady Winifred looked back 
with regret to her convent life when she thought with 
painful tenderness of her beloved sister when she keenly 
felt the want of congenial companions. 

Her mother, serious and abstracted, would sometimes pass 
whole hours in unbroken silence. Seated in her carved arm- 
chair of black oak, with its high back and its velvet cushions 
she industriously plied her needle at the elaborate piece of 
carpet-work which had occupied her fingers, though not her 
thoughts, for the last twelve years ; while the Lady Winifred 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 1? 

as patiently toiled at the delicate embroidery, in the execution 
of which persons brought up in foreign convents are usually 
so skilful. 

An airing in the ponderous coach, through roads which 
would now be deemed impassable, constituted the only break 
in the routine of their life. 

But even then, there was no one to whom she might exclaim 
upon the beauties of the Dovey, the rich interchange of 
meadow and mountain, wood and fields of waving grain, or 
admire the more majestic glories of Cader Idris ; which, although 
inferior in height to Snowdon, strikes the eye as being more 
lofty, from its more abrupt and bolder outline. 

The daughter of Rachael Evans had been appointed as the 
personal attendant of the Lady Winifred, and notwithstandnig 
the difference in their birth, their condition, and their educa- 
tion, it was not long before the high-born Lady Winified 
Herbert discovered in the humble Amy Evans a spirit as 
simple, as ardent, as unsophisticated, as her own. 

Their young hearts warmed to each other. The want of 
sympathy in the other persons who surrounded her naturaliy 
led the Lady Winifred to an unconstrained communication 
with her waiting-woman ; which, had Amy's mind been 
stamped in a common mould, might have produced disrespect 
or familiarity, but which, with a soul so true, so frank, as 
that of the Welsh girl, inspired the enthusiastic devotion 
which subsequently proved invaluable to her lady. 

The Lady Winifred was one evening summoned from her 
walk upon the terrace, where she was calmly listening to the 
tinkling of the distant sheep-bells, and watching the sun as it 
gradually sank behind the blue mountains. 

It was Rachael Evans, whose tall and stately form ap- 
proached through the twilight. From the circumstances 
before alluded to, she had been associated with those in a 
class above her, till she had acquired manners, as well as sen- 
timents, beyond her station. She now wished to prepare the 
Lady Winifred's mind for the unresisting compliance to her 
mother's wishes, which she knew would be expected from 
her ; but she was too really well-bred ever to lose, in tin- 
freedom of the trusted companion, the respect due from & 
menial to her superiors while at the same time the affection 
she felt for one whom she had nursed in infancy, though it 

G 

18 WINIFRED, 

tempered the sternness of her character, was but secondary to 
her devotion to her lady, and the cause her lady had espoused. 

There was respect, affection, and decision in Rachael 
Evans's tone as she thus accosted Lady Winifred: "Her 
grace requests your presence in the oak-chamber, madam : 
she has matters of high importance to communicate to your 
ladyship. You remember, my dear young lady, what I once 
told you, that your honoured mother had chosen for you a 
gentleman of noble lineage and undoubted honour ; and I 
trust that my dear young mistress will show herself, as I 
know she is, a dutiful and grateful child." 

" Oh, Evans ! you do not mean that my mother is really 
about to speak to me of the gentleman you mentioned now ! 

this evening ? " 

The Lady Winifred clasped her hands and trembled. 

" Yes, madam, assuredly is she. And from whom can a 
young lady more properly receive the first intimation of her 
approaching marriage, than from her parent her only re- 
maining parent? But I thought I would prepare you for 
what you were about to hear, lest you should at first look 
strange upon her grace ; and you know full well that the 
lady duchess is not one of those who could brook an unduliful 
word, or a look of disobedience. Ever since his grace's death 

Heaven rest his soul ! my mistress has been used to rule 
everything ; and nobly has she contended with adverse for- 
tune, and well is she entitled to observance and respect from 
all around her ! " 

" Certainly, Evans. Full well do I know that it is the 
first duty of a child to honour and obey her parents : still 1 
cannot but feel uneasy and alarmed." 

"Compose yourself, my sweet child. I know you are 
dutiful, although somewhat timid. Do not linger on the 
way, but hasten to her grace ; she is in the oak-room, and 
see ! the tapers are already lighted. Hasten, lest the supper 
may be served, and her grace may not be pleased if you are 
absent." 

The Lady Winifred followed old Rachael's injunctions, 
neither did she venture to question her any farther. Though 
kinder and less stern than when she had formerly opened the 
subject, still Rachael's manner was firm and uncommunicative, 
and she feared to show a curiosity which might be deemed 

COUNTESS OP NITUSDALE. 19 

forward or unbecoming;. In ages and in countries where 
marriages are arranged and contracted by parental authority, 
love, whether lawful or unlawful, is equally treated as a feeling 
improper to be indulged. 

With trembling hands the Lady Winifred turned the lock 
of the high and massive door. The apartment was brilliant 
from the wax tapers in heavy silver sconces which illuminated 
it. The venerable lady was content to live in retirement ; 
but though she inhabited only a few rooms of the rambling 
old castle, in those she would not dispense with any of the 
state to which her youth had been accustomed. 

She was, as usual, employed upon her carpet-work. How 
many serious and lofty thoughts how many ambitious, proud, 
and melancholy feelings how many sad and tender recollec- 
tions how many aspiring and loyal hopes had passed through 
the mind of the noble embroideress, while her fingers had 
been employed in tracing the unconscious leaves and fruits ! 
if unrolled, it would have been to her as a journal of past 
thoughts and feelings ! 

The Lady Winifred gently closed the door behind her, and * 
timidly approached her mother. 

" I sent Rachael Evans to bid you hither, my child," said 
the duchess, as Lady Winifred stood before her : " be seated, 
Winifred ; I have much to say to you. I have just received 
a letter from your brother, informing me that he will be here 
to-morrow by mid-day, and with him the Earl of Nithsdale, 
who accompanies him from Scotland. He is a nobleman of 
undoubted loyalty and gallant bearing, and one to whom I 
shall feel proud and happy in committing the welfare of my 
child. He is to become your husband, my dear Winifred ; 
your king, your surviving parent, and your brother, have 
chosen him for you : so prepare yourself to receive him with 
such maidenly attention as may be fitting in one of your noble 
birth." 

The Lady Winifred answered not ; but the tears stood in 
her eyes, and at length flowed down her cheeks. 

" What mean these tears ? " resumed the duchess, when 
she observed them. 

" Oh, nothing, madam ; only the news is sudden, and I 
scarcely know " 

" You scarcely know what, my child ? " 
c 2 

20 WINIFRED, 

" I scarcely know how I should comport myself on such 
an occasion. Is he is the Earl of Nithsdale a person 
such a person is he a good man ? " the Lady Winifred fal- 
tered forth. 

" Assuredly is he. Does my daughter think I would wed 
her to a person who was mean in character a heretic, a 
coward, or a profligate ? No ; not even to fulfil the com- 
mands of my king would I peril the immortal soul of my 
child ! " answered the lady, with a proud reliance on her own 
integrity of purpose. 

" Oh, no ! my honoured mother, I never imagined such a 

thing : only " but she durst frame no other question. 

If in her secret bosom she wished to know whether he was in 
outward appearance, and in manners, such as might win a 
youthful heart, she scarcely ventured to acknowledge to her- 
self any anxiety upon subjects concerning which both her 
mother and Rachael Evans had appeared to consider it un- 
becoming in her to inquire. 

The Duchess of Powis presently resumed. " The young 
earl" (the word young was not lost upon Lady Winifred) 
" was at Bruges when your sister Lucy took the veil ; indeed, 
he has not been many months returned from Flanders. When 
there, he was fortunate enough to obtain a secret interview 
with our gracious king." 

" Did he indeed?" asked Lady Winifred with eagerness ; 
for the loyalty in which she had been nurtured invested every 
thing that appertained to the exiled monarch with interest in 
her eyes. 

" Yes ; it was when King James was serving in the King 
of France's army. His retinue, alas ! was scarcely equal to 
that of a private gentleman ; and his gracious majeaty was 
suffering so severely from ill-health, that he was shortly obliged 
to return to St. Germain's ; but he received the earl most gra- 
ciously, and accepted his homage and devotion. Colonel Hook, 
who has since been sent from St. Germain's to Scotland, has 
been for some time in communication with the earl, and it is 
through him that the king has expressed a wish that the loyal 
family of the Maxwells should form an alliance with that of 
the Herberts." 

The servant now entered to announce that supper was served, 
and the Lady Winifred offered her supporting arm to conduct 

COUNTESS OF ^NITHSDALE. 21 

her mother into the adjoining apartment, although perhaps at 
that moment the daughter more needed a stay to her footsteps 
than the parent, who was pleased and satisfied at the success- 
ful termination which she anticipated to the plans she had long 
been forming. 

The repast was silent. The Lady Winifred felt as if the 
gray-headed butler and the two serving-men must all be aware 
that she was a destined bride, and she blushed for the agita- 
tion which prevented her being able to touch any of the viands 
placed before her. 

It was the custom of the ladies to retire to rest soon after 
supper; and when the young girl had carefully folded and 
arranged all belonging to her mother's work, and had dutifully 
lighted her to her apartment, the duchess gave her a more 
tender and fondling embrace than was usual, according to the 
formal manners of the time, and the cold bearing of the person 
we have described. 

This temporary unbending on the part of the parent roused 
all the smothered feelings in the bosom of the daughter. 

" Give me your blessing, dearest mother," she exclaimed, 
with an emotion her mother had never yet witnessed : " Bless 
me before I leave you, and pray that I may make a good wife 
to the stranger I am to marry." 

" I do indeed bless you, my good child ; nor can I doubt 
that you will prove the virtuous wife that is a crown of glory 
to her husband. None of your race and lineage have failed, 
nor will you, my gentle daughter. Heaven bless you, and 
preserve you, my Winifred, to be an honour to your family 
and to your sex ! " 

Amy Evans was surprised, when her young lady had closed 
the door of her sleeping-apartment, to see her suddenly throw 
herself into a chair and burst into convulsive sobs. She was 
greatly alarmed, and prescribed such simple nostrums for 
hysterics as occurred to her. She knelt by her side ; she 
patted her lady's hands ; she bathed her temples with distilled 
waters. 

" I am not ill, dear Amy ! I shall be better in a moment ; 
but but, I am going to be married, Amy ! " 

" Indeed, my lady ! You do not say so ? I hope it is to 
a worthy gentleman." 

c 3 

22 WINIFRED, 

" Oh, yes : my mother says he is in every respect most 
worthy, and was almost angry with me that I could doubt it." 

" And is he young ? " 

" I think the word young escaped my mother's lips." 

" And handsome, I hope ? " 

" Nay, of that I know nothing." 

" How ! my lady, not know ? " 

" I have never seen him, and these are questions it would 
not have been fitting for me to ask." 

" Oh ! I thank my kind stars I am not a lady," exclaimed 
Amy, " to be married to some ugly old man one knows 
nothing of." 

" Alas ! is he indeed old and ugly ? Oh, Amy ! would I 
were an humble country-girl ! But," she added, after a mo- 
ment's pause, with a gentle dignity and firmness of resolve 
" but, being what I am, I must do that which my station 
requires. I must obey my mother, even though he may be 
as old and as disagreeable as you say." 

" Nay, my dear, dear lady, do not look so sad ! I know 
not that he is old and ugly ; I was only thinking it would be 
a sore trial to be married to some old stranger, when when 
" It was now Amy's turn to blush, and to look con- 
fused, for she was betrothed to the son of a tenant of the 
Duke of Powis's. " But with you, my lady, it is quite dif- 
ferent. Who knows but your future husband may prove as 
dear to you, as as David is to me?" she added, half- 
blushing, but half-smiling also, for her engagement was an 
acknowledged thing. 

" Perhaps you may have seen him, Amy ? He is a friend 
of my brother's, the Earl of Nithsdale." 

" No, my sweet lady, I have never seen him ; but the name 
is a marvellous well-sounding name ; so do not look sorrowful, 
but hope for the best If your lady mother has chosen him, 
and if your brother loves him, why should not you love him 
also ? " 

" And the king, Amy the king approves of him, and con- 
fides in him ; and the king wishes for this union ! " 

" His majesty !" exclaimed Amy with awe ; " then it must 
he right ! And yet,", she added, " I know not how it would 
fare with me, if the king was to send his commands from be- 
yond the seas, that David was not to be my husband, but that 

COUNTESS OF NITIISDALE. 23 

I was to marry some one he chose for me ! Ah, well ! it is 
all as it should be ! You are a lady, and I am a country 
maiden ; and it is all for the best ! " 

CHAPTER V. 

His soul is tost sweet hopes and doubts between, 
And you might almost 'mid these flutterings trace 

A dear assurance to be lov'd by her ; 
For silence is Love's best interpreter. 

He might, besides, as she drew near, observe 

O'er all her face a deep vermilion dye ; 
And short and broken, cneck'd by cold reserve, 

Her accents of condoling courtesy. 

Translation from the Italian qfPulci. 

THE morrow came. The Lady Winifred was pale, more pale 
than usual. Her hands trembled as she toiled at her many- 
coloured silks ; more time was spent in disentangling them than 
in embroidering. Her heart beat at every sound : she started 
every moment. But the duchess was in the habit of veiling 
all emotions under an exterior of imperturbable composure, and 
proceeded with the eternal carpet-work without making one 
false stitch, although she might feel some inward agitation 
at the prospect of presenting her daughter to her future hus- 
band, and some joy at that of seeing her son, who had been 
many months absent. 

Once or twice she turned her eyes upon her daughter, and 
secretly regretted that she seemed pale and languid, and she 
even fancied she could perceive traces of tears upon her cheek ; 
but she knew that the marriage was arranged, and she was 
certain that a shade more or less of beauty in his betrothed 
would not affect the ultimate success of the negotiations with 
the Earl of Nithsdale. She was confident that the Herbert 
family was too noble to be slighted ; and she doubted not that 
the gentleness and virtues of Winifred must attach her hus- 
band, even should her personal attractions fail to strike him 
at first. 

The Lady Winifred, meantime, thought not of her own 
appearance. She imagined that Lord Nithsdale was as inevi- 
tably bound to her as she was to him ; and her agitation at 
the notion of first beholding him, and her longing desire to 

c 4 

24 WINIFRED, 

see the brother, who was equally a stranger to her, swallowed 
up all personal feelings. 

The apartment already described as that usually inhabited by 
the Duchess of Fowls was a corner room, and was lighted by 
windows on two sides. Lady Winifred habitually established 
herself in one of those which looked towards the east ; it com- 
manded the most extensive view ; and, moreover, when gazing 
in that direction, her thoughts o'erleaped the space lnlMa 
and wandered towards the friends and playmates of her child- 
hood. From the other, to the south, could be seen the ap- 
proach of travellers from some distance. If her brother only 
had been expected, probably she would have placed herself so 
as to command a view of the road, but now she scarcely ven- 
tured to turn her eyes that way : she sat with her face bent 
low over her frame, almost breathlessly listening to every 
sound. 

The castle clock struck three. The Duchess of Powis 
wondered her visitors had not yet arrived. She desired her 
laughter to look out towards the southern entrance, and tell 
her whether she saw any one approaching. 

: < Yes, madam ! " answered Lady Winifred, in a voice 
scarcely audible. 

Well, my child, whom and what do you see ? " 
toU fhere we four horsei en, madam, riding quickly up the 

" Then I imagine we may order dinner to be served ** an- 

the ' 

Av,, t K 

mfred sunk on the window-*.!, while her era 
d,zzy she could arcely distinguish .nythin/ fw 
vague indistinct recollection of si. ter M.rgaref. French 

f co'nf d* 1 ^"' '?* ( ' he h ~ in Wue 
-a confused thought of Amy's exprewion, ' old nd 

ran hrough her brain -when her motherW her r 

the 

COUNTESS OF MTHSDALE. 25 

called, the Duke of Powis, advanced to his mother, and having 
kissed her hand, was folded in her maternal embrace ; while 
Lady Winifred, having risen mechanically from her seat, stood 
pale and immovable behind her. 
" My sister ? " inquired the duke. 

" Our dear Winifred," replied the duchess ; and, to her utter 
surprise and confusion, the Lady Winifred suddenly found 
herself embraced by a bluff, gay, honest-looking man, who 
was indeed her brother. 

" And now, my lady mother, you must allow me to present 
to you my friend and companion, the Earl of Nithsdale, who 
has been my host for the last three weeks, which I have passed 
with him at Terreagles." 

The Earl of Nithsdale, who had hitherto kept in the back- 
ground, now advanced with a graceful and respectful bow to 
make his obeisances to the duchess, who then presented him to 
her daughter. 

The Lady Winifred, startled by her brother s greeting, 
blushed rosy-red. Lord Nithsdale bowed still lower than to 
the duchess, and for a moment gazed upon the fair young thing 
before him, but as quickly withdrew his glance ; for, with the 
nice feeling of a refined mind, he perceived, although her eyes 
were not for one moment raised from the ground, that she 
quivered beneath his gaze. 

The parent might have been satisfied with the personal at- 
tractions of her daughter at this moment. The surprise and 
the excitement had summoned a bloom that gave her all the 
brilliancy which at times she might require. The extreme 
purity of her expression, and bashfulness of her demeanour, 
suited well with the embarrassing situation in which she was 
placed. 

The mid-day repast was announced. The duchess was 
handed by Lord Nithsdale ; while the Duke of Powis gave 
his arm to his shrinking sister, who, shy and trembling, scarcely 
ventured to slightly touch it, alarmed to find herself on so 
familiar a footing with any man, even though a brother she 
who had scarcely spoken to one of the other sex, except good 
Father Albert. 

Had the soft innocent eyes of young Winifred never yet 
been raised ? Had she not yet beheld the face of her future 
lord ? When first the door had opened, she had stolen a fur- 

2(5 WINIFRED, 

live glance had seen enough to convince her that the person 
who accompanied her brother, if indeed he were the Earl of 
Nithsdale, was neither old nor ugly. But from that moment 
forward they had been riveted to the ground. 

The dinner was dull and constrained how should it have 
been otherwise ? Though the Duke of Powis exerted himself 
to the utmost, and told many lively anecdotes concerning his 
exploits when deer-stalking in the Highlands, or salmon-fishing 
in the Lowlands, his unassisted efforts could not succeed in 
sustaining the conversation. The venerable duchess was always 
stately in her manners : she had lived almost entirely out of 
the world, and had none of the small talk of the day. Lady 
Winifred, of course, could not be expected to speak. Lord 
Nithsdale, although he had read much, travelled far, and al- 
though he had seen much of the world in general, felt that in 
his situation, also, light and flippant conversation would be out 
of season ; and upon subjects of nearer interest, of deeper 
anxiety, whether personal or political, they could none of them 
touch while surrounded by attendants. 

When, however, they adjourned to the plcasaunce, they were 
able to communicate more freely. 

The Duke of Powis imparted to the duchess all that Colonel 
Hook had told them of the Chevalier's hopes and fears ; of all 
the promises of assistance which were held out to him by Louis 
the Fourteenth ; of all the pledges of devoted attachment to 
the cause which he had received from the various nobles and 
lairds of Scotland. 

The Earl of Nithsdale qualified his friend's hopeful view of 
the case, by mentioning the divisions which, in consequence 
of Colonel Hook's mismanagement, had arisen between the more 
zealous partizans, including the Dukes of Athol and of Perth, 
who were for at once receiving the king without any conditions, 
and the Duke of Hamilton, the Earl Marishal, and others, who 
adopted more moderate principles. 

The Lady Winifred cowered close to her mother ; but once 
or twice, attracted by the deep, low, earnest tones of his voice, 
as he feelingly deplored these disunions, which he feared might 
prove the destruction of all their hopes, she found her eye* in- 
voluntarily turn towards the speaker ; and once once only 
he surprised them fixed upon him. 

Confused and shocked at herself, she hastily withdrew 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 2? 

them, and from that instant found herself, all loyal Jacobite 
as she was, totally incapable of listening to the chances of 
success which attended the plans in agitation, but wholly 
occupied in wondering what must have been the Earl of 
Nithsdale's impression of her boldness, in having ventured 
thus to gaze upon him, and fearing he must necessarily have 
formed a very unfavourable opinion of her. 

This was a great change! She was little aware herself 
that the subject of her anxiety had so completely shifted its 
ground, from the impression he might make on her, to that 
which she might make on him. 

The Lady Winifred found the young Amy awaiting her 
with impatience in her chamber. " I have seen him, my 

dear lady I have seen him !" she exclaimed with eagerness; 

and if he is but as good as he is comely, why there is no 
harm in leaving it to one's king and one's parents to choose 
for one. I am so overjoyed to think my dear mistress may 
be as happy as she deserves to be ! for you never could have 
been happy, my lady, if they had married you to such a 
husband as I had fancied in ray own mind. But you do not 
look half pleased, madam ! Think you he is not so worthy 
a gentleman ? " inquired Amy with a tone of alarm. 

" Oh, yes, Amy ; I do not think any one with such a voice 
could be other than most excellent and most gentle ! ' 

" And it seemed to me, madam, as he was walking in the 
pleasaunce, that he had the goodliest eyebrows ! so black, 
and so straight! And yet he did not look as though he 
were stern." 

"I believe not; but indeed I scarcely ventured, I was 

fearful lest " 

" And then every time you turned at the end of the broad 
walk, he bowed with such grace and respect to your ho- 
noured mother, it did one's heart good to see ; for it seemed 
as though he would make a dutiful son to her, as well as a 
good husband to you." 

" Oh, Amy ! I cannot think it possible he should ever be 
my husband." 

" Why, 1 thought, madam, he was come here on purpose." 

"He never can think of me, I am sure ! so wise, so noble as 

he is! And I who know nothing, and have seen nothing- 

I never can make him a wife such as would be worthy of him !" 

28 WINIFRED, 

" And if you are not worthy to match with any earl, or 
duke, or prince in the wide world, my lady, I do not know 
who is good, sweet, gentle, beautiful, and noble as you are!" 
exclaimed Amy, with a burst of enthusiasm which almost 
resembled indignation at her lady for undervaluing herself. 

" Oh, no ! Amy, not beautiful ! I never thought before 
how much more beautiful my dear sister Lucy is than I am !" 

*' Nay, my dear, dear lady, I have often heard my mother 
say the Lady Lucy may be taller, and may have more colour 
in her cheeks, but that for real beauty her features are not 
near equal to yours ; and as for the Lady Carrington, or the 
Lady Mary, or " 

" Stop, stop, Amy ! I must not listen to such flatteries ! 
What would Father Albert say, if he knew I was listening 
to such sinful vanities as praises of personal beauty, and that 
I was listening to hear myself preferred before my sisters ? 
Oh, no ! It is not thus I may make myself worthy of him 
who is to be my lord, if indeed he can condescend to such as 
I am." 

" Oh, my sweet mistress ! you are only too good. Bear 
with me, my lady, and I hope in time I may learn to be 
something like you. But indeed it hurts me to hear you 
speak so humbly and so sadly : I am sure that every time 
you dropped behind, I saw the earl slacken his pace, and 
steal a look to see if you were there." 

" Did he, indeed ? " said the young Winifred ; but, checking 
herself, she added, "but now I will to my prayers. Alas! 
I wish Father Albert were here ! I feel as if I had much 
need of confession, and of ghostly counsel ; and yet I do not 
know what sin I have committed which seems to weigh so 
heavily upon me. My mind is bewildered. It is so very 
long since I have confessed ! I wonder what Father Albert 
would say ! " 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 29 

CHAPTER VI. 

His affection was of a very extraordinary alloy, a composition of conscience, 
and love, and generosity, and gratitude, and all those noble affections that raise 
the passion to its greatest height. 

Clarendon's Life. 

ON the following morning, after some private conversation 
between the duchess, her son, and the Earl of Nithsdale, the 
Lady Winifred was summoned to the oak-chamber, where 
her mother formally taking her hand, placed it in that of the 
earl. They both knelt before her to receive her blessing ; 
and though as yet they had never addressed one word to each 
other, they rose from their knees, their faiths mutually 
plighted. 

Such marriages have often been contracted, and sometimes 
they may have proved as well assorted as those in which the 
choice of the individuals has been more consulted ; but it has 
seldom occurred that hearts have so sincerely acquiesced in 
the vows dictated by others as on this occasion. 

The Earl of Nithsdale was approaching the age of thirty. 
He had visited Paris, he had travelled in Italy, he had passed 
some time in Germany. There was a singularity in the eye- 
brows, whose darkness had already attracted Amy's notice, 
and the clear but melancholy blue eyes which they shaded, 
in the pale complexion, and the expression of sadness about 
the mouth, which had proved irresistible to many a foreign 
fair one. He had often won unwooed the hearts of those 
Parisian belles, who were not devoted to the dreary court 
decorum prevalent during the reign of Madame de Main te- 
non ; while many of the more glowing beauties of Italy had 
absolutely courted the favour of the young Englishman, and 
many a sentimental German seemed ready to yield her heart, 
almost before he could lay siege to it. 

In his early youth he had not failed to profit by the ad- 
vances which were thus made to him ; but his was not a 
character which could long find pleasure in such conquests. 
He had an innate preference for virtue and purity ; his dis- 
position was naturally enthusiastic and contemplative. The 
gay, the thoughtless, passing attachments to which we have 
alluded, were not in unison with his mind. The sprightly 
Parisian was too volatile to make any lasting impression on 

SO WINIFRED, 

such a heart, the Italian too little refined, the German too 
easily won ; so that, though he had passed the first flush of 
youth, his real affections were still unhackneyed. 

He had accidentally found himself at Bruges when the 
Lady Lucy pronounced her vows, and was one of the assembly 
who crowded the church to witness the ceremony. Lady 
Winifred had been pointed out to him among the convent 
pensioners, as being sister to the young nun ; and he had then 
remarked upon the innocence and purity of her countenance, 
and had thought within himself how much more attractive 
was such an expression than all the graces and fascinations 
which are meant to allure. 

If there is any foundation of virtue in the heart of a roan, 
the more he has been thrown with the less respectable part of 
the sex, the more he has been exposed to their allurements, 
the more highly does he prize entire innocence when he meets 
with it, and the more strict is his line of demarcation between 
the modest, and those in whose conduct there may be any 
touch of levity. It might almost be taken as a touchstone of the 
original disposition, whether or not, through all the errors into 
which man, when tempted, is liable to fall, he yet preserves a 
quick perception of genuine purity, and also retains a taste 
and a veneration for it. Whatever may have been his aber- 
rations, there is always hope that such a one will return to 
the path of virtue. 

The Earl of Nithsdale, however, was not one who had ever 
been completely carried away in the vortex of dissipation. 
He had still cherished within his mind an ideal model of per- 
fection, which had preserved him from yielding up his affec- 
tions to any of the fair creatures who fluttered around him. 
He had always resolved that the woman to whom he should 
unite himself should be pure as the unsunned snow, with 
mind, soul, and affections fresh and unpolluted. 

It was, therefore, willingly that he entered into the alliance 
urged by the agent of his master a master towards whom 
he inherited loyalty with the blood which flowed in his veins, 
and to whom, since his interview with him in Flanders, he 
felt additionally bound by every tie of romantic honour. 

Lord Nithsdale had sought that interview with all the feel- 
ings of enthusiasm naturally inspired by the circumstance of 
the young prince so gallantly entering the King of France's 

COUNTESS OP KITHSDALE. SI 

army. He was then saddened at the appearance of ill-health 
visible in the Chevalier, and he was disheartened by per- 
ceiving how poorly he was attended. These facts, unpro- 
mising as they were, affected his hopes of success, but they 
did not lessen the interest he felt for the royal exile. The 
divisions among the Chevalier's adherents, consequent upon 
Colonel Hook's imprudent neglect of the more moderate Ja- 
cobites, who were not prepared rashly and unconditionally to 
yield the hard-earned liberties of their country into the hands 
of a restored monarch, portended, to a person who was not 
of a sanguine temperament, the ill-success which attended 
the attempt of 1707, but it did not for a moment affect his 
allegiance. 

This despondent, yet devoted loyalty threw over his whole 
demeanour a tinge of melancholy, which was calculated to 
render him only more interesting in the eyes of a young girl; 
and she soon learned to watch with anxiety the varying ex- 
pression of his brow, and to hail with joy the smile which 
her presence invariably called forth. 

His affection for her was a mingled feeling of almost pa- 
rental care and protection, with a punctilious respect, excited 
by her innocence and her noble birth. 

She had been brought up to honour and to obey ; and the 
love to which she gladly and dutifully yielded every faculty 
of her soul, evinced itself in a thousand actions of almost 
filial reverence. She was unaccustomed to the common atten - 
tions mechanically granted by the other sex, and unconsciously 
received by those who have lived in the world ; and he some- 
times smilingly checked her when she stooped for her own 
roll of silk, or performed for herself and others a thousand 
little services, which, in former days especially, were exacted not 
only from a lover, but from all gentlemen towards all ladies. 

When, however, they occasionally found themselves alone, 
a circumstance of rare occurrence, then her instinctive inborn 
nobleness and modesty made her for the time assume, un- 
known to herself, the dignity of demeanour befitting one of 
her rank and station. She was no longer the timid and af- 
fectionate girl, only watching to forestall the wishes of him 
to whom she owed duty and allegiance ; but the high-born 
damsel, whose gentle purity was more awful in its simplicity 
than the frown of another. 

32 WINIFRED, 

The novelty of such a character the contrast it afforded to 
those which he had previously met with the unusual mixture 
of perfect confidence in her entire affection for himself, and 
of perfect certainty that a few weeks would make her his 
wedded wife, with the fear of alarming the shrinking bash- 
fulness of one nurtured in such utter seclusion, the disirv 
of winning the unreserved confidence of a creature accus- 
tomed to reveal the secret workings of her innocent soul to 
her confessor alone, and the pleasure of gently insinuating 
himself into her heart of hearts, gave a new and singular 
character to this courtship. His own soul seemed to grow 
fresh, young, and pure by the study of hers. He enjoyed 
once more all the simple tastes and pleasures of childhood, 
which had long ceased to charm him ; and he hailed with as 
much delight, as in some cases a lover would the confession of 
reciprocal affection, any detail of the youthful amusements of 
her convent life which he could succeed in luring her to 
describe. 

It was seldom, however, that she spoke herself. She loved 
to sit in her own accustomed and retired seat, apparently oc- 
cupied with her embroidery, while she gave up her whole soul 
to the rapture of listening to his voice, and of drinking long 
draughts of the new and absorbing passion which it was be- 
come her duty to feel. If, as not unfrequently happened, he 
addressed himself to her, and asked her opinion, her feelings, 
upon the subject which might be under discussion, she started 
as from a reverie ; and unless it was one which touched upon 
some matter of morality, of religion, or of loyalty, she could 
give no opinion, for in truth she had none. She listened for 
the pleasure of hearing his full, sweet, mellow voice ; of 
learning his sentiments ; and of sometimes stealing an occa- 
sion of dwelling unobserved upon the countenance, which, in 
her eyes, beamed with all that was noble and intellectual. 

On the day preceding that on which the marriage ceremony 
was to be performed by a Catholic priest in the chapel of 
Poole Castle, the Duchess of Powis gave her daughter some 
of the sage maternal counsel which was to fit her to become a 
virtuous wife, and the head of a noble household, at a period 
when the duties of housewifery really devolved upon the 
mistress. 

" Be seated, my dear Winifred, and listen to me attentively. 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 33 

You are now about to enter upon a mode of life entirely new 
to you ; you will have no one to guide and direct you." 

*' Oh ! madam ! think you my lord is likely to be called 
away from me so soon ? " 

" No, my child ; it is not on that account I speak, unless 
indeed our gracious master should carry his proposed landing 
into effect ; in such a case you would not be a degenerate 
daughter of the house of Herbert, but you would wish your 
husband to be among the first who flock to the standard of 
our rightful sovereign. But though no such paramount duty, 
to which all others must yield, should call him from your side, 
there are many points connected with your household arrange- 
ments in which you must act and judge for yourself. Of 
course, should any circumstance occur on which there should 
be a diversity of opinion between yourself and your husband," 
(the Lady Winifred looked up in her mother's face with an 
expression of unfeigned astonishment,) "remember, Wini- 
fred, that on such occasions it will be your duty to submit, 
whether your reason is convinced or not." 

" Is it possible ? " 

" Is what possible, my child ? " 

" Is it possible, madam, that I should ever hold an opinion 
contrary to my lord's ? " 

" Such things have occurred," resumed the duchess, while 
a transient, almost imperceptible smile passed over her lips. 
" When you have lived more in the world, you may perhaps 
acquire wishes and sentiments of your own. Should subjects 
of dispute arise " 

"Oh! madam!" 

" Remember, it is the wife's duty to yield ; and remember, 
that a soft word turneth away wrath." 

The duchess had proceeded so far with her advice, because 
she had ever deemed it right thus to admonish each of her 
daughters before they entered into the marriage state, when 
the Lady Winifred exclaimed with tears in her eyes 

" Oh ! my dearest mother ! surely you have not seen in 
me any signs of wilfulness ! Heaven knows my heart is all 
submission towards him to whom it has pleased you and my 
sovereign to unite my destiny. Heaven is my witness," she 
added, clasping her hands, "that I honour him that I re- 
vere him, (saving yourself, madam, and Father Albert,) se- 

34? WINIFRED, 

cond to nothing under Heaven ! And to-morrow, mother 
to-morrow, I suppose, I may honour him first of all created 
beings!" She turned her soft and tearful eyes to Heaven 
with an expression of such enthusiastic, such sublime devotion 

though the devotion was not at the moment all religious, that 

the duchess looked upon her for a space in mute astonishment. 

" You are a strange girl," at length she said ; " so silent, 
so reserved, and yet so ardent:" and the mother, who had 
been too much occupied with other thoughts to study the real 
character concealed under the gentle, unobtrusive deportment 
of her child, was surprised and perplexed at this unexpected 
burst of feeling. 

After a pause she resumed. " And there is another thing 
which I have never failed to impress upon your sisters, which 
is, that however exalted may be a woman's rank, however ample 
her husband's fortune, she should not disdain to be the diligent 
housewife as well as the high-born lady. I have in this small 
clasped book a collection of family receipts, which I wish you 
to study carefully, and which you will find of infinite service. 
They descended to me from my grandmother, her grace of 
Somerset ; and our family have always been renowned for our 
almond comfits and our spiced cakes. Amy Evans can assist 
you, for she has learned to compose these condiments under 
our faithful Rachel." 

The Lady Winifred with gratitude and humility received 
from her mother's hand the small green book with silver clasps 
which contained these valuable documents. The duchess 
continued : " In uniting you to one of the Maxwell blood, I 
need scarcely fear for your principles of loyalty. There can 
be no doubt that, born of the Herberts, and married to a 
Maxwell, you will live and die true to the king of your ances- 
tors. And now, my dear child, may a merciful Providence 
grant that, firm in the faith in which you have been brought 
up, you may live a virtuous, if not a happy life, and that you 
may die the death of the righteous ! " 

The Lady Winifred knelt ; and her mother baring thus 
advised her upon conjugal, economical, political, and religious 
subjects, kissed her fair child's forehead, and they retired to 
rest. 

The next day witnessed the vows of the betrothed pair ; 
and they shortly afterwards took up their abode at the Earl of 
Nithsdale's castle of Terreagles, in Dumfrieshire. 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 35 

CHAPTER VII. 

The realm from danger to secure, 

To foreign aid we cry ; 
With papists and non-jurors join 

To keep out popery. 

IN the mutual affection which subsisted between herself and 
her lord, the Countess of Nithsdale would now have enjoyed 
happiness, as perfect and as unalloyed as mortals may look for 
here below, had not the public affairs of the time been to both 
a subject of deep interest and anxiety. 

The party of the Chevalier de St. George was strong in 
Scotland. The people in general were disaffected to the govern- 
ment in consequence of the Union : a measure against which 
many signed a protest, which was presented by the Duke of 
Athol ; and a measure which, in the eyes of many Scotchmen, 
appeared contrary to the honour, interest, and constitution of 
their country, the birthright of the peers, the privileges of the 
barons and boroughs, and to the claim of right, property, and 
liberty of the subject 

While such feelings tended to produce discontent among all 
orders, the regular troops, under the Earl of Leven, did not 
exceed 2500 men, many of whom upon the landing of the 
Chevalier would most probably have joined him. The castle 
of Edinburgh was destitute of ammunition ; and if it had sur- 
rendered, the Jacobites would have found themselves masters 
of a considerable sum of money. 

The King of France, with the view of making a diversion 
from the Netherlands, and of occupying Queen Anne with 
disturbances at home, had granted considerable assistance to 
the Pretender. A squadron was assembled at Dunkirk under 
the Chevalier de Fourbin, and a body of land forces was 
embarked under M. de Gace : James was furnished with 
services of gold and silver plate, sumptuous tents, splendid 
liveries, and all sorts of necessaries, even to profusion. Louis 
had presented him with a sword studded with diamonds, and 
had repeated to him the same words with which he had dis- 
missed his father, that the kindest wish he could express 
towards him was, " that he might never see him again." 
D 2 

36 WINIFRED, 

The Scottish nobles but awaited the moment of the Cheva- 
lier's landing to rise simultaneously in his favour: though 
outwardly all was quiet, they were on the tip-toe of expecta- 
tion, when the active measures taken by Queen Anne, the 
vigilance of Sir George Byng, who intercepted the squadron 
before it could reach Edinburgh, and the wind, which pre- 
vented its ever arriving at Inverness, rendered vain all their 
hopes and fears. 

The Chevalier, after having been tost upon the seas during 
a month of tempestuous weather, returned to Dunkirk ; ami 
Sir George Byng sailed up the Leith road to Edinburgh, for 
the purpose of receiving the freedom of the city which he had 
delivered from impending danger. 

Thus ended the Chevalier de St George's first, and almost 
ridiculous, attempt to recover the throne of his ancestors. 

To the Earl of Nithsdale this period had been one of no 
common anxiety : he was too well aware of the dissensions 
which Colonel Hook's imprudence had produced among the 
Chevalier's most faithful partisans, to feel confident of the 
result under any circumstances ; and he knew that till the 
king was actually in Scotland, and was himself a rallying 
point for all his adherents, nothing but mischief could accrue 
from any movement among his friends. He had therefore so 
conducted himself as to escape the notice of .government : his 
disappointment was great when he found that a moment, in 
many respects so favourable for the Jacobite cause, had been 
allowed to escape; but far greater was his mortification at 
rinding the monarch to whom he had devoted himself could be 
so easily persuaded to return to dependence on the court of 
France ; and his fears for the future affected him still more 
deeply than his vexation at the failure of the present attempt. 

His young wife also grieved at the dispersion of their 
cherished hopes; but to her, the object of real and deep 
anxiety was her husband. Sometimes, when, with folded 
arms, he would gaze vacantly upon the blazing fire, his dark 
hrows knit, his lips compressed, his mind absorbed in sad re- 
trospections and melancholy forebodings, the unread book 
would fall upon her knee, or the needle drop from her hand, 
as she watched the expression of his face. On one occasion, 
when he. caught her eyes thus fixed upon him, a kind but 
passing smile illumined his countenance ; and addressing her 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 3? 

with the low and mellow voice which first made her maiden 
heart his own, <c My gentle Winifred," he said, " you have 
exchanged a calm and peaceful home, beloved and cheerful 
friends, the sister of your affections, and all the joyous care- 
lessness of youth, for an unsettled country, a troubled land, 
and a gloomy husband who hates himself, dearest, when he 
thinks his thoughtfulness and his abstraction can cast a shade 
of care over that smooth ami tranquil brow " 

" Oh my dear lord ! " she exclaimed, as she looked up at 
him, her eyes half filled with tears. 

Lord Nithsdale continued, " Or that his moody silence 
can bring tears into those dear eyes ! " and seating himself 
beside her, he pressed her slender hand in his. 

" It is not his silence, but my beloved lord's kind words, 
that have brought tears into these foolish eyes. I can scarce 
believe that one so far above me in wisdom and in knowledge 
one whose mind is engrossed by subjects of such moment, 
can take so much thought for such an ignorant child as I am. 
I often regret my convent education ; for I feel, my lord, that 
I can be no companion to you ; and in these times especially, 
when " 

" Wish not yourself other than you are, my love ! It is 
that purity, that heavenly innocence, that confiding simplicity, 
which render you in my eyes so immeasurably superior to all 
the far-famed beauties of this, or any other land. What are 
their charms, their wit, their talents, their learning, their 
acquired attractions, to that pure blush which even now 
mantles my own sweet Winifred's cheek, to hear her praises, 
though from a husband's lips ? " 

And Winifred was happy ; for she found that in truth her 
unobtrusive affection, her gentle cares, could alone dispel the 
gloom which hung over that beloved husband. 

Time, however, changed the nature of his regrets. Lord 
Nithsdale's clear understanding could not fail to perceive that 
his country was quiet, prosperous, and glorious under the rule 
of its present monarch; and the doubt would cross him 
whether it were the act of a true patriot to favour the preten- 
sions of one who must necessarily overturn much of what 
tended to promote that prosperity. 

Still, was he not by birth a Jacobite ? a Catholic ? and 
therefore bound from motives of religion to support a Catholic 
D 3 

38 WINIFRED, 

claimant to the throne? Moreover, had he not, in his 
romantic interview with the Pretender, pledged himself per- 
sonally to his service ? It was too late to retract ! If any 
attempt were renewed in his favour, he could not but join in 
it. Yet the consciousness of being bound in honour to a 
cause of which his reason could not thoroughly approve, op- 
pressed him with a sense of care almost of guilt. 

He was a man who wished strictly to act as honour and as 
duty might dictate, and he was not carried away by eager 
hopefulness, or by ambition, or by passion. He saw and 
balanced so nicely the reasons and arguments on both sides 
that he was apt to be dissatisfied with himself; sometimes to* 
think he was guilty of a dereliction of duty towards his lawful 
sovereign, when his clear judgment forced upon him the 
thriving condition of his country; at others, to feel that he 
was perhaps ready to sacrifice the real good of thousands to 
ms own private notions of personal honour. 

The Lady Nithsdale, with never-failing gentleness soothe 
these wayward feeling,, if wayward ,hey 5 be caT^hi* 
were so natural to a conscientious man in time, such u those 
treat of. She would chase away hi, gloom bjr ~ 

Wend. 

COUNTESS OF XITHSDALE. 39 

occupied : affection is called into action ; it is not allowed to 
drop into a slumber, which sometimes ends in lethargy. The 
enduring love of wives to wayward husbands, the exceeding 
fondness of some husbands for capricious wives, may thus 
be accounted for. How natural was it, then, that an anxious 
and thoughtful temper, produced by conscientious scruples, 
devoted loyalty, romantic honour, and disinterested patriotism, 
should concentrate upon her husband every feeling of a soul 
which, like the Countess of Nithsdale's, was made up of duty 
and of tenderness ! 

The imprudent boldness with which many Jacobites pro- 
fessed their principles and their attachment to the Pretender 
was to Lord Nithsdale a source of much vexation. The 
Duchess of Gordon sent the faculty of advocates a silver 
medal, representing on one side the Chevalier de St. George, 
and on the reverse the British islands, with the motto " Red- 
dite." The duchess was thanked for having presented them 
with a medal of " their sovereign lord the king;" and a con- 
fident hope was expressed that her grace would soon have an 
opportunity of offering them a second medal, struck upon the 
" restoration of the king and royal family, and the destruction 
of usurping tyranny and whiggery." 

This whole proceeding was afterwards disowned by the 
faculty, and by a solemn act they declared their attachment 
to the queen and the Protestant succession. But such un- 
called-for boldness, such weak retracting of daring imprudence, 
in the opinion of Lord Nithsdale, augured ill for the cause 
to which he was bound. Such conduct could in no wise 
forward the hopes of his master, and it only served to keep 
the country in an unquiet and disturbed state. 

He disapproved of the measures of his party; and con- 
sequently he kept himself somewhat retired at Terreagles, 
associating more with his immediate neighbours than courting 
political connexions. With the Earl of Derwentwater alone 
he kept up a constant and confidential intercourse. They 
together deplored the infatuation of some of their friends : in 
loyalty and patriotism each found in the other a spirit con- 
genial to his own. 

Lord Nithsdale's visits to London, or to Edinburgh, were 
rare; and no change occurred to mark the lapse of years, 
unless we may note that which took place in the bearing of 
i) 1 

40 WINIFRED, 

Amy Evans. She was still, as before, high in her lady's 
favour, who regarded her more in the light of a confidential, 
though humble friend, than merely as a waiting-woman. 
Indeed, Amy in her childhood had been admitted as play- 
fellow and associate to the daughter of an old cavalier who 
resided in the neighbourhood of Poole Castle, and from her 
youthful intercourse with Mrs. Mellicent Hilton, she had 
acquired a tone of feeling somewhat superior to those in her 
station of life. 

Lady Nithsdale could not but remark that the laughing 
eyes which once sparkled with merriment were now dull and 
spiritless, and that the ruddy cheek had lost its bloom. When 
she sought the chamber where her maidens were employed at 
their needle, she no longer heard the clear voice of Amy, who 
used to enliven the light labours of her companions with the 
ditties she had learned in her childhood. Her gay laugh no 
longer pealed cheerily on the ear. Lady Nithsdale attributed 
the change which had gradually stolen over the demeanour of 
her dear Amy Evans to her separation from her lover. 

" You are sad, dear Amy," she one day remarked to her ; 
" but I think I have news that will call up the bloom on 
those pale cheeks, and I shall hear your old Welsh songs 
carolled with fresh glee. The farm of Hetherstone is vacant 
now, and my lord proposes that David should become his 
tenant; and then I suppose I must make Jeannie Scott my 
'tirewoman ! " 

" Alas ! my gracious mistress, not unless your ladyship is 
weary of the services of poor Amy Evans. 1 trust that I can 
still diligently ply my needle, and that I can arrange your 
ladyship's head-gear with as neat a hand as Jean Scott at the 
least." 

" Nay, you have been a diligent and careful servant to me, 
Amy, and I shall love to see you as careful and diligent a 
wife ; and when I visit you in your home, I shall once more 
see your merry eyes sparkle as they used to do." 

' No, madam, those days are gone by for me. You shall 
ever find me a true and faithful servant, but I shall never be 
a wife." 

" And what will David do without a housewife to see to 
his dairy, to bake his bread and his bannocks, and to trim hit 
hearth, and keep all neat and seemly around him ? " 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 41 

" He needs not me for a housewife, madam : he has found 
one, more to his taste, these six months back. He was mar- 
ried, madam, last Lammas-tide ;" and, though her hands 
trembled, she still proceeded in the composition of the spiced 
comfits which her lady had come to overlook. 

" Oh ! my poor Amy ! And is this true ? Can men really 
be so false ? " 

" Indeed can they, madam. And I am not the first girl 
who has been slighted : they all tell me so ! But I always 
held myself high ; and it is no comfort to hear how, when his 
wedding morning came, Donald M'Rae was nowhere to be 
found ; or how Jockie Smith deserted Kate Armstrong, after 
he had broken a gold piece with her ; or how Mary Morrison 
pined herself to death for the loss of Jamie Elliot. But I am 
not one to pine myself to death ! David's wife shall never 
hear that Amy Evans had so mean a spirit ; no, she shall 
hear of me cheerful, and contented, madam. And why should 
I not be so, when I have such a good, kind lady, whom I 
love better ay, better than I once did David himself!" 
And now the tears rained fast from her eyes, whicli Nature 
seemed to have intended should only express sprightliness and 
warm affection. " But, I beseech you, madam, speak not to 
Jean Scott or to Annie Bell of my griefs. They have never 
yet seen me weep, and I would not have them know that 
David's falsehood had wrung tears from me. I shall not 
feel it so much after a while, my lady ! And when all is said 
and done, where could I ever be so happy as with my kind, 
my honoured mistress ? So you will never say anything more, 
my lady, of making Jean Scott your 'tirewoman ?" 

" Oh no ! dear Amy ; I should never, never like any one 
about me so well as you ! " 

" I thought so, my lady ; and I told Jean Scott I was sure 
you would never turn me off, though she prides herself so 
upon her taste, and the nimbleness of her fingers, and is 
always throwing out that the time will come when she will 
have my place ! " And Amy was half consoled for the loss of 
David, when she had ascertained that she retained the same 
hold on her mistress's affections. Since the blight which had 
fallen on her first and early love, she valued the favour of her 
lady above all other earthly goods, and watched over it with 
the jealous tenderness of a lover. 

42 WINIFRED, 

Her secluded education, and her own early marriage to so 
Honourable a man, had prevented the Countess of Nithsdale's 
having ever witnessed, much more having ever experienced, 
the caprice and infidelities of the other sex. She had heard 
and read of them, as of matters undoubtedly true, but as never 
likely to come under her own immediate cognizance ; and she 
was astonished at Amy's treating a lover's desertion of his 
mistress as an event of common occurrence. She wondered 
still more that pride should, in a low-born country maiden*a 
heart, almost overbalance the more instinctive feeling of love. 
That a noble damsel should resent any slight was indispens- 
able to her birth and breeding ; and the proud blood of the 
Herberts mantled in her cheeks at the mere imagining such 
a case. But she thought, had she been lowly born, pride 
could never have sustained her under BO cruel a blow. She 
forgot that, in all ranks alike, each feels the eyes of his equals 
upon him, that the lowest, as well as the highest, have their 
world, before whom to blush is degradation. 

It was not that the gentle Lady Nithsdale was haughty in 
her nature ; the affection which subsisted between herself and 
Amy sufficiently proved the contrary ; but as she was imbued 
with the divine indefeasible right of kings, so was she with the 
innate inherent nobility of an ancient family. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

The virtue of her lively looks 

Exceli the precious stone, 
I with to have none other books 

To read or look upon. 

The modest mirth that she doth use 
Is mixed with shamefacedness. 

Attributed to Lord Aoetybnf, 

Anne Boltyn't brother. 

ALTHOUGH they differed widely in politics, the Duke of MonU 
rose was one of the persons whom Lord Nithsdale looked 
upon as a true patriot, and a young man of great promise. He 
was the grandson of the great marquis, and had been by Queen 
Anne lately raised to the dignity of Duke of Montrose. 

The family of the Earl of Nithsdale was, through Douglas, 
Earl of Moreton, nearly connected with that of the duke ; and 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 43 

also, through the marriage of Lord Nithsdale's sister, the Lady 
Mary Maxwell, to the Earl of Traquhair, with that of his 
young duchess, the Lady Christian Carnegie, daughter to the 
Earl of Northesk. 

This double connexion had assisted to foster a friendship, 
which the opposite tendency of their political opinions might 
otherwise have prevented from attaining maturity; and con- 
sequently, when the young Duke of Montrose first brought 
his fair bride and cousin into Scotland, he failed not to present 
her to a family with which they were mutually connected. 

The duke was a zealous supporter of the Protestant succes- 
sion, and was at that period high in favour with Queen Anne. 
His youthful wife had shone as one of the most brilliant stars 
at her court ; and gay, lovely, and volatile, she had not failed 
to adopt the style and manners then in vogue ; she was 
esteemed the most modish lady about the court ; the furbelow 
of her petticoat was no sooner seen than it was copied ; her 
commode attracted all eyes, the jaunty air of her hoop was 
envied by all the sex, and she no sooner appeared in one of 
the small muffs which we sometimes see represented in pic- 
tures of the time, than all the muffs about town were cut in 
half. 

She enjoyed the admiration she excited, as was natural to 
one who was aware, though not vain, of her powers of fasci- 
nation ; and there was a grace in her harmless coquetries, and 
a joyous good-humour, a frankness, piercing through the court 
airs, which had become as it were second nature to her, that 
took captive the hearts of all. 

The young duchess would sometimes rally Lady Nithsdale 
on her antiquated notions, her housewife-like avocations, her 
retired habits; she would try to persuade her to follow the 
fashion of the day, and would urge her to taste with her the 
exciting pleasure of being swiftly borne by a spirited steed 
over hill and vale, dell and dingle: but Lady Nithsdale, un- 
accustomed to such exertions, would shrink from the very 
idea, and trembled when she saw her fair friend mounted on 
her palfrey, and, dressed according to the mode which has 
excited the indignation of cotemporary writers, dash from the 
hall-door like an arrow from the bow ; then, turning gaily 
back, laugh at her timid cousin's fears. Her hair, which was 
suffered to hang at some length on her shoulders, was loosely 

44 WINIFRED, 

tied by a scarlet riband, which played like a streamer behind 
her ; her small hat was edged with silver ; her dress was of 
green camlet embroidered with the same material ; and a 
cravat of the finest lace completed the toilet of the tltgant? of 
the year 1711. The horse, as though it were proud of so 
fair a rider, seemed to share in her vanity : he was adorned 
after the same airy manner ; and tossed and shook his pretty 
head, as if he despised the silken rein which hung loosely 
upon his neck. 

Lady Nithsdale watched the party of equestrians as long Ml 
they continued in sight ; and Amy, whose blighted hopes en- 
abled her to give her undivided affection to her lady, and her 
undivided thoughts to her dress, had not allowed this oppor- 
tunity to escape of enlarging her notions upon the subject of 
the prevailing mode. Presuming upon her favour with her 
mistress, she had stolen away from Annie Bell and Jeannie 
Scott, and glided to the oriel window of the hall, that she 
might see the great London bride in her new-fangled garb. 

" By my troth, madam, but her grace is very fair, and 
wears a goodly dress, and mounts a jennet such as might befit 
a lady in one of my old ballads !" 

" Yes, Amy," replied Lady Nithsdale, " the dress is 
strange, but graceful, and well does it suit my gay and 
sprightly cousin : yet she must have a marvellous good cou- 
rage ; I think I never could mount any horse, much less a 
pawing prancing steed such as delights her grace. It is 
strange thus to peril one's life for pleasure ! " 

" And yet, my lady, such a close-fitting jaunty coat as that 
would right well set off your ladyship's slender waist. Trust 
me, madam, but I should like to have the curling of your soft 
brown hair, and the shaking in a thought of powder, (her 
grace's maid showed me the powder-puffs they use now,) and 
the making it just hang in such ringlets as my lady duchess's." 

" Nay, Amy, such flighty doings are not for me !" 

In the evening, when the company were sipping their cho- 
colate, and the servants were preparing the ombre-tables, the 
lively duchess again rallied the Lady Nithsdale upon her taste 
for staying at home. 

" Now we will put you upon your trial," she said, playfully 
tapping her with her fan ; " and you, my lord duke, and the 
Earl of Nithsdale himself, and Sir Hector M'Gregor, and Mr* 

COUNTESS OF N1THSDALE. 45 

M'Kenzie, and my fair cousin Crawford of Kilbirny, and 
young Mistress Rose Scott of Murdiston, shall sit in judg- 
ment, and pronounce whether I have not passed a more pro- 
fitable morning than our demure hostess there ! Now stand 
forth, Countess of Nithsdale, and answer the truth, the whole 
truth, and nothing but the truth !" 

The Lady Nithsdale smiled, while the slight colour mounted 
to her cheek, at being called into notice ; but she professed her 
willingness to submit to the verdict of so goodly a tribunal. 

" After our morning meal," resumed the duchess, " which 
I grant you was somewhat to the credit of the housewife 
there was no fault to be found with the bannocks, nor with 
the saffron-cakes, nor the honey, nor the marmalade, nor the 
Finnan haddocks, nor any of the other delicacies for which 
our good land of Scotland is renowned, after this meal, 
what were my lady countess's avocations !" 

" Even such household duties as your grace must needs 
attend to when you reach your own castle of Kincarn. I 
visited the 'still-room, and gave the housekeeper directions for 
making of some mint-water, and some julap, and other simple 
medicines, which the neighbouring poor are used to procure at 
the castle. And, moreover, this is the season when the dis- 
tilled waters for the year must be made ; the elder-flowers 
and the roses are all in bloom." 

" Oh, stop, my dear countess ! This last employment was 
most vain and useless ! for who could endure such homely 
scents ? It is impossible now to use anything but orange- 
flower water ; so you have indeed mis-spent your time most 
shamefully ! Now you, by your own confession, did only one 
thing at a time, while I cultivated my mind and improved my 
beauty at one and the same moment. I studied Locke on the 
Human Understanding, while my woman curled my hair; after 
which I read two chapters on the properties of the loadstone, 
and I would fain have studied the mathematics, only my 
wicked lord" and she shook her fan at the duke "would 
not give me the lesson he promise^." She put on the pret- 
tiest pout of her ruby lips, while her gay eyes laughed through 
their fringe of eyelashes, as she looked down her cheeks with 
a mock air of pettish anger ; then raising them suddenly on 
the duke, she continued in a reproachful tone, " You know, 
my lord, you would not wish your wife to be quite out of the 

46 WINIFRED, 

fashion ; and every lady now talks of the mathematics, and 
speaks but in words with a Latin derivation ; and I will 
learn these things too, in spite of you ! " 

The duke looked upon her with delight and love, while he 
replied, " Learn of our fair hostess how to make a sack- 
posset, Christian ! " 

" Not unless your grace will teach me the mathematics ! 
Now promise, and it shall be a bargain, and I will let you 
kiss my hand upon it." 

The duke most gladly availed himself of her permission 
to imprint on the fair hand she extended more than one kiss. 

"Nay, you are too bold! "she added, withdrawing her 
hand suddenly, and frowning for a moment, while she ex- 
pressed a pretty anger in the eloquent language of the fan, 
by quickly opening and shutting the sticks so as to produce 
a somewhat sharp noise. ' But, my lord duke, you interrupt 
the trial. Silence in the court! The Lady Nithsdale had 
not made an end, when I, to my shame be it spoken, some- 
what rudely interrupted her. Proceed, fair countess." 

" I visited my children for a while, and then I practised 
to my new spinet some of the songs your grace showed me 
last night ; for my lord loves sweet sounds so well, that he 
will sometimes listen to such poor music as I can make." 

" That is well. But now, fair countess, how did you pass 
your time while I, having duly attended both to my under* 
standing and my person, now took heed to my health, by 
galloping in the clear fresh air, many and many a mile, over 
sweet heath and thymy downs?" 

" Why, after seeing my maidens at their embroidery, I 
wrote and despatched a letter to my dear sister Lucy at 
Bruges." 

" Useless ! still vain and useless ! If your letter had been 
addressed to some court lady, who might have informed you 
in return of what colour was Mrs. Masham's new hood, and 
whether the queen had yet adopted the fashion of my last 
commode, and whether her grace of Marlborough had yet 
left off the philomot-coloured petticoat of which we are all 
so weary, well! But what news can your devout sister 
send you from her dull convent?" 

"Nay, your grace is jesting now! Every word that 
comes from Bruges, and tells me of the dear, dear friends of 
my childhood, is precious to me." 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 4>7 

" I can well believe it," replied the duchess with a winning 
frankness ; " for dearly do I love a letter from old Eupheme 
Stuart, the sister of our minister at Ethy ; and I would often 
rather sit and con over her prosy epistle, than dress myself 
for a court-ball. But you know, Lady Nithsdale, that all 
other considerations must give way before our loyalty to our 
monarch." 

" Most true, your grace," answered the Lady Nithsdale, in 
a tone of voice which showed she thought of the " king over 
the water," while the volatile duchess watched her with a 
laughing and malicious countenance. 

"Oh, my dearest countess!" she exclaimed, "do you 
know you have patched yourself in the most factious manner ! 
For Heaven's sake, remove that shocking patch on the wrong 
side of your face ! it might lead to much mischief. It is an 
old saying, that extremes meet ; and they say that some of 
the discomfited Whigs are even now plotting with the Ja- 
cobites. This is a season when it behoves every one to be 
most discreet in such tokens of their sentiments, and your 
imprudent patching might bring suspicion on your good lord.'* 

" Does your grace speak of the mole on my right temple?" 

" Is it indeed a mole ? I pray your pardon, dearest 
cousin. But this is very sad ! quite a misfortune ! Do you 
not know we all of late express our political opinions after 
this fashion ? You may perceive I always wear a patch on 
the left side of my chin, to evince my loyalty." 

" If such be the case, my loyalty is born with me, and 
cannot cease but with my life ! " replied the Countess of 
Nithsdale, whose feelings were so strong and so devoted she 
could not jest or banter on the subject. 

"Treason! treason!" exclaimed the duchess: "we shall 
have to put you on your trial for still higher crimes and mis- 
demeanours." 

" A prisoner cannot be tried for two offences at once, and 
your grace has not brought the first accusation to an end," 
interposed the Earl of Nithsdale, somewhat anxious to give 
the conversation another turn. 

" To tell the honest truth, my lord, I thought the evidence 
seemed likely to go against myself, and I was not sorry to 
drop the prosecution. We will let judgment go by default .' 
Is that good law, my Lord Privy Seal, for you should un- 

48 WINIFRED, 

derstand these matters ? " she continued, turning to her hus- 
band with an air of mock solemnity. 

" You are a mad-cap, Christian ! " replied the duke, who, 
while he half attempted to repress her lively sallies, listened 
to them with pleased amusement, and, like the mother of a 
spoiled child, looked round upon the company to see if they 
also did not applaud her wit and grace. 

In truth, though she was somewhat the spoiled child of 
fortune, no one could wish her other than she was. What in 
another would have been frivolous or impertinent, in her was 
graceful and most fitting. She was in the vein for playful 
malice, and with an air of mock penitence replied, " Well, 
then, my lord, I will be most staid and serious. I will not 
play one single game at ombre to-night, but I will sit by my 
gentle cousin's side, and learn of her to ply my needle as good 
housewives and virtuous matrons should;" and seating herself 
on a low stool in the window, she fell to sorting and choosing 
shades of silks, till she had confused and mixed them all. 

" I must look at you, fair cousin," she added suddenly, 
" to learn how I should begin ; but methinks you have not 
chosen your colours with that taste which all admire in what- 
ever else you do. Surely a white rose on that pale blue ground 
lacks contrast : a red rose, or a tulip, or a peony, would better 
please the eye ; a white rose is, to my mind, but a mean and 
insipid flower," she added, with a sidelong glance at Lady 
Nithsdale. 

" In my eyes it is the fairest flower that blows," replied 
the countess. " This stool is for my mother ; and well may 
the white rose be dear to the widow, and the daughter, of the 
Duke of Powis!" 

"Well, may it be dear, for it has cost you dear, or rather 
it might have cost you dear, had it not been for our gracious 
sovereign's clemency in restoring to your brother his estates, 
Now own, sweet coz, that never was Old England so great or 
so glorious as she is at present ; our navies triumphant, our 
armies crowned with laurels, our commerce flourishing, our 

colonies prospering, our negotiations successful Anything 

else, iny lord duke ? for 1 often hear a recapitulation 'of our 
glories, and I ought to know them by heart" 

" Nay, dearest cousin, I do not understand such things ; 
but I know full well that adverse fortune cannot loose us from 
our allegiance." 

COUNTESS OF NITHSPALE. 49 

" Nay, nay, constancy to a falling cause is treason, not alle- 
giance ; for you know 

' Treason doth never prosper. What's the reason ? 
That when it prospers, none dare call it treason.' " 

<e Methinks, if any are guilty of treason, it is not those who 
through weal and through woe, through danger and distress, 
at the risk of their fortunes and their persons, preserve their 
fidelity to the king of their ancestors ! " 

The Earl of Nithsdale turned a warning glance upon his 
wife, whose feelings had for a moment outrun her prudence. 
The blood rushed into her face ; her eyes filled with tears. 

" Nay, dearest cousin, you are moved. Forgive my giddy 
bantering, and trust me, that whether Whig or Tory, Pro- 
testant or Catholic, Jacobite or not, I love you dearly ; and if 
ever there should arise occasion to prove it, you shall not find 
your cousin Christian Montrose wanting :" and she threw her 
arms around her neck, and embraced Lady Nithsdale with a 
warm-hearted frankness which caused their playful dispute to 
draw still closer the bonds of affection between them. 

Although the earl would not have denied his attachment to 
the exiled family, he wished not to be unnecessarily forward 
in expressing his sentiments. He respected the sincere pa- 
triotism of the Duke of Montrose he did him the justice to 
believe that it was from firm conviction that he was so stre- 
nuous a supporter of the Protestant succession ; and it was 
no matter of surprise to him when, two years afterwards, 
the duke retired from the ministry, rather than support the 
Earl of Oxford in measures of which his conscience did not 
approve. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Wigton's coming, Nithsdale's coming, 
Carnwarth'g coming, Kenmure's coming, 
Derwentwater and Foster's coming, 
Withrington and Nairne's coming: 

Little wot ye who's coming, 

Blythe Cowbill, and a's coming. 

The Chevalier's Muster-roll. 

THE queen's health was now declining; and Lord Nithsdale, 
in common with many others of his party, looked forward to 
the chance of a peaceable restoration of the Stuarts. 

50 WINIFRED, 

His impartial judgment acknowledged that, under the rule 
of Anne, England enjoyed a more than common measure of 
prosperity; and though she was not the rightful heir, still it 
was Stuart blood which ran in her veins. He augured, from 
her silence upon the address of both houses of parliament, 
urging her to press the Duke of Lorraine and her other allies 
to exclude the Pretender from their dominions, and from her 
open disapprobation of the Elector's sitting in the house of 
peers, as Duke of Cambridge, or even taking up his abode in 
England, that her secret inclinations were in favour of her 
brother. 

All these considerations combined to render Lord Nithsdale 
unwilling to disturb the tranquillity of his native land ; and it 
was with satisfaction that he found month after month rlippo 
without his being called upon to sacrifice either the peace of 
his country, or the principles of loyalty in which he had been 
brought up. 

The moment, however, came at length, in which conflicting 
duties made it difficult for the most conscientious to preserve 
a fame untarnished, or so to conduct themselves as that their 
motives should not be liable to misconstruction. If in times 
comparatively settled, when loyalty and patriotism may and 
ought to go hand in hand, it is difficult for public men to 
steer clear of suspicion, we should not be too severe on those 
who were exposed to trials, and placed in difficulties, from 
which all are now happily exempt. 

Queen Anne died : and it might have afforded a lesson to 
both the claimants to her throne, that she, under whom this 
country had ranked higher in the scale of nations than at any 
previous period of its history under whom the British arms 
had been crowned with unexampled success under whom no 
British subject's blood had been shed for treason that " good 
Queen Anne," the mild and merciful, sank a victim to mental 
anxiety, a martyr to the harassing dissensions of her ministers 
and of her confidential friends and favourites. But when was 
such a lesson of any avail ? The prize was sought by both 
parties with unabated ardour; and Lord Nithsdale's hopes 
that the title of King James the Third might be acknowledged 
were quickly blasted. 

The Duke of Montrose, true to the Protestant cause, has- 
tened to Edinburgh, there to assist in the proclamation of the 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 51 

Elector ; and the Jacobites lost no time in communicating with 
the Pretender. 

Both pity and indignation had been roused in the Earl of 
Nithsdale's bosom, when, upon the queen's death, the King 
of France intimated to the Chevalier that it was expected he 
would immediately quit his territories and return to Lorraine ; 
and when, on the other hand, the King of England refused an 
audience to the minister of Lorraine till the unfortunate exile 
was removed from his master's dominions. 

That the descendant of a long line of monarchs should thus 
be hunted from country to country that the lawful sovereign 
of one of the fairest realms of Europe should not have where 
to lay his head, overcame all other considerations ; and it was 
with zealous passion that he joined himself with the Earls 
of Mar, Carnwarth, Kenmure, and the other most ardent 
Jacobites. It was the generous impulse of compassion for 
the injured, indignation, reckless of the consequences, which 
prompted his conduct, rather than hope of seeing their efforts 
crowned with success. 

While others were elated at the unpopularity of the king, 
whose foreign language, manners, and habits were not cal- 
culated to please the multitude, and who, by the favour shown 
exclusively to the Whigs, had indisposed the Tories, with 
whom lay the great mass of landed property ; Lord Nithsdale 
perceived that the new monarch was determined, spirited, and 
active. While others relied on the secret assistance which 
Louis the Fourteenth, notwithstanding his engagements with 
England, afforded to the Chevalier ; Lord Nithsdale was con- 
vinced, from the effectual measures taken to defeat them, that 
the Chevalier's designs must be by some means communicated 
to the government: and, in truth, the Earl of Stair, the 
English ambassador at Paris, found means to discover, and 
transmitted to his own court, all the plans and intentions of 
the Pretender while yet in embryo. 

Not many months after the king's accession, some tumults 
and riots took place, which tended greatly to raise the spirits 
of the more sanguine ; and even to Lord Nithsdale himself 
seemed to augur well for the ultimate result. 

Those who celebrated the king's birth-day were insulted ; 
while on the following day, which was the anniversary of the 
E 2 

WINIFRED, 

Restoration, the whole city was illuminated, and its streets 
re-echoed with the sounds of mirth and rejoicing. 

The government, aware that the spirit of disaffection was 
making considerable progress, adopted measures of some 
severity towards the Scottish Jacobites ; they resolved that all 
who were in any degree liable to suspicion should be sum- 
moned to appear at Edinburgh, and there required to give bail 
for their peaceable behaviour. 

The Earl and Countess of Nithsdale were one evening on 
the bowling-green of their castle of Terreagles, watching the 
gambols of their children ; the little Lord Maxwell, a stout 
bold boy, was exerting all his might to drag one of the garden- 
seats up the steep grass bank. He had turned it upside down ; 
had stuck in it a tall staff, with a handkerchief for its streamer; 
and having christened it " his gallant vessel the Royal James," 
had laden it with all the bowls and bowling-pins he could find 
scattered upon the grass. 

The parents for the moment forgot the disputed succession 
to the throne, the claims of James the Third, the dangers 
which beset their country, the perils which awaited themselves 
lost in the pride and delight of watching the eager spirited 
boy, whose sun-burned cheek was flushed with the exertion, 
every muscle called into action, every sinew strained, as by 
turns he pushed and dragged, and shoved his unwieldy play- 
thing. 

" He is a brave boy, is he not, my lord ? " exclaimed 
Lady Nithsdale, looking into her husband's face, her eyes 
beaming with maternal pride ; *' he will not bring disgrace 
upon the Maxwells ! Methinks he may one day fight as gal- 
lantly for his king and country as his ancestors have done 
before him !" 

"God bless him!" ejaculated the earl; and he turned 
half away, ashamed of the emotion which suddenly surprised 
him. 

At that moment a servant approached, and delivered to him 
the summons issued by government, requiring his attendance 
at Edinburgh, there to offer bail for his good behaviour, under 
pain of being denounced a rebel. 

"Winifred, my love, the decisive moment has arrived," 
said Lord Nithsdale, turning to his lady with a sad, a serious, 
but a determined air. " I am here ordered to Edinburgh a 

COUNTESS OP N1THSDALE. 53 

summons I cannot and will not obey. I am henceforward a 
rebel to the existing government. The die is cast. Alas ! 
alas ! for this poor land ! Let the event be what it may, ruin 
and desolation must fall on many. Blood must flow! the 
blood of our countrymen! Winifred, it is an awful thing 
to take the first step which must inevitably lead to civil war!" 

" Nay, nay, my lord, if our gracious prince but sets foot 
upon his native land, all loyal hearts will at once acknowledge 
him. Was not his uncle's restoration bloodless ? and was not 
the public mind less prepared for such an event than at the 
present moment ? Oh, think more hopefully, my dear, dear 
lord ! The ' rose of snow' will be triumphant yet !" 

The earl shook his head sorrowfully. " I cannot join in 
the sanguine hopes of those who think this matter can be 
brought to a speedy termination. I tremble, Winifred, nay, 
do not look at me as though you scarcely believed, and yet 
blamed me," he continued, with a smile, in which there was 
little mirth, " I tremble for my native land : God knows I 
honestly and sincerely wish for its welfare. During the just 
and mild reign of the late queen, it would have gone hard with 
me to have assisted in any disturbance, for her people were 
happy ; but now, when a stranger and a foreigner persecutes 
my rightful sovereign when he is driven, like a hunted beast, 
from one land to another when all the persons of note in the 
country are prosecuted, banished, or disgraced when my 
honoured friend and cousin, the Duke of Ormond's name and 
armorial bearings are razed from out the list of peers, his 
achievement as Knight of the Garter taken down from St. 
George's Chapel, no, it is not in mortal man to sit down 
calmly under this tyranny ! I should disgrace my name, my 
ancestors ! Let the success be what it may, it shall never be 
said that William Maxwell, Earl of Nithsdale, proved false to 
the cause of his king, through coward fear of the event !" 

Lady Nithsdale watched his kindling countenance with love 
and awe : the colour flushed into his pale cheek ; his eyes, so 
full of care, gleamed from beneath the coal-black eyebrows. 

" King James must succeed," she cried ; " a few such 
spirits as my noble lord's must carry victory with them. Let 
the king but set foot in Scotland " 

" Yes, Winifred," he resumed, and an expression of care 
again stole over his countenance ; " let the king come in per- 
E 3 

54 

son, and come quickly .'-but, alas! he is in the hands of those 
who use him for their own purposes. I fear but ] 
dare own the fear to myself that he lacks that decision, Uiat 
boldness, that promptitude of action, which in such an unde 
taking are so indispensably requisite ! Why is he not here 
even now ? Why does not the Earl of Mar receive his com- 
mission? Yes, Winifred, I tremble. Should we plunge our 
native land in strife, should the rose of sna be indeed 
'steeped deep in ruddie heart's bluid/ and should we fail in 
our object, shall we not have much to answer for? 

At that moment the little Lord Maxwell came running to 
his parents, breathless and exulting: " I have towed the Royal 
James safe to land, father ; there she is in port !' 

"Oh, take this for a good omen, my lord! said Lady 
Nithsdale, kissing the boy. Lord Nithsdale shook his head ; 
but bending over the boy, he kissed him likewise. 

Winifred, do you not think your sister Lucy, the abbes*, 
would let them be pensioners in your old convent ? I should 
engage in this business with better heart, if I knew that my 
boy and poor little Annie were tafe in any other land. 1 
would urge your accompanying them," Lady Nilhsdale 
started," but I know that it would be in vain." 

Vain indeed!" replied Lady Nithsdale. " In all things 
else I have been, and I will be, a submissive wife ; but do 
not ask me to leave you, my lord, I scarcely think 1 could 
obey." 

"But the children?" 

" Gain but a little time, and we will despatch them to 
Bruges." 

" I will excuse myself from attending the summons to 
Edinburgh, will beg the commissioners to take my bail here, 
at my own castle. This they will refuse ; but some days will 
thus be gained, and we will hope" he added with a sigh 
" and we will hope his majesty will either arrive in person, 
or we may be authorised from himself to set up his standard 
openly." 

In consequence of this resolution, the Earl of Nithsdale 
returned an evasive answer, in which, under the plea of ill- 
health, (and indeed the mental anxiety which he had of late 
undergone had somewhat affected his health), he applied to 
those entrusted with the government in Scotland for indulgence 

COUNTESS OF NI1HSDALE. 

55 

to have his bail received at Terreagles ; and, in the mean time, 
the children were despatched, under the care of trusty and con- 
fidential attendants, to Bruges, and there placed under the 
protection of their aunt, the Lady Lucy. 

It may well be imagined that such a separation could not 
take place without a bitter pang to both parents. With Lady 
Nithsdale it was the instinctive tenderness of the mother which 
suffered at parting from the objects of her love ; but she looked 
forward with hope and reliance that the long-desired moment 
had arrived, that they were at last on the eve of seeing 
realised the expectation, which in her mind amounted to a 
kind of religious trust. With her husband the feeling was 
different 

Lady Nithsdale wept as she bade her children adieu. Lord 
Nithsdale's eyes were dry. The last sound of their voices, 
the last embrace, melted away the heart of the mother. The 
father, silent and almost stern, scarcely heard their parting 
words ; but as he watched the carriage which bore them from 
their paternal halls, pass under the archway and emerge into 
the brighter light beyond, he felt that the heir of the house of 
Maxwell had for ever quitted the tower of his ancestors ; and 
that he, by his own act and deed, was about to deprive his 
child of his home, his heritage, his titles, and his country. 
Bitter were the thoughts which struggled in his soul. He 
turned abruptly from the portal, and strode with a hasty but 
firm step into the withdrawing-room beyond the hall. 

Lady Nithsdale followed with streaming eyes ; and winding 
her arm within her lord's, she spoke of the winning words of 
their boy, of the pretty grief of the Lady Anne. For the first 
time Lord Nithsdale forgot to soothe her sorrows, forgot to 
press the arm that clung to him for support ; but throwing 
himself into a chair, he hid his face with both his hands, and 
remained for some seconds absorbed by emotions far more pain- 
ful in their intensity than the tender regret which drew tears 
from the mother's eyes. 

Those tears were, however, soon dried, for in the fearful 
grief of her husband she found cause for alarm, which changed 
the current of her thoughts. " My lord, my dear lord !" she said, 
" be not thus moved, the children will do well See ! I have 
dried my woman's tears. They will be well cared for by my 
good sister; and we shall see them soon again bounding 

E 4 

WIMK1U.P. 

through the hall, we shall hear their gay voices prattling on 
the stairs." 

"Never, Winifred, never!" he replied, withdrawing his 
hands, and looking at her with a sad and fixed countenance ; 
" never ! I have banished my children ; I have deprived my 
son of his lawful patrimony ; I have now driven him forth to 
beggary, exile, and dependence. No Earl of Nithsdale will 
ever inhabit these halls again : I know it, I feel it ! The 
lands I inherited from my forefathers must pass to others. 
Our castles will be desolate, our name extinct ! But this is 
weakness all. I knew I hazarded all earthly goods when 1 
devoted myself to the interests of my king. Alas! If 1 could 
but feel assured that I was truly devoting myself to the interests 
of my king, and also of my country, 1 would not pause to 
think of my fair castle, my goodly lands ! " And his eye 
glanced quickly round the noble apartment, and dwelt for a 
moment on the smiling prospect from the windows, where the 
Nith danced along the valley through banks diversified with 
fields of waving corn, and luxuriant copses, whose deep green 
contrasted beautifully with the yellow harvest, 

During this momentary silence the distant sound of the 
bagpipe came fitfully on the ear, as its wild music cheered the 
reapers to their toil. " Though," he added, " the descendant 
of a long line of ancestors loves the halls where those ancestors 
have dwelt, though the man loves the spot where he has 
wandered a child, though,'* he continued, " a patriot loves 
the soil which gave him birth ; yet," and his voice strengthened, 
his eye flashed upwards, " gladly, willingly, gallantly, would 
I resign them all, were I certain that I indeed strove to secure 
my country's good, when I seek the restoration of my king." 

Neither the countess nor her lord had ever contemplated the 
possibility of their deserting the Jacobite party ; but they 
viewed the probable result of the enterprise, in which both 
deemed it equally indispensable to join, with very different 
tym. 

Even the success of his schemes did not to him hold out a 
prospect of certain good. Though a strict Catholic, he was 
no bigot ; and he could not blind himself to the inexpediency 
of giving a Catholic king to a Protes ant people. 

To Lady Nithsdale, on the contrary, the peaceful restoration 
of the Stuarts appeared to be the universal panacea ; and she 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 57 

devoutly believed that if that object could be accomplished 
without effusion of blood, all orders of British subjects must 
be good and happy. Little used, however, to join in political 
discussions, little accustomed indeed to hear them, she did not 
venture to urge any arguments of her own ; yet she could not 
remain silent when she saw her lord thus moved, and timidly 
suggested 

" You are a true patriot, my lord ; and that you yourself 
could not be content under the rule of a stranger and a heretic, 
is surely proof enough that neither could others, who have 
noble souls, be happy under his dominion. Does England 
boast any man whose name is fairer, whose character is more 
unblemished, than the kind, good, generous Earl of Derwent- 
water ? he whose purse is open to the poor, whose hand is 
ever ready to assist the unfortunate ? Must not he seek his 
country's good ? Is not the Viscount Kenmure's name a noble 
and an honourable one ? would he sacrifice his country ? But 
why should I seek other names than my own dear lord's? 
The Earl of Nithsdale's is in itself a justification, and a sanc- 
tion, of any cause he espouses !" she continued with warmth. 
Lord Nithsdale shook his head. " Our noble friend, the Duke 
of Ormond too ! he has joined his majesty at Havre." 

" Ah, Winifred ! now you have touched the chord to which 
my soul vibrates. Such flagrant injustice must rouse the 
spirit in all honest hearts ! Ormond's name must be restored ! 
Ormond's banner must be replaced ! Yes, we are driven to 
the course we are pursuing : we must proceed. Let us think 
no more ; but blindty follow where honour, loyalty, friend- 
ship, consistency lead us, without anticipating what may be 
the event ! To-morrow we shall receive the answer from Edin- 
burgh to-morrow I am a denounced rebel ; I must join the 
other lords who are already seeking the Earl of Mar. But 
oh ! Winifred ! would any other general were appointed to 
the undertaking ! That man has not the head, the heart, nor 
the character fitting for such a situation. He has zeal, but 
that is ali The honour the undoubted, the unquestionable 
honour is wanting. Was he not one of the first to make pro- 
testations of loyalty to the Elector? and now But there 

is no use in retrospection ; we must on on on ! To- 
morrow, my love, I leave you : how, when, where to meet, is 
in the hands of Providence." 

58 WINIFRED, 

Lady Nithsdale's eyes were cast to Heaven, and her hands 
involuntarily clasped themselves in prayer. '* And now, dearest 
wife," he continued, " we must to business. You are safe 
here at present I shall take but four men with me. The 
inmates of the castle, and the dependants immediately around, 
are more than sufficient to defend you from any ministers of 
the law who might seek to make you answerable for the actions 
of your husband. But, before I go, I must commit to your 
care the title-deeds to the estates, and the other papers, which 
may secure to us and to our children some property in case of 
the worst" 

Lord Nithsdale then entered into all necessary details con- 
cerning his wishes and intentions, with a firm, methodical 
coolness, which proved how little he expected ever to return to 
the happy home of his youth and manhood. 

CHAPTER X. 

Lrt u think bow our ancnton rote. 

Let us think how our tncettori fell ; 
The rifhu they defend*!, tod UKJM 
1 hrv bought with their blood, well ne'er trU. 
Let the love of our klnjr't ucred OUIM 
To the lore of our country uccecd. 
Let frtendihlp and honour unite. 
Ami flourtth on both Jde tbe Tweed. 

Jta 

THE messenger returned from Edinburgh, and brought with 
him such a reply as the Earl of Nithsdale had anticipated. 
Towards evening, therefore, he made ready for his departure. 

The Lords Athol, Huntley, Traquhair, Seaforth, and th, 
were already gathered round the Earl of Mar, under pretence 
of joining in a hunting expedition ; but, after his refusal to 
attend the commissioners at Edinburgh, Lord Nithsdale's 
making one of the famous " Hunt of Braemar" would have 
betrayed the nature of the meeting. He therefore resolved to 
seek the Earl of Derwentwater at his castle in Northumberland. 

Lord Derwentwater was perhaps of all the Jacobite lords the 
one with whom his feelings and sentiments were moat in 
unison : even his enemies have never ventured to cast any 
imputation on the motives and the character of a nobleman of 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 5Q 

such known integrity : with him Lord Nithsdale felt he could 
ever conscientiously act in unison. ' 

Lady Nithsdale assisted her lord in all his arrangements, 
listened to all his instructions : it was indeed fitting she should 
do so. The time was past when the wife needed only to be 
the gentle housewife, the graceful hostess, the dignified countess. 
Her husband knew well the enduring courage, the calm reso- 
lution, which were latent in the soul of his wife ; and in her 
he reposed entire confidence, on her he placed implicit reliance. 
But she herself was not aware of the qualities which slumbered 
within her ; qualities which, had her life been passed in the 
common routine of polished existence, would never have been 
awakened and called into action. She trembled as she heard 
her lord give the directions which he deemed necessary for the 
security of the castle ; and she shrank instinctively when she 
saw him gird on his sword, and prepare the pistols which he 
carried in his holster. 

Such precautions, although not unusual in these times, struck 
her as the real actual commencement of war, of civil war ; 
and an icy chill ran through her veins when she heard the 
balls rattle down the iron barrels of the pistols. 

The shades of evening had now gathered around : the four 
domestics who were to attend their lord were ready mounted 
in the court-yard ; his own stout horse was there, bridled and 
saddled. Lord Nithsdale, with a firm and stately step, tra- 
versed the dimly lighted apartments. The time for doubt or 
hesitation was past. There was sadness, but no wavering in 
his eye. His wife was on his arm, but she pressed it lightly ; 
she dared not cling to him as her heart would have prompted 
her to do, neither durst he unman himself by giving way to 
the tenderness he felt. 

When he reached the door, he paused for a moment ; and 
turning back, he looked slowly round the hall, where hung the 
portraits of his forefathers, the battle-axe of Eugene Maxwell, 
the helmet of Lord Eustace, the banner of good Earl Robert. 

His eye rested for a moment on the family motto, " Revi- 
resco." " Not here, my love, not in these ancient halls, will 
the Earls of Nithsdale flourish again ! " and gently pressing 
both the cold trembling hands of his wife between his own, he 
descended the steps, and, mounting his horse, he rode reso- 
lutely from out the castle gate. 

fiO WINIFRED, 

It was a glorious summer night. Lord Xithsdale felt, 
painfully felt to his heart's core, the beauty of the scene, as 
he traversed the valley from which he took his title, and the 
lands endeared to him by early recollections, as well as by 
that consciousness of possession, which assuredly has for the 
mind of man a charm almost magic in its influence. 

The moonbeams slept calmly on the towers of Terreagles, 
of his home ! and they sparkled on the waters of the Nith 
as it bounded through the smiling vale with its green sheep- 
walks and its wild copses. 

Avoiding the town of Dumfries, he followed the banks of 
the stream, till he found himself under the very walls of his 
own far-famed Castle of Caerlaverock. It was with a pardon- 
able feeling of pride that the fifth Earl of Nithsdale surveyed, 
for the last time, the noble edifice which had been the seat of 
his ancestors for nearly seven hundred years, and which they 
had rendered famous by many an act of prowess. 

The two circular towers which flanked the northern en- 
trance stood out, bold and dark, against the deep blue of the 
moonlight sky ; the rippling waves were tipped with silver as 
they broke against the walls of the castle, which, built in a 
triangular form on the point of land where the Nith throws 
itself into the Irish Sea, rose on two sides abruptly from the 
waters. 

But though he might cast towards the mined walls a glance 
of regret, and might bid them in his heart a long and sad 
adieu, he reminded himself that the Lord Eustace had in his 
zeal for King Robert Bruce demolished the ancient fortifica- 
tions of this same castle, lest the English might garrison it 
themselves ; and he thought of Robert, the eighth Lord Max- 
well, and first Earl of Nithsdale, who had so gallantly de- 
fended it for his unfortunate master Charles the First : and 
in the glorious recollections of former deeds of loyalty, and in 
resolutions to emulate such deeds, he attempted to drown the 
sad anticipations which crowded on his soul 

But he was alone ! No eye was upon him ! No enthu- 
siastic Jacobite was by his side, before whom he might blush 
to own a thought which had reference to self. Each step, as 
he advanced, was full of the memorials of his ancestors. He 
passed the Tower of Repentance, a monument of the osten- 
tatious remorse of John Lord Henries. In the distance he 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 6l 

saw the Castle of Hadham, which came into his family by the 
marriage of Sir John Maxwell to Agnes, heiress of the Lord 
Herries of Terreagles. " And the time will come," he 
thought, " when the Maxwells will be forgotten in a country 
where they have been known and where they have been ho- 
noured, where they have been feared and where they have been 
loved, for so many centuries ! But if remembered, their name 
shall never be coupled with dishonour, with treachery, or with 
disloyalty : " and he spurred his gallant horse, hastening from 
scenes which, while they confirmed him in his devotion to the 
cause he had espoused, made him feel the extent of the sacrifice 
he was making. 

Intelligence little calculated to raise the spirits of the Jaco- 
bites awaited him upon his arrival at Dilstone Castle, the seat 
of the Earl of Derwentwater. He there found the earl and 
all his adherents in the utmost consternation at the death of 
Louis the Fourteenth, and the refusal of the Regent to assist 
the Chevalier with arms, men, or money, or to do anything 
which might be considered an infraction of the treaty of 
Utrecht. 

The Earl of Mar, although not yet provided with a legal 
commission as general, had set up the standard of King James, 
and had gathered around it at Braemar three hundred of his 
own followers. They had all advanced too far to retreat ; but 
the most sanguine were dismayed and dispirited at the unfa- 
vourable aspect of affairs. 

Lord Nithsdale alone did not appear affected by the intelli- 
gence. Most of the other insurgent nobles were actuated by 
motives either of ambition, or of revenge, by discontent with 
their present condition, and by the hope, in the changes con- 
sequent upon war, to improve the estates which they found 
inadequate to the support of their rank and station. But in 
Lord Nithsdale's mind no personal consideration mixed itself 
with his conscientious belief that honour demanded his ad- 
herence to the Stuart race, whether it might be for weal or for 
woe. His hopes were not blasted, for he had never enter- 
tained any ; and on the present occasion it was he who sus- 
tained the resolution of those around, and reminded them that 
the change in the policy of France did not loosen the bonds 
of allegiance to their sovereign ; that in union and in perse- 
verance consisted their only chance of success ; that to them- 

62 WINIFBBD, 

selves alone they must look. ' If," said he, " the feeling of 
the people is really in favour of their lawful monarch, when 
once the standard is raised, when once the Earl of Mar can 
show his sovereign's commission, they will declare themselves : 
if, on the contrary, the mass of the people is satisfied with 
the present order of things ; if Englishmen are indifferent 
whether a Stuart or a Guelph wear the crown of England, 
provided they may enjoy the comforts of life in security ; if 
loyalty no longer survives in the hearts of those who are oc- 
cupied only with selfish considerations, French gold, French 
arms, will never impose upon the British nation the sovereign 
that nation rejects. In that case we are traitors, and we must 
abide the consequences ! " 

It was not long, however, before the success which at first 
attended the Earl of Mar's strenuous exertions, elevated the 
drooping spirits of the English Jacobites to as high a pitch of 
exultation as they had before sunk low in despondency. 

He had actually raised an army of ten thousand men ; he 
had at length received, and read aloud at the head of each 
regiment, his commission as general- in-chief of the Scottish 
forces ; and he had despatched to the Chevalier a numerously - 
signed address, urging the necessity of his immediate arrival 
in Scotland. Mr. Foreter and Lord Derwentwater, with Lord 
Nithsdale, had proclaimed King James at Wark worth, Mor- 
peth, and Alnwick. They advanced into Scotland as far as 
Kelso, where they were joined by Viscount Kenmure with 
two hundred horse, and the Earls of Carnwarth and Win- 
toun, who bad already set up the Chevalier's standard at 
Moffat 

But these temporary successes could not blind Lord Niths- 
dale to the elements of discord which were found in the very 
union which gave the assembled forces a somewhat imposing 
aspect; and which, had they with one accord proceeded to- 
wards Dumfries, made themselves roasters of that town, thus 
forcing a communication with the main army under the Earl 
of Mar, might have enabled them to furnish themselves with 
arms and ammunition at Glasgow, and finally to dislodge 
Argyle from Stirling. 

But he saw and deplored, on one side, the obstinate infa- 
tuation of the English Jacobites, who seemed confident that 
an immediate and universal rising in the northern counties 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 63 

would be the consequence of their marching into England ; 
and, on the other, the resolute wilfulness of the undisciplined 
Highlanders, who declared that they would not cross the 
border. 

The town of Dumfries continued in the hands of govern- 
ment. The Countess of Nitbsdale therefore kept herself in 
strict retirement, nor could she often receive direct communi- 
cation from her husband. A thousand vague and unauthenti- 
cated rumours daily, nay, hourly, reached her ; rumours, 
which, coming through the medium of the royalists, brought 
even exaggerated accounts of the disunion and the want of 
discipline which prevailed among the insurgent forces. Her 
heart sank within her when, through Amy, she heard how 
the WTiigs had exulted at the confusion produced among the 
Jacobites by an incident in itself trifling. 

Captain Wogan having mistaken some of their own troops 
for an advancing party of General Carpenter's, inadvertently 
discharged a pistol, the preconcerted signal to warn those 
behind of an approaching enemy ; and, until the mistake was 
discovered, there ensued considerable tumult and disorder 
among the soldiers in the rear. On another occasion, the ca- 
valry of the insurgents, which had just entered Jedburgh, 
were hastily marched out again to assist the foot in repelling 
a party of their own friends who had joined them by 
another route ! These, and other occurrences of a similar 
nature, were subjects of mockery and exultation to the Whigs 
in Dumfries, and failed not to be goodnaturedly transmitted 
to the inhabitants of Terreagles. Nor did the letters which 
she occasionally received from her husband tend to cheer her. 
Although, partly from prudential motives, partly to spare her 
the feeling of blank and hopeless self-immolation which per- 
vaded his own soul, he refrained from expressing his full con- 
viction of the inadequacy of their means, the mismanagement 
of those means which they did possess, the futility of all 
their endeavours, still she could plainly perceive that his fears, 
rather than his hopes, had gathered strength since last they 
parted. 

She was one day seated in the tapestried withdra wing-room, 
from whose large and deep-set windows the Earl had taken his 
last sad look over his vast possessions ; her eye was also me- 
chanically following the mazes of the Nith as it wound through 

64- WINIFRED, 

the valley below ; when Amy Evans hastily entered, with a 
joyful countenance, and a thick packet for her lady. 

" News from my lord ! " she exclaimed, all breathless ; 
" and Walter Elliot, who is even now from the array, says 
they are coining to lay siege to Dumfries immediately, my 
lady ; and we shall have my lord at home again in his own 
castle. And oh ! how glad I shall be to see my lord's own 
noble bearing as he mounts the entrance-steps, and to hear his 
firm tread as he paces his own hall, and to see my own dear 
lady smile once more ! " 

Lady Nithsdale meanwhile had with trembling hands and a 
flushed cheek opened the packet which Amy hoped would have 
proved so welcome ; but the words of gratulation died away 
on her lips while watching the fallen countenance, the blanched 
cheek of her mistress, as she perused the letter. 

" Alas ! my good Amy, you are a flattering, but most false, 
prophet. The English counsels have prevailed ; they are 
even now withdrawing the troops towards the borders, and 
have sent to recall the horse which had advanced as far as 
Ecclefechan. 1 never knew my lord write so despondingly. 
How strange it is, Amy, that when he is there to tell them 
what had best be done, to point out to them the advantages of 
occupying all the west of Scotland, of gaining easy possession 
of Dumfries, of Glasgow, and of Stirling, they should persist 
in their infatuation. Oh ! if the king were but in Scotland, 
he would surely know who were his true friends ! Then my 
lord's counsels would be attended to, as it is fitting they 
should be." 

" Indeed, my lady ! And are they not coming to Dumfries 
after all ? Why, Walter Elliot said it was the talk of all the 
army ; and that the Highlanders said they would fight the 
enemy to the last in their own country, but that they never 
would be marched across the borders, to be kidnapped and 
made slaves of, as their forefathers had been in Cromwell'* 
time ! And can it be, my lady, that they will really turn 
back, when my lord says it is more advisable that they should 
advance ? " 

" Alas ! it is only too true ! My dear lord also says that 
all will be leaders, and that none will be led. But he adds at 
the same time, that, whether they follow his counsels or not, 
he will never desert the true cause from any personal pique. 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. OJ 

Oh! my own true noble lord!" she exclaimed, looking up 
with tearful yet beaming eyes ; " there spoke your own high 
soul ! The king in all his army has not another spirit, dis- 
interested, uncompromising as yours!" Then resuming her 
letter, she continued, " My lord says that, notwithstanding 
all the Earl of Mar's confident hopes and assertions, he cannot 
find that the Duke of Ormond has landed yet. 'Tis strange ! 
it seems as if all aid from foreign shores were spell- bound. 
He loves his cousin of Ormond ! methinks if he were with 
them, my lord would have more heart and hope in what he 
undertakes ! " Then, as she proceeded in the perusal of the 
letter : " Nay, did I say that there was not another noble 
spirit in all the king's army ? Shame on my lips for uttering 
such treason ! for here my lord writes that he and the Earl of 
Derwentwater think and feel alike on all things; and that 
were it not for his friendship, his support, he should indeed 
find himself alone. May Heaven bless the good Earl of Der- 
wentwater, if it is only that my lord finds comfort in him ! 
and moreover, I know full well that he is as brave and as kind 
a gentleman as ever trod this earth." 

" And what is to become of us, madam, if my lord and all 
the army are gone into England ? " 

" We must e'en wait, as we have done, ray good Amy ; 
and abide the result, as we have done." 

" And must I still see you pine, and pine, and grow thinner 
and thinner ? Alas ! alas ! these are weary times ! I almost 
think it would be best to let King George alone upon his throne, 
and see if we cannot be as happy under him as we were under 
Queen Anne." 

" Amy ! you would not be a turncoat, would you ? You, 
Ilachael Evans's daughter ! " answered Lady Nithsdale, in a 
tone of half-playful, half-serious reproof. 

" Indeed, my lady, I would fain be loyal, for you, and my 
master are so, and my poor mother was loyal also to the last ; 
but I can never love any king, whether a Stuart or no, as 
I love my own dear lady, who has been to me as mother, 
sister, friend, and mistress!*' and the warm-hearted Amy 
kissed the countess's hand with devoted affection. 

" You are a good girl, dear Amy ; and I do not know how 
I should bear my present anxiety, and the sorrows that may 
await me, did I not feel assured I should ever have one true 

66 WINIFRED, 

friend to lean upon in every exigency. Let what will come to 
us, Amy, I think I may count on your affection as long as 
I live." 

While there is breath in this body, while the pulses 
beat in this heart, my lady, Amy Evans shall be true to you 
and yours, through woe and through weal, for life and for 
death!" 

Lady Nithsdale wept soft tears of gratitude ; they rolled 
down her cheeks, they dropped on Amy's hands as she pressed 
them in her own, and the true-hearted girl wished not for 
farther assurances of her lady's affection. 

CHAPTER XI. 

There'* some t*j that we wan, 
Some My that th*y wan. 
Some aav that MM wan 
At a\ man ! 

But ooe thin* I'm rare, 
That at Shrrriff Muir, 
A battle there was 

Which 1 MW. man. 

And we ran, and they ran, 

And thry ran, and we ran, 

And we ran, and they ran, 

Awa' man. 

TUB Duke of Argyle had not yet been reinforced by the Irish 
or the Dutch troops. This would indeed have been the mo- 
ment for the insurgents to have made themselves masters of 
all the west of Scotland ; but, as Lord Nithsdale informed his 
wife, the English counsels prevailed. 

Letters were confidently asserted to have been received from 
Lancashire, declaring that twenty thousand men would imme- 
diately join th army upon its appearance in the county ; and 
the various advantages attending a speedy march into England 
were urged with such vehemence, that the troops most in 
advance were suddenly recalled, and appointed to meet the 
main body at Langtown in Cumberland. 

But the Highlanders, under the influence of the young 
Earl of Wintoun, who was intimately convinced of the diffi- 
culties into which they were heedlessly plunging themselves, 

COUNTESS OF NITOSDALE. 67 

and the favourable occasion which, they were now throwing 
away, halted a second time. Many then deserted, and chose 
rather to surrender themselves prisoners, than to go forward to 
what they looked upon as certain destruction. 

The Earl of Wintoun himself, finding that all his efforts 
to alter the destination of the army were fruitless, returned to 
the main body, but from that time he was never called to 
assist in a council of war ; indeed, a reckless levity was hence- 
forward visible in his whole demeanour, and he seized upon 
every opportunity of idle amusement which chance threw in 
his way, in a manner scarce befitting one engaged in an 
important and perilous enterprise. 

Not so Lord Nithsdale; for having little hope that the 
most prudent course could have brought the undertaking to a 
successful termination, he felt less keen disappointment at the 
rejection of any of his counsels. In sad, but conscientious 
devotedness, without anger, or personal mortification, he pa- 
tiently strove to smooth ruffled feelings, to accommodate jarring 
interests. It was principally through his influence that the 
ardent and intemperate young Earl of Wintoun had been in- 
duced to rejoin his companions in arms ; and it was he who 
prevailed on some of the Highland troops to accompany them, 
upon the condition of receiving sixpence per day from the 
time they crossed the border. 

The task of tracing the progress of the insurgents through 
Carlisle, IVnrith, Appleby, Lancaster, &c. is relinquished to 
those who are more capable of describing the military move- 
ments and the political intrigues of such stirring times. It is 
enough for us that the next advices which the Countess of 
Nithsdale received from her husband were somewhat less 
gloomy in their tenour. Although the expected risings in 
England had not proved so numerous, or so general as the 
Scottish leaders had been taught to expect, still they had met 
with no serious opposition. They had proclaimed King James 
at Lancaster ; they had levied the public revenue in his name, 
and they were rapidly advancing towards Preston. 

Mar, meanwhile, had established his head quarters at Perth, 
and he made some attempts to fortify that city, as a place of 
defence in which the Chevalier might be received upon his 
expected landing. 

The decisive morning of the 13th of November approached, 
p 2 

68 WINIFRED, 

the day on which the battle of Sherriff Muir was fought in 
Scotland, and that on which the Jacobites surrendered at Preston 
in Lancashire. 

In the battle of Sherriff Muir the Earl of Mar displayed that 
energy, and that decision, which are requisite qualifications for 
the head of an insurrection. His eloquent and animated ad- 
dress to the chieftains in the council awakened a corresponding 
ardour in the bosoms of all, except, perhaps, of Huntley and 
Sinclair ; and when he wound up his appeal by briefly stating 
the question in the words, " Fight, or not?" the whole as- 
sembly answered at once with an universal shout of ' Fight ! " 

This resolution, reaching the lines as they were drawn up in 
order of battle, was welcomed by loud and continued huzzas, 
and a general tossing up of hats and bonnets. 

Such demonstrations of eagerness for the onset promised well 
for the result, and for a time the insurgents bore down all be- 
fore them. But, though the left wing of the Duke of Argyle's 
army was routed, his right wing, in its turn, put to flight the 
left wing of the Earl of Mar's ; and to the English remained 
the solid fruits of victory, inasmuch as they retained the position 
by which they defended the Lowlands. Both generals, how- 
ever, claimed the advantage ; and to a party which had strug- 
gled with so many adverse circumstances, the fact of having 
withstood the royal forces in a pitched battle, gave some con- 
fidence for the future. 

To Lady Nithsdale's hopeful heart the battle of Sherriff Muir 
appeared a glorious victory, which was to change the aspect of 
affairs. With the buoyancy of youth and loyalty, she exulted 
in the idea that her husband and the Scottish army were march- 
ing triumphantly through England, while the English army 
was sustaining a defeat in Scotland. She dwelt with pride and 
delight on the individual acts of prowess which came to her 
knowledge ; and Amy hastened to her lady with every fresh 
piece of intelligence she could collect from chance-comers to the 
castle gates, thus endeavouring to beguile the tedious hours of 
sickening expectation, and hope deferred, in which her mistress 
wore away her days. 

" Did you hear, my lady, how the M' Leans with one accord 
joined their old chief the moment he set foot among them ? 
for all the isle of Mull belongs now to the Duke of Argyle 
himself." 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. Og 

" Indeed, Amy! And so the tie of clanship was stronger 
than interest, or than duty to their new landlord. And, more- 
over, Sir John M'Lean has been living for many years in 
France, and on an allowance too granted him by Queen 
Anne." 

" However that may be, he soon raised a regiment of eight 
hundred men, and when they were prepared for battle, all the 
speech he made them was, "Gentlemen, yonder stands Mac 
Cullummore for King George, and here stands M'Lean for 
King James. God bless M'Lean and King James ! Charge, 
gentlemen !" and on they rushed like wild creatures. It was 
in that very charge the gallant young Clanronald was killed by 
the heavy fire of the regulars. But Glengarry would not give 
them time to be disheartened, but cried out, * Revenge ! re- 
venge ! to-day for revenge, and to-morrow for mourning ! ' " 

" Yes, yes ! there is some of the true spirit left ! " exclaimed 
Lady Nithsdale, exultingly : then, with a changed voice, she 
added, " But, alas ! for young Clanronald : he was a brave 
youth, and, I have heard my lord say, a complete soldier ; he 
had been trained in the French guards. When he received 
the Earl of Mar's summons, he replied, ' That his family had 
ever been the first on the field and the last to leave it ! ' and he 
has proved but too well that he was a worthy scion of that 
noble house!" 

" Yes, my lady ; and they say that as he fell out of the 
ranks, after he had got his death wound, the Earl of Mar met 
him, and asked him why he was not in front. ( I have had 
my share/ said the poor young man, and dropped dead at the 
earl's feet. Oh, my lady ! a battle is a shocking thing ! and 
though one is so glad to hear of a victory, and one thinks no- 
thing of hundreds of the enemy being killed, yet when one 
pictures to one's self one fair and gallant youth lying pale and 
stiff, and cold and bloody, on the bare ground, oh ! one's heart 
sickens within one, and one wonders how one could ever wish 
the king should come back among us to cause bloodshed and 
slaughter ! " 

Lady Nithsdale answered not. The words " pale, and stiff, 

and cold, and bloody, on the bare ground," had conjured up an 

image to her mind which seemed to curdle the very life-blood 

in her veins. She clasped her hands closely, and pressing 

p 3 

70 WINIFRED, 

them tightly on her knee, she sat with fixed eyes and lips 
compressed, striving to exclude from her mind thoughts which 
would rush into it. 

" Oh, say no more, dear Amy ; I cannot, must not think. 
Each day, each hour, may bring us news of a battle in England. 
How do we know what may be the result? Alas ! if it were 
not for the blood which runs in my veins, if I were not 
a Herbert, if I were not married to a Maxwell, I too might 

wish that But no, I will not utter what would be, in me, 

a dereliction of duty, treason to the cause my lord upholds. 
I will remember that my lord has done that which he deemed 
it his duty to do; and for the event, we must leave it to 
Providence. We must submit, and only pray for strength to 
perform the part that may be allotted us, whatever that part 
may be. It is but two days since 1 received such a letter 
from my dear sister the abbess as should teach me to trust and 
to submit. Oh ! if I could but look as she does, on all earthly 
and temporal concerns ! but, alas ! how can one wean one's 
self so entirely from this world, when it contains one's souls 
treasures ? Lucy has no husband ! Lucy has no children ! 
Alas ! these ties hold me down so tight to earth, that not all 
her holy counsel, not all Father Albert's ghostly advice, are 
enough to detach my heart from it : 1 cannot fix my thoughts, 
as they bid me, on Heaven, and Heaven alone." 

"Nay, my lady, nor is it fitting you should. It is for 
priests and nuns to be so much better than other people : it 
would never do for those who have to wrestle with the world aa 
it is, not to have their thoughts somewhat in it." 

" Yes; but Amy, the more our affections are set upon 
things which are not of this world, the more thoroughly we 
shall be enabled to do our duty here." 

" I am sure my lady, there is no need for anybody to 
do their duty better than you do ; and whichever way your 
heart is set, it must be the right way ;" replied Amy, whose 
devoted attachment was such that she did not like to hear it 
implied, even from her lady's own lips, that she was capable of 
improvement 

" I must not value myself according to your estimate, Amy, w 
replied Lady Nithsdale, smiling, ' or I shall be sadly lacking 
in that first of Christian virtues humility." 

It was not many days after the battle, or, as the Jacobites 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 71 

termed it, the victory, of Sherriff Muir, that vague rumours 
reached Terreagles of disaster and defeat at Preston. 

Lady Nithsdale was struck with the pale countenance of 
Amy when she had summoned her, ostensibly to assist in ar- 
ranging some household matters, but more, in fact, that she 
might hear a friendly voice, and look on an affectionate coun- 
tenance. She was still more struck with the haste in which 
Amy wished to depart, instead of gladly lingering, pleased 
and honoured at being admitted to share the counsels and the 
feelings of her mistress. 

'* Think you not, Amy, that these damask hangings will 
make my lord's apartment look exceedingly handsome ? and 
to my mind the old pictures which adorn his study will show 
well upon the deep crimson. He will be pleased, when 
Heaven vouchsafes him a safe return, to find we have been 
mindful of his comfort. I would gladly turn these hangings 
to so good account. What think you, Amy?" and Lady 
Nithsdale gazed inquiringly in her face. 

" Yes, madam, in sooth they are as good as new," replied 
Amy with a hurried voice ; and her eye avoided that of her 
lady: her fingers trembled as she smoothed the fringe, and 
she kept her head bent low, as though examining the texture 
of the damask. 

" Amy, you have heard ill news that you fear to commu- 
nicate," said Lady Nithsdale, laying her hand firmly on Amy's 
trembling arm, and looking at her fixedly. ' Speak ! I charge 
you, speak ! I can bear anything but suspense. Let me know 
the worst ! " and she grasped her almost convulsively. 

" Oh, my lady, do not look thus at me: truly you fright 
me. In very truth I know nothing, nothing for certain." 

" Amy, Amy, this is not like yourself; you are trifling 
with me !" 

" We must not heed every silly report that comes from so 
far off, my lady." 

" Then it is of the army in England ! " and Lady Niths- 
dale dropped into a seat " Speak ! speak ! tell me all ! " 

" Indeed I have but little to tell. They said there had 
been an engagement : but we have often heard that before, my 
lady; and people make so much of a little thing; and the 
news comes through Dumfries, and the people there tell every- 
thing their own way.** 

72 WIN I Fit ED, 

" And they say, then, that we have been defeated ! " con- 
tinued Lady Nithsdale, striving to appear perfectly tranquil. 
' Tell me, Amy ; you see I am quite calm." 

" Why, yes; I suppose it is as your ladyship says, for they 
seem marvellously well pleased." 

" And are King James's forces retreating ? " 

" Not that I know of, my lady." 

" What, do they still hold Preston, then ? " 

" Why no, my lady. I believe what they call the Royal- 
ists have possession of it now." 

" Then where is our army ? " 

" Alas ! dearest madam, I cannot justly say. Indeed, in- 
deed, my lady, those who told me do not seem to know them- 
selves, and I dare swear it is not half true." 

" Amy, you have heard more ; I am sure you have ! Is 
my lord ? Have they told you anything ? I cannot, can- 
not ask. Oh, Amy ! answer me, and answer the truth, or I 
think I shall die!" 

" Nothing, my lady ! They never mentioned my lord's 
name one way nor another ; indeed, indeed they did not." 

"Thank Heaven BO far!" and Lady Nithsdale closed 
her eyes for a moment, as if to regain composure and re*o- 
lution. 

" And you know, my lady, ill news travels fast enough, and 
everybody hereabouts would be curious enough about my lord: 
so pray set your mind at rest" 

Lady Nithsdale looked at Amy with a sad withering smile. 
" At rest, Amy ! at rest ! " and pressing her hand upon her 
bosom, " it is long since this heart has been at rest, and I 
am much mistaken if it will be so for many a long day yet If 
there is any truth in what the people of this country call 
second-sight, I have much to suffer yet ; but I will not de- 
spair. I place my reliance above ; I will confide in Him who 
will not abandon the humble, even when all human succours 
fail." 

COUNTESS OF MTIISDALE. 73 

CHAPTER XII. 

When the day it gaue. an' night is come, 

An' a' folk hound to sleep, 
I think on him that's tar awa. 

The lee-lang night, an' weep, my dear, 

The lee-lang night, an' weep. 

Jacobite Song. 

IT is singular how the first vague rumour of a great event 
travels faster than can almost be accounted for by human 
means, and how much time sometimes elapses before the real 
and authentic account is received ! Two nights and a day of 
dread and uncertainty did Lady Nithsdale endure before any 
farther details reached Terreagles. 

The honest Amy's face soon betrayed that fresh intelligence 
had arrived, and that intelligence unfavourable. Almost be- 
fore her lady could question her she said, 

*' My lord is well, madam ! my lord is safe !" 
" Oh, dearest Amy, thanks ! " and her eyes flashed with 
joy. " But why this sad countenance then ? Look cheerful, 
girl, for your face belies your words. You are not deceiving 
me ?" 

" No, no indeed, madam. He is unhurt : not a wound, 
nor a scratch, as I believe." 

" Then why can you not smile ? Oh, Amy ! at this mo- 
ment I feel how weak a sentiment is loyalty to one's king, 
when put in the balance with love for one's husband ! Still 
no smile ! Why, we have changed characters, Amy, and you 
are going to school me into my due allegiance." 

" Oh, my sweet lady ! I joy to see a smile upon your lips ; 
and I dare not finish my tale, for I shall banish it more 
quickly than I have called it up." 

" You said he was unhurt ; not a scratch, you said ? " 
" I did, my lady ! but oh ! can you not guess what other 
misfortune may have befallen him, and all of us? oh, my 
lady!" 

" I am dull of comprehension ; but I cannot picture any 
great evil now my lord is safe ! " 

" He is safe, now, madam, unhurt, unwounded ; but " 

" But what, Amy ? Speak ; you distract me!" 
" But, madam dear madam he and all the other lords 
are prisoners, madam, prisoners to King George ! " 

7-i WINIFRED, 

" Prisoners ! " and she seemed to awake as from a trance. 
" Prisoners to King George ! then rebels ! traitors ! Fool 
that I have been ! and my thought never glanced towards 
this ! Oh! to whom can I apply for advice or for assistance? 
Alas, alas ! what can a poor weak helpless woman do ? If I 
had wings to fly to my lord, then he would tell me bow I 
might assist him ; then at least I should be near to soothe 
and to support him ! But here, alone, and helpless/' she 
added, wringing her hands, " what can I hope ? what can I 
effect ? But you know more, Amy ; you can tell me more ? " 

" No more, madam, than that the Scots were the last to 
come to terms and to surrender." 

" And they surrendered ! yielded themselves up to the 
Whigs! Oh, my dear, dear lord, what must thy noble spirit 
have endured ere it was bowed to this ! How must thy counsels 
have been scorned, thy hopes blasted, thy heart crushed ! I 
know thy lofty nature well, and truly my woman's soul 
almost refuses itself to picture what thine must have under* 
gone!" 

Amy stood for some moments bewildered, and unable to 
offer consolations which she felt must be unavailing. Then, 
resuming her self-possession, she urged : Think, madam, 
how much worse it might have been ! you forget that my brd 
is safe in person." 

" But, Amy, what he must have suffered in mind ! And 
what are bodily sufferings to the tortures such t mind is capa- 
ble of enduring ! " 

" There is one thing, my lady, for which we cannot be too 
grateful. He is now safe from the dangers of battle : think 
how you felt when we were talking of young Clanronald, so 
fresh, so blooming on the bloody sod ! " 

" True, true ! " and she looked up for a moment. " But * 
and she lowered her voice ''there are other and more inevitable 
perils than those which are met with in battle. If, indeed, 
the usurper keep the throne, if the new dynasty prevail 
then loyalty is treason, and treason, treason, Amy ! Even 
King James spared not his own nephew ; can we expect more 
mercy in the soul of a stranger than in one of our own royal 
blood ? Oh Heaven, be pitiful .'" 

" Nay, madam, but the Duke of Monroouth was the 
usurper himself. This case is quite different ! And then 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 75 

there are so many of them. Mr. Forster, and the Earl of 
Derwentwater and his brother, and the Lords Wintoun, Carn- 
warth, Kenmure, Nairne, and many, many more of noble and 
gentle blood. King George, if indeed he is to be our king, 

must show mercy. He could not have the heart " Amy 

dared not finish the sentence : she could not have uttered, her 
lady could not have listened to, the termination their imagina- 
tions but too well supplied. 

Lady Nithsdale bowed her head in silence, and Amy feared 
to break in upon the sad solemnity of her thoughts. After a 
pause, the countess slowly rose : " I will to my closet, Amy, 
and there tell my beads, till I have regained composure enough 
to think. But fail not to let me know should farther intelli- 
gence reach the castle." 

Amy opened die door for her lady, and as she passed, she 
kissed her hand in token of obedience to her injunctions. 
Lady Nithsdale pressed her's, and slowly, steadily withdrew. 
Amy watched the closing door ; and then giving a full vent 
to her own repressed feelings, she wept and sobbed in freedom. 

Every hour now brought fresh reports, each more distressing 
than the last. One told how fourteen hundred men were 
inclosed in one of the churches, where they suffered both hard- 
ships and indignities from the soldiery ; how they were strip- 
ped, not only of every article of value which they might have 
about them, but almost of necessary clothing. 

These were principally Scotch, who, having been the last to 
surrender, were treated with the greatest rigour ; and Lady 
Nithsdale shrunk with almost equal horror from the idea of 
her noble husband being exposed to the insults of the low-born 
and the mean, as from the more tremendous vengeance of the 
law. 

Another rq>ort reached Scotland, that the rebels were to be 
tried by martial law, and shot upon the spot. But the alarm 
which such a notion was calculated to excite, was in some 
measure allayed, by learning that this summary punishment 
was only to be inflicted upon those who had actually held 
commissions under the government, against which they had 
borne arms. Lady Nithsdale was farther re-assured, when the 
name of Lord Charles Murray was the first mentioned as likely 
to suffer, for she knew well that her husband's could never 
have been omitted had be been in danger of such a fate. 

76 WINIFRED, 

But still she heard not from himself, and these !% and 
often contradictory rumours almost wore away her soul in 
feverish anxiety. 

The town of Dumfries was in the hands of the Royalists, 
and it was a matter of difficulty for the prisoner* to transmit 
any communication to their friends, which was not subject to 
the revision of those who were in power. There was time for 
each hope, in which she had formerly indulged, to be succes- 
sively crushed. That which she had fondly imagined to be a 
victory at Sherriff Muir proved in its consequences to be no 
better" than a defeat. Dutch reinforcements joined the royal 
army ; while scarcely a day elapsed in which some of the 
Lowland chieftains did not desert the standard of the Earl 
of Mar. 

Still no succours arrived from France. It became known 
that the regent Duke of Orleans had proscribed the Chevalier, 
and still the Chevalier's arrival was delayed. 

Lady Nithsdale roamed about the vast and deserted halls ; 
the un-read book dropped from her hands; the once loved 
spinet remained unopened ; the needle, which she used to ply 
so rapidly and so dexterously, was still resorted to for occupa- 
tion ; but the flowers no longer grew under her fairy fingers, 
and the falling tears would often tarnish the colours of the silks 
before the leaf had yet assumed its form. She started at every 
noise : the changing cheek, the fluttering heart, the trembling 
finger, the faltering voice, all spoke the heart ill at ease. The 
long, long days wore wearily away ; it seemed to her that 
each dismal winter evening closed in more slowly than the 
last 

Her children were far away ; she could not visit their 
couches, listen to their tranquil breathing, and beguile the 
hours in watching their unconscious slumbers. Her existence 
would have been less irksome had there been any duty for her 
to perform, any exertion to be made ; but in this forced inac- 
tivity of body, while the mind was distracted with doubts and 
fears, she endured, not so much the pangs of hope deferred, as 
those of protracted disappointment. 

Watching the blazing logs on the hearth, and listening to 
the incessant whistling of the December blast, only varied by 
the rattling of a dry and withered stray leaf against the case- 
ment, she had sat through the early and lengthened twilight 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALH. /, 

of a Scottish winter's evening. Gla4 of the excuse of fading 
light to indulge in the idleness of vague, dreamy, but most sad 
meditation, she had allowed the night to steal upon her un- 
awares, till all without was darkness that might be felt, and 
the stone mullions of the oriel windows alone shone white in 
the fitful blaze of the wood fire. 

She was startled from her reverie by the sound of men's 
voices, and the tread of a strange and heavy foot. The attend- 
ants entering, explained that a peasant was without, who 
insisted upon seeing the countess. 

*' It is the countess herself that my business is with," said 
the stout and rosy boor, who forced his way past the serving- 
men ; " I was to come to the speech of the lady herself; and 
if you can certify to me that yonder she is, why I am ready 
enough to give up my packet ; but I shan't let it go to any 
of you. How do I know what sort of jackanapeses you 
may be?" and the peasant grinned good-humouredly, with a 
twinkling eye, which led to the conclusion that he had not 
journeyed so rapidly, but that he had taken time to refresh 
himself by the way. He held a packet in his hand : " If it 
is true that you are that rebel lord's lawful wife, why, here's 
the letter I was to deliver safe into her own fair hands that 
was, when she gave me the reward I have earned by a journey 
of some hundred and fifty miles." 

" Oh, give it me ! in mercy give it me !" exclaimed Lady 
Nithsdale ; and starting from her seat, she would have snatched 
it at once. 

" Softly, fair lady," cried the peasant, withholding it ; 
" where is the reward the gentleman promised me ? " 

" Oh ! you shall have anything you will, only give it for 
pity, give it me! Amy!" she cried to Amy Evans, who, 
never far from her lady's side, had by this time made her 
appearance ; " fetch my casket : nay, here, take the key, and 
bring hither my purse ; it is in the embossed casket, and give 
the fellow what he will. And now, my friend, the letter 
the letter." 

" I think the lady's one that loves him ; but nobody has yet 
assured me that she is his lordship's wife," continued the un- 
daunted boor, with a knowing glance round the room : " all 
wives are not in such a taking about their husbands," he 
added, wishing, with a sort of low craft, which he deemed 

78 WINIFRED, 

prudence, to delay delivering the letter till he had made sure 
of the money. 

" Oh, trifle not with me ! Give it me, as you hope to meet 
with mercy yourself!" 

" Well, here it is, then ; the poor soul shall have the letter 
any how." She snatched it quickly from his hand, and 
throwing herself upon her knees before the fire, she hastened 
to devour its contents. Her eyes, blinded by tears, could not 
decipher the lines as fast as her wishes prompted. 

"Bring lights !" she exclaimed; "why are there no 
lights?" 

The servants hastened to fetch the tapers ; and the peasant 
remained near the door, watching the lady with an expression 
half compassionate, half comic. 

" Sure enough, the poor soul loves that darkbrowed fellow," 
he muttered ; " she tucks back her hair, as if she could tear 
off the curl that falls between the fire light and the paper ; and 
she thinks no more of me ! But I shall not depart without 
the pay 1 have been promised, I can tell her." 

Amy re-entered with the purse at the same moment that 
the serving -men returned with lights ; and Amy, showering 
into the hands of the messenger several gold pieces, led the 
way into the hall, that her lady might be left to peruse her 
packet in privacy. 

The peasant clinked the money in his hard palm ; then 
looking cunningly at Amy, " Your lady said I should have 
what 1 would." 

" Well, and have I not rewarded you handsomely ?" 

" Why, pretty fairly, pretty fairly ; but I should not mind 
another gold piece or so. You must bear in mind that my 
journey has been somewhat perilous, all through the royal 
armies and the loyal inhabitants, with a letter in my pooch 
from a rebel lord to a rebel lady." 

"Nay, you are unreasonable, you should not be covetous: 
but here are a couple more, for my dear mistress will not 
think anything can be too much for one who brings her news 
from her husband." 

" Thanks, fair mistress ! I am one who always keep the 
eleventh commandment, even if I keep no other." 

"The eleventh, fellow! Why, Protestant and Catholic 
agree there are no more than ten ! " 

COUNTESS OP NITUSDALE. 79 

" Ah, but I know the eleventh, and I know it best of all, 
and so do most people ; and if they all kept the ten others as 
strictly as they do that one, why the world would be a better 
world than it is, that's all ! " 

" You speak in riddles, friend; explain yourself." 

" ' Get all you can, and keep all you get.' Did you never 
hear that before, mistress ? if you have not heard it, you have 
practised it, I warrant me. But where's your buttery-hatch ? 
I am spent with hunger, and 'specially with thirst." 

While Dickon, the Lancashire ploughman, was restoring the 
strength, which did not seem to be much impaired, the countess 
was absorbed in the long-wished for epistle. 

The letter was sad, almost hopeless ; but it was from him- 
self, and she gazed with delight on every line traced by that 
loved hand. The first impulse was that of joy ; it was not 
till upon consideration and reflection, that she found in it 
matter for deep sorrow and despondency. It ran thus. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Nor can any men's malice be gratified further by my letters, than to see my con- 
stancy to my wife, the laws, and religion. Iteea will gather honey where spiders 
suck poison. Ei*on Baiililcf. 

" DEAREST WIFE, 

" You will have heard from other hands the ill success of 
our expedition. My Winifred, who knows what have been 
my fears from the beginning of this undertaking, also knows 
that my mind has been prepared for the result, and will 
therefore be aware that among all his sorrows her husband 
has not had to endure those of disappointed hope. Let her 
then be assured that his heart, though grieved, is unsubdued ; 
and that his soul is fully made up to meet with constancy 
whatever may occur to himself. 

" As my dear wife may well believe, I have suffered much. 
I have seen counsels which appeared to me the most impru- 
dent, and which the event has proved to be such, invariably 
prevail. I have seen every opportunity of success neglected. 
I have seen, without the power of preventing it, rashness, 

80 WIMFR! 

where prudence should have ruled ; deliberation, where bold- 
ness and decision would have been true discretion. 

" But, as my Winifred knows, it was not with the expect- 
ation of ultimate success that 1 devoted myself to the cause of 
my king. I obeyed what I believed to be the call of duty, 
but I may have been mistaken. When I have seen the blood 
of my countrymen stain their native soil, then indeed I have 
felt doubts, agonizing doubts, as to the correctnesa of my 
judgment. I have looked on death before ; I have aerved in 
Germany ; I have been an eye-witness of assassinations in 
Italy ; I have seen criminals pay the forfeit of their lives ; 
but, in the solitude of a prison, it is the image of the first 
victim of civil strife that haunts my imagination, that mo- 
ment, when I saw one of our own Scots fell with his battle- 
axe a fellow Scot ; when I heard one fat-man utter a threat, 
the other a cry for mercy, in the selfsame tongue i 1 ull 
see the dying glance of that blue-eyed youth, the life-blood 
staining his fair crisped curls : in the heat of battle the im- 
pression was momentary ; but now, in darkness and in silence, 
that image rises up between me and sleep ! 

" It is only to my beloved wife, who has so long read every 
feeling of this wayward heart, that I dare confess such weak- 
ness. To my companions in arms and in misfortune such 
sentiments would appear the sickly phantasies of a distempered 
mind : even to her, I will dwell on them no longer. 

" My Winifred will have learned with pride for the land of 
her husband, that the Scots were the last to yield at the fatal 
affair of Preston : indeed, all our party fought with unequalled 
bravery ; each several street was obstinately defended. General 
Willis's troops set fire to the houses betwixt themselves and 
the barricades ; but we still fought all night by the light of 
the conflagration, and we had the advantage in every several 
attack. Yet what could be done by a small body of men, 
cut off from all assistance, and cooped up in a burning town 1 

" The English were for submission, while our brave men 
were for rushing on death, or regaining liberty by one dea- 
perate sally. The English accomplished a capitulation ; but 
Forster's life was near becoming the sacrifice ! Many of our 
Scots still loudly accuse him of treachery ; and Murray levelled 
a pistol at his head when he heard what was the mission on 
which Oxburgh had been sent to the English general Had 

COUNTESS OP NITH8DALE. 81 

not a friendly hand struck the weapon upwards, Forster must 
then have fallen ! But I sincerely believe that he has acted 
with loyalty and sincerity throughout. When the cause is 
hopeless, is a commander justified in wasting the blood of 
those under his command ? Each of us, individually, may 
prefer death to submission ; but has a general a right to sport 
with the lives of others ? 

" Should my Winifred have an opportunity of seeing our 
king, who, though his coming is now too late, must, I 
imagine, he by this time in Scotland, it would be but jus- 
tice towards a man, who, though unfortunate and perhaps ill. 
judged, is, I believe, a faithful servant of King James's, to 
let his majesty know that such is my impression. 

" We have not yet been told our ultimate destination ; but 
we conclude we shall be conveyed to London, there, let 
not my dear wife be startled, for she must be aware it is the 
inevitable consequence of defeat there to take our trial. 
Let her rather rejoice that it is in an honourable, though per. 
haps a mistaken cause, that her husband will appear before 
the tribunal of his country ; and that among his fellow- 
prisoners he may count the noble Earl of Derwentwater, the 
good Viscount Kenmure, and many more of unsullied honour. 

" When I make use of the word * prisoners/ let her not 
picture to herself handcuffs and irons, a dark and damp dun- 
geon : we are poorly lodged, it is true, but we are not deprived 

of necessary comforts. If I could see my Winifred ! 

But that is now impossible. 

"She may rely upon my summoning her when there is a hope 
of her being allowed to cheer me with her presence. I should 
think myself unworthy of her true and devoted affection, it' I did 
not place on it the implicit reliance which it deserves. Adieu, 
my beloved ! I know that, next to Heaven, I am ever in your 
thoughts ; neither do you need to be assured that you are 
loved with equal truth and fervour. Professions are needless 
between those whose souls are united as ours have ever been ! 
And yet there is a satisfaction in tracing with my own hand 
the words which I trust will reach my Winifred's eyes, 
that whenever, however, death may meet me, my last prayer 
shall be for her, my last thought on her, and that I firmly 
believe the affection which fills my soul must survive death 

82 WINIFRED, 

itself ; that I am, and ever have been, her true and faithful 
husband, 

"NlTHSDALK. 

" P.S. I hope I have engaged a countryman of these parts 
to convey this safely to your hands, under the promise of a 
handsome reward upon the safe delivery of the letter." 

Full many a time did Lady Nithsdale read over the assurance 
of that affection which she never doubted. She laid the pre- 
cious document next her heart ; and then she summoned once 
more the English peasant, who she thought had probably be- 
held her lord with his own eyes. 

He was ushered into her presence ; and never did two 
human beings form, in their outward appearance, a more 
striking contrast, than the pale, slender, high-born countess, 
whose anxious countenance bore the traces of deep feeling, 
whose transparent complexion varied with every word she 
uttered, whose shrinking form seemed aa if every breath of 
wind might blow it away, while the light which shone from 
her eye spoke a soul capable of withstanding the storms of 
adverse fortune ; and Dickon, who with stout and sturdy 
limbs, and a ruddy countenance, beaming with health and 
good cheer, mixed with a sort of rustic, merry cunning, stood 
una wed before her. 

" You saw my lord your own self, did jou not, my good 
friend ? " inquired Lady Nithsdale, with a degree of timidity 
and anxiety in her tone. 

" An' it please your ladyship," answered Dickon, with a 
scrape of the foot and a pull of the hair, " I saw a many of 
the rebels, great and small, one day, when they were changing 
their quarters." 

" But it was my lord himself, the Earl of Nithsdale, who 
entrusted you with the packet you brought even now ? " 

" Yes, *I take it, it was ; for the packet was directed to the 
Countess of Nithsdale and the gentleman told me to take it 
to his wife, and to be sure and give it into her own hands, 
without fail, myself ; and he said, if I did, I should be sure 
to get a handsome reward ; that nothing would he too Rood 
for me, and such like, he said. He was a civil-spoken gi*ntle- 
man, and very free of his promises." 

" You have been rewarded for your pains, I hope. I gave 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 83 

orders to my waiting- woman to see to your wishes in every 
respect." 

u Oh! she is a smart lass, that, and she behaved very civil 
to me, and I'm no ways dissatisfied. Only perhaps a trihV 
from your ladyship's own fair hand ; she is but a waiting- 
woman after all," added Dickon, not forgetting the eleventh 
commandment, and making another scrape, which he meant 
should savour of gallantry. 

Lady Nithsdale slipped some additional gold into his hand. 
" And did my lord look well ? " she inquired. 

" Yes, very well, my lady, as far as I know, Just as well 
as the other lords he was along with ; only a trifle paler. 
He did not look, my lady, as if he had visited his own buttery- 
hatch quite so lately as I have." 

" Alas ! was he very pale ? Tell me, in pity tell me all 
the truth." 

" Nay, madam ! don't put yourself in such a fluster; He 
looked pale, just like all the rest of them." 

Lady Nithsdale turned away for a moment. She could 
scarcely endure to commune with one who saw in her noble 
husband but a man, like other men : and yet this peasant had 
seen him, he had heard his voice ; from him alone could she 
hope to learn any particulars. Dickon, who was not wanting 
in natural shrewdness, perceived that his answers did not give 
entire satisfaction ; and when Lady Nithsdale again turning 
towards him inquired whether her lord moved with a firm 
step, or whether his health did not appear to have suffered 
from long confinement, he answered, 

" Oh, bless your heart, my lady, he walked as strong, and 
looked lusty and hearty ; quite different from the other lords ! 
Oh ! he's a fine gentleman sure enough, and looked more like 
a prince than anything else." 

" He has a noble carriage, in good sooth," rejoined Lady 
Nithsdale ; " and sorrow has not yet subdued his lofty 
bearing ? " 

" Lord save you, my lady ! he was quite of a different sort 
from the rest of them. They seemed like rabble by the side 
of him : anybody might have known him among a thousand ! " 

" They might, indeed. And when he spoke did his voice 
sound full and mellow as ever ? " 

" Why, he spoke somewhat low, for he did not wish every- 
o 

84 . 

body to hear ; but methought it was a marvellous good voice, 
quite different from the other rebels." 

Lady Nithsdale hung upon his words with delight, and 
forgot that at first she had thought him incapable of estimating 
her lord's superiority over his fellows. 

" And can you tell me how my lord was lodged, and how 
he is attended *? " 

" Why, as I have heard say, very well lodged ; not so 
handsomely as he would be here in such a castle as this, but 
right well lodged as times go ; and they say that the rebels 
they live like fighting-cocks, and there is revelry of all kinda 
going on among them. But that's among the young lords," 
added Dickon, who saw he had not now touched the right 
string ; " not my Lord Derwentwater and my Lord Nithsdale, 
they are quite of another sort ; but some of the young gal- 
lants, and young Bottair of Athol Oh ! he's a comely 
young fellow that! and they do say that pretty Kate Mut- 
grave " 

The countess began to think she had convened long enough 
with the trusty messenger, especially after his supper at the 
buttery-hatch ; and repeating her thanks in the manner moat 
satisfactory to the worthy Dickon, she dismissed him to seek 
the repose he must need after his journey. 

The Chevalier's arrival, which Lord Nithsdale in his letter 
had considered almost certain, had not yet taken place : and 
although the Earl of Mar was resolved, by keeping poaaeasion 
of Perth, to retain at least one town where his master might 
be sure of an honourable and safe reception, the defection of 
the whole clan of Frascr, the advance of the Earl of Suther- 
land, the reinforcements which strengthened the Duke of 
Argyle's army from the regular troops, whose presence waa 
no longer required in England, rendered each day the situation 
of the Jacobite general more desperate. 

Still, having formally invited the Chevalier to put himself 
at the head of the insurrectionary army, Mar felt himself 
under the necessity of keeping his remaining troops together, 
to protect the person of the prince when he should effect his 
landing. In this dilemma, he proposed a military oath in the 
name of King James the Eighth ; but the attempt to bind 
together those who were only waiting for an excuse to dis- 
perse proved as unavailing as his previous proposal of an 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 85 

association. All the principal chiefs and leaders complained 
that they had been deluded by promises which had never 
been fulfilled. They insisted and there was much reason 
in their arguments that they had no more grounds for now 
believing the king was on the point of arriving, than that the 
long promised arms, ammunition, and treasure, should be sent 
from France ; and from this period a party was established 
in the very army of the Earl of Mar which declared for open- 
ing a negotiation with the Duke of Argyle. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

Since I parted hence. 

I have beheld misfortune face to (ace ; 
Have mark'd the ills or desolating war 
In all the sad details kings never see. 
The sun that rises on the peasant's toil 
In happy lands not visited by war, 
And gilds thetr waving harvests with his beams. 
With barren splendour glares on desert fields 
Depopulated by the sword. The gale 
Sweeps sullen o'er them, loaded with the cries 
Of frantic widows and of orphan babes, 
That else had borne upon its gladsome wing 
Th<* careless carol of the husbandman, 
Tilling in peace and liberty his field. 

Gonzalvo qf Cordova. 

REPORTS of the indignities to which the noble prisoners had 
been exposed on their journey to London failed not to reach 
Scotland ; indignities which, galling enough in themselves, 
were not likely to be softened in the recounting. 

Upon their arrival at Barnet, they were all, without dis- 
tinction of persons, pinioned with cords. By some of the 
younger and more hot-headed of the noVle rebels- this humi- 
liating ceremony was not submitted to without remonstrance 
and resistance. Lord Nithsdale simply remarked to the Earl 
of Wintoun, " Degrade not yourself, my friend, by bandying 
words with those who are appointed to execute the behests of 
their superiors: the disgrace is on them who exult in this 
unworthy triumph ; not on us, who are thus triumphed over. 
Surely, Sea ton, you would rather endure, than inflict, such 
insults." Presently, however, he added, while he held his 
hands to have the cords attached, " 1 grant you I should be 
sorry my wife should witness this. My gentle Winifred ! 
thy shrinking, sensitive pride would never brook seeing thy 

o 3 

86 WINIFRED, 

husband thus manacled. For the first time I rejoice that thou 
art far, far away." 

At Highgate the prisoners were met by a large detachment 
of horse grenadiers and foot-guards, and here a halter was 
placed around the neck of each horje, which was held by a 
common soldier, walking by its side. 

In this mode did they make their entrance into the metro- 
polis, accompanied by a concourse of people shouting at them 
and reviling them ; some loading them with abuse, others 
singing scurrilous songs, and many beating upon warming- 
pans, in allusion to the popular notion concerning the birth of 
the Chevalier. 

With these increased indignities the spirit of Lord Niths- 
dale was excited. As he rode on, his carriage became each 
moment more lofty ; his dark brow assumed a more awful 
gloom ; his eye, from beneath its shade, flashed defiance on 
the mob ; his nostrils dilated ; the curl of his contemptuous 
lip plainly expressed how utterly he despised the mean taunts 
of the senseless rabble ! Thus erect, undaunted, he passed 
on through the crowded suburb* ; but before they entered the 
streets, a separation took place between those whose destination 
was different. 

General Forster and Brigadier Mackintosh were taken to 
Newgate, some to the Marohalsea, some to the Fleet ; while 
Lords Nithsdale, Derwentwater, Kenmure, Widdrington, 
Nairne, &c. were conveyed to the Tower. 

The moment of parting from their companions in mis- 
fortune, those with whom they had shared ho|e and fears, 
with whom they had enjoyed triumph and endured defeat, 
was one of bitterness ; a parting, too, which to all might be, 
and to many proved, an eternal one ; one which took place 
under the gaze of an insulting populace, and under circum- 
stances which admitted of no word of kindness, no last in- 
junction, not even the pressure of the friendly hand 1 

At that moment all former differences of opinion were 
forgotten ; the prudent counsel neglected, the headstrong per- 
severance in contrary measures, the impatient rejection of ad- 
vice, the contempt of timely warnings, all faded from the 
mind. As the different bands receded from each other's view, 
they saw but the trusted companion in arms, the fellow-suf- 
ferer, endeared by similar misfortunes. 

COUNTESS OF NITUSDALE. 8? 

The Earl of Nithsdale and the, other noblemen proceeded 
towards Westminster Bridge, where, according to custom, 
they were placed in a government barge, and were rowed 
down the river to the Tower. The boat shot London Bridge; 
it was admitted through the Traitor's Gate ; and, as it darted 
from the open daylight under the three low and gloomy 
arches, each prisoner cast a lingering look behind him, and as 
he withdrew his eyes, met those of his companions. 

There was no need of words to express the feelings of that 
moment; each read his neighbour's but too plainly in his own; 
each was aware the other felt he had taken his last look at 
the free bright world without the prison walls. And, alas ! to 
more than one was it indeed but too truly his last glimpse of 
freedom ; more than one was doomed never to pass those bar- 
riers, but to take his trial at Westminster Hall, and then to 
mount the scaffold upon Tower HilL 

Not a word was spoken. The plash of the waves against 
the stone stairs, as the sudden entrance of the barge into the 
narrow landing-place caused the muddy sullen water to over, 
flow the bottom steps and as quickly to recede, the hollow 
echo of the oars as they were shifted, were the only sounds 
heard. 

The barred gates were unlocked, and the prisoners, one by 
one, mounted the dank steps, and emerged into daylight, op- 
posite the Bloody Tower. They heard the portals closed and 
barred behind them ; they heard the splash of the portcullis 
as it was let down into the water, and each was then delivered 
over to the warder in whose apartments lodgings were as- 
signed to him. 

As long as he remained exposed to the observations of 
others, the most acute physiognomist could not have per- 
ceived any alteration in the countenance of the Earl of Niths- 
dale. He had, as it were, set his features to an expression of 
calm contempt and stoical endurance, which he would allow 
no circumstances to alter. With a firm step, a lofty unem- 
barrassed air, he followed his guide into the small and nar- 
row apartment which was destined to his use. He showed 
no emotion when the cords were removed from his wrists, 
and he replied with punctilious politeness to the civilities of 
the warder. 

At length the door was closed upon him, he was left in 
o 4 

88 WDTIPBBD, 

solitude ; no eye was upon him, and he was able to relax for 
a moment from the imperturbable composure which he had 
forced himself to maintain. He hid his face in his hands, 
and allowed the thought of his beloved wife, the memory of 
his innocent children, whom he perhaps was never, never more 
to behold, to rush over his soul ! 

With what tenderness did the recollection of home over- 
power him ! the thousand every-day enjoyments, which are 
not prized till they are lost ! 

The current of these enervating thoughts was checked by 
the sounds of steps upon the stairs, and he had only time to 
resume the unmoved countenance he had before preserved, 
when the entrance of some menials and attendants again 
forced him to repress the emotions, which, though repressed, 
could not be extinguished. 

The bringing in of his few necessary packages, the arrange- 
ments for his personal accommodation, die preparation* for some 
refreshment, were all inexpressibly irksome to him ; ami he 
impatiently awaited the welcome solitude of night, when he 
might revel in the luxury of thinking of the happy pa*t, the 
wretched present, the fearful future, without a witness. 

It was at this moment of general dismay, when, as we have 
already mentioned, each day saw the gradual diminution of 
the Earl of Mar's army ; when the greater proportion of the 
most zealous Jacobites were already in the hands of govern- 
ment ; in the midst of increasing disaffection among his re- 
maining partisans; that the unfortunate descendant of the 
house of Stuart landed in his native country, at Peter head, on 
the 22d of December, in the year 1715. 

He arrived almost as a fugitive. He had been obliged to 
traverse Normandy in disguise ; his retinue consisted but of 
six gentlemen ; and when the Earl of Mar, the Earl Ma- 
rischal, and some others, to the number of thirty, went from 
Perth to kiss the hand of the prince for whose cause they 
were in arms, they found him at Fetteresso, suffering with a 
severe attack of ague. 

Neither in body nor mind was he capable of inspiring his 
adherents with the ardour which could alone turn or even 
arrest the untoward course of events. Mutual discourage- 
ment was the feeling consequent upon this melancholy meet- 
ing. The unwelcome news which awaited the Chevalier, 

COUNTKSS OP NITHSDALE. 8p 

that, for a month previous to his landing, the resolution had 
been taken to evacuate Perth, did not tend to dispel the de- 
spondency natural to him ; while in the speech which he 
made to the privy council, whom he had immediately pro- 
ceeded to name, the despairing view which he took of his own 
situation pierced every moment through the words of hope 
which he thought himself bound to utter. He closed his ad- 
dress by saying, " That for him it would be no new thing to 
be unfortunate; his whole life, even from his cradle, had 
shown a constant series of misfortunes ; and he was prepared, 
if it so pleased God, to suffer the extent of the threats which 
his enemies threw out against him." 

With a spirit thus crushed by repeated disappointments, 
and a constitution impaired by illness, did this ill-fated prince 
proceed to enact the sovereign to a diminished and dispirited 
party of disunited followers. 

The intelligence of his arrival was speedily communicated to 
Seaforth, Huntley, and all the other chiefs who had formerly 
flocked to his standard, and who had withdrawn, wearied out 
by his protracted delay ; but they were summoned in vain, 
none of them heeded the notice. 

Preparations were made for King James's coronation at 
Scone ; a day of thanksgiving was appointed for his safe 
arrival ; prayers were offered up for his majesty in all the 
churches ; the currency of foreign coins was enjoined ; and 
the convention of the Scottish estates was called together. 

The Countess of Nithsdale experienced a momentary sensa- 
tion of hope and exultation when she heard that the monarch 
to whom all belonging to her had been so constantly devoted 
had actually set foot in the realm of his ancestors ; and her 
generous heart throbbed with indignation when she heard of 
the nobles who neglected to obey his summons. She thought 
how different would have been the conduct of her own brave 
lord ; and she resolved to do as, if he had been at liberty, he 
would himself have done, and as he seemed, by what he said 
concerning General Forster, to expect her to do. She there- 
fore prepared herself for journeying to Scone, there to pay 
the homage she conceived to be due to her lawful sovereign. 

She travelled privately, not to attract the notice of the 
royalists ; but as she passed through the country which lies 
between Stirling and Perth, all was one scene of desolation. 

90 WINIFRED, 

By an edict of James's, the Tillages of Auchterarder, Black- 
ford, and Dunning, and other hamlets, had been destroyed by 
fire; houses, corn, and forage had all been laid waste, lest 
they should afford quarters to his enemies. 

Helpless women and desolate children had been deprived of 
their homes ; the blackened walls of the buildings which had 
been burnt contrasted cheerlessly with the snow which covered 
the ground. 

Lady Nithsdale's journey was one of sorrow and dismay. 
She thought upon the days of her youthful enthusiasm, and 
she looked into her heart in vain to find it there. She remem- 
bered how in her Flemish convent her girlish heart had beat 
when she imagined her king actually on British land, and 
herself a witness of the joyous restoration ; and her childish 
dream was fulfilled, the king was 

Him*, ham*, ham* 
Maine to bit tin counlrre : 

but misfortune, disappointment, time, had worked their effect ; 
and with her husband a prisoner, her children banished, her 
country laid waste, she could not work up her feelings to the 
pitch of loyalty which she deemed it her duty to have ex- 
perienced. 

At length the fair town of Perth rose to her view, and the 
broad Tay swept gracefully around it. She saw the ancient 
palace of Scone, the spot where all the Scottish kings had 
been crowned, and she tried to feel assured that " the king 
would enjoy his own again." 

That night she took up her lodgings in Perth ; and the 
following day she repaired to the royal palace of Scone, there 
to kiss the hand of her monarch.- 

She felt an universal trepidation ; not so much from the 
awe which majesty inspires, as from the fear of seeing bar 
king in a condition so unbecoming his dignity. A noble mind 
shrinks from seeing nobility degraded ; and she felt more 
abashed at the poor attendance around the king, and at the 
want of state in his appointments, than others do at all the 
pomp and ceremony of the most gorgeous and splendid court. 

The Chevalier received the Countess of Nithsdale with 
what he meant to be marked attention ; but hi* manner waa 
subdued, his bearing dejected ; partly through his late illness, 
and partly from that consciousness of being marked out for 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALU. 91 

misfortune, which pervaded his every look, his every action. 
There was a melancholy majesty irt his thin person, and his 
handsome but pale features, which (although united with a 
certain stiffness and reserve, little calculated to find favour 
in the sight of the adventurous and the desperate who alone 
adhered to his cause,) interested Lady Nithsdale, while it 
saddened her. 

The Earl of Mar presented her to the Chevalier, whom, 
upon her entrance, she found engaged in conversation with the 
Earl Marischal in one of the windows that overlooked the flat 
country between the palace and the Tay. She dropped upon 
both her knees, overcome with emotion at finding herself in 
the actual presence of her king, and with grief at the desolate 
appearance of all around him, of all without and all within his 
residence. 

He quickly raised her, and imprinting on her marble fore- 
head a royal kiss, he professed his satisfaction at becoming 
personally acquainted with one, whose family had ever been 
faithful servants to his own. 

The measured expressions chilled her ; she had never before 
looked upon the sacrifices made either by the Herberts or the 
Maxwells but as the performance of a bounden duty, in which 
they had not failed ; but when these sacrifices seemed to be 
considered in the same light by him for whom they had been 
made, their magnitude and their extent increased in her eyes. 
The Chevalier then inquired whether she had received news 
lately from the earl her husband. 

Her eyes filled with tears ; the inquiry was made in so 
cold, so formal a tone : " But once, sire, since he has been a 
prisoner ; " and had she at that moment attempted a longer 
sentence, her voice would have failed her altogether. 

" We hope that the worthy lord's health continued unim- 
paired by confinement ? " 

She struggled with her feelings, and replied, " My lord 
complained not of any personal privation or hardship. His 
thoughts were all, as they have ever been, for his king, his 
country, and his faith ! " 

" It is now many years since we once had an interview with 
the Earl of Nithsdale in Flanders ; and if our memory does 
not fail, we were then suffering from this same agueish com- 
plaint which discomposes us at present. Methinks our health 

92 WINIFRED, 

is always least fitted for exertion and fatigue when circum- 
stances call most imperiously for both ! But so it has ever 
been with us ! " He sighed, and his eyes instinctively sought 
the ground. Then turning again to the countess, *' Is your 
ladyship's seat situated far from hence?" he inquired, for, a 
stranger to Scotland, he knew not the topographical details of 
the country. 

" Please your majesty, I journeyed from my husband's castle 
of Terreagles near Dumfries." 

" We hope your journey was prosperous and agreeable, 
although we fear in this weather it must have been somewhat 
tedious. Dumfries is some days' journey hence, I fancy." 

Lady Nithsdale thought upon the villages in ashes, the de- 
solated fields, and could not find words for her reply, but con- 
tented herself with bowing assent. When, turning to the 
Earl of Mar, the Chevalier remarked, that if the present severe 
weather continued, the Tay would soon be completely frozen 
over. " In that case," he continued, " the river will no 
longer be serviceable as a protection and defence." 

" Neither will it be any impediment to the design I have 
been explaining to your majesty," replied the earl in a low 
voice. 

Lady Nithsdale soon after retired from the royal interview, 
discouraged and dissatisfied. She had never found the desired 
opportunity of speaking her husband s sentiments concerning 
General Forster ; and she now felt intimately convinced how 
wild and hopeless an enterprise it must ever have been, to re- 
place on the throne one who was so little calculated to conquer 
or to win it. 

CHAPTER XV. 

Kay. hc*d thrtn not, fair Naryarct ; true, ihry art 
L'ntutor'd, and in 'havtour surly, rough ; 
Rut they have heart*, nor unacquainted are 
With iiit.u charine* and strong affection* 
At oft within the prickly husk lie* UpC 
The sweetest kernel. 

OhpsMh 

TIIK Countess of Nithsdale had intended to return for the 
present to Terreagles, till she could ascertain what course 

COUNTESS OF N1THSDALE. Q3 

would be most pleasing to her husband, when, upon her return 
from Scone, she received a letter from the Duchess of Montrose, 
which decided at once what was the line of conduct it now 
became her duty, as well as her inclination, to pursue. The 
duchess's epistle was conceived in the following terms : 

" Though the late unfortunate events have separated Chris- 
tian Montrose from her dear Lady Nithsdale, her friend and 
cousin must not imagine that she has forgotten the happy days 
she spent at Terreagles, or that the affection she then professed 
has aught abated. Trust me, dearest cousin, I have felt for 
you, as I am sure you would have felt for me, had the cause 
you have espoused proved successful, and had my husband 
been the sufferer in that which he esteems the just one. 

" At my earnest request, my lord duke has constantly made 
inquiries concerning the prisoners in the Tower, and your good 
lord arrived there in health and safety on the 10th. I under- 
stand he is not inconveniently lodged, and I do not learn that 
he is in want of any necessary comforts ; indeed, many of 
your party who have been slack in openly joining the insur- 
rection, make peace with their consciences by supplying the 
Jacobite prisoners with money and luxuries of all kinds. I 
have heard say, that when in the streets it has been difficult 
to procure silver for a guinea, in the various prisons change 
for large sums might be procured in silver and in gold. They 
say also, that among the more wild and thoughtless of die 
prisoners, much mirth and revelry prevail ; and, as I hear, 
they so confidently rely upon the merit of their unconditional 
surrender at Preston, that they trouble themselves but slightly 
concerning their approaching trials. It is reported, that the 
Earl of Derwentwater observed to your good lord, that many 
of bis followers were fitter inhabitants for Bridewell than a 
state prison. 

" Let not my dear cousin be needlessly alarmed, when I tell 
her that the lords will be impeached on the 10th of January, 
and that I have reason to believe my Lord Nithsdale would 
not now deem it unadvisable that she should repair to London. 
Indeed, I am informed that his most earnest wish is to see 
her ; and I have no doubt that, supposing the result should 
not be so favourable as many of the more sanguine are inclined 
to believe, her presence may prove of service as well as of 
comfort to her lord. 

94 WINIFRED, 

" I should advise her to lodge herself privately, as, to my 
poor way of thinking, any appearance of rank or splendour 
may not be agreeable to those in power ; and I think I am 
not mistaken when 1 say that the riotous mode of living of 
many of those in confinement does uot serve to forward their 
cause. 

" I would myself have visited the good Earl of Niths- 
dalf, that I might have informed you how it fared with 
him, had it been fitting that I should do so openly ; but 
my lord duke deemed such a measure would not be advisable ; 
and as to visiting him privately, I feared that you and others 
might have suspected your noble husband of having learned 
from young Bottair of Athol, that a prisoner may be a very 
dangerous gallant, that 

' Stooe walU do not a pri*oo make.' 

" ' Mad-cap Christian/ as you called me once at Terreagles, 
is not so void of discretion as to run the risk of being taken 
for one of the ' divine Altheas ' who come ' to whisper at the 
grate.* 

" Indeed, I am sobered since those days ; and these are 
times which may make the most unthinking reflect. Sad or 
merry, thoughtful or giddy, my heart is still with my dear 
cousin, and she may count on my willing services should the 
time arrive when they may be useful. She will not fail to let 
me know when she reaches London ; and meanwhile she will 
believe me her faithful and affectionate friend 

and cousin, 
CHRISTIAN MONTROKK." 

This letter had followed Lady Nithsdale from Terreagles, 
which had occasioned some delay in its coming to hand. 
It had been brought by Walter Elliot, an old and trusty 
servant, who had been ever in the confidence of his master, 
and on whom Lady Nithsdale had relied for advice and pro- 
tection since the absence of her husband. 

Her resolution wax instantly taken ; with Amy Evans and 
Walter Elliot she determined at all hazards to set forth upon 
her journey : but in the condition of the country at that 
period, means of conveyance were not easily procured ; and it 
was highly expedient she should escape all observation : she 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 95 

therefore gladly availed herself of such steeds as Walter Elliot 
could procure in the exigency of Che moment, and although 
totally unaccustomed to horse exercise, proceeded in this 
manner as far as Newcastle. 

She there parted with the horses, and took the stage, think- 
ing she should thus travel more expeditiously ; and trusting 
that, when quite beyond the boundaries of Scotland, she was 
not so likely to be recognised. Such had been the tumult of 
her feelings, she had scarcely had time to be conscious of 
fatigue or cold, or to be aware of the strange and unusual 
companions with whom she was occasionally brought in 
contact. When, however, she found herself enveloped in 
her cloak, her hood brought low over her face, and en- 
sconced in a corner of the heavy and lumbering vehicle, she 
found leisure to think, to feel, anil to suffer. 

The capacious coach contained several other passengers, 
but Lady Nithsdale heeded them not ; their discourse turned 
chiefly on the comparative merits of different breeds of cattle 
and sheep, on Scottish Kyloes and Cheviot mutton, and she 
knew not what words they uttered, till her attention was sud- 
denly arrested by one of them remarking, " The last time I 
journeyed along this road was some six months back ; I had 
been as far as Hawick to buy some of those famous north- 
country sheep, and, to be sure, all those parts were in a fine 
disturbed state. I was obliged to come back without the 
sheep. Some thought their property was safer in sheep than 
in money, for whichsoever side got the upper hand, butchers' 
meat would still be wanted ; others thought they should be 
sure of a good price when there were two armies, as it were, 
in the neighbourhood, and they asked twice their worth for 
the sheep. As for me, I would not give much hard money 
for the creatures, which might be taken from me, and killed, 
and then what should I do ? There's no telling in troublous 
times what's justly the value of any thing, so I had my 
journey for my pains ! and as I came back, those rebel lords 
were going about proclaiming their mock king, and a pretty 
penalty they are likely to pay for their folly. Why could not 
they be quiet, and enjoy themselves at their own great houses, 
where they say the Earl of Derwentwater lived like a prince, 
and was beloved by great and small : and why could not 
they let us enjoy ourselves too ? Fanning went well while 

96 WINIFRED, 

good Queen Anne lived ; crops were pretty fair, and pno - 
held steady, and I don't know what folks would have more, 
not I ! " 

" Well, it all bids fair to be quiet enough now," replied a 
rough-looking farmer who sat opposite ; " they'll settle old 
scores with them all. They have made away with a pretty 
many of them at once at Preston ; and I know for certain 
that the king means to have off the heads of every one of 
those he has got up at London now, so they will make no 
more disturbance ! " 

Amy turned an uneasy glance upon her lady, whose bosom 
jshe could perceive heaved rapidly beneath the folds of her 
cloak ; but her face was towards the window, and the black 
hood concealed it from all within the coach. She feared to 
draw attention upon her, and she remained tranquil. 

" Nay, I can't think the king will have all their beads off 
either/' rejjined the first spokesman. " Why, there are as 
many as twenty lords, to say nothing of knights, and gentle* 
men, and members of parliament, and such." 

" 1 have been informed that such are his roost gracious 
majesty's intentions," answered the yeoman, with the import- 
ance of a privy-councillor. 

" For God's sake, what is your authority ? " exclaimed the 
Countess of Nith&dale, unable any longer to control her 
feelings. 

" Young mistress, I do not consider myself called upon to 
give up those who tell me a bit of newt,** 

" Well, neighbour, you need not be so touchy about your 
news ; who knows but the young woman may have a friend 
among some of the rebels, and she need not be the more of a 
rebel herself ! Brothers and sisters, fathers and sons, have 
taken different sides, but they are not the less relation* for 
that Ah ! that's one of the misfortunes of these civil wars ! 
They're not like a good war with the French, or the Dutch, 
or the Spanish ; when you know for certain that every parlez- 
wtw, and every mynheer, and every Don, is your enemy. 
Hut when people of one country take to fighting, why, if you 
chance to be in a battle, you don't know who you may be 
killing ; and if you chance to tell a bit of news promiscuously, 
you don't know whose feelings you may be hurting. Folks 
should not be over free of their speech in these times ; and, I 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 97 

ask your pardon, neighbour, but you should not be so positive 
about what such as you and I can*t know. Don't you look 
so sad, mistress. How should we, any of us, know what the 
king's thoughts are ? " 

" But we may know those who do know what the king's 
thoughts are : not that 1 wish to hurt the gentlewoman's feel- 
ings." And the farmer relapsed into silence, somewhat of- 
fended at the doubt with which his annunciation of the sove- 
reign's private sentiments had been received. 

*' Are you from Scotland, madam ? " resumed the good- 
natured yeoman, whose curiosity was somewhat awakened by 
Lady Nithsdale's evident emotion. 

" Yes, sir," answered Amy quickly. " My friend and I 
come from Scotland last, but we are natives of Wales;" which, 
although strictly true, would, she imagined, lead their new ac- 
quaintances from suspecting who they really were. 

" And are ye for London now, my pretty lass ? " 

" Yes, sir ; our friends live in London now." 

" If this snow goes on falling at such a rate, why, I think 
we shall never get to York ; and as for you, you will never 
get to London. I'll be bound the stage will be stopped to- 
morrow. I declare there's no making out the hedge from the 
ditch, the snow has drifted so in some places. I don't know 
that I ever remember such a hard winter as this has been. 
My poor ewes ! " he continued, shaking his head, " I fear I 
shall have bad luck with them ! However, 'tis as the Lord 
pleases ! I dare say 'tis all for the best. If we have quiet 
times, and we have nothing to fight against but the seasons, 
as God sends them to us, we shall xlo well enough. As long 
as we are in the Lord's hands, and have only the troubles He 
gees fit to try us with, and none of those man makes for him- 
self, it will all be right ! Is not that true, young woman ?'' 

" Indeed, sir, I am no judge of public matters," replied 
Lady Nithsdale in a faltering voice, for she felt that it had 
been the Jacobites who had disturbed the public tranquillity ; 
and true and reasonable as was the sentiment expressed by 
the yeoman, she could not echo it without throwing blame on 
those she most loved and honoured, or without belying the 
opinions and the feelings of her whole life. 

" Humph ! " replied the yeoman : " I do not call those 
public matters. I think I have said nothing but what every 

H 

98 WINIFRED, 

good Christian should say amen to. I don't see how any- 
body can help saying 'tis better to be in the hands of the Lord 
than of men, not I." 

" Nor I, indeed !" exclaimed Lady Nithsdale with fervour. 
" O Lord, take us into thy hands, and deal with us accord, 
ing to thy mercy ! " 

" Well, that's much what I said, only not in such a way. 
Verily, if I don't believe she is one of the new Dissenters that 
have sprung up of late ! " 

Amy Evans, anxious to withdraw observation from her 
lady, asked him some question concerning his flock ; and, 
affecting great interest in such matters, she was enabled, from 
her youthful Welsh education, to converse with sufficient 
knowledge of the subject to lead the honest unsuspicious 
farmer into a detail of his own plans and systems, in which 
he readily forgot what had at first excited his surprise in the 
bearing of the silent and serious young gentlewoman. 

By the time they reached York, his prediction concerning 
the weather was fully verified : the wheels of the heavy 
vehicle could scarcely cut through the deep snow ; and so 
slow was their progress, that it had long been dark before the 
stage arrived at its destination in one of the most dismal 
streets of the ancient city of York. 

The snow continued to fall during the whole of the night, 
and the next morning the roads were found to be so totally 
impassable, that not only were all stage-coaches and carriages 
of every description arrested in their progress, but the post 
itself was stopped. 

Lady Nithsdale's disappointment amounted Almost to de- 
spair. Every hour was precious. The letter which announced 
her husband's wish to see her had already been somewhat de- 
layed on the road, and the duchess said that on her exertion* 
might depend the mode in which his case might be looked 
upon. She thought, too, on his desolate, his forlorn condition ; 
she judged from her own feelings how intensely he must de- 
sire her presence; and she deemed any hardship, any suffer- 
ing, preferable to the mental anxiety of being shut up in 
York, unable to hear of him, to communicate with him, to 
exert herself for him. 

The long period of suspense and of forced inactivity which 
she had passed at Terreagles had been almost insupportably 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 99 

irksome ; and now, when her lord- had expressed a wish for 
her company, when possibly she might be of real service to 
him, to be imprisoned in a dismal room in an inn at York : 
it was an infliction not to be endured. 

She again employed Walter Elliot to procure three saddle- 
horses ; and, in spite of his dutiful remonstrances, and all un- 
used as she had ever been to brave the inclemencies of the 
weather, or to encounter any bodily fatigue, she set off on 
horseback, through roads in which the snow often came up 
to the girths of the saddle. To Amy, who had been a moun- 
tain-bred lass who had often wandered about her native 
hills on the rough Welsh ponies the undertaking was not 
one of such difficulty ; though she feared the strength of her 
delicately nurtured lady would never stand such hardships ; 
but the soul which animated that apparently fragile form was 
such as to communicate to the frame some of its own power 
and elasticity. As they rode out of the town, the sun shone 
forth in dazzling splendour upon the brilliant whiteness of the 
scene. The roof of each house was clothed with a thick soft 
covering of newly-fallen snow, which the smoke of the town 
had not yet tarnished, though the power of the sun had al- 
ready melted it in some degree, so that each gable was orna- 
mented with a fringe of long pendent icicles. As they quitted 
the town and waded through the obstructed road, still the 
same dazzling whiteness presented itself to their view : the 
load which bent down the branches of the trees was not yet 
dissolved ; and when the small birds, twittering in the wel- 
come sunshine, lighted on a feathered spray, they shook from 
it a shower of bright snow-flakes. 

To a mind at ease the scene was beautiful and cheerful ; 
and Lady Nithsdale in the midst of her sorrows felt grateful 
for the cheering light and for the clear pure atmosphere. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

The drowsy night grows on the world, and now 
The busy craftsman and o'erlabour'd hind 
Forget the travail of the day in sleep : 
Care only wakes, and moping pentiveness ROWB. 

THE sun was now midway through its course, and their prc - 

gress had been but slow. " Is not my dear lady in need of 

H 2 

100 WINIFRED, 

rest ? " inquired Amy Evans, as they approached a small vil- 
lage, at the entrance of which there was a newly-painted gaudy 
sign of the King's Head. 

" No, Amy, no ; I need no rest. The consciousness of 
drawing nearer to my lord is rest enough for me." 

" But, honoured madam," interposed Walter Elliot, " it 
were not ower wise in us to push our steeds too hard. They 
dumb creatures are but flesh and bluid like our ainselves ; and 
should they chance to knock up, what shall we do, I'm think- 
ing. 'Tis weary wark for them lifting their hoofs eighteen or 
twenty inches through the snaw every step they take. An* it 
please your leddyship, we had better gie them a rest at yon 
bra'- look ing inn." 

" Not there, good Walter, not there. Look at that flaring 
sign I A little farther on there is another place of refresh- 
ment ; 'tis but an humble one I grant, but at this moment 
any one will be more welcome to me than this." And she 
averted her eyes from the " King George's Head/' in large 
and golden letters, which adorned the front of the building. 
The place she had selected was indeed but a wretched ale- 
house, and they only stayed there long enough to allow the 
animals necessary food. She was impatient to be gone ; and 
as they seldom could proceed beyond a foot's pace, they 
were still some miles from their destined resting-place for the 
night when the short day had closed in ; the sun had already 
set crimson beyond the cold snowy fields, and the clear deep 
blue of the heavens was spangled with innumerable stars. 

The cold was piercing ; and her attendants shivered, and 
wrapped their cloaks closer around them. At length they 
passed a blacksmith's forge; and the bright sparks which 
darted upwards through the chinks in the roof, the ruddy light 
which flared through the open door, the clear blaze of the fire 
itself, looked invitingly warm. Amy could not help remark- 
ing to Walter Elliot how comfortable and tempting was the 
interior of the forge. 

" Art thou cold, my poor girl ? " inquired the countess, 

" Why, madam, of a surety the wind is very sharp ; I 
should have thought your ladyship would have felt it more 
keenly than myself, who have not been so softly reared. I 
have been regretting all the day that we forgot to bring your 
mantle lined with sable, which her grace of Montro&e tent you 
last winter." 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 101 

" Xay, heed me not, good Amy : I thought not of the cold 
But now you speak of it, the night is frosty." 

" I have been fain to ask you, honoured madam, where 
your ladyship means to abide when you reach London ? " 

" In truth, Amy, I cannot tell ; I thought but of seeing 
my lord : when once in London, I felt I should be near to 
him ; but it is more than probable they will not allow me to 
share his prison, and I suppose I must seek lodgings. Her 
grace of Montrose bade me live privately, and advised me not 
to affect any state in my accommodations : but 1 am little 
used to the bustle of a crowded city, and scarcely know how 
I must proceed/' 

"If your ladyship will excuse my boldness, I have been 
thinking that I know of some one who might stand our friend. 
Does not your ladyship recollect, when you were in Wales, 
just at the entrance of the village, about a mile from Poole 
Castle, a low white house, with a high tiled roof composed of 
many gables and strange angles ? Two goodly cypress trees 
grew before the windows on each side of the gravel walk which 
led to the porch, and the trim garden was fenced from the 
road by a low stone wall, and a laurustinus hedge within. 
Your ladyship must remember they were the finest laurus- 
tinus' in all the country, arid they were always the first in 
bloom in that sheltered spot." 

" Yes. I think I remember the white house, Amy ; the 
sun seemed ever to shine upon it, and make it gleam white 
against the green hill which rose behind." 

" Sure enough, madam, that was it. The midday sun 
shone full upon it, just about the hour your ladyship and your 
honoured mother were used to take your customary airing. 
And do you not remember, madam, a tall pale gentleman, who 
wore his hair parted up the middle of his forehead, and hang- 
ing long over his ears : it was silver-white, for he was very 
old ? " 

" Oh, yes ! I recollect him well, for he used to lean over 
the gate that opened upon the road, and watch our carriage as 
it drove by. He always bowed with a respectful yet a stately 
air to my mother as we passed : and I well remember her say- 
ing he had been a cavalier in King Charles the First's time, 
and she regretted that his increasing infirmities did not allow 
him to visit her, for she would have been proud to receive 

H 3 

102 WIXIKRED, 

under her roof one who had been a faithful servant to his 
master in times of trouble. If I mistake not, my mother said 
that when quite a youth he had been one of the gallant cava- 
liers who rode post, along this very road, to carry to the king 
at York the news of each day's proceedings in the parliament. 
Would we had their steeds, and their strength ! by this time 
we might have reached London." 

" Well, madam, this old gentleman had a young daughter, 
who was little older than myself. Her mother had died early ; 
and the old gentleman had no companion but the merry maiden, 
and the merry maiden had none but her reverend but melan- 
choly father. She made acquaintance with me one May morn- 
ing, when we were gathering cowslips and primroses for our 
garlands. 1 was to be queen, and she gave me all her posies 
to help adorn my crown ; and when we all came round, a 
troop of laughing girls with our garlands, Colonel Hilton gave 
me a gold piece. After that we often met ; and as the colonel 
found that my mother was looked upon more as a friend than 
as a servant by the honoured duchess, and as I was somewhat 
better taught than other maidens of my degree, he would often 
let us pass an afternoon together, and young Mrs. Mellicent 
Hilton would teach roe some of her songs, and read to roe 
from her beautiful books, and in return I instructed her in 
many curious stitches and rare sort* of embroidery ; and thus 
we whiled away the hours ; and she promised that we always 
should be friends, though she was a lady, and I but the 
daughter of a menial. She married a Mr. Morgan a few 
months before your ladyship came into Wales : they said the 
old cavalier did not over well like the match, for Mr. Morgan's 
family had turned against King James the Second ; bat he 
was a well-favoured young man, and Mrs. MelUcent, poor 
soul, saw no one else, so it was but natural she should indine 
towards him. 

" The poor old colonel died soon after ; but before he died 
he grew quite fond of his son-in-law, and he left all he had 
been able to save of his property to him and to Mrs. Mellicent, 
provided they added his name of Hilton to that of Morgan. 
I have since heard that Mr. Morgan is in favour with the new 
people, and that he has a place about the new court, so I 
think she must have it in her power to serve us ; and if Amy 
Evans's old playmate, Mrs. Mellicent, has not quite forgotten 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 

the pleasures and the pastimes of her youth, I am sure she 
will have the inclination to do so." 

My good and thoughtful Amy ! and do you know wne 
Mrs. Morgan now resides ? " 

" Yes dearest madam. 'Twas only m the last letter I re- 
ceived from Wales, that I learned many of these particulars 
about my old friend, and that she was just settled in her new 
house in Bloomsbury." 

" But if her husband is so staunch a Whig, Us more than 
probable she will look coldly on me, who am the wife of one 
whom she thinks a rebel." 

' Nay, madam, but she loved her good old father dearly, 
though she would have been loth to give up her sweetheart for 
what then seemed a by -gone matter. She would affect you 
none the less for being of the same way of thinking as the 
parent to whom she was ever a dutiful child ; and, moreover, 
the world may work great changes in the hearts of those who 
live in it, but Mrs. Mellicent Hilton's must be sorely changed 
indeed if she is not one whose eyes will overflow at any tale 
of woe, and if she will stop to calculate the chances of success 
before she troubles herself to assist a fellow-creature in distress. 
Her old father used often to bid her have more discretion in 
her kindness, and to tell her she gave her alms to those who 
least deserved them : but she never could say " no to any 
one that asked charity in a piteous tone of voice, and the very 
dogs about the white manor-house were kept so fat by Mrs. 
Mellicent that you might tell them from any others by their 
good case. And then, madam, it seems to my poor judgment, 
that one who knows something of the court, and yet is not -so 
verv great as the Duke of Montrose, or his lordship s cousin 
her' grace of Buccleugh, or the Earl of Pembroke, or any of 
those nobles, may prove of service in a quiet way, when sucU 
great people might fear to attract notice." 

There is much truth in what you say. You have a per- 
tinent judgment, Amy, and it may be of good avail; we will 
think more of this. But we are drawing near our place of 
destination. See ! by the lights gleaming from so many win- 
dows, this must be a considerable town. Walter, is it not here 
we are to pass the night ? " 

' Yes, madam. Your leddyship maun set up here for the 
H 4 

104 WINIFRED, 

night, an' it so please you. I weel know, for one, that my 
puir nag could na' carry me a mile farther." 

The snow became less deep as they approached the me- 
tropolis, the roads more beaten, and they were enabled each 
day to compass longer journeys. On the evening of the 23rd 
of January they entered London. 

Lady Nithsdale's first impulse would have led her to the 
Tower, but it was too late to hope for admittance, and she 
thought that from the Duchess of Montrose she was most 
likely to learn how it fared with her husband, and what steps 
it might be most advisable for her to take. 

Leaving Amy, therefore, to make what arrangements were 
necessary for their accommodation, she instantly took coach 
and proceeded to the residence of the Duke of Montrose. She 
sent word by a servant to the duchess, that a person desired 
to see her grace upon business of importance, and with the 
Milage she gave a written billet entreating to see her in pri- 
vate. She did not sign the paper, not feeling assured how far 
any communication with the wife of a state prisoner might 
compromise the duchess herself. She was certain that the 
sight of her hand writing would procure her instant admission ; 
and yet the few moments she passed waiting in the street were 
spent in a state of mental agitation which surprised herself. 

It was a painfully new situation for the daughter of the Duke 
of Powis, who was thoroughly imbued with the indelible no- 
bility of aristocratic birth, to find herself alone, in a hired 
coach, as a suitor at the door of one with whom she had ever 
lived on terms of equality and intimacy. It waa not that she 
doubted the kindness, the sincerity, the generosity, of her good 
friend and cousin ; but she now felt more lost, more unpro- 
tected, in the busy, noisy, thronged streets of London, than 
she had done in all the difficulties of her perilous journey. 

Only a few momenta, however, elapsed before the portals 
were thrown open, and she found herself ushered through the 
rank of powdered liveried domestics, who in those days were 
deemed indispensable appendages to the great, into a small 
ante-room on the ground-floor. 

Lady Nithsdale sank on a seat, bewildered, overcome. It all 
seemed to her like a strange dream. What news might await 
her ! Three weeks had elapsed since the date of the duchess's 
letter what fearful events might not have occurred ! 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 105 

The door opened ; the duchess appeared, beautiful, brilliant, 
blooming, glittering in diamonds and jewels, and rustling in 
satins and point- lace. " My sweet cousin ! my dear AVini- 
fred ! " exclaimed the duchess. 

" Oh, Christian ! dearest friend ! " and Lady Nithsdale 
rushed into her open arms, and wept upon her neck. 

For twelve days body and mind had been upon the stretch, 
and the words, the tones of kindness at this moment of ex- 
haustion, completely unnerved her. " How is he ? " she in- 
quired, as she sobbed upon the duchess's bosom. 

" Well, dear cousin, well. Compose yourself; why is this, 
my gentle, staid, tranquil cousin of Nithsdale ? These tears, 
this trembling, do not promise well for the work you have in 
hand." 

'* True, true ! " exclaimed Lady Nithsdale, " it is over ! 
'twas but a momentary weakness. I have ridden a weary dis- 
tance to-day," she continued, attempting to smile, and hastily 
pushing her hair off her brow ; " and with a heart not well 
at ease," she added, pressing her hand upon her bosom, as if to 
still its throbbings: '" but tell me all ; I am ready now to hear 
and to endure. On the 10th they were impeached," she said 
firmly and resolutely ; " of course, my lord pleaded guilty." 

" He did. Last Thursday, the 19th, when the lords sent 
in their reply to the impeachment, your noble husband, with 
Lord Derwentwater and Lord Kenmure, pleaded guilty to 
the articles exhibited against them. Lord Wintoun alone on 
various pretences petitioned for longer delay." 

tf 1 knew my lord would never deny the share he took in 
this sad business," exclaimed Lady Nithsdale, with a con- 
fidence and pride in his integrity which for a moment over- 
came her fears for his safety. Then she added, in a tone 
which seemed to ask for reassurement, " Surely this plain- 
dealing, this honesty, cannot indispose the king ! His sur- 
render at Preston " 

"Yes, yes, we will hope for the best," interrupted the 
duchess, anxious to evade the question, for she was too well 
aware that the Earl of Nithsdale was looked upon with fear 
and suspicion ; and though she could not bring herself to 
crush Lady Nithsdale's hopes, she dared not encourage them, 
" only be calm and prudent." 

" Trust me, I am now firm and resolved : I am ready, 

106 WINIFIU I>, 

even impatient, to be stirring in ray husband's nervice. It 
was the sight of you, dear cousin, and the kind tones of your 
sweet voice ! n 

" Well, no more of this : I will see you to-morrow, when 
we will confer more at large : I must not now delay. I am 
to court to-night, as you may perceive by all this gay ap- 
parel ; my lord duke is there already in attendance, and I 
must not be late. But, before I leave you, let me en force one 
thing ; I fear they will refuse you admittance to your hus- 
band, unless you consent to share his imprisonment: this 
must not be ! You must remain at liberty, or we cannot 
concert our measures ; you must yourself see and speak with 
some I will name to you. I have assurances that the king 
will show mercy to several of the prisoners ; but still we all 
know the good Earl of Nithsdale has many enemies, and there 
is the more need you should be in freedom to use your in- 
fluence with them. Remember, that for his sake, you must 
not preclude yourself from serving him far more effectually 
than you could by sharing his prison." 

" Trust me, my dear friend, I will obey your injunctions. 
Whatever it may cost me, I will turn back from his prison- 
door, if it is for his good that I should do so. May Heaven 
bless and reward you, dearest cousin !" and she seized the 
duchess's hand and pressed it to her heart. 

" 'Pshaw ! silly Winifred, you need not thank me yet," 
replied the duchess, half turning away, and brushing off a 
tear ; " you must not make me weep before I go to court, or 
my eyes will make no conquests to-night, and my lord duke, 
who loves to hear me praised, will be angry with you, fair 
cousin. 1 must stay with you no longer, or I shall play the 
very fool, and not be fit to show myself at St. James's. One 
kiss, dear cousin, and adieu ! It would not be wise that I 
should absent myself from the king's presence just now. For 
your sake I must not linger ; " and the fair creature moved 
away in grace and beauty. 

She glided through the hall ; the splendid coach drove off; 
the running-footmen, bearing torches, preceded and accom- 
panied her. 

" How unjust," thought Lady Nithsdale, is the common 
accusation that pomp and splendour harden the heart ! Where 
could I find more true kindness and sympathy than in my 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 10? 

dear cousin Christian, whose life has been one sunny dream of 
unclouded brilliancy ? " But as sne slowly and thoughtfully 
returned in solitude to the temporary lodging which Amy had 
procured for her, she pondered on the duchess's words " My 
lord has many enemies, she said : how can he have enemies ? 
Surely, if favour is to be shown to any, to whom could it be 
more properly extended than to him ? Does not the kind 
duchess alarm herself needlessly? And yet she knows the 
counsels of those in power. She would not wish to excite 
unreasonable fears in my mind. Alas ! what can she mean ? 
My lord was not one of the first to join the insurgents : Lord 
Derwentwater was already in arms ; Forster was at the head 
of a considerable body of troops ; the Earl of Mar had set up 
King James's standard. Neither had he, like the Earl of Mar, 
ever made professions of loyalty to the House of Hanover. 
General Forster is even now a member of King George's par- 
liament. But my dear lord is not obnoxious from either of 
these causes. He has never been guilty of treachery, neither 
has he ever been forward in causing disturbances in his native 
land ; but when civil broils became inevitable, then then he 
was not found wanting to the family for which his ancestors have 
bled and suffered. Oh ! would that the morrow were arrived ! 
This long tedious night, which must intervene before I can see, 
learn, hear, know, do anything further, how wearisome, how 
irksome is it ! " 

Upon her return to her lodgings, she found that Amy Evans, 
on her part, had not been idle. She had already sought and 
obtained an interview with her former companion Mrs. Morgan. 

Nearly ten years had elapsed since Mellicent Hilton had left 
the Welsh valley of her childhood as the bride of Mr. Morgan, 
and from that time the playfellows had never met ; for before 
Mrs. Morgan returned to visit her father in his solitude, Amy 
had accompanied the Countess of Nithsdale into Scotland. 

Mrs. Morgan was fortunately alone on the evening in ques- 
tion, when Amy, half-alarmed at her own presumption, pre- 
sented herself at her door. 

She did not at first recollect, in the Mrs. Evans who was 
announced, the merry Amy of her childhood ; neither would 
Amy have recognised, in the tall, slender, modish lady before 
her, the buxom, rosy girl who had climbed the mountain paths, 
and pulled the wild flowers with her. She hesitated for a 

108 WINIFRED, 

moment, while she assured herself that, although the com- 
plexion was less brilliant, and the full form had fined into a 
marvellous taper waist, still the laughing blue eye was the 
same, the expression of the free hearty smile the same, although 
the dimples were not so visible in the less rounded cheek. 

Mrs. Morgan, with an air of courtly breeding, bent herself 
gracefully towards the stranger, waiting till she opened her 
business ; when Amy, half abashed at the changes which had 
taken place in the exterior of her former friend, half reassured 
by the kindly countenance which spoke that the heart remained 
unchanged, after making a low and respectful courtesy, began 
with some hesitation, " that she could scarcely hope Mrs. 
Morgan would still bear in mind the childish playmate of 
Mrs. Mellicent Hilton, Amy, the daughter of old Ilachael 
Evans, of Poole Castle." 

" What, Amy, the Queen of the May ! is it you, my old 
friend ? " exclaimed Mrs. Morgan, holding out her hand with 
the frankness she brought from the Montgomeryshire valley, 
unimpaired by the intercourse she had since had with the 
world. " Oh ! I have often wished to see you again, and 
often thought what happy hours we have passed together, 
when we have laughed even to tears without knowing where- 
fore, and sung for very want of thought and care. But, my 
good Amy, your looks speak that, since those days, you have 
been made acquainted with thought and care. Your coun- 
tenance is sorrowful. In your mother, the good Rachael, 
well? And David? How comes it you ire still Amy 
Evans ? Have you been cruel after all ? " 

" Alas,' madam ! my poor mother has been dead these two 
years ; she scarce survived her mistress more than a few 
weeks : but they were both in years ; and the good Duke of 
Powis allowed her to be buried in his own family vault, and 
he lies near her honoured mistress, the duchess. And as to 
David, my dear Mrs. Mellicent, I have not thought of him 
for many and many a year ; I should esteem it beneath me to 
pine for him ! He showed the truth of the old saying, ' out 
of sight, out of mind ; ' and I shall never be the one to prove 
an old proverb false ! " answered Amy, with a flash of her 
former spirit, " But, madam, I have other cares, and heavier 
ones, upon my mind. My dear mistress the pood Countess 
of Nithsdale's lord is in prison, with the other lords whom 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 10.Q 

they call rebels, and my lady and I have rode to London to 
attend him, and, as I hope, to to of some service to him. 
But we are nearly strangers in London ; and I thought, 
madam, that for old acquaintance sake, perhaps, you would 
stand our friend. I knew Mr. Morgan was much about the 
palace; and they say, madam," she continued, smiling, "there 
is nothing like a friend at court ; and so I made bold to come 
to you at once. I thought, also, you could perhaps inform 
us where we might lodge respectably, and yet privately ; for 
her grace the Duchess of Montrose warned my lady not to 
live in state, but to keep private." 

" Alas ! good Amy, I fear you are come on a sad errand," 
answered Mrs. Morgan, with a serious countenance. " I fear 
that the Earl of Nithsdale is one whose fate is sealed. I 
hear no talk of mercy being extended towards him. So 
staunch a Catholic ! so influential a man on the borders of 
Scotland and England ! so forward as his family have ever 
been in support of the exiled race ! Alas, for your poor 
mistress ! Js she much attached to him ? " 

" Oh, madam ! " exclaimed Amy, with a face of consterna- 
tion, " it will kill my mistress if anything happens to my 
lord ! I am sure, quite sure, she could not outlive him," she 
continued, wringing her hands ; " you never, madam, saw 
such love as hers ; it is not like anything else that ever I 
heard of. I am sure, when I see how she hangs upon my 
lord's words how she honours and reveres him how she 
watches his looks, and lives but for him I cannot think 1 
ever cared anything at all about David. And you, madam, 
you were very partial to Mr. Morgan ; and I well remember 
you were resolved to have him " (iMrs. Morgan smiled) ; " but 
still your love was not like my poor mistress's ! " 

" Poor soul ! '' said Mrs. Morgan ; " what can I do for 
her ? I would serve her, or any one in such distress, if I 
kuew how I could do so. More especially, I would gladly 
serve any one whom you seem to love so dearly." 

" I do indeed love my dear lady with my whole heart, and 
no one who knows her excellence could do otherwise." 

" Well, dear Amy, you may count on my exerting what 
little influence I may possess ; and Mr. Morgan is so kind, 
I am sure he will assist us, if he can. In the mean time, I 
can tell you of a worthy family with whom your mistress 

110 WINIFRED, 

might be comfortably and respectably lodged. I will see 
Mrs. Mills to-morrow ; her house is not far removed from 
the Tower, which would, I think, be a recommendation to 
the Countess of Nithsdale ; and she is a gentle, kind soul, 
who will be ready to weep with your lady, and will never 
wound her by a thoughtless or indiscreet word." 

Amy Evans's countenance brightened. " I was right," 
she exclaimed, " when I told the countess the world might 
work great changes, but it would be indeed a great one il 
Mrs. M ell icon t Hilton had not still the kindest heart that 
ever beat. I feared I was making very bold, and was pre- 
suming too much upon the freedom permitted in childhood, 
when I ventured to come to you ; but 1 thought time could 
never have hardened such feelings as yours, so as to make you 
resent the liberty I was taking. In my honoured lady's name, 
and my own, receive our most grateful thanks, madam ; " and 
Amy kissed the hand which Mrs. Morgan cordially extended 
towards her. 

" I will see Mrs. Mills to-morrow morning ; and then, 
with the Countess of Nithsdale's permission, 1 will wait on 
her, and inform her what arrangements 1 have been able to 
make." 

" Our blessings on you, dear madam ! " repeated Amy, as 
she took her leave, and hastened back to meet her lady upon 
her return from the Duchess of Montrote. 

Lady Nithsdale listened with gratitude to all tint Amy told 
her; and the kindness they had both met with on their 
several missionn proved the best cordial which could be admi- 
nistered to feelings so tried as hers had been. Exhausted 
nature, however, claimed its rights, and she slept. The bodily 
fatigue which caused sleep, 

" Tir'd nature'* iweet rertortr. balmy Jeep," 

to give a respite to the workings of her mind, may have 
axsisted in enabling her to bear all that awaited her. 

COUNTESS OP NIT1ISDALE. Ill 

CHAPTER XVII. 

The less I may be blest with her company, the more I will retire to God, and my 
owne heart, whence no malice can banish her. My enemies may envy, but they 
can ncTer deprive me of the enjoyment of her virtues, while I enjoy myself. 
Eikon Basilike. 

As the day began to dawn, and the grey winter light gradu- 
ally illumed the narrow dirty streets, which the remains of 
snow rendered more than usually dreary, the Countess of 
Nithsdale wound her way to the Tower. 

It was still too early to gain admittance, or even to be 
allowed to speak with the porter. The gates were not yet 
opened : she stood and gazed till her feelings were almost in- 
tolerably excited, and then she paced up and down with a 
quick and hurried step, till, abruptly stopping, she pressed the 
arm of her faithful companion, Amy, and pointing to the an- 
tique building, she cried, in an accent of despair, " He is there, 
Amy, he is there, and I cannot be with him ! " 

Amy looked with awe and vague fear at the spot, which, 
from our cradle, is united in our minds with the ideas of 
murder, the scaffold, open executions, and secret assassination. 
She trembled at the certainty that her dear master actually 
lay within its fearful precincts ; and she turned an eye of 
commiseration on her lady, to think that she was, in sober 
truth, an actress in one of those tragedies of which we are 
apt to hear and read as of fictitious horrors. 

They gazed upon the thick and muddy water of the moat, 
upon the lofty wall which rose on the other side, and in which 
the inhabitants, of whose dwellings it formed a part, had here 
and there opened windows, added gabled roofs, and pieced 
the ancient rough stone-work with brick additions of their 
own. This patch-work took off from its antiquity and solemnity, 
without imparting to such a building any air of comfort. On 
the contrary, it spoke of long residence within the narrow 
limits of a prison. 

At length the clock struck the appointed hour, and she 
hastened to the gates to solicit an interview with the Lieutenant 
of the Tower. 

After some delay, the request was granted, when she re- 
ceived the answer the Duchess of Montrose had led her to 

112 WINIFRED, 

anticipate. The orders were most strict that none should IK? 
allowed to visit the prisoners before the day appointed for 
pronouncing sentence upon them ; but hopes were held out 
to her that she might obtain permission to share Lord Niihs- 
dale's confinement. 

Had it not been for the duchess's caution, it is more than 
probable she would gladly have accepted the conditions : for 
to feel herself so near him, and yet to be withheld from seeing 
him ; to know that he was in solitude and sadness, looking 
only for her company to cheer him, and to refuse to share his 
prison ; to turn away when she had it in her power to look 
upon bis face, to bear again that soft, deep, melodious voice, 
alas ! it was a sore trial ! But she was firm in adhering 
to her resolution. Such, however, was her agitation, that as 
she tottered from the lieutenant's apartments, some of the 
soldiers, moved with compassion, offered her a seat for a few 
moments in the guard-room. One kindly brought her a cup 
of water, for which she did not fail to show her gratitude by 
dodl at well as words. He accompanied her to the outer 
gate ; and she succeeded so well in working on his feelings of 
kindness and of self-interest, that she obtained from him a pro- 
mise to exert himself in her behalf, and an assurance that 
when he was on guard, he would not watch too narrowly 
which way she passed. 

With many a lingering look towards the dismal edifice, she 
tore herself away, but it was not without a hope of compassing 
by stealth the interview which she had been refused. 

She hastened to her appointment with the duchess, when 
she did not fail to tell her how faithfully she had obeyed her 
injunctions, how resolutely she had even turned from his 
prison gates, when her heart burned to rush to her husband ; 
but at the same time she imparted to her the hopes she enter- 
tained of seeing him through the means of the kind-hearted 
guard. 

" If all that is said be true," answered the duchess archly, 
" it is not so difficult to gain access to the prisoners ; a golden 
key is often more potent than an iron bar ! Meantime, I would 
advise your exerting all the influence you may possess with 
my Lord Townshend and the Duke of Richmond. My husband 
tells me they are both likely to advocate measures of severity ; 
and yet I should hope the Duke of Richmond would remember 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 113 

that the Earl of Denventwater is his kinsman. The Earls oi 
Danby and of Nottingham I spoke with last night, and I trust 
with good effect. They both promised they would second any 
petition from the prisoners. Some will certainly be pardoned ; 
but, dearest cousin, we must exert ourselves to the utmost, 
and yet our zeal must be tempered with discretion. The earl 
your husband has, as I told you, many enemies ; and I should 
be a false friend did I not confess to you that he is not one of 
those who are likely to be most leniently dealt with." Lady 
Nithsdale clasped her hands with such an expression of anguish 
that the duchess hastened to add, " But I know not, neither 
can any one know, in truth, what will be the sentence of the 
court. 'Tis all conjecture." 

" But why, O why, should conjecture be unfavourable to 
my lord ? " 

"Nay, I cannot say. It may be a Catholic, his pro- 
perty on the very borders of the two countries, his family 
so long attached to the Stuarts ; but all may yet be well. 
Circumstances may arise in his favour. Should the sentence 
be be such as to blast our hopes, they speak of a petition 
to be signed by the prisoners." 

" My lord will never put his name to anything that may 
savour of dishonour. I know not what this petition may 
prove ; but if it is such as should change any sentence that may 
have passed, I marvel if it can be such as it would become 
my lord to sign, or such" she added emphatically, 
" or such as 1 could wish him to sign : " her voice broke, and 
she burst into tears at thus, as it were, with her own lips pro- 
nouncing his doom. " His life," she continued, as if to justify 
herself for what she had uttered, " must not be preserved at 
the price of honour ! " and her delicate form reared itself, and 
her eye glanced upwards, as if to seek from Heaven the strength 
she so much needed. 

The duchess sighed. " What a noble spirit," she thought, 
" is probably destined to be crushed ! what a generous heart, 
in all probability, will be condemned to drink the bitter cup 
of sorrow to the very dregs ! " She cast her dark bright eyes 
on the ground to conceal her emotion. 

Lady Nithsdale saw the tears glistening in her eyelashes : 
" You weep, cousin ! you are weeping for me ! Alas ! alas ! 
you know his doom. You know the counsels of those in 

i 

1 14 WINIFRED, 

power ; and you know that they are his inveterate foes. You 
fear to tell me that you know it ! " 

" On my honour, I know nothing," repeated the duchess 
with solemnity ; " but surely we all suspect and fear enough 
to draw tears from drier eyes and harder hearts than mine. 
My dear cousin knows of old, that a little thing will move me 
to smile, or to weep ; so you must not augur ill from my 
childish weakness, but set it down to the account of Christian 
Montrose's variable temperament : " and she strove to smile 
through the tears which now flowed every moment faster down 
her cheeks. 

After some farther consultation between the friends they 
parted, and at dusk Lady Niihsdale again repaired to the 
Tower. The accommodating guard was in attendance. He 
quickly and silently admitted her through the wicket. As 
she passed under the first archway, she fancied she perceived 
another muffled female figure who glided quietly on, as if 
accustomed to the way. The sight re-assured her, as it seemed 
to confirm what the duchess had told her of the potency of a 
golden key. In silence she crossed the bridge over the moat : 
she looked fearfully on all sides, dreading lest each form she 
saw might be that of some guard more strict in the perform- 
ance of his duty ; and doubting whether in a few moments 
she might be blessed with the sight of her husband, or whether 
she might be driven forth despairing to her desolate lodging. 

When on the bridge, the masts of the vessels lying in the 
Thames were visible over the parapet She could just dis- 
tinguish them dark against the sky. She cast towards them a 
lingering look, and thought, "O that we were together on 
board the meanest of those vessels ; together, on our way to 
life and liberty ! " 

They emerged from the gloom of the second archway, and 
keeping under the shallow of the southern wall, they passed, 
what seemed to her, a considerable distance between the lofty 
buildings. " Those are the warders' apartments," whispered 
the guard, pointing to the high wall to the north : * 'Tis 
there that most of the rebels have their lodgings ; go straight 
on, till you get to the Traitor's gate, there, to the right," 
she shuddered as the word was uttered, and looked fearfully 
as he directed to the portals which are only opened to admit a 
prisoner, but never to send him forth to freedom ; k( when 

COUNTESS OP NJTHSDALE. 115 

you get there, turn to your left through the Bloody Tower," 

a more icy chill ran through her veins ; " then to your 
left again, up the steps, and you will see a girl who will lead 
you where you wish to go. I must not be seen any farther than 
this spot. I shall be on guard just an hour longer. Be sure 
you do not linger beyond that time, or you will never make 
your way out of this dismal place ; and as for me ! I shall pay 
a heavy price for my good-nature." 

" Would I could adequately reward you for your charity ! " 
answered the countess, pouring gold into his hand ; " but 
Heaven will not forget this deed of mercy ! " 

She found the girl upon the steps, as she had been led to 
expect, and she immediately followed her to a door about the 
centre of the building to the south of the court, when, bidding 
her wait for a moment, the girl disappeared. Lady Nithsdale 
trembled from head to foot : her heart seemed almost to stop 
its pulsations, so agonising was the fear that now, on the very 
threshold, something might occur to disappoint her hopes. 

Intense as was her anxiety to see her husband, as the 
moment actually approached, a dread came over her at the 
notion of seeing him under such circumstances. Her thoughts 
were painfully broken in upon by the sounds of merriment 
and revelry which burst from one of the neighbouring windows 

loud songs and shouts of laughter ! They jarred upon her 
ear as something out of tune, unfitting for the place or season, 
and she wondered how gaolers could be so devoid of feel- 
ing as to indulge in noisy jollity, within hearing of their 
prisoners. 

The young girl quickly returned. 

" This is the moment, madam. The guards are all en- 
gaged ; they are going to convey those prisoner lords, whom 
you may hear carousing within, back to their several apart- 
ments ; and now you can slip up unperceived." 

" The axe suspended over their heads," thought Lady 
Nithsdale, " and this unseemly recklessness ! and shall such as 
they find mercy, while my lord " 

In a few seconds she had mounted the narrow stairs ; 
passed the outer room, which was at that moment vacant ; and 
the young maiden having gently unbolted the farther door, 
she found herself in her husband's presence ! 

He was reading by a dimly burning candle, and started at 

116" 

the sound of footsteps; but before he could ascertain the 
cause of this interruption, his wife was on his bosom, her arms 
were around his neck. 

" 1 am here ! I am with you at last ! It is your own 
Winifred ! " she exclaimed. 

" Then Heaven has mercy still in store for me ! n he re- 
plied. 

For a few moments neither could speak. Words seemed 
all inadequate to express the strong emotions of joy, and of 
grief, which straggled in their hearts. The Earl of Niths- 
dale, whose mind was chastened, whose feelings were tempered 
by long confinement, was the first to recover his self-posses- 
sion. " Now I see you, my love, I am indeed no longer com- 
fortless ! Oh, Winifred ! I have passionately longed for this 
blessed moment! It is five long months since we parted, 
love ; I have counted the days, the hours ; there has not 
been one in which I have not required your gentle strength, 
your trusting patience, to support me or to soothe me. Thanks 
be to Heaven that has vouchsafed to me once more the joy of 
beholding you ! " and he lifted her gently from his shoulder, 
on which her head had sunk. " And now let me look upon 
that dear face, and from those pure and holy eyes draw faith, 
submission, and resignation." He gazed upon her for some 
moments with a tenderness, which, as he gazed, increased in 
intensity. " Alas I " he suddenly exclaimed, and flinging his 
arms upon the table, he hid his face in his hands "Alas ! it 
is not thus I shall learn to submit cheerfully to my fate ! To 
see you once again ! to hear that voice to press that be- 
loved form once more to my heart to feel that if my life 
were spared, it would be to pass that life with yon, for you ! 

oh! this does not reconcile one to what must be " 

Then checking himself, he added, in a calmer tone, " But 
are you well, my love? you have not suffered on your 
journey ? And the children ? you hear of them ? 1 know 
not how it has fared with them for many, many weeks. 
Poor innocents ! " And the thought that he should never 
ee them more, -made his voice quiver as he spoke. 

44 Oh, they are well, and safe, and happy, in health and 
freedom, in a more favoured land than this ! ** 

He looked up, and a smile illumined his features ; but by 
the dim light of the solitary taper his countenance looked wan, 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 117 

and the last few months had left deep traces of care upon his 
brow." 

" You arc ill ! " she exclaimed in affright ; " you must be 
ill/' 

" Nay," he replied, with gentleness, " my health is unim- 
paired ; and now my Winifred is come, my spirits will soon 
be cheered." 

" Alas ! I have seen you pale before, and I have seen you 
sad ; but never, never did I see you look thus ! " 

" Time will do its own work, dearest ! and I am older by 
some months than when you saw me last. My Winifred 
must not quarrel with her husband," he added, smiling, " be- 
cause age steals upon him with no gentle hand. Oh ! is it 
not our wish, our most earnest wish, my love," he con- 
tinued, with solemnity and tenderness, "to see each other 
grow old ? And do you not think that if we should be 
spared to each other, years would only rivet still closer the 
bonds which unite us ; that for every charm which may de- 
part with youth, there would arise a thousand recollections of 
mutual kindnesses, mutual sufferings, ay, and mutual joys, 
(for we have known many days of happiness,) which would 
still render us more dear, one to the other ? Mi-thinks that 
when that delicate form shall have lost its roundness," and he 
passed his arm around her slender waist ; " and when those 
eyes shall have lost their brilliancy, and that clear forehead 
its smoothness ; when these soft curls," and he pressed to his 
lips one of the two or three long curls which, according to the 
fashion of the time, were suffered to fall on her neck, 
" when these soft brown curls shall be mixed with grey 
that my Winifred would be, if possible, more precious to my 
heart than she is even now ; for I should remember that those 
eyes have been dimmed with tears for me, that smooth brow 
care-worn on my account." Lady Nithsdale wept softly, un- 
resistingly ; she struggled not against her tears, for she was 
almost unconscious that they flowed. " Should those blessed 
days ever come to us, Winifred, the recollection of this hour 
will be sweet ; and should there be no future for me " 

" There will be none for me/' she quickly interposed ; " I 
feel assured," and she pressed her hand against her heart 
" I feel assured, there would be none for me ! " 

" Hush, hush, dearest ! remember the children ; they 
i 3 

118 WINIFRED, 

must not be orphans : but we will not unnerve ourselves, 
I have still much to hear : as yet I have thought but of my- 
self, I blush that private feeling should so wholly have en- 
grossed roe. Did you see the king ? for thus I must still call 
him, though I well see that he is fated never to rule over this 
land. And I begin to think that it might not be for the general 
weal that he should do so. The sight, the actual sight of civil 
war, makes one view matters in a different light." 

" Yes, my dearest lord, I waited on his majesty at Scone ; 
for I imagined you would have wished me so to do." 

'* Assuredly, assuredly ! " 

" Though many whom we believed to be his most faithful 
adherents heeded not the summons to attend him, I thought 
that my dear lord would be the more anxious I should not be 
backward in my service.*' 

" My Winifred judged of my feelings as she is ever wont 
And did the king receive you graciously ? " 

" Yes, graciously ; they told me most graciously : but I know 
not how it was ; he seemed ill at ease, suffering in body and 
in mind. He said as much, I suppose, as is usual and fitting ; 
and yet, methought, under the circumstances, there lacked 
something of that warmth which might have relighted the ex- 
piring flame of loyalty in one's bosom." 

" The expiring flame of loyalty in your bosom, my Wini- 
fred ? If I had spoken so, having seen all I have seen ! " 

" Oh ! but I have seen enough ! I pasted through the 
blackened ruins of the burned villages, burned by his own 
orders. I saw the houseless inhabitant* of what once were 
flourishing and happy homes; I saw the helpless children 
perishing in the snow, the old and the infirm without a shelter ; 
I saw the desolated fields ; and 1 had heard oh ! I had heard 
how the noblest of the land had been treated on their approach 
to this city, and I felt that it was for his sake that my husband 
had been pinioned, that his hands had been tied with cords ; for 
his sake that he had been exposed to the gibes of the multitude ! 
And there he stood, cold and unmoved, and ' hoped my good 
lord's health continued unimpaired ! ' Oh ! at that moment 
my loyalty died within me ! and I felt oh ! how agonisingly 
did I feel that we had sacrificed all for one who was little 
worthy of the sacrifice ! " 

" Alas ! I have, as you know, long feared that such was 

COUNTESS OF MTIISDALE. 1 1 J) 

the case. His spirit has been early crushed, and it does not 
possess the elasticity to spring up -again. They still retain 
Perth. Do they expect to hold it ? " 

" The proclamation orders that a public thanksgiving for 
King James's safe arrival should take place on the 26th ; but 
there were vague rumours that the Earl of Mar had resolved 
to evacuate the town ; still these were only rumours." 

" A thanksgiving for his safe arrival ! " Lord Nithsdale 
repeated with a faint sad smile ; " one for his safe departure 
would be more to the purpose, I fear. Did you see the king 
but once ? " 

" It was on my return from Scone I received the good 
duchess's letter, and you may well imagine I did not linger on 
the way." 

" Some one told me the roads were impassable from the 
snow ; that all carriages were stopped, and that even the post 
was delayed ; so I did not look for you to cheer me yet." 

" I rode from York," she replied, " with Walter Elliot and 
our faithful Amy Evans." 

" You, Winifred, who never could be persuaded to mount 
the gentlest and best-paced palfrey ! " 

" Oh ! I forgot those foolish fears, those fears which were 
bred of too much happiness, and of being too tenderly cared 
for ; I never thought of any fear but one that of being de- 
layed on my journey." 

My own love ! that soul of thine will ever have the mastery 
over that fragile form." 

" Hark ! The clock strikes. I have but a few moments 
more. The hour is wearing away. I have seen the duchess, 
and she has told me to whom I must most strenuously apply ; 
and she has warned me that I must not do what, as you may 
well believe, my heart would prompt, share your prison. I 
must be at liberty to act in your service : but I have bribed 
a kindly guard, and he will admit me when it is possible. I 
understand others, without the holy claim I have, gain access 
to some within the walls : so trust me, 1 shall soon be here 
again ; and, as I hope, with news to cheer us both." Lord 
Nithsdale shook his head slightly, but then, with an assumed 
cheerfulness, listened to what she had to communicate. " Lord 
Danby and Lord Nottingham are friendly ; the Duke of Rich- 
mond, though not friendly, cannot be forward in the prose* 

i 4 

120 WIMFH! 

oition, related as he is to Lord Derwentwtter ; and I feel 
persuaded the next news from Scotland will be such as to 
quiet the fears of government." 

" And is the time come when one calculates upon the failure 
of the cause to which oneself and all one's house have ever 
been devoted ? " 

" Nay ! can I now think of any cause but my own dear 
lord's ? such days are past, and gone for ever ! To accomplish 
all that may be compassed with honour is now my first, my 
only object ! " and she tore herself from the husband who, 
whatever might be her devotion to him, repaid her with the 
love and reverence he might feel for a guardian angel. 

She was gone ! He remained in his solitude, gazing upon 
the door through which she had disappeared, and almost 
doubting whether he had been blessed with her actual pre- 
sence, or whether it had not been a cheering vision vouchsafed 
to him in mercy. 

How often had he thought that were the near to console 
and to support him, he could meet his fate without a murmur. 
He fancied that the bitterest part of his present condition was 
the entire separation from her who was the partner of all his 
feelings, the depositary of his sorrows, the sharer of his anxieties. 
But alas ! while life was so dreary, so joyless, so irksome, it 
was far less precious to him than when the sight of her had 
brought before him all he was to lose. He was sad, hopeless, 
^signed before. He felt that, if wrong, he had not been wil- 
fully so in the course he bad pursued ; he consoled himself 
with the reflection that no stain could rest on his fair fame ; 
that, though his name might be attainted, he left behind him 
to his children a character of unblemished honour. He had 
deliberately, and with little hope of any better result than the 
present, upheld the pretensions of the prince for whom he was 
now suffering ; and he felt it would not become him to repine 
at an event to which he had always looked forward as pro- 
bable. 

An honourable death in battle, a more awful one on the 
scaffold, or at best an eternal banishment, were the alternatives 
which he had ever contemplated ; and he thought he had 
schooled his mind to acquiesce calmly in the fulfilment of that 
which awaited him, although it might be the least welcome of 
the three. 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 121 

Once more to see his beloved wife, to pour forth all his 
thoughts and feelings into her bosom, to deliver to her his 
last injunctions concerning his children, to arrange with her 
some plan for her future life, to give and to receive the last 
adieux, and then placidly and composedly to lay his head upon 
the block, such had been the course in which he had guided 
his feelings and his reflections. 

He had seen her ! He had felt how dearly he was loved ! 
He had felt what charms life still possessed for him ! He 
had also felt how utterly impossible it was that she could ever 
acquiesce as he did in his fate, how completely her happiness 
was bound up in his ! And where were now the resignation, 
the cheerful submission, the philosophical indifference 
with which he had brought himself to anticipate his probable 
sentence ? 

Never since the first night he had become an inmate of the 
Tower, had he experienced such a struggle of conflicting 
feelings ! The picture which he had himself drawn of the 
gradual approach of age, of the happiness of descending hand 
in hand into the vale of years, had awakened a desire of life 
which he had hoped no longer lurked within his bosom, and 
it required the aid of prayer to subdue, and all the pride of 
man to conceal, the agitation of his mind. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

It in God's indulgence which gives me the space, but man's cruelty that gives me 
the sad occasion for these thoughts. Eikon Jiasilikc. 

THE greater part of the night which succeeded the Earl of 
Nithsdale's interview with his wife, was spent by him in 
restlessly measuring with hasty strides the mean apartment to 
which he was confined. ? .! ! 

In the morning he obtained permission to refresh himself 
by walking on the leads over the warders' lodgings, an indul- 
gence occasionally granted to the prisoners. 

The fresher air, all chilly as it was, and loaded with London 
smoke, revived him ; and as he paced the narrow limits, his 
eje turned involuntarily towards the vessels which crowded 

122 IVJMFU; 

the river up to London Bridge. As he watched, he saw one 
who sesails were beginning to be unfurled, while all was I 
hurry, and confusion on board : she was getting under weigh, 
and he sighed to think how impossible to be surmounted were 
the obstacles which interposed between him and the VMM! 
which seemed so near. 

His eye dropped, and rested on the Traitor's Gate, mod he 
almost thought he once more heard the jarring sound of the 
iron bolts and bars which had closed behind him. 

As his eye passed on, it was arrested by the Bloody Tower, 
which, as some say, was the spot in which the tragic murder 
of the young princes was enacted. " They knew not the 
pains of life," he thought, " neither knew they its joys I 
They knew not that mutual affection which so painfully yet 
so sweetly attaches one to existence! But there/' and he 
looked upon the stone which marks the place where Lord 
Guildford Dudley and Lady Jane Grey were executed, 
" there did two pure creatures, bound to each other by every 
holy tie of faith and love, yield up their innocent spirits. 
They who had scarcely tasted of happiness, the cup was 
snatched from their lips ere they could fully know its sweet- 
ness ! They would have esteemed themselves roost blessed, 
could they have been assured of as many years of mutual affec- 
tion, of wedded bliss, as I have already enjoyed. Alas for 
ye, innocent victims of the ambition of others ! when I re- 
member you, I must not repine ! And there, again ! " as his 
thoughts followed the objects on which his eye dwelt, *' that 
was the prison of the unfortunate Anne Boleyn, wounded 
in her affections, in her honour, pampered with flattery, 
surrounded with pomp, enervated by splendour, only to be the 
more cruelly and suddenly plunged into the depths of misery 
and disgrace. No i no ! I must not repine ! " and he again 
schooled his mind to resignation and submission. I have 
neither met with falsehood nor with ingratitude ! my honour 
is not impeached ! I must not, will not, repine !" 

Lady Nithsdale meanwhile was not inactive. She visited 
the Countesses of Derwentwater and Wintoun ; and they agreed 
that, should the sentence not prove favourable, they would to- 
gether present a petition to parliament, and in the intervening 
pace of time that each .should exert her private influence with 
those in power, to win as many as possible to their interest. 

COUNTESS OF NITIISDALE. 123 

She visited her husband's cousin, the Duchess of Buccleugh, 
and obtained the duke's promise to present a petition should 
the necessity occur; and having' taken every measure that 
prudence could dictate, she had but to await in tremulous 
anxiety the sentence which was to be pronounced on the 9th 
of February. 

She frequently contrived to see her lord, though she was 
always obliged to do so by stealth. These visits, although so 
ardently desired by both, were to both hours of bitter anguish. 

The Earl of Nithsdale, fully aware of the feeling which 
prevailed against him, anticipated but too justly the sentence 
which would be pronounced, and could not bring himself to 
echo the hopeful sentiments with which his wife buoyed up 
her spirits ; neither had he the heart fully to express to her 
his own more gloomy apprehensions. 

He listened to the details of all she had done, and all she 
projected, with a gentle, hopeless gratitude, which saddened 
and dispirited her ; although she could not, she would not, 
adopt his view of the subject 

This produced a certain reserve. She felt he restrained 
his own feelings for her sake, that he smothered the anticipa- 
tions of which she could not endure to hear the utterance ; 
and the open communion of thought was at an end ! She 
dared not allude to the future, his countenance so plainly 
expressed there was no future for him ; and they both shrunk 
from a recurrence to the joys of that dear home which neither 
hoped again to inhabit. 

To a third person it would often have appeared strange that, 
under suca circumstances, a wedded pair, so devotedly attached, 
should be able to dwell at such length upon the public affairs 
of the day, and to discuss with so much interest the move- 
ments in Scotland. 

But the earl could not be indifferent as to what befel the 
prince to whom he had sacrificed himself; while Lady Niths- 
dale, on the contrary, since her interview with the Chevalier, 
in which her feelings had been so little gratified, had looked 
on him as the unworthy object for which her happiness had 
been wrecked. As her sorrows pressed more heavily upon 
her, she felt more and more that he had seemed careless of 
the sufferings of others. As her fears increased, and as her 
hopes diminished, she more and more resented the cold inquiry 

124 WINIFRED, 

after " the health of the earl her husband ; " and the beha- 
viour, which at the time had only seemed measured and 
unsatisfactory, assumed, as she dwelt upon it, the character of 
selfish hardness. 

Alas ! the keen edge of sensibility must have been blunted 
long ere this in the heart of the unfortunate Chevalier de 
St. George ! Inured to misfortune, he appears to have been 
stupified by it. With the resolution already taken to evacuate 
Perth, three days after that appointed for the general thanks- 
giving, did the infatuated prince carry on the pageant of 
royalty. 

The address then offered up " O Lord, who hast pre- 
served and brought back our dread sovereign King James 
safely into his own dominions, to the comfort of all those 
who, in obedience to thy holy word, ' fear God and honour 
the king'" could to none present have appeared a more 
sickening mockery than to the dispirited, despairing descend- 
ant of a hundred kings. 

Surrounded by a scanty train of heart-broken attendants, 
in the midst of those very counsellors who had declared the 
absolute necessity of abandoning the only town of importance 
which they yet held, the very spot where they were as- 
sembled in prayer and thanksgiving, did he listen to the 
words, " Bow the hearts of all his subjects as one man, so 
that they may only contend who shall be the first to bring the 
king to his own house." 

When, upon the approach of the Duke of Argyle, a vague 
rumour arose, that it was purposed to retire before the enemy 
without striking a blow, the indignation of the Highlanders 
knew no bounds. The love of fighting, inherent in that 
hardy race, had caused them to look forward with joy and 
alacrity to the desperate conflict which they imagined to be 
approaching. 

But when they found that the unwelcome report was only 
too true grief and disappointment turned all to rage, and they 
assailed their officers as they passed in the streets with every 
species of reproach. 

" What can we do ?" was the answer of one who was 
supposed to be intimately acquainted with the counsels of the 
Karl of Mar. 

" Do ! " replied the Highlander. Let us do that for 

COUNTBSS OF NITHSDALE. 125 

which we were called in arms, which certainly was not to run 
away." 

Nor was the retreat carried into effect without meeting with 
strenuous and vehement opposition, even in the council of the 
Chevalier ; although, after much violence of discussion, at 
length it was agreed by the majority, that to attempt the 
defence of Perth would be an act of desperate chivalry. 

To appease the feelings of those who appeared most irri- 
tated, it was given out that a halt was to take place at Aber- 
deen, where supplies of foreign troops were expected. 

It was on the 30th of January, the anniversary of his grand- 
father's martyrdom, that the Chevalier's Highland army filed 
off upon the ice, which, as the Earl of Mar had anticipated, 
rendered the Tay, if of no avail as a protection, no impedi- 
ment to the movement which he even then projected. 

The town was immediately occupied by a body of the 
Duke of Argyle's dragoons. The Chevalier arrived at the 
sea-port town of Montrose, from whence it was his intention 
to make his escape by sea. To mask his design of thus re- 
linquishing his ill-concerted attempt, and abandoning the 
faithful few who still adhered to him, his equipage and horses 
were brought out before the gate of his lodgings, and his 
guards were mounted as if to proceed on the journey to 
Aberdeen. 

But before the hour appointed for the march, James had 
secretly gained the shore, and, accompanied by the Earl of 
Mar, had safely reached a small vessel which had been pre- 
pared for their reception. Thus did he for the second time 
abandon the shores of that land over which so many of his 
ancestors had reigned, and in which so many of them had 
given proofs of personal prowess and manly courage. As 
some of his cotemporaries have observed, the only purpose 
accomplished by this expedition seems to have been that of 
bringing off in safety his general, the Earl of Mar. 

On General Gordon devolved the unwelcome and difficult 
task of leading to Aberdeen the remains of the Highland 
army, who were only restrained from acts of insubordination 
by knowing that the Duke of Argyle's forces hung upon their 
rear. At Aberdeen a sealed letter, which had been entrusted 
to General Gordon, was opened according to the Chevalier's 
instructions. In this, after expressing his thanks for the 

126 WINIFBED, 

faithful services of his adherents, he gave them full pcrmi 
sion to treat with the enemy, or to disperse to their several 
homes, as might best suit the exigency of the moment 

Thus ended the rebellion, which proved so fatal to many of 
the noblest houses both of England and Scotland ! And the 
Countess of Nithsdale felt almost relieved when each day 
brought intelligence of the hopeless condition of the insurgents; 
for she judged, not unwisely, that the lest cause there remained 
to fear them, the less need would there exist of intimidating 
them by measures of severity. 

The 9th of February, on which day the lords were to re- 
ceive their sentence in Westminster Hall, was fast approaching. 
On the 8th, Lady Nithsdale passed some hours with her hus- 
band. The hopes to which she had so long and so pertina- 
ciously clung had gradually given way before the cold and 
constrained demeanour with which all her inquiries and in- 
tercessions had been met. Evasive answers, professions of 
inability to be of service to her under the present circumstances, 
declarations that they must not flatter her, were all the satis- 
faction she could procure from those who might be supposed 
to know the probable decision of the court. 

The earl, always hopeless, looked upon the worn and anxious 
countenance of his wife, till every feeling for himself was lost 
in commiseration for her wretchedness : ' It will be better for 
you, my love, when it is all over." 

" What mean you ? " she replied quickly, wilfully mis. 
apprehending his meaning, which it would have been too 
painful to comprehend, and vaguely trusting that he would 
not dare to explain his thoughts more clearly. 

" I only mean, this state of suspense, dearest Winifred, has 
almost worn you out. I shall be glad when the morrow is 
past, for any certainty is preferable to suspense ; though," be 
added in a lower tone, " I cannot say it is nurmmt that I 
feel." 

" Spare me, spare me ! " she said ; " to-morrow is soon 
enough ! But there is hope ! There must be hope ! Man 
is not a wild beast that he should find pleasure in destruction ! 
When self-preservation no longer impels to cruelty, human 
sympathies will again influence the heart, James's hasty re- 
treat must set their fears at rest. I must I will hope ! " 

"Against all reason, dearest!" he added, with smile, 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 127 

taking her cold passive hand in his. " My Winifred's firm 
and well-ordered mind has always -hitherto been the stay and 
the support of mine : it has been from her gentle lips that I 
have learned true piety and real submission ; from her that 
1 have learned, or tried to learn, to bend my will to the de- 
crees of Providence ! Her support will not now, in my utmost 
need, be withdrawn from me ! she will not make my task 
more hard ! neither will she say or do aught that shall un- 
settle my mind, or render me unfit for what is to be done 
to-morrow. She would not have her husband appear in 
Westminster Hall before his assembled peers, before the court, 
and before the people of England, with excited feelings and 
nerves unstrung ! And trust me, when I gaze on you, it is 
no easy task to face death with composure, and to brace my 
mind to hear unmoved the sentence which awaits me to- 
morrow. The love of life, of life with you, is only too strong 
within this bosom. Speak not to me of hope ! I must not 
admit the notion ; but speak to me of that heaven where we 
may be re-united ! Tell me that by unrepining submission I 
may best make myself worthy of once more meeting you, my 
love ; tell me that life is short, and that we have already en- 
joyed many years of happiness ; that we have already mounted 
the hill, that we must soon descend it ; that probably we have 
known the best years of our existence ; that before us may be 
a future of sickness, sorrow, suffering, the death of friends ! 
the loss of children ! " He paused ; then overcome with pity, 
he added, in a broken voice, " Alas, alas ! and shall your gen- 
tleness be left to meet these sorrows alone? to buffet with for- 
tune alone ? Oh, my poor, poor Winifred ! pardon me for 
having indulged in such sad anticipations ; pardon me for 
having pictured sorrows which can only be alleviated by being 
shared ! for sickness would not to me be suffering if tended 
by you ! grief would lose half its sting if you were near to 
whisper consolation ; and who but the beloved of one's heart 
can administer comfort under the other deprivations to which 
I so cruelly alluded ? Alas for you, my poor, poor Winifred ! " 
And the composure which he had so striven to preserve 
completely gave way when he thus painted to himself the 
desolation of her whom he should leave behind. He pressed 
the hand he still held to his lips ; and the tears which he 
could no longer restrain, fell fast upon it. 

128 WINIFRED, COUNTESS OF NITI1SDALE. 

" Hush, hush ! not another word," she said ; " I will speak 
neither words of hope nor fear ! my own noble lord shall bear 
himself in the sight of his fellows as it is fitting he should. 
No weakness of mine shall enervate that manly mind ; though 
my heart-strings crack, I will be composed and firm. And 
now we will part for the night ; we will each to our orisons : 
prayer and solitude will best strengthen us for the morrow. 
Should your anticipations prove only too correct, there is yet 
much to be done, and I will seek confidence and calmness 
from that Heaven who will, I trust, take thee this night, and 
ever, into its holy keeping ! " 

" Amen to thy good wishes, love ! " 

END OF THE FIRST VOLUME. 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 12Q 

VOLUME THE SECOND. 

WINIFRED, COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 

(CONTINUED.) 

CHAPTER XIX. 

The heroine assumed the woman's j>! . 
Confirm'd her mind, and fortified her lace. 

, Dryden. 

WHEN Lady Nithsdale arrived at her lodgings, she there 
found Mrs. Morgan, who from the moment she first, through 
Amy Evans's means, became acquainted with her, had proved 
herself a kind friend, and a strenuous and efficient agent. 

As the countess entered the apartment, the haggard ex- 
pression of her countenance struck the little party of friends 
who had been awaiting her return. Amy hastened to support 
her lady, whose steps appeared to totter as she advanced. 
" Thanks, dear Amy ; but I need not your assistance," she 
replied, with a forced composure : " I am not ill, my good 
girl ; I do not need these attentions ; I am well and strong. 
You do not know how strong I am ! " 

" Would not your ladyship be better near the fire?" in- 
quired Mrs, Mills, rising from her chair ; " the evening is 
chilly." 

" Disturb not yourself, my good friend ; I am well here ;" 
replied Lady Nithsdale, sinking into a seat. 

" How fares it with my lord, madam ? Is he of good 
cheer?" 

" W'ell, Amy, right well ; he is well in health, and will 
bear himself gallantly to-morrow, as the grandson of the brave 
defender of Caerlaverock castle should bear himself," an- 

ISO WINIFRED, 

swered the countess, with a forced air of resolution ; for she 
had employed Mrs. Morgan to procure for her a seat in some 
obscure part of Westminster Hall, from whence she might be 
a witness of the trial ; and she feared, if she now betrayed 
any weakness or emotion, even the yielding Mrs. Morgan 
might not comply with her wishes. 

" And now I must ask my dear Mrs. Morgan, whether her 
friend the Earl of Dorset has been as good as his word ; 
may we hope for seats in the Hall to-morrow ? " she inquired, 
in a tone which she meant should be steady. 

" Yes, dearest Lady Nithsdale ; he says that if you really 
arc resolved upon being present, he can accommodate us ; for 
you must allow me to accompany you, and also our faithful 
Mrs. Evans ; I could not allow you to stir without her." 

'< My dear Amy ! no ; I am too well assured of her affec- 
tion not to be always the better if she is near." Lady Niths- 
dale's eyes were for a moment suffused, for it often happens 
that a slight emotion draws tears which are frozen in their 
cells by stronger and deeper ones. " The spot is a retired one, 
I trust ; not within sight of the prisoners : I would got that 
my lord should guess or suspect that I was present 1" she 
clasped her hands, " it might unman him ; his voice might 
falter ; his lips might quiver ; and the world might fancy it 
could be through fear ! Oh ! he must not, must not see me ! " 
she repeated with earnestness. 

" I thought of that," replied the considerate Mrs. Morgan, 
44 and the seats provided are near the door a back entrance 

through which you may easily withdraw whenever you 
may see fit. But still I doubt whether I am a true friend in 
assisting you in this business. I fear it is rather yielding 
weakness, than true kindness, as my poor father used to aay. 

The scene will be too much for you." 

" Did not Lady Russell act as her lord's secretary during 
his trial ? Woman's affection in her overcame woman's weak- 
ness. She wavered not, she trembled not, at the time ; 
though afterwards she wept herself blind ! And was her 
husband more worthy of a wife's devotion than is mine ? Did 
she, could she, love him with more passionate fervour than 
1 do my own dear, dear, noble lord ? Oh no ! for she had 
loved before ; he was not the first and only object of the con- 
centrated affection of a whole life ! She bad been bound bv 

COUNTESS OF KITHSDALE. 131 

previous ties ! She had known joys and sorrows unconnected 
with him ; but I my existence was a blank till it was wound 
up in his ! Depend upon it, dear Mrs. Morgan, what wo- 
man's love has done, what woman's love can do, the love that 
warms this bosom can accomplish ! You need not doubt me. 
1 will not expose myself, nor you, to observation or remark." 

The colour had returned into her pale cheeks, her eye 
gleamed with a holy brilliancy, her brow assumed an air of 
lofty resolution, and all present felt assured that, however 
strong might be her feelings of tenderness, she possessed the 
courage which could subdue them to her will. 

The next day she found herself, as had been previously 
arranged, in the seats prepared by the Earl of Dorset, who 
himself conducted them through the crowd. The Earl of 
Pembroke also, who was nearly related to the Powis family, 
was not wanting in every kindness and attention. 

The Countess of Nithsdale's deportment was perfectly col- 
lected. The dress of the day, which allowed much of the 
form to be concealed by a black silk mantle, and the face to 
be buried in the hood, enabled her to escape all observation. 

A considerable time elapsed before those of whom the court 
was composed were seated in their due order, and that the 
prisoners were summoned. She had time to look round with 
awe upon the innumerable heads with which the floor of the 
Hall seemed, as it were, to be paved. 

At one o'clock, the gates at the end of the vast and antique 
building were thrown open, and the lords entered walking two 
and two. Then followed the Garter King at arms, and other 
officers of the crown, iu their robes of state. Then the 
masters in chancery. The Lord Chancellor Cowper, Lord 
High Steward on the occasion, walked alone, his train being 
borne by his attendants to the wool-pack, on which he seated 
himself. 

The peers then uncovered themselves ; and they, as well as 
all others present, stood uncovered during the time occupied 
by the reading of the commission. 

All listened in breathless silence. The moment was awful 
in itself; but the accompaniments of solemnity and state 
rendered it, if possible, more so. 

When the commission was gone through, the serjeant-at 
arms cried with a loud voice, " God save the king !" 
K 2 

132 WWIFRBD, 

These words excited an undefinable sensation in the bosom 
of Lady Nithsdale. She felt in good sooth that he, in whom 
resided the power to call together and to control the imposing 
assemblage before her, was monarch of the realm. She felt 
that he, for whose sake they were placed in their present des- 
perate situation, had proved himself little worthy of tlu ir 
devotion; yet the words grated harshly on her car, her 
bean still refused to acknowledge them. 

The herald, and gentleman tuber of the black rod, after 
making three reverences, kneeling, presented the white staff 
to his grace, who, attended by the herald, black rod, and the 
seal-bearer, made his proper reverences to the throne, and 
removed from the wool-pack to an arm-chair which was 
placed on the uppermost step but one of the throne, when, 
seating himself, he delivered the staff to the gentleman usher 
of the black rod, who stood on his right hand, while the seal- 
bearer held the purse, standing on the left. 

After a proclamation enjoining silence under pain of im- 
prisonment, the serjeant-at-arms proceeded : " Oyei ! Oyei I : 
Oyez ! Lieutenant of the Tower of London, bring forth your 
prUoners to the bar, according to the order of the House of 
Lords to you directed." 

Each of these words fell, as it were, actually, palpably, 
knocking upon Lady Nithsdale's heart. For a moment she 
wondered how she could have willingly placed herself in her 
present situation ; but the remembered the strong motives she 
had to try her powers of self-command, and she also remem- 
bered her promise to Mrs. Morgan, and she subdued the rising 
tumult of her soul. 

Her companions, also breathless with anxiety, stole a fearful 
glance towards her as the prisoners were brought to the bar 
by the deputy governor of the Tower. When the axe, which 
was brought before them by the gentleman jailer, first made 
its appearance, they saw Lady Nithsdale for a moment close 
her eyes, as if unable to endure the sight ; but she recovered 
herself, and when her lord himself made his appearance, her 
looks were so intently fixed upon him, that it may be ques- 
tioned whether her powers of vision took in any other object 

The prisoners, when they approached the bar (after kneel- 
ing), bowed to his grace the Lord High Steward, and to the 

COl'NTKSS OP NITHSDALE. 133 

House of Peers, which compliment was returned to them both 
by his grace and by the House of Peers. 

The Lord High Steward then ordered the articles of im- 
peachment to be read ; after which, he asked them severally 
what they had to say for themselves why judgment should not 
pass upon them according to law ? 

Lord Derwentwater spoke at some length ; and after him 
the Earl of Nithsdale, and the Viscount Ken mure. They all 
pleaded guilty ; but expressed their hope that the assurances 
of clemency held out to them at Preston would not prove 
fallacious. 

Lord Nithsdale concluded with professing, what his wife 
well knew he spoke in sincerity and truth, that if mercy were 
extended towards him, " he should, during the remainder of 
his life, pay the utmost duty and gratitude to his most gracious 
majesty, and the highest veneration and respect to their lord- 
ships and the honourable House of Commons." 

The Lord High Steward, who did not hear distinctly, 
inquired whether the Earl of Nithsdale had pleaded anything 
in arrest of judgment ; to which the earl replied in a clear 
sonorous voice, whose mellow tones seemed to thrill through 
the whole assembly, " No, my lords, I have not ! " 

The Lord High Steward then stood up. Every breathing 
was hushed ! Such stillness reigned throughout the dense 
mass of living creatures congregated within the spacious hall, 
that each rain-drop might be heard as it pattered against the 
windows. But there came a singing, rushing sound in Lady 
Nithsdale's ears : at first she could scarcely distinguish the 
awful words which were slowly, clearly, solemnly pronounced. 

" The sentence of the law must be the same as is usually 
given against the meanest offenders in the like kind. The 
most ignominious and painful parts are usually omitted by the 
grace of the crown to persons of your quality ; but the law in 
this case, being deaf to all distinctions of persons, requires I 
should pronounce, and accordingly it is adjudged by this court, 
that you James Earl of Derwentwater," the Lord High 
Steward paused between each name, " William Lord Wid- 
drington," her husband's had not yet been pronounced ; the 
countess leaned breathlessly forward, "William Earl of 
Nithsdale," she covered her face with her hands, but she 
spoke not ; she did not sob, she did not faint ; her companions 
K 8 

134 wiNn HI n 

would have led her out, but she motioned them to be still. 
The Lord High Steward meanwhile continued in die same 
clear and unmoved voice, " Richard Earl of Carnwarth, \\'i\- 
liara Viscount Kenmure, and William Lord Nairne, and every 
of you, return to the prison of the Tower, from whence you 
came ; from thence you must be drawn to the place of exe- 
cution : when you come there you must be hanged by the 
neck, but not till you be dead, for you must be cut down alive; 
then your bowels must be taken out, and burnt before your 
faces.** They looked again upon the unfortunate countess ; 
but she had fainted with her back supported against the wall, 
and she had not, it is hoped, heard the last few words. They 
feared to excite attention, and they sustained her in the po- 
sition in which she sat, till in the general movement of the 
ccurt breaking up, they might be able to remove her quietly 
from the dreadful scene. Still the same stern and brazen voice 
proceeded : 

"Then your heads must be severed from your bodies, 
divided each into four quarters, and these must be at the king's 
disposal And God Almighty be merciful to your souls !" 

The sergeant-at-arms then repeated : " Oyes ! Our sove- 
reign lord the king strictly charges and commands all manner 
of persons to keep silence upon pain of imprisonment." After 
which the Lord High Steward stood up uncovered, and declar- 
ing there was nothing more to be done by virtue of the present 
commission, broke the staff, and pronounced it dissolved. 

For some moments after the whole was concluded, the silence 
which had been so strictly but so needlessly enjoined continued 
unbroken. The prisoners, the peers, and all the court, then 
retired in order as they entered, and an universal buzz of 
voices anil general movement took place. 

There were sounds of sorrow ; feelings long repressed found 
vent ; and in the confusion, Mrs. Morgan and Amy Evans 
removed Lady Nithsdale into the freer air. She gradually 
revived, but at first she looked wildly around. 

" Alas ! " said Mrs. Morgan, " I have been to blame in 
yielding to your wishes. How could I permit you to expose 
yourself to such a scene? and all the while I felt assured 
that you miscalculated your own strength. Oh ! it was too 
dreadful!" 

" Hush ! " answered the countess ; " I know all you need 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 135 

not tell me ; I heard enough ; I knew it, I expected it. And 
now I must remember all I had previously resolved upon." 

At this moment the Lords Pembroke and Dorset approached, 
with countenances expressive of deep commiseration. She 
pressed both their hands in silence. They conducted her 
down the steps to the coach which awaited her. Before she 
entered it, she turned to them : 

" You have each promised me your good offices in case of 
need. That hour of need is fast approaching ; you will not 
forget your promises ! " 

They bowed assent upon her hand ; and having respectfully, 
nay almost reverently, placed her in the carriage, they turned 
hastily away to conceal the emotion which overpowered them. 

CHAPTER XX. 

Certainly virtue \t like precious odours, most fragrant when they are incensed, 

rity.l.,tt 
s Assays. 

Certainly virtue is like prerious odours, most fragrant when they are incense 
or crushed ; for prosperity doth best discover vice, but adversity doth best discover 
virtue Lord Bacon' I Ettayt. 

MRS. MORGAN and Amy Evans expected that the control 
which the unfortunate Countess of Nithsdale had as yet exer- 
cised over her feelings would have completely given way when 
no longer exposed to the gaze of indifferent persons : they 
prepared themselves for tears and fainting ; and were surprised 
when Lady Nithsdale, although silent, remained firm and col- 
lected. 

Reared in a foreign convent, from which she had only been 
removed to a retired Welsh castle, and from thence to a life 
of domestic privacy in Scotland, or, if she occasionally mingled 
in the busy world, accustomed to look up to her lord for ad. 
vice, to hang upon him for support, to rely on his judgment 
for the guidance of her own, it seems wonderful that under 
such trying circumstances as those in which she was placed, 
she should have possessed the worldly wisdom, the courage, 
the discretion, and the decision, to act for herself and for her 
husband, and to proceed, without wavering or irresolution, to 
take every measure that prudence could dictate. 

When they reached Lady Nithsdale's lodgings, the kind- 
hearted Mrs. Morgan took her leave, after having given Amy 

K 4 

136 WINIFBl 

and Mrs. Mills a thousand directions and injunctions as to the 
tenderness with which the countess should be treated, the 
possets which she hoped might compose her to sleep, and the 
julap which should be placed by her bed-side. 

Lady Nithsdale listened to all her good-natured counsels 
with a placidity which astonished and almost alarmed Amy 
Evans, although to Mrs. Morgan it appeared but the effect of 
exhaustion, and, as she trusted, only augured that she might 
be restored by some calm and refreshing sleep. 

Amy, who better knew her mistress, and knew that with 
increased danger and distress her strength and courage pro- 
portionably rose, was not surprised when, upon Mrs. Morgan's 
departure, and Mrs. Milk's leaving them to prepare the posset 
so earnestly recommended, Lady Nithsdale laid her hand upon 
her arm. 

" Now, Amy, your true affection, in which I have the 
utmost confidence, I rely on it almost as on my own to my 
lord, now it is going to be put to the test He must not 
die ! and we must save him ! you and I, Amy, must save 
him ! You start, and look as though you feared that all I 
have heard and seen this dsy " (she pressed her hand over her 
eyes) " had turned my brain, but it is not so ; for many weeks 
I have considered the plan, which is now almost matured 
within my head. Prisoners have made their escape from 
places as strong and as well guarded, before now ! If others 
have succeeded in rescuing those most dear to them, why 
should not we succeed ? Promise me, my good and faithful 
Amy, that you will assist me to the utmost of your power ; 
and, above all, promise that you will offer no argument to dis- 
suade me from my purpose. I tell you beforehand it will be 
of no avail : should you refuse to serve me, it will only drive 
me to confide in others who will not deserve my confidence so 
well" 

" Oh, madam ! do yon doubt me ? and do you think Amy 
Evans would leave undone what others could be found to do ? 
1 started, for I remembered those high walls, that broad deep 
moat, those guards who pace about each avenue to the Tower, 
and I thought what could we hope to effect ? But, madam, 
command me, and I will diligently execute your behests, and 
scrupulously keep your counsel.*' 

" Thanks, dear Amy ; I was fully assured you would prove 

COUNTKS8 OF NITHSDALE. 137 

true, and I know not why I spoke for a moment as if I could 
doubt your devotion. Forgive me ! but the necessity is so 
absolute that all who meddle in this undertaking should be 
able to answer for themselves under all circumstances, that I 
would not have you enter into it thoughtlessly, or unadvisedly. 
Even myself, to-day, I thought I could have heard unmoved, 
or at least without betraying emotion, the horrible, horrible 
words that were uttered ; but I misjudged my own strength, 
my woman's nerves failed ! And yet I bore a great deal, 
Amy, and wavered not. I saw the axe, the glittering axe ; 
and I saw my lord, and 1 heard his voice ; and 1 heard part 
of that sentence ! I bore much without betraying myself ; 
and, at last, I was only stunned, confused, for a time. Yes, 
I think I may rely on my own fortitude ; and you, Amy, you 
never for a moment lost your self-command, and you have 
always had a ready wit ; oh, we shall succeed, I am sure we 
shall'!" 

" Heaven grant we may, my honoured lady ! If zeal 
and perseverance can effect my lord's preservation, we shall 
succeed." 

" Then listen : You must purchase at various shops, 
and on various occasions, not to excite suspicion, all that is 
necessary for female dress, and we must make it up, complete, 
the size to fit my lord. I have one in my thoughts whom he 
may personate : she is very tall ; and though slender, her 
present condition makes her appear more stout than usual, 
when wrapt in a loose cloak. She suspects not my design, 
nor must she ; for she is timid, and might betray all by her 
fears. She must not know till too far engaged to retreat. 
And now, Amy, send Walter Elliot to the Tower to inquire of 
the lieutenant at what hour to-morrow the Countess of Niths- 
dale may be admitted to visit her lord. I am informed that, 
after the sentence, we are to be allowed to see the prisoners 
freely ; and it will be best we should do this openly. Alas ! 
the hardest task of all will be to work on my lord to con- 
sent." 

" And, madam, think you I also shall be admitted to see 
my lord ? ** 

" Assuredly, I hope so ; I trust we shall procure admission 
for many of his friends : it is upon that understanding I build 
my hopes. I have been informed that when sentence is once 

138 WIKIPRKIt. 

passed, such has usually been the custom. And now away ; 
let us be stirring. I would there were something to be done 
every hour in the day. It is in solitude and inaction that my 
sorrows press upon me most heavily. But to-night there is no 
more I can effect ; I must even wait for the morrow ! w 

Soon after the Earl of Nithsdale had been reconducted to 
his lodgings in the Tower, he heard the striking of the chapel- 
clock: " It is now more than an hour/' he thought, "since 
the court broke up. By this time the news has reached her. 
By this time my dear wife knows my sentence, and those 
hopes which she was resolved to cherish, and which she never 
would allow me gradually to undermine, have been destroyed 
at one rude blow. Would I could know how it fares with 
her, how she supports the shock ! To-morrow I shall se 
her ; and strange is it, but I dread to see her I dread the 
sight of her despair. Oh ! were it not better to pass unloved 
into the grave, than to feel that one's fate inflicts such ex- 
quisite anguish on her, to spare whom a pang such at she now 
suffers, one would willingly endure any lengthened torture. 
Yet could I wish to lose one particle of that affection which 
alone suffices to make life so precious ? It may be cruel, 
it may be selfish ; but no ! 1 cannot wish her love to be 
less ! After all, we part but for a time ! I do not doubt that 
we shall meet where the weary are at rest. And now that all 
hope is over, my Winifred will assist me to prepare my soul 
for the great change ; and she will bear to speak placidly and 
composedly of those happy regions where the fear of parting 
will never embitter the enjoyment of each other's presence ! 
and I shall be able calmly and cheerfully to fulftl my destiny, 
if I can see her resigned ! " 

But when the morrow came, and Lady Nithsdale was ad- 
mitted, he found her far indeed from placidly acquiescing in 
the fate which he esteemed unavoidable ; but neither was she 
bewildered with despair, nor dissolved in tears : she was alto- 
gether different from anything he had anticipated. Her cheeks 
were flushed, her eye was brilliant, her manner resolved. He 
was surprised ; but he rejoiced that his own fortitude was not 
put to the trial he had dreaded. 

" My Winifred will assist her husband to bear himself as 
becomes a man and a good Catholic : I see she will avoid un- 
nerving me by her grief; and among my many causes of 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 13Q 

gratitude to her, I may still add this, that she will smooth 
my presage to a better world. Thanks, my own love, thanks ! " 

" And does my lord imagine I could speak, stand, look, 
move, as I now do, if I believed it would be carried into 
effect that sentence, that horrible sentence ! For I was 
there I was in Westminster Hall I heard it ; I saw the 
axe ! and I saw you, my own dear husband, I saw you, 
and I heard your voice, that voice which thrilled through 
all the court, which must have penetrated to the inmost re- 
cesses of every heart ! " 

" Oh, Winifred ! I could almost chide my best beloved for 
having wantonly, without any adequate motive, exposed her 
feelings to so needless a trial !" 

" It was not needlessly ; it was not without a motive that I 
did so: I had the strongest earthly motive. It was with a 
view of ascertaining my own strength, my fortitude, that I 
courted what I should otherwise have shrunk from. It was 
with a view to the accomplishment of that plan which I have 
long been forming, and which not all the arguments you can 
adduce shall prevent me from pursuing. It was with a view 
to self-preservation, for is not my life wound up in yours ? 
Think you, in honest truth, think you, I can exist without 
you ? Do you not believe that if you perish, I shall not 
survive ? " 

" Nay, nay, my love," he replied, almost smiling at her 
vehemence, " I do believe your affection for me is as strong as 
ever warmed the pure soul of devoted woman ; still I cannot 
but think and hope that you will live many, many years, to 
be a guide and a protectress to our children. Remember, you 
but share the fate of many other fond and loving wives ! 
Have not the other condemned lords wives, fond and loving 
wives ; and must not they endure ?" 

" No, no, no ! Speak not of them ! they do not, cannot 
love their husbands as I love you ; for have they husbands so 
worthy of their love? What is the wild Lord Wintoun, 
the Lord Kenmure, or the good old Lord Nairne ? The Lord 
Derwentwater, I grant you, is a worthy gentleman ; but- 
what are they, any of them, when compared with you ? " 

" But, my sweet Winifred, to die is the doom of all created 
beings. Many have loved before ; and of all who have ever 
loved, one must survive. It is a sad, it is a painful truth ; 

140 WIM IK- 

but it is a most plain and undeniable one. Then why should 
not this be borne as patiently as the same bereavement by any 
other means ? A long illness would reconcile you to the 
event! and yet would you wish me to endure length* in l 
bodily ills ? Should you not rather rejoice that I shall thus 
be spared all the protracted sufferings of sickness, and that, 
comparatively speaking, I shall thus be exempted from tin- 
pains of death ; that I shall pass from earth with all my in- 
tellects unimpaired, in the full enjoyment of ray faculties ! 
Could there be any satisfaction in marking the decaying mind, 
the enfeebled spirit, the soul waxing weak, as the body sinks 
under the effects of some wasting malady ? Yet how often 
has the most devoted affection watched all these humiliating 
and painful harbingers of death, till the mourner has been 
brought to look upon the dreaded bereavement almost in the 
light of a blessing ? But is there any consolation in this ? 
Would one not rather choose that toe memory of the de- 
parted should be undimmed, unpolluted by the recollection of 
mortal decay ?" 

" Your words are beautiful ! I love to bear your voice ! it 
thrills like music through my heart ! The thoughts are noble, 
lofty, pure, and holy ; but they persuade me not ! As I gate 
on you, as 1 listen to you, I only feel the more, that lift- 
without you is not life : it is a blank ! a dark and dreary 
chasm into which I dare not look : that I must, must save 
you ; and that if you love me, you will give heed to me, and 
that you will agree to what I shall propose." 

" Oh, Winifred ! this is cruel kindness. It is cruel to 
wean me from the thoughts of death, which I have almost 
taught myself to love, to lure me back to those of life, which, 
alas ! possesses only too many charms for me ! " 

There was a tenderness in the tone and the manner which 
gave her hope that she had worked upon him. She felt that 
love for her, and pity for her sorrows, might at this moment 
induce him to listen ; and she opened to him the plan she had 
formed for his escape. 

But she had scarcely detailed her proposed measures, when 
he vehemently refused to engage in what he thought could 
not be carried into execution without compromising others. 
Desperate at the ill-success which attended her efforts, she 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 14-1 

abandoned herself to grief: she strove not to control her 
feelings ; she wrung her hands, she'wept in hopeless agony. 

Meanwhile he paced the apartment in anguish not less 
acute. He accused himself of cruelty towards her when he 
witnessed her desperation ; and yet he could not bring himself 
to agree to measures tvhich he deemed degrading, and in the 
success of which he placed little reliance. 

Such moments comprise a greater sum of suffering than is 
spread over many a common life. At length he stopped be- 
fore her. 

" Winifred, my wife, my honoured wife ! Urge me not 
to anything unworthy. Call up that noble spirit, which has 
ever deserved my respect, my admiration, as much as your 
beauty and your tenderness have won my love ! Now listen 
to me in return ! " 

In a moment her attention was riveted. She scarcely 
breathed ; she listened as though she would devour each word 
that fell from his lips, in ardent hope that he might himself 
have struck out some plan which she might execute. 

" I have ever been unwilling to present petitions to the king, 
or to the government. All that I could in honour urge in 
self-defence, all that I could in honesty profess for the future, 
has been already stated in my answer to the impeachment, 
and in my address to my peers yesterday. I have been, and 
still am, unwilling to crave mercy at the hands of one who 
owes me nothing ; from whom I have no right to expect it ; 
but that you should not reproach me with wilfully neg- 
lecting any means of safety, I will consent to a petition being 
presented to King George by you yourself. If anything can 
move him, it must be the sight of distress such as yours, 
and in such a form as that ! " he added, looking upon her, as, 
like a marble statue, she sat with lips apart, her slender throat 
bent forward, and her eyes fixed upon him. " He cannot 
behoicl thee unmoved ! It may avail tliee something in future, 
if it serve not me ! " he murmured in a low voice. 

" Oh ! do not trust to the pity of those who have already 
proved themselves so ruthless : trust rather to the zeal of your 
own wife, and our faithful Amy Evans !" 

" I will trust to your zeal, niy love, but let it be employed 
in such a manner as befits us both ; and doubly precious will 
life be to me if 'tis to you I owe it !" 

142 WINIFRED, 

" And if, as I expect, the king is obdurate ? for he fears 
you ; he fears the unconquerable fidelity of your family to 
the Stuarts, and he fears the influence of your high character: 
he fears, therefore, will not pardon you ! " 

" There is the general petition to parliament, to which I 
have agreed to put my name." 

- And if that should fail?" 

" Then, my love, you must prove that you are a Christian, 
and a Catholic, and that you have not forgotten the exhorta- 
tions to faith, submission and patience, which good Father 
Albert gave you in your youth, and which you tell me he has 
so often repeated by letter." 

" Nay, nay. If all these fail, then promise me that you 
will not reject the means I will offer you ; that you will not 
be more merciless than the king himself; that you will not 
obstinately refute to save from despair one who has ever loved 
you with most true faith ! " 

"Oh, Winifred!" 

" Promise that you will listen to my plans ; that you will 
maturely consider them ; that, if practicable, you will not re- 
ject them ; and I will present the petition, I will cling to the 
knees of the king, I will wring mercy from him if it be pos- 
sible ; and if he pardons you, 1 will honour him, I will love him, 
and I will ever esteem him worthy to be the monarch of these 
fair realms by the qualities of the heart, as I already believe 
him to be so by those of the head ! Only promise me that, 
if all this should fail, you will not condemn me always to 
plead in vain, that you, at least, will not turn away from my 
prayer, that you will listen." 

" If all other means should fail, then then, my love, I 
will listen attentively, calmly, to all you may urge.** 

" Thanks, I am satisfied," replied Lady Nithsdale, resolved 
to interpret his measured expressions into an implied assent to 
all her wishes : " and now prepare the petition, my deare*t 
lord, and I will lose no time in taking measures that it should 
reach the king himself. These hands shall give it him. 1 
know how I may gain access to bis presence. I will see 
.him with my own eyes ; and he shall refuse me with his own 
lips, if he cannot be worked upon to mercy. When will it be 
ready?" 

" Patience, my love. 1 mvst consult with those who can 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 143 

assist me in so wording it that I may not risk giving offence. 
In some days it shall be drawn up."* 

" Why such delay ? Time is precious. Talk not of days. 
To-morrow, or, at farthest, the day after, the twelfth. 
Tell me when, that I may seek the kind Mrs. Morgan, and 
with her arrange all for my admission to St. James's." 

" Gently, gently, dearest Winifred. We must do nothing 
rashly. By the thirteenth the petition shall be ready, and we 
will hope it may find such grace as shall spare you all further 
fears on my account. Meantime, compose yourself." 

Nay, am I not composed ? Surely I think I must be a 
stock, a stone, thus to preserve my senses, and move, act, speak, 
like other people. I sometimes fancy I must lack natural 
feeling ; for it is not grief that possesses my soul, but hope 
and fear so strangely blended that there is no space left for 
grief!" 

" My Winifred need not tax herself with coldness ! " re- 
plied the earl tenderly, but sadly, smiling as he looked upon 
her. Then, resuming a calm and business-like tone, he added, 
' The Lord Nairne's lady, as I understand, is also to present 
an address to the king, and there seems good hope that hers 
may be graciously received. If you could accompany her it 
might be well ; for she is a staid and discreet person, and has 
been much used to courts. She was for some years in great 
favour with Queen Anne. She may support and guide you ; 
and, indeed, Winifred, you must not overtask yourself!" 

He was half alarmed at the reliance she seemed to place on 
her own strength, and feared it might proceed from a feverish 
state of excitement. 

" I will wait upon the Lady Nairne to-day," resumed 
Lady Nithsdale. " I will do anything, everything, you sug- 
gest, now you have promised in return to listen to my argu- 
ments." 

She instinctively worded his promise as vaguely as he had 
done himself, fearing to alarm him into a declaration that he 
had only promised to listen to, not to comply with, her wishes. 
Without being exactly conscious that she was endeavouring to 
cheat him into attending to his own safety, she hoped to 
accustom him to the idea, that if she adopted every plan he 
proposed, he was thereby pledged to follow hers upon the 
failure of his own 

144 WINIFRED, 

CHAPTER XXI. 

Thy bom hath been iw'd br pride of Mate. 
Hard. cold, and dead to nature^* ivmpathtet ; 
Nor know'st thou virtue's awe nor gentleness. 
How sovereign 'lU I Nor ha*t thou felt 
The nameleu Oar and humbleii.-** of mind 
Gender'd by sight of other.' mUery. 

MS. riff. 

WHEN the Countess of Nithsdale quitted the Tower, she lost 
no time in despatching to her lord the lawyer in whose discre- 
tion he had most confidence, and who had previously assisted 
him in drawing up his written answer to the impeachment. 

She then waited on the Lady Naime, whom she found sur- 
rounded by her family ; a quiet and sober matron, upon 
whose composed countenance, and in whose well-ordered de- 
portment, it would have been difficult to detect the pa&sions 
that might, or might not, affect the soul within. 

The countess was introduced with all the form of those 
more ceremonious times, and the Lady Naime received lur 
with due attention. It was not till Lady Nithsdale had 
made many apologies for so sudden a visit to one with whose 
acquaintance she had not previously been honoured, and had 
begun to explain the cause of her intrusion, that the vehe- 
mence of her emotion made her break through the trammels 
imposed by custom ; and she adjured her, by her own hope 
of saving her husband's life, by her own hope of preserving 
a father to her children, to give her the support of her com- 
pany and countenance to the king's presence. 

The Lady Nairne at first hesitated, for she was not, like 
the Duchess of Montrose, the ardent, devoted friend, nor, like 
Mrs. Morgan, the creature of impulse; but a sober and 
prudent lady, past the age of enthusiasm, occupied with her 
own interests, and discreetly intent on availing herself of 
every means calculated to preserve a father to her numerous 
family. 

After some moments spent in consideration, she came to the 
conclusion that in all probability the king would be loth, in 
the very outset of his reign, to reject at once the prayers of 
two disconsolate wives ; and that, of the two, there was every 
reason to believe that her lord was likely to be more favourably 
looked upon than the Earl of Nithsdale ; and that, conse- 

COUNTESS OF N1THSDALE. 1 1 ;"> 

quently, his countess's presence might rather advance, than 
mar, her own chance of success. 

Having thus reflected, she politely acquiesced in the Lady 
Nithsdale's wishes ; nor need we imagine she felt no sym- 
pathy for a fellow-creature in distress so similar to her own. 
On the contrary, she was happy to afford her any assistance 
that did not tend to injure her own cause ; but bred in courts, 
and accustomed to repress all outward demonstrations of un- 
usual feeling, she replied in so measured, though not unkind a 
tone, that the glowing expressions of gratitude, which were 
ready to overflow from the countess's heart, were frozen on her 
lips, and her thanks were couched in terms scarcely less mea- 
sured than the Lady Nairne's consent. 

Having, however, arranged that when the petitions of their 
lords were ready they would again meet, and that meanwhile 
Lady Nithsdale should procure the assistance of a friend who 
was well acquainted with the king's person, (for his outward 
appearance was equally unknown to both the Jacobite ladies,) 
the Lady Nairne accompanied the countess to the head of the 
stairs, and, with all the courtly forms of good breeding, dis- 
missed her guest. 

Lady Nithsdale then hastened to the warm-hearted Mrs. 
Morgan, and, explaining to her the nature of the service she 
required, obtained her cordial assurance that she would be in 
readiness to accompany Lady Nairne and herself to St. James's 
on the evening of the 13th, when she had no doubt she 
should be able so to place them as that they might personally 
present their petitions to his majesty. The expansion of 
heart, the mt-hing sympathy of Mrs. Morgan, were a balm to 
Lady Nithsdale's feelings, after the coldness and prudence of 
the Lady Nairne. But deep grief is in its nature selfish. 

It may be true, that unclouded prosperity sometimes hardens 
the heart, or, at least, renders the impressions made by sorrows 
which have never been felt, and are consequently ill under- 
stood, but slight and transient ; and it is also true, that the 
having once known grief opens the heart to the full compre- 
hension of the feelings of one's fellows, but then it must be 
a grief that is past. While writhing under present anxiety, 
while smarting under present agony, the warmest, the most 
capacious heart is unable to take in the sufferings of others. 
Human nature, in all things limited, can feel but to a certain 

L 

1 i UfMIHED, 

extent ; and when every faculty of the soul is absorbed by 
present, actual evil, there is no power left to feel that which 
is not personal. Mrs. Morgan, happy and prosperous herself, 
had leisure to give herself to the sufferings of Lady Nithsdale; 
she adopted them as her own she entered into them heart 
and soul ! While Lady Nairne, with all most dear to her- 
self at stake, could not but consider the concerns of another 
as of very secondary interest, and would not have felt herself 
justified in allowing compassion for a person, in no way con- 
nected with her, to interfere in the slightest degree with her 
duties as a wife and a mother. Lady Nithsdale would have 
been the first to admit such views to be most just and fitting; 
but still the expressions of gratitude, which had before been 
chilled, poured forth in eloquent profusion when addressing 
Mrs. Morgan. 

Upon her return to her own lodgings, she perceived that Amy 
Evans learned with satisfaction, that a petition was to be pre- 
sented to the king, before the attempt was made to effect her 
lord's evasion. Although resolved to assist to the utmost in 
carrying her lady's plan into execution, she felt that escape 
from the Tower must be impracticable ; while, on the con- 
trary, it seemed to her impossible that any being with human 
affections could resist the voice, the words, the pleading looks 
of her dear mistress ! 

The 13th arrived. Lady Nithsdale attired herself in deep 
mourning, considering such a habit most suitable to a person 
under her circumstances; but Amy gave an involuntary 
shudder as she looked upon her lady in this ominous garb. 
The expression of her countenance did not escape Lady Niths- 
dale's observation: ** Start not, dear Amy, at this sad-coloured 
dress. If it betokens anything, 'tis but the failure of my this 
day's business. But it is not on the result of this day that 1 
rest my hopes. 1 wait on the king, for my lord wishes me to 
do so, and I cannot choose but execute his behests ; but I have 
slender hope of moving him by my entreaties. It is to our- 
selves that we must look ; to our own efforts, Amy, aided by 
that Divine Providence, who deserts not the humble in their 
need. 1 feel hope, strong hope, within my bosom ; but it is 
not of finding favour at the court. No ! it is to a higher 
power I look for sal rat ion, on Heaven that I place my 
reliance ! " 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 147 

<f Assuredly, most honoured madam. But it is right to try 
every means that Providence places within our reach." 

" Yes, Amy, and I will leave none untried." 

Mrs. Morgan and the Lady Nairne were now announced, 
and the Countess of Nithsdale entered the coach to proceed 
with them to St. James's. 

Mrs. Morgan found no difficulty in procuring their admission 
to the antechamber through which the king must necessarily pass 
in his way from his own apartments to the drawing-room. The 
ladies placed themselves in the recess of the middle window of 
the three, which occupied one side of the apartment; and, some- 
what concealed by the curtains, they there awaited the coming 
of the king. 

Upon the most trifling occasions expectation makes the heart 
beat: the watching the opening of a door, the entrance of 
any particular individual, excites a certain emotion. What 
must then have been the feelings of the countess as, with her 
eyes riveted upon the folding-doors through which his majesty 
was to enter, she fancied every moment she saw them move ! 
And when they unfolded, and some of the lords of the bed- 
chamber passed forth, she each time turned an anxious, inquir- 
ing glance on Mrs. Morgan, to know if this might be the king. 

While she was thus in breathless expectation, the Duke of 
Montrose approached to cheer her, by a few words of kindly 
encouragement ; but she made him a sign not to claim her 
acquaintance ; for the Earl of Pembroke having, at the time 
he promised to interest himself in her favour, desired her not 
to address him in public, she deemed that any exertion the 
duke might subsequently make for her, would come with the 
more effect from one who did not appear in the light of a per- 
sonal friend. 

Every moment seemed to Lady Nithsdale an age. Even 
the composed Lady Nairne changed colour : and Mrs. Morgan 
looked from one to the other, and frequently pressed Lady 
Nithsdale's hand, and bade her be of good cheer and not lose 
courage. She assured her the king would not long tarry ; that 
he was usually most punctual in his habits ; and, in an agitated 
tone, uttered all the consoling nothings, which are poured into 
the ear of those, whose highly-wrought nerves are expected 
to give way at the moment it is most needful they should be 
collected. 

L 2 

148 WINIFRED, 

At length the door again opened: there was a general stillaeas. 
Every one who could command a view of the persons approach- 
ing, arranged his countenance, composed his demeanour ; tin- 
court gossip, which had been buzzed around, was suddenly 
hushed, the lounging attitude relinquished, the droll anecdote 
suspended, and the laugh silenced. 

A pale man, with a good, rather than a dignified aspect, 
entered the apartment. He wore a tie-wig. His dress WM 
plain, and all of one sober colour, with stockings of the same 
hue. 

Lady Nithsdale read in Mrs. Morgan's glance that it was 
the king, and she hastened from the recess of the window. 
She threw herself on her knees before him, as he reached the 
middle of the room, telling him she was the unfortunate 
Countess of Nithsdale, who implored mercy for her husband. 
She spoke in French, as the king's knowledge of English was 
very imperfect. She held up the petition with both her hands, 
entreating him to read it ; but the king waved her off, and 
attempted to proceed. 

The Lady Nairne also was not backward in pressing her 
petition, and the king impatiently thrust them both from him, 
and passed on towards the opposite door; but the Lady Niths- 
dale clung to the skirts of his coat. 

As she pleaded, and pleaded in vain, she grew desperate, 
almost maddened. Still in vain ! The king listened not to 
her prayers. She would not let go her hold, and was actually 
dragged in her agony from the middle of the antechamber to 
the door of the drawing-room, when one of the lords in at- 
tendance forcibly wrested the king's dress from her hands, 
while another took her round the waist and raised her from 
the ground. 

No sooner did she feel the touch of a stranger than all her 
dignity and self-possession returned. Quickly disengaging 
herself from his grasp, she stood for a moment looking on the 
door by which the monarch had retired. Her bosom swelled 
with indignation the blood of all her noble ancestors mantled 
in her face. That she, the daughter of the Duke of Powis, 
should thus be treated ! rejected ! cast off like the scum of 
the earth ! when it was well-known the king received the 
petitions of the meanest of his subjects ! that she should 
be dragged on the very ground that she should be spurned 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 149 

from his feet that she should be forcibly seized by rude 
hands ! 

All around seemed to swim before her eyes ; and had it not 
been for Mrs. Morgan's kindly help, she must have fallen on 
the floor. Her friend gently assisted her to a seat, and then a 
flood of tears came to her relief. 

Meanwhile, the petition which she had attempted to thrust 
into the king's pocket had fallen to the ground, and one of the 
gentlemen in waiting brought it to her. The Lady Nairne 
had already succeeded in delivering her's to one who promised 
it should reach the king; and the Lady Nithsdale, when 
somewhat recovered from the agitation of this strange scene, 
hastily wrote a few lines in pencil, addressed to the Earl of 
Dorset, who was the lord of the bed-chamber then in waiting, 
and entrusted it, with the petition, to Mrs. Morgan. 

Her friend left the countess for a while, and entered the 
drawing-room ; but to one so zealous, so devoted, so warm- 
hearted, the brilliant circle seemed for a moment a confused 
and bewildering scene. She had just parted from a fellow - 
creature, whose soul was harrowed by the most agonising 
emotions, her face pale and haggard, her dress disordered ; she 
had just been witnessing grief, desperation in its most 
touching form ; and in one moment she found herself among 
gay and thoughtless creatures, all intent on their own objects 
of vanity and amusement ! The studied attire, the conscious 
simper, the pretty blush, the down-cast lid, the bewitching 
smile, the graceful turn of the swan-like throat, the brilliant 
flash of the sparkling eye, the affected flutter of the fan, the 
thousand varied attractions, were all put in requisition to charm, 
to dazzle, or to subdue. She heard around her the playful 
banter, the witty repartee, the implied compliment, the softened 
whisper, the politely turned attack, the sharp retort ; and she 
wondered for the moment how such frivolities could possess so 
absorbing an interest ! 

She was threading her way through the gay and dazzling 
throng, when her progress was arrested by the circle around 
the king himself. She was compelled to wait with outward 
composure, although she was secretly all impatience to execute 
the commission entrusted to her, and to return quickly to Lady 
Nithsdale. As she stood watching for an opportunity of 
L 3 

1 50 WINIFRED, 

slipping past unperceived, she found herself within sight, 
though scarcely within hearing, of the Duchess of Montrose. 

Two young men were evidently paying her the sort of ho- 
mage permitted by the gallantry of the day. She was an- 
swering each with animation and spirit. There was the passing 
frown, the lightening smile, the assumed air of absence if 
anything was said which she wished not to hear. 

The attention of one of the gentlemen being presently with, 
drawn by some of his acquaintance, it appeared to Mrs. 
Morgan that the other continued the conversation in a more 
earnest tone than before. She fancied she saw a blush mantle 
on the cheek of the duchess, for a moment she appeared 
distressed. The duke, who was near, and wit <0iged in 
deep and serious discourse with the Earl of Pembroke, had 
taken no part in the playful conversation which was passing 
behind him. But the duchess, making some light evasive 
answer, suddenly tapped her husband's arm with her fan, and 
caused him to turn round. She then seemed to be detailing 
to him the point in dispute, and applying to him as umpire. 
Mrs. Morgan watched all these little manoeuvres ; for she could 
not help wondering how one who professed friendship for the 
Countess of Nithsdale could thus give herself up to worldly 
vanities and interests. When first she caught a view of the 
Duke of Montrose's countenance, it bore the traces of sad- 
ness ; but as he listened to his graceful and lively wife, it 
brightened into a bland expression of amusement Upon the 
duke's being thus called to join in the discourse, the young 
gallant seemed discomposed but for an instant, and apparently 
recovering himself, at once entered into the spirit of the 
duchess's bantering ; and Mrs. Morgan again thought of the 
countess's despair, and mentally exclaimed, " If she could see 
how gaily her friend, the lively duchess, can smile even now!" 
But she did not long feel thus. In a few moments the duke, 
in a low voice, made some communication to his wife, which 
had the effect of chasing the roses from her cheeks, and dim- 
ming the brilliancy of her smile. The dark and laughing eyes 
no longer sparkled with the gay consciousness of charming, 
but were fixed on her husband's face with an expression of 
dismay and woe. 

She looked round as if wishing to make her escape ; then, 
perceiving Mrs. Morgan, she rushed to her : 

COUNTESS OF NITIISDALE. 1 51 

" Oh, Mrs. Morgan ! " she exclaimed, " is this all true ? 
You were with her, were you not?-" 

" Yes, your grace ; I was with the Countess of Nithsdale, 
even now, in the antechamber." 

" Is she still there ? I must go to her ; I must go instantly 
to my poor cousin Winifred ! " 

'*' Stay, dearest Christian ! " interposed the duke ; " Lady 
Nithsdale herself, this very evening, motioned me not to speak- 
to her; and the Earl of Pembroke says, the less we put our- 
selves forward unnecessarily, the more effectually we may be 
able to serve her. Be not so rash and thoughtless. That 
warm heart of yours carries you beyond the bounds of pru- 
dence, dear Christian !" but the duke looked at her with 
pleasure and kindness while he checked her. 

" Alas ! and is it true that the king dragged her all across 
the room, and would not give heed to her petition ?" 

" Most true, your grace ! " 

" Oh, my lord duke ! but indeed this was not kind and 
right in his majesty," said the duchess, turning once more 
towards her husband an appealing glance. 

" We must not speak treason, dearest Christian, here, in 
the royal presence ! " 

*' Nay ! I cannot but thinHc this was cruel : and may I 
not go to her ? Is she still in the antechamber, Mrs. Morgan ? " 

" Yes, but she will be gone in a few moments ; and yout 
grace may rest assured that the countess shall meet with every 
kindness and attention." 

" You are a good, kind soul," said the duchess ; " and my 
poor cousin has many times told me how much she owes to 
your friendly sympathy." 

The king had changed his position, and the passage was 
now free. Mrs. Morgan, after briefly explaining her errand 
to the duchess, passed on to where the Earl of Dorset was 
engaged at cards with the Prince. She contrived, however, 
to give him the packet ; and received his assurance, that when 
the game was over, he would peruse and attend to its contents. 

As she wound her way back, she found that the king's re- 
jection of the Ladies Nithsdale's and Nairne's petitions had 
been rapidly communicated from mouth to mouth ; and that, 
except in the immediate hearing of the king, no other subject 
was discussed. She could scarcely make her way through the 
L 4 

1.V2 wiMiurn, 

crowd, so anxious was every one to learn from her each detail 
of what had really passed. All were eager, some indignant ; 
but some urged, that if his majesty once received a wife's 
petition, it would be most difficult then to refuse, and that 
unless he had made up his mind to pardon treason proved 
and acknowledged treason he had no other course to pursue 
than to avoid witnessing grief he could not alleviate ; that his 
sudden, though somewhat undignified flight, did not by any 
means bear the character of hardnesa, but, on the contrary, 
might lead a candid mind to believe he durst not trust himself 
to witness the desperation of two disconsolate wives. 

It was with difficulty that Mrs. Morgan regained the door, 
and hastened back to the friend who stood so much in need of 
her consoling sympathy. Slowly and drearily did they retrace 
their steps. 

The Lady Nairne, who had secret information that her ap- 
plication was likely to be successful, was comparatively com- 
posed, and bore what should have seemed an equal disappoint- 
ment with equanimity and resignation. 

The Countess of Nithsdale, exhausted, humbled, indig- 
nant, mortified, grieved, was for the time more thoroughly 
subdued than she had ever been before. 

And yet she had not been sanguine as to the result of this 
petition ; those means on which she most relied were still 
available ; but to her lofty spirit, the contempt with which 
she had been treated, in sight of all the court, gave her a 
painful sensation of degradation. It was some slight conso- 
lation to her to learn from Mrs. Morgan, what the Duchess of 
Mont rose the next day confirmed still more strongly, that when 
the circumstances which had occurred without became gene- 
rally whispered through the drawing-room, the harshness of 
the king had been the topic of conventaiion the whole evening. 

With her gentleness there was blended a certain degree of 
pride, a consciousness of being the scion of an ancient stock, 
which would have rendered it impossible for a mean thought 
even to pass through her mind, and which ever enabled her to 
entrench herself in dignified reserve, should others neglect to 
pay that respect due to noble birth, which, unless forgotten by 
them, would never be remembered by herself. 

COUNTESS OF MTHSDALE. 153 

CHAPTER XXII. 

Distress is virtue's opportunity. Southern. 

THE Earl of Nithsdale felt even more keenly than did the 
countess the indignity with which she had been treated in her 
interview with the king. 

His dark eye flashed, he bit his compressed lip till the 
blood almost started ; he paced the apartment with hasty 
strides, as he pictured to himself his graceful, his delicate, his 
shrinking Winifred, on whose fair form he would scarcely 
allow the winds to blow too roughly, dragged along the floor, 
the rude hands of strangers round that slender waist ; and it 
was then he felt indeed that he was a prisoner, powerless to 
defend her whom he had sworn to cherish ! The bars, the 
bolts, the high walls, the moat, the guards ! oh, how his soul 
rebelled against them all ! How agonising was the impotent 
indignation which possessed his every faculty. 

Lady Nithsdale grieved to see his agitation, and yet from 
his very agitation she gathered hope that she might eventually 
work him to her wishes. 

Meanwhile, with the assistance of Amy, she had procured 
most of the articles necessary for the disguise of her husband ; 
and although resolved that every other means of safety should 
be tried, she still kept her mind fixed upon this last resource. 
The consciousness of having still a point to look to, something 
still to rest upon when all else failed, sustained her courage ; 
but at the same time it prevented her attempting to submit to 
an event, which, in the judgment of others, was now ine- 
vitable. She could not even think of resignation ; on the 
contrary, with this secret hope in her heart, and this plan in 
her mind, she would have been alarmed at her own want of 
reliance in that plan, had she tried to school her feelings to 
acquiesce in the fatal doom. 

A few days after the countess's unsuccessful application to 
the king, the resolution was taken in council that the sentence 
passed upon the rebel lords should be carried into execution 
without delay, and on the 18th the necessary warrants and 

154 W1NIPRFD, 

orders were despatched, both to the Lieutenant of the Tower, 
and to the Sheriffs of the city of London and Middlesex. 

There was a startling reality in these measures that for the 
moment shook her inmost soul ; yet she would not allow her- 
self to dwell upon the intelligence ; she scarcely gave herself 
time to reflect, but all the more strenuously busied herself in 
seeing that her preparations were complete ; and she strove 
to interest herself in the attempt made the following day by 
the Countess of Derwentwater to more the king to mercy. 
Accompanied by the Duchesses of Cleveland and of Bolton, 
and by many other ladies of rank, she was introduced by the 
Dukes of SL Albans and of Richmond, to the king's presence, 
and humbly implored his clemency ; but her application met 
with no better success than the Lady Nithsdale's more pas- 
sionate appeal. 

It was therefore arranged by the wives of all the condemned 
lords, that two days afterwards, on February the 21st, they 
should repair to the lobby of the House of Peers, and there 
implore the intercession of their lordships with the king. 

More than twenty other ladies of the very first distinction 
accompanied them. It might have moved the most unfeeling 
to behold so many of the fairest and the noblest of the realm 
in such deep and unfeigned distress. But though among the 
mourning group there were many countenances which bore the 
traces of intense anxiety, many whose expression of grief 
amounted almost to despair, some perhaps who might boast 
of greater positive beauty of feature, on none did sorrow sit 
with so touching a grace as on the Countess of Nithsdale. 
The wan transparency of her naturally pale complexion, the 
refined cast of her features, which seemed moulded only to 
express the highest and purest affections of the soul, Assorted 
well with the situation of deep interest in which she was 
placed. 

But on this occasion the hearts of all seemed steeled against 
them. Their application met with little attention : no mea- 
sures were taken, no motion made, in consequence of their 
petition. In blank disappointment each sought again her 
disconsolate, her widowed home. 

Dispirited, but not utterly hopeless, they on the following 
day, the 22d, repaired again to Westminster Hall, and with 
them a still greater attendance of the first, and the noblest, of 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 155 

the ladies who adorned the British court ; and with still 
more passionate earnestness they appealed to both houses of 
parliament. 

In the Commons their petitions met with no success. Not- 
withstanding an eloquent address on the part of Sir Richard 
Steele, the court party moved that the discussion should be 
adjourned to the 1st of March, and carried it by a majority of 
seven voices. 

\\'ith the Lords they found more favour. Although the 
Duke of Richmond, even when presenting the Earl of Der- 
wentwater's petition, declared that he would himself vote 
against it, yet others spoke warmly and eloquently in behalf of 
men, who, though mistaken, had still acted from conscientious 
motives. 

The Earl of Danby, moved with pity for the Lord Nairne's 
numerous family, urged strongly that the petitions of the 
several lords should be received and read. The Lord Towns- 
hend and several others, who upon all occasions had given 
undoubted proofs of their attachment to the present govern- 
ment, supported the contrary opinion ; when, to the surprise 
of many, the Earl of Nottingham declared in favour of the 
petitions being read. As president of the council he drew 
with him many peers, and the motion was carried by nine or 
ten voices. 

Then came the question whether in the case of an impeach- 
ment the king possessed the power to reprieve. It was now 
that the Earl of Pembroke redeemed his pledge of exerting 
himself in Lady Nithsdale's favour. His animated and elo- 
quent address carried with him the sense of the house ; and, 
witli the assistance of the Duke of Montrose, the king's power 
to pardon was carried in the affirmative. 

This was followed by a motion for an address to the king 
that, as he had the power to do so, he would be pleased to 
grant a reprieve to the lords who lay under sentence of death, 
which, although opposed by the firmest friends of govern- 
ment, was also carried. 

Lady Nithsdale's heart bounded within her ; hope for a 
moment danced in her bosom, and Ugh ted up her cheek with 
a passing bloom. Her joy was however doomed to be 
evanescent, for another lord represented that " though cle- 
mency was one of the brightest virtues which adorn and sup- 

156 WINIFRED, 

port a crown, yet in his opinion the same should be exercised 
only on proper objects ;" and he therefore moved, " that they 
should address the king to reprieve such of the condemned 
lords as deserved his mercy, and approved themselves worthy 
of this intercession, and not all indiscriminately." 

The amendment was carried by two voices only, but it was 
carried ; and her heart once more sank within her. This 
salvo blasted all her hopes. She was assured it was aimed at 
the exclusion of those who would not subscribe such a peti- 
tion as some of the peers had themselves prepared, a thing 
she knew her husband would never submit to ; nor, as she 
herself declared, would she have wished to preserve his life 
en such terms. 

Still, however, the address to the king had passed generally, 
and she thought she might turn this circumstance to account 
in lulling the vigilance of the guards. She lost no time in 
quitting the House of Lords, and hastening to the Tower ; 
where, affecting an air of joy and security, she told the sol- 
diers as she passed, that she brought joyful tidings to the 
prisoners, for that the petition had passed in their favour. 
She then gave them some money to drink to the lords and hie 
majesty ; but she prudently made it but a trifling sum, hoping 
thereby to secure their good-will, without awakening in them 
any suspicion of design on her part. 

And now there remained but the one last resource. She 
trembled as she thought that, though all was in her own mind 
prepared, the most difficult point remained yet to be accom- 
plished, her husband had not yet consented to the disguise 
she proposed ; and although he had not retracted hi* promise 
of giving her proposal a fair and patient hearing, she had in 
fact extracted from him nothing more. If he should now 
pertinaciously refuse to accede to it ! Oh, no, it was impos- 
sible. He could not doom her to such hopeless, unutterable 
misery! 

Trembling, agitated, yet worked up to the utmost pitch 
of courage and resolution, she reached his apartment. She 
staggered into the room ; and flinging herself into his arms, 
she sobbed convulsively on his bosom. She could not speak : 
but after a few moments he said, with hopeless composure and 
tenderness, 

" So, my poor Winifred, both houses lave then rejected 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 157 

our prayers ! Alas for you, my love ! would I were able to 
give you consolation ! would I could alleviate your sorrows !" 

" You can ! you can ! You, and you alone, can now save 
me from despair ! " she exclaimed with passion. Her eyes 
were dry, her cheek was flushed, her whole countenance 
seemed suddenly inspired : " My life, my existence, are in 
your hands ! You have but to will it, to make me the hap- 
piest of wives, of mothers ! If I am doomed to the early 
death of the heart-broken," she continued almost in a threat- 
ening tone, " or if I am doomed to drag on a weary, joyless 
existence, a lingering death-like life, in which the welfare of 
my soul yes, the salvation of a precious soul, is in peril, for 
I shall murmur, I shall repine there is no resignation here 
I feel I shall not submit as it would be my duty to do : 
if such is the fate before me, it will be you who doom me to 
it ! I can save you I am sure I can ! If you refuse to 
lend yourself to the measures I propose, it will be you who de- 
stroy my happiness in this world, you who peril my salvation 
in the next ! " 

There was a restless fire in her eye, an energy in her man- 
ner, a fearful inspiration about her, that awed, while it touched 
him. He could not but think what must be the strength of 
those feelings which could so transport her out of herself ; 
which could change the mild, timid, shrinking wife, into the 
inspired threatening Sibyl ! 

" Hush, hush, my love ! you know not what you say !" 

She looked wildly and doubtingly around her ; then burst- 
ing into tears, "Alas! alas! what have I uttered?" and 
falling on her knees, with clasped hands raised to heaven, - 
" Pardon. O most merciful Being ; pardon for my wild and 
wicked words ! O Thou on whom my reliance is placed, Thou 
in whose providence I trust, cast me not off for these hasty 
words, wrung from me by insufferable anguish ! And thou, 
my lord, my love, my husband, urge me not to despair ! This 
brain may become unsettled, reason may give way, I may 
again be hurried into impious ravings ! Oh, take pity upon 
me, dearest, dearest husband ! " She clung to his knees ; she 
stretched her beseeching arms towards him. 

" Do with me what thou wilt, Winifred. If this is weak- 
ness, I am weak ! If this is cowardice, I am no longer brave ! 
Command me ! guide me ! I am but the instrument in thy 
bauds, my wife ! I would sacrifice my life to honour ; but 

158 WINIFRED, 

if there is dishonour in my attempt to escape, I will sacrifice 
honour itself to you, my love !" 

" It is not the sacrifice of your honour I demand ; your- 
self cannot value it more highly than does your wife. They 
carried the address to the king, but it was coupled with an 
amendment that it should only apply to those who would sign 
a petition of their own framing. I knew you would not I 
do not ask you to do so. Your honour is precious to me as 
your life more precious than your life ! but there is no dis- 
honour in escaping from a cruel and an ignominious death !" 
" Not ignominious, Winifred ; an honourable death ! " 
" From a cruel and an unjust death ! a treacherous death ! 
Was it not upon the understanding that your lives were to be 
spared that you all surrendered at Preston ? Was it not to 
avoid useless effusion of blood that you yielded ? and that you 
advised others to yield ? Would it not have been easier and 
sweeter to have perished in battle, than to die on the scaffold, 
as your fellow prisoners must ? No ! there is no dishonour 
in escaping from tyranny !" She spoke with energy, for the 
first time uttering the words of " death " and " scaffold," 
which had never before found their way to her lipg. 

" Have I not said it, my love ? I am ready to follow your 
injunctions. Do with me what you will." 

"You have promised it, you have sworn it!" and her 
face was radiant with joy. " My own love ! you are mine 
once more ! We shall not be parted ; we shall live and die 
together, we shall grow old together ! Oh, thanks ! thanks ! " 
and her imagination had overleaped all the bars and bolts, the 
dreary boundaries of the prison. She felt they were at large 
to roam over the wide world together. He gave her one sad 
and grateful kiss, and walked to the window to conceal his 
emotion ; but she saw the expression of his countenance as he 
slowly surveyed the court-yard, and his eye rested on each 
sentry as he paced in his appointed spot. 

She perceived the almost mocking smile which passed tran- 
siently over his lips ; and she plainly read how vain he thought 
her hopes, how unavailing would prove the consent she had 
extorted from him. 

"You think my schemes aH visionary! you think me 
scarcely in my right senses ! you deem me already crazed 
with grief!" 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 159 

" Nay, my love, I think your wishes run beyond your judg- 
ment, and I fear you are only preparing for yourself a more 
bitter disappointment. The blow will fall the heavier for 
coming upon you in your present state of excitement. It 
would tend more to your future peace of mind if, discarding 
all worldly thoughts, you would fix your hopes, and would 
assist me in fixing mine, on heaven, and heaven alone." 

" And think you it could tend to my future peace of mind, 
the reflection that one hour of bold prudence, one hour of 
steady perseverance in the execution of the scheme already 
formed, might have led to a reunion for life? perhaps a 
long and happy life ! You would not surely retract the vow 
so solemnly made, even now ? " she added in a reproachful 
tone. 

" No ! I have promised ; and I will keep my promise ! " 

She pressed his hand in token of gratitude. " Then I must 
away. There are still some with whom I have need to com- 
municate. Do not look for me early to-morrow : I shall not 
be with you till towards dusk, and then " 

" Not till evening ? The last day must I be deprived of 
your presence till evening ? " 

<: The first day of your deliverance, my love ! the first of 
many days of liberty and happiness !" 

He dropped his eyes. He would not sadden her by his 
own forebodings. And yet he felt he should be permitted to 
look on her for so short a space, that it was with difficulty he 
could bring himself to lose sight of her for a moment. 

It was already night; but he watched her from his prison 
window, and fancied he could detect her beloved form as she 
glided down the steps leading to the archway. He stood 
gazing at the spot till tears suffused his eyes ; and he flung 
himself upon a seat, determined to wrestle with his emotions. 

When alone, when not exposed to the influence of her 
tenderness, he looked on death with perfect composure, and 
almost wished his course was run, and that the inevitable 
moment was arrived. The hopes with which she strove to 
inspire him unsettled and distracted him ; and then he re- 
proached himself for such weakness. Yet how collect his 
thoughts ? how temper them down to a tranquil, firm, un- 
moved acquiescence in his doom, when all his energies would 
be required for the enterprise which was to restore him to life, 

iGO WIMFIIED, 

to love, and to liberty ? He strove to forget the plan in agita- 
tion. He tried to abstract himself in prayer; but when most 
he hoped to have spiritualised his meditations, visions of the 
future would flash across his mind, painful anticipations of 
what would be his Winifred's desperation upon the failure of 
her attempt, agonising shame at the idea of being discovered 
and caught in the act of evasion, dread of appearing in the 
undignified position of a reclaimed fugitive, dragged unwil- 
lingly to the block, instead of the loyal martyr, boldly, firmly, 
with an unconstrained step, mounting the scaffold, to con- 
summate the sacrifice he had of his own free will chosen to 
make. 

He almost repented the promise he had given ; he longed 
for the repose of hopelessness. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

Methlnki my tool li rout M to hr tot work, 
Has much to do, and little time to |re. 

DRYDCN 

THE Countess of Nithsdale had quitted her husband. She 
wound her solitary way through the dreary purlieus which had 
become only too familiar to her. She bad gained the long- 
wished-for consent ; she had extracted a vow, a solemn vow, 
from her lord, and she feared not that he would break it : hut 
never did the difficulties of her undertaking appear to h > 
appalling as at the present moment ; the sentries BO innumer- 
able, the guards so alert, the way so long, the wall* so lofty, 
the moat so broad ! 

While his consent was to be gained, all else seemed easy , 
but now the dangers rose up in fearful array before her ! 

But this was not the time to waver. Where could the look 
for support but to her own unshrinking soul ? Amy, she 
knew, considered her plan impracticable. To no one else had 
she imparted it. 

During the short time which intervened before she reached 
her home, she had recovered her confident reliance on the 
protection of Providence, and on the strength which that Pro- 
vidence would vouchsafe to her; and with a firm countenance 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 

161 

she informed Amy that her lord's consent was obtained, that 
every difficulty was smoothing itself before her, and that they 
had but to go on and prosper. 

"Thank Heaven that my lord has consented," answered 
Amy ; " but, dearest madam, is this, in truth, the only hope 
now left ? Here is a packet which arrived even now from the 
Duchess of Montrose. Who knows but it may contain good 
news ? " 

With trembling hands the countess tore it open ; but Amy 
saw with a glance that there was no hope administered by its 
contents. " No worse news, I trust, madam ? " 

" No worse than I expected ; but read yourself, good Amy. 
I have nor voice nor eyesight," as she brushed off a tear, "nor 
strength. All the strength I possess must be reserved for to- 
morrow." 

The duchess's letter told her that the petition from the 
Lords had received no more favourable answer from the king 
than " that on this, and all other occasions, he would do what 
he thought most consistent with the dignity of his crown and 
the safety of his people." The duchess added, that this 
answer would next morning be formally announced to the 
public, but that meanwhile she had hastened to communkate 
it to her friend, thinking she might deem it advisable to adopt 
some farther measures, although she scarcely knew what mea- 
sures to recommend. 

In consequence of this information, Lady Nithsdale re- 
solved, as a last resource, in the event of her scheme proving 
unsuccessful, to prepare for still presenting one more private 
petition to the king. To this end she appointed Mr. M'Kenzie, 
an old friend of her lord's, and, through her sister Lady Sea- 
forth, a connexion of her own, to await her on the following 
evening, at her lodgings. She felt secure of his friendly sup- 
port in any emergency. She also applied to the Duchess of 
Buccleugh ; who promised, if Lady Nithsdale called upon her 
to do so, she would be in readiness to accompany her to court. 

She passed what remained of that evening, and the early 
part of the following morning, in completing every arrange- 
ment in case of either contingency. Even had not these 
manifold cares occupied her time, she could scarcely have 
trusted herself with her husband. Constant, incessant busi- 
ness was absolutely necessary to her. If she had sat down to 

M 

WINIFRED, 

think, to calculate the chances, it would have been impossible 
to her to have preserved the self-command so indispensable to 
the success of her undertaking. 

It was not till towards the afternoon of this trying day, the 
23rd, that she desired Amy to request Mrs. Mills would favour 
her with her company for a few moments. 

The compassionate Mrs. Mills instantly obeyed her sum- 
mons, though almost dreading to find herself in the presence 
of one whose grief she feared to witness. But Lady Nitlis- 
dale was perfectly calm and collected. After thanking her for 
her constant kindness and hospitality, she at once entered upon 
the subject ; and telling her that having had such experience 
of the goodness of her heart, she did not doubt but she would 
continue to prove herself the kind friend she had ever found 
her ; and that she would not refuse to accompany her that 
day to the Tower, in order that, as she was not personally 
known to the guards and those in attendance, her lord might 
the more easily pass for her. She then detailed to her the 
whole plan for his escape, and urged that as this was the very 
evening preceding the execution, there was no time for doubt 
and hesitation. She told her all other hope was now at 
an end. Reprieves had been despatched for the Lords Win- 
toun, Widdrington, and Nairne ; but at the same time orders 
had been given for the execution, the next morning, of Lord 
Derwentwater, Lord Kenmure, and of her husband ! She 
spoke with a firm voice ; and such was her excited state of 
hope and resolution, that the words which struck through 
Amy's heart, which made Mrs. Mills shrink and tremble, 
seemed as if they were to her but a matter of business. 

Mrs. Mills, all agitated and confused, promised to assist to 
the best of her ability, and Lady Nithsdale instantly over- 
whelmed her with thanks ; and having despatched Walter 
Elliot to Mrs. Morgan, to request she also would instantly 
visit her, she then occupied herself in ascertaining from Amy 
Evans the exact situation of the house where they were to 
meet, when she should have succeeded in placing her husband 
beyond the precincts of the Tower. 

Mrs. Morgan delayed not to wait on the countess, who 
found little difficulty in gaining her consent to any plan which 
might serve one whom she had quickly learned to love with 
all the warmth of her enthusiastic heart. Indeed, both she 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 1 63 

and Mrs. Mills were so taken by surprise, the case was so 
pressing, the plan to be so instantly carried into execution, 
that there was no time for indecision or reflection. They 
must either doom the Earl of Nithsdale to certain death on 
the morrow, and his wife to utter despair; or they must lend 
themselves to the scheme so warily, so judiciously, so dis- 
creetly contrived. 

Lady Nithsdale begged Mrs. Morgan, who was of a pecu- 
liarly slender make, to put under her own riding-hood that 
which she had prepared for Mrs. Mills, who was to leave hers 
in the prison for the earl. 

She then hurried them both into the coach ; and repeating 
her directions, enforcing her counsels, she allowed no pause in 
the conversation, during which they might have leisure to 
reflect and to repent. 

In their hurry and their astonishment, they thought not of 
the possible consequences, but submitted to obey Lady Niths- 
dale in all things, who guided them with the overawing 
mastery which, at the moment of trial, the stronger mind in- 
variably exercises over those of a more feeble and yielding tem- 
perament. 

The coach stopped at the Tower. Lady Nithsdale had 
permission to introduce but one person at a time ; and leaving 
Mrs. Mills in the carriage, she took Mrs. Morgan with her. 

She had not seen her husband since the preceding night, 
and this was the eve of execution ! If she failed, the morrow 
would see her a widow ! But she drove such thoughts from 
her mind ; she hurried Mrs. Morgan along, she almost 
pushed her into the apartment. 

Lord Nithsdale rushed to his wife, and pressed her to his 
bosom. " Oh, Winifred ! " he exclaimed, half reproachfully ; 
" this long, long, weary day, and I have not seen you ! " 

She disengaged herself from him. 

" I must not look on you," she said ; " I must not listen to 
you I must not think we must now act, and not a word 
must be uttered that is not to the purpose ! Here is my good, 
kind, dear Mrs. Morgan ! She is, and has been from the first, 
a true and faithful friend ; and now, dear Mrs. Morgan, we 
must lose no time in speech or compliment." 

Mrs. Morgan took off the hood, and soon disencumbered 
herself of the dress, which had been put on over her own. 

M 2 

]()4 WINIFRED, 

Lord Nithsdale meanwhile stood by, passive, but'miserable. 
The long morning had appeared to him interminabe. The 
earlv February twilight had seemed as if it never would arrive, 
He still looked upon this day as his last on earth ; and his 
feelings, though not his reason, were almost disposed to 
murmur at his wife for not being with him during the few 
remaining hours which they might have passed together. He 
had to remind himself that she was toiling in his service, not 
to feel abandoned by her. It was with a strange and mixed 
sensation that he had watched the waning light He was im- 
patient for the shades of evening, which he trusted would 
bring to him the beloved of his soul ; and yet, as he dwelt 
upon the last rays of sunshine, he felt loth to part with tlu-ni 
for ever, to think that he should never again see that glorious 
luminary fulfil its course in splendour, and shed its brilliancy 
on all around ; hateful to him as was the dreary prospect 
from his prison windows, he now thought with regret that he 
should never again see its western beams gild the square 
turrets of the White Tower. At moments he felt life was 
worth one desperate effort; but more frequently he hoped, 
when his Winifred did come, it would be to tell him that her 
scheme was impracticable, to release him from his vow, and to 
allow him to meet his fate with dignity and resignation. 

She came, and all was turmoil and confusion within his 
bosom. He was pledged to obey her. Indeed there was no 
time for argument or remonstrance. She would have listened 
to none. 

Those who stand upon the threshold of the grave those 
to whom in a few hours the mysteries of a future existence 
may all be unfolded seem as it were a link between the 
living and the dead, and are ever regarded with a certain 
awe, as Mrs. Morgan experienced when looking on him of 
whom she had heard so much on him for whom, though 
unknown, she had felt so keenly on the stranger for whom 
she was now incurring, what might prove to herself, no in- 
considerable peril. 

That pensive countenance, that noble brow, those lofty 
features, all spoke a soul within, which might well justify 
his wife's devotion, and she felt that such a creature must not 
perish. She repented not of her consent ; but gladly, wil- 
lingly, incurred the present risk. 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 

165 

When the change in her dress was effected, Lady Nithsdale 
conducted her back to the staircase ; begging her, in the hear- 
ing of the guards, to lose no time in sending her maid to dress 
her, and expressing the greatest fear lest, if she did not come 
immediately, she should be too late to present the last petition 

that night. 

She presently afterwards descended the stairs to meet Mrs. 
Mills, who, according to their previous arrangement, concealed 
her face with her handkerchief, as if in tears. When the 
door was closed she made her take off her own hood, and put 
on that which Mrs. Morgan had left for her; and then 
bidding her assume a more cheerful countenance (in order 
that when her lord appeared in her dress, he might the more 
easily personate the lady who had entered weeping and 
afflicted), she took her by the hand, and led her out of the 
earl's chamber. In passing through the next room, she said 
with all the concern imaginable, 

" My dear Mrs. Catherine, go in all haste, and send me 
my waiting-maid. She certainly cannot reflect how late it is. 
I am to present my petition to-night ; and if I let slip this 
opportunity, I am undone, for to-morrow will be too late ; 
hasten her as much as possible, for I shall be on thorns till 

she comes." 

The guards, to whom the countess's liberality the preceding 
day had endeared her, disturbed her not, but allowed her to 
pass and repass with her company : the more freely also, as, 
having been told by her that the imprisoned lords were likely 
to obtain their liberty, they were not so strictly on the watch 
as they had hitherto been. All in the outer room, who were 
chiefly the guards' wives and daughters, seemed to compas- 
sionate her exceedingly ; and the sentinel himself opened the 
door for them. There was nothing in the appearance of the 
fair and florid Mrs. Mills wliich could excite the slightest 
suspicion. 

Having seen her safe out, Lady Nithsdale returned to 
finish dressing her lord. She had prepared false hair of a 
fair colour; the more to resemble Mrs. Mills, whose hair was 
inclined to be flaxen. She coloured his dark eye-brows with 
light paint; and she also painted his face with red and white, 
for there was no time to shave his dark beard. She dressed 
him in some of her own petticoats, and in the hood Mrs. 
M 3 

166 WINIFRED, 

Mills had worn. As the evening had by this time closed in, 
and she feared that the light of candles might betray them, 
she hastened him from the apartment She led him by the 
hand, whilst he held his handkerchief to his eyes ; and being 
dressed in the same dress, and his hair and complexion being 
made somewhat to resemble those of Mrs. Mills, he easily 
passed for the weeping young lady whose affliction at having 
parted for the last time from a dear friend might very natu- 
rally be even more overwhelming than when she entered a 
short time before. 

Lady Nithsdale spoke to him in the most piteous tone of 
voice, bitterly bewailing the negligence of her maid Evans, 
who had ruined her by her delay. Yet, wbUe she spoke, it 
almost went against her to accuse of negligence the devoted 
Amy ! Still, addressing the earl, she continued : 

" My dear Mrs. Betty, for the love of God run quickly, and 
bring her with you. You know ray lodging, and if ever you 
made despatch in your life, do it at present. I am almost 
distracted with this disappointment." 

The guards opened the door. She was permitted to pass 
with one friend at a time : they had not kept exact account 
of the number who had entered, satisfied that all was right 
while she was accompanied by only one female, and one also 
whom they believed to have seen so lately enter the chamber 
within. She went down with him, still conjuring him to 
make all possible haste. 

As soon as he had cleared the door, she made him walk 
before, lest the sentinel should take notice of his walk ; and 
she still continued to press him to make despatch. At the 
bottom of the last outer step, she met the faithful Amy Evans, 
and into her hands she committed him. 

She had before engaged Mr. Mills to be in readiness before 
the Tower, to conduct him to a place of safety, which at that 
period might be the more easily effected, as, instead of a clear 
and open space without the walls, the purlieus were choked 
with mean habitations, with close and narrow alleys. The 
gates were no sooner passed, than they found themselves in 
the throng of the most dense and busy part of the London 
population ; but Mr. Mills had looked upon the affair as so 
very unlikely to succeed, and his astonishment threw him 
into such a consternation when he actually beheld them, that 
he was bewildered and quite out of himself. 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. l67 

Amy Evans perceived his confusion, and with that presence 
of mind which had so justly entitled her to her lady's con- 
fidence, instantly decided on her own line of conduct. She 
took no notice of his agitation, lest she might attract the 
attention of the passers-by ; and she feared that possibly the 
earl might mistrust them, if he should perceive wavering and 
uncertainty in those to whom he was confided. She there- 
fore at once took him to some friends of her own, on whom 
she felt certain she might rely ; and leaving him with them, 
immediately returned in search of Mr. Mills. 

Meanwhile the Lady Nithsdale had in safety regained her 
lord's apartment. As she passed, all sympathised in her dis- 
tress, and pitied her for the disappointment she had met with. 
She closed the door, and then kept up a conversation as 
if her lord had been really present. She answered her own 
questions in his voice, as nearly as she could imitate it She 
walked up and down the room, as though they had been con- 
versing together, till at length she imagined the earl and Amy 
must have thoroughly cleared themselves of the guards. 

During all this time she had not allowed herself once to 
pause or to reflect. She had contemplated nothing but suc- 
cess she had not permitted herself to anticipate failure 
she had not suffered her mind to glance towards the fatal 
morrow. Still calm and collected, she now calculated that 
she might with safety depart herself. She neglected no pos- 
sible precaution: she opened the door, and standing half 
within it, so that those without might not have an opportunity 
of commanding a view of the interior, she bade her lord a 
formal farewell for the night, saying, " That something more 
than usual must have occurred to make Evans negligent on 
this important occasion, who had always been so punctual in 
the smallest trifles;" she added, "there was no remedy; 
but that she should go in person ; that if the Tower was still 
open when she had finished her business, she would return 
that night ; but bade him be assured she would be with him 
as early in the morning as she could gain admittance, and, as 
she flattered herself, should bring him favourable news." 

Then, before she shut the door, she pulled through the 

string of the latch, so that it could only be opened from 

within ; she closed it with some force, to make sure that it 

was well fastened ; and as she passed she told the servant he 

M 4 

168 WINIFRED, 

need not carry candles to his master till his lord sent for 
them, as he desired to finish some prayers. 

She descended the stairs. She found herself in the open 
air ; for a moment all seemed to reel around her ; she scan-fly 
dared trust her senses that he was really free. She trembled 
as she passed on. She thought each sight, each sound, might 
be that he had been discovered, overtaken, and that they were 
now leading him back to captivity and certain death. 

She feared to excite suspicion by looking too eagerly and 
curiously about her, and yet she fancied every moment she 
heard hurrying footsteps in pursuit of her. She reached the 
outer gates at last she passed them ! There were several 
coaches on the stand : she called one, she threw herself into 
it, and drove to her own lodgings. 

It was all true ! He was free ! She had saved him ! . The 
joy seemed too great for endurance her heart felt bursting ! 
But there was still much to be done, she must not yet relax. 

CHAPTER XXIV. 

And all extreme* how llnk'd I Do we not weep 
For joy ? aitd Uugh. aj. laugh, for angulih ? 
A hideout laugh, that teU* of orrow, more 
Than tear* and tight I 

MS. Play. 

WHEN Lady Nithsdale arrived at her lodgings, she found poor 
Mr. M'Kenzie in waiting to accompany her to present her last 
hopeless petition, had the attempt, in the success of which she 
had so confidently, and, as it proved, so justly relied, proved 
ineffectual. 

She told him, with exultation, there was no need now of 
any petition, as her husband was safe out of the Tower, and 
out of the hands of his enemies, as she supposed ; although, 
she added with truth, she knew not where he was. 

It was also necessary to inform the Duchess of Buccleugh 
that she should not require her good offices that evening, but 
at the same time she was unwilling to spread the news of her 
lord's escape. She had discharged the coach which had con - 
veyed her from the Tower ; but, sending for a sedan-chair, 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. l9 

she resolved to go immediately to the Duchess of Buccleugh's. 
She inquired if she was at home ; and being answered in the 
affirmative, and that she was in expectation of the countess's 
arrival, but was at that moment engaged with another 
duchess.* Lady Nithsdale declined going up stairs, but de- 
sired to be shown into a chamber below, begging at the same 
time that the duchess's maid might be sent to her. 

She was glad to escape being questioned by the duchess 
herself, and bade the maid acquaint her grace that her only 
reason for not waiting upon her was her having been informed 
she was engaged with company. She charged the maid with 
her most sincere thanks for her grace's kind offer of accom- 
panying her to court, but desired her to say, she might spare 
herself any further trouble, as it was judged more advisable 
to present one general petition in the name of all : still, she 
should never be unmindful of her particular obligation to her 
grace, which she hoped soon to acknowledge in person. 

She had dismissed the chair which brought her to the 
Duchess of Buccleugh's, lest she should be pursued and 
watched ; and she therefore now desired one of the servants 
to call another, in which she proceeded to the Duchess of 
Montrose's. 

Upon hearing of Lady Nithsdale's arrival, the duchess was 
seized with such a panic, she so dreaded the notion of wit^ 
nessing her despair, that she suddenly quitted the apart- 
ment, and hastened to deny herself. Her husband, seeing 
her abruptly break from her company, anxiously followed to 
inquire the cause of her evident agitation. 

" I cannot see her," she exclaimed : " I could not bear to 
behold my poor cousin of Nithsdale's anguish. I have no 
power to save her, and I have not courage to contemplate the 
agony I cannot alleviate. Oh ! make some excuse for me ! I am 
weak and helpless ; I cannot preach resignation. Alas ! 
alas !" she continued, wringing her hands, " I know too well 
what must be her feelings ; I am too well aware of what a 
nature is her devotion to her lord ; it would be mockery in 
me to bid her be patient, to tell her time will temper her 
despair. I know it will not : I could but feed her grief ! It 
must be some stronger, firmer mind than mine that dare face 
such agony as hers ! " 

* These details are from Lady Nithsdale's letter. J 

170 WINIFRED, 

Even while she spoke, the servants, who had not under- 
stood the order to deny their mistress, and who were accus- 
tomed at all hours to admit Lady Nithsdale, entered the 
apartment to inform her grace that the countess was below. 

" What shall I do ? " exclaimed the duchess, in dismay. 

" Go to her, dear Christian," answered the duke ; " though 
you may not be able to inspire her with firmness to bear such 
affliction, your sympathy must soothe." 

" Oh, that is true ! Yes, I will go to her, poor soul ! 
Assuredly I would rather die than be unkind ; and have I not 
promised she should always find a friend in Christian Mont- 
rose. But if you knew how fearful her grief is when she is 
so resolutely calm, you would not wonder that I shrink from 
seeing her under her present circumstances." 

The duchess slowly, hesitatingly, descended, and fearfully 
entered the apartment where Lady Nithsdale awaited her. 

Instead of the harrowing image of despair, which the 
duchess had pictured to herself, she saw the countess with 
glowing cheeks and a countenance brilliant with joy, who 
rushed into her arms in her ecstacy of delight. The duchess 
stood appalled. She apprehended that her cousin's trouble* 
had, indeed, unsettled her reason, and that it was the light of 
madness which flashed from her eye. She shrank in fear and 
amazement. 

" He is safe !" exclaimed the countess. " My husband is 
in freedom ! he is restored to roe ! " 

" My gentle cousin, my sweet Winifred ! Alas ! you are 
not well ; be seated, and let roe entreat you to compose 
yourself!" 

" You do not rejoice with me ! " she cried, seizing both the 
duchess's hands. " Why do you not congratulate roe ? I am 
the happiest creature in the whole world ! " she exclaimed, 
bursting into a flood of tears. The duchess's alarm increased 
every moment. " I tell you, Christian, he is out of prison ! 
he has escaped them all ! he is, I trust, safe from all dis- 
covery. Oh ! Heaven has been very merciful to me ! " she 
continued, bowing her head with a meek fervour, which some- 
what reassured her friend, and made her hope the countess's 
words were not all the hallucinations of a maniac. 

By degrees she became more composed, and gave some ac- 
count of how her lord's escape had been effected : then, in- 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 171 

deed, did the duchess mingle tears of joy with hers, and smile 
to think how she had misconstrued her friend's expression of 
happiness. 

When they had sufficiently recovered themselves to con- 
verse with some composure, the duchess informed Lady 
Nithsdale that the king was so much incensed against her for 
attempting to force her petition upon him, that she advised 
her to keep herself as closely concealed as possible. She told 
her she would herself go to court that evening, that she might 
the better judge how the intelligence of the Earl of Nithsdale's 
evasion was there received: and the friends once more 
parted. 

The countess, as before, had discharged her chair, and now 
procured another, in which she proceeded to the house at 
which she had appointed to meet Amy Evans. 

The duchess repaired to St. James's, where she found the 
king much irritated, and declaring that such a thing could not 
have been effected without a conspiracy : he that night de- 
spatched two persons to the Tower, to ascertain that the other 
prisoners were well secured: and on all sides the duchess 
heard different surmises as to the mode in which the earl's 
evasion could have been accomplished. Some threw the blame 
in one, some in another quarter, none glanced at the true 
mode. 

The duchess alone was acquainted with the countess's .part 
in it ; and if she had not still felt too deep an anxiety for the 
ultimate fate of such dear friends, she could almost have 
smiled at the confident assertions, the contradictory reports, the 
consequential hints, which were either loudly spoken or myste- 
riously whispered in all directions. 

Indeed it has been a singular circumstance that an event of 
considerable importance, and one of such recent occurrence, 
should for many years have been enveloped in such mystery I 

Meanwhile Lady Nithsdale had been the first to reach the 
appointed spot ; but Amy Evans soon joined her. She told 
her how, after having placed the earl in temporary security, 
she had returned in search of Mr. Mills ; how she had traced 
him to his own home, which he had regained when he reco- 
vered from his astonishment ; and how they had then removed 
her lord to the house of a poor woman, directly opposite the 
guard-house. They imagined that, having changed the dis- 

jyO WINIFRED, 

guise in which he had made his escape, all means of tracing 
him would become difficult ; and that the last place which 
would be searched would be one so near the Tower itself. 

The poor woman had but a single small room to spare, up 
one pair of stairs, and which was almost destitute of furniture. 
Guided by Amy, the countess hastened to this humble abode, 
and there she had the inexpressible happiness of finding herself 
re-united to her husband. 

There are moments of agony too intense to bear description ; 
there are also moments of bliss which baffle the power of Ian- 
guage to paint. And if it is sometimes a relief to think the 
woes that excite our sympathies too acutely are fictitious woes, 
there ought to be pleasure in reflecting that the happiness which 
these two devoted spirits then enjoyed was real ; that this is 
no fiction, but a plain and simple narrative of what has actu- 
ally occurred. 

CHAPTER XXV. 

But I, that knew what harbour'd In that ! 

What virtue* rare were tmm>r'd in that brcact. 
Honour the place that inch a Jewel bred. 

And kUi the ground whereas the corpce doth re*t I 

Lord Surrey on the Deal* qfSir Tkomat K'yotf. 

WHEN Lady Nithsdale, after all the varied sufferings of many 
weeks, the painful excitement of the few preceding days, the 
agonising violence she had done to her feelings for the last 
twelve hours, at length found herself pressed to her husband's 
bosom, when she knew that she was supported by his arms, 
over-wrought nature gave way, and she fainted. 

With the assistance of Amy, however, she soon revived, 
and in a state of blissful exhaustion she wept freely on his 
shoulder. Few words were spoken. 

When her lady seemed more composed, Amy stole away, 
for she feared to excite the notice of the other lodgers. 

" Let us pray, my love ! " said Lady Nithsdale when the 
door was closed : " let us together pour forth our souls to that 
Providence who has this day extended over us so special a 
mercy. It will relieve my bursting soul to give utterance to 
the gratitude which almost oppresses it;" and they both sunk 
on their knees in humble adoration. 

COUNTESS 'OF NITHSDALE. 173 

For a time, nor doubt nor fear disturbed the full security 
of their gratitude and their joy ! It was not till the first grey 
light began to dawn, and that the twitter of the sparrows on 
the house-tops, and the discordant sounds of London streets, 
again broke the stillness which had reigned, that the diffi- 
culties and dangers that still surrounded them recurred to their 
minds. 

The earl sighed when first he saw the rays of the sun 
shine on the taller chimneys of the adjacent buildings, and that 
the tiled roofs of the surrounding houses became visible from 
their narrow window, for he remembered his own feelings as 
he had mentally bidden adieu the preceding evening to the 
sunbeams ; and, mixed with gratulation and thankfulness for 
the different circumstances under which he now hailed the 
cheering light, came the recollection of his fellow-prisoners. 
He thought on the good Earl of Derwentwater, and on his 
old friend Lord Kenmure. 

His wife watched the expression of his countenance. She 
read what passed within. " Alas !" she said, " I have been 
a very egotist in my joy. I have not been able to think of 
those who are now marking in agony and desperation the 
dawning of this fatal day, who turn from its glorious light in 
sickening, loathing despair. Alas for them ! The extremes 
of grief, and of happiness, both make us selfish creatures. And 
yet can I really think of aught but you ? How can I grieve, 
when I can gaze as now upon you, rescued from that dismal 
place, restored to me and to your children ? Oh ! we shall 
together hear their clear young voices; we shall together, 
with delighted eyes, follow them in their graceful sports ; we 
shall both feel their twining arms around our necks ; we shall 
together guide and direct their young minds ; we shall watch 
the opening intellect develope itself, and ripen into all that is 
noble in man, all that is lovely in woman ! Oh, my love ! 
my husband ! what happiness is there in store for us ! " 

Lord Nithsdale listened in deep-felt rapture : he hung upon 
her words ; he let his soul go to the delightful picture she 
drew ; he drank in the musical sounds of her soft voice ; he 
looked with love and tenderness upon the sweet though wan 
countenance, which, in its delicate paleness, bore the traces of 
past suffering. 

" What happiness indeed I " he echoed. " What unutter- 
able happiness ! " 

174 WINIFRED, 

" And how tall our noble boy will be ! We shall scarcely 
know him, except by those clustering fair curls which con- 
trast so prettily with the dark brows, which are all your own, 
my love ! Oh, those blue eyes ! how they used to dance from 
beneath the shady brow ! And Anne, my darling Annie ! she 
will not have forgotten us, I trust; she will not have for- 
gotten to climb your knee, and nestle into your bosom, as 
she was used to do, while you still remained absorbed in 
meditation." 

A smile, a pleased, a tranquil, tender smile, played over his 
lips as he said, "My own sweet children, I dare think of 
you now ! Yesterday it was with such painful regret that 
the image of your innocent endearments rose before my mind, 
that I strove to banish you from my thoughts. My gallant, 
stout boy! my pretty Annie!" and a silent but sweet tear 
stole down his manly cheek. " And yet, ray love, are we not 
almost presumptuous in looking forward thus confidently? 
Though no longer within a prison's walls, we must not deem 
ourselves too secure " 

As he spoke, one loud, deep, sonorous toll of a bell was 
heard. Lady Nithsdale started. The colour, which the 
joyous picture she had drawn had summoned to her cheeks, 
gave way to a ghastly paleness. Lord Nithsdale did not finish 
the broken sentence : both sat in mute horror. Several mo- 
ments elapsed ; they heard no more. They began to fancy 
some accidental sound had startled them, when again the 
clear, deep sound struck on their ears their hearts! She 
looked upon him with a fearful inquiring glance. 

" It must be so," he said ; " this is the very hour ! w He 
clasped his hands firmly together ; and, dropping his head, he 
pressed them against his bosom. * My friends, my noble, my 
true-hearted friends ! " he ejaculated in a low and smothered 
voice. 

" O God ! and is it over ? " she exclaimed, and she wound 
her arms around him; she clung to him with desperate energy; 
she pressed him closely to her, while she gazed wildly at the 
closed door, as if she every moment expected to see it burst 
open, and the ministers of the law rush in to bereave her of 
the loved being she had rescued. 

" They shall not tear thee from me ! No, no ! I feel this 
woman's arm could hold thee with so firm a grasp, that no 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 175 

earthly power could sever us. They shall not, they cannot 
wrest thee from these arms !" 

Again the awful toll of the minute-bell rung upon their 
ears ! " Does it mean all is over ? " she again slowly whis- 
pered in trembling horror. 

" No, no ! not so ! they are even now on their way to the 
scaffold," he said. " He breathes yet ! my friend, my noble 
Derwentwater yet breathes this vital air ! The healthful blood 
still flows through his veins ! That gallant heart still throbs 
in its mortal clothing ! He is yet alive ; and on this vast 
globe there does not beat a heart more gallant, a spirit more 
undaunted dwells not on this earth ! " 

Again that toll struck on their hearts, that toll for which 
they listened, till they almost fancied each must have been the 
last ; when, no ! the next awful sound struck their very frame, 
jarred on their every nerve, even more painfully than that 
which preceded it. They were half tempted to stop their 
ears to exclude the torturing clang, but a power which they 
could not resist compelled them to listen with redoubled 
intensity. 

" By this time they must have reached Tower Hill ! " he 
murmured. If he had seen the fearful expression of her 
countenance while he thus pictured what would have been, 
what still might be, his fate, he would in pity have been silent; 
but his thoughts were at that moment all upon his friends, his 
companions, his fellow-prisoners. Though he pressed her to 
his heart, he looked not upon her, and was still absorbed by 
the scene which he knew was enacting. 

" Hush ! all is silent ! the bell has ceased !" No : it came 
again ! its brazen clang again sounded. They still listened in 
breathless silence ! At length it really ceased. 

" What means this stillness ? " she faintly asked. 

" It is even now," he replied, in a smothered tone, " they 
must have reached the spot ! " He pressed his hand upon his 
eyes: " My friends ! my friends! my dear, my noble friends! 
I should not have abandoned ye ; I should be there to share 
your fate; I ought to be with ye now!" he exclaimed in 
passion. 

' " My husband ! my life ! my love ? " she softly whispered, 
in an appealing, a deprecating tone. 

" Oh ! no, no ! I did not mean to say so ! This is my 

176 WINIFRED, 

home ! here is my resting-place ! " and his head dropped upon 
her shoulder. 

Minutes elapsed : neither could keep count of time; it might 
be moments, it might be hours ! 

Again the awful, the horrible bell resounded ; it seemed to 
crack his heart-strings. He started up ; he shook her from 
him : he paced the room with hasty strides. 

"It is all over ! " he exclaimed, " it is consummated ! 
They are now bloody corpses ! headless trunks ! " 

She seized him by the arm : " Hush, hush ; in mercy 
hush ! speak not with such ungoverned earnestness. Did not 
Amy forbid us to stir for our lives? did she not bid us con- 
verse in subdued tones? did she not bid us avoid every 
movement that might betray that this apartment was occupied? 
Are there not other lodgers in the bouse? If you do not 
value life yourself, take pity on me. Spare me ! oh, spare 
me the horrors you have just brought so vividly before me ! 
Be still, I implore, I command, by all I have done, all I 
have ventured, all I have endured !" and she dragged him to 
the wretched bed on which they had been seated, and which 
was the only article of furniture the chamber contained. He 
unresistingly yielded to her gentle force, and reseated himself. 
The dreadful certainty that the fate of his companions in 
misfortune was sealed completely dispelled the gleam of 
secure happiness which had shone through the hearts of both. 
Lady Nithsdale thought on the Countess of Derwentwater ; 
on the Lady Kenmure ; and while she closely clung to her 
husband's arm, to assure herself in very truth that he was 
safe, and to prevent his making any movement which might 
betray him, she pictured to herself the unavailing agonies of 
the other ladies, till her very brain went round ! 

It now seemed to her she had as yet accomplished but little. 
She felt there was no security in their freedom ; the fact that 
they were still within so short a distance of the fatal spot, which 
had this moment been brought only too forcibly home to the 
feelings of both, made her impatiently await further intelli- 
gence from her faithful friends made her feel that nought 
was done till the seas rolled between him and bis enemies ! 

She listened breathlessly, hoping each step might be Amy's", 
or Mrs. Mills's ; and yet she dreaded each sound that reached 
her, lest it might prove the approach of guards, who, having 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 177 

traced his steps, might have succeeded in discovering his 
retreat. 

Lord Nithsdale, on the other hand, thought not of himself ; 
his feelings were all for the departed. His imagination rapidly 
ran over his former intercourse with his friend. 

" I never saw him from that day," he murmured thought- 
fully ; " we parted at the second gateway when we returned 
from Westminster Hall, on the 9th. As we were in the coach, 
on our way home, he regretted having pleaded guilty ; ' for,' 
he said, ' it is not treason that we have committed ! it would 
have been treason in us to have acted otherwise than we have 
done. Yes,' he continued ; ' all, save the prisoners, all the mul- 
titudes who crowded the vast Hall all, all were traitors, 
except ourselves ! * And when I urged that the expression 
thus used was but the form in which we conveyed that 
we denied not our share in the business, 'But I am not a 
traitor to my lawful king, and I should not have allowed the 
word,' he replied with earnestness. We were then led from 
the coach to our separate lodgings," continued the earl, follow- 
ing the current of his own melancholy thoughts, " and as we 
parted, for the last time parted, he pressed my hand, 
and said, ' Nithsdale, we have been friends through life, 
should we be parted in death ? (which I do not think we 
shall be, we shall probably share the same doom !) but should 
one survive, let me live in your remembrance, as, 1 promise, 
you shall in mine ! ' And so he shall ! never, never will I 
forget you, my noble Ratcliffe; here shall your memory dwell," 
he added, striking his bosom, "here, while the life-blood 
throbs through this heart ! " 

He paused, and Lady Nithsdale for a while feared to 
disturb the sad recollections in which he so naturally indulged ; 
but at length she gently ventured to whisper : 

" And if you thus feel for him who was your friend, think 
what would have been my condition had the husband of my 
love shared his fate ! Control your voice! Speak but in 
whispers. Think should you now be dragged from me ! " she 
continued in a meek and supplicating tone. 

" True, true, my gentle love ! " he softly answered. " I 
will be prudent, calm and prudent ; I owe it in gratitude 
to my deliverer." 

She had scarcely thus tempered down his emotions, when 

178 WINIFRED, 

they were both startled by the sound of footsteps ; but they 
were soft and stealthy. There was no heavy tramp, no sound 
of arms, no rough voices. 

There came three gentle taps upon the door ; Lady Niths- 
dale hastened to it ; Amy gave the preconcerted sign, and she 
admitted her. 

Her face was pale, almost livid ; her eyes seemed starting 
from her head ; she staggered into the room, but she failed 
not carefully to close and double-lock the door behind her. 

" I came to tell you all that we have arranged," she said, in 
a broken voice ; " and I will speak in a moment . . ." 

" Oh, merciful Heaven ! Do they suspect ? Have they 
traced him ? " cried Lady Nithsdale, in tremulous agony. 

" Oh, no ! it is not that : my dear lord is safe, 1 trust, 
I hope ; safe from that dreadful doom ! " and Amy closed 
her eyes for a moment. 

" For pity's sake explain yourself, dear, dear Amy ! " 

" Tis nothing, it will pass. 'Tis nothing more than we 
all know. We knew this was the fatal morning ; and I 
waited till all was over, for I dared not willingly risk seeing 
anything dreadful. I thought I might now venture here, for 
Mr. Mills, who was there, told me all was accomplished. I 
came to tell you we have hopes for my lord's speedy de- 
parture. But oh ! I did not wait long enough ! The scaffold 
is still up," she continued, shuddering at the recollection, " all 
hung with black cloth ; and the block, the huge bloody 
wooden block, and the saw-dust ! Oh ! my soul sickens ! " 

Deep as was her anxiety for her lord's escape, the countess 
herself could not command words to inquire what were the 
hopes of accomplishing it, to which Amy alluded. All re- 
mained for some moments speechless, with eyes fixed on the 
ground, fearful to meet those of the other. 

At length Lady Nithsdale stole a glance towards her hus- 
band to see how he bore what Amy bad just uttered. His 
face was concealed by both his hands. 

Amy was the first to recover herself: "The Venetian am- 
bassador sends his coach next week to meet his brother at 
Dover ; and we hope to persuade his excellency's servant, M. 
Michel, to take charge of my lord. He is one on whom we 
may depend. He is under great obligations to Mr. and Mrs. 
Mills, and would do anything to repay them ; and when once 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 179 

he is safe away, he is not responsible to those in power here. 
Yes, dearest madam, I have good hope that all will turn out 
right," continued Amy, striving to shake off the horror which 
had overpowered her when first she entered. 

" Thanks, my faithful, true friend ! " and Lady Nithsdale 
tenderly embraced her. 

Lord Nithsdale appeared not to heed what they had said ; 
but, in a low, hollow voice, inquired, with his face averted, 
for he shrunk from showing to any eye but his own Winifred's, 
the traces of deep emotion which he could not master, 
"Did Mr. Mills mention any particulars? " 

" Nothing very particular," answered Amy, shuddering at 
the question. 

" Did the lords address the people ? " he again asked, his 
face still averted, and with a forced calmness in his tone. 

" I believe they did, my lord." 

" Was Mr. Mills within hearing ? " 

" Yes, my dear master ; but why harrow your feelings by 
listening to these details ? Surely it were better to think of 
the future, and bend your mind to all that there remains to do? " 

"Nay, I must hear; I must learn all I can of my lost, lost 
friends ! " he exclaimed, turning upon them a face so awful in 
its noble grief that none dared for a moment to resist his 
wishes. " Tell me all ; let me hear everything ! " 

Unable to oppose, or to resist, his firm and solemn command, 
Amy began her tale: "They were taken, my lord, in a 
hackney-coach from the Tower to the Transport Office. It 
was a little before ten o'clock." 

" I know it," he answered. " We heard the bell ! " he 
added in a sepulchral inward voice. 

" The Earl of Derwentwater was the first ; and though he 
seemed somewhat pale, his bearing was resolute and sedate, 
Mr. Mills said." 

" Assuredly it was ! " said the earl, almost angry that 
it should be deemed possible his friend could have borne him- 
self otherwise. 

" After some time spent in prayer he obtained the sheriff's 
leave to read a paper. He came forward to the rails, and he 
asked pardon of those whom he might have scandalized by 
pleading guilty at his trial." 

" I knew that weighed upon his mind," murmured the earl. 
N 2 

180 WIMFRBD, 

" He said he was sensible he had by this made bold with 
his loyalty to King James ; but that he had been told it was 
merely a form, and that there was nothing of moment in so 
doing." 

" They told us all so ; that, having been undeniably in 
arms, pleading guilty was but the consequence of submitting 
to mercy." 

" He said he died a Roman Catholic, and was in perfect 
charity with all the world ; and he added, that if the prince, 
who now governs, had spared his life, he should have thought 
himself obliged never more to take up arms against him." 
Amy was silent. Lord NithsdaJe, after a pause of some 
moments, said, in a voice scarcely audible, 

" Did he suffer ? Was it quickly over ? " 

" At one blow, my lord," answered Amy, shuddering as she 
spoke. 

" Pardon me, good Amy, I pain you ; but I must know. 
And Lord Kenmure? " 

" He did not speak to the people ; but in his devotions he 
prayed for King James. He apologised for bis dress; saying, 
he had so little thought of dying so soon, he bad not provided 
a black suit. Mr. Mills says he showed great resolution and 
firmness in his carriage, though, to his mind, he was not so 
calm within as the Earl of Derwentwater." 

" I can endure no more ! " at length exclaimed Lady Niths- 
dale, as all these details so horribly pictured the scene : " I 
cannot, cannot bear it ! Amy, in mercy cease ! " 

" I crave your pardon, dearest wife ; but they were my 
friends my best friends, and they are gone ! Bat we 
will hear no more ! " And he again buried his face in his 
hands. 

Amy told her lady that Mrs. Mills would soon be with 
them, and bring the answer of M. Michel. She was even now 
at the Venetian ambassador's, and hoped to have arranged 
everything according to their wishes. 

The countess pressed Amy's hand, and they silently 
awaited Mrs. Mills' s coming. 

It was late before she arrived ; bat she told them that on 
the following day, the Saturday, Lord Nithsdale might remove 
to the ambassador's, where M. Michel undertook to conceal him 
in his own chamber ; that on the Wednesday in the following 

COUNTESS OF MTHSDALE. 181 

week, his excellency's coach-and-six was to go to Dover to 
meet his brother, when M. Michel could easily take Lord 
Nithsdale in his master's livery as one of his retinue. 

All seemed to promise well, and the countess breathed more 
freely. 

Mrs. Mills had considerately brought with her some bread, 
which, with a loaf and a bottle of wine which had been pro- 
vided the evening before, was all they had to subsist upon for 
the two days and nights they spent in their present lurking- 
place. 

On the Saturday they parted, according to this arrange- 
ment. To both, such a parting was a severe trial ! 

The countess feared every possible and every impossible 
danger must beset his path when she could no longer see him 
with her own eyes. He found the task a hard one to tear 
himself again from her, when so lately reunited ; but he also 
felt how incumbent it was on him to accept with gratitude so 
favourable an opportunity of escaping. They were both 
aware that to linger in England was risking all their hardly- 
earned happiness. In trembling hope, they parted. 

" It would be sinful in us to mistrust Providence," he said ; 
" we have been so mercifully dealt with, we ought to feel 
confidence that we shall be preserved to a safe and joyful 
meeting ! " 

" True, true, my love. I would not detain you one moment 
in this fatal land ! I wish you gone ! And yet and yet 
it is so painful, so very painful, to part ! But you shall go 
even now, this moment ! It is not for me to doubt the 
mercy of Heaven." 

She gently disengaged herself from him : he pressed her 
once more to his bosom, and then followed Mrs. Mills to the 
door. He there paused to take one more look at her as she 
stood half supported by Amy. She watched him through the 
door- way, she listened to his step as he descended the stairs, 
she heard the street-door shut : "He is gone ! " she 
said ; " but I must not repine. Oh, what a parting it might 
have been ! When I think of Lady Derwentwater and of 
Lady Kenmure, I feel how blessed I am ! I will not weep 
I will not grieve : I must allow no feeling but that of grati- 
tude to find a place within this bosom ! " 

v 3 

182 WIN1FRKH. 

CHAPTER XXVI. 

La ncf qui dejoint mei amours 
N'a cy de tnoi que la moitit. 
Une parte te reite, elle et Uenne. 

i/ary Quffn <tf Scott. 

THE Countess of Nithsdale lost no time in quitting her pre- 
sent retreat, and she took up her abode at the house of a quiet 
honest man in Drury Lane, where, in the utmost privacy, she 
awaited the news of her husband's safe arrival on the Con- 
tinent 

After the intense agitation of the foregoing week, she expe- 
rienced a kind of listless stupefaction ; she was totally incapable 
of employing herself. Although her mind was comparatively 
at ease, yet a thousand vague horrors shot across it. The in- 
action was oppressive and irksome to her. She wished every 
hour, every moment, to know how it fared with her lord ; and 
yet she was fully aware that the only prudent course to pursue, 
both for his sake and her own, was to keep herself quite re- 
tired, and to avoid being seen by any. 

On the Wednesday the Earl of Nithsdale, as had been pre- 
viously conceited, accompanied the Venetian ambassador's 
coach to Dover, where he anived without detection or danger. 

When there, M. Michel hired a small vessel, and immediately 
set sail for Calais. 

Was it a moment of unmixed joy to Lord Nithsdale when 
he set foot upon the vessel which was to bear him from the 
land in which his life was forfeited to the laws, from the 
land in which he was proscribed, to seek one which held out 
to him all the charms of life and liberty ? 

It was not so : for that land was the land of his birth, 
that land contained her to whom he was bound by stronger 
ties than ever attached man to woman ! " 

As the swift bark bounded over the deep, he gazed upon 
the receding shores with tenderness and regret The breeze 
was favourable, the ship skimmed the waters, the passage WM 
performed in so short a time that the captain remarked, " the 
wind could not have served better if his passengers had been 
flying for their lives." 

Until the countess received assured intelligence of his safe 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 183 

arrival at Calais, she had been able to turn her thoughts to no 
other subject. She felt he might at any moment be discovered ; 
it was still possible that all the horrors and the sufferings with 
which she was only too well acquainted might still be in store 
for her. At moments she accused herself of wanting that 
reliance she ought to feel in Heaven ; at others, she thought 
she was presumptuous in fancying herself too secure. 

But when once she knew he was safe from all pursuit, other 
cares beset her mind. 

The feelings of the mother rose strong within her. Every 
paper, every document, which might secure to themselves, or 
to their children after them, any means of existence, had been 
left at Terreagles. While fearing for his life, all other con- 
siderations had been forgotten ; but now that all-absorbing in- 
terest was at rest, anxiety for the fate of her children took 
possession of her soul. 

She resolved, if possible, to revisit Terreagles. If she had 
exposed her life for the father, she thought she could do no 
less than hazard it once more to save her son from beggary. 

After the great events of the last month, her mind seemed 
to stand in need of some strong excitement ; she was almost 
glad to feel called upon by duty for a fresh exertion. 

She hoped, through the means of the Duchess of Buccleugh, 
she might obtain leave openly to visit Terreagles ; and she 
wrote to her, telling her that she understood some suspected 
her of having contrived her lord's escape, but that she imagined 
a bare suspicion, destitute of proof, would never be held suffi- 
cient ground for her being punished for a supposed offence, 
although it had been motive enough for her to remain in con- 
cealment. She entreated her grace to procure permission for 
her to depart freely upon her business. 

But her application, far from being granted, rather roused 
in the government the desire to secure her ; and she owed to 
the Solicitor-General (who, though an utter stranger to her, 
had the humanity to plead her cause,) the decision, that as 
long as she evinced such respect to government as not to appear 
in public, no search should be made for her ; but that, if she 
showed herself in England or in Scotland, she should be forth- 
with secured. 

This was but poor satisfaction. Having been so suddenly 
summoned from Scotland, she had not been able to arrange 

N 4 

18t WINIFRED, 

any thing at Terreagles ; bat before she repaired to Scone to 
wait upon the Chevalier, not knowing in such uncertain times 
what might occur during her absence, she had taken the pre- 
caution of burying in the ground the family papers, which her 
husband had committed to her charge, and other articles of 
most value. 

It was fortunate she had done so, for the house had been 
searched after her departure ; and, as the countess herself ex- 
presses it, "God only knows what might have transpired from 
those papers ! " 

If these documents were to be preserved, it seemed abso- 
lutely necessary she should repair to Terreagles, and that she 
should do so without delay, and as privately as possible. 

For this purpose she again provided herself, Amy and 
Walter Elliot, with saddle-horses, and retraced her way to 
Scotland 

It was no longer the inclemency of the season which con- 
stituted the danger of the journey, but the fear of being dis- 
covered. On this occasion, however, it was but for herself she 
feared : after her long seclusion in the most confined parts of 
London, as she rode forward, inhaling the clear country air, 
with the delightful certainty that her husband was in safety 
and in freedom, instead of being a prisoner, in danger, distress, 
and loneliness, within the Tower walls, she contrasted the 
buoyant spirit with which she looked upon this merely personal 
risk, with the horrible oppressive weight which lay at her bosom 
as, two months before, she had traversed the same road. 

Her spirits almost rose with the danger ; and she gladly 
yielded herself up to the enjoyment of the early spring. 

The hedges were already beginning to be partially clothed 
in their green livery ; the meadows in the neighbourhood of 
London were fresh and bright ; the birds twittered, and sprang 
from twig to twig; the primroses and wild violets already 
peeped forth on the more sunny banks. The unusually hard 
winter had been followed by the rapid bursting forth, the 
flush, of an early spring. As she advanced, the new-cut 
copses were spangled with wood anemones and the blue hare- 
bell ; cowslips, and daffodils painted the fields. All nature 
seemed to smile before her. Her journey was one of positive 
enjoyment, notwithstanding the degree of fear which induced 
her prudently to avoid the large towns, and the considerable 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 185 

inns, at which she was likely to be known, and to put up only 
at the smallest and humblest resting-places. 

To Amy, the naturally light-hearted Amy, the joyous laugh 
was no longer a stranger. Her eye danced once more with 
gaiety, and she even occasionally trilled a snatch of one of her 
old Welsh ditties. 

Her lady smiled kindly upon her : " I scarcely thought ever 
to have heard that sound again, Amy. It does me good to 
hear it ; and yet," she said, ."there is much pain mingled 
with the pleasure it affords. It brings back with overwhelming 
tenderness past days of happiness; past, never to return !" 
and her eyes filled with tears. 

" My dearest madam, I could chide myself for my silly 
song if it makes you weep." 

** No, dear Amy, sing on. I love to hear the melody, al- 
though it draws tears : they are not bitter ones." 

" Nay, madam, I can sing no more ; my voice is gone : " 
and they rode on in silence. 

After several more days of continued journeying, Lady 
Nithsdale ventured to repose herself for two nights at Traqu- 
hair ; where, with her sister-in-law, and Lord Traquhair, she 
enjoyed the happiness of a free outpouring of the soul, and 
where, to willing ears and open hearts, she gave every detail 
of their brother's escape. 

The lieutenant of the county being an old and tried friend of 
her lord's, she felt assured that he would allow no search to be 
made for her without forwarding to her due warning to abscond. 

She did not send any notice of her return to Terreagles, 
that the magistrates of Dumfries might not be prepared to 
make inquiries about her ; but she suddenly made her appear- 
ance there, feigning that she had the leave of government to 
do so. The better to persuade them that it was with permis- 
sion she was there, she sent to her neighbours and invited them 
to visit her ; while in the interim she busied herself in se- 
curing the papers. 

The gardener alone knew where they had been buried, and 
with the assistance of the faithful old Hugh she recovered 
them. They were as yet unhurt; but, although in the 
highest state of preservation after one very severe winter, they 
could not have remained much longer in the ground without 
prejudice. 

186 WINIFRED, 

It was, as Lady Nithsdale herself says, a particular stroke 
of Providence that she made the despatch she did, for the 
magistrates of Dumfries soon suspected her. 

The indefatigable Amy, whose ears were always open, 
whose discretion was never slumbering, learned by a fortu- 
nate accident that one of them was heard to say, he should, 
the next day, insist upon seeing the Countess of Nithsdale's 
leave from government. 

There was not a moment to be lost : Lady Nithsdale re- 
solved to depart before daybreak. She forwarded the rescued 
documents by a safe hand to Traquhair, and on the following 
morning set forth again for London* 

It was now that she bade a fond, lingering, last adieu to 
her home : she knew that it was for ever she quitted it ! 
When all were at rest, she gently visited each well-known 
apartment. She repaired to that which her children had 
usually inhabited : she looked with sadness upon the vacant 
room. She thought how often she had there heard their 
prattling voices there bent over their quiet slumbers. She 
paused at the door, and the tears gushed from her eyes. A 
thousand trifling incidents crowded on her mind : there was 
not a spot that was not alive with recollections. 

Truly," she thought, " did my dear lord say, as he parted 
hence, 'Our castles will be desolate, our name extinct !'" She 
looked upon the motto, ' Reviresco : ' " Truly did he say, 
4 Not here will any Earl of Nithsdale flourish again ! * but 
he is safe ; our children are safe ; and we shall be happy, in 
all the charities of domestic life. Twere sinful to allow such 
regrets to stifle for a moment the gratitude which ought to 
overpower all other emotions." 

But when, ere the early dawn appeared, they prepared to 
mount their horses, and she saw the faithful old gardener, 
with his blue bonnet in his hand, respectfully hold the bridle 
rein, enacting the part of 'squire, the tears would flow un- 
bidden : " Thanks, ray good Hugb I I am glad to see you 
once more ; for, alas ! Hugb, I shall never, never, return to 
this dear home again ! Heaven bless you, and all, all, who 
dwell around ! " she continued, looking around her at the 
scattered cottages on the hill-sides ; " may you and yours be 
well and happy ! " 

" I feared how it was, my leddy ; I fancied, if I was not 

COUNTESS OF NtTHSDALE. 18? 

here betimes, I should never look on your leddyship's fair face 
again. Eh ! madam, 'tis an awful thing when the head of 
an ancient house flits for ever from the home of his ancestors. 
'Tis an awsome thing for a' the puir folks about ! and as for 
me and my gude wife, why, I think it will go nigh to break 
our hearts ! But that's neither here nor there : what maun be, 
maun be ; and I dinna' mean to make your leddyship down- 
hearted ! I only thought I would see the last o' ye ; " and 
the old man brushed away a tear. " I just made bold, my 
leddy, to bring wi' me a little o' the seed of our famous kale, 
which my lord used always to praise. I thought, in the out- 
landish countries my lord is like to abide in now, he might 
not meet with any such ; and I guessed 'twas next to impos- 
sible that, with so much upon your mind, your leddyship 
should give it a thought." 

" Give it me, good Hugh ; and depend upon it your kind 
recollection of my lord shall not be forgotten. I will tell him 
that his old friends here haye not put him from their minds 
yet!" 

tf Nor ever will, my leddy ; that's not the way with a true 
Scot. We shall keep the Maxwells in mind as long as you 
and yours remember Scotland, and, may be, longer too. But 
yonder 's the grey light in the east ; 1 must not be keeping 
your leddyship. 

Lady Nithsdale could not speak ; but she pressed the old 
man's hard weather-beaten hand in her own soft delicate 
fingers, and she hurried from the castle. It was in vain to 
struggle longer with her tears ; she yielded to the natural im- 
pulse, and suffered them to flow. 

As on their former journey, they only stopped at the poor- 
est inns ; and at one of these they were compelled to take 
their evening meal in the room where the other travellers 
were also accommodated. They remarked a sturdy farmer 
who looked hard at them, and by the blaze of the fire they 
recognised the yeoman with whom they had conversed on their 
way to York. He soon renewed acquaintance. 

" Why, is it you, my demure puritan ? What brings you 
this road again so soon ? Did you not find a hearty welcome, 
that you are so soon for the north country again ? How fared 
it with your friends in London ? " 

" It fares well with some of our dearest friends, I thank 

188 WINIFRED, 

you; far better than when last we met," answered the- 
countess. 

" There have been great doings going on in London since 
you went this road ; and what my companion said, though it 
was roughly said, has come out pretty true : they have made 
away with a good many of the rebel lords." 

Lady Nithsdale shuddered. 

" But the king did spare some of them, and they say would 
have spared more if his ministers would have let him ; but a 
good many took French leave. There was half a dozen broke 
out of Newgate at once, they say ; and though some were 
taken again, there was one Hepburn found out where his wife 
and children were abiding, by spying his own family tankard, 
the Keith tankard, as they call it, which they had stuck in the 
window just for that very purpose : he was a lucky fellow ! 
And Forster, he is safe in France, they say. And pray, 
young woman, you can't tell roe how 'twas the Earl of Niths- 
dale got away ? " 

Lady Nithsdale started. " Nay, sir ! how should I know ? " 

" Why, you have been in London, and I thought folks 
roust have talked enough about it there ; for, to my mind, 
'twas a strange thing, and that's the truth. Do you think the 
guards were in the secret ? " 

" Oh, no, no ! they knew nothing ! " exclaimed the 
countess, anxious to exculpate them from such a charge. 

" Why, I thought you knew nothing ! " answered the 
yeoman, with a cunning glance ; 4i but if you do, you need 
not stand in fear of roe ; I should never wish to say anything 
of anybody to their prejudice." 

' I never heard any suspicion of infidelity thrown out 
against the guards," answered Lady Nithsdale, in a more com- 
posed manner ; " but I have left London some time, and other 
circumstances may have transpired." 

" Then you don't know that 'twas the earl's mother that 
brought him the clothes in which he disguised himself? " 

" No ! indeed I did not," answered the countess, with a 
glance at Amy, which she could not control 

" They say that's a positive fact ! " proceeded the farmer : 
" and perhaps, then, you have not heard, what they tell roe is 
equally true, that on the 24th, yes, it was the 24th, was it 
not, that the rebels had their beads off? " 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 189 

Lady Nithsdale bowed assent. 

" On the 24th of last month, the very day the Earl of Der- 
wentwater was beheaded, the water in the moat round Dill- 
stone Castle turned as red as blood ! That was very singular, 
was it not ? " 

" Strange indeed ! " ejaculated Amy, with a countenance in 
which awe and wonder were honestly visible ; " on the very 
day he suffered ! " and the thought of the scaffold, and the 
blood, of which she had caught, or fancied she caught, a sight, 
flashed across her mind. She turned so pale, that the countess, 
now the most self-possessed of the two, hastened to withdraw 
attention from Amy, lest her emotion should become too ap- 
parent. 

The feminine horror of blood, and the superstitious terror 
with which she listened to so unnatural a portent, had thrown 
her more off her guard than circumstances of real peril would 
have done. 

Lady Nithsdale inquired whether the Earl of Wintoun's 
trial had yet come on, and the yeoman, proud of his superior 
information, told her that it had, and that he had received sen- 
tence of death ; but he added, " he seemed so wild and strange 
that half the world thought he was not in his right senses." 

Meanwhile Amy Evans had recovered herself, and the 
countess was glad to seize the first opportunity of retiring, and 
of avoiding any further observation. 

Upon her arrival in London, she found from her friends, 
the Duchess of Montrose and Mrs. Morgan, that the king was 
even more than ever incensed against her, for having, against 
his prohibition, made her appearance in Scotland ; and that if 
he should succeed in securing her, there was every reason to 
fear that she would be proceeded against according to the ut- 
most rigour of the law. And this, she heard from some of 
the best law authorities, would be no other than, in a case of 
high treason, to make the head of the wife answerable for that 
of the husband. 

It therefore became necessary that she should take measures 
for her own speedy departure. But, before she left her native 
land for ever, she ventured to have one more interview with 
her good cousin, Christian of Montrose. It was, however, by 
stealth that the duchess visited her, and in sorrow that she 
bade her farewell. 

190 WINIFRED, 

" I fear to injure you by my visit, dear cousin," she said ; 
" and yet I longed to bid Heaven prosper you on your journey. 
You will let me know when you are really restored to your 
husband and your children. Though we may never meet again, 
it will be sweet to me to fancy you enjoying perfect happiness 
with those who are so dear to you." 

" I shall indeed be happy ; but, alas ! dear Christian, this 
heart will ever yearn towards its island home. I love the very 
soil of England ; and, as I pass along, I look with fond re- 
gret at every house, at every tree, and think with sorrow that 
I am henceforth to be an exile ; that I can never, never, look 
on them again. As for my friends such friends as you, 
dear Christian ! But think you in very truth there is no hope 
of our being ever allowed to revisit our dear England ?" 

" Alas ! the king is still so angry with you individually. 
He has granted the Viscountess Ken mure 1507. per annum 
for the education of her children ; the Lady Nairne too has 
met with favour ; but, dear cousin," the added, smiling, " he 
says you have given him more trouble than any other woman 
in Europe ; and although 1 verily believe many of the other 
prisoners who have made their escape have not been over- 
strictly guarded, yet both the warders who had charge of the 
earl your husband, and only they, are likely to be punished 
for neglect of their duty.*' 

" They deserve no punishment on that score," replied the 
countess. " Neither do I owe them gratitude, nor need the 
government visit upon them the good deed in which they did 
not participate." 

" But from all I tell you, dearest Winifred, it is plain you 
should not linger here ! " 

" I shall be gone to-morrow, Heaven favouring me," replied 
the countess. " This evening I bid farewell to two dear 
friends, and to-morrow I am gone ! " And with many tears, 
and last farewells, and promises of communicating by letter, 
the cousins parted. 

The friends to whom Lady Nithsdale alluded were Mrs. 
Morgan and Mrs. Mills, whose names she did not care to 
mention even to the duchess, lest it might ever transpire that 
they had assisted in her lord's escape. 

To them she scarcely knew in what terms sufficiently to 
express her gratitude ; and it cast a gloom over the prospect 

COUNTESS OP NITHSDALE. 191 

of speedy reunion to the objects of her dearest affections, to 
think that she should never more see the persons to whom, 
under Providence, she was indebted for that happy prospect. 

CHAPTER XXVII. 

But I wad rather see him roam 

An outcast on a foreign strand, 
And wi' his master beg his bread, 

Nae mair to see his native land, 
Than bow a hair o' his brave head 

To base usurper's tyrannye, 
Than cringe for mercy to a knave 

That ne'er was owned by him or me. 

Jacobite Song. 

LADY NITHSD ALE'S voyage was performed in safety ; and at 
Paris she joined her husband and her children, whom he had 
conveyed thither from Bruges to await her coming. 

The happiness which they had almost feared to picture was 
at length realised. They together gazed upon their noble boy ; 
she saw the little Lady Anne nestled in her father's bosom, 
she gave herself up to the joy of gazing on them, with no 
fear that this joy should be snatched from her by any power 
except the immediate will of Heaven. 

On the 4th of May they reached Avignon, where all his 
adherents flocked around the Pretender, the Earl, or, as he 
was there styled, the Duke of Mar, the Duke of Ormond, and 
many others, to the number of thirty lords. 

But the petty broils, the dissensions, and the jealousies of 
this mock court assorted but ill with the feelings and habits of 
Lord and Lady Nithsdale. They soon left Avignon, and pro- 
ceeded to Italy, where they lived in privacy, with no wish 
beyond each other's society and the company of their children. 

After all which they had endured, it was enough to be to- 
gether ; and for weeks, nay, months, the delightful certainty 
of being restored to each other, stood in lieu of all things else. 

But human nature is so constituted that the continued pos- 
session of that which we have long enjoyed, and that which 
we no longer fear to lose, will not alone be productive of lively, 
positive happiness ; other thoughts, other desires, find room 
within the heart 

192 WINIFRED, 

As their children advanced in years, they could not but fWl 
that they were doomed to vegetate in a foreign soil, tlu y 
could not but feel that their position in life was very different 
from that to which they had been born. 

The remembrance of home, the images of absent friends, 
the memory of departed ones, were treasured up in their minds : 
and Lady Nithsdale would, unperceived, dwell on the pale sad 
brow of her lord as, banging on his arm, she paced with him 
the shores of the Mediterranean ; and she could easily read 
that his thoughts had leaped over intervening time and space, 
over years gone by, and over the mountains, plains, and seas 
that interposed between them and their home, and were sadly 
fixed upon the past, and the distant. He caught her eye, as 
tearfully, fondly, it was turned on him. 

" Yes," he said, " my thoughts were far from hence. The 
clear pure heaven above us is unbroken by a cloud, but dearer 
to my eyes the misty sky of Scotland ; the deep blue of the 
unruffled sea is beautiful, but to my feelings the dusky waves 
that dash against the ruined walls of our own Caerlaverock are 
more sublime in their wild grandeur. The distinct, defined 
outline of yon purple mountains may be more brilliant, but 
my heart yearns for the softened hazy outline of our own Scotch 
hills, melting into the pearly hues of our watery sky ! " 

As he spoke, a light bark glided rapidly by, and the boat- 
men kept time with their oars as they chanted, in their musical 
tongue, Italian poetry to Italian melody. 

" And dearer to my ears," said Lady Nithsdale, " the simple 
ballad of a Scottish maiden, than even these sweet sounds as 
they are wafted to us over the waters ! " 

They stopped to listen to the song as it died away ; and, as 
they listened, another and more awful sound struck upou their 
ears. 

The bell of one of the small chapels, often constructed on 
the shores of Catholic countries, was tolled for the soul of a 
departed mariner. As it happened, the tone was not unlike 
one of which they both retained only too vivid and painful a 
recollection. 

The countess felt her husband's frame quiver beneath the 
stroke. There was no need of words. With a mutual pressure 
of the arm, they returned upon their steps and sought their 
home. 

COUNTESS OF NITHSDALE. 193 

Unconsciously their pace quickened. They seemed to fly 
before the stroke of that bell ! Such suffering as they had 
both experienced leaves traces in the soul which time itself can 
never wholly efface. 

To those who may have been interested in the fate of the 
two persons who form the subject of the foregoing memoir, it 
may be satisfactory to know, that the Lady Nithsdale was 
not parted by death from her beloved husband till many years 
afterwards, when, in the year 1744, he died, in his exile, at 
Rome. She survived him five years : but she had the com- 
fort of knowing that, by her exertions in her last visit to 
Terreagles, she had succeeded in securing a competency to her 
son, who married his cousin the Lady Catherine Stewart, 
daughter to the Earl and Countess of Traquhair. Her daughter, 
the Lady Anne Maxwell, became the wife of Lord Bellew. 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

CHAPTER I. 

And still it wai her night); prayer 

To live to close bU tighUess eye* ; 
For this her torturing pains to bear. 

Then sink in death ere morning rie. 
Who, were ah* gone, the ta!T would guide 

With which he feeU, amU*. hU way ? 
Who. careful. Jay the stone aside, 

That might his tottering footstep stay ? 
Who lead him to the sheltered stile 

That fronts the sun at noontide hour. 
And watch the western clouds the while 

To Warn him of the gathering shower ? 
L'npuL 

allad from Xaturc. 

IN one of the last cottages of the village of Overhurst, dwelt 
Nicholas and Sarah Foster. There, in their accustomed seats, 
did the neighbours for many years find old Nicholas, still 
bending over the embers of his humble hearth, and Sarah still 
gazing through the casement window, in patient endurance of 
the evils with which each was visited. 

They rest now in their quiet graves ; but those who have 
known that ancient couple will not easily forget their appear- 
ance, or that of all around them : they will remember the well 
polished wooden chair in which the old woman sat, both her 
hands pressed tightly against her right side, as if to quell the 
tortures of an agonizing and mortal complaint which had long 
preyed upon her : they will remember the very dress she wore, 
such as is rarely seen of late years. But Sarah was aft 
English peasant of the olden time, and she changed not with 
the fashion of the day. Her cap had a narrow, close, stiff 
border ; the crown was high and well-starched ; and round it 
was tightly pinned a broad piece of dark-purple ribbon. Her 
grey hair was turned back over a roll, one of the last re- 
maining specimens of that mode of dressing the hair. Her 
waist reached to her hips ; her sleeves were tight, and ended at 
the elbow. The gown was open in front ; and the apron, 
which was of spotless white, always seemed to be just out of 
the folds. 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 1Q5 

' Her usual seat, by the long casement of their clean and 
decent kitchen, commanded a view down the village street ; 
before her was a clean deal table, which ran the whole length 
of the window, and upon it lay her spectacles and a book of 
prayer. 

Her countenance bore the traces of extreme suffering, and 
her brows were always contracted ; but on her lips dwelt a 
patient smile. She swayed her body incessantly backwards 
and forwards, as if to allay her pain ; but her voice was in- 
variably cheerful, and even lively, for Nicholas was blind; 
and to cheer his days of darkness was her constant task of 
love. 

Nicholas in his youth had been a hedger, and he still wore 
the brown leather coat peculiar to his calling. His place was 
in the chimney-corner ; his back towards the light, his two 
hands resting on his staff, his chin upon his hands, and his 
sightless eyes fixed on vacancy. 

Tempted by the beauty of the sunset, the 'squire's family 
one evening extended their walk to the village, and, as they 
frequently did, paid a visit to Master Foster and his dame. 
Sarah's face lighted up with a momentary expression of joy as 
they trooped in, filling the humble dwelling ; and the old man 
smiled upon them the patient placid smile of blindness. 

There was the 'squire's lady, the gentle and kind Mrs. 
Mow bray ; and her blooming daughter, the young Alice, in 
the full flush of maiden loveliness ; and the tall, slender, merry 
Fanny, just verging on womanhood ; and two stout school- 
boys ; and the rosy little Emma, who had quickly gained pos- 
session of the tortoiseshell cat, and was trying high its powers 
of endurance by her childish mode of fondling it. Besides 
this, the usual party, there was also a dark and handsome 
youth, who appeared to be all attention to Mrs. Mowbray ; 
while the young Alice's cheeks were more brilliant even than 
usual, her smile more animated, and her eyes more downcast. 

Old Sarah Foster soon perceived that the village report, 
which said the 'squire's eldest daughter was likely to be early 
settled, was* better founded than is usually the case with such 
reports. 

" Where is Susan this evening ? " inquired Mrs. Mowbray. 

" 'Tis Freshfield fair to-day, madam," answered the dame, 
" and all the young people hereabouts are gone to see the 

o 2 

195 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

humours of it : and so her father and I thought poor Susan 
should take a little amusement for once. She has hut a dull 
life with us, so poorly as 1 am, and so helpless as my good 

man is 

" 1 think you look rather better this evening, Dame Foster," 
said Alice, who was in that happy frame of mind when it is 
painful to be obliged to believe others less fortunate than one's- 
self, and when one had far rather be called upon to sympathise 
in their joys than in their sorrows. 

" Thank you, Miss Alice," replied the old woman, while a 
sudden pain caused the smile, with which she tried to receive 
Alice's kind words, to die away on her lips, and her brows in- 
voluntarily to become more contracted. " Thank you, my 
dear young lady, I am much as usual ; but I do not mind my 
pains as long as I am able to do for my poor Nicholas. I 
know his ways so well. Susan, herself, could not guess all hia 
thoughts as I can. Blindness is a heavy affliction, ladies. 
He wants some one who can speak comfort to him at times, 
when he gets thinking his sad thoughts ; some one who can 
talk of by-gone days, when we had every thing to make us 
happy ; and one who can remind him of that better place 
where we shall be happier than even the happiest are in this 
world. Morning and night I pray to be spared as long as my 
poor Nicholas lives, however hard my pains may be to bear ; 
and morning and night I pray that, when he is gone, I may 
never see another sun rise." 

A silence of some momenta ensued. All were touched by 
the pure and devoted affection so unconsciously expressed by 
the old woman. Alice's eyes had filled with tears ; for one ' 
instant they were raised to those of the youth to whom she 
was betrothed, but they as quickly fell again. 

" I am sure, dame, you are a pattern for all wives," at 
length added Mrs. Mowbray. 

At this moment, the sound of distant merriment was heard; 
and parties of young folks, the slant western sun shining on 
their holiday apparel, were seen trooping down the headland 
of the opposite hill, under the shelter of the hazel copse. 

" My Susan will soon be at home," said the dame, " for I 
told her to he sure and not stay late at these merry-makings. 
I always hold that no good comes of too much pleasure, 
madam ; and, in my young days, girls had not half the liberty 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 197 

they take now. I can't say, however, but that Susan is a 
good girl, and minds what we old folks say to her : but she is 
light-hearted, poor thing, and has not known trouble yet 
God grant it may be long before she does ! There she comes, 
poor girl ! Ah ! time was when I could move as nimbly as 
she does, and laugh as heartily. You must excuse her, ladies : 
she little thinks what visitors we have in our cottage, or she 
would know better than to be so free of her jokes," added the 
dame, as Susan and her lover reached the garden gate, and 
she laughingly shut it against him, and ran into the cottage. 

Upon finding herself in the presence of the 'squire's family, 
she stopped suddenly, while the blood rushed over her face ; 
and she dropped a court'sy, graceful in its awkwardness, and 
took refuge close to her mother's chair. George Wells meap- 
while had followed ; and, threatening that he would steal a 
kiss in revenge for the trick she had played him, burst into 
the cottage after her. His shame-faced look of dismay when 
he perceived the company assembled was irresistibly comic : 
Mrs. Mowbray smiled, Fanny tried to be serious, the two boys 
laughed outright, while Alice and Captain Harcourt each main- 
tained a countenance of imperturbable unconsciousness. 

The visit was now speedily brought to a conclusion ; and 
Susan and her lover were left to settle their little quarrel, re- 
lieved from the awe inspired by " the gentlefolks." 

They had already kept company, as it is termed, two years. 
George had saved enough to furnish a cottage decently ; and 
Susan had already provided the linen, blankets, and counter- 
pane, which, among the better sort of poor people, and those 
who think it necessary to make any provision before they enter 
into the marriage state, is reckoned the proper dowry of the 
bride. They only waited to hear of a cottage which they 
might rent, before they were asked in church. 

George Wells was invited to stay supper, and the quick and 
lively Susan had soon arranged the humble meal. The rashers 
of bacon were fried, the smoking potatoes were on the table : 
she had placed her father's chair, and she gently led him from 
his chimney-nook, and settled him comfortably to his supper ; 
then, gaily kissing him on the forehead, she began to tell him 
of the wonders they had seen at the fair. The old man turned 
his sightless eyes towards her, and, leaning forward as he 
listened, smiled placidly to hear of all the brilliant things which 

o 3 

198 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

he might never gaze on again ; and the dame forgot her pain* 
for a while, rejoicing in the happiness of her child. " But, 
mother, you do not know why I am so overjoyed to-day ! I 
have such a piece of news for you ! I think you will he as 
pleased as I am ; and father too ! Won't they, George ? " 

" Maybe they will, if it comes true." 

" Well, mother, guess." 

" I never was a good guesser, Susan, not in my hest days ; 
and I shall never begin now." 

" Well, father, do you guess, then." 

" Lord save you, child ! how should I know ? Maybe 'tis 
that the 'squire will give away coals gratis to the poor this 
Christmas?" 

" No, 't an' t that ; 'tis something that will make us happy 
at Christmas and at Lady-day, at Midsummer and at Michael* 
mas, and all the year round, as long as we all live." 

" If so be that it comes true; but we are not rare yet, 
Susan," interposed the more steady George, who did not run 
away with a notion so quickly as the light-hearted Susan. 

" Oh, George ! I know they will give up the cottage ; you 
will see if they don't They say, father, that Master Mum- 
ford is going to set up carpenter, and that he is to move to 
Mr. Peters's shop, and Mr. Peters is to be a great cabinet* 
maker at Turnholme ; and then what should hinder us taking 
Master Mum ford's cottage, and living next door to you ? I 
should not mind marrying if I was to go no farther than that 
from you and mother ; for then I could do for you as well as 
I can now, and mother need only just trouble herself with 
little odd jobs that will be rather t pleasure than a trouble to 
her." 

" But, Susan, we don't know, even if Master Mum ford 
should set up at Mr. Peters's, whether the 'squire will let the 
cottage to us. If you run off so at score, maybe you'll only 
meet with a disappointment However, I am willing to go 
to the 'squire's to-morrow morning, and see what I can do." 

" That's right, George ! " exclaimed the eager Susan ; 
" that's what I have been wanting all along ! " 

"Well, I never said I was against trying ; only I a'nt fop 
making too sure of a thing before we have got it You have 
heard, maybe, Susan, of counting your chickens before they 
are hatched ! " 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 199 

<c Don't you make game of me, George ! I'll answer for it, 
the 'squire is not the man to say no to us ; he has always 
been a kind friend to father : " while the suspicion that he 
seldom missed an opportunity of asking her how she did, and 
taking a look at her sparkling black eyes, may have increased 
her reliance on his kindness to her blind father. 

" I shall be glad enough if we are so lucky as to get the 
refusal of it," replied George ; "for I see little chance of our 
rinding any other place hereabouts ; and I would never be the 
man to take you into another parish, with your parents such 
poor afflicted creatures as they are ! I'm not one of your 
high-flown, flighty folks; and I've never read any of such 
fine books as you and your school-fellows sometimes get hold 
of, Susan ; but I can read my Bible pretty middling, and I 
know what is the duty we owe to our parents, who took care 
of us when we could do nothing for ourselves, and I would 
never wish my wife not to be a dutiful child." 

Old Sarah Foster looked approvingly at her future son-in- 
law ; and Nicholas said, " You are a young man with good 
principles, and it will be a pleasure to give our Susan to such 
a one as you. When I die, I shall rest quiet in my grave if 
I know she is married to you." 

'' They did not always speak so of you, George ! " answered 
the merry girl. " You used to say I was a wilful girl, did 
not you, father, when I said I would have George, or nobody ? 
So, after all, I have got an old head on young shoulders, 
though nobody has given me credit for it yet ! " 

It was not many weeks after Freshfield fair, when the 
village of Overhurst was all alive with another and a greater 
jubilee. The church bells rang a merry peal from the very 
sunrise ; the village maidens, in their most trim apparel, were 
in waiting to strew flowers on the path of Alice Mowbray and 
Captain Harcourt; an ox was roasted whole in Overhurst 
Park, and the beer flowed as beer should flow on such oc- 
casions. 

The 'squire had promised Master Mumford's house to 
George Wells, and he had obtained Susan's consent that they 
should soon be asked in church. Susan was all blushes and 
smiles, as among the other maidens she scattered flowers on 
the path ; and she court' sied with a pretty confusion when the 

o 4 

200 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

bride gave her a nod of recognition, as she hurried past into- 
the travelling carriage at the gate. 

Hitherto, all had seemed to smile on Susan ; for, having 
been accustomed to them from her youth, her father's blind. 
ness and her mother's ill-health did not dwell upon her mind 
as misfortunes; while the wish to enliven her parents, and 
the pleasure they took in her sprightliness, had rather tended 
to increase the natural gaiety of her disposition. But on this, 
the happiest day of her life, a change came over the destiny 
of Susan Foster. 

The festivities of Overhurst Park concluded with a dance 
on the green ; and Susan, gay, blooming, and thoughtless, 
seemed to be the reigning village belle. 

The scene was one which could not be looked upon without 
interest There the good-natured Mrs. Mowbray might be 
seen, moving about among her humble guests, with a kind 
word for each. She was flushed and agitated, breathless and 
tearful ; but she had given her daughter to a son-in-law 
whom she thought perfection, and she was as happy as a 
mother can be who has for the first time parted from her 
child. The simple congratulations of the poor people over- 
came, while they pleased, her. The tears started into her 
eyes when she heard the hearty " God bless Miss Alice ! " 
" May the captain make her a good husband ! " " May Mist 
Alice be as happy as she deserves to be ! " which greeted her 
on all sides. 

Half ashamed of ber own emotion, she turned away to a 
demure and staid matron, who sat somewhat apart, watching 
the young ones as they footed it merrily on the grass to the 
music of the village band : " Well, Dame Dixon, I hope you 
have enjoyed yourself, and that you have had everything you 
wished for ? " 

" Everything was beautiful, I am ure, madam, replied 
Mrs. Dixon, rising respectfully from her seat : " his honour 
has treated us with the best of everything." 

' Is your daughter among the dancers ? " inquired Mrs. 
Mowbray, as she saw Mrs. Dixon's eye glance frequently 
towards the country-dance. 

" Yes, madam ; Jane is very partial to dancing almost 
too partial," she continued, as a bouncing couple came flying 
by beyond the double hedge of dancers. " Jane," said the 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 201 

mother, as she clutched the maiden's red elbow, " don't you 
see that madam is here ? Where's your manners, girl ? " 

Jane stopped short, dropped a sort of court'sy, and com- 
posed her laughing countenance, while the partner disappeared 
among the crowd, with the sheepish bashfulness which cha- 
racterises an English clown, especially in his youth. 

" I am afraid we have stopped their dancing," said Mrs. 
Mowbray. " Pray do not mind me, Jane. I hope I have 
not frightened away your partner ; " and the kind hostess 
glided on. 

" What is become of Will Smith ? " asked Dame Dixon. 

" I don't know," replied Jane ; tf and what's more, I don't 
care. I'm very tired," she continued, as she let herself drop 
on the bench by her mother's side ; while her countenance 
relaxed into as decided an expression of sadness, as it had 
previously worn that of uncontrolled merriment. 

" Then I am sure, Jane, I wish you would not make so 
free with him, nor with half-a-dozen other young men. You 
have too much to say to them by half." 

" It won't do to sit and mope," cried Jane, starting up, as 
George Wells and Susan Foster were slowly advancing to 
join the dancers, with a lingering step, as though they were 
loth to have their conversation broken in upon. Jane was off 
like a startled deer ; and in a few moments Dame Dixon saw 
her dancing away with more spirit than ever, having already 
provided herself with another partner. 

Mr. Mowbray meantime had stopped Susan Foster to speak 
to her, and she was blushing and court'sying under the com- 
pliments he was paying her on her bright skin and her black 
eyes, and George was shifting from leg to leg under the com- 
pliments he was paying him upon his good taste and his good 
fortune. 

Mr. Mowbray had an eye for beauty, and certainly felt the 
glow of charity more strongly in his bosom towards the 
young and the good-looking of his parishioners, than towards 
the old and the ill-favoured: at least he was apt to think 
Mrs. Mowbray understood the wants and the sorrows of k the 
latter better than he did. 

" And who is that buxom lass ? " said he to his wife, 
who was looking on upon the scene ; " she is a light-hearted 
one. How indefatigable she is ! " 

202 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

" That is old Dixon's daughter, Jane, to whom you always 
used to give a shilling for opening the gate, because her eyes 
were so blue." 

" So she is ! Faith, she has turned out a fine creature ! 
But, bless me, who is this pretty woman ? Quite an elegante, 
I declare ! Where can she come from ? " 

" Why, from our own farm of Holmy-bank, to be sure. 
Do you not see Farmer Otley close behind her ? and do you 
not know he has been married this year, though they are only 
lately come to the farm ? " 

" Why you know, my dear, I have a taste for the beautiful, 
and not for the sublime ; and I quite overlook everything else 
when there is such a pretty woman as this to be seen." 

" I am sure, if you are thinking of beauty, Mr. Otley is 
almost the handsomest man I ever saw in my life ; and if she 
looks like a lady with her smart dress, he looks ten times 
more really distinguished, with those fine features, and his 
head like an antique gem, though he is dressed as befits his 
station in life." 

" Well, my dear, you may admire Mr. Otley if you like it : 
it is only fair to allow me to admire his wife. I have just 
recollected, I have a great deal to say to Farmer Otley," con- 
tinued Mr. Mowbray, laughing; and he was soon in deep 
conversation with his tenant about his course of cropping and 
his stock : while Mrs. Mowbray secretly reflected, " Mr. Mow- 
bray is growing too old to talk so much about beauty. I feel 
quite uncomfortable when he goes on so before the children." 

" Well, mamma ! " interposed Fanny ; " don't you think 
Susan Foster is much prettier than Mrs. Otley ? Her eyes are 
much larger, in the first place ; and then she is so quiet, and 
does not look up and down so ; and then, as for her nose - " 

" My dear, Susan Foster is a very respectable, worthy 
young woman, and very good-looking ; and now do not let us 
hear any more about beauty. I am really rick of the subject." 

It was not that Mrs. Mowbray was jealous, for Mr. Mow- 
bray was a kind husband, and she knew it was only " his 
way." She knew that his foible was not to " affect a virtue 
though he had it not ; " but rather to talk, as if he were far 
less scrupulous than he really was. It was only before the 
children, or in the hearing of strangers, who did not know 
" his way," that Mrs. Mowbray felt seriously annoyed. 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 203 

Mr. Otley was of course gratified when his landlord wished 
to be introduced to his wife ; and Mr. Mowbray, with twink- 
ling eyes and gay smile, was soon inquiring into the condition 
of her pigs, her poultry, and her dairy. 

" Oh, sir ! " she replied, with a tender look at her husband ; 
" you must not ask me about the pigs : Mr. O. says I am a 
sad fine lady;" (and she looked up for applause ;) "but I 
never could bear the smell of those creatures/' (and she 
looked down with a refined cast of countenance:) "but I am 
very fond of my dairy ; am I not, Mr. O. ? and I slip on my 
clogs every morning, and step into my dairy ; don't I, Mr. O.? " 

" Why, yes, Lizzy, you do that, to be sure ; but my 
mother used to see to the scouring of the milk-pans herself, 
and would never let father have any peace if there was not 
always plenty of wood-ashes to clean them with, every morn- 
ing." 

" Oh dear, Mr. Otley ! don't you go off now about that 
dear good old soul, your poor dear mother. 1 am sure 
Mr. Mowbray will not care to hear what she did twenty years 
ago." 

" I had always rather hear about a pretty young woman 
of the present day, than about an old one, be she ever so good, 
of the past day," replied Mr. Mowbray, with a bow ; and 
Mrs. Odey simpered, and blushed, and looked down, and re- 
moved a curl which fell a little too much over her eyes, and 
then added, turning to her husband, 

" You know, Mr. Odey, I have promised to be very good 
about the poultry, and to look after the eggs every morning, 
as soon as you have made a raised path across the farm-yard 
to the hen-house. But really, sir, the farm-yard is in such a 
pickle, that nobody but the labouring men could think of 
crossing it." 

" Impossible that Mr. Otley can have so little gallantry as 
to wish those pretty little feet should step into the farm-yard ! 
He would not be such a Goth ! '' 

" That's just what I am always telling Mr. O.," added 
Mrs. Odey, turning round exultingly ; " I am always telling 
him he is a Goth and a Vandal ; and then he says he does not 
know who the Goths and the Vandals are ; and then I laugh, 
and tell him he is more of a Goth and a Vandal than ever." 

" Ah, Lizzy ! you must not mind everything his honour 

201 THK HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

says; he is pleased to joke sometimes. But he knows well 
enough that a farmer has need of his head, and both his 
hands too, and that a farmer's wife should be a stirring body : 
he knows well enough they are the sort who pay their rent to 
the day, and keep their land in good condition." 

" You, and your father before you, have been very good 
tenants, Master Otley ; no landlord need wish for better : 
but here comes Mrs. Mowbray. My dear, you must allow 
me to have the pleasure of presenting you to our new neigh- 
bour, our friend Mr. Otley 's pretty wife." 

Mrs. Otley simpered, " Mrs. Mowbray had already done 
her the honour " 

" You need not introduce us, Mr. Mowbray,'' answered 
Mrs. Mowbray, with a shade of asperity in her tone, which 
amused her husband ; " I have already had the pleasure of 
seeing Mrs. Otley's pretty farm, and her sweet little boy : 
Emma and I walked to Holmy-bank a few days ago, and 
Mr. Otley showed us all about the place." 

" How are the dear little calves, Mr. Otley," exclaimed 
Emma, " that Fanny and I were feeding ? " 

" They are growing nicely, thank you, young ladies," re- 
plied the farmer ; " and I shall be proud to show them to you 
again, if you would favour us with a call/' 

" Oh ! Mrs. Otley, what a pleasure the calves must be to 
you ! I dare say you pass half the day feeding them : I am 
sure I should ! " 

" They are pretty innocent creatures, indeed, miss ; and if 
our old Daniel would keep the pens a little cleaner, I should 
have no objection to looking at them oftener than I do. But, 
if Mrs. Mowbray should honour us with another visit, I think 
I could show you something that would please young ladies 
more than such common, every-day creatures as calves. I 
have got two beautiful green parrots, that can chatter, and will 
repeat anything. And I am sure it would please you to see 
the curious Gothic castle, all made of shells, and the lady at 
the window playing on the guitar ! " 

" Oh ! I should like another walk to Holmy-bank of all 
things ; but it would be to see the dear calves : I like them 
much better than parrots." 

" My girls are very homely in their tastes, Mrs. Otley ; 
they are quite country lasses ; " and Mrs. Mowbray glided on, 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 205 

a little provoked that her husband should find so much to say 
to such a would-be fine lady as the farmer's pretty wife: 
" and he has never remembered to speak once to good old 
Mrs. Williams, our own steward's mother/' she thought, as 
she proceeded towards Mrs. Williams, in order to make up for 
his omission. 

The evening was now beginning to close : the cockchafers 
were humming under the beech-trees, and were flying into 
the fcces and among the hair of those who had taken refuge 
under their shade. Much was the merriment they gave rise 
to, and many a rustic coquette affected a little more fear than 
she really felt of their harmless, though sticky, claws ; while 
Jane Dixon laughed rather longer and louder than the occa- 
sion seemed to require. 

The sun had quite sunk below the horizon; and the 
vapours, which had been rising during the heat of the sultry 
day, were suddenly condensed, and hung on the lower grounds, 
looking silvery-white under the light of the summer moon. 

Susan and some other village girls, tired with dancing and 
the excitement of the day, mounted an empty waggon which 
was returning homewards, and the merry group of thoughtless 
young creatures thus made their entry into the quiet village 
street. Susan had, in the exuberance of her spirits, danced 
the longest and the latest ; the day had been oppressively hot, 
but with the evening came a heavy dew, and the air was 
chilly. When Susan arrived at home, her mother thought 
she looked pale ; and scolded George for having allowed her 
to return in the waggon, after having heated herself with 
dancing. 

" Time enough for me to mind him, mother, when once 
we are married," answered the joyous girl ; " I have but a 
little while longer to be my own mistress, and I must use 
my liberty now, or never ! " and the gay creature laughed, 
conscious of her power over father, mother, and lover. 

" Oh, mother, we have been so happy ! I never was so 
happy before, and, maybe, never shall again ! never, at least, 
if you teach George that I am not to have my own way ! *' 
and she turned her beaming eyes from her mother to her lover, 
while old Sarah hoped she had many days in store for her of 
more true happiness, if not of such flighty gaiety. Alas ! it 
was well for them they could not look into futurity. 

206 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

The next morning Susan woke with a heavy cold, and an 
unusual pain in her eyes ; they were bloodshot and inflamed. 
The dame reproached her with her imprudence : and doctored 
her with that degree of discretion which is usual among the 
poor people. Her eyes became hourly more painful. 

As he returned from work, George paid her his accustomed 
visit He wished she would see the doctor ; but she laugh, 
ingly replied she should be well to-raorrowy for old Dame 
Jones had given her an infallible remedy for all complaints of 
the eyes. 

CHAPTER II. 

O dole* Amor che di ri*o t* aramantl 
Quanto pareri ardcnte in quo' farilll 
Ch' ftveano pirto sol di peiuitr unti. 

DAMTC, Paradito, am/. 20roo. 

DAME JONES'S infallible remedy rather increased than dimi- 
nished the evil ; and Susan's spirits began to fail her at the 
continued suffering, the enforced idleness, and also in some 
degree at the disfigurement occasioned by tbe dimming of her 
brilliant eyes ; for she was not without a share of female 
vanity, vanity which is indulged as almost a laudable feel- 
ing when it is for the sake of another that personal attractions 
are valued. 

The Sunday on which Susan and her lover were to be asked 
in church was fast approaching, when she half sadly, half 
sportively, thus addressed him : " You had better go 'to Mr. 
Sandford, George, and tell him not to say any thing about us 
in church. It would never do to be a bride with such eyes as 
these ;" and she tried to smile, though she was more inclined 
to weep. 

" There will be plenty of time for your eyes to get quite 
well, Susan, before we are out-asked." 

" They must begin to mend, George, before we need talk 
of their getting well," replied Susan with a sigh ; and then 
she playfully added, " Do you remember your telling me 
when Miss Alice, that was, walked down the church-yard, 
looking so blushing and beautiful, that you would show them 
a prettier bride before long ; and that, though she would not 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 20? 

have such a smart lace-veil to hang over her face, she would 
have a pair of hrighter eyes to shine out of her bonnet. You 
must wait a bit, George, before your words can come true." 

" Not long, Susan, not long ; I am sure you will be well 
before three weeks are over ; that's a long time." 

" So it is, George, a long, long time to be as I am ! But 
the folks shan't laugh at you for having such a homely half- 
blind bride. I should not like you to be ashamed of your 
wife, upon the wedding-day at all events ; " and she tried to 
carry off her sadness and her mortification by an assumed air 
of sprightliness. 

Still poor Susan's eyes did not mend ; her mother's appli- 
cations, and Dame Jones's wonderful remedy, proved equally 
unavailing. Susan's spirits quite gave way : she often sat and 
wept when her mother's back was towards her, and her sight- 
less father could not perceive how sad his once light-hearted 
girl was now become. After Alice's marriage, the family of 
the Mowbrays had left home for some time, and Mr. Sandford 
was old and had been ill, or Susan's sufferings would never 
have been allowed to continue so long, without her having 
been provided with better medical attendance. The old 
couple themselves had derived so little benefit from the advice 
of doctors, that they, as is frequently the case among the 
poor, reposed more confidence in the doctoring of Mr. Sand- 
ford, or of any other gentleman or lady, than in that of the 
first physician in the land. They all felt anxious that the 
good minister should recover his health, and visit them ; and 
they flattered themselves he would soon afford Susan some 
relief. When he did call, he was shocked at the alteration in 
the poor girl's appearance, and he instantly sent for the best 
medical practitioner in the neighbourhood, deeming the case 
much too important a one for his own unassisted advice. 

Mr. Sandford's countenance first excited alarm, serious 
alarm, in Susan's mind : for the first time she trembled for 
her eye-sight; and an icy chill ran through her when she 
thought of her future fate. 

George called as he returned home from work ; and, on 
hearing that Mr. Sandford had visited the cottage, his coun- 
tenance brightened : " Then now we shall see you begin to 
mend ! What has our good minister told you to do, Susan ? 
Am I to go to his house to-night to fetch any stuff for you ? " 

208 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

" No, George, no. He says I must see the real doctor. Ih 
says he can't do any thing for me himself." George looked 
amazed and confounded. " He says he does not understand 
such things himself;" and she added, in a tone which she 
tried to make perfectly calm and composed, " he says he is 
afraid I shall not be well for a long time." 

George was in despair. He thought, if Mr. Sandford could 
not cure a complaint, it must indeed be a bad one ! He turned 
his eyes towards the old dame : she sat, as usual, rocking her- 
self backwards and forwards, with her hands pressed to her 
side, in mental as well as bodily suffering, for she too had 
been struck by the manner of their pastor. " We shall hear 
what the doctor says to-morrow, George ! I am sorry now 
that we kept waiting and waiting for Mr. Sandford to get 
well ; but I have had enough of doctors in ray time, and I 
was loth to begin again with them. We must hope for the 
best, and not be down-hearted." 

" She is young, poor thing !" added old Nicholas ; " and 
'tis to be hoped she won't be afflicted at her age as I am. I 
was near three-score when I lost my eye-sight, and I thought 
it a heavy affliction. It would be a deal worse for a young 
thing just turned her one-ami- twenty," continued the father, 
at once uttering in plain English the utmost extent of their 
fears, in the simple straightforward manner common among 
the poor people, but which would sound harsh and unfeeling 
to the sensibilities of the more refined. 

" I only hope I may be able to bear my trials as well as 
you do, father, if I am to be so afflicted," exclaimed Susan, as 
she burst into an agony of tears, rendered the more violent by 
her having previously attempted to control herself. 

*' Susan, Susan, you must not take on BO," said George, 
anxious to soothe her. 

" You'll do your poor eyes more harm if you cry, Susan," 
said her mother, " than the doctor can cure in a week. You 
must try not to give way, Susan dear ! w 

" Cheer up, my child," added Nicholas. " We do not 
know yet what the doctor will say ; perhaps it may not be so 
bad after all." 

Susan dried her tears, and tried to be composed ; but the 
inmates of Nicholas Foster's humble cottage retired to rest that 
night with sadness in their hearts, which waa not destined to 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 209 

be much alleviated by the doctor's visit the next day. He 
talked of time and patience, of a cooling diet and soothing ap- 
plications, a tranquil mind and the necessity of not fretting, 
of all injunctions the most difficult to obey ! He gave them 
hope certainly, which, though not enough to relieve Susan's 
mind, was eagerly caught at by George, and he was beginning 
to urge that it could do no harm if they were asked in church. 

" Not yet, George, not yet. Wait till I begin to mend. I 
should be but a useless wife to you at present. I have given 
up the thought of making a pretty bride," she continued in a 
tone almost of bitterness j " but I must be able to do for you, 
and to keep your house tidy : so there's no use in talking 
about being asked in church, George." 

George desisted, for her manner was so resolved he felt it 
impossible to oppose her. 

CHAPTER III. 

E 1'aspettar del male & mal pegijiore' 

Forse, che nou parrebbe il mal presente. TASSO. 

SUSAN was a good-hearted girl, but she had a high spirit. 
She had a generous temper, but it was not always under con- 
trol. Of all qualities a sweet temper is perhaps the one least 
cultivated in the lower ranks of life. The peculiar disposition 
is not watched ; care is not taken to distinguish between the 
passionate child, the sulky, the obstinate, and the timid. The 
children of the poor are allowed a latitude of speech unknown 
among the higher orders, and they are free from the salutary 
restraint imposed by what is termed " company." 

When in the enjoyment of full health and strength, the 
ungoverned temper of the poor is one of their most striking 
faults, while their resignation under affliction, whether mental 
or bodily, is the point of all others in which the rich might 
with advantage study to imitate them. 

Susan's spirit was not yet tamed by affliction. There were 
moments when she could not bear, without impatience, the 
pain her eyes occasioned her, and the weight of care which 
oppressed her mind. 

P 

210 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

It was towards George that she most frequently evinced any 
signs of captiousness ; and yet it was on his account that she 
most poignantly felt her present affliction, and her future 
prospects. She was more unhappy than she quite ventured to 
own to herself, or to him ; more apprehensive of what might 
be the result. She feared he would not always continue to be 
as kind as he now was. She could not expect it ; and she 
sometimes received bis simple attentions as if she was more 
surprised, than touched by them. 

One evening he brought her some flowers from his father's 
garden. 

" Well ! I shall be able to smell," she said, " even when I 
shall not be able to see ; but perhaps, George, you will not 
go on bringing me flowers then ! What beautiful double, 
stocks these are ! we can't get any to grow like these in our 
little bit of garden." 

" I raised them for father myself, Susan ; so I don't see 
why we should not have some, just as fine, and finer, when 
we have a garden of our own ! " And poor George looked 
pleased at her praise of his pet flower. 

" I dare say you will never get any to come so thick and so 
double another time, even if you should try," answered 
Susan despondingly ; for she thought, " when could she hope 
to have a home of her own ? " 

" And do you think I shall not try, Susan, to make my 
wife's home as nice as father's ? " 

" Maybe you will, and I may not be there to see it." 

" Why, Susan, I do not know what is come over you ; 
there is^no pleasing you. I thought you would like my 
flowers ! " 

" And so I do, George ; and I am very much obliged to 
you for them," she continued in a tone of gratitude almost 
beyond what the occasion called for. Presently she added, hi 
a sad, low voice, " You are very good to me, very good 
indeed.*' 

Just at this moment Nicholas and his dame were seen ap- 
proaching the garden-gate. She was leading him from the 
stile over which he loved to lean, and to feel the warm sun on 
his eyes, and turn his face in the direction of the setting orb. 
Sarah was hobbling back, guiding the blind old man, whose 
firmer step assisted in supporting her suffering frame. George 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 211 

opened the cottage-door to admit them, and the slant beams 
of the sun glanced through the opening upon poor Susan's 
eyes. 

The sudden light pained her ; and although she had one 
moment before reproached herself with not being sufficiently 
grateful for the kindness shown her, she exclaimed somewhat 
pettishly, " Don't you know, George, how it hurts my eyes 
to have the light glare upon them all at once ? " at the same 
time pushing back her chair with an impatient movement, 
which was accounted for, but not justified, by the pain which 
she suffered. 

The sight of her poor blind father, and of his meek ex- 
pression of countenance, recalled her to herself. She hastened 
to him and helped him to his chimney-nook, and then assisted 
her mother to her usual chair. They each thanked her in a 
kind and gentle voice, and she felt inwardly rebuked by their 
patience and their submission. 

George had stood aloof, awkward and mortified. She drew 
near him. " I beg your pardon, George," she murmured : 
" George, I do not know what is come to me ;" and she burst 
into tears. 

" Never fret, Susan ; I don't mind. 'Tis very natural, I 
dare say, that you should be a little testy or so : don't cry, 
your mother says 'tis so bad for you. I don't mind, though, 
to be sure, you do sometimes hurt my feelings a little." Dame 
Forster thought she saw him brush off a tear with the back of 
his hand. 

'' Why, what's the matter, Susan ? Sure you and George 
have not been falling out, have you?" 

" Oh, no ! not a bit of it, dame ! " 

" George is very good to me, mother ; but I don't know 
how it is, I believe sometimes I am hard to please ; " and she 
strove to smile. 

" Ah, my poor girl," said Nicholas, " trouble is hard to 
bear when first it comes ; but the back gets used to the burden. 
If you are a good girl, and say your prayers as should be, 
God will give you strength to bear what it is his pleasure to 
lay upon you. Won't He, dame? I am sure we have found 
it so. He is very merciful ; and if He gives us trouble, He 
sends us comfort to make up for it. If it has pleased Him to 
afflict me with blindness, He has given me a good wife ay, 

p 2 

212 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

the best of wives ; and if she is afflicted with her side, poor 
soul! why He has given her, and me too, dutiful children, 
and children who, some of them, are likely to do very well. 
There are our two boys, though they are settled in distant 
counties, they are very good to us, and have never let us want 
for anything, but have kept us off the parish as yet ; and that's 
what few people can say for their sons. If we do but look 
the right way for them, we shall all find we have our comforts ; 
though we may not be so sharp to find them out, as we are to 
find our troubles." 

Among Susan's causes of uneasiness there was one which 
she did not like to dwell upon to her parents. She had been 
used to assist towards the maintenance of the family, by taking 
in needle-work. She had now for many weeks been obliged to 
give up her occupation ; and she felt that, though her brothers 
provided for the comfort of their parents, it was hard upon 
them to have a helpless sister also to support. 

She was allowed to be much in the air if she wore a shade 
over her eyes ; and she frequently made use of this liberty to 
visit an old neighbour, who had long been bedridden, tnd who 
earned herself a decent livelihood by knitting stockings for the 
poor, and muffettees and handkerchiefs for the gentry, who 
admired the intricate and curious stitches with which she 
adorned her work. 

Susan, who already contemplated the probability of being 
eventually condemned to blindness, thought it would prove 
useful if, while she still retained some eyesight, she was to 
make herself acquainted with old Nelly's art ; and accordingly 
she applied herself diligently to acquire the requisite profi- 
ciency. She would sometimes close her eyes and try whether 
he could thus accomplish the difficult stitch ; and then, when 
she opened them for the purpose of ascertaining where lay her 
mistake, she would sigh to think the time might soon arrive 
when the darkness would be eternal. 

Susan's visits to Nelly Warner had a considerable and not 
unfavourable influence upon her future character. 

The old woman was naturally of a querulous disposition, 
and was more inclined to dwell on the many privations to 
which her complaint condemned her, than on the superior 
comforts which fell to her lot beyond others who were equally 
afflicted. She had an attentive grand-daughter, who was de- 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 213 

voted to her ; and she was not in want of what might in her 
line of life be deemed comforts, for the neighbouring gentry 
showed her much kindness. 

Susan could not but compare the patient endurance of her 
mother, the placid submission of her father, with the fret- 
fulness of Nelly Warner ; and when she answered her com- 
plaints with such arguments for resignation as naturally oc- 
curred to her mind, she could not but apply the words she 
uttered to her own case. 

" So you are come at last, Susan," said old Nelly, in a 
reproachful tone ; " I have been expecting you this half-hour. 
The church clock has gone three, I do not know how long. 
Young people should not keep old folks waiting, more espe- 
cially when they want them to do them a kindness." 

" It is only ten minutes past three, Nelly ; I looked as I 
came by ; but I am sorry I was not quite to my time. The 
bright sun dazzled my eyes, and I went back to get mother to 
alter my green shade." 

" Ah ! young folks always have some excuse or another 
which they think mighty good themselves. It fidgets a poor 
body like me to lie wondering, and expecting, and listening to 
hear the door open ! When one is helpless and ailing, as I am, 
folks should take care not to worry one. It is bad enough to 
bear one's own miseries. Here I lie, and what pleasure have 
I from one week's end to another ? " 

" Little enough of pleasure, indeed, dear Nelly, except the 
pleasure of doing a kindness by me," said Susan, as she took out 
her knitting needles. " Then you have little Patty to help you, 
and to bring you all you want, and she is a good child. Some 
people, Nelly, have not the comfort of such a good little girl 
to attend to them : sure you have much to be grateful for." 

" I can't tell what I have to be grateful for. There's Master 
Thompson, he is two years older than I am, and he is hearty 
and well, and goes to his work regularly, and earns as much 
as a young man. And there's my own sister Pratt, why she's 
ten years older than I am, and she can walk to market." 

" Oh, but, Nelly, the way to be contented is to compare 
our condition with those who are worse off than ourselves. 
You want for nothing ; you are able to earn a good deal your- 
self. Now, I can't earn anything yet :" she added in a very 
low voice ; " and people are very good to you." 

p 3 

214 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

" They like my warm muffettees well enough ; but I need 
not thank them, but myself, for that." 

Susan felt shocked at Nelly's ill-temper and ingratitude, and 
she thought what a hard task it must be for Patty to study the 
humours of such a discontented old woman. 

She remembered how kind her mother had always been to 
her, she remembered how patiently George had borne with her, 
and she resolved she would not put him to such trials any 
more. 

The uncertainty in which she remained concerning her 
future fate, sometimes appeared to her harder to bear than the 
knowledge of the truth would be, and she made up her mind 
she would some day ask the doctor what was his real opinion 
of her case. But many a visit passed over without her sum- 
moning the requisite courage. If he should destroy all the 
hopes she still indulged, what should she do ? How ought 
she to conduct herself towards George ? Could she wish him 
to be 'cumbered with a blind wife ? 

While all these contending feelings were working in her 
mind, she found it difficult to be always gentle and placid, and 
yet she was ashamed before her good resigned parents to give 
way to impatience. They never tutored her, they never gave 
her advice ; but 

' Example more than precept weight," 

and their whole lives were one continued moral lesson. 

Susan was one day sitting at home, with her back towards 
the light, diligently plying her long needles, when she suddenly 
addressed her mother : " Mother, do you think 1 shall ever 
get well?" 

" There 's no saying, my dear Susan ; such things are in 
the hands of Providence ! " 

"Mother, has the doctor ever told you anything?" she 
asked, with a great effort. 

" No, my child, he has never said anything for certain : but 
how do you feel your eyes yourself?" 

" No better, mother, no better ; I don't think they will last 
long, and that 's the truth of it," she said, relieved by giving 
utterance to what had been so long preying on her mind. 

"My poor Susan ! The Lord have mercy upon you, and 
bear you up under this affliction ! and He will, my child, 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 215 

depend upon it, He will. But it goes harder with me, Susan, 
to see you so, than it has to bear all the other troubles I have 
ever been visited with." 

" Well, mother, don't fret; we will hope," said Susan, 
alarmed herself at the alarm she had excited in her mother's 
bosom, and half disappointed at not meeting with more re- 
assurement ; but Sarah had long perceived with grief that her 
daughter made no progress towards amendment, and the 
melancholy truth had gradually forced itself upon her mind. 

The doctor called one day, when the dame was leading her 
good man to his usual stile, and Susan was therefore alone. 
She determined to put the question to him, and to be assured 
whether she ought, or ought not, to relinquish all hope. Hav- 
ing thus armed herself with resolution to hear the worst, she 
framed her question with such apparent composure, and as if she 
entertained so little expectation of recovery, that the doctor 
thought there was no occasion to deceive her, and did not 
attempt to deny that her fears were only too well grounded. 
She dropped him a respectful court'sy, and only said, " Thank 
you, sir." He praised her for her strength of mind, advised 
her to seek fortitude whence alone it was to be found, and re- 
commended her being as much as possible in the open air, that 
her general health might not suffer. 

When he had taken his leave, when poor Susan found her- 
self quite alone, then all her strength of mind forsook her. 
She relieved her bursting heart by floods of tears ; and had 
scarcely recovered any composure, when her father and mother 
returned from their evening stroll to the neighbouring stile. 
That night Susan could not sleep, but she pondered deeply on 
the future. 

CHAPTER IV. 

But not to understand a treasure's worth 

Till time has stolen away the slighted good, 

Is cause of half the poverty we feel, 

And makes the world the wilderness it is. COWPER. 

AFTER her conversation with the doctor, Susan applied herself 
more diligently than ever to her knitting, and succeeded in 

p 4 

21 6 Tin: HAMPSHIRE COTTAI.I:. 

acquiring such dexterity, that she nearly equalled 
She took every opportunity of walking in the fields, for she 
thought she should like to see the beautiful face of nature as 
long as it was permitted her to do so. George found that all 
peevishness had disappeared ; his kindnesses were received 
with gratitude, and any little omission on his part did not 
seem to he perceived. The days had become so much shorter 
that she could no longer take a walk with him each evening 
when he returned from work, but on Sundays they still wan- 
dered through the fields together. He one day remarked how 
long the oaks had kept their leaves this year. 

" I can see that the woods look thick," she replied ; " but 
I cannot well distinguish their colour. However, I am glad 
the leaves last late this autumn, for I shall never see them 
again ; before spring I shall be quite dark, George. I shall 
be very sorry not to see the young lambs : I used to like to 
. watch them skip about upon the headlands, when the sun shone 
out on a spring morning ; and I shall be sorry not to see the 
primroses in the dell by Fairmead Shaw. O dear ! I shall 
tie up no more bunches of violets in Oldash Lane, where the 
banks are always so blue with them ! I did not know at the 
time how much I enjoyed all those tights. And the pretty 
young shoots of the sallow, that we used to gather for Palm 
Sunday ! Oh ! we are all giddy thoughtless creatures, George, 
and do not half value the common blessings of life while we 
have them. I think sometimes of such things till my heart 
seems ready to burst ; and then I remember poor father, how 
patient and contented he is ; and I know how mother bears all 
her pains, and I remember that I have not much pain to bear; 
for 1 do not suffer now, except, to be sure, in my poor mind. 
I feel a great deal sometimes, George, more than I like to 
talk about ; and I think a great deal; and the time must come 
when you must think too. I know this is not the way for a 
young man to wear away his life ; I know it all, and I do not 
mean to hold you to your word ; only, as long as I can walk 
about and see the old places at all, I should like to walk with 
you, and see them with you." 

" Oh, Susan ! you go near to break my heart when you talk 
so beautifully. But you know I wanted long ago that we should 
be married, and you know I am ready to work night and day 
to keep you ; and there will be Master Mumford's house at 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 217 

liberty by the spring. I am ready and willing to do my best 
for you." 

" No, George, it won't do ; such a poor helpless creature as 
I shall be by the spring must not think of taking care of a 
family. Hark how that robin is singing ! There is one com- 
fort : I shall be able to hear the birds sing, and I shall know 
when the spring comes by hearing them ; and listening to their 
songs will put me in mind of all the pretty sights there are in 
spring time. I will tell you what is worst of all, George, 
that I shall never be able to see the faces of those I love again. 
I cannot justly discern the favour of any one now ; that is 
what I miss most. I cannot be sure now when you look at 
me, except by a kind of guess. Oh, George ! sometimes I 
think how vain and foolish I used to be, and how much I 
prided myself upon looking pretty of a Sunday, when I thought 
I should meet you, and it all seems to me now to have been 
such vanity ; and I am sorry now I did not read my Bible 
more when I could read. It would be a comfort to me to 
have more texts by heart, to repeat to myself when I feel as 
sad as I often do." 

They walked on in silence till they passed under a large 
holly which grew on the steep bank of the road. " Is not 
that the old holly from which we used to gather the branches 
to stick in our windows at Christmas ? I think it looks black 
against the sky." 

" Yes, dear Susan, that is the very holly." 

" Are there many red berries upon it this autumn ? " 

" Yes, there's quite a sight of berries." 

' I wish I could see them ! but that can't be. As I was 
saying George, about the Bible, be sure you read a chapter 
every Sunday : it will do you good : as poor Mr. Sandford used 
to say, the Bible is the poor man's best friend. Poor Mr. 
Sandford ! I am sorry he is so bad. It would have been a 
good thing for me if he had been able to go about as usual, and 
to talk to me, and give me good advice. Perhaps I should 
never have been so pettish as I was for a little while ; but I 
have got over that now. He will be.very much missed in the 
parish when he is gone ; but he is a great age, and we all must 
go when our time comes. The place won't seem like itself 
when he is in his grave, and 'Squire Mowbray in foreign parts; 
for they say he is not coming back, but is going somewhere for 

218 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

Miss Fanny's health, and to finish the young ladies' education, 
now Miss Alice is married. Poor Miss Alice ! To be sure, 
how well I remember her wedding ! and truly enough did I 
say I should never spend so happy a day again ; but I did not 
think so when I said it. I thought I should spend many and 
many much happier days when I was married to you, George, 
for all I was so flighty that evening.'* And Susan smiled, and 
then sighed to think how light-hearted she had been. 

" Ah, that was a happy day ! " said George ; and he shook 
his head sorrowfully, as he led poor Susan home to her father's 
cottage. 

ach succeeding week saw Susan's blindness gradually in- 
crease ; and as her sight became more and more dim, she 
became more than ever gentle and uncomplaining. Of all the 
visitations with which human nature is afflicted, none assuredly 
has such a tendency to calm, to purify, and to refine the heart, 
as blindness. The absence of all external objects to distract 
the attention, forces the soul to look back into itself, to 
subdue its passions, to control its emotions, to chasten all its 
feelings. It is seldom that the countenance of a blind 
person does not bear the stamp of a meek and resigned spirit 
within. 

Old Mr. Sand ford died, and was replaced by a worthy 
common-place clergyman, who did the duty in a respectable 
common-place manner ; who attended the schools, and visited 
the poor people, and was sorry for the blind young woman ; 
but, not having known her previously, took no particular 
interest in her case. Susan and her father lamented the 
death of Mr. Sandford. To them the loss of the voice to 
which they had been accustomed was a deprivation far greater 
than to others, for to them a voice was everything. 

Susan was one day seated at her usual hour with her knit- 
ting by Nelly's side, when Mr. and Mrs. Otley paid the old 
woman a visit. 

" Ah !" said Nelly, ' I warrant me, they are coming for 
some job of their own. It's seldom any one opens my door 
to keep me company, or. to cheer my lonesome days: that's 
the way of the world, every one for himself." Then ad- 
dressing Mrs. Otley as she entered : " Well, ma'am, and what 
queer new-fangled piece of work do you want to set me about 
now ? " 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 219 

" I have brought you a new pattern, Nelly," replied the 
good-humoured Mrs. Otley ; " these knit boas are quite the 
fashion at Turnholme ; and I thought if you got some done 
before they grow common, it would be such a good thing for 
you ! " 

" And can you tell me how I am to set about making such 
an out-of-the-way thing as this ? " said Nelly, as she held up 
the boa with a disdainful air. 

" No, I cannot tell you how to do it ; but you are so 
clever at such matters, I thought you would know directly." 

" Perhaps I may find out, as there are few stitches I do 
not know," replied Nelly, her temper a little soothed through 
the medium of her vanity ; " but when I have made them, 
I do not see who there is to buy them, now Mrs. Mowbray 
and her family are gone." 

" Oh ! in the first place, I will take one ; and then Miss 
Mincing will be glad to take any number, if you let her have 
them a trifle under the usual price." 

Nelly nodded, with a half-pleased, half-cunning air, as if 
she had proved right, and Mrs. Otley had her own ends to 
answer in her apparent good-nature. " And, perhaps," con- 
tinued Mrs. Otley, " the Mowbrays may be at home before 
next winter." 

" No," said Nelly, " not a bit of it. That's all a pre- 
tence about the young ladies' education. They have had some 
losses out, there away, in them sugar-mines, and they won't 
be at home these two years," replied Nelly., with the dog- 
matical air of one whose superior information could not be 
doubted. 

" That 's sad news, Mrs. Nelly," interposed Mr. Otley ; 
" 'tis a wonder Mr. Williams did not say a word about it 
yesterday, when I called, about stocking up that hedge." 

" The news only came this morning ; but I believe you 
will find it 's true enough ; though people think an old woman 
can know nothing." 

"I'm loth to credit such bad news about such good people," 
answered Mr. Otley. 

" They may be good, for aught I know to the contrary ; 
but I am sure it is little enough I have profited by their 
goodness." 

" Oh, Nelly ! " exclaimed Susan, " did not they keep you 

220 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

always in employment ; and if you had nothing else to do, 
did they not bid you always be knitting stockings for tin-in, 
which they afterwards gave to the poor ? " 

" And much good that did me ! I was none the warmer. 
They paid me for my work, sure enough ; and what thanks 
do I owe them for that ? It would be a pretty thing indeed, 
if gentlefolks ordered goods of poor people, and then cheated 
them out of their money." 

"Oh, Nelly !" cried Susan, and she longed to add, "how 
ungrateful ! " but she remembered she was old and sick, and 
she restrained herself. 

" I always thought it would come to this. I always thought 
the 'squire would run himself into debt with the warm house 
he kept, and his dances on the green to giddy boys and girls ;" 
(Susan sighed) " and then the grand company that 
visited at the Park ! I am sure it hag kept me awake many 
a night to hear the carriages rolling by after a dinner-party. 
It won't do to burn the candle at both ends. I have always 
said so ; but nobody minds me." 

" I am sure, Nelly/' intcrpoted Mrs. Otley, " Mr. Mow- 
bray saw no more company than was proper and becoming for 
a gentleman of his birth and connexions : and it would have 
been a sin and a shame if he had let his daughters mope at 
home without allowing them to see a little of the world ; and 
as for his losses in his West India property, he could not 
foresee that his crop of sugar-canes would fail, or that a hur- 
ricane would ruin his plantations." 

" I know nothing about sugar-canes, nor hurricanes, not I ; 
but I know that if they are things that pay one year, and 
don't pay the next, you should reckon accordingly, and not 
live as if sugar-mines paid every year as regular as sheep or 
corn." 

" Not sugar-mines, Nelly. Sugar grows in plantations/* 

" Sugar-mines, or salt-mines, it is all one to me ; that 's 
no business of mine," replied Nelly doggedly, " and it makes 
little difference to me. If them losses out, there away, hinder 
the 'squire's family from coming home, and I have no regular 
sale for my stockings, it matters little what keeps them in 
foreign parts." 

" Well, Mrs. Nelly," said Mr. Otley, you are not the 
only person who will miss Mr. and Mrs. Mowbray. All who 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 221 

are willing to work will wish for the 'squire back again, and 
all who are sick or sorry, will miss Mrs. Mowbray's kind 
words, and kind deeds ; and I am sure I shall miss those 
sweet young ladies, with their smiling faces, and their affable 
manners, running about my yard, and playing with the dogs, 
and the cats, and the calves, and all the dumb animals." 

" And I am sure I shall miss Mr. Mowbray's elegant 
manners and agreeable conversation, though I own it struck 
me there was something rather high about Mrs. Mowbray's 
ways, though she was such a dowdy in her dress. Well, 
Nelly, you do not seem to like the idea of knitting boas, so 
I will take away the pattern." 

" And if I don't get employment from Miss Mincing, who 
am I to look to now ? but if you are against leaving it with 
me for a day or two, why I don't wish to be beholden to 
anybody." 

4< I borrowed it on purpose from Mrs. Knotaway, and if 
you succeed in making them, I shall be very glad to buy one," 
added Mrs. Otley, as she took her leave. 

Almost before the door was closed, " There," said Nelly, 
te I told you how it was. She thinks she can get her flaunt- 
ing boa a trifle cheaper than if she bought it at Miss Mincing's. 
I know her well enough. People think I can't see through 
them, because I am old and helpless ; but I have not lost my 
senses." 

" Indeed, Nelly," said Susan, " Mrs. Otley ordered one, 
out of good-nature." 

" And do you think, if my work was dearer than the shop- 
price, she would think so much of being good-natured ? " 

" Oh, Nelly ! we should not be looking out for bad motives 
to kind actions. It will be a great advantage to you to find a 
market for your goods at Miss Mincing's, and I am sure 
Mrs. Otley meant to do you a service; and if it had not 
been for your good, Mr. Otley would never have let her pro- 
pose it." 

" Mr. Otley, indeed !" He just lets his flighty wife take 
her own way." 

" He is very kind ; but my cousin, Sophy Foster, who lived 
with them half-a-year, says he can be firm enough when there 
is need for it, and that he rules in all great things, though he 
does not like to be jarring about trifles." 

222 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

" I don't know how it is, Susan, you are always contra- 
dicting one. You always have something to say in defVnce 
of everybody. It is a very disagreeable trick in a young 
woman to be contradicting her elders." 

The spring had now stolen on ; Master Mumford's house 
was free ; and Susan thought it her duty to tell George that 
she released him from his engagement She was quite blind. 
No hope was held out to her of recovery. Her becoming the 
wife of a poor man, the mother of a poor man's children, was 
absolutely out of the question. She took the opportunity one 
day, when her father and mother were both present, to say to 
him, "The time is come, George, when 1 must give you 
up. You have been very good to me, and I shall feel your 
goodness as long as I live ; but I cannot make you such a wife 
as a poor man ought to have : and now, George, here, before 
my father and mother, I give you back your word. The 
house next door is free, and you must give the 'squire's 
steward your answer ; and so you had better go to Mr. Wil- 
liams and give it up at once. I can never live there with you; 
and if if you should if you should marry another girl, 
George," she continued resolutely, though with a choking 
voice, " I could not bear to have her live there no more 
could you, I am sure you could not ; so you had better go to 
the 'squire's steward and tell him how it is ! " She stopped, 
exhausted with the effort she had made. 

George stood by, grieved, distressed, uncertain how to act, 
or what to say. He loved Susan dearly,' as dearly as ever; 
but it was true, she could not take care of a poor man's house. 
He was but a labourer; it was impossible he should earn 
enough to support her, and a person to do for her and the 
family they might have. It would be bringing her into a 
state of hopeless poverty and distress. He had no arguments 
to adduce, and yet he could not bear to break off his engage- 
ment. " What is to be done, dame ?" at length he said, with 
the tears in his eyes. ' I love your Susan, there, as dearly 
as ever I did, and I can't bear the thoughts of giving her up ; 
and yet I have nothing to say against the reasons she has 
been bringing up against me. I am fairly puzzled what to 
do," he continued, rubbing his forehead. " I would not 
mind, if I thought I could keep her creditably ; but if she 
and her children were to be brought to want, and I not able 

TIIE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. . 2 1 23 

to earn a decent maintenance for them, why, I do think that 
would be worst of all." 

" There is nothing to be done, dear George, but what I 
tell you. We must break off with one another, and you must 
try to forget by-gone days : that will soon be easy enough for 
you. As for me, I do not see there is any need for me to try 
to forget, for I may as well think over everything that is 
pleasant ; and it will always be a pleasure to me to think how 
kind you have been to me, and how true you have been to 
me!" and she held out her hand in the direction where he 
stood, moving it slowly towards him as blind people do. He 
took her hand, he grasped it firmly ; he pressed it between 
his own hard palms, occasionally patting it, in silence for 
some minutes, till at length he let it fall, and dropping his 
head upon the deal dresser, he burst into an agony of uncon- 
trollable sobs. 

CHAPTER V. 

These orbs, that Heaven's gay light no longer know, 

Nor meet with kindred beam affection's eye, 

(Long, long denied each grateful ministry !) 
Still own the tear that flows for others' woe ! 

Unpublished Poems. 

SUSAN sat dissolved in silent tears. The dame had clasped her 
hands in prayer. Old Nicholas's head rested on his staff, while 
tears also rolled from his sightless eyes. It is not a new remark, 
but it is always a touching reflection, that eyes which have long 
forgotten to minister to pleasurable objects should still retain 
the faculty of weeping. 

Few more words were spoken that evening by the party 
assembled in Master Foster's house. It was necessary that 
George Wells should decide whether he meant to take the 
neighbouring cottage. There was no alternative, and he was 
obliged to give it up. But he still continued to visit Susan. 

The summer came on, and he often led her carefully forth 
to walk in their accustomed paths. He thought in his heart 
that he should never marry, and he was sure he could never like 
any girl as well as Susan. He sometimes told her so, and she 

224 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAOB. 

gladly believed him ; and she found herself, when thus con- 
vinced of his continued affection, less unhappy than she had 
imagined it possible to be under her melancholy deprivation. 
Her skill in knitting almost exceeded that of her old mistress ; 
and although she could not earn as much as she formerly had 
by needle-work, still the farmers' wives patronized her ; some 
of the gentry in the nearest country town bought her muffet. 
tees as fast as she could make them ; and she was able to assist 
her parents in some degree. The household cares fell heavier 
on old Sarah, but she had a willing spirit, and grudged no la- 
bour for those she loved. 

One of Susan's most constant customers for her worsted 
manufactures was Mrs. Otley, who thought, in the absence of 
the Mowbrays, it was incumbent upon her to patronise their 
favourites. Though her husband ranted but a small farm not 
exceeding a hundred acres, she was not, in her own estimation, 
a personage of small importance. She was possessed with that 
desire of aping her betters, which is the misfortune of many in 
her condition. 

Because a man with a capital of ten or twelve thousand 
pounds chooses to invest that capital in a large farm, and con- 
sequently lives himself, and brings up his family, as he would 
be entitled to do if the same fortune was invested in any other 
speculation or profession ; why should the small farmer, who 
can barely stock his forty or fifty acres, and by the utmost in- 
dustry ought not to expect a profit much beyond the earnings 
of a good labourer, think himself called upon to emulate his 
richer neighbour ? Like him he keeps his greyhounds to go 
coursing, or his nag to ride hunting; while his wife and 
daughters appear at church attired in the extreme of the fashion, 
and at home display in their best parlour the elegancies of * 
drawing-room ; such as diminutive cupids bearing gigantic 
candlesticks, petitt objrt* on a small table, a flower-glass con- 
taining an artificial bouquet, and not unfrequently a piano-forte. 
Farmer Otley himself was not one to whom these remarks 
were applicable, but he had married a woman who was the very 
type of a fashionable farmeress. She had received a boarding- 
school education, could play on the piano-forte, spoke French, 
wrote a delicate hand with a steel pen, embroidered muslin, was 
really a pretty and not a vulgar-looking woman, and having 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 225 

brought him a decent fortune, felt herself entitled to be as re- 
fined as books and backboards could make her. 

She had been struck by Mr. Otley's personal beauty, and had 
fallen in love with him as being more fitted by his appearance 
to enact the hero than any one else with whom she associated. 
He was certainly a singularly handsome man ; and although 
(after marriage) she sometimes reproved him for allowing his 
voice to go beyond what she thought the true pitch of romance, 
and his laugh to become too hearty, she consoled herself by 
finding many examples in novels and poems, where strength, 
manliness, and courage are the requisite attributes of the lover, 
and the delicacy and refinement are only indispensable in the 
lady-love. 

When she married him she imagined all farmers must move 
in the same sphere of gentility ; and as Mr. Glover, who rented 
and cultivated highly a thousand acres in her native parish, 
drove his wife and daughters to church in a phaeton with too 
pretty ponies ; as the Miss Glovers were dressed as well, or 
nearly as well, as the Lady Larkingtons ; as Mrs. Glover fre- 
quently dined with the clergyman's wife, and Mr. Glover oc- 
casionally at Larkington Hall, she concluded that when she 
also was united to a farmer, Mrs. Otley would be as great and 
as genteel a personage as Mrs. Glover. 

Much has been said, and much has been written, both against 
the farmers of the present day, and in their defence. Surely 
the condemnation and the approbation have both been too 
general. It is often urged that all the distress among that class 
of people is owing to their altered notions, their finery, and their 
ambition. It has also been urged with truth, that there is no 
reason why a large capitalist who invests his money in agricul- 
tural speculations should be condemned to eat bread and cheese, 
and to wear a smock-frock ; and his wife to churn, bake, and 
feed her chickens. 

The fault appears to be that sufficient regard is not paid to 
the difference of capital requisite for a large and a small farm. 
The small shop-keeper in a narrow alley does not feel himself 
called upon to make the same appearance, or to indulge in the 
same luxuries, as the proprietor of one of the brilliant ma- 
gazines in Regent Street, or Bond Street; but the small farmer 
strives to vie with the large one, and would be ashamed to see 

Q 

226 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

his family appear at church less well dressed, than that ot a 
man whom he considers in the same rank of life as him 

Dame Foster was, as usual, one afternoon sitting at her cot- 
tage window, whence she commanded a view down the village 
street, which enabled her to beguile the tedious hours by re* 
porting to her blind companions each little village incident. 
She saw Mrs. Otley draw near, accompanied by her children, 
and a girl who attended upon them. Old Sarah could not help 
remarking that Mrs. Otley was more dressed out than ever 
Mrs. Mowbray used to be. " It is a pity folks do not know 
their own places. I remember the time when Mr. Otley's 
mother old Mrs. Otley that's dead and gone used to wear 
her black satin bonnet and her red cloak just as I did ; only 
her cloak was handsomer, and the satin was a richer satin, and 
she was never forced to wear them till they were shabby. She 
looked respectable at all times ; and she kept as warm a house 
as anybody in the parish plenty for her own family and for 
anybody who was in want When you were courting me, 
Nicholas, you used to work with old Farmer Otley, and I dare 
say, if you had gone on with him, you would not have married 
for some years longer. I don't justly mind bow it was, but 
you and he came to words, and you went off to Farmer Light- 
foot, and he did not board nor lodge his men ; and I remember 
well you said 'twas all so different from old Mrs. Otley'* com- 
fortable hot suppers, and her good clean bed, and her warm 
fireside to sit by of an evening, that you resolved you would 
have a home of your own, and you said it would not cost you 
much more to have a cottage to yourself than to hire a single 
room. Ah ! it was all very well, and we got on pretty mid- 
dling ; but it was a good while before we gathered things com- 
fortable about us. \Ve often used to say that if we had waited 
another two or three years we should have begun quite before- 
hand with the world. Do you remember, Nicholas, how 
pleased we were when we got our nice clock at last ? It was a 
hard matter to save up enough for the clock, with a growing 
family coming on ! " 

When old Sarah had advanced thus far in her reminiscences, 
she perceived that Mrs. Otley crossed the road and directed her 
steps to their cottage. She entered the humble apartment with a 
graceful slide, and Her silk gown rustled, as Nicholas said, till he 
almost thought she must be the minister's lady. Her little boy 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 22? 

was dressed in a Polish coat, with a cap from which dangled a 
smart tassel. The little girl, who was just able to toddle, had a 
boa round her neck ; and the brawny country-girl who enacted 
nursery-maid, seemed to have been tutored into taking as minc- 
ing steps as her mistress. Mrs. Otley came to bespeak some 
handkerchiefs and muffettees like those which Mrs. Parkins, the 
oracle of fashion in the town of Turnholme, had ordered ; and 
she begged Mrs. Foster's permission to wait at her house till 
Mr. Otley passed by from market, and would drive her home in 
" his chaise," a term which serves some people to designate 
every gradation of one-horsed vehicle, from a stanhope to a 
tax-cart. 

It was not long before Mr. Otley was seen approaching in 
the market-cart, which Mrs. Otley denominated his chaise ; 
and she sent the girl to the garden-gate to stop him on his way. 
The goodnatured husband quickly dismounted from his cart, 
and entered the cottage, fearing something might be the matter. 
" Why, what's this, Lizzy ? You're not ill, to be sure ? " 

" No, my love," answered the lady ; " only fatigued with 
my walk : but do not speak so loud, if you please, my love ; 
you forget my nerves." 

" Lord bless you, Lizzy, I can't remember those things 
I know nothing about : but I am sorry you are so troubled with 
them. I am sure if they are a trouble to you, they are a trouble 
to me too ; for they won't let you do any of the jobs that 
want doing about a farmhouse. Why, what's this queer bit of 
a rat's tail you've twisted round little Lizzy's neck ? " he con- 
tinued, laughing, as he held up the child's Lilliputian boa. 

" Take care, dear Mr. Otley ; the poor child will take cold 
if she is without her boa. Mrs. Foster will think you quite 
a savage," she continued, in a mincing half-tender tone, to 
carry off his rough manners. 

" No, no, she won't," he replied ! fc Dame Foster knows me 
of old ; and Nicholas, he was the first that taught me how to 
take a wasp's nest. Do you remember, Nicholas ? You had 
left working for father then ; but you were always partial to 
me, and I remember well you used sometimes to come at after- 
hours, and help me wasp-nesting, or bat-fowling, or such like." 

" Ah, Master Otley ! you were a smart spjig of a lad, and I 
always had a liking for you. You always were sharp and active ; 
and when you were quite a child, you would be helping your 

Q 2 

228 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

poor mother when she was busy at her dairy, or her poultry- 
yard, or when she was particular busy on baking-days." 

" There, Lizzy; you see I always told you how mother used 
to set her hand to everything, and never thought any useful 
work was beneath her. That's the way to make fanning 
answer. 'Tig the small profits and the small savings we must 
look to, if we mean to get on in these hard times." 

" Dear Mr. Otley, I do not like to hear you talk so. Any- 
body would think you quite mean and niggardly to hear you. 
I am often telling you you do not do yourself justice." 

" Ah, wife ! that 's all very well ; but it is just because I 
want to do myself justice that I talk so. But come along. Up 
with you into the cart, and we '11 be jogging home. The more 
the merrier/' he added, as he took the little girl in" his arras. 

" Ob, Mr. Otley J when will you get me a little pony- 
chaise, or something decent, to go about in ? I have never 
been used to such a shabby conveyance." 

" I am sorry for it, my dear ! When I have the money, 
you shall have just such a chay as you may fancy ; but mean 
time you must put up with this. Good night to you, Master 
Foster ! " he continued, as he left the cottage. " Good night, 
dame ! good night, Susan ! I saw some rare fine worsted in 
a shop-window at Turnholme to-day. You shall have some, 
next time I go to market. I did think about bringing some 
to-day. It would be just the thing for your work." 

" Thank you kindly, sir. You are very good," answered 
Susan. 

" Well to be sure, she looks too much of a laxly to be get- 
ting up into that common cart," remarked Sarah, as she watched 
Farmer Otley carefully assisting his wife into the " chaise," and 
dutifully saving the silk gown from coming into contact with 
the wheel. *' There's no particular harm in the woman if she 
was married to some one who only wanted a wife to look at ; 
but how she is to keep everything going about a farm, is 
more than I can tell ! She needs somebody to look after her, 
instead of her being able to look after others. There's her veil 
flying, and her bit of fur that she calls a boa slipping off 
among the spokes of the wheel, and her smart shawl almost 
shaken off her shoulders as the cart rattles down the street. 
Now the wind takes her bonnet, and it is blown quite back ! 
Old Mrs. Otley used to look so decent and respectable as she 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

came home from market by her husband's side, with her warm 
red cloak held tight round her, and her close black bonnet 
fitting to her face, it was a pleasure to see her. Well ! after 
all, this young woman's a goodnatured soul, and gives you 
a good price for your work, Susan ; and for all she is so fine 
herself, she is not proud nor haughty to others," added the 
kind-hearted Sarah ; for though the habit of sitting at her 
window, watching all that took place in the village, and making 
her remarks and her calculations thereon, had unavoidably 
caused her to be something of a gossip, her heart was so good, 
that she always qualified any fault she might find with her 
neighbours, by discovering some counterbalancing merit. 

It is almost impossible that those whose lives are passed 
in ministering to the mental cravings and the amusement of the 
infirm and the unoccupied, should avoid talking too freely of 
others. However amiable their intentions and their feelings 
may be, so many words cannot be uttered without some- 
times doing mischief, if it were only by magnifying trifles 
into matters of importance. 

CHAPTER VI. 

When Lore's afraid, do not that fear despise ; 
Flames tremble most, when they the highest rise. 

. D'Avenanf. 

GEORGE WELLS still took his Sunday walk with Susan ; and 
Susan, having once told him distinctly that she should never 
marry, and that she gave him back his troth, having even alluded 
to the probability of his marrying another woman, felt she 
had done her duty, and that they might still be, and ever might 
remain, friends. But friendship between man and woman 
seldom exists without an admixture of love, past, present, or 
to come. The feeling that begins in friendship often leads 
on to love; often, too often, love is indulged under the garb 
of friendship; and sometimes, but more rarely, love leaves 
behind it a regard which subsides into friendship. Such, 
as Susan flattered herself, was the case with George ; and 
she therefore hoped that she should always experience from 

Q 3 

230 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

him the same kindness and the same attention. But it was not 
friendship, it was still love, that George felt for Susan : and 
it was a touching sight to mark the young man leading his 
once plighted wife, the blind Susan, on her way from church ; 
tenderly watching that the merry urchins who were playing 
in the path did not run against her in their sport, or carefully 
pushing aside with his foot any loose stone which might 
cause her to stumble. He would often bring her a nosegay 
too ; and Susan might generally be seen with a bowpot placed 
near her, containing the common flowers of the season, backed 
up with southern-wood and marjoram enough to drown the scent 
of all the roses and pinks of which the foreground was com- 
posed. George loved to see the smile with 'which his present was 
greeted; and still looked with admiration at the silken eye- 
lashes which shaded the eyes that could no longer beam upon 
him. 

The summer thus glided by ; the autumn was equally tran- 
quil ; and Susan learned to listen for the accustomed step ; 
to know, without attending to the village chimes, the very hour 
at which he usually dropped in, and to recognise his hand upon 
the latch. But as the winter advanced, and the days became 
short and the weather severe, when they could no longer walk 
together in the fields, and that his visits were as much to the 
old people as to Susan, he did not call so regularly ; and 
Susan listened in vain for the sound of his step on the gravel, 
or the turn of his hand on the latch. In vain did she now 
count the hours and the quarters most accurately. The usual 
time had long elapsed when he did call, and sometimes he 
omitted to do so altogether. She could not wonder; she 
told herself she ought to be grateful for all the kindness she 
had met with ; she was aware she had no right to reproach 
him, but yet she felt her sorrows more acutely than before. 

Old Nicholas was the first to remark upon George's frequent 
absence. Some rumours had reached Susan's ears that George 
was not so steady as he had formerly been ; but she hastened to 
defend him and to account for the manner in which his time 
was occupied. Though she might feel hurt herself, it was pain. 
ful to hear him blamed, and she dreaded hearing herself pitied. 

" Why, is not that seven o'clock ? five, six, seven, 
yes, sure enough it is seven o'clock," said old Nicholas, one 
Sunday evening just after Christmas, " and no George ! 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 231 

He was not here last Sunday neither. I am got so used to 
the young man, it seems quite dull when so many days go by 
without his giving us a call." 

" Young men must take a little pleasure sometimes, father ! 
'Tis always the same thing here, and I dare say he likes a 
little change." 

" That's quite true, Susan. I've been young in my day, 
and have had my pleasure ; and Sarah, she has known what 
it is to be light-hearted ; and we must not grudge young 
people what's natural at their age ; " then, after a little 
while, he added, u but you, my poor girl, trouble is come 
upon you before its time. It is all as it should be for us to 
bear our trials and wait patiently till it pleases God to take 
us ; but you, not yet turned your two-and-twenty " 

" Don't pity me, father ! that's just what I can't bear. 
I do very well when I 'm not pitied," exclaimed Susan, with 
a little touch of her former petulance : " Thank you all the 
same, father, for thinking so much about me," she added, in 
a few moments, with a subdued manner. " But, hark ! 1 hear 
his step ! I know the sound of his nailed shoes on the gravel ;" 
and her head was raised, and her face turned to the door, 
while a smile almost angelic in its sweetness played around 
her mouth. " I am glad you are come, George," she said, 
" for father missed you so much. Come in, and sit down by 
him, and tell him all the news." 

This was just what suited George ; for he felt conscious 
that he had been somewhat neglectful of late, and he found it 
easier to entertain old Nicholas with the village news, than to 
sit by Susan and explain to her how his evenings had been 
occupied. 

" I heard plenty of news, and bad news too, at the Cart 
and Horses t'other night." 

" Oh, George ! you have not taken to going to the public- 
house, sure ? You never used to do such a thing ! " 

" Bless you, Susan, a man can't work all day, and take no 
amusement when his work is over. What can a man do that 
has not got a home to go to ? " This went to Susan's heart, 
but she said nothing. " As I was telling you, they said at 
the Cart and Horses no, 'twas at the Chequers Tuesday 
evening." 

" So he frequents both public-houses ! " thought Susan. 
Q 4 

232 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

George continued : " Master Smith said there was a talk of 
breaking up the benefit club." 

"The benefit club!" exclaimed Sarah; " why, what will 
my good man do if the benefit club should go I His half-pay 
is almost all we have had to live upon for many a long year ! " 

"That will fall heavy upon us, indeed," said Nicholas. 
" Why, what's the meaning of this ? I never heard any talk 
of the club being so low." 

" Why, they say the members are all growing old, and so 
many of them keep coming upon it that it can't hold out, 
unless they consent to take less pay." 

<< Ah I" cried Nicholas ; " I always was afraid how 'twould 
be, and I was very sorry to be such a burthen to it myself. 
That was why I agreed that, as my affliction was not like a 
common illness, of which one might hope to be cured, but as 
I must look for no other than being on the club as long as 
I lived, I would take only half-pay, walking-pay, as they call 
it. My two sons are very good, they always make up the 
money to me out of their earnings. I am sure 1 would not 
wish to be too covetous, and to break my club." 

" I hope 'tis only talk : it will do well enough, I dare say, 
if we can get some new young members into it that are not 
likely to be any drain upon it yet. Well ! I have put in for 
four years, and never drawn a farthing yet" 

" I am sure, George, you should be very grateful to think 
what a blessing God has granted you, in giving you such good 
health all these years." 

" True enough, Susan : in that sense I should be glad never 
to have any of my money back again. Aud I am sure, Master 
Foster, I am glad enough to be in the club, and help to keep 
it going, if it is only for your sake." 

" Thank you, George ; that's kindly said," answered Susan, 
while a tear trembled in her eye-lashes. 

" Well, Master Foster," said George, " I must be going ; 
for I promised to meet Will Dixon at the Chequers this 
evening." 

" Oh, George ! you are not going to pass your Sunday 
evening at the public-house ! " 

" Come, don't scold, Susan ; I promised to meet Will 
Dixon ; and though we want to have a bit of talk together, 
we need not make too free with the beer, you know ;" and 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 383 

George was gone. Susan remained with an indefinite sen- 
sation of uneasiness for which she could not satisfactorily have 
accounted to herself. 

The following week they saw no more of George, neither 
did they on the Sunday ; but in the succeeding week he again 
called. The alarm concerning the benefit club seemed to have 
subsided : Nicholas's mind was set at ease upon the subject ; 
and Susan timidly asked George whether he and Will Dixon 
had had a merry bout of it at the Chequers. 

" Come, come, Susan, you want to get me to tell tales out 
of school ! we drank no more beer than was good for us, and 
then I went home with Will Dixon to supper." Did these 
few words reassure Susan that George was not likely to fall 
into the habit of frequenting the ale-house, and did they con- 
sequently restore her mind to its usual tranquillity ? On the 
contrary, a sensation shot through her which she had hitherto 
been spared. She remembered that Will Dixon's sister Jane 
was a pretty girl with bright blue eyes, and one who had for 
a short time divided George's attentions with herself, before 
she had finally fixed them. She remembered thinking that 
Jane Dixon was very partial to George, and she remembered 
that the neighbours had joked Jane Dixon about wearing the 
willow. Jealousy for the first time darted through her heart, 
and she was alarmed and roused by the keenness of the pang. 
With the rapidity of lightning she pictured to herself George 
in love with Jane, George, Jane's accepted lover, George 
her bridegroom,! George her kind and affectionate husband ! 
It was with difficulty she could bear her part in the conversa- 
tion, and her smile was sad and constrained. 

" I do not think you seem right well, Susan. Are you ill, 
Susan ? " inquired George kindly and affectionately. 

"No, thank you, dear George; I am quite well only 
I feel a little dull I think 'tis the weather. Mother said she 
felt heavy this morning." 

" Maybe it is. Jane Dixon was saying, Sunday, that this 
mild weather was not seasonable, and that she liked a good 
sharp frost, and a good long walk." Susan quivered as the 
name came from George's lips. But George was not yet in 
love with Jane, and no consciousness prevented his uttering 
the name freely. Susan had almost said, " So, you were 
walking with Jane Dixon, Sunday ! " but she checked the 

234 THE II AMP-HIRE COTTAGE. 

remark, mentally saying, " and why should he not walk with 
Jane ? and why should he not marry Jane ? M'hy should 
I fret ? I ought to hope Jane may draw him away from idle 
companions and bad company. I fretted when I thought he 
was taking to such courses ; surely I ought to be glad if any- 
body else gets the power I have lost to lure him from evil 
ivays. Poor fellow ! he would never have thought of such 
things if I had not been afflicted as I am. If he had married, 
and had a comfortable home, he would have gone on being 
steady. Yes, I ought to hope he may marry Jane Dixon, 
and make her a good husband." But, school herself as she 
would, she did fret ; and all the placidity of mind which she 
had laboured to acquire was gone. Night and day did she 
think of George and Jane, and constantly did she fancy them 
walking through the same lanes, strolling up the same field- 
paths, loitering along the same head-lands, where she had so 
often wandered with George. Long before such things did 
occur, had she imagined them. But in the course of a 
few months, that which her reason wished, but her feelings 
dreaded, came to pass. George's visits became more and more 
rare ; and when he did look in, Jane Dixon's name was never 
breathed. 

There was an awkwardness in his manner, and he almost 
exclusively addressed himself to Nicholas. Susan was all 
gentleness, and invariably, when he took leave, thanked him 
for calling, in a subdued manner, which showed how entirely 
she felt it was from motives of charity, and not from prefer- 
ence, that he now visited them. George, without decyphering 
what caused the change in her tone, was aware that she read 
his mind, and he became ill at ease in her presence. 

Jane Dixon had originally liked George ; and now that he 
was free again, and that Susan Foster had, as it was well 
known, refused to marry him, she saw no reason why she 
should not put forth all her store of rustic allurements to win 
back her first love. George was by nature steady and domestic : 
he had for two years been engaged to Susan, and had there- 
fore been in the habit of considering a wife, a family, a home, 
as the enjoyments to which a poor man should look forward ; 
and although he had latterly been led to mix more with com- 
panions of loose character, though he had loitered away many 
an evening at bowls or in the ale-house, he was not happy 
while leading such a life. At first, it was for the loss of Susan 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 235 

herself that he grieved ; but in time his regrets became less 
sentimental. He pined for a fire-side of his own, his own 
chimney-nook, his hot rasher of bacon for supper, and the 
kind attentions of a wife, even though that wife were not 
Susan Foster. He was in a state of mind which laid him 
peculiarly open to such attractions as Jane Dixon possessed ; 
a tolerable share of beauty, extreme good-humour, and, above 
all, a very decided predilection for him, which she was at no 
pains to conceal. No wonder, then, if after two years of 
hopeless attendance upon poor Susan, he should now find him- 
self engaged to Jane Dixon, and that the only difficulty which 
remained, was to break the event to Susan. 

Every time George entered their cottage, to bid them a 
hurrying good morning, or to wish them a hasty good-night, 
Susan thought the moment was arrived when he was going to 
announce to them the step he had taken j for she felt that 
he would not allow them to learn it only from common report ; 
and she judged rightly. Once, or twice, after having wished 
them good night, he had lingered with his hand upon the 
latch of the door, or had returned to ask some trifling ques- 
tion, and then had hurried suddenly away. Each time she 
felt that the decisive moment was come, and she worked her- 
self up to receive the intelligence as she ought. She thought 
she wished it over, and her mind at rest; and yet she felt 
relieved when the door was closed, and she heard his step 
receding along the little gravel path, and she might still think 
of him as her George, and not as the promised husband of 
another. 

CHAPTER VII. 

Behold the herbage rich, in pride of June, 

Pranked with gay flowrets dancing merrily 
Beneath the sunbeams of the sultry noon, 

While slumbering in their cells their perfumes lie. 
But when the scythe sweeps on right sturdily, 

Laying their sweet heads low, their, spirits fling 
Pure incense on the breeze ere yet they die ; 

So doth the chastening hand of sorrow bring 

Virtues and graces forth, by joy left slumbering. 

Unpublished Poems. 

IT was rather more than two years from Alice Mowbray's 
wedding-day, when George Wells lifted the latch of Master 

236 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

Foster's door, and, closing it after him, walked into the house, 
seated himself on the polished wooden chair opposite old 
Sarah's, and said in a hurried voice, " I am come, neighbours, 
I am come to tell you a piece of news which I should be 
loth you should hear from anybody but myself." 

Susan's heart died away within her her head drooped 
more than ever over her knitting ; Dame Foster took off her 
spectacles, and, wiping them, laid them within the sacred 
book from which she had been reading some texts to her hus- 
band and her child ; old Nicholas half turned himself upon 
his settle : but none spoke. Susan felt that the silence must 
be distressing to George; and exerting herself the first, she 
replied, " If it is any news, George, that concerns yourself, 
you may be sure there are no friends who will be more rejoiced 
to hear of any good likely to befall you, or more grieved to 
hear of any misfortune. You have scarce any older friends 
than father, and mother, and myself; so you need not be afraid 
to speak." 

" Thank you, Susan, thank you ; that *s just like you. I 
was sure you would take it so. And yet, after all that has 
passed between us, I felt 1 don't know how I felt. But it 
seems strange I should marry anybody else." 

" I gave you back your word, George, and this is what 1 
have long expected ; and long tried to make up my mind to/' 
she added, with some effort " I could not expect you to go 
on always tending upon a poor blind girl like me. 'Tii 
better, much better, than getting any ways unsteady. God 
knows, I have not a word to say against your marrying Jane 
Dixon." 

" Thank you, Susan, thank you," he repeated ; " I feel 
easier now ! Susan, this has been a great trouble to me ; for I 
could not bear deceiving you like, and yet I did not know 
how to tell you there was any courting going on between me 
and Jane." 

" You know, George, I gave you back your word from the 
first." 

" Yes, yes, so you did ; but for a long time I did not 
believe I should ever think of any girl but you : but I do not 
know how it is, a man wants a home does he not, Master 
Foster ? and he wants a wife to see to him. And then, 
Jane Dixon, she 's a tight lass ; and I don't know how it was, 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 23? 

I never came home from work without meeting her going 
of an errand somewhere ; and then she is a bustling girl, 
and one who will keep things nice and tidy in a poor man's 
house." 

" Her mother was a thrifty, hustling body, and I hope she 
will make you a good wife, George," said Dame Foster, in a 
tone which she meant should be very kind ; but her thoughts 
were so much occupied with Susan, that she had no feeling to 
spare for any one else. 

'* I wish you happiness, George," said Nicholas ; " you have 
behaved very well by my poor girl ; and, if it had not been for 
her affliction, you would have married her, and made her a 
good husband, I warrant. It is the will of God it should all 
be as it is." 

" Thank you kindly, Master Foster." 

Meanwhile Susan had been feeling upon the little shelf on 
the wall close to where she sat, for a small book, which at 
length she found. " George," she said, " I have a book here 
which I ought to give you back. 'Tis those Watts's Hymns 
which you gave to me a few days before Miss Alice's wedding ; " 
she could not repress a sigh. "If you remember, you wrote 
both our Christian names upon it, and then said you would 
add the surname when one name would do for both. I don't 
think it is right I should keep that book, and you the husband 
of another ; and yet I could never find it in my heart to 
destroy it. Besides, I can't read all the beautiful hymns that 
are in it ; but you can, and sometimes it may do you good 
perhaps to read them." 

George indeed remembered giving Susan the little book : he 
had that day obtained the promise of Master Mumford's house, 
and he had that day gained her consent to their being speedily 
asked in church. They had then written their names in the 
manner described by Susan, and had talked over their future 
prospects, with the assurance of soon being indissolubly 
united. 

As George took the book from Susan's hands, he felt them 
tremble. He was scarcely more composed himself. The 
appearance of the little volume, the sight of the writing, anni- 
hilated for a moment the intervening two years ; and he saw 
Susan as she then stood beside him, radiant with health, joy, 
and tenderness. 

238 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

Jane Dixon would not have been pleased had she known 
with what pain he received this present, with what regret he 
looked back upon the image thus conjured up to his mind. 
The tears were in his eyes as he held it. "If it is not riiiht 
for you to keep the book, Susan, I do not think it is right I 
should ; for I am sure I shall never look upon it without wish- 
ing, without remembering Oh ! Susan, how happy 

we were when I gave you that book ! " His voice broke, and 
he passed the back of his hand several times over his eyes. 

Strong emotion in a stout and sturdy peasant, whose feelings 
we are sure are thoroughly genuine, and in which we are satis- 
fied there is no touch of sickly, morbid sensibility, is always an 
affecting subject of contemplation. It was almost too much 
for old Sarah, who now wept like a child ; while Susan ex- 
perienced among the poignant regrets which overpowered her, 
a mixture of satisfaction to find she was so tenderly recollected. 
" I did not think you would have minded it, George ; but if 
it makes you think too much of by -gone days, why, perhaps, 
'twill be best you should give the book to mother to keep. I 
would not wish you to think any more about me now ; it would 
be no ways right" But it was a comfort to Susan, though 
she was not aware of it, that she had to tell him not to think 
about her. 

George still held the book, awkwardly nh'ifting it from hand 
to hand : at length he held it out ; " Take it, dame," he said, 
" take it; for I'm going to be married to Jane Dixon, and I 
must not think any more about Susan, nor about the days that 
are passed and gone ; it won't do," and he pushed the book 
towards Dame Foster, and abruptly opened the door. " God 
bless you, George," and Susan held out her hand. He had 
closed the latch, and was gone. Her hand dropped to her side, 
but she was not mortified. She scarcely knew how it wan 
that she felt so much less miserable than she expected she would 
have done, when George was about to be married to another, 
when an eternal barrier was about to be placed between 
them, when she had broken the last link that bound them to 
each other. Alas ! it must be confessed that if the causes of 
her more resigned frame of mind were accurately analyzed, 
there might be discovered, among better feelings, a slight ad- 
mixture of vanity, which had been soothed by finding George 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 239 

still remembered her with affection, and by feeling that he did 
not love Jane Dixon so well as he had once loved her. 

Susan was a good and a generous girl ; but in her nature 
there was a portion of that quality which, although subdued 
and chastened by heavy affliction, is seldom entirely rooted out 
of the human heart. She did not wish George to be unhappy 
on her account ; she heartily hoped Jane would prove a good 
wife to him ; and yet, after having experienced considerable 
mortification in the course of his unavoidable neglect of her, it 
was a balm to poor frail human nature to feel that she was 
not relinquished without a pang. 

" My poor girl," said Sarah, after she had watched George's 
hurried steps along the road, over the stile, and into the fields 
beyond the village, " my poor girl ! I must no longer pray, 
as I have done, never to see another sun rise when once my 
poor Nicholas is in his grave, for what will you do without 
me ? As long as George was single, I felt you would never 
want a friend ; but now I must hope to be spared still for 
your sake ! I once thought, when you were George's wife, 
and my good man was at rest, that old Sarah Foster's task 
would be finished, and that she might pray the. Almighty to 
release her from these pains. But God's will be done ! " and 
she bowed her head in meek submission. 

George Wells had instinctively avoided the village ; he 
dreaded to meet his betrothed. Susan had risen up to his 
mind as she had been in her best days : those days once more 
became so present to him, that all his former love seemed to 
return with fresh force, and he wondered how he had become 
entangled with Jane Dixon. But a few weeks more, and she 
would be his wife ; and among the lower orders that name is 
more sacred than among the higher, where the gradations be- 
tween virtue and vice are softened down, and the line of 
demarcation not so absolute. He remembered that he had 
promised to walk with Jane that very evening, and he some- 
what slowly and unwillingly returned towards the village by a 
path which led nearer the dwelling of his new love. He had 
not advanced far when he met her gaily approaching in search 
of him. He was scarcely yet in a frame of mind to meet her 
gladly, and he wished she had not been quite so affectionate in 
her disposition towards him. She certainly was not coy. He 
had never been called upon to sue ; he had but to receive the 

24-0 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

advances she was disposed to make. " Poor girl ! " he thought, 
" it is not her fault, if I once liked Susan so much. She has 
always been partial to me : I must make her a good husband. 
It would never do to be anywise unkind to her now ; besides, 
the parish begins to talk, and the best thing we can do is to be 
married out of hand." And the result was that they agreed he 
should wait on the minister, and inform him they wished to 
be asked in church. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

Let fowk bode weel. and strive to do their best, 
Nae mair's required ; let Heav'n make out the mt. 

ALLAN RAMSAY'S Gentle Stephen! . 

SUSAN was somewhat agitated and perplexed the next Sunday 
morning, debating in her own mind whether George and Jane 
were likely to be asked that very day, and whether she could 
hear their names called over with the composure which befitted 
so holy a place. She did not like to absent herself from 
church on that account ; for to those who have acquired the 
habit of never failing in their attendance, the omission appears 
a dereliction of duty. She therefore summoned up her 
courage ; her mother, as usual, arranged her bonnet, and 
pinned her shawl with due attention to neatness. The dame, 
as usual, turned the key of the door, and placed it in her 
pocket; then, taking Nicholas's arm with one hand, she 
guided him safely on his way, while with the other she sup* 
ported her own feebler steps with her polished staff. Susan 
followed, led by a neighbour's little girl, who always came to 
attend her to church. 

This afflicted family, so decent in their apparel, so respect- 
able in their behaviour, were never Keen drawing near the 
house of worship without exciting a feeling of pity and vene- 
ration in all whose souls were not callous to every good emo- 
tion. They had arranged themselves as usual in their pew. 
The service had begun ; and when the close of the second 
lesson drew near, poor Susan's heart beat almost audibly. Her 
head was held low, and her face was partly concealed by her 
bonnet : but she strove to maintain as unmoved a countenance 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 241 

as possible ; for she knew that the opposite seat was occupied 
by gay young girls who would feel a curiosity about her, and 
she was unable to tell when, or when not, her countenance 
might be the subject of remark to others. 

The last words of the lesson were read ; the large Bible 
was closed with a heavy noise ; there was a moment's pause, 
but the clergyman proceeded with the service, and Susan was 
spared for that Sunday. A sort of hope shot through her 
mind ; and yet what did she hope ? She had herself relin- 
quished George, she had herself anticipated his marriage, she 
knew he was engaged, she knew he could not with honour 
break off with Jane Dixon ; if he did, was not she as unfit 
for a poor labourer's wife as when she first gave him back his 
troth ? It was all so, and yet she felt relieved. 

The following Sunday she was again seated in her accus- 
tomed place, and she again listened as the clergyman read the 
service. This time the names were read, " George Wells, 
bachelor, and Jane Dixon, spinster, both of this parish." The 
girls opposite might have seen her lips quiver ; and the hands 
which were habitually meekly clasped upon her knee, were 
slightly raised, and fell again immediately. 

That day Sarah herself led Susan from church, and gave 
up the guidance of Nicholas to the little girl. They reached 
their home ; and before old Sarah busied herself in the pre- 
paration for their humble repast, she sat down to rest herself. 
Susan heard her mother sigh. 

" Mother ! " she said, " you are fretting about me ! " 

" Not to say fretting, Susan, for we heard no more than 
what we expected to hear ; but I thought it was a great trial 
to you to hear their names in church. I was afraid whether 
it might not be almost too much for you. And then I sighed 
to think, when we were gone, what a poor desolate creature 
you would be ; and I was wishing we could any way provide 
for you. I should not like you to come on the parish, and 
yet I don't see how we can save any thing, we, that can't 
earn a shilling. Next time Farmer Otley calls, I will ask him 
about the Friendly Society he was mentioning ; and I have 
heard talk of insuring one life against another, and perhaps 
we might get your brothers to help," continued the old wo- 
man, her thoughts gradually led from the wound Susan's affec- 
tions had received, to the blasting of her worldly prospects. 

R 

C12 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

AVhen, as among the lower orders, the provision necessary 
for existence is at stake, the most tender regrets must often be 
mixed up with other considerations ; but Susan could not yet 
comprehend any sorrow but that of losing the lover of her 
youth. " Never trouble your head about me in that way, 
mother ; I don't care nor think anything about such matters." 

" That's all very well for young folks who have always had 
their fathers' roof over their heads," interposed Nicholas, 
" and a bit to eat as long as their parents had it ; but it is the 
duty of parents to look forward for their children. You will 
find it very different when we are in our graves, and you have 
to find yourself board and lodging and everything. It frets 
me so, sometimes, I can't go to sleep ! I and my old woman 
used often to say we should be at rest when we were beneath 
the sod, and we did not care how soon our time came ; but 
now I quite dread to think we may be taken any day." 

"And so may I, father, be taken any day. It often hap- 
pens that the youngest goes first ; and as 'tis all in the hands 
of Providence, there is no need for you to make yourself un- 
happy about me in that way. Besides, who knows but God 
may raise me up friends if my time of need should ever 
come? It is not my board nor my lodging that troubles 
me," she could not help adding with an irrepressible expres- 
sion of grief. 

" Ah ! I know what 'tis that troubles you. 'Tis just what 
I am often thinking of. In my affliction I have a kind help- 
mate to cheer me, and keep up my spirits, and save me from 
ever feeling lonesome ; and I have you, Susan, and I love to 
listen to your voice, though it has not its cheerful tone, and 
though I never hear the laugh that used to make my heart 
glad within me. You, my poor girl, you can never have these 
comforts, and that weighs upon my mind, though I do not 
like to say much about it." 

" It cau't be helped, father, and I hope I submit as I 
should. It has pleased God to visit me as He has done, and 
I am sure I have done no more than my duty in not letting 
George burthen himself with me for a wife." 

" Yes, yes, it is all right ; you have done your duty, that's 
certain." 

" And when we have done that, we must leave the rest to 
Providence." 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 243 

Mr. Otley called soon afterwards with some of the worsted 
which he was now in the constant habit of procuring for Susan. 
Dame Foster took the opportunity of getting her mind en- 
lightened concerning annuities, and friendly societies, and all 
the other modes of provision for the poor which were esta- 
blished at Turnholme. But all required a larger monthly 
sum, or a more considerable desposit, than they could possibly 
contrive to pay. " I wish, Mr. Otley," said Susan, " you 
could persuade father and mother not to think so much about 
ine ; if 'tis anything about themselves, they always say we 
should rely on Providence : tell them they should do so for 
me, as well as for themselves." 

" It is quite right, Susan, you should speak as you do, and 
feel as you do ; but it is quite right too that your parents 
should be willing to do the best they can for you. I am sure 
I wish I could put them in the way of making some provision 
for you ; but when people get to be in years, all the insurances 
are so high : that is a thing people should think of when they 
are young and in health." 

" That is quite just, Master Otley, and so I did when I was 
young ; for I put into my club as soon as I was turned nine- 
teen, as soon as I got anything like man's wages; and a 
good job it has been for me that I did so : but, you see, one 
could not reckon upon such an affliction as poor Susan's." 

"And that's quite just too, Master Foster; and I'll be 
bound that if ever she should be in want, the gentry, ay, and 
the farmers too, would not grudge her some help, such a 
good girl, and such a patient girl as she is ! and so young too, 
and so well-favoured as she is ! I often tell my mistress I 
don't care how many warm handkerchiefs she buys of Susan, 
'tis all money well spent ; though I will say I wish she would 
not always be making me drive her over to Turnholme, that 
she may learn the new fashions. What do the fashions signify ? 
say I ; where is your red cloak ? say I ; and where is your 
checked apron ? say I : and then she is so mad with me ! But 
she is a good-natured soul, and always comes round after I've 
laughed a bit. And then then she is not so hearty and strong 
as I am, and she can't bustle about. Well, good night, Ni- 
cholas ! I must be off. I must not forget this package though : 
Miss Mincing, at the shop, told me I must be sure and carry 
it very carefully, for the least touch would spoil it." And 

R 2 

244 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

away went the good-natured farmer, carrying the parct-1 very 
carefully to the cart, but then putting it at the bottom of the 
vehicle among many other articles of great size and weight, 
where it was jumbled in a manner which would have agonised 
Miss Mincing had she witnessed it, and which did agonise 
Mrs. Otley when she extracted it from among its travelling 
companions, and upon examination found the beautiful cap, 
with its wires, and its bows, more fit to adorn a May-day chim- 
ney-sweeper, than the head of so refined a lady as she was. 

"Oh, Mr. Otley, how could you!" she exclaimed, in an 
accusing voice to her husband. 

" How could I do what, Lizzy, dear ? '* 

" Look at my cap ! " she said ; " 1 am sure Miss Mincing 
must have told you to take care of it" 

" So I did, Lizzy ; I held it up between my finger and 
thumb, as tenderly as if it was a plum with the bloom on it, 
till I laid it quite light at the top of everything else in the 
cart" 

" And then you went rattling away as hard as you could 
drive, without once looking behind you to see how all the 
articles rode in the chaise ! I do think you must have been 
a little too gay at market, Mr. Otley," she said, in a small 
voice ; " you must have made a little too free with some of 
your coarse drinking companions : " and she drew herself up. 

" Not a bit of it, Lizzy ; none of your insinuations ! I just 
wetted my bargain, as everybody should, and that was alL 
I'm sorry your cap is tumbled." 

"Crushed, spoiled, abetmy," (query abtmt?) "as Miss 
Mincing says." 

"But I'll tell you what: it is a sort of a flashy thing I 
can't abide, and I had rather by half see you in such a cap as 
old Dame Foster wears." % 

" My love, you are quite uncivil : you have quite lost your 
manners. I am sure you are saying what you do not think, 
and I am sure that ail the while you like to see your wife look 
neat and genteel" 

"Neat, I do, and neatness is gentility enough for me. 
Come, I'll buy you a new cap after my own fashion ; and 
then if you take half the bows, and all the flowers, off this 
queer thing," and he held the cap up aloft, dangling by one 
of its strings, " you will have two decent caps, instead of one 
out-of-the-way concern." 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 245 

"You have no taste, dear Mr. Otley!" said poor Mrs. 
Otley, as she pinched, and pulled, and tried to squeeze the 
unfortunate cap into its pristine shape. Mr. Otley watched 
her as she put her head first on this side, then on that, look- 
ing distressfully on the cap, and every now and then giving it 
a masterly twitch. 

" Now, what puzzles me, Lizzy, is, when you look to wear- 
ing this cap : you can't go to church in it, and you can't drive 
out in the cart in it ; and hang me if I know when you mean 
to put it on." 

" Surely, Mr. Otley, every woman should have something 
decent to wear if visitors should come." 

" I'm sure Farmer Dobson will never know what sort of a 
cap you have on your head, and Mr. Higgins is quite a plain 
sort of a man ; and 'tis but seldom they call in, except just 
in the way of business." 

. " But Mr. Dobson has a wife, and daughters too," answered 
Mrs. Otley triumphantly; "and Mrs. Higgins's lace- veil, last 
Sunday, was quite the talk of the whole church. I am sure I 
heard of it three times before I could get down the church- 
yard and into our chaise ; and I saw all the bonnets moving 
in all the pews as she came up the aisle with her beautiful veil 
hanging down almost to her knees." 

Mr. Otley had nothing to reply, and Mrs. Otley remained 
in possession of the field. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Cancel all our vows ; 
And, when we meet at any time again, 
Be it'not seen in either of our brows 
That we one jot of former love retain. 

MICHAEL DRAYTON. 

GEORGE WELLS and Jane Dixon had been asked for the 
last time, and the wedding was fixed for the Wednesday 
following. George Wells had not again visited the family 
of the Fosters. His mind was more at ease since he had 
spoken to Susan ; but he found that the sight of her meek 
countenance, the sound of her gentle voice, and the recollection 
of former days, unsettled him. Neither did Susan desire that 

n 3 

24-6 i HI: HAMPSHIRE COTTA 

he should call any more. She was never again to consider 
him but as the husband of another, and she wished for time 
to accustom herself to this idea before she again heard his 
voice : she wished to school and calm her feelings, so as to be 
sure her heart would not beat when she heard his step and 
recognised his hand upon the latch. 

The sun rose in the full effulgence of a September morning, 
and all seemed gay in the village of Overhurst : the children 
were all sporting in and out of every cottage-door : the bells 
began to ring a merry peal while the Fosters were yet at 
breakfast ; and Betsey Smith, who was Jane's particular 
friend, was seen by old Sarah, in her white gown and her new 
shawl and ribands, carefully picking her way across the road, 
as she came from her home, in the outskirts of the parish, to 
join the rest of the party at the Dixons. Susan and her 
father did not see the bridesmaid in her gala dress ; but they 
heard the merry chimes of the bells, and Susan with difficulty 
swallowed the cup of tea her mother had prepared for her. 
The chime of church bells is of all sounds that which conveys 
the most melancholy, or the most joyous impressions to the 
heart, according to the circumstances under which it is heard, 
and the associations with which it is connected. If the feel- 
ings are not in accordance with their peal, there is no sound 
so unutterably, so unaccountably sad as that of a merry chime. 
It may well be imagined that to Susan, that morning, it was 
more sad than a funereal toll, and it was a relief when the 
ringers relaxed from their exertions. Dame Foster's eyes 
were frequently turned upon her daughter with increased 
tenderness. 

The countenances of the mother and of the daughter formed 
a singular contrast. The old woman, who bore her bodily 
sufferings without uttering a complaint, who never allowed 
her voice to fall into a cadence, which could express pain, or 
peevishness, or vexation, lest she should grieve the two ob- 
jects of her love, had, from the knowledge that they could 
not read her looks, allowed her features to set themselves into 
a form expressive of intense agony, and constant anxiety. 
Those of the daughter, on the contrary, who was aware that 
her feelings might be the subject of observation to others if 
suffered to show themselves on her face, seldom, if ever, varied 
in their placidity. She knew not when her mother might be 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 24<7 

gazing upon her ; and, from the fear of grieving her, she had 
learned to wear a gentle smile, whatever might be her mental 
sufferings. 

The village noises gradually subsided. Susan felt that the 
wedding had drawn off the idle children and the village 
loungers in another direction. Neither Nicholas nor Sarah 
spoke. There was no sound except the incessant and buzzing 
hum of the autumn flies in the sunny window. 

"It is a beautiful day, is not it, mother? " at length in- 
quired Susan. 

" Yes, my dear ; a beautiful sunshiny day," answered the 
dame, with a deep-drawn sigh. 

" I thought it was, for the flies buzz so. I am glad of it. 
It is a pity when a wedding comes on a bad day. I hope 'tis 
a good omen for poor George ! " 

" I have heard say, that the duller the day, the brighter 
the marriage ; not but what I wish well to George and his 
wife." 

" It would be very wrong in us not to pray for his happi- 
ness, mother ; for I have not a word to say against his be- 
haviour to me from first to last." 

" Jane Dixon is a lucky girl. He's sure to make a good 
husband, for he has good principles." 

"And he her first lover and all, too!" replied Susan. 
" She is a lucky girl ! I used to feel sorry for her, when 
fiist George slighted her for me ; for I saw she did not laugh 
and joke with him as she did with the other men. Now 'tis 
her turn to be sorry for me, and perhaps she is, though she 
has given up calling to see me almost ever since I have been 
afflicted. But it was not to be wondered at, when she began 
to think of George again. That was one ^ thing made me 
almost sure what would come to pass at last." 

" Why, 'twas to be expected that things should fall out 
much as they have done. But I do not know how it was, 
when I found George seem so attentive and so constant for 
such a long time, I thought, mayhap, he would always go on 
as he did then. I believe it is the way with parents, they 
can't help fancying their own children something beyond other 
people's ; and so I began to count George would never be 
looking out for any body else. However, 'tis my belief he 
will never love Jane Dixon, as he has loved my Susan." 

R 4 

218 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

" If he does not yet, mother, he will soon. Georp 
be sure to love his wife, and he will grow to love her better 
and better every day, and then he will quite forget me ; but 
that is all as it should be. Do you think, mother, I shall 
ever forget him ? I mean to try hard to do so ; and I don't 
mean to talk over what has gone before, even with you, mother ; 
and then do you think at last, mother, I shall quite forget to 
think of him, except as a friend ? " 

" 1 hope you may, my child ; but it is always harder for a 
woman to forget than it is for a man : and 'tis harder still for 
you, who have nothing to draw off" your mind. I have often 
heard old folks say, that scarce anybody marries their first 
love ; and, if that is true, many and many must have got over 
such things. But I can't justly say myself, for I never kept 
company with anybody but your father, and we have been 
married so long that I can't frame to myself a notion of any- 
thing but being his wife." 

Susan sighed. " And that's just what I used to feel about 
George ; and I always thought he and I should be just such 
another couple as you and father." 

Susan had indulged herself in thinking and speaking of 
George as her lover till the images of the past had usurped 
the place of the realities of the present. The growing hum 
of voices struck her quick ear. The village was all alive again. 
The shouts of children and the steps of passers-by recalled her 
to herself, and painfully dispelled the recollections which had 
taken possession of her mind. It was over, and he was now 
the husband of another ; and she felt wicked in having given 
way to such thoughts. 

" Mother, we must not say any more : the time is come 
when it is not enough for me to put a guard upon my words 
and my actions ; I roust now set a watch over my thoughts. 
I do not often talk as I have done to-day ; and I felt as if it 
would do me good to speak of him once more : but there's 
an end now." 

Towards the afternoon the bridal party paraded the humble 
street, as is the custom among the peasantry. The bride and 
bridegroom, and the bride's-maids and bride's-men, dressed in 
their holiday apparel, and paired for the day, perambulated 
the most frequented parts of Overhurst ; the laughing blush- 
ing bride received the hearty, if not refined, congratulations of 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 249 

her neighbours ; and, probably, among some of the wedding 
guests the foundations were laid for another festival of the 
same kind. 

George had as much as possible curtailed the usual march 
of the little procession, and had contrived that only once did 
they pass before Master Foster's cottage. He was ashamed 
on his wedding-day to say he wished to avoid that part of the 
village, and yet his heart sunk within him as he approached it. 
He almost rejoiced for a moment that Susan could not see the 
merry troop ; and, as he passed, he dared not raise his eyes in 
that direction. 

Muny remarked that day, that Jane was all joy and smiles 
as would have befitted the bridegroom, while George's down- 
cast looks would better have suited the bride. 

Dame Foster was at her window, and saw the party advanc- 
ing. Susan heard them almost before her mother perceived 
them, and inquired if the wedding procession was not passing. 
Her mother answered in the affirmative ; and could not help 
adding, that she had not believed George would have been so 
unfeeling. 

" Do you see him, mother ? " 

" Yes, there he is, Susan, sure enough ! " 

" Oh, mother, how does he look ? I gave him a handker- 
chief two years ago last summer, and he said he should keep 
it for his wedding-day. He has not got that on, sure ? " 

" 'Tis a checked brown and yellow he wears round his 
neck." 

" No ! 'twas a spotted blue I gave him." 

" Poor fellow ! " exclaimed the dame, in a more kindly 
tone ; " he holds down his head, and now he looks the other 
way, quite away from his bride, up the hill. Poor fellow ! 
he can't bear to turn this way after all. I'll be bound he does 
feel it ! " 

" Jane must know all that has been between him and me," 
said Susan with some bitterness ; " and I do think she need 
not have led him this way neither ! But I am glad you have 
seen him, mother. I like to know how he looks ; for I may 
still wish him well." Susan's fingers resumed their knitting, 
and the dame proceeded with her darning. 

George would have silenced their merriment had he had the 
presence of mind to do so ; but a peasant bridegroom is of all 

250 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

creatures the most awkward, the most shame- faced : far from 
bearing himself as the man who has won the prize he sought, 
he has the air of one who has been* fairly caught in the snare, 
and has no longer a chance of escape. 

George, however, felt it impossible to again march, as it 
'were in triumph, by Susan's door ; he led Jane the back way 
into the village : it was nearly the same path he had taken the 
day he had told Susan of his marriage : and it is to be feared 
that Jane did not find her George the more gay or the more 
tender for being removed from the observation of others. 
Presently the sounds of gay voices once more grew upon the 
ear at the party returned on their steps. 

Dame Foster again put down her spectacles, and gazed 
through the window : " God bless him ! " she exclaimed ; 
" he could not stand it again, and he is not with the rest." 

"Not gone away and left Jane?" inquired Susan in a 
tone of alarm, " that would not be right." 

" No, no, she's gone too. I warrant me, they've taken the 
back way round to Master Dixon's, and I like him all the 
better." The dame felt more in charity with him than she 
had done a few minutes before ; and Susan was gratified, and 
yet grieved, that George should not be thoroughly happy. 
" He will be so soon ! " she thought, however ; and so he 

\v. -. 

He enjoyed the comforts of a tidy home, a blazing fire, a 
warm supper, and a smiling wife to greet him on his return 
from work. His days were occupied in his accustomed labour; 
his after-hours were filled up by cultivating his garden ; and 
the helpmate who received him kindly, and provided him with 
comforts, became daily more endeared to him. The birth of 
a child gave him a fresh object of interest, and George was a 
happy man. 

Susan also was calm, if not happy. He was another 
woman's husband he was a married man and all was over 
for her. The barrier was so entirely insuperable that her 
feelings did change, that she did learn to think of him, merely 
as of a kind friend, and that the past did at length appear to 
her only as a dream. 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 251 

CHAPTER X. 

And now, their wanderings o'er, 

They, 'mid embowering trees, descry their home once more. 
Home, thrilling sound ! To the time-sobered breast, 

Thronged with remembrances, not sweet alone 
But sacred, and with sadder thoughts imprest 

Of cherished sorrows, and dear hopes o'erthrown ; 
"While to young hearts, that yet have only known 

The hey-day joys, and buoyancy of spring, 
It speaks of happiness again their own : 

Of throbbing bosoms, bright eyes glistening, 

And laughter's merry peal, that through the hall shall ring. 

Unpublished Poems. 

THREE years had elapsed since the Mowbrays had left Over- 
hurst, and all the parish was now joyfully expecting their 
return. Again the village bells rang a joyful peal, again the 
village children shouted, and all was animation in Overhurst 
and at the Park. 

Susan was the first to hear the carriage-wheels. " Yes, 
sure enough, here they are ! " said her mother ; " three car- 
riages full : and such a load, and the horses so jaded, poor 
things! And there's Mrs. Mowbray nodding as she goes 
along; and there's Miss Fanny no why, I declare if it is 
not Miss Emma, with her head quite out of the window. Well, 
I'm glad enough to see them all come home again. And 
there's the 'squire on the box ; he turns round to speak to 
Mrs. Mowbray ; he looks hearty still. And there is such a 
queer foreigner behind, with such black whiskers. And sure 
that can never be Jenny Simpson? Her very face seems 
Frenchified ! I'll be bound her own mother will hardly know 
Jenny when she sees her." Not long afterwards the dame's 
eyes were again attracted to the window. (t Why, sure, there 
can't be another carriage full of them ! Why, if it is not Cap- 
tain and Mrs. Harcourt ! And there is the baby ! May the 
Lord bless them all ! It will be a happy evening at Overhurst 
Park !" And Dame Foster sighed while she rejoiced in their 
happiness. 

And heartfelt joy and social gaiety did reign in Overhurst 
Park. The delight of finding themselves again in Old Eng- 
land, the joy of meeting after a long separation, the raptures 
of Mrs. Mowbray over her first grandchild, the pleasure of 
visiting their old haunts, occupied the ladies for the first day 

252 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

or two ; but Mr. Mowbray had been looking about him, and 
had made himself acquainted with all the village gossip. 

On the third day after their return, he bustled into the 
drawing-room, where his wife and daughters were eagerly dis- 
playing to Alice and Captain Harcourt their relics from the 
various places they had visited in their travels, and were ex- 
plaining the exact point of view from which such a drawing 
had been made, or directing their attention to an invisible dot 
in a pencil sketch, which stood for 'imperial Rome' in the 
distance, or helping out by descriptions viva voce the tints 
which did not express the roseate hues of evening upon the 
glaciers. 

" 1 do not know what all the pretty women in the parish 
have been thinking of while we have been away," interrupted 
Mr. Mowbray. " There's poor Susan Foster ! Have you 
heard, my dear, about poor Susan Foster?" 

" No, indeed. I have been so occupied with Alice and her 
baby, and so full of our own travels, I have not had time to 
go into the village. What has happened ? You quite alarm 
me." 

" Why, I really am put out about it myself. She is gone 
blind ! Pretty Susan, with the bright eyes ! I am quite vexed. 
If it had been any other girl in the village, I should not have 
felt it so much. Those soft brilliant eyes, that could sparkle 
so merrily too. And then, that pretty Mrs. Otley ! she is 
going into a consumption." 

" Susan Susan Foster blind ! " exclaimed the ladies all 
together. 

" Impossible!" cried Mrs. Harcourt ; the hopeful, happy, 
Mrs. Harcourt. 

" It is quite true, my dear Alice : she is blind ! and what's 
more, George Wells has jilted her, and has married Jane 
Dixon. The fellow has some taste, I will say that for him. 
She was as fine a girl as ever I saw, though hers is not such a 
high style of beauty as Susan Foster's. Susan Foster, if she 
had been a lady, would have looked well anywhere ; now, Jane 
Dixon would never have told in a ball-room : and then, she 
is so altered ; she is grown coarse ; and blue eyes soon lose 
their blueness and turn grey, while black eyes retain their 
brilliancy " 

Mr. Mowbray might have proceeded at greater length in 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 253 

discussing the comparative merits of black eyes and blue, but 
neither filial piety, nor conjugal devotion, could enable the 
listeners to keep silence any longer. " Oh, papa !" exclaimed 
Alice, " George Wells married to another girl ! and Susan 
Foster blind, and jilted ! and I had fancied her so happy in 
that cottage close to her parents ! I remember begging you so 
to let them have it, because I thought how I should have 
liked to live close to you and mamma ! " 

" Yes, my dear Alice ! I have seen Susan myself; and there 
she sits knitting, by the side of her blind father. I declare 
it was almost too much for me. I got away as quickly as I 
could, for I hate seeing sad sights when one can do no good ; 
I always make it a rule to get out of the way." 

" But do you think it impossible we should be able to do 
her any good ? Let us go and see them, mamma ; perhaps we 
may think of something. I always was so fond of Susan, and 
we were to have been married the same month ! Poor dear 
Susan ! " 

"Oh, yes!" cried Emma; "at all events it will please 
them. Old Nicholas used to be so fond of me. How well I 
remember he used to put his hand upon my head to feel how 
much I was grown ! Do let us go directly, and pay them a 
visit, dear mamma." 

Airs. Mowbray was shocked and grieved at Mr. Mowbray's 
intelligence, and the whole party was soon in motion along the 
well-known paths. 

" I wonder how Susan looks !" said Emma, in a low voice, 
while a sensation of awe stole over her youthful mind at the 
prospect of an interview with a person who had undergone a 
great misfortune since she had seen her last. 

Dame Foster soon recognised the visitors she had been 
watching for. " Here they are ! " she exclaimed ; " I was 
sure Mrs. Mowbray would come and ask after us before long. 
And there's Miss Alice Mrs. Harcourt I should say looks 
prettier than ever; and Miss Fanny ! I'm sure she does not 
seem as if anything had ever been the matter with her ; and 
Miss Emma, why she is almost a woman now." Susan sighed, 
and thought what sad changes had taken place in her fate 
since last they had received a visit from the 'squire's family. 

As they approached the little garden-gate, the bearing of 
all the party became subdued and saddened ; and they gently 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

opened the door, and followed each other quietly into the 
cottage. The dame and Susan both rose, and Susan court'sied, 
but not exactly in the direction in which Mrs. Mowbray stood. 
She soon made them resume their seats, and then inquired 
after old Sarah's health. 

' Thank you kindly, madam, I am still able to get about, 
though sometimes I think my pains make me grow weaker ; 
but I must try to the last to do for these poor afflicted crea- 
tures, madam. You have heard, I dare say, madam, of all 
ourjnisfortunes. And there's my poor girl now, no better off 
than her old father. But 'tis as pleases God, and it is not for 
us to murmur." 

The old dame had at once entered upon the subject in the 
plain, direct manner usual to the poor, and the restraint which 
might have rendered such a meeting distressing among the 
higher orders was soon dispelled. 

" My poor Susan ! " said Mrs. Mowbray, going up to Susan, 
and taking her by the hand, " I have only this moment heard 
of your afflictions, or I should have been here sooner. I 
wonder such sad news should not have reached me abroad, 
but the death of poor Mr. Sandford has been a loss to us all. 
lie knew my village friends, and he would have told me about 
you. And you, Nicholas, how are you? How do you bear 
up against these trials ? " 

- " Pretty middling, madam ; pretty middling : I am quite 
used to my own, and I don't think anything at all about 
them ; but I can't say I have rightly got over hearing my poor 
girl ask her mother whether 'tis a fine day or not, or who it is 
going by the door, and whether her shawl is pinned straight, 
or her cap as it should be. Them things go hard with me. 
But, as my good woman says, 'tis as it pleases the Lord ! 
Are all the young ladies with you, madam ? " he added, after a 
short pause. " I warrant me they are grown very tall," and 
he stretched out his hand : " I should like to put my hand 
on Miss Emma's head once more, bless her heart ! " 

" You must put it a good deal higher," said Emma, as the 
old man was feeling at the same height he had been used to 
feel, three years before ; and she took his brown withered hand 
and lifted it to the crown of her head. 

" Sure !'* he exclaimed in almost childish wonderment. 

Alice meanwhile had been talking to Susan, and had ex- 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

255 

traded from her some account of the mode in which her eyes 
had been attacked, although it was with pain she was brought 
to allude to anything connected with Alice's wedding-day and 
the happiness which at that time was hers. She could not 
help an inward shudder when she heard Captain Harcourt 
address his wife : " Alice, my love, I think you should return 
home to the baby j I would not have you out too late." The 
picture of home happiness, wedded love, maternal affection, all 
the visions in which she had indulged as almost realities on that 
day, rushed over her mind ; but she remembered that George 
was the husband of another, that another was the mother of 
his child ! 

When they returned home, Alice eagerly recounted to Mr. 
Mowbray an instance of a person, whose blindness had been 
described as somewhat resembling Susan's, having been restored 
to sight by an oculist with whom Captain Harcourt was ac- 
quainted. With the sanguine disposition of youth, she felt 
convinced that something might be done; that Susan need not 
be condemned to perpetual blindness. 

The more sober part of the company did not enter quite so 
warmly into Alice's hopes, but all were equally ardent in their 
wishes that Susan might recover her sight. Captain Harcourt's 
friend had the care of an eye-hospital ; so that Alice declared 
it would be the easiest thing in the world to secure Susan's ad- 
mission, and the most certain thing in the world that she would 
be immediately cured. The only difficulty that remained was 
to get over the prejudice entertained by many of the poor 
against hospitals in general, and the horror they had of parting 
from their friends. 

"But Dame Foster is so reasonable!" exclaimed Alice ; 
" and Nicholas is so quiet, he will never oppose it ; and as 
for Susan, what would one not do to recover one's sight ? To 
be sure, her lover is married now, and even the restoration of 
her sight cannot restore her to happiness, poor thing ! But 
still ! think of the joy of seeing the blue heavens and the 
green fields again ! " 

" Oh, yes, dear Alice," answered Mrs. Mowbray, " if we 
could indeed restore to Susan her eye-sight, she might look 
forward to many happy years. She is still young, and she is 
so pretty, that I dare say she may yet marry comfortably." 
" Oh, mamma ! " exclaimed Alice reproachfully. 

TIIK 11 A 51 PS I IRK COTTAGE. 

" I am sorry to have shocked you, my love ! and if you 
wish it so much, we will suppose that Susan shall lu-vor 
marry." 

" Mamma, you speak as if marrying was marrying, and as 
if it did not signify whom one married." 

" Not exactly, my dear ! but I do imagine it just possible 
that after a certain number of years have elapsed, a woman 
may be happy with a man who was not her first love. But 
now we will not disturb ourselves concerning the use Susan 
may make of her eyes when they are restored to her. We 
will first adopt all possible means to accomplish this most 
desirable, but, I fear, improbable event." 

" She has had no advice yet but that ignorant man's at 
Turnholme. Captain Harcourf shall write to-day, and the 
moment we get the answer, I will undertake to persuade 
Susan and her parents to consent to our proposal." 

All prospered according to Alice's wishes. Her protegee 
was to be admitted into the hospital, where she was to meet 
with every kindness and attention. Susan gladly agreed to 
any plan which might possibly enable her to assist her pa- 
rents more effectually than she could at present ; old Nicholas 
thought it so "against nature" that the young should be 
afflicted like the old, that he was pleased and hopeful, while 
Sarah assented, but assented despond ingly. 

" If it is God's will our poor child should be blind, why 
there is no use in man's fighting against Providence. How- 
soever, there's no saying these may not be the means by 
which God has ordained she is to be cured ; so it is not for 
us poor mortals to say any thing against it : we will try, and 
hope for the best ; but it is an awful thing to have our blind 
child go quite away from us to that great town." 

" But we will send somebody with her, dame, who shall 
see her safe into the hospital." 

" Thank you, madam, you are very good ; and let it turn 
out which way it will, we shall always be grateful." 

The evening before Susan's departure, Farmer Otley 
called : " I thought I would just look in and wish you good 
luck, Susan ; we shall all be heartily glad to hear of your 
doing well, though my good woman will miss your nice 
wors ted- work. She would have come down to see you too, 
but that she is not quite as she should be. She has got a 
nasty cough that keeps plaguing her. I tell her 'tis because 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 257 

she will wear such smart thin shawls, instead of a good warm 
cloak ; but young women they will have their own way : I 
dare say you have a way of your own too, Susan, though I 
don't know what it is." 

Susan smiled. " I believe I was as headstrong as other 
young folks once ; but a poor helpless creature like me, who 
is quite dependent upon mother's goodness, has no business 
with any fancies now." 

" Well, Susan, I hope you will come back with a will of 
your own, that 's all : and I dare say, dame, you won't mind." 

" My poor Susan ! I should be glad enough, indeed, to 
see her her own sprightly self again ; and 'tis our duty not to 
throw away any opportunity that God puts in our way." 

Susan was safely conveyed to the hospital, and from thence 
the reports, which were received by Mrs. Harcourt, and duly 
transmitted to Nicholas and Sarah Foster, were satisfactory. 
The hopeful Alice was not disappointed in her eager desire 
to serve Susan ; and before six weeks had elapsed, she was 
able to run breathless to the cottage of the Fosters, with the 
surgeon's letter in her hand, announcing that Susan's sight 
was safe, and that in another month she might return to her 
friends, in health and happiness. 

Old Sarah clasped her hands in speechless joy ; the tears 
rolled in torrents unheeded down her face : her soul was 
absorbed in prayer. Old Nicholas groped about till he found 
Mrs. Harcourt's hand ; and seizing it, the old man suddenly 
fell on his trembling knees before her. 

"God bless you, my dear young lady, and God reward 
you ! I know it is to God we first owe our gratitude ; but 
you have been the blessed instrument in his hands. God 
bless you ! " and the old man sobbed aloud. Alice, inexpres- 
sibly distressed and affected, assisted him to rise, replaced 
him in his seat, extricated her hand from his grasp, and has- 
tened away from a scene which, although delightful, was 
almost too overcoming. 

At length Susan herself wrote to them: it was the first act 
of her restored sight : and the dame placed the letter before 
her on the deal table, with her prayer-book and her spectacles, 
and every day did she look at it, and every day did she read 
it over, word by word, to Nicholas, and every day did Nicholas 
say " God bless Miss Alice that was !" 

258 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

CHAPTER XL 

WUe Nature it les partial in her love 

Than ye do judge withal. When lavishly 

She pour* her gift* profuse, satiety 

Doth blunt the sense : when sparingly dispensed, 

A keener relish doth supply the measure ; 

And but to live and tee the blessed skies 

(A good unmarked, unheeded, till 'tis lost,) 

Is rapture all too big for utterance 

To one long shut from heaven's light. 

Unjmblitked Pofmt. 

IT was a joyful day in Overhurst when Susan Foster returned 
to her home. The old roan and his wife had toddled up to 
the village inn, where the coach stopped ; and there they stood, 
Sarah to catch the first glimpse of her, Nicholas to hear the 
first sound of her voice. Many a head was popped out of a 
casement window, and many a doorway was thronged with 
its inhabitants, at the hour when the coach usually arrived. 
George Wells was lingering in a field hard by, occasionally 
looking over the stile. He had twice called upon the Fosters 
during Susan's absence, and had inquired, in an awkward, 
hurried manner, how she was. The inquiry was meant 
kindly, and it was taken kindly. 

The coach drove up to the little inn, and out sprang Susan, 
blooming and lovely as ever. The old woman nearly fainted ; 
and the neighbours assisted her and the trembling Nicholas 
into the little parlour of the inn. 

In about half an hour, Susan was seen supporting the feeble 
steps of her mother on one side, and on the other those of 
her father, down the village street, to her own dear home. 
George Wells had disappeared ; and the other neighbours did 
not intrude upon the sacred joy of that family party. 

" Oh, mother, did we ever expect to be so happy ! " ex- 
claimed Susan, as they entered the little garden : " And there 
is my own moss-rose blowing!" a slight pang shot through 
her, for George had given her the tree: but she was too 
happy, too grateful, to allow any but feelings of thankfulness 
to find a place in her heart. 

With what eagerness did Susan hasten to busy herself 
about the household duties ! with what pleasure did she re- 
sume her former privilege of settling her father in hit seat, 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE, 259 

of preparing the supper, of assisting her father up stairs! 
She had thought the first sight of the heavens glorious, she 
had gazed with rapture on the face of Nature, she had recog- 
nised with tenderness each well-known spot of her youthful 
home ; but all these had been but lesser joys in comparison 
with that of once more ministering to the comfort of her 
parents, after having so long been a burthen to them. Never 
were prayers of more heart-felt gratitude offered up to the 
throne of Grace than those of the Foster family that night. 

Early the next morning, Susan repaired to Overhurst Park, 
to make her acknowledgments to her benefactors ; and as she 
walked alone through those paths where she had so often 
wandered with George, which she had never beheld since she 
had seen them with him, did not the memory of former days 
come over her with almost overwhelming power ? She thought 
of him certainly, but she thought of him as the contented 
husband of another ; and after having drunk so deeply of the 
bitter cup of affliction, her present comparative happiness 
seemed as great as mortals might dare to hope for in this 
world. She looked with kindly feelings on all around her. 
There was no touch of bitterness in her emotions. 

Farmer Otley was one of the first to welcome Susan home 
again. He told her his wife was still very poorly, " and that 
she would take it very kind" if Susan would step up and pay 
her a visit some evening at Holmy-bank. 

ft Well, Susan," he said, " I need not be fetching you any 
more worsted from Turnholme now. You won't send me to 
market any more. Those eyes of yours can see to take up 
your old trade again. I dare say my mistress will have some 
needlework for you, for she is a rare bad hand at plain-work 
herself." 

A few days after Susan's return, she was employed in tying 
up some straggling flowers, and in winding the honeysuckle 
round the porch, enjoying the long untasted pleasure of at- 
tending to her little garden, when, on looking round, she saw 
George Wells loitering under the hedge of the field which we 
have often described as being opposite Master Foster's house. 

Upon finding himself observed, George made a sudden 
effort, and leaping the stile, he crossed the road, came straight 
up to Susan, and, before she had time to collect herself, he 
had taken her hand, shaken it, and had hastily uttered, 

s 2 

260 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGK. 

" I just came to tell you I was heartily glad you had got 
your eye-sight back again, Susan ; and to wish you health and 
happiness, Susan : that's all : " and he was gone. 

Susan trembled all over ; she tottered back into the cottage, 
and sat down. 

" I have just seen him, mother, for the first time these 
three years ! But it was not so much the seeing him, as the 
hearing his voice again. It has put me quite in a tremble ; 
but I shan't mind it another time. I must not mind it, you 
know, mother ; and I am so happy, oh ! so very happy, to be 
able to do for you and father, that I do not feel as if I had 
any thing left to wish for ! " 

In a few days Susan paid her promised visit to Mrs. Otley, 
and she found her indeed sadly altered. She passed through 
the kitchen, where all bore the marks of the mistress's eye 
being wanted : a servant-girl, in greasy papiUotes, the children 
in smart frocks, but with unwashed faces ; the copper vessels, 
instead of being the pride of the housewife and of her assist- 
ants, all out of their places ; the floor, as if it had not been 
swept and sanded for a week. The slipshod maid, with a 
dirty apron, ushered Susan into the parlour within, where 
Mrs. Otley sat in a shabby-genteel arm-chair, cowering over 
the fire, although it was in June. 

Her cheeks were sunk, and there was a hectic flush upon 
them which alarmed Susan ; her voice sounded hollow. The 
smart cap, of which we have already made mention, had now 
fallen from being a "dress cap" into being an "every -day 
cap," a purpose for which it was peculiarly unfitted. Its 
weak wires, and its heavy ribands, shook in a most unseemly 
manner as the sick woman restlessly moved her head. She 
laid down the well-thumbed novel she was reading : "I am 
glad to see you, Susan," she said. " Why you look surpris- 
ingly well, as blooming as a rose. Mr. Otley told me how 
well you were, and he said your eyes were as black as sloes : 
I was quite curious to see you. Sit down, Susan, and tell me 
all about it." But before Susan could begin to speak, Mrs. 
Otley continued ; "I am such a poor creature this cough 
fidgets me so ; but I am a great deal better, only the weather 
is so unseasonable, and the cold winds always affect my nerves. 
Do you think I look ill ? " 

" You are something thinner than you were, ma'am," an- 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 26l 

swered Susan; "but it is three years since I saw you last, 
and three years is a long time." 

" So it is a long time, Susan ; but now tell me, what did 
they do to you in London ? I am so curious ! Did you stay 
in the hospital all the time ?" 

" Yes, ma'am, I never left it, except to come home." 

"What! did you not see any of the sights? Not the 
King's palace, nor the theatres, nor anything ? " 

" No, ma'am, 'tis against the rules for people to go out 
visiting ; and sure, as soon as I was well, I wanted to see 
nothing so much as father, and mother, and home. As soon as 
I was able, they set me to work, cleaning the place, and helping 
to wait on other poor creatures who were worse than myself." 

" Poor girl, that was very hard ! " 

" Oh no, ma'am ; I was very glad to be useful, and I was a 
deal happier than being idle. 1 missed my worsted-work sadly 
at first ; the time seems so very long when one has nothing 
to do nothing but to think, think, think ! " 

Just then Farmer Otley entered. 

" I say, Lizzy, where are the keys of the cellar ? 1 want 
to get something to drink for Mr. Hawkins, who is waiting 
at the door." 

" Dear Mr. Otley, don't speak so quick ; you hurry one. 
The keys are in my reticule ; it is up stairs. Tell Hetty to 
fetch it." 

Mr. Otley went after Hetty, and Mrs. Otley remarked, 
" Poor dear Mr. Otley ! his manner is so abrupt ! He is not 
used to an invalid ! " 

" Lizzy, I can't find your bag anywhere. The keys should 
be in your pocket : feel for them there." 

" Dear Mr. Otley, you know I do not wear pockets ; a re- 
ticule is so much more convenient." 

" Well ! but where are the keys ? Mr. Hawkins will 
think I grudge him a glass of ale." 

" Oh ! my love, be patient ; you quite make me shake ! " 
and she began in a really nervous trepidation to hunt for the 
reticule, which was found in her chair. 

Mrs. Otley and Susan resumed their conversation, when 
presently the farmer returned. 

" Lizzy, you have not got a needle and thread handy, have 
s 3 

262 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

you ? I told you I thought this button would soon be off, and 
so it is." 

" Oh, dear Mr. Otley, I thought you had told Hetty to sew 
it on yesterday. Do call her, and tell her to bring my work- 
box here." The good-natured husband called Hetty, and 
after some time the needle and thread were found. 

' Come, look sharp ; I must be at the Vestry at three 
o'clock ; and I don't like to be seen with my waistcoat all 
any how." 

Mrs. Otley's fingers really trembled as she was sewing on the 
button. " Why, Lizzy, I have hurried you ! I am sorry for 
that There, never mind ; don't fluster yourself." 

" You never think of one's nerves, Mr. Otley." 

" I'll tell you what, Lizzy, if you did not talk about them, 
or if you did not call them nerves, 1 should think about them. 
I see you are not well, and you have got a bad cough, and I 
must take care of you ; so don't fret yourself, but keep quiet. 
I'll try to see to the things myself, though in-door matters are 
not in my way : but we must make a shift." 

" I am sure Mrs. Glover never did all the drudgery poor 
dear Mr. Otley expects me to do/' said Mrs. Otley, when her 
husband had left them : " I do not think a wife is to be a 
servant," she continued, with a toss of her head. 

Susan thought that a wife ought to see that all was well 
regulated in her household ; but poor Mrs. Otley was evi- 
dently ill and suffering, and she pitied her. As Susan went 
away, she saw the little girl crying because the maid had 
slapped her, and the little boy slapping the maid because she 
would not let him put his fingers into the pie she was pre- 
paring. She retraced her steps to her humble home, in the 
full persuasion that she was happier than any of the inmates 
of Holmy-bank farm. 

Poor Mrs. Otley became rapidly worse ; and before many 
months had elapsed, her troubles and her finery were alike 
brought to a final close, and she was laid in the quiet grave. 

Mr. Otley remained a widower with two young children. 
He was a sincere mourner. The natural kindness of his 
heart had caused him to become truly attached to the woman 
whose preference for him had at first been her principal at- 
traction ; and her sufferings latterly had still farther endeared 
her. But when the freshness of his grief had subsided; 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

he found that a bustling old body, whom he took as 
housekeeper, kept all things around him far more neat and 
trim than they had formerly been ; when he found his kitchen 
clean, his buttons sewed on, his shirts mended; and, above 
all, when everything he asked for was always forthcoming 
from that compendious receptacle, the old woman's pockets, 
his spirits gradually revived. His children were less fretful, 
their faces were cleaner ; and he only lamented that the old 
woman could not read, and that he had not much leisure him- 
self to attend to their morals, or their education. By degrees 
he began to think that a younger woman might perhaps attend 
to the dairy and to the chickens as effectually as old Goody 
Thompson ; that a younger woman might make the new ser- 
vant-girl (for Mrs. Thompson had dismissed the slip-shod 
maiden) scour the pots and pans as perse veri ngly ; and he 
also began to think it would be more agreeable to have a 
younger face and a brighter smile welcome him home, after 
his labours of the day. And whom could he find who would 
be more active and useful than Susan Foster ? Who was 
calculated to train his children's minds to duty, submission, 
and religious resignation, more practically than Susan Foster ? 
And where could he find a brighter smile, or more sparkling 
eyes, than Susan Foster's. 

CHAPTER XII. 

Bairns, and their bairns, make sure a firmer tie 
Than aught in love the like of us can spy. 
See yon twa elms that grow up side by side : 
Suppose them, some years syne, bridegroom and bride ; 
Nearer and nearer ilka year they 've pressed, 
Till wide their spreading branches have increased. 
This shields the other frae the eastlin blast, 
That iu return defends it frae the west. 

ALLAN RAMSAY. 

ALTHOUGH Mr. Otley had no longer any commissions to per- 
form at Turnholme for Susan, her worsted-work having given 
place to her former occupation of needle-work, still he found 
many an excuse for calling. Sometimes he would send the 
old man a rabbit for his supper; sometimes a cheese, the 
handy-work of Dame Thompson. At another time, he gave 

s 4 

264 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

Susan a hive of young bees which had just swarmed, as the 
dame had said she was fond of honey. By degrees he greatly 
won upon the esteem of Susan by his attentions to her parents. 
He was in a situation comparatively so much superior to 
theirs, that he had the opportunity of appearing to them 
almost in die light of a benefactor. Some time, however, 
elapsed before he ventured to express his feelings in any mode 
but by kindness to her parents. The sorrows she had known, 
the trials she had gone through, and the composed resignation 
to which she had trained her mind during her affliction, had 
left a sedate self-possession in her cheerfulness. He waa 
aware of her previous attachment, and he did not feel sure 
whether an offer of marriage would be received, in the manner 
probable, from the relative situation of the parties. 

At length his little presents became more pointedly addressed 
to her. His basket of ripest gooseberries was given to her. 
He would invite her to take a walk to look at his garden and 
gather herself a nosegay. He sometimes lamented to her that 
his children were not sufficiently attended to. "He did not 
wish to bring them up to over-gentility, but he wished them 
to have a good plain education. He should like his girl to be 
as good a scholar as Susan was ; that would do for him : plain 
useful learning, plain useful good sense, and plain useful 
work. He wished Susan would step up and see how little 
Lizzy went on." But this Susan did not like to do. 

The neighbours already began to talk, and the old dame 
already began to hope her girl was likely to be well settled in 
life ; " and then," as she said to Nicholas one evening, when 
Susan was gone out to carry home some work, " and then, 
Nicholas, it does not signify how soon it pleases the Lord to 
take us : then I may pray, as I used to do, that I may never 
see another sun rise when once it has pleased God to call you 
to himself." 

Susan herself bad no pride of romance about her. She 
esteemed Mr. Otley, and she was aware that he became every 
day more particular in his manner to her ; she knew that the 
home he could offer her would be comfortable beyond what 
she had any right to expect ; his plain manners appeared to 
her neither rough, nor homely, and she felt sorry for the little 
children, who were deprived of a mother's tenderness. Such 
being the state of mind of the parties in question, the sequel 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 2,*J 

may easily be guessed. Mr. Otley stopped one evening on 
his way from market, as it was now grown his custom to do, 
and good-naturedly reproached Susan for not having been to 
see his garden or his children. She was ashamed to give the 
true reason, and said she had been very busy with a job of 
needle-work. 

" I don't like you to work so hard, Susan : it is not good 
for her, is it, dame ? Young folks should take a little plea- 
sure sometimes. I know I should like to see Susan in a home 
of her own, with a servant-girl to do her work for her. She 
is too good by half to be always drudging." 

" Thank you kindly for your good wishes, Master Otley," 
answered old Nicholas. " 1 should like to know my poor girl 
had a good home over her head when I am dead and gone." 

" Ah ! that's what a good father is sure to think of. You 
would rest easier, Master Nicholas, if you knew Susan was 
mistress of a comfortable place of her own, and was never 
likely to come to want as long as she lived." 

" Ah, sure ! should I," replied the simple old man, who 
was in great hopes Mr. Otley was coming straight to the point. 
And he wished no better than to come to the point : but it is 
not easy to propose in company ; and, straightforward as Mr. 
Otley was, he began to feel as shy as others do in this pre- 
dicament. 

" I should like to see Susan in a home of her own very 
much," repeated Mr. Otley, slowly and awkwardly, and look- 
ing out of the window when he had spoken. 

The dame, who plainly perceived what was in the farmer's 
mind, thought that if Susan was out of the way he might 
speak openly to them, or if Susan was alone, he might find 
courage to declare himself to her. She therefore, with 
feminine resource, told Susan to go to the shop and buy her a 
pennyworth of ginger to put in her tea. Susan had left the 
cottage in a moment, for she found herself becoming confused 
and uncomfortable. Mr. Otley lingered a short time, and said 
nothing ; but when he left the cottage he watched for Susan's 
return, and their conversation was prolonged till the dame 
began to doubt whether she should ever have any ginger at all. 

When Susan reappeared, Mr. Otley was with her. She 
looked blushing, but happy ; the farmer confused, but glorious, 
as he told Nicholas he " hoped he would rest soundly that 

266 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

night ; that is, if he thought Holmy-bank farm was a place 
where Susan might make herself comfortable, and if he could 
trust to him to see she never wanted for anything as long as 
he lived." 

The old people did not attempt to conceal their satisfaction, 
and never was son-in-law more cordially received. 

We have already celebrated two weddings in this short tale, 
and it was not long before a third took place in the village of 
Overhurst. Mr. and Mrs. Otley ate their wedding-dinner in 
the Fosters' cottage ; for Mr. Otley had had enough of finery 
and fine folks, and he enjoyed the heartfelt happiness of those 
whom he felt he rendered happy. When he took his bride 
home in the evening, he left the old couple in a state of bliss- 
ful composure of mind which they had once thought could 
never again be theirs on this side the grave ; and when they 
retired to rest, they returned their fervent thanks to Heaven 
for having been allowed to see this day : and now they felt 
their task was ended, their duties were fulfilled. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Then be It itlll my nightly prayer 

To live to cloMltU sightless ere*, 
For tliii my torturing (Mini to bear, 

Then tint In death ere morning riM ! 

With steadfast hope, and faith serene. 

The humble prayer of duteous love, 
Pour'd ardent forth In anguith keen. 

Was beard where merer rules above ! 

I'mpvbtitked Ballad from Nature. 

SUSAN FOSTER'S unexpected prosperity was not regarded with- 
out envy by some of her neighbours ; and old Nelly, her 
former mistress in the art of knitting, whose temper had not 
grown more gentle with increasing years and infirmities, failed 
not to remark to her grand-daughter that " she could not see, 
for her part, what there was about Susan Foster that people 
should always make such a fuss with her. Other poor souls 
had their afflictions, but the gentlefolks did not send them to 
all the great London doctors to be cured ; other girls had had 
bad eyes before now, but they did not get a good husband a 
bit the more. And if Susan Foster was so lucky as to marry 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 26? 

so much above her station, she thought she ought to do some- 
thing for her poor old father and mother, who had taken care 
of her when she was blind. Folks might talk of Susan being 
such a dutiful daughter, and all that ; but for her part she 
did not see what the old people were the better for having a 
farmer's wife for a daughter." 

" I am sure," answered Patty, " I cannot see anything 
particular about Susan, grandmother ; I think there are many 
girls in Overhurst who are quite fit to be her match. And 
many a time since I have grown big, I have wondered why I 
used to be so pleased when Susan Foster spoke kindly to me, 
and told me I was a good girl. I think she took upon her very 
much ; for though she may be quite a great lady, and may 
ride in her one-horse chay now, she was no better than myself 
then ! " 

" Ah, my dear Patty ! 'tis the way of those people who seem 
to have such a respect for themselves, to make themselves 
somehow respected by others. However, Susan is but a 
labourer's daughter after all, and I don't see why you should 
demean yourself to her : I have no patience with your up- 
starts. A poor girl that could not have earned a farthing, and 
must have gone into the workhouse, if I had not taught her 
how to knit ! and now she goes driving by with her hus- 
band, and has called upon me but once, though she has been 
married a fortnight ; and has never sent me anything but a 
basket of apples out of her orchard, which don't cost her a 
farthing." Just at this moment a boy knocked at the door, 
and Patty lifted the latch to admit him. " Mrs. Otley's 
respects, ma'am, and she sends you a goose, and a bottle of 
Farmer Otley's elder wine, that you may drink her health on 
old Michaelmas day." Nelly was a little at a loss what to 
reply ; but after contemplating the present with a satisfaction 
which she could not quite controul, she consoled herself by 
saying to Patty as soon as the boy was gone : f< Mrs. Otley's 
respects, indeed ! I think it would have been more respectful 
if Madam Otley had called herself with her present, instead of 
sending it by a scrubby boy." 

It may well be imagined that if Susan did not forget old 
Nelly, she took care that her parents should never want any 
comfort which her affection could provide for them, and her 
kind-hearted husband seconded her wishes to the uttermost. 

268 

HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

He would willingly have had them remove to Holmy-bank ; 
but the old man had learned to grope his way about his own 
cottage, and he would have missed his accustomed walk to his 
own stilt-, and they found it was kinder not to break in upon 
his habits. 

Mrs. Thompson had resigned her charge to Susan ; and Mr. 
Otley found that not only were the dairy and poultry-yard as 
efficiently attended to, but that his children became orderly and 
submissive, and that his house soon acquired that air of home 
comfort, of tasteful neatness, that a wife only can give it In 
her dress Susan took old Mrs. Otley, the mother, as her model, 
although she somewhat accommodated herself to the fashion. 
She was a goodly sight to look upon as she sat by her hug- 
band's side in the market-cart, once denominated a chaise, her 
black hair parted on her white forehead, her smooth, rounded, 
blooming cheek enclosed in her snowy cap, and black velvet 
bonnet, with her brilliant eyes glancing gaily as she stopped at 
her father's door on her way to market. More than a year had 
thus glided by in sober and respectable happiness, when old 
Nicholas began to droop : he could no longer reach his 
favourite stile. He was obliged to content himself with lean- 
ing in his accustomed attitude over the wicket of his own 
little garden. After a while he could do no more than take 
his seat at the cottage-door, there to feel the rays of the setting 
sun. Susan now devoted herself to her parents, and all other 
considerations sank before the paramount duty she owed to 
them. One evening she had brought him his tea to the door, 
where Mr. Otley had settled him on his own chair, and she 
asked him if he felt the warmth of the sun. " I don't seem 
to have any warmth in my bones," he said; "but I like to 
know the sun is shining upon me.*' 

" Ah, the sun is a glorious thing," said Sarah, " as it sets 
there in its golden bed ; but when my poor Nicholas is at rest, 
I never wish to see its bright face again. You have got a 
good husband, Susan, and a comfortable home, and you will 
not want me now ; my pains have almost worn me out : 
there's no taking pleasure even in the works of God, when one 
is so racked by pain." 

" How well you do bear your sufferings, mother, 'tis very 
seldom you make any complaints." 

" There's no good murmuring, my dear Susan ; and it is 
my duty to bear what 'tis God's pleasure to send." 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

They looked round, and the old man's head had dropped 
back upon the chair ; they thought he was asleep ; hut he did 
not breathe : life was extinct. His wife was the first to under- 
stand the truth. " My husband's spirit has passed/' she said. 
" My poor Nicholas is at rest, he is in heaven ! He is 
happy ! Look at that smile, yes, he is happy. God's will 
be done ! " and she bowed her head. 

In tears and trepidation Farmer Otley and Susan moved 
him within doors. He carried the lifeless body, and laid it on 
the bed upstairs ; while Susan held her mother's hands, kissed 
them, and wept over them. " He is gone, Susan ! my poor 
husband is gone ! He has left me my poor Nicholas ! " 
and she rocked herself backwards and forwards, her hands 
clasped upon her knee. 

The neighbours soon assembled ; the last sad duties were 
performed ; and the aged woman, whose melancholy province 
it was to lay out the dead, and to keep her dreary vigil by the 
corpse, attended as usual. But old Sarah would not allow her 
to remain. She said, " she had done for Nicholas to the last 
while he was living, and she did not see what need there was 
of any one else to tend him now. She thanked the neigh- 
bours kindly, but she could watch by her husband now, as 
then ; and she would not trouble any of them/' She settled 
herself in her chair at the head of the bed, and sat there silent, 
meek, and patient. 

Susan, who was a nurse, had her baby brought from the 
farm, and established it in what had formerly been her own 
little bed-room. She and her husband then took their station 
in the chamber of death, and together looked upon the decent 
corpse of the old man. 

The brilliant sunset had been followed by a stormy night 
The wind howled, and the rain beat againt the casement. The 
rush-candle burned fitfully, and shone with an uncertain light 
upon the sunk but placid features of the old man. Susan 
could scarcely defend herself from the vague and superstitious 
terrors which assail the uneducated on such occasions. The 
furniture creaked ; noises, which in the day are unnoticed, 
sound startlingly acute in the stillness and darkness of the 
night. Susan frequently crept into the adjoining apartment 
to see how it fared with her baby ; she bent over it as it 
slumbered, she listened to its respiration till she fancied it 

270 THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 

drew its breath painfully. When suffering under one calamity, 
the human heart is tremblingly alive to the apprehension of 
others. She imagined the infant was pale; she stole back to 
beckon her husband to look upon it with her. He attempted 
to reassure her ; but Susan's heart was oppressed with tin- 
foreboding of some fresh ill, and it required all Mr. Otli-y's 
patience and good-nature to soothe fears which appeared so 
unreasonable. 

It was an inexpressible relief when the grey dawn began to 
appear. The rain all cleared away, and the sun shone forth 
in all its splendour ; every leaf was glittering in the sunshine, 
the rain-drops hung on every spray, the birds sang as if to 
strain their little throats, the flowers were beginning to expand 
to the welcome rays. Susan placed her baby in her husband's 
arms while she returned to share her mother's melancholy 
watch. 

When she entered the low room, the sun almost dazzled 
her : its beams streamed in upon the slanting, white-washed 
ceiling : they shone full upon her mother's face, as she sat in 
the same attitude in which she had left her, her head sup- 
ported by the high back of the upright chair, her hands 
slightly clasped as they had fallen on her knee, and her eyes 
closed. 

Susan drew near ; her mother spoke not, moved not : she 
knelt by her she listened in breathless agony no sound, 
no sign of recognition. The sunbeams glared upon her eye- 
lids, but she heeded them not. 

A nameless chill ran through poor Susan's frame. She 
dared not touch her mother's hand. She rose from her knees, 
and tottered back to her husband. " I wUh you would come 
to mother/' she said ; '* she is very still. Mother is very still 
and very pale," she added, in a voice scarcely audible. Susan's 
looks were ghastly. Mr. Otley hastily placed the sleeping 
infant on the bed, and followed Susan. The truth was at 
once evident ! " Your mother's prayers have been heard, 
dear Susan ; she has not seen another sun rise, she has not 
seen the sun which now shines upon her. Her troubles are 
ever, and we should thank God for his mercy to her! " 

And the time did come when Susan was able thus to feel ; 
when she was able to rejoice that her mother's humble prayer 
had thus been granted ; when she learned to look upon its ac- 

THE HAMPSHIRE COTTAGE. 27 1 

complishment as an earnest that the spirits of her parents 
were enjoying the reward of their piety, and their submission. 
But, at first, nature had its course, and she could but weep 
for that dear mother who had supported her under her heavy 
affliction, consoled her in her sorrows, tended her in her help- 
lessness. Nor did her husband oppose the grief which was so 
natural : he wept with her ; and she felt the holy tie which 
bound them together for weal and for woe, in joy and in 
sorrow, in sickness and in health, become more closely riveted 
as she clung to him for support, as she turned to him as her 
only earthly comforter. 

The neighbours again assembled. The two corpses were 
decently laid out in the same chamber which for so many 
years they had inhabited ; and all who had known them in 
life, came to have one last sight of Nicholas and Sarah Foster. 

Susan was soothed by this mark of respect to those whom 
she had loved so well ; and she was gratified when, among the 
rest, George Wells mounted the narrow stairs to look once 
more upon the well-known faces of the departed. She wept 
when she heard him sob, as he came down again, and when he 
wrung her hand as he hurried by through the little kitchen 
where she sat in deep but gentle grief. She wished not that 
he should cherish the recollection of herself ; but any slight to 
the memory of her parents would have been bitter, coming 
from him whom they had once treated as a son. 

One funeral service was performed over the venerable 
couple ; one grave received their mortal remains ; one stone 
still marks the spot where they repose; and together, we may 
well believe their spirits mounted to those regions where 
suffering and sorrow are unknown. 

END OF THE SECOND VOLUME. 

273 

VOLUME THE THIRD. 

BLANCHE. 

CHAPTER I. 

The hidden traynes I know, and secret snares of love ; 

How soon a look will prynte a thoughte, that never may remove. 

LORD SURREY. 

AT the period when our story commences, Lord and Lady 
Westhope had been married sixteen years. Theirs had been 
a love-match. The love had lasted on the part of the lady at 
least seven years and three months ; but on that of her lord 
not quite seven months and three weeks, from the wedding- 
day. 

Lord Westbope had then been thrown with the handsome 
but designing Lady Bassingham, who made an easy conquest 
of his heart ; which conquest she retained till the rustic bloom 
of Lucy Meadows, his wife's new maid, eclipsed the some- 
what faded charms of the lady of fashion. When weary of 
Lucy Meadows, he became deeply smitten with the Honourable 
Miss Asterby, the young beauty of the day, who indulged her 
vanity in listening to the compliments of a married man, and 
allowed him to monopolise more of her conversation than was 
either judicious, or prudent 

To these succeeded another and another object, selected from 
every rank and condition of life. 

During the six years, seven months, and one week, which 
Lady Westhope's love survived that of her husband, she had 
undergone tortures of jealousy, anger, indignation, and morti- 
fication. At the end of this time she made up her mind to 
her fate, and bore his infidelities with tolerable composure. 

T 

274 BLAV 

Henceforward their domestic life was very peaceable. The 
wife no longer reproached and wept ; and the husband was 
exceedingly gay and good-humoured. 

But now began trials of another sort to Lady Westhope. 
She was extremely handsome : her beauty was of a sort to be 
more striking at twenty-five, than at eighteen. Her husband 
was known to be faithless she was soon found to be indif- 
ferent. All vain and idle young men consequently aspired to 
her favour. It need not be added, that the number was 
prodigious ! 

But though she had been disappointed in her hopes of being 
loved, she resolved to pass through life admired and re- 
spected. She would set the world the example of a beautiful 
and neglected wife, defying the breath of slander, repressing 
every sign of admiration, and pursuing her course uncontam- 
inated by the profligacy around her. A word, a look of en- 
couragement, would have brought any of these aspiring youths 
to sigh at her feet ; but on none did she deign to bestow a 
glance firmly and calmly did she check the first symptom 
of preference which might be evinced towards her. 

She was not blessed with children, but she had many female 
friends ; and to her cousin, Lady Blanche De Vaux, she was 
warmly attached. Lady Blanche was fifteen years younger 
than herself, and her affection for her young cousin combined 
something of a maternal character, with the ease and com- 
panionship of two women who were both in the perfection of 
womanhood ; for Lady Westhope at thirty-four had scarcely 
lost any of her beauty, and Lady Blanche at nineteen was in 
the fulness of hers. 

The VVesthopes were going to Paris ; and Lady Westhope 
proposed to Lord and Lady Falkingham, that their daughter, 
Lady Blanche, should accompany them. Lady Falkingham 
had gone through the toilsome duties of chaperonage for a 
series of years, during which she had successfully disposed of 
her elder daughters in marriage. She was not sorry, there- 
fore, to repose from her labours, and to entrust the youngest 
to the care of so unexceptionable a person as her niece, Lady 
Westhope. 

To Paris went Lady Blanche, in all the buoyancy of youth ; 
escaped for the first time from the trammels of an education 
in which no possible accomplishment had been neglected, and 

BLANCHE. 275 

the vigilance of the most correct of mothers. She was en- 
chanted with the Louvre, full of admiration at the beauties 
and grandeur of Paris ; amused with the threatres, the Champs 
Elysees, with Tivoti with everything; and entered with 
spirit and gaiety into the agreeable society which is^ nowhere 
to be found in greater perfection than at Paris. 

Lady Westhope was also amused and interested ; and, for 
the sake of Blanche, mixed more generally with the world than 
it was her custom to do. 

Lord Westhope also amused himself very much ; but how, 
we do not exactly know. 

Independently of their rank and their situation, the beauty 
of our two cousins would have rendered them no inconsiderable 
personages among the English at Paris. Lady Westhope's 
skin was whiter than snow, her hair blacker than the raven's 
wing, her form full and graceful, her manner calm and 
self-possessed : had she been unmarried, it might have been 
thought cold, perhaps haughty ; as a matron, it was dignified. 
Lady Blanche's clustering curls, and hazel eyes of the same 
rich dark brown as her hair, the mantling glow of her blooming 
cheek, her slender form and elastic step, possessed all the graces 
of youth, while her countenance beamed with animation, joy, 
tenderness, and each emotion that rapidly succeeded the other 
in her bosom. 

Among the many slight preferences, incipient flirtations, 
and positive love-makings, which took place in the set to 
which Lady Westhope belonged, none was more decided than 
that between the beautiful Lady Blanche and Captain De Molton. 
She was a romantic, enthusiastic girl, peculiarly calculated to 
feel the attractions of a man who was formed to figure as a 
heros de roman. He was very tall, he was pale, his fea- 
tures were marked, but they bore an expression of melancholy 
and of feeling. The qualities of his mind corresponded with 
his exterior. Lofty, uncompromising rectitude, was combined 
with acute feelings, which, as his appearance indicated, were 
more calculated to work him woe than weal. A look of sen- 
timent, though to the old and wary it may portend no hap- 
piness either to the possessor or to those connected with him, 
is often to the young and gay more attractive than the most 
joyous liveliness. 

Captain De Molton was in love desperately in love with 
T 2 

276 BLANCHE. 

Lady Blanche. But he knew he was poor : he knew that if he 
was to offer her all he had f. e. his whole undivided affections, 
Lord and Lady Falkingham could not in conscience allow their 
daughter to accept him. He therefore confined himself to 
watching her while she was talking to others ; he did not 
allow himself to occupy the seat by her side. If by chance he 
was betrayed into any expression of his feelings, he studiously 
avoided her for the next twenty-four hours ; and, by so doing, 
he flattered himself he was playing the part of a martyr. 
He fancied he was only endangering his own peace of mind ; 
he believed he so completely concealed what was passing 
within, that hers could run no risk. He had not the self- 
sufficiency to imagine he could win a heart he did not attempt 
to gain. But these very starts of passion, these inconsistencies, 
these uncertainties, the air of intense melancholy which at 
times overspread his countenance, were more dangerous to a 
person of Lady Blanche's disposition than the most open and 
decided attentions. 

She could not think he was indifferent towards her ; yet 
she was piqued by his occasional avoidance, touched by his air 
of intense melancholy, delighted with the fire which gleamed 
from his eye when she addressed him, and with the smile 
which, when it did light up his countenance, was bright and 
dazzling as the sunbeam after a summer-storm. 

In short, while intending to preserve her heart from the 
sentiment which possessed his own, he unconsciously acted 
with the most consummate coquetry 

" Piqued her and toothed by turni." 

Things were in this state, when Captain De Molton's par- 
ticular friend, Lord Glenrith, arrived at Paris. He was im- 
mediately struck with Lady Blanche's beauty, and fascinated 
by her manners. He was an eldest son, and heir to a fine 
property. He was extremely good-looking his character was 
excellent as a parti he was unexceptionable. 

De Molton, with a lover's quickness of perception, read 
Lord Glenrith's feelings almost before he was aware of them 
himself ; and he thought it would be a crime to stand in the 
way of an union which would be advantageous to Lady Blanche, 
and which must indeed make the happiness of bis best and 
earliest friend. Although it was almost agony to see Glenrith 

BLANCHE. 2?7 

constantly occupy at dinner the place he resolutely did not 
take, and to see him whisper soft nothings into her ear, which 
it would have been rapture to him to utter ; though it was 
maddening to see Glenrith act as her escort on all morning 
excursions, when he seldom dared approach ; still a sort of 
fascination bound him to the spot. It was with trembling 
anxiety that he watched Lady Blanche's reception of his 
friend's attentions, with pain which he could not control that 
he marked anything which might be construed into encourage- 
ment on her part ; but it was with most unreasonable joy that 
he perceived her listen to him with cold indifference, and 
sometimes that he caught her eye glance towards himself 
while Lord Glenrith was by her side. 

Any doubt he might entertain as to his friend's real inten- 
tions was soon set at rest by his one day confiding to him 
that he was very much attached to Lady Blanche, that his 
parents wished him to marry, and that he had made up his 
mind to propose, as soon as he felt sure of the lady. 

This annunciation fell as a final deathblow on De Molton's 
hopes if hopes they might ever have been called. " Yet 
Glenrith spoke doubtfully of her reception of his offer and 
Glenrith is not usually over-diffident of himself," thought De 
Molton in the midst of his despair. Still he felt it would be 
folly, madness, to linger in the society of Lady Blanche. In 
all probability she would soon be the affianced wife of his 
friend. It would be base and treacherous in him to attempt 
to circumvent that friend cruel to sport with her feelings ; 
and now that Glenrith had spoken thus confidentially, there 
was nothing left but to withdraw himself from witnessing the 
prosecution of a suit, in the probable success of which he felt 
he ought to rejoice, while his spirit recoiled from the bare 
anticipation of such a result. 

Accordingly he told Lord Glenrith that he was suddenly 
recalled to England on particular business. He seated himself 
in the cabriolet of the Calais diligence, and took his weary 
way to his native land with the most profound adoration of 

wealth with the most ardent aspirations for honour, rank, 

riches, and all the good things of this world that he might, 
without folly, or presumption, be entitled to throw himself at 
the feet of Lady Blanche. 

Lady Westhope's duty, as a wise chaperon, would have 
T 3 

278 BLANiHI. 

been to discourage in every way the attentions of Captain De 
Molton, and to foster those of Lord Glenrith. She meant to 
do so, she thought she did so. She constantly repeated 
to Blanche how impossible it was that Captain De Molton 
should ever propose, how impossible that he should be accepted, 
how totally impossible that they could ever marry or that, 
if married, they could have bread to eat ; and she thought she 
had done her duty. But the spectacle of a man, sincerely, 
ardently, respectfully, and hopelessly in love, was to her feel- 
ings, naturally warm, though she had encased them in an 
armour of coldness and reserve, so interesting a sight, that she 
could not help treating him and speaking of him as a person 
formed to win the heart of woman. All those who had for- 
merly seemed inclined to pay her attention, she bad from the 
very beginning treated with such repelling coldness, that she 
had never been exposed to the trial of witnessing real and sin- 
cere emotions strongly excited. In the desolation of her own 
secret soul, the sight was tantalising and painful. She could 
not help envying Blanche the power of calling them forth, 
nor could she help looking back with a sigh upon the blank 
of her own loveless career. She would have given anything 
for Aladdin's lamp, that she might have endowed young De 
Molton with the worldly wealth which could have secured to 
them the fate from which she was herself cut out 

The few months they passed at Paris had a sensible effect 
upon the minds of both the cousins. Lady Blanche for the 
first time felt love. She also felt keen mortification for to 
nothing does love more completely blind its victim than to the 
sensations experienced by the object beloved. While Lady 
Westhope saw in Captain De Molton an interesting and high- 
minded young man struggling with a hopeless passion, in 
short, while she accurately read, and was able to appreciate, 
his feelings, Lady Blanche thought him cold, indifferent, 
capricious, and frequently doubted whether indeed he enter- 
tained any preference at all for her. 

In Lady Westhope 's mind a great change also had taken 
place. Perhaps the example of all around her (for, whatever 
the propriety of French women under the new regime may be, 
the conduct of English women, when once they have crossed the 
Channel, is not such as to impress foreign nations with a high 
idea of the morality for which we would fain be thought 

BLANCHE. 279 

remarkable), perhaps the more easy footing of society abroad, 
combined to produce in her vague aspirations after an inter- 
change of sincere affection : visions of mutual love, devotion, 
attachment, &c. notions against which, for nine years, she 
had been shutting her ears and barring her heart again 
found entrance to her bosom. 

CHAPTER II. 

Whom call we gay ? That honour has been long 
The boast of mere pretenders to the name. 
The innocent are gay. The lark is gay, 
That dries his feathers saturate with dew 
Beneath the rosy cloud, while yet the beams 
Of dayspring overshoot the humble nest. 

COWPER. 

THE morning after De Molton's departure, our two cousins 
were prepared for an excursion to Versailles, and were expect- 
ing the gentlemen who were to accompany them, when Lord 
Glenrith entered. Lady Westhope inquired what was become 
of Captain De Molton. 

" Gone," he replied : " he set off for England yesterday ; 
called home on some tiresome regimental business. But 
did you not see him ? did you not hear from him ? Very 
uncivil, faith ! not at all like De Molton." 

" I wonder he did not call/' said Lady Westhope : and she 
stole a look towards Blanche, who was so busily employed in 
tying her bonnet and putting on her shawl, with her back to- 
wards them, and her veil half covering her face, that she 
could not detect how she took this unexpected intelligence. 

The carriages of the rest of the party drew up in the street. 
Lord Glenrith ran down stairs to deliver a message to one of 
the Miss Elwicks, offering her Captain De Molton's seat in the 
barouche ; when Lady Westhope remarked, 

" How strange in Captain De Molton ! " 

" How mortifying ! " replied Lady Blanche : " the idea of 
marrying may be foolish and imprudent, as you say, but he 
might leave me to find it out. I hate cold, calculating men, 
who do exactly what is right, and discreet, and proper ; whose 
conduct nobody can find the least fault with. Such men may 
be esteemed, but they cannot expect to be loved. I almost 

T 4 

280 BLANCHE. 

think I should prefer a warra-hearted, impetuous person, who 
was generously wrong, to a wary, prudent one, who was coldly 
right. But what am I saying ? The simple fact is, that the 
poor man did not happen to like me. I do not know why I 
should find fault with him because he did not fall in love with 
me ! " And she tried to smile, and to treat the whole thing 
lightly. 

Lady Westhope could not help adding, " that she had 
thought, and indeed she did still think, that he was in love, 
notwithstanding his prudence." Lady Blanche had just time 
to reply, half bitterly, half jestingly, " that there could not be 
much love, if prudence could so completely master it ; " when 
Lord Glenrith returned to hand them from their splendid 
apartments, down the dirty brick-stairs of a French hotel. 

The day was beautiful the drive not long enough to be 
fatiguing the palace magnificent the gardens noble the 
whole replete with the most interesting recollections. Lady 
Blanche had always been an enthusiast about Madame de la 
Valliere, Louis XVI., Marie Antoinette. She had anticipated 
the greatest delight in visiting the scenes of so many events 
with which, from childhood, she had been familiar ; but she 
found herself listening with the most absent mind to the de- 
tails given by the guide, even though be pointed out the very 
balcony from which he himself remembered having seen Marie 
Antoinette, with the dauphin in her arms, addressing the people 
on that dreadful day when the royal family were carried off by 
the mob to the Tuileries. She looked round with vacant eyes 
at the white and gold apartments where Marie Antoinette held 
her evening soirees ; nor could she warm herself into a proper 
emotion over the oratoire of the unfortunate king, nor even 
over the narrow back passage by which he attempted to escape. 

In the gardens, the statues which were pointed out as those 
of Madame de Maintenon, Mademoiselle de Fontanges, and 
Madame de la Valliere herself, failed to excite any interest 
In her present state of mind she thought it was all nonsense, 
and did not the least believe that Diana was Madame de 
Maintenon, or Fidelity, with a dog at her feet, was intended 
for Madame de la Valliere. 

She became somewhat more interested at the Petit Trianon. 
The Swiss cottage, the vacherie of poor Marie Antoinette 
touched her, and she remarked to Lord Glenrith, on whose 

BLANCHE. 281 

arm she leaned, how, in the midst of all her splendours, the 
queen seemed to have preserved her taste for nature, the 
country, freedom, and simplicity. " It shows, after all, how 
insufficient are pomp and grandeur to happiness ! " And she 
thought of Captain de Molton, and that just such a cottage as 
the Swiss farm, with him (supposing he had liked her, which 
he did not), would be vastly preferable to Versailles itself with 
any one else. Lord Glenrith thought, what a noble, high- 
minded girl ! she will love me for myself she will not be 
influenced by my being a good match ; and he redoubled his 
attentions. 

The party had obtained permission to have their collation 
laid out in the marble gallery ; and they sat down, a large and 
brilliant party as young, as beautiful, as had ever been the 
inmates of that palace, consecrated to pleasure, and pleasure 
alone. 

Lady Westhope was the eldest lady present. The two 
Miss Elwicks were beauties decided beauties, and in the first 
bloom of youth, with gay and lively manners, high spirits, light 
hearts, and vanity enough to thoroughly enjoy the admiration 
they were in the habit of exciting. Mrs. Courtney Astwell 
was very pretty, and, being married, and a coquette, of course 
commanded the attentions of the gentlemen still more super- 
eminently than any of the other ladies, whatever their claims 
might be. Lady Westhope was, for the first time, quite in the 
background nearly on the shelf. Lord Glenrith was devoted 
to Lady Blanche ; Sir Charles Weyburn was decidedly struck 
with Miss Elwick; Lord James Everdon and Miss Eliza 
Elwick were so merry, that another joke succeeded, long be- 
fore the laugh produced by the first had subsided. Mr. Staple- 
ford, the sharp, sarcastic, clever diplomate, did Mrs. Courtney 
Astwell the honour of giving her his arm ; while Lord Faver- 
sham walked on the other side and joined in the conversation, 
and the stripling Lord Elmington hovered on the flank or in 
the rear, as opportunity might serve. 

Mr. Wroxholme alone remained for Lady Westhope. He 
was a new addition to the society whose claims to notice had 
not yet been ascertained. He was in the law, and he looked 
clever. He might be nearly thirty, and he was presentable in 
appearance and gentlemanlike in manners. 

Notwithstanding the dignity and reserve of Lady West- 

282 IJI.ANCHE. 

hope's deportment, she had never before found herself over- 
looked. Her rank, her respectability, her beauty, in the usual 
routine of dinners, parties, and balls, secured for her the at- 
tentions of some one of the first persons in the company. She 
never before had found herself the most passee of a party 
and on an occasion, too, when the usual forms of precedence 
are not attended to. Though she had never sought or valued 
attention, she did not half like the absence of it. She never 
wished for it while she had to repel it, it was not till it was 
withheld, that she found she attached to it any value whatever. 

Mr. Wroxholme, however, was well informed and agreeable. 
By degrees she found he was acquainted with several acquaint- 
ances of hers, and the scenes which they were viewing together 
afforded matter of conversation. 

At the breakfast, or luncheon, or by whatever name the re* 
past might be designated, the pictures which adorned the walls 
of the gallery were discussed. Among others, that of Madame 
de Main tenon, with Madame de la Valliere's daughter at her 
knee. Lady Blanche exclaimed with energy, " The only re- 
deeming point about that hypocritical old woman is her having 
been so good-natured to poor dear Madame de la Valliere's 
child ! " 

" And may I ask Lady Blanche why she so much prefers 
Madame de la Valliere to Madame de Maintenon ? " in the 
softest voice imaginable, inquired Mr. Stapleford, who was 
rather fond of putting people out of countenance. In this case 
he perfectly succeeded ; for though it is true that every one 
loves the erring Madame de la Valliere, and few have any ten* 
derness for the discreet Madame de Maintenon, it would not 
have been so easy for a young lady to defend her feeling* 
and opinions on the subject, without entering into a discussion 
which might be rather awkward. 

This Lady Blanche felt, and replied scarcely knowing what 
she said. " Everybody pities Madame de la Valliere, because 
she was so unhappy ! " 

" Then every one who suffers may hope to have some place 
in your affections," whispered Lord Glenrith. 

Mr. Stapleford replied, " As an approving conscience is 
universally allowed to produce cheerfulness, I conclude the 
strictly virtuous have no chance of finding favour in Lady 
Blanche's sight." 

BLANCHE. 283 

" Oh ! Mr. Stapleford, how you misconstrue everything one 
says ! " Blanche blushed, half in confusion, half in anger. 
Mr. Stapleford enjoyed it; he liked to make women blush ; 
many men do. 

" I am sure every one present ought to be very much obliged 
to me for what I have said, if it is only for having brought so 
beautiful a bloom into Lady Blanche's cheeks." 

All eyes turned towards Lady Blanche, who did indeed blush 
over forehead, throat, and arms, till the tears were ready to start 
from her eyes. Lord (jlenrith uttered in a more severe tone 
than was usual to a person renowned for his good-nature 

" One would think Stapleford had neither mother nor sisters 
of his own, that he should find pleasure in causing a woman 
to blush." And at the moment Lord Glenrith worshipped 
Lady Blanche as devoutly as he hated Mr. Stapleford. Lady 
Blanche felt grateful to him for having defended her, and for 
having given Mr. Stapleford a reproof. 

" Is Mr. Stapleford a friend of yours ? " said Mr. Wrox- 
holme to Lady Westhope. 
. Not at all," she answered : " is he of yours ? " 

" I am happy to say he is a perfect stranger to me : that is 
a kind of man I detest." 

Lady Westhope liked her new acquaintance, for his warmth 
and his openness. 

The repast was over. The personages already mentioned 
sauntered for a short time before their departure among the 
close walks and the orange-trees. Lord James Everdon [and 
Miss Eliza Elwick were inseparable ; not that they had the 
slightest preference for each other their whole bond of union 
consisted in the magnificent set of teeth with which nature 
had favoured them both. They were not the least aware of 
the reason they were pleased with each other ; but it may be 
remarked, that those who have bad teeth do not find them- 
selves so comfortable with a companion who makes them 
laugh, as with one whose conversation is more serious ; while 
a person with fine teeth discovers a point in many a jest, 
which to one who is conscious of anything defective in that 
respect would appear stale, flat, and unprofitable. Many 
flirtations might be traced home to similarity of teeth, which 
have passed for congeniality of disposition. 

When they arrived at home, the two friends talked over 

284 BLANCHE. 

the day. " Who in the world is your Mr. Wroxholme ? " 
said Lady Blanche. 

" I assure you he is a very agreeable man," replied Lady 
Westhope, anxious he should appear to have been her com* 
panion by choice, rather than from necessity. 

" What is he by birth and parentage ? " 

" I do not know, but he is acquainted with several people 
who are mutual friends ; I shall invite him to my parties 
next spring. I think he will be a great acquisition." 
. " What an odious man Mr. Stapleford is ! I always dis- 
liked his quiet sarcastic manner of dropping out just the 
thing that is most disagreeable ; and I was so much obliged 
to the dear, good, honest Lord Glenrith, for giving him a 
lecture, which ought to have made him look foolish." 

" How handsome Lord Glenrith is ! " said Lady Westhope, 
curious to know how Blanche felt towards him. 

"Yes! he certainly is handsome; but he has too much 
colour, and he looks so very healthy and robust ! I do not 
think his countenance could express unhappiness. I like a 
man to look serious and thoughtful, as if he was full of feel- 
ing, and as if his gaiety was just a bright gleam of sunshine, 
the mo* brilliant for the gloom which precedes and follows it. 
Nothing is so beautiful as the smile of a countenance habitu- 
ally melancholy." 

Lady Westhope perceived that, notwithstanding her pique, 
Blanche had not forgotten De Molton. 

They returned to England. The London season was 
nearly over ; Parliament did not sit late ; there was no 
business which required Lord Falkingham's presence, and 
Blanche joined her parents in the country, where they had 
already established themselves; but, as she passed through 
London, she went to the play with the Westhopes. They 
were leaving the theatre, when they met Captain De Molton 
on the stairs. He rushed to them with a face in which the 
much-admired smile usurped the place of the melancholy 
which Lady Blanche also admired. He asked her if she was 
staying in London: she replied she was going to Temple 
Loseley the next day. 

" Then I must esteem myself fortunate to have caught even 
this glimpse of you." 

' Oh, but I hope we shall see you in the country." 

BLANCHE. 285 

They were both thrown off their guard by the suddenness 
of the meeting, and their looks and their manner proclaimed 
the state of their feelings as much as it was possible for them 
to do so, in descending the last ten steps of the private box 
entrance. But he had handed her into the carriage the 
door was closed she was gone before he had time to 
answer the sort of half invitation contained in Lady Blanche's 
last words. 

Blanche had much to tell her mother ; all she had heard 
all she had seen, but not all she had felt. Lady Falkingham 
was reserved with her children ; she was above all weaknesses 
herself, and never seemed to contemplate the possibility that 
younger minds might not be so well regulated, younger feel- 
ings might not be so sober and temperate, as her own. 

The summer passed quietly ; Blanche rode with her father, 
gardened with her mother, and tried to think no more of a 
person who felt nothing for her. Had she not most un- 
guardedly, most imprudently, almost invited him to Temple 
Loseley ? She forgot that, not being acquainted with her 
parents, it was absolutely impossible he could act upon such a 
hint, She only remembered that she had advanced a step 
which had not been met by him, and she recalled what she 
had heard and read a thousand times, that a lover can gene- 
rally create an opportunity for seeing his beloved ; how much 
easier, then, to improve one that presents itself ! The only 
conclusion, therefore, to be drawn was, that she was an object 
of perfect indifference to him. 

In September a party was collected for shooting; and, 
among others, Lord Glenrith accepted with joy and eagerness 
an invitation to Temple Loseley. 

Lord and Lady Falkingham rejoiced to see so fair a pros- 
pect opening before Blanche. Lord Glenrith was particularly 
good-tempered ; he was heir to a fine property ; there was 
not an objection to him. Lady Falkingham, whose health 
was very delicate, was much relieved by the idea that she need 
never again pass from twelve till four in the morning, seated 
on the blue sofas at Almack's, her head nodding with sleep 
under the plumes which she thought it her duty to place 
upon it 

Blanche could not fail to perceive that Lord Glenrith was 
serious in his attentions : it was impossible to dislike him ; 

286 BLAN 

he was an honest, genuine creature ; he loved her sincerely, 
admired her, and respected her; he was not wanting in 
sense or information. Had not her mind been prepossessed, 
she would most likely have been in love with him ; at least, 
ninety-nine girls in a hundred would have been so, and ought 
to have been so. He proposed : her parents were delighted ; 
she was sorry, although she preferred him to any one else, 
except Captain De Molton. Yet, what nonsense to allow her 
imagination to dwell upon a person who cared not for her ! 
Should she refuse an excellent man who was sincerely attached 
to her a connection with whom would delight her own 
parents, and his parents, and all their mutual connections, for 
the sake of a penniless captain who cut her positively cut 
her ? It would be the height of folly ; there would be a 
want of pride in continuing to pine for an indifferent swain. 
So, as she had no good reason to adduce either to herself, or 
to others, for saying " No," she said " Yes," and she was 

This great event took place a few days before the Falking- 
ham family paid a long-promised visit to the Westhopes. 
Lord Glenrith was to have joined the party at the end of the 
week ; but, as the accepted lover, he obtained leave to accom- 
pany them to Cransley. 

His sterling worth gained upon Blanche every day ; there 
was something so English, so true, so generous about him. 
Her parents were quite delighted with his sentiments upon all 
subjects connected with settlements. She heard him praised 
from morning till night, and she was beginning to persuade 
herself that she ought to be, and that she was, exceedingly 
happy, when they arrived at Cransley. 

The sight of Lady Westhope reminded her of Paris, and 
of all she had felt when there ; and she was shocked to find 
she still retained such vivid recollections of incidents the most 
trivial in themselves. Mr. Wroxholrae had arrived the day 
before, and at dinner Lord Westhope remarked, " We shall 
be quite the old Paris party on Friday, when De Molton 
comes." 

Lady Blanche was listening to Lord Glenrith's description 
of his father's place, Wentnor Castle; but she was not so 
absorbed in the subject, but that these words caught her ear. 
She gave an involuntary start ; she felt Lady Westhope look 

BLANCHE. 287 

at her ; she felt herself colour. But her start and her blush 
were unobserved : Lord Glenrith was completely occupied in 
explaining how the seclusion of the south and west fronts of 
the castle, and of the broad terrace overlooking the rapid 
stream of the Dwent, was preserved by the alteration in the 
road, which now approached the gateway from the north-east, 
instead of the north-west. 

If Lord Glenrith had a fault, or rather a foible, it was 
his passion for his native place, and an inclination to think 
everything belonging to himself superior to that which be- 
longed to another. He seldom sold a horse ; for when once 
he had possessed it, he became so alive to its merits, that he 
always asked more for it than others, who were not so clear- 
sighted, thought it was worth. This is a happy disposition 
for the possessor, and for those connected with him. It is 
seldom that such a person makes an unkind husband, or a 
tyrannical father, or a hard master ; but it is not a quality 
that interests a romantic girl. Lady Blanche, however, thought 
" Captain De Molton shall see I am not pining ; he shall see 
that bis friend can appreciate me, if he cannot." 

Mr. Wroxholme proved, upon farther acquaintance, to be a 
very agreeable addition to the society. He had read much, 
and was full of information. Lord Falkingham pronounced 
him to be one of the most rising young men of the day. 
Mr. Wroxholme, on his part, was delighted with Lord Falk- 
inghara's political sentiments, with Lady Falkingham's high- 
breeding, with Lady Westhope's gentleness, with Lord West- 
hope's good-humour and ease in his own house, with Lord 
Glenrith's downright happiness, with Lady Blanche's beauty, 
with the good shooting, and the beautiful place, and he felt 
gratitude towards Lady Westhope for having given him the 
opportunity of enjoying society so much to his taste. 

He was a man of good birth ; but though born and bred a 
gentleman, he had not before mixed in the very first circles, 
and he was flattered at being deemed worthy of admission 
into one of them. He had discrimination enough to be pleased 
with the shade of superior refinement which pervaded it, and 
tact enough instantly to acquire its tone. 

When Lady Westhope found herself alone with Lady 
Blanche, she never alluded to Captain De Molton ; she felt 
that the less that was said upon the subject the better. 

288 BLANCHE. 

Blanche had treated his departure from Paris as wilful 
neglect of her, and she had laughed at his indifference. Al- 
though in her heart Lady Westhope believed she had felt it 
acutely, it was wiser to treat the whole affair as a trifling 
flirtation which had left no trace behind. She was sorry 
Lord Westhope had invited Captain De Molton at this 
moment, but it was one of those things for which there was 
no remedy. He and Lady Blanche must meet some time or 
another, and the sooner it was over the better. 

Lady Blanche, meantime, continued to receive Lord 
Glenrith's attentions, and to find her imagination more and 
more inclined to wander, and her mind less and less able 
to take in the relative positions of the stables, the kitchen- 
garden, and the coach-houses of Wentnor Castle. 

CHAPTER III. 

Dicrn qu* amor harcnddo 
A lot dejrdjuie* mavorei, 
Y que de ut pandoras 
Cieio y Urra e*U " 

DURING the four months which intervened between Captain 
De Molton's leaving Paris and his joining the party at 
Cransley, bow had he passed his time ? He was a person of 
much determination of character, and when once he had 
made up his mind what was right, he could, generally 
speaking, carry bis resolutions into effect ; at least it was 
only when his feelings, naturally strong, were immediately 
under excitement, that he was betrayed into actions of which 
his judgment did not approve. 

To Lord Glenrith he owed an early debt of gratitude : their 
friendship dated from boyhood. At Eton they had been 
bathing together, when De Molton was seized with the cramp, 
and must have perished, had it not been for the exertions of 
his young schoolfellow. This and many other acts of kind- 
ness which the rich heir of Wentnor Castle was naturally 
enabled to show to the penniless seventh son, and thirteenth 
child of the distressed Lord Cumbcrwortb, made De Molton's 

BLANCHE. 289 

friendship for Glenrith partake in some measure of the nature 
of gratitude. He felt it would be doubly base in him to at- 
tempt to gain the affections of the girl to whom Lord Glenrith 
owned himself attached, even if, with regard to Lady Blanche 
herself, it would not have been ungenerous to drag her from 
her exalted sphere into poverty and destitution with him. 

He went straight to his regiment, and devoted himself with 
particular energy to teaching his men the new manoeuvres 
recommended by the Horse Guards. Never were men so 
well appointed, never was troop in such order. But his 
fellow-officers at the mess found him somewhat moody and 
silent ; he was not a jolly companion ; and although all re- 
spected him, yes, and loved him too, and would have ap- 
plied to him for advice and comfort in any distress, he was 
not, in the common acceptation of the word, a popular man. 
It was not De Molton who was asked to ride this fellow's 
horse at the hack stakes got up in the regiment ; or De Molton, 
to whom another fellow proposed to gallop forty miles to 
London to see the new actress, and down again at night, 
or to jump into a hack- chaise after dinner and drive off to 
the tradesmen's ball at the county town : but if any dutiful 
son wished to prolong his visit to his parents, or any pining 
lover had an opportunity of flying to his mistress, he felt 
pretty sure that De Molton would take his duty for him. His 
manners were a little stately, and a youngster was not likely 
to choose De Molton as the confident of any foolish scrape ; 
yet no one was more ready to sympathize with, and to re- 
lieve, any case of unmerited distress. 

He chanced to be in London one of the days that Lady 
Blanche passed there in her way from Paris ; and he had been 
attending his mother, and three of his six sisters, to the play 
on the night when he saw Lady Blanche. 

It was with an uncontroulable burst of joy that he rushed 
to hand her down the steps ; and this brief interview sufficed 
to unsettle in his heart all the reasonable acquiescence in the 
disposition of their fates which he had been striving to attain. 

When he received Lord Westhope's invitation, he certainly 
did not think it quite impossible he might meet Lady Blanche ; 
but he persuaded himself that he had in four months allowed 
his friend all proper time for making himself acceptable, and 
that there was no necessity for his refusing the accustomed 

u 

BLANCHE. 

invitation to a house to which he was in the habit of paying 
an annual visit. At all events, he should learn from Lady 
Westhope what was the state of the case : anything was better 
than the uncertainty in which he lived. 

Lady Blanche's manner, when he met her on the dimly 
lighted stairs of the theatre, had made him vaguely hope 
he knew not what ; for, supposing they did love each other, 
what then was to happen ? He repeatedly asked himself this 
question ; but did any one ever wish that the person beloved 
should not return his love ? De Molton was a very reasonable 
man he kept his feelings under great controul, but they 
were strong and ardent, and he could not reach that pitch of 
stoicism ! 

To Cransley he went, with a mind distracted by doubt, 
wonder, hope, and fear. As he drove to the door, he saw 
Lord Falkingham dismounting from his cob ; so he knew that 
Lady Blanche was in the house. " How will she meet me ? " 
he thought ; " how shall I find her ? how shall I regulate ray 
own behaviour? " and he almost repented having wilfully 
run into such danger ; although, in truth, it was the hope of 
being placed in that very danger which had made him so 
gladly accept Lord Westhope's invitation. 

He was giving his orders to his servant at the door, when 
he saw Lord Glenrith approach the house in shooting costume, 
followed by keepers and dogs. He could not mistake the 
bright, happy face of his friend. His teeth gleamed as the 
setting sun shone on them ; his cheek was sun-burned, and 
ruddy with exercise ; his kind eyes beamed with honest joy to 
see De Molton. De Molton 's heart sank within him as he 
recognized his dear friend ; and it was with an effort, which 
would have been visible to any other eyes, that he returned his 
cordial greeting. 

As they both entered the drawing-room, the pale counte- 
nance and melancholy brow of De Molton would, in the opinion 
of many, have set off to advantage the gay good-humour of 
Lord Glenrith. 

The ladies were all there. Lady Blanche shook hands with 
Captain De Molton as soon as he had paid his devoirs to Lady 
Westhope, and, without having raised her eyes higher than to 
his chin, reseated herself to her embroidery frame. 

Lord Glenrith approached her. De Mol ton's heart beat 

BLANCHE. 291 

quick ; he felt almost giddy. Lord Glenrith's manner was 
gay and unembarrassed : he held a parcel in his hand. Lady 
Falkingham drew near there was a great colloquy : De 
Molton heard the expressions "beautiful!" " the prettiest I 
ever saw ! " " they tell me it is the first that has been made;" 
" well, how lovely ! " Lady Blanche seemed to be express- 
ing her thanks, but in so low a tone of voice he could not 
catch the words. She looked blushingly beautiful ! Lady 
Falkingham moved a little on one side, and he saw Lord 
Glenrith in the act of fastening a bracelet on her arm. Per- 
haps another lover might not have selected such a moment for 
presenting his first love-token, but the parcel was only just 
arrived. Lord Glenrith was pleased with his purchase ; all 
around were friends, and why should there be any mystery ? 

To De Molton's eyes all mystery was indeed dispelled. 
He felt choking. He could not master his feelings sufficiently 
to preserve an indifferent countenance, and he left the room 
under the pretence of seeing after his postboy, or his port- 
manteau. 

The rest of the company gathered round the bride elect, 
and admired the beautiful ornament and discussed its peculiar 
fabric; while poor Blanche sat frightened at the agitation 
which pervaded her whole frame in consequence of having 
been for five minutes in the society of De Molton. 

However,- when she retired to her own room before dinner, 
she satisfied herself that what she had felt was merely a very 
natural awkwardness at first meeting a person with whom she 
certainly had flirted a little, and shyness at being seen by a 
young man acquaintance, in the act of receiving her lover's 
first present. She could not help secretly wishing Lord Glen- 
rith had not given the bracelet before so many witnesses, and 
she felt there was a want of delicacy in the proceeding, even 
while she told herself it was in unison with his open, unsus- 
picious character, which measured the kindliness of others by 
his own good-natured heart. 

At dinner De Molton placed himself at the farther end of 
the table, and the epergne prevented his being able to perceive 
Lady Blanche's face. However, he saw Lord Glenrith's ; and 
never did an honest countenance express more secure and un- 
disturbed happiness. Poor De Molton ! He had quitted 
Paris on purpose not to stand in the way of that happiness 
u 2 

292 BLANCHE. 

which his friend had obtained ; and now, how painful was it 
to see the object accomplished ! 

During the evening, Lady Westhope contrived, in as quiet 
a manner as she could, to convey to De Molton the confirma- 
tion of a fact which was already too evident to his eyes, and 
she appeared not to remark the varying hues of his complexion, 
and the agitation of his manner, during her communication. 

Lady Blanche strove to be easy and unembarrassed ; and 
she succeeded so far as to make him believe her happy, and 
perfectly satisfied with the prospect before her. 

He resolved to plead particular and sudden business -a 
summons from his father a relation at the point of death 
any excuse to depart the following day. This torture was not 
to be endured. Yet he wished to have an opportunity of 
speaking to her once, and of telling her how ardently he prayed 
for her welfare. 

He left his room very early the next morning, and he 
perambulated the library, the saloon, the breakfast-room, the 
hall. He knew Lady Blanche was an early riser ; Cransley 
was renowned for the lateness of its breakfast-hour ; perhaps 
she would make her appearance before the other guests. He 
was not wrong in his calculations. Lady Blanche came into 
the drawing-room to look for her mother's work-basket, and 
fiat hastily retiring with it, when De Molton arrested her steps 
by saying, " that as he was obliged to depart in' an hour, he 
was anxious to express to one, for whom he felt such esteem 
and admiration, his earnest wishes his prayers for her happi- 

" You are not going to-day, surely, Captain De Molton ? " 
answered Blanche in a tremulous tone. 

" I must," he said : " I could not, would not stay here 
another day, for anything this world can now offer me." 

" Lady Westhope will be quite disappointed. She hoped 
you were come for ten days, or a fortnight." 

" Such was my intention ; but circumstances imperative 
circumstances, over which I have no controul, render my stay 
here impossible/' 

" I hope no misfortune has occurred in your family ? " in- 
quired Lady Blanche, thoroughly impressed with the idea of 
his indifference towards herself, and, consequently, by no means 
attributing his visible agitation to its true cause. 

BLANCHE. 293 

<e No misfortune has occurred in my family," he resumed 
in a voice of deep emotion " but one to myself. No no ! 
it is not a misfortune : on the contrary, it is the thing in the 
world I ought most to wish ; it is the union of the two beings 
I most value, most respect, most love on earth ! I ought to 
rejoice I do rejoice. Believe me, Lady Blanche, though my 
voice falters, and I am at this moment weak, I rejoice that 
the friend to whom I am bound by every tie of gratitude and 
affection has gained the heart of the most perfect of woman- 
kind ; and that the woman who alone in my eyes is perfect, 
is likely to be happy with a man who is all honour, truth, 
and uprightness. May Heaven in its mercy bless you both ! " 

The tears stood in De Molton's glistening eyes. They 
almost overflowed. " I am a fool," he added ; " I thought I 
had more command over myself; I did not mean to torment 
you, to insult you, with an avowal of my hopeless, my presump- 
tuous love !" 

Lady Blanche had stood transfixed in fear, amazement, joy ; 
yes, joy ! there are no circumstances under which it is not 
joy to find affection is requited. " And do you indeed love 
me ? " she said, scarcely conscious of what she uttered. 

" Do I love you ! Lady Blanche, can you ask that ques- 
tion ? In folly, hopelessness, misery, I cannot cannot quell 
my love !" 

" Oh, why why did not you tell me sooner ? " she said, 
earnestly clasping her hands. 

" Tell you so ? How could I venture, penniless as I am, 
without a home to offer you, how could I have the insane 
presumption to ask you to share poverty penury with me, 
when splendour, rank, wealth were courting your acceptance ? " 

" Oh, I despise these things ! I always did 1 I never could 
care for money in all my life, and now ! " She stopped ; her 
engagement rushed across her mind. She felt guilty of per- 
jury and infidelity. 

De Molton, in his turn, stood confounded; he had done 
everything he had especially resolved not to do, and, mingled 
with the delight he could not help experiencing at the avowal 
which had almost escaped Lady Blanche's lips, he felt humi- 
liated by the base part he had acted towards the friend to 
whom he had meant to devote himself. He struck his fore- 
head, and exclaimed, " Oh, Lady Blanche, I am a wretch 

u 3 

BLANCH K. 

not worthy of a moment's regard ! Do not waste a thought 
on me ; forget me, or at least only remember me to bestow a 
sigh of pity on one who has been betrayed, by his love for 
you, into an act of ingratitude for which he abhors himself. 
Glenrith is my best friend, he is the soul of honour, he 
he is worthy of you ! " 

Lady Blanche was frightened at what she had said 
frightened at what she had listened to. Voices were heard 
approaching, the door opened, Captain De Molton rushed 
into the adjoining library. Lady Blanche seized her mother's 
basket, and left the room before she had time to perceive who 
the intruders were. As she ran up stairs, she met Lady 
Westhope. " What is the matter, Blanche ? " exclaimed 
Lady Westhope, as her friend darted past her. 

" Mamma wants me," she hastily answered, as she took 
refuge in her mother's room. 

"Mamma! mamma!" she exclaimed, throwing herself 
breathless into a chair ; " I am wretched, guilty, and miser- 
able ! I am the most unfortunate creature in the world!" 

" What possesses yon, child ? what is the matter ? " re- 
plied Lady Falkingham, as she put down the untasted piece 
of toast she held in her hand. 

" Mamma ! he loves roe after all !" 

" Who, my dear ? what ! Lord Glenrith ? To be sure 
he does. I never saw a man more attached in my life ! " 

" Poor dear Lord Glenrith, so he is ! Oh, how little I de- 
serve that he should be so ! when I oh, mamma, what will 
you think of me ? I have almost owned that my affections 
are at least I implied Oh, mamma! what shall 1 do?" 
And poor Blanche wept bitterly. 

" Certainly, my dear Blanche, I do not consider it modest 
and becoming in any young woman to allow a man to perceive 
that he has acquired too much power over her heart ; yet, as 
you are on the point of marriage, I think you need not 
blame yourself so very much. There should always be a cer- 
tain reserve of manner and expression ; but anxious as I am 
that women should preserve their dignity, and that no 
daughter of mine should condescend " 

' Oh, mamma ! you do not understand me : I never told 
Lord Glenrith I loved him." 

" What on earth do you mean then ? what are you 

BLANCHE. 295 

talking about?" Lady Falkingham's countenance assumed an 
expression of alarm, wonder, and displeasure. 

"Oh, how can I tell you? you, mamma, who never did 
anything weak, or foolish, in your life ! Do not look at me, 
mamma, with those stern and reproachful eyes, or I can never 
confess it." 

" Blanche, you alarm me more than I can describe. Do 
you mean that you love any one better than the man whom 
you have accepted as your husband, the excellent, amiable, 
high-minded Lord Glenrith, who is so sincerely devoted to 
you ? " 

" Oh, mamma ! I do value him, and I render him justice, 
indeed ; and I love him in a kind of way " 

Lady Blanche was each moment becoming more alive to the 
ingratitude, the duplicity, with which she had acted towards 
Lord Glenrith, and began to wish she had not opened the 
subject at all to her mother. 

" Explain yourself, Blanche," repeated her mother : " whom 
are you talking of? Is it Mr. Wroxholme, whom you met at 
Paris ?" 

" Oh dear, no, mamma. It is Captain De Molton ! " And 
she no longer found any difficulty in speaking his name. Mr. 
Wroxholme might be a very good man, but, in her eyes, was 
immeasurably inferior to the object of her preference. Those 
who are in love, always resent as an injury the suspicion that 
they could find charms in any other than the one person to 
whose merits they are alive. 

" Captain De Molton ! " exclaimed Lady Falkingham ; 
" why, I scarcely ever heard you mention him ! You ought 
to have told me this before/,' 

" I never knew till to-day what were his feelings towards 
me, mamma ! " 

" I must say your lover has chosen a good moment for 
avowing his passion ! It proves an honourable mind ! And 
he wishes to induce you to break off your marriage with a 
man in every way calculated to make you happy ? For what ? 
He has scarcely bread to eat himself, and his father has none 
to give him." 

" He knows all that, mamma, and he is going away this 
moment. He does not ask me to marry him. He says he is 
not worthy of me." 

u 4 

296 BLANCHE. 

t( Oh, Blanche ! Blanche ! and you allow this man, who 
tells you he cannot marry, to make love to you, while you are 
the affianced wife of his friend ! I should never have thought 
a daughter of mine would have acted in so improper, so un- 
principled a manner. Heaven knows, I cannot accuse myself 
of having neglected ray children. You have all had every 
attention paid to your minds and your morals. Each hour 
had its avocation ; you were never permitted to read a book 
which Miss Strickland or myself had not previously perused ; 
you were never allowed to walk beyond the shrubberies and 
the park ! If, like some mothers, I had neglected the essen- 
tials for the sake of accomplishments but the religion- 
master always came three times a week ! How on earth can 
such low notions of moral rectitude ever have found entrance 
into your head, or your heart ? " 

Lady Blanche was in despair at her mother's grief. She 
now viewed her own conduct with horror ; but how to meet 
Lord Glenrith, with this weight of guilt upon her mind ? 

" Look here/' continued Lady Falkingham ; " read this 
letter ; all kindness and generosity receiving you into the 
family with joy, treating you already as if you were their 
daughter ! " Lady Falkingham gave Blanche the joint epistle 
she had just received from Lord and Lady Wentnor, express- 
ing every thing most gratifying concerning the choice their 
son had made. 

Each word she read was a dagger to Lady Blanche's heart. 
'' I cannot overthrow all the happiness of these worthy people," 
she mentally revolved, " and that of my parents, and of poor 
Lord Glenrith. I must quell this foolish inclination, I 
must fight a good fight, and I shall conquer, I dare say. But 
it is hard, when now, for the first time, I know myself be- 
loved." 

After a pause, she told her mother she would try to com- 
pose herself : she implored her not to mention the subject to 
her father ; she strove to persuade her mother, and herself, 
that it was only a passing feeling, a momentary agitation which 
would soon subside ; that it had been pique, that it was now 
gratified vanity any thing, in short, except love. Her mother 
was only too glad to be deceived, and assisted her in her self- 
deception. 

Lady Falkingham would have been very sorry to lose so. 

BLANCHE. 297 

estimable and so unexceptionable a husband for her daughter ; 
but the disgraceful eclat of breaking off an engagement openly 
entered into and acknowledged, was still more appalling to a 
person who had a salutary horror of being " talked of." She 
had herself passed through life with the highest character as a 
wife and as a mother. Her elder daughters had married at a 
proper age, and in a proper manner. She looked upon a young 
lady's first love as a silly affair, which has more to do with 
the imagination than the heart ; and if any of her other 
daughters had ever felt a preference which had not received 
their mother's sanction, they would never have ventured to 
confess it with that frankness which, in spite of the education 
just described by Lady Falkingharn, was one of Blanche's 
characteristics. 

CHAPTER IV. 

Now have I shewed you bothe, these whyche ye lyst, 

Stately fortune, or humble povertee : 
That is to say, now lyeth it in your fyst 

To take he're bondage, or free libertee. 

SIR THOMAS MORE. 

CAPTAIN DE MOLTON had sent his servant to the neighbouring 
town to procure him a chaise, that with the least possible de- 
lay he might carry his project of departure into execution. 

When he had in some measure recovered his self-possession, 
he made his appearance at the breakfast-table, and informed 
Lady Westhope that he was unexpectedly obliged to return to 
London, to arrange with his father some matters connected 
with his exchange from his present regiment, which, as Lady 
Westhope knew, was under orders for India. 

This was strictly true, for he had resolved to insist upon 
his father's suspending the application he was on the point of 
making for this exchange. He determined to proceed to India 
with his regiment. The unhealthiness of the climate, which 
gave his relations so much uneasiness, appeared to him, in his 
present frame of mind, a positive recommendation. 

The company expressed all due disappointment at his sud- 
den departure all but Lady Blanche ; she was not present. 
Lady Westhope suspected something must have occurred, and 

JfKS BLANCHE. 

when she bade De Molton adieu, she pressed his hand with a 
mysterious kindliness, which she meant should imply, " You 
are acting like a man of honour ; I see you suffer, and I pity 
you." 

She was confirmed in this opinion, by Mr. Wroxholme 
telling her he had found Captain De Molton in the library be- 
fore breakfast, with his head leaning against the marble chim- 
ney-piece, and his countenance so pale and haggard, that he 
feared for a moment something dreadful must have happened. 
Lady Westhope recollected Blanche's hurrying manner of 
passing her on the stain, and she pitied all parties. 

Lady Falkingham's indisposition accounted for Lady Blanche's 
absence till the hour of luncheon, when she came down stairs 
with a feeling of kindness towards Lord Glenrith, awakened 
by the consciousness of having injured him. She scarcely 
ventured to raise her eyes from the ground, but her blushing 
manner passed for the modesty of a young girl on the eve of 
marriage. Lord Glenrith pathetically lamented the absence of 
his friend, and Lady Blanche quivered at the sound of his 
name, and then reproached herself for doing so. 

Lord Glenrith showed her the letters he had received from 
the different members of his family. Blanche could not but 
feel flattered by the manner in which she was spoken of; could 
not but think the better of the son, and the brother, who waa 
loved with such tender affection ; could not but own she ought 
to be happy with the prospect of possessing such a father, 
mother, brothers, and sisters-in-law. Lord Glenrith in his 
own happiness perceived nothing wanting in her manner, and 
laughed, and talked, the gayest of the gay. His inward satis- 
faction did not render him sentimental, but his buoyant spirits 
made him inclined to be pleased with everybody and every* 
thing. He even forgot the dislike he had imbibed for Mr. 
Staple-ford ; and when his arrival that day was announced, he 
declared him to be a ' devilish good fellow, though he was a 
sarcastic dog." 

His flow of spirits was almost oppressive to Lady Blanche, 
yet she rejoiced he did not possess the sensitive tact which 
might have rendered him alive to every look of hers. 

At dinner, Lord Glenrith was telling Lord Falkingham he 
had a famous brood-mare at Wentnor Castle, whose colt was 
likely to win the St. Leger. 

BLANCHE. 299 

" Is your colt as clever as your old horse Perseus, Glenrith? " 
asked Mr. Stapleford. 

" Ah ! Perseus ! by Jove, that is a horse ! Never was a 
thorough- bred one so good for weight and as active as a cat 
such action ! and such pasterns ! None of your short pas- 
terns the grooms are so fond of but long enough to be elastic ! 
He is a true "Whalebone ! " 

" I am not sure, after all, I do not like Quirk still better," 
Stapleford dropped out quietly, while a sly smile lurked in the 
corner of his lip. 

' f Quirk is a singularly good horse ! He has such bone, 
and such a constitution ! " 

" And that grey pony, Glenrith you will never part with 
that pony ? " 

te Part with Yung-frau ? not for three hundred guineas ! " 

" You are a fortunate man in your stud, Glenrith ! " re- 
marked Stapleford, with a quiet, composed, and serious air, 
which to the unsuspicious Lord Glenrith was perfectly satis- 
factory, while the rest of the party, especially poor Blanche, 
were painfully aware he was playing on the one weak point of 
the amiable young Benedick. 

Nothing lowers a man in the eyes of a woman so much as 
being made a butt, no matter whether the quizzer be a person 
for whose opinion she entertains any respect or not. It was 
unlucky that, at the moment the heros de roman lover had de- 
parted in magnanimous despair, the successful one should lay 
himself open to the quizzing of a dandy. Lady Blanche felt 
miserable more miserable than when she parted from De 
Molton more miserable than when she heard the jingle of 
his hack-chaise as it drove from the door more miserable 
than when her mother's statement of the case made her awake 
to the enormity of her misconduct more miserable than 
when she resolved to drive her lover's image for ever from her 
mind. Those distresses were at least elevated ones this 
bordered on the ridiculous. 

In the course of the evening Mr. Stapleford found himself 
near Lady Blanche. " I must offer you my congratulations, 
Lady Blanche, and especially upon the good looks and the 
good spirits of the fortunate Lord Glenrith. His beaming and 
ruddy appearance shows that you have not been unnecessarily 
cruel, tormenting before you consented to make him the 

.300 BLANCHE. 

happiest of men. It must give a person of your kindly feel- 
ings great pleasure to behold a face so redolent with joyous- 

mem 

Every word of this speech was disagreeable. Poor Blanche 
did not admire a "ruddy "man did not like an unsenti- 
mental lover ; and, above all, she did not like the implication 
that she had been 

* Won unwooed, or illghtly wooed at bt." 

Mr. Stapleford bore not the slightest ill-will either to Lady 
Blanche, or to Lord Glenrith. He enjoyed saying the dis- 
agreeable thing in the civilest manner possible ; partly because 
it is almost the only exercise of power which a person without 
house, or lands, or fortune, can indulge in ; partly because he 
liked to see what people really felt and he thus frequently 
discovered the true state of their minds ; partly because he hap- 
pened to possess the species of tact which enabled him to do 
it and everybody derives pleasure from success of any kind. 

The next day Blanche received a packet from Wentnor 
Castle. It contained some beautiful ornaments offerings 
from different members of her future family, each accom- 
panied by the prettiest note imaginable. Congratulations 
showered in from every quarter. All the numerous friends 
and relations of both sides wrote letters in which each party 
was described as perfection, and each as having met with 
perfection. It is astonishing that matrimony should ever fail 
to secure lasting happiness, when (if we may believe the 
written testimony of those who best know the contracting 
parties) none but paragons ever enter into the holy state. But 
among all the happy unions that have been joyfully antici- 
pated, none ever gave more general satisfaction than the pre- 
sent The age, situation, rank everything was suitable. 
Poor Lady Blanche felt herself every moment more thoroughly 
hampered, entangled, and pledged; and every moment her 
disinclination to the marriage increased. 

It was an odd thing ! but Mr. Stapleford's quiet manner of 
quizzing Lord Glenrith, and his imperturbable good-humour 
under it, or rather, his perfect unconsciousness of what was 
happening, hurt his cause even more than her preference of 
De Molton. She would rather have seen him angry and re- 
sentful ; to persons with la tcte exaltte, the smallest shadow of 

BLANCHE. 301 

ridicule irrecoverably destroys the halo of romance they would 
fain throw around the object of their devotion. Blanche might 
have turned from her hopeless and youthful dream of love, to 
admiration, respect, obedience, and submission ; but when her 
head, her heart, and her imagination were possessed with the 
dignified brow, the melancholy eyes, the mellow voice, the 
lofty air, the noble grief of De Molton, to see the joyous, the 
" ruddy" Glenrith perfectly contented under the quizzing of 
a Stapleford, prevented her being able to work herself up to 
the feelings it was her duty to entertain towards him. 

Mr. Wroxholme one day remarked to Lady Westhope, that 
Lady Blanche appeared to be extremely out of spirits, and 
that he almost feared her disposition and that of her future 
husband were not exactly suited. 

" She seems to take no pleasure in his country pursuits 
she listens with an abstracted air while he continues to pour 
into her ear details which he might perceive are not interest- 
ing to her ; though I own I sometimes wonder she should not 
be more curious about Wentnor Castle, which, from the en- 
gravings, must be a magnificent and interesting place." 

Lady Westhope agreed with Mr. Wroxholme, and could 
not help half confiding to him, that she feared Lady Blanche 
had some other prepossession. 

" Poor girl ! " resumed Mr. Wroxholme; "but then it is 
a thousand pities she should marry, if she cannot love, Lord 
Glenrith." 

" He is such a good man ! " answered Lady Westhope ; 
" he has such excellent principles he is so sure to make a 
true and faithful husband, that in the long-run I should hope 
no woman, who had herself good principles, could fail to be 
happy with him." 

Lady Westhope sighed, and Mr. Wroxholme, who had by 
this time heard and seen somewhat more of his host, felt that 
poor Lady Westhope spoke as one who had suffered from the 
absence of these qualities in her husband. 

302 BLANCH K. 

CHAPTER V. 

Ever (till most I adore the* : 

Though wide *ea* between us roll, 
Each food thought shall bow o'er thee. 

And thine image fill mj soul 

Morning breaking o'er the ocean 

Will thine opening graces wear, 
And with evening ' last devotion 

I will breathe thy name in prayer. 

UmptMMed foemt, 

UPON leaving Cransley, Captain de Molton bad hastened to 
town. He there found his father, who haying left the res 
of the family at Brighton, had also repaired to London for th 
purpose of effecting the proposed exchange. 

Lord Cumberworth was preparing to enter a hackney-coach, 
which waiteiKto carry him to Brookes's, where he meant to 
dine and to solace himself with a quiet game at tolerably high 
whist, when he was startled at the unexpected appearance of 
his son. 

" Why, Francis ! " he exclaimed, " I thought you were 
gone to Cransley for a fortnight ! What brings you here ? " 

" I wished to see you, father, and to talk to you seriously 
concerning my prospects in life. You are come up about my 
exchange, are you not ? " 

" Yea and I hope I shall be able to settle it all comfort- 
ably. Your mother has been in one of her nervous ways at 
the bare thoughts of your going to India." 

" I think I ought to go, father." 

" Why ! which way does the wind blow now ? Why the 
d 1 did you not tell me so sooner ? They have all been 
pestering me to come to town, and to leave no* stone unturned 
to save you from this banishment, as you all called it ; and 
now I have taken the trouble of coming, you change your 
mind ! Upon my word, this is very inconsiderate. But, after 
all, I myself do not like your going into such an unhealthy 
climate, and I would rather keep you at home if I could. If 
you are to go into danger, let it be where some honour and 
renown are to be obtained. There is no glory in dying of a 
liver complaint, as yellow as a guinea." 

" I am very sorry, my dear father, to have given you so 

BLANCHE. 303 

much unnecessary trouble, but I have fully made up my mind 
to sail with my regiment." 

" And pray, Master Francis, what has worked this wondrous 
revolution in your mind ? " 

" Why, father, to tell you the truth, happiness is out of the 
question for me ; and therefore I had rather do whatever will 
make me least burthensome to my family, and also take me 
out of the way for a time." 

" And why do you want to lie perdue ? You have not 
been running in debt, have you ? " 

" No, father ; I am too well aware what are your circum- 
stances." 

" Not a scrape ? eh, my boy ! " and Lord Cumberworth, 
whose morals were not puritanical, smiled. " It can't be Lady 
Westhope, she is such a prude. You have not been playing 
the fool, I hope ? " continued Lord Cumberworth, putting 
more of parental gravity into his countenance. 

" 1 have been guilty of nothing wrong in deed or thought," 
replied De Molton with seriousness. 

" Egad ! but there's a woman in question though," replied 
Lord Cumberworth. " You are not in any danger of marry- 
ing ? " and his face really assumed an expression of sincere 
alarm. 

" Not exactly, father ; but I am unfortunately attached to 
a person who is on the eve of marriage with another." 

" Thank heaven that is all ! " exclaimed Lord Cumber- 
worth. " Remember one thing, Frank a man is never 
thoroughly undone till he is married." 

De Molton remained silent. His father's tone of feeling 
was so little in unison with his own, that he wished to say no 
more upon the subject than was absolutely necessary. 

" Does the girl like you, my boy ? " added Lord Cumber- 
worth. 

De Molton was somewhat perplexed how to answer, but he 
said, " I told you, father, she was going to be married to 
another man." 

" Ah ! but women have married a rich man, when they 
have been in love with a poor man, before now. And you are 

a d sh handsome fellow, and more like me than any of my 

children. Well, don't look so sheepish, like a bashful maiden 
yourself. Is the girl in love with you ? " 

304 BLANCHE. 

" I conclude not," resolutely answered De Molton. 

" Have you told her you are in love with her ? " 

' Why, yes, I have." 

" And she was not angry, eh ? Come, I suppose your nice 
sense of honour will allow you to say whether she is very 
much in love with her future husband or not ? " 

" I should say she esteemed him highly, but was not pre- 
cisely in love with him/' was De Molton's guarded reply. 

" Wheugh gh gh ! " with an elevation of the eye- 
brows, and a sound that ended in something like a whistle, 
was the response produced by this last communication of his 
son's. " You had better go, my boy. I see how it is : if 
you stay, we shall have the marriage broken off and die d 1 
to pay. Ah ! well I am sorry to part with yon, but you had 
better go we will do no more about the exchange. But I 
am as hungry as a hound I have eat nothing since I left 
Brighton. There is no dinner in the house nothing in it 
but the old housemaid : we can't roast her she would be 
tougher than Pedrillo. Let's be off to Brooke&'s. By the 
by, you don't belong to Brookes's : I remember you said it 
was too expensive, when George wanted to get you put up. 
Well, you can eat your dinner at your Junior United Service 
Club ; and we will meet here, at home, at ten o'clock, and 
talk matters over quietly." 

Lord Cumberworlh got into his hackney-coach, and De 
Molton walked off to his club, to snatch a hasty morsel, and 
return to South Audley Street, there to ruminate sadly upon 
his future fate until his father should join him. There was 
much of bitterness in his reflections. He could not help re- 
pining at the unequal distribution of fortune, and thinking it 
hard that the happiness of two beings should be wrecked for 
lack of that contemptible thing, money. He almost doubted 
whether he was acting rightly by Lady Blanche in abandoning 
her when she had all but acknowledged her love for him. 
And yet, what could he do ? His worldly pelf consisted but 
of his pay, and the very moderate allowance his father was 
able to make him. He had nothing to look to. His father's 
property was entailed upon the eldest son his circumstances 
were embarrassed he had been obliged to let Cumberworth 
Hall, and lived principally in London, making an occasional 
excursion to some watering-place : there was no chance of his 

BLANCHE. 305 

saving money, and there were twelve of them to divide the 
fifty thousand pounds settled on younger children. Lady 
Blanche certainly had no dislike to Glenrith, or she would 
never have accepted him : and who could know Glenrith, and 
not learn to value and to love his kind feelings and singleness 
of heart ? The more he reflected, the more strengthened he 
was in his purpose. When he was far away, she would 
assuredly forget the slight prepossession she had entertained 
for him, and she would soon give her whole heart to Glenrith. 
When he had brought his reasonings to this most desirable 
point, he found it infinitely more painful than any other view 
of the subject. 

His father returned about ten o'clock, and after arranging to 
write immediately to the person with whom they had been in 
treaty for the exchange, and to lose no time in procuring the 
proper stock of articles necessary for the voyage, as there was 
a possibility of the regiment sailing within a fortnight, they 
agreed to leave London the following afternoon, and to join 
the rest of the family at Brighton. 

" Well, cheer up, my boy ! " said Lord Cumberworth, as 
he bade his son good night. " There is no use in fretting 
there are more pretty girls than one in the world, and you are 
not the first sentimental young man who has been crossed in 
love. // enfant passer par Id. We have all been crossed in 
love in our time. I, myself, was very much smitten with 
another woman when I married your mother ; but I saw that 
my marrying Helen was out of the question, and so I did 
what they all wished me to do, and it answered just as well. 
Your mother is a very good woman, Frank, and I am very 
fond of her. So cheer up, my boy never be down-hearted! 
You will forget your Dulcinea long before you cross the line." 
He was closing the door, when he turned back again to say, 
" Frank, you look for all the world as if you were younger 
brother to the knight of La Mancha el cavaliere de la triste 
figura, with your pale cheeks and your high forehead. I 
would not be a skill of wine or a windmill in your way for 
something ! " 

The good-humoured but unsentimental father chuckled at 
his own joke, and went off to bed so relieved that his son 
would be secured from the impending danger, that it quite 
reconciled him to his departure. 

x 

306 BLANCHE. 

When they arrived at Brighton late the following evening, 
poor Lady Cumberworth was in despair at the prospect of her 
pet, her darling, the most affectionate, the most considerate, 
the most dutiful of all her children, running all the risks con- 
sequent upon a banishment to India ; " not only," as she said, 
" braving perils by sea and perils by land, but those of climate 
and disease." 

'' There are worse perils in England, Mary," replied her 
husband with a knowing wink. " Perils by eyes are the most 
dangerous for handsome young fellows ! Depend upon it, he 
is far safer in the other hemisphere ; for peril by marriage is 
the worst of all that is to say, when a man has nothing, and 
never can have anything as long as lives." 

De Molton shrunk at hearing his attachment alluded to 
among all the family circle ; though to his dear gentle mother 
he could have opened his whole heart, and to most of his sisters 
individually also. The eldest was grown a little starch, and 
the youngest was rather too young and giddy ; but the four 
middle ones had plenty of romance in them, and would have 
listened to his tale with tears in their eyes. To any one of them 
in a tete-a-tete he might have spoken his feelings ; but to have 
twelve curious, wondering, though kind eyes, turn upon him at 
once, was peculiarly unpleasant to a sensitive and reserved man. 

Lady Cumberworth saw his distress, and hastened to say, 
" We were just going to bed when you arrived. I shall carry 
Frank off to have a quiet gossip with him ; so good night, 
girls!" 

De Molton followed his mother, and in her found a sym- 
pathizing listener one who entered into all his difficulties, 
and who was ready to love poor Blanche for appreciating her 
own dear Frank as he deserved. But she saw that, deeply as 
his affections were engaged, their union was impracticable ; and 
she was obliged, though most reluctantly, to confess that a tem- 
porary absence, and entire change of scene, were likely to spare 
his feelings and principles many a trial. 

Lady Cumberworth entreated her husband not to annoy 
poor Frank by any allusion to his unfortunate attachment. 

" Lord bless the fellow ! " exclaimed Lord Cumberworth, 
" I never meant to annoy him ! I know he is d shly in love, 
and that is all I said ! And I only said, he could not marry, 
and that he knows well enough ! w 

BLANCHE. 307 

" He is unhappy, and we must refrain from remarks that 
wound his delicacy just now." 

" Delicacy fiddlestick ! You always did spoil that boy 
and you will make him as full of feelings, and nerves, and 
refinement, as the most fanciful woman of you all ! " 

The young ladies also met in a nocturnal synod. (< What 
is this love of Frank's ? " exclaimed Mary. 

(S How papa made him blush ! " said Laura. 

" And is he really going to India?" asked Charlotte. 

" Who is the girl?" inquired Emily. 

" And why could not mamma talk to him before us, I 
wonder ? " added Katherine, the youngest, who was rather pert. 

" When you are a little older, you will know that people do 
not like to discuss les affaires du cceur en pleine.salle," answered 
Jane the eldest ; and with a dignified air she retired to bed. 

" I suppose Jane wishes to persuade us she has some love 
affairs of her own, though we know nothing about them," con- 
tinued the merry Katherine : " she has preserved a most dig- 
nified mystery upon the subject, ever since I have been grown 
up." 

After a few more questions which could elicit no answers, 
seeing that all parties were equally in the dark, the sisters 
separated for the night, and all found the repose they sought 
except Lady Cumberworth, who acutely felt the approaching 
separation from her son, and still more the pain that darling 
son was doomed to endure. 

Lady Cumberworth was not one who considered the suffer- 
ings of lovers as matter for sport; she had been fervently 
attached in her early youth, and the object of that attachment 
had been snatched from her by death. On her side, as well as 
on her husband's, their marriage had been one of reason and of 
expediency. But she had made him an excellent wife, had 
borne him a large family, and they had always been a happy 
and affectionate couple happier, perhaps, than if one of the 
parties, and only one, had felt more warmly. 

In a fortnight from the time De Molton joined his family 
at Brighton, he tore himself from the arms of his sisters, and, 
lastly, from the long, speechless, close embrace of his mother, 
to whose more sad and sacred affection all instinctively yielded 
the parting caress. 

He sailed with his regiment, and we will leave him for a 
x 2 

308 BLAN 

while, losing the sense of all his romantic and high-wrought 
sensibilities in the absorbing sufferings often endured in tlu 
Bay of Biscay. 

CHAPTER VI. 

% No te falter* otra Dama 
Hermota r de galan Ulle, 
Quc t* qirtwm, y tu I* quieraa 
Pursue k> aeiwce* Zajrde. 

afanitk Romance. 

TIIK visit of the Falkinghams at Cransley had now lasted more 
than ten days. Blanche ardently wished to be at home again. 
She felt wretched, hypocritical, and guilty. She found herself 
so uncomfortable where she was, that she imagined any change 
must be for the better. When they left Cransley, Lord Gkm- 
rith was to pay his parents a visit of a few days, and then to 
join them at Temple Loseley ; after which they were all to 
proceed to London for the purpose of procuring the wedding 
paraphernalia. 

Lady Blanche's depression became so evident, that even 
Lord Glenrith, although not an acnte observer, could not avoid 
perceiving it. He was exceedingly flattered, and attributed it 
all to his approaching absence. He kindly consoled her. "I 
shall soon be with you again, Blanche. I love my father and 
mother dearly ; but just now 1 do not think even they can 
succeed in keeping me above three days away from you. I 
hate the thought of leaving you, but it will be such a pleasure 
to meet again ! will it not, dearest Blanche? I think it will 
almost make up for the pain of parting ; and then I suppose, 
I need not leave you any more. So we have nothing but joy 
before us." And he wondered his betrothed did not appear to 
be more consoled by this prospect. 

He has handed them all into their travelling barouche, and 
1st 1 has thrown himself into his britska, and they have left 
Cransley in opposite directions. All the rest of the party had 
previously dispersed all but Mr. Wroxholme, and he was 
going to town the next day. As he and Lady Westhope stood 
upon the steps watching the receding vehicles, they could not 
help communicating to each other their fears concerning the 

BLANCHE. 309 

approaching marriage. Lady Westhope was exceedingly out 
of spirits at poor Blanche's prospects, and Mr. Wroxholme 
entered into her feelings, with all the delicacy of a person with 
good heart and good taste. 

As their barouche rolled smoothly along, Lord and Lady 
Falkingham fell into deep and earnest conversation : Blanche 
sat in the back seat, absorbed in her own meditations. The 
road lay through an open, hilly, and heathy country, watered 
by small rivulets, on the immediate banks of which were some- 
times seen a solitary cottage, and, close around, a small patch 
of cultivated ground. It was a mild watery day, with little 
positive rain, but one in which the shifting lights and gleams 
of pale sunshine give a purple hue to the heathy hill-side, and 
a bright yellow to the green meadow, or the mossy swamp. 
Her eyes mechanically watched the varying hues, and at 
length fixed themselves upon a lonely turf-roofed hut in the 
valley below. ec How peaceful must be existence in such a 
hut!" she thought within herself; "no worldly considera- 
tions, no aspirations after rank and situation, can there inter- 
fere with the affections. A strong arm and a willing mind 
are all that are required to authorize the peasant lover to seek 
the hand of his peasant mistress. Personal, individual qualities 
alone are considered, not the adventitious recommendations 
of fortune. How much happier must be that rank of life, 
where love, and love alone, leads to an union which is to 
endure as long as life itself ! Oh ! if I could, in honour and in 
respectability, become the wife of De Molton, how willingly 
would I resign every luxury to which I have been born, and 
live in that very cottage, unnoticed and unknown ! I think I 
could gladly perform even the household drudgery : I could 
feed the chickens and sweep the brick floor, and pile up the 
blazing faggots, and prepare my husband's evening meal if 
that husband were De Molton ! " 

She gazed upon the cottage as long as it remained in sight, 
and almost felt as if she left a place that was endeared to her 
by habit, when a turn in the road concealed it from her view. 

It may be much questioned whether Lady Blanche's view 
of the various conditions of life were a correct one, and whether 
there may not exist as much, or more, disinterested love in 
the higher orders than in the lower. 

But her thoughts continued, " And feeling thus, shall I 
x 3 

310 BLANCHE. 

promise entire, undivided, eternal love to another man ? Has 
not my life been an enacted lie for the last fortnight? Can I 
make up my mind to continue for years and years this unceas- 
ing duplicity ? I thought De Mol ton's image would have faded 
from my mind I thought I should each day have become 
more attached to Lord Glenrith. I hear of so many happy 
wives who did not marry for love ! But is this the case ? 
No ! his image rises to my mind's eye more frequently than 
ever, and I find my soul recoil more, every day, from poor dear 
Lord Glenrith's tenderness. 1 shall behave ill to him in break- 
ing off the marriage, and I shall be called a jilt ; but shall I 
not behave more ill to him by marrying him, when I feel as I 
now do ? I will tell him the whole truth myself ! It is a horrid 
alternative, but I cannot I cannot marry him !" 

The day after their arrival at borne Lady Blanche com- 
municated to her mother the resolution the had formed. Lady 
Falkingham was thunderstruck. Blanche had continued for 
the last week to admit of Lord Glenrith's attentions, and had 
never again alluded to her attachment, so that Lady Falking- 
ham had convinced herself the childish affair had passed from 
her mind. She was inexpressibly grieved at the information ; 
but she was a woman of principle, and could not insist upon 
her daughter's marrying, while a passion, which would become 
criminal, retained full possession of her breast Lord Falking- 
ham, as might be expected, was very indignant perhaps 
more so at first than his wife had been ; but when the first 
ebullition of anger was past, he was sooner able to resume his 
usual bearing towards his daughter. The days are passed, 
when any measures, beyond argument and persuasion, can be 
put into practice to force an unwilling bride to the altar ; and 
argument and persuasion were of no avail with one who un- 
equivocally declared that she had tried in vain to subdue her 
love for De Mol ton that her efforts to return Lord (ilenrith's 
affection were totally unavailing, and that, if she found herself 
his wife, she should be utterly miserable. 

Two days had elapsed from Lord Glenrith's departure for 
his father's. On the third he was expected at Temple Loseley. 
There was no cross post ; there was no time to write ; and, 
indeed, Blanche thought she had rather tell him the whole 
truth herself, as she could better exonerate bis friend from any 
blame, by word of mouth, than by letter. 

BLANCHE. 311 

Never did three persons await the coming of a gay and 
gallant bridegroom with more uncomfortable feelings. At the 
appointed moment on the third day he arrived, beaming with 
honest joy. After the first greeting, he slipped upon the 
finger of his love, with an attempt at sentimental mystery, a 
ring containing his own hair. He also brought from his mother 
the family diamonds, which, she said, would infinitely better 
grace the blooming young bride than the sober matron. Lord 
Glenrith exhibited them with some pride and great delight ; 
pride at the family glories delight at offering them to 
Blanche. 

Never were diamonds received so awkwardly, and with so 
little apparent gratitude. 

" Why, Blanche ! you do not seem to care about the dia- 
monds," he said, in rather a mortified tone. 

" Indeed I am very, very grateful to Lady Wentnor for 
her constant, her unmerited kindness to me so much more 
than I deserve ! " 

" You are very modest, my dear Blanche ! Well ! I hope 
it is that you are so glad to see me, you cannot think about 
the diamonds ; and if that is the case I will forgive you, and 
so will my mother too, I dare say. I have been told many 
women love their diamonds better than their husbands : that 
will not be your case, I trust, or you will care very little for 
me." He hurried off" to dress for dinner, a little put out by 
the reception he had met with. 

The dinner was most distressing. Lord Glenrith began, in 
the innocence of his heart, to tell them everything he had done, 
every arrangement that had been made, and how Lord and 
Lady Wentnor meant to visit Leamington for a few weeks, 
and to relinquish Wentnor Castle to them for their honey- 
moon ; but he found his audience so cold, that he in his turn 
became chilled and daunted. 

As they left the dining-room, Lady Blanche summoned all 
her courage, and said, " I wish to speak to you presently in 
the breakfast-room." 

The die was cast ! She must now tell him all. She seized 
her mother's arm as they crossed the hall. " O, mamma ! what 
a task I have to perform ! How could I ever accept poor 
dear Lord Glenrith, and plunge myself into this dreadful 
difficulty?" 

x 4 

312 BLAN 

" My dear, say rather, * How could I let myself fall in 
love with a man whom it is utterly impossible I should 
marry ?' that would be more to the purpose. But it is too 
late now : there is no use in retrospection ! " 

It was not many minutes before they heard the dining- 
room doors open. Lady Blanche rushed into the breakfast* 
room adjoining, and in two seconds Lord Glenrith followed 
her. He saw something unusual had occurred, and he felt 
uneasy, but his mind never glanced towards what awaited 
him. " Well, Blanche, what in the world have you to say to 
me ?" and he seated himself on the sofa by her side. " How 
glad I am we are once more quietly here, and no longer sur- 
rounded by simpering, quizzing acquaintances ! " And there 
seemed a considerable danger of his attempting to put his arm 
round her waist. If he did meditate such a thing, his in- 
tentions were by no means carried into effect, for she started 
up to take her reticule off the table, and re-seated herself at 
the opposite side of the fireplace in an arm-chair. 

" Lord Glenrith," she said, " I have something upon my 
mind which has made me very miserable of late." 

" Miserable ! you miserable, and I not know it ! What 
can I do, dearest Blanche ? You know I would go through 
fire and water to serve you.** 

" Do not speak so kindly to me, you make what I have 
to say more painful, more difficult I deserve nothing from 
you but hatred and contempt." 

41 What are you talking about ? Are you in your right 

" Scarcely, I believe ; for any other woman would think 
herself the happiest and most fortunate of creatures in marry- 
ing you ; and if I was to do so, I should be both wicked and 
wretched !" 

" Not marry me, Blanche ! you are dreaming. What 
can all this mean ? It is very unpleasant, though you cannot 
mean what you are now saying." 

" Indeed I do mean what I say ; and you cannot know 
how much I have suffered in coming to this conclusion." 

'* This is strange this is unaccountable ! " and he passed 
his hands over his eyes, as if to make sure he was awake. 
" Have I done anything to change your opinion of me ? I 
am not aware of having been wanting in any way and I am 

BLANCHE. 313 

sure, Blanche, I have loved you truly and sincerely." A tear 
glistened in his eye. " Tell me what I have done, and I will 
correct my fault. You are only saying this to try me ; and if 
so, let me tell you that it is a very foolish jest, and one en- 
tirely unworthy of you." The colour mounted into his face, 
and he looked for a moment extremely angry. 

" No ! Lord Glenrith, this is no jest ! I am in sober, se- 
rious, most sad earnest. Your conduct towards me has been 
from the beginning ten thousand times better than I deserved; 
but I should be treating you shamefully if I were to marry 
you when my heart is another's." 

" Your heart another's ! Did you say so ? Your heart 
another's ! Then why, on earth, did you accept me ? " 

" Well may you ask that question, and well may I blush to 
answer it ! I thought my affection was unrequited, and I 
esteemed you. My parents thought more highly of you than 
of any one. I believed I should soon prefer you to the one 
person I had loved, as much as I already did to all common 
acquaintances ; and it was not till I found my affection was 
not unrequited, that I became aware of the depth and strength 
of my own attachment. I have been miserable ever since, 
and all I can now do is to tell you the honest truth." 

Lord Glenrith sat with his eyes fixed on the ground. " This 
is a cruel blow ! " he said at last ; " I have not deserved this 
from you, Lady Blanche. And who is the favoured object? 
By heaven, it must be De Molton ! I remember his coun- 
tenance at dinner the day he was at Cransley how pale he 
looked, and how continually he strove to catch a view of you 
by the epergne ; and every time he met my eye, he looked in 
another direction ! I am born to be made a fool of to be 
deceived by the friend I have loved from childhood, and by 
the woman to whom I would fain have devoted all the rest 
of my existence ! " He hid his face in his hands. 

" Blame me, Lord Glenrith, for I deserve your reproaches ; 
but your friend has never deceived you : Captain de Molton 
has always considered you more than himself." 

" Then it is De Molton ! These are the actions dictated 
by his high-flown notions of honour ! A plain, matter-of-fact 
man would never have proved such a shabby fellow ! ' 

"Captain de Molton shabby!" The word "shabby" 
sounded strangely on her ear when coupled with the name of 

314 BLAN 

De Molton. She would have answered Lord Glenrith an- 
grily, if the consciousness of how deeply she had wronged him 
had not checked her speech ; but she could rather have for- 
given his calling her lover a black-hearted villain, than a 
" shabby fellow." " Lord Glenrith," she repeated, " you 
wrong your friend. He carefully concealed from me bis 
feelings till till " 

" Till you had promised to marry me ! " 

" Till he fancied the avowal of them could not endanger 
your happiness, or, as he imagined, mine. When he took 
leave of me at Oansley, he showed some emotion, which 
caused him to reproach himself for betraying feelings he had 
long concealed. Then first 1 learned he did experience any 
feelings which he wished to conceal, and this discovery pro- 
duced a revolution in my mind which appalled me. I strove 
to blind myself as to the nature of my sentiments, I strove to 
conquer them, in vain ; and now, what can I do, but throw 
myself on your mercy, and implore you to forgive me for 
having ever accepted the devotion of an honest man, whose 
affection I could not requite as it deserved!" She held out 
her hand to him. 

"Oh, Blanche! you break my heart!" and he kissed the 
hand which she did not withdraw : she felt a tear fall upon it. 
Her very soul seemed to melt towards the kind being to whom 
she was giving so much pain. 

" Believe me, Lord Glenrith, when I tell you, that every 
sentiment of esteem, respect, and gratitude every sentiment 
which my reason can command, is yours ; and that I esteem 
and respect you too highly to wish you married to a wife who 
cannot give you her whole heart In a short time you will 
forget a person who has caused you nothing but disappoint- 
ment and annoyance; and you will find many, many girls 
who will esteem themselves fortunate in being allowed to 
devote to you their first affections. You will soon rejoice 
in the liberty I now restore to you. While I have nothing 
in store for me but contempt and ridicule, you will find, with 
some one far superior to me in all respects, happiness, which 
I must not hope for." 

" Never, Blanche, never ! I shall never marry ! " And 
Lord Glenrith conscientiously believed what he uttered. 

"Before we part, tell me that you forgive Captain De 

BLANCHE. 315 

Molton, and that you believe me when I assure you, that he 
never intended to interfere with your interests." 

" Yes," he said, " I do believe you, and I will try to for- 
give De Molton." 

Everything was said. Blanche felt that their return to the 
drawing-room was very awkward, but there was no other 
course to pursue. She led the way to the door there was 
nothing left for Lord Glenrith but to follow after. He felt 
that something of ridicule always attached itself to his posi- 
tion ; but at the same time he felt injured, and he tried to put 
a certain resolute and dignified air into his walk. He looked 
flushed and heated, his eye glanced suspiciously and uneasily 
from side to side, but he attempted to assume an unembar- 
rassed deportment. 

CHAPTER VII. 

The smile that on thy lips erewhile 

So kindly wont to play 
That could each idle care beguile 

Of Love's first golden day, 
Now, when lone Fancy rules the hour, 

At evening's lingering close, 
Comes o'er my soul with mightier power, 

To soothe my real woes. 

Unpublished Poems. 

LORD and Lady Falkingham were seated, one on each side 
of the fireplace, awaiting the result of the conference which 
was taking place in the apartment within. They had been 
pathetically lamenting the folly with which Blanche was re- 
solved to throw away the most desirable establishment in the 
world ; and they had been indulging in unpleasant anticipa- 
tions of what the world would say when it was known that a 
daughter of theirs was an avowed jilt. The door of the 
breakfast-room opened, and Blanche entered : Lord Glenrith 
followed close behind. Lady Falkingham perceived, at a 
glance, that the unacknowledged hope, which she had still 
cherished, of Lord Glenrith's eloquence prevailing at the last, 
was doomed to annihilation ! 

During their absence the tea had been brought in, and the 
urn was smoking and boiling upon the table. Lady Blanche 

31 6 BLANCHE. 

sat down before it, and rejoiced in her mother's old-fashioned 
fancy for having the tea made in the drawing-room. 

Lady Falkingham and her daughter took the earliest op- 
portunity of retiring for the night. Lord Glenrith lighted 
their candles, and opened the door for them. As they passed, 
Lady Falkingham pressed his hand with an expressive look 
of sorrow and of regret. Lady Blanche held oat hers, and 
uttered in a low voice, " We part friends ! " He took her 
hand, and turned away. 

When the door was closed, Lord Falkingham addressed 
him: 

" I am afraid, Glenrith, yon have had a very unpleasant 
conversation with my daughter. I need not tell you how 
much my wife and myself regret the foolish fancy the girl 
has taken into her head. But what can we do? We cannot, 
in justice to you, urge her to fulfil her engagement" 

" I should be the last man to wish Lady Blanche's affec- 
tions to be controlled ; and I hope I know sufficiently what 
is due to myself, not to wish any woman to be forced into a 
marriage with me." 

After a few more words of regret and kindness on the part 
of Lord Falkingham, they also parted for the night. 

The next morning all the jewels and trinkets which he had 
presented to Blanche were restored to him, and before the 
family were assembled round the breakfast-table he was se- 
veral miles on his road to Wentnor Castle. 

Lord Glenrith felt his disappointment keenly, for he loved 
Blanche. He felt his mortification keenly ; for although not 
vain (if by vanity we understand a desire to show off in the 
eyes of others), still he entertained no mean opinion of him- 
self. He had never in his life before met with anything bat 
success. He had been accustomed to the admiring affection 
of his parents, the devotion of his dependants, die good- 
fellowship of his equals, the attention of his inferiors ; and he 
had been early warned by hit mother to be guarded in hi* 
manner towards young ladies, lest he should excite hopes 
which he could not realise hopes which he found them, 
generally speaking, only too ready to entertain. Astonishment, 
therefore, almost equalled the other emotions to which we 
have alluded. He turned and turned in his bead how he 
should break to his parents the result of the preceding evening's 

BLANCHE. 317 

conversation, and he felt that he equally dreaded their pity, 
and their indignation. 

By degrees, as he got farther from Temple Loseley and 
nearer to Wentnor Castle, he found his love and his grief 
diminish, and his mortification and disappointment increase, 
till, by the time he reached the lodge, he thought he could have 
endured the latter, provided the publicity of his engagement 
had not exposed him, while writhing under the former, to the 
pity, the stare, and the jest, of great and small, rich and poor, 
old and young. 

Blanche's first sensation, upon retiring to her room, was 
that of relief and freedom. She felt as though a weight of 
guilt and deceit was removed from her bosom, and she re- 
solved she would now indulge herself in thinking of De 
Molton as much as she pleased. But the mortified expression 
of Lord Glenrith's countenance would rise up to her mind's 
eye ; and she found herself more occupied with him, and less 
with the image of De Molton, than at any other moment since 
their meeting at Cransley. She scarcely knew, whether satis- 
faction at having now done that which was decidedly honest, 
sincere, and unworldly, or self-reproach for having so wronged 
Lord Glenrith by ever entering into an engagement with him, 
ought to preponderate, and, upon the whole, she found her- 
self less happy than she expected. 

The ensuing weeks passed drearily enough. Lady Falking- 
ham was under the necessity of announcing to her friends and 
relations that her daughter's marriage was broken off; an 
occupation which did not raise her spirits, or smooth her 
temper. Of course the true reason could not be openly di- 
vulged, or all hope must be relinquished of Blanche's ever 
forming any other alliance. It is strange, but it is an un- 
doubted fact, that a girl loses half her attraction if her 
maiden affections are supposed to have been in any degree 
touched ; while there is a peculiar charm attached to the idea 
of a widow, although it may be presumed she has known 
what it is to inspire, and to experience, all the emotions at- 
tendant upon love. 

Blanche herself wrote to her sisters ; and as she felt that 
her rejection of Lord Glenrith bound her fate in some mea- 
sure to that of Captain de Molton, she made no mystery of 
the prepossession which had rendered her incapable of doing 
justice to Lord Glenrith's good qualities. 

318 BLANCHE. 

She had scarcely despatched these letters, when she read 
in the newspapers the departure of De Molton with his regi- 
ment for the East Indies. He had sailed the very day of her 
final interview with Lord Glenrith. She experienced a blank 
sensation nearly allied to mortification ; forgetting what were 
the motives which induced him to seek safety and repose in 
another hemisphere. 

Still, when she rejected Lord Glenrith, she did not quite 
anticipate that there was to be an end of everything. She 
had not precisely looked forward to sitting down quietly in 
deep retirement with her father and mother, till the arrival of 
another spring should summon them to London, there to be 
dragged the weary round of insipid entertainments, without 
the hope or the possibility of seeing the only face she wished 
to see. Her home was no longer what it had been. Lord 
Falkingham's vanity was mortified in the daughter of whom 
he had hitherto been exceedingly proud. Lady Falkingham, 
although not absolutely unkind, was cold and reserved, and 
never encouraged her to speak of feelings, which she always 
treated as a silly, unreasonable, youthful whim. On all oc- 
casions, the attachments of young people were spoken of in a. 
slighting and contemptuous manner, which confirmed Blanche 
in her resolution to prove, that hers was not a passing fancy 
but a real, sincere, and respectable attachment. 

Captain De Molton, after a prosperous voyage, had arrived 
at Calcutta just about the time when the meeting of parlia- 
ment called Lord Falkingham to London ; and Blanche with 
pain and disgust saw the bracelets, the trinkets, the jewels, 
which her various friends had given her upon her expected 
nuptials, packed up to adorn her person during the ensuing 
season. She felt she never could bring herself to wear these 
tokens ; for although it had been impossible to return any, 
except those which had been presented by Lord Glenrith's 
family, it seemed to her as if they had all been obtained under 
false pretences. 

De Molton had struggled hard to bring his mind to a state 
of calm acquiescence in his fate. He had tried to accustom 
himself to the idea of Lady Blanche as the wife of Lord 
Glenrith ; he had used all possible means to divert his thoughts 
from his unfortunate passion ; he had occupied himself during 
his voyage with studying some of the Eastern languages, 'with 

BLANCHE. 319 

learning everything connected with Eastern warfare; and 
although the renown to be gained in India at the expense of 
health, if not of life, falls far short of that gained in an 
European campaign, still he resolved that Fame should now 
become his mistress. 

He had not been more than three weeks at Calcutta, when 
a letter reached him from his mother, which overturned all 
the good resolutions he had formed, and rendered him almost 
incapable of profiting by the opportunities which now offered 
themselves of perfecting his knowledge of Hindostanee or 
Sanscrit, or of putting in practice the tactics he had studied. 

His mother informed him that the marriage between Lord 
Glenrith and Lady Blanche de Vaux was suddenly broken off, 
and that no cause was assigned for the event except that the 
lady " had changed her mind." She tried to persuade him 
that the case was as hopeless as ever for himself, and she 
resisted the temptation of telling him it was whispered that 
a preference for himself was the true cause of the rupture. 
Although she longed to communicate what she knew must 
give him pleasure, even she was aware that it would be weak- 
ness and folly to keep alive a passion to which no prosperous 
termination could be anticipated. 

Her intelligence, however, was sufficient to inspire De 
Molton with an ardent desire to return to England. Lady 
Blanche was free : honour no longer called upon him to avoid 
her ; on the contrary, honour seemed to demand that he should 
now profess his anxiety to devote himself to her for life ; and 
he bitterly lamented having so rashly banished himself from 
his native land. Yet, upon his first arrival in India, he could 
not in decency apply for leave of absence. He suffered tortures 
of perplexity, doubt, and anxiety. At one time, he thought 
he would write to Lady Blanche, and regularly make her an 
offer of himself and of his fortunes. Then he shrank from 
doing so ; for what were the fortunes he was able to offer her? 
and, moreover, such a proceeding would be assuming that it 
was for his sake she had broken off her marriage with Lord 
Glenrith, a conclusion he had in fact no right to draw. 

The news contained in his mother's letter was already six 
months old. Before his answer could reach England, another 
six months must have elapsed. What events might not have 
taken place in that time ! Lady Blanche would have passed 

.,'() BLANCHE. 

through another season in London : with her beauty, she must 
have been surrounded by admirers. It was possible, nay pro- 
bable, that his letter might find her married, or on the eve of 
marriage with some one else. How ridiculous then would his 
conceited assumption appear in her eyes! No he would 
wait, at all events, for further information ; at the same time 
fully resolved to let slip no opportunity of returning home, 
when he might easily judge for himself whether an offer on 
his part would or would not be esteemed presumption. 
Then again he thought, if for his sake Glenrith had indeed 
been rejected, bow cold and how ungrateful must be appear, 
not instantly to avail himself of the chance afforded him. 
Fortunately for him, bis thoughts were necessarily in some 
measure withdrawn from his own annoyances, by his regiment 
being marched up the country, and by being encaged in some 
slight but animating skirmishes with the Pindarries. 

The prospect of active service rendered his applying for 
leave of absence absolutely out of the question. All doubt 
upon that subject was thereby set at rest. It also seemed to 
set at rest the question whether he should or should not ad- 
dress Lady Blanche herself : it was impossible to hint at 
her plighting her troth to him in a foreign land, from which 
he might never return, or of her keeping herself disengaged 
in the hope, at some future indefinite period, of following the 
drum with him from country quarter to country quarter. 

He relieved his mind by writing to his mother a full state* 
ment of his perplexed feelings, and by imploring her, if pos- 
sible, to convey them to Lady Blanche ; and having done so, 
he resolutely bent all his energies to the discharge of bis pro- 
fessional duties ; while his heart beat high with the cheering 
hope of returning to her feet, bis name coupled with deeds of 
valour, and illustrated by feats of military prowess. 

BLANCHE. 

CHAPTER VIII. 

The sooto season that bud and bloom forth brings 
With preene hath cladde the hyll, and eke the dale 

The night ingall with feathers new she sings, 
The turtle to her mate hath told the tale. 

LORD SURREY. 

THE " soote season " had arrived, and the Falkingham family 
were in London. Lady Blanche's heart sank within her at 
the prospect of the wearisome pleasures in which she would 
be forced to join. She shrank also from the idea of being 
looked upon in the light of a jilt. 

Though Lady Falkingham, by her system of education, had 
not been able to subdue the natural warmth of Lady Blanche's 
feelings, or her somewhat headlong indulgence of them, she 
had succeeded in inspiring her with her own horror of being 
subject to the animadversions or the ridicule of the world, and 
Lady Blanche felt, more keenly than most girls, what is con- 
sidered as a disgrace by all who have been well brought up. 

She thought that the only mode of redeeming herself in the 
estimation of others was to adopt manners the most reserved ; 
and to justify, by her scrupulous fidelity to the object for 
whom it was now pretty generally understood she had rejected 
Lord Glenrith, the inconsistency from which she could not 
clear herself. 

Lady Falkingham, whose most ardent wish was to see her 
daughter settled, was in a continual state of vexation at the 
distant and chilling manner with which Blanche received the 
most common attentions. There was truth in the charge her 
mother brought against her, of being on the defensive, even 
before she was attacked : and though there is nothing more 
attractive than the reserve which springs from innate modesty, 
Lady Falkingham knew full well, that few things more offend 
the self-love of men, and render them proof against the charms 
a woman may really possess, than the reserve which seems to 
proceed from contempt, or from a pre-determination to check 
their advances. 

Blanche would gladly have passed her days in retirement, 
but her parents believed that the only mode of effacing the 
impression made by Captain De Molton was to place her in 

Y 

322 r.r.AM in . 

the society of others. Moreover, to seclude herself entirely 
from the world, would be a tacit acknowledgment of desrrvi;i : j; 
blame. At all the usual places of amusement they were con- 
sequently seen. But the calm brow of Lady Falkingham had 
acquired a careful and discontented expression ; and the bright 
glances and glowing smile of Lady Blanche had given place to 
a cold and stately pensiveness. She danced occasionally, but 
partners no longer disputed the honour of her hand. She 
sometimes received compliments; nor did she dislike them, 
for as she felt an internal dissatisfaction, she would have en- 
joyed anything which tended to reconcile her to herself; but 
she was so afraid of appearing to enjoy them, that she assumed 
a disdainful manner which effectually prevented any recur- 
rence of what appeared to give offence. 

With Lady Westhope alone did she find any comfort. T . 
her she opened her whole heart with her she talked over 
each trifling incident which had occurred during their visit to 
Paris to her she repeated every word De Molton had said 
to her she dwelt on his looks, his manner, his expression, 
in their last interview at Cransley. Lady Falkingham little 
guessed that the cold, the discreet, the immaculate Lady West- 
hope, could be a companion so little calculated to lead her 
daughter to a reasonable and worldly view of her own pro- 
spects ; Lady Westhope, who, unknown to herself, was 
every day acquiring a more thorough conviction, that in 
mutual affection alone can a married woman expect to find 
happiness. Blanche's conversations with Lady Westhope 
tended not only to keep alive the impression produced at Paris ; 
they also made her feel still more pledged to adhere to the 
attachment which she professed. 

It was about the middle of the season when Lord Glenrith 
arrived in London. He and Lady Blanche occasionally met 
at public places, in large and mixed society. Their first meet- 
ing was inexpressibly awkward. By some untoward accident, 
they found themselves ri#-d-tri* of each other in a quadrille. 
Although good breeding might prompt the fourteen or eighteen 
other people in the quadrille to withdraw their eyes from the 
pair who had once been lovers, their attention could not fail 
to be riveted upon them. They were to meet as friends ; 
consequently, they bowed when first they caught each other's 
eye ; and both blushed equally crimson. The rest of the time, 

BLANCHE. 323 

they advanced and retreated, performed their queues de chat 
and their dos-d-dos, without raising their eyes from the floor 
but when poor Lord Glenrith was obliged in the pastorelle 
to figure before Lady Blanche as cavalier seul, she felt ready 
to sink into the earth with distress on his account as well as 
on her own. The effect which this position had upon Lord 
Glenrith, and the degree to which his pride and his self-love 
suffered under the gaze of others, may be deduced from the 
circumstance of his having that night resolved he would not 
long be seen in the light of a discarded lover, and of his having 
the very next day begun a series of devoted attentions to the 

lovely daughter of the Duke of L . Before the London 

season drew to a close, the magnificent trousseau of the future 
Lady Glenrith was the general subject of conversation among 
young ladies ; and the beautiful horses and equipages of Lord 
Glenrith that among young gentlemen. 

Then came the morning when the narrow entrance to St. 
George's Church was crammed with lovely bride's-maids, and 
weeping, smiling relations ; and the afternoon, when half the 
coachmen and footmen in the Park appeared with gorgeous 
favours in their hats ; and the evening, when little morsels of 
tinsel ensconced in white satin ribbon were seen pinned to the 
side, or stuck in the button-hole, of all the most distinguished 
personages of both sexes. 

Blanche and her affairs were utterly forgotten, and she 
heard on all sides descriptions of the loveliness of the bride 
and the happiness of the bridegroom. 

In sober earnest, Blanche rejoiced that her anticipations 
with regard to Lord Glenrith had been so soon realised ; and 
if she could have seen De Molton if she could have heard 
him speak, if she could have received any communication 
from him, if she could have indulged any hope of ever her- 
self knowing the happiness of reciprocal affection, she would 
have utterly despised the frivolous grandeurs which excited 
such a sensation in the London world. 

But with her all seemed a blank. She had wished her story 
should be forgotten, and it was forgotten. No one seemed 
to remember that she might have been in Lady Mary L/s 
situation. She wished people to be aware that, though she had 
jilted Lord Glenrith, she was no flirt; and she had suc- 
ceeded ! No one attempted to make love to her. 
y 2 

324 BLANMir. 

She was sitting with Lady Westhope, when Mr. Wrox- 
holme, who had also been paying a morning visit, took his 
leave. " I have just heard what is to me a very melancholy 
piece of intelligence/' said Lady Blanche. ** Mr. Wroxholme 
tells me Parliament will sit three weeks longer. I feel so 
weary and so jaded with the joyless entertainments to which 
mamma thinks it her duty to take me ! She fancies I may 
thus forget ; but she is mistaken. My thoughts only recur 
the oftener to him from whom she hopes to wean them. I 
think, when among a number of indifferent people, one feels 
the want of the person with whom one would fain interchange 
thoughts and feelings, even more acutely than in the retirement 
of one's own home." 

" That is only too true," answered Lady Westhope, with a 
igh. 

" This U to be alooe- tbU, tbU it solitude." 

" I like Mr. Wroxholme," rejoined Lady Blanche. " He 
looks as if he could understand one. I always feel at my ease 
with him." 

" I told you you would like him ! For my part I think he 
is quite an acquisition. 1 know no one who is d'un plus dotut 
commerce. He has so much tact, and he is particularly 
obliging ! One has but to express before him a wish for any- 
thing, and one is sure to find one's wish gratified." 

" And then he has another great merit in my eyes : he 
cannot endure Mr. Stapleford." 

" And I know of one more merit still," added Lady West- 
hope with a smile " he likes Captain De Molton. They 
were schoolfellows, you know." 

Mr. Wroxholrae had been always interested for Lady 
Blanche and her lover, and, with the tact for which be was 
supposed to be remarkable, had from the first read her feelings. 
When her marriage had been broken off, Lady Westhope had 
not scrupled to speak confidentially to a person who had shown 
so much sympathy and kindness concerning her friend. Mr. 
Wroxholme had warmly approved of Lady Blanche's disin- 
terestedness, and, naturally enough, had spoken his sentiments 
on the subject of worldly marriages. 

He seemed to consider congeniality of tempers, tastes, and 
opinions, as the only objects to be sought in such a connexion ; 

BLANCHE. 325 

and there was something to Lady Westhope's feelings singu- 
larly soothing and agreeable in hearing such sentiments so 
warmly expressed, especially as her strict notions of propriety 
could not take the alarm at a disprejudiced observer merely 
giving an opinion upon the affairs of a third person. 

All he said breathed a tone of high respect for the sex in 
general a generous horror of seeing a woman thrown away 
upon a man who was not worthy of her, or who did not suffi- 
ciently value her, which could not fail to be gratifying to a 
person who felt such to be her own case. 

The indignation he felt at Lord Westhope's neglect of his 
wife, and the pleasure she took in finding herself appreciated, 
might gradually and unconsciously have led them both to 
entertain sentiments for which both would have reproached 
themselves, had nothing occurred to arouse them to a sense of 
their danger. An incident did however occur, which, though 
trifling in itself, served to open the eyes of one who had no 
wish to keep them wilfully closed. 

CHAPTER IX. 

Gentil parlar, in cui chiaro refulse 
Con somma cortesia, somma onestate ; 
Fior di virtd ; fontana di beltate ; 
Ch' ogni basso pensier del cor m'avulse. 

PETRARCA. 

LADY WESTHOPE'S praises of Mr. Wroxholrne, and her in- 
timation of his early intimacy with Captain De Molton, led 
Lady Blanche to talk to him with more satisfaction than to 
any one else. When in conversation with him, her coun- 
tenance resumed some of its former animation ; and they 
frequently met, and always met with pleasure. 

One evening Mr. Wroxholme had been recounting to Lady 
Blanche some boyish prank at school, in which he had con- 
trived to let her know that De Molton had been engaged ; she 
had been listening with an expression of amusement, which 
had been succeeded by a look, half confusion, half tenderness, 
on the incidental mention of De Molton's name, when Mr. 
Stapleford remarked to Lady Westhope, " I think the con- 

y 3 

526 BLANCHE. 

versation in that recess seems to justify the report I heard 
yesterday." 

" What report ? " inquired Lady Westhope. 

" Why, that Wroxholme might succeed in consoling Lady 
Blanche for the loss of her penniless, as well as of her wealthy, 
lover." 

"Oh, what an idea!" exclaimed Lady Westhope. 

" I assure you the report is very general, and I think there 
can be no doubt but that Wroxholme is very much in love." 

" There never was so unfounded a notion ! What could 
put it into anybody's head ? " 

" Though no blue-stocking, I presume Lady Westhope 
knows enough of optics to be aware that the rays of light re* 
fleeted from objects actually before us, passing through the 
different lenses of the eye, are impressed upon the retina, and 
are, by some process beyond the comprehension of us poor 
mortals, thence communicated to the brain : in plain English, 
Lady Westhope has heard the old adage, that seeing is 
believing." 

His eyes, when he began to speak, were fixed upon Lady 
Blanche, who was diligently picking to pieces the bouquet she 
held in her hand ; (Mr. Wroxholme was telling her what a 
good-hearted fellow Frank De Molton was at school, and how 
kind he had been to a poor boy who had been run over by a 
cart;) but as he finished his sentence, he withdrew his most 
penetrating and disagreeable eyes from the couple, whose feel- 
ings he, for once, misinterpreted, and let them fall gently and 
fixedly on Lady Westhope. 

" I can assure you, you are perfectly mistaken in this in- 
stance," Lady Westhope replied with some quickness. " Lady 
Blanche in only likely to be perseveringly, foolishly, constant ; 
and as to Mr. Wroxholme's being in love with her, it is quite 
out of the question." 

" Why out of the question ? " asked Mr. Stapleford, with 
the most provoking matter-of-fact coolness. 

Lady Westhope did not very well know why it was so ; 
but she answered 

'^Oh, he is not the sort of man to fall in love with Blanche." 

" He is an odd sort of man, then, if it is out of the ques- 
tion for him to fall in love with one of the handsomest girls 
in London, who plucks off every leaf of a beautiful camellia 

BLANCHE. 327 

while he is talking to her ! A prepossession in another quarter 
might steel a man's heart even against such attractions as 
those I have alluded to ; and I have no doubt Lady West- 
hope is better versed in the mysterious workings of the human 
heart than I can pretend to be. I must bow therefore to her 
superior knowledge of the state of Mr. Wroxholme's affec- 
tions ;" and, with a supercilious bow, he joined a knot of 
politicians. 

Lady Westhope felt prodigiously annoyed. She could not 
tell why she disliked so much to hear that Mr. Wroxholme 
was in love with Lady Blanche. There was no harm in it if 
he was. She looked upon him as a man with whom a woman 
might be very happy ; and, although not rich, he had a com- 
petency. Why was she so certain he entertained no parti- 
cular preference for her friend ? and why did she feel 
aggrieved at the suspicion ? It could not be that, at her age, 
after having passed unscathed through all the trials of her 
youth, her own heart was in any danger ? What a humili- 
ating, what a degrading surmise ! She felt almost ashamed 
of suspecting herself of such a weakness ; one that she would 
always have thought criminal, but that now would be ridi- 
culous as well as criminal. It was evident, however, that Mr. 
Stapleford did suspect her of harbouring so ridiculous a pre- 
possession, and she scrutinized her own feelings with resolute 
accuracy. 

The truth was, that she had been accustomed for some 
months to feel herself the first object with Mr. Wroxholme ; 
and although no words ever passed which expressed, or im- 
plied, that such might be the case, it was that consciousness 
which made her find his society so agreeable. She had felt so 
secure that she was past the age when she need guard her 
heart from tender impressions, that she had relaxed in her former 
watchfulness ; she had felt so strong in her virtue, that she 
had not taken heed lest she might fall; and it was with a 
sense of deep humiliation and self-abasement that she awoke 
to a conviction of her weakness. She thenceforth resolved to 
keep strict watch and ward over her inward feelings, as well 
as over her outward actions. 

These resolutions were more easily taken than carried into 
effect : she had no right to assume coldness towards a person 
who had never given her the slightest cause of offence, who 
Y 4 

S28 BLA> 

had never presumed upon the intimate footing to which l.e 
had been admitted in the house. 

How difficult is it, with the very best intentions, for a wo- 
man who lives in the world to steer entirely clear of suspicion, 
or misinterpretation, unless there exists between her and her 
husband a frank and cordial understanding ! If, with all her 
knowledge of the world, Lady Westhope did not find it easy 
to shape her conduct so as to be discreet without prudery, and 
cool without unkindness, it is not surprising that the inex- 
perienced should, without really deserving it, occasionally lay 
themselves open to blame. 

The subject of love is one which young ladies are not 
allowed to discuss ; at least, not with their elders. But how 
much have parents to answer for, who, by their avoidance of 
the subject, leave the responsibility of forming their daugh- 
ters' minds on a point of such vital importance, to the man 
whom they may chance to marry ! How much has the hus- 
band to answer for, who, by his neglect, his sternness, or his 
profligate notions, fails to become the guardian of the virtue 
he is bound to protect ! Yet, by light conversation, by re- 
porting gossiping anecdotes, and witty though immoral jokes, 
how frequently does he treat with levity, and make the sub- 
ject of mirth and ridicule, errors, nay crimes, which hitherto 
the girlish matron has scarcely ventured to contemplate ! Is 
it wonderful that the young mind should sometimes, when it 
fancies it only throws off the shackles of old-fashioned pre- 
judice, discard at the same time the restraint of rigid prin- 
ciple? And the husband who has thus contaminated the 
fountain whence the actions flow, is surprised and indignant 
that the purity he once admired should have given place to 
notions more resembling his own ! Is it surprising that a 
young creature, whose mind is thus deprived of ballast and of 
rudder, should in the voyage of life fail to steer clear of shoal* 
and hidden reefs ? 

Fortunately, Lady Westhope had withstood the first trial, 
that of being early united to an unprincipled man ; and 
she had now acquired knowledge of the world, which enabled 
her to meet her present difficulty. 

She debated within herself whether talking to him freely 
concerning marriage, and advising one, who appeared to en- 
tertain such exalted notions of the happiness to be found in 

BLANCHE. 329 

the wedded state, to enter into it himself, might not he a good 
mode of proving how completely she considered herself in the 
light of a friend, though of a kind friend deeply interested in 
his welfare ; but, upon the whole, she decided that it was 
entering upon a dangerous topic. It might be construed into 
the common artifice of coquettes to pique, or to lead to senti- 
mental conversation ; and if, unknown to himself, he did en- 
tertain for her the feelings she more than suspected, it might 
open his eyes to the true nature of them, as Mr. Stapleford's 
insinuations had opened hers. 

In her early youth she had made to herself a rule never to 
admit male visitors in the morning: but, since she had ap- 
proached the middle age, she had gradually relaxed in the 
strictness of her prohibition ; and gentlemen now lounged on 
her sofas, and whipped their boots before her fire, as freely as 
in any other house in London ; and no one more frequently 
than Mr. Wroxholme. These visits, in the first place, she 
resolved to check ; but she knew that an explanation was 
always a thing to be most scrupulously avoided. By remain- 
ing late in her boudoir, and denying herself to all persons 
equally, on the plea of not being dressed ; by seizing every 
opportunity of taking an early drive into the country; she for 
some time succeeded in her object, without wounding one 
whose only fault consisted in regarding her with respectful 
partiality. When he did find her at home, she received him 
cordially, and he was for the moment re-assured that she had 
not intentionally avoided his society. When they met in 
public, though she spoke to him but little, she carefully pre- 
served the tone of friendliness and intimacy. 

Still, in the long run, gently and gradually as the change 
was made, Mr. Wroxholme perceived that there was a change. 
He could not but become aware that he was less frequently 
invited to dinner ; and when invited, that it was to large set 
parties, and not to the hasty repast before the play, the 
friendly gathering of a few intimates ; and he could not but 
be struck with the numerous avocations and engagements 
which so often prevented his finding Lady Westhope at home 
of a morning. 

In the course of time, he became hurt and half angry. 
He had always heard that fine ladies were apt to be capricious, 
and his pride was wounded : he was a gentleman in mind, in 

330 BLANCHE. 

manners, and in birth ; and his spirit rose at the bare suspicion 
of having been so sported with. He, in his turn, avoided Lady 
Westhope, and this was the severest trial she had yet met with. 

They still, however, occasionally met ; for both parties 
wished to preserve the same demeanour towards the other. 
Mr. U'roxholme took an opportunity of expatiating upon the 
meanness of those men who could condescend to be toad-eaters 
and hangers-on of the great : " He had no notion how any one 
with the feelings of a gentleman could endure being take up, 
and set down, at pleasure ; " and asserted, " that a man who 
could submit to such treatment, amply deserved to meet with 
it ! " There was a tone of asperity in his mode of speaking 
which proved that his was not a general observation on men 
and manners, but that he spoke from personal feeling. She 
was inexpressibly hurt, and she determined she would, by 
some means, let him know she was not one of the heartless 
fine ladies to whom he alluded. 

The evening before their departure for the country, she 
invited a few friends to meet at her house ; and, among others, 
Mr. \Vroxholme. She had formed no distinct plan ; and yet 
she vaguely hoped she should be able to undeceive him, and to 
correct the impression he had so erroneously received of her 
late conduct. 

Notwithstanding his wounded pride, he could not resist the 
temptation to pass one more evening in her society. 

The party was small, the conversation general : subjects of 
literature were discussed ; the novels of the day were naturally 
mentioned. From them she easily led the discourse to the 
French novels of the day that is passed, and she took the 
opportunity of remarking how just were the little observations 
and reflections with which they were often interspersed. Mr. 
Wroxholme added, that in knowledge of the smaller workings 
of the human heart, he thought Madame de Genlis was 
scarcely inferior to Madame de Stael. 

" But none of Madame de Genlis's are equal in power to 
Delphine," replied Lady Westhope. 

" Are you a great admirer of Delphine ? " inquired some 
one. 

" A great admirer of the eloquence and fire with which it 
is written ; and if the motto at the beginning is borne in 
mind, the truth of which is forcibly exemplified by the fate of 

BLANCHE. 331 

both the hero and heroine, I think a great moral truth may be 
extracted from it ; though I grant that the charm thrown 
around immoral feelings might render it a dangerous book for 
the young." 

" And what is the motto ? " 

" ' Que 1'homme doit braver 1'opinion, la femme s'y sou- 
mettre.' All the miseries of Leonce and Delphine arise from 
their neither of them following the maxim contained in the 
motto. How fortunate it is for us women, that the opinion 
of the world, and virtue, always prescribe the same line ot 
conduct ! There are many occasions in which it is praise- 
worthy, nay, admirable, in a man to risk the censure of 
his fellows ; many in which he may act ill without risking it. 
But with us it is quite different : it is seldom that we incur 
the condemnation of our own consciences, or the disapproba- 
tion of others, if we avoid not only what is really wrong, but 
that which may bear the semblance of wrong." 

" Well/' interrupted a young man present, " I think it is 
enough for man, or woman, to do what is right, and to leave 
appearances to take care of themselves." 

" I am glad it is a man, not a woman, who says so," re- 
sumed Lady Westhope, smiling. {f I am always grieved and 
alarmed when I hear a woman speak with contempt of the 
opinion of the world : it argues in her neither good feeling, 
cleverness, nor true courage. True courage (in woman) con- 
sists in at once giving up what may be agreeable and innocent 
in itself, rather than risk having one's good name called in 
question." 

Mr. Wrcxholme had listened with interest, for his attention 
had been arrested by the earnestness with which Lady West- 
hope spoke. He suddenly understood all that had previously 
puzzled him in her conduct. He admired and respected her; 
and his wounded pride, his offended vanity, were soothed. 

When she bade him adieu, she expressed a hope that he 
would join their Christmas party at Cransley ; she did not 
invite him for partridge-shooting in September, as she had 
done the previous year. He felt that she meant to be kind, 
yet firm ; and although the intervening six months appeared 
to him immeasurably long in perspective, he had too much 
principle himself to blame her, or to repine. 

There was a cordiality in the respectful devotion with which 

332 BLANCHE. 

Mr. Wroxholme took his leave, which convinced Lady \\ < < ( - 
hope that he no longer looked upon her as a capricious fine 
lady, but as a woman of rigid, uncompromising virtue. 

She felt, however, lowered in her own estimation when she 
could not disguise from herself how great an effort it cost her 
to exercise this same virtue ; and she was indignant, almost 
disgusted, with herself when she found her home cheerless, 
and her time unoccupied, upon her arrival in the country. 
This very feeling roused her to shake off the disgraceful weak* 
ness ; and she resumed her wonted employments, and strove 
to make to herself new ones. 

CHAPTER X. 

And words of imall import, but tinged with gal], 

Jar nu the sense by their unkindly tone. 
The morning greeting may sound harth withal, 

Tin- t'Yenlng Ix-nUon a curse may own ; 
While oft a smile a kindly look alon* 

Born of compunction, falls right soothingly 
On the sick heart, the past offence t* atone, 

Ere word be spoke at all. As violets shy, 
By their sweet breath betray where they are lurking nigh. 

TUB events of the last few weeks in London had also awakened 
Mr. Wroxholme to the state of his own affections ; and he no 
sooner admitted to himself that he had been in danger of 
liking Lady Westhope too well, than he rejoiced in the pru- 
dence and discretion with which she had checked his growing 
preference, and felt grateful that he had been preserved from 
the danger which beset him. 

During the period when London is nearly deserted, and 
that the few who are still detained in its dreary and dirty 
streets are naturally drawn into habits of closer intimacy, he 
was much thrown with the daughter of an eminent lawyer, 
with whom he often had professional intercourse. 

He fancied a considerable resemblance to Lady Westhope's 
in the profile of her nose : her complexion was of the same 
tone ; and he perceived a decided likeness in the setting on of 
the head. 

When Christmas arrived Mr. Wroxholme wrote an excuse 
to the Westhopes, informing them that he was on the eve of 

BLANCHE. 333 

naarriage with the daughter of Sir H. B , and that the 

arrangements attending this happy event must detain him in 
London. He told Lady "\Vesthope that his future bride bore 
a strong resemblance to herself in outward appearance, and 
that he only hoped she might take her as a pattern in more 
essential qualifications. 

How did Lady Westhope feel upon the reception of this 
letter ? She felt exceedingly surprised, for experience only 
can teach woman how short a time love can survive hope in 
the heart of man ; but she felt satisfied, nay relieved. She 
had for six months devoted herself to the performance of her 
duties, she had repelled every weak emotion. She rejoiced 
that Mr. Wroxholme should be happy, she rejoiced that she 
would no longer be called upon to keep strict watch and ward 
over her own heart, and she was gratified by the manner in 
which he spoke of herself. The likeness which he professed 
to discover in Miss B. was a balm to her vanity, and prevented 
its obscuring her reason. She was therefore able to rejoice, as 
her principles pointed out she ought to do, that they had 
escaped all further trial. 

U'hile Lady Westhope was thus regaining tranquillity and 
self-esteem, Blanche toiled through a long summer of very fine 
weather and the usual country occupations, through a long 
autumn and its shooting-parties. She had to listen to the 
number of head of game killed at battues, or to the merits of 
the young hounds or of the new huntsman ; and she con- 
scientiously danced through the winter balls at the county town. 

In some respects she gave great satisfaction to the neigh- 
bours. No one could accuse her of showing the slightest pre- 
ference for the most distinguished young heir apparent over 
the most Tony Lumpkin-like son of the most humble country 
'squire, or the most penniless young curate, who might sum- 
mon courage to ask Lady Blanche De Vaux to dance. In- 
deed, the more out-of-the-question the partner, the more 
gracious was Blanche ; so that the popularity of the house of 
Falkingham was greatly on the increase. Unfortunately there 
was no son, or his chance of being returned for the county- 
would have been considerably augmented : Lord Falkingham's 
family consisted only of daughters, among whom his personal 
property would be divided; while his whole landed estate 
would descend, with the title, to a nephew. 

33 1 BLANCHE. 

A second spring arrived. To London they went again. 
The brilliancy of Lady Blanche's complexion was gone ; her 
step had lost its elasticity, her figure something of its round- 
ness. The last month or two had been to her a period of 
much uneasiness, much mortification. 

She had calculated that the intelligence of her marriaj 
having been broken off, must have reached De Molton, and 
by this time she might have received from him a passionate 
expression of his joy and his devotion. Day after day elapsed 
and no letter arrived. It is impossible to say whether, suffer- 
ing the pangs of (as she imagined) unrequited affection, she 
might not have found a remedy, as it were, in the very excess 
of the disease, had not a circumstance occurred which again 
excited hope. 

Even in woman, love can seldom exist if completely de- 
prived of aliment, though it thrives upon the very smallest 
portion of sustenance imaginable. 

Blanche frequently met Lady Cnmberworth and her daugh- 
ters in society : the very sight of De Molton *s mother caused 
a tremor and an agitation which roused her from the state of 
apathy into which she had fallen. Moreover, she often per- 
ceived Lady Cumberworth's eyes fixed upon her with a kind 
and motherly expression ; and she even fancied she looked as 
if she longed to speak to her, although they had never been 
regularly introduced. Lady Falkingham watched with a 
jealous eye every symptom of intercourse with Lady Cumber- 
worth ; and if they found themselves within speaking distance 
of De Molton's mother, never failed to move to the other side 
of the room. 

One morning Lady Falkingham complained of a cold, and 
promulgated at breakfast that she should not go to Mrs. Bal- 
timore's party that evening. Now Mrs. Baltimore was a 
relation and a particular friend of Lady Cumberworth's. 
Blanche quickly replied, " Oh, do not run any risk on my 
account, dear mamma ! You know Lady Westhope can 
chaperon me." 

" Bless me, Blanche ! " exclaimed her father ; " you, wish- 
ing to go out, and your mother to stay at home ! I am de- 
lighted to find young and old are resuming their natural 
characteristics." 

" Really, Blanche," said Lady Falkingham, I think you are 

BLANCHE. 335 

the most perverse girl I ever knew. Every evening I am 
obliged to urge you to go and dress, to drive you by force to 
the best parties in London ; and the one only night I would 
rather stay at home, you are seized with such a fury of dissi- 
pation, that you wish to send all over the town to find a 
chaperon ! Nothing I dislike so much as that a girl should 
be hawked about, one night with one person, and the next 
night with another ! " 

" But surely, mamma, sending to Lady Westhope is not 
sending all over the town ; and I was so long with her at 
Paris, that it is not like going out with a stranger." 

" Don't talk to me of Paris, Blanche, if you wish me to be 
able to eat any breakfast ; the sample she gave of her cha- 
peronage there, is not calculated to make me anxious to entrust 
you to her again ! " 

<: Really, my dear, I think it is you who are rather perverse : 
you often find fault with Blanche for wishing to shut herself 
up, and for not exerting herself to recover her spirits, and now 
you check her when she attempts to do what you so often 
urge. I have some business with Lord Westhope this morn- 
ing, and if I find Lady Westhope at home, I cannot see any 
objection to my asking her to take Blanche to-night." 

Lady Falkingham could say no more : she could not, before 
Blanche, explain her objections to Mrs. Baltimore's party. She 
resolved, however, to risk a fit of rheumatism, rather than 
allow her daughter to elude her vigilant eye. 

Lord Falkingham quickly settled the evening arrangements 
with Lady Westhope, and as quickly took his leave, to avoid 
the formality of a wedding visit from Mr. and Mrs. Wrox- 
holme, who had just returned from passing their honey-moon 
in the country 

Lady Westhope was exceedingly surprised to find Mrs. 
Wroxholme small and slender, whereas she herself was tall, 
and was altogether a fine woman rather than a pretty one. 
She was also surprised to find that her mouth was wide, 
(though her teeth were so bright, and her smile so sunny, that 
no one who spoke to her would be disposed to criticise it too 
severely,) whereas Lady Westhope's was peculiarly small, and 
classical in its form. The setting on of the head was concealed 
by the winter apparel; and Lady Westhope was not suffi- 
ciently well acquainted with her own profile, to be struck with 

336 

any resemblance in Mrs. Wroxholme's. She scarcely kne\v 
whether or not to be flattered at Mr. Wroxholme's having fan- 
cied a likeness where so little existed ; and yet it proved th.it 
she had been present to his thoughts, and that he could not 
admire any one without trying to discover in her a resem- 
blance to the person he had fixed upon as the type of female 
perfection. 

Mr. Wroxholme looked the happiest of the happy. Mrs. 
Wroxholme was modest without being awkward, and did not 
seem to be indisposed towards her husband's friend, as is so 
frequently the case when the husband has injudiciously praised, 
or the woman has a narrow mind or a jealous disposition. On 
the contrary, she seemed disposed to take it upon trust, that 
the person of whom her husband approved roust be deserving 
of esteem. 

Lady \V r esthope was much pleased with all she saw of the 
bride in this morning visit ; and she was gratified by her evident 
inclination to like, and her desire to be liked. When they were 
taking leave, she took an opportunity of expressing to Mr. 
Wroxholme, how much she was flattered at his having found 
any resemblance between so charming a person as his young 
wife, and herself. Mr. Wroxholme looked surprised, and 
wholly unconscious to what she could allude ; then suddenly 
recollecting himself "Oh yes, so I did! I thought Emma 
very like you when first I knew her; but I have not been so 
much struck with the likeness of late." 

The truth was, that since he had become so exceedingly in 
love with his wife, as he now was, he had utterly forgotten 
what had at first been to him her greatest attraction. With 
the generality of men, love, when once over, leaves not a trace 
behind. With women, on the contrary, a person whom they 
have once loved, or even one by whom they once believed 
themselves to be sincerely loved, remains to them an object of 
interest, though the sentiment itself may long have ceased to 
exist. 

Lady Westhope felt almost abashed when she replied in an 
explanatory tone " I should not have had the vanity to make 
such a remark, if, in announcing your marriage, you had not 
yourself mentioned the resemblance." 

Mrs. Wroxholme, who caught what was passing, said with 
such an air of honesty, that she was " really distressed at 

BLANCHE. 337 

hearing the comparison made," and looked as if she sincerely 
thought Lady Westhope so much handsomer than herself, that 
Lady Westhope felt gratitude towards the wife, mixed with a 
momentary (it was but a momentary) emotion of pique to- 
wards the husband. 

To Lady Falkingham's infinite annoyance, her cold in- 
creased towards the evening she was threatened with the 
tooth-ache the night was extremely cold; she could not, 
without openly saying she would not trust her daughter out 
of her sight, insist upon accompanying her to Mrs. Baltimore's; 
neither was her illness such that she could make it a pretext 
for keeping Blanche at home. 

Meanwhile Blanche looked unusually animated at dinner, 
and her father rejoiced exultingly to see her dark hazel eyes 
sparkle once more with the rich lustre which was natural to 
them. Lady Falkingham, on the contrary, was suffering, and 
uncomfortable, both in body and mind. Her tone was que- 
rulous ; and she found it impossible to agree either with her 
husband or daughter upon any subject, whether of literature, 
society, or politics. She felt provoked and oppressed by the 
unaccountable spirits of both father and daughter. 

Lord Falkingham had been trying to talk his wife into good- 
humour, and, nothing daunted by the ill success which had as 
yet attended his efforts, he proceeded: " I find Mapleton is 
quite sure of the county if he stands next election." 

" That is very odd !" said Lady Falkingham : " Mr. Evans 
told me that Mr. Talpoys had eight hundred votes to spare." 

" Well ! Mapleton himself told me he had more than fif- 
teen hundred to spare." 

" I do not believe Mr. Mapleton knows anything at all about 
the matter. He believes what his agents tell him ; and they 
wish him to persist in his opposition to Mr. Talpoys, that they 
may make their own perquisites." 

" Mapleton must be a great fool if he is so taken in." 

" I never heard he was clever," answered Lady Falkingham, 
with a sarcastic smile. 

" How pretty the new lamps look ! " remarked Lady Blanche, 
who knew that her father had a regard for Mr. Mapleton, and 
did not like to hear him spoken of slightingly. " I think they 
give a most agreeable, soft light, do not you, mamma?" 

z 

338 BLANCHE. 

" I carmot say I agree with you, my dear. To my mind, 
they are not near so pretty as the old ones." 

Lord Falkingham, who always felt a vague uneasiness when- 
ever he saw his wife look out of spirits, as he amiably termed 
and thought what others might have deemed being out of 
humour, made another attempt to say something agreeable. 

" Is that pretty cap the handiwork of your new maid, my 
dear ? If it is, 1 think she is likely to suit you." 

" My dear Lord Falkingham, you mean to be very com- 
plimentary, I dare say ; but it would be infinitely more com- 
plimentary if you had recognised the old friend you have seen 
me wear half the winter at Temple Loseley." 

This was another failure ; but he laughed at his own mis- 
take, said he evidently was not born to be a milliner, and 
remarked what a good vol-au-i*nt he was eating. 

I am glad you like it. I thought it very bad, I must 
confess, and had meant to speak to the cook about it ; but 1 
will tell him you approve.*' 

I. r<l Falkingham was provoked at last He piqued himself 
upon his taste in gastronomy, and did not at all like any owe 
presuming to have a more refined palate than his own. Little 
more was said. 

Blanche counted the moments till Lady Westhope called for 
her, with something of the same eagerness she would have done 
had it been DC Molton, instead of De Motion's mother, whom 
she expected to meet. 

To her great joy, the first person she saw on entering the 
room was Lady Cumberworth ; and she felt, she knew not 
wherefore, that this evening was big with events of th utmost 
importance. 

CHAPTER XL 

So. bounding o'er the billow*, 'rid* our 

To reach the land that own* the sacred 

Of kome ; and high among the throudi brave hearts 

Heat toward* that borne with ttrong tutuultuou* joy. 

UnpubiuHed Poemr. 

LAI/Y BLANCHE and Lady Cumberworth were at opposite end* 
of the room. They were net acquainted with each other. 

BLANCHE. 339 

Rubber after rubber was played by the elder people ; some of 
the younger won and lost considerable sums at ecarte. The 
evening wore away : Blanche's high-wrought expectations 
seemed likely to end in nothing. " After all," she thought, 
" what did I expect ? What was to happen ? How foolish I 
have been ! Lady Cumber worth does not even turn her head 
my way." She might have seen that a very charming young 
man was in deep conversation with the fourth Miss De Mol- 
ton': and Lady Cumberworth would not have moved an inch, 
or even looked as if she could ever wish to move, as long as this 
conversation lasted. When the charming young man had,, how- 
ever, taken his leave to grace some more splendid assembly 
with his presence, Lady Cumberworth changed her position, 
and crossed to the side of the room where Lady Blanche stood. 
She was slightly acquainted with Lady Westhope, and seated 
herself by her. Blanche's heart beat quick something would 
surely occur now. 

Presently Lady Cumberworth begged Lady Westhope to 
introduce her to her cousin, Lady Blanche ; which common- 
place ceremony was performed in the most common-place 
manner : but Lady Blanche's eyes were full of tears, and she 
blushed to her very temples. Lady Cumberworth saw that 
her darling son was as truly loved as ever, and, though she 
knew it would be reckoned imprudent, she could not help 
ardently wishing to let her know that De Molton was neither 
faithless nor indifferent. "After all," thought she, in the 
good-natured weakness of her heart, " it is evident they are 
both so deeply attached, that they never can be happy if they 
are separated. Lord Falkingham is rich he has no son ; if 
he chose to provide for Lady Blanche, he could make them 
tolerably comfortable. I must give the poor girl pleasure by 
letting her know what are Frank's feelings ; and then he will 
be so very happy if I tell him I have seen his Blanche, and 
that she is constant!" She took the opportunity of Lady 
Westhope's changing her position to draw nearer to Lady 
Blanche. " Now," thought Blanche, " something is coming; 
Lady Cumberworth looks as if she did not wish my cousin to 
hear." 

Lady Cumberworth asked her " if she had been at the last 
ball at M. House." Lady Blanche answered " Yes," and felt 
disappointed at so unmeaning a question. 
z 2 

BLANf HI.. 

Lady Cumberworth did not know how to open the subject. 
" Were you much amused ? " she inquired. 

" No ! I did not think it was very gay," was Blanche's 
reply. 

" I had a letter from my son in India the other day/* con- 
tinued Lady Cumberworth, while Lady Blanche's heart seemed 
almost to stop its pulsations from excess of emotion, " and he 
tells me the society of Calcutta is very dull. He is gone up 
the country now, on an expedition against some native chiefs." 

Lady Blanche changed colour, and her eyes turned fearfully 
and inquiringly on Lady Cumberworth, who proceeded : 
" He soothes my maternal fears by telling me that it is not a 
service of much danger ; but he adds, that while there is any 
active service to be expected, he cannot, in honour, follow his 
own inclination, which would be to return to England instantly. 
He seems very much to regret having gone to India at all." 

This was enough. Hope again danced in the heart of Lady 
Blanche ; but she dared not raise her eyes from the ground ; 
she did not utter she could not think of anything which 
would not too openly commit her to a person who was, in fact, 
a stranger. But Lady Cumberworth saw enough to convince 
!HT that Frank's devotion was amply requited, and she abso- 
lutely loved Lady Blanche. She was a kind, nay, a tender- 
hearted woman. She never could resist doing the thing 
which she saw wished by others, and many a lecture had she 
received from more sage and worldly matrons for allowing her 
daughters to flirt uselessly, and for permitting herself to be 
completely managed by them upon most subjects. Several 
very imprudent marriages had been in question for the girls, 
and had from her met with little discouragement. Fortunately 
Lord Cumberworth's heart was not so soft, while his head was 
somewhat harder. 

From this time, whenever Lady Blanche and Lady Cura- 
herworth met, a few words of cordial recognition passed 
between them. Lady.Falkingham, to avoid the necessity of 
being introduced, was either affectedly engaged in earnest con- 
versation with some one else, or statelily reared herself to her 
full height, her eyes looking over, or beyond, Lady Cumber- 
worth. The greetings, consequently, became each evening 
shorter and more constrained ; but still they were sufficient to 
keep Blanche's mind engaged with the idea of De Molton. 

BLANCHE. 341 

The letter which his mother wrote to him immediately 
after her conversation with Lady Blanche, found him one 
sultry day lying in his bungalow, exhausted both in body and 
mind. The expedition against the Pindarries was over. He 
had distinguished himself by his eager and ardent courage, 
and his previous study of the history and nature of the country 
had enabled him to be of essential service to his commanding 
officer. The novelty and excitement of this desultory warfare 
had assisted to divert his thoughts from dwelling exclusively 
on the subject of his unfortunate attachment ; but that ex- 
citement was over. The regiment was at present established 
in bungalows, near the borders of the British possessions, and 
removed to a great distance from any European society. 

The weather was so oppressively hot, that, except for some 
hours about sunrise, and for a few more in the evening, it was 
impossible that even any military duty could take place. 

The intervening space of time was generally passed by the 
officers languidly stretched on mats, and gasping for breath. 
They were cut off from all communication with any of their 
countrymen, and the unhealthiness of the climate had wofully 
thinned the number of those who had originally formed their 
small society. The few books possessed by the party had been 
read and re-read a hundred times. An occasional tiger-hunt 
before daybreak, the exhilarating intelligence of a crocodile 
having been seen on the bank of a neighbouring tank, the 
punishment of some native discovered in one of the thefts, 
which were so often perpetrated and so seldom detected, or the 
death of another comrade, were the only events which oc- 
curred to vary the monotony of De Mokon's existence. 

In the vacuity of such a life, the image of Blanche would 
rise before his mind, more beautiful, more fascinating than 
ever; and he would pass whole hours with his eyes fixed 
upon the blinds which the natives were constantly watering to 
preserve some freshness in the atmosphere, while his thoughts 
wandered far away from the melancholy and uninteresting 
sights around him, to the festive and brilliant saloons of Paris, 
or to the dimly-lighted stairs ' of the private-box entrance of 
Covent-Garden, or to the long dinner-table at Cransley, with 
the epergne and its projecting flowers, or, dearer than all, 
to the library where he last beheld her,- where he caught the 
expression of her countenance when she said, " And do you 

z 3 

342 BLA> 

then love me? " to the library where she had uttered tla 
few words which had changed the whole tenour of both their 
fates " Why did you not tell me this sooner ? " 

He was feasting his memory on these precious recollections ; 
he was wondering whether she still remembered him, whether 
he should ever return to England, whether he should find her 
free from any other engagement whether there was a possi- 
bility that she might ever become his, or whether he was not 
flattering and deceiving himself in attaching so much import, 
ance to these few words ; when he was roused from his 
reveries by the arrival of despatches from Calcutta with En- 
glish letters, and his eyes were greeted by the sight of many a 
well-known handwriting. 

It is only those who have been in distant lands, far from all 
most dear to them, who can judge of the mingled emotions of 
joy and fear with which letters from home are received by the 
exile. The mogic contained in that word Home! the thou- 
sand tender, delightful, and painful feelings that crowd upon 
the soul ! The anxiety with which the letters are hastily ex- 
amined to see that they are not sealed with black, the 
eagerness with which the one from the person nearest and 
deiMit to the heart is selected from all the rest, the sicken. 
ing agitation with which it is torn open, and the nervous 
haste with which the eye glances to the top of the page to look 
for the accustomed " All well," and the glow of delight with 
which the comfortable words are hailed ! 

De Molton seized his mother's letter, perused the assur- 
ances of the welfare of his father, his brothers, his sisters, his 
uncles, his aunts, his first cousins, and his second cousins f 
Nothing could be more satisfactory than the report his mother 
gave of every branch of the family, and yet he was not 
satisfied. 

At length came the postscript; and there he found the 
name he had been longing to see. There he found that 
Blanche was still free and unfettered, that Blanche did not 
enjoy society, that Blanche still blushed when she heard hi* 
name. 

His impatience to return home now exceeded all bounds. 
Two years had elapsed since he left England ; there seemed 
little chance of any war in which his services would be useful 
to his country, or in which he could himself acquire fame. 

BLANCHE. 343 

He lost no time in negotiating his exchange into a regiment 
which was shortly to sail for his native land; and towards the 
end of the third spring from the time of his departure, he 
once more set foot on English ground, and hastened to his 
father's house, with all the trepidation and anxiety experienced 
by any one who arrives at a home from which the last intelli- 
gence is nearly a year old. 

CHAPTER XII. 

Love mocks all sorrows but his own, 
And damps each joy he does not yield. 

Unpublished Poems. 

DE MOLTON had the happiness of finding no chasm in the 
dear and well-known family circle. He could look round and 
meet the beaming, tearful, tender glance of his doting mother, 
the gay but kindly smile of his father, the affectionate coun- 
tenances of his sisters; and he felt that the joy of reunion 
almost compensates for the pain of separation, when the return 
is not embittered by the absence of any familiar face. 

Three years, however, had worked some changes in those 
around him. His mother was thinner, her eyes were dimmer, 
her nose appeared sharper, and she was altogether a smaller 
person than he had left her. His father was fatter, and his 
head more bald. His elder sister had acquired an air which 
bespoke the spinster of a certain age. His youngest sister was 
wonderfully improved : but it was Charlotte, the fourth, in 
whom he perceived the greatest alteration. 

The very charming young man whose conversation Lady 
Cumberworth had been so unwilling to interrupt, had at length 
made his proposals ; and Charlotte, whom her brother Frank 
remembered pale, and thin, and shy, and dull, was grown rosy 
and blooming, with a peculiarly expressive countenance, and 
singularly speaking eyes. 

The moment De Molton could draw his mother aside, he 
questioned her concerning Lady Blanche ; and from her he 
learned that the Falkinghame were still in London, that Lady 
Blanche was still unmarried, and that she was supposed to 
have lately refused a most excellent and worthy man. 

z 4 

344 BLANCHE. 

De Motion's heart throbbed with joy which he did not 
attempt to conceal from his mother; but the very hope, to 
which, in her tenderness, she had not been able to resist 
ministering, alarmed her, now she witnessed its excess, and she 
began to remind her son how impossible it was that he should 
ever marry Lady Blanche, how improbable that the Falkinjr- 
hams should ever consent to such an union, and, even should 
they not oppose it as strenuously as she anticipated, how im- 
possible it was that he should by any means muster an income 
sufficient to provide against real, actual poverty. 

But Lady Cumberworth's prudential reasonings came too 
late. Her son had made up his mind that honour and grati- 
tude now demanded the same line of conduct as that prompted 
by inclination, and he resolved if, upon the first interview 
which he could obtain with Lady Blanche, he had reason to 
believe he still held the same place in her affections, that be 
would brave all the frowns of fortune, and gladly, gaily, 
gallantly encounter any degree of poverty, provided she were 
willing to share it with him : if she were not willing to do so, 
she could but refuse him. 

In vain did Lady Cumberworth use every argument she 
might have recollected before she imprudently revived the 
hopes he had been attempting to crush. De Molton, when 
once he had taken a resolution, was immovable ; and his 
mother, although frightened at what she had assisted to bring 
about, could not help loving him the better for his ardour, and 
her heart went with him, while she dreaded the reproaches of 
others for having fomented what she ought to have repressed. 

De Molton left a card at Lord Falkingham's the day after 
his arrival. On returning from the morning drive, Blanche 
found it upon the table, and she could not entirely check a 
faint exclamation. Her mother looked at her with a stern 
and reproachful, but melancholy glance, which suddenly drove 
back the colour already mounting to her cheeks. She felt 
ready to faint ; but she was ashamed to show such emotion 
before one whose feelings were so little in unison with her 
own, and by a strong effort she mastered herself. She would 
have given the world had Lady Falkingham spoken, even to 
reproach her. This chilling silence was more awful, more sub- 
duing, than any words which could be uttered. 

She gladly seized the first excuse to retire to her own room, 

BLANCHE. 345 

and there to enjoy the delight of finding that her lover was in 
England, safe, and faithful; for she felt convinced he was 
faithful. She had seen Lady Cumberworth only two days 
before. He was not then arrived. His calling the very day 
after his return, before he had any printed cards (for his name 
was only written, and, as she thought, written with an 
unsteady hand), spoke volumes to her hopeful heart. 

They dined out on that day ; and, after their dinner, were 
to proceed to a party at which Blanche thought it possible she 
might meet the Cumberworths, and, consequently, De Molton. 

If Lady Blanche's reputation for good manners had de- 
pended upon her conduct on that memorable day, she would 
certainly have been reckoned the least well-bred young lady 
who ever sat at " good men's feasts." Three times did the 
master of the house ask her to drink wine before she took any 
notice whatever of his request, and then she answered, 
" Mutton, if you please." The servants -were repeatedly 
obliged to touch her sleeve with the silver dishes containing 
the entrees, before they could induce her to turn round ; and 
her next neighbour gave up the point of leading her into any- 
thing like connected conversation ; not, however, till he had 
made many fruitless attempts to do so ; -for there was an ani- 
mation in her countenance, there was a fire in her eye, and a 
blushing consciousness pervading her whole demeanour, which 
convinced him it was not because she was either dull, or shy, 
or stupid, that it was impossible to excite or to interest her. 

It was with infinite vexation that Lady Falkingham re- 
marked all these symptoms. Not a word was spoken during 
their drive from the dinner to the party. She knew Blanche's 
frank nature, and she knew, if once the ice was broken, she 
would speak boldly and strongly all that Lady Falkingham 
least wished to hear. 

When they entered the assembly, the room was not full, 
and Blanche at once saw that none of the Cumberworth 
family were there. Though she ardently desired to see De 
Molton, yet she almost dreaded it So many eyes would be 
upon her, that she would willingly have postponed the long- 
wished-for moment of meeting. 

The rooms began to fill. She fancied a likeness in the hair of 
this man, in the forehead of another : but no ; when the crowd 
allowed her to see the rest of the face, it was not De Molton. 

Ul. \\CHE. 

At length the door opened wide, and she heard announced 
in a loud voice, " Lady Cumberworth, the Miss De Moltons, 
and Captain De Molton." 

Every thing swam before her eyes : she could scarcely dis- 
tinguish Lady Cumberworth's delicate and fragile, though 
faded beauty, as she entered the apartment followed by three 
fine handsome girls, all taller and larger than their mother. 
Behind them all, she at length perceived the stately figure of 
De Molton ; his face bronzed, yes, and oldened too, but 
there was the same look of feeling and of dignity, although 
he seemed to wish to glide unperceived into the room till his 
eager and inquiring glance had ascertained whether his long- 
loved Lady Blanche was present 

Their eyes met, and as insatntly fell ; but that one glance 
revealed to each that, although so long separated, time had 
worked no change in their feelings. In one second he wit by 
her side the crowd had again closed in Lady Blanche was 
seated while most of those around were standing, and their 
meeting was more private than in many a less crowded apart- 
ment. 

But Lady Falkingham was by her daughter's side ; both 
felt her cold and searching eyes upon them, and both were 
unable to utter. Lady Falkingham, after a somewhat lofty 
recognition of De Molton, made nor sign nor movement 
which could encourage him to seat himself; and he stood 
before them, growing every moment more and more shy, and 
feeling himself more inconveniently tall than ever he did 
before. 

Blanche, in a trembling voice, had asked him when he 
landed, and inquired whether his voyage had been prosperous, 
to which questions he had made some indistinct answers ; 
when Lady Falkingham's attention being for a moment with* 
drawn by some one on the other fide, he asked in a low voice 
whether he should find Lady Blanche at home the next 
morning ? She answered " she hoped so." 

" I must see you," he added ; "but not here not thus ! " 
Lady Falkingham turned round, and he hurried away, leaving 
Blanche in a confused state of perfect happiness. 

He mingled among the crowd, and was soon overpowered 
with greetings from numerous old acquaintances, and friendly 
congratulations upon his safe return ; but Lady Blanche wit 

BLANCHE. 347 

aware that his eye still turned towards her, and that she was 
still in his thoughts. 

She was romantic ; her heart was formed for love ; while, 
for nearly three years, her taste for the romantic, and the 
warmth of her attachment, had been 'nearly deprived of ali- 
ment. Since her last definitive conversation with Lord Glen- 
rith, she had had no delicate distresses, no interesting perse- 
cutions, no occurrences of any kind. This very blank had, 
to a person of her disposition, been a greater trial than any 
more active trial would have been. Perhaps it was one which 
her constancy might not have stood, if her rejection of Lord 
Glenrith had not caused her pride, as well as her feelings, to 
be engaged in preserving an undeviating fidelity to her absent 
lover. Be that as it may, the pleasure of again knowing her- 
self beloved, of again meeting eyes which beamed softly upon 
hers, of being once more engaged in all the pleasing agitations 
of a love-affair, was inexpressibly delightful. 

De Molton, on his part, returned home intoxicated with 
the rapturous conviction that the beautiful, the admired Lady 
Blanche had for his sake rejected many of the best matches 
in England ; that among all the temptations of the London 
world, and in spite of all the opposition of her parents, she had 
enshrined his image in her heart of hearts. The result was, 
that they were both desperately in love ; and they both won- 
dered how they had endured existence during their long and 
hopeless separation. 

The next morning, De Molton called at an unusually early 
hour ; but Lady Falkingham, as a measure of precaution, had 
ordered the servants to say 'not at home/ and he was re- 
fused admittance. He bit his lips, and retired from the door 
with a flushed brow, but a more lofty bearing even than usual. 
He returned home to indite a long and passionate epistle to 
Lady Blanche, as passionate as might be expected from a man 
who had loved long, fervently and hopelessly ; who felt him- 
self presumptuous in offering himself, yet was conscious that 
his effusions would not meet a cold and disdainful eye, but 
that they were addressed to one who fully returned his 
affection. 

At the same time he wrote to Lord Falkingham, giving a 
true and undisguised account of his present situation and of 
his future prospects ; both of which were, it must be con- 

348 BLANCIIE. 

fessed, as unpromising as can well be imagined. Yet, while 
he honestly detailed his own unworthiness to match with such 
a person as Lady Blanche, there was a proud humility per- 
vading every line he wrote, which proved that, although on 
the score of fortune he owned himself her inferior, he felt 
conscious of being an honourable and high-minded man, her 
equal in birth and situation, and one who would not brook 
being treated with any want of consideration or respect. 

Blanche received his letter with unalloyed delight. She 
read over and over again the glowing expressions of devotion 
it contained, and resolved that nothing short of the positive 
commands of both parents should prevent her returning such 
an answer as might reward De Molton for all he had suffered 
on her account 

With his letter in her hand, she hastened to her father's 
study, in order to open the subject to him before her mother 
had bad an opportunity of influencing him against her wishes. 

" Papa," she said, " I have had a letter !" 

" So have I, my dear !" answered Lord Falkingham, who 
was sitting in his leathern arm-chair, one foot on the fender, 
the other on a bar of the grate, with one hand holding the 
open letter, with the other stroking his eyebrows, as he often 
did when thinking deeply and unpleasantly. 

" Papa, mine is from Captain De Molton," and she co- 
loured a little, but it was only a little ; for she was resolved, 
and not trembling. She knew her father was aware of her 
attachment ; and she did not experience the confusion attend- 
ant on the first confession of a budding preference. 

" So is mine," rejoined Lord Falkingham, " and very dis- 
tressing it is. Take it and read it, my dear Blanche, and you 
will perceive that, knowing as 1 do how completely you return 
Captain De Molton's affection, it is a communication which 
must exceedingly distress a father's feelings ! " 

Blanche's countenance fell : she seized the letter ; she 
fancied there must be some difficulty, some objection on his 
part, to which he had not alluded in his letter to her, and she 
devoured each line with her eyes, dwelling with delight upon 
the expressions of devotion to herself, on the impossibility he 
had experienced to drive her from his mind ; she admired the 
noble pride which pervaded the whole ; she fully appreciated 
the candour with which he entered upon the subject of his 

BLANCHE. 349 

poverty ; and quickly glancing over the- sums specified as his 
younger brother's fortune, the amount of his pay, &c., as 
topics in which she had no interest, and which were " papa's 
affair/' she returned the letter to her father with a pleased 
and animated countenance. " What a beautiful letter, papa ! 
There is nobody the least like him ; nobody so noble, so true, 
so constant ! " and she clasped her hands earnestly ; " and I 
know, papa, you value such qualities a thousand times more 
than riches ! " 

" Yes, my child, more than riches ; but they will not do 
instead of a competency. You have been brought up in 
luxury, and you are very little calculated to make a poor man's 
wife." 

" Oh, papa ! you know that Lord Glenrith's splendour did 
not gratify me the least. You know how indifferent I was to 
the diamonds ; that I never felt the least wish for his wife's 
beautiful trousseau, which all the world was admiring ; nor 
for the long-tailed roan horses ; nor for anything of the sort. I 
could be happy without those things ; but, papa, I could not 
no, I could not live with a husband I did not love:" she 
spoke with strong emotion : " and I never shall love any one 
except Captain De Aiolton. So, if you forbid me to think of 
him, you may rest assured I shall never marry as long as I 
live. I have proved this is not a girlish fancy. It may be a 
first love ; but it is not the contemptible first love of every 
young lady which you and mamma despise so much." 

" Would to Heaven it were ! " exclaimed Lord Falkingham. 
" Blanche, you make me very unhappy, for I see nothing be- 
fore you but a choice of evils ; no happiness, or much un- 
happiness." 

" Xo, papa ! not unhappiness. People cannot be unhappy 
when they are truly attached, and when they are together. 
And indeed ours is a true attachment. It has stood the test 
of time and of absence. It has conquered all difficulties. If 
it was the passing fancy people can be laughed out of, I 
should have been cured long ago. If I could not forget 
Captain De Molton when I was uncertain whether he remem- 
bered me or not, shall I forget him now, when I find that, 
among strangers, in foreign lands, in another hemisphere, he 
has thought of me, and me only ; when, added to my admira- 
tion of his character, I must feel gratitude for his constancy ?" 

350 BLANCHE. 

" This is very perplexing," rejoined Lord Falkingham ; I 
wish the fellow was not so very poor. He is an honest, 
straightforward gentleman, though : he has no humbug about 
him : he does not try to make the best of himself." 

Blanche smiled through her tears, and looked up at her 
father with such a proud exulting tenderness at hearing him 
speak in these terms of De Molton, that his heart was touched, 
and, kissing her forehead, he said, " Well, my child, I will do 
my best If he can get his father to assist him, and if we 
can make up anything like an income " 

" Remember, I despise riches, dear papa ; I hate the very 
name of money." 

" Yes, ray love, yes ; and so do a great many other people, 
who want the things which cannot be got without money, at 
much as their neighbours do. Well ! 1 will see De Molton ; 
I will talk to him/' 

At this moment Lady Falkingham entered. Blanche felt a 
little alarmed at having first flown to her father in the tumult 
of her joy ; but still she was glad her father was not to re- 
ceive his first impressions upon the subject from her mother. 
Lady Falkingham looked surprised at finding father and daugh- 
ter together, with evident traces of agitation visible on both 
their countenances. Lord Falkingham began : 

" My dear, I have just received this letter, and I have been 
talking to Blanche very seriously upon the subject." 

Lady Blanche was grateful to her father for so wording hit 
sentence that it might almost seem as if he had sent for her ; 
for she now felt that Lady Falkingham might be hurt, and 
perhaps with some reason, at her first impulse having brought 
her to her father, rather than to her mother, upon such an 
occasion. Lord Falkingham dwelt upon the serious manner 
in which he had spoken to his daughter; for he knew hit 
wife would disapprove of his having allowed her to hope there 
was any chance of his ultimate approbation. 

Lady Falkingham took the letter, and after having perused 
its contents with an unmoved countenance, she return^ 1 it, 
merely saying, 

I think Captain De Molton is as presumptuous a young 
man as I ever heard of. He cannot surely expect that Lady 
Blanche De Vaux is to follow him in the baggage-waggon." 

The colour forsook Blanche's cheek, but the next moment 

BLANCHE. #51 

it rushed again to her face, and her eyes flashed at hearing 
De Molton thus spoken of. The few words her father had 
said in approbation of his conduct had justified and sanc- 
tioned to her own mind her resolution to abide by him through 
all opposition. Her father thought him noble in soul, and 
worthy in character; he found no objection to him but the 
want of contemptible worldly advantages ; and she felt it was 
both generous and consistent to persevere in her devotion. 

Lord Falkingham, having once said he admired the manly 
candour of De Molton's letter, was not disposed to agree with 
his wife ; and the severity of her remark made him adopt the 
side of the lovers more decidedly than he might otherwise 
have done. "Nay, my dear," he answered, "there is no- 
thing presumptuous in the manner in which he offers himself. 
He speaks most humbly of his own situation." 

" It is the pride that apes humility. The very fact of pro- 
posing, is presum.ption in itself." 

" It might be, if he did not know that Blanche was in love 
with him ; but as he cannot doubt that fact, I must say I 
think the young man has acted very properly in offering him- 
self. We should think him cold and calculating if he did 
otherwise." 

" Certainly, if a girl throws herself at a man's head, pro- 
claiming her attachment to the sound of the trumpet, and 
making her bette passion the talk of the town, it alters the case. 
. I once thought it impossible a daughter of mine should ever so 
degrade herself. But Blanche has long been beyond my control." 

Blanche was so indignant for De Molton, that, although 
deeply hurt at what her mother said, she was not softened, 
and did not weep, as she would otherwise have done. She 
had always fancied that if Lady Falkingham had known more 
of De Molton, she would have perceived his superiority to 
the rest of mankind ; that, like Lady Westhope, she would 
have admitted that he was formed to captivate the heart of 
woman, even while she condemned the marriage as imprudent : 
but now that her mother had read this touching and manly 
effusion, this epistle breathing the very soul of honour and of 
loyalty to the lady of his love, she was indeed astonished, disap- 
pointed, and mortified, at finding her still unmoved; and for 
a time her heart shut itself up from one parent, while it 
opened to the other. 

352 BLANCHE. 

" I think the best thing I can do," resumed Lord Falking- 
ham, " is to have some conversation with Lord Cumberworth, 
and see whether it is possible to arrange anything." 

' It is utterly impossible Lord Cumberworth can ever make 
Captain De Molton a fit match for Blanche." 

" But the girl says she can never marry anybody she does 
not love, and that she can never love anybody except Captain 
De Mohon." 

" She has never tried," rejoined Lady Falkingham : " from 
the moment she so foolishly rejected Lord Glenrith she has 
wilfully fostered her silly predilection for this interesting pen* 
niless captain, though she has seen how miserable her infatua- 
tion has made me. If she had not nurtured it by every 
means in her power, it would have died away like other young 
ladies' first loves." 

There was a contemptuous expression thrown into these 
last words, which roused all the heroine in Blanche. 

" Mamma," she said, " I am very sorry I have made you 
unhappy; I am very sorry to have given my father any un- 
easiness ; but it is not in my power to command my feelings. 
I can tell Captain De Molton that I will never marry him 
without your consent ; but I can never cease to love him, nor 
can I ever love another. How can you say I have not tried 
to please you, and to obey you ! Did I not accept Lord Glen- 
rith, and have I ever ceased to repent having done so ? If 
you command it, I will now refuse Captain De Molton ; butj 
when I do so, I cannot attempt to conceal from him that my 
affections are wholly his, that they have been his during three 
years of absence, and that they will be his as long as I live." 

" You see, my dear, that you will not manage Blanche in 
this way. The truth is, the girl is desperately in love, and. 
we must try to make the best of it." 

Blanche was glad that her father at length treated her at- 
tachment with some respect, but she would greatly have pre- 
ferred the phrase * irrevocably attached,' to ' desperately in 
love/ 

41 Indeed, Lord Falkingham, if you encourage your daugh- 
ter in these highflown notions, there is no use in my inter* 
fering, and I must make up my mind to seeing her a beggar, 
and an unhappy beggar ; for Blanche is not formed to struggle 
with poverty ; she has been accustomed to every indulgence ; 

BLANCHE. 353 

every wish, every fancy has hitherto been gratified. No 
young lady thinks it more indispensable to be perfectly well 
dressed, no one is more alive to any want of refinement in 
those with whom she lives. I know my own child ; she will 
never be happy in the style, and among the associates to whom 
she wilfully dooms herself." 

Lady Falkingham wept, but her tears were not all tender- 
ness ; some anger, some mortification were mixed with the 
feeling which prompted them to flow. 

Blanche felt all this, without knowing that she felt it, and 
was somewhat shocked at her own want of filial piety in not 
being more touched by the tears her mother shed over her. 

This most unpleasant family colloquy ended by Lord Falk- 
ingham's writing to Lord Cumberworth to request an inter- 
view, and by the mother and daughter returning to the 
drawing-room, with less cordiality between them than is usual 
in modern days, when mothers are oftener over indulgent, 
than over severe. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

Je demeurai etourdie, muette, et confuse ; ce qui etiat signe que j'etais charmee. 

MARIVAUX. 

- 

BLANCHE'S life had not of late been a happy one, and in 
addition to the natural wish of being united to the object of 
her love, she experienced considerable anxiety to change her 
present mode of existence ; and having candidly avowed to 
her parents that she would not attempt to conceal the state of 
her affections from De Molton, and having received from them 
no prohibition to answer his letter, she retired to her own room 
to indite a suitable reply. 

She longed to be alone, and at length to communicate freely 
with the person who had so long been master of her affections. 
She spread the paper before her, she dipped the pen in the ink; 
and when she had thus prepared herself, she found herself 
totally at a loss what to say. She was going to write a love- 
letter : how ought she to begin ? She had written, Dear 
Captain De Molton:" she thought it looked very common- 

A A 

.;.*) r BLA^ 

place and cold ; and she did not know how to proceed. I 
was true they had been long and faithfully attached, but they 
had seen very little of each other. Not more than half a 
dozen words of love had ever passed between them, and those 
had passed three years before, so that there were no habits of 
intimacy ; and now it came to the point, she felt inexpressibly 
shy at the thoughts of confessing her love in words addressed 
to the object of it 

If a man is doubtful of the success of his suit, he should 
never propose by letter. It is very easy to write the kindest, 
the civilest, the prettiest, refusal in the world ; whereas a 
gentle and good-natured, or a timid person, finds it always 
difficult to utter, in plain distinct words, to a man's face, " I ; 
do not like you ; you are disagreeable to me." The hesitation 
produced by the difficulty of couching such sentiments in 
pretty language may be construed into encouragement : silence 
is proverbially consent ; and a woman may easily become 
entangled, in cases where the feeling on her part does not 
amount to positive dislike. 

Blanche's epistle would, to the eyes of the indifferent, have 
appeared a very stupid, ill-written letter. It was formal at 
first : as it proceeded it almost too plainly expressed the 
warmth of her attachment ; she then professed her determina- 
tion to abide by the decision of her parents. In short it was 
nut consistent, it was not in keeping ; but De Motion 
thought it perfect. He perceived ardent feelings struggling 
with maiden modesty and filial obedience, and he thought the 
eloquence displayed in it might render it worthy a place among 
the effusions of a Sappho or an Heloise. 

The next morning Lord Cumberworth waited upon Lor^ 
Falkingham. He did not like the idea of the marriage, for 
he feared he should be expected to make some sacrifices for 
his son's happiness, and he was not a man who was fond of 
making sacrifices. He had, however, an unfailing and excel- 
lent excuse for never doing any thing he disliked, in the number 
of other sons and daughters who had an equal claim upon his 
parental care and tenderness, a tenderness which consisted- 
in imperturbable good humour, and in allowing them all the 
run of the house. 

The two fathers were slightly acquainted ; and Lord Cum- 
berworth, seating himself with an easy air by the fire, rubbed 

BLANCHE. 355 

his hands several times up and down his shins, and at length 
said with a half smile and a shake of the head, " My dear 
Lord, this is a sad business of my son's and your daughter's ; 
I am very sorry for it, upon my soul !" 

Lord Falkingham felt that he had more reason to regret it 
than Lord Cumberworth, inasmuch as Blanche would have 
twelve thousand pounds at his death, and De Molton would 
only come in for the eleventh part of fifty thousand pounds at 
his father's death ; inasmuch as Lord Falkingham was an earl, 
and Lord Cumberworth only a baron. He looked a little 
awful, and replied, 

" Your Lordship cannot regret the circumstance more than 
I do." 

" I have done my utmost to prevent it ; I have told him 
from his boyhood that a man is never undone till he is married. 
Just before he sailed, I said, ' Frank, my boy, remember peril 
by marriage is the worst peril a man can fall into/ But, as 
they say, every one must buy his own experience ; and when 
young people have taken a fancy into their heads, we cannot 
preach them out of it. We cannot put old heads on young 
shoulders, as you have found with your daughter, my Lord." 

Lord Falkingham did not half like hearing Lord Cumber- 
worth speak as if Blanche was as resolute in her predilection 
as her lover was in his, though it might be perfectly true that 
she was so. 

" My daughter places herself in my hands, and has no idea 
of disobeying my commands." Lord Cumberworth slightly 
elevated his eye-brows, and the expression of his countenance 
did not betoken that he participated in Lord Falkingham's re- 
liance on his daughter's submission. " But as I know her 
happiness is deeply concerned in this affair, I am anxious to 
do every thing in my power to forward hers and Captain De 
Molton's wishes." 

Lord Cumberworth's countenance brightened : he did not 
exactly know how strictly Lord Falkingham's property was 
entailed upon his nephew, and he drew his chair nearer to 
Lord Falkingham, hoping that his son was going to make a 
better match than he had been aware of. 

" That is exactly what I say ; as their happiness is con- 
cerned, poor young things, parents should strain a point, 

A A 2 

356 BLANCHE. 

rather than see their children pine, and pine, as poor Lady 
Blanche has done." 

This was unpleasant to Lord Falkingham's pride and his 
delicacy : he instinctively pushed his chair back as many 
inches as Lord Cumberworth had advanced his. The good- 
humoured, but unrefined father of De Molton was totally un- 
suspicious that he had at all offended, but on the contrary 
flattered himself he was cleverly pushing his son's interests. 
" After all, what do any of us wish but to see our children 
happy ? I am sure there is nothing I would not do that was 
compatible with my means." 

" You are aware," resumed Lord Falkingham, " that my 
estates are all entailed upon my nephew ; but my personal 
property will be equally divided among my four daughters, so 
that I shall be able to leave to each twelve thousand pounds at 
my death. This sum I will give to Blanche upon her mar- 
riage ; and if you will make up Captain De Molton's income 
equal to the interest of her fortune, I will consent to their union, 
although by so doing I believe I am acting the part of a weakly 
indulgent, rather than of a truly kind father." 

Lord Cumber worth's countenance fell. He had imagined 

he scarcely knew what ; and although nothing could be 
more fair than Lord Falkingham's proposal, it fell infinitely 
short of what he had expected, and he found himself not only 
unwilling, but unable, to do what was required of him. 

De Molton had hitherto lived upon his pay and an additional 
1002. per annum from his father. Lord Cumberworth was 
very little prepared to make such an addition to the 100/. per 
annum, and replied evasively, " that he would do all in his 
power, but that he had duties towards his other children, 

that he could not exactly say, that he would communi- 
cate with his man of business, that his daughter Charlotte's 
marriage, and the expneses attendant upon it, did not render 
him just then very flush of money, &c. &c." In short, he 
took his leave, somewhat disappointed with Lord Falkingham, 
while the impression he left upon Lord Falkingham's mind 
was by no means a favourable one. 

Meanwhile, Lady Cumberworth, who could not endure to 
witness the state of nervous excitement and agitation in which 
her darling Frank paced the floor of her boudoir, resoh 
would herself seek Lady Falkingham. She felt sure she could 

BLANCHE. 357 

so work upon her womanly and maternal feelings as to win her 
over to the side of the lovers. She accordingly ordered her 
carriage, and soon after Lord Cumberworth's return from his 
momentous interview with Lord Falkingham, she found her- 
self at the same door. 

She did not inquire if Lady Falkingham was at home, but 
sending in her card, she desired the servant to take it at once 
to his lady, and to ask if she could see her for a few minutes. 

By this means she effected her entrance ; but Lady Falk- 
ingham was exceedingly annoyed at what she deemed an un- 
warrantable intrusion, and was disposed to think Lady Cum- 
berworth, who was the most humble and the meekest of her 
sex, a pushing, obtrusive person. 

Lady Cumberworth was somewhat abashed when she 
entered ; for although she had worked up her courage to take 
this step by reminding herself that Lady Falkingham was 
universally allowed to be a most exemplary mother, and that 
therefore she must surely understand, and sympathize with 
the maternal feelings of another, she could not quite shake off 
the impression produced by Lady Falkingham's constant 
avoidance of herself. 

Lady Falkingham was alone, and received her with the 
most awful perfection of good-breeding. The gentle, the 
kind, the unsuspicious Lady Cumberworth felt chilled ; but 
she thought of her son's care-worn face, and she found resolu- 
tion to open the subject. (t She was sure that Lady Falking- 
ham's own tenderness for her daughter would plead her excuse 
for intruding upon her : that her son's peace of mind was so 
completely involved in the event which was then pending, that 
she could not withstand the temptation of seeking Lady Falk- 
ingham, and of pleading his cause. She was fully aware that 
her Frank was by no means worthy in point of fortune and 
situation to match with Lady Blanche ; but that still, in point 
of character and disposition, he was so perfect, so kind so 
dutiful a son ! so affectionate a brother ! so excellent in all 
the relationships of life ! that if personal qualities could 
make up for the absence of worldly advantages, he was not 
unworthy of any good fortune." * .--., 

Lady Falkingham listened with stately politeness, and when 
Lady Cumberworth paused, she answered :. " that she had no 
doubt his mother's account of his moral perfections was per- 

A A 3 

358 BLANCHE. 

fectly just, but she feared these qualities would not provide 
the conveniences of life. She regretted, as much as Lady 
Cumberworth herself could do, the necessity of attending to 
such paltry considerations ; yet, as the world was now con- 
stituted, it was impossible to disregard them." 

" But, dear Lady Falkingham, surely anything is better 
than that two young creatures should die of broken hearts ! " 

"If young people regulated their feelings, we should not 
hear of such unreasonable proceedings." 

" But in youth the feelings are strong, and the reason 
not matured. We have all been young ; we all know 

" Certainly I also have been young ; and therefore I 
know that in youth, as well as in maturity, it is possible to 
take reason, rather than impulse, for our guide." 

Lady Falkingham had never deviated for a moment, in 
principle, inclination, or practice, from the strictest line of 
prudence and propriety. Lady Cumberworth thought of her 
own early love, and of its tragic ending, and ardently wished 
to preserve her child, and the object of his love, from the 
blight which had passed over her own young days. In the 
warmth of her feelings she could not help saying : " You have 
been a fortunate woman, Lady Falkingham ! If you had 
known what it is to give the whole treasure of your young 
affections to one only object, and to be deprived of that object 
for ever, you would pause before you doomed anything you 
loved to such a fate ! It is hard to bear when the deprivati< 
comes from the hand of Heaven ; how much more hard ii 
from the band of man ! " 

Lady Falkingham did not reply. The deep tone of einotic 
with which Lady Cumberworth spoke, made her unwilling 
maintain her own side of the argument ; neither could she 
brought to allow the expediency of Blanche's marrying Caj 
tain De Molton. 

At this moment, Blanche accidentally entered the 
She started at seeing Lady Cumberworth, but approached h< 
with a glowing, blushing countenance. Lady Cumberworth, 
whose feelings were excited by her previous conversation, 
ceived her with open arra%, embraced her tenderly, and 
into tears. Blanche, surprised, delighted, overpowered, 
turned her caresses with corresponding emotion. Lady Fal- 
kingham sat by, provoked to see how everything conspired 

BLANCHE. 359 

bring about the dreaded union, and somewhat jealous of her 
daughter's sudden tenderness for a stranger. 

The following day a second interview took place between 
the fathers, in which Lord Falkingham ascertained, through a 
profusion of fine words, that Lord Cumberworth either could 
not, or would not, do anything more to assist his son in making 
up an income ; and Lord Falkingham thought it his duty to 
inform his daughter, that she must in good earnest exert 
herself to conquer her attachment, that the marriage was 
impossible. 

Lady Falkingham looked triumphant. Lady Blanche gave 
way to utter despair. She wept, she was in hysterics ; she 
would not leave her room ; she fretted herself really ill ; phy- 
sicians were sent for, draughts prescribed. Even Lady Falk- 
ingham began to be alarmed, and was unremitting in her at- 
tentions. But these attentions did not relieve or soothe 
Blanche's perturbed spirit. Her mother had never attempted 
by kindness to win her from her imprudent attachment, and 
she had completely failed in ridiculing her out of it. The 
consequence was, that she had lost all influence over her mind, 
and much of that which she had possessed over her affections, 

De Molton of course heard of Blanche's illness. He wan- 
dered about the neighbouring streets; he inquired twenty 
times a day at the door ; and at length, upon hearing that 
Lady Blanche was considered worse, and that a new physician 
had been called in to a consultation, he sent a message to 
Lord Falkingham, to implore one moment's conversation. 

Lord Falkingham was uneasy and confounded at the serious 
aspect of his daughter's illness, and was beginning to think 
anything was preferable to the present state of affairs. De 
Molton was admitted, and a passionate appeal on his part did 
not meet with an absolute refusal. The matter was again 
renewed ; Blanche was allowed to hope her health rallied 
surprisingly, and in the course of three or four days she was 
able to descend to the drawing-room, and there to receive De 
Molton as her plighted lover, her affianced husband. 

And now did they at length enjoy many delightful tete-a- 
tetes ; and so fully were they engaged in detailing to each other 
all the sorrows and fears, doubts, anxieties and sufferings of 
their years of separation, that they had little time to talk over, 
pr to arrange their plans for the future. They had both been 

A A 4 

BLA.N 

duly warned what were their prospects. Even the tender 
Lady Cumberworth had told them that they must not exprrt 
to possess all the blessings of this world ; that as they would 
be rich in that which seemed to her the greatest of all earthly 
ones, mutual affection, they must make up their minds to be 
happy without others. Lord Cumberworth repeated, ' Re- 
member, Frank, there are twelve of you: I cannot rob my 
other children :" which meant, " I do not mean to give up 
any of my own comforts for you." Lord Falkingham said 
everything that was reasonable and kind, and at the same time 
provided them with a plain travelling-carriage, with all that 
is useful and necessary in the way of plale, and with as much 
household linen as would be advisable for people who must 
change their abode as often as their regiment changed its 
quarters. Lady Falkingham, who had been too much ter- 
rified by Blanche's despair and her illness actively to oppose 
the marriage, contented herself with shaking her head mourn- 
fully, and with secretly detesting her future son-in-law : but 
she spared Blanche many of the home truths and useful se- 
verities, which might have been of much service had they 
been duly attended to, but which, under the present circum- 
stances, might have been productive of no good effect. 

Blanche and De Molton, however, acquiesced in the truth 
of all that was urged by their other relations and friends, and 
declared, with the utmost sincerity, their contempt for filthy 
lucre ; a contempt unconditionally expressed by Blanche, but 
by De Molton in more measured terms, as considering it un- 
worthy to be put into a competition with the affections of the 
heart. 

Immediately after their marriage, they were to repair to a 
very pretty villa belonging to a friend of Lord Cumberworth 's ; 
after which they were to pay several visits ; and towards the 
autumn they were to join De Molton's regiment, which was 
quartered in one of the most lovely parts of Devonshire. 

As they had no house of their own, there was no need to 
procure furniture. Lord Falkingham had already provided 
plate and linen ; Lady Falkingham of course selected the 
trousseau; presents of all kinds flocked in from the numerous 
connexions of both families, presents which, as they were 
known to be poor, were all intended to be useful : china ink- 
stands Sevres ornaments for chimneypieces buhl clocks, 

BLANCHE. 

and beautiful dressing boxes, with cut-glass bottles, mounted 
in silver gilt ! 

Nothing could exceed the happiness of the lovers, nothing 
could exceed their gratitude to their friends for their consi- 
derate kindness ; and Blanche felt how preferable were these 
tokens of affection, to the Glenrith diamonds, which she had 
received so coldly. 

CHAPTER XIV. 

llordly gallants, tell me this : 

Though my safe content you weigh not, 

In your greatness what one bliss 
Have you gain'd, that I enjoy not ? 

You have honours, you have wealth, 

I have peace, and I have health ; 
All the day I merry make, 

And at night no care 1 take. 

GEORGE WITHER. 

THE honeymoon was spent at Sir Frederick Vyneton's villa ; 
whose man-cook and whole establishment were devoted to the 
new-married couple, while the good-natured proprietor was 
making a tour in the Low Countries. 

When Captain and Lady Blanche De Molton entered the 
dark-green travelling chariot which Lord Falkingham had 
given them, and drove from the portico of Sir Frederick 
Vyneton's villa, on their way to Cransley to pass a fortnight 
with the Westhopes, Lady Blanche exclaimed, " How strange 
it is that there should exist people who can sell themselves 
for money, or for an establishment ! Should we be happier, 
Frank, if we possessed the mines of Golconda, than we are 
now ?" She threw her beaming eyes upon him with an ex- 
pression of joyous tenderness which made him indeed feel 
himself the happiest of men ; yet he trembled to think how 
little she knew the details of that poverty with which he was 
already acquainted, although only in the limited degree ex- 
perienced by a single man, whose wants, and consequently 
whose privations, are merely personal. 

" Dearest Blanche," he replied, " you know nothing of 
poverty yet. Repeat what you have just said, two years 
hence, and I shall indeed esteem myself the most blessed of 

32 BLANCHE. 

human beings. I hold it a matter of duty and of conscience 
to live within one's means whatever they may be ; and if, 
when you really have learned what is the life of a soldier's 
wife, you still say you despise worldly wealth, I shall be 
happier yes, still happier than I am at this moment; for 
I now feel as if you had engaged yourself in a fate you are 
not prepared for. But I have warned you, dearest Blanche 

I have not won you under false pretences ! " 

" We shall see," replied Blanche, smilingly. " I think I 
am made for a poor man's wife ; for nobody can more heartily 
detest everything appertaining to pomp and splendour, and 
that odious thing called money." 

Blanche expected a rapturous glance of gratitude from De 
Molton, and was surprised at hearing him sigh. The truth 
was, they knew little of each other's dispositions when they 
became irrevocably engaged. Blanche was warm, enthu- 
siastic, inconsiderate; she followed her impulses, without 
looking forward beyond the present moment De Molton was 
not without enthusiasm, but his was of a more thoughtful 
and serious cast. A high notion of honour was in him 
paramount to all other considerations. It enabled him to 
leave Paris when he found his friend was in love with Blanche, 

it enabled him to quit England when he discovered that 
she was in love with himself, it enabled him to stay in 
India while there was any military duty to be performed,- 
it prompted him to throw himself at her feet when he found 
her still free, although by so doing he scarcely hoped for 
anything but a contemptuous refusal on the part of her pa. 
rents. It now made him resolve that his love for his beautiful 
wife should not lead him into any expenses which his limited 
income could not meet ; and that, however painful he might 
find it to see her deprived of the luxuries to which she had 
been accustomed, he would never be tempted to run into debt, 
or to be a burthen upon his father, who was neither able nor 
willing to assist him. 

But when he made this resolution, he did not look forward 
with unmixed pleasure to installing her in the temporary home 
which he should be able to procure for her, near M * * *. 
She watched the serious expression of his countenance ; and 
she admired that expression, though she wished at this mo- 
ment to dispel it ; nor was it long before she succeeded in 
driving away all traces of care from his countenance. 

BLANCHE. 363 

Several agreeable visits succeeded that to Cransley ; and at 
last, when they approached the neighbourhood of M * * *, 
he left her for a few days at the house of a cousin,, while he 
preceded her to his quarters, for the purpose of preparing 
some comfortable habitation for her reception. 

He was fortunate enough to find a very pretty cottage, 
with a veranda and a garden, to be let, within a mile of the 
town. He arranged the furniture so as to make it look as 
little like a lodging-house as possible ; he unpacked all the 
presents which had, at a considerable expense, been forwarded 
to M * * * ; and before Blanche joined him, he had so dis- 
posed the buhl clock, the inkstands, the paper-cutters, the 
letter-pressers, the Persian table-covers, and the low, 
luxurious, well-cushioned arm-chair which Lady Cumber- 
worth insisted should form part of the camp equipage, as to 
give the room a look of home. 

De Molton hastened to receive Blanche at the door, and 
ushered her, with more complacency and satisfaction than he 
had anticipated, through the narrow entrance, into the treil- 
laged drawing-room. 

It was a lovely evening ! The flowers had not yet all 
faded, the little garden was bright in the western ^un. The 
view was enchanting ! rich varieties of luxuriant trees clothed 
the undulating slope to the sea-shore, and the clear blue sea, 
at a little distance, which from their elevated situation reflected 
to their eye the azure of the heavens, formed as it were a 
background to the wooded bank. 

Blanche was enchanted. " How lovely, how beautiful ! 
Oh, what are castles, halls, abbeys, parks, or palaces, to such 
a home as this, with the person one loves ? " 

De Molton was indeed happy too happy for utterance. 
A tear gathered in his eye, which he was almost ashamed 
should be seen even by his wife, and yet he could not avert 
his eyes from hers when she looked up so tenderly in his face. 
He gently drew her arm within his own, and they walked 
forth to enjoy in the fulness of their hearts the beauties of 
nature, and the delight of enjoying them together. 

Thanks to the snow-white table-cloth, the handsome plate, 
the presents of Lord Falkingham ; the pretty dinner service, 
that of Lord Cumberworth ; the lovely dessert service, that 
of Lady Cumberworth ; the cut-glass bottles, that of the eldest 

3()4f BLANCHE. 

Misa De Molton ; the tea-things, that of Miss M. De Molton ; 
the breakfast-things, that of Miss J. De Molton ; the silver 
urn, that of one of Blanche's married sisters ; and the silver 
coffee-pot, that of another ; the first four-and- twenty hours 
of Blanche's life as the mistress of her own house, passed in 
a state of rapture and of constant exclamations at the useless- 
ness and contemptibility of money. 

She forgot that she was all this time enjoying money's 
worth, and that indifference to worldly advantages is not put 
to the test while a person possesses every luxury, every 
elegance, though on a small scale, at the moment of all 
others, too, when married lovers wish only for the enjoyment 
of each other's society. 

One of the soldiers, who had been trained by De Molton 
to act as his valet, served as footman. His horses were, of 
course, taken care of in the barracks ; and as he had a gig, 
they were able to drive every day in different directions, ex- 
ploring new parts of the delightful country around. Blanche's 
life was a day-dream of delight her rich hazel eyes sparkled 
with feeling and gaiety her rosy lips smiled joyously when- 
ever De Molton entered the room : to her 

" Thit earth wai all one beautiful dream." 

Still, De Molton felt that Blanche had not steadily and dis- 
passionately weighed the advantages and disadvantages of their 
present situation, and that it was not with a thorough know- 
ledge of what she was undertaking that she had made choice 
of poverty with him. 

Too much reliance must not be placed on those who, hav- 
ing never had a wish ungratified in the way of worldly con- 
veniences, profess to despise them. If those who have already 
experienced privation deliberately form a poor marriage, we 
may conclude that they will know how to abide by the selec- 
tion they have made, and we need not anticipate for them 
mortification and disappointment. 

De Molton, from his early youth, had had many opportuni- 
ties of seeing the real details of a married officer's life ; and 
though, for the sake of the woman he loved, he gladly encoun- 
tered the difficulties which he knew awaited him, he was tho- 
roughly aware what they were, and he regretted that she should 
be exposed to them. He almost trembled at her exuberant 

BLANCHE. 3()5 

happiness, knowing that he might not always procure for her 
a pretty cottage orne in the neighbourhood of his barracks, and 
that they should not always be quartered in so cheap a country 
as Devonshire. 

He would rather have seen her more soberly contented ; and 
when she, proud as it were of being so happy, looked towards 
him for applause, she was half-mortified at the flatness with 
which her unworldly sentiments were received. 

These sentiments were not so frequently expressed as the 
season advanced. The flowers were all gone ; the little gar- 
den was very damp ; the veranda kept out the sun, and the 
windows did not keep out the wind ; the roof did not always 
exclude the rain ; and black beetles abounded on the ground 
floor, and sometimes a stray one mounted to the bed-rooms. 
The walks were muddy, the drives were windy, the trees had 
lost their foliage, and the chimneys smoked. 

One evening, as they left the little dining-room, and entered 
the small drawing-room, they were half-stifled with smoke. 
" Oh, dearest Frank ! make haste and open the window, or we 
shall be smothered. 5 ' But the window was a French window, 
and the wind set that way. There was no fastening it open 
so as not to run the risk of breaking it, or letting in a perfect 
hurricane. They agreed to open door, and window, and to 
return to the dining-room till the atmosphere was once more 
fit for respiration. 

This desirable result was soon accomplished, as small rooms 
are soon filled with smoke, soon cleared, soon warmed, and 
soon cooled. Accordingly, when they re-entered their snug 
apartment, they might as well have established themselves under 
the veranda, for any benefit they derived from the fire, which 
was only now beginning to burn. " This is the only objection 
to small rooms ! " exclaimed Lady Blanche. " If one keeps 
the doors shut, they become oppressively hot ; and if one opens 
a door or a window, they are as cold as if they had never been 
inhabited." 

" It is very true indeed," rejoined De Molton : " shall I fetch 
you a shawl, dearest Blanche ? " 

" Thank you, dearest Frank, I think it would be comfort- 
able : " and she drew her chair close to the fire, and placed her 
feet upon the fender, when a great puff of black smoke turned 
back from the chimney, as if to fly in her face. She quickly 

"(if)' BLAM in:. 

pushed back her chair. " How stupid that Devonshire L- 

she always will heap the grate with small coals. Sun ly a 

housemaid's business is to know how to light a fire ! " 

" It is, indeed ; but I am afraid a raw Devonshire girl U 
not likely to be an accomplished housemaid." And De Motto* 
hastened out of the room to seek his dear Blanche's shawl. 

" Now, Frank, you must read to me while I work : that 
will be so comfortable ! and I have a great deal of work to do. 
I shall show you what a good poor man's wife I am ! " She 
took out of her delicate ivory work-box a small cap of tiny 
dimensions, which she was beginning to embroider with the 
the moat intricate patterns. 

De Molton looked really pleased, and smiled upon her with 
the gentle sentimental smile which had always appeared so 
bewitching. 

The room became warmer, the fire clearer ; the shawl was 
very tenderly arranged by De Molton himself; and they sat 
down to pass a comfortable, domestic, and rational evening. 

" What book shall I read to you ? " inquired De Molton. 
" Some of your own youthful library, which your mother so 
kindly sent after us?" 

" Oh no ! 1 know all those books by heart ; but you have 
some of your own upon that shelf. 1 dare say they will be 
quite new to me." 

** I dare say they will, dearest, for they are all upon mili- 
tary tactics, engineering, and fortification, Vaubaii, Coehorn, 
and Jomini, &c." 

" Oh, that will never do/* rejoined Blanche. " But there are 
some novels from the circulating library at M * , which I 
have not yet looked at. I dare say that you will find some- 
thing to amuse, though it may not instruct us." 

He turned over the volumes the u*ual trash of a country 
town library Lady Evelinas and Altendorfs, and Cecilia* and 
Mortimers, Albertinas and Ildelheims, K lean or as and Miral- 
dinis, by the dozen. They attempted one or two, but could 
not proceed beyond the first three pages. 

" Dearest Frank , why would you not subscribe to a London 
library, as I begged you to do ? You see these books are not 
readable." 

" The expense of the carriage, dear Blanche, as well as that 
of the original subscription, made me very unwilling to do so. 

BLANCHE, 

367 

Moreover, even the London libraries do not supply one with 
very good books, when one is at such a distance in the country. 

" Well ! we will return these horrors, and you shall see 
what you can procure to-morrow. By the by, do send for 
the mason, or the bricklayer, or whoever the man may be, who 
does chimneys, and let him try to prevent the smoke. Look, 
again ! now we have had fresh coals." 

I will send about it to-morrow ; but I am afraid we shall 
not be able to effect much good in a lodging-house/' 

The next day " the man who did chimneys ' came, and he 

proposed new setting the grate, contracting the sides, and alter- 

ing the flue. Blanche said, by all means, if these measures 

would secure the absence of smoke. De Molotn inquired what 

would be the cost of the alteration, and found that it would be 

nearly a third of the house-rent for the year. He paused, dis- 

missed the man, and explained to Blanche, that as they were 

to pay her father and mother a visit in the spring, and as a 

Kreat part of the winter was over, and as they would probably 

be quartered in some different part of the world the following 

winter, it would not be wise to spend much money upon thu 

chimney ; and he advised their sitting in the dining-room when 

the wind happened to blow from the smoky quarter. 

TTthis she assented, but it was with an effort; and she 
evidently did so, to prove that she was indeed the good poor 
man's wife she had professed to be. 

Colonel Jones, the colonel of the "rf^^ 
their return from a short absence among their friends, 

attention from an inferior to a superior officer, did not 

SfA^*KSB ; and they W to call 
on Colnel and Mrs. Jones, W ho lived in the town, close to the 

368 BJ.A^ 

Nine rosy children and the governess were seated at dinner; 
Mrs. Jones officiating as carver, and the head nurse assisting 
the youngest to guide its food safely to its mouth. A smell of 
pudding and of small beer pervaded the apartment, and greatly 
annoyed Lady Blanche. 

De Molton introduced her to the Colonel's lady, who, relin- 
quishing the carving knife to the governess, retired from the 
scene of action to the sofa with Lady Blanche, and apologised 
for her children being so late at dinner, saying, " The colonel 
had taken the boys out with him to see the itinerant menage 'ru- 
in the market-place, and had kept them beyond their usual 
dinner-hour ; or else," she continued, " I always make it a 
point to be fit to be seen at visiting hours, for when one lives 
in the world, one can never tell who may drop in." 

The little Joneses, who, having always lived " in the world," 
were not shy, and were not more awed by the De Meltons than 
by Mr. and Mrs. M'Vining, or Mr. and Mrs. Green, or any 
of the other misters and mistresses who " dropped in," pro- 
ceeded with their repast somewhat noisily : they were healthy, 
and there were nine of them ! 

Blanche could hardly hear herself speak, but she was too 
well-bred to be fine ; and she contrived to look as if she heard 
all Mrs. Jones said, and as if she was quite accustomed to noisy 
children and clattering plates. 

Dinner was over ; grace was said in French by the eldest 
girl ; they rose simultaneously ; and, after being kissed by 
their mamma, were dismissed to have their faces washed, and 
their brown Holland pinafores taken off, preparatory to the 
afternoon walk. 

Mrs. Jones was an excellent woman, who was devoted to 
her domestic duties, and she considered the whole proceeding 
as to completely in the common course of things, that she 
made no apologies ; and was so far from being distressed or 
annoyed by the bustle, the ferment, and the clatter, that she 
was scarcely aware a noise had existed, or that when the door 
closed upon the last child a calm succeeded to the storm. 

When the De Moltons took their leave, Mrs. Jones good- 
humouredly ran to the top of the stairs and called aloud for 
John, at the same time complaining how troublesome it was 
that neither of the bells in the drawing-room would ring. John 
was not forthcoming ; and a dirty housemaid appeared in his 

BLANCHE. 369 

stead, hastily tying a clean apron over the very dirty one 
beneath: she opened the street-door, and Blanche squeezed 
past her into tne welcome open air. 

" Oh, Frank ! " she exclaimed, "" how can people submit to 
live in so wretched and vulgar a manner ! Mrs. Jones is not 
so dreadful herself, but her entourage!" 

" My dear Blanche, Colonel Jones is very poor : and he has 
nine children." 

" But there is no occasion to have things about one so dirty, 
so untidy, so uncomfortable. We are poor, but how different !" 

" Our cottage would not contain one ninth of Colonel Jones's 
children." 

" But why have no bell ? And why such bell-ropes ? " 

" Poor people cannot afford to furnish every temporary 
lodging-house with elegancies." 

" But why have all the Master and Miss Joneses dine in 
one's drawing-room ? " 

" I dare say all the other rooms are pre-occupied as sleep- 
ing apartments for said Master and Miss Joneses." 

" Now you are resolved to be provoking, and I could beat 
you for not agreeing with me." 

" I am afraid, Blanche, that poverty is not a pretty thing in 
reality, though it sounds pretty in a book." 

De Molton looked serious ; he could not joke upon the 
subject Blanche also looked serious, for she thought he was 
rather over solemn, and she firmly resolved she would not be 
poor after Mrs. Jones's fashion. 

Blanche worked very diligently at the little cap ; and when 
she had finished the cap, she embroidered the body of a little 
frock, and showed them exultingly to her husband. Still these 
preparations did not go far towards providing the expected 
scion of the house of De Molton with the necessary wardrobe, 
and Blanche feared she should be obliged to procure many 
articles ready-made in the town. 

" Why should not your maid work at them, my dear ? " 
suggested De Molton, as he found her considering, and won- 
dering, and calculating what plan she had best pursue. 

" Why, perhaps she would undertake the caps for me ; but 
she has never been used to anything but dress-making. Mamma 
never expected her to do anything else." 

370 BLANCHE. 

" You have been working BO much yourself, surely yon 
must have done a great deal." 

" Oh yes ! this cap and this body. Look, how beautiful 
they are!" 

Blanche's distresses on this score were however soon re- 
lieved by learning from Lady Cumberworth that her good* 
natured sisters-in law had amused themselves by making and 
providing everything she could want, and that a lovely set of 
baby-linen would meet her at Lord Falkingham's, where she 
was to pass some time previous to her confinement, in order 
that she might be under her mother's eye. 

She was not sorry when the time came for leaving the pretty 
smoky cottage. The March winds did not agree with the 
chimney, and she was not well enough to be able to roam 
among the dells and dingles, the shaws and the banks, in 
search of violets and primroses ; and she thought it would 
certainly be more desirable to enact the invalid, with all ap- 
pliances and means to boot, in her father's luxurious mansion, 
than in the windy, smoky, creaking lath and plaster cottage, 
which looked so pretty in the beginning of September. 

In London, Blanche would have been perfectly happy with 
her kind father, her mother who loved her, though not 
with the usual melting tenderness of a mother, with her 
husband, who was as handsome and interesting in appearance, 
and if possible more affectionate in his attentions than ever, 
and with her husband's family doting upon her, if it had 
not been that Lady Falkingham treated De Molton with a 
shade of superciliousness. She always spoke of her daughter 
as " poor Blanche," wondered to see her look so well after the 
terrible winter she had passed in a house scarcely weather -tight, 
alluded constantly to the great change that had taken place in 
her situation, and almost ridiculed the notion of the Miss De 
Moltons having presented her with such pretty worked caps 
and embroidered frocks for the " poor little creature " that 
was expected ! 

These speeches, although they contained some undeniable 
truths, were extremely galling to De Molton, and very un- 
pleasant to Blanche, for his sake, as well as for her own. 

Blanche found herself infinitely happier with her husband's 
family, where, instead of being treated as a person who waa 
now to be looked down upon by those who were once her 

BLANCHE. S71 

compeers, she was considered the most charming of her sex ; 
adored by Lady Cumberworth for having loved her son so 
disinterestedly ; made a fuss with by the Miss de Moltons 
because they were good-humoured girls, by nature inclined to 
like rather than dislike any fine, natural, affectionate creature 
of their own age ; and very much admired by Lord Cumber- 
worth, who thought she was an exceedingly fine woman, and 
that Frank was a very lucky fellow, for the present at least, 
however the marriage might turn out in the long-run. 

CHAPTER XV. 

There little love or canty cheer can come 
Frae duddy doublets and a pantry toom. 

ALLAN RAMSAY. 

As De Molton expected, the quarters of his regiment were 
changed ; and soon after Blanche's confinement, he left her to 
superintend the removal of their goods and chattels, and the 
arrangement of them in some other temporary domicile. 

Unfortunately, the regiment was sent to a small town, 
built principally of red brick, situated in one of the midland 
counties, ugly, bare, and bleak. There were no pretty 
cottages with nice gardens in the neighbourhood ; not even a 
retired farm house, with a few rooms to be let ; for the rustic 
inconveniences and rural inelegancies of a rambling farm- 
house are infinitely preferable to the pert vulgarity of a red 
house in a street. 

To this last alternative De Molton was most unwillingly 
reduced, and all he could accomplish was the acquisition of 
one of the few tenements to which was affixed a bright light- 
green balcony, which formed a brilliant contrast to the ver- 
milion of the walls; at least, the untarnished freshness of 
the colouring gave promise of new furniture and cleanliness 
within. 

He returned to London for his wife and child, and his de- 
light at seeing them was somewhat alloyed by finding that, 
during his absence, Blanche and her father had ascertained that 
Turton was very little out of the way to Temple Loseley, and 
that, consequently, he and her mother would pass a night or 
two with Blanche on their way into the country. 
BBS 

BLANriU . 

If his heart had sunk within him at the thoughts of intro- 
ducing his wife to the vulgar abode which he had } m <>}>li-t(l 
to provide for her, how much more did it sink at the thoughts 
of exhibiting to her parents their graceful, their beautiful, 
their high-horn daughter, as mistress of this same abode. 
Moreover, the house was not calculated to receive an influx of 
company. 

Still every one ought to be proud and happy to receive their 
father and mother-in-law under their roof ; and he was dutetfi 
mined to be so. He reminded himself that, though he was 
poor, he had never pretended to be otherwise, he never would 
pretend to be otherwise : there was no disgrace in poverty ; he 
had presented himself under no false colours ; he knew hit 
own situation, and be would not throw a ridicule over it by 
seeming ashamed of it, 

Blanche had pictured to herself another cottage, of the same, 
stamp as that in Devonshire: and as the country was now ID 
full beauty, and as there was no occasion to put the chimneys 
to the test, she anticipated with pleasure showing her mother 
how happy and how pretty an humble home might be ; how 
dignified I)e Molton could look, though employed in working 
in bis garden ; and how little she deserved the pity that had 
been lavished upon her. 

She was extremely vexed when her dear Frank broke to her 
the nature of the country, the situation of the town, the son of 
house be had been compelled to hire. 

"Is there nothing else to be procured for love or money ? ** 

" For money, yes ; for love, not ! " he replied. 

" But if something else is to be got, for Heaven's sake make 
My sacrifice ! " 

" There is one house much larger than we require, which 
has been fitted up with every luxury by a retired brewer, who 
now wishes to travel, and would gladly let it." 

" Oh, that will be just the thing ! " 

" My dear ! die rent is far, far beyond our means." 

" Oh ! but for one year, dearest Frank ! " 

" With a limited income, one year's extravagance unavoidJ 
ably entails many, many years of real distress. I will not nUB 
the risk of being unable to answer the just demands of my 
tradesmen. I never sent a creditor away without his money, 
and I never will" 

BLANCHE. 373 

De Molton spoke with seriousness, and something approach- 
in pr harshness ; for he suffered under the mortification of his 
wife, and the tone was meant to confirm his own determina- 
tion, not to be unkind to her. She thought him stern. 

" We had much better put off papa and mamma, and say at 
once we cannot receive them." 

Her tone was a little pettish. De Molton's task was no 
longer so difficult ; he dreaded seeing her unhappy, but the 
moment he perceived there was temper mixed with her sorrow, 
his fortitude returned, and he replied, " By no means : such 
as it is, our home is ever open to our parents ; and we have 
only to regret that it is not in our power to make them more 
comfortable." 

" I had a thousand times rather mamma did not come at 
all, than that she should see me in such a hole as you describe." 
Her voice was half choked with rising emotion : she had led 
her mother to expect something so very different ! The Devon- 
shire cottage had grown under her glowing descriptions into a 
miniature terrestrial paradise. 

" Blanche, this is not kind by your parents ; you should 
wish to see them for their own sakes." Certainly De Molton 
did not wish to see them, but he would not have pleaded guilty 
to such a weakness for the world. 

" I do not know how I can wish to be exposed to mamma's 

taunting expressions and contemptuous looks ; " and partly from 

vexation, and partly from bodily weakness, she burst into tears. 

" Blanche, this is childish ! You chose to marry a poor 

man, and you must abide by it." 

" You should not be the person to speak so coldly and un- 
kindly. You know the thing I mind most of all is, that 
mamma always seems to despise you ; and I had hoped to 
show her that, though we were poor, we did not deserve pity." 
Her sobs here interrupted her words. In addition to her 
other mortifications, she felt injured by the husband whose 
dignity she was so anxious to uphold. 

De Moltou was quite overcome by finding it was for him 
her feelings were so strongly excited. " Blanche, dearest 
Blanche!" he exclaimed, "you do not think me ungrateful 
for all you have given up for my sake ! Oh no ! you cannot 
think that ! " And he soothed her by every attention and 
kindness in his power. 

BBS 

374 BLANOMI . 

The effervescence of her mortification and vexation had 
exhausted itself, and she was sorry to have wounded him ; In- 
was also annoyed at having allowed an unkind word to escape 
his lips ; and they were still sufficiently lovers for their little 
quarrel to he almost a renewal of love : almost, hut not 
quite. Blanche could not forget that he had said, "You 
have married a poor man, and you must abide by it ; " and 
De Molton remembered that she had said, " She should IK- 
ashamed to be seen in such a hole" as the only home he could 
take her to. 

These words recurred to his mind more and more frequently 
as they drew near the small town of Turton. He felt quite 
angry with the Horse-guards for having built any barracks in 
so frightful a country as that which they were approaching. 
It was all arable : but there were no enclosures, no hedges, no 
hill, no dale, no woods, no copses ; merely t succession of 
fields ; in the highest state of cultivation it is true, bat that 
circumstance did not add to their beauty in Blanche's eyes. 
She would gladly have seen the wheat enlivened by some 
brilliant scarlet poppies, some beautiful old-fashioned blue 
corn-flowers, now almost exploded by the improvements in 
agriculture; she would gladly have been greeted with the 
fragrance of a distant field of charlock. 

They had a good view of Turton long before they reached 
it ; for it was placed in the midst of a large basin of land, 
divided into squares by the various crops, though by no other 
visible mark. From the last hill, as they looked down into 
the broad vale below, De Molton felt responsible for its ugli- 
ness, and tried to carry off* a sensation something resembling 
shame, by remarking that, though such scenery was not to our 
English eyes picturesque, it was very like " la belle France." 
The day was grey and colourless : there were no gleams of 
sunshine, no passing shadows, which will invest any extensive 
view with a certain degree of beauty. The wheat was all 
green, the barley was green, the oats were green, the tares 
were green, the clover was green ; there was no variety of hue, 
except where, here and there, a field lay fallow, or had been 
newly ploughed up. 

De Molton looked cheerlessly upon Blanche's spiritless face, 
and fairly wished the first evening in their new domicile come 
and gone. Blanche wished, upon her arrival, to be able to 

BLANCHE. 375 

say she found it better than she expected, but the words died 
away upon her lips. She walked to the window, and looked 
up and down the straight street. There was the lawyer's 
house opposite, with a brass knocker well polished ; then came 
the Sun Inn, all new, and red, and staring ; then a paltry 
shop ; and then the apothecary's door, surmounted by a gilt 
pestle and mortar. The road was dusty, and the cut lime- 
trees before the houses on the other side of the lawyer's were 
rather whitish-brown, than green. The street ran north, and 
south ; a gust of wind drove down it from the north, which 
gave the poor leaves a fresh coating before her eyes. 

It was as cold as days sometimes are in June: she turned 
from the window, and proposed a fire ; they both dreaded the 
attempt, but it succeeded, and there was no smoke. 

Blanche wished the days had not been so long, that they 
might sooner have let down the green Venetian blinds (there 
were no shutters), drawn the short and scanty white curtains, 
and shut out the dismal prospect. She tried to place the 
furniture in such positions as to give the room an inhabited 
appearance, but she only succeeded in making it look untidy. 
The little dimity covered chaise-longue was wheeled out from 
the wall, and placed between the fire and the window, till 
they found that so sharp a draught cut across from the ill- 
closed sashes, that it was quickly wheeled back to its original 
situation. A card-table was set open, and made to enact the 
part of a stand for petite objets. Blanche collected all her 
baskets and boxes, in hopes of making the apartment look 
comfortable, but her efforts were not as yet crowned with success. 

The next day she bought a square of dark red cloth, and she 
bound it with gold-coloured binding, and with it concealed a 
great portion of the card-table, and set off to better advantage 
the chef-d'oeuvre* of art and the souvenirs of sentiment. The 
arm-chair, the dear arm-chair, was unpacked ; and the buhl 
clock, it was hoped by both of them, would be a redeeming 
object. 

Alas ! there was no part of the room in which the buhl 
clock could be safely and advantageously placed ! The little 
chimney-piece was infinitely too narrow ; the card-table was 
already filled ; and the one other table which was not in con. 
stant requisition was by far too rickety to be entrusted with so 
precious an article. 

B 4 

376 BLANCHE. 

At length the small souvenirs were remoYed to the rickety 
table, and the clock was established upon the card-table ; and 
De Molton, when he looked upon his wife with her child upon 
her knee, saw no fault in the arrangement of the room. 

There was, however, one misfortune to which even De 
Molton could not close his eyes or bar his senses, a misfor- 
tune, too, which was utterly irremediable. 

A kind of fixture, half cupboard, half bookcase, the 
lower part of which opened like a cupboard while the top 
finished in shelves, adorned each side of the fire place. Now, 
in the lower part of one of these nondescript things there was 
every reason to believe the predecessors of the De Moltons had 
been in the habit of keeping apples. When the room was 
closed, this dire smell of apples assailed their noses, and at 
length it was traced home to the guilty spot. 

Chloruret of lime, eau de Cologne, every sort of fumigation 
was tried, but the indomitable smell was only quelled for the 
time : it returned with fresh vigour ! Blanche was in utter 
despair, for Lady Falkingham was expected in a day or two, 
and she was renowned for the extreme acuteness of her olfac- 
tory nerves ! Blanche had repressed any expression of her 
feelings, till this last blow quite overcame her fortitude, 

" Can nothing be done about this smell, Frank ? It will 
distract mamma ! " 

" Upon my word I do not know what more to recommend. 
Let us wash it again with chloruret of lime just before your 
mother comes." 

" I would not mind all the rest if we could but get rid of 
this smell of apples ! " 

That expression "all the rest," spoke volumes. De 
Molton was fully aware how much it implied of discomfort. 

Love in a cottage is a thing very frequently met with in 
books, and not unfrequently in actual life ; but love in a red- 
brick house in the street of a country town can never exist in 
poetry, and seldom in reality. 

" There is one other thing I would fain alter, Frank, and' I 
think it might be accomplished without much expense." 

Blanche spoke timidly, for she had learned to be afraid of 
proposing anything which he might deem extravagant, " Could 
we not get rid of the knocker on the door ? It looks dreadful ; 
but the horrid vulgar sound is worse than the appearance. 1$ 

BLANCHE. 377 

is impossible to forget where one is, when one hears that rap- 
a-tap ! " 

Ue Molton sighed to think she should so wish to forget that 
she was in her home, with her husband and her child; and 
Blanche, two years before, would not have believed she could 
ever have been otherwise than contented, when certain of De 
Mohan's constancy, of his undivided affection, and when 
united to him by the holiest ties. 

The day arrived on which the almost dreaded parental visit 
was to be paid. De Molton proposed driving to a nursery- 
garden at no great distance, and buying some flowers, which 
would make the room look rather more gay and countryfied. 
To this Blanche gladly assented ; and she took great pains to 
fill all the little ugly vases upon the chimney-piece, and all the 
finger-glasses which were not wanted after dinner, with such 
flowers as could be procured. They had arranged everything 
for the accommodation of Lord and Lady Falkingham as well as 
the capabilities of the house permitted. Blanche's maid was 
turned out of her room, and into the nursery, for Lady Falk- 
iugham's maid ; an arrangement which by no means met with 
her approbation, and which had not been accomplished with- 
out considerable difficulty. 

De Molton relinquished his dressing-room to his father-in- 
law, and, unknown to any one, as he hoped, performed his 
toilet very early in the morning in the dining-room ; the little 
back-parlour having been consecrated to the ladies'-maids, and 
anything being more practicable than to interfere with their 
morning repast. 

Both Blanche and De Molton had looked repeatedly into 
each room, and had ascertained that everything was as com- 
fortable as they could make it, and they sat waiting in some 
agitation for the arrival of their guests. 

Generally speaking, if there is a moment of unmixed hap- 
piness, it is that in which parents pay their first visit to a 
married child, and in which children receive the first visit from 
their parents. 

The pretty, half-childish, half-matronly pride with which 
the young wife does the honours of her domestic arrange- 
ments; the tearful joy of the mother as she inspects and 
admires ; the honest happiness of the father ; and the modest 
exultation of the bridegroom who has installed the creature he 

378 BLANriii. 

loves in all the comforts with which she is surrounded, 
render the moment one of pleasing interest to the most care- 
less bystander. 

But such were not the feelings which animated any of the 
present party. 

CHAPTER XVI. 

Some difference of thli dangerous kind.' 
By which, though light, the linki that bind! 
The fondest heart* may toon be riven ; 
Some ihadow in Loe'i uammcr hrav'n. 
Which, though fleecy rloud at flrtt, 
MAy yet In.awful thuuder* bunt. 

LallaRookk. 

THE Falkinghams did not arrive till very late. Blanche 
knew that every moment's delay was injurious to the repast 
she was so anxious should be tolerably well dressed. She 
several times ran down into the kitchen herself, to enforce 
upon the cook that she must contrive to keep back the dinner 
without letting the meat be over-roasted. 

At length they heard a great rumbling of wheels and halloo- 
ing of little boys, and the well-known carriage with four 
horses drove rapidly by, and drew up at the Sun Inn opposite. 
The postillions were soon directed to the right house; the 
whole equipage was turned round, and at length drew up 
before the little door. 

All this caused a sensation ; and well crtpCA heads were 
seen popping up above the white blinds of the lawyer's 
opposite, and frilled caps appeared at the windows of the 
house with the cut lime-trees, and waiters, chamber-maids, and 
boots thronged to the door of the inn, hoping the coroneted 
carriage was going to put up at the Sun. 

The first greetings were over, and Blanche was eager to 
show her mother to her room, for, " on hospitable thoughts 
intent," she was reflecting on the over-boiled chickens and the 
over-roasted beef. But their progress was arrested by the 
imperial ! It was stuck in the turning of the stairs ; and 
Lady Falkingham's tall footman, who measured six feet two 
inches and a half, and De Molton's omnipresent John Benton, 

BLANCHE. 379 

were struggling, and lifting, and pushing, and shoving in 
vain ! 

This was an unlocked for misfortune; one which might 
have been laughed at, among people so nearly and intimately 
connected, and one which might have been an excuse for 
dining very merrily in travelling costume ; but with Blanche's 
feelings, with Lady Falkingham's, with De Molton's feelings, 
the misadventure had a contrary effect. Blanche was ex- 
tremely annoyed, and led her mother back to the drawing- 
room ; while De Molton hastened^to lend his assistance, and, 
with the help of his more judicious mode of turning the im- 
perial, it was extricated from its inconvenient position, and 
was safely deposited in Lady Falkingham's room. 

All this produced some delay ; then came their respective 
toilets ; and they were not seated in the dining-room till an 
hour and three quarters after the cook had expected to " dish 
up." 

It requires the coolness, the presence of mind, the decision 
of the bolder sex, to be able to accelerate or to retard the 
dinner-hour. The humble cook of the De Moltons was 
thoroughly feminine in her timidity, and the consequence was, 
that the chickens fell to pieces in the dish, that the beef 
crackled under the teeth, that the potatoes were watery and 
sodden, that the greengages of the pudding had burst through 
their surrounding paste, and presented a shapeless, confused, 
and uninviting mass to the eye, while the maccaroni was 
stringy, strong, and burned. 

De Molton had wished the dinner to be plain and without 
pretension, and he had flattered himself that, by attempting 
nothing, they must be secure from a failure. Alas ! they had 
the mortification of seeing both their guests scarcely able to 
finish what they had upon their plates, and of perceiving that 
Lord Falkingham helped himself three times to cheese, and 
that Lady Falkingham demolished full half the sponge-cake at 
dessert ! De Molton, who was habitually reserved and pos- 
sessed much self-command, maintained a calm exterior ; but 
Blanche, who, whatever might be her wish to do so, was never 
able to conceal her feelings for any length of time, was in a 
fussy state of agitation, and was the first to complain of the 
badness of the dinner. 

Her remarks disturbed the equanimity of John Benton, 

580 BLANCH* 

who was most anxious that all should go off well. In his 
eagerness, he made more noise, jarred the plates, knocked the 
glasses together, clattered the knives and forks, and placed the 
dishes on the table in a more fearful undecided manner than 
he was ever known to do before ; constantly brushing by Lady 
Falkingham's cap to give a finishing touch to the arrangement 
of the table. Blanche's martyrdom increased every moment ! 

It is very easy to be tranquil, composed, and agreeable at 
the head of one's table, if one has the comfortable assurance 
that all will proceed properly and decorously ; but when one 
has no reliance that such will be the case, it is not so easy to 
preserve the careless air of perfect good-breeding ; still less so, 
should one actually see one's guests hungry and incommoded : 
such tranquillity amounts to a lofty pitch of stoicism scarcely 
attainable by common mortals. 

If the Falkinghams had smiled good-humouredly, it might 
have been better ; but the mother preserved a civil semblance 
of not perceiving what was amiss, evidently treating the pre- 
sent, as the best entertainment it was in the power of the De 
Moltons to give, and considerately sparing their feelings. 
When the ladies retired after dinner, Lady Falkinpham made 
no allusion to the house, the establishment, the cookery, or any 
part of the mtnagr, except the baby, on whose growth she ex- 
patiated, and whom she wished to see in its crib. 

Blanche accordingly took her mother up-stairs to the garret, 
where Lady Falkinpham was shocked at finding two beds in 
the small room. " My dear Blanche, do you allow two people 
to sleep in such an apartment as this? It is very bad for the 
baby to be so confined as to air and space." 

" My maid sleeps here just now," Blanche replied ; " it 
cannot hurt the baby for a little while." 

" The weather is so hot, I own I should dislike it very 
much ; I always was very particular about giving you all an 
airy nursery ; but I suppose it cannot be helped," added 
Lady Falkingham, checking herself. 

" Oh this house is horrid ! " exclaimed Blanche ; " if you 
had but come to see us in our Devonshire cottage, mam- 
ma !" 

" I wish I had, my dear." 

" But you know we have this only for a time, mamma ; 
and next year we may be quartered in a prettier country, and 

BLANCHE. 381 

a nicer neighbourhood, and where we can get something out of 
a town/' 

" I hope you will, my love/' replied Lady Falkingham, 
who was resolved to dwell as little as possible upon her 
daughter's present discomfort, and who thought herself very 
kind and very meritorious in not saying what she thought, 
felt, and looked, viz. " I told you how it would be," 

The breakfast was not more prosperous. The bread was 
baker's bread : the French rolls, well rasped and very tough, 
were exceedingly unlike the rolls and cakes of every variety 
which graced the breakfast-table of Temple Loseley. The 
butter was bought at the shop ; and Turton was situated in 
an arable, not a grazing country : they churned every morning 
at Temple Loseley. The cream was thin, colourless, and 
tasteless: the Alderneys at Temple Loseley were renowned for 
their perfection in beauty and breeding. 

Most assuredly, urban and rural poverty are very different 
things. With a pretty garden ; with flowers, poultry, cream, 
butter, eggs, and vegetables in profusion ; vulgarity and dis- 
comfort may always be avoided, though splendour may not be 
attained. 

The Falldnghams went away, sincerely commiserating their 
daughter, although Lady Falkingham's sincere sorrow was 
somewhat alleviated by being able to remark to her husband 
how precisely everything had, turned out as she had foreseen 
and predicted. 

When they had driven from the door, Blanche sat down to 
work at her needle, with a sensation of depression more over- 
whelming than she had ever felt before. " I am glad mamma 
is gone ! " she exclaimed, after having hemmed nearly a yard of 
muslin without uttering : " when people are no longer young, 
they miss the comforts to which they have been accustomed ! " 

De Molton said nothing. He also had been deeply hurt, 
mortified in every way ; hurt to see his wife exposed to mor- 
tification, and mortified to see her feel it so keenly. 

"Not but what mamma behaved beautifully," continued 
Blanche, for she was half angry with her husband for his 
very silence : she wished him to declare how annoyed and 
unhappy he also was ; but he was a proud man, and when 
such a man does feel mortification, it does not find vent in 
words. Being somewhat displeased at his silence, she dicj 

382 BLANC11E. 

not spare him. The feelings of the daughter got the better of 
those of the wife, and she proceeded : " Mamma never com- 
plained of anything. It was only through her maid that I 
heard she could not sleep a wink on account of the baby 
crying over head ; and the partition being so thin, she 
heard her as plainly as if she had been in the same room. 
Mamma was very kind, she took care to say nothing to vex 
me." 

De Molton thought mamma would have been infinitely 
more kind if she had appeared a little less miserable, and had 
not looked at Blanche as if she thought her a victim. He 
did not feel in charity with Lady Falkingham ; he found no 
pleasure in hearing her praised. 

" I am going to call on Colonel Jones," said De Molton ; 
" I shall be at home again in time to walk with you." He 
took his cap and his stick, and sallied forth ; but he had 
walked far beyond Colonel Jones's, before be recollected his 
intention of calling upon him, and he had to retrace his steps 
for some quarter of a mile. He found him just returning 
from a long walk with some of his children, who were joy- 
ously sporting around him ; and they all together mounted 
the narrow staircase which led to a drawing-room much in 
the same style as Blanche's, though somewhat larger in it* 
dimensions. 

Mrs. Jones and her eldest girl were busily engaged in 
needle-work, while the second daughter was reading history 
aloud. She cordially greeted De Molton, and said they had 
been taking advantage of the Colonel's having cleared the 
house of the boys to get on with the education of the girls ; 
" for in a small house, and with such a family, it is difficult 
to find a quiet moment," added Mrs. Jones, with a cheerful- 
ness and good-humour which seemed to prove she found no* 
thing unpleasant or disgraceful in poverty. 

She was the daughter of a country curate, and although 
well educated, and tolerably well born, she did not feel the 
want of luxuries and elegancies to which she had never been 
accustomed, and which none of those with whom she asso- 
ciated missed any more than herself. 

De Molton wished he could teach his wife to accommodate 
herself to her circumstances, as Mrs. Jones did. But how 
many habits had she to unlearn and to forget before she could 
be happy as Mrs. Jones was happy ! 

BLANCHE. S83 

He resolved to cultivate the Joneses, and he asked them to 
dinner that very day, frankly bidding them come and feast 
upon the remains of the provisions they had laid in for his 
father and mother in law. The happy and good-humoured 
Joneses accepted the invitation in the same unceremonious 
spirit in which it was made, and De Molton returned home to 
inform his wife of the company she might expect. She de- 
tested the thoughts of encountering another dinner in her own 
house ; but De Molton was not a person who would ever 
condescend to ask his wife's permission before he invited a 
friend to dinner, and of that she was fully aware. 

The Joneses arrived just five minutes before the appointed 
hour ; and Mrs. Jones asked Blanche's leave to take off her 
bonnet, and arrange her hair at her looking-glass, as she had 
walked from her own house. She shortly re-appeared with 
her bows and her ringlets in the most perfect order, for she 
had never been in the habit of depending upon the services of 
a maid. She also appeared in a smart silk gown ; her fair, 
fat, handsome arms uncovered, a necklace on her neck, and 
ear-rings in her ears. 

Blanche, on the contrary, was in a more seemly costume 
for a country dinner by day-light ; and Mrs. Jones wondered 
her hostess should wear in the evening what seemed to her a 
morning dress. 

The cook's nerves had not been agitated, and the dinner 
was very good. Colonel Jones was gay and conversible : he 
had served in the Peninsula ; he, and his wife also, had been 
at Paris when the allied armies entered it ; they had seen 
many different countries, had been mixed up in many of the 
events of that period, when every day brought changes which 
affected empires ; they had been thrown with many of the 
personages who already figure as historical characters. They 
were delighted with De Molton, who was an excellent lis- 
tener ; delighted with Lady Blanche, who possessed the charm 
to which all people in all ranks are sensible, the real good- 
breeding of real high fashion; and Blanche was astonished 
to find herself in better spirits than she had been in for some 

days. 

No fund of natural spirits, however inexhaustible it may 
be, can stand the trial of seeing the guests under your roof, 
cold, abstracted, and comfortless; whereas the phrenologists 

384 BLANCHE. 

could certainly point out some organ in the human head which 
takes pleasure in being developed when you feel that those 
towards whom you are exercising the rites of hospitality are 
really and thoroughly enjoying themselves. 

There was a good deal of broad humour about Colonel 
Jones, and no shyness ; he was animated in his descriptions. 
De Molton's wine was good of its sort ; and the dinner was 
gay, noisily gay. Blanche thought them a little vulgar, but 
still she liked them both ; and after the cheeriest restraint 
which had prevailed during the two preceding days between 
ths nearest and dearest relations, there was something which 
expanded the heart in the warmth and cordiality of the Joneses. 

The dinner which they gave the DC Motions in return 
proved less agreeable. The astonishing clatter made by the 
servants, the badness of the cookery, the multitude of child- 
ren, and the friends who were invited to make up the party, 
did not conduce to reconcile Blanche to the real work-day 
details of poverty, as De Molton had at first intended it 
should, by showing her how happy people could be in its 
despite. 

The summer wore away, but without any rummer enjoy- 
ments ; the autumn succeeded, and winter followed in due 
succession. They had many invitations from different friends, 
but travelling was expensive ; and having been in London for 
some months during the spring, they could not obtain leave of 
absence for any length of time which might make it answer 
to leave home. 

The following year saw them removed to a fresh habita- 
tion, and saw another olive-branch added to the parent stock. 

The nurse now professed her inability to attend to two 
children, " both babies as it were ; she could not do justice to 
the dear little loves. Miss Emma, she was just old enough 
to get into mischief ; and she was more work, a body might 
say, than the infant himself." There was no denying the 
reason and truth of the nurse's statement. It was also true, 
as the nurse added, " that my lady was very particular, and 
liked to see the children always nice ; that it was not as if 
she did not mind their being just dressed in brown holland pina- 
fores, and such like, as the little Master Joneses were ; that, 
for her part, she could not a-bear to see children look so, 
just like anybody's children." 

BLANCHE. 385 

De Molton, as well as Blanche, was proud of little Emma's 
exquisite beauty, and they could neither of them endure the 
thoughts of their children not being thoroughly well taken 
care of. "Could you not ask Mrs. Green to help nurse?" 
suggested De Molton ; " she might walk out with Emma, and 
might make her clothes. Our life is such a quiet one, surely 
she must have a great deal of time upon her hands." 

Blanche stood rather in awe of Mrs. Green, who was a 
regular fine lady, and who felt the change in her situation to 
the full as acutely as Blanche herself could do, and who had 
not the same strong motive for bearing it with uncomplaining 
fortitude, inasmuch as she was not married to the man of her 
choice, neither had she any character for consistency to main- 
tain. In many of the minor distresses and difficulties which 
had occurred, Mrs. Green had not failed to make her mistress 
feel how great was her merit in submitting to them ; and 
Blanche knew it was utterly impossible to accomplish what 
De Molton (who was not so well versed in the nice limits and 
boundaries of the honourable office of lady's maid) thought 
could be so easily arranged. 

" It is quite impossible, my dear Frank ! Green has already 
put up with a great deal to oblige me, and I could not ask her 
to wait upon the nursery." 

" I do not want her to wait upon the nursery, but she might 
assist the nurse." 

" I can part with her, Frank ; but I cannot propose to her 
to attend upon the children." 

De Molton, who saw no reason why one woman should sit 
idle, while another had more to do than she could well per- 
form, was half annoyed with Blanche, and he answered 
rather quickly, " All I can say is, I cannot afford to keep 
another servant." 

" I will tell Green what you say," replied Blanche, with 
the tone of a heroine and a martyr ; and accordingly she lost 
no time in informing Green that she must look out for another 
situation unless she would wait on Miss Emma, as Captain 
De Molton wished ; and as, of course, Mrs. Green declined 
to do. 

So much separated from all former connexions, friends, and 
relations, as Blanche had been of late, she naturally felt a 
good deal annoyed at parting with a person whom habit 

9 C 

386 

bad rendered agreeable to her, who was an excellent lady's 
maid, and was pleasing in ber manners. De Molton could 
not sympathise in her annoyance at getting rid of a fine lady, 
and infinitely preferred the stout good-humoured girl who 
came in her stead, and who was too happy to fetch and carry, 
and was too much honoured by being allowed to wait on my 
lady. 

Unfortunately, the last remnant of Blanche's trousseau was 
growing very shabby, and her wardrobe needed recruiting. 
Green was gone ; the girl Pbo?be wan no milliner ; Blanche 
could embroider beautifully, and she could now accomplish 
children's frocks with considerable success, but she could not 
make her own clothes. How should she ? She was obliged 
therefore to have her wants supplied by the country milliners, 
and both she and De Molton were appalled at the bills which 
were the inevitable consequence. 

Blanche wished exceedingly not to be expensive, but site 
knew not how to avoid being so. She had never had any 
allowance when a girl : she had been so amply supplied with 
every article of dress upon her marriage, and had since led so 
retired a life, that little occasion to spend money had occurred 
until now ; and she was ignorant how miraculously, when 
once the purse-strings are opened, the contents vanish as it 
were of themselves. 

It is a great fault in the education of girls, to omit teaching 
them, in some measure, the value of money. They suddenly 
find themselves at the head of an establishment, in which, if 
large, considerable sums pass through their hands ; if small, 
on them depends the comfort, or discomfort of the mbiagt; 
and they are not aware, (except from theory, which has little 
to say to practice) that twenty shillings make a pound. 

The loss of Green was an annoyance of daily recurrence. 
Blanche could not dress her own hair ; and the awkward 
attempts of the shy and frightened red-fisted maid to brush 
and to curl, to braid and to crepcr, made her every morning 
come down to breakfast in a ruffled and uncomfortable state. 
She found it necessary now and then to buy herself a cap, 
and unluckily the bill for these caps came in at a time when 
De Molton 's finances were at a very low ebb. Blanche had 
no pin-money, and she applied to him for the requisite sum. 

" What nonsense, Blanche, to buy tawdry caps, when you 

BLANCHE. 387 

Iteve all that beautiful brown hair, which is so much prettier 
and more becoming than any cap that can be made." 

" I never learned to dress hair ; and since Green is gone, 
I rind it impossible to do without a cap. I have not quite 
made up ray mind to go about a perfect figure, yet ; but I 
dare say I soon shall. It is impossible to be well-dressed 
without a maid." 

" But surely you could soon learn to arrange your hair. 
You told me Mrs. Jones always dressed her own, and I am 
sure it is very smart in bows, and all kinds of things." 

This was too much for Blanche to endure. To have been 
forced to part with her maid ! To be refused a cap ! To be 
twitted with Mrs. Jones ! To have Mrs. Jones set up as a 
pattern ! " Indeed I should be very sorry to look like Mrs. 
Jones ! " she exclaimed, with a heightened colour, and an eye 
which was very beautiful in its increased brilliancy : " if you 
wished to have a wife who should look and dress like Mrs. 
Jones, you should not have selected me ! I hope I may never 
arrive at such a pitch of vulgarity as that ! I had rather look 
like anybody in the whole world than Mrs. Jones ! " and in 
her anger and petulance, she spoke, as she would not have 
done in a cooler moment, of a person whom she both respected 
and liked. 

" Mrs. Jones is a most excellent and exemplary woman," 
replied De Molton, with some solemnity of manner ; " one 
who performs the duties of her situation in life cheerfully and 
admirably. I have a very great regard for Mrs. Jones. Where 
is this bill?" he added, with an awful calmness: "I am 
sorry to say you must buy no more caps. I have not the 
means of paying for them ! " He gave her the money, which 
she took with pain and indignation. 

It is very disagreeable to ask for money, very disagree- 
able to receive it when it is given grudgingly. Women should 
have, settled upon them when they marry, the sum which, in 
proportion to the income of their husband, they may in fair- 
ness spend upon their dress; otherwise, if extravagant, there 
are no regular limits to their extravagance : while, on the other 
hand, however economical they may be, and however liberal 
the husband may wish to be, they may chance to ask for 
money at a moment when it may prove inconvenient to pro- 
c c 2 

SS8 BUM in:. 

duce a sum which the man had not calculated would be called 
for at that particular moment. 

An expression of annoyance will wound and distress a high- 
minded woman, will anger a high-spirited one, or will induce 
a timid one to conceal her bills, and to acquire the habit of 
contracting debt* unknown to her husband. 

Blanche received the money with a swelling indignant heart, 
and her feelings were not soothed when a tradesman entered 
with a long bill, for which De Molton drew a draft without a 
remark or a murmur, and roost politely dismissed the man, 
pleased with his exactness and punctuality. 

Blanche thought, " After all, he is not really so poor as he 
pretends to be. He only talks thus to prevent my spending 
anything. He has money enough for every one else." 

De Molton had appointed that very morning to pay that 
very bill. He had purposely reserved the requisite sum, and 
he remained with scarcely enough for the weekly unavoidable 
expenses. But he did not explain all this to his wife. He 
was resolved never to run into debt, and he was unapproach- 
ably serious and correct upon the subject If he had can- 
didly explained the state of the case to her, shown it her in 
black and white, perhaps she would have joined with him in 
cheerfully accommodating herself to existing circumstances ; 
but he dealt in general expressions of poverty and distress, and 
yet, at the very moment he complained most bitterly, the money 
was forthcoming for those things which must be paid for. It 
WM exactly brrau*t he would have wherewithal to meet ne- 
cessary expenses, that he so strenuously opposed any which he 
deemed unnecessary. 

Having once come to the conclusion that he had acquired a 
habit of complaining, and that he could find money if he chose 
to do so, she only felt injured when he enforced economy, and 
mentally accused him of making needless difficulties. 

Two more years elapsed, and their family consisted of four 
promising children, when De Molton's regiment was ordered 
to Brighton : they were again thrown among people of their 
own class, and friends of former days. 

They had been married nearly five years, and during those 
years words had been spoken which could not be forgotten. 
Poverty had come in at the door, and if Love had not quite 
flown out at the window, he fluttered on the window-sill. 

BLANCHE. S89 

CHAPTER XVII. 

And ruder words will soon rush In 
To spread the breach that words begin, 
And eyes forget the gentle ray 
They wore in couitship's smiling day, 
And voices losu the tone that shed 
A tenderness round all they said ; 
Till, fast declining one by one. 
The sweetnesses of love are gone. 

Lalla Rookli. 

AMONG other old acquaintances, the Westhopes were esta- 
blished at Brighton ; and it was with mixed feelings that 
Blanche prepared herself to meet the friend of her youth, the 
person who had most unintentionally assisted to foster her 
love, by always appearing so impressed with Ue Mol ton's at- 
tractions. Upon that subject both men and women are more 
influenced by the estimation in which the object is held by 
others, than they would willingly allow : they are ashamed to 
be so easily pleased as to prefer a person whom no one else 
thinks pleasing, and they are decidedly proud of being pre- 
ferred by one whom every one else admires. 

Mingled with her desire to see her early friend, Blanche ex- 
perienced a certain dread of the scrutinizing eye of intimacy. 
She felt she should never be able to echo, with the accent of 
truth, the romantic sentiments in which they used once to in- 
dulge ; and she did not wish her friend to discover that the 
love which she had spoken of as equal to endure any trials, 
had nearly sunk under the petty and undignified vexations of 
pecuniary difficulty. 

Time, however, had worked some changes in Lady West- 
hope. She had long conquered her incipient inclination to- 
wards Mr. Wroxholme ; she had learnt that a well-regulated 
mind can make itself contented, if not happy, under almost all 
circumstances ; she had quite given up the point of being the 
youngest and most admired person in her circle ; and she had 
convinced herself that she ought to be grateful for the worldly 
comforts with which she was surrounded, for the ample means 
of doing good which were within her reach, and for the cir- 
cumstance of having a very good-humoured husband, who, 
whatever might be his faults, was no tyrant. 

Lord Westhope, also, was somewhat altered. He was now 
c o 3 

ni. AN. in:. 

eight years older than when vie began our story, and r.vmty- 
two years older than when he began his infidelities. It was 
indeed, time he should have sown his wild oats, and accord- 
ingly he was become infinitely more domestic. Although love 
was a feeling which could never again exist between them, 
there subsisted a considerable regard, and their society was far 
from disagreeable to each other. 

On the morning after the arrival of the De Moltons, when 
Lady Westhope called upon Blanche, one of the disputes, 
which were now of too frequent occurrence, had just taken 
place between her and her husband. Blanche had made a 
desperate effort to persuade De Molton to take a house which 
was to be let at a rent, low in proportion to its size, but still 
higher than he thought he could afford. Blanche shrank from 
being seen by her former associates in the mean and paltry 
lodging which, in BO expensive a place as Brighton, was the 
only one he found within his means. He persisted in his 
usual resolution, never to do anything which might eventually 
lead to a shabby action, for the sake of avoiding a shabby ap- 
pearance. He had not long left the room, after a peremptory 
refusal to accede to his wife's request, when Lady Westhope 
entered. 

After the first greetings were over, and Lady Westhope had 
admired Blanche's beautiful children, they drew their chairs to 
the fire, and Lady Westhope exclaimed, " How I envy you 
those lovely children, Blanche ! 1 think, if I had four such 
enchanting creatures, I should be quite happy ! I should so 
like to have a large flourishing family growing up around me ! " 

" Heavens ! dear Lady Wenthope ! and I consider each 
addition to mine as a visitation which gives me the blue devils 
for months ! When once they are there, and they have made 
themselves beloved, one would not part with them for worlds ; 
but if you knew what unceasing trouble they give, and how 
difficult it is to do one's duty by them, you would not wish for 
a large family." 

" Well ! perhaps there are advantages, as well as disad- 
vantages, in everything. I have schooled my mind, and 
brought myself to think everything is for the best. I am a 
much more contented person, Blanche, than when we used to 
talk over your love affairs in former days. Now, tell me a 
little about Captain De Molton. Is he as handsome as ever ? 

BLANCHE. Sgi 

and are you as much in love as ever ? I certainly never did 
see such a regular love-match as yours ! The longer you were 
separated, and the more you were thwarted, the more despe- 
rately constant you both were!" 

" Opposition has always been supposed to have that effect : 
I believe it has often turned many a passing fancy into a 
grande passion." 

" Why, you are not implying such treason against yourself 
as to say that opposition assisted to foster your grande pas- 
sion ?" 

" Oh dear, no ! I only spoke generally. But do you tell 
me a little about Lord Westhope," she added, to turn the 
conversation from her own affairs. 

" Oh ! he is grown so kind and attentive ! I assure you 
we are settling down into a most domestic comfortable old 
couple." 

The entrance of Mr. Stapleford interrupted the mutual in- 
vestigation of conjugal felicity which the friends had set on 
foot. Mr. Stapleford said he had just met De Molton in 
the street, who had told him where he should find Lady 
Blanche, and he had lost no time in paying his respects to 
her. " But, dear Lady Blanche, you are going to remove 
from this horrid place ? In such a situation too ! A mile and 
a half from the sea. I could scarcely believe De Molton, 
when he pointed out this as your abode; and should have 
imagined he was playing off a practical joke upon me, if I 
had not known he was not given to being facetious. But I 
suppose you are only here till you can procure something in 
the land of the living." 

Blanche did not wish Mr. Stapleford to perceive she was 
not perfectly contented with her fate, and she replied that she 
did not like being within hearing of the sea, the constant 
monotonous breaking of the waves upon the shore made her 
melancholy. 

" There is no accounting for tastes," he replied, with a 
polite bow, and a glance which quickly ran over the shabby 
furniture, the once smart trellised paper, (a sort of paper pe- 
culiarly in vogue at sea-bathing places, where real flowers and 
real green leaves are rare,) the little round convex mirror sur- 
mounted by an eagle with a chain in its bill, and the other 
lodging-house elegancies which adorned the room, especially 

c c 4 

BLAM III . 

the bell-ropes, which were as fine, and much more dirty, than 
those at Mrs. Jones's, which, four years before, had excited 
such strong feelings of horror in Blanche's mind. She saw 
the excursive glance of his eye, and she saw the affectation of 
politeness with which he then let it fall on the ground, while 
a slight smile just played about the corners of his mouth. She 
always disliked him ; and she now most devoutly wished he had 
not fancied the sea-air bracing, and the society of Brighton 
agreeable. 

" You will be at Mrs. L.'s this evening, shall you not?" 
inquired Stapleford. 

"No!" replied Lady Blanche; "I am not acquainted 
with her." 

" Ah ! by the bye, she has come into fashion since your 
time. How long is it since we lost sight of you ? " 

" I have been married five years.'* 

" Married ! Ah ! marriage is a holy rite, synonymous with 
honourable sepulture. You have, from that day, been dead to 
all your friends ! By the bye, I was with the Wentnors a 
month ago. You know your old friend Glenrith is become 
Lord Wentnor now. He, however, seems determined not to 
be buried alive. He is giving balls and fetes of all descrip- 
tions ; or rather the is, for he is such a doting husband, that 
every fancy of here is a law to him. It is quite pretty to see 
such love-making after eight years of marriage, especially as 
the result of this Arcadian conjugality generally is a splendid 
entertainment by which half England profits." 

Stapleford's instinct for saying the disagreeable thing had 
not deserted him ; and he left Blanche to ponder on the fate 
she had rejected, and to compare it with that she had per- 
sisted in choosing. Lady Westhope, too, was happy ! She 
rejoiced that such should be the case ; but certainly the re- 
flections she made during the rest of that day were not un- 
worldly ones. 

De Molton had again met Stapleford in his morning walk, 
who, after complimenting him upon the unimpaired beauty of 
his wife, attacked him most unmercifully for having kept her so 
long in seclusion, and for now burying her in such an out-of- 
the-way place, and implied (what he had no right to know, 
but what he had guessed from the expressive countenance of 
Blanche, in which her feelings might always be read as in a 

BLANCHE. 393 

mirror,) that she was an unwilling denizen in that remote 
suburb. 

De Molton returned home somewhat displeased at having 
been, as he imagined, spoken of as a tyrant and a miser. The 
tete-a-tete in the evening did not promise to be agreeable. 

" Mr. Stapleford called this morning," Blanche began. 

" So he told me," replied De Molton. 

" And Lady Westhope has been here." 

" Did they tell you any news ? 

" Mr. Stapleford told me he had been staying at Wentnor 
Castle ; and he gives such a description of their happiness ! 
They seem to be giving splendid fetes and beautiful enter- 
tainments, all to please her ; for, he says, that every wish of 
Lady Wentnor's is a law to her husband." 

De Molton felt this last sentence as an implied cut at him. 
" It is very fortunate for Glenrith that he has money to throw 
away in gratifying every foolish whim of a fantastical woman." 

Blanche felt that this was a hit at her ; and forgetting that 
by applying to herself what her husband said, she gave him 
a right to conclude she meant to be personal in her ac- 
count of Lord Wentnor as a husband, she followed her im- 
pulse, and replied : 

" I cannot see that there is anything fantastical in wishing 
not to be laughed at by all one's acquaintance, and in disliking 
a house one's friends can hardly bring thein selves to enter." 

'' Blanche, when y6u married me, you knew you married a 
poor man : if you wished for riches and splendour, why did 
you not marry Glenrith ? " 

" I am sure, if I wished for kindness and for good-humour 
I had better have married Lord Glenrith. I do not know 
what foolish, girlish infatuation came over me." 

" It is, indeed, unfortunate, that in consequence of this 
foolish, girlish infatuation, which are the terms by which you 
designate your attachment to your husband, you should have 
thrown away a situation in which you would have been so 
much happier. I have but to regret that I should have 
marred your fortunes so unwittingly marred them, for 
neither Glenrith nor yourself can accuse me of having, by 
any arts or underhand practices, attempted to win your affec- 
tions from him." 

This implied, according to Blanche's interpretation of his 

r/) t- BLANCHE. 

words, that she had allowed them to be gained before he had 
made any attempt to do BO ; and, as angry people usually do, 
answering to the sense she chose to attribute to his speech, 
rather than to its plain and obvious meaning, she replied, 

"If it was only pity for die unfortunate passion which 
you supposed me to entertain for you, which induced you to 
profess love tt Cransley, it is indeed unfortunate that you 
allowed your pity so far to overcome your prudence. If I 
had imagined such to have been the case, I should most 
assuredly uever have broken off my engagement with Lord 
Wentnor." 

" I can only again lament that I should have been the cause 
of your doing what you so much regret" 

" If this is my reward for having rejected, for your sake, 
the best parti in England, a good man, too, and one who 
loved me ; for having disappointed and angered my parents ; 
for having preserved an undeviating constancy for three years 
to a person who now laments that I did not marry his rival, 
and confesses he only married me out of pity, I am indeed 
the most unfortunate woman in the world !" She burst into 
a flood of tears of anger and vexation. 

" Blanche, you wilfully pervert the meaning of all I say. 
When did I imply that I married you for anything but love ? 
But these reproaches, this petulance, are not the right method 
to preserve a husband's affection." 

" If nothing but a slave, a patient, meek Griselda, a 
Mrs. Jones, can preserve your affection, I am afraid I have 
no chance of preserving it ! I do not know what I can do 
more than I already do. I work for my children ; I go with- 
out all the comforts I have been used to ; I have no maid ; 
and I must refuse going to Lady Westhope's to-morrow night, 
because the nursery-maid cannot dress my hair, and because 
I have no gown fit to appear in." 

" I am very, very sorry I have not the means of providing 
you with the luxuries you regret, and I am very sorry you 
refuse yourself the pleasures and amusements that so naturally 
fall in your way. I had hoped that at Brighton, where 
people may join in society withe ut much expense, and where 
it is not necessary to keep a carriage, you might have mixed 
with your friends. I should have thought the art of hair- 
dressing was not so very difficult to acquire, when one sees 

BLANCHE. 395 

every attorney's daughter, every milliner's apprentice, every 
shop-girl, with hair which puts to shame all the exertions of 
M. Hippolite." 

" I am not a shop-girl or a milliner's apprentice", answered 
Lady Blanche, while all the blood of the Falkinghams mounted 
to her cheek, and all the spirit of an ancient race flashed from 
her eye. 

" But you are the wife of a poor man, although of one as 
nobly born as yourself!" and all the pride of the De Moltons 
rendered the brow of her husband absolutely awful. 

" I know full well that I am the wife of a poor man ; there 
is no need to remind me so often of that truth," replied Lady 
Blanche, with some bitterness in her tone ; " and therefore I 
shall stay at home, and not expose my poverty to the eyes of 
the pitying world, or to the sneers of a Mr. Stapleford." 

" You will do as is most agreeable to yourself. I shall 
certainly go to Lady Westhope's, as I shall feel sincere plea- 
sure in seeing my old friends again." 

To Lady Westhope's went De Molton ; and Blanche stayed 
at home. She had originally intended, for the sake of enjoy- 
ing agreeable society, to brave the slight mortification of not 
finding herself, as was once the case, the best dressed woman 
in the room ; but the conversation of the preceding evening 
had left her so unhappy, so discontented, and so indignant, 
that she found a certain pleasure in martyrdom. It was, 
however, only in the eyes of her husband that she wished to 
enact the martyr; from the world she would fain conceal that 
she had so misjudged the strength of her own attachment : 
she meant to persuade others that it was from choice, from 
bad health, or from any motive rather than the true one, that 
she persisted in leading a retired life. 

But with her candid disposition, and her speaking eyes, it 
did not require the malicious tact of a Stapleford to read the 
true state of her feelings. With Lady Westhope, especially, 
she could not always be on her guard ; and to her it was soon 
only too evident that the love for which she had given up 
everything else did not repay her for the sacrifices she had 
made. Lady Westhope began indeed to doubt whether this 
much-vaunted love had not, when tried in the balance against 
privations of every sort, been found utterly wanting. 

It may be asked, should then Blanche have married Lord 

BLANCHE. 

396 

Glenrith? No, certainly; for she was not in love with him. 

ore especially no, for she was at the time in love with ano- 
ther. But we would urge that if affluence without love is 
insufficient to wedded happiness, so is the most romantic love 
uhout those habitual luxuries, and that dispensation from 
sordid details, which, to persons in a certain situation, may 
almost be termed the necessaries of life. 

Let not those who, valuing the good things of this world, 
are dazzled into forming an interested marriage, anticipate 
the delights of sentimental affection, nor be disappointed if 
one whose situation was the attraction prove destitute of those 
qualities which were not sought ; and let those who are " all 
for love and the world well lost," keep in mind the latter half 

the sentence, and not expect to find both that which they 
>nze, and that which they profess to contemn. Above all, 
t not those who have an opportunity of uniting in their 
hoice true affection with the enjoyments of those comforts to 
which they have been accustomed, be induced, by any tempta- 
tion of rank, wealth, or power, to give up virtuous happiness 
for heartless splendour. 

CHAPTER XVIII. 

Th* path of wirrow. und that path alone. 
I^Mds to the Und when* tor row it unknown ; 
No traveller ever rr ..ch'd that hint abode. 
Who found not thorns and briers in his road. 

Cowruu 

IN her intercourse with the De Moltons, Lady Westhope ob- 
served that they seldom addressed each other; and that, in 
speaking of her husband, Blanche invariably called him Cap- 
tain De Molton, instead of Frank, as he had formerly done ; 
and that De Molton also, when speaking of his wife, added 
the title to her name, and even occasionally addressed her as 
"Lady" Blanche. 

These were trifles, but yet they indicated much. Though 
grieved for her cousin's sake, Lady Westhope's reflections 
served to reconcile her to her own fate, and to confirm her in 
her opinion that 

Every black must hare its white, 
And every sweet its sour, 

BLANCHE. 

and that true wisdom consists in dwelling on the sweets" of 
one's own peculiar lot, and striving to forget the " sours-" 
and though for herself she would still have chosen Blanche's 
trials rather than her own, it might be that she knew her own, 
and was not so well versed in Lady Blanche's. Yet her cha ? 
racter was better fitted for Blanche's situation : she had more 
decision, more strength of mind, more pride, not worldly 
pride, but pride of soul to persevere in the path which she 
had once chalked out for herself. 

De Molton had keenly and painfully felt the coolness 
which had for months, nay almost years, been gradually in- 
creasing between them ; and he was still more deeply wounded 
when she nearly confessed, or at least did not deny, her regret 
at having rejected Lord Glenrith for him. He could have 
found excuses for anything else. The pride of man, the ten- 
derness of the husband, the sensitiveness of the individual, 
were all touched in the tenderest point. 

" Could this," he thought, " be the same creature who was 
such a contemner of worldly wealth, so ardent a votary 'of 
love in a cottage, such an enthusiast for the pleasures of na- 
ture?" Alas! for poor Blanche! it was love in a lodging- 
house, not love in a cottage, that she had tried ; and as to the 
pleasures of nature, the dusty suburbs of a country town are 
scarcely "the country" to a person brought up in the midst 
of an extensive park, in a wild and woody country. 

De Molton recollected how, out of consideration for her, 
he had concealed his own feelings at Paris ; how scrupulously 
he had avoided interfering with the more brilliant prospects 
which were opening before her ; how, far from taking advan- 
tage of her unguarded confession of preference, he had ba- 
nished himself from his native land ; how, though hopeless, 
he had remained constant to her image for three long years ; 
how, when he found her free, he had hastened to throw him- 
self at her feet; how, without murmuring or repining, he 
gladly endured privations, the same that she did, and thought 
himself only too well rewarded if she would cheer their 
humble home with a smile. He thought over all these things, 
and he felt himself the most injured of men. Did he not 
deny himself every indulgence ? Did he not even refuse him- 
self the satisfaction of asking a friend to share his morsel ? 
the most galling self-denial enjoined by absolute poverty ! 

SQ8 BLANtlll. 

Did not the responsibility of providing for their children 
weigh upon his mind ? Was it not his duty to look forward 
to the time when education must commence; when boys mu.st 
be sent to school, when girls must have master* ? What 
]>:irrnt will set down contented under the notion that his 
children will not be fitted by manners and education to move 
in the sphere in which they were born ? None, who are not 
without that commonest and strongest feeling in all created 
beings, parental affection or who are not without the power 
of reflection ! And how were these expenses to be met ? 
How, but by increased economy on their part ? 

Such were the cares which pressed on De Molton's mind. 
How much better would it have been had he fairly commu- 
nicated them all to his wife ; had he frankly counselled with 
her upon the best plan to be pursued ; had he openly laid be- 
fore her his actual income, his actual expenses! But the 
constitutional reserve to which we have alluded prevented his 
pursuing this course. 

It was most painful to him to refuse any of her wishes, and 
the very pain it gave him imparted to his manner of doing so a 
certain harshness which prevented Blanche from entering into 
his views. Her resistance to his views, or her martyr-lik ; 
acquiescence in them, rendered him still less communicative, 
when, perhaps, had he pursued a more open line of conduct, a 
person who married with such good intentions as she did 
(though with little knowledge of things as they are) might 
have been led to suggest the very sacrifices at which she 
repined when they were demanded as a right. 

Each succeeding day seemed to widen the breach between 
them. This result of a love-match afforded the materials for 
many a bad jest among some who called themselves their 
friends, while others saw nothing entertaining in the wreck 
of happiness to two people possessing many amiable qualities, 
though neither of them might be faultless. Some pitied Lady 
Blanche for having such a harsh and ungrateful tyrant for a 
husband ; and some felt for the noble, uncompromising De 
Molton, whose home was evidently rendered miserable by a 
wilful, discontented wife. Some predicted a separation : some 
predicted that, beautiful as was Lady Blanche, and tired as 
she was of her home, the time would arrive when she would 
be induced to leave it, for one more brilliant, though less re* 

BLANCHE. 

spectable ; although her manners were now so reserved, so 
decorous, a few years, and people would see the difference ; a 
woman who had once loved so passionately, would not remain 
contented to pass her life from the age of twenty-eight in a 
fctate of cold indifference, if not of absolute dislike. 

But those who thus prognosticated, proved uninspired pro- 
phets. Affection was still deep-rooted in both their hearts. 
The noxious weeds of petty grievances had choked, but not 
destroyed, the goodly plant. It still retained sufficient life, 
when moistened by the waters of affliction, to spring up with 
renewed vigour, and overcome in its growth the weeds which 
had almost stifled it. 

CHAPTER XIX. 

And dearer seems each dawning smile 
For having lost its light awhile. 

Lalla Rookh. 

THE illness of their children first awakened Blanche and De 
Molton to a knowledge of their real feelings towards each other. 

The children caught the measles, a complaint which had at 
that period proved peculiarly fatal. The eldest girl, who was 
at that most engaging of all ages, when, without losing the 
graces of infancy, the mind opens into companionship, became 
alarmingly ill. In their tender assiduity by the little bed of 
the sufferer, all feelings of asperity, all feelings of coldness, 
were quickly forgotten. 

Together they watched with intense anxiety, together they 
listened to the short and frequent cough ; one held the cup of 
cooling beverage with which the other moistened the parched 
lips of their child. No ! it is not possible that parents can 
bend over the sick bed of their first-born, the creature equally 
dear to both, the creature whose first accents of tenderness 
have been framed to utter their names, the creature whose 
first emotions of love have been for them, whose first notions 
of right and wrong they have together laboured to form ! 
no ! they cannot bend over the sick bed of this loved creature, 
and harbour any recollection of former unkindness. The im- 
pression may fade away ; new causes of irritation may sub- 

400 BLANMM. 

sequently arise ; but, for the time being, surely it is impossible 
that any but feelings of affection can find a place in tlu-ir 
hearts. 

With Blanche and De Molton all that had ever passed was 
utterly wiped away, as, with the sickening dread of hearing 
their worst fears confirmed, they followed the physician from 
the sick chamber. They scarcely knew in what terms to couch 
the dreadful question to which they feared to receive a still 
more dreadful answer, that question which is asked in * 
broken and quivering voice, but sometimes with a faint smile 
assumed to reassure the questioner, that question which is 
oftener put in the form of an assertion, " You do not think 
there is any danger." 

" Why, certainly, our little patient is in a very uncomfort- 
able state," replied the physician, who considered it his duty 
to prepare the parents for the event which he thought only too 
probable. 

The false hollow smile faded from the countenance of the 
agonised father : he knit his brows, and bit his compressed lip, 
till the blood almost started ; but Blanche, worn out with 
fatigue and agitation, his poor Blanche, unable to meet this 
death-blow to her hopes, staggered towards him for support, 
and the husband mastered the feelings of the father, to sustain 
her fainting form, to soothe her more overwhelming agonies. 

There are sufferings on which it is painful to dwell, 
sufferings too real, too true, too common, sufferings which 
have been often endured, and which, alas ! many have in store 
for them,' sufferings which equal in intensity any of which 
human nature is capable. 

For two days and two nights did they watch each varying 
symptom, count with trembling accuracy the minutes, the 
seconds, which were passed in undisturbed repose, and listen 
with painful rapture to the sweet voice, the plaintive and en- 
dearing " papa," " mamma," which the poor child often uttered, 
when, in the restlessness of illness, she wanted, she knew not 
what. , 

How sad and painful an effort was it to veil under a sem- 
blance of playfulness the anxiety which consumed them, while 
they attempted to amuse the infant sufferer ! to tell her childish 
tales, in a gay tone of voice, while the heart was bursting ! to 
smooth the brow, to affect a smile ! How often during these 

BLANCHE. 401 

two long days, these two interminable nights, did Blanche 
reflect upon her folly and her ingratitude ! her folly in not 
enjoying to the uttermost the happiness which, a few short 
days before, was within her reach, her ingratitude to Pro- 
vidence for the blessings till then vouchsafed to her ! 

A horrible chill ran through her ! perhaps it was this very 
ingratitude which had deserved so severe a chastisement. How 
did she now wonder that petty annoyances should have so 
ruffled her ! What to her were now the sneers of Stapleford, 
the pity of the world, the absence of elegancies, of comforts ! 
Dry bread to eat, a shelter from the weather, and her children 
once more healthy, now appeared to her the summit of earthly 
happiness. 

De Molton, too, when he beheld his still- loved Blanche 
bowed down with grief, when he found her once more over- 
flowing with tenderness to himself, wondered how he could 
ever have imagined her to be estranged from him, and he 
watched over her as tenderly as over his child. 

On the third day the physician perceived a slight improve- 
ment. He allowed them to hope ; and the revulsion of feel- 
ing, the unbounded joy with which this permission was hailed 
by Blanche, alarmed him by its vehemence. He attempted to 
qualify his opinion, but it was in vain ! she was allowed to 
hope ; and, stronger than reason, her ardent nature made her 
jump to the delightful conclusion that her child was safe. 

De Molton, fearful of a relapse, tried to subdue her raptures; 
but no sooner had the physician left the room, than, throwing 
herself into his arms, she exclaimed, " Our child will live, 
Frank ! 1 know she will ! She will live, and we shall be happy 
entirely, perfectly happy ! Nothing can ever make me 
unhappy again ! " 

Short-sighted mortals ! We little know what the next week, 
the next day, the next hour, the next moment, may have in 
store for us ! 

The hopes of Blanche, however, were not doomed on this 
occasion to be disappointed : the little girl rapidly recovered ; 
the other children had the complaint mildly ; and Blanche, 
indeed, thought herself beyond the reach of misfortune. She 
felt gratitude, fervent gratitude, to Heaven for its mercies^; 
but affliction had not yet taught her to " rejoice in trembling." 
She did not remember how, always, at all times, and in all 

D D 

402 BLANCHE. 

places, our happiness is in the hands of an all-wise, all-power- 
ful, but merciful Being, whose chastisements are dealt in pity. 

This truth was forced upon her mind when, just as the 
children were convalescent, she saw her husband become listless 
and oppressed : she heard him frequently cough, and she felt 
some alarm on his account. 

It had always been a matter of doubt whether a slight 
rash he had in his boyhood was or was not the measles. IK 
had never remembered this doubt while attending his child, 
and it was not till he felt unaccountably languid and suffering 
that he recollected he might possibly have caught the infection. 

The suspicion which he then hinted to Blanche shot through 
her frame with the conviction of impending woe ; and when 
the physician confirmed the fact, the agonizing, but not un- 
common dread which often overtakes those in affliction re- 
curred to her mind with increased intensity. Were their 
sorrows the visitations of an offended Providence, called down 
upon their devoted heads by their own want of submission to 
its decrees? was she unworthy of a happiness which she 
had failed to value ? was the moment come when her re- 
pinings and her discontent were to be requited with a terrible 
retribution ? 

Nothing that Doctor A.' could utter was capable of reassur- 
ing her. She shook her head mournfully, and redoubled her 
attentions to her husband. When told that " she ought to 
place more reliance in that Power which had raised her child 
from a much more desperate state of sickness," she answered 
mournfully, " 1 do not deserve it." 

" We none of us deserve the mercies we meet with," re- 
plied the kind-hearted physician : " if we were dealt with 
according to our merits, well might we all despair." For a 
few moments such arguments would cheer her, but again she 
would relapse into despondency ; and when, after some days, 
Dr. A. confessed that the pulse was very high when his 
tone of encouragement changed to one of consolation and con- 
dolence, her spirit completely sunk hope died away within 
her bosom. 

In what fearful array did her own faults towards him rise 
up against her ! How completely did she forget the little 
tone of harshness which had once appeared to her to excuse 
and to justify her in disputing his wishes and opposing his 

BLANCHE. 403 

plans ! She felt she could never do enough to expiate her 
faults, that a whole life of devotion could scarcely suffice to 
atone for them ; and, extreme in everything, she now looked 
upon herself as having been the most sinful of creatures. 

De Molton, whose affection had only been suspended, not 
destroyed, by the coldness he had met with, now, when he 
found her tender, gentle, and indefatigable, felt for her all, 
and more than he had ever felt before. One day she had 
been tending him with even more than her usual solicitude, 
when he said, " Thank you, Blanche ; you are a kind and 
excellent nurse ; and it grieves me when I think to what a 
dreary home of sickness, penury, and drudgery, I have been 
the means of bringing you. Without me, you would have 
been now enjoying the splendour, the brilliancy of your fa- 
ther's house, even supposing you had never deigned to adorn 
any of the other happy homes which courted your acceptance. 
I know that you have suffered much from the privations un- 
avoidable in our situation; you have at times thought me 
harsh ; but indeed, my dearest Blanche my dear, dear wife, 
you do not know how much it has cost me to refuse you any- 
thing on earth." 

" Oh, Frank ! do not speak in that manner ! I now know 
how unreasonable, how ungrateful, I have been. Do not talk 
of what is past. Believe me, you should not agitate yourself." 

" It will do me good to say what is upon my mind : it 
is possible I may not recover." 

" Oh, Frank ! " She looked at him reproachfully, as if he 
was unkind in saying what it was so painful to hear. 

" Nay, do not cast at me so frightened and so accusing a 
glance. I am not so very ill yet ; and anticipating what is 
possible, will not make it more probable. Dr. A. says there 
are still hopes." 

" Oh, Frank ! I cannot bear it ; indeed I cannot ! " 

" Dearest love, if it should please God to take me from you, 
you must bear it ; and, what is more, you must exert your- 
self. You will be left with four young children, and, I am 
sorry to say, with less than ever to support them and yourself. 
I have ensured my life ; but that could be but to a small 
amount, though to the utmost I could succeed in saving. It 
was this, as I thought, indispensable duty which contributed 
to render us so very poor." 

D D 2 

I'll- 

"Oh! you were doing everything that was right; and, 
indeed, if I had known all, I think I believe I should have 
behaved better. I think, if you had told me " 

" I ought to have done so, perhaps. It was a kind of mis- 
taken pride. The whole thing was so distressing to me ! I 
desired so ardently to have been able to gratify every wish of 
your heart, that my spirit rebelled at being able to gratify 
none. Still, my sense of duty and of strong necessity made 
me resolve not to transgress one inch the line of prudence 
I had marked out for myself. The more your notions seemed 
unfitted for the fate we had embraced, the more I thought it 
my bounden duty to resist them, and to impress upon you 
the plain naked truth of our condition in life. I was wrong ; 
I feel now that I was wrong. I should have made you the 
partner of my thoughts and plans, as well as of my affections." 

" No, no ! it was not you who were to blame : you were 
all that was admirable ; yours was strict, uncompromising 
rectitude, firmness of mind, everything that was manly and 
noble ; while I ! oh, that I can have so misjudged you ! 
oh, that I can have so wasted these past years, which 1 now 
feel ought to have been years of such unmixed, such unalloyed 
happiness!" 

" Now, when perhaps it is too late !" he added in a low 
faint voice ; then perceiving the expression of her counte- 
nance, he added, " but better late than never, my love ; " and 
he held out his hand to her, with a smile half playful, half 
sad, attempting, as sick people often do, to familiarize their 
own and the minds of their friends with the idea of a final 
separation. He drew her hand towards him, and placing the 
other upon it, he continued with earnestness and solemnity : 
" We have been both to blame both of us. When I am 
gone, do not torment yourself with useless regrets, but re- 
member what I now say that I am conscious of having been 
to blame on my part If I had treated you with entire con- 
fidence and openness, I might have won on your generous 
nature to submit cheerfully to any privations. But I am 
reserved, I am proud. 1 am at length aware of these consti- 
tutional faults ; and I trust, if I should be raised from this bed 
of sickness if I should be spared to you, dear Blanche - 
that I shall in future know my duty better, and that I shall 
pursue it resolutely, and never again allow pride and reserve 
to chill our intercourse." 

BLANCHE. 405 

" Oh, Frank, if we are but spared to each other, in spite of 
all outward circumstances, we will be so very, very happy ! 
But we will rejoice in trembling. We are now too well aware 
how precarious is our happiness, and we shall prize it the more 
from that very consciousness. We shall learn to be grateful 
for the sterling blessings we possess." 

" And we shall know, my love, as I do now, that, when we 
meet death face to face, those points only on which we have 
done our duty can afford reflections in which there is any 
comfort, those alone on which we have failed to perform it 
can give unmitigated pain ! " 

" Alas, alas ! how much have I to repent of ! Instead of 
making your happiness, have I not caused you vexation and 
disappointment? Have I always honoured, always obeyed 
you ? have I been really a helpmate to you ? Oh, Frank ! 
forgive me ! Indeed, indeed, I need your forgiveness ; and 
even that can never reconcile me to myself ! " 

" Have you already forgotten my injunctions, my love? 
Remember what I so earnestly wish to impress upon your 
mind, that we have been both to blame, both." 

"Thank you, my good, kind, beloved husband, thank 
you ; and may God in his mercy preserve you to guide my 
mind, and direct me in the path I should go ! then I shall 
never err again." 

" A weak and erring mortal, like yourself, is a poor guide 
to lean upon, dear Blanche ; we must look within ourselves for 
the ardent and sincere wish to do what is right, but we must 
seek from above the strength to perform it. It is easy to know 
our duty ; the difficulty is to persevere in its performance." 

" I shall be able to persevere, with you to support me I* 

He looked upon her with an expression of unutterable ten- 
derness and pity, and pressed her hand in silence. 

The more the fear that they might be for ever parted grew 
upon her, the less could she admit any allusion to it, the more 
did she cling to the idea that their union was indissoluble. 

405 BLANCHE. 

CHAPTER XX. 

Some manne hath good, but children hath he none ; 

Some manne hath both, but he can get none healthe. 

Some hath all three, but up to honour's throne 

Can he not crepe by no manner of ttelth. 

To tome the endeth chyldren, riches, welthe, 

Honour, worship, and reverence all his Irfe. 

But yet she pyncheth him with a shrewde wyfc 

With such reward a* Fortune hath you sent. 

Sit THOMAS MOM. 

* ' 

DE MOLTON'S health remained for some weeks in a most pre- 
carious state, during which period they had time and oppor- 
tunity for opening their whole hearts to each other. 

The religious sentiments which, although never before much 
called forth, were latent in both their bosoms, were more fully 
developed ; and in sorrow, in fear, and in distress, the com- 
munion of feeling and interchange of thought became more 
complete than in the earlier years of their marriage. 

When he recovered for he did recover, they found them- 
selves thoroughly, entirely, and reasonably happy. The first 
time that he came into the drawing-room, when she had ar- 
ranged his arm-chair by the fire, and drawn the narrow cur- 
tains, placed the table close to him, and settled little Emma on 
a stool at his feet, she looked round with delight, and could 
not help expressing that she thought the room an exceedingly 
nice one, and that really a horse-hair sofa was not so very 
uncomfortable. 

" Take care, Blanche," replied De Molton, playfully ; " we 
must be happy without deceiving ourselves : we must see things 
as they really are. Do not, because you are glad to see me 
here, fancy this little room a splendid apartment, or a horse- 
hair sofa a luxurious seat, lest the moment of disenchantment 
should come. No, no ! we will be happy in spite of a bad 
room and wretched furniture; but we will indulge in no 
visions." 

" How right you always are ! All will go well, now you are 
recovering. Yes, you will at last make me reasonable too: 
and you will teach me to keep all my feelings, good as well as 

BLANCHE. 407 

bad, under proper controul ! And yet, I do not know how it is, 
the room does really look different in my eyes ; and I almost 
think I do not slip off the sofa as much as I used to do!" 
He smiled at her again ; and she laughed gaily at herself. 

As he gradually recovered, some friends were admitted to 
see him. Lady Westhope rejoiced, not only at the restoration 
of his health, but at the restoration of confidence between 
them. Mr. Stapleford pathetically lamented that De Molton 
should have been taken ill in this horrid nutshell, and asked 
when they should move to a more habitable part of the 
town. 

" Not at all," answered Blanche. 

" You are not in earnest ? What can you find to admire in 
this apartment, dear Lady Blanche ? " 

" Its cheapness," replied Blanche resolutely : " do you not 
know, Mr. Stapleford, that we are very poor ? " 

The courage to utter these few words would spare many 
persons many moments of doubt, and hesitation, and awk- 
wardness, and many unavailing efforts to make an effect. 

Mr. Stapleford bowed with much respect, and a glance, 
which seemed to say, " You have made a bad bargain I with 
your beauty, thus to have thrown yourself away I" 

But his glance met that of Lady Blanche, which seemed 
to answer, " I am very poor, but I do not repent my 
bargain." 

Blanche's object was no longer to make a decent appearance 
in the eyes of others, but to render her husband's home happy. 
De Molton no longer felt humbled at their poverty, when 
she no longer seemed affected by it. He candidly detailed 
his expenditure and his plans : she took great pains to dress 
her own hair, and soon acquired the proficiency of a Mrs. 
Jones, or of a milliner's apprentice; she gaily sprung into 
a Brighton fly with a bounding step, and willingly went 
into any agreeable society that presented itself: and she found 
that, though no longer the leader of fashion in point of dress, 
she was handsome and agreeable enough to be equally sought 
and liked. 

In one of her tete-a-tetes with Lady Westhope, they were 
botli exclaiming at the worldliness of some mutual acquaint- 
ance, who courted a woman whom no one esteemed or loved ; 

408 BLANCHE. 

whom no one thought either agreeable or handsome, solely on 
account of her position in the world. 

"At least Frank and I have one comfort," exclaimed 
Blanche, in the corner of whose heart there still luiked <i 
remnant of vanity : " if we are sought, it must be for our in- 
trinsic merits. There can be no interested motive in any 
attention or kindness that is shown to us ; and that is a re- 
flection which puts one in better humour with one's self." 

" Yes," answered Lady Westhope ; " and if we were so 
inclined, we might moralize on this subject as well as on more 
serious ones. * This is a world of compensations/ as Lady 
Montreville says she has learned from her old nurse. You 
remember Milly Roberts, who was always toddling after her 
lovely children in St. James's Square ? It is quite refreshing 
when one is in London to converse with Milly Roberts, and hear 
good sense, good feeling, and philosophy uttered so uncon- 
sciously. Lady Montreville says she has taught her almost 
all she knows of right and wrong ; and, among other thini s 
that we must not look for perfect happiness in this world, 
that the most fortunate are not without their troubles, as she 
expresses it, nor the most unfortunate without their own pe- 
culiar blessings. 1 have reasoned myself into a very r 
able degree of contentment, and I only hope that the * 
you and your husband, as you now are, may not disturb my 
philosophical, and, I hope I may add, religious view of my 
own fate, as much as the sight of you three months ago 
tended to confirm and strengthm it." 

Blanche had time to prove that her cheerfulness under pri- 
vation was not the effort of a moment, but a resolution 
founded upon principle, and persevered in from the same mo- 
tive ; and I)e Molton also had time to prove that the tender- 
ness of his wife had softened the sternness which was the only 
flaw in his character ; and to become as gentle as he was firm 
in the performance of his duty ; when an event occurred 
which prevented their late-acquired virtues from being any 
longer put to so severe a trial. 

By the death of a very rich godfather, De Molton became 
possessed of a small independence. It was very small ; but it 
enabled him to retire on half-pay, till he might be wanted for 
the active service of bis country, and to take a small cottage 

BLANCH E. 409 

in the immediate vicinity of Cransley, where Blanche was able 
to realise her preconceived notions of refined poverty and 
elegant indigence. They kept a cow, and their butter equalled 
that at Temple Loseley ; their cream was no longer blue milk ; 
they baked at home ; and instead of a knocker on the door, 
they had a bell with a respectable countrified sound. They 
had a garden, a small one certainly ; but its flowers were as 
bright as those at Cransley, and the primroses decidedly blew 
a week earlier ! They had a veranda, and it did not darken the 
room much. In short, they had all appliances and means to 
boot requisite for real happiness. 

They were enabled, while their children were so young, to 
lay by something to assist in their education as they grew older ; 
and they began to think that Milly Roberts was wrong, and that 
some fortunate people were without " their troubles," when 
Mr. Stapleford paid them a morning visit from Cransley, and 
enlightened their minds as to the one only point on which their 
fate might admit of amelioration. 

After expressing his astonishment at their not knowing all 
the innumerable pieces of scandal which he retailed to them ; 
at their not having read all the new novels of the last spring ; 
at their not having seen the new actress, heard the last singer, 
visited the last exhibition, and become intimate with the last 
brides of the season; he exclaimed, " Why, dear Lady Blanche, 
you will let the grass grow over your intellect, as you are letting 
it grow over the gravel before your door ! One can see by your 
road and your conversation that Cransley has been uninhabited, 
and that Lady Westhope has been in London, while you have 
been in the country, for the last six months ! " 

" Oh, come and help us, Mr. Stapleford ! we will soon get 
rid of the weeds out of doors. Emma, fetch the gardening 
basket ; Henry, bring your old knife ; Arthur, where is my 
rake ? and Frank, if you will get the roller, we will make our 
Jittle bit of gravel quite nice before Lady Westhope calls." 

" Of course I am a vos ordres, Lady Blanche ; but, I 
assure you, I shall be vastly more useful in polishing your 
mind than your garden. People who ruralize all the year 
round, and cannot therefore be au courant of what is going 
on in the world, should never let slip an opportunity of in- 
struction." 

E E 

410 BLANCHE. 

" There fa some truth in what you say," replied Blanche, 
as she looked up from her labours, with sparkling eyes, and a 
complexion dazzling in its brightness from the warmth of the 
day and the nature of her employment : then shaking back 
her curls, she bade him seat himself on the bench beneath the 
young acacia, and tell her " everything, about everybody." 

" Well then, Lord D. did not propose, after all, to Miss C. ; 
but set off for Paris, just as the family was on the tiptoe of 
expectation, thinking every double knock was the peer come 
to propose in person, and every single knock was a special 
messenger bearing a written offer of his hand and heart" 

" I did not know Miss C. was grown up : does she turn out 
pretty?" 

" Heavens ! Lady Blanche, she has been out these two 
years ! and everybody thinks her quite gone off. She was 
pretty when the duke made such a fuss with her at her first 
ball ; but Mrs. L. thought it an insult to her charms." 

" Mrs. L.'s charms ! I thought she was so very plain ! " 

" Plain ! why, she has been a beauty these three years. 
Lady G. betted Captain S. an amber-headed cane, to an ivory 
fan, that within a month she would talk her into being a beauty : 
and she did so, in three weeks and two days, five days 
within the prescribed period. When once Lady G. hail 
given her a start, she had the ingenuity to keep it Her por- 
trait now adorns the Annuals, and the Duke has worn her 
chains for two years and a half. But I must not linger here 
any longer, or I shall be late at dinner. Good morning, dear 
Lady Blanche ; your simplicity is quite piquant and absolutely 
refreshes me. You dine at Cransley to-morrow, when I will 
finish rubbing the rust off your mind." 

That evening Lady Blanche remarked to De Molton : " The 
only little drawback to our perfect happiness is, that certainly 
one does grow very dull, and very stupid, knowing nothing 
that goes on in the world ! Yet, after all, how much better to 
be like you, than like Mr. Stapleford ! Yes, notwithstanding 
the grass that has grown over our minds, I do believe ours is 
the happiest position in life, that we have the fewest trouble* 
and the greatest number of blessings. I think I may now say 
with truth, and without enthusiastic nonsense, that we arj 
happier than if we possessed the mines of Golconda. I told 
you so when we left Sir Frederick Vyneton's villa after our 



BLANCHE. 411 

honeymoon ; and you then declared how happy you should be 
if I said the same at the end of two years. I could not have 
said so then ; but I can now, after eight years of marriage." 

We need not add that De Molton was indeed perfectly 
happy, nor that he told his wife he was so. 



THE END. 
