THE

WILD IRISH BOY.



Lady Montrevofs Story.

All Biography, I believe, should begin with a moral sentence. I am afraid the moral sentence will come in of itself at the conclusion of mine; besides to confess a truth, the first (of the kind) I ever told in my life, I know not a single moral maxim of which my life would be an exemplification, except by the rule of contraries; so, as the clown says in Barbarossa, "For want of Prologue I will tell my Story."

I cannot imagine what I was originally intended for; certainly not for a woman of fashion; for to the best of my recollec

Vol. nr. B





tion, I had an heart once. One of the belles of Louis the fourteenth's court said, that she could not remember retaining her heart, or something else, after she was seven years old. I think I was about sixteen when I first peeped into the world, and saw—what d'ye think I saw?—a man. You need not stare, my dear, he was really a man; not the creature of his taylor and the women; not a man by courtesy, but in his own right. There was—what I had better not think of now. When the thought of that . man floats over my mind, I seem to myself like Lucifer hovering on the outskirts of light, and healing his scars with the distant air of Heaven. I had better speak of him no more; if I do, these starts of passion will disfigure my story, as they have done my life. But what in passion is so horridly insupportable as love and remorse.





When I came out, as they say, at sixteen, the men said that I had twice the beauty, and the women that I had twice the belair; and all the world allowed that I had ten times the vanity of any daughter of fashion in London. I agreed perfectly with them all, and did not know with which of my attributes I was most flattered. About this time half a dozen sickly brothers and cousins died, and I became the heiress of immense wealth, though the title was extinct, for want of a fool of a different sex. Then every body found out that I had ten times the beauty, &c. &c. &c. that I had before; and for fear of being inconsistent I increased my vanity in the same proportion. Yet with all this, I was not destitute of all good, though what it was, I can hardly now remember.

I believe it was rather a capacity of good, an improvable spot in the waste lands of vanity, that no one thought it worth their while to look after. But, my dear, I might as justly describe my former self by my present self to you, as exhibit the beauties of a country through which an earthquake had passed. I find I must return to this man (whose name shall never pass my lips.)





When we were actually children, I had given him a promise in writing, in that strong form which passion never learned of the law, to marry him, and none but him. All this was done according to the best precedents of romance, on some moonlight night or morning, under a branch where two pigeons were very pert and amorous. I try to make you smile, my dear, but you will weep without an effort. This memorial he kept, he said, as a pledge of affection; I said, as a constraint on my feelings.

I had now a greater number of admirers than of any thing else, except





follies. My levee was absolutely a shop of coronets, stars, and ribbands; all the pretty things were marked with the same price—my fortune. But in, the corner was a small parcel of pretensions, including only every virtue of the human heart, of which the price was myself. .Yes, I owe it to my former self, to say I loved that man; but it was with a woman's love, a vain selfish love, that delighted in the homage it knew not how to appreciate or to deserve, and pleased itself with the prostration of an heart whose conquest it valued more than its virtues. Oh, I was a creature vain, volatile, presumptuous, I was unworthy of a noble heart's love!

It was my pride, my despicable pride, that first took the alarm; he was the only man that addressed me without a title. I blushed that he should hold an influence over me, that I thought I discovered a knowledge of in every one who approached me (-though his honourable love had kept it as secret as delicacy or vanity could wish); and foolishly I ascribed what was a natural deference for a superior character, to the restraints of this invidious talisman. Oh, I was a weak intoxicated wretch, unworthy of his generous love! Do not imagine, my dear, that all this exclamation is unintentional, I am fluttering in my narrative, like a fascinated bird, over the very jaws of ruin, and these short uneasy sallies suspend me for a moment longer.





But why need I be long in relating, what was but too soon in doing. Among the crowd, who " bowed and talked of love," your father was one. You know your father, my dear, his exterior I mean—they who can see the "mind in the visage," need not look further than his. Such as he was, with all the graces of a man of the fashion, and ten times the intellect of one, I fixed on him





as a proper instrument to execute all the devices of my pride, and jealousy, and vanity. I disclosed to him (indelicate and unprincipled) the secret of my engagement, and commissioned him to request that the paper which contained it might be restored to me. Wretch that I was ! The act I dared not be guilty of myself, I added tenfold the guilt of meanness and indelicacy to, by employing another to do it. It is the nature of women (and their curse) to compromise between evils, not from a consideration of their magnitude, but of their distance. I could bear the thought of his distress, his resentment, but I could not bear the single glance of his dark eye, had my request been personal. I can scarce analyse my motives now, but I believe them to have been not quite so bad as your eyes have pronounced them. I thought if I could get that paper, my knowledge of my own feelings would be clearer, I should be a better judge whether I really loved, and if I did, my love would have more merit as well as sincerity.





I had a faint hope that in the vehemence of passion he would refuse it, and my vanity was gratified by the hope. At the bottom of my heart lay the selfish thought of a few years more of liberty without a bar, and pleasure without a monitor. Your father accepted the commission with an eagerness that might have undeceived me. The time of negotiation, which I passed in vicissitudes of hope and fear, of reproach and congratulation, was soon over. On the first mention that I had disclosed the secret of our engagement, to an envoy, he surrendered the paper without uttering a sentence. I passed a short interval burning with impatience, and shame, and resentment, and hope. I expected an explanation, I prepared an apology. I ac





cused, I soothed, I vindicated, and I pleaded. No part of my life had before been so restless and miserable; yet such has been every part that has followed, that I wish it had lasted for ever. The interval was not long; the next morning I was informed he had quitted England for ever. Such was the intoxication of my vanity, I could not believe it.— Such was now the conviction of my passion, I dared not believe it. My heart misgave me. When in a few hours after I saw your father—saw him with that cruel smile which I yet see, and which you may see any day in Fuseli's picture of the serpent ancr-Eve—I asked him with a faultering voice (for guilt always humbles) for the paper. He showed it to me at a safe distance, talked of his happiness, my condescension, &c. &c. I was stunned. He had not the mercy to let me doubt long. He let me read the paper. The form was strong and valid, but no name was expressed in the engagement, I was bound to whoever had possession of the paper. My signature was not plainer than my ruin. I know I should have resisted: I know I should have done any thing, but what I did—but shame and importunity and disgrace at the first opening of life terrified me. All this would not have done but for some remains of proud and womanish resentment, at the desertion of a man who left me without the honor of a vindication, or the tenderness of a farewell. I can dwell upon this terrible period no longer. There is, perhaps, no pain like retracing steps to evil, which might have been shunned when they were first entered on, and of which the repetition adds the novelty of recent pain to the gnawings of inveterate remose. I must dismiss this—I was frightened and flattered and beset. In a few weeks, I was a bride—a peeress—a wretch !— Nor could all the glare and tumult of my other distinctions prevent my feeling





the last. I believe there is nothing more decisive of the character than a conviction of certain and permanent misery. It must make us either saints or devils. I had too much humility for the former— and so I became what I am.

I cannot describe to you the facility with which I adopted any reasoning that my passions suggested to me. I knew that I was young, and wealthy, and beautiful, and witty, and the world told me that to be so was to be happy. Now I felt I was miserable, but still I believed the world, and resolved to be as happy as the envy of society, and the abuse of my advantages could make me. Oh there is no telling the spirit of splenetic gaiety, and romantic wickedness with which one fastens on the world, determined to take all it can give, but feeling that peace it cannot give.—I did all that a bride and a peeress could do to dazzle every one and myself. Lady Westhampton's equipage, and entertainments, . and diamond hoop, and court-hoop were talked of, till praise or envy could say no more. All this did vastly well for three or four winters: at last I began to be weary of folly, then I tried 'vice. Do not start, my dear, " Can wonien then no way but backward fall?" Do not you think gambling vice—don't you think extravagance vice—don't you call neglect of my health, my peace, my reputation, my children, myself vice? Such is the morbid taste which we acquire from the habits of the world, that actually nothing but what has the haut gout of vicious extravagance will go down with us. I led an horrid life; horrid even to myself!—my talents, my capacity for better things, my powers of being useful, or being happy, I piqued myself upon martyring to tasteless wickedness j like Cleopatra dissolving the pearl in vinegar, they gave a kind of lavish and fantastic richness to the draught;





but it was as unsavoury as ever. Besides my very pretensions to supreme fashion were often doubtful. I had sometimes too much feeling for a fashionable dasher—too much religion for a wit— too much conscience for a gambler. A thousand and a thousand times, like a truant boy, I measured the distance I had strayed, and wished myself back1 at any price. But there was no hand to guide me—not even an eye to encourage me. Had any one good creature but looked me steadily in the face with an expression of pity, I am sure it would have broke my heart or mended it. What do you" think,my dear?—in my despair\attempted to extort something like happiness from your father: It was despair indeed!

Since I have mentioned your father, I will tell you a little of his vices ifi place of my own. Never man commenced life with such advantages, rank, wealth, talent, spirit. The picture had but one shade; he was a mere voluptuary—nothing more. Pleasure was his system; but he was conscious of his great powers, and he imagined that he could enjoy all species of pleasure in rotation, that gross and refined pleasures would follow each other in amicable succession, without encroaching on their respective claims and capacities. Never was there a greater error. He that sacrifices the night to intemperance, will ( not, cannot in the morning have an eye for nature, or an head for study. The breath of heaven will not smell wooingly to the feverish wretch; the very lassitude which is the consequence of dissipation will compel us to seek for near and obvious pleasures to relieve its weariness, it will not leave us the activity that is necessary for remote, or the delicacy of organ that is requisite for refined enjoyment.





This I have experienced myself; so has your father. He found that the gaieties of the night left him unfit for any thing but a repetition of them on the following night; so he slept away all the interval, pour passer le temps. With talents the most original and distinguished, he became a mere gourmand; because the pleasure of eating may be enjoyed more easily than any other.





He is now a Comus, who has lost his wand, and is driven from his palace of enchantment, but grasps the cup still.

A few years ago, a most extraordinary party rose in the fashionable world; they were a number of people who found it easier to laugh than to think, and therefore laughed at every thing, and never thought at "all. Laugh, fun, frolic, were the watch-words of this society; and terrible, indeed, to sense and feeling, and modesty, it was, when the watch-words were given.

Really they resembled more a party in masquerade, burlesquing rank by the most egregious mixture of buffoonery— more like the court in Tom Thumb—than characters in real life. The first time I ever was among'them, I actually blushed (as the famous Magdalen picture was said to weep) au bouts de doigts. However, my motto was never to be outdone; and I accommodated myself to their style of conception and language, with such facility, that the whole society declared, Lady. Westhampton was more novel, more poignant, more recherche than any professor? of the style. I went home, with , my head aching, and my heart too, at- my proficiency. Such things as I have heard—such things as I have said; some of them I could not understand, some I would not understand, but the worst of all were those I did understand.





I will tell you a circumstance about those people, for it is in some measure connected with my own history. Fun was their object; but the triumph was complete, when they could abase or corrupt what was really good, and worthy, and eminent. There was a young clergyman of some abilities, and some worth, but whose vanity certainly exceeded both, who had got one of the first lectureships in London. His vanity, however, was well directed; it stimulated him to professional excellence; he was an eloquent preacher, and as fond of his own homilies, as the archbishop in Gil Bias was of his.





The quizzical society fixed on him as an excellent subject. I will not say I was wicked or weak enough, but I was vain enough, (which is often worse than either, by its consequences) to be drawn into this plot, by the praise of my talents for conducting it. The very vice I was tempted to expose, I betrayed most egregiously myself in the attempt;





so much was I degraded, from want of proper objects to direct "my ambition or my powers, that the laugh of fools had a power to bribe or to frighten me into any thing. A party of us went one evening, looking as grave as lurking mischief could, to hear him preach. He soon discovered us; and wretched indeed was our joy at finding that we had the power of making a man of talents faulter and hesitate, from his fear or his desire of our suffrages. According to plan, we redoubled our attention, and threw such staring admiration into our faces, that the poor man became absolutely ridiculous: he dashed on, decking out his garbled declamation with illremembered scraps from other sermons, and torn limbs of metaphors, and similies and illustrations that " wondered how the devil they came there." His tones became absolute screams, and his gestures those of a maniac. Every sen





tence was echoed by our party, with groans of contrition, something like those with which the Vicar of Wakefield's sermon in jail was received, and by which they contrived to stifle their laughter; but I topped my part, for, standing up, with a composure of face that cost me no little pain, I deliberately took notes of passages which more resembled cross-readings, or the sybilline leaves in a storm, than the sentences of a sermon. I am sure all the congregation were undeceived, but the poor man himself descended from the pulpit, with the air of Paul descending the Mars Hill. There we thought the farce ended; and, like Falstaff, we resolved it should be laughter for a month, that we had made a worthy man ridiculous, and disturbed a devout congregation. But what was my astonishment a few nights after, at seeing myself solicited by a billion of bows, to look to





wards a little spruce figure in black, whom, when I had put up my glass, I hardly recollected to be the preacher our party had quizzed. I could scarce believe my eyes,: it was at Lady D ., .% one of the most dashing houses in London. I actually took the trouble of inquiring how he could have got in, and learned, that since the night of our frolick, the man had been so intoxicated by the belief of our praise and admiration, and particularly of mine, that, with indefatigable pains he had insinu-; ated himself into a company whqre. he understood he would meet me, and enjoy the applauses of his eloquence from. my own lips. For a moment I pitied the man; but the party had him in their talons, and they would not release him either for pity or shame. He was put down to play at the table with me, his partner was a companion (an humble one jo principle as well as fortune) of





Lady D -'s; her cue was to lose,

which she performed with an impatience that was capitally acted. But the looks, the gestures, the toute of the little parson, was so outre, his compliments, so bizarre, and his toute so hyperbolical, that I could hardly command myself enough to win. At length, his repeated losses roused him from his trance of delight; he endeavoured to play with judgment, but judgment he did not possess. When the last game was concluded, like all the rest, he tremulously asked the rate we had been playing; his partner informed him, and obliged him at the same time with the exact account of his losses; it w as probably about a fourth of his salary: the creature, with agony in his face, confessed he had not so much about him. I was about to request he would account with me; but my partner, with vulgar rapacity, required from him all the money he had, which still left a terrible balance, and to be inforfned of his address. They pillaged him to his last shilling! Oh, I was sick of their horrid fun! I pitied the unfortunate man, and with more painful conviction I pitied myself.





It did not end there, the poor man was unwilling-to leave his money without an effort: the employment he had engaged in from vanity, he pursued from avarice; in the vain and desperate fight of ignorance against skill and rapacity, he frequented the card-table night after night. His talents, his duties were neglected; from an exemplary pastor, he became a gambler, a' pigeon; and, as a man of fashion, a caricature. His friends lamented, his parish complained, and the quizzing society laughed.

At last, Lady D ran one morning

into my room, in high spirits. Our little parson (as she called him) was blown completely. He had lost at her house, the night before, a large sum, for which he had offered a draft, that, on examination, had strong marks of forgery; marks that had been verified by his distraction in giving it. "He is blown completely," said she, actually laughing with joy, " we shall have another Dodd meditating in jail, with a gallows in perspective." I listened to her with horror, which I could not make her feel. But whatever were her notions of humanity or of juftice, her notions of the value of 350/. were perfectly accurate, and she actually persisted in her intentions of exposing to prosecution the wretch she had betrayed, till shocked and terrified both at her and myself, I gave her the value of the draft myself, and bribed her to forego the frolic of a legal murder. The gratitude of this woman was equal to her humanity; as soon as she was in possession of the money, she whispered every where that Lady/Westhampton's reasons for quashing the business of the forged draft were more than the dictates of compassion. I confess this and other circumstances, such as will occur in the life of a woman of fashion, made me start, and would have made me think, had I dared to be alone for a moment. But what could I do? I had gone too far to recede. And what could I have gained by receding? I had no home,no husband, no happiness—nothing for a retiring heart to throw itself back on. Lord





W , whose only spring of life or

motion was a search for pleasure, proposed, about this time, a tour through France and Italy. It was fashionable for the English nobility to make tours at that time. Do not imagine we expected any pleasure from each other's society; but he was still vain of his wife's wit and beauty; and I was still afraid of the eclat of an external separation; my peace was gone for ever, but my name was unsullied. As I am going to tell you horrid things that happened, when I did go, I will first tell you something that happened before I went. I wrote an earnest and forcible letter to the clergyman, I mentioned to you, in which I neither spared his errors nor my own. I absolutely insisted on his quitting London, and London habits; and that obedience might not be implicit, I procured him a valuable living, at a distance from Portman-square and all its works, where I am told to this day he continues an example, that human virtue may recover from wounds apparently mortal, merely by change of air. The night after this business was finished, I think I recollect having slept without laudanum, which I had been in the habit of using some time. Vol. nr. c





We went to Italy, with a splendid suite. You look as if you wanted to know something about the Italians; positively I will tell you nothing, because my intention is not to deprave you but to instruct. The conviction, that an involuntary insight into their character suggested to me, was, that if there existed on earth national religion, morals, or good sense, they existed only in England. Intrigue—intrigue is the entire occupation of the Italians, body and soul. By the constitution, men are excluded from politics, and women from literature, by their education, in most instances; so they make love, as children do mischief; not from, passion, but idleness. The inside of anltalian isexactly like the inside of an Italian church—a mixture of tawdry devotion, and childish ceremony, and antic gesture, where gallantry and religion chase each other over





the scene, and cupids and cherubs, and Venus and Madonas, dance along in great harmony and confusion.

I actually was frightened at discovering where I was, for the reputation of gallantry is not enough. In London I could hide my coward fears of decency and shame, under an affected defiance of both, that succeeded vastly well. I talked so like a woman of fashion, and a libertine, that every one was satisfied I had said enough, if not too much, to prove my claims; but the Italians go deeper:—Oh, they are an horrid people! Yet, such was my infatuation, such was my inability to be any thing but the creature of flattery and fashion,^that I went to the very brink of the precipice; and, when I grew sick with horror and giddiness, instead of retreating from the danger, I shut my eyes on it; and all this to please or to pain a set of beings whose praise or. envy made them





alike contemptible to me. There was at Rome a very mysterious and useful character, the Countess B ;she kept

one of the most splendid palaces in Rome, no one knew how; but if you saw the crouds there, you would imagine that all Rome was pledged to discover it.

Her entertainments were somewhat singular: she always introduced some person in a fantastic habit, some juggler, or wizard, or wandering Jew; every thing was immediately abandoned, to witness his exhibitions; they were generally performed in a dark or shaded room, and consisted of some extraordinary deceptions of light, and disguises of persons, that were amazingly clever, they said. In short, his experiments made all the men very happy, and the ladies very wise. This woman had persecuted me with politeness since my arrival in Rome. I was warned of the





danger of her conversazione; so I resolved to go, to prove how inferior Roman wit and courage were to mine. Her apartments were crouded by all the nobility of Rome: at the usual hour the conjurer appeared, as an Armenian pedlar; we all crouded into a small room, and I began to wish, with Falstaff, that it were bed-time, and all well. Some beautiful transparencies were displayed, and while we were all gazing at them, he announced an experiment, for which he said it was necessary the room should be darkened. I fixed my eyes on the door—the lights were extinguished in a moment, I am sure by some chemical preparation, it was so sudden.

But the scene that followed—screaming with horror, and cursing my own folly and madness, I extricated myself from I know jiot whom, and struggled through the darkness, till I felt the hangings of a window. I did not know but it was an attic one, but death was preferable to what I dreaded, and I flung myself from it; it was on a ground floor, and I found myself in a garden, through which I fled like a fawn, without knowing where flight would lead me. I thought I heard steps; I rushed into a bower through the trellis of which I actually forced myself, and got into the garden of an adjacent palace. "Madre di Dio!" said a voice which I knew to be Lady Delphina Orberry's, who was then married to an Italian Duca, '* Who is that?"—I had never seen her twice before, yet I actually embraced her, and implored her to protect me with the cowardice of real innocence. She led me to the palace, making a wonderful mystery of my concealment, and assuring me that if the Countess B——was acquainted with my flying from, or exposing the orgies of her house, I could not reckon on my personal safety





in any part of Italy, for her taste in poisons was as ingenious as her taste in gallantry. I was terrified, you may guess how much, from the sequel of the story. The duchess was determined not to let my gratitude waste itself in acknowledgments. There was a tall, thin, pale, sentimental boy at Rome, who, between religion and love, was actually mad: every thing in the Italian character is blended with superstition. This spiritual Pygmalion had fallen desperately in love with a statue of S. Veronica, which he said made such returns to his passion as no statue ever made before— it was, indeed, a beautiful figure. Had he stuck to the marble, all would have been vastly well, and no ill consequences could have accrued to the saint's reputation or his own; but unluckily, on my arrival in Rome, inventing or believing some resemblance between us, he took it into his good Catholic head, that I was the saint in person, come from heaven or hell, to reward his pious gallantry. Actually, while the host was passing through the streets of Rome, and all the devout Italians were on their knees, he fell on his before my coach, which stopped as usual for the procession, and addressed me in a prayer that was certainly pleine (Fonction. He was an interesting boy, with dark, melancholy eyes, and a shade of such mild religious dejection over his face, that his etourderies would rather make you weep than smile. With this unhappy boy the duchess had actually fallen in love. She loved him, she assured me, ten thousand times more than she did her Santa Padrone, and I believed her.





At first I tried to laugh at her romantic folly; but I soon found that the passions of an Italian were not to be laughed at.

At last, when I had listened to her





vehement professions till I was quite weary, and a little frightened, she made me a proposal, on my compliance with which, she said, she rested the proof of gratitude for my preservation. Horrid wretch! How fear had humbled me to listen to her. I was to array myself in the costume of Veronica, and appear in a chapel belonging to a convent, where his confessor, whom she had bribed, was to conduct him. Here 1 was to play my saintly part, and wave him, by inviting gestures, to a dark recess, where I was to be supposed to follow him, but where the duchess was to be concealed in my place. When I had recovered my breath, of which rage and shame had deprived me, I answered her with as much energy of affronted honor and feeling, as if the folly which had put me in her pOwer, had not rendered them impotent to me. She interrupted me with violence, and kissing a cross that hung on her neck, swore, with the virulence of a Catholic, and an Italian by marriage, that before night she would inform the countess of my flight from her conversazione, and before the next, I would probably be a corse; that I owed my life to her believing that I went away from her party, as others went, and that she would not preserve my secret for nothing.





Oh, dread for. ever, Athanasia, the consequences of that daring levity, that hazards the appearance of evil, from the consciousness of its being no more than the appearance, a consciousness impossible to communicate to others, or to trust to in ourselves. The dread of false shame will lead any one to merit every imputation of the true. With an heart as chaste as any saint in Rome, St. Veronica not exempted, I was compelled to be the pander of a vice I loathed, and the imp of a sorceress whom I abhorred.





Yes, compelled actually in terror of my life, for what evil at that moment could havebeen so terrible tomeasdeath? There are parts of my narrative, my clear, that must not be told, or even imagined; yet, it must have turned the brain of a good Protestant to have seen me glide from among the draperies of the altar, my light vestment floating like a cloud around me, and my head wreathed with phosphoric radii, which, in my fears of poetical' or divine justice, I thought a thousand times would be changed into pure element for my sake; in short, the whole business was conducted with true Popish art, and Pagan wickedness. As soon as I could I descended, and implored the confessor to take me away from a place which I thought was falling over my head. On our passage, which was unaccountably long, my ecclesiastic became vastly more spirituel than I could wish; but what could he think of me? Was not he justified in thinking the worst of me?





Feel for my situation, or rather do not feel for it, for I do deserve it. By her own levity, an Englishwoman, of the first rank, and of spotless character, was placed in the solitary power of a ruffian, who, possessing the confidence of guilt, thought nothing else could be withheld from him. I was almost mad with horror !— With the strength of phrenzy, "I broke from him, and ran along passages of which I knew not whether they led to the dungeons of the inquisition or not, provided I escaped. At last I found myself in a dark, narrow, vaulted recess; one dim lamp burned in it, which shewed me faintly a crucifix, and a dark figure kneeling before it. Blind with terror and flight, I grasped it, and adjured it to save me from " horrid shame and





ruin." The figure turned round—the

light of the lamp fell on its face!

How shall I go on!"

Athanasia, who felt all her mother was about to say, sunk from her chair almost at her feet, and grasped her hand, with the other Lady Montrevor hid her face for a moment.

"It was he himself," said she, in a broken voice—" it was he whose name I never shall mention. How or why he was there, I knew not; but I hung on him as if he had dropt from heaven, for my preservation. He did not know me at first—I do not wonder at it: when he did, I wished to sink into the earth.

He had risen, in surprize—and I had fallen from my hold; unsupported, I fell to the ground—I spread my hands before my face—I wished him blind— I wished the lamp extinguished—I wished

myself on the wings of a whirlwind.

An heart-striking pause followed. He raised me—he dragged me to the lamphe traversed my features, with a gaze of horror and incredulity. He released me, and again I fell, for I was not able to stand: it was the hour and the power of conviction—it came over my heart with a force proportioned to its long, unnatural suspension. It is a dreadful task to learn, in one moment, what you are, when years have been expended in the effort to hide from yourself that very thing. In that one moment I felt, myself a lost creature, whom folly had sunk as low as vice—whom wretchedness had made as desperate as depravity.





Other convictions were with me—our early hours of innocent love, our hopes of better things than either of us had seen or done; for I had heard that he had become a man of unhappy, wild habits—our remembrance of each other when-"

Lady Montrevor's voice utterly failed her, and she bent upon her daughter's neck, and wept. "He stood at a distance from me, and I could hear him muttering to himself, at intervals—' can





it be?' Yes, said I, it is—it is, your

I could not stand, but I tried to follow him on my knees—my pride was gone, I humbled myself like a child, and wept, as I do now. Hear me, hear me—I am miserable, very miserable, but I am not guilty: my heart is broke almost, but not changed. I know you—I remember you well. I humbled myself to him—I poured out my heart to him—I told him all; how despair of happiness had driven me to desperate ways; how I had become from folly and perverted ambition, the involuntary, the shuddering partaker of vices I loathed. I told him why I was there.

Before my wretched tale was done, he knelt and wept beside me; but oh, his burning tears! they were not such as fell on me, when first, in the energy of young passion, they rushed into his eyes, while he looked on me. How thin and wan he was! I felt, from his being in that place, that his character had changed as well as his person. I knew it from his language: he tried to talk like a saint, but still he wept like a man. I felt the bursts of passion that shook him, as if they would rend him in pieces. I would have shortened this scene; but who will blame me for listening as long as I could, to the voice I was to hear for the last time? He spoke much of himself and of me. He said I had made him a wild, hopeless being; that he was not mad, but at times he felt his mind was changed; that, in the wreck of his passions, he had fallen into unhappy courses, but he would not reproach me: he was restored to the bosom of the true church. But when he talked of me— when he adjured me, like him, to abandon the world and its vanities, when he spoke of our yet meeting where neither tears nor passion would stain the meeting —a flood of agony drowned his voice— and I—Athanasia, let go my hand—you are in tears yourself, leave me for some time; and remember for your comfort," said she, trying to smile through her anguish, "that all this was twenty years ago—that he is dead since, and I am buried."





It was some days before Lady M—— renewed her story, for after any exertion she usually passed a long interval in those heavy dozes, which the habitual use of laudanum will produce; and from which she only awoke to call for it. At length Athanasia was summoned one

evening; for till the evening Lady M

was never perfectly awake. "I do not know, my dear," said she to Athanasia, as she was dressing, " what effect my narrative may have on you; but with me ' it murders sleep.' So I have sent for you, to try whether my waking or sleeping dreams are most disagreeable; with me in this deep loneliness, the review of these things is like the recollection of a dream.





I got home without any more persecution; and for some time I thought I should be freed from persecution for ever; for I was seized with a violent nervous fever. The tragedy of the " Fruits of a single Error," was followed by the farce of the "Doctor and Apothecary." They sent for a vast number of nurses and physicians, to whom I took care not to tell my complaint; so they found employment in taking their fees, which amused them, and guessing what it was, which amused me; but whatever were the consequences of this masquerade to me, they were worse to our unfortunate victim, who no sooner discovered the deception, than he stabbed himself to the heart, in the presence of the duchess. The business was however hushed up, as none were acquainted with its reality, except the duchess, the priest, and the saint. After this, you may believe, I found the air of Rome did not agree with me. I returned to England, bringing back with me, after an absence of four years, a person polished with all the art of beauty, a mind stored with all the graces, ou piquant, ou seduissante, ou naive—and an heart corroded by despair. Oh, it was weary, stale, flat, and unprofitable. No creature could believe, that with the life I led, and the efforts I made, and the laborious confusion I contrived to keep up about me, that I was actually dying of a broken heart—the slowest as well as the most certain of deaths. Oh, the depth of settled gloom to which the most mercurial spirit will sink, when unsupported by conscience and reflexion. I was the miserable Carlini of laughing hundreds and thousands. You have read of Carlini, who kept all Paris laughing, and half-dying with dejection himself, was advised by a physician, who did not know his persoa, to go see Carlini, as a cure for his hypochondria. I was the miserable Carlini of laughing hundreds and thousands. —But why did I persist in this tragical mirth ?—What could I do, my dear?—Besides, to confess the truth, tho', like Pandora's coffer, every good thing appeared to have escaped from my touch, vanity still remained behind to console me. I had no husband, no children to live to—but I had vanity. I had no friends, no worthy applause to exert myself for; but I had vanity. I had not even the fresh and nimble spirit of youth—the emulation, or the curiosity, or the jeunesse de Vesprit, that renders folly sweet and graceful; but I had vanity,'vanity, vanity! After all, I do not recollect that I became so desperate and hopeless, till I heard of his





death; then I felt as if all restraint, or cause for restraint was removed; for I often have seen his eye fixed on me, when half the world was between us. Whatever follies I was guilty of, the world gave me abundant credit for, and for a thousand vices beside, that I never was, never could be guilty of. Never was woman abused as I have been. Why did not I resist, d'ye say? Why, my dear, I laughed at the malice, and, I did not dislike the eclat; but when my own children joined the cry, then my resolution or my patience failed for a moment; but my pride upheld me—I laughed on— hid my wounded spirit under an assumption of mirth, that made all its wounds ache again; and submitted rather to the imputation of vice, than the meanness of pleading for reputation to my own children. Such children !—I gave them every advantage, brought them out, almost from the nursery: I have put on their rouge and pearl-powder with my own hands. I was as much above the jealousy of mothers as I was above any ground of jealousy; for now I may avow a superiority that can offend them no more. All was in vain—they were mere fashionables—they had no hearts— that I could pardon; but they had no justice, no candour, no principle—that I never can. I will relate to you, Athanasia, the circumstances that preceded their matches, and you shall pronounce if ever a fashionable mother was more contented to abdicate in favour of her successors than I have been.





You know your eldest sister, Lady Castle Wycomb, is married to the first political character, perhaps, in Europe. I have to give you his domestic character :—He was, I admit, my professed admirer for many years before he married Delphina—it was not then supposed he ever would marry. No people could understand each other better, we had both read Rochefoucault, and the world. He professed to admire me, because I was a fashionable beauty, to whom some political influence was ascribed. I professed to admit his admiration; because—because he was the premier. But I knew in my soul that man delighted not him, nor woman either. He had neither feeling nor admiration for any one but himself; and he knew also that pour Vaffaire ffamour, S. Francis's wife of snow would have been as accessible as Lady Westhampton with all her coquetry; so the world and we agreed perfectly well about the affair. We stopped on the brink, the world said we had crossed the Rubicon—the world was delighted with the scandal, and we were * delighted with the reputation of it. I think Louis the XIV. confessed that no man could be a great man to his valet de chambre—Lord Castle Wy— has verified it, though he understands and manages the resources and revenues of the wealthiest nation on earth. He is such an ideot in domestic affairs, such a dupe to peculating servants, and an whole army of placemen out of place, and men of business, who have no business on earth, whom like the sorcerers in tales, he is obliged to find employment for, lest they should tear him in pieces, that actually nothing but his privileges have preserved him from a jail for life. The character is not an uncommon one, but I never saw so striking an example of it.





Latterly, however, one reptile like Aaron's rod, has swallowed up all the other reptiles. A confident subtle fellow, whom nobody knew, who had latterly become his charge d'affaires, or rather charge sur ses affaires, had driven away every one else from him, and been admitted to his table, his interest; nay, to a share in his political confidence and consequence. So much had his fear or his gratitude to this person prevailed, that he actually went the length of a quarrel with the first families, because they did not treat him with respect. At last, this creature took a whim to sit in parliament—Could you guess the reason? He had received some slight at the premier's table, from a barotiet of an ancient family, whose ancestors had been the representatives of a certain shire, since the first invention of shires by king Alfred, for ought I know. Nothing could satisfy his spleen but ousting the old representative, and bearding all his ancestry to their grim faces, in the very Town-hall, where their pictures had hung since the conquest.





But the difficulty was how to deal with the proud and attached electors, who had always voted in favor of one family. Lord Westhampton happened to

VOL. III. D





have extensive interest there, which hitherto had been always employed for the baronet. But now Lord Castle-Wycomb in behalf of his candidate, supplicated, and promised, and bribed; and Lord West— always accessible on the score of interest, consented to withdraw his Voters; and in order to identify the interest of the family, Lord C. W. proposed his friend Mr. Mason, in form, as a candidate for my eldest daughter's hand.

I confess I was amazed at his presumption; so, I believe, was Lord Westhampton! but a detail of the immense wealth and numerous appointments that the creature had engrossed, together with the additional promise of a brilliant diplomatic appointment for our eldest son, then Lord Montrevor, prevailed with my money-loving Lord, who inclined to these profitable arrangements—" with sweet, reluctant, amorous delay."





Nothing now remained but to win the Lady; for my part, I had laughed through the whole transaction, and I now laughed more than ever, at the idea of the reception of the proposal from Delphina, high-born, and proud, and passionate as she was. To my astonishment, she yielded in a moment; but in a manner sufficiently in character; for she intimated to Mr. Mason, that she would dispense with his presence, till it was actually necessary, or rather metaphorically unnecessary, as they were then not to be twain, but one flesh. You will wonder if I did not cease to laugh now, when I saw my daughter to marry, withoutpassion, or even respect, or any thing, but a rage for expence, without bounds, and levity without controul; for the wretch whom she could thus despise, she must also not hesitate to abuse. Why, my dear, I could do nothing; I dared not advise or appeal to her; my own conduct had deprived me of any demand on her confidence, or any authority over her conduct.—Mine to her had been merely that careless indulgence by which I tried to conceal or palliate my, perhaps, criminal indifference to her, and to every thing else. We were sisters in dress, in habits, in conversation, in mutual independence, in every thing but confidence and affection. But had I been even disposed to play La bonne mere with Delphina, I would have been alone on the stage.— She is a woman of a proud and hard heart, and her principles are as bad, as she had a right to conclude mine to be from the exterior she saw.





A dreadful confession has escaped me; but from it, you must observe, that I dared not advise my own child.

All things, therefore, were going on in the usual train of fashionable marriages; that is, the lawyers were contriv





ing how to settle a vast deal. of money on the lady; and the lady was contriving how to spend ten times the sum before it was in her possession. One day as Delphina and I were passing through Bond Street, in my baroche, we were stopped by a croud collecting round something we could not see. At length out of the midst of the mob rushed a man, very much frightened, and after him a woman, big and ugly enough to frighten any man. The man was Mr. Mason, the woman was—his wedded wife, she said, who had heard of his doings in the wilds of Cumberland; where he had confined her, she said, on twenty pounds a year, with his large family of small children, Avhile "he revelled with nobles in Loudon, like a vile perjured wretch as he was, she said. In short, it is impossible to tell all she said and sung; for it was actual recitative, with a very full accompaniment from half a dozen squalid brats, that hung around her, pretty much in the costume apd tones of Scylla's brood, that you have read of: while he, poor man! surveyed his family with the same loving looks of recognition, with which Milton describes Satan ogling Death, when first introduced to him by Sin, as his child.— Here, you may suppose, I was disposed to laugh again; but the truth is, I was frightened almost as much as poor Mason; the woman looked able to eat us, baroche and all; and I had no wish to tempt the fate of Tom Thumb with a red cow. We drove home as fast as possible.—Lord W. had heard all; so lawyers met, and referees were appointed; prosecution and pistols were talked of; and good Mrs. Mason, with her family, had taken undisputed possession of her husband's splendid house, in South-Audley Street.





I confess, this affair (of- which the truth soon appeared to be exactly what





good Mrs. Mason and the children had represented so strongly in Bond Street) did not surprize me much. I knew him to be a mean low-born creature, who had crepfinto affluence, by practising on the obvious weaknesses of a great mind; a rat who had gnawed out his burrough in the hold of a great vessel, and then compassed the world in safety. That such a man should be married in the early part of his life was not improbable, that he should be married to a being like himself, was very probable; and that he should desert and banish her, and be a villain in the hour of his affluence, was the most likely thing in the world.

In the mean time, the election was just beginning—Lord Westhampton was to withdraw all his interest from Mason, and was posting down to take the field in person against him. Delphina was in distress between rage and shame: like a mask I have seen between half-tragic and half-comic; and I was determined to send out six hundred tickets, for a masked ball; contradict the whole story, and treble my quantity of rouge, that "no thought infirm might alter my cheek," while I was lying to the whole world;—when one morning, as I was coining from the Queen's drawing-room, where I thought it necessary to be just at that time, 1 was surprised to see Lord Castle-Wycomb's chariot at my door, we alit at the same moment—he followed me, unbidden, up stairs. I entered one of the drawing-rooms half-angry, half-amazed; for all the family included him in the insult they had lately received. We were alone.—He addressed me in the most earnest manner—implored me to save him from confusion and disappointment indescribable—swore that he would make any terms and concession to Lord Westhampton, and if his interest in shire was not withdrawn from his





friend—" That splenetic little devil," said he, "insists upon that borough— nothing will else satisfy him, but to gall that foolish old baronet. He is undone if Lord W's influence is withdrawn from him; and I am undone if he is disappointed. He has threatened me this morning in the most insolent manner. I cannot conceive or resist the influence he has over me! I cannot do without him! He knows it, and insults me. De,ar Lady W. I throw myself on your mercy, devise, suggest something to pacify Lord W. and your daughter."

I actually was touched by his perplexity and distress—to see the man who ruled the councils of Europe, crouching to the whims of an insolent dependant. I tried to rouse him by irony—he did not feel it. u As to Lord W." said he, "I know he would not long continue implacable, could the lady be appeased." "Aye, my Lord—there's the rub."-— "And can you imagine nothing to satisfy—to sooth her."—" Really," said I, still ludicrously, "I know of nothing, unless your Lordship proposes for her yourself." He struck his forehead— "The luckiest expedient."—I could not believe him serious, I requested him to consult his feelings.—" Oh !"said he impatiently, " It is a matter of perfect indifference to me." "How infinitely flattering!" said I. "You mistake me, ma belle Comtesse" said he, resuming the courtier. I was very willing to mistake him; for my eyes were dazzled by the auspicious brilliancy of Delphina's prospect. I accepted his apology, promised to submit his proposal to my daughter; and to prevent Lord Westhampton's contradicting the instructions, he had given his tenantry in behalf of Mr. Mason :—" Then every thing is arranged," said he, "how happy I am in having a fair ally, a lovely minister!"





I assured him that my expedition was prompted by my wish to get rid of my hoop; for I still doubted the seriousness of the whole business, I still mingled some badinage in my condolence— "Every thing then is arranged," said he, but pausing, and trying to look tender—

"Mais mon cceur," 1 laughed, and

shuddered—" Oh," said I, still speaking in French, for fear of the servants— "An affair of the heart with you was always a sinecure affair." He was hurrying away, when struck by his last words, and foreseeing consequences more than I ever foresaw before—I called him back.

"My Lord," said I, "though you are a statesman, and I am a fashionable belle, the present moment requires candour. You have been my professed admirer—you are about to be my daughter's husband; the world has said more of our connection than it ought; and, perhaps, of our separation it will say less than it ought; but, ydu know me; and you know that to vanity I have made large sacrifices, to vice never the smallest. Bereft, perhaps, through my own folly, of my natural protectors and natural confidence, I must appeal to you. Let neither vanity nor jealousy betray you to insult your wife, by slandering me and yourself. Remember from henceforth, I am your mother; let me, like Ninon, convert an admirer into a son, though not with the same consequences." He promised with the air of a man who is thinking of other things than a woman's feelings; and I was pleased with even this security, for being not exposed to horrid infamy. In the mean time much was to be done





—I dispatched an express to Lord W ,

who was dining with an election party at Richmond, from which he intended to set forward that night. I sent a footman with my own chariot for Delphina, who was at the exhibition. I gave him a note, which I desired should be given her between the leaves of a catalogue. Every thing succeeded as I could wish. Delphina hurried home, delighted with her new prospeets—Lord W—, maugre Ham, pie and Burgundy, set off that night for shire, to recal his instructions to his agent, and arrived time enough to prevent a single man of his from polling for the independent member—while I hurried to my dressingroom, not to throw off my hoop, but to draw up a bond of marriage between Lord Castle-Wycomb and Delphina, under a penalty of 40,000/. on the failure, which I presented to him in my hoop, and fairly locked the door till he had signed it.





Now was the time for a coup de main. The story of good Mrs. Mason was unluckily as public as her appeal aupeuple was. I went that night to the opera, and laughed so well at the report of my daughter being married to Mr. Mason, that the people began actually to distrust their senses, and wondered with each other at so improbable a story, which the good souls had been propagating themselves, with more veracity than they imagined. To those to whom I was compelled, like Falstaff, to give a reason, I whispered, confidentially, that it was an election manoeuvre. I had no more idea annexed to the phrase than they had, yet they all went away, flattered by the disclosure, to improve it in their different proportions of faith and knowledge. Thus / did all—the idea was mine—the execution was mine—the success was mine; and the first conjugal speech of Lady Castle-Wycomb to her Lord, was, that she was acquainted with the whole story of the loeking-up business; and insisted that I never should be invited into her house, except





when all the world was there, and I might be ajigure in her rooms.

This Lord Castle-Wy— repeated to me, —for the sake, I suppose of repeating his answer, which was spirited enough, for the ghost of a departed lover in the purgatory of Wedlock to make, that he was shocked at the proposal, and never would consent to it. Of Lady C. W. however, it is but justice to mention, that she delivered her lord from his degrading subjection to Mason, who is never admitted within his doors. As to the care of his property, she has taken all that upon herself, and I am told is very successful in removing any reason for care upon the subject—so much for my Gonerill.

Now for our second daughter:—<• Lady Invermay is, if possible, still lovelier and more worthless than her sister: — her extreme coldness, hei haughty insensibility, her utter want of any thing that could touch or enchain the feelings, repelled every one that approached her. They gazed on the statue, left it on its pedestal, and walked away. The summer after Lady C. W. was married, I passed at Sjr W. D.'s: it was the most ridiculous thing in nature—a party of cognoscenti—no creature was to be admitted that had not been a member of the Arcadi—nothing was to be spoken at meals but Italian— no sound but of Italian melody was to be breathed at the concerts; the house itself was constructed after the model of the villa at Arcolono, where, for the honor of antiquity, they found aglaeed window. All this could be borne, but there was no bearing our little, lying virtuoso host. He was enough to raise or lay the spirits of Mendez Pinto,^or Sir John Mandeville. No one had seen any thing that had not seen an eruption of Vesuvius, and such eruptions as he had witnessed, no one had ever seen.





As he sat at his table vomiting out mountains of fire, and seas of lava, he reminded me of the dwarfs of old romance, feasting the knights at their table with the lies of enchantment. But in the midst of all,pur taste and stupidity, when we were just beginning to wish for a little English and common sense, there dashed in upon us a wild young Highland nobleman, a nephew of Sir W.'s, who violated Virtu, and charmed the heart by every word and look and motion: it was his delight to confound and torment his uncle, to dismount the endless cavalry of statues that blocked up his gardens, and throw himself at full length upon the flimsy Etruscan seats, and hang his hunting cap on the spires of the chrystal candelabra. He did not take the smallest notice of Lady Invermay, as she was soon to be, but every thing else was driven away by an evenement tres grand. A black marble





figure arrived from Puzzoli, purchased by Sir W.'s agent there, about which there were as many disputes as about Dr. Scriblerus's shield, or Mambrino's helmet, or any other antique, useless, and ugly, and inestimable. Sir W. insisted that it was the Syrian Venus, and had all the foreign academies about his ears. I assured him it must be the witch Canidia, or one of the hideous mourners at an ancient funeral; and Lord Invermay taking the hint, swore it was the picture of the old woman who led the funeral cry at the interment of his uncle, the Laird of Kilcarron, and died of drinking spirits, in honor of the solemnity. This almost drove Sir W. mad: to strike us dumb, he determined to have a public Apotheosis of his deified statue:—he set apart a small cabinet for her temple, filled it with heads and legs and wings of eastern deities; erected an altar, so perfectly constructed on ancient principles, that it was impossible for the unhappy divinity to sit, stand, or kneel on it; and persuaded the ladies to officiate round the figure, in the attitudes of sacrifice, dans le costume Vorient: we were all to present flowers or gems or shells; or, if we had nothing worse, our own figures. All this was sufficiently nouvelle and recherche; but with true childish gaudiness of taste, Sir W. determined to invest his statue in a spangled robe and cestus, and begged of me to adjust this doleful masquerading dress; after which the figure looked so like the little swarthy Lady of Loretto, that I assured Sir W. that he would be fined for keeping an unlicensed chapel. On the evening before the fete, I had just led a large party into the cabinet, to adjust the flowers from which the drapery of the nich was to be suspended; when, stretched on a sopha, quite unconscious of any divinity but Mor





pheus, we saw Lord Invermay fast asleep. He had been out with an hunting party all day; came home fatigued, and, as usual, took his repose on the first sopha he met. The glow of health was on his cheeks, which were temptingly shaded by his ruddy hair. He looked charmingly for a votarist in the Temple Of Venus, consulting her by dreams. As he lay, half sunk among the roses with which the sopha was strewn, a peer, who had read Pope's Homer, observed he only wanted a Juno, to represent Jupi'ter-asleep on Mount Ida, which poured forth flowers to refresh his slumbers. Fond of the praise of my graceful attitudes, and graceful confidence., I placed myself at the sopha, suspended one arm over his face, and bowed myself in an attitude which extorted "charming!— grace-contour /" from every- one that knew how to speak virtu and French. Lord B. drawing the cestus from the poor little black devil of a goddess, declared, that I was more worthy of it; and besides it was the costume of the character I represented, who had borrowed it for the occasion. As he was folding it around me, I perceived, by the undulation of Lord Invermay's lip, that he was awake, and preparing to catch me in his arms. I started from the sopha, just time enough to prevent him, and ran laughing out of the cabinet, leaving the cestus behind me; this he caught on my flight; and, in a very pretty chivalric flourish,,kissed it as a pledge of discovery, and swore by it, that he would follow and recognize by it, the fugitive owner, a part of whose dress he believed it to be. All this was told, and- laughed at as a jest, by every one but me. I caught an idea from it, which I developed that very evening.





Your sister had been on a visit during the adventure, of which I took care- not to inform her, but proposed that we should exhibit the attitudes which we were to assume in the sacrifice the next day; and commenced by displaying one that tore me a veil worth seventy guineas. Several followed—some laughing, and some so serious, that every one laughed but themselves. Sir W. was in raptures—he started—gesticulated— screamed with applause. "Raise the arm—plant the foot—fa little more en profile)—now you are quite a fury—delightful. Now extend this coffee-pot in your right hand, and you are converted into a ministering Hebe."





In the midst of his cognoscenti agonies, I glided away with your sister to the cabinet; threw the drapery and cestus of the statue over her; and, without mentioning my motive, entreated her to float in among them, in one of the attitudes of Parisot, in the famous pas de shawl, which was quite the rage at that time: she obeyed, for she had a reliance on my taste. I followed her, when she entered in the trophies which Lord Invermay had sworn to recognize. Every eye was directed to him; he felt the appeal—it was not difficult to address some badinage to a beautiful woman. He sprang forward, and addressed her in a flow of such sudden and animated gallantry, that she actually blushed and looked interesting: I believe he felt her to be so at that moment; and whether it was this impulse, or the difficulty of retreating, after so ardent an approach, or a restraint something like obligation, from the presence of numbers; and the remembrance of the language into which he had been surprized before them, or the consideration that he must marry some time, and might as well marry then as any other, or all these causes combined; but from that evening he pursued her with the most assiduous attention,





entreated leave to follow us to Lord C. W.'s, where we passed the remainder of the summer, and in autumn your sister became Lady Invermay, from the success of a finesse, which, light and fantastic as it is, was as successful as the heavy manoeuvres of a whole winter campaign in London.

There were two tolerable things said on the occasion: the peer, who had read Homer, observed, that we need no longer be at a loss for the denomination of the statue, as the event had proved her to be the Juno Pronuba. The other, alluding to Lady I.'s entre into the saloon, that eventful evening, observed, that her dancing master or mistress must have been a consummate artist, as they had taught her to step into a marquisate and 20,000/. a year a pied.

Now to tell you of the good things that were done as well as said, in consequence of this event. I have heard of some people whose sensibility was so exquisite, that they could not endure the idea of an obligation, but Lady Invermay carried this to a most fastidious excess; for she appeared, by her conduct since her marriage, to consider the obligation it had conferred, as the most mortal injury.





I will not tell you—I cannot bear to think of—the many trivial, goading provocations, by which a weak mind may sting a generous one almost to distraction. I cannot bear to tell the paltry, female stories of rival parties, and rival equipages; and woundings of silence, and the eye, that are invisible and mortal. Oh, let me die by any poison but the serpent-tooth of a thankless child !— let me be damned with any thing but the faint praise of civil hatred.

I will say no more of myself; my feelings are perpetually breaking in on my narrative. Of your sister Bellamy I need not speak; she has behaved to me with

VOL. III. E

.





uniform decency, and I am content that she "shall dwell in decencies for ever."

Thus was I living, if this could be called life. My talents, my feelings, my time, my happiness, lost! and lost without account; and, what was worse, without enjoyment. Every day, like Lady Townly's last 500/., was gone after the other; every hour was passed in misery; yet of no day could I tell why it had been thus passed. No abuse was ever so wilful, no wretchedness ever so criminal. True I knew no one happier than myself, and many that looked up to me as the happiest of human beings; but it is a wretched mind that can be fed by the envy of others. It was no mitigation to my contempt of myself, that I was able to contemn all the rest of the world.

At this time the event occurred, of which you deserve to have some account; an event which would have driven half the fashionable, women in the world to





madness: it had even a more extraordinary effect on me, it drove me to reflection.

It is a long and horrid story; I will try to abridge it for your benefit, or my own. It appeared that your father, who succeeded to the title and estates of his cousin the late Earl of Westhampton, who died suddenly, was apprized that his cousin had been married to an obscure and low-born woman, who was unacquainted with the real rank of her husband, who" bore him a son, and who died unconscious that she had brought an heir to the house of Westhampton; the Earl himself died before he had acknowledged his son, and the few witnesses of whom your father could obtain any information were silenced by what has the power of making all mankind silent or eloquent as it pleases. The heir himself was sent to Scotland, to Ireland, to the Indies, East and West, to every country from whose





bourn no traveller returns. He survived every hardship, he struggled through every difficulty. He was possessed of some documents, and some intimations remembered from childhood; he was conscious of something not congenial to the mean and laborious life he was condemned to, and he contrived to make a friend and confidant wherever he could make an acquaintance. In the mean time, the number of confidants that your father made, for other reasons, was increasing every year; the care of the absentee became every moment more difficult and more expensive; those who were employed, communicated it to others whom they employed; the douceurs became more exorbitant, and the secret less safe: in the four last years the sums laid out in the care of this unfortunate young man's safety, by the extortion of agents, amounted to upwards of 30,000/., as appeared before a committee of the House





of Lords appointed to examine the business. In this miserable strife of fraud, oppression, and fruitless waste of principle and money—in these horrors of secret iniquity—in this abjectness of menial collusion, had your father lived since the period of our marriage. A little after your sister Bellamy's marriage, the whole matter was discovered; the unfortunate exile found means to reach England, where a suspicion of his existence and pretensions had long been diffused. He applied to eminent lawyers, prepared a petition to the King, lodged in the verge of the Court, and took every means that promised success, or what was equal to it—publicity. Such was your father's infatuation, that till a committee had actually been appointed to examine the affair, he could not be persuaded of his danger: the ruin then was sudden and dreadful! I was totally ignorant of our circumstances till then—they were in the most desperate state! It was aggravated





by a report that Lord W bad lost

his peerage, and consequently his privileges; and on the night we escaped from London, eight executions were in the house in Curzon Street, and his person was threatened with an arrest. When we had leisure to look stedfastly on our ruin, the Irish estates, the title of Montrevor, and about 4000/. a year, were all that remained of an establishment once adequate to the support of princes. We were fallen! fallen! fallen! Yet I was determined to fall like myself. I had been the Cleopatra of the revels for many loose and worthless years, I was now to be the Cleopatra whose departure was to throw dignity upon a clouded life. Lord W was so perfectly convinced of my having been utterly innocent even of the knowledge of the persecution practised on him, that he offered me out of his recovered property the jointure stipu





lated in my marriage settlement, with the title of Dowager of Westhampton. I rejected it. I resolved to banish myself to a country I dreaded, with an husband I despised, to extort admiration from a world that had refused me justice. No matter; I was born for admiration, and admiration I was determined to have: my mind was perverted, my peace was lost, but my pride was unbent and unbounded. I will not repeat the interview I had with your father. The glimmerings of human feeling flashed out on both sides: he was melted at my magnanimity, at his finding me to be what he could hardly believe to exist, and I was melted at his discovering it so late. I believe I shed tears, or something like it, but I will tell no more now, though I think I have been treated harshly. I am not begging for mercy (said she, bursting into tears), but I think I have been treated harshly. But, Oh 1 (said she,





rising hastily, and striking her forehead violently) when I think of my time, my powers, my heart—of the things which I might have done—of the life I ought to have lived; when I think of that first and best of men murdered, actually murdered by me—a murder on my soul—it is a wonder that I waste existence between the dozings of laudanum and despair!" —Such was the story of the victim of fashion.

At the end of this melancholy narrative, to conceal my feelings, I snatched up the English papers which the servants had just brought in; I was glad of the pretext to call Athanasia's attention from me. They were all in a blaze with Lord and Lady Montrevor's return, and the marriage of Lord and Lady Weshampton, and the joy and triumph of so many noble families, and of all the fashionable world. Paragraph-Nevill himself, in the "Winter in London," never exhibited





such a chef d'oeuvre in splendor and interest; the whole pride, pomp, and circumstance of the progress from Ireland, their traversing roads with six horses, and four out-riders, and a chariot with four for her Ladyship's female attendants, her Ladyship's travelling costume of scarlet and gold (exactly similar to that which the Irish papers announced as the Duchess of B—df—rd's, when her Lord arrived in Ireland to assume the vice-regal honors), no other guest being admitted while they staid two days in Dublin at the splendid hotel in Sackville Street, which was once the mansion of the Marquis of Sligo; their declining the urgent request of His Exc—11—ncy and Her Grace the Duchess of R—chm—d to pass one day at the Phoenix Lodge hefore they quitted Ireland; and, four days after, their triumphal entry into London,where unfortunately a slight cold (the consequence, we hope, of travelling merely) at present prevents her Ladyship from receiving the congratulations of the fashionable world, on an event which has restored to it unusual splendor and felicity. After this, the account of the nuptials of Lord and Lady Westhampton was like a train to the nucleus of this blazing meteor: her Ladyship must have felt some disappointment at the bridal jewels, and veil, and blushes, being compressed into a paragraph of about ten lines, while her mother's triumph blazed in every column of the newspaper, and regular bulletins announced the importance of her health to the fashionable world.





While we were perusing these pompous paragraphs, the servant who had been employed to shut up his lordship's closet, as we inhabited but a few rooms of the spacious mansion, came in with a paper .which had been found there, and which he begged pardon forsupposing of consequence. I looked at it to discover if it was. Athanasia and I were not a little amused at finding it to be a copy of the paragraphs, with a thousand interlineations and emendations, partly in his lordship's hand, partly in his valet's (with whom it appeared he had been consulting, for the last week, to frame this pompous intelligence), which described every stage of their progress before they set out, and their reception in London, while they were in another country. Such was the weak and ostentatious mind of the husband of Lady M.; of the man who had destroyed her happiness, and perverted her mind, and upon the ruins of the first of female characters erected his toy-shop of glittering vanities, and insisted that she must appear happy at the exchange.





With a mind burning with the passion of distinction, and determined to forget joy and anguish alike in the struggles of public fife, I set out for England, and carried with me a spirit as ardent, and hardly better versed in the science of life than that with which I had commenced my winter in London. After a journey performed with the ease with which people of opulence usually travel in England and Ireland, we arrived in London on the 4th of December, 180—; and immediately entered into a splendid suite of apartments in a new street at the fashionable extremity of the town, which had been prepared for us by Lord M. The arrangement made at Montrevor House was, that we were to have passed our time in London at a house which Lord M. had taken in Berkeley Square; on his arrival, however, he found, or fancied the furniture so defective, that he accepted Lord Castle-Wycomb's proposal to remove to his house in the same square, till "every thing had been arranged in Hope's style in the. new mansion." A note was therefore dispatched to us, intimating the new arrangement which was only to continue a few weeks, as the first artists in London were employing their utmost expedition in filling the new house with all the wonders of a fairy palace. It was late when we .arrived. Athanasia was languid and weary: the chimney-piece was crowded with invitations for "to-morrow, and to-morrow, and to-morrow" from every branch of the family in expectation of our arrival, and as far as the branches which were lit as we entered the room, threw their light, it only fell on titles. There was an invitation to a family dinner in Berkeley Square for the very day of our arrival: Athanasia, throwing herself on the sopha, requested me to go: "No, my love, I will not leave you to-night; besides it is too late, and they will think my intrusion at this hour a blunder of supper for dinner; my first essay shall not be so characteristic." "Oh not at all) you will be quite in time; they are amaz





ingly late at Lord Castle-Wycomb's, you will make me happy by going." "I should rather if I could, make you happy by staying, let me stay (and I threw myself on the sopha beside her,) and do something to amuse you." "No," said she, with one of her smiles of languor and sweetness, " you shall go and do something to amuse me; you shall bring a note to Madame, who is of course at Berkeley Square, and tell her I am dying of fatigue, or dying to see her, whichever she pleases to believe, and she can return in the carriage, and sit with me till you come home, and don't hurry yourself to return early."

I had no wish, no intention to go out, but I dreaded to appear suspicious of her conduct or her companions; I promised to go, and while I was dressing, she gave me a note for Madame; it was a twisted one.- I was struck by this expedient of secresy, and thought of it, till I found myself in Lord Castle-Wycomb's spacious hall; I gave the note to one of the servants, and hastened to the dinner-room, where I understood the company had just assembled. To me, accustomed even to the splendor of Montrevor House, the effect of the present scene was actually dazzling. Lord Castle Wycomb lived more splendidly than all the rest of the ministry, distinguished as they were for convivial splendor. Lady M. had appeared in full dress rarely and capriciously when in Ireland, and assumed a fantastic mixture in her costume to mislead the starers; but here the full splendor of a winter in London, in the costume both of dress and entertainment, burst on my eyes that ached with their glare. Lord Castle-Wycomb, in respect or in curiosity, rose at my entrance, and displayed in my reception a condescending dignity that he was somewhat surprized to find I had expected, and was accustomed to; a general circulation of bows, and a muttered repetition of names, and an immediate application of glasses followed round a company of about twenty persons. I was at length seated between two ladies, whom by their inquiries for Mrs. Bethel, not by the manner of them, I discovered to be two of her sisters. I conceived it necessary to make some apology for the lateness of my appearance, of which I felt the awkardness had probably increased the general scrutiny. I was answered by Lord Castle^V. slightly touching his glass, and slightly bowing to me, as an intimation that he wished to take wine with me. I was accustomed to the fashionable abbreviations in manner, and bowed as slightly in return. "We have quite exploded apologies," said the dashing Lady of the mansion, who was one of my neighbours, "all that is now passh; we have intro duced in its place a facility that does every thing it pleases without giving of





fence, and lets every thing be done without taking any." I congratulated the system on having so eloquent a definer, and ventured, as I spoke, to raise my eyes where more lovely and luxuriant than ever, Lady Montrevor was seated opposite me in all the glare of exaggerated spirits, and all the pride of gratified ambition; amid splendor and dissipation, quite at home, and too much at home, she shone out the queen of pomp and pleasure, with whose wit no one could contend, and whose beauty no one could emulate. She was conversing with a gentleman whom she immediately named to me particularly as Mr. Bellamy, and then resumed her conversation; yet from that moment her manner became interrupted—I thought she remembered Ireland—I thought she remembered Mr. Corbett. The dinner, interrupted cm\y by occasional introductions to my new relatives, who appeared to think " the honor of taking wine with me," sufficient notice of the connexion, passed away like any other dinner, at which she was present, in gazing at her. My eyes ached with her lustre, and-my heart .with her levity. When the ladies retired, she passed my chair; I waited for a word, for a look; I had at least the latter, but it was one which perhaps I had been better without.





The conversation after dinner was local and desultory—politics were not even alluded to. I have observed, in my intercourse with distinguished political men, that, except when engaged in actual details of business, they speak rarely and guardedly on the subject. The company seem to act parts in conversation, which were assumed for the occasion. Mr. Bellamy, Lord Invermay, and some other young men, who "were fashionable loungers, calculated the chances of an important expedition, of which intelligence was expected every day. Lord M. with his usual tirade of feeling, begged them not to mention the subject, as the anxiety he felt on his son, Colonel Montolieu's account, who was engaged in it, rendered it insupportably distressing. Lord CastleWycomb, and one or two political characters, talked with rapture of Catalani, and with gravity of a sale at TattersalPs. When we ascended to the drawingrooms, I was dazzled with a new scene of splendour: about one hundred persons, of both sexes, were dispersed through a suit of rooms, whose walls presented views such as the windows of the palace of an Egyptian Bey, opening on the surrounding country, might give, if that view could include all the wonders of Upper and Lower Egypt. The Nile drew his mighty train among the colossal ruins of the greatest empire of the world. The paintings were divided into compartments, by obelisks, inscribed with hieroglyphicks; the lights were dispersed by bronze sphinxes, the corners of the seats, and the cornices of the draperies, were moulded into sphinxes—sphinxes supported the pediments of the chimney-pieces; and sphinxes formed the handles of the splendid vases that embellished it. Kotzebue was never more assailed with representations of this unclassical figure, in the French theatre, where he complains they formed or destroyed the entire decorations of the fabric. I was soon sated with gazing at every object but one; she was playing, and winning with a nonchalance that appeared to provoke her antagonists more than her success. She rose from the table— "What have you been doing, Lady M." said one of the party—" Winning, my lord, winning; Lady M. always wins," said the dowager, who was fanning her





self vehemently. "Losing, my lord, losing—m}' time, I mean, for I should have been at the opera half an hour ago. I have not been there yet, and I proposed going with Mrs. Bellamy's party. I have hardly had time to win a few guineas as you see. Mr. Bethel, will you come? We shall have room for you in Mrs. B.'s box; and as it is not to be uncommonly brilliant, you will lose less spectacle by not going to the pit."

As we passed Lady Castle-Wycomb's chair, she intimated her wish that I should return to a petit souper. In the anti-chamber, a large party were assembled for the opera. Lady M. manoeuvred with her usual skill, and we went together in her chariot. A long silence followed. u At length we are in London," said Lady M. "and I am repeating, ' son regime,' as has been said or sung. Now to avoid "thinking of myself, let us talk of you. I have spoken a vast deal of you to Lord Castle-Wycomb; amid all the recent changes he has kept his place, and his consequence. I really believe him to have some respect for my opinion. He does not look on me as a weak woman. I have made some impression on him, by my representation of your talents. The remainder must depend upon yourself; but never commit yourself to Lord Castle-Wycomb: make use of him, but let him never make use of you: he is a mere statesman: the inscription on Lewis the Fifteenth's statue, might be placed on his, if ever they build a statue to him, or hang him in effigy, which is much more probable, and equally useful, in point of notoriety—' sans foi,' sans loi, et sans entrailles? Exhibit whatever you possess of talent, but forbear to exhibit your information, if you have any. Make yourself important to him by a display of powers which he will find it his interest to produce; but when once produced, or introduced, let their exercise and direction be determined by your own principles: let him flatter himself that he is bearing a ' wren upon an eagle's wing,' till he finds that, 'you have soared above him.' The present ministry want talents, I do not mean in themselves, but in others: they require men of ardent mind6, and ambitious activity, such as yours was, when you imagined the reformation of Lady Montrevorpo.?sible." She sighed, as she spoke; and of .all she had said, only the impression of the sigh remained.





I was astonished, and almost entranced at my entrance into the most superb theatre, probably in Europe. By the judicious regulation relative to the dress of the company, at least the male part, 'we are. saved the disgust of seeing the splendor of the house contrasted and polluted by the plebeian appearance that is admitted at the theatres, where men of rank lounge into the boxes, and in the lobbies, in the slovenly costume of the livery stable. I listened to the first singer of her own, or perhaps any other age, with as much delightful attention as the perpetual prattlement of the party allowed me to enjoy. It was ludicrous to observe the caprices of fashion in the group. Mrs. Bellamy, who, her mother informed me, possessed hereditary taste and performance in music, affected a total insensibility of the most exquisite pleasures of sound; and, during the performance, drew a lace handkerchief, that was appended to the ringlet on the crown of the head, over her ears and neck, as the morning papers had announced " the fashionable chin-stay assumed by our elegantes, in consequence of the prevailing sore throats." While the rest of the party, who were totally indifferent to music, were in raptures, and perpetually interrupted their pleasure by applause, at the commencement of Sl da capo, or the midst of a cadence. "These are the people," whispered Lady M.—whose breath forms the fashionable atmosphere in which I live, poisonous as it is. All this is physically true, for you know Azote forms a principal part of the air we breathe, and what is worse, it is morally true, as I can prove by my present perverted existence. Take warning by me, Mr. Bethel—beware of false and dangerous notoriety—beware of such men as those around us, as Lord Roschamp, and Sir J. Orberry; and beware of such women as his wife."—" Is Sir John married?"— "Yes, he is married to a sister of Lord Castle- Wycomb"s; she was formerly married to an Italian Duca; she was in Italy, when I was there; she is a finished pupil of the Italian school. Her husband and she live in the most comfortable





VOL. III. F





manner possible; he never visits her, except to extort money from her, a kind of tax upon gallantry, which the liberality or the fear of her friends supplies her with; and in the mean time takes care that no actual ill usage allows her a pretext for a divorce, as that must conclude the traffic of profit and disgrace."—" Is such depravity possible?" —" Xook at her, and you'll not believe it, or forget it all:—she is just coming into the opposite box." I looked and beheld a female apparently not twenty, attired with the simplicity of-a-vestal, hardly a tinge of rouge on her cheek; her dark-brown ringlets disclosing her white, serene forehead, and arranged in a tuft on her fine formed head, whose bend made it resemble an antique bust of Attention. An air of shrinking, and timid, and playful innocence, pervading her whole frame, seemed to contend with the polished ease and elegance of fashion,





which she could assume in a moment. There was no glare; no flutter in her manner: she appeared anxious to-be left to the music, and to herself; and" the naive and childish attitudes by which she diversified her deep attention, and musical enthusiasm, exactly touched on the barriers between nature and grace. It was a relief to look on this object, when the mental and bodily eye alike were dazzled with the too brilliant and beautiful Lady Montrevor.

"I am quite wretched I came here to-night," said Lady M; u I beg pardon, Mr. Bethel, but I must request you to lend me your ears or your eyes, for the remainder of the night, if they have done waiting on Lady Delphina Orberry. I cannot think of being seen here by her and her parti/ to-night, 'Or any night but Saturday: this is not the night for me—my forces are not collected yet—Lord and Lady Westhampton are not returned from burying their bridal blushes at their villa in Kent: when they return, which will be to-morrow, I believe, we will charge at the head of all the family forces, and plant our standard in the very centre of the pit, by all the laws of fashionable warfare, where its memory will glitter long after I have ceased to glitter. At present, have the goodness to put me into my* carriage, and then do with yourself whatever you or Lady Delphina Orberry may please, for the remainder of the night."





Determined to convince her of the disengaged state of my feelings, I informed her of my intention to sup at Lady Castle-Wycomb's. "N'import," said she: "when I lost the power of example, I lost the power of advice." I was about to answer this painful language of perverted feeling, when we were obstructed by two male figures who stood apparently without any purpose,





directly in our way. They were Lord Roschamp and Sir John. They immediately assailed us with execrations of the opera—it was the most infernal lounge in the world-—nothing but the ballet tolerable. No, damme, the famously knowing night here, Bethel, was the bishop's night: we were the performers, and they the spectators--damme, but we gave them a most famous exhibition: the instruments never gave so pleasant a sound to my ears as when they all went crashing together, mixed with the lights, and the squalls of the performers."—" Mr. B. I must get into the carriage, before Lord R. thrice ' slays the slain'"—" But was not your Ladyship most infernally annoyed by this unmeaning kiud of horrid screaming, that they have here—-not like English at all, damme."—" Yes, and whenever I am infernally annoyed, I always try to make my escape, you see,





as soon as possible." "Bethel, my famous fellow, I shall certainly call on you to-morrow: I mean to show you something of a more knowing lounge than the opera—I'll put you up to Bond Street, and a lounge in the betting rooms at New Market—and all that, damme. I'll certainly be with you to-morrow, Bethel, damme. There is nothing I like so much as putting up a fresh one to a knowing touch. Heh—-Orberry, I think we'll have Bethel one of us."

They both laughed, and we passed on. At that moment I was amost impelled to forbid their visit: something between false politeness and false shame prevented me. Among the croud of loungers, a lady, who appeared to be retiring, passed us. 4< Who is that—she's a damned knowing figure," said Lord R. who still lounged near us. "That, upon my soul, I believe—upon my soul I do not know Yes, by heavens it is my wife—





yes, that's my wife, Lady Delphiua Orberry." A slight bow of recognition passed between the fashionable husband and wife. "If she is approaching, I will not retreat," said Lady M.—" To conceal the want of forces by courage, is one of the first manoeuvres of generalship." We paused, and the haughty bend, and striking attitude of Lady Montrevor, were again contrasted with the simple and diffident grace of Lady D. Orberry, that seemed to " blush at its own praise."

"Drive to Berkley Square 1 am

so little one of us yet, that I have a mind to play le bon mari, and go home to Mrs. Bethel." '» Since I have removed you from Lady Delphina's sphere, I am not afraid of the attractions of any other; but have the goodness to accompany me as far as Berkley Square." "How can you speak thus to me — you who know who know"





"Yes, I know you to be an enthusiast; one who feels too much, and who conceals nothing he feels: I saw your eyes— I saw your soul to-night. You must acquire a little more addressb—an intercourse with the most worthless must teach it to you; people, by appearing to hide their feelings, get the credit of having something to hide. In life you may meet few characters, but you will find every one wears a mask selon le costume. Apropos of both masks and characters, Lady Delphina Orberry is a Messalinain the habit of a vestal; she is a dangerous, a dreadful woman; she is the only enemy I ever had, and her enmity is not half so dangerous as her love. Ob, my Lord, beware of that, it is a monster that doth mock the meat it feeds on."

We were in Berkley Square, as she spoke, where splendor and luxury, and exquisite wines, and music, protracted the supper till a late hour in the morning. On my return, Athanasia was





asleep. Madame Hahl's novel of Delphine was under her pillow, and her eyelids, even in sleep, were stained with the tears which a false sensibility had excited by its perusal. ''

We were lingering over a late breakfast the next morning, and Athanasia was inquiring about her sisters, and whether I thought any of them as beautiful as their mother; and I was endeavouring to answer her evasively, when a curricle, in which, no way distinguishable from each other, Lord Roschamp and his groom were seated, with two out-riders, stopt at the door, and the next moment his lordship was in the drawing-room, sans crpologie. "Mrs. Bethel, I'm delighted to see you in London—upon my soul you look enchantingly---want a little of Lady M's rouge though: never saw her look so famously lovely as last night; she's quite the rage again—quite the knowing thing to know her now. All London is at Lady CastleWycomb's door, since that nervous cold she had, or said she had, on her arrival: upon my soul, I believe she has a patent for beauty-—she ought to have had her daughters names included. Come, Bethel, we're just in time, half past three is the hour for Bond Street. Damme, you'll be most amazingly astonished; you, who were never up to any thing of the kind before.'' I told him Mrs. Bethel was an invalid, and I did not wish to leave her: I had at least no wish to accompany him. "Not leave your wife—-damme, you'll both be in every caricature shop in London. How do you like that curricle? It's amazingly knowing built. Come, I see you are devilish shy about your dress; but no matter for that: you can be up to a curricle, if you are not up to a pavementlounge. I'll whirl you to all my people of business, and you'll be a devilish knowing figure to-morrow; only tie a





silk handkerchief about your neck, and just let the neck of your shirt appear above it, and muffle yourself up in a great coat; for, damme, if the building of that coat is not quite scandalous." I still resisted, though such a Cicerpni as Lord R. was the very thing for a fashionable lounger; but Athanasia telling me that her people of business would occupy her whole morning, and that she would probably take whatever carriage might call on her to La Tour's, who never went out to any one, I hesitated, and Lord R. dragged me away, after informing Mrs. Bethel, that if she did the knowing thing, she would never employ any but male artists about her person: male milliners, male dress-makers, toute k rage, as your fashionable mother and all your fashionable sisters can tell you."

In a few minutes I was whirled, according to promise, to all the people of business, who were employed by fashiona-" bles: the complete equipment of a Bond Street lounger was bespoke; Lord R. was particularly attentive to the construction of the hat, twentv of which he examined, and at last selected a "knowing slouch;" but hesitated a great while, as the importance of the cause demanded, between the surtout's being furnished with velvet cuffs and facings, or with a deep border of fur round the perpendicular collar and the wrists; the artist declaring, that the latter was much more expensive and elegant, seemed to determine him, and the fur was bespoke. "Now," said Lord R. "we must bespeak a full dress, as it is impossible to be ' un konnete homme,' without sometimes going to those infernal parties which our women of fashion give." I told him I had brought all I probably should want with me. "Heh —damme, that's a good one—brought your wardrobe from Dublin: sell it to an old clothes-man, then, my fine fellow. Do you imagine that such a costume as your's last night would do for a fashionable party?—your waistcoat three inches too long, when a waistcoat is hardly more than three inches in all:— the buttons at the knees of your breeches so straight and lateral, instead of beingalmost across the knee; and the strings tied at the side, instead of nearly in the front; and the coat with that short waist and high collar, instead of buttoning below your waistcoat, and fitting on your shoulders like a woman's shawl.'* I asked was it possible he had time to reconnoitre my appearance so distinctly during the short interval of our meeting the preceding night?" Time ! — Oh, damme, time enough, I have nothing else to do with my time. And along with your wardrobe, I suppose you have brought the family equipage from the Castle, and mean to petrify us in Hyde Park, with those famous old cattle you had in Ireland." I pleaded guilty.— "Good heavens, could you endure to let your wife drive in such a caravan to her sister's doors, or clash with their splendid carriages in Bond Street! By heavens, they are a famously knowing set, quite up to every thing—no women live in a more dashing style; and now that they are re-inforced by their mother, who is an host of fashion and beauty in herself, you will look damned insignificant among them, unless you have every thing in the most knowing style. I'll shew you to the first coachmaker's in London—has all the birthday business; and, Oh!—damme, I see you could not have done without me at all.





This was too like a scene which I had once before acted with Deloraine on another stage, and which had ended so tragically. However, I considered that I was. now in London, that to have a carriage was necessary, and to have a fashionable one equally so; at all events I determined Athanasia should not have cause to repine at the splendor of her sisters. We were now in Bond Street, which is as inferior to Dame Street, its corresponding street in Dublin, in regularity and splendor and spaciousness, as it is ;superior to it, or any other I could imagine, in the concourse of business and passengers, and the tumult and magnificence of the equipage. Twice we passed Lady Castle Wycomb's carriage, which appeared to have no other purpose there than to display its fashionable mistress, whose rouge was visible through all the fog of a wintry evening in London in Bond Street. Another figure sat back in the carriage, applying a glass to the objects as they passed, in an attitude of fashionable vacancy. Lord R. who was manoeuvring with his utmost skill, through the blockade of vehicles of every description, now exclaiming that he saw Orberry on the pavement, that it was choaked up with the loungers, and just the time, and just the party to charge among them—,! I make it' * principle never to take the lounge inBond Street, with less or more than three"—jumped from the curricle; I followed his example, and placed between him and Sir John Orberry, found myself enclosed in a crowd, to which all crowds I had ever encountered in Dubblin, were trifling.





By a lady crossing from her carnage to a shop, before which several carriageswere entangled by their wheels, we were at length stopped on the edge of a pavement close to a covonetted equipage, which the driver was vainly attempting to conduct into the mid current that was in motion. The carriage was particularly low, I looked up, and found my head in contact with Lady Castle-Wycomb's." She laughed—*'o.Almost cast away in the storm of Bo&oukreet," said she. "He has got an experienced pilot at least," said Lady M. who was in the carriage. Ashamed of this trfling, I would have passed on; but Lord R. assuring me it was quite the knowing thing to lounge beside a fashionable equipage, detained me by the arm, while he continued a whispering conversation with her ladyship, his arm resting on the window. "I have just been with Mrs. Bethel," said Lady C.—" She looks vastly interesting. She has promised to dine at Berkley Square, I hope we shall have the pleasure ofintroducing you to your new relations, Lord and Lady Westhampton; they have just arrived in London; if your pilot steers well, I hope we shall see you about seven." I bowed, for I was anxious to do something beside lounging in Bond Street.





It was near five o'clock before I extricated myself from my companions. I entered the drawing roomj-and found Atbanasia immersed iip?Jinery, which the whole morning had been spent in examining and purchasing: "Will you be angry with me for all this extravagance?" said Athanasia, who was adjusting an enormous lace veil before the glass. "No, my love, it reconciles me to my own. I have been importuned to the purchase of a thousand superfluities myself." "How good, how indulgent you are," said she, approaching with a sudden impulse of softness, "I ought to love you—How I ought to love you!" "Love me, my darling, for any reason but that you ought to love me." "Is love voluntary? You should not teach me so." "Why not?" "Because you appear to me to talk quite out of character,—All the husbands I read of, are stern, rigid beings, with nothing but lessons of duty in their mouths, and all the horrors of it in their faces and lives; but you—you have a sad and gentle carelessness about you, as if you did not care for me, and did not care to shew it; and still you are so kind and indulgent; if I had not married you, I must have loved you!" "The practice of love is always sweeter than its metaphsics," said I, kissing her. For her blandishments had obtained an influence over me, which a married man often feels to be superior to that obtained by merit or affection. Her spirits revived, and she amused me during our progress to Berkley Square, with the singular character of Lojd Westhampton; and Lady Castle-Wycomb's singular skill in managing him in her negotiations for Miss Montolieu. Lord W. was, in the language of the fashionable world, quite a savage and a bore; that is, he was utterly averse from its manners and habits, ludicrously jealous of his station and responsibility, as a peer; and as ignorant of the part of life to which his recent rank had introduced him, as a heing who had been only intimate with its utter reverse, and passed the prime of life amid hardship and vulgarity.—Rough as he was, Lady C. however, and her sister, saw his "Visage in his wealth;" all the Montrevor family had made a point of visiting and noticing him. to exculpate themselves from a consciousness, or a share in the persecution he had undergone from their father. The man was captivated and flattered by the attention of polished and beautiful women; but he recoiled from their dissipation, and loudly reproached their immodesty. Every one, therefore, who could sacrifice their feelings to the hopes of a coronet, and 2,5,000/. a year, tried to accommodate themselves to the unaccommodating taste of the Earl. In this struggle, however, Miss Montolieu instructed and encouraged by her sister, was fairly





triumphant. She encountered a large party of fashionables, where he was present, with her robe up to her throat, and her sleeves down to her elbows. She preferred going to hear Incledon and Mountain, the very week that all the fashionables in London were dying with rapture, at the Opera where Catalani had made her first appearance; and she fed and caressed an enormous Newfoundland dog, which any other female would have fled from; and which his Lordship always introduced into company, together with a story of its having saved bis life.—When some years ago, "being a little in liquor, d'ye see, and walking the decks, with my weather eye almost closed up, I soused overboard, and should have gone to the bottom as plump as lead, but for Neptune here."

The contest was soon decided between art and perseverance, and simplicity and security. Lord Westbampton proposed for Miss M—; but qualified his proposal by a very extraordinary impulse of humanity; "for damme," said he, "but I think I owe the poor girl something, after depriving her of her rank and fortune, and leaving her dependant, as one may say, upon her sister and your Lordship." Lady C. however, was to be indemnified for the damage of her furniture, and the injuries done to her fashionable reputation, by the intrusion of his Lordship and Neptune into her drawing-rooms, by Lady W's. opening a faro-bank, on her marriage, in Soho Square, in the profits of which, her managing ladyship expected largely to participate: "For," said she to Athanasia, " Lord CastleWycomb, who is the oddest creature in the world, and will never give up some particular points, has declared, that considering his public station, &c. &c. &c. he never can consent to my keeping a





faro-table in Berkley Square; so to avoid his diplomatic tirade, I have got Lady W. in consideration of the assistance I afforded her establishment, to make her Lord consent to her keeping a faro-bank; and we are so much together, it's just the same thing. Now you must not tell my mother of all this; for though she is quite the rage now with her wit and her beauty; yet she never was up to any thing of that kind. She never was completely one of us—there was always something fastidious and shirking about her, when things came to a point; she appeared to have joined us more from vanity than inclination."

At seven o'clock, we were again greeted by the same splendid circle in Berkley Square, and the task of bowing round it was hardly concluded, when Lord and Lady Westhampton were announced. LordW's appearance was ex ctly adapted to his character j his exterior was thatof a Commodore Trunnion; but unlike the commodore, he hated his professional element, and never fpoke of his former hardships, but with sincere and honest aversion. Lady W. paid her compliments with uneasy expedition, and appeared anxious that her Lord and Neptune should be seated as soon as possible. Lord and Lady M. had not yet quitted their dressing-rooms, and as they had not yet seen Lord and Lady W. it was necessary to renew the ceremony of introduction on their entrance. Lady M. entered first, and received her new relative with a dignity that proved a complete command of her ludicrous feelings. Lord M. approached, and Lord W. who expected that the man who had persecuted and injured him, would feel some degree of diffidence at his sight, was so disconcerted and astonished at the courtly facility with which the unblushing peer approached him,





that hastily withdrawing his hand, and exclaiming, "Oh! damme, this is too bad !" he seated himself again in visible displeasure. Lady. M. who wished to spare her daughter's feelings, or to disguise her own laughter, lamented her cold, which had prevented the pleasure she had purposed herself, &c. &c. Lord W. who had transferred his attention from Lord M. to her Ladyship, muttered audibly—" A glorious vessel, by heavens! but mounts French colours like all the rest.". \

Dinner was announced, and Lord W. after recommending his dog to the care of his servant, determined to distinguish himself, by some signal act of politesse; and rushing into the circle, seized hold of Lady M's. hand, and led her down with a perfect unconsciousness of the violation of eticpiette, while Lord C. shrugging his shoulders in the back ground, presented his hand to the young Countess; and ar

VOL. III. G





rived in the dinner-room, only time enough to see the incorrigible Lord W. seated almost at the head of the table, beside his beautiful mother-in-law, and enquiring what she chose, before any one but himself was seated. On seeing a number of ladies approach, however, he quitted his station, and placing himself beside me at the lower end of the table, did as much honor to the French maxim of " Place aux Dames" as the first breeding would have done more happily.—He sat next me at table, and I was abundantly amused by the mixture of matter with (almost) madness in his conversation.— "Now," said he, "you must not be surprised at my talking to you quite pleasant and affable; for though I am a lord, and you a commoner, yet as we are brothers-in-law, we should be quite easy and friendly d'ye see—not that you should be cast down at being a commoner—seeing, as how---so is many a





man; and so I was myself once, thanks to my smiling and bowing friend there— (Lord M.)—but what of that, you see I am all among lords and ladies now— and my wife—my Lady W. there as bright, and as gay as any of them; for what I say is this—and I'll stick to the maxim, that peers and peeresses, and all that belongs to them, should be quite different from the rest of the world, and have every thing about them grand and handsome; but nothing mean, or light, or trifling about their conduct d'ye see. For why, it is just as if it was at sea in an engagement, where every one obeys the signal vessel, and acts according to the instructions issued from that, unless it be for sheering off, or the like of that, which a seaman never likes to obey; but he must though; for as I was saying, at sea, every thing depends upon distinctions of ranks, and so it must at land; and if the higher officers desert their d act too like





0 stark naked, the vessel—

his observasociety ought ished benefits an merely an

me tell you, --that dress is ;at effect upon a only see your How you into

1 wing-roomslie ; and it has self. Damme, a officer, I felt leek upou me, to get drunk, age in it, d'ye je reminded of sst way to reance; because, ;st."—" Would





your Lordship," said Lord C. "because I am a knight of the gai ter, insist upon my always appearing in the full robes of the order ?"—Why, if your Lordship always feels that you are one, there would be no occasion certainly; but damme, if I know that man on earth who never requires to remember himself."-—" Lord

W. the honor of wine with you."

"Why, my lord, as to that, I do like a good glass, when men are all sitting quietly and sociably together; but as for all this drinking, I do . not understand or take to it at all, because I think dinner rather a time for eating, d'ye see; however, if I must take wine, I'll take it with some of those ladies yonder; because a peer ought always to shew attention to the ladies ; and I do not like the present fashion of speaking to them, and pushing them about, with no more respect than if they were cabin boys. Now you must tell me, for I have taken something; of a likin<r





to you, though you have such a fairweather face—you must tell me something about those ladies, for though they are all my wife's sisters, damme, if I'd know one from another, under those masks of paint that they wear. Who is that pale, mild, pretty looking creature, with her hair all done in that fantastic manner?" I told him that was Mrs. Bethel, and the next Mrs. Bellamy, Lady Invermay, Lady Castle-Wycomb: my eyes fell last on Lady Montrevor, but I did not utter her name. "By heavens, they all just look like a parcel of actresses; only them one would pity, because they cannot help themselves; they must do it for bread, and if they get it by making themselves spectacles, why it is the town is to blame, for encouraging them to go naked, with only a bit of gilt paper on them here and there. Why, now I ask you, Mr. Bethel, for that I find is your name, do you think it is





decent or proper, or the like of that, for an English peeress, and the mother of a large family —and, damme, she can't he young neither—by heavens her timbers must be pretty well seasoned, to go without a rag on but that glittering gauze, in which there is nothing like comfort or decency, and her bosom and arms perfectly naked? For those ornaments on them she wears for pride, and not for use, d'ye see; and that sparkling trumpery, just on the crown of her head, like a queen in a play; and those ringlets dangling from it, just like a girl of fifteen; and as beautiful and glorious a sight as she is, and damme, if ever I saw such another, except the launch of a man of war; yet, somehow, if she was rigged more like a woman of high rank, and a wedded wife, and a mother—aye, and a grandmother too, I would like her better, and she would like herself better; for, d'ye mind, when she is not speaking and putting out all her features on a cruize for admiration, there is something like melancholy in them. Damme, now, if I drink wine with one of them, except my Lady Westhampton, when it comes to my turn."





Disgusted with his strictures, or with the object he had chosen, I turned away, and for the remainder of the time, endeavoured to extort something like conversation from Mrs. Bellamy, who sat next me. I imputed her silence and languor to pride —it was the offspring of better feelings. Bellamy, with powers to distinguish himself" in society, and with a strong affection for his wife and child, was a gambler, an hopeless and incurable gambler: his unhappy wife had ceased to remonstrate, but she had not ceased to feel. With bitterness of heart, she saw herself blazing in precarious splendor, and reflected that it might iri a moment be exchanged for the gloom of a prison. The





;

late.change in the ministry, in depriving him of his seat in parliament, had deprived him of his only security against the most dreadful consequences of his infatuation. As these circumstances of misery developed themselves slowly, I could hardly believe myself surrounded by the first characters in the first kingdom in the world; blazing in splendor, and feasting with luxury : I could hardly conceive, that the magnificence I beheld could be allied with actual misery. I can give no other name to the situation of the Bellamy's, or to the situation of the Marquis and Marchioness of Invermay, who were literally living on an allowance that hardly amounted to a fifth of their great but involved income; an allowance made by an agent to whom their almost ruined affairs had been trusted, and who had undertaken to retrieve them only on the condition of confining the careless peer and his dissU pated wife, to an allowance; who supplied the deficiencies of their income, by contracting debts so enormous, that the recovery of their affairs could only besucceeded by fresh involvements. Lord and Lady C. since their marriage, twice on the eve of actual bankruptcy, now saw it again approaching, without a possibility of prevention; and the speculation on Miss M.'s marriage with Lord W. and the expedient of the pharo-bank, to be opened at Westhampton-house, were all that retrieved the sinking spirits of her ladyship, or of her numerous and fashionable, and importunate creditors.





Such was the situation of this fashionable family, of whom Lord Montrevor, whose selfishness had always preserved him from involvements, was by far the least distressed, and who now looked round upon his daughters married splendidly in the language of the world, and his. sons distinguished by professional





talent and eminence, without a single sensation but that of gratified vanity, and luxury determined to sate itself with renewed opportunities of indulgence. The ladies had hardly retired, when Lord W., eager to display his consequence to his political relations, began to inform them how he proposed qualifying himself for the arduous duty of a Patrician senator. "For, my Lord," addressing himself to Lord C. " damme if I understand what is meant by calling us pillars of the State,, when we lend no support to it; so d'ye see I consented to pass the last week in all the follies of a new-married man, such as driving about the country in my new carriage with my LadyW., not sitting upon the box or dicky, or whatever you call it, being as how I think that quite scandalous and improper, for a peeress I mean; for damme if ever I saw a poor sailor's wife, going down mayhap to see her sick husband in an hospital, and with no better seat than the outside of a stage coach, if I did not pity her from my soul in bad weather and the like of that; but to see a peeress going about in that extravagant manner is quite out of character—so I and my Lady W. sat in the same carriage always, and went about the country with the windows down, and the like, which was very pleasant for one week. But it is my intention, now that I am a peer, and to sit in debate upon the welfare of this great nation, to qualify myself a little, being as how my youth was past in quite another kind of way, as some of us here know, and the cause of it, but no more of that; so d'ye see I mean to get a great parcel of books together that wise men have written upon the constitution, such as my Lord Coke's and Blackstone's, and the like, and a work which some Frenchman* wrote





upon the British Constitution, which, damme, I don't see how any Frenchman could pretend to understand! and I'll read these over day and night, till I have got the sense of them d'ye see into my head: and I'll get some clever linguist to teach me Latin, and my lady is to teach me French, for, hy Heavens! I'd knock down any French monseer that came near me with his damn'd jabber, though now that I am a peer it is necessary to have a little of it."

Mr. Bellamy and Lord Invermay, by this time, had in vain applied their handkerchiefs to their mouths to suppress their laughter, but Lord M. determined to conciliate his rugged sonin-law by a coup d'essai, intreated him to proceed with his plan, and commended every part of it with the most painful politeness. "Why then, damme, if I say another word, for I know a joke's a joke, as well as e'er a landsman or courtier among you; and if ye all think it so damn'd ridiculous for a man among his friends to acknowledge the defects of his education, and to think himself responsible d'ye see for the duties of his high station, why then, though the laugh is on your side, the sense mayhap is on mine."





By this time Lord Castle-Wycomb, who sat next me, depressing his voice, had made some trifling observations on the state of the weather when I was in Ireland—the weather introduced the produce of the land, the agriculture, the state of the peasantry, and the difference between their condition and that of the similar class in England. He constructed the conversation so, that his part of it was merely inquiry, and mine detail. I saw his purpose, but I forgot my caution, or Lady M's. I was ambitious to shew him that Irishmen were not the degraded beings that England has a right of concluding from their scandalous desertion of their duties and their country; I was ambitious to shew him an Irishman was not destitute of information, or dead to national feeling and spirit. I spoke of Ireland, her depressed trade, her neglected populace, her renegade nobility, her dissipated, and careless, and unnational gentry. I spoke of the country as deteriorated by a religion, which, in every country where it had prevailed, had extinguished all spirit, but the spirit of superstition—a religion alike unfavorable to morality, industry, and improvement—a religion, which by establishing an internal principle of operation superior to law or government, must be intrinsically and invincibly hostile to law and government, and compounding for the duties of a divine system by a prescription of its forms, destroyed the very essentials of religion. I spoke of the first and fairest countries in Europe destitute of cultivation, and degraded in their national spirit and character by its influence—a lesson which had not yet made us wise. I spoke of Ireland peculiarly suffering from its influence, because in other countries it was connected with the government, and therefore taught subordination to it; in Ireland it was not avowedly but inveterately at war with the civil establishment, and must remain so till it had assimilated it to itself. I spoke of the curse and reproach of Ireland being the want of national education, a want which must always remain, while the priests of that religion in many countries anathematize those who send their children to Protestant schools, and those to whom they are sent; yet are utterly averse to any system of national education themselves, and indeed in general incapable of framing or executing one; so that the children of the peasantry are sent by hundreds to an hovel where some squalid wretch, for a miserable pittance, teaches them to mangle the English language without religious instruction, or selection of books, or any species of discipline or order, literary or moral. I spoke of ministers being so immersed in the details and officials of business, as to neglect, not unfrequently, its principle and object; that Ireland was not a country to be civilized by temporizing concessions, and partial provisions: that nothing could insure her safety or welfare, but diminishing the power that lacerated and convulsed her entrails, or establishing it altogether; that that power was ambitious and would not easily be satisfied, was strong and could not be easily resisted; that the influence that contended with it, and hoped to contend successfully, must be directed to the minds, not the persons or properties of its professors; that the latter policy was equally illegal and unsuccessful, as oppression only tends to heighten the merit of suffering, or the dignity of resistance, and a loose and incoherent mass may be crushed into coalition by vehement pressure; that they who hoped to diminish the evils of Ireland must begin by diminishing the influence of the Romish priests on the minds of the people, by procuring them independent support, and not suffering mutual confidence to be strengthened by mutual services, must facilitate the diffusion of knowledge (an event always unfavorable to that religion) by the promotion of national education; and by, in some manner, restraining the desertion of the country by its higher orders, in some measure procure a balance to that bloated and overweening majority which always exceeded us in population, and now threatened to equal us in opulence and power. I traced without any hesitation the increasing magnitude of the evils by which my unhappy country was overborne to the fatal measure of the Union—a measure which had diminished her population, impoverished her metropolis, depressed her internal business (in the single article of printing I instanced the fact of the Dublin press now being kept open only by pamphlets and newspapers), and above all, by encouraging, and in a manner rendering necessary, the non-residence of her nobility, had completely suspended the great and beginning work of national humanization, by removing those on whom it must depend equally for its principle and its operation. I observed that this fatal measure could not probably be now recalled, but might certainly be alleviated.





I was proceeding to speak to the point of its having been attended with all the evils that had been foreseen, but not one of the advantages which had been promised, viz. the equalization of commercial and other privileges, which had not been obtained; the importation of English





improvements and English natives, which had not heen obtained; and perfect security from internal commotion and danger, which had not been obtained—inasmuch as on the 23d of July, 1803, a troop of rebels marched within half a furlong of the Castle of Dublin, the seat of a military governor. I was proceeding to speak to these and other points, when I was checked by the total silence with which my observations were received, and by the reflexion that then they could expect no better reception— I bowed and was silent.

I am by no means giving the language which I used on this occasion— I am sensible it was much more animated and picturesque, and such as probably .to leave no unfavorable impression of the mind of him who uttered it—I have only retained the substance of what I said. After a few atempts at desultory conversation, the party separated; as we retired, Lord C. who never appeared in her ladyship's drawing-room in the evenings, drew me aside, and, after a few favorable expressions, requested that I would favor him with my company at breakfast in his apartment the following morning, as the pressure of business occupied every other part of his day. /





The assembly in the drawing-room was unusually numerous and splendid:Lady Castle-Wycomb was fashionable, Lady M. was still more so; but, superior to all other attractions, the high play which distinguished Lady C.'s assemblies, ensured them a brilliant and tumultuous croud, whenever her doors were opened. The business of the night had begun, when I entered the drawingrooms: every face was cloudy with-deliberation, and that mixture of hope and fear, with which every gambler commences the contest. The few loungers, who were unemployed at first, were soon tempted, by the ardor of the scene, to





engage in bets; success or disappointment alternately induced them to augment these from trifles to sums which made rouleaus disappear in a moment; and in a short time the betters were as ardent and as clamorous as the players.

At one of the highest tables, stimulated with all the passions of the place, animated with success, and increasing the vexation of the losers, by the perfect, but laborious ease of her manner, and triumph of her wit, Lady M. burst on my eyes, as I entered—I withdrew them. I knew at that moment she was as miserable as she was dazzling, stifling the struggles of her mind, and the reproaches of her heart, in the intoxications of vanity, to which wretchedness had driven her, and from which augmented wretchedness could not drive her away. Never had the world such a victim—I knew her heart—I knew its principles, its pride, its agony at the very moment when every feature was radiant with apparent joy and splendor almost beyond human brightness. I wished for Mr. Corbett — I wished for some one with an angel's office, and an angel's power to call back this unhappy woman from a course into which the want of domestic happiness and early stability had driven her, and in which she still persisted from pride and despair: but who could have read pride and despair in those angel-features, warm with artificial beauty, and sparkling with artificial joy!





I knew not the cause of her peculiar gaiety of triumph that night, till I learnt from Lord Invermay, who was a kind of fashionable diable boiteux to me, as we lounged through the rooms, that her unsuccessful adversaries were

the Duchess of and the Rees, an

enormous figure enveloped in scarlet velvet and blazing with diamonds, whose ill-luck and boisterous complaints ludicrously contrasted the airy triumph of her opponent. I looked round for Athanasia, she had retired to the apartment of Madame. I was vexed at this dereliction of herself—I was elevated by the splendor around me—I wished her to partake of it, and to be seen to partake of it, instead of wasting her hours in the society of a woman whose principles appeared to have poisoned her mind, and whose conversation generally left her bathed in the tears of a vitiated sensibility. I took the worst way possible of concealing my vexation—I accepted a proposal of Mr. Bellamy's to engage in a game at piquet at the corner of a vacant card-table; from which, just as supper was announced, I rose a, winner of seventy guineas, which appeared to be paid with much less pain than it was received; the stake, however, my antagonist had named himself.





At supper the party was increased by the addition of Lady Delphina Orberry, and her party, from the Opera. They were in raptures; but the slight and discriminating praises of Lady Delphina, ushered by a diffident apology, and breathed in tones of languid melody, made a deeper impression on me than almost the sounds they praised. '. .' From the moment of her entrance Lady M. redoubled her efforts to delight and to dazzle: Lady Delphina retreated from the contest, but, like the Parthian, was most dangerous in retreat. Her soft, seducing manner, her timid silence, her melting whispers, and her warm and delicate applause of the wit and talents which the whole room echoed with applauses of, almost divided the victory. I could not believe her the dreadful, the dangerous woman Lady M. had said she was—she was seated next me. "How exquisitely beautiful she is, more beautiful than ever I think; by what happy exemption has she escaped the haggard look





VOL. III. H





of dissipation, which has even stole over her daughters' lovely faces. Exquisite sensibility, I perceive, is the greatest enemy to beauty. Poor Lady M.—I am glad she has forgot—or forgot to feel— the melancholy events at the early part of her life: they would have destroyed any one but her. Then she succeeded so well, in getting those appointments for her sons, and marrying her daughters, no sacrifices could be too great for such services to her family. Then she is always so successful at play—so brilliant, and always seems so happy. I really think her more lovely to-night, than when I first saw her twenty years past at Rome. If you wish to see her as she was then, and judge from the comparison, I have a picture of her, by an Italian artist, at my house in South Audley Street: come and see it, and I am convinced you will be of my opinion. She was rather thinner, and did not wear quite so much





rouge and pearl-powder; but whatever she wears becomes her. Will you come and see the picture to-morrow?" This was addressed to me with that soft simplicity of manner that made every thing Lady Delphina said and did, naive and unsuspicious and casual.

Week followed week in careless dissipation—no day differed from another, except such diversity as fashionable indolence admits. My mornings were generally passed with Lord C. W. who dismissed me with such praises of my talents and spirit, as were even then offensive to me; declared that I must distinguish myself; that we wanted such men; that my ideas only required a little more maturity, and my feelings a little more regulation, &c. &c. and then fixed me for some fashionable party of dissipation, the following night.

From the ministerial and political dinners, I perceived I was studiously exeluded—the exclusion was no mortification to me: with the pride of a man conscious of untried capacity, I wished not to seek, but to be sought for.— I wished them to think me an Henry Prince of Wales-, till they saw me in the field. The mornings were passed after leaving Lord C. W. in resolutions to devote some hours to study, or in search of some distinguished characters in literature or in public life; resolutions perpetually broke by a summons, or rather a subpoena, to some exhibition, where I could see nothing but the rouged cheeks and haggard eyes of the gamesters of the preceding night; or a fashionable lecture, where I could hear nothing but the prattlement of the listeners; or a sale, where, too often urged by the impulse of the place, I engaged in a species of auction-gambling, which speculates on the ambition of your adversary, till you find yourself incumbered by a





profusion of articles which you do not want, purchased for a sum you cannot spare. Bond Street occupied the remainder of the day, till it was time to dress for a dinner at one of my fashionable brothers-in-law, and the evenings subsided into the gloomy silence of deliberate gaming.

Fatal as this mode of life was to my peace and principles, the infatuation of its splendour and luxury was resistless. I lived among fashion and beauty; among those who had always the power of stimulating my senses, if not of gratifying the mind; but both powers were so united in Lady M.; she had so much the art of giving variety and poignancy to the insipidity of fashion; and making even caprice and vanity nouvelle and recherche; she was still so brilliant in crouds, and so interesting in solitude to me, who knew what

solitude must be to her, that no hour seemed even mispent, on its retrospect, that had been spent with her.





It was now fashionable for all who admired wit, or its reputation, to attend her dejeune in Berkeley Square; that is, crowd to her dressing-room, from twelve till three; apply your glass, when any distinguished face entered the room; disarrange the new publications that were scattered on the pier-tables and chimney-piece, without perusing them; press into the circle that surrounded her; tell the trifles of the day, in a whisper, or catch some halfheard, and not half-understood, bon mot of her Ladyship's, whose repetition gave you the credit of having been at the ruelle of the modern Aspasia. Lady C. W. actually neglected, in her own apartment, was at length obliged to join forces; and, by her volubility and dashing manner, effect something like a division in her own favor; but Lady C. W. had resources of notoriety, to which Lady M. never could have stooped. Her beau





tiful villa, near Brighton, the designs for decorating which had been furnished by the pencil of a noble amateur, was still unfinished; the designs enveloped in a superb port-folio, had lain on her dressing-room table, till every one was weary of gazing at them, and her ladyship was weary of being asked when the whole charming thing would be finished ?"— Lord C. had actually interdicted all further operations of the artists at Brighton. It was in vain that her ladyship remonstrated, and intreated; and, at length, swore in very audible terms, she would be revenged. No brain but a female's could have devised such a revenge. Lord C. like many others who have no children, was somewhat impatient of his misfortune, to which the lightest allusion offended him irretrievably. Her ladyship, like many other fashionable wives, had professed herself extremely happy at the exemption from a





state of peril and suffering, and confinement;' but now she assumed quite another language—deplored her misfortune and his lordship's, in language of the most delicate grief; declared there could be no felicity in life, without children; and to console herself for the privation, fitted up an elegant baby-nursery within her dressing-room, decorated a fashionable hammock, with sattin furniture, and placed in it, half-buried in lace, an enormous wax baby; while all the ornaments of this fanciful nursery were heightened by groups of genii strewing poppies, classic deities watching the slumbers of infancy, &c. &c. from the emblematic pencil of Hope. Her friends were all admitted into the apartment—compelled to commend her taste, and to pity her misfortune; and to make the ridicule insupportable, a female attendant, with the infant in her arms, accompanied her ladyship in the





carriage in the Park, Bond Street, &c. Lord' C. was distracted; her ladyship was perfectly calm: he forbad the carriages leaving the stable, when her ladyship ordered them for her ponpet. Her ladyship went in her friend, the Rees's barouche. At length a kind of pacific negotiation commenced between them; the conditions of which no one was acquainted with; but the result I learned too soon.

While this etourderie lasted, the effect was very perceptible on the loungers in Lady M.'s dressing-room: every creature flew to the nursery, except the scavans, whose faces were pointed out to me by Mr. Bellamy, a man in whom the fatal rage of gaming, though it had destroyed the habit of better things, had neither destroyed their power nor their taste. "Thatyoung man with the striking appearance and dishevelled hair," said he, "is the celebrated writer, who produces epic poems, as others would sonnets. I am sure his appearance here is quite involuntary and irksome, for no man ever had a more democratic mind; but its democracy was not vulgar or atrocious; his attachment to it was rather an attachment to a sound than a system: a sound to which he annexed an ardent but confused meaning, and of which he has, probably by tins time, discovered the emptiness and fallacy."—" I have read his poems," said I, " to me they strongly bear the marks of a mind forced and flattered into an early maturity; a man who versified before he had read or thought, and who still continues to versify, without often calling on either reading or thought for assistance. He certainly possesses imagination, but never was imagination less purified by taste: his embellishments are grotesque and laboured, and voluminous: they strike by exaggeration, and do not shine, but glare. His sentiments are ge





nerally pure, but it is prosaic and common-place morality, in the bloated and uneasy garb of a versified homily. His descriptions and manners are certainly pure; and perhaps no other praise can be compared to that which S—th—y has deserved, of having given to the public, in early youth, a mass of pages, from which modesty would hot wish to expunge a single line: were I the gentleman's friend, 1 would wish him to alter his line of study. His appears to be a mind that has adopted its habits of reading too much from a fantastic and misguided choice. I believe his literary education has had no restraint, and no adviser. His mind, if I may judge from his notes, appears to be inveterately depraved, by a course of reading which has starved his understanding, and fed his fancy with the most morbid food. The legends of superstition, antient and modern; the gleanings of monkish fabu





lists; the researches of mystic science; the wonders of the invisible world, however related, or however attested, all that 'fables yet have feigned, or fear conceived, Gorgons, and hydras, and chimeras dire,' appear to constitute all the resources of his library, and of his mind; and so desirous is he of accumulating the shades of horror on us, that he mingles the mythology of different ages and nations; introduces the vampire-tales of Hungary and Greece, into Arabia; and arms the wizard on the banks of the Euphrates, with the hand of glory, one of the darkest fictions of Western superstition. Every part of his writings has assumed the complexion of a sombrous and melancholy mind, darkened almost to despondency, by peculiar habits of reading. When he is merry, he tells us the story of Cornelius Agrippa and his bloody book: when he is grave, he rehearses a legend from Matthew Paris: when he gives political instruction* it is by the vision of the Maid of Orleans; a vision such as never floated before ' the eye, in a fine phrenzy rolling;' a vision compounded of the murky fumes of querulous democracy, and shapeless delirium; and when he gives morality, it is the quaint and garnished, and sententious wisdom of the East, so mixed and beat out with fantastic decorations, that it resembles an illuminated page of the Alcoran—a line of plain and ordinary sense hid among theflourishings and foliages of tasteless blazonry. No part of this writer's works offends me so much as his style—I mean that garrulous and drivelling simplicity of manner,: by which he and his contemporaries are, distinguished. Nothing can be more unfortunate than a struggle for ease—a giant walking on his hands and knees, does not resemble an infant; he loses his own part and powers, and gains nothing by the loss—except ridicule. The labour for magnificence generally attains its object—the labour of simplicity always defeats it. His subject and his style make his works resemble a spectre dressed out by a child—its very honors have something weak and ludicrous in them: his mind is a thesaurus terrorum —he dwells for ever in the 'Domdaniel caverns under the bed of ocean.' I wish he would remember, that, at no period of life is it too late to begin to read, or that he would at least read, and allow nie to prescribe his studies, before he begins to write again."





A figure very different from the last, now entered — a young man of diminutive stature, but an' intelligent countenance, and a most easy and felicitous address. "I fear," said Bellamy, " you can hardly bestow the praise of purity, on the productions of your countryman, Anacreon M—re.''— "I fear," said I, " the want of that





praise excludes him from more. The merit of a writer must be in some measure connected with that of his subject; and the subjects that writer has chosen, are such as exclude all praise but that of brilliant levity of sentiment, and exquisite versification. By what evil genius his choice was directed, I cannot conceive, but I lament its influence has been equally unfortunate for poetry, and for himself. He was formed to enlarge her territories and her honors; but, like Vasco, his expedition has terminated in being thrown away on the Island of Love. A dull writer defeats the mischief of his own depravity; but the pointed and polished shafts of M—re, like those of his favourite deity, tingle in the blood, with delicious irritation; and convey sweet—sweet poison, through the most balmy and seductive medium. I speak of him with real sorrow: he might have done much, he has done nothing, but what I hope he will yet wish undone. No writer I have ever read, possessed so much the power of picturesque, and living description of nature; or of luscious, and yet lively and uncloying harmony of sound. He is a writer of whose powers the world (or perhaps himself) can no more form a just estimate, than we could of Pope, from his paraphrase on the first Psalm, or of Homer, if we had read no more than his Loves of Venus and Anchises. Before the wreath of his fancy had well bloomed, he hung their blushing honors on the image of the Garden God. I fear no other power will now receive his vows— It is possible to injure the mind's eye, as well as the bodily, by a constant contemplation of one object: the object that M—re has contemplated, must of itself give an obliquity to the intellectual sight. He has talked and written of love, or of what he imagined to be love, till I fear he can no longer write on any thing else. His ideas, which like those of every writer, must, in some measure, be supplied from external sources, do not appear to me to be drawn from sources either deep or various. I am afraid, like his own Little, he has only read what he pleased, as well as written what he pleased. If his reading has been extensive, the power of assimilation which his mind possesses must be amazingly strong. It is a perfect fountain of salmacis, whatever enters it becomes voluptuous and debilitated. His language, which at first presents an endless and unwearying range of diversified elegance, if closely examined, betrays repetition artfully concealed, like the boundaries of the garT dens of the Serail, it escapes the eye under a fence of roses.





It is painful to speak with severity of a man whose suavity of manner and facility of information, and easy dissipa





tion of life, present a kind of innocent and infantine luxury. But we should remember that the levities of a man arc vices in an author. No man need publish the frolics of his intemperance, or expose the nudities of his indulgence. While Alcibiades riots in the recesses of his luxury, the injury is only done to himself; but when he sallies out to outrage sanctity, the offtnce becomes serious and cognizable. For a man possessing so many powers of giving delight, between whose lips and whose pen harmony seems to have divided her existence, eminently skilled in pleasing those whom all are proud to please, capable of erFecting the rare union of sentiment with sound, of being the poet of the senses, and the minstrel of the heart; for such a man there may be, there must be a thousand excuses, if he sinks into the softnesses around him; but for the attempt to communicate what he must





have felt the injuries of himself, for the attempt to add seduction to pleasure, and teach impurity a new system of sentimental logic, to add an impulse to the lapse of vitious feeling, and modulate the death dance of vice with the harmony of a lyre strung by heaven; for this—there is—there can be no excuse, even at the bar of literature; and if he carries the cause to an higher court, I doubt still more tremblingly his acquittal there."

As I spoke, Bellamy pointed out to me the most distinguished novelist of the day. He was at some distance examining one of the morning papers, of which every column was filled with the political dinners, and fashionable fetes of our nobility; anecdotes or hints of private history, of marriages in speculation, and divorces in practice, with an interesting detail of fashionable arrivals in town, and expectations of fashionable arrivals. The splendor of Lady Montrevor's arri•





val; and the pleasure over the world of fashion distinguished every paragraph explicitly or implicitly. "Those are the sources," whispered Bellamy, "from which thevitious taste of our fashionable novel-readers has compelled this writer to draw his materials. He certainly possesses feeling, and some power of communicating those feelings. Without any knowledge of the modes of composition or the benefit, I believe, of a regular education, he has certainly the power of representing and exciting the stronger passions in no trivial degree. But these and all his powers, whatever they might be, he is compelled to sacrifice to that preposterous appetite for the garbage of fashionable anecdote, which our novel readers demand; and with which our novel writers, if professional, are compelled to comply. His first novel, which was founded on a popular play, and represents the ruin of a feeling and arr





dent boy by the arts of a courtezan, is more fit for any library than a circulating library. I mean it possesses strong power of exciting the feelings, but few details of fashionable life. His succeeding works, however, have gradually sunk in the scale of composition, and risen in that of reputation. His last novel, which is a melancholy melange of extracts from morning papers, information extracted from the menials of noble families, and hints from manuscript histories—the paltry legends of obscurity and spleen—His last novel has gone through numberless editions, completely satisfied the curiosity of novel readers, and mine, after the first ten pages: yet such are the men whom we compel to neglect the cultivation of their talents, and the attainment of just and permanent reputation, for the important task of supplying the defective conjectures of a newspaper about a fashionable involve





ment, and a fashionable marriage; and sparing our loungers the trouble of yawning away the interval between breakfast and the lounge in Bond Street."

I spoke of the deplorable deficiency of English novels, and of the difficulty of finding one which combined a faithful representation of life, with just modes of reasoning, and a forcible inculcation of good principles. "The. difficulty is certainly great,'? said Bellamy, "but to the honor of your country, I think an Irish female writer has overcome that difficulty."—I joined with him in his warmest commendations of Miss Edgeworth's Belinda, "which for a strong and masterly delineation of the passions, which yet never over-steps the modesty of nature, for a blaze of colloquial wit, heightened by fashion, and refined by teste, and for a strong, local, and circumstantial detail of life, a representation of the greater effects of life produced by





partial causes, and the influence of the lesser passions, and casual incidents affecting the temper, and the conduct, more than novellists allow us to suppose, for the preservation of the false unique—for these features of character and mind, I do not hesitate to pronounce Belinda a work that has never been equalled, and, perhaps, never will be equalled; for it requires in the author habits of study, and habits of acquaintance with life, an intimacy with the stronger passions, and an observation of the minuter shades of manner, which, perhaps, nature and education never combined to unite in any female, but the writer of Belinda."— This was Bellamy's speech, and my sentiment. . Lady M. with true diplomatic facility, had addressed every one in the circle, told Mr. S—th—y, that he possessed in his. vivid imagination, a more powerful spell than all the sorcerers in the caverns of Domdaniel, whispered





M—re, that his compositions were almost enough to make her renounce the true Italian faith, and turn an English heretic, in her musical principles; and told the novelist, that if to paint insanity was one of the highest privileges of talent, she could not think too highly of his, after reading the ravings of the Somnambulist, in his Spl—nd —d M—s—ry, and the horrid, real picture of domestic insanity in the short specimen of the "Hetherington in his W—nt—r in L—nd—n,"—when a note was delivered to her Ladyship from Lord M. who was at the King's levee. Her ladyship in her triumph read it to the company: government had just received information of the complete success of the British forces in the recent expedition; the details were of the most favourable nature, and Col. Montolieu, who had eminently distinguished himself on the occasion, was hourly expected





with the official dispatches. The affectionate energy of Lady M.'s triumph was contagious, the congratulations were loud and sincere, and the national joy was said to be "augmented by its being owed to a family distinguished by their rank and talents and triumph.

Lady M. with a step that seemed to disdain the earth, approached where we were reading the note, that had been handed round the circle. "All this joy is very delightful, and very oppressive, it has actually overcome me.-— I want breath— I want air—Did not they sacrifice to Good Fortune in the open air formerly, Mr. S.? I shall make no trifling sacrifice in quitting this circle." (She bowed.—) "Mychariot is at the door,"said Bellamy, "you can avoid the delay of ordering your own." "No chariot for me, but a triumphal one. Mr. Bethel, I think 1 see your phaeton: I'll go in it, and take you with me, as the ancient conquerors

VOL. III. I





took some one to remind them of their humanity." The last words were marked by strong and painful emphasis..

As I drove her to the Park, we were every moment detained by groups of fashionables, who were endeavouring to excite their vapid spirits, by an assumed solicitude about our success, and magnify their consequence, by addressing the mother of the hero of the day in public. The streets were unusually crowded. When we got out of them, Lady M. who had been all life and animation during our progress, suddenly became silent, and sighing heavily, let her arms fall like a person quite exhausted; her attitudes, her language, her air of pride and joy disappeared at once. I enquired was she unwell? for such was the facility and spirit with which she played her artificial character, that at times it deceived even me. "Yes—perfectly so; but may I not drop the mask for a moment, and





with you—What a morning, and what a night, and what a past week, and what a past life; and yet I dare not pause, not even to think, for that is the most exquisite misery of all!"-—" Misery?"— "Yes; do you think Splendid Misery only the title of a novel? It is the inscription of real life, fashionable life.—I cannot go on this way, 'tis impossible, 'tis distracting. I thought when I was absent, of these things as the most important in the world, their presence has undeceived me. To see Lady Delphina, and the Rees, and the Duchess, and the rest, or rather to be seen by them again, was only the triumph of a moment, if it was a triumph at all. Some of them have too much address to allow my triumph over them; and some of them too much insensibility to afford me any at all.-— When I was absent, I only thought of them, now that I am among them, I can only think of myself. They who climb a precipice only see the object before them;





when they have reached the summit, they have leisure to tremble for themselves. But it is all in vain, let me tremble or fall, there is no hand to save me. Lord M. will not release me, if I had courage to wish for release. It was in the Bond, that if I returned to London, I should live or die in London. He will not remit the penalty. I will never beg his mercy; he knows his power, and let him use it." "I do not understand this painful and mysterious language." "No matter, I have no wish that you should; yet you might understand me well enough to know, that reputation'true or false was the idol to which I have sacrificed every thing, to which I am sacrificing myself—Can you understand the pride that loves to stand on the very edge of the precipice, to tread the precise bai rier-line between safety and danger, without one false step? Can you

understand that to such pride the bare suspicion of one false step would be





worse than death ? and that suspicion the meanest and most depraved wretch mayblast us with. Am I intelligible enough when I tell you of an husband who indulged, who impelled his wife to the brink of shame, and would have impelled her further, if she would have gone; merely because judging from his own mind, he believed mutual confidence could only be produced by mutual guilt, and he wished to have a security for her silence on the subject of his vices,, and her concurrence in all his schemes of wickedness and folly; and when, at length, he found her sensibility of even false shame more exquisite than he could have believed it was of true, compounding for the absence of real power, by erecting a false and tyrannical one, and goading her by the terrors of imputed guilt to every step; because he knows that to her the bare imputation is more insupportable than the reality to another/'





My blood boiled at this infamous cru. elty; I urged her to defy him, to follow the path her natural principles and high spirit pointed out to her, and suffer no false and vicious impulse to drive her from it.—" Defy Lord M.—Ah ! you know nothing of him or of me. It is his wish, it is his object to devise some means of separation from me. I hate and dread and despise him. I have long, long done so; but I hate and dread public infamy still more—He knows it—-The levities to which his neglect, or his art drove me; the painful struggles of a shackled mind, those levities might, I know, be magnified and misrepresented into something that would bear a construction in any court on earth. lie knows it too—and with this sword suspended over my head, I sit at the feast in pride and agony, depending on the mercy of one who has no mercy—no principle-—no motive to spare me, but





the caprice which may have ceased while I am deprecating it."

My heart bled for her, for that high and fatal feeling of vanity, which had been the cause of all her misery, and which menaced still more. Her mind wanting nothing of actual rectitude, but the courage to avow its choice and pursuit of it, had lost the merit of clandestine virtue, and hazarded the shame of artificial depravity. I tried to speak, but my words were lost. I was myself plunging into the involvements of dissipation—I was myself beginning to feel its restless unhappiness.-—I could not console her.—" Would you believe," said she, after a pause, "that of the earnestness with which I pressed your removal to London, the real motive was my vanity. I wished you to see me here-—I am sufficiently punished—-you have seen me here, and seen me miserable. The fatal ardor with which I entered on my





fictitious character, has actually made it a real one; mental defects may be acquired like bodily ones, by mockery. Vanity is with me a kind of galvanic principle of existence, that produces the motions of life, after its spirit is gone. I am sufficiently punished by these moments of wretchedness and truth. I am not at ease enough for further hypocrisy —J care not how much lam degraded in your eyes, and my own—I care not if all the world knew how wretched I am this moment; but they never shall know it—they would ascribe it to guilt. In justice to myself, I must be a dissembler— I must conceal my anguish—I must smile on the rack, or they will not believe me innocent!—-I wish I was dead!—I wish I had the courage of innocence to die, or even the courage of despair. Lord Montrevor, I dare say, will supply me with that ere long. Beyond the day that my name is exposed to public shame, I





will not live! My life set out with the murder, the actual murder of the best of beings, it will probably end with an expiatory sacrifice to his memory."

I was chilled with horror: her voice became inarticulate --tears of agony and despair forced themselves through the veil which she had drawn over her.— "Let us return, you are agitated, and so am I—-too much so to say all I feel of grief, and honor, and love for you. I would die, by heaven, I would die to give you relief, or vindication! Compose yourself; let us return—laudanum is a dreadful resource; but it will at least stimulate your spirits, and banish this dreadful despondency."—" No—no—I see, I feel an excitement much more strong approaching. I see Lady Delphina Orberry's barouche, and its owner, so "drive on, my merry men all; for why, my foe beholds my fate, the Orbtrry sees me folk" No, that she never shall!—turn your horses heads---I am





quite well—quite composed---c'e.y£ mon foible, or my strength rather. Is the rouge washed off my face? Or does this veil conceal it? They must not see Lady Montrevor's mind or face either in their natural colours."

We passed, and Lady Delphina expressed her pleasure at the event of the day, and the Colonel's distin- guished share in it, in tones that no common ear could have distinguished from those of affectionate sincerity.— As we parted, Lady Delphina's footman followed me with his Lady's compliments, that she had learned " Ah, quanto Vanima" that her harp was in perfect order, and she would be at home at nine in the evening. I was disconcerted, surprized—I did not understand the addresse of this intimation, which was in fact, intended more for Lady Montrevor than for me. Lady M. took advantage of my silence, "Mr. Bethel's compliments wait on her Ladyship, he ac





companies me to the theatre this evening." We were both silent for a. moment. "I wished to speak to you about this, but from modesty, or some other cause, I always begin to speak of myself; now in the case of Lady Delphina, or her heart plaintiff, and Mr. Bethel, or his blushes defendant."—Allow me to ask, dorit you go constantly to South Audley Street ?—"I do go frequently."— "And you receive notes of invitation,, sealed with the impression, ne manquez pas de venire." "That is, that must be, I mean, accidental?" "And you hear her Ladyship sing? I know her harp is always in perfect order for Ah quanto Vanima, or any tender air!" "I have heard her sing with almost as much pleasure as I have heard you." "And not. more erudition?" "Less." "On either part?" "On either part." "But that was not the case when you listened to her Ladyship speaking—or felt her speak





ing? for she can speak with her eyes— la lingua d'amore" "If she does, it is unintelligible to me." "And what forms the attraction that draws you every evening, as I am credibly informed by my knowledge of the human countenance, to South Audley Street?" "The extreme simplicity of her manners, her exquisite taste in music; ip every thing. Her aversion to crowds, and my aversion to them, and the mild and refreshing light that seems to be effused from her person and manner, so balmy to my sight seared as it is with the glare of fashion." "You can accuse yourself of no other motive?" "The law," said I, laughing, **. does not compel a man to accuse himself." "To leave this keen encounter of our wits, or our follies, let me again warn you of Lady Delphina. Beware of any woman who will not be satisfied with admiration; who Avishes to excite a softer, a deeper feeling, particularly when that woman has no feeling, knows





no passion, but the horrid passion of the senses, and would sacrifice to that all mankind, as she has sacrificed herself! Beware of her—drive round the Square.

I have one word more to say to you— it relates to one, who should be a more interesting object to either of us than Lady Delphina Orberry—I speak ofyour wife. My knowledge of the human heart never deceived me, except when I thought I knew my own. Athanasia has an heart—a gentle, fond, feminine heart—it loves you—can you break it? "I would sooner stab my own; by all that is sacred, I love Athanasia, love her more than she believes I can, more than I believed 1 could—love her amid dejection and melancholy, of which I cannot discover the cause. I feel I could be a domestic, could be a happy man, could Athanasia assume the appearance of a happy wife. I will say nothing of the versatility of human feelings, or of the case with which the heart resigns its first and favorite impressions; but I can believe, from experience., that the mental eye may be dazzled at first by a blaze of beauty and rthniere—may believe that it has lost all power of admitting any other object, and yet may afterwards repose with pleasure on the softer shades of domestic mildness, and female suavity, and feel its powers recover, and feel them filled and gratified by their new exercise/'





"The allusion is very charming and philosophical; but all philosophy must be established by experiment—and now pour faire f experiment — don't go to-night to Lady Delphina Orberry. "But politeness—common politeness ""Oh*

common politeness every one is equal to, and above. To-night the Royal Family go to the Theatre; this great intelligence will of course fill the house: John Bull loves to shew fiis joy in public. We must be there, as we have more than a public feeling to gratify—all our family ought to be there; I assure you the spectacle will be amazingly striking, you should on no account miss it, exclusive of the satisfaction of doing the right thing—an inducement on which I may lay particular stress, for as I never experienced it in my life, my recommendation must be totally unbiassed. Now let me run in, and call to Ben net for fresh rouge and fresh spirits as soon as possible, before I am compelled to hear op make any more speeches—selon l'occasion."





I handed her from the phaeton, and she glided into the hall with the grace of an Ariel. I could not feel the glow of pride, as a number of loungers stopped to see the fashionable Lady Montrevor, as I assisted her from the phaeton, but it was succeeded by a sting of anguish, when I recollected that the beautiful hand whose touch made me so proud, had but a few moments past been in vain employed to wipe away tears of the bitterest agony.





At night, however, Lady Montreyor's triumph was complete; the house was crowded; the Royal Family appeared in high spirits, and were greeted with the loudest acclamations of national joy and loyalty. Occasional addresses, music and scenery hastily sketched, but appropriate and animating, diversified the entertainment; and every one who had a military or naval relative engaged in the expedition, felt their consequence increased -and their pleasure magnified. But the applauses were almost inextinguishable when Lord Montrevor led in his lady, all radiance, and triumph, and beauty! Not a trace of the morning's agony in her features; her rouge, and her diamonds, and the splendid animation of her whole form literally makiug the eye shrink from the lustre; and when rising at the performance of the appropriate music, they returned the loud applauses of the audience with the graceful humility of pride, and casting their eyes around them saw every box sparkling with the relatives of their numerous and splendid family, who had all assembled to claim their share of the public pride and, joy, who would not have repeated the favorite exclamation of all around them—" Lord and Lady Montrevor are the happiest pair in the world."





The crowd was so great, that in goingout, our party (by far the most numerous) completely obstructed the lobby, after the departure of the Royal Family; the rest, with an occasional impulse of respect, fell back, and the long procession of the mother and sisters and relatives of the hero of the day moved on in pride and splendor, such as even to witness was, in some measure, to partake





Athanasia, fatigued with the tumult of the night, had proposed going home, but just as the cry of " Lady Invermay's carriage stops the way" announced that ours was yet at a distance, she fainted in my arms: Lady Invermay insisted on her going into her carriage, and I followed in my solicitude for her recovery. At Lady Invermay's a large party had assembled to sup, but a few momenta remained for play; those moments, however, were protracted to hours, by the increasing interest of the pursuit. I had sat down to picquet'with Bellamy, intoxicated with the spirit of the evening, and careless of success, I returned home about five in the morning completely sobered by the loss of twelve hundred guineas. I alwaj's had a taste for dissipation, it recurred to me strongly now: the insipidity of fashionable life can only be rendered tolerable by the stimulation of high play. I struggled in vain with the





infatuation—my feelings had become the slaves of my senses. I felt I was gradually relinquishing the distinctions of public life for its splendor and luxury. I cursed my voluptuous debility, and determined when I rose the next day about two, to compel Lord Castle-Wycomb to an explicit declaration of his intentions towards me; to inform him that my object in public life was not profit but distinction, and that distinction in England was easily attainable by every man who could write.

I left Athanasia still in bed; but as I crossed Berkeley Square it occurred to me, that Lord Castle-Wycomb was engaged with the Cabinet Ministers just at that hour, in consequenceof the recent intelligence; and that in the interval some apology was owing to Lady Delphina Orberry, for the neglect of the preceding evening. As I approached her door, Lord Montrevoi s chariot drove from it; who was in it I could not discover, but I was tolerably certain it could not be Lady Montrevor. I knew Lord M. was a man of gallantry, I heard Lady Delphina was a woman of gallantry—I could hardly have credited the evidence of my senses had they told me so. Her simplicity, her gentleness, the sigh with which she regtetted the absence of pure and delicate pleasures, and the resources she possessed for exciting even apathy, and diversifying solitude—resources displayed without ambition, and exerted without effort (resources so unlike those of Lady Montrevor, whose painful and restless brilliancy left the strained and dazzled listener weary, and exhausted herself to despondency that was recruited with laudanum); all this must have pleased the man for whom such powers were exerted — all this had made me think or feel, perhaps, with such a woman love might divest solitude of weariness, and existence of pain.





Lady Delphina was not at home, she had just gone out in the barouche. I was beginning to distrust the intelligence, when the servant (depressing his voice) informed me that his lady had directed him, if I called, to inform me that she was at Madame La Tour's, her milliners, in Tavistock Street. Utterly ignorant of the peculiar intelligence of this message; and believing my apology could as well be made at Madame La Tour's as in South Audley Street, I proceeded there. I saw several male and female loungers in the shop: I strolled into the splendid ware-room — Lady Delphina was not thereI was unwilling to enquire for her —I was unwilling to Have the appearance of a fashionable trifler, who dangled patiently after fashionable females to their milleners : unejolieJillette, with her black hair arranged a VEgyptienne, saw my perplexity, and whispered me that Lady Delphina was in the boudoir of the back drawing-room.





I ascended the stairs, and entered a room which seemed to have been formed and furnished by the wish of voluptuous indolence. By the windows which, darkened by draperies and blinds, cast a dim, but not religious light, I hardly perceived Lady Delphina extended on a sopha, whose rich and vivid crimson contrasted the slender form that reclined on it, and defined its exquisite contour more exquisitely. Her not rising, compelled me to approach her: while I made some indistinct apology for the neglect of the preceding night—" It is I who should apologize," said she, fixing her dark swimming eyes on me, "for the trouble I have given you in coming here; but though the world envies me the pleasure I enjoy in your society, I cannot yet prevail on myself to relinquish it. They teaze me so about your visits in South





Atidley Street, that I wished—I was compelled to make some sacrifice—I would make any, rather than resign your society; so, with true female selfishness, I sacrificed your ease to my indulgence, and brought you here. Here we shall be unobserved—uninterrupted—alone." She cast down her eyes—I tried to withdraw mine: the emotion I felt, I could assign no reason for. Not only Lady Delphina's costume, her manner, her language had always been those of a vestal to me. I said, indistinctly, "I was too much honored by her considering me of such consequence; that the pleasure of her society I enjoyed so rarely — so innocently—I could hardly believe it could be a subject of censure, though it might, it must be, a subject of envy." No human being ever spoke, ever looked more sillily. "You don't know the malignity of the world—my unfortunate situation—" and she paused—" But I am speaking to one who does not, who ought not, to feel for me more than common compassion." "You have appeared to me ever, and now, an object of delight, not of compassion." Have I, indeed ?—indeed, an object of delight!— it is a dangerous happiness to hear you say so—but repeat it again, and I must forget the danger." "What danger can there be in feeling, in avowing that your taste, your sensibility, your touching manner, something that I feel at this moment, though I cannot express it, must make you an object of delight to all who see, who hear you." "To all," said she, in a melancholy tone: "it has been my misfortune that I have been an object of admiration to all, when it was my wish to be loved but by one." I faultered out, still adverting to her worthless husband, "the wish was enough to have formed such a one." "Was it?" said she, half rising from the sopha; "Ah no, I mis





understand you, or you will misunderstand me: If the wish is enough to make me beloved, why am I not loved at this moment?" "I do not, I cannot understand you; I am ignorant and young, at least among women and the world; I feel your attractions, I respect your sorrows, what can I do more?" "Don't ask me—I might give an answer dangerous for us both—no, not for you, you are safe and indifferent, and innocent —you are armed in a celestial panoply. I am a weak, feeble, artless woman; it becomes your sex to be stem and inflexible, and ours to be submissive. I will submit. I must. Yet if I could think that my hard fate would be pitied by you; that you would sometimes think of " one who never told her love," or if she told, supplicated your pardon for your having made her wretched—supplicated it with a broken and contrite heart; an heart that preferred passion to dignity and

VOL. III. K





peace, and broke, without a murmur, for the preference—if I could think this—my last tears would not be so bitter as these."

Bathed in tears, she sunk on the sofa; I could have sunk into the earth. I knelt beside her. I told her, my voice trembling with agony, I could not love. "I do not ask your love, I asked only for your pity. You have no pity—go, and leave me." "I cannot go; I cannot leave you—thus at least." She started up, with horror in her face. "Sir John's voice. He is on the stairs. I was mad to forget it. He has a chere amie in some part of the house. He will certainly come in. I am undone! I am undone!" Half distracted, I was rushing out. "Have mercy on me," said she, clinging to me wildly, "let him not see you—only let him not see you. Go into this closet, and if he comes in he will possibly take no notice of me, as usual." I past a few moments of agony in shame and fear,





heightened by the feeling that I had not deserved them.

Of all evils, accidental ones, the ills of ill-luck are the most insupportable. I heard a murmur of voices; in a few moments it ceased, I ventured out; the boudoir was empty. I rushed home, cursing La Tour and Sir John, and myself, and every one but Lady Delphina, whom I pitied but could not accuse. As I approached home I saw, at the window, Athanasia, and other female .figures, standing to survey a splendid equipage, finished in the first style by Godsall, which had just rolled to the door in all the pomp of modern luxury. My losses the preceding night rushed on my memory. Godsall must be paid immediately. I entered the drawing room, little disposed to be elated by the praises which Lady Castle-Wycomb, and Lady Westhampton, who had called on Athanasia, were bestowing on the taste and magnificence of her new equipage. "But, Mr. Bethel, you are just in time to terminate a dispute between Athanasia and me, which I am sure you will in my favor. I have been telling her, that in consequence of Lord and Lady Montrevor, and Colonel Montolieu's returning, and Lady Westhampton's marriage, and all those distinguished circumstances, our family will appear, on the birth-day, in the most brilliant manner, and it will be absolutely outrb if she is the only absentee, except Ida, who is in the nursery. You could not take a more favorable opportunity to be presented. I am to present Lady Westhampton, on her marriage, as- the change of titles would render it rather awkward for her mother to perform the office; but she can present you, you know. Our family will almost form a circle in themselves, probably the most brilliant in the drawing room; and it is the only place I ever wish to encounter a family-circle in, for one is reconciled to





the stupidity by the splendor. I see Mr. Bethel thinks just as I do, so we'll save him the trouble of speaking; so come this moment to La Tour's, and look over all her finery; she is the court-milliner, and has an immensity of taste. I'll take you, or you shall take me in your new carriage. That hammer-cloth would be quite superb, if it had the embroidered coronets on the sides."

I had no power to stop Lady CastleWycomb, whose language was as rapid as her ideas. In the short interval of her appeal to me I had argued with the bad logic of perverted feeling, that Mrs. Bethel ought to go to the draw ing room, if all her family went; that the increasing expences of one winter in London might be retrieved by the economy of a summer in Ireland, &c. &c. As I attended the sisters to their carriage Lady Westhampton reminded me it was her first night that winter, and





that she expected to see Mrs. Bethel and me at Soho Square. "I fear I shall renew Lady Castle-Wycomb's horrors of a family-circle by appearing there.,T "Oh wherever there is faro, I am insensible to every thing else. Drive to Sloane Street, and as you are returning stop at my jeweller's. You will of course want jewels, Mrs. Bethel, at least you will want to look at them."

They flew away and I flew up stairs to write to Deloraine for immediate remittances, when Lord Roschamp, who had been looking for me all through Bond Street, lounged into the room, and after extending himself on the sopha, started up and dragged me to a sale, extorting my approbation the whole way for his exquisite taste in my new horses, whose choice I had unfortunately committed to him, "for damme now, the thing is this, there is not a groom, or jockey, or rascal of that kind in London, that knows the points of a horse better





than I do." I assented to avoid increasing a violent head-ache by contention. The sale, and the debate on it, which was adjusted in a fashionable coffee-house, detained us till it was too late to dine anywhere but at Lord Roschamp's, where I went with the party "nothing loth." I wished to forget myself, and there was wine enough to make me forget myself \ and every thing else. ,

I was restored to perfect recollection by a note which was put into my hands immediately after dinner; the contents were brief. "I am the most unhappy of women, not on my own account, but yours; come to me this moment. I hardly have power to sign my name.

Delphiua O ." I did not heed the

laugh which the direction in a female hand, and the precipitation with which I quitted the room, excited. I reached South-Audley Street in a moment. Lady Delphina was in her dressing room, and in tears. "What have I done," said she, wringing her hands, "oh, whht have I done!" "What have you done, tell me, tell me, I beg, only spare me this exclamation; these tears, and I will bear to listen to any thing, to every thing." "I will tell you, but don't terrify me by that pale and breathless wildness; that hollow voice. I too can bear any thing, any thing, but to see you so wretched—so frantic-looking."





She clung round me, but I was insensible of her touch, of her embrace, of every thing but her story. "I will not speak, I will not utter a word till you have drank this wine." I swallowed it; I swallowed another glass. I sunk upon the sofa; she stood before me. "We were seen to-day. Sir John came into the room. You were concealed, but you had left your hat on the sofa, I saw him take it up, and examine it." She took up the hat which had dropt on the floor. "Yes, your name is in it, we are undone.





He was here this evening, after he had drank himself into brutal courage. He menaced me with public infamy; I defied him. He menaced you; then I trembled. He saw it, and left me."'

I groaned in the bitterness of my heart; I dashed myself on the sofa, and tried, with my handkerchief, to stifle the passion that almost choaked me. Infamy, at the firft opening of life, of married life, incurred without the guilt, or the solace of passion, and extending its ruin over my principles, my affections, my fortune, my character. I did not love Lady Delphina, but I felt at that moment how I loved Athanasia. I felt that the intelligence would perhaps break her heart.. I felt it had stabbed mine to its inmost recesses of honor and affection. I felt all the shame of youth, and all the abandonment of the stranger to life and to vice. I felt all the guilt of the man, and all the aaguish of the husband.





My despair terrified Lady Delphina; she dried her own tears. "There is one hope, but one hope for us. He is the most mean, the most sordid wretch; he has no principle of resentment or revenge." "If he has," said I, starting up, " I am ready to vindicate myself either to his justice or his vengeance. I will meet him to-night this moment. I will write to tell him so. All that man can do to justify himself to man, I will do. I will stake my honor, if he will. If he will, I will stake my existence to prove my innocence. You know it; you know my innocence." ' " I know it; I know my own; but what will that avail. No declarations will satisfy him, and he dreads clanger too much to seek satisfaction at the hazard of your . life or his own. It is not Moloch, but Mammon he worships. I believe—I am convinced he might be bribed to silence." "Oh, then let me bribe him. He shall have all, and more than I can afford, let





him but spare my youth and my name. It was not to run this course of infamy I came to England." *

Tears of hot and bitter agony ran over my cheeks while I thought of the wife, whose peace my apostacy would destroy, and of the child whom it would impoverish before it saw the light. "Calk , you, indeed; can you, without inconvenience, produce a sum that would satisfy him, before delay provokes him to augment his extortions." "I have but four hundred guineas in the world. He shall have them to-night." "And an hundred more from me. I can bear any distress but yours. Five hundred gui-' neas would, I am convinced, bribe hira to conceal a murder."

Her magnanimity,-her disinterested and animated kindness melted me. I implored her to let me write to* Ireland, to apply ia any other direction. I had no doubt of procuring the money. I would feel no distress in parting with it. She smiled with melancholy dignity. "What is your peace, your honor, to an hundred guineas." "A world, in purchase for a friend., is gain." "I must lose no time in getting the money. I shall bring it back to you in a moment. Do you conduct the whole business silently, and secretly, and safely. I shall not be a moment going home and returning." I kissed the hand she held out to me as I rushed from the room, and thought her eyes reproached me for parting so coldly.





I returned, after depositing the money with her. I asked the servants vacantly for Mrs. B. "My lady is at Lady Westhampton's, Sir—she went about an hour ago—at eleven o'clock." A thought rushed upon me, with the recollection of the engagement. I composed my dishevelled hair and dress, and throwing myself into a carriage, drove to Lady Westhampton's. The glare of the rooms, and the tumult of the company, stimulated my harassed senses to something like recollection. In the principal room nothing was to be heard but the jargon of the faro-table, diversified only by the clamorous success of Lady Castle-Wycomb, who transferred rouleau after rouleau, from her dear unlucky friend the Rees to herself; and the gay wit of Lady Montrevor, whom neither success nor ill luck ever interrupted in the display of that nonchalance to which it was her triumph to bend an agonized mind.





I did not join the groupe. With the provisional reserve of a determined gambler, I determined only to hazard, with an hope of success, and to play only a game I understood. As I lounged through the rooms with a face that (as I caught a glimpse) seemed to hold little alliance with the carelessness of my attitude, I met Bellamy, whom a discovery of my propensity to high play, had drawn more frequently to the family parties. We sat down—supper was an





nounced—we continued to play, fresh candles were brought—the company separated-—we continued to play—-pushing away the refreshments that were offered to us, and deprecating all intrusion.— Athanasia, who refused to go home without me, threw herself on a sopha, in an adjoining room; and, after Waiting nearly an hour, fainted, from fatigue, and perhaps anxiety and alarm. Bellamy's politeness or humanity would not suffer him to protract the game any longer. I rose a winner of two thousand five hundred guineas. Lady Westhampton, who had sat with Athanasia, from compassion or curiosity, congratulated my success and her own, in having the eclat of her entertainments established by the report of such a sum being lost at them.

I past a night of restless agonydegraded in my own eyeSj and loathing myself, I execrated gaming, as the vilest of vices,, and myself as the vilest of gamesters. I thought of the distress of Bellamy, and of the dereliction of my own feelings. 'It was not





for this' a thousand times I began to

say to myself, and left the sentence unfinished. I was only reconciled to myself by the most solemn resolutions to extricate myself from the embarrassments in which I was plunged—bribe my persecutors to silence, by the local application of the money I had won; and then bribe my own feelings by its restitution, when I had retrieved my present derangement. My heart clung to the images of domestic peace and love. I thought of retiring with Athanasia, soft, and lovely, and innocent, as she yet was, from the convulsive and delirious struggles of dissipation; and forgetting,in the softness of solitude, the passions that had fevered me to madness, during my winter in Dublin andmywinterin London.

I entered her dressing-room, (where we breakfasted) with a flushed face and aching head. I made some apologies for the fatigue the distress of the





preceding night. "I was only terrified by the terrible solicitude you appeared to shew. You know, my love, I never presumed to dictate to your amusements, but had I the two thousand five hundred guineas, I would have given them to banish the gloom that was settled on your countenance, last night, to have brought back one of the smiles that you left in Ireland."—" If I left my smiles there, my heart accompanied' you."—" Did it," said she, catching and kissing the hand that was extended to her. "You should not say those soft, fond things to me too often, you see how foolish they make me."—" They make you bewitching, lovely. By heaven, I love you more than language can tell— your softness, your timidity", your fond and feminine nature has wound itself into mine, by a thousand delicate fibres. How happy I would be—how happy I will be, if my love banishes this reserve this





«—I know not what to call it, that veils her from me and herself, and gives herself to speak the language of love, as well as to feel its meaning. Do you love me, Athanasia?" She had half risen, I folded my arms round her, her head sunk gently on my shoulder. "You will

never know how well till when—till

till I am dead." I attempted to reason or to trifle away a dejection which I believed was only the consequence of her situation. "No," said she, in a voice whose firmness resembled that of her mother—" No—no power can deceive me, I shall live but a few months longer; but while I live, (suddenly changing her manner) I'll reconcile you to my departure—I'll make you wish for it by my extravagance. Your two thousand five hundred guineas must be transmuted by fashionable alchemy, into hoops and trimmings, and diamonds, and birth-day finery, in a few hours; so give them to me, and give me a kiss,





which entre nous I would rather have than all the rest, if we were out of the circle."—" My love, I have not paid for your new carriage and horses yet."— "Oh, give them the four hundred guineas you have in your secretaire, and that will pacify them, till after the birthday."—" I have not the four hundred guineas to give them."—" No! Where are they ?"—" Upon my soul I don't know."

I rose and turned from the table with unrestrained vexation. "Gone, I believe—Why do you ever ask a gambler how or where money goes ?"—" Why do I ask the most generous, the most indulgent of men, how he pleases to dispose of his money!" said she, rising, and following me, and winding her milky arms about me. I was touched to the soul; her kindness, her confidence, like a fine instrument, cut more keenly and deeply than the bluntest reproaches. I returned her caresses with vehemence. I told her the two thousahd guineas were her's—all I had was tier's, and an heart whose worthlessness almost made me weep, while I told her, all was her's. "Here's grandeur coming to interrupt happiness, as it always does," said she, pointing to an enormous hoop that was introduced into the room, as she spoke, and spread by two assistants on an armchair. I gave the money to her, all but five hundred guineas, which I purposed to give the coach-maker: there was yet a debt unpaid, whose recollection filled me with anguish and shame: the one hundred guineas which I owed to Lady Delphina Orberry—to my heart-—to my honor, but one resource remained; I hurried to Berkeley Square; it was between three and four, and Lord Roschamp's phaeton parading before the windows, announced that the ladies were preparing for their morning lounge. The folding doors were open, and as I sprung «p the stairs, I saw Lady Castle-Wycomb, Lord Roschamp, and some other fashionables, in the drawing-room; her ladyship was declaring she was actually broke, by her ill success at faro, the precedingnight, (the luck had turned so horridly against her, and then bid Lord Roschamp not forget to make her call at — 's, for the diamond tiara) as she was adjusting her veil at the glass. Lady M. was not in the drawing-room—the group had not seen me—I passed on to her dressing-room—Bennet was arranging a superb vase of gold fish on a stand; and her ladyship, attired for an excursion, was just dismissing the person from whom she had bought them. "Mr. Bethel, admire my gold fish; or, at least, admire the price I have given for them. Pretty creatures— PH discard all other favorites from henceforth, and love nothing but you-and myself: neither fashion nor caprice shall ever banish you from my boudoireven Mercury itself may befixed by gold."





She perceived I wished to speak to her, for my eyes were directed—not to the gold fish, but to her. Bennet, I believe you have touched a torpedo, instead of a gold fish—how can you be so long arranging that vase?" Bennet, after vindicating herself from tediousness, in a speech twice as. long as the period of the offence, disappeared. "Can vou let me have an hundred guineas immediately ?"---" With pleasure—I have had an immense run of luck lately." She checked herself as if her delicacy forbad her to advert to mine. She took a note for the amount from her secretaire; as she handed it to me, she threw up her veil, and fixed her eyes on me. I had never seen such an expression in them but once before. I actually started. "I know the meaning of all this—it is something relating to Lady Delphina—she is directly or indirectly the cause of this"—" My own





folly, my own culpable, ideot-folly, has been the cause of it." "I would inquire deeper--1 would probe you to the quick, but for this" as she gave me the note, "the creditor is not allowed to eviploy torture, by the laws of England."— *' Don't torture me by your goodness--your undeserved goodness. In my present state of feeling, that is the peine forte et dure to me." As I spoke, I vacantly traced some characters on the back of a note that lay on the table, with the pen she had just endorsed the note with. "We will not put you to the trouble of oral confession," said she, looking over me. "Your pen, I see, can 'the lover's wish, without the blush, impart.'" My eye followed her's—it was not without " the blush" that I perceived I had written the word " Delphina." I threw the note into the fire. *' What would I give that her ladyship could see you---but, seriously, don't be angry with yourself, or the pen, which I see you are about to throw into the fire, it is not the first time a goose has saved the state, you know."—" You distract me by your badinage. I had rather have advice than an hundred—than a thousand guineas, this moment."—-" If you want advice, delay not a moment, from diffidence or indolence, or any other want of reason to take it."—" I have no friend—no director. Hammond and his wife quitted England a week before I arrived in it. His father's death brought him to Ireland."—" Lord Roschamp is waiting in his phaeton for your ladyship," said Bennet, half-entering. "Til wait on his lordship in a moment: you see I have but a moment to say to you—shun Lady Delphina ; disengage yourself from her at any price that you or / can afford. Don't, like the Sicilian diver, lose yourself for ever, by plunging into the gulph after your gold."





I accompanied her down—" You go in Lord Roschamp's phaeton."—" Yes, I go on with his lordship, and the rest, for a short time—a very short time longer. I have written to Mr. Corhett—I will leave London—I will leave every thing, to find myself, and happiness—if / can. Tell no one. Wait till after the birth-day, and you will wonder; and wonder you know is involuntary praise." The word praise seemed to operate by instinctive association on her ideas, and she gave her hand to Lord Roschamp, and sprung into the phaeton, with the step of Juno, when she ascended her car, after borrowing the cestus.

I lingered in Berkeley Square, debating the safety of presenting the one hundred guineas in person. I recollected that it might perhaps miscarry, if committed to an envelope; I recollected the coldness with which her parting look had reproached me; I determined to leave her, at least, with tenderness and respect: she had deserved tenderness and respect at least from me. I went to South Audley Street, and passed the day in contending with the tender magnanimity of Lady Delphina; who, M'hen she found herself vanquished in argument, and compelled to accept the one hundred guineas, flew to her harp, and lapt me in elysium, by sounds that brought with them oblivion of all pain. When I recovered my recollection, I rose to retire. "You must not go away now," said Lady Delphina, "the streets are still full of carriages going to dinnerparties; at least, stay till you will no longer be observed: the dangerous—dangerous indulgence of your presence, I would purchase at the expence of any danger but your's." There was something so flattering in this secresy—something so confidential in this repose of , her fame and happiness in mine, that I Vol. nr. L





could not resist her request. The thought of Athanasia, pale, dejected, deserted, eame to my mind, bringing so much pain, that I tried to banish it.

I dined with Lady Delphina: she had a thousand expedients to divest solitude of depression; the most impassioned works of poesy and love, were heaped on the gilded book-shelves; her harp was always tuned, and her port-folio, filled with animated and popular sketches, was always in sight. A volume of Hayley's metrical plays lay on the sopha, beside Lady Delphina; she took it up, and repeated the first lines of the Tragedy—" Let ardent friendship be the bond between us; but, oh, subdue this inauspicious love, and chase it from thy breast."

I will not repeat the pause which followed this sentence, or the conversation which followed the pause. I left Lady Delphina in no error, which the representation of strong and simple feeling could re





move. I told her of my domestic habits—> of my wish for domestic happiness; I told her of the habits, or impulses rather, by which she saw me urged—being merely the parasite plants, whose clinging was hostile to the native growth of my heart. I told her of my lovely, innocent wife, of the exquisite and vernal wreaths of fancy and feeling, that she had scattered in my path, and hung round my heart. I told her of her talents, which only required developement, to be flattered into perfection; of her situation, which opened the sources of a new gush of hope and pleasure to my feelings. She did not complain—she did not remonstrate— she knew her strength, she only wept; and, to a woman's tears what can be replied? She asked me had I never loved? I told her I had known all the wild and wayward, and exquisite wanderings of that unspeakable feeling; that I hoped now to know its balm—its com





fort^its soothing and domestic softness; that the storm that had flashed a fitful and perilous brightness on my heart, had passed by, and the still and fertilizing shower that followed, fell like dew upon it, softening its soil, and healing its scars. She asked me had I no mercy for those who felt as I did?—then she told me she desired no mercy. Still she wept, and only wept.

I left her in agony; yet I left her. Athanasia had, as usual, when alone, sent for Madame,todine withher; theevenjnghad been exhausted in novel reading, or novel conversation: her sickly struggle to smile, when I entered, depressed me more than the dejection it attempted to hide. I was .weary and dispirited, was it a wonder I ran to the firsfengagement I recollected, in such a state of feeling; and that in such a state of feeling, I was too carelesss of any thing but the forgetf ulness I sought; and that from that, not even





immense losses awoke me? The morning roused me to such misery, that, unable to bear Athanasia's innocent and distracting smiles, I again rushed to Lady Delphina's, and again was soothed by her softness, and animated by her endless and exquisite resources.

The day I passed in indolent and voluptuous melancholy, (in sighings over better things neglected, and the habit and power of evil ones increasing) was a proud and important one to England. Col.Montolieu arrived, with the official dispatches, confirming the success of the expedition, and displaying the details in which his own courage and capacity wereso eminently distinguished. I tore myself from South Audley Street, about ten: Lady Del prima, who was invited to Berkeley Square, suggested the propriety of our not entering together; and 1 drove in her chariot round the square, before I followed, or attempted to follow her, through the crouded hall and corridor of Lord C. W.'s. Even there, the croud and the tumult were such, as almost to obstruct the entrance; and the number of strangers who were admitted to see a grand transparency, on the staircase window, respecting the action in which Colonel Montolieu had distinguished himself, completely filled the space to the drawing-room doors. Colonel Montolieu, who had been at St. James's, in the morning, and received in the most distinguished manner, by their Majesties, had returned to dine at Berkley Square, where the whole world of fashion were assembled to greet his appearance—it was fashionable to applaud brilliant actions; and the triflers of the day, unable to understand or appreciate the importance of the detail they importuned for, hung round the fashionable hero, with acclamation and wonder. In the principal room, the circle formed round





him, defied all attempts to penetrate. His words, his looks, his whispers were conveyed by instant gestures, from those who were nearest him, to those for whom not the most painful posture of attention could procure a glimpse of his figure. Lady Montrevof, hanging on the arm of ber darling son, seemed to have " forgot herself to rapture:" her loud and animated praise frequently interrupting his narrative; and her wit and her beauty, elevated by pride and joy, almost to "excess of light:"—" I hang upon your arm, George, like smiling victory." Those who could hear her, repeated all she said; and those who could not, at least comforted themselves by repeating the magnificence of her appropriate dress, of sea-green -crape, draped with bunches of silver-weed and water-lilies: her hair arranged under a naval coronet of emeralds, and the comb from which ber long and mermaid-ringrets floated on





I



her white bosom, rising into a sparkling shell of diamonds.

I saw all this splendor, with the in difference of one whose sight was " dazzled and spent," with perpetual glare; but not with indifference did I see the hero of the day, and reflect, that I was wasting in thraldom to a woman, and to my senses, the powers that might have raised me to an eminence like his own, that eminent night, J I wished I had been permitted to enter, as 1 proposed, a private soldier into his regiment, and take the chance of life or death. I wished I had never been recalled to enervating wealth, and inglorious indulgence. . My temper was embittered by self-contempt and dissatisfaction. I was impatient of the croud, and of thek foolish face of praise. I was negligent—I was almost harsh to my companion, but it was in vain: from the moment I entered, Lady Delphina had fastened on me, and nothing could





release me from my vassalage. She had the happy art of attaining her object, by appearing to have attained it. The croud had compelled her to take my arm for protection, and she led me through with the most merciless display of my complete subjection; and such was her gentleness, that, when I struggled in vain to disengage myself from her, it only made me reproach my own brutality; and such was her address, in laughing at the caprice of fortune, or of accident, being allowed to elevate a man into a demi-god, and the folly of the fashionables, who praised with'out the power or the sentiment of admiration, that I was almost reconciled to her, and to myself. She drew me into another room, where the heat was less oppressive---here the naval devices, with which the floor had been chalked, were effaced by the feet of the dancers; here all around me was levity ---I did feel it less oppressive,





They had commenced with country-dances, but in compliment to some German officers who had accompanied Colonel Montolieu, and to the Imperial Embassador, who was present, they were exchanged for waltzs, in which the ladies were instructed by their foreign partners. The first object I saw was Athanasia floating round the room with a striking figure, in the attitude which Werter describes as the most exquisite and dangerous that can be assumed; her dejection, her situation forgot in the intoxication of motion and music. No human being could have conjectured, from our mutual attitudes, and mutual disengagement, that we ever had hearts, or that those hearts had ever felt for each other one emotion. She was in the arms, literally in the arms of a stranger; and a stranger was hanging on mine. "How interesting she looks," said Lady Delphina, whose talent and whose pleasure was praise. I





could not look at her. I cursed the perversions of fashion in silent bitterness of spirit. "Are these changes from dejection to extravagant spirits frequent?"— "I—I believe so—I have not observed." "No,—true—observation is certainly not your forte." "What do you mean? "Nothing, or, as Elvira says, " I like resolution, and I am resolved you shall not know." ** Know what r" "What all the world knows. Oh, what am I saying; instead of an Elvira I am playing Marplot." "And you want to make me play the Suspicious Husband!" said I, with a suddenness that startled her and myself. "How unjust, how cruel you are! but I was formed to bend tc cruelty and injustice. On the contrary I implied that the changes in Mrs. Bethels disposition proceeded merely from a nervous cause. I am sure of it, from their frequency. I myself could never believe themtb arise from any other." "Nor I,





I never could—I never will—never, by Heaven, never." "Suppress your voice and your emotions, I entreat. I am very unhappy to have been the cause. But I am not the cause. There must be something more. What is it that disturbs you this evening?" "I don't know. I am disturbed. I am unhappy. You have mentioned this several times. I know not what you mean. I have no wish to know. My feelings are too irritable, too painful to be trifled with." "Oh, but I am a trifler, and you must forgive me. I should have remembered, that trifles are to the jealous, confirmations strong." I was going to assure her seriously of the pain these perpetual allusions gave me, when Lord Roschamp, who had been laughing at the dancers, strolled up to us: "Damme, Bethel, you ,are famously up to fashionable life I see; the outset of his winter in London, Lady Delphina, began with his-declaring he meaned to sit with Mrs. Bethel all his mornings; and now, unless they meet at some fashionable party, by Heaven they never meet at all, morning or night; and when they'do, it is only to display to each other some dashing lounger with whom' they stroll round the rooms, nod to each other, and meet and part scion au dernier gout."





I was relieved from this attack by Lord Westhampton's loudly declaring, that it was a shame and a sin for men to be congratulated on not knowing their own natural wives and husbands; that for his part, if Lady Westhampton should take it into her head to nod it at him, because they went to a fashionable party, it would be the last she should go to with his consent; as to our meeting that way, like strangers, that is impossible, for we always go together in the same carriage, and I take eare that we shall come home at the same time." Lord Roschamp laughed vociferously, and Lord Westhampton as vociferously argued. I might have been amused by this characteristic dispute, but Bellamy at that moment came up with an invitation to play, which I knew was his only object in being there, and which my late success had left me no power of refusing. I followed him to one of the less frequented rooms. Lady Delphina still hung on my arm. We sat down. "The usual rate," said I, cutting for the deal, " I presume." "Halfcrowns, if you please," said Bellamy. The usual rate was five guineas a game, and a bet which varied selon foccasion. "Are you serious, Bellamy? "Perfectly serious; you'll oblige'me by playing halfcrowns." "I shall certainly oblige you." We played, and he lost a trifle. I comprehended his motive. He believed himself to be in a run of ill-luck, and determined to exhaust it on trifling losses. I was confirmed in my opinion when, on supper being announced, he told me he





would expect me in the same place, but" not at the same rate, when it was over. "Montolieu," said he, "is fond of dancing, it will be renewed for him after supper. When he is tired of thrice slaying his slain, for all the fashionables in London, we can then be here unnoticed and undisturbed." I led Lady Delphina from the room. "If you are going to play after supper, put me into a chair, or any thing that will take me away from seeing your agitation." On the staircase the croud compelled us to stop. Colonel Montolieu, who was laughing with all the vivacity of a soldier, after peril is over, desired to be introduced to me, and a slight form of recognition took place. At that moment, stung by the sight of Athanasia hanging on the arm of her partner, and conversing with, hiui in French, I hurried on with Lady Delphina. A grove of dowager's plumes concealed me from Montolieu's sight. He thought





I had passed on. I heard him say something to Lord Invermay, who stood next him, about a striking figure. "But what is his character, or has he any character at all?" "He is a young man of distinguished talents, but cursedly dissipated, like all his countrymen, always intangled with the women; you see the Orberry is hanging on him now, and he'll find it infernally hard to shake her off." "Sir John will instruct him; I know no man who gets rid of all his incumbrances better, debts, wife, all." A loud laugh followed. I hesitated for a moment whether I should turn or not. My feelings were aggravated by Lady Montrevor's passing me at that moment with a look of reproachful indifference, if such an expression can be imagined. She was repelled by the croud. "George, I must learn of you how to advance, my courage entirely fails; the command of this expedition must be committed to you, or to Mr.





Bethel. Mr. Bethel loves to expose himself to danger." Vexed and goaded, I demanded the reason of this delay, and was told by some panting dowagers, that the servants found some difficulty in removing the crouds who had been admitted to see the illuminations on the staircase, and the transparency which terminated the perspective of lights on the corridor, and that some stragglers still insisted on being permitted to see Colonel Montolieu and the company as they descended to the supper-room. At' this moment something like an impulse was given to our progress, but as we reached the landing-place, I observed a figure, who was evidently one of, the intruders, stationed in a corner, muffled in a dark coat, and observing the company composedly. I passed him without further observation, but recollecting that Lady Montrevor had disengaged her hand from Lord Rosehamp, I turned and offered her mine. "Attend to your own steps, Mr. Bethel." I passed on, hut in the next moment a scream of horror and agony made me turn suddenly, and, rushing back, I saw Lady Montrevor sink on the steps, and the figure dart through the croud, and disappear in a moment. All now was confusion and terror. Part of the company collected round Lady Montrevor, part in vain pursued the stranger. The tumult was terrible—the screams of affright from those who had witnessed this strange transaction, and of inquiry from those who had not, and the general struggle of distress and importunity and ignorance rendered Lady Montrevor's recovery impossible, while she continued exposed to it. I relinquished Lady Delpbina's hand—I rushed through the crowd, and, raising Lady Montrevor in my arms, bore her back to one of the deserted drawing-rooms, which in a moment was again crouded with inquirers.





Water and essences were now applied: she opened her eyes — they were fixed and hollow; the deadly whiteness of her bloodless forehead and neck terribly contrasted the rouge on her cheeks, and the ornaments that glittered on her corse-like figure. "Where am I?" said she, in a hollow voice—" and where is he?" She uttered some unintelligible words, and closed her eyes again. The croud again gathered round her, with various conjectures: the German readers declared she must have seen a spectre, and shuddered at their own voices, as they threw their eyes round the spacious room, where the half-extinguished lights burned dimly, and the sudden change of scene and employment produced a forcible change of feeling. The voices appeared to restore her to recollection: she immediately assumed that command over herself, which nothing but the absence of reason could divest her of for a moment;





requested that Bennet might be called to attend her; entreated the company to return to the supper-room, and not think so much of the trivial effects of heat and fatigue and pleasure. "After all," said she, "I have a better constitution than the Grecian who died of joy the day his son was crowned as a conqueror: you, may tell George I only swooned: Madame Recamierv and "I will divide the glory of entertaining company by retiring to bed." She attempted to rise, as she spoke; her mind was stronger than her frame — she could not even stand—she leaned upon me—I entreated her ,to retire, and Bennet joined in my intreaties, with a something like a trembling consciousness I had never seen her assume before—she was obliged to yield. I carried her in my arms to her dressing room, and she fainted again while I placed her on the sopha. Bennet insisted on being left alone with her lady, and M allowed to manage her lady quite alone." I was retiring, when Athanasia entered, who, among the crowd in the supper-room, had heard indistinctly her mother's indisposition; and now rushing in, declared her resolution not to quit her, and hung over and soothed and supported her with an officious tenderness, such as none but a female knows how to display, and such as a lovely female becomes a thousand times more lovely from displaying.





The thought of her mystery, her reserve, her coldness to me, was exquisitely painful to my heart at that mo- * ment: what would I have given to have felt one of her cool soft hands pressed on my burning forehead at that moment, or to have tasted one of the kisses that she wasted with fond grief on her mother's lifeless hands.

The remainder of the night doubled the losses of the preceding—I gave my note to Bellamy for a sum I cannot now bear to tell of, and hurried home to find a letter from Deloraine, assuring me that he could not get another shilling from the tenants; that the lands were set much above their value, &c. &c. I had just flung it into the fire as Athanasia returned from Berkeley Square—" Athanasia, I must have the 2000 guineas I gave you." She fixed her eyes on me for a moment, and then, without speaking a word, took up one of the branches and went to her dressingroom—I followed her,' she opened her secretaire, and took out the bills. "I wish I could tell you, my love, the pleasure it gives me to return them: I take an omen favorable to our happiness from it: may 1 hope you don't wish we should go to St. James's, or remain in London, or plunge ourselves deeper in these involvements fashionable and pecuniary." I did not speak. "Tell me, my love, is this the price of our departure





—are we to return to Ireland, are we to be happy?" I sighed heavily—" Could you be happy in Ireland? I thought you detested Ireland." "I am at least miserable here." said she, clasping her hands with sudden violence. She threw herself on me —" Take me from this place if you love me, if you love yourself—here I am not, I never can be happy—take me to your heart, shield m'e, shelter me, fold me, hide me in it—from

myself from every thing but the

thought of you—Oh! I could tell you every thing at this moment." She sobbed with vehemence. I knew the enthusiastic state of her feelings—I believed she had nothing to relate but the confessions of exaggerated feeling — my own were dreadfully irritated—I was not able to hear every thing at that moment. I told her to spare herself and me—to seek.her mother's confidence—her affection, her strength of mind will be of equal use to





you. "Oh! I cannot encounter her— her wit oppresses, and her despair terrifies me: I could hear her talk for ever of herself, but I cannot bear to talk to her of myself." I hardly heard the last words: as she spoke she was closing her secretaire, but so slowly that I saw a packet of letters in Deloraine's hand lying among the papers in it. Again she pressed me to apply the mouey to the payment of my debts, and not incur any new ones by compelling her to appear at St. James's. All my better feelings had

yielded in the struggle of vanity:

"You shall go to Court—you shall appear in nothing inferior to your sisters. This is our first and last winter in London; but while it continues, you shall shine a star of the first brilliancy, if not the first magnitude. We shall soon cease to struggle against our circumstances, and our feelings; but in the mean time do not contend with me, I cannot bear it now—I am harrassed, wretched, spent —do not oppress me with your caresses —do not distract me with your tears." She forbore to oppress or to distract me; but the night was one of unmixed distraction. Every character around me seemed to be rising on the ruins of mine. Athanasia's softness increased with my feverish irritation and self-reproach; and her dignified resignation with my despicable subjection to reluctant depravity. She soothed, she palliated, she flattered the very vices of my temper and sentiments, assured me the splendor of her appearance should be equal to my expectations, my wishes—" And La Tour can easily wait for her bill till your next remittances from Ireland."





Determined to lose nothing of the grace of a favor, she gave orders while at breakfast, in my hearing, for her dressmakers, milliners, &c. to attend her immediately; yet so painful was the mild

Vol. in. sr





struggle of her feelings, that unable to bear my own, I hurried to Berkeley Square, the moment breakfast was over. None of the family were yet visible—I wished to see only one. From Bennet, whom I met on the staircase, I learned that her Lady had passed a dreadful night, and was very ill; but rising to dress, and go to the Queen's drawingroom. "For you know, Mr. Bethel, my Lady never yields to any thing but when there is nobody to see her."

I hurried to her dressing-room, and sent in a request to see her as soon as she rose. In a few minutes she was in the dressingroom leaning on Bennet, who placed her on asopha, and immediately began toadjust the dressing-table. "Oh, I have passed a dreadful night!" said Lady Montrevor. "Athanasia, who hung over me like a ministering angel, -told me you knew all my terrible story, when I expressed my fears that you had heard something in my "ravings. You know all, and will you believe that I saw that man last night—him whom I believed dead these twenty years—whom I do, from my soul, believe dead; and come from the dead to me, and for me!" - "Oh, banish these horrid dreams, you were deceived by a resemblance." She shook her head incredulously.—" I do not expect to be believed; but I know, I feel I am right in the fact, and in its consequences too.—When Cassandra predicts evil only to herself, she may be believed. Oh, no power could shake me as I am shaken this moment, but a power above humanity!" I reasoned with her as well as the distraction of my mind allowed me. I told her of the probability of resemblance, of mistake, of sudden confusion, of any thing but the horrible fancy that had taken possession, of her mind, ff You balance probabilities like Hume," said she; "but I am M 2 , ' .





not like Hume, a sceptic." To turn the current of her thoughts, I spoke of Mr. Corbett. I inquired what had been the language of his answer to her letter ?— "Your earnestness," said she, - with a forced smile, "puts me in mind of the French physician, who wrote on his prescription, 'to be taken immediately, as the patient has but a few hours to live.'— I will try the prescription however—it is the air of Ireland—I will live there, if I am to live any where ; and if I am not, I can learn to die there. But in the mean time, I must try to live out the birth-day, for the sake of those who love me, and those who hate me.—-I am forced to hide the agony of my mind alike from both on their accounts, or my own."

She rose as she spoke, and moved slowly to the dressing table, and looking at herself in the glass, said with a painful smile, "Bennet, some more rouge before I attempt to dress, I need not look like a corse yet." In my solicitude for her, I had almost forgot the purport of my visit. "Here are youf one hundred guineas, Lady Montrevor, and one hundred thousand thanks for them."— "One hundred thousand, thanks is exorbitant interest;" said she smiling, so to appease my conscience, you shall keep





the principal till ""I will not, I

cannot—these involvements are hateful to me—I cannot bear to owe any thing— even to you!" "Not to Lady Delphina Grberry!" "Oh, no, no.—nothing but common politeness, common gratitude." "Take care, if you incur any penalty there, it will certainly be levied 'as near the heart as possible.'—I am troublesome, I fear, and I hope mistaken; but while I remain in-this world, I must continue to feel for you, and Athanasia." "You are—you always have been an angel!" "So I have been always told, but I never believed it, till Mr. Corbett





told me I was intended for one. But unless you wish to see 'angels in machines,' you had better make your escape as soon as possible; for I see Bennet is dying to put on my hoop, and I declare, at this moment, I would rather put on Regulus's—though mine is certainly fitter for a general—purple velvet and gold laurels included."

Of the time that passed between this and the eventful birth-day, I have no recollection, but from the wildest vicisitudes of triumph and despair. With the false reasoning of a mind depraved by its infatuation, I determined to try the fortune of gaming—I was plunged in debts, which I had no means of discharging, and impelled to contract more, by the vanity that when I had commenced a course, forbad me to retreat. Play presented itself no longer as a resource of amusement, or of dissipation; but as a means of relief, certain and sud





den if I succeeded—that I might lose, I did not suffer myself to think. I was "settled, and hound up to a terrible feat." During this frightful interval, I could not bear to glance at my own face—I could not bear to meet the mild anguish of Athanasia's. She saw my determination, she did not dare to remonstrate, but she did not dare to encourage me. She accompanied me to the dreadful orgies in which my nights were wasted, with a countenance which seemed to say, "this must terminate itself, and must terminate soon." I frequented the faro-table, to which the sudden and marvellous importunity of Lady CastleWycomb.and her sister was not my inducement: it was suggested only asa more obvious source of rapid aggrandizement. The event was what might be expected: in a few days I was on the brink of ruin; and heard Athanasia, in obedience to me, giving orders for her birth-day splendor, as if I heard the voices of a dream.





The birth-day arrived; glitter and tumult had no effect on my harrassed senses now, but, to disgust them; but this occasion was marked by a kind of splendid absurdity, such, as though I observed it but little then, made an impression, I find, on my memory. The equipages, and dresses, and paraphernalia of the day were prepared at the distance of some weeks; but one part of the preparation it was necessary^to secure but a few hours before the occasion, and almost impossible to secure within that time. All the fashionables in London were determined to have their heads dressed by one artist; and this artist, though he dressed the court-heads a merveille, could not dress every fashionable head in London, in the few hours that intervened between the time of a fashionable breakfast, and the time for the drawing-room.—Lady Montrevor, and Lady





Castle-Wycomb, by being inmates of the same mansion, had some chance for being touched^, (for he never did more) by the plastic hand of this creator of fashion. And Athanasia went before nine in the morning td Berkley Square, in a chair, that she might, if possible, avail herself of the distinction of his attendance en passant. I did riot go—I had no ambition to sparkle only as the satellite of the proud Montolieu family; though every one who wpuld claim the most remote relationship, was proud of recognizing itj on the day that Lady Montrevor, radiant with undiminished beauty, and augmented triumph, introduced her fifth married daughter,' (three of whom were peeresses) to Majesty; and Lord Montrevor saw every eye fixed on, and heard every tongue 'ardent in acclamations of his gallant son, from whose chariot the horses were taken, as he returned from St. James's; and lie





and his father, stunned with applause and exultation, were drawn by the crowd back to Berkeley Square. I had placed myself in the anti-chamber, merely to avoid the suspicion of an invidious carelessness. I had expected little from the spectacle, but weariness and confusion; I confess I was disappointed, as all would wish to be—The sight was such as completely to abstract me from myself, and my wretchedness. The effect of the perpetual glare of foil, and rouge, and diamonds, was, after some time, rather painful; but when I beheld, and I did behold it, the animating spirit of loyalty and affection, with which the nobles of England poured the high tribute of their splendor, and the dignity around the throne of their venerable sovereign— When I saw them, as the storm darkened, and the sky lowered, displaying the vast resources of their wealth, their spirit, and their attachment; their "proud sub





mission;" their dignified dependance— not bating in the hour of peril one jot, even of the external and casual forms of safety and prosperity, and flashing back, on the tinsel trappings of a plebeian usurper, the habitual and hereditary magnificence of a court of native nobility—When I reflected that the splendid crowd I saw, were not like the courtiers of St. Cloud, the ephemeral productions of a political convulsion, whose effect had been to make all that was .. great contemptible, and all that was contemptible great; a race of beings nursed in vice and vulgarity, all elevated by crimes, or criminal in elevation; drunk with sudden vicissitude, and trembling with precarious grandeur; that they were, with a few exceptions, an high-descended, and high-principled people, jealous of honors, which, if they had not acquired^ they supported nobly, and strongly attached to a constitution, and country, to





which their attachment was neither venal, nor fugitive; a people who yet loved their king, and worshipped their God; a people who, with many vices, were yet the first on the earth in national virtues; who, amid the convulsions of the world, had stood unshaken ; had retained their honor, their independence, their government, and their religion; and now by this public display of their magnificence, and their attachment, proved to their Sovereign, and to their countrymen, the unexhausted resources, and spirit of the English Patricians. When I reflected on this, the spectacle filled me with thoughts that reconciled me to all its tumult, and its levity; that elated me with confidence, with exultation, with pride; but, however gratified my feelings were, my eyes grew weary of the glitter of hoops, and the nodding of plumes.

fis I returned home, I observed a meanlooking man pacing up and down before the door, as if waiting for me; my heart sickened—I felt, at that moment, the agony of a debtor. He approached me, and said, "Mr. Bethel, I presume, I have been waiting for you, Sir. Can I speak to you, for a few minutes, alone?" We entered the drawing-room.—His address, which was that of a man not unused to the courtesies of genteel life, excited my curiosity, and I had no apprehensions from his manner. "We are quite alone, Sir, I presume, and you are quite at leisure to hear me." I bowed. "My business is peculiarly interesting to us both; and, when it is known, you will, probably, think with me." "Very probably; but in the mean time, may I beg to know your name? It occurs to me, that no business can be very interesting to me at this moment; but, perhaps, you may undeceive me." "My name, Sir," said Ire, rising, with a look of importance, "had, formerly, more consequence attached to it than at present, but even yet it has not altogether lost all distinction, all consequence. My name, Sir, is Mason."





The name did not excite my recollection in the slightest degree. "Have the goodness, Mr. Mason, to proceed."— "Sir, I am unwilling to proceed without some explanation—some sort of preface, as it were. Gentlemen, I know, young gentlemen particularly, are very tenacious of their- feelings, very jealous of anything that seems to question their delicacy—or their fastidiousness. Now, if they can be prevailed on to examine, to weigh matters a little, they will probably find, that their attachment is in general more to names of things, than to things themselves, and that the value of things is always permanent, and the value of names fictitious and transitory." I admitted the truth of the preface, in hopes of hearing some consequence deduced from it. You are a friend Sir, an intimate friend, a very intimate friend of Lord Castle-Wycomb's: the world says you possess his lordship's confidence eminently, and are eminently deserving of it, and of every notice-—every distinction in his lordship's power to bestow."— "Upon my soul, Sir, the world does me a vast deal of honor and injustice. I am allied to Lord Castle-Wycomb, and very often in his society, but I cannot flatter myself with having made the slightest progress in his intimate confidence. I am apt to believe Lord CastleWycomb's confidence is not so easily acquired."—" Nor is it worth acquiring," said the man in a kind of whispered vehemence. "Sir, he deceives you, the whole world, and himself, by a false opinion of a consequence he does not possess. Sir, his consequence is almost extinguished with the pfesent ministry ! — almost entirely extinguished ! — They have retained him in their train, but not in their confidence, or their employment!--'-he fills his place no longer-—he is gradually, diminishing in influence, and in intellect too, sir !—his health is destroyed, and they only wait his first indisposition, to hint to him, his dismission from business, in the civil form of the necessity of taking care of his health."—" Permit me to observe, that I think all this intelligence rather more interesting to Lord Castle-Wycomb than to me."— "Sir, pardon me, my first object was to assure you, to convince you, of Lord Castle-Wycomb's utter insignificance at the present juncture; a conviction, perhaps, hard to produce in a mind like your's.—a mind, so constantly, I may say, in contact with his, and seeing his splendor, and hearing his imposing language, and all that."—" Suppose that object gained, Mr. Mason, for expedition sake, and proceed to the next."—" Ah,





Sir, I doubt it is not gained, from that, slighting manner; yet, if you knew who was speaking to you, I believe you would listen with rather more consideration. Sir, I have been much in Lord CastleWycomb's confidence: I am now quite on the other side; and, if his consequence has declined, mine, I assure you, has increased very much, since the exchange."

I now at once recollected the Mason mentioned by Lady Montrevor, in the history of Lord Castle-Wycomb's marriage with her daughter: the recollection did not much augment my cordiality towards him. " Sir," said the man, "it grieves—it shocks me, to see a young man like you, on your very first entrance, I may say, into life, hoodwinked, and led patiently by Lord C. Your fine talents and situation, and all that, made the victims of a bigotted opinion of his influence and power, and good dispositions towards you." I assured him he had entirely mistaken my principles and feelings, political and private. "Sir, I shall be happy to find I am mistaken; but I must first convince you of your mistake. Sir, I will convince you that Lord Castle-Wycomb is the bitterest enemy you have—the enemy of your principles, your character, your fortunes, that he would reduce you to beggary, to idiotcy if he could, merely that he might render you as a dupe, more subservient; and as a drudge, more laborious. Sir, he is a man who would sacrifice the whole world, to retain the consequence which be feels shaken under him at this moment."—" Your language, Mr. M. is somewhat extraordinary—I have no exaggerated confidence in the regard of Lord Castle-Wycomb, but what motive can he have for such enmity as you ascribe to him."—" Sir, I am not a man to use extraordinary and unsupported language-—I come prepared with proofs;





but, Sir, it is reasonable to expect, that when a man runs the risk I do, he should expect something more than mere conviction for his pains: he is entitled, in my opinion, to claim some service in return, some little consideration—not pecuniary, I mean, for that would be mercenary, but something that proves one has not thrown away the pains that have been taken for another."—-" When I know the service you are to render me, Mr. M. it will be time to consider what compensation I am to make for" it"— "Well, Sir, that is fairly said; and, now to the proof. May I ask, Sir, without any offence, are you not in the habit of high and frequent play at the houses of Lady Westhampton and Lady CastleWycomb?"—" Have the goodness, Sir, to inform me, when and where this catechising is to end."-—" No offence, Sir— dear Sir, no offence in the'world is intended. Know your friends, Sirand if





you would know your enemies, read this letter—this letter in my hand, Sir; pardon me, Sir, in my hand—I'll hold it as near as you like." The letter was in Lord Castle-Wycomb's hand: it was addressed to his lady '. a great part of it Avas reproach contained in a variety of allusions I did not understand: tbe latter part related to me. It was as follows:

"I am sensible we may both injure each other, by open war. I am, therefore for a treaty of alliance on political (that is the best) principles. You have provoked me, and I have not been deficient in retaliation, but these things are better forgotten, at least we need not reriew them. I know what you insist upon as the guarantee of every treaty, but I have no money to give you—of my own, I mean. That wild Irishman, who married your sister, and came to London to be ruined, may be useful to us both;





but he must be tamed first: he is exactly the man I want for Irish affairs, animated and popular, and with some degree of information; but he is exactly the man who would use all those powers against us, if we employed them now. Helms got his head and his heart too, filled with all the stuff that many young mens' heads and hearts are usually filled with, for the sins of their employers. It would be of use to me to bring forward this bold, dashing, fresh character in my traces, but I must break him first—nothing breaks a man so much as pecuniary involvement. His property is a greater obstruction to my object, than his principles, as I am fond of believing. If I have any knowledge of his character, he is easily dissipated, and easily duped by women. I resign him to you; bring him to your parties—to your E. O. tables, and make him useful there. Throw Bellamy in his way, they are just fit to ruin each other. Even if he wins, he will be dissipated—thoroughly, inveterately dissipated; and dissipation is almost as strong a security for pliancy of principles, as poverty. I resign him entirely to you, which, remember I would do on no other condition, for it is a pity to ruin so fine a young man, if it was not for our mutual advantage. I resign him to you; the villa shall be finished, you shall give the masked ball after the birthnight, if you resign the infernal poupon and its furniture—If not—war, open war." There was a vast deal more. I had read enough: too much, for it was now too late. The whole plan had succeeded. I was ruined. I turned to Mason, and collected breath enough to tell him it was now too late—that I thanked him for his service—but its only use was now to teach me revenge, since it could not teach me safety. He followed me with arguments upon arguments as I strode up and down the room breathless with agony and shame. I remember nothing of what he said but the object; it was evidently to make me, like himself, the hackneyed agent of the opposite side. "You have ground to stand on, Sir, that will shake the ground under his feet: you can now expose him as a mean plotter with dissipated women to subdue a man of talents and spirits to his object." As he spoke, a wild thought struck me; I turned on him. "How did you obtain possession of that letter?" He started back. "Sir, that is a question you must not ask, at least I must not answer; but be assured it came into my hands with the full consent of Lady Castle-Wycomb." I was rushing to Berkeley Square, when Mason caught me by the arm—" Is this the return you make for the service I have done you, to expose me and yourself only to new derision and further injury. Ts this your gratitude?" "What gratitude, what return do you expect? I know not what vou can ask, or mean."





I can hardly bring myself to detail his answer. I will not at least detail his prefaces and preparations. The object was , simply this: that I should avail myself of my frequent access to Lord Castle-Wycomb's closet, to possess myself, or rather possess Mr. Mason, of somepapers relative to the late election for M—ddl—sex, in which Lord Castle-Wycomb was suspected of having given private documents to some of the constituents, utterly different from his public sentiments, on the choice of the member. It was an unfortunate time for this infamous proposal; the conspiracy against my character had aroused all its pride. Mr. Mason made a very rapid and disorderly retreat, and I hurried to Berkeley Square. My recollection had entirely forsaken me, till I saw it all tumultuous with carriages and chairs, and Lady Castle-Wycomb and Lady West





hampton alighting from theirs at the same moment. Encumbered by their hoops, i was compelled to offer my assistance to them, and followed them into the drawing room (where the whole party were to reassemble on their return from court) with a kind of vacant misery of mind, such as follows a sudden and incredible shock of the feelings. I answered the badinage of the ladies, who were in high spirits, with levity as loud as their own, yet my heart was almost bursting with the struggle it underwent. More brilliant triflers arrived, intoxicated with the splendor of the day, and I trifled with them till Lady Montrevor and Athanasia arrived in my magnificent unpaid-for carriage. I heard Lady Montrevor's voice, as Bellamy, who had arrived at the same moment, handed her to 'the drawing-room. "Oh, Mr. Bellamy, I am actually dying of pleasure and fatigue, and attar of roses. Never was anything so gracious and so flattering

VOL.-III. N





i



as my reception. I never beheld anything like the splendor and croud of the circle. Go, and assist Mrs. Bethel, who is sinking under her hoop, or her terrors: I am a veteran you know, and accustomed to this unwieldy armour. I assure you it did prodigious execution to-day."

She entered the drawing-room with a flush of triumph and animation, and beauty and pride, that to me, who knew "all was false and hollow, that her spirits were as much worn for the occasion as the rouge that lit her features with all the freshness of youth, to me gave a pang of love and despair, such as for a moment made me forget myself for her. But her spirits were as much under her command as any part of the preparation of the day. "Well, Mrs. Bethel, you are now initiated in the mysteries of the drawing-room, of which, like all others, the only secret lies in the courage that determines to find it out. Really the spectacle was quite formi





tlable to a novice. Old Clytus may talk as he pleases of Greeks, but when "Hoops join hoops, then is the tug of war." When they abolish them at court all the amusement of the occasion will disappear. Nothing diverts me so much as an helpless figure, stuck in the center of its own finery, and managing an unmanageable circumference of drapery with artless melancholy and pains. Did you see the Duchess, Lady Westhampton, treading on her own train, and begging every one else's pardon? And the dowager—." "Oh, spare me," said Athanasia, "I am sure all this tirade is aimed against Me, and my artless melancholy. I am sure I acquitted myself most shockingly." *l Pardon me, my dear, nothing could acquit themselves better than you and your nastwitieme-wreaths: I actually woukl have praised you before, if I had time to spare from my own praises." "I wish to heaven," said Lady Castle-Wy





comb, " we could send our hoops to court, as we send our tickets, to visit for us, and let them stand in our places there." "And some of them would stand much better than their owners, that look like spirits conjured into a magic circle, and obliged to answer certain interrogatories by the operation of the white or black rod. Now, Mrs. Bethel, observe I am not alluding to you. Hoops, not wearers, as the political people say—measures, riot men, are the objects of my animadversions. 'You acquitted yourself most' charmingly,with a diffidence, a simplicity, si touchante, si naive, that I could see by the princesses charming eyes,' they were all delighted with you. Then, in your simplicity, you did not mistake the first lord of the bedchamber for Majesty, when I presented your ticket to him, nor did you turn your back on the presence; or commit any of the etourderies of a stranger to courts and their ways.





But were not you delighted and amazed? Lady Castle-Wycomb, did you ever see so splendid a circle ?—actually I believe one of my feathers is broke—I don't wonder at it—" dire zvas the noise of conflict, over head the feathery hiss of nodding plumes in waving vollies few, and flying vaulted either host with dozvn." "The occasion has made you quite a poet, Lady Montrevor!" "Yes, my lord, a poetlaureat. I wish to heaven there was a poet appointed to describe the splendors of a birth day—it 'would be no very troublesome office; "pure description," you know, might "hold the place of sense." It is a melancholy consideration how many spangles will be tarnished, and how many flowers fade, and crape petticoats grow yellow, and foliages grow heaven knows what colour or colours, that might look for ever green in song, and glitter in our dreams of past splendor when we are buried in the country, or





in Ireland. ' Oh, Heavens! here are the croud actually drawing Colonel Montolieu's carriage. Throw up all the sashes, and let us see and be seen."

I would neither see nor be seen. I hurried from the room, followed by Lady C. W. who deserted the spectacle of her brother's triumph, to remind me it was her night, and she expected the pleasure of seeing me in Berkeley Square. I told her, in a voice of false composure, that I should certainly wait on her, it was my firm intention ; and hurried away to hide myself from the hateful tumult of the day, and think while but a few hours remained to think or act.

As I traversed the streets, shunning those that echoed with triumph of the Montolieu's, and the tumult of this tumultuous day, my thoughts almost hurried me to distraction. Lord CastleWycomb was a man against whom I could exhibit no resentment, that would





not injure myself more than him. He was in power, and an habitual invalid—■ reproaches would never reach him, and he would not fight. He would shelter himself, under his privileges, from all persecution; and of my accusation, Avhat proof could I bring while the letter remained in Mason's hands? Against his depraved wife what could be said or done? I was injured without a possibility of retaliation, and ruined without an hope of redress: one paragraph of that infernal letter astonished me while I recollected it. It ran thus—" If my sister, Lady Delphina Orberry, would make our alliance a triple one, we should make sure of our object with greater expedition; but a woman who sacrifices so largely to her vanity or her passions, is not a safe instrument to be employed by us at least; she has her own designs on him, and if she succeeds, her success will benefit us; if she fails, we shall at least not be committed in her failure."





This passage seemed to acquit Lady Delphina of joining their conspiracy, but it hinted a deeper one of her own formation. I had not a friend on earth at that moment but Lady Montrevor. Nothing ever interfered with the views of her clear and powerful mind, but the fatal passion whose influence had only extended to herself. She had no failings of understanding or feeling to others.— I determined to consult her, and abide implicitly by her advice. My heart was wrung to its inmost nerves! For myself, I felt at that moment the awakened pride of my character:—my consciousness of abused powers, my contempt of the infamous management that had been practised on me by the collusion of political fraud and rapacious depravity, could have, supported me to struggle through, and to spurn the difficulties in





which they had plunged me!—but my wife — my heart bled! How could she

abide how could / see her abide the

pelting of the storm that darkened round us? I felt, with intolerable compunction, that the enmity of the whole world could not have injured us, had not my folly, my vanity, my infatuation conspired to spread and to close the snares of iniquity! My feelings were intolerable!—it was a relief to escape from thent by hurrying to Berkley Square.

I was there at an early hour. The party who were to make their appearance on their return from the drawing-room, and who principally consisted of those who had gone there, was of course unusually splendid, and unusually late.— Lady Castle-Wycomb's vanity had fixed on a night when the magnificence of the court-dresses would heighten the eclat of her entertainment; and had requested all with whom she was intimate not ta take the trouble of throwing off their hoops and ornaments, as they would meet very few, and all would be in the same costume with them. The servants were only lighting the tripods on the stairs "Are any of the ladies returned from St.. James's?" "No, Sir; they are not expected to return this hour." "Has Lady Montrevor returned?" "No, Sir."





I turned away, weary and disappointed. The night was clear and beautiful, the cold pure air refreshed my burning eyes and forehead. I dismissed the carriage, and determined to walk round the square till some one arrived: in a few minutes I saw a chariot stop at Lord Castle-Wycomb's; and a glittering figure, in a court-dress, descend from it. By the distant light of the flambeaux, I thought the figure had some resemblance to Ladv Montrevor's. I was in that state of mind which believes the first object it sees to be that it wishes to see. I followed the





lady to the drawing-room, and there discovered Lady Delphina Orberry, who not at all flattered by her reception at Court, from a Queen, whose purity of manners adds dignity to her dignified station, had retreated as soon as possible to Berkley Square, where she was to pass the night. "Oh, Mr. Bethel, I am rejoiced to see yon—and to see you alone. The hope of it was all that impelled me to this encounter. I have no longer spirit for a croud—and I wish to spare you the pain of deserting me in the midst of one as you did the other night.—~ Don't be afraid" (she saw me about to speak) "I have no intention, no motive to reproach you: you are happy in the bosom of domestic felicity and honor. I could not disturb you—I have no wish to do it. It will not at least offend you. that I wish for your happiness;—I know I have no power to contribute, to it by. more than wishes." "I have no spirits





to encounter your satire, Lady Delphina; and no heart to thank, to reward your kindness—if you are kind." "Oh, you do yourself injustice—you knew how to reward my kindness well,—my weakness, my wretchedness I would say—when you exposed it to the bitterest enemy I have on earth—when you told Lady Montrevor of your triumph over the weak, fond fool—weak and foolish that I was—and fond, too fond."

She was in tears:—I vindicated myself by the most solemn and vehement asseverations; I assured her that Lady Montrevor had her intelligence from herself as soon 1 was proceeding—" Oh,

Heavens! how cruel men can be. How else came her signature, her hateful name, on the note you gave me? Here it is— take it back: aye, you may read, you may kiss the name if you will—I know how you love it—M. D.. J. Montrevor— it is as. plain as my shame—my folly t but take it back, Sir. Sir John, provoked by the discovery of my weakness, has refused it, has refused any compromise for the prosecution. I would have consulted —I would have advised—but your cold, contemptuous, cruel manner has deprived me of all feeling, but for myself."





It is a mockery to talk of feelings at some horrible moments. In my agony I fell at her feet-—I besought, I implored* for relief, for refuge—I promised any concession, any sacrifice, any thing, and every thing in the power of man, or beyond it—I threw myself on her resources, on her mercy, utterly and unreservedly. "Oh spare me," said she, "the sight of your distraction, for it makes me incapable of thought. You know not what an heart you have abused, what a spirit has been sacrificed to your love, and youp hatred. I am not deficient in resources, but the horrors of this moment have only left me one to suggest. To one who





loves as I do, in spite of contempt and cruelty, nothing can be terrible; oh that yeu Felt as I did, willing to leave this horrid country, and go somewhere where solitude would be soothed by love, and love would be unbroken by shame or persecution of cruel, worldly minds."—* I was silent, for I was stunned. "Oh come with me, and we shall be happy," 'said she, rising, and hanging on my shoulder, *' I have enough for us in some delightful retreat in a safe and delightful country, where no cruel, formal minds shall dictate to us our modes of happiness—where if the world despises us, we shall despise the world with so much more reason, so much more conviction of its worthlessness."

She still hung on me; but she saw my eyes fixed on a point—she saw the big, cold drops on my forehead—she heard me murmur in agony—" Great God, is it come to this !"—" Oh, I see my proposal, and myself, are horrible to you; but they cannot be more horrible than this despair is to me. Be calm, be composed, and I will say no more—not another word— let the world, the infamous unfeeling world, and my unfeeling infamous husband act as they will" "And, is there no other resource—no other refuge r Is there no hope—no redemption for me—





for Athanasia? Oh, G—d ! — Oh,

God 1" "Hush !—Are you a man?—Have you reason? There is: Money—money will purchase any thing; it will bribe even my horrid tyrant to silence; all things are possible, if you have money, I will undertake—I will negotiate."—"I have nothing, absolutely nothing; I am plunged in debts, and have not the means of extricating myself, if I mortgaged every acre I am worth. The disposal of a large estate takes too much time for my persecutors to wait. I could raise money, by ruining my unborn child; but I will first consume in z dungeon—let him coin my blood for drachmas: I have nothing else to give."





I wept with the weak agony of a child. "This is dreadful! and you suffer thus, and you persist and rejoice in suffering . thus, for one who is melting in your arms, with the dreams of another love, and you spurn one who—". "What is it you mean?—What would you have me think?" "That you are the most insensible of mankind, in every thing—that you either are cursed, or blessed with a total blindness, in respect toyour wife; or that by a mutual happy act of amnesty, you both agree to forget—she, that she has too beautiful a mother; or you, that you have too zealous-a friend." "I hear your words, and hardly hear them; they have no meaning in my ears. I am stunned and giddy; if you have any thing to propose, do it quickl}', while I am able to comprehend you; for my





brain-—my eyes, seem bursting out in

flames." "Try your chance your

chance this one night—only this one night; if Fortune has not favored you of late, she will relent to-night. I know of nothing that can extricate us from our present misery, but money; double your rates, and triple, and quadruple your bets. Bellamy, or Lord Invermay, or Lord Roschamp, will play with you for any thing. This is a night of intoxication and joy; all may be well in a few hours, and we may laugh at persecution.—Hush! Hark! they are coming—I hear carriages at the door—they must not see you with this dishevelled hair, and flushed cheek. It will kill your affectionate wife, or mother-in-law, I would say, to see you; run down the back stairs, wait till they have come up, and then enter through the hall. I will stand here, and spread my hoop before the door."





There was but a moment left for taking her advice.—The horrors of that night never will quit my memory, if I lived a thousand years. I quitted Berkeley Square, at five in the morning, a beggar.---! leaned my burning head on Athanasia's neck, when I got into the carriage; she did not shed a tear; she did not utter a reproach. When she thought my despair had exhausted itself, she said, in a voice of soft, youthful, tender firmness—" When my love has repressed the keenness of his too exquisite feelings, he will, perhaps, pronounce this the happiest period of his life; we have nothing left to love or cherish, but each other; and if the trappings of which we are divested, were an obstruction to the ease and simplicity of love, how shall we regret their removal!"

Her reproaches would have been more tolerable—I threw myself on the bed in frantic, unmanly grief She had no strength to contend with me; she was apparently intent on something that was passing in her own mind. As I lay extended on the bed, stifling my groans, I saw her through the dressing-room door, go to her secretaire, take out a number of letters, which she tore and burned, and then write, apparently a short note, with many pauses of thought. When she had finished, she came to me again, and again hung over me. I was insensible to reason, I would have been irritated by the clamour of consolation; but the touch of her cold, soft cheek, on ray burning hands, and the dew of her silent tears, and the gentle unfelt wind* ing of her fairy arms within mine, were like balm to my body and mind; but these moments of undeserved softness and consolation, could not continue long, I was compelled to rise, and look my ruin in my face. The morning presented me with bills to the amount of thousands; and recollections of debts for more than thousands. I looked on them with a fixed and empty eye; I heard Athanasia's voice; I started up and traversed the room in agony. Had I never known her, or her worth, it had been a mercy to me. I wished to banish all human feelings from-my heart; I wished to be as wild as my fortune at that moment, to have no hope, or resource, or tie---Nothing to hold me to life or reason; and to know her only amid misery and ruin, to her mild and steady virtues, beaming out on the darkness that gathered round me, and showing its extent, and its blackness—to know that she loved me when.I was no longer worthy to be loved; that / loved her, when I could no longer maintain her!!! How could my reason survive that moment; it could not survive much longer. I had no resource, but the disposal of my property, the impoverishment, the





alienation of my child. I had but this^ this only to interpose between myself and a prison; between Athanasia and aprisoii.

At that moment, I had no power to propose either alternative, I determined to adopt neither, without the consent of my injured wife; but the application for consent, that killing exposure of our ruined state, that full, unfeeling detail of our utter destitution, -I dared not, I could not, at that moment, have undertaken for worlds. With the natural compromise of misery, I resolved to defer it, at least, for a few hours, and with the natural vitality of hope, I tried to believe, that in those few hours something might intervene to prevent it.

I could not in those few hours, confine myself to home, to the reproaches of Athanasia's soothings, to the woundings of her sight—I rushed out. How shall I disclose the workings of a despairing mind.—I wished when I quitted the house, that I might never behold her again; that she might be at peace before I returned to tell her she was ruined.— I rushed out—I hurried through the streets, without knowing where I was going; without intending to go any where. The business of the preceding night, it was necessary to disclose to Lady Delphina Orberry; — but to her house I dreaded to go, as I would dread to enter the den of scorpions.





It was the latter end of January, a chill and drizzling shower had fallen all day, I was drenched and insensible of it; the only sensation I experienced, was a kind of blind impatience, to escape from all places of concourse. I had almost reached the end of Sloane Street, when a carriage, which I had not noticed, stopt close to the pavement, and a voice called to me. To any Voice that called to me, in a tone of feeling, I would have turned at that moment; for I panted for relief and refuge. I knew not what I was doing till I felt myself seated in a carriage, beside Lady Delphina, my bodily weariness was great, almost as great as my mental emotions. I fell back in the carriage; I felt her applying her handkerc hief to my damp, pallid forehead. I felt her cool, soft touch on my cheek; I could not resist; I could not repel the soothing tones in which





she spoke; they were like music

melancholy music to my ear. She

brought me to South Audley Street; I passed that day (a dreadful day) with her.: .... .

I will not tell of our long, and broken conferences; of the varied and opposite passions that tore my mind; of the address with which she combated my wildest bursts of emotion, and insinuated, at safe intervals, the poison of her consolation, of her advice. When I told her, in a voice of agony, I was ruined— when I repeated it, till like the sorceress in "Thalaba," "my voice was a shapeless yell," she again whispered the proposal, of—Escape from England, from wretchedness, from ruin! When she saw me rushing into frenzy at the hint, she again deprecated 'my despair, bewailed her own rashness, exhorted me to stay and bear as I might\ the proud compassion of the Montolieu's, the worldly feeling, and hackneyed Comedie Larmoyante, that Lord Montrevor would play; the cold, politic triumph of her brother. "The glittering Lady Montrevor," said she, "will distinguish your fate by a brilliant sentence ; or, perhaps, a brilliant tear; and the world will applaud her wit, or her sensibility; no matter which, to her, provided they applaud.—And j7our little sentimental angel of a wife will, for once, be obliged to defraud her feelings oi a tear to bestow on vulgar distress." "My wife.!"—I groaned involuntarily, it was an ill-omened sound for the effect it was intended to produce. I gave way to all the vehemence, and all the anguish of my feelings. I cursed myself, and commiserated Athanasia with that bitter and compunctious pity, that could weep blood over the ruins it has caused, and cannot repair.





She wept too—her tears were nothing to me—I felt only my own despair— "Oh heavens," said she, or sobbed in a struggling and inward tone, as if absorbed in her own thoughts—" Oh heavens, was ever man so cruel—he has no heart —let any power, if the powers of mercy have not all renounced me, look down and judge between us this moment—see how he weeps for her to my face—for her who is wasting and cold in his arms with passion for another—-before me, me who would follow him—what do I say ?—who have supplicated to follow him, ruined as he is, through the world." If I did"

VOL. III. o





not understand this dark language I felt it. I was in that state, to which a new source of misery is even a relief. I demanded an explanation of her words. She would again have involved herself in allusion and mystery; but it was too late, I was too desperate for suspence or circumlocution. I compelled her to a long, distinct, consistent narrative. My blood ran cold, yet I listened till I had heard it all. No suspicions of the narrator's veracity could throw a shadow of relief over my mind; they were circumstances she had no concern in, which she could not fabricate, which she could not have contributed to. When all was told, I asked for proofs, in a voice whose firmness startled myself. She paused a moment, but she. was soon collected: "Since," said she rising, "I have committed myself by this disclosure to one who has no feeling for me, or for himself, if he neglects it, I must not be asked for





proofs in vain; if you have courage for confirmations strong, I have told you they are deposited in Mrs. B.'s secretaire; mine and hers were made by the same artist, I believe the same key will open them both, probably, if you try, you will succeed" (she well .knew I must) you know we have high authority for intercepted correspondence,"

She gave a small key into my hand as she spoke: I took it vacantly, I gazed on it for a moment, without the slightest consciousness of its use. She saw my eye fixed in a kind of wild stupor, she knew the way to rouze me: "this is the moment," said she, looking at her watch, "this, or never; Mrs. B. is at a party, some ball or concert, I heard her talk of it; you will perhaps have no other opportunity, if you neglect this, and if you think it worth the trial, why neglect it?"

I had not noticed the lateness of the hour. It is a false observation, that to the miserable time appears universally slow; there is a species of misery to which it appears to acquire an incredible precipitation. I hurried from South-Audley Street; it was near eleven o'clock when I quitted it; it never occurred to me that Athanasia might be at home. When I reached the drawing-room, she was alone, and reading. In the confusion which I felt at her sight, I traced something like the consciousness and the punishment of detected meanness; but I was now in the habit of struggling with my better feelings, yet I could not collect myself to conceal my surprize at seeing her at home. I said something inarticulately about her engagement. "I knew," said she with that gentle firmness, whose language was now like daggers to me, "it was your wish that I should appear abroad just at this time, and I therefore determined to go; but from some cause I felt myself so agitated,





that Doctor D. told me I must not venture into a crowd. He did not know the pleasure he was procuring me; yet I had a presage (said she stretching out her white slender arms to me) that you would not pass this whole night abroad." I could not resist, yet I could not yield to her. I bent to her, hut it was with averted head; I dared not let her see my face. Suddenly I turned to her, I clasped her with agony, with violence; I gazed on her with dry, and burning eyes. I held her for a moment, and released her with a pang, which if I ever feel again, it will be surely the presage of dissolution. .

She attempted to follow me. "No, my love, not now; your softness is too much for me; 1 am not well, I am not happy." My voice failed. I wished every thing else might fail me at that bitter moment. "Noip then," said 6he, and she clung to me, not with the cloyingand fulsome blandishments that weary instead of soothing, but with the chaste monitory pleadings of conjugal fondness, the " sweet remembrancers" of mutual joy and sorrow.





It was thifc memorable night that I obtained a just and comparative knowledge of Athanasia's character, that made it appear superior to any I had ever known or imagined. How different was the pure breath that played over my parched, and pallid cheeks, from the feverous sighs of passion exhaled by one whose name and image were at that moment hateful to me; the latter breathing all the voluptuous despair of guilty passion, the former able to "chase all sadness but despair." How different was the bland and balm-dropping lip, that gave such touching effect to its lessons of love, from that which only talked of the indulgence, or the desperation of guilt. I mentally compared Athanasia with all of her sex who





had ever attracted me. Lady Montrevor, by far the most brilliant and fascinating both to the senses and the mind, I felt was formed to be admired; the seductive and infatuating Lady Delphina was formed to be desired, but Athanasia was formed to be loved.

I yielded to her spells of softness with the melancholy pleasure of one who has to travel a long, dark way, yet lingers as he goes to gaze on the fairy lights that cheer while they cheat him by their "blear illusion." I never knew the powers of her mind till this night, they were various, they were exquisite. She told me with a smile, that was not one of her plaintive smiles, that she was determined to try if her harp retained the virtue of charming away the evil spirit; and seating herself at it, began adapting some passages from the "lay of the last minstrel," which she had been reading, to a wild extemporaneous melody which she excelled in in





venting. From the praises of her music she led me to the praises of the subject. She pointed out the passages of that most beautiful poem she had heard me admire, with a kind of doubtful appeal that almost interested me. I was willing to forget myself. I yielded to her with a melancholy joy that struggled to catch one weak and wintry beam of gladness before the night set in.

Supper made its appearance at a late hour, yet we thought it early; it was the first domestic night I had passed since my marriage. "Well," said Athanasia, as she quitted her harp to approach the table, lf if fortune denies us other luxuries, we can, at least, have the feast of music, and the flow of song." The delicacy of this reference to fortune, where she might have accused another agent, I , felt in every nerve. I acquired some command of myself—our supper was almost chearful. As she rose, she said, u'ith a smile, "J pitied poor Julia de Roubigne iq her retirement, when her proud father tore away the little wreath with which, she had decorated his supper. Jtfy Jove is pot of his mind. He will not tear away the little ornaments of fancy or taste which I have reserved to embellish pyr table—when—when it is spread in solitude and indigence, like Roubigne's." Tl)i$ was too much: she ought to have been less an angel, in mercy to me. I. begged of her to spare me; to spare herself; to reflect that her physician had recommended repose. "And you have exerted yourself very much, too much, to-night, my love." "I have exerted myself very much, not too much, if J have amused you, (she was retiring; she turned suddenly, and said, with a face glowing with expression) do you know I was piqued to exert myself to prove .to you, that when you retire from the world, \% wiH be with one not destitute of' the rer o $.





sources that make retirement supportable." I caught her in my arms. I forgot every thing at that moment—every object but herself. I banished all that was past. I would not think of what was to come.

The medicines her physician had prescribed to compose her soon produced their effect. To me—to sleep was impossible. My restlessness was even increased by her tranquillity. At this moment the recollection of the key, and of Lady Delphina's narrative, rushed on my mind: for a moment I repelled it. It returned to me with resistless impulse. Something like a confused notion of justice to Athanasia prompted the investigation; something like a desire, a confidence of her vindication, palliated the meanness of a clandestine scrutiny. The words " cold and wasting in your arms with passion for another," rung in my ears. I felt that I must be satisfied. I felt that my mi





sery would be insupportable if I received conviction of what I could not name to myself; and I felt that suspicion would be almost worse than conviction. I rose. She was still asleep—I went to her dressing room—I applied the key—it opened the secretaire in a moment. My hands recoiled as I touched the papers which I knew were not mine. I forced myself to examine them—there were some fragments of letters in Deloraine's hand: they probably belonged to those I had seen her tear the preceding night. Among them lay a letter recently written, addressed to Deloraine; it was unsealed. I opened it—it was the writing of Athanasia—it was dated the preceding night. During my perusal of the first lines I felt some revoltings at the act I was engaged in, but they were quickly swallowed up by other feelings. I will make no comments on this letter—I will state it exactly as it occurs to my memory.





To E. Deloraine, Esq. Moglena Castle, Galway, Ireland.

. 41I MEAN not to assail you with reproaches, for to you I owe it, that my eyes are at length opened: the work was gradual, but it is at length completed. Never did woman escape from such ruin; never did woman escape by such means from such ruin. When I look back and .reflect that a few months—what do I say —a few days back I was a miserable, perverted being, seduced by the jargon of sentiment, and sacrificing my best feelings and affections to a false pernicious principle which I dared not examine, yet thought it a duty not to resist, and trying to assume a wild virtue from the sacrifice. When I recollect myself, and so , lately, the pupil of false sentiment, and all its works; dying to be the heroine of a mad and wicked tale of a Rousseau, of a Gothe, of a Wolstonecra'ft; dying to





convert imaginary duties into real, and real into imaginary ones; when I recollect this, how can I be but grateful to the hand that led me to the very brink of the precipice, though its intention was to dash me from it, since it was there that I recovered my reason and my sight? Yes, Sir, you have led me blind and infatuated through many a maze of delusive feeling, and you might, perhaps, have led me on till the power to pause or to retreat was utterly lost to me, had you not, by too precipitate a disclosure of your own views, awoke for ever those of your victim. The reign of false feeling is over. Alive, and trembling at my new existence, I review my past and present self, and shudder to think what I might have been, and triumph to think what I may yet be— what I may be, for my present feelings want confirmation and exercise. To the whinings of romantic delirium has succeeded a determined discharge of duties,





to which my heart has long prompted me, had I not struggled with its dictates —struggled to mistake them. Lest the smallest suspicion should remain on your mind that I am deceiving myself or you, in this representation of the change of my feelings, I most solemnly assure you I never loved you: I never loved man hut him whom misfortune has endeared to me; whom I never knew how much I loved, till urged to desert and dishonor him. The wild attachment, which I deceived myself and you in suffering you to believe you had inspired me with, was the unhappy offspring of many unhappy causes—of a neglected mind, an insidi^ ous and fatal companion—an artful man —a dangerous course of study—and the wanderings of an untutored mind, too prone to passion and to melancholy; too fond of exalting fantastic sufferings, and believing it ought to be unhappy, because the subjects it loved to read of were unhappy. Accept my solemn declaration that my heart is my husband's; it ever was—it ever shall be his. I never knew I loved him, till now—but it is not too late. When I compare his heart and character with those of him who would alienate me from him, my own is torn with shame and pride and love. In the agonies of my first conflict, on the discovery of your unworthiness, or my own, I believed I had not long to live. I now wish to have my life protracted, that it may (for I flatter it yet may) be devoted to the happiness of his. Write to me no more, Sir, it is in vain; your miserable agent is dismissed, I wiil see her no more; I will hear no more from you. I have banished all my French books. I have destroyed all your letters. I would request you to destroy those you have received from me, but I would be sorry to be thought to possess interest enough to make a request from you: perhaps it may humble me, and reform you, that they should be left with you as evidences of a mind retrieved from folly before folly was darkened into guilt. I will spare Mr. Bethel the knowledge of your unworthiness, for I wish to spare him pain. Perhaps my lenity may be erroneous, I trust you will not prove it so.





I am, Sir, &c. &c. &c.

Athanasia Betpel.

Such was the letter: I have said before I will make no comments on it. I am as little able to make any comment on the feelings with which I perused it. I had no time for feeling; that gush of delieioys emotion which overflows the heart on the renewal of affection, and the vindication of virtue, had hardly visited mine, when I was disturbed by a footstep approaching—I turned round—Athanasia had risen, and stood at the dressing-room door. She saw my employment, and was. bending forward with an expression that can never be described, and never for-; gotten. I did not move—neither of us spoke. This strange scene continued in silence for more than a moment. She retired without speaking- a word. I remained—ah the enthusiasm of my joy, a joy that made me for a moment forget all misery, extinguished by a consciousness of meanness, of jealous and officious meanness, that abased me to the dust. It was near an hour before I could drag myself into the next room—she was asleep. My heart sunk within me when I was compelled the next morning to meet her injured, unrebuking eye. She never hinted at the subject, or shewed the least constraint in her manner; but I was now so well acquainted with the strength of her mind, that this did not deceive me with regard either to her knowledge or her feeling on the late subject. We both seemed to talk studiously on indifferent topics; nor do I ever recollect having talked more, and understood less of what I was saying, than that wayward morning. .





To the distraction of my thoughts but one relief presented itself, to consult Lady Montrevor, from whom I now felt as if I was to expect every thing; for there is a weariness in wretchedness, that imposes an artificial debility on the mind, and makes it impatient to devolve its burden on another. As I hurried to Berkeley Square, I formed a' resolution to make one desperate effort for the happiness which I seemed hitherto to have trifled so worthlessly away. With my views of Athanasia's exquisite mind and character, my hopes of happiness, however remote, or however undeserved, rose strongly and sanguinely—as sanguine as my first dreams of pleasure. I determined to extricate myself from all pecuniary embarrassments—from London— from Lady Delphina, at any price; and to fly with Athanasia from the withering atmosphere of vice, as the only chance of safety or of happiness.





People often defeat their own intentions, by the policy which they employ in compassing them. Athanasia and I, concealing our separate intentions of consulting Lady M., met in her dressingroom, and counteracted each other's object. It would have been indeed impossible, under any circumstances, to have procured a long audience of Lady Montrevor. Castle-Wycomb house was in a tumult of preparation, that occupied every room. The grand fancy ball, which was to celebrate all the distinguished events that had lately occurred in the Montolieu family, was to take place the following night. All the company were to be in character, but without masks; and all that taste or fashion, or wealth, could accumulate, was summoned to this brilliant festival. The first artists in London were employed to lend all the witchery of light, and drapery, and dramatic picturing, to the decorations. It was the fashionable lounge of the day, to examine the preparations, bestow praise, and hint improvement; and Lady M., to whose taste every thing was submitted, after stimulating her harassed spirits with laudanum, walked through the rooms, a second Aspasia, dispensing the oracles of taste and fashion, and hiding the corro' sions of her mind, under applause and admiration. I found her surrounded by a group of fashionables, to whom she was explaining the intended effect of a deception in the perspective of the adjacent room, which was intended to represent the Temple of the Sun, the splendid theatre of Peruvian worship. Colonel Montolieu was laughing, with all the open vivacity of his character, at the fashionable rage for borrowing all the embellish





merits of our drapery, and apartments, and fetes, from the recent local scenery of some national victory. "It is very

well, hitherto," said he, laughing

"Egypt and South America certainly furnish enough of picturesque objects, but what the devil will you do, if our next successful expedition should be to the Cape of Good Hope, for instance? Will you fill all your rooms with sketches of squab Dutch villas, and Hottentots in natural bronze, capering among them— Mais coutume est tout." —" At least," said Lady M. "if you give us no other decorations, you will take care we shall be supplied with laurels."—" Oh," said she, turning, and observing that Athanasia and I had entered at different times, and apparently with different parties, "quite a fashionable pair, I protest —I believe the only w«-fashionable pair, at this moment in the room, are Manco Capac and his wife, if we may judge from their attitude." She continued, fixing the attention of the whole groupe of triflers, on the figures of the great Peruvian legislators, at the extremity of the room, and turning her full, dark eyes on Athanasia and me, with something like mingled fondness and reproach at the same moment.





The group gradually dispersed through the apartments, gazing at novelties, but one straggler remained near us. "My tlear Lady Georgina," said Lady M.— "Can you think of no colour for theMantle of Manco Capac but yellow. I know all you would say about his affinity to the sun, &c. &c. &c. But you know all the colours that Ovid gives to the palace of his sun; and why should the South American sun be less brilliant."—" I really do not know," said the simple Lady Georgina, stunned, as Lady M. meant she should be, with this tirade, " but I am sure your ladyship has the best taste in the world."—" Oh^ my clear, don't talk of taste, every one knows that your taste is equal to your understanding--almost; and you will do me the greatest favor in the world, by just glancing at the figure again; and the light it is placed in, and giving me your opinion, which I assure you will be decisive, as it ought to be."





Lady Georgina, delighted with her commission, tripped away. Lady M. walked rapidly into a small cabinet: I followed her—her back was turned to me, but by the sudden motion of her arms, I could perceive she was clasping them on her breast, with the strongest expression of agony and devotion. I approached her---she did not turn.— "What an employment," said she, apparently to herself, " for a dying woman!" I repeated the word "dying," with astonishment. I could not follow such rapid transitions of mind as this most unhappy woman was accustomed to undergo, in the struggle between her feelings and her habits. "Yes, I know, I feel I have not long to live: I cannot be deceived in my present presages—the laws of the invisible world are not repealed for mockery."—" Good heaven! what can you mean by this terrible language ?"— "I mean," said she, in an hollow but calm voice, "that I am dying, certainly dying: scepticism cannot resist the warning that has been sent to me---whether in wrath or mercy, I know—oh, I knownot !" She threw up her eyes to heaven with an expression of appealing agony, that terrified and exalted me. "Twice," she continued, turning to me, "twice since have I seen the figure of that man who has been dead these twenty yearslaugh, if you will, but I must tremble, .till I know the truth; and then, perhaps, others will tremble for me—twice," said she, sitting down, and suppressing her





voice, " I have seen him, and in the same place, and in the same form: I knew him well: he stood firmly on the ground —he gazed steadily on me."

She put her hand before her eyes, as if to banish the horrible vision. I urged the distracted state of her nerves—r urged the effects of laudanum, and the dreadful quantities she was accustomed to take. She shook her head incredulously. "No, no—I know the state of my nerves—I know the state of my mind. I have been accustomed to a kind of artificial and delirious strength, which has rather disposed me to ridicule these things, than to yield ridiculously to them; but you are not stupified with laudanum. I adjure you to go to Berner's Street"—(here she gave me a most particular description of the place, and the person she believed she had seen) "if you see any thing like that form,

which I have certainly seen but no, it

Vol. nr. p





is impossible—he cannot be alive; and, if he were, of what use could it be to me ?—no human being can now be of any use to me, nor I to them, except

'to point a moral, or no, not adorn

a tale.' Oh, that Mr. Corbett were near nie now: he might do something; but him I hardly reckon human. Oh, that I were the meanest of his flock, that sat at his feet, and listened "to him humbly, and lived and died in the bliss of ignorance, instead of the glittering, miserable Lady Montrevor. All my powers only incresse any self-condemnation.— What powers have I possessed, and what a life have I lived? I am no Catholic— I cannot ' dying, put on the weeds of Dominick, or in Franciscan think to pass disguised'---the disguise will not even pass with myself." She threw her head on the arm of the sopha, and appeared plunged in dreadful thought. I listened with deep emotion to this





genuine and convulsive burst of despair! the awful lesson of humbled pride and abused distinctions before me, filled me with sensations that banished all recollections of myself. I spoke something of comfort—of better hopes—of happier prospects; but the neglect of my own reproached and silenced me. She started up—" Are they coming }—they must not see me this way. Remember, I conjure, my request—the request of a dying woman; and 1 would have said a word

about poor Athanasia, but I have not time to say a word, or even think a thought, about myself— -tant mietw, oil tant pis. "I hardly know—I hardly know which" (said she, assuming her character with almost magical expedition, as Lady Georgina glided into the room) "I hardly know!which to prefer for this cabinet; orange drapery to correspond with the antiques in the cornice ---or dark green, as the chimney-piece





is of verde-antico. I believe we must consult Hope—his work is lying on the secretaire in the next room." She passed on with the light step of a grace.---" But js it possible you could think of nothing since, Lady Georgina?" No, indeed," said Lady Georgina, with the most simple earnestness. "Oh then, speak without thinking—it will do just as well I dare say; I assure you it is what I am trying to do at this moment—with the worst success in the world."

There appeared little reason for this last complaint; for at this moment the rest of the loungers came up, and Lady Montrevor was all herself again. The voice of flattery, and of crowds, seemed to operate upon her most awful paroxysms of feeling, as if by instinct; and through her mask of rouge and pearl-powder, no thought infirm could be seen " to alter her cheek." She wandered through the rooms, pouring out all the appropriate





informations from all the writers on the subject, from Ulloa to Robertson inclusive; till looking at her watch, in the midst of a glittering sentence, she recollected a private auction of emigrh toys, the property of Madame la Duchesse de

, which " she would not miss for

the world," and hurried away as fast as possible, uttering the word—remember, as she passed me.

It was now near four o'clock: the commission of Lady M. including anew subject of interest (for she, and every thing relating to her, were still but too interesting to me), I determined to execute immediately: I wished to be epgaged in something that would,banish for a moment self-solicitude and self-reproach. I traversed Berners Street till it was almost dark, without seeing any object like that which Lady M. had described. I was quitting it, when I was detained by a carriage driving close to the pavement: I looked up—it was Lady M's. She appeared to start at my sight, but collected herself in a moment r I leaned on the carriage window; her servants were apparently making some inquiries which she was anxious to conceal the object of from me. She talked and laughed with unusual vivacity. —" You cannot imagine how extravagant I have been; but those French toys are so beautiful—they certainly have the art a eterniser la bagatelle—and. it is a very useful one, particularly when one has no other hope of immortality. You will wonder at my acquisitions," (said she, endeavouring to draw my eye to the interior of the carriage) " and ' wonder is involuntary praise.' And you will wonder more how I could make them, after all my losses last night—that dreadful dowager! —actually, I lost merely to vex her:— first she scolded me out of all attention to the game, and then scolded me for





having lost it. I never shall see her frightful mountain of powdered curls (only , think of her persisting to wear powder!) without thinking of the wool-pack clouds that Mount Vesuvius always sends forth previous to an explosion."

All this time her quick eye was reading something like inquiry in my face, which all her gaiety and wit had not been able to talk away. "What can you be thinking of, with that face of absence ?—actually I might believe you in lov"e, if I did not know you were married—les Egaremens de cccur et de resprit are always allied you know." "If absence," said I, "be an evidence of love, what shall I conclude of the state of your ladyship's heart? I heard you say half an hour ago, that you had but just time to be at the auction, and hurry home; and I now find you in a direction quite opposite to either—this is surely . not the way to Berkley Square." "Oh, yes; it is my way :—a woman's way is always odd, and perverse, and uncommon, you know. Since I have nothing to do but to go to Berkley Square, I am determined to do that . " nothing in so strange a style," as will amaze the majority, and divert the rest of the world, according to the poetical computation. So now smile, on pain of being incontinently classed among the unlearned,"





I was disposed to do any thing but smile at that momenti "Have you forgot?" said I, in a serious tone:—" Oh, no; but you have forgot, or mistaken, your commission. I sent you out-to meet a ghost, and instead of that, you are personating a ghost yourself. What, not a simper;— I believe I must whisper the charm, or charms of Lady Delphina Orberry to raise one." "Not if you wish to make me smile.""1 "Oh, smiles are of a thousand casts, you know; for instance, the one which, with all my art, I have called





up from the depths of your countenance, is t he offspring of surprize and contempt." "No, — but your spirits astonish me; and there is a secret in them, and your situation, which I am unable to penetrate." "Wonderful!—then, not to demand from you—what no man possesses —knowledge of the female character—au

fonde without conducting the spark

of conviction through a long chain of argument, I will flash it upon you at once —I am a woman!—.When you recover yourself, bid my coachman drive on." "Where shall I bid him go?" "I—

I actually don't recollect philosophy

you see drives every thing else out of the head—and while you stand there like the ghost of Beatrice in the Monk, I can do nothing but gaze in silence de ma parte;—so, walk about a hundred yards, and return, and by that I will forget you, and remember myself, I hope."-'— Half laughing at the whimsical injunc





tion, I obeyed; but before I had moved half a hundred yards, I heard the coach drive away rapidly. I knew that Lady M. would laugh all this away with her usual gay facility, but I could not part with her so; there was something of convulsive and delirious gaiety that terrified, contrasted with what I knew of her real despondency. I followed the carriage with all my speed; the lamps were now lit.—I pursued it with my eye, and after some obscure windings, I saw it stop at the door of a small private house.

No suspicion till that moment had ever shadowed my mind. Lady M. appeared to me, by her extraordinary endowments, and extraordinary vanity, raised quite above the petty characters, and objects of her sex, either in the Egaremens de Cceur ou de IEsprit. She was raised by ambition to a 'painful preeminence,' which she maintained without weakness, or sympathy, an eminence





of distinction, and pride, and solitary suffering. Her passions, like all the rest, were completely under the controul of her pride; a bitter and melancholy greatness was all she desired or possessed; and though sometimes "tears, such as angels weep, burst forth," at the " loss of her original brightness;" yet in general she seemed to think, " to reign was worth ambition;" though among fallen and inferior natures. At this moment, something like a suspicion of a part of her character being altogether human, crossed my mind, as I saw her folding her pelisse about her, and with her handkerchief to her face, enter the house, after speaking a few words tq her servant, who, immediately with the carriage disappeared.

I approached the house; it was a mean, obscure house, and after much examination, I hardly recollected it (by the assistance of the number and an emblematic scroll over the dopr) to be the residence of a person, who was a professed astrologer, and against whose marvellous pretensions, I had heard Lady M. point all the powers of her ridicule and wit, in a crowded assembly, a few days past. I was actually overcome by this last melancholy proof of the 'overthrow of a noble mind.'—To this cause, this last retreat of a trembling, and agonizing mind, pushed from its grasp of hope, or reason, I ascribed her late superstitious terrors, and struggles of miser1 able gaiety, to hide a weakness, which she herself felt was contemptible and degrading while she bowed to it; but I had now scarce time to think for myself, for Athauasia,. The resolution I -had formed of tearing myself, by one desperate effort of strength, from the toils that beset me; and of retreating with my invaluable partner into rest and happiness, delighted me .with its rich and exquisite imagery; but in determining the event, I had overlooked the means— distress, actual distress, was rapidly approaching. I had no means of paying the enormous debts I, had contracted--of some of them I expected the payment to be exacted in that very week—I had not a single weapon, a single expedient to oppose the misery of actual and present beggary.





"As I grasped my almost empty purse, m a kind of vacant agony, I felt Lady Delphina's hey in my hand; at that moment, I felt the superiority which the enthusiasm of excellence and affection can give above all local advantages.— At that moment, I felt myself in the possession of Athanasia rich, though almost pennyless; and happy, though assaulted by every shape of wretchedness. I could not. resist the triumph/with which the recollection of the key supplied me. I went to Lady Delphina, with her key in my hand,





I told her of the tempted innocence; the purified virtue of Athanasia, ten thousand times more precious, in my eyes, than if it had never heen tried and found perfect. I told her of my triumph and my shame; I told her of my intentions, immediately to extricate myself from my pecuniary, and all other embarrassments; and retiring to cultivate the happiness over which I had hitherto slumbered with a criminal negligence, that neither deserved, nor enjoyed it. I spoke with energy—with enthusiasm; my affections were again excited, they flowed from the deep sources of love, and gratitude, and admiration; and their flow was full and rapid, and unresisted. She did not attempt to resist it—she listened with astonishing composure; and then calmly asked me, by what means I purposed to extricate myself from my pecuniary, and other embarrassments? I was silent---I knew of no means upon earth, at that





moment. My resolution appeared to me to wear all the vigour of action. I believed it actually done, when it was once determined.---She, perceived my confusion. "The happiness. I must never know, I will, at least, facilitate," said she, in tones that had lost their vibration to my heart, "you must "not injure your expected family, or alarm your wife, or commit yourself, by dealing with professed money-lenders, who always double the distress they affect to relieve! Apply to a Jew, I advise; I would intreat, but that I have lost all power of intreaty; 1 am contented to lose it, if I may yet-be of service to you ;«the ordinary, unsuspected service of friendship; common, worldly good-will—is that too much ?"—" No, no—I shall always remember your kindness, your name, your image, with, perhaps, too much softness; too much pleasure—gratitude, I would say; but this is no time for the indul





gence of such feelings. The honor, the principles of a man, an husband—call upon me to tear myself from these infamous involvements.. When I have satisfied honor, I may then indulge feeling—till then, my only feelings are agony and impatience. The method you propose is safe, I believe, though I know but little of these matters; but Jews, if I am not misinformed, require not only an exorbitant interest, but an exorbitant premium—I have no ready money." "But I have, give me your bond for the premium, which I will advance; and tonight, you shall be freed from all your embarrassments."

That night, I received from a Jew, whom Lady Delphina summoned, a sum adequate to the entire discharge of all my debts, at the head - of which was a douceur of one thousand guineas to the infamous Sir John, on the receipt, of which, she promised to procure from. him, a written obligation to decline the prosecution—An obligation, by which" in the hurry of my joy, I did not discover no man could legally be bound. All was concluded, I made an exact statement of my debts, and received the money from the Jew, who departed gratified with the enormous usury of the premium; for the amount of which, I gave my bond to Lady Delphina, who was now my sole creditor.





Happiness now seemed no longer a vision. With the natural luxury of mind, that suggests refinements in pleasures, I determined not to disclose my purposes, or my hopes, to Athanasia, till I had realised them, by a complete liberation from the involvements of debt and dissipation; till I could clasp her to a heart that had not a care but for her; and— but I am telling my dreams. On my arrival home, I found Athanasia was abroad: I knew that some of the fancygroupes were to meet that night, at Lady Westhampton's, to rehearse their attitudes, drapery, costume, &c. I repaired there, at a late hour, in high spirits— all was frolick and festivity. I mingled in the madness of the hour, and forgot, in the long-absent luxury of joy, my enmity to Lord Castle-Wycomb, and even my detestation of Deloraine.





They had all exhibited the utmost range of their fancy and gaiety; the prospect of the following night had revived the recollection of a masquerade some years ago, at which Lady M. had distinguished herself, in the character of Roxalana, in the Sultan. She was importuned to exhibit some passages from it again; and, in high spirits complied, on condition of Lord Westhampton's personating the Sultan. Nothing could exceed the esprit, the maniere naive et bizarre of the seraglio coquet, except the awkward and rueful silence of the





Sultan, who, swathed in shawls, and turbaned with the handkerchiefs of his fair tormentor, sat sullenly on the sopha, afraid of ridicule, whether he stirred, or spoke, or remained mute and passive.—

Shocked as I was at this levity of despair in Lady M. it was yet impossible to resist the fascination of her wit and gaiety. I was dazzled, like all the rest of the world, by a brilliancy, that sometimes dazzled even herself. In the course of the evening, I was pressed to play, by some spiritless loungers, whom nothing but gaming could excite.—I refused steadily; I believe, audibly; for from that moment Lady Ms spirits seemed to redouble, and she played her part, I thought, with more natural gaiety.

When the scene was over, and a select party, who had been invited to sup, were in raptures of admiration at Lady M.'s "delightful powers"—J approached her, for a moment unobserved, and whispered, "I am too much interested for you to be deceived by all this—I am impatient to speak to you alone—I have new plans, new hopes, and in those of happiness— you must be included."





"Well—well—don't talk of happiness to-night. I am in high spirits, and any mention of any thing so remote, would only depress them."—" But, why this perpetual sacrifice of yourself t(H-" "Oh! they who live to please, must please to live. So, lay aside that oracular face, if you mean that I should consult it; if you mean to impose on my understanding, begin to impose on my senses." "Impose on your understanding?" — "Yes; is it not imposition to talk of happiness to me f—Well, I will listen to your plans of happiness, and laugh at them, all for your encouragement; for if a smile imply satisfaction, a plus forte." "Your belief of my facility in being flattered with such approbation must be very great!" "Oh no; there is no flattery too piquante for a theorist: If I dropped asleep during your plans, I would undertake to persuade you, it was only that I might dream of them^ undisturbed." "Can you be serious for a moment?" "For the present, I dare not. Come to my dressing - room tomorrow night, the crowd will be too great to suspect any thing serious in our retiring, and we'll try what can be done; perhaps, by that time, all further necessity for acting a part, whether gay or serious, will be at an end. In the mean time, however, we are remaining too long behind the scenes."





She rose from the sopha as she spoke, she saw something more than common interest, or common intelligence in my face. She dreaded the discovery of her weakness, and weakness she never could bear to betray; she wished to destroy the effect of what she had been saying, with references to her superstitious terrors, and fixing her dark eyes on me,-as if she meant to fascinate me—" Confess now, that the etourderies of the morning and evening have amazed you, if they have not made you smile; perhaps, the confession would be as bad a compliment to my understanding as your own; for "true no-mcaning puzzles more than wit." 1 knew, she said this to efface my belief of her having any meaning in the finesses of the morning, or the allusions of the evening. I could not bear to insult her with the knowledge of her weakness, and I suffered her to believe that I was deceived.





The supper was uncommonly brilliant. Lady M. was in unusual spirits: and though none of her daughters could contend with her iu beaut}', or grace, or esprit; yet the assemblage of so many lovely women, sparkling in all the luxury , of modern costume, and all the brilliancy of modern maniere, presented a coupd'oeil too gratifying to the senses. No human power could at that moment have discovered, under such an exterior, the passions that were tearing every heart— no one could have believed at that mo-' inent, the despair of the bright leader of the fashionable host, t>r the degeneracy of her glittering, fallen train—the very means that had supplied this splendid fete, would have disclosed a shocking history, had they been known.





Lady Castle- Wycomb, as I afterwards learned, had levied the most enormous exactions on Lady Westhampton, since her marriage, partly to indemnify herself for the speculation on her marriage, and partly on threatening to disclose to her Lord, certain little inaccuracies of conduct, into which her sister had been , betrayed while under her fashionable protection, and fashionable example.





Lady W. weary of extortion and oppression, threatened to retaliate; and hinted, that certain particulars, in her knowledge, would probably be as acceptable to Lord. Castle-Wycomb.

"There, my dear, you are quite mistaken;" said her sister, with perfect nonchalance. "Lord C. W. and I have come to a treaty offensive and defensive, as other powers do, by mutual good understanding; yon can tell hint nothing more than he knows, or believes he knows, which is the same thing; and he is determined to ' bear his faculties so meekly', that he will be 'as one who knoweth nothing.' Now, you must be sensible it is quite a different case with Lord Westhampton; he has got some old-fashioned principles, that if once touched properly, would bristle up till he became a perfect porcupine in a passion. In one word, he has so much love for you, or for himself, that I am convinced he would almost kill you in a paroxysm of jealousy, if it was once fairly or foully excited. So you see, my dear, you need not contend with me—I have fairly the 'vantage ground—I must have money for this fete; nothing else will do—for it or me. I am completely a cypher in my own house, since Lady M's arrival. I shall get rid of her with all convenient expedition; but in the mean time, it will be delightful to out' shine her on the spot. I will shine in your gold, my dear, if you please, and I am sure you must be gratified by the preference."





Again Lady W. assured her that she had advanced all- the money she had received from her Lord; that his wealth and generosity, though great, were not boundless, and that she had no excuses for further extortions. — " Besides, I know my supplies must always be insufficient, while you play and lose so despe

VOL. III. Q





rately, and double your debts by borrowing from your creditors. Do you imagine I can ever enable you to repay Mrs. Rees, the sum you borrowed from her?" "Oh, I am quite easy about that; for she has allowed me to pay her more than the legal interest; and if she reclaims the principal, I can threaten to prosecute, instead of paying it." "Gracious heaven! who could suggest so villainous a scheme!" "Oh, it was Mason, put me up to that, and every thing else in the way of business. He is extremely clever and useful, and"—" And, whois Mason?" "Oh, you must know Mason /" said Lady C. in visible confusion, "He that was my Lord's assistant, or I don't know what; but what matter about Mason, I must have money: I am a bankrupt in every thing; in health, in fortune, in happiness.—Happiness I never knew, or knew it only in distinction: I must enjoy it, therefore, while I can purchase it.





!

or you for me.—Bethel's business turned out badly—he declines playing, though while we had him, we made a good deal of him. — I apprehend Lady Delphina put him on his guard; and if so, by all that's good, I will make her remember it as long as she lives, which cannot be very long; for she is consuming with her own vices. You see, Pandora, I am the devil, when provoked! better not urge me—-and I am half-mad already; that insolent wretch refuses to let the ornaments for my table out of his shop, till half the money is paid ; and here I am wasting my time, when you could raise three times the sum, for me, on your diamond necklace."---" My necklace !— I never will part with my diamondsraise money on your own." "So I did, my dear, some months ago; and yet, you see, what a glittering figure I continue , to make."

Lady Westhampton wept, wrung her hands, cursed all the ways of fashionable life, deplored her being resigned to the example and influence of her sister. "Distinction, distinction, a splendid settlement, was all I have ever heard from my infancy as the object of desire: I am a miserable example of the consequences. I am united to a man I never can love, and tyrannized over and robbed by a woman who committed me to vice that she might establish a power over me. Every day I make some new sacrifice of my principles, or my feelings. I know I shall fall into infamy. I know I am undone, for I have every thing to impel me to destruction, and nothing, nothing, no happiness, no honor, no strength of mind to preserve myself." "My dear, I actually have not leisure to see you play out this comedie larmoyant, but to convince you that I wish to do everything equitable, be assured that the Rees is included in my subsidizing plan. I am determined





to make un coup d'essai to-morrow night. I have read in the Life of Charters, I think, of his winning three thousand guineas by placing his antagonist with her back to a glass, which I am determined to try, at least, to-morrow night. The Rees, I know, will soon get tired of her character, and long for a game: I will indulge her. If I lose I can only owe it, you know, and if I win, it shall be thousands and ten thousands for your comfort, my dear, as I hope it will. Oh, you must be gone with that dreadful red face, I hear people coming up stairs; they must not meet you all in tears—run into that closet—no, not into that—not into that, oh, for heaven's sake! not there." It was too late. Lady Westhampton, intent only on escaping, ran into the first retreat that presented itself, and in that retreat was couched—Mr. Mason!

The event of this business was a full explanation between the sisters. Lady Castle-Wycomb, desperately involved in her circumstances, had called on MasoD, her ci-devant elect, for pecuniary assistance; she knew his habits of business, and she knew his hatred to Lord CastleWycomb for his dismission of him. Mason, a man of the most rancorous disposition, assisted her only that he might acquire a power over her, of which he made such an use as completely to revenge himself on the husband, by the infamy of the wife. Lady Castle-Wycomb, on the discovery, consented to remit her demands on her sister, on condition she would undertake the Rees at the masquerade, according to the looking-glass scheme, half of the profits of which she was contented to allow her; "for you must be sensible that it will be better and more unsuspicious for me to appear quite disengaged on the occasion."





The giddy Lady Westhampton, anxious to relieve her own great losses, and rejoiced at being permitted to retain her diamonds, consented; and Lady Castle*Wycomb, determined to sacrifice even her avarice to her rage at the discovery, dispatched an anonymous note to Mr. Rees, requesting him to observe the situation in which his lady would be placed the following night by the art of a certain dissipated peeress, who would engage her at piquet at the masquerade, merely with a view of plundering her by a most fraudulent finesse. Having dispatched this note, by Ihi unsuspected channel, she hurried to her sister's, where the. brilliant festivity, that illuminated every mind and countenance, effectually concealed the depravity that raged in many an heart, and the misery that corroded all.





As we returned from this splendid Pandemonium in our carriage, Athanasia, who had partaken more than usual of the gaiett of the night, became profoundly silent—I took her hand; I pressed it to my heart. I longed to tell her that heart was burning with wishes for her happiness, with resolutions to make her happy. But till it was relieved from all its sordid misery, till I had discharged every debt, and regained perfect bodily and mental freedom, I determined not to speak of my purposes, for theirmention must have included the mention of the means; and my intanglements with Lady Delphina were the last subject I could bring myself to speak, or think of. She gave me her hand coldly, but in a few minutes, apparently dissolved by recollections, her head sunk on my shoulder, and she wept. I believed them the tears of pardon and love. I would not break the sacred silence of her feelings, my heart melted in visions of joy.





The following clay I devoted entirely to business. I discharged every debt I owed, reserving only a sum sufficient to support my establishment till the next remittances from Ireland, to which I purposed to return on receiving them. The delirious dreams of ambition and pleasure were over. My winter in Dublin, and my winter in London, my folly and my madness, rose to my thoughts like the visions of a fever. I fixed my whole soul on that " sober certainty of waking bliss," which I resolved to seek in the arms, the heart of my Athanasia.





The night arrived, i returned fatigued; and happy to dine with Bellamy, who had assembled a large male party, who were to accompany us, at night, to the masquerade. Colonel Montolieu, who* dined with us, assured us, that even his dressing-room had been put into requisir tion for the fete, and as he conceived dinner would be quite out of the question at Berkley Square, he came where he knew he would not be compelled to dine on paper hangings, and wash down his dinner with the contents of a jar of oil-colours,





I had still a jealousy of meeting Athanasia. I knew she was to dine at Lady Invermay's, in whose groupe she went, and I ordered the domino, which I intended to wear, to Bellamy's at nine o'clock. It was near eleven when we reached Berkley-Square. The concourse and tumult impeded all approach for an hour; but those who entered were repaid by a blaze of such splendor as had never before been witnessed. The hall and stair-case were filled with the rm-st exquisite imitations of the vegetable productions of South America, among which lights half-concealed glimmered, as if through the foliage of groves. The principal stair-case terminated in a spacious gallery, which extending the whole front of the house exhibited the Temple of the Sun, in all the magnificence of Peruvian worship, as Peruvian magnificence has been represented by dramatists and romancers. Pillars, in imitated green mar





ble, wreathed with gold and ruby foliage, supported a roof whose cornice was formed of volumes of golden exhalations tinged with amber, and rose, and purple, to represent the approach of day. The centre of the roof represented the rites of Peruvian worship, bloodless, simple, consisting principally of offerings of fruits and flowers, which were represented with the most glowing luxury of colouring, and exuberance of disposition. The opposite extremities of the cieling represented the sun rising over the summit of a mountain, which blushed with all the glories of the dawn, and sinking into his western bed of waters, where a long track of vivid light contrasted the rich dark green of ocean, and the brilliant and fantastic forms that were sporting in his setting ray, and showing " their waved coats dropt with gold."

In the recesses formed by the pillars, painting conducted the eye through long, artificial perspectives, filled with priests and virgins of the sun; inferior altars supported vases of flowers, or of lights, from which perfumes steamed like incense; but, at the upper end of the temple, a splendid, transparent veil, glittering with representations of the vivifying influence of the sun, in animal and vegetable life, the productions of the earth, and the imaginary forms of the elements, was suspended from the deling to the floor, while a rich and radiant glow of transparent light, emanating through it, intimated the presence of the great object of Western idolatry.





Beyond this, two other spacious apartments, or ranges of apartments, though less splendid, solicited, by the variety and exquisite taste of their decorations. The first (of which the cieling was tinged with the g-lowina: and cloudless blue that some regions of that climate see stretched over their heads, and whose walls were divided into compartments, by plantains, their trunks wreathed with flowers, and their branches alive with the burnished tints, and airy forms of the beautiful birds of the climate) was decorated with paintings representing the most striking passages of Peruvian history; the first interview of the unfortunate Ataliba with the Spanish troops; the magnificence of his train and procession; the car enamelled with pearl and diamond, and glowing wth the luxuriant plumage of his country, from which he was dragged by the hands of the Spanish soldiers. In another part of the room, the paintings represented the modern state of South America, views of the country and sketches of the inhabitants, in all the varieties of the mingled, the native, and the Spanish costume.





The next apartment carried the spectator to another world—a world of horrors !—All the awakened rage of the climate, whose beauties blushed in the adjacent regions of pleasure, were pourtrayed here. The mountain, the volcano, the rage of the tempest, the desolation of the earthquake—here torrents of lava, and clouds of fire burned through the blackness with intense and sulphurous glare; and here the ruins of Lima, the capital of Peru, tottering on the gulph that yawned below its foundations, presented the mingled and terrible convulsions of art and nature---the aspect of the earth, and the works of man. The dim light that played on these objects was supplied by transparencies of the various fires with which the terrible picture glowed, and the cieling was filled with a gigantic figure, who throned amid storms, lightnings, and meteors, according to the description in Campbell's well known poem, ." looked from his throne of clouds o'er half the world."





The splendor of the apartments, if possible, was exceeded by that of the brilliant groups who rilled them: nearly seven hundred persons of distinguished fashion, in all the captivating and fantastic luxury of masquerade costume, glittered in the apartments. Among them were easily distinguished Lady CastleWycomb, in the gorgeous character of High Priestess of the Sun; a character which she said she preferred, as it "required a great deal to look, and nothing to say." Lord Invermay, his lady, and Athanasia, formed a very striking group as the " Ladye of Branksome, Lord" Cranstoun, and the fair Margaret" in the Lay of the last Minstrel; they had persuaded Sir John Orberry to accompany them, as the " Goblin Page." He needed but little to disfigure him in character. But all eyes were dazzled, and all hearts captivated, by the blaze of attraction and sensibility exhibited by the still too beautiful Lady Montrevor, in





the costume of the celebrated " La Valiere, as she appears in the picture of the Orleans Gallery, in the act of renouncing all the splendors of luxury, and all the blandishments of the world, "which she loved too well."

My heart throbbed with long forgotten sensations, and my eyes failed, as I gazed on her; but at this moment, my attention was arrested, by the languishment of two dark, soft, eloquent eyes fixed on me. In the habit of a Spanish gipsy, Lady Delphina Orberry had consulted all the touching beauty, and all the bland, and playful witcheries of manner, by which she was distinguished. I yielded to the allurements of the scene —I remembered that this was to be my last night of pleasure—I wandered with her round the circle---she hung on my arm, and I suffered myself to be amused by the address with which she blended her fictitious with her real character. "Oh, Cavalier, what would the lady of your love give for the looks which you have bestowed on that beautiful figure," pointing to Lady M. "I would be sorry, if the lady of my love were jealous of looks that mean only admiration."--* "Oh, Cavalier, contend not with me in knowledge of the meaning of looks—I know what they mean too well—admiration never fixed such burning looks on its object yet."—" Do you speak from your own feelings, or those of your profession ?"—" From both."—" Then be assured, that they both deceive you—-to deceive is your profession-—to deceive, I am afraid, is your nature; at least to throw over life, those delicious deceptions, which we lament only when they . cease. Be not displeased with me then, enchantress, if I warn you against exercising those deceptions on your own feelings, which it is your sport or your wrath,





to practise on others. If I warn you that admiration may exist without love, and love itself without distinguished admiration."—" Oh, Cavalier, that eye, and that lip, are always at variance— never did ,a lip of rose, and an eye of dark,' brilliant fire, talk such opposite language. Which shall I read ?."-—" Neither—read my heart."—" What does it say ?"---" That I am the happy, happy husband of a lovely, a beloved angelwife, and" "And the lover, the happy, happy lover of her angel-mother."

Away, you tempt me beyond my patience—-beyond all patience: no Jiction can excuse this license."—" But truth may."—" Gracious heaven!—What can you mean?"—" What can you mean, by this sill)', pedantic language?—Was this the language you learned to speak at Montrevor house?—Ah, no—gallant and gay, in 's proud alcove, the bower of wanton— and love! Shall I fill up the blanks V—" No, leave it a blank for ever, for your own sake."—" Ha, ha, ha !—how you are altered—quite a Janus, with two faces: an old, frozen, forbidden, moral one; and another, such another as you gazed at the beautiful Lady M. with just now. Ha, ha, ha—a most' delicate monster, with two voices'—one for a mistress, the other for a friend; but remember, . this privilege of simony in gallantry— this privilege of erring with such gross impunity, and preaching to inferior offenders, is not in the bond." She burst from me; it was no place to indulge the passions with which she had filled me— filled me. almostto niadness.





At that moment, I was born away by the croud to the volcano-room: amid the tumult of voices, and of my own feelings —a strange, wild, mournful sound, made itself be heard. 'A figure approached— tall and majesties in the ancient Irish habit: he bore in his hand an harp, constructed according to the model of that of Brian Boree, now in the University Museum of Dublin; it was from this he drew the melancholy, expressive tones, which, together with his remarkable figure, had drawn numbers around him. The moment I saw him, I was struck with his resemblance to the figure who had addressed Lady M. on the staircase, during a crowded assembly, some nights past: but I had no time for conjectures, for at this moment Lady M., who had exchanged her costume, for that of "Glorvina, in the Wild Irish Girl," floated with a glittering train round her into the room, flashing.around her beauty and her wit with lavish ease; she was in the midst of a ludicrous description of the natural productions of the country from which she said she was just arrived, when she and the Irish minstrel exactly met in the circle. Lady Delphina was close to me at that moment, "I "must retire," she whispered, "for here "comes a tempest of provocation." I hardly heard her, for just then the crowd, struck by a strange similarity in the habits of the stranger and Lady Montrevor, had withdrawn on each side, and left them almost together. The stranger stopped, and fixed his eyes on Lady Montrevor; I saw hers fixed with a kind of wildness on him; he mingled in the crowd, she appeared to me sinking as I once before saw her.' I rushed to her, she grasped my arm, her command of herself was so great that she neither screamed nor spoke; through the mask of her paint no emotion could be traced, but the cold dews of fear forced themselves through all her rouge and stood trembling in ghastly drops on her forehead and cheeks. What shall I do?" I said, " Who is this? what shall I do for you or him?" "Follow him, oh follow him," she whispered in a manner which she had the presence of mind to give the appearance of masquerade gibier to, "follow him, if he be alive, but he cannot live for me."





It was in vain that I plunged with unrelenting violence through crowds of sultanas, chimney-sweepers, angels, and devils; in every room I pursued, in every groupe I sought him, in vain. The crowd and heat Were now almost intolerable, and thelevity around only exaggerated the distraction of my mind. I knew not what to think, he seemed indeed to be a creature of the elements, that could appear and disappear at his pleasure. I still less knew what to tell Lady M. I dreaded to terrify her by silence, I dreaded to terrify her by telling her what I knew, or did not know of the stranger.

As 1 still wandered through the throng, a strong hand grasped mine, I turned round, it was the stranger: "You appear, Sir, to be a friend of Lady Montrevor's," said he, "am I to think so of you, or an admirer only; I believe the number of the latter, has rather exceeded that of the former." "Inform me first, Sir, what am I to think of you, your appearance"—" No matter for my appearance, and no matter for your opinion of me. If you are her friend, give her this note, if you are not, hover round her still, and feed her with the sweet poison of flattery, till she dies of it; but tell her withal, that let her paint an inch thick, to this favor she must come:" he pointed to his own furrowed and sallow cheek and disappeared.





As I still held the note, and pon- . dered on this wild message, it struck me that I had heLfd the tones of that voice once before, but where or when had vanished from my memory. I had to "fight all my battles o'er again," to regain the place where I had left Lady M- who always possessing address enough to hide the vicissitudes of feeling under the pretence of local caprice, had thrown





herself on a sopha, and was declaring she was "quite wearied, delaissee, ennuyie, unable to utter another word, or be amused even by the folly of others." "And are you equally incapable of being amused by wit?" said Bellamy, who was lounging near her, "if you are not, come with me in quest of the Irish peasant; he said some amazingly good things." "Oh quite incapable," said she, affecting to yawn violently; "in an exhausted receiver you know, a feather and gold are equally light, or to apply, equally heavy. Oh Mr. Bethel, you could not get me a glass of ice, or if you did I suppose you thawed it with a look—you appear dreadfully heated—do try, Bellamy, to get me something, and do not be frozen in the attempt."—Bellamy laughed and attempted to obey her. "Now that I have sent him away to do a thing impossible," said she, "for heaven's sake tell me all in a word, have you seen him, have you spoken to him, has he—"? "He has given me this note, for you. I am as anxious as you can be, that you - should read it; could you now retire for a few moments to your dressing room"? " I can, and do you follow me, in a few moments after."





As I followed her, I observed Lady Delphina near the door, in close, conversation with a tall figure in a Spanish habit whom I immediately discovered to be Lord Montrevor. I hurried to Lady M'sdressing room—she was traversing the room with rapid steps, her form almost ethereal with joy. "He is alivelie is alive—he loves me still." She fell upon a seat, her voice faltered, the hand which she spread before her face trembled, "loves me, worthless, degraded, perverted as I am, with nothing left, nothing left of my former self, but an heart that never forgot him, and virtue—entirely. "—

VOL. III. it





I took the note which she held out to me; she walked to the glass, she surveyed her gay, fantastic dress, her delicious form scarce veiled by the transparent drapery of luxurious nakedness, her costume sparkling with the fanciful regalia of the western princess; her whole appearance a combination of glittering levity, and voluptuous magnificence; the glow of feeling out-blushed all her rouge.

"What a figure do I present what

a figure for one who might have been so different a figure in this world, or out of it—who might have been an

honoured, an happy wife, a mother!

——What am I now ?—and yet he loves me still—and yet I will struggle to be something worthy of his love, worthy of myself."—" This is the moment, the very moment I have wished—I have prayed for; be yourself—dare to be yourself, and you must be all that is good and happy; the present opportunity seems of





fered by heaven for your happiness, for the happiness of us all. I am going to Ireland; come with us, with Athanasia who loves you, with me who~-come with us, any excuse will serve the world, and Lord M.; you want no excuse for visiting your daughter—we will, we must be happy!"

I related as briefly as I could, the circumstances that had occurred in the few preceding days. I dwelt on my extrication from distress, from involvement, from Lady Delphina. I told her of the infamous conduct of Lord C. and the villain Deloraine—conduct I now could

neither resent nor punish—but which

she interrupted me—" As to Lord C I always believed him, and told you I believed him to be a mere political character, who, in playing his cards, would take care to deal all the honors to himself; yet I thought your talents might strike him: as to Deloraine, / always thought him a villain, but as I had no reason for thinking so, except physiognomy or caprice, I did not wish to teach your mind " the needful vice of suspicion." She eagerly inquired by what means I had extricated myself---I informed her—she shook her head---" It must not be, to that woman you must owe nothing; if all I can supply you with can discharge your debt to her, you shall not be a debtor beyond tomorrow. I will have no further occasion for expences—for such expences—it is to be hoped."





I congratulated—I consoled—I tried to confirm her:—" Oh, my dear friend! I will confess to you, that if I did not almost think it too late, I would suffer myself to dream again of hope and of happiness. I was formed to be a domestic creature, ff any thing could give me strength of mind to resist the fatal infatuation that has almost destroyed me—the infatuation of vanity and





despair—it would be the thought of yet acquiring, the thought of deserving that man's approbation. His approbation— observe, I mean nothing more. I should forfeit it—I should forfeit my own, if I could think of any thing else. There is a date for passion-—buj there is, thank Heaven! no date for virtue or for happiness.

But am I not mad, or doting, to talk

of virtue and happiness? I who have

lived such a life—who am living such a

life. What a figure / shall be, going to

a school of reform'.-—and what a figure

in a school." ■

Agaiu she looked at herself in the glass, with a struggle of melancholy vanity.—" But what a wretch I am to talk thus. I who have made such sacr,ifice$ to a world I despised—-to a world that has destroyed me, almost! I who have sacrificed myself to it, now to hesitate to sacrifice it for myself--—for more than myself—for more than I have ever known





or been of myself.- Ah! I -see you

smile :—is it a smile of encouragement? Oh, tell me what you think of me?---tell me not what the world will think or say. Can 1 ever, ever emerge ?—Will the pure air of retirement, of peace, of happiness, breathe its balm to heal the scar of these corrosive fires'---or is it your mal dii pays

that deceives us both ?

She sunk again on the sofa; how lovely, how interesting she looked at that moment—M£ utterance was impeded—I scarcely articulated. Her beauty, her despair, an air of wild and melancholy grandeur, of hope contending against hope, darkened her face with a kind of sad brightness. "I never, never thought you "less than arch-angel ruined," but now, I hope—I am convinced—I would pledge my existence, you will yet be all that woman can be of excellent—as you have always been all—too much all of





lovely"—" Allons done, a VIreland, you; know, it is the Island of Saints, so we shall be quite in character, by being out of all human character. I protest I only fear we shall be too perfect"; so lest I should rise too rapidly in my own estimation, I will go talk nonsense to all the world for another hour—once more let's "mock the midnight bell." Oh, my dear Ormsby, don't despise me for this levity— ~ it is not levity—a glow of natural feeling pervades my whole heart and soul, and if I don't laugh, I must certainly cry."

At this moment she looked so lovely that I involuntarily kissed the hand she extended to me. We were quitting the room, when the door was suddenly thrown open', and Lord Montrevor entered. I had a glimpse of another figure that glided down the passage - it was Lady Delphina. My mind was at that moment so occupied by the new world of happiness that had burst on it, that I noticed neither his entrance, nor his looks, but silently relinquishing Lady Montrevor's hand, I flew to the gallery to pour my intelligence, and my hope, and my joy, into the bosom of Athanasia. I could no longer conceal them; there was no longer any reason for concealing them. Lady Montrevor had promissed to liquidate my debt to Lady Delphina, and to accompany us to Ireland. What intelligence for Athanasia. How my heart swelled and panted with its treasure.





The gallery was almost deserted; the company hadcrowded to thesupper rooms, impatient for the display of a new blaze of luxury and splendor. In the adjacent rooms were only a few gamesters, clinging to the tables, from which no temptation could solicit them; among these I observed, in a private room, Lady Westhampton and the devoted Rees in proper attitudes. Mr. Rees was near them, with a look of angry vigilance, which I did





not understand (hen. In vain I searched for Athanasia everywhere. On the staircase I met Lady Invermay and her party. I enquired for Mrs. Bethel. Lady Invermay believed she was gone: she had complained of the crowd, and quitted her party at an early hour. Vexed and disappointed, I forced my way through the crowd on the staircase, and throwing myself into the first carriage I saw,, hurried home. "Has your Lady returned yet?" No, was the answer. I continued to traverse the room impatiently—the clock, struck five, and six and seven. Amazed, and almost terrified, I hurried back to Berkley-Square. The crowd had. not yet entirely dispersed; but in their appearance, and the broken expressions I heard, I caught some extraordinary intimations. I rushed into the house; it was now broad day-light; the half extinguished lamps burnt faintly, and the dim discoloured ornaments bore a melancholy look. As I





hurried through the deserted rooms, a voice of agony struck my ear, it uttered a long, deep, continued cry of distress. I recollected the voice to be Lady Westhampton. I threw open the door of a small room in which refreshments had been distributed. By a single light which burnt dimly, I could scarcely see this young victim of fashionable seduction stretched on the ground, at the foot of a sopha, from which she had sunk in apparent weakness, drenched, absorbed in tears, her splendid ornaments strewing the floor around her—I approached; I attempted to raise her. "Oh, I am undone! undone!" she exclaimed, in despair, "let me go, let me die, let me sink into the earth—lam undone forever!" Hardly could I obtain from her a coherent answer; still I importuned her, for I felt there was something impending; at last I understood the dreadful commo





tion that had followed on my quitting Berkley-Square in pursuit of Athanasia.

Lady W. according to the plan of her depraved sister, had been observed by Mr. Rees in the whole process of defrauding his Avife of 8000 guineas; and in the moment that she was rising from the table in triumph, he charged her with the, fraud, before a number of witnesses whom he had alfembled and stationed in proper places. Naturally weak, and timid from detected guilt, Lady W. at once confessed the fraud, and restored, the money: this was not enough for Rees, who saw his power, and'wished to use it, to break off the ruinous connection between his wife and Lady CastleWycomb. He talked loud, and threatened prosecution; and what was worse, a complaint to her lord. Terrified to agony, Lady W. threw the whole blame on her sister; who, she asserted, was the fabricator of the whole mystery of ini





quity—who had driven her to involuntary vice—who had undone her, by all the influence of example and compulsion.

The tumult now became general:— Lady C. was condemned and vilified by all; Lady Westhampton accused, and Rees menaced her; and Mrs. Rees, safe in her husband's resentment being transferred to another object, now poured out her "secret memoirs," with a fluency and virulence that shocked as much as the depravity it related. But in the midst of all this burst of condemnation, it was discovered that Lady Castle-Wycomb was far beyond its reach: at the first gathering of the storm, she had foreseen her danger, and yielding at once to fear, despair, and depraved inclination, fled from her house with Mason, who was disguised among the attendants, to await the events of the night. "But on me, on me all the burthen of shame and suffering has fallen," franticly sobbed the victim of fashion; "my lord, distracted with passion at my disgrace, swears he will confine me for life, in his old ruinous castle in Leicestershire. I am to be dragged away this very hour!—Me has gone to order the carriages—I expect him every moment—and oh! such is his fury, I am sure he will destroy me before we have completed our dreadful journey!"





Again she sunk on the floor, in convulsions of agony, and cursed the compulsive misery into which she had been dragged by fashionable example. "But, Mr. Bethel," said she, recovering her voice, and staring wildly at me," is it possible you are here ?—you, whom my father found, in such shocking circunistances, in my mother's dressing-room V She laughed, fearfully. "I am not alone in the shame and misery of this night— you are destroyed for ever. Lord M. has declared his intention of separating from her, and prosecuting you, and declares that he has long suspected the whole affair, and has witnesses to prove it existed long before he quitted Ireland." * * * # ####*##





I recovered my senses: I flew to Lady Montrevor's apartment: no power could withhold, or delay me. In the presence —in the despite of men and devils, I determined to vindicate her with a force and truth, that should write conviction as with the lightning's point, upon every human heart. * * * Ben net was weeping before the door. "You must not pass!—begone!—you have undone yourself—you have undone us all Jar ever." I pushed her away, with no gentle hand. Lady M. heard the tumultShe demanded—" Who was there?" I felt myself unable to utter my own name, but she knew the sound of my voice. "The door is locked—you must not enter here—you must not enter ?wtv! I applied my shoulder, to the door—it began to yield. "Hold I" I heard her scream, in a voice of passion and command—" the laudanum is in my hand !— another movement to enter, and I swallow it." I fell on my knees at the door —I adjured, I appealed, I supplicated. "It is too late," said she, in a dreadful voice. "I am driven to this—I acquit you—I know myself innocent, but I will not outlive public shame: he threatens with it—the monster threatens me with it, who knows my innocence—and with my own son-in-law! But he is determined on my destruction !—my destruction be on his head! Remember I am driven to this !—escape from that sorceress, if you can: it is her influence over the most weak and wicked of men, that pushes me on self-murder 1"





I heard no more — I burst into the room — I tore the laudanum from her hand—convulsions followed. I remember nothing distinctly, but that I saved her life. Lord Montrevor and Colonel Montolieu entered—I remember nothing distinctly—all was rage and madness— and menace and execration F The last thing I remember seeing, was Lady M. apparently lifeless in the arms, and Col. Montolieu kneeling to his father, not to destroy his mother, himself, and his children, by an accusation he knew to be false and infamous—then all recollection forsook me! ***♦*•





When I recovered it, I was in a prison. —Slowly my faculties returned. I demanded at whose suit I was arrested. I had discharged every debt I was acquainted with the morning of the fatal night. I was informed it was at Lady Delphina Orberry's, for the money due on my bond. I demanded, where was my wife? Oh, howl longed for her hands

i





to bind my burning forehead. I was presented, after some delay, that seemed suggested by humanity, with a letter which was dated the day of the masquerade—the hand was Athanasia's. # # * # . * •

"You will never see me more. I' write but to supplicate your forgiveness--your forgiveness for an error, of which the discovery is to me intolerable; for which, though only mental, though valmost involuntary, I will do penance in everlasting banishment. Oh you, whom I have loved with a love passing that of women, never agaui can I bear to meet your sweet, generous, killing smile, your soothings, of which the angel tones would be daggers to me. Forgive me, only forgive me, and I will live and die in peace—if possible. While I believed you ignorant of my weakness, of my guilt, for there is guilt of the mind, I hid the" anguish of my heart, and tried to





believe that it was my duty to amend my errors without confessing them, that it was enough if I restored you the full aud faithful homage of my heart, without humbling myself to say how that heartno, how my senses had wandered. But you have discovered all, and never will I bear to meet you after the discovery. Remember what I'was—a weak, ignorant girl, without education, without example but of vice and folly, left to form my ideas from the vilest of books, aided by the poisonous conversation of the vilest of companions.—Remember that those books taught me, that to yield to sentiment was almost a virtue; and that companion represented it equally as the habit of the world and the duty of romance. I was left to devise my own romance, and in what a tragedy has it terminated! I never loved Deloraine, yet I was taught to believe that I ought to have a lover and an husband; I would have sought both in you, but what heroine was ever happy with an husband !—When, at last, my heart grew sick of disguise, and my senses of imposition (for who could love Deloraine who was wedded to you) I was "told of the duty of fidelity, of the despair and death of the unhappy object of my cruelty, &c. Thus was I led on to act as if I really loved a man who was totally indifferent to me, and was indifferent to an husband whom I adored.—Remember, that though I trod the path of folly with my conductors, I retreated, I broke . from them for ever when they would have led me into guilt. Remember, T had no monitor, no assistant, no confidant, no aid but Heaven and my love for you—that will console me in the solitude to which I have devoted myself; that will prompt my last prayer for you. The misery, which the struggles of the last months has caused me, has worn away my health—I have not long to live.





My poor ihfawt stirs within me from the agony in which I write this;—if it lives, it shall be sent to vou, and you will weep for me when you see it:—if it dies, let it be laid in its mother's grave. On my knees, with my last breath, I implore your forgiveness. Remember, my offence was but mental, and remember how it has been expiated—how I have lost all I ever truly loved on this earth—my mother and you.

A. Bethel."

*#######

My pale and blasted rose*##*it was I who threw your sweets away !—Over their withering fragrance, so rich in death, I shed the last human drops I believed my eyes would ever shed * * *

**##*##*

"Can you, will you persist in this dreadful obstinacy? I know my love, my life are of no consequence to you; but think of your own—you will die of despair and shame if the prosecution goes on; Lord M. has summoned the most able lawyers, he has procured, he sags, the





most infallible witnesses. Oh think

of such a trial, such an exposure! can you outlive the thoughts of it, can you outlive the fact itself? and it must, must happen—if you will not sign this paper:— it confesses — what every one already knows—your unfortunate attachment to Lady M. Lord M. empowers me to say if you will sign this acknowledgment, and admit all it implies, he will stop all the proceedings—why will you hesitate? not from consideration of the ungrateful woman who has betrayed and abandoned you—she has fled from Berkley Square—no one knows where—gone with some other paramour,—-and left you here to encounter all the shame and misery that should have fallen on her own head."





"I adjure you," said I, speaking for the first time for some hours, " to tell me the truth. Has Lady Montrevor escaped from England?—will she not stand the event of the prosecution ?"—" By all that is true and holy !"— and Lady Delphina kissed the cross that hung on her breast. Again she importuned, she suplicated, she adjured me to save myself:—" her you cannot injure by the declaration, her character is decided by her flight, no one can believe her innocent—you may yet save yourself; I plead, I«upplicate to you for yourself; I know your proud impetuous spirit,—it will leave your frame breathless the day you hear your infamy proclaimed.—Lord M. has the whole world on his side: what can you do in prison against him?"

rr—i" Who put me there?" 1—" I did,

to prevent Lady Montrevor seducing you to accompany her flight"—" Seducing me to accompany her flight!—merciful Heaven!— Heaven who knows her purity!—But I appeal no more.—Will this declaration free me, free me fully and finally from all further importunity ?"— "Yes—cruel that you arc!—it will—it shall free you from all further—importunity.'*—I fell upon my knees, and in the solemn language of conviction and agony called Heaven to witness my belief of Lady Montrevor's perfect purity, and my consciousness of my own.—I resigned myself to that power which seemed resolved to" make a spectacle, a tale of me;" but I implored its mercy for her, if she yet existed, with anguish that spoke her innocent to Heaven and Earth.—:— Lady Delphina rushed from me in despair. * **#*#*'#* # # •** **«•*#**#





In a few hours she entered again.—Our dreadful conference lasted four hours.— I am forbid " to tell all the secrets of my prison house:"—But the tale that was unfolded deprived me of breath, of reason, of feeling.—I staggered from her—She held me with her cold hand—" You must forgive me vow, for ***** * *******





Shewas in the agonies of death—" You have driven me to despair—to death—Yet I forgive you—Oh if you feel a spark of mortal passion, let this sight disarm it? I have destroyed you, but I have revenged you—your destroyer is come to die at your feet—If I have sacrificed you to my wild passion, I have also sacrificed myself.

That form, which I see every moment more dimly, was the cause of all—From the moment I saw you, I determined you should be mine—no man ever had resisted me but you—I knew no restraints when my passions are engaged—I- never did know any—I believed nothing but distress could subdue your pride, or your reluctance. You were too fond of vour wife to be fond of dissipation for dissipation sake. I found that nothing but your ruin could make you mine—despair and nothing but despair could drive you into my arras. I urged your ruin, for I had determined you should be mine. I .extorted money from you by way of bribing Sir John. Sir John never knew you visited «ie. I drove you to the gaming-table to supply your losses—then I was sure of you. But I dreaded the influence of your wife—I dreaded the influence of Lady M. whose knowledge of Jife was dangerous to my plans, as dangerous as her true affection for you. Unhappy woman! equally my enemy from Jove and hatred—she was ill-fated to contend with me—I have destroyed her. Her miserable lord I had an arrangement with many years ago. I renewed it that I might command her fate and your's. You never suspected that I was Lord M.'s amie— Ills' friend; no, I was his bitterest enemy; Vol. lit. a





I used him as he deserved—as a tool, and now I have thrown him away for ever. Is all the mystery of my conduct now explained? I became your creditor that you might be mine. All I was worth upon earth I would have given for you. I compelled Lord M. to give up his wife, and menace you with a prosecution to terrify you into my arms. I promised to go to the continent with him. Wretched man! he has been wretchedly rewarded for his officious fidelity in vice—in vice of another's. I never would have gone with him. He set out, persuaded I would follow. On the first stage he overtook his fugitive daughter and her paramour Mason. The spirits o: habits of a man were not wholly extinguished in him, infamous as he was. He challenged Mason—he fell. Mason escaped. Lady Castle-Wycomb is in a private mad-house. Oh ] it is a day of many deaths; he is dead, and I am dying. When I found nothing could shake your





resolution, nothing could stimulate your passions, nothing could bend your principles, I fled from you in the despair of fruitless repentance. I had scattered destruction round me: I had ruined all that opposed me, and still I was a weak and blasted agent. I had driven Lady M. to distraction: that proud and powerful mind I had crushed and humbled—I had killed, actually killed her wretched husband, by torturing her sensibility. I had banished your innocent wife. Oh ! her pale, wasted form will be-the first that will greet me in woe. I had done all this, and done all in vain. I could neither allure, nor compel you to—for you I had done all, and in solitude and in a prison you grasped misery to your heart, and pushed me from you. I had no other choice; I had but one child—a daughter—the daughter of a man whom I knew abroad. I sent her to her father's relations in Ireland. I charged them never to let her know me. If she never knew a mother's affection, I resolved she should never know a mother's vices. I wished not to destroy more than myself. I resolved to fly to Ireland, and bury myself with her in a nunnery: my life had left me no other choice. This, this last refuge was denied me—she is no more—Elmaide St. Clair is dead—she died for love. Read these letters—ah, no, read nothing now but my dim and dying





eyes, and say can you forgive me?" ######

* * "Soothed by your forgiveness, sustained by your arms—But, oh! where am I going? Oh! hold me

up to look at you once more."

*####*.

I fell upon the body, while speech remained to me. I prayed that I might be soon cold Hke it. But while I yet hung over it, it grew livid, bloated: the marks of poison appeared, my senses wandered again * * * * *





In this state I must, have continued several months. I have not the slightest recollection of any event, or almost any sensation during that period, except a faint and sleepy uneasiness at something like attempts made to disturb me from time to time, but by whom, or for what purpose, I had not reason enough to discover or to inquire. When my faculties returned, it was contrary to all expectation, and, I believe, all analogy: they returned completely without weakness, and even without confusion of ideas. The first distinct impression made on my senses was that of a voice reading prayers—a soft and solemn voice—a well-known voice—the voice of Mr. Corbett. It acted on my mind like an omen for good. I sat up softly (I was in bed) like one who fears to break a spell in enchantment. My motions were so quiet, they did not reach the ears of the person; I had leisure to look around me.





It was evening, but a mild light breaking through the half-drawn curtains, showed me a spacious and elegant apartment, and Mr. Corbett, whose figure I now saw distinctly, kneeling near the bed, with his back turned to me. I called to him. My voice was feeble and broken, and wild: it sounded strangely to my own ears, yet in a moment be discovered it to be the voice of sanity and reason. His own was inarticulate with joy. I poured out a thousand questions and exclamations. He would have delayed answering them; he would have enjoyed composure: but he perceived that in the present state of my feelings, it would be more dangerous to contend with than to gratify them. He was proceeding with a slow and jealous caution, when a door half opened disclosed a well-known figure—it retreated—1 called to it—" Sybilla, Sybilla, my sister, can you ihink your sight would injure you?" She approached me with fears of joy and





timidity. "Though I have no longer a title to the name of sister, no sister ever, ever felt more joy at a brother restored.'' "Not my sister—is this a dream > if it be, it is peopled with such delightful shapes, I would it could last for ever/' "It is no dream," said Mr. Corbett, " she is no longer your sister; but if you have lost a sister, you have found a father."

I cannot detail the gradual and trembling process of this discovery. In a few hours I was clasped to the bosom of a real father. He was the stranger of the solitary tower in the west of Ireland; he was the Irish peasant of the masquerade; he was the lover of Lady Montrevor, who now, with her hand clasped in his, leaned on my shoulder while he hung over me, and Sybilla and Hammond saw us dimly through the tears which yet they did not seek to wipe away, and the heavenlyminded Corbett called upon us in a tone of tempered monition, to repress the tumult of human feeling, and consecrate our happiness by gratitude and praise.





Many days elapsed before I could hear or comprehend the tale of wonders they told me. My father, attached in early life to Lady Montrevor, and repelled from her by the error of her pride, or his own, suffered his despair to deprave his mind and habits; he gave up professional distinctions: he gave up all that could make life happy or honorable. He wandered over the continent a reckless, unhappy libertine, stimulating his senses by temporary connexions, and trying to forget the aspirations of a lofty mind in the blandishments. In this state he formed a connexion with my unhappy mother, who had been brought to Avignon by an English gentleman with whom she lived— and, deserted there, sought a refuge from dejection or poverty in an arrangement with my father. This continued for some months, till learning that his younger





brother, (Mr. Bethel,) with whom he had no connexion, had arrived in Avignon, he abruptly left that place, leaving Miss Percival, with whose situation he was unacquainted, pregnant with me.

She was too attractive, and too anxious to attract, to remain long neglected: she threw herself in Mr Bethel's-way,-became his mistress; and believing it would confirm her influence or her establishment, informed him shortly after their connection, that she was likely to make him a father. I was the offspring of the elder brother, though supposed (by all but my mother) to be the son of Mr. Bethel; and so striking was my resemblance to my reai parent, that Lady Montrevor, who remembered him too well, at one of my first interviews with her, drew me into the recess, that she might gaze on me without disturbance, and feed her melancholy mind with the recalled imagery of early hope. This resemblance, the cause of her first





and distinguished partiality for me, was the cause in me of a too flattering error of which the consequences have long since ceased.

During his feverish and unhappy career of libertinism, my father was seized at Rome with a violent fever. He was a Catholic; the agonies of conscience smote him on what he believed to he his dying bed; the priests, by whom he was surrounded, knew how to employ this as an instrument to subdue and debilitate their catechumen. The " faitez penitence," of the Romish ritual was substituted for the intellectual and moral amelioration that should have restored him to mental sanity and rational happiness. He became a lay brother in a convent in Rome, and here Lady Montrevor, flying from the dreadful consequences of her dissipated madness, met him, as she then believed to meet no more. Another fever followed the shock of this interview, and the intel





Jgence of his death (which was expected every moment) followed her to England. On his recovery he found the place where he had last beheld her insupportable to his sight and feelings, and learning that a country man of his was about to go to I reland, attached himself to him as a religious companion, and resided for years with him in the West of Ireland, without making himself known to his brother, the Chieftain De Lacy, or, (when he rarely ventured abroad) being himself known amid the ravages of a ruined constitution, and a broken mind.

When the person with whom he lived at length died, he succeeded to the small property he had died possessed of, disposed of the house and grounds, and confining himself to a ruinous building that stood on part of it, occupied his time and his revenue in acts of the most laborious beneficence. Me lived in total solitude, and this solitude was deepened into total seelusion, when Lady Montrevor with her lord and family arrived in Ireland, and in his neighbourhood. This was the cause of his abstraction, his silence, his dark and hurried appearance. He wished not to be known to either of his brothers, to the Chieftain he knew he could give no happiness, and to Mr, Bethel, he believed he could teach no repentance: and Lady Montrevor he believed equally beyond the reach of both. Yet when his brother's life was threatened, he hastened to save him, and to impel me to save him, but disappeared as soon as his purpose was effected, to escape discovery,





j\s be was about to enjoy some tranquillity on our removal from Ireland, he was one night disturbed in his solitary residence by my unhappy mother who. came to implore hi» forgiveness, and to die. She informed him that he had a son, that that son was the supposed child of bis younger brother Bethel, and that the falsity which she had at first fabricated for her own advantage, she had afterwards kept from fear, from the difficulty Of discovering his real parent, and from the ex* perimental spirit of the new philosophy which taught that parental affection being merely a mechanical and desultory impulse; might be as easily transferred as an attachment to any other fluctuating and incidental possession. . She had been afterwards occupied too much by her own concerns, to think of herchjldren. Masseau, whom she had robbed us to follow, with the usual levity and wickedness of a Frenchman, had plundered, abused, and deserted her. ( On the verge of death, to which her connexion with him had reduced her, she had collected her declining strength to crawl to my father's melancholy retreat, and tell him that I was his son; and; that I was, as she had learned during her short residence in London, on the brink of





ruin, winch nothing but his interference could prevent.

The affections of nature poured into my father's heart again. He confessed afterwards to me that he had beheld me during this inter-regnum of human feeling with interest such as he never thought he could again feel for an human being. He now discovered that 1 was his son. He wasimpelled for my sake, and for his own, to make some inquiries into the state of the properly, whose rapid dilapidation my mother had apprised him just before her death. The inquiry terminated in a discovery of Deloraine's (my agent) real character and views; of that inveterate and unpacified enmity which had so often nearly terminated my existence; and which at length, had ended in the terrible dissolution of his own. He discovered Deloraine's having endeavoured to suggest to me a line of conduct the most offensive to my .SBBcle, his having impelled me to decline the duel, of which the effects he knew (and hoped) would be my utter alienation from his property and his affections, of his afterwards having employed a ruffian to strangle my uncle, in consequence of some indications of his returning affections, a danger from which my unexpected interference rescued him; of his endeavouring to seduce the affections of Athanasia through the medium of the wretched gouvernante, who had been formerly his mistress: his successful attempts to poison my mind and constitution by the seduction of dissipated habits"; his last effort to alienate my uncle Trora me, by procuring his arrests for debts which he had impelled me to contract; and of his finally de tanging the affairs I had committed to his inspection, in consequence of which 1 was on the verge of ruin. My father felt there was no time to be lost in the recognition oi his son and of his claims. He immetliately coiled on Mr. Corbett, whose chameter and abilities he venerated, to observe the movements of the enemy in Ireland, while he himself hastened to London to snatch me from destruction.





In London he lived for some time concealed, hesitating in the natural suspense of feeling on the mode of discovering himself. At this period he was recognized by Lady Montrevor, in Berkeley-square, on the night when, mingling with "the crowd, who were admitted to gaze at the decorations of the night, he had lingered to ejaze on her; she knew him. Her re* collection gave a throb of wild and dangerous joy to his heart. He forgot the purpose he had come for to enjoy it again;. On the dreadful night of the masquerade he made himself known to her. Oh! that terrible period, when Lady Mon* revort, goaded to agony by her infamous husband, was only preserved from suicide





by the reflection that there was one arm extended to protect her—that there was one heart which beat for her still. She threw herself in despair into the arms of her first love, and implored him to hide her in the solitude of his retreat from the world and from herself for ever. To a mind like her's, powerful and perverted, nothing appears so striking as a plan of monastic seclusion, and gloomy penitence. Such was the plan that she had formed in the distraction of her thoughts, wild and great, like all the rest.

My father, yielding to his religion or his passion, resolved to place her in Ireland in some retreat, and then return to vindicate me and her. But in the mean time, Hammond, on the first intelligence of my situation, had hastened from Ireland, and appearing in his professional character in Court, had exposed the bribed witnesses and mis-stated facts of the prosecutor to such contempt and abhorrence, that Lord Montrevor's retreat with Lady Delphina was anticipated by the necessity of flying from the infamy that had almost endangered his life as he returned from hearing a complete verdict given for the defendant.





His dreadful fate has been already related. My father and Lady Montrevor were met on their journey by Mr. Corbett, who was hastening from Ireland, with the terrible account of Deloraine's death, who, dreading the discovery with which his disappointed influence over Athanasia threatened him, had shot himself; and in the short interval of approaching dissolution, (for his death was not immediate,) confessed his persecution of me to Mr. Corbett; and disclosed to him the retreat of Athanasia, which the post-mark of her final letter to him had informed him of. He adjured Mr. Corbett to hasten and repair the evils he had done us; and while he was yet struggling to relate them all, died in the agonies of immature death, and involuntary penitence.





Mr. Corbett, feeble with age, and shaken by the horrors he had witnessed, hastened nevertheless to fulfil the great duty imposed on him. In his progress to London he met my father and Lady Montrevor, with whose purpose he was soon acquainted, and with whom he reasoned so powerfully on the inutility of that repentance which consisted in gloomy and secluded virtue, and the danger of confounding the dictates of religion with the impulses of human passion, and sacrificing with unhallowed fire on the altar of reformation, that they returned with a resolution of final separation; he determining on the termination of the trial, to return to Ireland, and she, though she abjured all future connexion with her infamous





husband, resolving to see the beloved of her youth no more.

From this state of unhappy heroism, they were extricated by the death ef Lord Montrevor. The exiles from happiness and from-themselves, returned to each other's arms, and fel* that no period of life was too late for felicity. Their minds were no longer distorted by unhappy passion, their talents no longer abused by opp bite perversions, their feelings and their happiness no longer subverted by the necessity of artificial display on one side, and a gloomy interment on the other. Afy melancholy state was the only obstruction to their happiness, ar«t this last obstruction was removed by the restoration of my reason. It was to more than reason; to health, to tranquillity, to affection, to friends, to fortune, (for my father had rectified the artificial derangement which the unfortunate Deloraine





had introduced into my aff.irs.) "And when we return to Ireland," said my father, on concluding his narrative, which had occupied some days, " and when once .more in the castle of your ancestors, you are surrounded by me, Tjy Lady M. by Hammond, and Sybilla, and Mr. Corbett, will you have a wish ungratified, a recess in your heart unoccupied?"

I could not speak, the thought of my angel-wife filled me with love and agony; they had never mentioned her name; I had not dared to utter it. I grasped my fathers hand; I held it to my heart. He felt how it beat; he felt it was dangerous to trifle with its struggles. He was beginning to speak, when a sound, sweeter than the first whisper of happiness, struck my ear; it was the voice of an infant. I did not wait to speak— to think—to ask a question—I started up—a door halfopened—a figure appeared at it—It was Athanasia, with my child in her arms!





She would have knelt, but I sunk beside her: I tasted the kisses of my wife and my babe! Let those who cannot feel my ielicity, attempt to describe it.





