ADA RE IS, 



A TALE. 



Totuvra. /xh 7rep) tovtcov sTrcugev, afxa. cr7rou8a<ja>y. 

Xenophon. Memorabilia, lib. i. cap. iii. s. 7. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. III. 



LONDON : 
JOHN MURRAY, ALBEMARLE-STREET. 

1823. 



y&3 

v.3 



ADA EEtS. 



CHAPTER I. 

" Every plant," said Kabkarra, 
*' seeks its own soil, and possesses its 
peculiar property; every insect seeks 
its peculiar plant; the wild beast roams 
the forest; the barren rocks are the 
home of the vampyre. In the same 
manner, and according to the same 
law of nature, every country is peopled 
by invisible as well as visible inha- 
bitants ; some prone, like yourself, Ada 
Reis, to mischief and wickedness, and 
others virtuous and benevolent. You 
have the sense of sight, and you see, 

VOL. III. b 



2 ADA REIS. 

as you imagine, real objects ; but I sec 
also those, which you term spiritual 
objects ; and the sense I possess is not 
more wonderful than the one permitted 
to you. We are all under the agency of 
the good or the evil principle ; the one 
is continually exhorting us to refrain 
from what is wrong, the other labour- 
ing to seduce us into evil. I serve the 
latter. My mother was the famous 
witch Niagara, who, in her early youth, 
it is said, allured an angel from Hea- 
ven by the sweetness of her song. 
Certain it is, that having crossed the 
seas, she bore a child amidst the flowery 
orange groves of Syria; and the youth 
Zamohr, my half-brother, is that son : 
he is the gentlest and most benevolent 
of beings ; weak, I have heard, at 
times ; and loves to dwell in the soft 
moon-beam, and play with children, 
soothing, with gentle care, the disap- 



ADA RETS. 8 

pointments of love- sick maids and 
youths. But, to return, Niagara, as 
she continued her career, gave way to 
the violence of her passions, until they 
exceeded every limit ; and her crimes 
drew from the regions below a fiend to 
visit her, in the shape of the condor of 
the rock. After her return to her own 
country I was the offspring of that 
guilty flame. On the day of my birth 
the moon came betwixt the sun and 
your world, so that it was dark upon 
the summit of the Andes, where I stood 
at the first instant of my breathing the 
breath of life. As I grew in strength, 
my infant steps followed the track of 
the panther, and my eyes strained 
themselves after the flight of the eagle 
of the sun. I climbed the lofty tops of 
the palm-trees to gather their golden 
fruit, and watched from behind the 
umbrageous leaves of the sycamore, to 

b 2 



ADA REIS. 



behold Niagara, as she howled in the 
moon-shine, and danced along the 
banks of the great river, whilst the ba- 
silisks and crocodiles gazed upon her 
in affright. She was a mistress of 
charms and spells ; could hear, unin- 
jured, the groan of the mandrake, and 
sing the lioness to sleep whilst she stole 
away her cubs. I have known her bind 
up the torrents with a w r ord, and saddle 
the black ostrich with the leopard's 
skin, then ride it, whilst it flapped its 
wings, flitting along like a night-mare 
through the boundless Steppes, until 
she came to the valley of death ; there, 
where the palm, the cypress, and ba- 
nana sadly blend together their dark 
foliage over the cemetery, there would 
she dismount and sit down by the waters 
of the Orinoko, to watch the skeletons. 
She had learned a song to raise them 
up ; they would dance together in the 



ADA REIS. 



watery mists of night, playing like sha- 
dows amongst the vapours, shining with 
phosphoric light, whilst she laughed or 
howled to them, and gathered from 
each the history of his stay on earth. 
She never gave me suck, she never fed 
me when I was hungry; but the bird 
of the mountains 1 came down to me 
and cherished me, shadowing me with 
its mighty wings from the hot sun, or 
fanning me with them to repose : his 
size was monstrous, his strength match- 
less, his dark brilliant eye could gaze 
upon the orb of the sun ; and when he 
arose from the peak of the Chimbo- 
razo he bore me with him, where I 
could count the stars of the firmament, 
and see the meteoric stones fall hot and 
whizzing through the air. Niagara's 
eye was black and penetrating, but the 
condor's eye was more wild and terrible 
than hers. The hair of her head was 



ADA REIS. 

white, as if time and care had bleached 
it, but the snow on the top of the 
Himalaya was more white and more 
dazzling as it shone in the distance, 
and thither I went to behold the eastern 
hemisphere, and gather diamonds and 
gold, and bathe in the waters of the 
Ganges. I traversed the burning de- 
serts of Africa upon the back of the 
swift dromedary, and the frozen moss 
on the lighter-footed reindeer; over 
seas I had sailed upon the dolphin's 
back ; and the mammoth was my guide 
and my defence in a strange land. I 
became familiar with the Valkyriar of 
the north, and Mista, Sangrida, and 
Hilda, wove for me a silver thread, 
which rendered me invulnerable. From 
Egypt the sisters of Behirre sent me the 
worm that never dies. I have spoken 
with the old man, who was seen, at 
sun-set, to come out from the great 



ADA ItEIS. 7 

pyramid, after lying there many hun- 
dred years, and he knew every thing, 
and laughed at all that is, and all that 
was, saying continually, ' Allah acbar; 
Eched en la ilia Allah*; 9 but his heart 
had been turned to stone with grief for 
the fate of his son, a fate too horrible 
to relate ; and Niagara wept when she 
heard it, for she thought of my brother 
Zamohr; and I saw her weep at the 
hour when from the minarets of Cairo 
eight hundred voices called aloud the 
faithful to prayer. But perhaps I fa- 
tigue you with so much detail ?" 

" Oh ! no," said Ada Reis, "go on : 
it is not unnatural that a being, who 
has seen so many and such strange 
things, as you say you have, should 
prose a little." 

" Well, then," resumed Kabkarra, 

* From the Koran — " God is great - x and I 
witness there is but one God." 



8 ADA REIS. 

" ' Allah Acbar,' I faintly repeated, as 
soaring above I looked upon that land 
of plenty, and sighed to think of the 
pride and presumption of men. * Fare- 
well to Egypt, to the Nile and the 
Delta ; to her rich fruits and flowers ; to 
her citron and orange groves. Farewell 
to India, to the New, and to the Old 
World. Farewell to Niagara,' I said, 
as upon the wings of the condor I cut 
the air, for my mother's call was vain : 
she could do all that spells and mystic 
power can do — she could do more — 
but she could not fix the roving heart 
of her son." 

Whilst Kabkarra thus spoke, the ma- 
rimondas, the birds, the crocodiles, all 
approached the mouth of the cave, as 
if listening to him; whilst the musk-ox, 
with his long horns, and the vicuna, 
stood and stared from the heights with 
stupid tameness. The waters of the 



ADA REIS. 9 

cataract rolled with ceaseless violence 
their eternal course, and the bat circled, 
from time to time, across and around 
the mouth of the cave. 

" What are revolving years ? What 
reckoning can there be of ■time," said 
the spirit, " when existence is pro- 
longed to eternity? — All that was or 
will be — all that appears to pass before 
us, is a mere illusion of our senses. 
When we speak to those who may not 
understand us, in what manner can we 
address ourselves to them ? When the 
language of congenial feelings is denied, 
how can we make ourselves intelligible? 
What are worlds — what is life — what 
is night — day — and, more than all, what 
is man ? Yet even mortal mind has de- 
fected the illusion of colour and matter, 
saying, as he truly may, * that nothing 
really is ;' then wherefore doubt that 
there are still greater wonders, and still 



10 ADA REIS. 

greater illusions. The world has circled 
around its sun three thousand years 
since first I quitted my native land ; it 
was in the ardour and rashness of vain 
youth, that I then attempted to possess 
myself of mysteries unmeet for even a 
spirit's ear. I gave my heart up to the 
dominion of passion. I lived and I 
enjoyed every good thing that this fair 
earth could offer ; but my love was like 
a searching flame, and destroyed its 
object. My adoration rendered it hate- 
ful, and disfigured it. My hate, like 
the lightning, blasted my victims. — In 
war, in danger, in the agony of despair, 
in the hour of vengeance, I was ever 
present — ever foremost, amidst the 
crash of ruin, the war-cry of rebellion, 
and the bloody festival of triumph. It 
was I who taught the people of these 
countries their savage customs ; I de- 
ceived their credulous spirits ; I but- 



ADA REIS. 11 

chered their children upon the altars of 
false deities ; and when they were en- 
slaved by tyrants, I assisted in the work, 
and excited against them the bloody de- 
mons of pride, cruelty, and superstition. 
Zamohr I chased aw r ay to purer and 
colder regions : for me, I loved the dark 
nations — child of the sun, I basked in 
his rays. The universe was before me. 
Bright shone the dawn of life, and I 
hailed it with the rapturous feelings of 
exuberant and overbearing youth. Why 
need I recount to you the means I used 
to undeceive myself? Why need I tell 
to him who feels it too well, what dis- 
appointment waits upon hope, and how 
unsatisfactory are the researches of 
science ? Better sit upon the promon- 
tory, and sing with my kinswoman, the 
spirit of the storm 2 , whilst the clouds 
gather and the ocean rolls beneath her 
feet; better ride with her in the simoon, 



12 ADA REIS. 

or the siroc, or in the whirlwind of hot 
sand, whilst men and animals faint and 
expire beneath her fury. Better do 
this than live to be deluded by hope. 
For however we may dream away the 
early hour of life, in pleasure, in sloth, 
or in study, we must awaken at last too 
soon for happiness, too late for amend- 
ment; ignorance cannot learn, and 
man is both ignorant and presumptu- 
ous. Ada Reis, you sigh. — Shall I pro- 
ceed ? Ah ! wherefore seek to know 
that which for wise purposes is hidden 
from your understanding ? The road 
was plain before you, your duty was 
prescribed ; you have wandered far, 
and there is no return ; for the idle 
bubbles which played before you, you 
have lost yourself. Whilst I, seeking 
for pleasure in liberty, and for light in 
the brilliant meteor as it flashed along, 
when scarce midway in my course lost 



ADA REIS. 13 

myself in the labyrinth of error, and 
sunk down into the valley of despair ; 
there, where death stands sentinel, and 
he I may not name waits to receive the 
fallen. Yet if you will hear the rest, 
mark me. 

" When the condor, my more than 
father, first carried me into that mourn- 
ful abode, its monarch sprung forward 
eagerly to receive me, and all that is 
evil and terrific upon a sudden burst 
upon my view. ' I am thy sire/ he 
cried: 'it is I, the friend, the parent of 
Niagara, whom thou shalt serve/ In 
vain I shrunk with horror from all I 
there beheld: the shrieks of despair, the 
wailing of the miserable, affrighted me 
w T ith their continual din. Niagara past 
her remaining years, inconsolable for 
my absence, in deeds of darkness and 
of crime ; till time had taken from her 
every enjoyment : then turning for one 



14 ADA RE IS. 

to pity her, long, long she sought for 
me ; her cry was heard in the desert, 
and her shriek from the top of the 
Chimborazo. At length, disappointed 
in all hope, she forsook the lands which 
reminded her of her children j journey- 
ing northward back to her own coun- 
try, she stood a lone and widowed being 
upon its mountains, until the spirit of 
life burst forth, and rushing forward 
with overwhelming fury, she fell, and 
falls for evermore from rock to rock 3 , 
driving all things before her, as she had 
done in life, adown the torrent of her 
ungoverned passions. There is a shrub 
grows upon Lake Erie; the juice of its 
berry, if used in time, will restore the 
wandering sense. I administered it 
myself to a maiden abandoned by her 
lover : reason returned, but the girl 
died upon the instant ; for then she 
remembered her grief, and him who 



ADA REIS. 15 

caused it. That juice, as it can restore 
the alienated understanding, so can it 
enlarge and invigorate the sound and 
perfect; drink of it, and thou also shalt 
see and know every thing as I do, and 
accompany me wherever I go." 

" Pardon me, my good friend," said 
Ada Reis, " but before I taste of any 
more of your enchanted gifts, I should 
be glad precisely to understand the 
effect they are likely to have upon me. 
The case of your former patient, as 
you have stated it, does not appear the 
most encouraging. In your extreme 
kindness you may, who knows, per- 
chance, see fit to transform me into 
the shape of a beast, or send me to 
reign over some other nation. Let me 
hear, therefore, from you the remainder 
of your history; and when you have 
concluded it, if I approve the account 
you give me of the master you serve, I 



lG ADA REIS. 

will obey your commands. Tell me, 
in the first place, in what manner you 
employed your time during your re- 
sidence in that valley of despair of 
which you have already spoken. " 

" During the first hundred years that 
I was confined in that miserable abode, 
where agonizing hearts make continual 
lamentations, where hope, and truth, 
and love are blighted, and only the 
malignant and rancorous passions can 
exist, I was seldom permitted to revisit 
earth. The monarch I served was 
lonely ; in the midst of crowds of 
slaves, he was desolate ; for he was 
conscious of being detested. He was 
the parent of deformity, disorder, vice, 
drunkenness, uproar, and murder. It 
was my sole pleasure to view, from the 
enchanted window he had constructed, 
and where he passed most of his cheer- 
less hours, the splendid orrery of the 



ADA REIS. 17 

heavens, bright in celestial beauty; to 
hear the heavy worlds as they rolled 
around, and listen to the choirs of 
angels, hymning their praises and peti- 
tions to the great Being who has created 
all things. But our sovereign, regard- 
less of their glory, sadly turned his 
eyes almost continually upon your 
world ; for it seemed to stand a single 
blot in the fair page of creation, marring 
the harmony and perfection of the stu- 
pendous whole. It was my continual 
thought, that if the race of man could 
know their doom, could see a little 
further than the worm they scorn and 
tread upon, the deceits we practised to 
beguile them, and the falsehoods we 
used to retain them in our sovereign's 
service, they would not forsake, as they 
do, the glorious light of truth, the 
breath of health, the hope of immor- 
tality, for the transient, unreal enjoy- 
vol. in. c 



18 ADA REIS. 

ment of a moment ; but I have since 
discovered that I was mistaken. I tire 
you, do I not?" said Kabkarra. 

" Oh, by no means. You are prolix," 
replied Ada Reis; "but my time, just 
at present, is peculiarly my own : I 
would thank you, therefore, to pro- 
ceed." 

" Upon the blue air of the spangled 
vault of the heavens, around the lu- 
minous atmosphere of the circling 
planets, spirits light and beautiful 
passed and repassed continually before 
our eyes, enjoying the beatitude of the 
blessed, inconceivable to me, but ap- 
parent in the celestial radiance of their 
angelic smile ; and cherubs, as thej 
sported with each other, in all the in- 
nocence with which they had returned 
uncontaminated and untried from life's 
infant morn, shuddered, as they flitted 
quickly along, fearful lest one exhala- 



ADA REIS. 19 

tion from our seats of misery should 
reach and blast them. You who inha- 
bit earth — you who have viewed with 
transport the distant stars in the firma- 
ment, and the softer moon, which you 
hail as your own sister planet ; could 
your imagination even conceive the 
scenes I have beheld, you would fall 
down entranced, calling out as I have 
done, ' Allah acbar ; Eched en la ila 
Allah? 

" Judge thou, then, Ada Reis, child 
of a world created fair, '■ so much in vain 
for you,' what the agony of his heart 
must have been who viewed, as the 
king of darkness did, from whence he 
stood, such a prospect ; what the grief, 
the despondency, of that mighty mind 
which had known the perfection, and 
the loveliness of the scenes, he had for 
ever renounced ? Oh! never may you 
hear a sigh like that his bosom heaved, 

c 2 



20 ADA RETS. 

as he stood a lone spirit, with the con- 
sciousness of strength, without the 
power of employing it nobly : w T ith a 
mind capable of every thing, fretting 
itself away upon the contemplation of 
its own nothingness — activity circum- 
scribed — energy suppressed — hope baf- 
fled — existence prolonged for ever, and 
a curse to him who endured it." 

" How popular the devil is become 
of late!" interrupted Ada Reis. " Lan- 
guage is exhausted for the purpose of 
representing him in interesting colours. 
We hear of nothing but the high en- 
dowments of his mind, and the melan- 
choly beauty of his countenance." 

" I represent him as I saw him," 
said Kabkarra, " when, turning from 
the glorious view of perfect wisdom, 
truth, and order, he fixed his eyes, and 
concentrated his hopes upon that one 
dark spot, where still his name was 



ADA REIS. 21 

held in reverence. * Oh earth !' he 
cried, * let me not lose thee also, thou 
only remaining hope ! Still be blind to 
the light of reason, and deaf to the 
promises of benevolence. Worship me, 
as you have done heretofore, and let 
me be as a king and as a god. I will 
flatter and bribe you ; my emissaries 
shall be day and night amongst you. 5 
The intentions, which he thus ex- 
pressed, he diligently contrived to 
fulfil, and I, with many others, was 
employed to allure the wavering and 
uncertain, who were still struggling 
against evil, and doubtful of their 
course. I called to them when vanity 
and pleasure had deluded them ; my 
caresses seduced them farther, and my 
passion inflamed them to acts of mad- 
ness. Often when Zamohr had been 
idling away whole years with some silly 
innocent maiden, I seized upon her 



2% ADA REIS. 

inexperienced heart, and bore it from 
him, even as I have Fiormonda's. My 
power fixes itself where pride or hard- 
ness have gained dominion ; and when 
I have seized on a victim, I pervert 
and transform the soul, so that few can 
recognise it again. Sometimes, when 
secure of my prey, I leave it on earth 
a little longer, to mislead others, and 
assist me in my work ; but if those 
whom I have seduced be young, and 
likely to repent, I so devise my plans, 
that death, if possible, should surprise 
them in the midst of their sin ; for my 
master must be served ; and I, as he, 
delight to entice and to destroy. His 
palace awaits you, O king ! his retinue 
must be kept up." 

" Fiormonda, then," said Ada Reis, 
" is already quartered in that most de- 
lectable habitation ?" 

" She is in the highest favour at pre- 



ADA REIS. 23 

sent," said Kabkarra ; " but to ex- 
plain this, I must inform you how far, 
and by what ties, she has connected 
herself with us." 

" And also inform me," said Ada 
Reis, " if the inquiry be not imperti- 
nent, by what means I had the peculiar 
honour of your acquaintance? for, 
strange as it may appear, I do not re- 
member." 

" Not remember !" said Kabkarra, 
fiercely. " Not remember ! I should 
have thought ' there were moments 'never 
to be t forgotten. 9 Vice is the mark at 
which I aim ; and where I perceive its 
seeds to be sown, there am I. In the 
still night I arm the hand of the as- 
sassin : in treason and in war I urge to 
violence and blood ; but mostly I de- 
light in snatching from the lap of se- 
curity the proud children of prosperity. 
I give to the seducer that grace and 



24 ADA REIS. 

hardihood which secure him success ; 
before the eyes of ambition I spread 
titles and crowns ; for vanity, mere 
baubles and flattery; but, above all, I 
confide and rejoice in infidelity. Thy 
house, Ada Reis, was long my dwelling, 
for there it stood forth open and un- 
disguised. I have partaken of thy 
hospitality, revelled at thy banquets, 
hallowed thy superstitious rites, and 
triumphed in thy profaneness." 

" Then, I hope, at all events, after 
such acknowledgments," said Ada 
Reis, " thou wilt demean thyself to 
me accordingly; for how wilt thou ex- 
cuse, for example, the partaking of my 
hospitality, the receiving all these ho- 
nours and courtesies from me, and, in 
return, seducing away my daughter ?" 

" Hah ! these things occur continu- 
ally," said Kabkarra ; " in Europe it 
is the commonest of all returns. Be- 



ADA REIS. c 2 t 

sides, I had this excuse — I loved thy 
daughter from early infancy : I watched 
her as she bounded along, wild as the 
antelope, and vain and gay as the va- 
rious-coloured lory. In the liquid lustre 
of her blue eyes — and blue eyes are 
ever the frailest — in the mantling blush 
of her cheek, in the soft smile of her 
full lip, I read my empire, f Passions 
fierce reign in that bosom,' I cried, 
* and by their power I shall gain do- 
minion ;' but innocence and piety 
guarded the shrine, and a rival ap- 
peared amongst the good angels that 
were sent to watch over her: it was my 
half-brother, Zamohr. He loved her, 
like myself; and the first sigh of love 
she breathed was for him. To blight 
the hopes of youth and beauty, to lure 
from happiness I must never enjoy, 
to crush and wound Zamohr, who flies 
me, and dwells in stars with the blest, 



26 ADA REIS. 

where I may not enter ; to accomplish 
this, I gave up my whole dark spirit : 
you assisted me by your impiety, and 
yet the struggle has been great, the 
conquest difficult, and such as required 
all my art and all my power. It was 
in a dream that I first entered into her 
heart ; pride and ambition took the 
place of love, who timidly retired; and, 
when these fierce masters gained the 
ascendancy, passion did the rest. We 
have her not, however, entirely; she 
has but half consented to be ours, and 
Zamohr and love are still attempting 
to rescue her." 

" Zamohr, then, was the youth with 
the angel countenance. I suspected 
him throughout ; but who was Condul- 
mar, and who was Shaffou Paca, and 
what became of the Bey, and the Jew 
Kabkarra?" 

" They were all the agents of the 



ADA REIS. 27 

evil one," answered the spirit ; " and 
yet there were such persons : they were 
passive clay, and permitted our power 
to enter their hearts ; they are now 
enjoying their own reflections. Con- 
dulmar is with Fiormonda, he is the 
son of Zubanyann. Shaffou Paca, mo- 
ther of the Jew Kabkarra, had sold 
herself to me in early youth. Her son 
was a wretch capable of any mean ac- 
tion ; he applied to me in his poverty 
and distress, and I gave him gold- 
dust, the pearls, and the sabre which 
made his fortune, and received in lieu 
of these inestimable rarities his worth- 
less soul : they are now suffering as they 
deserve." 

" Suffering what ?" 

" That you will know when you meet 
them. 5 ' 

" By what name shall I distinguish 



28 ADA REIS. 

thee, thou most execrable and per- 
fidious spirit ?" 

" Call me still Kabkarra — you first 
knew me by that name. I am but a 
servant of him you call Zubanyann ; 
you are also his follower: let me hasten 
to present you to your master. ,, 

" Your master is a cheat and a liar, 
I care not if you tell him so ; he has 
deceived me shamefully ; and, as to 
my daughter, she was to wear an im- 
perial crown." 

" She wears it already; but it is op- 
pressive, I fear : however, you shall 
behold her." 

" Where is she ?" 

" She is at this moment in the cham- 
ber of gold, in the palace of riches, 
where pleasure is striving to detain her 
with music, dancing, and festivity." 

" If this be the punishment decreed, 



ADA REIS. 2{) 

and the fate to dread," said Ada Reis, 
" I am not over alarmed or grieved 
about either my daughter or myself: 
matters might have been worse, and 
your monarch's palace, in the valley of 
despair, 1 make no doubt, is, upon the 
whole, as comfortable a residence as 
that which I have been so eager to quit : 
let me therefore hasten to it, and join 
my Fiormonda. ,, 

" It is only one of his palaces," said 
Kabkarra, with a malignant smile; "he 
has others for the accommodation of 
kings." 

" I will go thither, nevertheless; so 
let me try this juice you speak of: life, 
indeed, begins, for some time past, to 
weary me ; and, as Fiormonda is de- 
parted, so will I." 

" This night," said the spirit, "your 
wish shall be accomplished. Arrange 
your worldly affairs, settle the sue- 



30 ADA REIS. 

cession to prevent bloodshed, and swal- 
low from this goblet a few drops of its 
contents ; death shall strike surer than 
the famed guaapa juice, and without a 
pang your spirit shall be released." 

" I fear no pangs," said Ada Reis ; 
" but it is death I fear !" 

" Death is nothing," said the tempter, 
" when pain and sickness do not fore- 
run it." 

U But it is perchance to a hell you 
would bear me ; I have read of such 
things." 

" I bear you where all must go ; it 
is to a fairer place than this ; and there 
your cause will be heard and tried. If 
virtuous, you shall be borne by good 
angels to the islands of the blessed." 

" Ay, but if the contrary?" 

" Why that," said Kabkarra, laugh- 
ing, " we will consider hereafter." 

11 I am prepared," said Ada Reis ; 



ADA REIS. 31 

" for as to worldly affairs, they are but 
as the shadows, which the magic lantern 
casts upon the white cloth, as the paint- 
ed glasses are passed before its light. 
What are these to eternity? I long— I 
burn to see the wonders you have de- 
scribed. Let one historian alone record 
that I lived the greatest and wisest of 
men ; and that I died by my own desire, 
at the respectable age of fifty -four, and 
I am satisfied. My people may settle 
their own affairs; a little letting of blood 
after so much inaction will do them 
service : so thus I pledge you." 

Saying which, with a firm hand he 
held the tutumos and drank : it was 
not the unpleasant taste which made 
Ada Reis shudder when he felt that he 
had swallowed the contents, but a love 
of life, which at that instant returned 
upon him, or rather, I may say, a fear 
of death, and he would have given 



3 l 2 ADA RE IS. 

much not to have drained the draught; 
it was, however, too late ; and shortly 
afterwards he felt a drowsiness come 
on ; yet before he closed his eyes for 
ever, he roused himself to cast one last 
look around him upon a world he had 
loved so well ; never had it appeared 
to him more fraught with beauty. " I 
doubt, I doubt," he cried, " the other 
place I am going to will not be half as 
delightful" 

Suddenly a majestic bird descended 
proudly and firmly from the heavens. 
By its swiftness, strength, and magni- 
ficent air, Ada Reis soon knew it to 
be the condor, and almost without a 
moment's loss of reason, he found him- 
self reposing upon its back, and gently 
ascending with it into the clouds. 
Kabkarra, like a wicked urchin, be- 
strode its neck, laughing and shouting 
as they proceeded swiftly through the 
air. 



ADA REIS. 33 



CHAPTER II. 

" I had a dream, which was not all a dream." 

Byron. 

Ada Reis had read every thing 
which had ever been recorded of the 
unknown land to which he was jour- 
neying; he had studied the poetry 
which describes it, and from the learn- 
ed had gained what information could 
be obtained in every different country 
in which he had sojourned. He does 
not, however, say whether the course 
he took to reach the palace of Zuban- 
yann, situate in the unhappy valley, 
was the same that others had taken be- 
fore him; he mentions nor bridge, nor 

VOL. III. d 



34 ADA REIS. 

river, harpies, centaurs, giants, hy- 
dras, nor chimeras. As he is far from 
short in his narrations in general, it is 
somewhat extraordinary, that the only 
remarks which he makes upon this 
journey are, that, had he known be- 
forehand what he was to go through, 
he would not have voluntarily under- 
taken it. 

At the entrance of the Valley of 
Despair, Death stood before him, in 
the form of a pale wan woman. She 
glided by him the moment he alighted. 
Her breath was so cold, it chilled him 
as she passed ; and her hand, which 
she offered him, was damp and heavy. 
She glided by perfectly calm, and 
her countenance free from all expres- 
sion. Her appearance so much dis- 
turbed him, that he twice attempted 
to return by the way he had entered — 



ADA REIS. 35 

but that, he heard, was quite out of 
the question. 

However, these uneasy sensations 
were relieved, and even the emotions of 
fear were in some degree dispelled, as 
he found himself at the entrance of a 
long avenue of lofty trees advancing 
towards a large building, which was 
neither gloomy nor terrific in its as- 
pect, but, on the contrary, of modern 
date ; and such as appeared to promise 
comfort and luxury within. As he 
approached nearer, he observed that 
an immense concourse of persons, 
dressed in the garb of each different 
nation, were thronging the galleries, 
and walking in the gardens. He ad- 
vanced still nearer, and gazed upon 
the scene awhile before he joined the 
crowd, surveying the strange prospect 
before him, as a spectator might from 

d 2 



36 ADA REIS. 

a gallery contemplate a superb feast, 
or from a secure height a field of 
battle. 



ADA REIS. 'J7 



CHAPTER III. 

THE PALACE OF ZUBANYANN. 

" Com'st thou alive to view the Stygian bounds 

Where the wan spectres walk eternal rounds j 

Nor fear'st the dark and dismal waste to tread, 

Throng'd with pale ghosts, familiar with the 

dead." 

Odyssey. 

In a dream, the imagination pre- 
sents to us distinctly the forms of those 
whom we have known ; they appear to 
us to be actuated by the same motives 
that actuate living beings. In a dream 
we hunger and thirst; we laugh, we 
weep, we walk and run ; yet these ap- 
pearances are altogether more vain and 
more transient than the illusions which 



38 ADA REIS. 

mislead us in life. The gardens and 
long avenues which now lay before 
Ada Reis were filled with company, 
who appeared to him as distinctly as, 
heretofore, the inhabitants of the world 
which he had left. All, like himself, 
seemed strangers to the place ; some 
arriving on the moment, others having 
been there a short time before him. 
The courts and the hall of entrance 
to the palace were full to excess ; cu- 
riosity still impelled, and a desire of 
being first, led all alike to press for- 
ward; but as all, like Ada Reis, had 
met death upon their entrance, the 
crowding was not so inconvenient, nor 
the obstruction to be compared to that 
which takes place in one of our most 
select assemblies upon earth. How- 
ever, if the pushing and squeezing were 
not as great, the whispering and chat- 



ADA REIS. 39 

tering were in no respect diminished: 
the Tower of Babel alone could have 
been a scene of like confusion of 
tongues. Arabs, Armenians, Greeks, 
Turks, Indians, Cherokees, Moors, 
Spaniards, French, Germans, Italians, 
Scotch, English, Irish, were assem- 
bled together, eagerly discoursing 
one with another : and though un- 
civilized Barbarians and Idolaters 
formed a dark mass behind the rest, 
rudely and loudly calling for all they 
required, the only part of this vast 
community which at first attracted the 
attention of Ada Reis was a crowd of 
personages of courtly manners and 
cultivated minds, who seemed, like 
himself, to consider themselves as far 
above the vulgar herd. Eager to pay 
his devotions where he thought they 
would be best appreciated, Ada Reis, 



40 ADA REIS. 

not forgetful of his graceful native sa- 
laams, was bowing rather obsequi- 
ously to several nobles, when Kab- 
karra, who had left him, returned 
with two attendants in splendid uni- 
forms. He himself having changed his 
dress. He now wore a robe of purple 
and gold, at his side he had a golden 
key, and in his right hand he carried 
a white wand. His new attire imme- 
diately attracted the attention of Ada 
Reis. " The master we serve," said 
Kabkarra, " is particular in these tri- 
fles: it is his chief amusement to vary 
our dress and the furniture of his own 
house; the hangings, trappings, and 
ornaments, are changed daily ; the 
newest fashions in the best taste are 
ever studied, and forwarded by one of 
us to your world, as soon as adopted 
here. 



ADA REIS. 11 

" That urchin page in green is 
chiefly employed in these details. The 
changes of the mode, the varieties of or- 
naments, extravagance, and profusion, 
originate with us. Nothing brings us 
more subjects in the end than these 
fashions. France and England greedily 
seize our ideas ; half the rest of the 
world copy them ; but, as your country 
excels in the really magnificent, your 
chamber, Ada Reis, is prepared for 
you in the fashion of the one you in- 
habited when at Tripoly." 

M Thus, then," said Ada Reis to 
himself, " I have, after all, been pay- 
ing this servile court to the mere mi- 
nion of a sovereign, to the creature of 
another's will, whose ornamented habit 
is a badge of slavery! Ye powers! 
how men may be continually de- 
ceived !" 



42 ADA REIS. 

At this moment a girl, fair as is the 
goddess of eternal youth and health, 
smilingly approached: " How tardy 
you are grown," said she to Kabkarra ; 
" Peiries and Sprites have an hundred 
times refreshed every flower with dew; 
the bear and the tiger have left their 
caves to prowl for food ; the imps sent 
to Tara and Cacoa, Adrianople, and 
Lothmond are returned. The black 
Swifts have circled around the green 
islands of England and Ireland the 
time permitted, and have resumed 
their posts, and you, you alone, have 
loitered upon your errand." Kabkarra 
made no reply. 

" What, may I ask, if it be per- 
mitted me, are the black Swifts?" said 
Ada Reis; " I thought they had been 
birds, who come and depart with won* 
derful regularity on particular days." 



ADA REIS. 43 

" They are the souls of certain un- 
believers, who studied the laws of na- 
ture, without acknowledging the Law- 
giver; who dealt in sorcery and witch- 
craft, and misled the people under 
the name of Egyptians, necromancers, 
witches — they are allowed for a time 
to return and circle around, perform- 
ing their rites in the countries they 
once infested ; after which, at a mo- 
ment, they are recalled, and here they 
perform severer penance than I dare 
tell of." 

" Who have arrived since my depar- 
ture ?" said Kabkarra, " and what is 
become of the thousands I left?" 

" They are disposed of," said the 
damsel, slightly shuddering, as she 
tried by a laugh to hide her emo- 
tion. 

Ada Reis, although a professed ad- 



44 ADA REIS. 

mirer of beauty, felt repugnance to- 
wards this lady: she had something 
about her unfeminine, and unrefined ; 
he looked upon her therefore with a 
degree of disdain, and turning to Kab- 
karra, he said, " Where is my daughter 
— is she here?" 

u She is," said the lady : " slaves at- 
tend around her ; and, if pomp and 
ceremony can confer happiness, she is 
happy." 

Ada Reis, still addressing his guide, 
somewhat impatiently (for he liked not 
the lady), added, " Shall I soon see 
her ?" 

" Very soon ; and in the mean time," 
said Kabkarra, " you shall survey the 
suite of apartments, and converse with 
some of the company." 

The porter at the entrance of the 
first gallery was seated by the fire, 



ADA REIS. 45 

playing with his foot his master's tat- 
too. The lazy door-keeper arose, 
when repeatedly called upon by Kab- 
karra, and admitted Ada Reis and his 
followers. 

Kabkarra, who, though only a ser- 
vant, appeared, like most of that race, 
to command every thing in these re- 
gions, (observing in a moment the 
dislike Ada Reis had taken to the 
familiar air of the lady) led the way, 
with an air of dignity, showing Ada 
Reis from one apartment into an- 
other, and conversing as he passed 
freely and jocosely with the com- 
pany; for well he knew how to use 
the light satire, the gentle hint, the 
quaint repartee, and the mortal stab 
that annihilated every hope at a blow ; 
and, above all, how to nod familiarly 
to some, and turn aside from others 
of little consequence: but the princi- 



46 ADA REIS. 

cipal part of those whom he met were 
not, as Ada Reis observes, personages 
of much distinction : they were not 
great and noble characters, fallen from 
their original destination ; neither were 
they like the followers of Eblis, wan- 
dering about, each with his hand upon 
his heart, wherein an unrelenting fire 
had been kindled, as told in the sublime 
and affecting description of Vathek ; 
nor did they, like Achilles, in his sad 
answer to Ulysses, with few but awful 
words, express regret of life, and the 
hopeless misery of the gloomy realms 
to which they were consigned. They 
were for the most part second-rate, for 
there was little sublime or interesting in 
this quarter of the palace of Zubanyann. 
Such as Ada Reis found it, I have ren- 
dered it ; its general character was fri- 
volity, surprise, chatter, clatter, noise, 
and disorder, in it and around it. The 



ADA REIS. 47 

temperature, too, was singular ; as, in 
lieu of the sultry heat so often alluded 
to as prevailing in these sort of places, 
the air of these valleys and these gar- 
dens was cold, raw, and unpleasant, 
such as is felt in the capital of England 
when an east wind brings with it a fog 
that darkens the city and its neighbour- 
hood, or a freezing whirlwind from the 
North Pole bears quinsies and influen- 
zas upon every blast. 



48 ADA REIS. 

CHAPTER IV. 

" Quivi sospiri, pianti ed aJti guai 
Risonavan per 1 aer senza stelle; 

c 

Diverse lingue, orribili favelle, 
Parole di dolore, accenti d'ira 
Voci alte e fioche e suon di man con elle, 
Facevano un tumulto il qual s'aggira 
Sempre 'n quell' aria senza tempo tinta 
Come la rena quando '1 turbo spira." 

Canto 3d dell' Inferno. 

As the member of parliament for 
a rotten borough bends before the 
crowd, whom lie represents, but who 
did not elect him ; as a king bows pro- 
foundly to those he most detests and 
fears \ as a courtier deprecates the 
frown of his sovereign, and a dema- 
gogue, with exactly the same ser- 
vility, the hisses of the mob: so Ada 
Reis, with a humility and a desire of 
obtaining popularity which he had ne- 
ver felt before, made his obeisances 



ADA REIS. 49 

to the throng who surrounded him. At 
length, recovering himself a little, he re- 
assumed the air of dignity to which he 
had so long accustomed himself upon 
earth, yet leaned his arm familiarly 
upon Kabkarra's shoulder, and began to 
ask him questions upon every thing he 
heard or saw. " Who," said Ada 
Reis, " are these troops of noisy wan- 
derers, who seem to me more like pas- 
sengers crowding out of a galley, or 
guests into a banquet-room, than shades 
of the departed awaiting their trial ?*' 

" These, said Kabkarra, " are per- 
sonages from civilized countries, who 
possessed rank, dignity, and riches 
when alive ; such as have dreamed away 
life's little hour without committing any 
actual crime; but, mispending every 
moment in idleness and folly, have 
proved the cause of ruin to others, and 
have brought themselves, by mere wan- 
tonness and neglect of duty, into our 

VOL. III. E 



50 ADA REI6, 

abode. Most of them, as you will per- 
ceive, are men and women of the world, 
who never cast a look beyond the mo- 
ment, nor prayed the heart's prayer 
until death dissolved them." 

" And what will be their fate?" 

" They will be permitted to enjoy 
themselves awhile in the golden cham- 
ber and state apartments, until the hour 
appointed for their trial ; then, weak as 
they appear, they must endure the fate 
decreed. " 

" And what are these?" 

" Still the idle, as indeed most are 
who enter our abode; yet look to the 
tablets in the burning vault, where the 
red flame kindles for ever and for ever; 
there neither will you rind the idle nor 
the illiterate. " 

" And what," said Ada Reis, " is 
that group of people, that mob I see 
driven from the palace gate bv hun- 
dreds at a time? — there seem bea s, 



ADA REIS. .01 

birds, and men ; and the din they make 
is prodigious." 

" These, sire, are beneath your no- 
tice; for to rank and high lineage we 
pay deference, and he who has bar- 
tered his honour for a title or for gold, 
stands first amongst us. The crowds 
we drive elsewhere are the lower or- 
ders: amongst these you will see ne- 
gro-lashers, hangmen, beadles, master 
bakers, knavish tailors ; human beings, 
indeed, of all descriptions ; rebellious 
manufacturers, radical reformers, pic- 
cadores, drunken patroles, men of the 
fancy, and about two thousand London 
footmen, coachmen, and cooks.'' 

" But whom do I see? Est-il possible 
— can I believe my eyes? My old 
friend Coup de Vent, why, what 
brought you here?" 

" Ah! Monsieur, je suis charme* de 

e 2 



LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY OF ILLINOIS 



52 ADA RETS. 

vous revoir," said the Parisian hair- 
dresser, bowing low. 

" Mais, comment se peut-il?" said 
Ada Reis. 

" Ce nuit fatal," replied the coif- 
feur, " quand la foudre tomba sur nous, 
Sainte Vierge ! quej'ai eu peur! J'aitou- 
jours detest£PAm£rique,a cause de ces 
malheureux tremblements de terre." 

" Helas ! mon ami, l'on trouve le mal 
partout," said Ada Reis: "croyez moi, 
les tremblements de terre, les orages, 
les Eclairs, les famines, les foudres, 
la grele, les pluies, les pestes, les mor- 
tality, se trouvent partout, et les coif- 
feurs aussi, a ce que je vois !" 

u Monsieur est paitri d'esprit." 

u Vous me flattez, Coup de Vent ; 
mais qui le diable avez vous la?" 

11 Plait-il," said Coup de Vent. 

" Qu'est ce, Monsieur? 



ADA REIS. 53 

" Permettez que je vous presente 
St. Laure, fameux tailleur: il cher- 
choit en vain votre protection a Lima. 
II fait les habits a merveille." 

" Quelles couleurs porte t'on ici, 
mon ami?" 

" L'on ne porte absolument," said 
St. Laure, " que les plus recherchees. 
II y a premierement ce draps printanier 
et la puce effray6, mais Pelephant 
malade et le gris de souris evanouie 
c'est la derniere mode." 

" My next garb shall be gris de sou- 
ris eVanouie," said Ada Reis, laugh- 
ing. " And how, my dear Coup de 
Vent, is this place for company — does 
it rival Lima?" 

" O," said the coiffeur, " c'est bien 
autre chose ; et a ce que j'ai ouie dire 
du beau temps de la Rigence : c'est 
Paris comme autre fois, car il n'y a ici 



54 ADA REIS. 

que le vrai brillant et tout y est en- 
chanteur." 

" But, my good friends, you have 
not sojourned here long enough to 
judge, I imagine." 

" Nous arrivons des l'instant." 

" And Condulmar?" 

" O, pour Monsieur, il nous a fait 
dire mille politesses, mais nous ne l'a- 
vons pas encore vu 1" 

" Qu'est ici ?" 

" La Princesse de L., Mil£di S., et 
la petite Fleur de Rose." 

" Quoi! est elle ici?" 

11 Oui, Monsieur, cette pauvre enfant 
adans^ejusqu'a saderniere heure." 

" Et Nirza?" 

" Pas encore." 

" Et Fiormonda?" 

" Quant a Mademoiselle nous ne 
l'avons vue." 



ADA REIS. 55 



" And what, my excellent Kabkarra, 
are they doing in that corner, which 
makes that most infamous noise, whilst 
peals of laughter from little mischievous 
imps show that it is a jest?" 

" That," said Kabkarra, " is the 
famous L., the musician, whose crimes 
were as notorious as his talent ; he is 
said to have caused more tears to flow 
than any man, and nearly as many by 
his wonderful art as by his infamous 
deeds." 

" What is his punishment?" 

" He is doomed, as you perceive, to 
take the shape of that huge viol de 
gamba, feeling with exquisite taste and 
sensitiveness, whilst those mock artists 
are playing upon him out of time and 
tune, whenever it suits their fancies. — 
Hark ! how that note jars upon the 
ear; think what it must be to his soul 
embodied in the instrument ! it is like 



5C) ADA REIS. 

the distracting tooth or ear ache, the 
grating sound touches upon every 
nerve, and sets even the dragon Hen- 
na's teeth on edge." 

" I hope I fatigue you not with my 
questions," said Ada Reis; "but, as I 
am here, I would see and learn all 
things : who are these ladies and gen- 
tlemen who seem of gentle, kind, and 
fair aspect?" 

" Fair forms they are in truth," said 
Kabkarra, " but who showed no spirit ; 
heads ungarnished within, and mostly 
bald without ; souls of babes, though 
arrived at a certain age ; all modern 
characters, where little defects and 
great vanity make the sole sign of 
distinction ; lack of virtue alone brings 
them here — they are nonentities, who, 
receiving no admittance into the gates 
of paradise, have been remanded with 
a smile of pity and contempt to our 



ADA RE1S. 57 

abode ; they will be placed in the 
nursery, where toys to entertain them 
await them ; we shall find several of 
this sort at their games and pastimes 
as we proceed." 

" But we now come," said Kabkarra 
gravely, " to the picture gallery." The 
crowd followed, Ada Reis and his guide 
paused as they entered; it was indeed 
a sight to surprise; from the days of 
old until the present hour, there were 
portraits of every one who had betrayed 
his country or forsaken his God; and 
every countenance expressed such 
anguish, that it pained the heart of the 
spectator to look thereon ; they all were 
painted to the life. " The eyes move,'* 
said Ada Reis. 

" They drop tears of contrition," 
said Kabkarra ; " the painter waits to 
place you with the rest." 



58 ADA REIS. 

" I wish to go to the end of the gal- 
lery first," said Ada Reis. 

" It would take you four hundred 
years only to walk through it, begin- 
ning since the deluge." 

" For mercy's sake, then, let us not 
think of it," said Ada Reis. 

A large apartment, full of mechanic 
swings, wooden horses, ups and downs, 
shower baths, bats, balls, battledores 
and shuttle-cocks, of an immense size, 
was next displayed. " This," said 
Kabkarra, "is the nursery. These are 
a variety of toys, the uses of which 
would be tedious to explain; in that 
swing I have seen a lady swing for two 
hundred years without ever stopping, 
until at length she learned to know her 
own mind. A gentleman, who had loved 
and left many ladies, coming here, was 
kept between those battledores for a 
couple of centuries; the players at the 



ADA REIS. 59 

game being two of our most skilful 
imps. The two ambassadors, in the 
what is vulgarly called titter-totters, 
are to remain there till they have finally 
settled the balance of power between 
the respective kingdoms they repre- 
sent : see, at this moment one is up and 
the other is down.'' 

" I hope I shall not taste of these 
amusements," said Ada Reis, hastening 
on; " and here, in good earnest, are 
the chess-men and girdle you presented 
to my daughter." 

" If it give you pleasure to view 
these things, there are millions of 
them," said Kabkarra, " each more 
wonderful than the other. There is a 
stud, too, in which flame-coloured dra- 
gons, arTrits, ippogriffins, rakshes, so- 
hams, syls, ejders, hyenas, and mer- 
maids are kept. The coach-house and 



60 ADA REIS. 

store-*ooms, kitchens, and dairy, are 
also very curious to a new comer, and 
worth seeing ; but the jewel-room, the 
turning-room, the printing-press, and 
the women's apartments, with the il- 
luminated galleries and banqueting- 
halls, are what I think you, Ada Reis, 
will most admire." 

* I wish I were safe back again, my 
dear Coup de Vent," said Ada Reis 
with a sigh; " somehow or other, I do 
not feel comfortable, and the air does 
not agree with me. Ulysses and ^neas 
had been used to inconveniences on 
earth ; I have been spoiled, except, 
indeed, since I quitted Lima. Might 
I trouble some of you, in the mean 
time, for a goblet of water?" 

" It is the only article we have not 
here," said Kabkarra, in a confused 
tone; " but wine of every growth, and 



ADA REIS. 6\ 

liqueurs the most rare and costly, you 
can have in one instant." 

* What is the hour?'* 

" We keep no reckoning here; there 
is no such thing as time." 

" Ye powers supreme, what shall I 
do! no water! no time! why half these 
gentlemen will not know what to do 
with themselves ; the English gentle- 
men, in particular, who do nothing but 
inquire what o'clock it is ; and the 
French — why, Coup de Vent, what will 
they do without eau sucree?" 

" We shall find them occupation, I 
doubt not," said Kabkarra. 

At the end of the nursery Ada Reis 
saw with surprise grown folk not only 
attired like infants, but enduring the 
various entertainments, lessons, or pu- 
nishments inflicted upon children. " I 
marvel," said Ada Reis, " what those 



62 ADA RKIS. 

rather ancient and precise-looking gen- 
try are about?" 

" They are enduring all they have 
inflicted," said Kabkarra : " some are 
condemned to translate and analyze 
dark passages in difficult dialects, of 
which possibly the author himself knew 
not the import: there, are they to ham- 
mer at it daily, and when they cannot 
expound, they are lashed. That stiff 
old gentlewoman in a high chair, with 
a large basin of maize and milk, sees 
daily every dainty she most wishes 
for, and must alone, by spoonfuls at a 
time, eat the potion placed before her. 
These women and these men are in 
seminaries now themselves; they are 
exposed to every temptation, they are 
permitted to transgress every hour ; 
and on a sudden, at the convenience or 
pleasure of that sedate little urchin, 



ADA UEIS. 63 

they are to be beaten for the detection 
of the same errors when found out, as 
it is called, which, until they are found 
out, they are daily allowed to practise. 
They are, in fact, made slaves to the 
arrogance and ignorance of that little 
despot. 

" If there is any thing they more 
than another dislike, at which their 
appetite revolts, they are made to eat it. 
In fine, these are tutors, governors, 
keepers, nurses, and bonnes, who, igno- 
rant themselves, and in proportion ob- 
stinate, rendered the happiest years, 
and to many the only happy years, of 
the life of human beings miserable, not 
by lawful and necessary restraint nor 
instruction, but by their false notions, 
conceit, and tyranny, their ignorance, 
and hardness of heart. They had a 
sacred charge, their office was highly 
respectable, and had they filled it pro- 
perly, great would have been their re- 



64 ADA REIS. 

ward : but they were only base pre- 
tenders. Here too are such keepers 
of the mad as neglected their patients 
and benefited themselves. Here too 
are servants who betrayed their trust; 
nurses of the sick who drank and slept, 
and suffered their dying patients to 
want. Here, also, flaunting in the di- 
stance, are pretty nursery maids and 
other menials, who, by over-indulg- 
ence, flattery, and vice, perverted the 
children confided to their care: these 
are condemned to hard labour now, to 
sweep and clean the burning vault ; 
to polish the iron-work in the inqui- 
sition-hall, and keep in repair the in- 
struments of torture: hateful wretches, 
who, to gratify themselves, deceived 
the confiding parent's eve, and 
blighted the floweret even in the bud ; 
they showed no mercy; ask not, Ada 
Reis, what is the penalty of their 
crime. 



ADA REIS. 65 

" This, ,, said Kabkarra, hastening 
forward, " is the stamp-office. Here 
also are the scales, the great scales, in 
which the intellect and knowledge 
of every man is weighed against his 
actions and conduct. You will see 
in many cases the former weigh so 
heavy, whilst the good works are so 
deficient, that one scale kicks the beam, 
whilst the other goes at once to the 
lowest chambers, through the dark 
gallery. Hark ! they are weighing now P 

" How awful ! how solemn !" said 
Ada Reis, starting back, and listening 
to the hollow heavy sound. 

" This, sir, is the printing-room," 
said Kabkarra ; " here is the press." 

" And who are these gentlemen?" 

" Bad authors from different coun- 
" tries, and the friends who have in- 
" sisted upon their publishing, as also 
" most reluctantly their publisher, and 

VOL. III. f 



C)C) ADA REIS. 

" all his devils with him : they are con- 
?■ demncd to be screwed together, and 
" stamped for ever with their own dull 
" ideas, making a heavy Jbmn, and re- 
" quiring the whole strength of the 
" pressmen, and a short pull, in order 
" to bring off a perfect impression. The 
M ribs, the tympan joints, the frisket 
" joints, the garters, both ends of the 
" rounce-spindle are all well oiled to 
" prevent any delay. 

" A thousand imps are employed 
" here: the sheets when stamped, 
" formed, and pressed, are made up 
M into these stupendous folios. Now, 
" as beating is an important part of a 
" pressman's business, which, if not 
" properly done, renders every other 
" operation useless, the beaters here 
* perform their art to a nicety. Pray, 
" observe.'' 

The over-curious Coup de Vent 



ADA REIS. 67 

having inclined himself near the form 
where the beating party was placed in 
order, perfectly upright, one of the 
beaters, going on regularly from right 
to left, beating hard and close, close 
and strong, hit him a smart rap, which 
much amused Ada Reis, who now 
turned to examine the pulling and the 
mixing and grinding of colours. Here 
he found light bodies from various 
countries of various sorts and sizes ; 
they were pounded and ground upon 
a marble slab until they produced the 
hue desired. The black in thought — 
the green and yellow — the bloody- 
minded — the pedantic blue, all were 
here, and each preserved his different 
characteristic colour; whilst, with won- 
derful dexterity, Greek, Hebrew, Ara- 
bian, Chaldean, Chinese, Egyptian, 
English, Ethiopian, French, German, 

f 2 



68 ADA REIS. 

Persian, Syrian, Tamoulic, Teutonic, 
were printed according to their distinct 
national characters. 

" I was never given overmuch to 
reading," said Ada Reis, mending his 
pace : *' it is not my intention to linger 
long in this place." 

" And yet," said Kabkarra, turning 
into a magnificent library, " here is 
much to suit your fancy ; for I believe 
we have every profane and immoral 
work that ever was written : here, too, 
are authors and authoresses, and bas 
bleus— " 

" And Shaffbu Paca, by all that is 
wonderful !" said Ada Reis, coldly 
inclining his head to her, for fear she 
should join him : she was presiding at 
a tea-table. 

" She is a great favourite of the 
president," said Kabkarra. " And," 



ADA REIS. 69 

then addressing her, " much respected 
parent, while you explain to Ada Reis 
the wonders of this apartment — " 

" Enough, enough !" said Ada 
Reis, impatiently; " I wish to go on. 
Scientific women and pedantic men 
were ever my aversion : bas bleus I 
love not. And, I pray you, as you are 
so very accommodating, before I see 
any thing more, allow me to eat and 
drink; for, considering the very long 
journey I am come, the excessive ap- 
petite I ever was famed for, and all I 
have gone through, it may be thought 
not less than natural that I should re- 
quire some refreshment." In one in- 
stant a table was served; the dishes 
were exquisite, and in the best pos- 
sible style of cookery. 

When he had finishedthe repast, Ada 
Reis, upon rising from the table, was 



70 ADA RE IS. 

attracted by the beauty, the eloquence, 
and the interesting nature of a conver- 
sation which he heard going on near him. 
It turned upon various topics of litera- 
ture, and was maintained with infinite 
spirit. As different questions arose, the 
library was ransacked for volumes to 
refer to. A grey-headed librarian was 
indefatigable in bringing the books as 
they were demanded. — One of the dis- 
putants wished to refer to the Book of 
Truth and Knowledge. 

The librarian hesitated: — " There is 
but one copy here," he said, " and it 
is fixed : it cannot be moved." 

" Where is it ?" said the philosopher, 
eager to refer to the passage, that he 
might make out his point to those with 
whom lie was discoursing. 

"They shall see it ere long," said the 
old man ; "but I dare not move it now.'' 



ADA REIS. 71 

" Where is it?" said Ada Reis. " I 
will fetch it ; for I dare any thing." 

" It is,' 1 said the old roan, smiling 
malevolently, " where thousands of 
eyes are fixed upon it, reading and con- 
sidering it. You, too, will see it in 
good time, but you cannot approach it 
now." 

The mysterious words of the libra- 
rian repressed the conversation, and 
cast a sudden gloom over the whole of 
the assembly. They began to remem- 
ber (for they had all been in their day 
immoral and licentious writers), they 
began to remember the poison which 
they had administered to their fellow- 
mortals. The venom of their sophistry 
had perverted innocence, and drawn 
the tear of anguish from the hearts of 
parents. It had spread into the system, 
corrupted the blood, and brought many 
to that place where they were now them- 



72 ADA REIS. 

selves. The fair, the young, and the 
innocent had been destroyed by them; 
cut off, and lost for ever. They seemed 
to hear the reproachful voice of the 
victims whom they had perverted; the 
cry pierced the ear, and penetrated the 
heart : it sounded as mournful and as 
unavailing as the shriek of the drown- 
ing amidst the roar of the overwhelm- 
ing waters. They had ruined thou- 
sands of whom they had never even 
heard; and they were now themselves 
about to be rewarded according to 
their works, Ada Reis, upon perceiv- 
ing their sudden melancholy, thanked 
the Prophet that he had never written 
aline in his life, and was about to quit 
a society, which had thus in a moment 
lost all its gaiety and interest, when 
several good authors, whose lives un- 
fortunately had not entirely accorded 
with their writings, were ushered in. 



ADA REIS. 73 

Their works were immortal, and placed 
in the stars with the blessed, but they 
themselves were here. They were so 
covered with laurel, and so puffed up 
with each others' compliments, that at 
first it was difficult to recognise any of 
them. When all this unnatural and 
artificial exterior was a little removed, 
and they began to see things as they 
really were, they were surprised to 
discover how cordially they had always 
detested each other, notwithstanding 
the many civil things they had been in 
the habit of mutually saying. " I re- 
member these gentry upon earth," said 
Ada Reis, " both the good and the 
bad; they are just alike; it is impos- 
sible to satisfy them with flattery, any 
more than an actor or a singer. I 
often attempted to address to some of 
them what I conceived would be gra- 



7 4 ADA KEIS. 

tifying; but their expectations were 
always so much above any thing that 
I could in conscience say, that what I 
did say fell flat, and was taken rather as 
a criticism than a compliment." 

A body of physicians was next in- 
troduced to Ada Reis, each coupled 
with his apothecary. They had been 
condemned at once, without further 
inquiry, and with evident justice, to 
swallow all the execrable and useless 
draughts, with which, playing into each 
others' hands, they had drenched the 
stomachs of their wealthy patients. 
Ada Reis, however, shook them heartily 
by the hand; for the greater part of 
them were highly clever and agreeable. 
" I like you, gentlemen, " he said ; M I 
always did, and the more as your pre- 
scriptions I never tasted." 

They now entered spacious chain- 



ADA REIS. 75 

bers, adorned with mirrors, fitted up 
with silken couches, with easy chairs 
for rest and indolence, and others 
highly ornamented for show and osten- 
tation. 

" Here," said Kabkarra, "areamixed 
multitude, ladies from every country, 
persons of all conditions, from the 
highest to the lowest, waiting to an- 
swer, not for great and decided crimes, 
but for mistakes, prejudices, follies, 
and foibles; for vices which wore the 
garb and spoke the language of vir- 
tue, and for errors of the judgment, 
which often produce upon your earth 
worse consequences than malignity of 
disposition." 

" It somewhat surprises me," said 
Ada Reis, " to observe how many more 
men there are here than women." 

" The reason," said Kabkarra, " is 



70 ADA REIS. 

not so much that women are better 
than men, as that, by one way or an- 
other, women are generally punished 
upon earth for their offences : our 
master receives no broken and contrite 
hearts here. However, if you take a 
nearer view, females are not so very 
rare in these habitations. — Hark ! the 
clamour which rises from that part of 
the chamber will tell you that we have 
some of them here." The noise, in- 
deed, was shrill and loud; the voices of 
women were heard in every tone and 
key of vexation, peevishness and an- 
ger, commanding, ordering, whining, 
complaining, scolding. Maids were 
called for, and reprimanded in every 
direction. " The former ladies," said 
Kabkarra, smiling, " are here the ser- 
vants ; their merciless caprices, their 
unreasonable expectations, their vanity, 



ADA REIS. 77 

their meanness, are all returned upon 
themselves. No wonder both they and 
their new mistresses are dissatisfied." 
Ada Reis moved towards that part 
of the chamber, where he found that 
dresses,je wels, watches, Mesdames, and 
Mesdemoiselles, and drugs of every 
description abounded, aether and opium 
in particular; most medicines coming, 
as Kabkarra remarked, originally from 
and leading to these quarters. Here 
were boxes of rouge, and pearl pow- 
der, and essences ; beginning from the 
simple essence of rose, and ending 
with eau de mousseline double, lait vir- 
ginale, eau des souverains et de toi- 
lette : nought, that could heighten the 
charms or conceal the defects of na- 
ture, was wanting. " To-day," said 
Kabkarra, "they shall see how the king 
to whom they have paid tribute upon 



78 ADA REIS. 

earth can entertain them; and to- 
morrow (their to-morrow, I mean) the 
will of fate must be fulfilled." 

" Upon looking around the multi- 
tude of persons whom I have seen,' 3 
said Ada Reis, " I am surprised to miss 
some whom I knew upon earth, and 
whom I should have expected to have 
met here." 

" Oh ! I dare say we shall stumble 
upon them somewhere,'' said Kab- 
karra, " before w T e have done." 

" But I am more surprised," con- 
tinued Ada Reis, " to perceive a great 
many here who bore upon earth the 
highest and most irreproachable cha- 
racters." 

" Very likely," rejoined his guide : 
" we have a great many very excellent 
characters here; and many of them 
brought here on account of that, which 



ADA REIS. 79 

you considered as the very excellence 
of their characters. The religious hy- 
pocrites you have found out and ex- 
posed upon earth. Indeed, it is not 
my interest to say so, but perhaps you 
carry your suspicions of piety and de- 
votion somewhat too far. However, it 
is for our advantage that they should 
be discouraged, and so I say no more 
upon that head. But there are other 
hypocrites and pretenders, who con- 
tinue to take you in with the greatest 
success, and in perfect security." 

U Very probably," said Ada Reis ; 
" I have always suspected as much. 
" Now, there is a lady, who, in the 
" country in which she lived, was al- 
" ways held up as a pattern and an ex- 
" ample; correct in her own conduct, 
" severe towards others. What can 
" have brought her here?'* 

" She is here to answer for the gross- 



80 ADA REIS. 

ness of her conversation. Indeed, she 
was all you have described her; but 
she paid herself for the strictness of 
her life by the freedom of her lan- 
guage, and thus made it sufficiently 
clear that her freedom from error was 
by no means the result of the purity 
and innocence of her mind and feel- 
ings. 

" That lady, who stands at some 
distance from her, and whom she re- 
gards with such a scowl of disdain, I re- 
member her," said Ada Reis : " I am by 
no means surprised to see her here.* 1 

" You are very much mistaken,'* said 
Kabkarra, " if you suppose that that 
lady has any actual misconduct to 
answer for: — she has to account for 
having fallen under the suspicion of 
errors which she did not commit, and 
of having lost her character without 



any reason 



»l 



ADA REIS. 81 

" Is that her fault?" said Ada Reis. 
" That is owing to the censoriousness 
of the world, the general love of scan- 
dal, the envy of rivals, the malice of 
enemies." 

" Never," interrupted Kabkarra, 
" never; it is always owing to impru- 
dence and folly." 

" But, after all, is it a crime ?" 
" One of the greatest that can be 
committed: it has all the evil effects 
of actual guilt; it sets as bad an ex- 
ample, and it injures the individual as 
much." 

" But is injuring oneself an offence ?" 
" Again, one of the greatest; be- 
cause, in your world, no one can injure 
himself without injuring all with whom 
he is connected, and more particularly 
those with whom he is the most nearly 
connected, and whom it is his particu- 
lar duty to benefit and assist." 

VOL. III. G 



82 ADA REIS. 

" But there is one," said Ada Rei>, 
pointing to another, " who can be ac- 
cused of none of these errors: — pure 
herself in morals, as well as life; not 
austere to others." 

" Oh!" said Kabkarra, " that is all 
very true: it will not go hard with 
her. She is here on account of her 
violence in politics." 

fl By my faith, but I am glad of it!" 
exclaimed Ada Reis: u I hope she will 
be soundly trounced. I always hated 
women intermeddling in affairs." 

M You are wrong in this, too," an- 
swered Kabkarra. " They may often 
be of the greatest service in public 
matters, as in every thing else; but 
women who engage in politics ought 
to take great care that they do not be- 
come like the women who follow a 
camp — more savage and ferocious than 
the soldiers themselves. The duty and 



ADA REIS. 83 

office of their sex is to soothe and allay 
— not to irritate and inflame/' 

" Well, it may be so," said Ada 
Jleis; "but I never liked them to inter- 
meddle at all." 

" Of the others, whom you are sur- 
prised to see here," Kabkarra resumed, 
" some are come to answer for the 
ostentation of their charity ; some for 
perpetually tormenting and domineer- 
ing over their husbands and families, 
under the pretext of care and affec- 
tion ; and many in consequence of 
what you call upon earth a good heart 
— a possession which leads the owner 
of it into more scrapes than any other 
that I know of. For the male sex, 
many, whom you accounted generous, 
are arraigned here for the misuse of 
their wealth ; and many, very many, 
whom you held blameless, for the mis- 
employment of their talents." 

g 2 



84 ADA REIS. 

" Well," said Ada Reis, " but how 
come so many of the poor here?" 

M They are here to account for their 
poverty." 

" What! is poverty a crime?" 

" Not necessarily a crime ; but it 
is, as the English lawyers say, zprimci 
facie case against a man. He must 
show how he has become poor ; parti- 
cularly if he has fallen below the situa- 
tion in which he was originally placed. 
My good friend, if the devil really did 
all the mischief which you upon earth 
lay at his door, we should have much 
more difficulty in making out our case 
than we have : but of what you call 
accident, misfortune, calamity, disas- 
ter, infliction, you will rind here the 
real names to be negligence, sloth, im- 
prudence, despondency, and intem- 
perance." 

Whilst Ada Reis and Kabkarra were 



ADA REIS. 85 

thus discoursing, a terrible commotion 
interrupted the conversation; which 
was found to proceed from a man and 
his wife, who, having been linked to- 
gether, were struggling violently to 
get free. All they entreated was to 
be released from each other. " Any 
other punishment!" they mutually ex- 
claimed, " any other punishment I am 
willing to bear!" — But, alas! this was 
the doom pronounced; and the reason 
given for it was, that they had hitherto 
lived so much asunder. 

" Marriages then, I find," said the 
woman, u are not made in heaven, 
after all, but here." 

The next person whom they met 
was Fleur de Rose: Ada Reis em- 
braced her with delight. " Et toi, ma 
petite," said Ada Reis, " comment 
se peut-il que je te trouve en si sombre 
demeure ?" 



86 ADA REIS. 

" II est bien dur pour moi," said 
the pretty dancer, " de vous r^pondre ; 
c'est un veritable supplice de me faire 
cette question devant ces dames." 

" Parlez de grace." 

" II me faut absolument le temps de 
m'ajuster." 

" Vous n'etes que trop charmante." 

" Ah vous etes toujours aimable!" 

" Votre crime?" 

" Mon crime ! n'oubliez done pas 
ainsi toutes les biens£ances." 

"Vous avez commis?" 

"Du-tout, Monsieur; pour vous parler 
nettement, s'il faut tout avouer, s'il le 
faut, voici mes forfaits. N£e, monseig- 
neur, avec un cceur des plus sensibles, 
une imagination des plus vives — enfin, 
Monsieur, j'ai 6te cause de la mort de 
mon pere: j'ai quitt£ mon mari, train 
mes amants, et la douleur c'est emparee 
de mon ame. Au reste, je suis morte 



ADA UEIS. 87 

d'avoir attrapee un rhume le soir avant 
le tremblement de terre a Lima, ou j'ai 
eulebonheurdefairevotreconnoissance, 
mutant trop echauffee en dansant." 

" E lei Signora," said Ada Reis ad- 
dressing an Italian, who put him for 
one moment in mind of his beloved 
Bianca di Castamela. 

" L'amante mi ha trafltto per gelosia 
dello sposo," said the lady, passing on. 

" And you, my rigid north-coun- 
try Englishwoman, what brought you 
here ?" 

" Me, Sir! I don't know my crime." 

" Your error ?" 

" My error !" 

" Ay, my good lady." 

" It was, I believe, Sir, dissipation." 

" Indeed! from your appearance, 
that is the last crime of which I should 
have suspected you." 

" Yet, sir, I was dissipated, after our 



88 ADA KEIS. 

English manner ; and I find that here 
the dulness of my dissipation is no ex- 
cuse for it: it is just as criminal, they 
say, as is the levity of a Frenchwoman, 
or the gallantry and spirit of an Italian." 
" And are they dull, then, in England 
when they lead a life of idleness, and 
seek for amusement ?" 

u Oh, sir! if you were but to know 
how dull. In truth, they never do seek 
for amusement — they are always aiming 
to be what they are not, or studying to 
hide from others what they are : they 
never love; they never resent; they 
never hate ; they never enjoy : they af- 
fect alone, and they assume. ,, 

" I pity, but cannot sympathise with 
either them or you, madam, " said Ada 
Reis coldly : "but pray, what are those 
gentlemen that torment the air with 
groans?" 

" They are fortune-hunters, who, 



ADA REIS. 89 

having married for money, thought it 
no crime to treat with cruelty the vic- 
tims of their avarice: they are now 
condemned to drink hot liquid gold 
and silver. Those whom they so ill 
treated daily administer the same to 
them." 

" Dreadful," said Ada Reis," butjust. 
And, I beseech you, who is that hand- 
some man, surrounded by women who 
seem persecuting him to death ; is he a 
fortune-hunter ? Now, by the Prophet, 
there seem enough women in that 
quarter ; I need not have made my re- 
mark." 

" Sire," said Kabkarra, " the young 
man you observe was, when on earth, a 
general admirer of the wives of others. 
He made his way into the houses of 
his neighbours under every false pre- 
tence, for the purpose of practising 
upon the affections of their silly and 



90 ADA REIS. 

frail partners. He took advantage of 
every petty defect in the character and 
manners of the husband ; made use of 
every calumny respecting his conduct; 
inflamed every domestic difference; in 
short, acted the part of the skilful and 
consummate seducer. Idleness, vanity, 
and entire want of judgment, were not 
proof against the seductions of so fa- 
shionable a profligate. His career was 
run, of course, in London, for no coun- 
try but England acknowledges such a 
master, or bows with submission to such 
a deity as Fashion. You have seen those 
who worship the all-glorious sun, and 
in its up-rising and down-setting think 
that they behold a God: they, mistaken 
as they are, adore at least what a God 
alone could have created or guided in 
its orbit : but for these singular be- 
lievers, these enlightened idolaters, who 
ridiculed the worshippers of the sun 



ADA REIS. 91 

whilst on earth, how can you account 
for their infatuation ? They have bowed 
the knee to a meaner object than a cow 
or an image ; they have loved, admired, 
thought on, lived for, a deity, which 
they themselves had created ; a deity 
composed too of a greater variety of 
substances than the molten idol which 
the stiff-necked Israelites worshipped 
in the desert. They have sacrificed 
honour, peace of mind, health, wealth, 
wives, parents, and, shudder when you 
think of it, their children, at the shrine 
of this painted doll, this Fashion ; and 
they are now, in bitter accents, la- 
menting their infatuation. See," con- 
tinued Kabkarra, "what numbers are 
advancing to bow the knee and wor- 
ship even here the image I have 
described to you, the many-coloured 
deity who on earth misled them ! 
Not frantic, like the followers of 



9% ADA REIS. 

Atis ; not in Bacchanalian riot and 
disorder, do they advance wildly to 
perform horrid rites, but gently re- 
served, and timidly fearful, these fair 
but faded votaries approach! In their 
hands they bear flowers once fragrant, 
now blighted, to strew upon that altar 
to which in early youth they were sacri- 
ficed. How mournful, how haggard is 
their air !" 

" Yet do they dance and smile, and 
sing the song of love and joy," said 
Ada Reis. 

" It is no effort," replied Kabkarra, 
" for them thus to deceive the eyes of 
others, whilst their hearts are bleeding: 
the mask of gaiety, the outward garb 
of happiness, these misled votaries are 
commanded to put on; many, however, 
have no hearts nor minds : these, if 
you observe, follow the rest, and form 
the mass of the assembly, whilst the 



ADA REIS. 93 

more distinguished, with heads erect, 
and insolent air, usurp at parties and 
at feasts the places of supposed di- 
stinction: these wear peculiar badges 
of servitude to their deity, to raise 
them in the estimation of the gaping 
crowd; they mingle not, if you ob- 
serve, with the vulgar herd — nothing in 
life for them had charms but honours 
denied to others. At theatres they sat 
apart ; to public exhibitions they went 
upon days when the public were ex- 
cluded ; the beauties of nature, the 
works of art, the mimic representation 
of passions exhibited on the stage, 
study, amusement, the voice of song, 
the fire of genius, were all tasteless and 
dull to their apprehension, unless they 
alone might exclusively see, hear, read, 
enjoy, what others could not." 

" I would speak with them," said 



94 ADA REIS. 

Ada Reis, " and hear from their own 
mouths their divers histories." 

"Alas! the history of one," said Kab- 
karra, " is the history of all." 

As he yet spoke, a fly, gaily extend- 
ing its wings, soared round and round, 
ever the same continued round until 
it consumed itself in the flame of a 
golden lamp, and languished a way in 
agonies. — Kabkarra, pointing to it, 
smiled scornfully — " Such is the hi- 
story, and such the fate of those you 
have gazed upon — but enough of them. 
— Passion, not fashion, I imagine, sire, 
brought you here." 

" I would converse," said Ada Reis, 
" with that thin woman: — why does she 
weep thus ? Art thou also one of these? 
Thy faded wreath, thy haggard air, 
thy lingering step, declare it." 

" I once was one of them, u said the 



ADA REIS. 9^ 

lady, with a deep-drawn sigh; " but I 
am nothing now." 

" Communicate to me, gentle lady," 
said Ada Reis, " what have been your 
adventures, and what occasions you 
such regret V* 

Ci The happy dream of life being for 
ever passed; the dread, too, lest I 
should have been thought wanting in 
gratitude and attachment to those I 
loved so well." 

" Are you sincerely penitent for your 
errors?" 

" From my heart, I am!" 

" What are you doomed to suffer V 

" My punishment is now to see the 
shades of every one once dear to me 
pass by me with indifference ; to feel 
intensely, but to know that none do 
feel for me; to hear from time-pieces, 
all day and all night long, not the hours, 
but all my thousand follies and faults 



96 ADA REIS. 

repeated; and to be conscious that all 
my thoughts, wishes, and actions are mis- 
represented. Sir, can I say more? I was 
idolized — lam — ah! would I were only 
forgotten! — But it is well — I lost my- 
self. I felt the harshness and the un- 
kindness of some too keenly — I seized 
a pen — and the pen which knew once 
but to write with the milk of human 
kindness I dipped in gall." 

" No woman should ever write," said 
Ada Reis. 

The lady sighed. 

" Name to me," said Ada Reis, "as 
they pass us in long procession, these 
misled votaries, and tell me truly all 
you know of them." 

" They have borne with me," said 
the lady: " I will never return evil 
for good, and — " ... As she yet spoke, 
she mournfully turned away, and fol- 
lowed with the rest. 



ADA REIS. 97 

(t If I had but really believed all 
this," said Ada Reis, " nor passion, 
nor fashion, nor ought else should 
have brought me here. Why, Kab- 
karra, you knave of knaves, you never 
even hinted at such things." 

" Did I not?" 

" No, by the prophet ; and, so far 
from it, you promised to gratify my 
ambition to its fullest extent; you even 
promised me, you dog, to bestow upon 
me a kingly crown !" 

" That promise alone should have 
told you," said Kabkarra, " that I 
meant you but little favour ; for whe- 
ther it be of thorns or of gold, it is a 
heavy care to him upon whom it is be- 
stowed. Man, when he places it upon 
his brows, assumes a pre-eminence over 
his fellow-creatures, and undertakes 
an awful responsibility : if he perform 

vol. in. h 



98 ADA REIS. 

the arduous task well, his reward is 
infinite; and if he fail, Ada Reis, mucli 
is forgiven to the difficulty of his situa- 
tion. But I speak only, my good Sir, 
of kings who were born to the honour; 
upon whom it descended unsought for, 
and not to such as thou, who had no 
more need, heaven help thee, of being 
a king than a cook ; and as I know you 
are fond of eating, tell me, by-the-by, 
if you ever any where tasted such fare." 

" I think at Paris." 

" Why the very traiteur you allude 
to is head cook here; and another such 
left in that city had sent the rest of 
the inhabitants of that too delightful 
capital to us without a chance of re- 
demption." 

" Oh, this at least is good," said 
Ada Reis; " then we shall live well, at 
all events. But Fiormonda?" 



ADA REIS. 99 

" I hasten to find her," said Kab- 
karra, for one moment retiring. 

Ada Reis now turned about, and 
observed that from every apartment, 
whoever they might be, and whatever 
might have been their occupation, every 
soul was following him ; he seemed to 
be the leader of an immense multitude, 
or the popular representative of an En- 
glish city, or a Pasha performing a pil- 
grimage to the shrine of the Prophet, 
so great was the increasing number of 
his followers, and so diversified were 
their various countenances and habits. 
An equerry, named Mousti, now opened 
a door, just peeped through it, then 
shut it again, and laughed. Ada Reis, 
who never took a jest well, unless he 
had provoked it, and who was curious 
to a fault, was highly offended at this 
freedom, and might have fallen into a 
phrensy of passion, had not at that in- 

h 2 



100 ADA RETS. 

stant the new guide approaching with 
solemnity, requested him to put on 
the royal robe and the crown, and 
permit himself to be conducted to the 
golden chamber and illuminated gal- 
lery, where an entertainment had been 
prepared in return for the voluntary 
visit he had paid to the master of these 
regions. 

* Belnabi ! I think it singular I have 
not seen thy master before this ; it is 
no mark of respect in him to treat me 
thus. Where is he ? what is he about ?" 

Ada Reis received no answer to this 
inquiry. 



ADA REIS. 101 



CHAPTER V. 

THE ROYAL APARTMENT. 

" I am in torments, ineffable torments! an un- 
relenting fire preys on my heart." 

Vathek. 

Kabkarra returned; the doors of 
the royal cabinet were open. Ada 
Reis walked forward. All was gloomy 
here; nor massive gold, nor imperial 
purple, nor magnificence, nor cold 
ceremony, could enliven the cheerless 
aspect of the place. 

" It is not just! it is not just! it is 
not just ! that we should be here," cried 
the multitude, mournfully address- 
ing Ada Reis; as vast numbers sur- 
rounded him on his entrance, all lament- 



102 ADA REIS. 

ing, and all looking to him with hope 
of redress; for even in these strange 
scenes and halls they required a leader, 
the Europeans, in particular; and see- 
ing in Ada Reis that manner which 
bespoke command, and hearing that 
he was a monarch, without further dis- 
cussion they accompanied him where- 
soever he led them. 

What had the gloomy party now 
given for one hour of that life they had 
lavished away with such prodigal un- 
concern ! Of what matter now were the 
quarrels, bickerings, envyings, hatings, 
fears, and hopes, which had darkened 
or illumined their journey upon earth! 
How their hearts reproached them 
for every act of unkindness to crea- 
tures as frail, as miserable as them- 
selves ! How idle appeared now every 
useless extravagance, every selfish care! 
They were at the end of all things; 



ADA REIS. 103 

and as time past was presented to the 
memory of each, with every action 
marked, as in a chart, their spirits 
sickened at the detail and exhibition 
of so many follies and iniquities ; and, 
what was still more painful to them,they 
saw that others knew them, and all they 
had done, and they durst not look 
around them, so great was their humi- 
liation. A thousand eager voices aris- 
ing at once, continually inquired — 
" What was to be their doom? 1 ' some 
asking, others speculating, others rea- 
soning, others fearing, others hope- 
ing — no one answering. But as soon 
as they had entered the royal cabinet 
a deep and solemn silence ensued; for 
there, under a canopy, Fiormonda 
and Condulmar were seated in awful 
majesty upon thrones, adorned with 
every badge of royalty. Despair was 



104 ADA REIS. 

pictured upon Fiormonda's counte- 
nance; malice and cruelty distorted 
the beautiful expression of Condul- 
mar's. Ada Reis paused to contem- 
plate this unexpected scene. It is 
true, Fiormonda wore an imperial 
diadem, but it appeared to weigh upon 
and oppress her. She was pale, as 
is the first hue of death, but, like it, 
calm, and still lovely : passion no longer 
lighted her eye, nor moved her lip ; 
a look of suffering only proved that she 
was alive ; but though alive, the heart 
that had felt so warmly was as ice ; the 
blood that, in its rapid current, had 
rioted so violently, was chilled; the 
thoughts, which had burst the bonds 
and fetters imposed by reason and duty, 
were all now turned inwardly upon her- 
self. 

Ada Reis's was for a moment deeply 



ADA REIS. 105 

affected. He advanced, andwould have 
clasped her to his bosom, but he could 
not approach her. She only looked 
upon him with mournful, reproachful 
silence ; her eyes gazing as the eyes 
of one in stupor, but half-conscious 
of what they see: her countenance 
perfect in beauty, but darkened in its 
expression by all the hopelessness of 
despair. 

" We keep no sabbath here" was 
written in large and bright characters 
above the throne. Kabkarra, to relieve 
Ada Reis, drew aside a rich curtain, 
and suddenly the illuminated gallery 
burst upon his admiring view. This 
was splendour! this was beauty! It 
was lighted with a brilliancy unknown 
in the palaces of mortals, and in the 
midst of it was spread a banquet of 
more than regal magnificence. A 



100 ADA REIS. 

burst of rapturous applause proceeded 
from the astonished crowd. 

"By the Prophet, this is fine!" said 
Ada Reis. 

" Enjoy thyself the moment grant- 
ed," said Kabkarra. 



ADA REIS. 107 



CHAPTER VI. 

THE BANQUET. 

" A table richly spread, in regal mode, 
With dishes piled, and meats of noblest sort 
And savour, beasts of chase, or fowl of game, 
In pastry built, or from the spit, or boil'd, 
Gris — amber — steam'd ; all fish from sea or shore, 
Freshet, or purling brook, of shell or fin, 
And exquisitest name, for which was drain'd 
Pontus and Lucrine bay, and Afric coast. 
Alas ! how simple, to these cates compared, 
Was that crude apple that diverted Eve !" 

Paradise Regained. 

As the first clamour of wonder and 
delight subsided, a profound silence 
again prevailed ; but the spectacle was 
at once so grand and so fair, that each 
individual awakened from despair to 
remorse, from remorse to hope. 

The tables were covered with the 
richest meats, fruits the most tempting, 



108 ADA REIS. 

and wines of exquisite and rare flavour, 
whilst opening doors displayed asuperb 
range of apartments, ornamented with 
breathing marbles, and paintings the 
most exquisite : one charm alone was 
wanting — the charm of rarity; for 
jewels and gold were scattered around 
with such profusion as to be disre- 
garded, and the blaze of light was re- 
flected from so many mirrors, that the 
dazzled eye had difficulty in fixing itself 
upon any one object. While thus rapt 
in enchantment, music was suddenly 
heard, such as the ear of love listens 
to with delight ; not the martial strain 
that kindles our wilder passions, nei- 
ther the mournful tone that melts the 
heart to sadness, but the soft-breath- 
ing flute, the gay guitar, the harp ac- 
companied by the Italian voice, notes 
that thrill the ear, and vibrate to the 
heart;, and after this a more lively and 



ADA RE IS. 109 

a nobler strain. Its effect was like that 
of a summer breeze on a gloomy da}', 
which puts the feathery spray of the 
saplings in motion, while the duskier 
foliage hardly quivers to the sound; 
for its effect on the youthful and gay 
was instantaneous. Fairy forms circled 
with even measure in the easy waltz, 
or glided in the light quadrille, while 
the Spanish and the Russian moved 
lightly to the sound of the balalaika, or 
bounded to the gay rattle of the cas- 
tanets. Condulmar and Fiormonda pre- 
sided over the entertainment, and Ada 
Reis was to fill the next seat of honour. 
Fiormonda hitherto had not spoken ; 
and despair still sate unmoved upon her 
countenance. 

Condulmar seemed to regard her 
with a smile of scorn. In truth, he 
hated and despised her, and had the 
misery of feeling she could never die ; 



110 ADA REIS. 

turning, therefore, from her with dis- 
dain, he descended from the throne, 
and approached the banquet, making 
sign for every one to be seated. Ada 
Reis had been waiting some time for a 
word of notice. Condulmar now fixed 
his eyes upon him and smiled a wel- 
come, then casting them around upon 
the fair assemblage, " Men and women 
of the world," he said, " I am com- 
manded to bid you welcome by him I 
may not name, whose sceptre for this 
night I bear. Partake of this feast, en- 
joy the moments allowed you, and to- 
morrow your claims will be fairly heard, 
and your future state appointed. Ada 
Reis, as a friend, I greet you." 

A nice observer might, perhaps, have 
detected as much of mockery as of com- 
plaisance in Condulmar's address, but 
it was accepted by the multitude, as it 
appeared to be intended, when Fior- 



ADA REIS. Ill 

monda arising, at length broke silence 
as follows, in unexpected accents : 
" Unhappy mortals, 5 ' she cried, " O yet 
beware ! all here is deception. This 
palace is but the abode of remorse and 
grief; these flowers distil poison ; these 
viands carry in them death; in the 
goblet is a serpent, and the lips of 
love will whisper curses after they have 
touched it ; eat not, drink not, but re- 
pent." 

" In life's short day," s^id Condul- 
mar, " you had time and means allotted 
to distinguish between good and evil ;. 
and having preferred and followed evil, 
have joined me in this abode. You have 
chosen for yourselves, and now learn 
as far as you can yet learn, the value 
of your choice ; it has been yours to 
sin, it is mine to reward." 

As upon a stormy night the shrieking 
wind sounds mournfully as it passes 



112 ADA REIS. 

over the forests, and shakes with its 
violence some old battlement, so one 
fearful cry of wailing and despair burst 
from the assembled guests, and made 
the galleries and halls tremble with the 
sound. Fiormonda again addressed 
herself to Condulmar, her voice faint 
and broken, as if no longer supported 
by hope. " Were it possible to move 
the unjust to one act of justice, were 
there a single chance of impressing the 
hardened heart, I should yet be heard. 
It is true, that, in the short deceitful 
days of life, we committed errors : 
young in mind, and wanting in expe- 
rience, we suffered ourselves to be be- 
guiled ; we knew right from wrong, I 
allow ; but daemons in your form being 
permitted to arise and tempt us, il 
was scarce possible for us to resist : in 
the name of these beings, who, like 
myself, have been beguiled, I plead. — 



ADA RETS. 113 

If it be permitted to you, — if yet a 
pitying angel hovers over us to snatch 
us from your grasp, — try us but once 
again ; permit us, with our present 
consciousness of the punishment that 
awaits us, to encounter any tempta- 
tion: and should we, by our conduct, 
and sincere repentance, merit some 
mitigation of our menaced fate, may 
we hope to find it? Alas! we judged 
but through the medium of our senses ; 
we saw imperfectly, and the intelli- 
gence of our minds was not suffi- 
cient to penetrate the mystery: young, 
infatuated, inexperienced, we suffered 
ourselves to be misled ; but had we 
lived, had time been given us, had we 

positively felt afraid " 

" This," said Condulmar, " is the 
general complaint; but Ada Reis 
knows human nature too well, not to be 
certain that were you again, with all 

VOL. III. I 



114 ADA REIS. 

the experience you have acquired, to 
be exposed to temptation, you would 
again fall before it." 

" Oh, but we should not!" cried a 
million of voices at once. " Put us to 
the proof now, now that we know to 
what error and frivolity will lead, re- 
store us but for a few moments to life, 
give us but one chance more, tempt 
us as you will, but let us retain a cer- 
tain remembrance of the consequence 
of our faults, and see if we shall again 
commit them." 

" Why do I waste my tears and 
prayers," said Fiormonda, " upon one 
who cannot feel. Too happy in our 
misery, you would not give us this one 
chance of safety, even were the power 
granted you to allow of it." 

Something like a smile curled the lip 
of Condulmar, when a voice arose from 
beneath, which seemed to shake the 



ADA REIS. 1 15 

foundations of the palace, " The power 
is granted to me, and the trial shall be 
made !" 

" Creatures of clay, attend ! — On 

* this one night depends your fate. 
1 The master I serve, although reviled 
6 by all, cannot, may not be unjust; 
'justice wills, that penitence be put 
' to the proof. We force no votaries 
1 into our train; we need not the harsh 
' means of force and compulsion : no 
1 one enters the service of our sove- 
' reign, except willingly and by his 
1 own consent. You came here by 
1 your own free choice ; you shall now 

* have power given, if you desire it, to 
' depart ; Zubanyann is not a tyrant ; 
1 he wins and rules by gentleness and 
1 persuasion, not by compulsion and 

* violence. Your feelings and passions 
' will return : remember, in the hour 

* of temptation, eternal happiness or 

i 2 



116 ADA REIS. 

" misery depends upon your choice. 
" Should you now resist the seductions 
" of vice, and break through her fasci- 
" nations, angels, who yet hover above 
" in hopes of bearing you hence, shall 
" snatch you from our grasp. — Energy, 
" firmness, resolution, may regain 
" for you that which you have lost : 
" awake, then, and strive for victory, 
" as the hour of trial is at hand." 



ADA 11EIS. 117 



CHAPTER VII. 
THE DAY OF PROBATION. 

As in the Mediterranean and summer 
seas the waves will often not begin 
to work and whiten till the wind is 
down, so when the voice, which had been 
listened to in silence, ceased, a mixed 
murmur arose. All lifted up their 
voices, all promised, and all resolved, 
and at this moment from above the 
vaulted roof the hymn of penitence 
and faith struck full upon their hear- 
ing. Amidst the choir Fiormonda di- 
stinguished the voice of her guardian 
spirit; — her heart melted into grief, 
yet hope prevailed. The diadem no 
longer oppressed her temples, a smile 
fromConduimar was all that she desired : 



118 ADA REIS. 

lie looked upon her, as when first he 
had loved her. 

Oh ! what a dream is happiness, since 
it depends upon a smile or frown ! 
That look restored Fiormonda from 
despair to ecstasy; and the beauty and 
vivacity of her countenance returned 
once again to captivate each beholder. 
She was now no longer a silent mourn- 
ful shade, but the idol and queen of 
the feast ; and the first act of her 
changed feelings was to throw herself 
into her father's arms, who clasped her 
to his heart, and wept with tears of joy. 
Others were there as young and nearly 
as lovely as Fiormonda, who no sooner 
forgot their former alarm, than they 
gave way to their former flow of spirits. 

Lovers now wandered around the 
galleries with the ladies of their hearts, 
asking of them their adventures, and de- 
scribing what had occurred to them- 



ADA REIS. 119 

» 

selves, since they had parted. Ada 
Reis, in transport, calling Coup de 
Vent, and Fleur de Rose, and Kab- 
karra, entreated that the splendid ban- 
quet might not be neglected, nor the 
dejeun6 a la fourchette, of which he 
had partaken in the morning, prevent 
the evening repast. Shaffou Paca, as 
usual, presided at her tea-table of bas 
bleues, to which every one was not 
admitted. 

At the same time, whatever was done 
was done in fear, and alarm still crept 
over the guests, as they recollected 
where they were; so that they might 
be said to rejoice in trembling, and to 
feast with dread. Hope, however, was 
theirs with all her fair attributes ; the 
feast was exquisite, the chambers beau- 
tiful, and the whole scene of unparal- 
leled magnificence. 



120 ADA IlEIS. 

The conversation by degrees grew 
more and more animated and interest- 
ing. " How singular, after all, that 
there should be such a place 1" 

" I never believed a word of it, I swear 
to you," said one, " though I affected 
to do so, of course, for the example." 

" But what do you really imagine, 
after all, is to happen ?" said another. 

" Really," replied a third, " I have 
done with imagining now." 

A Monsieur de S , a celebrated 

professor of philosophy, who had often 
proved (to his own satisfaction) the 
falsehood of all religion, was now dis- 
coursing with Ada Reis. " He was," he 
said, " he must confess, exceedingly dis- 
composed at what had occurred ; a 
point blank refutation, he acknow- 
ledged, of arguments which had con- 
vinced the most enlightened, and gained 



ADA REIS. 121 

for himself the highest distinction. But 
that which surprised him even more 
was, that so many philosophers were 
wrong, and so much of what they were 
thought actually to have demonstrated 
erroneous. I used," added Monsieur 
de S , " to talk much of the weak- 
ness of the understanding of man, of 
the narrow limit of human views, of 
the strength of prejudice, and the wan- 
derings of imagination; but, until I 
came here, I was never aware of the 
extent to which they existed, nor of 
how much the world was misled by 
them." 

Ada Reis stood some moments 
musing deeply upon what the professor 
said. " It is strange, sir IV at length 
he exclaimed: " I too, like you, have 
been deceived ; and now I find that all 
I thought certain is false, and all that 



122 ADA REIS. 

I derided and disbelieved as impossible 
is true." 

A lady, who had pleaded with elo- 
quence for a respite and further trial, 
now perceived her lover by her side, 
" Are you here ?" said she ; " is it pos- 
sible ?" 

" Your hand," said her lover. 

" Take it," she said, " it is yours 
alone and for ever." 

But hardly were their hands united, 
when the chill of death crept over her. 
" How deadly cold," she cried, as they 
stood petrified and entranced, while the 
gay company still laughed around and 
saw them not, or gazed upon them as on 
the statues which supported the portico. 

Every one perceived with astonish- 
ment the weakness of his neighbour ; 
every one in turn proved, that were 
they to be tempted, as others were, 



ADA REIS. 123 

they should assuredly resist. Some 
took the opportunity of the failure of 
others, to preach to such as remained, 
warning them of their danger ; some 
turned with asperity from those whose 
errors they had observed, wholly un- 
conscious of their own. These sup- 
posed advocates of chastity and reli- 
gion were astonished at rinding them- 
selves in such a place — like the pha- 
risees, they enumerated all they had 
done — like them they looked with hor- 
ror upon the frail company before them, 
and with whom to avoid associating 
they formed a little junto of their own, 
when suddenly a mirror was exhibited 
to their view, in which they saw the 
malice, the envy, the uncharitableness 
of their hearts. " For these," said the 
guide, "for these who showed no mercy 
to their fellow-creatures, no mercy shall 



124 ADA IlEIS. 

be shown : and by the religion and the 
morality they have misapplied and 
misused they shall be judged and con- 
demned." Their fate occasioned in- 
finite triumph to the lawless and the 
profligate ; but short was their laugh, 
and short their boast: for, strange to 
tell, every oneyielded, however resolved 
against it, when his own particular 
ruling passion was excited by tempta- 
tion. So that before the evening had 
concluded, the pretended patriot had 
sold himself for hire ; the minister had 
betrayed his king; the king in his 
resolves, had oppressed his country; 
the son had forsaken his parent ; the 
parent had mis-spent the heritage of 
his children ; the virgin had renounced 
her honour ; the wife had forgotten her 
vow; the ambitious man had become 
mean ; and the infidel, after enjoying 



ADA REIS. 125 

all the blessings of a long life in a fair 
and wonderful world, denied his Crea- 
tor! 

Ada Reis, with new animation in his 
eyes, filled his goblet to the brim, and 
laughed at the failure of each depart- 
ing guest, swearing that he himself had 
never felt happier any where. " In 
truth," he added, " if it were not my 
own inclination, I have done nothing 
to deserve being retained in these 
abodes." 

As he spoke, a female stood before 
him : it was not Fiormonda, but one 
little less beautiful, and much re- 
sembling her. Could it be? Yes, it 
was! it was Bianca di Castamela — 
young, innocent, attached : he ap- 
proached to greet her — at that instant 
the shade of Giulliano passed him. 
Bianca appeared confused — her infi- 



J2G ADA REIS. 

delity was beyond a doubt. Jealousy 
raged in Ada Reis's heart; he seized 
her by her dark tresses, and, dragging 
her along, prepared himself to take 
signal vengeance upon her. She knelt, 
she implored for mercy: she fell a 
mangled corpse at his feet. Then with 
a hollow laugh he rejoiced at what he 
had done. The vision fled. 

" I have done a deed of blood," said 
Ada Reis; " but I am secure." 

" Rejoice in that security," said his 
guide; " thy crimes are not single: 
continue, therefore, and enjoy thyself." 

Condulmar again breathed vows of 
ardour to his mistress. " I have dis- 
guised till now," he said, " my real 
wishes ; your love, dearest and best 
beloved, is all I ask for. In infancy I 
watched thee, in maturer vears I di- 
rected thy mind — thou art mine ! My 



ADA REIS. 127 

feigned disdain was but to make trial 
of thy attachment." At that moment 
the last faint sound of an evening- 
vesper passed over the ear of Fior- 
monda ; she looked upon Condulmar, 
his beautiful countenance was softened 
with the expression of love, his eyes 
were dimmed with tears. " I am mi- 
serable," he said, " and amidst thou- 
sands I am alone." # # # 
# # # # 

All have, perhaps, felt what it is to 
love with ardour; some have, no doubt, 
been loved again, even to idolatry. 
Have any, thus loved, been forsaken — 
have they endured the agonising bit- 
terness of heart of seeing those for 
whom they have wasted feeling, per- 
haps their character, unworthy; and 
what some lovers feel, even more, 
ungrateful, contemptuous, and indif- 



128 ADA REIS. 

ferent — has this been the case? — in 
one generous heart has affection yet 
outlived the hard trial? — has such a 
one struggled hard, yet failed, to over- 
come an unworthy attachment ; and 
was that being thus doted upon be- 
lieved to be superior to all others? — was 
his smile, like Condulmar's, all beau- 
tiful and seductive ? — was his voice soft 
and persuasive? — in his frown was 
there death to the heart's peace ? Let 
such a one now imagine Fiormonda 
amidst the base, the vile, the wicked ; 
estranged from every human tie, and 
lost to that love which she still con- 
tinued to cherish. 

" Is that a catalpa in your bosom ?" 
said Condulmar : " give it to me, in 
token of forgiveness." 

She looked upon him, and love, more 
dangerous than an infectious fever, 



ADA REIS. 129 

caught from his glance new fuel where- 
with to consume her ; — she hesitated ; 
she had forgotten his cruelty — his 
wickedness : she adored him, and 
she saw that her attachment was re- 
turned. She felt again with all the 
confiding innocence, the ardour, the 
enthusiasm of first youth, for to that 
period had she returned. The moment 
of temptation had recurred, and hu- 
man frailty could scarcely resist : sud- 
denly springing from its delusions, she 
knelt and prayed for support. 

Scarce had she uttered the heartfelt 
prayer, when her spirit, like a cloud, 
dissolved and melted into air. She 
was borne through the shrieking winds; 
she was carried in the lightning amidst 
storms and whirlwinds. Through flame 
and through air she saw crowding be- 
fore her astonished senses all that was, 
and is, and will be: delirium never con- 

VOL. III. K 



ISO ADA REIS. 

jured up such fantastic horrors as passed 
before her; but her determination con- 
tinued unshaken, and by that deter- 
mination she was preserved. 

In the meantime the revellers con- 
tinued their entertainment. The song 
was gay, the dance was more and 
more rapid ; the wine was quaffed, the 
meats vanished, and the light became 
so dazzling that the enfeebled eye 
could scarce endure it. Condulmar 
now approached his other votaries and 
admirers with tempting and deceitful 
words; but, whilst he spoke, his visage 
became deformed, and its expression 
terrible. 

His adulators started back. "Is this," 
they said, " him whom we have loved?" 

" I was ever," he cried, " the monster 
you now see me. I did not oven dis- 
guise myself, fair and frail ones, but 
you cliQse to love me in spite of what 



ADA REIS. 131 

1 was. I sought you not ; more even 
than this, I warned you. I have the 
same splendid talents now, the same 
powers of seduction ; one only gift I 
retain not, and, to your shame I speak 
it, it seems the only one which has 
power to win and keep you — I mean 
beauty. My conversation shall be as 
delightful, but my smile more horrible 
than imagination can conceive." 

Ada Reis heeded not what was pass- 
ing; he had entered into a fierce dis- 
pute with several learned men. 

The Book of Life was again appealed 
to. " There is but one copy here," 
said the same malignant old librarian, 
whom Ada Reis had conversed with 
in the morning. 

" I will fetch it," cried Ada Reis ; 
" ay, and I will see this king of terrors 
face to face. I will read in the Book 
of Life, though millions of demons 

k 2 



132 ADA REIS. 

should oppose my passage ! Come with 
me, ye disciples, as I am, of evil : we 
have seen the beauties and wonders of 
this palace ; let us now look upon our 
king himself/' 

He arose, and went forward; all 
crowded after him; a sudden dark- 
ness enveloped them. The chill from 
a newly-opened vault could not have 
occasioned a tremor like the cold 
which now shook every limb of the 
terrified guests : they remembered, 
each of them, that again they had 
failed under temptation — the hour 
of probation was passed ; darkness 
was over all ; none can conceive the 
depth of that darkness. As in the 
silence of night a sleeping city is at 
once awakened by the shrieks of the 
dying when a sudden fire has broken 
out and devours whole streets, such 
horror and astonishment came upon 



ADA REIS. 133 

them. Ada Reis started; but with 
desperate courage proceeded on his 
way — low wailings, convulsive sobs, 
were heard around — the stifled groan, 
the agonizing sigh, the bursting heart, 
every where betrayed the victims of 
uncontrolled passion, lawless ambi- 
tion, and misused talents. The bright 
aspiring eye of genius was downcast, 
as before the mind of each individual 
appeared his past life in full review, 
and all his sins blazoned forth with- 
out excuse or palliation. Now flames 
issued from the vault, a dazzling light 
broke the darkness, and again deep 
darkness followed the light, till the 
bewildered brain and enfeebled sight 
became confused. Then that power, 
which yet upheld them, gave way, and 
they fell sinking into that abyss, where 
myriads of the miserable were con- 
demned to remain in an eternity of 
anguish, falling headlong for ever, as 



134 ADA REIS. 

in whirlwinds the hot sand circled 
around their parched bodies, and the 
cold blast pierced their unprotected 
lungs — A shrill trumpet sounded at in- 
tervals ; it sounded the funeral of life's 
hopes, pleasures, and illusions. 

Ada Reis pursued his course — de- 
spair had taken possession of his heart. 
The old grey librarian still guided 
him on his way: terrific noises now 
distracted his hearing ; sights the most 
disgusting, huge, and extraordinary, 
crowded, one after the other, before 
him ; thought travelled with such speed 
through his brain, that incoherent mad- 
ness could alone be likened to it ; yet 
consciousness was left him. " I will 
read in the Book of Life," he conti- 
nually cried; " I will see my king face 
to face.'' 

Kabkarra suddenly reappeared ; he 
laughed — that laugh grew louder and 
louder — one prolonged terrific yell 



ADA REIS. 135 

then issued from the burning vault. 
"Hail, Ada Reis ! Hail, king ! hail, em- 
peror of the whole surrounding scene !" 
said Kabkarra. 

The various noises, the crowding 
sights, the intense heat and cold, ceas- 
ed — Ada Reis gazed as upon one inter- 
minable sea; his eye seemed strength- 
ened, so as in one view to grasp a vast 
ocean without boundary ; and far, far 
as he gazed, all shrouded, all cold, the 
wrecked, the dead arose silently upon 
the surface of that still water. They 
all mournfully gazed upon the gates 
of fire which yet concealed the burning 
vault, the only point of land visible in 
that cold, still, never varying ocean. 

Issuing from that vault, a voice loud 
and terrible thus addressed the multi- 
tude: " Cease, wretched beings! to 
hope: the hour is past! I am your king; 
you have worshipped me on earth, you 



136 ADA REIS. 

have worshipped me here — fall down 
and tremble before my feet ! Hail, Ada 
Reis V 

The massive portals opened, and, wide 
as is the surface of the heavens, the 
Book of Truth opened upon Ada Reis's 
view, — every leaf was bright as a silver 
cloud, or the shining surface of a lake, 
whilst upon each page was written, in 
distinct characters of fire, the word of 
the Most High. It was suspended in 
the centre, and the atmosphere around 
it was serenely calm ; rescued souls, 
still performing penance, supported 
the leaves ; with eyes averted and 
raised towardsheaven, they prayed eter- 
nally for the condemned; whilst fire 
and smoke enveloped the evil. The 
condemned within the immeasurable 
depth of the area crowded together, 
all wailing and imploring for release 
from pain. That release was granted. 



ADA REIS. 137 

They were now silent, and from a di- 
stance stood mournfully gazing upon 
the sacred book ; their breaking hearts 
and sorrowing eyes were all fixed upon 
its glorious promises, with the conscious- 
ness that they had contemned, disbe- 
lieved, and rejected its commands. 

The bad angels, though not per- 
mitted to approach and touch the book, 
surrounded it with flames of fire, which 
they breathed from their nostrils and 
mouths, vainly endeavouring to darken 
and consume its pages ; but, like a 
stream of light athwart the darkness, 
it remained unobscured. Condulmar 
nowentered; and with a form which had 
not yet lost all its original lustre, took 
his post, and pointed to the sacred vo- 
lume with a mournful air. The mon- 
arch of that abode appeared not. 

Whilst Ada Reis pondered upon this 
fearful and unexpected scene, his feet 



138 ADA REIS. 

became riveted, and his eyes, never 
more to turn away, were drawn towards 
that, to him, despairing leaf; the awful 
sentence upon which so many bleeding 
hearts, distracted thoughts, and weep- 
ing eyes were fixed, was now read to 
him by a voice from beneath, loud as 
the shock of clouds and the last trump : 

— it said — 

* * * # # * * 

* * # # # * * 

* ***** # 

* ****** 



ADA REIS. 139 



CHAPTER VIII. 

Whilst these hardened victims were 
suffering the punishment of their crimes, 
impenitence, and want of faith, Fior- 
monda was borne away by the good 
spirit, through all the terrors and dan- 
gers of that mysterious gulf which se- 
parates the living from the dead. 

" Have mercy and save me !" she 
cried, starting from visions of agony 
and sorrow which pursued her, when, 
upon opening her eyes, she found her- 
self in an Indian hut, surrounded by 
faithful Indians, who were endeavour- 
ing to soothe her pain, and administer 
relief to her fainting frame. " Where 
am I?" she cried, gazing wildly around 
her. Was all she had felt, then, but 



110 ADA REIS. 

a dream ? Could the human mind have 
pictured that which she had seen? 
And was she still on earth, saved, by the 
care of Providence, from that tremen- 
dous earthquake which had destroyed 
so many others? What was the truth 
she knew not. Never more did she 
see Condulmar or Ada Reis ; never 
more did she re-enter the ruined city 
of Lima. Far away from all she had 
loved, she sought, in a lone country, 
for a sacred asylum — she dedicated her 
heart to her Creator ; she studied bv 
day and by night to subdue in herself 
every selfish and weak feeling — and 
she succeeded. 

In the course of time a pious mis- 
sionary, who chanced to pass near her 
humble dwelling, hearing of her great 
piety, called upon her to be baptized, 
and converted her to the true faith: 
then, with tears of gratitude, she blessed 



ADA REIS. 141 

the mercy of her Redeemer, and prayed 
the heart's prayer of the penitent. Her 
sole object, with respect to others, 
was to do good ; and, for herself, her 
sole employment was to repent her 
past offences, and to amend her life. 
She lived the remainder of her days 
alone. Peace at length returned to her 
suffering heart; and when she died, 
she died in the hope that she had 
been of use, that she was beloved and 
regretted by her fellow- creatures, and 
forgiven by that Being who delights in 
mercy, and to whom she commended 
her spirit. 



142 ADA REJS. 



CONCLUSION. 

Not far from the town of Guatimala, 
upon the Rio Las Vaccas, in the pro- 
vince of Honduras, in Mexico, arise 
two mountains. The one remarkable 
for its perpetual verdure, blooming 
flowers, and richly cultivated land ; 
the other for a wild and barren volcano, 
ever groaning deeply from within, and 
rolling to the heavens volumes of sul- 
phureous smoke. 

The native Indians imagine that a 
good and an evil spirit dwell within 
these heights. 

The good spirit is said to inhabit the 
verdant mountain, where spring ever 
reigns ; and the evil spirit to dwell 
in the volcano, from whence it rushes 



ADA REIS. 143 

forth in flame and desolation. Thus 
ends the history of Ada Reis ! 

Ye, of whatsoever country, age, or 
sex, who have accompanied me through 
these pages, attend to the moral of 
them. Kabkarra is every where, ever 
active, ever zealous, ever lying in wait 
and watching for his prey. But, for 
those who will listen to his voice, Ze- 
vahir is still at hand to rescue and to 
save. There is no seduction so allur- 
ing, that he will not enable the senses 
to resist it ; no danger so appalling, that 
he will not animate the soul to brave 
it; no situation so lost and miserable 
that those who will listen to his exhort- 
ations may not extricate and retrieve 
themselves from it. 

The resolution and energy which his 
lessons inspire can, by sure but slow 
degrees, raise and elevate to the sum- 
mit of happiness and of honour. 



144 ADA REIS» 

Arise, ere it be too late — the fate of 
man is in the will of man. The good 
spirit will confirm the resolute, and 
embolden the bold ; but the timid and 
the feeble voluntarily deliver them- 
selves over to Kabkarra. 

Look then, into your own heart; 
repent, and pray ; beware of the fate 
ofAdaReis; for, however seductive the 
paths of pleasure, however delightful 
the palace, the banquets, and the song 
of the tempter, remember that, step by 
step, they lead to the gate of the burn- 
ing vault, over which it is written — 

" Lasciate ogni spcranza voi ch* intrate." 



NOTES. 



Note 1, page 5. 
Bird of the mountains. 
Condour ou Condor. — La region que Ton 
peut regarder comme le sejour habituel de cet 
oiseau commence a une hauteur egale a celle 
de TEtna, et comprend des couches d'air ele- 
vees de seize cents a trois mille toises au-dessus 
du niveau de la mer. La caverne (Machay) 
d 1 Antisana, situee vis-a-vis la montagne de 
Chussulongo, et de laquelle nous mesurames 
Toiseau planant, est elevee de deux mille quatre 
cent quatre-vingt treize toises au-dessus du 
niveau du grand ocean. Ainsi la hauteur ab- 
solue que le condor atteignoit etoit de trois 
mille six cent trente-neuf toises ; la, le baro- 
metre se soutient a-peine a douze pouces. 
(^est un phenomene physiologique assez re- 
marquablc, que ce meme oiseau, qui, pendant 

VOL. III. L 



146 NOTES. 

des heures entieres, vole en tournant dans di 
regions ou Pair est si rarefie, s'abat tout d'un 
coup jusqu'au bord de la mer comme le long 
de la pente occidentale du volcan de Pichincka, 
et ainsi, en peu d'instans, parcourre en quelque 
sorte, tous les climats. — Tableau dc la Nature, 
p. 62. — Humboldt. 

Note 2, page 5. 
The peak of Chimborazo. 
Chimborazo, qui est quatre fois plus ele\ i 

que le Puy de Dome J'ai vu, comme je 

l'ai dit, le barometre descendre sur le Chim- 
borazo a, treize pouces onze lignes deux dixi- 
emes. Mons. Gay-Lussac a respire pendant 
un quart-d'heure dans un air dont la pression 
netoit que de m , 5 288. A de si grandee 
hauteurs, Thommc se trouve en general dans 

un etat asthenique tros-penible Le savant 

qui fait des recherches sur les Ungues, verra 
peut-etre avee plaisir quelques conjectures sur 
le nom de ee Chimborazo si celebre. Le Cor- 
regimento, ou district ou se trouve le Chim- 
borazo, s^appelle Chimbo. La Condamiuc 
(Voyage a TEquator) derive Chimbo de 



NOTES. 147 

Chimpani. Suivant lui, Chimbo-Raco, signifie 
la neige de l'autre bord ; parce qu'au village 
de Chimbo, en vue de Penorme montagne 
couverte de neiges, on passe un ruisseau. — 
Tableau de la Nature, p. 74, 192. — Hum- 
boldt. 

Note 3, page 8. 
8 Alia Acbarf I faintly repeated. 

In better times, " when a wy tch on a broom- 
stick seeing her friend the devil sailing through 
the air, advanced familiarly to meet him, a 
bishop, whom she had not perceived, riding 
statelily on his back, exclaimed, " Ave Maria," 
which so frightened her broomstick that she 
got a fall." — See the ballad of Bishop Athen- 
dius. 

The condor, undoubtedly, if he had under- 
stood Arabic would have kicked up : it is not 
the author's fault that he was ignorant of the 
language. 



148 NOTES. 

Note 4, page 11. 
Better sit upon the promontory, and sing with 
my kinswoman, the spirit of the storm. 
It is difficult, but it is possible, to see tin 
spirit of the storm. There is a wonderfully 
beautiful drawing of her, which the translator 
of Ada Reis's Tale once was permitted to look 
upon. 

Note 5, page 14. 
She fell and falls for evermore, 
Les fameux sauts du Niagara dont les prin- 
cipaux se trouvent dans le haut Canada. Dan> 
cet endroit la riviere a (jOO verges de large, et 
la chute est de 142 pieds. Entre les chutes, 
il y a une petite ile ; le saut qui est du cote 
des Etats-unis, a 163 pieds de hauteur per- 
pendiculaire, sur un quart de lieue de large. 
Rien ne saurait depeindre Tetonnement que 
Ton eprouve en voyant cette enorme ftaSM 
d'eau tomber sur une roche calcaire tiv-- 
blanche, durcie par des particules de sable 
quartzeux, d'ou elle rejaillit a une grande 
hauteur, changed en ecume qui la fait paraiter 
blanche comme la oeige. La vapeur qui B*en 



NOTES. 14Q 

exhale elancee en brouillards vers le ciel, 
s'apercoit de cinq lieues, et les rayons du 
soleil y produsent un superbe arc-en-ciel. Le 
bruit qu'elle fait est tel, qu'a plus de six lieues 
il se fait encore entendre comme celui de vingt 
tonnerres a-la-fois. II se forme, apres la chute 
du fleuve, des tourbillons d'eau si terribles, 
qu^on ne peut y navigue, qu'a deux lieues de 
distance. Au pied de la cascade, on trouve 
des monceaux de poissons et des tas d'anguilles 
entrelacees les unes avec les autres. — U 'Europe 
et VAmerique comparees, p. 108. 



THE END. 
