HERBERT-LODGE; 

A 
NEW-FOREST STORY. 

IX THREE VOLUMES. 
BY 

MISS WARNER^ 

CF BATH. 



VOL. III. 



" Know, we are bound to cast the minds of youth 
" Betimes into the mould of heavenly truth, 
" That taught of God, they may indeed be wise, 
" Nor, ignorantly wandering, miss the skies." 

COWPER. 



PRINTED BY 
RICHARD CRUTTWELL, ST. JAMES's-^STREET, BATH; 

AND SOLD BY 

LONGMAN, HURST, REES, AND ORME, PATER- 
NOSTER-ROW, LONDON. 

1808. 






HERBERT-LODGE. 



»?»;*><? ?2>*e 



CHAPTER I. 



A S it seemed Indispensable that Mary 
-^ ^ should immediately set out for 
Hampshire, the following morning was 
fixed upon for her departure; and a 
slight indisposition having attacked Mr. 
Stan more and confined him, and of 
course his lady also, still longer to Batli, 
her only companions were Harriet and 
a confidential domestic. 

As nothing occurred to impede their 
melancholy journey, they arriv^ed the 
VOL. iir. B 



[ 2 1 

same evening at the gate of Herbert- 
Lodge; where they found Dame Wheat- 
iey, who had caught sight of the carriage 
through the glad^e, and was waiting to 
welcome Mary, with tears of mingled joy 
iind sorrow. 

^' How is my beloved friend, mother, 
and prote6lress?" said the affedion ate girl, 
in interrupted accents. ^'Mayl hope 
that Heaven will restore her to my 
prayers? Will she know her afflicted 
Mary?" 

* Know you, dear Miss !' returned the 
old woman, ' why she ha' been wishing 
to see you ever so long. AYhen I told 
her just now, I saw the carriage from the 
window of her bed-room, I thought she 
would ha' leaped out of the great chair 
for joy. * 1 think,' said she, ' I could 
almost find strength to go down to 
meet her.' 

^'Heaven's mercy be ever praised! 
Ah, let nve fly to see her!" exclaimed 



[ 3 ] 

Mary, as slie leaped from the carnage, 
and darted like lightning into the house. 

In a moment she was at Mrs. Her- 
bert's chamber-door; and the next she 
enfolded in her arms her more than 
mother. 

Though some^vhat amended since 
Dame Wheatley's letter, Mrs. Herbert's 
countenance bore strong marks of sick- 
ness and sorrow ; her person too was 
thin ; and her weakness appeared to be 
extrem.e. 

A faint blush of joy, however, suf- 
fused her cheek, when she felt Mary's 
embrace, and the sweet smile of love 
irradiated her features, as she in return 
pressed hier to her bosom, and with eyes 
uplifted to Heaven, welcomed her safe 
arrival. 

This interview of mutual rapture was 
only interrupted by the entrance of Miss 
Stanmore, who received from Mrs. Her- 
bert the most cordial reception. 



[ 4 ] 

Of coarse none of the distressing do- 
mestic circumstances whicli had hitely 
occurred, i)ecanie the subje6l of conver- 
sation. The young people carefully 
avoided the mention of ^latilda's name, 
and every other to])ic ^vliich might 
.awaken painful impressions in Mrs. Her- 
bert's mind; and endeavoured to amuse 
her thou2.'hts bv the relation of manv of 
the incidents that had occurred to them 
since their departure from the Forest. 

Amongst these little narratives, Mary 
did not forget to recount the adventure 
of the commerce-table, the benevolence 
of Mr. Winburne, and her own success 
in bearing away the prize; and con- 
cluded her recital with an animated de- 
scription of the interesting emigrant, on 
■Vr'hose account the party had been made; 
^' but,'' added she, ''you shall yourself 
judge of her taste and ingenuity;" and 
desired the servant to fetch the box, 
which was in the seat of the chaise. 



[ 5 ] 

i\Irs. Herbert had listened wltlr deep 
attention and evident emotion to ^ladanie 
Henri's story, and no sooner cast lier eye 
upon the ])ainting on the lid, than she 
exclaimed, ' Heavens, v.hat a poA\'ertiil 
resemblance! Can it be possible that 
tliis forsaken fair one? — oli, no; it can- 
not be; groundless, vain idea!' 

As she appeared to be exceedingly 
ailec-ted, Mary did not attempt to ])ress 
for an explanation of her vrords ; but 
beeing her fatigued, and thinking that 
quit^t might be necessary after her exer- 
tion, fehe took im afleftionate leave for 
the night, and retired with Harriet to 
thai Ujiartment, which in happier times 
hud been jointly occupied by Matilda 
and herself. 

Her companion, tired with her jour- 
ney, so(;n sunk into sluuiber, and kft 
JIary to silence and meditation. 

It was now that the sad changes vrhich 
liad lately occurred I'ushed upon her 



[ 6 ] 

mind ^vith tenfold force. Vf itii a sigh 
that swelled her heart ahiiost to burst- 
ing, she recalled to her recollection the 
happy hours of childhood, when Edmund 
and his sister equally shared her ardent 
afFe6lion; when she knew herself to be 
equally dear to both ; the companion of 
all their innocent sports, the soother of 
their little sorrows, and the beloved 
partner of all their enjoyments ; that de- 
lightful period, wdien 

** Friendship and love seemed tenderly at strife, 
^< Which most should sweeten her unruffled life:" 

when pleasure followed her footsteps; 
and hope, dipping her fairy pencil in 
futurity, delighted to sketch a flattering 
perspe6tive of long and durable felicity. 
**Alas!" whispered Mary to herself, 
''how dark, how dreary the reverse 1 
The dear prote61:ress of my orphan state 
reduced perhaps to penury by the ex- 
travagance of him who should have been 



t.7 ] 

her surest friend and guardian ! IMatilda, 
the early partner of my aifeftions, a vo- 
luntary, and (ah! Heaven avert the 
stroke !) perchance k criminal, exile from 
the parental roof; Edmund a prisoner 
fn distant lands, or (oh, distrading 
thought!) a lifeless corpse!" 

Overcome by the painful feelings 
excited by these distressing refle6lions, 
despair for a moment threatened to seize 
on ]\Iaiy's soul. 

On every side nothing but sorrowful 
hnages presented themselves, all hope 
seemed to be excluded, and every source 
of joy cut off for ever. 

But to a mind disciplined as hers had 
been, these gloomy impressions could 
not be of long continuance. 

The lessons of piety she had early 
imbibed from her excellent instruclress, 
revived in her bosom. She had been 
accustomed to trace the finger of mer- 
ciful Omnipotence in the disposal of all 



C 8 ] 

sublunary events; and even the daik 
picture that was noM^ before her, faint 
as the vestiges of good in it miglit be, 
she stiii beHeved would ultimately be 
tino'ed with briohter colours. 

She lifted up her heart to heaven in 
earnest silent prayer, and felt tlie goodly 
influence of this tribute of homage to 
the Father of the universe, 

" Who with an eye of pity views distress, 
" And in his wisdom only fails to bless." 

The gentle dew of peace distilled upon 
her soul; her heart ceased to beat with 
the fear of future woes ; her spirits be- 
came tranquil ; her thoughts colleded ; 
and after a short time, a sweet sleep 
gradually stole upon her senses, and 
locked them up in deep repose. 

Awaking early on the following morn- 
ing, refreshed by her rest, with renewed 
energy of mind, and a fixed determina- 
tion to devote ail her powers to the solace 



[ 9 ] 

and service of ^Irs. Herbert; she dressed 
herself Avitliout disturbino- IMiss Stan- 
morCj and wrapping iier pelisse round 
lier^, and tying on her bonnet, descended 
the stairs vvith an intention of enjoying 
the cahn deliglu of a solitary walk be- 
fore breakfast. 

The mists of a frosty morning early in 
February were just dispersing before the 
cheerful beams of the newly-risen sun. 

The frequent report of the fowling- 
piece, the sprightly tones of the horn, 
the clamour of the hounds, and the blue 
smoke which rose in curling columns 
from the chimneys of the neighbouring- 
cottages, proved, that though luxury 
chose still to repose on beds of down, 
the active votaries of rural sport, and 
the sons of laboirr, were already entered 
on their different occupations. 

The earth fresh with the dews of night 
breathed fragrance around; whilst eve/y 
bush and plant reflecled the solar ray 



[ 10 ] 

from the innumerable diamond drops that 
trembled on their heads. 

It was a scene to ravish both the ear 
and eye, which none but tliose to whom 
the charms of nature are dear, could 
paint or imagine : 

«< For who the melodies of morn can tell ? 
« The wild brook babbling down the mountain side ; 

" The lowing herd, the sheepfold's simple bell ; 
** The pipe of early shepherd dim descry'd 

*< In the lone valley ; 

*« The hum of bees, and linnet's lay of love; 

»* And the full choir that wakes the universal grove." 

For Mary all the harmonies and beau- 
ties of nature possessed indescribable 
attra6lions. 

Refinement and fashion had not strip- 
ped her of those sensibilities, which 
sympathise with the joys and sufferings 
of the subordinate animated world, and 
draw both instru6lion and delight from 
the contemplation of the exquisite orga- 
nization of vegetable life. 



[ " 1 

*' Each season of the changeful year'' 
brought with it its peculiar enjoyments 
to her unsophisticated taste. 

It \vas a volume of diversiiied enter- 
tainment v/hich she studied v/ith increa=- 
sing gratification, as its interesting pages 
^vere successively unfolded to her admi- 
ring eye. 

As she now trod the spangled lawn^ 
brushed away the dew-drops from the 
bending grass, and inhaled the fresh 
perfume of '' the incense-breathing, 
morn," she felt conscious of new vigour- 
and elasticity of mind; a holy calm 
possessed her bosom ; the little concerns 
of life seemed to lose their interest; her: 
views took a wider range ; the love of • 
•'the All-good, All-perfect, and All- 
fair," absorbed her thoughts; and she 
ex-claimed with pious rapture, 

^'^ Father of light and life, thou God supreme, 
« O teach me what is good, teach me Thysejf! 
" Save me from folly, vanity, and vice; 



[ 12 ] 

" From every low pursuit, and feed my soul 

«' With knowledge, con sclo.is peace, and virtue piire,- 

« Sacred, substantial, never-failing bliss." 

Having wandered for some time thro' 
the more open parts of the grounds, 
]\Iary at length turned towards the flov/er- 
garden, and instinctively opened the 
wicket that led into the gravel-vv^alk, 
which Mrs. Herbert had formerly allotted 
for the exercise of the children in damp 
weather, and which bounded the little 
plots of ground she had kindly set apart 
for their own separate cultivation. 

The instant she unlatched the wicket 
and trod the well-known path, the for- 
titude with which she had stored her 
mind began to desert her. A thousand 
tender recolledions rushed at once upon 
her imagination. Not a tree, not a 
plant presented itself which was not 
associated, in some shape or other, with 
the idea of the absent Edmund, and the 
lost Matilda. 



r 13 } 

Here, in chlidhoocl she had sported 
for hours together v rth these affection- 
ate companions, in all the innocent 
varieties of juvenile amusement. 

In this arbour, or in tliat alcove, at a 
more advanced period of life, Edmiund 
had accompanied her voice with liis fiute, 
or whiled away the sultry hours of noon 
in reading some favourite instructive 
or amusing author to her. 

At the further end of the walk grev/ 
a beautiful plane tree, whose widely- 
spreading branches offered shelter from 
the sudden storm, or shade from the 
oppressive heat. 

She approached it with palpitating 
heart; it had heretofore been a favourite 
retreat ; the silent witness of many aa 
interestino- conversation between her 
adopted brother and herself. 

A venerable ivy covered its trunk, 
except where it had been cut away to 
make room for the effusions of Edmunds 



[ 14 J 

boyish muse, and the nicelv-carved lines 
found shelter under the foliage of a- 
creeping Avoodbiue, which had been 
planted and trained by their mutual care. 

The early year had not yet thrown 
over them the mantle of leaves which 
hid them from the eye in the softer sea- 
sons ; and Mary easily discovered many 
specimens of his sportive w'it and lively 
fancy inscribed upon the bark, at that 
happy age, when every hour was crowned 
with peace and joy. 

She had then dwelt Avith pleasure on 
the progress of his labour; enjoyed the 
sprightly thought as it became embodied 
under his knife; and lightened the tedi- 
ousness of work with her enchantin<T<' 
converse. 

But, alas, at present she viewed . it 
with far different emotions. 

The hand which had traced those clia- 
rafters, might now be mouldering into 
dust; the eye that had directed its pro- 



[ 1-J ] 

gress, miglit be closed in endless night; 
the vivacity, the ardour, the enthusiasm 
of characler, which had at once amused 
her fancy, and interested her hearty 
mio-ht now be extino-uished for ever! 

A thrilling horror pervaded her frame; 
the tears coursed each other down her 
cheek, and she was again fast relapsing 
into melancholy, when the breakfast- 
bell sounded in her ear, and by remind- 
ing her of the duties she had to perform, 
awakened her to a sense of the impro- 
priety of indulging an useless grief, and 
Aveakening the powTr of present exertion 
by wasting her sensibilities and aife^tions 
on the shadows of departed joys. 

Breathing out a prayer to heaven^ 
therefore, for strength and support, she 
turned from this scene of sad recollec- 
tions, and hurried towards the house, 
determined to be firm in her self-imposed 
task of controuling her own feelings, 



L IG ] 

that she niloht be able to achniui-:!.' r 
peace and consolation to the wounded 
bosom of the bereaved and suiiering 
mother. 



I i7 ] 



Cil AFTER IL 



'THHE charm of Mary's society opera- 
-^ ted upon Mrs. Herbert, as Dame 
Wheatley had predicted, M'ith the most 
rapid and beneficial eireds; and the 
return of Dr. Fairford to his living 
assisted greatly also in promoting her 
convalescence, by the solace of his con- 
versation, the cheerfulness of his piety, 
and the wisdom of his advice. 

In proportion as her frame gained 
strength, her mind recovered its custom- 



[ 18 ] 

ary tone; and the saint-like smile that 
dwelt upon her wan features, sufficiently 
evinced, that whatever her outward cir- 
cumstances might be, all within was 
resigned and serene. 

Severe, indeed, wxre the external evils 
which he had now to encounter. 

An account had just reached her, that 
Matilda w^as returned to France, under 

the prote6tion of Lord William , 

one of the most unprincipled profligates 
of the day. 

Of Mr. Herbert, no circmtistance had 
yet occurred to explain his sudden and 
extraordinary departure; though from 
the violent agitation he had manifested 
on receiving the letter that occasioned 
it, and the suspicions she had before en- 
tertained of the fatal consequences of 
his. imprudence, she had every reason 
to anticipate the intelligence of complete 
ruin to him, and beggary to herself and 
family. 



f 19 ] 

Rcspe6i:iiig Eduiuiul, also, she was 
.still in painful suspence. The papers 
gave as yet no account of the a6lion in 
Avhich the Lively had been engaged, 
though private reports continued to re- 
present it as a very bloody and disas- 
trous one. 

Both ^,Iary and Miss Stanmore (who 
was still at the Lodge waiting the return 
of her parents from Bath) participated 
with Mrs. Herbert in the pain of all these 
uncertainties, though each, as if by nni- 
tual consent, forbore to mention her own 
apprehensions, from the fear of aw-aken- 
ing, or at least increasing, a possibly 
unfounded terror in the other. 

Vrhiist they were tluis a prey to this 
distressing silent anxiety, they v^'ere 
one morning surprised by the appearance 
of Dr. Fairford upon the lawn earlier 
than was customarv with him, whose 
expressive countenance and hurried step 
manifested the unusual agitation of his 



[ 20 ] 

niiiul, and led the party to anticipate 
some information from him of calamitous 
importance. 

As lie entered the room he drew a 
letter from his pocket, and approaching 
Mrs. Herbert, and affedionately taking 
her hand, '' Prepare, my dear friend," 
he cried, *' for the intelligence of one 
of those awful dispensations of Provi- 
dence, ' which justify the ways of God 
toman,' and overAvhelm infidelity Mith 
the convl(5tion that even on this side the 
grave the retributive justice of Heaven 
is ever dispensing appropriate punish- 
ments and rewards. " 

Pausing for a moment, he continued, 
** Your husband is no more ! he lias 
fallen a victim to his passions and his 
vices. May that Being whose omnisci- 
ence alone can know and make allow- 
ances for the Vv'eakness of liumanitv. 
extend his mercy to a sinner, who, I may 



[ 21 ] 

say, has voliuitarUi; rushed into the pre- 
sence of liis God! • ; 

" I know, my dear friend, the strength 
and steadiness of your principles, the 
sincerity of your piety, and your un- 
bounded submission to the Divine v/ill; 
and venture at once, tliereforc, to im- 
part to you a tale of horror, which from 
a mind less disciplined tlian yours it 
might be prudent perhaps to conceal." 

Saying this, he opened the letter, and 
read as follows. 

^' Acquainted as I am, esteemed and 
reverend sir, with the affeclionatc inte- 
rest which you have always taken, in 
every incident that relates to Mrs. Her- 
bert; v/ho, amiable as I have understood 
iier to be, is, I confess, still more par- 
ticularly endeared to me by the connec- 
tion in which she stands to the captiva- 
ting Miss Whcatley; I deem no a;)ology 
necessary for troublingyou with a detail, 
the particulars and consequences of 



[ 22 ] 

\riiicli must, I fear, prove very afflictive 
to GLir highly-valued friends. 

^' It is necessary to mention to you, 
that I was hastily summoned from Bath, 
a short time since, to attend the death- 
bed of Mr. Monson, whom I must ever 
blush to call my maternal uncle. 

" I had not seen him since my return 
to Eng-land from a lono- residence 
abroad ; and my absence had occasioned 
me to be a stranger in a great measure to 
the character of one, whose possesions, I 
suppose, secured to him that resped: and 
credit, without which I never recolle6l 
to have heard him mentioned. 

'' The death of this man, however, 
has unfolded such a scene of villainy, 
in which Mr. Herbert has been both 
an aCtor, and a viClim, as I shudder to 
relate. 

But it must be developed; and who is 
so capable of softening its horrors, as 
one whose sacred funftion and tried 



[ 23 ] 

attachment will furnish Iiim with the 
power of consoling the innocent suffer- 
ers, and supporting tlicm under the tide 
of calamity which is preparing to over- 
vv^helm them. 

'' To you, sir, therefore, I beg to dele- 
gate the task of communicating to ]\Irs. 
Herbert the afflictive inteilio'ence of her 
husband's guilt, and the utter ruin of 
his fortune. 

^'Even while I am thus taking upon 
myself the painful business of stating 
undisputed fads, I tremble to refled; on 
the atrocity of a man, who, when affect- 
ing with exalted generosity to sacrifice 
all pecuniary considerations to the gra- 
tification of a sincere and interested 
passion, was deliberately adopting a step, 
which not only deprived him of every 
claim to the chara6ter of common ho- 
nesty, but by which he knew he must 
eventually rain the woman he pretended 
to adore. 



[ 24 ] 

*' Can it be, that a man, who in a 
moment would have resented the slightest 
attack upon his honour at the hazard of 
Ills life, should have stained that honour 
for e\'er l)y imposing upon Sir Cliarles 
Fitzmordaunt a false statement of his cir- 
cumstances, when suing for the hand of 
his lovely sister, whose person he de- 
spaired of obtaining on any other terms 
than those of matrimiOny ? 

^' Before this period, however, Her- 
bert-Lodge (which he went through the 
mockery of settling on his intended 
bride) had been mortgaged for even more 
than its value; and to this horrible 
imposition, I am constrained to acknow- 
ledge, my late uncle was accessary. 

By the assistance of Mr. Monson, ]\Ir. 
Herbert was enabled to maintain the ap- 
pearance of affluence in England, and of 
princely prodigality in France, where fcr 
a great part of the year he resided, 
attracted, it seems, by the charms of a 



C 25 ] 

lady whose name delicacy obliges me to 
leave to your conje(5lure ; and this at the 
very time when his affairs were in reality 
deeply involved. 

^*As any exigency arose, however, he 
applied to this ready friend for means 
of extrication, who cheerfully supplied 
them ; weaving still closer by every ad- 
ditional advance the web he was pre- 
paring for the infatuated wretch, who 
soon became the ruined vidim of the 
man he trusted. 

*'Mr. Monson had a daughter; had, 
I say, for Heaven thought lit to punish 
him by the sudden death of this idol a 
short time since; for whose sake (1 am 
willing to believ^e) rather than his own, 
he lost siffht of the ties of honour, and 
the obligations of conscience, in the 
anxious Avish to accumulate a fortune. 

'' This girl was intended to be the wife 
of Herbert's son ; and the interests of the 
two families being thus united, the 

VOL. iir. c 



C 26 J 

father's debt was to be liquidated, and a 
large sum advanced to him besides, in 
lieu of part of the marriage portion of 
Charlotte M on son. 

^^ The young man, however, it seems, 
could not feel that sentiment for the 
lady, vv'hich he had inspired in her bo- 
som ; and therefore peremptorily refused 
her offered hand : a refusal which threw 
Herbert into the most distressing em- 
barrassment, as he was thereby disap- 
pointed of the sum which his necessities 
required. 

'' With consummate hypocrisy, how- 
ever, affecting feelings wliich he did not 
suffer^ he wrouglit upon the generosity 
of his son to relinquish in his favour the 
whole of his fortune, excepting a few 
hundred pounds, with which the youtli 
purchased a commission in the regiment 
that lie accomjmnied to India. 

^^ But even the money raised by these 
iniquitous measures could scarcely have 



[ 27 ] 

supplied the most clamorous of his cre- 
ditors, and by no means have provided 
for the demands of all. 

'* Herbert therefore applied but a 
small portion of it to the liquidation of 
his debts, and quickly dissipated the re- 
mainder in his customary pleasures. 

" The consequence was, he soon found 
himself more deeply involved than ever, 
and immediately adopted another equally 
unjustifiable scheme to avert approach- 
ing- ruin. 

'' You perceive, sir, I write freely to 
you on this unhappy subjed, under the 
idea that you are even better acquainted 
with manv incidents relatino- to tlie 
wretched man's condud:, than I can be 
supposed to be from Mr. IMonson's rela- 
lation of them. 

"• He informed me^ sir, that the pre- 
sent plan of Mr. Herbert was to marry 
his daughter to Sir Nimrod Heartley ; 
who had promised to advance to him a 
c 2 



[ 2S ] 

considerable sum of money on the day 
of the nuptials. 

*' The circumstance, however, of IMa-' 
tilda Herbert's running away with Lord 

Vv'ilUam , had entirely frustrated all 

his hopes in this quarter, and cut off the 
last chance which remained to him of 
saving himself from the hands of his 
impatient creditors. 

" In the mean time, sir, my uncle 
being, as he said, enraged at some 
circumstances in the condu6l of Mr. 
Herbert, (the particulars of which, I 
believe, were only of importance to 
themselves,) renounced all friendly con- 
nexion vrith him, and became his bit- 
terest enemy. 

''A letter to this effect, and full of 
threats of immediate arrest upon his 
bonds, and foreclos-ure of the Hampshire 
estates, reached Mr. Herbert at the 
Lodge just when he was recovering from 
a dangerous indisposition. 



[ 29 ] 

'* 111 a paroxysm of rage and despaiv 
he threw himself into a post-cliaise, and 
hurried to London for the advice and 
assistance of a voracious pettyfogging 
attorney, whom he had also frequently 
employed in his dark and ruinous money 
transa6lions. 

'* It was some days before he conld 
see Mr. Gripe ; an interval which Her- 
bert passed in agitation bordering on 
distradion. When he obtained an in- 
terview, this confidential friend per- 
ceiving at a single glance that tlie career 
af Mr. Herbert was drawing to a close, 
threw off the mask, and instead of the 
sycophantish sympathy v/hich he liad 
been accustomed to express on occasi- 
ons of similar distress, he declared 
without ceremony that he could assist 
him no more ; that his own demand upon 
him was large ; that he was in great 
want of money himself; and therefore, 
instead of further supplies, he must insist 



C 30 ] 

Upon an immediate liquidation of tlie 
bill that was due to liim. 

'^In one moment Herbert perceived 
that he v/as irreparably ruined. 

'' The two people who had hitherto 
furnished him with the means of his ex- 
pences, were now his most merciless 
creditors, and no refuge remained to 
which he could look for further aid. 

''Maddened with the refleclion, he 
rushed abruptly from Gripe's house; and 
with the few guineas which his purse 
■contained, hastened to the hazard-table, 
determined to make one last and despe- 
rate effort to retrieve his falling fortunes. 

''For a time success crowned every 
throw; his winnings accumulated, and 
with the levity natural to his chara6ler, 
the despair to which he had been a prey 
was quickly converted into exultation. 

" Wine, as usual, stood on the side- 
board, the more effe6lually to banish 
reason, and heighten the madness of the 



t 31 ] 

scene; and Herbert, in tlie triumph of 
his heart, called for repeated bumpers. 

*' By degrees, his head became con- 
fused, and his hand unsteady. 

" Fortune noAV seemed to withdraw her 
smiles; and a repetition of considerable 
losses, chequered by occasional trifling- 
successes, rouzed up again the violent 
passions of his soul, and plunged him 
once more into desperation. 

** The larger his losses were, the deeper 
became his bets. 

** His opposite neighbour, an oflficer in 
the army, had been his most successful 
antagonist; and double or quits upon a 
large stake not only made Herbert a 
beggar of every guinea, but dipped him 
also deeply in debt to this more cautious 
and fortunate opponent. 

** Inflamed almost to insanity by the 
event of the cast, Herbert instantly ac- 
cused the winner of cheating? : and swore 



C 32 ] 

that he had obtained his success by a 
false thrown. 

^' A challenge was the consequence. 
The parties left the room, and immedi- 
ately prepared to decide their quarrel. 

" At the first fire Herbert received a 
wound in the breast, which the surgeon, 
on being called in, pronounced to be 
mortal. 

''The unhappy man, it appears, was 
transfixed with horror at the informa- 
tion; and being conveyed to a bed in 
the same house, he dispatched a mes- 
senger to my uncle, requesting his im- 
mediate attendance on him. 

'' Before the man arrived at the house, 
hovv^ever, M\\ IMonson had fallen a vic- 
tim to the disorder which summoned me 
to tov/n, and breathed his last in a deep 
penitence, that I trust will be accepted 

at the throne of m.ercv. 

«/ 

" As he had previously made me ac- 
quainted with all the transadlions be- 



[ 33 ] 

tween Mr. Herbert and himself, I deemed 
it proper, as his executor and represent- 
ative, to obey the summons of the dying 
man. 

''But, ah! my dear sir, how shall I 
recount the particulars of the scene that 
there awaited me? 

^' A few hours of solitude and silence, 
and the certain prospect of a speedy 
change of existence, had effected an 
awful revolution in the mind of hiiUj 
whom I had heard described as tlie proud, 
the gay, the gallant libertine. 

'' His face was pale, and his look hag- 
gard and terrified. 

*' The world, and all its idolized plea- 
sures, were fast receding from his dark- 
ened vision ; and though his present 
sufferings were dreadful, yet his atten- 
tion seemed chiefly to be occujiied with 
what was to succeed their termination: 
with the scene that would open upon his 
astonished spirit, when the taper of life 



[ S^ ] 

which novr supported but a feeble flame, 
slioulcl be extinguished. 

'^ His awakened conscience had painted 
to him the most horrible pictures of fu- 
turity; and he ah-eady anticipated the 
punishment of his abandoned licenti- 
ousness. 

" The messenger returning from Mi\ 
Monson's house had communicated to 
him the death of that gentleman, and 
my intention of waiting on him immedi- 
ately. He expe6ied myi arrival, there- 
fore, and on my entrance into the room, 
with a look of inexpressible anguish 
beckoned me to approach the bed on 
which he lay. 

'^Seizing my hand with convulsive 
force, while the shades of death over- 
spread his livid face, and every feature 
was disiorted with sonl-racking agony, 
*0h!' exclaimed he in a sepulchral 
tone, ' oh, dreadful proofs of the ex- 
istence of that Providence which I have 



[ 35 ] 

SO often derided and denied; oh, awfid ex- 
amples of tliose judgments of a just God, 
which till now I have so madly despised. 

'See,' contined he, whilst his frame 
shivered Math horror, * see, in the sud- 
den summons of your uncle, and the 
fearful end of myself, two warning in- 
stances of that divine vengeance, which 
with impious senseless boldness wc both 
have affeded to defy. 

' Ah ! what avail us now our atheistic 
boasts, and proud rebellion against Hea- 
ven? I see, I feel, there is a righteous 
God, whose sentence I must listen to, 
whose terrors I must suifer. 

' Ah! how shall I appear before his 
bar? "Where shall I hide my iiead 
against his thunders? His mercy, I 
have heard, is great ; but, oh! can it 
extend to such a wretch as me ? — I, who 
have broken all his laws, scorned all his 
threats, and spurned all his promises; 



[ 35 ] 

I, who have ruined my wife^ my childreiiy 
and myself f 

^Yo\\. zveep,'' lie proceeded, observing 
the tears which I found it impossible to 
restrain. ' Ah ! would I could shed a 
single drop — but my eyes are dry, 
though my poor brain is on fire. Ob, 
God ! 'twill burst with agony ! Tis 
gone, 'tis gone,' he shrieked out, (press- 
ing violently his hand upon his forehead, 
as if the seat of reason were at that mo- 
ment overthrown by the horrid recol- 
le6lions that rushed upon his mind;) and 
burstinginto a wild maniacal laugh, ' Ha ! 
hal ha!' he cried, 'they come; they 
are here; but I shall still foil them, 

and escape What ; my wife too, and 

Edmund? — No, no; he must not sink ; 
save, oh, save!' 

''A spasmodic shivering now shook 
his every nerve, and left him in a state 
of insensibility, which, for a few minutes^ 
\\Q believed to be death, 



1 37 ] 

'^ After a time, however, he again 
awoke to fresh pain and accnniulated 
horrors. 

'' Indeed it is impossible for me to 
describe the various shapes which con- 
science assumed to torture and appal 
him, or the different terrible forms in 
which every surrounding obje6l appeared 
to liis distempered fancy. 

'^ At length, suddenly starting up, 
and looking wildly round, he turned to 
that side of the bed Avhere I sat gazing 
on him with compassionate earnestness, 
and in the voice and manner of mental 
derangement, 'What,' said he, ' Fitz- 
mordaunt, thou brother of my ruined 
wife; art thou come too, to harrow up 
my soul, and upbraid my cruelty? Why 
dost thou pierce me with that reproachful 
look? Alas ! 'tis now too late for me to 
struggle for her support. No ! from 
7/our hands I received her — to 3/t?z^r 
guardianship I commend her. She must 



[ 38 



-J 



inot crawl, and cringe, and supplicate 
the precarious bounty of strangers. I 
leave her, 'tis true, without a morsel of 
bread ! But surely you^ Charles, you will 
not let her want ! Speak; w^ill you not 
succour, will you not prote6i the deserted 
Caroline ? Promise me, Fitzmordaunt ; 
or heaven blast your tongue for ever.' 

"■' Saying this, he fixed his glaring 
eyes upon me with such an earnest gaze 
— Ought I to have undeceived him, had 
it been possible? I could not make the 
trial; but pressing his burning hand with 
fervour to my lips, My friend, cried I, 
your v/ishes shall be obeyed ; to the 
utmost of my power, I'll serve your 
angel wife. 

'^ ' Szvear it,' returned Herbert, in a 
voice of holiov/ dissonance. 

^' I swear it, most solemnly, I re- 
peated. 

** ^ Then all I have to do is to cry 
for mercy. Oh, God!' — 



[ 39 ] 

'* These were his last words : a convul- 
sive struggle rent asunder the last liga- 
ment of life, and in a deepened groan 
of anguish the soul of the libertine 
Herbert fled to ' that country, from 
whose bourne no traveller returns.' 

*' You will readily believe, sir, that 
such a series of events as I have taken 
the liberty of relating to you, must have 
much agitated, perplexed, and distressed 
me ; but amongst all the emotions they 
excited, the desire of fulfilling the pro- 
mise which I made to the unhappy Her- 
bert, has been the paramount one. 

'* It M'as a solemn eno-aoement, and I 

DO ' 

will solemnly fulfil it. 

'^ Independently, indeed, of such a 
conscientious obligation, the knowledge 
of the iniquitous means by which my 
uncle became entitled to the Hampshire 
property of this wretched man, would 
be a sufficient reason for me to shrink 
from retaining it a moment, after it was 



[ 40 ] 

111 my power to restore it to those from 
who]n it had been so unjustly torn. 

'^ I am willing too, to believe, that 
in doing this I am only fulfilling a debt 
of equity, which ]Mr. ]\Ionson himself 
might have been induced to perform had 
he recovered from his last indisposition, 
and witnessed the havock which his chi- 
canery had occasioned. 

'• The communication of these cir- 
cumstances to Mrs. Herbert, I commit 
entirely to your discretion and delicacy: 
all I have to request is, that it be so 
managed as to leave no impression upon 
her mind, of her being under the shadow 
of an obligation to me, 

*' If indeed my heart do not deceive 
me, I feel persuaded, that under an^/ 
circumstances I should acl in the same 
manner, even were I a stranger to the 
whole of Mrs. Herbert's family. But 
as it is, I candidly acknowledge, that I 
have an additional motive, in the ardent 



[ 41 ] 

..itachmcnt v»hich my bosom confesses 
for her lovely ward. 

** Yes, dear sir, presumptuous hope, 
even at this moment, points to that 
happy hour, when the restraint which 
delicacy for a time imposes may be 
removed, and leave me at liberty to sue 
for the right of fulfilling my engage- 
ment to thedvino; Herbert, to assist and 
protecb his wife, in the character of 
friend, guardian, and husband to the 
imcomparable iMiss Wheatley. 

'' Once more, sir, I intreat your par- 
don for my intrusion on your time, and 
the prolixity of my narrative; and add 
the hope, that an acquaintance thus 
commenced may improve under brighter 
auspices. 

'' In the mean time, I shall wait any 
directions you may deem it proper to 
favour me with, respecting the funeral. 

'' I must, however, take the liberty of 
observing, that I have already made 



[ 42 ] 

such arrangements, as will (if you do 
not disapprove them) enable us to con- 
du<5l it in such a manner as to spare Mrs. 
Herbert the distress of at all interfering 
on the occasion, 

'* I have the honour to be^ 
*^ Dear and reverend sir, 
** Your respedlful and obedient servant^ 

'* Ferdina^^p Fortescue.'* 

*' Can we be so blind, my dear friend, '*^ 
continued Dr. Fairford, having read and 
closed the letter, ^' as not to acknow- 
ledge the operations of a wise, just, and 
good Providence, in the events which 
this excellent man has related to us? 
And confessing this, shall we not hum- 
bly bend to its decrees, and rest satis- 
fied with its ordinances? 

*^ Your part, I must confess, is a dif- 
ficult one to support; and the line of 



I 



I « ] 



conduct you are to piu'sue, a (klicate one 
to decide upon. But tliat piety which 
lias hitherto been your solace and pro- 
tection under every trial, will not desert 
you on the present occasion ; and your 
admirable judgment and generous feel- 
ings will conducl you v\iLh ease and 
propriety through any intricacies which 

: may present themselves in the present 
critical situation of your aftairs, 

" As far as my experience and friend- 

= ship may be able to render you any 

isay, they shall be devoted to your ser- 

h'ice. At present, perhaps, the most 

acceptable thing I can do, Mill be to 

leave you to the free and unrestrained 

expression of your feelings." 

Saying this, the benevolent man took 
an affectionate farewell of the party, and 
returned to the redory, his mind greatly- 
relieved at having communicated the 
sad events to Mrs. Herbert; and at the 



[ 44 ] 

exemplary resignation with which she 
appeared to sustain the shock. 

The intelligence, indeed, had pained 
her in the most sensible manner ; but 
her mind was too well disciplined to per- 
mit any indications of wild impatience 
to escape her. 

Nor, had she been less collected, could ' 
she have felt that species of tumultuous ; 
eTief, which arises from the sudden 
abruption of felicity, when the objeds 
of the heart's best affe6lions are for ever 
removed from its grasp; and which the 
steadiest principle can hardly controul. 

The sweet attachment that grows out 
of an union of sentiment, she had never 
experienced for Mr. Herbert. Her heart 
therefore could feel no deprivation when 
her union with him was rent asunder; 
but the idea of his sudden removal into 
eternity, '^ with all his imperfedions on 
his head," was still a most distressing 
consideration to her kind and benevolent 



[ 45 ] 

mind ; and she felt an emotion of the 
sharpest anguish in the contemplation 
of the consequences which such a life of 
impious profligacy as Herbert's must m- 
evitably induce. 

Her perplexity, also, at the conduft of 
Mr. Fortescuewas extreme: and thouoh 
his unparalleled generosity awakened her 
warmest emotions of gratitude, yet at 
the same time she felt it would be im- 
possible to avail herself of it. 

She could not tor a moment suspecl, 
indeed, that his avowed affeaion for 
Mary had suggested a step, which his 
own noble heart, independently of that 
feeling, would have prompted him to 
adopt ; but delicacy naturally took alarm 
at any thing that bore the most distant 
resemblance to an implied condition; 
and as she did not conceive it probable 
that Mary should entertain any senti- 
ment favourable to the wishes of Mr. 
Fortescue, the impraclicabih'ty of her 



[ 46- ] 

allowing herself to be obliged to him 
became more apj)arent. 

She was resolved, hovvever, to sound 
her Avard upon the subject, that she 
might do notlung hastily, in a case where 
the happiness and comfort of more than 
one were interested ; and to regulate Dr, 
Fairford's answer to Mr. Fortescue accor- 
ding to the result of her enquiries. 

In the course of a day or two, jNIrs. 
Herbert, with every mark of her cus^ 
tomary affe(5lion, mentioned the subject 
to Mary. 

She enumerated the advantages that 
might be expeded from her matrimonial 
conne6lion with Mr. Fortescue ; a gen- 
tleman of such respectable character, 
delicacy of feeling, nobleness of mind, 
and affluent situation in life. 

'^That he entertains for j/oz^, my dear 
child, the warmest and sincerest affe6tion, 
tlierc cannot be a doubt; and should 
you feel a reciprocal attachment to him, 



t 47 ] 

I see nothing to obscure the prospect of 
your future happiness with him. In that ^ 
case, too, there might perhaps be no 
impropriety in my accepting the muni- 
iicent favour which he proposes to confer 
upon me. But, I must confess, that, 
under different circumstances^ I should 
not feel it rio-jit to lav mvself under such 
a weight of oblio-ation to a strano-er." 

Mrs. Herbert here paused for an an- 
swer ; and Mary, having gazed at her a 
few minutes in silence, in a voice half 
choaked with tears, assured her, she 
would be guided entirely, in this and 
every other action of her life, by the 
will of one to whom she was bound by 
the sincerest love, gratitude, and respect. 

' It is my only ambition, dearest ma- 
dam, to imitate the excellence which 
your example sets before me. Oh, teacL 
me liow I can best contribute to your 
happiness, and enhance your comfort. 
You cannot recommend a step, which I 



[ 48 ] 

ought not to pursue ; and whatever be 
your wishes on this or any other subjecl, 
rest assured that my fehcity will always 
be found in my ready compliance with 
them.' 

'^ Ah, dearest girl !" replied Mrs. 
Herbert, ^ ^beware of what you say. Make 
no inconsiderate promise in an affair of 
such importance as the present. Let 
me first request you to enquire of your 
hearty whether l\lx. Fortescue hold that 
place in its affections which a hus- 
band " 

' Spare me, oh, spare me, dearest 
Mrs. Herbert!' cried Mary, clasping her 
hands, and shuddering as she spoke; ' Mr. 
Fortescue possesses all that esteem, all 
that friendship can give ; but — ' for a 
mom.ent she continued silent, whilst the 
tears rolled down her cheek, and then 
added, in a firmer voice, ' yet, if by the 
sacrifice of my own feelings I can en- 
sure the future tranquillity of yoiirSy my 



[ 49 ] 

friend, iny prote6lress, my more than 
mother — if I can conduce to the sweet 
repose of that life, which has hitherto 
been spent in making me and others 
happy, whilst itself has suffered all the 
cruel severities of fortune, — I v>dll not 
hesitate a moment. Nothing shall weigh 
with me in opposition to your ease and 
satisfaction. And oh, that any offering 
of mj/ peace could at all compensate 
for those miseries which you have 
suffered.' 

" My dear ^lary,'' replied Mrs. Her- 
bert solemnly, whilst she wiped away 
the obtrusive tear, '' recolleci; that we 
are all in the hands and at the disposal 
of that Providence^ which is ever Vv^ork- 
ing for the good of its creatures, and 
wiiich marks out the walk through .life, 
that each is to pursue, with equa] wisdom 
and benciicence. Shall we, refuse then 
to go forwards in th^ way that is allotted 
us, with cheerfulness and contentment, 

VOL. 111. D 



because il iKij^pciis to olVcr less t'liarms 
to our iinai;iiiat ion, or lew cr ohJcMs ot" 
enjoyment, (o onr j)assi()ns, than wc 
fonid Jesire? 

" Ml/ path, I eon less, lias soiuifinics 
been \\\oyc. oiKstruMed with thorns iIkui 
IxNintilied M'itli roses; hut still I am 
eonseions, that, whati'vermy t I'ials mii^'ht 
l)e, it is o-ood lor me that 1 have ex])tv 
rieneed them. 

'' They ha\{*, I trust, corrected my 
heart, and diseiplined my mind. i lu-y 
liave taught. \\\v. to estimate, external 
cireumstanees at their proper* value, and 
to j)lace my hapj)iness on something' he- 
\()\\i\ the reaeh of temporal lortnne. 
They ha\e taught me, my lo\-e, to be 
satislied ^vithasmall portion ol'the gifts 
of prosperity; and," continued she, 
catehing Mary to her bosom, " to sulVer 
every privation that mistortune can 
inilid, rather than purchase all that 



[ ^I J 

afllucnce colUcI bestow, at the price of 
ouc pang to such a heart as yours." 

After a niomeut's pause, ^^ Let me not 
licar,"she proceeded, '' a word in reply. 
1 have learned as much as I wished to 
know, of your sentiments with respect 
to Mr. Fortescue; and am now decided 
how to act/' 

Mary was incapable of answering, even 
liad she not been prohibited from it. 

Her bosom swelled with contlictins: 
emotions, but gratitude to Mrs. Herbert 
wa5 the predominant one; and whilst 
she returned her tender embrace with 
enthusiastic warmth, she offered the in- 
cense of a prayer to heaven, that ^he 
might never prove undeserving of her 
generous )ove. 

As it became necessaiy for her to make, 
some immediate arrangements, consist- 
ent with the humble situation to which 
she was now reduced, Mrs. Herbert (as 
soon as Dr. Fairford had returned an 



[ 52 ] 

answer to Mr. Fortcscuc, clecliniiiG: a 
proof of generosity wliich lier feelings 
would not allow her to accept) quitted 
the Lodge, and removed with Mary to 
the house of i\Ir. Stanmore. 

This hospitahle friend had been ap- 
prized by Harriet of tlie changes which 
had occurred, and with the instant con- 
currence of his lady, v/rote to request, 
that the party would take shelter without 
delay at the Manor, and wait tliere the 
return of hinisclf and Mrs. Stanmore, 
which he informed them would be 
speedy, as his liealth was now completely 
re-established. 

He added, that Mrs. Stanmore would 
bring Madame Hen.ri to the ]\Ianor, with 
whom My. Winburne had made her ac- 
quainted, whose engaging manners had 
exceedingly interested her in her favour; 
and whose desolate situation, since the 
death of the old priest, (for he had been 
released a few days before, ) claimed more 



[ 53 ] 

than e\ ei" the compassion of those wlio 
liad hearts to sympathize with tlie dis- 
tresses ot" iiiimeiited suffering, and gene- 
rosity and ability to relieve tiiem. 

At Stanmore ■Manor, Mrs. Herbert 
proposed to remain till the return of Sir 
Charles Fitzmordaunt to England, ^vho, 
thou2:h little had been heard from him 
since the death of his lady, was soon 
expeded at Fitzmordaunt-castle to give 
dire6lions for some material necessary 
repairs in that fabrick; and painful as 
it might be to her to solicit assistance 
from one whom she could not recol- 
lect without horror, yet she considered 
it as a duty imposed upon her by lier 
affeftion for Mary, for whom she knew 
not how to provide, unless by interest- 
ing the baronet in their favour. 

I\Iatilda too was ever in her thoughts; 
but she had deserted the bosom of her 
mother, and chosen a protector for 
herself. 



i 34 ] 

Mrs. Herbert coukl only therefore 
drop the tear of maternal anguish over 
her recoliedion, and lift up her heart in 
secret aspirations to heaven for her 
innocence and safety. No tidings had 
reached the Lodge since her flight, of 
the place of her retreat, nor the circum- 
stances of her situation. 

She only knew tlie dreadful certainty, 
that her daughter had left her native 
land with one of the most unprincipled 



Oi 



A.\,^u:^^^ui. 



i w 



iibcrti::::^':, a-yJ flov/n to 
a country that was a scene of horror, 
anarchy, and blood. 

On Ednnnurs account^ also, her mind 
continued to be racked with suspense, 
and" day succeeded day without any 
certain intelligence arriving to lessen 
her aiixiety ; v/hilst to complete her cup 
of sorrow, an unusual silence on the 
part of Henry excited the cruel appre- 
hension, that some misfortune had rob- 



[ 55 ] 



bed her of the only brother on wliose 
love and friendship she could securely 
depend. 



[ 56 ] 



CHAPTER III. 



HE f(earsof Mrs. Herbert on account 
of Henry were not, indeed, entirely 

iin founded; they liad, hoAvever, consi- 
derably exceeded the bounds vvhich rea- 
lity authorized. 

He was still living, though under cir- 
cumstances of calamity and suffering ; 
and vrliilst his sister's heart throbbed with 
the sorrows we have iust related, he ex- 
perienced all the horrors of captivity in 
one of the most loatlisome and crowded 
prisons of France. 



[ .57 ] 

Shortly after the last of his letters to 
Mrs. Herbert, in v/liich he had painted 
in lano'uao'e more than commonlv ani- 
mated, his sitnation witli his uncle in 
America, as exactly calculated to soothe 
the cares that still rankled in his breast; 
and had described himself as experien- 
cing- from his affection all the solace 
that benevolence could bestow, a fatal 
reverse suddenly dispersed his visions of 
tranquillity. 

Theyellow fever attacked ?Jr. ]\Iorton, 
and in three days from his seizure he 
was a lifeless corpse. 

The shock aifected Henry in tlie most 
sensible manner. A feeling of desola- 
tion took possession of his mind, and 
he was last sinkino* into the <rloom of 
despondency, when the rccollecnion of 
his duties as a Christian and a man 
again animated him to exertion, and 
determined him to seek in scenes of 
activity and employment a cure for the 



[ 58 ] 

mental malady which had bigiui to at- 
tack liiin. 

For this purpose he resolved to make 
a personal visit to those mercantile 
houses in different parts of Europe, which 
had been commercially conne6ted with 
his late uncle, to settle new correspon- 
dences with them; and having amused 
his mind with contemplating the various 
objects of curiosity his tour would offer, 
to return again to America, and resume 
tlie busy avocations in which he had 
been before engaged. 

To France he naturallv first dire^ed 
his steps. 

It v/as a country to w^hich his heart 
was bound by the tenderest associations. 

It was ther€\\Q had hrst seen his Ade- 
laide ; it was there he had been united 
to his departed saint in the holy bands 
of wedlock ; and he persuaded himself 
that in the sweet recollections which the 
scenes of his former felicity would ex- 



[ 59 ] 

cite, he should receive a gratification 
which nothing else mi earth could now 
administer to his mind. 

Another though a suhordinate motive 
also influenced his making France th@ 
first object of his attention. 

The Revolution had now taken place, 
and presented a most interesting specta- 
cle to the contemplative mind. A great 
people having burst the chains of bond- 
age which ages had riveted upon them, 
were making the grandest poHtical expe- 
riment that the world had liitherto been 
witness of. 

The (piick succession of events, the 
unexpected vicissitudes, the variety of 
charafter, andthe developementof talent, 
which such a convulsion nuist necessa- 
rily produce, all promised to open un- 
bounded sources of consideration and 
reflection to ilenry ; and as he would be 
merely a quiet and speculative observer 
cf the tempest, he had not the least 



I 60 ] 

apprehension that any of its cfreds could 
be felt by him. 

The system of terror, however, had 
commenced in Paris, and its wild ex- 
cesses Ave re following each other in rapid 
succession at the time of Henry's arrival 
there. 

One massacre pursued another, and 
tlie dreadful scenes of carnage ^vhich 
weredaily displayed before hiseyes, whilst 
tliey inspired him with horror and dis- 
gust, convinced him that no domination 
is so fruitful of miser}* and destru6tive 
of happiness as the government of the 
mob ; with wliom the sudden impulses 
of passion are the only principles of con- 
du6l, and ignorance and prejudice the 
only rules of judgment. 

Though an inveterate dislike of tlie 
English was general at this time in Paris, 
yet rleury, being cou&idered as an Ame- 
rican citizen, continued for some time 
to be unmolested ; and remained a quiet, 



[ <^1 ] 

'though melancholy spcclator of those 
human sacritices, whicli, on pretence of 
state offences, were daily offered up on 
the shrine of private pique, rancorous 
malice, and determined revenge. 

But although he was thus, to all 
appearance, without the sphere of that 
vortex of misery which appeared on all 
sides of him, yet an accident;d circum- 
stance at leno'th involved hiui in the 
gulph, and threatened to close a life 
which had heen little else than an un- 
varied tissue of disaster and suffering. 

As he was one day crossing the Square 
of Louis XV. (afterwards called the 
Scpiarc of Concord) which was even yet 
moist with the blood of the unfortunate 
royal pair of France, and an innume- 
rable list of their friends and adherents, 
the soul-harrowing sound of tlie well- 
known tocsin suddenly rang in his ears. 
Enquiring the cause of a passing stran- 
ger, he was informed, that a ci-devant 



[ 62 ] 

nobleman had been just condemned by 
the tribunal, and was now in the hands 
of the mob, who were dragging him to 
the square in order to dispatch him at 
the guillotine. 

Henrv, heavino; a sio-h for the unfor- 
tunate unknown, immediatclv took a 
diiferent direction to that in which he 
supposed the mob might be found, wil- 
ling; to avoid the si^ht of misery that he 
knew he was unable to relieve. 

When however he had almost reached 
the end of tlie narrow street throuoh 
wliich he was intending to escape from 
the scjuare, he perceived with the most 
painfal surprize that he had taken a 
Avrono" route, and instead of avoidino- 
the murderous crew, he had unfortu- 
nately followed that which led direclly 
towards them. 

To attempt to fly was now in vain; in 
a moment he ^vas surrounded by the 
tumultuous mob, and borne along by the 



[ 63 ] 

irresistible torrent into the centre of 
the square whicli he had quitted only a 
few minutes before. 

In a short time tlie unruly multitucie 
approached the fatal instrument, whicli 
Avas to close their vi6tim's scene of suf- 
fering ; and Henry, whose situation had 
been frequently shifted by the struggles 
and pressure of those around him, now 
found liimself witliin a very little dis- 
tance of the unfortunate nobleman ; but 
his head was inclined towards the earth 
in hopeless despondency, and it was 
impossible to gain even a glimpse at his 
features. 

At length a discordant yell from the 
mob announced their arrival at the 
guillotine. 

The prisoner, electrified as it were by 
the stunnino: dissonance of the crv, 
lifted up his fiice in wild affright, and 
discovered to tlie astonished Henry the 
well-knov,n features of the ^larquis de 



\ 



[ 6i ] 



Eourdoii, the father of his Adelaide, the 
accessary to the murder of his wife. 

In a moment a "tide of the most tu- 
multuous emotions rushed into his soul; 
his heart throbbed, his knees trembled 
under him, and large drops of sweat 
rolled down his face. 

The injuries which the inhuman parent 
had heaped upon his head, recurred to 
his recoiled ion. His dying Adelaide, 
his ruined hopes of happiness, slavery, 
and torture, banishment, and poverty, 
all presented tliemselves to his imagina- 
tion, and instantaneously rekindled those 
feelings of rage and resentment against 
his persecutors, which his bosom had so 
long forgotten. 

A transient emotion of joy flashed 
through his mind at the contemplation 
of tlie ruined marquis, and he instincl- 
ively exclaimed, "Our hour of retribu- 
tion is arrived 1 Adelaide ! our wrongs 



[ 65 ] 

are not forgotten. Now are we indeed 
avenged !" 

At the sound of the well-remembered 
voice the prisoner turned his eye to- 
wards the speaker; and Henry at once 
perceived in its supplicating expression, 
as well as in the crimson that flushed the 
w^an cheek of the fallen De Bourdon, 
the sorrows of penitence, and the mi- 
sery of conscious guilt. 

That brow on which ambition, power, 
and affluence, had stamped their own pe- 
culiar characters, was no\7 dejeded and 
humiliated; its deep wrinkles, shaded 
bv a few thinlv-scattered silver locks,, 
wliicli formed the only covering for his 
aged head. Eig tears silently coursed 
each other down his furrowed cheek ; 
and his bent body was siiiki ng by the 
united pressure of calamity and age. 

A momentary contemplation of this 
man of sorrov/, disarmed the bosom of 
Henry of every resentful feeling. 



r 66 ] 

His soul was incapable of triuniphing 
over the unfortunate, and he melted into 
tenderness at the sad and altered form 
before him. 

The mild principles of the religion too, 
that had been the rule of his life, as well 
as the standard of his faith, recurred to 
his thoughts ; and the forgiving cha- 
raSer of its Divine Founder, which was 
to be his model, suggested an example 
of compassion upon thepresent occasion. 

He reprobated himself for the mo- 
mentary desire of vengeance he had 
experienced ; and panted to approach 
the prisoner, assure him of forgiveness, 
and speak peace and comfort to his 
soul, before he should be launched into 
eternity » 

As he strove to press through the thick 
circle which surrounded De Bourdon 
for this benevolent purpose, a shrill fe- 
male cry of ' Save the Marquis, citizens, 



[ 67 ] 

he is innocent. Save, oh save !' rang 
upon his ear, 

, At the sound, Henry panted ^vith 
surprize, and gasped for breath. 

'' Oh, God !" said he, '' is it not the 
voice of Adelaide? are they uot the 
words of my long-lost wife, supplicating 
for her father? Oh, let me hear once 
more the heavenly sound. " 

He now strained his attention to the 
most painful pitch; but in vain. His 
ear only met the confused clamour of the 
maddened multitude, who had brought 
their vi6lim to the scene of his execution. 

^'No," said Henry to himself, ''it 
was not a mortal voice. The spirit of 
my Adelaide, bending from heaven, 
called to her faithful Henry, to strive 
to save her parent from the hands of 
murderous rut^ans. 1 hear thy call, 
departed saint, and will fulfil it.'' 

As he whispered this, he snatched a 
club from one of the mob who stood 



[ 6-8 ] 

next to hini, and rushing forward with 
an iinpetiiosity which nothing coidd re- 
sist, quickly l)roke through the band 
that surrounded De Bourdon, and seized 
his clav-cold hand. 

''Citizens," cried he, in a voice of 
anguish and despair, '' he must not die. 
By Heaven, the Marquis is not guilty. 
Let me be your vidim in his room ; and 
spare the grey hairs of an innocent 
old man." 

* Secure tlie English aristocrat, who 
would arrest the course of justice;' ex- 
claimed one of the party that followed 
close behind the Marquis, who at the 
same moment plunged a poignard in the 
s i d e o f H e n ry , w h i c li f o r t u n a t e 1 y gl a n c e d 
against the ribs, and only occasioned a 
severe gash. 

*' Good God ! a brothers voice and 
hand!" said Henry, as he turned to see 
who liad intlicted the wound ; '' can 
nature be so entirely subdued ?" 



[ ('>9 ] 

The eye of the base assassin Fitzmor- 
daunt shrunk from his glance, but he 
still coiUinucd to cry out, ' secure the 
traitor.' 

In a moment, ' traitor, aristocrat, 
Enghshman,' echoed from an Imndred 
mouths; and as many hands seized the 
unfortunate Henry. 

Stao-o-ered bv the blow he had re- 
ceived, and overpoAvered by numbers, 
he soon sunk to the ground; the Mar- 
quis's liand was torn from his grasp ; 
but with his parting look he caught these 
mysterious words: 'Brother — deceived; 
Adelaide confined — separated — alive in 
France.' 

As the unhappy vi6lim of popular rage 
was led off to the o:uillotine, some of the 
party conducfcd Henry, bleeding and 
languid with his wound, to tlie prison 
of the Conciergerie, to be reserved for 
one of those mock trials so common at 
that time, which added insult to murder; 



[ 70 ] 

and though they generally preceded sen- 
tence, never averted death. 

But though condemned here to a pri- 
vation of every comfort. Ids mind was 
occupied with too interesting a sul)jc(^, 
to allow it to become a prey to do 
spondency. 

The last broken words of the Marquis 
were perpetually occurring to him. 

They seemed to hold out the flattering- 
hope that Adelaide was still in being ; 
and if no chance of escape for himself 
appeared, yet the thoughts of her having 
been saved from the horrid death to 
which he conceived she had been a 
vi6lim, of her still being an inhabitant 
of the same world with himself, seemed 
to render his own fate an unimportant 
trifle. 

Happy, indeed, was it for Henry, that 
his mind could feast upon a subject 
which appeared to be sufficient for all 
lU attention; since the scene around 



C 71 ] 

lilm was only such as could inspire 
despair. 

The grated room to which he had been 
consigned, was ah'cady nearly filled witk 
other prisoners, whose numbers would 
soon havx been too large for the spaee 
allotted them, had not the bloody ty- 
ranny of the execrable Robespierre daily 
thinned the crowd, by seleding from 
it those whom his capricious cruelty 
doomed to die. 

Every hour w^as his dreadful mandate 
expected to arrive ; and none of the 
wretched group could anticipate who 
nex.t should fall a victim to his rage. 

On the morning after Henry's con- 
iinemeut the deep tone of the tocsin 
announced the speedy entrance of a 
messenger for more obje6is of slaughter. 

The sad companions of affliction looked 
round upon each other with silent horror; 
and in each countenance was marked 



[ 72 ] 

the dread of the lot of death falling 
upon himself. 

Ileiiiy, too, partook of the expeda- 
tioii but not of the alarm. The forti- 
tude which conscious re6titude and ge- 
nuine piety inspire, combined with the 
pleasing hope of Adelaide's safety, 
seemed to elevate him above the fear 
of death, and preserved him tranquil 
and serene upon his own account, tho' 
he could not refuse tlie tear of pity to 
the unhappy sufferers around him. 

He could now receive with calmness 
that sunniions into eternity, which 
each succeeding liour rendered it more 
probable he should hear; and having 
with every exercise of piety and resig- 
nation prepared himself to meet a fate 
that seemicd inevitable; a fate, however, 
to which he was assured the immortal 
spark within would rise superior; with a 
sentiment nearly allied to pleasure, he 
anticipated the moment when the friendly 



[ 73 ] 

hand of the executioner should commit 
'^ the irreparable a6l that alone gives 
man a power over eternity;" that a6i 
which would close the persecutions of 
of his enemy, and place him far beyond 
the reach of human suffering, in the 
regions '' where time, and chance, and 
death expire;" where he would soon be 
joined by the spirit of his Adelaide ; and 
jouied to part no more. 

He felt too that he could even foro-ive 
his brother's last a<5l of malice; and offer 
up a prayer for the penitence and ac- 
ceptance of his murderer. 

In this situation Henry continued for 
some weeks, suffering with patience 
every discomfort which a crowded prison 
room, and a painful wound, could pro- 
duce ; and tranquilly expeding the sum- 
mons that should lead him to a public 
and ignominious death. 

He had, however, been drawn from 
a contemplation of hfs state for a day or 

VOL. iir. E 



[ 74 ] 

two past, by a circumstance that equally 
awakened his curiosity, and interested 
his feelings. 

Adjoining to the large apartment to 
which he had been condemned, Avas con^ 
necled one of much smaller dimensions, 
low, damp, and gloomy ; and only re- 
ceiving an imperfec-l and partial light 
from the adjoining room, which was ad- 
mitted through a square hole guarded 
with thick iron bars. 

For some time after Henry's impri- 
sonment, this chamber had been without 
any inhabitant; and lie had generally 
taken his post as near to it as possible, 
that he might enjoy the trifling circula- 
tion of air which the aperture produced. 

One morning, after the customary 
sound of the tocsin, its iron door grated 
harshly on the hinge, and a prisoner, 
heavily chained, was pushed rudely into 
the cell. The faint light that glimmered 
through the grating enabled him toper- 



[ 75 ] 

ceive that the unhappy man wore the 
Enghsh uniform; that he was of grace- 
ful person, and apparently in the bloom 
of life. 

No sooner was the thundering lock 
turned upon the prisoner, than he sank 
upon the floor, and uttered a groan, that 
in a moment awakened every sensibility 
in the soul of Mr. Fitzmordaunt. A 
secret sympathy mnited him at once to 
the suflering youth, and an earnest 
wush to console his sorrovv's spontane- 
ously sprang up in his bosom. 

After giving a few minutes, therefore, 
to the sac redness of his grief, he ad- 
dressed him in the kindest accents, and 
with every expression of friendly com- 
miseration assured him nothing would 
30 much lighten the pressure of his own 
misfortunes, as the power or oppor- 
tunity of removino; his. 

Hearing himself addressed in the lan- 
guage of his country, the youth raised 
E 2 



{ 75 ] 

his head irom the hand on which it was 
Feclined, and returned an answer of 
grateful poUteness ; but added, that his 
heart was too much burthened for con- 
vei^ation, and that he must beg the 
privilege of indulging his grief in silence 
and uninterruption. 

Thus saying, he again resumed his 
posture of disconsolation; and kissing 
with ardour a miniature which hung at 
his breast, heaved a sigh of anguish. 

This determined taciturnity of the 
young prisoner, which he maintained for 
tv/o days after his confinement, pro- 
duced in iienry the most sensible mor- 
tification; and rather increased than 
diminished the desire which lie had at 
iirst felt of affording him comfort. 

^\ hilst, however, he was planning 
sx)me method by which he might engage 
him to his conlidence, a circumstance 
occurred that gave a new and unex- 
pected turn to his own fortunes, and 



[ 77 ■] 

those of the objed of his present soli- 
citude. 

Th€ hour of midnight wa^ arrived, 
and his fellow prisoners lay stretched m 
troubled sleep around him, whilst Mr, 
Fitzmordaunt offered up his customary 
tribute of prayer and praise to Heaveiiy 
when the discordant jar of the opening 
door of the adjoining chamber excited 
his attention, 

Henry immediately applied to the 
grating, to learn what had occasioned 
the unusual noise at that hour of the 
night; and by the feeble gleam of a 
lamp which one of the gaolers carried 
in his hand, he perceived a female 
figure led into the cell, of beautiful form, 
and in elegant attire. 

The keeper retiring, left the light 
upon the floor ; and Henry by its assist- 
ance had just traced in her bewitching 
face a strong likeness of his sister Caio- 
line,, when what was his astonishment to 



[ 78 j 

behold the imprisoned youth start up 
from the ground on which he was sit- 
ting, and catch the female in his arms; 
at the same time exclaiming, '* Great 
Heaven! Matilda, my sister!" 

The lady disengaging herself from hi« 
embrace, replied, ' Edmund Herbert I 
is it possible my brother too should be 
reduced to this degraded state ? Inso- 
lent, detested barbarians ! Your tri- 
umph, however^ will be but shart. But 
pray, Edmund, inform me what ill 
ehaiice has brought you to this wretched 
place.' 

*' Ah ! rather," returned Edmund, 
*' tell me, my dear Matilda, the strange 
fatality that has conduced 2/ou to this 
spot? How is it that you are in France? 
that you are alone, and in captivity ? 
Where are our parents ? What is the 
destiny of my beloved mother ; and is 
my adored— — But you are silent — 
your colour too forsakes your cheek 1 In 



[ 79 ] 

pity speak, my dearest girl, and at oivce 
inform nie M'hat horrible calamity has 
overwhehiicd all those I love? Alas ! my 
foreboding heart ! your throbbing fears 
are about to be too fatally verified !" 

'Edmund,' resumed Matilda, ^vith 
some embarrasment, but at the same 
time affecting a lofty air, 'it is out of 
my power to answer any other of your 
questions than those which relate imme- 
diately to myself. Of Mr. and Mrs. 
Herbert I know nothing more than what 
you must be acquainted with. Some 
time has nov/ elapsed since 1 became 
a voluntary exile from my family ; they 
have doubtless renounced me^ as / re- 
nounce ' and she paused a moment 

— ' my native country.' 

A transient rosy suffusion, as she ut- 
tered these words, tinged her cheeks, 
which was suddenly succeeded by a deadly 
paleness, and she seized her brother's 
arm to support her trembling frame. 



L BO ] 

''Ah, dear Matilda," cried Edmund, 
drawing her gently to his bosom, '' what 
horrible words have escaped your lips? 
Wherefore this dreadful determination, 
which equally confounds and distresses 
me? Oh! recall the fatal speech; and 
hope, with me, that we shall soon be 
restored to liberty and Britain." 

^ Neve?' will I see it more:" resumed 
Matilda, recovering her composure, and 
again assuming a dignified and indif- 
ferent air; ** my resolution is as unal- 
terable as the decrees of fate, 

* But though I give up my family, 
conne6lions, and country, think not 
that they will fade from my recolledion; 
S>T that I can ever miss an opportunity of 
rendering a service to one who has that 
claim of fraternal affe6lion upon me 
which you possess. 

' You, 1 presume, Edmund, are a 
prisoner of war ; and would, probably, 
as such^ in the course of time, regain 



[ 81 ] 

j^our liberty. I say probably, for de- 
tested as the English are by the present 
rulers, it is not impossible, that, instead 
of an exchange, your confinement might 
be terminated by a sudden and speedy 
execution. 

'But whether or not such a- fatal ca^ 
tastrophe should take place, at the best 
you might be doomed to some weeks or- 
months imprisonment in this detestable 
dungeon. 

' From these eviis^ it is in my power to 
rescue vou, and I will with Dleasur^ 
exercise it; IMy own confinement can 
be but for a few hours ; , and no soone? 
shall they have elapsed, than you also 
shall be free, 

'Explain, however, to me, by what 
chance you were thrown into your pre- 
sent situation.' 

In reply to lliis, Edmund in few 
words informed his sister, that the Lively 
transport, in v/hich she miglit iccoUect 



t 82 ] 

he had sailed fom England, being acci- 
dentally separated fvom the fleet, was 
attacked by a French sloop of war. 
, *' Although," continued he, *^ the 
enemy was considerably our superior in 
strength, and better appointed in all 
respe6ls than ourselves, yet wc main- 
ted a sharp action for upwards of an 
hour. Finding at length that she was 
more than a match for us in distant 
firing, our captain determined to lay 
himself alongside of the Frenchman, and 
endeavour to board. 

** In a short time we had grappled 
him, and myself and a dozen of our crew 
were upon his quarter-deck. 

** It was now, however, that we found 
the enemy to be tnuch stronger than we 
expe6i;ed ; as in addition to his comple- 
ment of men, he had two companies of 
fusileers on board. 

*'In a few minutes nine out of our 
party lay dead upon the deck ; and myself 



[ 83 ] 

"svltb the rest being secured, were thrust 
into the hold, tilt the action was over, 

'* This soon took place, as the French- 
man availed himself of a breeze tliat 
sprang up, and made off, leaving to the 
Lively, if not the glory of a complete 
victory, at least the boast of having made 
the enemy run away. As soon as we 
came to port, myself and the other pri- 
soners were marched to Paris, and after 
passing through the slight examination 
of an insolent commissary, I was con- 
du6i;ed to the cell in which you find me, 

'' But let me entreat you, l\Iatilda, to 
satisfy my painful curiosity; and not only 
inform me by what mysterious ciiances, 
I see you in France, and a prisoner, but 
also account for the fatal words A\hich 
you have uttered, which still vibrate on 
my ear, and sicken my very soul/' 

During the whole of this singular in- 
terview the astonishment of Henry may 
•be better imagined than described. 



[ 84 ] 

Many years were now elapsed since he 
had seen the face of his nephew, but the 
shghtest consideration of it brought 
back a vivid recoUedion of that noble 
and expressive countenance, which he 
had formerly admired in the boyish 
Edmund. 

It was with difficulty he had refrained 
from discovering himself the moment 
he found he was so near such dear at- 
tachments, and the pain of concealment 
was still further enhanced by Edmund's 
simple unadorned tale, which excited 
in his uncle's mind the highest ideas of 
his heroism and modesty, and prompted 
him to pour out all the affe6lionate 
praises with which his heart was loaded. 

Matilda too was equally the objecl of 
his admiration and surprize: as her lovely 
features and enchanting form reminded 
him of that only sister and dearest friend, 
from whose society he had so long been 
banished ; so jier appearance in a foreign 



[ 85 ] 

country, and within the walls of a prison, 
her extraordinary deportment, and in- 
explicable language, struck him with an 
amazement, to which he could hardly 
avoid giving immediate expression. 

Thinking, however, that any avowal 
of himself at present might only inter^ 
rupt that disclosure of Matilda's history, 
which he hoped Edmund's requ-est would 
induce her to make, he resolved to com- 
bat the pain of concealment a little 
longer, and wait the termination of her 
narrative. 

He did not remain long in suspence. 
After a short pause,, and some slight 
emotion, Matilda replied to her brother 
as follows. 

'^ Yes, Edmund, I will unfold to yon 
the«story of my misfortunes, but first let 
me impose this solemn condition of my 
recital, that you make no comment on 
the steps I have taken, nor attempt to 
alter the resolutions I have formed. 



[ B6 ] 

*' Our sentiments respefting ftiy con- 
du6l, will, I am persuaded, be as distant 
from each other as light and darkness. 
It would only therefore be useless, as 
well as disagreeable, to contest a point 
on which it is impossible we should ever 
agree. 

'' An education every way opposite 
to yours has happily instilled into my 
mind-lotions of a complexion totally 
unlike those Avhich yoxi entertain ; and 
unshackled by the prejudices which hold 
others in slavish subjeftion, I can ridi- 
cule and despise the bugbear maxims of 
doating moralists, and the senseless 
dreams of superstitious bigots. 

'^ The refined and enlightened society 
of the French capital, to which my good 
stars condu6led me at that period of life 
when principles are formed, and the 
characler is determined, liberated me at 
once from the errors of the nursery ; 
aiid taught my aspiring mind to know 



I 87 ] 

its own dignity, to resped its own powers, 
and to make my will, impelled by the 
vigour of my imagination, and the 
warm energies of my affections, the only 
rule of the conduCl I should adopt. 

** With these opinions of perfe6l in- 
dependence upon the despots which the 
world has voluntarily enslaved itself to, 
nnder the names of propriety, decorum, 
and a thousand other equally unmeaning 
terms, I accompanied Sir Charles and 
Lady Antoinette to England -, regretting 
the absence which I was compelled to 
suffer from those benignant friends who 
had been both my instru6i:ors and exam- 
ples, in that fair and flowery path of 
freedom to which I was now introduced. 

*' But ah, Edmund, my heart acknow- 
ledged one to whom my debt of gratitude 
was larger than to others, for the pro- 
gress I had made in the science of human 
happiness. 



[ 8S ] 

'•' Lord William appeared to 

me to be all that the fondest fancy could 
pourtray, when sketching out the pi6lure 
of a perfe6l being. Godlike in his form, 
enchanting in his manners, and superior 
to all around him in talent and accom- 
plishment, his soul filled with lofty sen- 
timent, and his heart beating with the 
tenderest sensibilities, he seemed to be 
formed only as an object for the love and 
admiration of the other sex. Oh, hovv^ 
could insincerity dwell with such per- 
fection ? 

^' We became acquainted. I soon ac- 
knowledged the power of his excellence, 
and surrendered up without reserve the 
affedions of my soul to the youth that 
seemed so well to deserve them. 

'' The sentiment was returned, nor 
did a long time elapse, before we were 
mutually conscious of a reciprocal pas- 
sion. 



t 8.9 J 

*' At this period, Sir Charles took his 
laniiiy to England, to try the effect of 
a change of air on Lady Antoinette, 
"vvhose health was declining ; and to at- 
tend some business which demanded his 

])resence. Lord ^^ illiam pressed 

for a correspondence, to wdiich I con- 
:<euted, as 1 knew our absence would be 
long; and the idea of this interchange 
of sentiments seemed to soothe me under 
the allliclion of a scparatiou from one, 
whose presence became now essential to 
my happiness. 

*' For the first time in my life I felt 
the full force of that consolation from 
epistolary correspondence, which the 
poet has so beautifully painted: 

" IltMv'n first tanglu letters for some wretch's aid, 
« Some banish'd lover, or some captive nuiid; 
" They Hve, they speak, tJiey breatlie what love In- 
spires, 
<* Warm from the soul, and faitliful to its fires; 
'* The virgin's wish, without her fears, impait, 
*' Excuse the blush, and pour out all the hcait : 



[ 90 ] 

" Speed the soft intercourse from soal to goui, 
" And waft a sigh from Indus to the Pole." 

'* We had not been many weeks in 
England, before the odious Sir Ninirod 
Heartley took it into his head to form 
an attachment for me. 

*' I encouraged his attentions merely 
to vary the dull monotony of my life at 
Herbert-Lodge, and without an idea that 
the wretch would have the assurance to 
offer me his hand. 

*^ At lengthy however, a formal de- 
claration of marriage came through the 
medium of my father. 

'' I spurned at the unnatural proposal; 
but Mr. Herbert had resolved that I 
should accept it; and therefore not only 
encouraged Sir Nimrod to continue his 
addresses, but took the most arbitrary 
measures with me in order that I might 
be compelled to accept them. 

^' But I Uad a soul wliich soared above 
such groveling- wretches. Heaven had 



[ 91 3 

nmde me free, and I was determined to 
assert my privileges. 

*' Though I dissembled my disgust 
for a time, yet their persecutions at last 
became intolerable. I wrote to Lord 
"William therefore, stated the situ- 
ation to which I was reduced, and begged 
him immediately to come over to Eng- 
land, and assist me in escaping from 
tyrants whom I alike detested and 
despised. 

'' In the course of a fortnight, I re- 
ceived a note from him, informing me, 
he was in a neighbouring village, and 
would carry me off on the ensuing night. 

*^ i\Iy deliverer came as he had pro- 
mised ; I flew into his arms, and em- 
barking with him at Southampton, in a 
vessel which he had prepared for us at 
that port, soon arrived in the delightful 
country, where the powers of my reason 
had been first expanded, and my heart 
lirst learned to beat with love. 



[ S2 ] 

^' The sanation which the marriage 
ceremony is considered as affording to 
the union of the sexes, it was neither 
practicable, nor in the opinion of Lord 

William and myself necessary to 

obtain. 

*' His father, on whom he is chiefly 
dependent, would 'have resented such a 
breach of duty^ as the world is pleased 
to call a matrimonial connexion formed 
without parental consent, and immedi- 
ately have disinherited him, had he 
entered into the state unauthorised by 
himself; and, for my part, I was fully 
satisfied that no form of words could 
add sanftity or force to an union which 
had been consecrated by solemn vows^ 
breathed from bosoms that panted 
with the most disinterested passion for 
each other. 

*' Lord William , as liberal in his 

political principles as in his other senti- 
ments, ha,d taken a warm, though con» 



[ 93 ] 

cealed interest in the progress of the 
Hevohition, and our hotel was conse- 
quently frequented by those parlizans of 
liberty whose enlarged opinions were 
most consonant to his own. The secret 
detestors of the bloody system of terror 
"vv'hich was now triumphant, held their 
nodurnal meetings with us ; and con- 
certed measures f ;r that subversion of it, 
which will soon take place. Oar public 
style of living too w^as splendid, and all 
the fashion as v/ell as wit of Paris were 
to be found at the Hotel de Grammont, 
the place of our residence. 

Several weeks passed on in this de- 
lightful round of love and gaiety, and 
each successive day seemed only to in- 
crease our mutual attachment, 

' ' But it was a state of joy too exqui- 
site to last for ever; and fortune w^hen 
she appeared to be loading me with her 
choicest favours, was preparing to con- 
trast them bv the bitterest trials. 



f 94. ] 

'^ One of our most constant anH 
agreeable visitors, was Chambon de Bar- 
ras, a vouno^ rrenchman of fascinating:' 
manners, and high endowments ; a de- 
termined terrorist in principle, but afFe6l- 
ing at the same time a detestation of 
the party of Robespierre, and constantly 
pouring out wishes for its extin6tion. 

*' As the freest intercourse subsisted 
between us, Lord William and my- 
self were, as I supposed, the depositaries 
of his counsels ; and he pretended to 
take no step without the assistance of 
our opinion, and the san6lion of our 
approbation. 

*^ For some time I regarded him as 
one of the most estimable of men ; nor 
entertained the least suspicion of his 
being otherwise tlian that decided cliam- 
pion of liberty and reason, which he 
appeared to be. Of course his visits 
were always welcome to me, and I ever 
listened with attention and pleasure to 



[ 95 ] 

those schemes of pohtical reformation,, 
tor the discussion and arrangement of 
Avhich alone I fancied he frequented 
our house. 

'* Another charader amongst our 
guests, who enjoyed a great share of 
our esteem, though not so much of our 
confidence as de Barras, ^v3.s Phihppe 
Plassey, rather older than Chambon, a 
middle-aged man, and inferior to him 
in person and manners, but possessing 
strong sense and steady revolutionary 
principles. 

*' They frequently met at our parties, 
but never appeared to feel much cor- 
diality to each other ; a circumstance 
which I attributed either to the dissimi- 
larity of their dispositions, or to envy 
on the part of Plassey, who coufd not 
but perceiv'C that he was less regarded 
by us than our other friend. 

'' I must confess, indeed, he was not 
so calculated to inspire affection at first 



C 95 3 

:fejg'lit as de Barras, though the superiority 
of his understanding- gave him a greater 
claim to our respecl. 

'' As the intercourse, however, be* 
tv/oen de Barras and our family became 
more intimate, I began to suspe6l that 
I perceived an alteration in his behaviour 
towards me ; that he assumed an unusual 
softness when he addressed me; took 
eve^y possible opportunity of making a 
tender, or offering a complimentary, 
speech ; and usually timed his calls vv^hen 
he knew Lord William ■ would be 

from home. 

^' The apprehension that he either 
felt or affeclcd to feel for me a sentiment 
warmer than the friendship he had hi- 
therto professed, threw me into consider- 
able perplexity, and I was doubting in 
what manner I should a6l, when one 
evening, availing himself of the oppor- 
tunity afforded him by our being left 
alone, after a little prefatory compli- 



I 97 3 

iiientary language, he made an open 
avowal of afFection for me, entreated me 

to quit Lord William , and con- 

ne6t myself with one whose heart, for- 
tune, and influence should be devoted 
to my happiness. 

*' Degrading as I felt the proposal to 
be, I had scarcely patience to hear him 
to the end, but replied with all the in- 
dignation of wounded pride, that if he 
ever had the assurance to repeat it, I 
would instantly disclose the insult to 
Lord \\'illiam , who, I was con- 
vinced, would from that moment banish 
him from his friendship for ever. 

'* Far from appearing to be discon- 
certed at my answer, ^ Ah, lovely ]\Ia- 
tilda,' he replied, ' think not that I 
would attempt basely to supplant my 
friend in the affections of one on whom 
his soul reposed for happiness, or rob 
him of a jewel whose value he coukl 
ffistli/ estimate i No! far be sucli trea- 

VOL. J 1 1. F 



[ 93 ] 

cliery from me. But wlieii he cruelly 
deserts the woman who depends on him, 
and leaves such loveliness as yours to 
be tlie sport of fortune, shall 1 be taxed 
with insolence for humbly offering- to 
her that protection, of which she stands 
so much in need ?' 

'^ Saying this, he delivered into my 
hand, a letter from Lord William to this 
cffcd : 

' My dearest girl will pardon the 
abruptness of my departure, when she 
knows that an hour's longer continuance 
in Paris would rob me of my life. The 
t3Tant is apprized of the meetings at our 
hotel, and his emissaries are abroad in 
search of victims. Adieu, therefore, 
JMatilda: and speedily forget one who 
can never see you more. I\Iy return to 
England must quickly be succeeded by 
an union with a lady, whom my father 
has for some time since selected for my 
wife. Suchbeautv and accom!>lishments 



I 99 ] . 

as yours, however, will not be long un- 
protected in the country of gallantry and 
]ove ; and until you shall have Secured 
the friendship of another heart as ardent 
as my own, the inclosed bill Avill obviate 
any inconvenience on the score of pe- 
cuniary concerns.' 

*** Oh ! what were the tortures of my 
soul, on readino- this billet of horror? 

*^lUiined, betrayed, deserted, by the 
man 1 had trusted with unbounded con- 
fidence, and loved with the most intense 
aifection ! 

" For a short time my brain seemed as 
if it were incapable of enduring such a 
shock ; and had I not been relieved by 
a convulsive flood of tears, it is probable 
that reason would have lost her seat, and 
my mind become a scene of anarchy 
and ruin. 

'^ De Barras suffered mc to express all 
the agony of my atiliction, willmut en- 
deavouring to assuage or restrain it ; 
F 13 



[ 100 2 

when it was a little moderated, however, 
he again repeated the offer of his love 
and protection, mingling with his over- 
tures occasional reflections on the trea- 
chery and inhumanity of Lord William 
, and protestations of his own enthu- 
siastic attachment and inviolable fidelity. 

" But I was not in a temper of mind 
to listen with patience either to fresh 
vows of love, or aspersions against him 
who had hitherto been the lord of my 
^afil eel ions. 

* ' I answered Chambon, therefore, with 
scorn and indignation, and insisted upon 
his quitting my apartment, and never 
seeing me again. 

** The haughtiness and contempt of 
my manner called up the anger of De 
Barras. He assumed a fierce and threat- 
ening look, and replied; 

* Matilda, I can forgive for once an 
intemperance of language and behaviour 
which evident! v a vises ivom wounded 



[ 101 ] 

pviclc and .sliarp disappointment. I will 
therefore leave you at present, and re- 
frain from another vi-sit till I think this 
paroxysm may have ceased. Vmt re- 
member, haughty girl, if your perverse- 
ness continue, and vou still refuse to 
listen to De Barras' vows of eternal at 
tachment, you will have then every thing 
to fear from the resentment of one who 
h Rabcspiere's 5'6'cr^/ confidential frknd.^ 

'' Having said this with a stern air, he 
quitted my apartment, and left me to 
meditate not only on the afflictive loss I 
had endured in Lord William 's de- 
parture, but on the gloomy fears for the 
future which his mysterious words had 
just awakened, 

** Decision, however, was necessary 
for me ; and the steps I should adopt 
were to be taken immediately. 

** I deliberated therefore only for a 
moment; and having determined to 
unfold my situation to Philippe Plassey, 



t 102 ] 

and commit myself to his piote6tion, 
I packed up every valuable article that 
was portable, and instantly drove to his 
chateau. 

'' He received me with tenderness and 
affc61ion ; and by soothing my sorrows, 
quickly won my confidence, and secured 
my regard. 

*' Yes, Edmund, the generous soul is 
not a slave to individual attachments ; its 
love is not a jewel to be worn by 072e alone. 
The magic charm of sympathetic senti- 
ment will draw it to itself, and form a 
bond of instant union ; the joys of which 
the vulgar spirit ne'er can taste or fancy. 
'* From Plassey I learned that De 
Barras was a hypocrite and villain ; the 
secret spy of Robespierre; affecting opi- 
nions which hedid not entertain, in order 
to acquire the confidence and obtain 
the secrets of those who were inimical 
to the tyrant; that he had betrayed the 
nieetini>s and discussions which were 



C 103 ] 

held at Lord William 's hotel ; in 

coaseqaence of which his Lordship had 
been obliged to quit France immediately, 
though Yv'itliout being apprized who had 
been his accuser to Robespierre ; that 
Piassey found it necessary to confine 
liiinself entirely to his chateau, that he 
might, if possible^ escape the observation 
and attention of the savage who held the 
)eins of government, and his myrmidons; 
and that it would be essentially necessary 
for me to conceal myself with the greatest 
care, as any suspicion entertained by 
De Barras of my being under his pro- 
tection would be inevitable ruin to us 
both. 

'' For a fevv days I continued to be 
undisturbed in ray new retreat ; happy 
in the friendship and society of this ge- 
nerous man, and enjoying that feast of 
reason, and that flow of soul, which arise 
out of tlie conii^iunication of kindred 
spirits. 



[ 104 J 

** An unexpected tempest, however^ 
destroyed this halcyon scene. 

*' Early this morning Plassey left me, 
in order to attend a secret meeting of 
disaffected patriots in Paris, who are 
taking measures to destroy the present 
detestable dynasty of terror and tyranny. 

*' Shortly after his departure, a noise 
in the court-yard attracted my attention; 
and on looking out of the window, the 
first obje6l that met my eye was De 
Barras. 

'' He saw me before I could draw 
back, and exclaimed, *Ah! basilisk, 
have I at length discovered you ? You 
shall not again escape.' 

*' He then ordered the guard that 
attended him to search the house for 
Plassey, and immediately ascended to 
my apartment. 

*' For a moment my astonishment rob- 
bed me of my presence of mind; but be- 
fore he had entered the room in which I 



[ 105 ] 

was sitting, I had once more recovered m}'- 
selfj and was able to oppose his insolence 
with all my native dignity and pride." 

' Will you relent, INIatilda/ cried De 
Barras, * and quit the arms of a ruined 
conspirator for the protection of one 
who throws at your feet youth, power, 
and riches?' 

*' No, wretched apostate from all 
that's good and great," I replied. "The 
base betrayer of his friend, the mean 
traitor to those who trusted him, the 
hypocrite and the villain, can never ex- 
cite any other emotions in the soul of 
Matilda, than those of hatred and con- 
tempt. " 

' Die then, perverse fool, ' retorted De 
Barras, and thrcM' at my feet an order 
for my confinement and execution ; ' tl e 
guilliotine shallquickly mar those charms 
which you deny your lover.' 

" And gladly snail I Mclcome it," I 
exclaimed, " since it will save me from 



[ lOS ] 

the persecutions of one whom I detest, 
despise, and scorn. 

" Without making any reply, he im- 
mediately left the room, locking the door 
with the utmost violence; and soon after, 
I heard him give orders to the soldiers to 
watch the gates carefully; and the mo- 
ment they saw Philippe Plassey approach, 
to seize, secure, and bring him bound 
to him. 

'^ The whole day passed, however, 
without Plassey 's returning, or my suffer- 
ing any further interruption from De 
Barras; and the shades of night had 
already descended, when I heard a gentle 
tapping at the window of my room, which 
opened near the wall that surrounded 
the court. 

** I threw up the sash as quietly as I 
could, and perceived on the top of the 
wall Plassey's faithful little black boy 
Sancho, who. ;nalvinga sign of silence and 



[ lor ] 

secrecy, delivered a note into my hand, 
and immediately disappeared. 

*' The paper contained these words: 
* Be not alarmed, ano-elic o'irl. No evil 
will betide you, I am safe ; and before 
another morningdawn, the tyrant will be 
hurled into the dust; and all your fears 
sufferings will cease! Plassey. * 

** A few^ words will suffice for the re- 
mainder of my story. 

** Towards midnight, De Barras gave* 
orders for my immediate conveyance to 
tlie Conciergtrie; and we sliortly after, 
reached that prison, where the singular, 
adventure was in reserve for me of. 
meeting with a. captive brother in the 
cell destined for myself. 

** But your confinement shall not be 
of long duration ; as I before said, a few 
hours will again restore me to liberty and 
love ; and the first ad of Plassey's j)o\vcr 
shall be to free my brother. 



[ 108 ] 

'* Never, by heaven, never shall Ed- 
nuincl accept a boon, fovwhich his sister's 
honour is the price." 

' Noble, generous youth,' exclaimed 
Henry through the grate, unable longer 
to conceal himself, ' heir to all the vir- 
tues of my Caroline! No! let us rather 
perish by the executioner, than purchase 
a short disgraceful life by sanctioning 
the dishonour of our family. Oh! Ma- 
tilda, lost, undone Matilda, hear an uncle's 
prayer, that you would once more tread 
the paths of virtue ! Listen to the voice 
of reason, and the call of truth ; and let 
the banished Henry Fitzmordaunt, the 
dearest brother of thy mother, hear from 
your lips the glad sounds of penitence 
and sorrow for your apostacy, and he 
will die with pleasure. 

* Yes,' continued he, * I have listened, 
dear deluded girl, with horror and with 
j)ity to your story, and claim an uncle's 
right to censure and advise you. Ed- 



[ 109 ] 

muntVs simple tale too has agftated my 
soul, but with far different emotions; and 
the only pain which I now feel from my 
confinement is, that I cannot snatch 
him to my bosom, and tell him how I 
love him.' 

The astonishment of ]\Iatilda and 
Edmund at this unexpeded discovery 
of their uncle Henry so near them, and 
under similar circumstances with them- 
selves, was extreme. 

A few minutes, however, sufficed for 
mutual explanation; and the two young 
people were speedily satisfied, that the 
person who addressed them was that re- 
lation w^hom Edmund had seen and loved 
some years before at Herbert-Lodge, and 
whom Matilda had heard her mother 
often mention with the tenderest regard. 

But now was not the season of con- 
gratulation. 

Edmund's heart had been wrung with 
mingled sorrow and indignation by his 



[ 110 I 

sister's tale; and Henry sympathized in 
these feelings v/ith the most affedionate 
interest. 

Their united in treaties were addressed » 
to Matilda, that she would renounce the 
connection she had formed ; and by a 
sacrifice of every thing at the shrine of 
virtue, regain her peace, lestore her 
Ghara6ler,, and once more bring back 
that tenant of the bosom which she had 
lost, whose absence nothing can supply,. 
' — her self-rcspe6l. 

They recLiiled to her recollection the 
bitter grief of her sulfering mother, who 
was silently sinking under the shock of. 
her daughter's fall from virtue. 

They reminded her of those early les- 
^ns of piety, with which iier mind had; 
been stored, before she^ left the happy 
scenes of her infancy and childhood; 
and strove to awaken her to a. sense of 
her religious obligations, and to rowze.: 



[ 111 ] 

her to moral duty, by a remembrance 
of tliC awful sanctions which enforce it 
on the Christian's observation. 
But their efforts were in vain. 

* No,' returned IMatilda, in a solemn 
tone, and with a determined air ; * my 
mind is not to be influenced by the 
childish terrors which you have presented 
to my imagination. 

* There was a time perhaps when they 
might have operated on my sickly fancy, 
and raised a feeling of remorse within 
my bosom. But the reign of prejudice 
has long been over there. The silly no- 
tions with which a mother's education 
had begun to cloud my mind have faded 
away before the light of reason; and 
fashion has unfolded to my view the 
liberal unfettered system of happiness 
which she offers to her votaries. The 
feelings of my heart, and tlie dictates of 
my understand? ng, arc^ the only stand- 
ards by which i try actions ; nor do I 



[ 112 ] 

bkvsh to say, that whatever the warmth 
of the one has suggested, has always 
been confirmed hy the sandions of the 
otlier. 

'What!, return to England, to meet 
shame, disgrace, and. obloquy? Go 
back to a deserted home, to encounter 
reproaches and contempt ; to be the foil 
of my mother's pampered foundling ; to 
be the topic of conversation at every 
tea-table in the neighbourhood ; and the 
object for scorn to point the finger at, 
in all the surrounding villages. 

' No ! perish the idea! Rather would 
I spend all the remainder of my days 
in t4ie gloom and solitude of this horrid 
cell, than again set my foot in a country 
which is so unjust to our ill-treated sex, 
and so unmerciful to what it terms our 
greatest crime, 

' Insolent system of female oppres- 
sion, which brands with infamy the wan- 
derings of the heart, and the mistakes 



[ 113 ] 

of a too tender seii.'^ibility, in iinhapj.y 
woman ; and yet admits, eneourages, 
and applauds, an inlinitely more liecn- 
tious conducl in the other sex. 

' Xo ! let it be my lot to spend my 
days in gentler climes, and under the 
government of milder opinions; in a 
country where no tyrannical distinctions 
mark the inferiority of woman ; whci'e 
love has an unbounded range ; and plea- 
sure lights up every countenance with 
smiles, and tunes every heart to softness 
and sensibility. 

* Nor let me disguise my natural pro- 
pensities. I own that I pant after afflu- 
ence and power; not for their own sakes, 
indeed; my soul disdains the idea; but 
as the means of procuring those enjoy- 
ments, -without which life to me would 
be a dull insipid round. ■ 

' ]\Iy heart, too, doats on the delights 
of fashion ; and the splendour, gaiety, 
and joy which attend her footseps, will 



r n-t ] 

be cliea])ly purchased by the loss of 
the esteem of M^hat you are pleased to 
rail the virtuous and the good. Nor let 
Diy uncle ' 

A tremendous shout from without in- 
terrupted Matilda at this moment ; the 
door of the prison was suddenly burst 
open, and several armed men entered 
the apartment. 

** Joy, Madam," cried the foremost ; 
** the tyrant is dethroned, and will 
shortly die. De Barras, your persecutor, 
has fallen by the dagger. Plassey is 
busied with the council, but has sent aa 
escort to conduft you to him. We wait 
your orders." 

* Ah,' said Matilda^ whilst pleasure 
flushed her countenance, and sparkled 
in her large full eye, ^ I thought my 
hero would perform his promise. Wel- 
come liberty and triumph. 

* No, Edmund, your sister was not 
formed for dull domestic virtue. Her 



[ y:5 J 

soul disdains the shackles which sour 
niorahats have forged for vulgar minds. 
Nature, Vvdio spreads a wide unbounded 
field of pleasure before her children, 
has said to them, er,joy\ and where is 
the authority that shall forbid the privi- 
lege: Matilda will not own a power 
that stands between herself and hap« 
piness ; nor sufter any gloomy phan- 
toms of tlie imagination to scare away 
enjoyment from her grasp. 

* I go, brother, to resume my station 
in that scene of life for which my warm 
aspiring mind is formed ; but before 1 
part with you and Mr. Fitmordaunt/or 
tver, I would willingly be the instrument 
of restoring you to freedom. A word 
from Plassey will open to you the door 
of your prison. K breath from me will 
influence him to speak it. The times 
are tempestuous; and the sudden ca- 
price of an unmanageable mob may hurry 
the inhabitants of these gloomy cells to 



[ 116 ] 

Immediate execution. Will you be saved 
from danger, and freed from apprehen- 
sion? Will you accept from my pro- 
teftor that liberty and life which he has 
given to your sister?' 
. ^'Nol" replied Edmund,, witli vehe- 
mence, and almost choaked by confliol- 
ing emotions — 

. ** No! welcome captivity, torture, and 
death ; if, to be rescued from them, I 
must sacrifice the claims of virtue, or 
forego the laws of honour ! Oh wretched, 
lost, polluted girl, gladly would I this 
moment relinquish life and all its hopes^ 
to brmg thee back to innocence and 
peace. But since a fatal blindness has 
seized upon your mind, and enslaved 
you to. sentiments as false as they are 
destru(?l:ive ; all I can give you is my sor- 
row and compassion ; whilst I renounce 
with horror and detestation the accept- 
ance of a favour, that must plunge a 
ister still deeper in guilt and ruin." 



V0^- 



I 117 ] 

* Enjoy, then, the comforts of your 
system,' returned Matilda, whilst anger 
flashed from her eye ; * the fool that can 
prefer a name to a realhy, a shadow to 
a substance, deserves all the disappoint- 
ment and chagrin which his perverse 
■choice must heap upon him. Farewell, 
for ever. ' 

Thus saying; she hurried from the 
chamber, and stepping into a chariot 
that waited for her at the door, drove 
rapidly oif to the hotel of Plasty. 

The conversation which now took 
place between Henry and his nephew 
■was of the most interetsting nature. 

The sad apostacy of Matilda furnished 
■no inconsiderable part of it, and whilst 
they lamented that so much loveliness 
and talent should have fallen a prey to 
the libertinism of a fashionable educa- 
cation, Mr. Fitzmordaunt seized the op- 
portunity of coiifirming the excellent 
principles which Edmund had avowed to 



[ 118 ] 

his shter; and of expressing- tlie happi- 
ness he had experienced in finding so 
much worth and excellence in a relation 
whom he so greatly loved. He re- 
counted also to Edmund the sad but in- 
teresting story of his own misfortunes ; 
and received in return all the particulars 
of his nephew's tale; the conduct of 
his father, and the sacrifice Edmund 
liad made of Iiis own independence to 
saves him from ruin ; the sorrow of his 
mother; and the tender preference he 
entertained for that amiable orphan Avho 
had so deeply engaged the attention and 
affedion of ^h\ Fitzmordaunt, when he 
was at Herbert- Lodge. 

A mutual sympathy filled the bosoms 
of these affedlionate relatives, and the 
reciprocal consolations which they of- 
fend to each other seemed to invigorate 
the spirits and restore tlie confidence of 
both. The chano*e whicii had now 
taken place in the ruling powers of 



[ 119 1 

France appeared also to hold out the 
prospect of a release from their impri- 
sonmeat, and thev could at lens-th talk 
of plans to be adopted when they should 
obtain their liberty. 

It had been tlie secret intention of 
Mr. Fitzniordaunt, during: the wliole of 
his connnenicnt, that, should he escape 
iVom it with life, he would immediately 
endeavour to trace the foundation of 
those niystenous words of De Bourdon, 
which he had uttered in the moment 
when only truth could dictate what he 
said, and m hich had rekindled in Henry's 
bosom the extinguished hope of Ade- 
laide being still alive. 

He had resolved on the most diligent 
and patient enquiry after this treasure of 
his affections ; and if it failed of success, 
again to sail to America, without visit- 
ing any other Kuropcan country. Ed- 
mund, to whom he communicated his 
intentions, approved highly of the former 



[ i"-o ] 

part of the determination. He Gonsi- 
dered the extraordinary particulars of 
the narrative as justifying- the hope that 
De Bourdon's daughter might, by some 
unexpected chance, have been saved 
from that ties trutlion which seemed in- 
deed inevitable at the time; and he 
immediately made the offer to his uncle, 
(in case of their liberation, j of devoting 
himself as his companion in a search of 
io much importance to his happiness. 
But as far as !Mr. Fitzmordaunt's plan 
regarded a return to America, Edmund 
earnestly objected to its execution. He 
pointed out to him the probability of Sir 
Charles having been affected by the 
sudden revolution which had just then 
taken place, and in the tumult of the 
times having either fallen a sacrifice to 
the rage of the party that was now up- 
permost, and whom his own violence 
had irritated against him, or become, 
like them, the inhabitant of a prison ; 



[ 121 ] 

and of the nece^isity there would be, in 
either of such cases, for ]\lr. Fitzmor- 
daunt's presence in England, in order to 
assert his claim to the vacant title and 
estate. He dwelt upon the comfort 
which her brother's presence would af- 
ford to the unfortunate Mrs. Herbert, 
Avlio had' now to support herself under 
the cutting sorrow of a dishonoured 
daughter; and with all the energy of a 
mind deeply wounded with a sense of the 
atrocity of Sir Charles's conduct, he 
vehemently urged his uncle to an appli- 
cation, for justice and retribution, to the 
^aws of his country ; wliich, he pledged 
himself, under the circumstances of the 
case, would sanction all his claims. 

The n'enerous ard(;ur of Edmund was 
irresistible; and his uncle had just ac- 
ceded to his wish, w!ien both the apart- 
ments were unlocked, and a discharge 
was announced for all th.e Enghshmen 
confined within them. The aife<?tionate 

VOL. in. cr 



[ 122 ] 

relations were now permitted nearer in- 
tercourse; they flew into each other's^ 
arms, and having minged their tears 
and gratulations, retired from the hate- 
ful scene of their confinement to adopt 
those plans which they had determined 
upon in their previous conversation. 



hx. 



[ ^^^ 3 



CHAPTER ly. 



TV yfR. and ]\frs. Stan more, and their 
-^^-*' fair guest, iladame Henri, were 
prepared for their departure from Bath, 
a few days after IVIrs, Herbert had bden 
re(juested by a letter from that gentle- 
man to make the ]vIanor-House the place 
of her present residence ; but an accident 
having happened to their coach, in re- 
turning one morning from a ride, the 
ladies were under the necessity of remain- 
ing a week longer in their lodgings, in 
order that it might be repaired before 
it travelled into Hampshire. 
G 2 



[ 124 1 

Anxious, however, that Mrs. Herbert 
might enjoy as soon as possible that 
comfort and consolation which the sym- 
pathy of a kind friend can alone pour 
into the bosom of affli6lion, Mrs. Stan- 
more prevailed upon her husband to pro- 
ceed immediately to the Manor, and 
leave Madame Henri and herself to fol- 
low as soon as the carriao-e should be 
returned from the coach-maker's. He 
accordingl}^ set out in a post-chaise very 
early one morning, accompanied by his 
valet, intending to reach his home, if 
possible, the same night. 

His journey was uninterrupted till 
within thirty miles of the Manor, when 
he began to find some difficulty in- pro- 
curing horses, in consequence of a gene- 
ral ele6lion, which had engaged all the 
public carriages, and thrown the country 
into confusion for some days past. This 
circumstance rendered it late in the 
evening before he arrived at the last 



I V13 ] 

stage of his road, where he was informed, 
that not a single post-cliaise horse was 
in the stables, nor any expected liome 
for some liours. 

<< Very perplexing, indeed,'' said Mr. 
Stanu^ore; ** but have you nothing, my 
good friend, tliat you can put me and 
my servant upon, to enable us to get a 
night's lodging at our own home; for I 
see you can afford us none here?" 

* Lord love your heart, sir,' replied 
the man, ' you know you should be as 
welcome to any thing I have as my own 
father. Nobody will refuse any thing 
to Squire Stanmore; but if I were to 
give my life for it, I have only our fo- 
rester Bob in the stable. I'd bet a pint, 
however, that he'd trot to the Manor 
with you in an hour. And as for John, 
why, I'll put 'en upon the letter-carrier's 
horse, who'll be here in a quarter of an 
hour, and he may folio ^v your honour 
as fast as he can. I never was so put 



[ ^26 ] 

to it in all my life to provide company 
with cattle. 'Tisn't half an hour ago, 
that a great man, a baronet, I believe, 
came in with four horses, which he had 
driven two stages, because he couldn't 
get changes at the last. He wanted to 
go to Herbert-Lodge, and put himself- 
in a cursed passion because I couldn't 
furnish 'en with horses; but, I told 'en 
'twas no use, for I couldn't make 'em. 
He swore, however, lie'd get on, some- 
iiow or other; so I sent out and borrowed 
I'.eigiibour Giblet the butcher's horse, 
ibr I wouldn't trust Bob with such a tur- 
bulent cliap. Here, Tom, saddle the 
poneyforhis honour Mr. Stanmore; and 
as. soon as Bill, the maii-boy, comes in, 
gi' liis nag a few oats, and let John ha' 
'en to follow his master. Coming, co- 
ming. I heartily wish your iionour a 
good ride. I believe they'll hurry me 
to death.' 



[ V27 ] 

Air. Stanmore returned his best tlianks 
to old llosv-face, for the proof he had 
conferred on him of his confidence and 
friendship ; and having snatched a slight 
refresliment, mounted Bob, and took the 
road to Stanmore ]\Ianor. lie soon per- 
ceived that his friend had not spoken in 
too partial terms of his favourite pad, 
Vrho trotted on with great spirit, and 
would soon have brought him to the 
end of his journey ; but the beauty of 
the night would not allow Mr. Stanmore 
to pursue it with such rapidity. One 
wide expanse of glory surrounded him; 
and all thoughts of the lateness of the 
hour were lost in admiration of the won- 
derful scene: 

" Now glowed the fi-rmament 
" With living sapphires ; Hespems, that led 
«< The starry host, rode brightest, till the moon 
" Rising in clouded majesty, at length, 
" Apparent queen, unveiled her peerless light, 
♦* And o'er the dark, her silver mantle threw." 



t 128 ] 

'* AhV 'whispered Mr. Stanmore to 
himself, '^ how magnificent is this scene 1 
how apparent are infinite power and 
wisdom in each of its stupendous fea- 
tures ! Who can look up to this en- 
chanting canopy; and not exclaim, *the 
hand that made it is divine?' How deep 
too is the repose which reigns around ! 
How sweetly calculated to still each wild 
emotion, and soothe each rankling care 1 
Ah ! what a lovely contrast does it afford 
to the tempestuous state of the moral 
world, v/here all is anarchy and din ; 
where passion and vice obliterate the 
seeds of peace and order, which God 
himself has sown ; and transform a pa- 
radise into a waste and howling wilder-, 
.ness. Ah, wherefore will not man catch 
Y/isdom from his great Creator's M'orks ; 
and instead of living only to destroy the 
general harmony, co-operate with Hun 
who gave him being, in striving to pro- 
mote tranquillity and joy; and in shed- 



[ 129 ] 

ding on all around him friendship, bene- 
volence, and love!"' 

Whilst amused with these contempla- 
tions, the sound of voices gradually 
increased upon him. They issued from 
behind a brake, which he approached, 
and from their angry tone, seemed to 
be little in unison with the sentiments 
which occupied his mind. 

^' Tis fa]s€ as hellj" cried one of the 
speakers; 'Mou know your orders were 
that I should dispatch tlie child at any 
rate; and hadn't it been for God's good- 
ness, who put some compassion into my 
heart, I sliouid now have had to answer 
for the guilt of murder. Didn't you 
more than once too endeavour to per- 
suade me to assist to assassinate my 
master, betore you fixed upon the plan 
of carrying olf I-ady Adelaide in the 
Forest; and would you not have sunk 
me deeper in danmation if you could, 



[ 130 ] 

by making me bis murderer on the night 
we put him on board the smuggler ?" 

Mr. Stanmore's servant now rode up, 
and his master, ahnost breathless with 
impatience and amazement, having made 
a sign to him for silence, drew gradually 
nearer to the covert, and again listening 
attentively, perceived that the conver- 
sation was carried on by two persons. 
To the voice of one he was a stranger; 
but he soon found, to his surprize, that 
the other speaker was no other than 
Sir Charles Fitzmordaunt. The baronet 
seemed to be endeavouring to soothe and 
compose the person he conversed with ; 
and spoke therefore, in a lower tone, so 
that Mr. Stanmore could not collect the 
tenor of what he said ; but every syl- 
lable which th€ other uttered, was caught 
by his ear, and awakened still more his 
curiosity and wonder. 

*'' No," replied the stranger, to some- 
thing Sir Charles bad said to him, ** I 



[ 131 ] 

would not carry about with me the wicked 
secret for another week,- if you'd give 
me the Indies. 'Tis too late now to try 
any more your damned arts upon me. 
Had you performed your promise, and 
supplied me with money, you might have 
trusted me, and I wouldn't have betrayed 
you. But, I thank God, you didn't do 
it; for 'tis to that I owe it, that I have 
been able to see my ^fickedness, and 
(I hope) to repent of it in time. Not 
getting the promised su})ply from you, 
I was carried to gaol by my creditors ; 
and had there leizure for some months 
to refle(^ upon my past life and the con- 
sequences of it. There 1 first saw my 
damnable wickedness, and began to fear 
tlie punishment it deserved. There I 
hrst determined to make all the amends 
in my power, as soon as I got out, to those 
I had injured, by acquainting Mrs. Her- 
bert of the cheat \ve had put on the 
world, — that, the title and estates of tlie 



[ 132 ] 

late Sir Gilbert Fitzmordaunt belonged 
to Mr. Henry, instead of you; — that, 
you were an impostor, and my brother, 
instead of his ; who had been secretly 
received as her son by the late Lady 
Fitzmordaunt, in the room of a still-born* 
child; — that, I had been your wicked 
instrument in all your plots and contri- 
vances; a traitor to my master, poor 
Mr. Flenry, and betrayed him when he 
carried off his lady ; an accomplice in 
kidjaapping and sending liim into sla- 
very ; and the wicked exposer of his 
infant child. I shouldn't indeed have 
had an opportunity of acquitting my 
conscience by making such a confession, 
hadn't my wife's cousin taken compas- 
sion on my situation, and released me 
from my confinement by paying my 
debts. 1 was no sooner out of prison, 
however, than I resolved to unburthen 
my mind, and make my peace with 
God without delay, and set out imme- 



[ 13.3 j 

diately for ]Mrs. Herbert's house for that 
purpose. Nor shall any thing you can 
say prevent me from doing' what I in- 
tended. You would ruin, I know, if 
you could, my soul as well as my body ; 
but I trust in God that will find mercy, 
and as for the other I care but little what 
becomes of it." 

i-^stonishment riveted Mr. Stanmore 
to the spot on which he stood : he trem- 
bled with a variety of emotions ; nor had 
he any power either to speak or discover 
himself 

In the mean time, Sir Charles seemed 
to be earnestly endeavouring to mollify 
the other, and prevail upon him to 
change his resolution. 

* A thousand a year, — half his for- 
tune, — the Northamptonshire estate, — 
an establishment in France;' were suc- 
cessively offered without t^t6i, 

*' No, no ;" was the reply, '' my soul's 
at stake, and nothing shall bribe me to 



[ 134 ] 



sink it lower in perdition. By all that's 
good, ril tell the whole." 

^Then it shall be in hell T cried Fitz- 
mordaunt in a voice of frantic rage, as 
lie leaped upon his brother. 

* Thou shalt not live, damned vi])er, 
to blast my fortune, and triumph o'er 
my falh' 

The noise of a fierce struggle between 
the parties instantly ensued, mingled 
and deepened by the cries of the stranger 
and the blasphemiesof Sir Charles, which 
were succeeded in a few moments by 
hollow groans: — Mr. Stanmore and his 
servant now rushed to the spot. 

The bright radiance of the moon ren- 
dered every object perfedly visible, and 
they discovered Sir Charles Fitzmordaunt 
bleeding and panting on the turf; 'whilst 
his antagonist was rising with difficulty 
from the ground, grasping in his right 
hand a bloodv knife. 



I 135 ] 

*^ Here is murder, John," said ^h\ 
Staniiiore; '* secure tlie villain, who has 
committed the atrocious act." 

* No, sir,' said the stranger with 
quickness, 'I am not a murderer! — 
That I am a false and wicked villain, I 
Avill not deny; but blood has never wil- 
lingly stained niy Imnds. 

' The wretched man who lies before 
you, and is my brother, assaulted me 
with an intent to take away my life. In 
the struggle that followed, 1 snatcJied 
this clasp-knife from his hand, which 
he, in endeavouring to recover it, forced 
accidentally into his own groin. 

* This is the simple truth of the story. 
I am ready to go with you, sir, wherever 
you please; but let me beg of you to 
give this miserable man some assistance, 
as I have enough un happiness on my 
mind already, and do not wish to have 
in addition to it the death of my bro- 



[ 136 ] 

ther, though it was entirely uninten- 
tional.' 

Mx, StanmorCj giving orders to John 
to secure the stranger, turned to Sir 
Charles. 

He breatlied, but seemed to be insen- 
sible; blood still streamed from liis wound, 
and his eyes were closed. 

At this moment the cait of a peasant 
drove up, who M'as going with the pro- 
duce of his farm to an early market in 
a neighbouring town. 

He knew Justice Stanmore immedi- 
ately, and readily agreed to receive the 
injured man into his vehicle, and carry 
liim to the i\Ianor-House. 

Having therefore staunched the bleed- 
ing, and applied a bandage to the wound, 
Mr. Stanmoie direded Sir Charles to be 
lifted gently into the bed of the cart, 
and conveyed to his residence, which 
was not more than two or three miles 
distant: whilst his antagonist, being 



L 137 ] 

mounted on the horse of the wounded 
baronet, accompanied the vehicle ; Mr. 
Stanmore and his servant riding on 
each side of him, in order to prevent his 
escape. 

The procession moved on in solemn 
silence; for the thoughts of each indi- 
vidual were too much occupied to admit 
of conversation. 

A thousand ideas crowded into the 
mind of Mr. Stanmore, caviled up by 
the dark plots of iniquity which the con- 
versation he had just listened to un- 
folded ; and reflexions on the past and 
anticipations of the future, hopes and 
fears, doubts and convi6iions, alternately 
presented themselves, and kept liim in 
a state of tumultuous agitation, that 
coiirpletely occupied liis attention till the 
party reached the gate of his mansion. 

The clock had struck two before their 
arri\al ; and as the family were just then 
ewgaged in their quarterly brewing, 



i 138 ] 

several of the servants were already up, 
so that the wounded man was immedi- 
ately carried to a chamber, a surgeon 
sent for, and the prisoner lodged in a 
secure apartment, without any particular 
noisC;, or in the least disturbing the la- 
dies at the Manor, who Mr. Stanmore 
was anxious should hear nothing of the 
events which had occurred, till the en- 
suing morning. 

His precautions were efFeftual. Mrs. 
Herbert rested quietly till her usual hour 
of rising, when a gentle tapping at her 
door awakened her from a pleasing vision, 
in which she had been carried back to 
scenes of former happiness, and intro- 
duced again to joys that had long been 
flown. 

'^ Who is tliere?" cried Mrs. Herbert. 

' Ah, dear madam, 'cried Dame Wheat- 
ley, opening the door, ^ I hope you will 
forgive me for coming in upon you at 
so unseasonable a time; but 1 couldn't 



L i3y J 

hold out any longer, and was determined 
to tell you the news myself. 

' Oh, lack-a-day, to think I should 
Jive to see such turns.' 

A fit of crying prevented the old mo- 
man from proceeding, whilst ^Irs. Her- 
bert was lost in wonder and impatience 
at her language and unexpeded ap- 
pearance. 

^* For heaven's sake, Dame, what is 
the matter? Why these tears, wild looks, 
and swollen eyes? How happens it too 
that you are thus early at the Manor? 
What new distress have I to apprehend? 
Do ease my anvious fears by telling me 
at once the worst." 

* Nay, my dear mistress,* returned 
Dame Wheatley, wiping her eyes, 'don't 
alarm yourself; I dichi't mean to frighten 
you; tliough to be sure, murder will out,, 
as they say; and wickedness such as that 
couldn't alwavs be concealed/ 



[ 140 3 

*^ IVIurder andwickedness!" exclaimed 
Mrs. Herbert, still more shocked; ** what 
dreadful secret are you labouring with ? 
Pray be explicit, my good friend, and 
relieve my mind from the painful sus- 
pense which you have excited." 

* There don't ye, don't ye put yourself 
in a quandary now, I beseech you, 

' To be sure, no one v/ould have 
thought it ; but God won't let iniquity 
pass unpunished. 

' 'Tis all the better for Mister Henry, 
and whether a' dies or not, he must now 
be the baronet. ' 

*' Who die ?'' exclaimed Mrs. Her- 
bert, almost breathless. 

^ Why Sir Charles, to be sure ; Sir 
Charles that was, I mean ; the brother 
of our Jacob. Oh, the Father, v/hat 
shall I do ?' 

Another flood of tears now fell from 
the old woman, to which Mrs. Herbert 



[ 1^1 ] 

gave undisturbed course; convinced 
that her feelings required such a relief. 

In a few moments, however, she again 
dried her eyes, and being more com- 
posed, proceeded. 

' As I was saving;, mv dear mistress, 
this beino- brewino'-dav at the Manor, 
and John being here to assist, I came 
early this morning to speak to 'en about 
one of the cov>'s, that's a little queerish. 

'^ Lord, mother, says he, there's ter- 
rible work here. AVe a' got a robber 
and a murdered man in the house ; and 
the justice is coming down to try "em 
both presently. 1 can shew you one of 
*em, if you've a mind to see 'en."' 

^ I'm mortal afeard of wicked people. 
I confess, madam ; but somehow or other 
my curiosity prevailed ; and so leaning- 
one hand on Jenny, and the other on 
my stick, I hobbled up stairs into the 
back wardrobe, where the prisoner was 



[ U2 ] 

conlined ; John following behind, to 
prevent 'en from hurting us. 

* This, however, was out of his power, 
poor wretch ; for he had a pair of hand- 
cuffs round his wrists, and was lying his 
face upon the table, covered wi' his 
hands. 

^ There wal a good deal of vi6tuals 
by 'en ; but a' had no appetite to 
taste it. 

* A' started up, and turned his head 
toward the door when we entered ; but, 
good LoTtl, what a feel came all over 
me, when I looked in his face, and saw 
'twas no other than Jacob Vincent, the 
wicked seducer of my poor Betty ! 

* I screamed out his name, and should 
have fell upon the ground with fright, 
had not John supported me. 

' He, poor lad, too, was hardly him- 
self, when a' found out who the man 
was ; and doubling his fist, went up to 



E us ] 

'en wi' so fierce a look, that I thought 
for my life a' meant to have killed 'en. 

' He saw a' was bound, however, and 
therefore woudu't strike 'en ; so a' 
only said, '* Jacob, Jacob, is this the 
end of all thy wickedness? But what 
better could be expeded from the vil- 
lain who murdered my poor innocent 
sister?" 

'Oh, John,' cried the other, while a' 
groaned as if his heart would burst, * I 
am not a murderer. Call me any thing 
you please, but that : 'tis the only ^in 
that does not lye upon my conscience.' 

''What do you call it but murder?" 
said John. " The poor girl never held 
up her head after you forsook her. The 
neighbours scoffed at her, her compa- 
nions twitted her, and she died broken- 
hearted, after bringing poor Jenny here 
into the world." 

' What,'* cried Jacob, whilst his face 
coloured like fire, and the tears burst 



[ 



[ U4 ] 

from his eyes, ' is this my child .'^ tlie 
daughter of my dear Betty VVheatley ? 

' Ah ! well mav you turn away from 
your wicked wretched father. He de- 
serves to be forsaken of every one; nor 
' can expe6l to be acknowledged even by 
his child.' 

'' Oh, granny," said Jenny, weeping, 
^' what can I dor" 

' Go and kiss your father, child,' said 
T. ' He has been a naughty man; but 
he is still j/oz^r parent' 

''Yes, Mrs. Wheatley, reproach me 
as you please," said Jacob; ''I more 
than deserve it all. My heart breaks 
with sorrow for my crimes. But oh, 
forgive me ! Forgive me too, my bro- 
ther ; forgive me, my only child. God 
has promised pardon to the penitent and 
sorrowful; do not then refuse me j/0M7X 
" Oh! that my future life make amends 
for my past sins, and restore me to his 
favour, and your love." 



[ 145 } 

' Our hearts were melted, my dear 
madam, by his worcfc; and tears. We all 
cried together, and 'twas some time b^--' 
fore we had power to speak. 

' But what Jacob then told us, surpri- 
sed us more than what had already passed. 

* 'A told us, ma'am, that Sir Charles, 
as we a' called him, is the wickedest of 
all wicked men ; that he is Jacob's eldest 
brother, instead of being a baronet. 

* That Mister Henry has a right to th^ 
title and estates. 

' That Sir Gilbert Fitzmordaunt's wife 
had a dead child when her husband was 
from home, and she, knowing Sir Gilbert 
was unhappy for want of a son, had 
ao-reed to receive as her own an infant 
of Jacob's mother, who happened to lye 
in at the same wi' herself ; that this in- 
fant was Charles, who did not know "his 
own history, till Lady Fitzmordaunt told 
it 'en on her death-bed ; that Jacob 
after v.ards found it out from his own 

nfou III. II 



t 146 ] 

^ying mother ; but was prevented from 
telling the secret by some large sums 
which he received from his brother, 
and some still larger promises that he 
juade to 'en, but never performed. 

VThat prevailed upon by his devilish 
arts to endeavour to get rid of Henry, 
he betrayed en, when he had entered 
into his sarvice in France; that he was 
one of a party who attacked 'en, wlien 
he was travelling wi' his wife in the New 
Forest ; that he trepanned 'en afterwards 
on board ship, an-d sent 'en to be a slave 
in foreign parts abroad ; and would you 
believe it, that he was employed by the 
baronet (God forgive me, I mean that 
wicked wretch we have so long called 
Sir Charles) to kill Mister Henry's 
infant child; but that having more 
compassion than his devilish brother, he 
v/ould'nt shed its blood, and so dropped it 
in the Forest, just when it pleased God 
that / (aye, madam, I don't wonder at 



[ 1*7 ] 

• 

your trembling so) should come that 
^vay to take it under my prote(5lion.' 

' Lord help me, how little did Jenny 
and I think that twas her father from 
v/hom we received the little Mary' 

*' Gracious Heaven!" exclaimed Mrs. 
Herbert, panting with tender sensibi- 
bility, ''and is my dear adopted child 
the daughter of my beloved Henry?" 

' Yes, madam, as sure as you be 
there; and Jacob told us also, that 'a 
never should ha' left our Betty, but his 
wicked mother, who had gi'd away her 
own child to Lady Fitzmordaunt, per- 
suaded en, because t'other girl, for- 
sooth, had more money nor my poor 
daughter. Yes, Ma'am, she'd fiftypounds 
down upon the nail ; and twenty ' 

'• Oh, my dear dame, do pardon me, 
if I cannot now listen to the particulars 
of his match. ^ly heart burns to un- 
burthen its joy and gratitude in the 
bosom of that affectionate girl, whom I 
II 2 



[ 148 ] 

ca;n henceforth consider us claiming 
from me the love of a relation, as well as 
the attachment of a friend." 

^ Why aye, to be sure, dear madam, 
as you say, she does owe every thing to 
you, that's sartin. 

' I only saved her from starving wi' 
eodd and hunger; but your kindness, 
wi' God's blessing, has saved her soul, 
by bringing her up like a christian lady. 

-^ I taught her, indeed, all I could, 
but then she was too young to learn 
much ; and if she'd bid wi' me, and been 
as good as I could ha' made her, and I 
sliould ha' prayed morning and night 
that she might; yet poverty, you know, 
is full of temptations, and she'd ha' 
come far short of v/hat she now is by 
following your good lessons and example 

' Who knows, indeed, but she might 
ha' met wi' another Jacob Vincent, and 
been ruined, and died ^\'\ a broken 
iieart, like our poor Betty. 



C 1^9 ] 

* Alack-a-day; I never think of tire 
clear cinlcl even now, but my lieart 
seems ready to Inirst.' 

Tortunately for Mrs. Herbert, Tv-ho 
Avas agonized with impatienee, and yet 
too tender of the feelings of the good 
old ^roman to \vouncl tliem by an al)riipt 
dismissal of her,) a servant now ra|-j)cd 
at the door, and presented a message 
from Mr. Stanmore, announcing liis ar- 
rival at the Manor, and requesting tlie 
favour of her company in the breakfast- 
pa il our. 

She took the opportunity, therefore, of 
biddingDameWheatlcy adieu, with many 
expressions of regard and consolation, 
and a few hints respecting the behavi- 
our it would be necessary for her to adopt 
towards her lately-discovered son-in-law; 
whom, from liis sorrow and repentance, 
she had no licsitation in pronouncing to 
be deserving lier pardon and notice. 



[ 150 ] 

Mr. Staninore's countenance I'lowed 
with kindness and beneficence as he pre- 
sented his hand to Mrs. Herbert^ when 
she entered the room. 

^'Oh, my dear sir, " said slie, wliilst;- 
her head sunk upon his shoulder, " liow 
shall I acknowledge the obligations 
which your goodness has imposed upoa 
me?" 

^ Name not the subje6l, I charge 
you, my dear madam,' returned Mn 
Slanmore ; ' you have conferred the 
highest favour upon me, by accepting 
my protection. Tis the best proof you 
could afford me of your friendship; and 
who would not be honoured by enjoying 
the confidence of Mrs. Herbert? 

* But, my dear madam, matters of 
o'reater moment demand our attention. 

* You have, I presume, learned from 
Dame Wheatlcy, most of the adventures 
of the preceding night; and been ap- 
prized that the atrocious villain who Uas 



[ 151 3 

sa long usurped the title and estates of 
youv estimable brother, is now in the 
house, in a state of considerable danger 
from a wound which he received in a 
quarrel with a man whom we have 
discovered to be his real brother, as well 
as the tool of his former villainy. 

* I have had an interview with him 
since his revival from the state of insen- 
sibility in which we brought him here ; 
but though he is aware that we afe all 
fully apprized of the imposition and 
fraud which he has so long carried on; 
yet he refuses to throw any light on the 
subjed by his own confession, and main- 
tains a sullen silence on that head, which 
seems to predict a bold disavowal, rather 
than a penitentdeclai*ation of his iniquity. 

* I shall, however, endeavour to pre- 
pare against all his artifices, and have 
no doubt of convicling him, should he 
recover, of all his villainous pra6lices. 
I have already taken Jacob's examina- 



t 152 ] 

tioh upon oatbj and liberated him from 
confinement; as the testimony of myselt' 
and servant can establish the fa6t that 
tb/e wound was inflicted in defending bis 
life agaiiTst the assault of bis companion. 

* It must be your business, my dear 
•madam, immediately to v/rite to youV 
brother in America; apprize him how 
affairs are circumstanced, and request 
him to return to England with all expe- 
dition, to make that claim which I am 
confident facts will confirm, and the law 
support. In the mean time we will take 
care so to arrange every previous matter, 
as shall facilitate bis success wben he 
takes the business into his own hands.' 

The footman at this moment entered 
the room, and infoimcd Mr. Stanmorc 
-that Sir Charles (as lie called him) re- 
quested the use of pen and paper; as bis 
surgeon, after a second sight of the 
Avound, had pronounced favourably upon 
it, and allowed him to v/rite and read. 



[ 1:.3 ] 

!Mr. Stan more folloNved the man into 
his study, to comply with the request, 
and left ?slrs. Herbert to a short interval 
of silence and solitude, which the con- 
fusion of her ideas, and the vivacity of 
Iicr feelings, rendered almost necessary 
to the preservation of her reason. 

]\Iary, the daughter of her brother,, 
tlie child of his adored Adelaide, res- 
cued from destruction, and placed under 
liiC protection of that relati(m who alone- 
could supply the tender attentions of its ^ 
lost parents ! 

Henry, suddenly recalled from hope-- 
Icss exile, to the enjoyment of afHuence 
and honours, the sweet intercourse of 
fraternal love, and the rapturous feelings 
of a father^ when every expeftation of ' 
such joys had long faded from his> 
bosom ! 

]\Iysterious Heaven ! Wluii words > 
were adequate to express tiie wonder- 
and praise of Mrs. Herbert's soal^ v. hen 



[ 154 3 

the tide of such merciful vicissitudes 
passed rapidly before her recolle6lion ! 

With what gratitude and adoration 
was her heart borne up to Heaven, as 
memory traced the succession of events 
that Providence had planned, to soothe 
her sorrows, and relieve her difficulties 1 

'^ Yes," cried she, as she sunk upon 
INIary's neck, who now rushed into the 
apartment, and flew into her arms ; 
*' yes, beloved offspring of my dearest 
Henry; 'tis to his goodness, the bene- 
ficent Guardian of his creatures, and to 
that alone, we owe this flood of joy, 
this burst of sunshine on our clouded 
fortunes. 

*' Praise be to Him, the orphan's fa- 
ther, and the widow's friend, for this 
succour in the time of need ! 

''Oh! may we never cease to love 
and to adore ^/^a^ Power, whose mercy 
has given a father to my Mary ; and by 
a discovery which his providence alone 



[ 155 ] 

could dire6l, has ensured proteclion and 
support to her, when 1 shall be no more. 

^'But come, my child, let us seek 
some spot of solitude and stillness, where 
we may, unobserved, pour forth the 
feelings of our gratitude; and converse 
undisturbed on that wonderful train of 
circumstances, which has opened new 
prospers to our view, and still more 
firmly united our hearts together, by a 
new, a closer, and a dearer tie. 

''The quiet of a woodland walk will 
compose our spirits, and give us leisure 
to regard with more steadiness the ex-- 
traordi^iary occurrences of the last few 
hours. 

" Besides, we shall have the pleasure 
of communicating them to Dr. Fairford, 
and consulting with him on the steps it 
may be necessary for me to take on the 
unlooked-for events," 

Mary, whose heart was bursting wFth 
emotion, joyfully assented to a proposal 



[ 156 ] 

that would give her an oppoit unity of 
expressing her feelings without tlie ob- 
servation of those Vvho were not so 
deeply interested in them as herself; 
and whe nthey reached the rectory, and 
were pressed by the Doctor to remain 
there for the day, she earnestly united 
in his request, that a servant might be 
sent to the I\Ianor, to excuse their ab- 
sence from Mr. Stanmore and his daugh- 
ter at dinner-time. 

The society of Dr. Fairford was every- 
way calculated to allay the ferment of 
Mrs. Herbert's spirits. 

The tempered vivacity of his manner, 
and the agreeable animation of his con- 
versation, diffused cheerfidness around 
liim ; whilst his benevolence inspired af- 
fection ;. his v\'isdom, confidence; and 
his piety, respect. 

** Have Inot often told you, my ex- 
cellent friend," said he, as the smile of 
philanthropy played upon his couute- 



[ 1^7 1 

nance, ''that there was much good iii 
store for you? and predicted, that tlie 
clouds would at length disperse, and let 
in upon your mind scenes of joy and 
comfort at the last? 

" You see I liavc more than common 
claims to the charader of a prophet; 
and should be justified in inflicting some 
exemplary punishment upon you, for the 
incredulity with which you have listened 
to my assertions. 

*' But I spare you at present; and only 
insist upon it, that when I in future am 
exercising Uiy skill, and speaking of 
your deserts, and their probable rewards, 
you will not consider me as an authority 
inferior in prescience to the editor of 
]\Ioore"s celebrated yVlmianack, or the- 
illustrious. Mr. Partridge of prophetic 
fame. 

''Ye.% my dear ^vlrs. Herbert," con- 
tinued he, in a more solemn tone, and 
after a n)oment*s silence, whilst his eye 



[ 158 ] 

beamed ^yitli the flame of religious con- 
fidence, '^ it is not presumption to assert^ 
the great Father of Love will bless his 
faithful children, even on this side the 
grave. 

^' Let the wretched atheist deny the 
existence of a moral Governor of the 
universe, and a righteous Observer of 
the ways of men ; let the cold and mise- 
rable sceptic lose himself in the darkness 
of those doubts with which his sophistry 
has involved the nature and attributes of 
the merciful Creator; yet, in spite of 
the vain decisions and false conclusions 
of these children of error; reason and 
experience force the conviction upon 
the mind, that the concerns of huma- 
nity are in the hands of One, who not 
only has power to dire6l and controul 
them ; but benevolence also, to order 
their course for the happiness and peace 
of those who repose their confidence 
in him. 



C m 2 

*'\es! the unperverted heart, on the 
slightest survey of the moral history of 
man, will instantly confess that ' verily 
there is a reward for the righteous,' 
even here. 

'' What thougli the bitterest visita- 
tions of this Divine Being appear at 
times to fall upon the heads of those^, 
who, in the eye of man, have most la- 
boured to deserve his favour; 3^et stilly" 
said he, brushing away the tear that 
moistened his cheek, " his goodness ad- 
ministers the balm, whilst his wisdom 
inflids the wound; and the dispensation 
is converted into a blessing by the sweet 
but secret solace that accompanies it, 
which drops like honey-dew into the 
' soul, and fills it with holy peace, pious 
comfort, and religious joy. 

'^ Think not, therefore, my dear 
child," continued he, turning to Mary, 
*^ that the visitations of sorrow are to be 
considered as indications of the displea- 



[ 160 ] 

sure of our heavenly Master towards 
those who experience them ; nor allow 
your faith and confidence in the mercy 
and goodness of the Supreme Ruler of 
all things to be shaken by the occasi- 
onal appearance of suffering virtue and 
aifii6led worth, Avhich may meet your 
notice as you travel through life. 

*' Believe me,, my young friend, they 
are all beautifully consistent with infmite 
wisdom and beneficence ; since they all 
have a tendency to produce the happiest 
moral results. 

^'They purify the heart, and d^nlighteii. 
the mind; they correct the passions of 
the one, and strengthen the energies of 
the other. 

*' They pull dovn our self-confidence, 
convince us of our own impotence and^ 
impel us to cast ourselves at the foot-- 
stool of Omnipotence for support and 
protection. They redify our false esti- 
mates of the value of temporal concerns^ ^ 



[ I«I ] 

find loosen tlie bands tlicit chain oar 
^aiit'ctior!s to a deceitful and unsatisfac- 
tory world. 

*' They raise our contemplations froin 
this fleeting scene of being, darkened 
by the clouds of sorrow, and desolat<?d 
by moral tempests, to visions of future 
glory, and anticipations of approaching 
joy ; joy, which ' eye hath not seen, nor 
t])e ear heard, nor hath it entered into 
the h?ivvt of r:::tri to conceive/"" 

2'hs. Herbert was deeply afteded, and 
]\Iary wept aloud. 

*' Yes, amiable woman, and lovely 
innocence," continued he, grasping the 
hand of each, '^ ha])py shall it be for 
you, that the Disposer of human events 
hath thought fit to try you by the ordeal 
of suffering. 

'' It will perfecl your virtue, fit you 
for his presence, and lead you to his 
footstool. Continue to solicit his assist' 
ance, and to deserve his proteflion ; and 



[ 162 ] 

believe me, He will never withhold the 
one, or refuse the other. 

'' Remember what the long experience 
of David dilated to him; ' I have been 
young,' says he, ' and now am old, yet 
never saw I the righteous forsaken/ 
And if the sanation of wy observation 
might have any weight after that of the 
Psalmist, I could most conscientiously 
adduce it, to confirm the great truth his 
assertion was intended to eonvey ; that 
the merciful goodness of God will ever 
support those who trust in Him. 

** Oh !" cried he casting up his eyes 
to heaven; *' Oh, sainted spirit of her 
in whom were centered all my hopes of 
worldly happiness, thou knowest the bit- 
ter sorrows of my soul, when thou wast 
called from hence to inhabit thy kin- 
dred skies= ! 

'* Thou canst tell what was the deso- 
lation of my heart, when it lost the ten- 
der partner of all its joys ! Thou too. 



[ 163 ] 

canst tell the source from wlience dis- 
tilled that healing ou its wounds, which 
soothed their throbbino-s, and restored 
its peace. Religion, — the consolations' 
af my faith ; the insight which it af- 
forded into the /?r6'^^«/ system of God's 
moral government of all below^, and the 
views that it unfolded of his future dis- 
pensations ; of the mighty recompense 
of reward, which awaits them in another 
world, who bear with Christian resigna- 
tion their appointed lot of suffering in. 
this:' 

His voice here faltered, and a tear 
stole down the furrowed cheek of the, 
venerable re61or ; but it was the offspring 
of aife6tionate remembrance, mingled 
Avith the joyful anticipation of a speedy 
reunion with her for whom it fell ; and 
rather inspired confidence in the suffici- 
ency of the consolation he had described,, 
than doubts of its efficacy or power. 



{ 164 ] 

A moment of affecting silenee uTm 
ensued ; in which eacli of the party 
seemed to retire into their own hearts, 
and revert to those subjeds of distress 
M'hich were peculiarly their own. 

It M^as liowever a pleasing retrospec- 
tion, tranquillized by piety, and enlight- 
ened by hope ; that enabled them soon 
to recover their composure, and to de- 
scend to the discussion of future arrange- 
Jiients. 

'* Well,'' said the Doftor, '' measures 
must be immediately taken, my dear 
madam, respecting the confession of 
Jacob. 

** I have no doubt of its truth, and 
little apprehension that it will lead to the 
dete61ion of every scheme of iniquity in 
wliich that paragon of wickedness who 
had so long usurped your brother's title 
and estates, has been engaged. 

*^ ^luch caution and prudence, hov - 
ever, M'ill be requisite in our proceedings^ 



[ 1(7,5 ] 

as his cunning and address are fully cquaV 
to his depravity. 

*' But you will have an admirable 
adviser in Mr. Stanmore, as far as legal 
knowledge may be serviceable ; and if 
you will accept of the assistance whicli 
the experience of fourscore years can 
afford, you know }ou need not look fur- 
ther than the llectory for it. 

" It seems extremely probable, from 
the accounts which have at len^-th 
reached this countr}, that Edmund must 
be now a prisoner in France. 

'* In this case, I apprehend it will not 
be impossible to convey information to 
him of the circumstances which have 
lately transpired. 

*' Perhaps, also, his exchange or ran- 
som may be effccled ; and in that case 
you may shortly have the happiness of 
relating to him yourself the events which 
have taken ])lace; a conference,'' added 
he with an arch look, " at which Mary, 



[ 166 ] 

f am inclined to think, would have no 
obje6lion to be present." 

The hint, vrhilst it suffused the cheek 
of the amiable g-irl with a rosy blush, 
struck in unison with a secret hope which 
lay concealed in Mrs. Herbert's mind. 

She had long in silence indulged the 
idea, that Edmund and her adopted 
daughter were not insensible of each 
ether's excellences; and that a tender 
sentiment, the virtuous offspring of a 
mutual admiration, had bound their 
hearts together by an inseparable tie. 

The knowledge of Mary's stronger 
claims upon her love, by the dear rela- 
tionship in M'hich she now stood to 
her family, had increased the wish, 
that she should become her real as well 
as her adopted child ; and the fair oppor- 
tunity afforded by the worthy rector's 
observation, and Mary's delicate embar- 
rassment on the occasion, tempted Mrs. 
Herbert to pursue the subjeOl, as she 



I IS7 ] 

returned with her in the evening to 
Stan more Manor. 

The openness of Mary's chara6ler soon 
convinced her that her surmises had not 
been unfounded. 

The ingenuous girl knew no disguise; 
the sentiment that her heart acknow- 
ledged was pure and generous ; and, 
though her delicacy would have revolted 
from intruding a confession of it on her 
prote6lress; yet the thought of denying 
or concealing it was equally foreign to 
those principles o-f candour and honour, 
in which she had been instructed, and 
by whose dictates she regulated all her 
condu(51:. 

She therefore made a full disclosure 
of the tender scene that had passed be- 
tween Edmund and herself, and ex- 
plained the circumstances M'hich had 
prevented Mrs. Herbert from being in- 
formed of it before. 



r 168 ] 

If the hope of such an attacliaient 
subsisting between the darUng objects of 
Iier affeclion liad been a source of plea- 
sing contemphition to ]\Irs. Herbert's 
mind, the cerlaintij of its existence was 
attended with the most dehghtful emo- 
tions of joy ; and though she could only 
whisper a blessing on her absent son, as 
she pressed Mary to her bosom; yet the 
tears that fell fast from her eye con- 
vinced the lovely girl, lier sentiments 
towards Edmund had received the full- 
est san6lion of one, \vhose concurrence 
satisfied her at once of the propriety 
and reditude of the sentiments she en- 
tertained. 



t m 1 



CHAPTER V 



WHILST Stanniore Manor was the 
scene of these interesting disco* 
veries and events, Mr. Fitzmordaunt 
and his nephew Echnuud were bending 
their course from the continent to Her- 
bert-Lodge. 

In pursuance of the plan on which 
they had determined to acl, before their 
liberation, no sooner did this agreeable 
circumstance take place, than they com- 
menced their search after the daughter 
of De Bourdon. 

VOL. iir. I 



[ 170 ] 

The voice of Adelaide still echoed in 
the ear of Henry ; and the words of her 
dying father, ^^ confined, separated, alive 
in France," were never for a moment 
absent from his mind. 

Eternally busied on a subject the most 
delightful of any to his soul, his atten- 
tion during the day scarcely gave a 
moment's consideration to any other 
object than the possibility of discovering 
his long-lost treasure; whilst fancy, 
equally interested in realizing the charm- 
ing hope, perpetually indulged him in 
his dreams with the ecstacy of its ac- 
complishment. 

No measure, therefore, which ardour 
and affe6tion could dictate, which ex- 
pectation coukl suggest, or probabiHty 
encourage, did Henry and his nephew 
omit to adopt. 

But all were adopted Avithout success, 
and the result of every additional en- 
quiry onh^ convinced them, they were 



[ 171 ] 

still further from obtaining any satis- 
factory intelligence respe6ting the obje6t 
©f their search. 

Still, however, the perseverance of 
]\Ir. Fitzmordaunt was not to be shaken; 
each succeeding day found him more 
eager in the chace than the former one. 

^' No," said he to his nephew one 
morning, who would have deterred him 
from pursuing an enquiry which appeared 
to be hopeless, and had persuaded him 
to return to England; '* No, my dear 
Edmund, seek not to change my purpose. 
Never will I quit a country, where I 
have reason to believe, that my beloved 
wife, from whom I have been torn, and 
whose loss I have so long deplored, still 
lives; and lives an unprote6ied wanderer. 

'' Fortune, health, and safety, are 
trifles, when balanced against the slight- 
est hope of meeting her again. 

'' That hope, feeble as it may be, still 
fondly lingers in my bosom ; nor will I 

T <' 



[ >72 1 

leave France, till It be extinguished in 
despair. 

'^ But, far be it from me, my dear 
nephcM', to detain you longer from your 
higher duties; or to be the selfish barrier 
between you and the happiness which is 
so justly your due. 

" Go, Edmund, cheer that parent 
who now deplores the absence of her 
son ; and receive the tender welcome, 
with which the sensibility of my Mary 
will greet the arrival of one, to whom 
she has surrendered her afife61ions." 

' Alas, Mr. Fitzmordaunt, ' replied 
Edmund, ' how shall I acquire courage 
to annihilate in your bosom that linger- 
ing hope which still flatters you with the 
prospect of once more possessing your 
lost Adelaide ? 

^ But the cruel certainty must not be 
concealed. 

' Here, my dear sir, is a paper, which 
it will require all your fortitude to peruse, 



[ 173 ] 

since it contains a coniirniation of what- 
ever your worst fears might have anti- 
cipated. 

' It is the cursed list, published by 
authority, of those Aidims to lawless 
violence, who fell on the bloody day on 
which De Bourdon died; and names his 
daughter as tlie companion of his fate.' 

Henry, with trembling hand, took the 
infernal scroll. 

It had been printed at the time of the 
Marquis's execution ; and specified by 
name both hijn and the lady Adelaide. 

Having perused the paper, he for a 
few minutes continued silent; whilst his 
bosom swelled with a struggling sigh, 
and a tear stole down his cheek. 

At length recovering himself, and re- 
turning the list to his nephew, '^Heaven," 
said he, ''thy will be done ! It is not 
for me to murmur at thy decrees, to 
arraign thy wisdom, or to question thy 



[ 174 ] 

beneficence! Be it my care, a^ it is my 
duty, to obey, rather than repine. 

** Yes, Edmund, I will now attend 
you. 

** The last gleam of that hope, -which 
again gave Adelaide to my arms, is 
vanished. But," added he with fervour, 
*' we shall meet again, and meet for an 
eternal union." 

Little time now elapsed in their pre- 
paring to quit Paris, and return to Eng- 
land. Having procured passports, tliey. 
proceeded to Havre, and taking their 
passage on board a neutral ship, arrived 
at Portsmouth on the afternoon of tliat 
day, in which I\irs. Herbert had been 
apprized of the scene of villainy carried 
on by the fiditious baronet, and of the 
near relationship in which she stood to 
her adopted Mary. 

Anxious to reach the place of tlicir 
destination, instead of remaining at the 
sea-port where they landed, the travel- 



[ '75 ] 

lers determined to proceed the same 
evening, upon their journey to Herbert- 
Lodge; and to sleep at the inn, a stage 
short of it, that they might not disturb 
the family at a late and inconvenient 
Uour. 

Rising with the sun on the ensuing 
morning, they were soon on the road to 
that spot, which now contained all that 
was dear to the bosoms of them both. 

A variety of mingled feelings, hopes, 
fears, and anticipations, occupied their 
attention, wrapt them in meditation, 
and prevented all conversation. 

Every circumstance of the scene 
around them encouraged to silence and 
reflection. 

Not a breeze shook the burstmg buds 
of the tall trees that formed the magnifi- 
cent natural avenue, through which they 
passed. 

The sun, struggling with the vapours 
of the night, was gradually asserting his 



[ 176 ] 

dominion over them, and throwing an 
interrupted radiance upon the luimblcF 
plants, Vv'hich reflected his light tVom tlie 
large drops of dew that trembled on their 
branches. 

The song of love echoed through the 
deep W'Oods on every side, whilst the 
warblers that sent it forth, busily em- 
ployed in the gentle offices of congugal 
and parental affe<5t ion, though they broke 
the deep solemn repose of the scene by 
their harmony, yet excited a tender 
melancholy in the mind, which more 
than recompensed the interruption. 

'' Ah! happy tenants of these peace- 
ful shades," exclaimed Henry, breaking 
the silence he had hitherto observed, 
** how grateful is your melody to my 
bosom ! What sweet recollections does 
it awaken. V/hat piclures does it recal 
of that imaginary bliss which floated on 
my fancy, as I led my Adelaide through 
these deep recesses; and which I hoped 



C 177 ] 

to have enjoyed in your sequestered 
retreats. 

*' Oh, Edmund, had you known my 
love, the tears with which I embalm her 
memory would require no excuse in 
your opinion."' 

Edmund's heart Avas full ; since their 
meeting in Erance he had ever sympa- 
thized in the sorrows of jiis uncle, but 
he now participated with more than 
common feeling in those peculiar emo- 
tions, which the spot in which they Avere 
had produced in Henry's mind. 

He had brought the interest also 
nearer home, and applied the circum- 
stances of his companion's fate to hin> 
self and that adored girl to whom his 
heart had long been surrendered. 

The carriage too approa^ciud the 
Lodge, and was now winding up a hill 
from the summit of which they would 
command a view of the residence of his 
T>Iary,. 



[ 178 1 

The fears inseparable from sincere 
aifedion had grown upon him as the 
distance between them lessened; and a 
thousand alarms of the changes absence 
might have produced, increased the agi- 
tation of his bosom. 

He found himself incapable of reply- 
ing to his uncle's observations, and only 
answered them with the sigh of sympa- 
thetic sensibility. 

In a few minutes the post-chaise had 
reached the top of the hill, and Herbert- 
Lodge, and its majestic woods, lay spread 
before their eye. 

They were prevented, however, from 
indulging a long gaze at a spot which 
was so dear to them, by a nearer objeft 
that seemed to demand all their attention. 

It was a coach that had been over- 
turned on the declivity they were now 
preparing to descend. 

Two post-boys and a footman were 
endeavouring to put it to rightSj having 



[ 179 ] 

taken the horses out, Avhlch were grazing 
by the side of the road. 

As they approached tlie broken car- 
riage, '' I hope,'' cried Henry to the 
servant, '' no one has been hurt by the 
accident." 

^ No, your honour,' replied the man, 
* mistress and the lady luckily got out 
before the axle quite gave Avay. 

' I told 'em, before they left Bath, the 
coach wouldn't hold out the journey; 
but Mrs. Stanmore was so anxious to get 
home, that she would set out before it 
was thoroughly mended from another 
mischance it had met \%iX\\ — ' 

" And where is ]\lrs. Stanmore, my 
friend?'' said Edmund, interrupting him.. 
*' Perhaps, we may be of some service ta 
her. She and her friend may at least 
make us€ of our carriage to the Manor*" 
*" Why, as to the matter of that, sir,^ 
mistress will be very glad to see young 
Mr. Herbert, (for the footman now re- 



colleded Edmund, j because slie's nation 
frightened, I believe ; but I don't sup- 
pose she'll ride again, as we're only a 
mile and half from the Manor-House. 

' You'll find her and the lady, how- 
ever, in the path behind that tump of 
trees.' 

Henry and his companion now quitted 
the post-chaise, and having desired their 
driver to assist in the reparation of the 
coach, they struck into the little thicket 
before them. 

It opened upon a narrow green-sward 
walk, skirted with holly bushes on each 
side, and running parallel with the turn- 
pike-road, though concealed from it by 
the thick skreen formed by these beau- 
tiful evergreens. 

The ladies they were in search of^ 
were walking slowly on, and had pro- 
ceeded not more than an hundred yards 
over its green and velvet turf. 



[ 181 ]■ 

* There is Mrs. Stanmore," said Ed- 
mund, '' but who her companion in 
mourning is, I am at a loss to guess. 
She seems, however, to be a very fine 
woman. I think I never saw a more 
elegant figure, or a more graceful walk." 

* Truly interesting, indeed,' returned 
Mr. Fitzmordaunt, as he quickened his 
pace to join the ladies, and raised his 
voice that they might have notice of the 
approach of himself and fellow-traveller^ 
and not be taken by surprize. 

In an instant the unknown lady turned 
her head towards him ; — a long black 
veil hung from her bonnet, and entirely 
concealed her face. 

She gazed for a moment with earnest- 
ness on the gentlemen who were ap- 
proaching her, and then uttering a faint 
shriek, threw her arms round the neck 
of Mrs. Stanmore, and hid her face in 
her bosom. 



[ 182 3 

Henry sprang forwards with the rapi- 
dity of lightning, to prevent her fallings 
and caught her in his arms. 

The veil at this moment was wafted 
from her face, and in the lovely features 
which were now disclosed to him, he 
beheld the angelic countenance — of hi* 
adored and long-lost wife ! 

*' My love, my Henry, my husband;'' 
exclaimed she, as she opened her expres- 
isive eyes, and gazed upon him with 
intense affection; '^ is this happiness 
real, or am I the sport of a visionary 
dream ?" 

' No, beloved Adelaide 1' replied he, 
* no! best treasure of my soul, it is your 
fond, your faithful Henry, who now 
presses you to his heart. To that hearty 
which, though dark and desolate ever 
since it lost its Adelaide, has never ceased 
to dwell with the tenderest aifeftioa oa 
the memory of its beloved. 



[ 183 ] 

*01i. heaven, teach me to be tliankt'ul 
for this best gift thy bounty could afford^ 
the restoration of my wife !' 

Fora few moments the emotions natural 
to such a situation prevented all con- 
ne6led conversation. 

Nature demanded her tribute ; and 
tears of joy supplied the place of Ian- 
2:ua2re. 

It was a scene to affed even those who 
were least interested in the happiness of 
the parties concerned; but in Airs. Stan- 
more, who now witnessed the termination 
of all ]\Iadame Henri's sorrows ; and in 
Edmund, who saw his valued uncle thus 
unexpe6i;edly blessed by the recovery of 
that treasure, the pursuit of which he 
had relinquished in despair ; the disco- 
very and it seffe6ts occasioned a degree 
of tumultuous agitation^ only inferior 
to what Henry and Adelaide expe- 
rienced. 



r is^ ] 

"When tlu'" first oveillowings of emotion 
liatl sLibsiccd^ and the ladies had ex- 
pressed their wish to walk the remainder 
of their way, rather than finish it in the 
post-chaises; *' but how. my best be- 
loved," cried Henry, '^ is it possible, 
that you should be thus alive, sale, and 
in England? 

'' How could you escape the dreadful 
fate, to which I thought you had been 
doomed, Mhen you were first torn from 
my protection ? and by what means have 
you been since saved from that engine 
of death, which deprived your father of 
his life, and by w^hich you wTre said 
yourself to have perished r 

^* All is to me inexplicable mystery." 

* It is to the goodness of that Provi- 
dence^ my dearest husband, (replied 
Adelaide,) without whose decree not a 
sparrow falls to the ground, that I have 
been saved from every peril, and again 
restored to happiness and Henry. 



[ 185 ] 

* M\' litoi-y is a long one; full of iiiev- 
I'ics froai Ilini^ who is the fiicnd of the 
eiistressed, and binding* me to eternal 
gratitude and praise. 

* In time, voii sliall know it all. It 
may be sutHcient to satisfy present cu- 
riosity to acquaint you merely with the 
lieads of it. 

' You cannot have forgotten, my dear- 
est friend, the fatal evening that sepa- 
rated us from each other. 

' This forest was the scene of the event ; 
and, ah ! how did my bosom throb with 
tender recolledions, wlien I last nigh^ 
entered its well-remembered shades! 

* I M'as carried uninjured from the 
chaise in which we were attacked, not- 
withstanding che false account of my 
death inserted in the public papers by 
Sir Charles, (for the pistol-ball, that they 
afterwards told me had killed you, passed 
harmless by me,) and removed by nightly 



[ 186 ] 

journeys to Fitzmordaunt-castle, in 
Northamptonshire. 

' I do not detail to you the reproaches 
of my father and Sir Charles, who fre- 
quently saw me at this mansion ; nor the 
deep affliftion into which I was plunged 
by the news of your death. 

* Here I Avas concealed for some 
months with the most scrupulous cau- 
tion, and oh ! (forgive this tear) here 
the tender pledge of our affedion first 
saw the light ; that smiling female infant 
of which the barbarians after a few days 
deprived me, under the pretence of put- 
ting her out to nurse. 

* Yes ! Henry, they robbed me of my 
child, and soon informed me she was 
dead ; having either given our offspring 
a prey to chance, or filled up the mea- 
sure of their villainies by spilling the 
blood of the lovely innocent. 

/ As soon as I could be removed with 
afety, the baronet and my father took 



C 1S7 J 

jp.e vvitli them to France, and placed 
iiic in a convent, near the chateau of De 
l^ourdon, with the most rigid injunctions 
to the abbess of strict confinement. 

' It was an inexpressible relief to my 
spirits to find that the good father Albert 
had become the confessor of this society. 
He sympathized with my sorrows, soothed 
iny mind, and strengthened my resig- 
nation. 

' Years rolled on without any event 
occurring to alter my situation. 

*Thc revolution at length burst out in 
all its fury. The doors of every religious 
house, and of our convent amongst 
the rest, were thrown open ; and the 
wretched prisoners again restored to 
freedom and society. 

' Father Albert would not desert me. 
''We will go/' said he, ''to Paris, to 
get a small supply of money which is 
owed me there, and quit this land of 
horror for vour native countrv. 



[ 1^8 ] 

** With the generous English we shall 
iincl protedioii and support. Perchance 
too, some connection of your husband 
may be discovered, \A\o will receive and 
befriend you, when I shall be no more.'' 

' We had soon reached the French 
metropolis, and were walking through 
one of its streets to the house of Father 
Albert's acquaintance, when a mob en- 
countered us, leading to the guillotine a 
venerable old man, whom, on his nearer 
approach, I saw distinctly to be my 
father. 

* Heavens 1 what were my sensations 
on this discovery ! 

* I forgot all the injuries I had re- 
ceived; and nature only worked in my 
heart, I rushed into the thickest of the 
crowd ; and strove, but in vain, to reach 
my parent. My last effort of strength 
was exhausted in a piercing but useless 
cry, to proclaim his innocence, and ask 
for pity.' 



[ 1^9 ] 

'^Ah! merciful Heaven l" exclaimed 
Henry, " that was the cry tliat vibrated 
on n^y ear, and bade me once more hope 
to see my Adelaide !" 

' A fainting fit saved mc from con- 
templating more of the horrid scene. 

* When I recovered, I found myself 
in the arms of father Albert, who in- 
formed mc, he had with the utmost 
difficultv saved me from the o'uillotine 
to which De Bourdon had been led ; 
and had he not found means to persuade 
those around me, that, in spite of my 
declaration, I was not the daughter of 
the Alarquis, but a child of his own, 
whose reason was affected, the same in- 
strument would immediately have de- 
prived myself as well as my father of 
existence. He added, that the crowd 
had credited his assertions; but, insati- 
ate for blood, had instantly seized on 
another hapless female, and executed 
her as the daughter of De Bourdon ! 



[ 190 ] 

^ As soon as possible we quitted a 
city stained with tlie slaughter of inno- 
cent thousands, and sailed from France. 

'Landing at Southampton, we pro- 
ceeded to Bath; where I have experi- 
enced the delightful pleasure of repaying 
seme part of the debt of gratitude which 
the good father Albert had imposed upon 
niv?, by rendering the concluding scene 
of his life comfortable, and soothing the 
pains of his last sickness; and where the 
additional happiness has awaited me of 
gaining the friendship of this dear and 
excellent woman.' 

The confused emotions that agitated 
Henry during this short recital, might 
easily be perceived, by the quick changes 
which marked his expressive counte- 
nance; and Mrs. Stanmore, in order to 
wave a subject which was evidently too 
painfully interesting to the parties more 
particularly concerned, took occasion, 
from the conclusion of Adelaide's speech. 



[ m ] 

to explain to iNIr. Fitzmordaunt and his 
nephew the manner in which slic had 
become known to her; the circumstances 
of the Abbe's death ; the reason of tlieir 
being in the road by themselves, and the 
cause which had induced Mr. Stanmore 
to set out for the Manor, before the 
ladies were able to quit Bath. 

The unhappy termination of Mr. Her- 
bert's career, and the distressed situa- 
tion in which he had left his family, 
made a necessary part of her recital; 
but she touched the events with so much 
delicacy and good-sense, as almost healed 
the wounds Avhich the intelligence in- 
flicted on Edmund's feelings. 

Of the more recent occurrences at 
the Manor-House, she was herself still 
unapprized, and therefore could give 
no information respecting them to her 
auditors. 

The discover}' had taken place only 
two days before ; and she had passed on 



[ 192 ] 

the road that letter in which Mr. Stan- 
more had communicated the particulars 
of it to her. 

'ihcy had now reached the avenue 
which led to the Man or- House, where 
the party, just assembled round the 
breakfast-table, were expeding a neigh- 
bouring justice, whom Mr. Stanmore had 
requested to be present at the second 
examination of Jacob, and at the inter- 
view which he intended that morning to 
have Aviih the fi6litious baronet. 

On the preceding day he had been 
indulged at his own desire Avith pen, 
ink, and paper ; and from some hints 
which he dropped on receiving them, 
Mr. Stanmore was led to hope he might 
determine on a voluntary confession. 

As the matter, however, was of much 
moment and delicacy, he had prudently 
eno-ao'ed his friend in the commission to 
call at the Manor, in order to san61iort 
every step he might see it necessary to 



[ 193 ] 

adopt, as well as to take advantage of 
every occurrence that should arise fa- 
vourable to the full developement of the 
truth. 

*' No, my dear friend," said he, ad- 
dressing himself to i\Irs. Herbert, ^' I 
cannot for a moment doubt the eventual 
triumph of virtue; nor believe that the 
exemplary resignation Avith which you 
have endured your heavy and peculiar 
trials, Avill in anywise lose their reward." 

]\Irs. Herbert sighed, and o-entlv 
shook her head. 

'* Nay, do not check my hopes," con- 
tinued he, ^* by those expressions of 
incredulity. Surely the grounds of them 
are sufficiently solid to clear nie from the 
charge of being too sanguine. 

*' The miserable wretch above us will, 
I have no doubt, make a full confession 
of his villainy. 

^' A fev\' uionths will restore Henry to 
your embracc;s and the enjoyment of 

VOL. in. K 



[ 194 ] 

that property which has been so long 
unjustly withheld from him ; and INIary, '* 
added he, smiling, ''Avilljoiu her pray- 
ers to mine, that Edmund " 

^Oh, heavens!' cried the blushing 
o'irh as she turned her face towards 
the window to conceal her confusion, 

* Edmund is even now approaching the 

* house ! 

' Yes, my dear mother, it is indeed 
your gallant son !' 

^^ Impossible!" exclaimed Mrs. Her- 
bert, rising hastily from her place, and 
darting to the window — and after a mo- 
ment's pause, ''Oh! 'tis no delusion," 
added she; '' gracious Providence! teach 
me to deserve the blessing ; 'tis my child, 
accompanied by my dear, my banished 
brother!" 

^ My father, did you say?' resumed 
Mary, ' oh,"let me fly to beg his blessing, 
and offer all that duty and affe(5lion can 
inspire.' 



[ 195 3 

Tl^ piarty had now ascended the steps 
that led into the breakfast-parlour. 

In a moment Mary unlocked the glass 
door >yhich opened upon them, and 
rushing into Mr. Fitzmordaunt's arms, 
^ Oh !' exclaimed she, * receive and blesst 
your child 1 acknowledge and love your 
]\Iary ! whom Heaven preserved from an 
untimely grave, that she might live to 
soothe the sorrows of her parent.' 

''Yes, Henry," said Mrs. Herbert, as 
she caught Edmund to her bosom; 
''Mary, to whose discovery and pro- 
tedion Providence directed your sister, 
is the offspring of your adored, unfortu- 
nate, and long-lost Adelaide." 

'No longer lost,' replied he with ve- 
hemence, stretching out one hand to 
Adelaide, whilst his other encircled the 
neck of his daughter. 

* Behold my beloved wife! See, Hea- 
ven has filled up the measure of its 
K 2 



[ 196 ] 

goodness, by restoring the parent with 
the child. 

^ Here is the partner of my soul, for 
whom I have grieved in widowed soli- 
tude so many years. Crave her blessing, 
my darling daughter, and deserve her 
love.' 

Wonder, joy, and rapture filled every 
heart. 

Mary flew forwards to the embraces of 
her mother. 

Their faces were hidden in the bosoms 
of each other. 

Fast-flowing tears of ecstacy expressed 
the powerful workings of nature in the 
souls of both ; whilst the scene of tender 
passion was heightened by the broken 
accents of aflfedion, and interrupted 
ejaculations of gratitude and praise. 

Sometime elapsed before the party was 
sufficiently recovered from the natural 
agitation which such extraordinary and 
affedingevents were calculated to excite, 



[ 1^7 ] 

to tnable them to reduce their tlioughts 
or language to any regularity or cohe- 
rence; but as 3,Ir. Wilmot was arrived, 
(the gentleman expected by Mr. Stan- 
more, ) the presence of a stranger re- 
strained the expression of feelings whose 
violence mis»ht have exhausted the 
strength and spirits of the females, and 
gave rise to a conversation which briefly 
exp.lained to flenry and his companions 
the circumstances that had occurred, 
and the plan ]Mr. Stanmore meant to 
adopt for the compleat investigation of 
the extraordinary aliair. 

They had not, however, time for long 
discussions. 

A deep and lengthened groan was 
heard from the room above them ; suc- 
ceeded by the noise of broken murmurs 
and convulsive struggles. 

"It is/' said Mr. Stanmore, '^the 
miserable culprit, in the apartment o\er 
our iieads. 



[ 198 ] 

** He is even now reaping the re- 
wards of his villainy ; and suffering the 
throbs of conscience, and the terrors of 
remorse. 

*^ Allow me to step up to him at this 
favourable moment; perhaps I may per- 
suade him to a full disclosure of the 
'>vickedness which thus harrows up his 
soul." 

Not many moments elapsed before 
Mr. Stanmore again returned into the 
breakfast-parlour; but his countenance 
was palCj his look hurried, and his hand, 
which presented a paper to Henry, trem- 
bled as he delivered it. 

'' Alas!" said he, *'it was the strug- 
gle of death, and the groan of a depart- 
ing spirit, that we heard. 

*' Despair has cut off the possibility of 
repentance; and prompted the unhappy 
wretch to release himself from the shame 
of public detedion and temporal punish- 
ment, by self-murder. 



[ m ] 

*'He yet grasps the instrument of 
destruclion in his hand ; but his guilty 
soul is flown to that tribunal which 
suicide cannot escape, and where the 
impious ad will only aggravate his 
crimes, and enhance his punishment. 

** This paper lay upon the table, di- 
rec^led to me. Perhaps, Sir Henry, you 
will have the goodness to read its con- 
tents to us ; an office I am too much 
agitated to perform." 

The Baronet bowed assent, took the 
paper, and read as follows: 

'To Mr. Stanmore. 

' ' My mind is determined ! my 

resolution is fixed! I will boldly rush 
into the dark abyss of nothing; and ex- 
tinguish a being which I can no longer 
enjoy. 

* Think not that I v/ould stoop to pur- 
chase the worthless possession of a few 



[ 200 ] 

more feverish clays, at that expence 
which a longer continuance on this dis- 
gusting scene must entail upon me. 

'No! Perish the thought, that I 
should live to swell the joy of my 
enemies; to be the derision of those I 
despise, the scorn of those I hate. 

* But ere I sink into eternal oblivion, 
let me not lose the last gratification that 
my heart can experience; the recol- 
le6lion of the triumphs I have won over 
the fools of virtue; and whilst I con- 
template the desiru6lion of my own for- 
tunes, and the termination of my being, 
I will hug the solacing idea, that my 
career has been brilliant whilst it lasted, 
and adorned with tlie ruin of those, 
the thought of vv^hose surviving, and be- 
nefiting by my downfall, would alone 
render my departure from existence in- 
tolerable. 

*Yes, Sir, thanks be to fortune, vvhich 
m this instance, at least, has crowned my 



[ 201 J 

schemes Avith the compleatest success, 
Henry and Adelaide are no more ! 

' The hated objects v/hich for years had 
secretly blasted my enjoyment, and es- 
caped my vengeance, are at length 
removed, and become incapable of en- 
joying my overtlirow, or raising them'- 
selves upon my ruins. 

^De Bourdon's daugliter followed her 
father to the guillotine ; and Henry fell 
under my dagger, when he was endea- 
vouring to rescue from death the parent 
of his wife. 

'The triumph, therefore, of those 
"whose cause you have advocated, must 
be imperfect ; and my soul swells with 
rapture, when I recoiled that the joy of 
success shall be extinguished by the tears 
of reoTct for those who are lost. 

* But, sir let me not leave you Xo the 
flatterino' consolation of hope, that my 
information may be r round less. 



[ ^02 I 

' No; a slight recital of my fortimcsf 
shall convince both you and the females 
you have patronized, that narrow is the 
circle of those who can now reap any 
advantage from the discoveries that have 
been made. 

' You ^vill have heard from that hell- 
hound Jacob, the author of my ruin,^ 
much of the history of my life. 

* He will have told you, that, though 
apprized of my real birth, by the dying 
Lady Fitzmordaunt, (who fell a victim to 
absurd remorse for the imposition she had 
pradised on her husband,) I carefully 
cdncealed the circumstance from every 
human being; and would have let the 
secret perish ^vith me, had it not been 
disclosed by my own mother (curse the 
infatuation that impelled her to the 
folly) on her death-bed to my brother 
Jacob* 

^ From him you will have learnt too, 
that I purchased his concealment of the 



[ 203 ] 

story by large pecuniary bribes; but 
that notwithstanding the amount of these 
contributions upon my fears, his extra- 
vagance reduced him to occasional situ- 
ations of distress ; by one of which he 
was obliged to enter into the service of 
Henry, in France, whither Jacob had 
followed me, in hopes of extracting from 
me an additional sum to supply some 
immediate necessities. 

' You will further have been apprized 
that being possessed of his master's se- 
crets, he found me out, and discovered 
them all to De Bourdon and myself; 
thinking that on this account he should 
be entitled to draw more la,rgely on my 
purse. 

' The separation of Henry and his 
wife; the transportation of the former 
to America ; the concealment of the 
latter ; and the fate of her infant, which 
the infernal hypocrite, my brother, had 
&a\y exposed, instead of destroying, and 



[ 204 ] 

^vlvom 1 aftenvards saw with Iiorror at 
Herbeit-Lodge, and learnt was the 
adopted child of Carolhie, are of course 
in your possession. 

' I\Iy next step was to marry the 
natural daughter of De Bourdon, (wlioin 
lie released from a nunnery for that 
purpose,) the Lady Antoinette, now 
])ublickly adopted by the Marquis, and 
declared to be the heiress of his estates. 

* Basilisk, that thou wast ! how did 
the secret pangs of wounded pride and 
jealousy excruciate my soul, Avhen I 
discovered that Herbert was the favoured 
object of her love; Herbert, my compa- 
nion and my friend, to whom I had 
sacrificed the lovely Caroline, and freely 
assisted with my fortune to save him from 
disgrace. Curses light upon the memory 
of both 1 Ah ! well did ye revenge the 
wrongs of Henry and Adelaide. 

* Attention to my own interests with 
my father-in-law the Marquis obliged 



[ 205 ] 

Tne to an almost constant residence irs 
France, from whence I made only short 
and occasional visits to Enoland. But 
when the Revolution broke out, and the 
ditierent parties began to take their sta- 
tions, I soon perceived, that the one to 
which l)e Bourdon had attached himself, 
M'ould enjoy onlv a temporary existence,^ 
and that to secure \\\s property, Mhicli 
was become an important objed to me^ 
I must sacrifice its owner. 

' Without delay, I became liis accuser, 
though a secret one. 

* He was quickly apprehended, and 
condemned; and I had soon the satis- 
faction of following the tumultuous pro^ 
cession, that led him to the guillotine. 

^ But V. hat was my surprize, to hear 
amidst the croAvd the daughter of De 
Bourdon proclaiming the innocence of 
her father ; and to see Henry Fitzmor- 
daunt, her husband, (who I supposed 
had long since perished in an insurrec- 



[ 205 ] 

tion of the negroes in South-America,) 
CKerting himself to prevent the execu- 
tion of the Marquis ! 

' My good genius did not desert me^ 
however, at a moment upon which so 
much depended that w^as important to 
jnyself. I stabbed Fitzmordaunt with 
my dagger; I saw him fall, never ta 
rise again, for its point had reached his 
heart. In another moment I raised the 
hue and cry, that the daughter of De 
Bourdon, the partner of his conspiracies, 
was in the crowd. 

' The populace instantly took the 
alarm, and began to search foi* another 
vi6lim. 

* They quickly found her; and, as I 
afterwards learned from the daily list of 
executed traitors, revenged upon her 
all the disappointments she had heaped 
on me. 

* My fears on this account were 
silenced ; but other danger* awaited me^ 



[ 207 ] 

1 too had found a secret enemy^ and 
been accused at the tribunal of traitor- 
ous designs. 

* An intimation of the impending 
destru6lion accidentally reached me. 

' I instantly quitted the metropolis, 
and though diligent search was made 
after me, yet by taking a circuitous 
route, and lying concealed for some 
little time, 1 at length effected my escape 
to England. 

* You know the remainder of my story. 

* That damned, detested villain, wha 
had dipped for years so deeply in my 
purse, made, some time since, a larger 
pecuniaiy demand upon me than ever 
he had done before, for the payment of 
a debt incurred by his extravagance. 

* Startled at the magnitude of his 
exadions, I promised him assistance, 
but in the mean time privately prevailed 
upon his creditor to arrest him; hoping, 
from the largeness of the sum, he would 



[ £C8 ] 

be connned for life to the svalls- of a pri- 
son, and give me no further trouble. 

* His wife's relations, however, libe^ 
rated him; and the fool, irritated by my ' 
negle6i; of his demand, or panic-struck 
with scruples wliich none but ideots can 
experience, determined to betray me. 

' You know how effe6lually he has 
executed his malignant purpose. 

' Yes, sir, he has pulled down the 
fabric of my fortunes, but he shall not 
condemn me to the mortification of see- 
ing them enjoyed by others. 1 shall 
quit this hated light with one solacing 
conviftion on my mind, that Henry and 
Adelaide, the detested rival of my iirs't 
attachment, and the proud rejecler of 
my proffered affections, can neither 
know my defeat, nor rejoice in my over- 
throw. 

'But, ah ! hell and horror! What 
voices are those, Avhich wither my soul^.. 
as they fill my ear ?— - 



[ '209 J 

' \\ hat are these petrifying soiiiuis 
that freeze my blood, and turn my heart 
into an icicle ? — 

' ^' Henry, and Adelaide! — Husband ! 
wife! and daughter ! — Saved, preserved, 
returned !" 

' Furies of despair, are the thunder- 
ing accents real? or has distradion seized 
my brain ?— 

' Yes 1 'tis a damned reality.— My 
weapons turn upon myself, 

* Fate, thou hast done thine utmost. — 

* This is the instrument that shall 
prevent thy future wounds ! — 

* Welcome death ! — welcome insen- 
sibility ! — v/elcome annihilation ! V 



[ 210 1 



CONCLUSION 



TTANCY will readily supply the events 
-*• that soon followed those happy and 
rapidly-succeeding discoveries which we 
have just related; and strike out upon 
her ideal canvas much of the future 
fortunes of the personages who have 
made the most conspicuous figures in 
our story. 

In the following particulars, therefore, 
we mean only to assist her fairy pencil, 
by filling up the outline she may trace, 
with more minuteness than her own rapid 
sketches will allow. 



[ 211 ] 

Sir Henry Fitzmordaunt having 
proved his legal claim to the title and 
estates of which the departed impostor 
had so long deprived him, assumed his 
dignities and rights ; and blessed with 
the society of his restored Adelaide, 
continued for many years to diffuse from 
Fitzmordaunt-castle, the venerable man- 
sion of his ancestors, a portion of that 
happiness to all around him, with the 
enjoyment of which, Providence had 
vouchsafed to rev/ard his virtue and re- 
signation. 

Edmund and Mary, formed for each 
other by their kindred excellencies, were 
soon united, with the rapturous consent 
of those relatives, whose san<5tion alone 
was necessary for the happy purpose. 

Residing at Herbert-Lodge with their 
mother, they were enabled to assist and 
extend her beneficent plans; as Mr. 
Fortescue had, from motives of con- 
science, as well as delicacy, insisted on 



[ 212 ] 

surrendering that estate to the rightful 
owner, of which he was satisfied liis 
uncle had iniquitoudly deprived tli,e late 
Mr.- Herbert. 

Frederick Fairford having by 
absence, occupation^ and the exercise 
of his reason, extinguished a passion, 
v;hich burnt only with a hopeless flame; 
returned to his native country to cheer 
the latter days of his venerable parent; 
and by his presence and attention to 
assist the weakness of age, and soothe 
tlie pains of th.e closing scene of life. 

The ardent attachment which he had 
entertained for Caroline Fitzmordaunt, 
was remembered as a dream of distant 
days; and had been long succeeded by 
a solid friendship for I\lrs. Herbert, which 
was returned by her with reciprocal 
sincerity. 

The excellent Rector of Rosewc5od 
having been spared for a ftw years more, 
to reward tiie filial piety of Frederick, 



[ 213 3 

and to hless his nei<>hboLirhood bv his 
example as well as his precepts, at length 
gently " fell asleep" in the arms of his 
son, in the steady and joyful conhdence 
of waking again to glory and immorta- 
hty ; to the enlarged exercise of every 
pious and benevolent affection; and the 
renewed enjoyment of every dear and 
virtuous attachment. 

]\Ir. Foktescue on ]\Iiss Wheatley's 
refusal of his hand and fortune, had again 
left his country, and once more resumed 
his favorite })ursuit of travelling. 

Here, interested by the novelty of fresh 
objects, and refleding on the impro- 
priety of indulging wishes which could 
not be realized, he gradually weaned his 
inind from the contemplation of Mary's 
charms; and Avhen he returned to Eng- 
land, could meet her with no warmer 
sentiment than that of the most friendly 
esteem. 



[ 214 ] 

An intimacy took place between him 
and the family at Herbert-Lodge, which 
occasioned his more particular acquain- 
tance with the amiable Harriet Stanmore. 
Her elegant and cheerful manners 
soon engaged his regard, and the happin. 
ness which he experienced from his 
union with her, convinced him he had 
neither misplaced his afFe6lion, nor over- 
rated her excellence. 

Matilda, the lost Matilda, enjoyed 
hut for a moment the dazzling scene of 
gaiety and splendour, for which she had 
sacrificed her honour and her peace. 
Her proud ambitious spirit panted for 
still higher distin6lions than she yet en- 
joyed; and prompted by her suggestions, 
Phillippe Plassey engaged in intrigues, 
which in a short time involved both him 
and his fallen angel in one common 
ruin. 

They were led to that guillotine, w^hich 
had been moistened with the blood of 



[ 215 ] 

De Bourbon; where the terrors of ap- 
proaching fate, the inextuiguishable 
fears of an hereafter, and the pangs of 
disappointed ambition, combined to pro- 
duce an agony in the soul of Matilda, 
the poignancy of which words cannot 
pourtray, nor imagination conceive. 
Her shriek of despair, and countenance 
of horror, as she mounted the engine of 
death, manifested the insufficiency of 
the principles she had adopted, to give'' 
fortitude to her mind, and support to 
her spirit, in the hour of trial. 

A melancholy vi(5lim to 2, false system 
of education^ she afforded an awful ex- 
ample of the danger as well as folly of 
cultivating the fancy at the expence of 
the understanding ; of gaining exterior 
graces by the neglect of mental accom- 
plishment ; of sacrificing religious and 
moral sentiments on the altar of super- 
ficial acquirements; and lavishing that 
attention on personal attratiions, which 



[ 216 ] 

should be di levied to tlie regulations of 
the passions, and the improvement of 
the heart. 

Jacob Vincent, sincerely penitent 
for the part he had taken in the villainy 
of his brother, endeavoured to make the 
only amends in his power to those he 
had injured, by an earnest devotion to 
their future service. 

Appointed by Edmund to the office of 
his baiillT, he served him with a fidelity 
that realized the sincerity of his profes- 
sions; and living with Dame Wheatley 
and Jenny at the Dairy, every hour not 
given to his higher duties and his master's 
interest, was employed in affedionate 
attention to tlie enfeebled old Avoman, 
and in the expression of parental fond- 
ness for his daughter 

Happy in the society of her heart s 
best treasure, Edmund and his ^lary; 
occupied in the constant exercise of plii- 
lanthropy, and enjoy iil^>• frequent inter 



C 217 ] 

eoui'se with her brother and his amiable 
■wife, the grateful heart of Mrs. Her- 
bert was ever lifted up in silent praise 
to the beneficent Author of that felicity, 
which could not be increased on this side 
the grave. 

The recoUe6lion of Matilda's fate, of 
which she had been apprized, would 
occasionally wring a sigh from her ma- 
ternal bosom ; but the contemplation of 
the blessings she had received, at length 
obliterated every pang. 

Tranquillity became the settled tenant 
of her soul. 

Contentment gave rapidity to the 
flight of time ; and the evening of her 
days stole upon her almost without ob- 
servation, whilst it brought upon its 
wings that sweet serenity which is the 
sacred offspring of conscious re6litude, 
and rendered her to the last moment of 
her existence a bright example of the 

VOL. ItT. L 



[ 218 ] 

efficacy of piety, virtue, and resignathn^ 
ill soothing all the bitterest afflictions, and 
enhancing all the dearest joys of life. 



vi^is. 



Printed by Richard Cruttwell, St. Jaftics's-ftrect, Bath. 
