THE UNIVERSITY 

O^ ILLINOIS 

LIBRARY 

G660 

V.3 



mt 




Return this book on or before the 
Latest Date stamped below. 

' JAN 2 4 1986 

University of Illinois Library 



L161— H41 



THE OPERA 



A NOVEL. 



BY THE AUTHOR OF 

MOTHERS AND DAUGHTERS. 



Ou les beaux vers, la danse, la rausique, 
De cent plaisirs font un plaisir unique. 

VOLTAIRE. 



IN THREE VOLUMES. 
VOL. III. 



LONDON : 

HENRY COLBURN AND RICHARD BENTLEY, 

NEW BUKLINGTON STREET. 
1832. 



AVIIJTINO, UKAIJiOUT HOUSIi, .STliAN!). 






t^GG 



THE OPERA, 



CHAPTER I. 

Ces visites, ces bals, ces conversations 
Sont du malin esprit toutes inventions. 
La jamais on n'entend de pieuses paroles, 
Ce sont propos oisifs, chansons, et fariboles : 
Bien souvent le prochain en a sa bonne part, 
Et Ton y sait medire, et du tiers et du quart. 
Enfin les gens senses ont leurs tetes troublees 
De la confusion de telles assemblies. 

LE TARTUFFK. 

" How I do hate the tracasseries of a country 
house!" said -Lady Emily Willesden to Lord 
Fieldingham, as they wandered together through 
the illuminated corridors and boudoirs which 
the guests crowding to the ball-room and ban- 
quetting-room had left deserted ; and where, 
by loitering in suspicious solitude, they attracted 

VOL. III. B 

543159 



2 THE OPERA. 

the sneers of more than one mahcious whisperer, 
and consequently that very notice from the 
society at large they were intent on avoiding. 
" In London one does not find out the plans 
and projects, or detect the meannesses of one's 
friends. I never noticed till to-night, Lady 
Romford's fussy greediness of the Duke of 
Cardigan's attentions. She has been following 
him up and down, canvassing for applause for 
'^ her dear girls ;" while he has been lauding to 
the skies the briUiancy of Lady Clara's dra- 
matic tact with one eye fixed on La Silvestra, 
and raving of Lady Sophia's graceful dignity 
with the other watching the watchfulness of his 
prudish aunt." 

" And Villevargues and that German dandy 
who acts as tiger to the sentimental Mr. Maldyn, 
see how they go on waltzing and mazurkaing 
with the Charlevilles, without a suspicion that 
they are preferred as partners for the sake of 
displaying Clara's Parisian accent, Sophy's 
idiomatic German, and the graceful attitudes of 



THE OPERA. 3 

both. — Poor Bagot ! — He was made useful in a 
similar capacity, till be presumed to aspire 
above the calling assigned him, and talked of 
matrimony." 

" How I should laugh if the chevalier or 
young Adelberg were to tender their dotation 
de cadet to Lady Romford's maternal accept- 
ance ! I have long been convinced that Ville- 
vargues is a speculator. He would not be half 
so elaborate in his studs and waistcoats were 
not his good looks made a profession. The 
creature calculates on beauty-sleep, and dreads 
the sun like a woman! — I am satisfied he is 
conquest-hunting on a matrimonial scent ; and 
shall certainly proclaim the heiresship of Lady 
Sophia and her sister." 

" We know you of old for a lover of mis- 
chief," replied Lord Fieldingham, easily moved 
to pardon the malignancy which he fancied 
mere malice (in the French acceptation of the 
word) in favour of one of the prettiest faces ia 
b2 



4 THE OPERA. 

town, which smiled on none of its admirers so 
graciously as himself. '' Yet surely you carried 
your jest into earnest, in insinuating to that 
surly cub, Neville, that 'Stasio Pignatelli is 
a fox which finds his way too freely to his 
den. Was that fair on your friend Lady 
Neville?" 

" Quite ! Had I not been aware that Neville 
had no cause for jealousy, I should have been 
the last person to call it into existence. But 
really Gertrude is so vastly proper and prudish, 
so severe in her judgment of the conduct of 
others, and so rigid in her own, that she 
deserves to pay some penalty for rising 
conspicuously superior to the rest of the 
world." 

" Well, well ; do not let Pignatelli find out 
that it was you who kindled the spark. He is 
just come down from town, and met the Neville 
Hill party in the vestibule. Lord Neville frowned 
one of his ugliest frowns at him ; and the lady 



THE OPERA. Q 

was forced to pass him by on the other 
side." 

" Tant mieux ! — What can be so stupid as a 
liaison like theirs ? — It made me quite angry- 
last season to see them sitting together, night 
after night, in every ball-room in London ; look- 
ing like the hand-in-hand monument of Colonel 
Fanshawe and his lady — cold, silent, sulky — 
and '' 

'* Hush 1 Here is Volumnia Fitzgerald steal- 
ing away to bum the midnight taper in her own 
room. She would be shocked at all this scandal.'* 

" Apparently our very aspect is sufficient to 
drive her back ; she is making her way to the 
gallery with Miss Constantia on her arm, lest 
the young lady should be initiated into the 
mysteries of flirting by Lord Fieldingham and 
Lady Emily Willesden. We had better follow 
her into the ball-room ; the duke may perhaps 
issue a search warrant for the persons of the 
offenders.''* 



6 THE OPERA. 

It was not, however, the motive assigned by- 
Mr. Willesden's flighty wife which induced Mrs. 
Fitzgerald's retreat. Althougli wholly free from 
that petty vigilance of maternal love which fixes 
the chaperon's eyes incessantly upon her off- 
spring, she was struck with the unusual trepi- 
dation betrayed by Constance in the vaudeville ; 
and by the pale dejection with which she stood 
by the side of her partner, Anastasio Pignatelli, 
during the intervals of the dance. She plainly 
saw that something was amiss with her daugh- 
ter; and whether an attack of indigestion, 
requiring the aid of magnesia, — or an attack of 
the tender passion, demanding the succour of a 
mother' s counsel, — she judged it expedient that 
the sufferer should retire from the revels before 
her distemperature became evident to the rest of 
the party. Constance herself was evidently 
relieved by the proposal ; and as soon as it 
could be done without exciting attention, they 
withdrew together. 



THE OPERA. 7 

^' You are ill, my dear child," said Mrs. Fitz- 
gerald, drawing Constantia affectionately to- 
ward her knees, as she seated herself in the 
great chair of her dressing-room. " You fatigued 
yourself this morning with your ride? — " 

" No," replied Constance, shaking her head, 
but evidently reluctant to speak. 

" These theatricals are too much for you ; I 
will not allow you to act again." 

" No, don't allow me to act again," said her 
daughter, in a faint voice, and imprinting a 
kiss on the hand lingering tenderly on her 
shoulder. " I shall be glad of an excuse in 
your prohibition. But it is not the vaudeville 
which has disordered me, dearest mamma; a 
circumstance has disappointed and grieved me 
which I do not feel able to explain to you just 
now. I am sure you will trust me ; — I am sure 
you will feel satisfied when I tell you it is 
nothing necessary for you to know — nothing in 
which you can assist me." 



8 THE OPERA. 

" I do 'not feel satisfied — for I see my poor 
girl is suffering deeply/' said Mrs. Fitzgerald, 
distressed when she observed that tears were 
beginning to steal down her daughter's cheeks. 
" But I can trust you. I am persuaded that 
nothing I ought to be acquainted with will be 
concealed from me by my dearest Constan- 
tia." 

" Good night then, mother," said Miss Fitz- 
gerald, pressing her lips to the forehead of her 
parent. " Allow me," she continued, affecting 
a smile, in order to relieve her anxieties, " allow 
me to enjoy my head-ache and my troubles to- 
night without further inquiry. I promise you I 
will not shed a single tear more than is abso- 
lutely necessary ; and when I have had time to 
screw myself up into a little philosophy, I will 
tell you my story." 

As a young lady's philosophy, particularly if 
in love, may chance to be somewhat tardy in its 
progress, it may be necessary to forestal Miss 



THE OPERA. y 

Fitzgerald's confessions, by an acknowledg- 
ment that from the first moment of Adrian 
Maldyn's presentation to her, she had been 
more interested in his favour than in that of 
any of the numberless suitors who had yet pre- 
tended to her hand. She saw in the romantic 
dignity of his air, and the singular ingenuous- 
ness of his character, a charm beyond even 
those of his handsome person and intelligent 
mind. There was something so genuine in his 
tone, — so superior to the conventionalized hypo- 
crisy of such men as Brabazon or Crawford ; 
something so honourable in his disposition, — so 
much more attractive than the artificial elegance 
of Bruton or Ugo Pignatelli, that she became 
involuntarily ambitious of his good opinion. 
— Ambitious, and consequently uncertain. — It 
was the first time the popular heiress had been 
at all doubtful of securing the attentions of any 
young man of her acquaintance. Adrian was 
above the inducements which placed so many 
b3 



10 THE OPERA. 

adorers at her feet ; and the less she was assured 
of obtaining his preference, the more solicitous 
she became to deserve it. Most men and most 
women are considerably improved by the circum- 
stance of finding themselves in doubt respect- 
ing the degree of regard experienced towards 
them by some favourite object; and an occa- 
sional shadow of dejection overspreading her 
sweet countenance, had recently imparted to 
Miss Fitzgerald's beauty precisely that little 
touch of sentiment in which it had been found 
wanting. 

Constantia was not, however, one of the 
mawkish tribe of misses who are addicted to 
sighing their sighs, and breathing their hopes 
and fears to their female companions. She had 
never disguised from herself her growing par- 
tiality for the young friend of Sir Herbert Man- 
ningfield; she had even entered into a cove- 
nant with her own heart to watch vigilantly 
over Its auo-mentation, and examine carefully 



THE OPERA. 11 

into the merits of its object; and had the result 
assumed a more serious shape, Mrs. Fitzgerald 
herself, her real and most indulgent friend, 
would have been the first person to whom she 
confided the state of her feehngs. But though 
she had refrained, in her intercourse with the 
accomplished Sandoni, from expressing a remote 
hint of her admiration for Adrian, that artful 
companion was not slow to possess herself of 
the real state of the case. Having noticed the 
increased and increasing intimacy between them 
on her arrival at Donningwell, and observed 
the admiration with which Maldyn lent his ear 
to Constantia's lively sallies, and the tenderness 
infused into his manner during the love scenes 
of the vaudeville, she resolved to rouse Miss 
Fitzgerald from her happy illusion, and 
convince her that an attachment to Lord 
Abbotscourt's son and heir would be utterly 
hopeless. 

'^No wonder Mr. Maldyn makes so impas- 



12 THE OPERA. 

sioned aloverin Lubin/' said she, while affect- 
ing to rehearse with her friend the scenes of the 
evening performance. " His sentimental vein 
has been fully developed and exercised lately 
by his affection for his cousin, Mrs. Perceval. 
Last winter, at Naples, poor thing ! she was 
labouring hard to overcome her own attachment 
to him ; but I see the business is renewed, and 
I really do not wonder. She is a charming 
woman, — all grace and loveliness ; and our Lubin 
absolutely adores her. They are in daily cor- 
respondence. But do not notice it; for on some 
mysterious account or other, the business is 
kept secret." 

Such was the insinuation which had struck 
so hard a blow to the bosom of Constantia. She 
was not silly enough to fancy herself a predes- 
tined victim to an unsurmountable passion ; 
and was ready to acknowledge that she had 
been happy and contented previous to Adrian's 
appearance in England, and should pro- 



THE OPERA. 13 

bably become so again. But she felt that 
she had experienced a bitter disappointment ; 
that his smiles had surrounded her with 
that intoxicating atmosphere which emanates 
from the dawn of a first love; that she 
had begun to tremble beneath his glances, 
to feel her colour rise on the distant sound of 
his voice ; and that it would be a hard and un- 
gracious task to repress these emotions, to cut 
short these indications of weakness. But above 
all, she was persuaded that she should meet in 
no other man, of the same age and pretensions, 
that noble candour, that bright intelligence, 
and those honourable qualities, which she found 
united in himself. 

It was with difficulty she repressed her tears 
during the dramatic performance which brought 
them together under these trying circumstances ; 
and having been undeceived into a conviction 
that the mellow tenderness of his voice in giving 
utterance to Lubin's declarations of love, and 



14 THE OPERA. 

the earnest expression dignifying the mournful 
gaze of his eyes, borrowed from his attachment 
to another the intensity she had secretly ascrib- 
ed to a partiality for herself, she blushed with 
irrepressible dread lest Mr. Maldyn should en- 
tertain any suspicion of her folly. A similar 
apprehension induced her to disregard her own 
inclinations, and enter the ball-room at the close 
of the play, in company with the Lady Charle- 
villes and the remainder of the dramatis jJer- 
soiia. As they advanced to mingle Avith the 
company, the duke appropriated as usual to 
himself the hand of Mademoiselle Sandoni, on 
the plea that, having introduced her into society, 
it was his duty to raise her to its level by his 
own especial notice ; and Constantia, on whose 
arm she had been leaning, was about to pro- 
ceed towards her mother or Lady Harriet 
Manningfield who were stationed among the 
dowager guests, when Anastasio Pignatelli per- 
ceiving her intention, solicited her to remain 



THE OPERA. 15 

and join the dancers. Miss Fitzgerald, re- 
garding him at all times with interest as Mal- 
dyn*s friend, accepted his proposal with a view 
of ascertaining the accuracy of Silvestra's in- 
telHgence. 

She was surprised to observe that her partner 
seemed almost as listless and dispirited as her- 
self. The count was a person of such uncon- 
trolled vivacity, a person of so happy and 
happy-making a disposition, that a cloud was 
rarely seen to linger on his handsome face. 
But the discourteous manner in which his un- 
expected arrival had been noticed by Lord Ne- 
ville, and the constrained and distressed air of 
Gertrude, as they passed for a moment's greet- 
ing in the vestibule, filled him with surprise 
and anxiety. 

" Your entertainment was over early ?'* — said 
he to Miss Fitzgerald, for whose unaffected, 
veracious, but ardent character he felt precisely 
that degree of esteem which would have ripened 



16 THE OPERA. 

into cordial friendship had she been of his own 
sex. "Although I hastened down from town 
as fast as a Hounslow postboy could be bribed 
to press his horses, I met some of your 
party in the portico. Very provoking ! it 
was useless to come at all, if I was to be too 
late.'' 

Constantia had not lived so much in the 
society of the gossiping circle of Romford Park 
without hearing frequent allusions to Count 
Pignatelli's unhappy passion for the wife of 
Lord Neville. But she had never permitted 
herself to dwell on a subject in which she had, 
and wished to have, so little concern. She knew 
nothing of Lady Neville but what was com- 
mendable; and was willing to attribute all 
the Charleville anecdotes concerning her to that 
love of personal scandal so prevalent among 
empty heads and shallow hearts. She did not 
choose, therefore, to provoke any further expla- 
nation of Anastasio's causes of vexation. But 



THE OPERA. 17 

the judicious silence with which she received 
his murmurs could not maintain itself when he 
observed, " I suppose it was on Mrs. Per- 
cevars account they went away so early. I 
wonder she came at all. The night-air must 
be very dangerous to a person in her weak 
state." 

" Mrs. Perceval !" faltered Constance, feeling 
a sudden flush overspread her pale face. 
" Was she here to night ? — How was she 
dressed? — Where did she sit? — When did 
she go?" 

"Do you not know her by sight?" inquired 
Pignatelli, startled by the eagerness of his 
partner. 

"She was living in retirement as a widow, 
when I first came out," said she, "and went 
abroad without re-appearing in society here. 
I fancy she has rarely been into the world since 
her return to England." 

" No, indeed ! — a severe indisposition, and her 



18 THE OPERA. 

peculiar situation — her very peculiar situation, — 
have deprived us of one of the brightest orna- 
ments of society. She is a charming woman ; 
gay, artless, beautiful. I lived with her very 
much on the continent ; and never saw a person 
so distinguished by the favour of foreigners. 
She was a most advantageous specimen of 
English loveliness and English refinement, to 
send forth as a sample of the national character." 

" Foreigners ? — Mrs. Perceval is popular here 
and every where ! " involuntarily observed Con- 
stantia. 

" Is she ? — I am glad of it — she deserves it ! 
She is a delightful person, and has been 
thwarted with most unmerited misfortunes.'' 

" Misfortunes ! — Surely, she is what the 
world calls fortunate; young, beautiful, rich, 
amiable." 

" You speak of her qualities, not of their re- 
sult. As the daughter of a hard, worldly- 
minded, unprincipled woman, she was forced to 



THE OPERA. 19 

marry a man every way unattractive. As the 
v^idow of a profligate, coarse, ungentlemanly 
husband, she is now " 

Count Anastasio was interrupted by the 
figure of the dance ; but Constantia would not 
be disappointed. " You were speaking of the 
misfortunes of Lady Neville's friend?" — said 
she, when again they found themselves standing 
side by side. 

" Nay, I have no right to make them the 
topic of my idle discourse," replied Pignatelli; 
" but you, who have a gentle feeling heart, may 
be induced to regard Mrs. Perceval with in- 
terest when you meet her in society, by learn- 
ingthat she is deeply attached to a person every 
way worthy the distinction ; but who, from inex- 
plicable circumstances, is forced to disregard 
her preference. They never can be united. 
Never! and this fatal incompatibihty has 
already destroyed her health and happiness, and 
will probably hasten her to the grave." 



20 THE OPERA. 

At any other time, or in connexion with any- 
other person, Constantia would have protested 
against the exuberant influence thus attributed 
to an unhappy passion. But she had herself 
just attained that epoch of a first attachment, 
which rendered it possible to conceive that a 
woman thus situated, might die for the love of 
Adrian Maldyn, and that " the worms might eat 
her." The picture drawn by the young count of 
Cecilia's beauty and excellence, was rendered 
doubly interesting by the sympathy which 
established her destinies in a parallel with her 
own. 

'^ If your friend Mrs. Perceval is secure of 
the affections of the man she loves, she is not 
much to be pitied," was her concluding excla- 
mation, as she accepted Pignatelli's arm to go 
in search of her mother ; while he, astonished 
to hear so romantic a sentiment escape the lips 
of the lovely Constance, a person peculiarly 
averse to all tender disquisitions, looked stead- 



THE OPERA. 21 

fastly in her face, to ascertain that she was not 
laughing at him. But the dejected smile, the 
complexion more than usually colourless, and 
something very much resembling a tear glisten- 
ing in her large grey eyes, convinced him she 
was in earnest. He had not thought her sus- 
ceptible of such deep feeling, and unconsciously 
pressed her arm in token of his gratification at 
the discovery. 

Such were the incidents which imparted to 
Constantia's appearance that air of languor 
and depression which excited her mother's 
anxiety, and induced her to withdraw from the 
ball-room; and never had Miss Fitzgerald found 
her pillow so uneasy, and her prospects in life 
so little alluring, as during the night which 
followed Mrs. Perceval's visit to Donningwell. 

Adrian, meanwhile, after the first moment 
of disappointment, arising from Cecilia's pre- 
mature departure, had gone in search of Con- 
stance, as the person in whose society he expe- 



22 THE OPERA. 

rienced most relief from his own vexations. 
There was something soothing in the lowmur- 
mm' of her voice ; something consolatory in the 
contemplation of a destiny so secure as her's 
from worldly affliction, which imparted a sort of 
repose to their intercourse. Very different from 
the impassioned tenderness excited in his bosom 
for Mrs. Perceval from the first moment of 
their acquaintance ; — still more so, from the 
breathless admiration with which he noted the 
surpassing beauty and miraculous accomplish- 
ments of Stephanine ; — he' was deeply sensible to 
the charm of Constantia's conversation, to the 
good sense apparent in all her words and ac- 
tions, — to the feminine purity, wholly untinged 
by prudery, of her graceful demeanour. He 
would have been happy, indeed, in the posses- 
sion of such a sister; he would have considered 
any other man pecuharly fortunate in the pos- 
session of such a wife. 

On the present occasion he felt surprised, on 



THE OPERA. 23 

watching her in the dance, to notice the agita- 
tion of spirits with which she seemed to listen 
to the communications of her partner. So 
pure was her complexion, that the slightest 
suffusion was, at all times, distinctly per- 
ceptible; and Adrian beheld "the eloquent 
blood speak in her cheeks," and quickly sub- 
side — the tears glisten in her expressive eyes, 
and disappear to their source ; he saw her lips 
quiver and her hand tremble, as she listened 
to the earnest whispers of Count Pignatelli. 
How could he doubt that subjects of the tenderest 
import were discussed between them ? — 

And this was the end of all Anastasio'a fine 
protestations of fidehty to Lady Neville ! — This 
was the mirror of constancy, who had presumed 
to read so severe a lecture to himself on his 
imputed desertion of Ceciha! — Oh ! wanton, 
wilful, wayward human nature ! Poor Maldyn 
was as indignant at the supposition of Pig- 
natelli's passion for Miss Fitzgerald, as if he 



24 THE OPEKA. 

himself were inclined to cherish a similar weak- 
ness. Was it so ? — The business is at present 
problematical ; but nothing can be more certain, 
than that on learning from Lady Harriet her 
niece's retirement for the night, he returned into 
the ball-room in j ust that flurry of spirits and 
false excitement, which may generally be taken 
as an evidence of secret disappointment. 



THE OPERA. 25 



CHAPTER II. 



II n'est plus, cet amour tendre et passionn^ ; 
Vous I'avez dans mon coeur par cent vives blessures 
Cruellement assassin^ : 
C'est en sa place un courroux inflexible, 
Un vif ressentiment, un depit invincible, 
Un d^sespoir d'un cceur justement anime, 
Qui pretend vous haVr, pour cet affront sensible, 
Autant qu'il est d'accord de vous avoir aimd. 

MOLIERE. 



It was in this excited state of mind that 
Adrian was crossing from the saloon, in which 
he had been conversing with Lady Harriet, 
towards the refreshment room, when he sud- 
denly found himself in a circle of the tlite of 
the Donningwell party. Mademoiselle San- 

VOL. III. c 



26 THE OPERA. 

doni, seated in supreme dignity on the sofa of 
the Duke of Cardigan's morning room, was 
examining a collection of antiques, the casket 
of which was supported for her amusement by 
his Grace and Baron Adelberg ; while Villevar- 
gues and Ugo Pignatelli successively trans- 
ferred to the hands of Lady Clara and Lady 
Sophia Charleville, such of the cameos and in- 
taglios as were sanctioned by the fiat of the 
accomplished Silvestra. 

In the magnificence of her air and attitude, 
she already assumed the duchess ; and the ex- 
treme brilliancy of her complexion, — to which a 
splendid tiara of emeralds and diamonds en- 
circling her beautiful brows imparted a softened 
reflection, — seemed scarcely of earthly texture. 
Had she been even dull in her address, and de- 
void of grace in her demeanour, her beauty 
must have been surpassing : but presenting so 
rare a union of personal and mental refinement, 
the infatuation of her noble host appeared ex- 
cusable in every eye but those of the Manning- 



THE OPERA, 27 

fields and Adrian Maldyn. The duke's atten- 
tion was, in fact, riveted by her slightest 
movement — her lightest word. When she 
smiled, his own countenance involuntarily 
assumed a cheerful expression ; when she spoke, 
her opinions found an immediate support in his 
arguments; — his adoration was unlimited and 
unconcealed. 

On her own feelings, meanwhile, all this ex- 
uberance of devotion seemed unproductive of 
the slightest effect. Mademoiselle Sandoni's 
demeanour, at all times, and with all persons, 
was tempered by a tone of graceful humility ; 
but she marked no deference towards his Grace 
of Cardigan, beyond that testified in her ad- 
dress to Pignatelli, Villevargues, or any other 
man of the party ; and evidently took pleasure 
in opposing those dogmas he had been accus- 
tomed to find incontrovertible in the saloons 
of Donning^vell — in overturning and stampino- 
into dust every idol he had set up for worship. 
Scarcely had Adrian entered the room in which 
c 2 



28 THE OPERA. 

they were all established, when the light 
laughter of Villevargues and Adelberg, and the 
affected giggle of the Lady Charlevilles, pro- 
claimed to him that the prima donna was en 
verve, and as fortunate in the vivacity of her 
audience as of her own sallies. But when 
he found himself inextricably included in 
the circle, and compelled to join in the merri- 
ment of the little audience, he was not a httle 
surprised to discover that the Duke of Cardigan 
(generally esteemed the best-bred man in Eng- 
land, and decidedly the Lord Chesterfield of 
the county of Berks), was sanctioning by his 
presence and applause, certain admirable 
sketches and mimicries put forth by Silvestra 
of his country neighbours ! — Blinded by the 
dexterity of the performance to its manifest in- 
decorum, he was moved to fits of laughter by 
her personification of the fussy baronet's wife, 
stationed near the door to secure the precise 
moment of her precedence, with the date of her 
husband's creation emblazoned in letters of 



THE OPERA. 29 

gold upon her heart, as the unhnpugnable 
diploma of her own dignity; — of the thick, 
lumpy squiress with her redundant tongue 
impeding her utterance of the diffuse compli- 
ments prepared for her noble host, — her large 
hand grasping a well stuffed reticule, con- 
taining a cotton pocket handkerchief and her 
daughter's boa; — of the pride of the village, 
the blooming family of his reverence, the vicar — 
from the eldest blue to the youngest pink; each, 
when spoken to by the duke or Lady Harriet, 
nudging an elder sister to rescue them from the 
terrors of a reply; — of the prosy M.P. and the 
argumentative J. P., trying to talk each other 
down in a scheme for the erection and legisla- 
tion of a new county jail ; — of the sycophantic 
chaplain, and abrupt dignitary. 

But when Mr. Maldyn had passed a quarter of 
an hour in her society, his own disapprobation 
gave way before the oddity of her tones, the vi- 
vacity of her gesticulation, the singular effect 
produced by the contrast of her broken English 



30 THE OPERA. 

with the tact enabUng her to seize upon the 
nationaUties of the Enghsh character. Joining 
heartily in the peals of laughter with which her 
efforts were rewarded, he gradually drew near 
and leaned on the arm of the sofa with un- 
qualified admiration depicted in his looks. 

Perhaps it was this superfluous tribute of 
applause which suddenly brought the duke to a 
sense of the indiscretion of his own conduct ; 
or perhaps the scrutinizing eyes of Sir Herbert 
Manningfield, who more than once looked into 
the room and withdrew again, reminded him that 
the usual urbanity of his demeanour towards 
his visiters had been strangely violated on the 
present occasion. 

" These people are beginning to miss us," 
cried he, suddenly starting up from the sofa, 
" we must not let them see on our return to 
the ball-room, how merry we have been at their 
expense. Let us favour them with a mazurka, 
to divert their attention from our proceedings 
to ourselves. If Mademoiselle Sandoni deign 



THE OPERA. 31 

to be my partner, Lady Clara, Lady Sophia, 
and Lady Emily Willesden will make up our 
set." 

" Lady Sophia must be my substitute," said 
Silvestra, quietly drawing back from his grace's 
extended hand, and disposing of it in favour of 
another. " / am engaged to Mr. Maldyn." 

Adrian was astonished ! — more astonished than 
he ought to have been, considering the feats of 
audacity already exhibited by Stephanine in 
his presence. But there was no gainsaying 
the lady's declaration ; and though every way 
disinclined for the exhibition, there was some- 
thing in her preference of himself for a partner 
over the idol of the night — the idol of every 
night, and every female coterie in England — 
which insensibly tickled his vanity. Resolving 
to profit by the occasion to remonstrate with 
her on the subject of her imposture and claim 
the ring she had surreptitiously withdrawn from 
his possession, he conducted her into the ball- 
room \ — the crowded groups giving way as 



32 



THE OPERA. 



they passed, and greeting her beauty and ele- 
gance with a thousand involuntary exclamations 
of delight. 

In Adrian's frequent meditations on the 
necessity of an explanation between himself and 
Stephanine, it had never once occurred to his 
mind that he should experience the slightest 
embarrassment in addressing her on any subject 
past, present, or to come. An intimacy such as 
theirs had been, admitted, he thought, of no 
subsequent reserve. But when he found her 
actually hanging on his arm, — when he found 
himself stationed by her side, and the envy of 
half the room on account of that widely-coveted 
distinction,- — he began to discover the difficulty 
of addressing this brilliant being, covered with 
jewels, radiant with the precious tissue of her 
robe, and still more so by the youthful lustre 
of her beauty, as the poor dependant of his 
father's charity. He began to discover the inde- 
licacy, the impossibility of recalHng to a woman, 
seemingly irreproachable — probably redeemed 



THE OP BRA. 33 

from the frailties of her ill-regulated youth, and 
assuredly associating with the good and virtuous 
'—the less blameless days of her early life. Se- 
veral times did he turn towards her with the 
intention of invoking her as " Stephanine;" but 
as often the distinguished yet modest air of his 
partner, and the innocent smile with which she 
seemed tacitly to reprove his project, suspended 
the words upon his lips. In the figure of the 
dance her hand hung on his shoulder ; his own 
touched her slight and graceful waist. Their 
attitude was nearly that in which they had been 
accustomed to wander, after nightfall, or before 
daybreak, on the banks of the Elz ; but since 
that epoch — what vicissitudes — what miraculous 
transitions, had marked the destinies of both ! 
Again, he made up his mind to interrogate her ; 
to acquaint himself with her plans and the na- 
ture of her connexion with Colonel Sandoni ; 
again the sofc and feminine beauty of her per- 
son and his own apprehension of calling tears 
into the beaming eyes which gazed on his own 
c3 



34 THE OPERA. 

with so tender, so suppliant an expression, ren- 
dered his intention abortive. 

But to remain in total silence by her side was 
no less impossible. He saw that the singular 
awkwardness of his demeanour was beginning 
to attract the attention of the idlers who stood 
looking on the dance. He felt it indispensable 
to address her, but could scarcely endure the 
triumphant expression of superiority which 
irradiated her looks as she turned smilingly to 
listen ; and, piqued at least to act on the de- 
fensive where he wished to refrain from deep 
offence, assumed a firm tone in inquiring 
whether Mademoiselle Sandoni had fulfilled 
her purpose, whatever it might be, in the de- 
tention of his ring • and whether she were now 
disposed to relinquish what she had so unac- 
countably detained. 

*' No ! " replied Stephanine, without varying 
the inflexion of her bland and silvery accents, 
'^ I never yet resolved on the accomplishment of 
a purpose but I succeeded ; I never yet sue- 



THE OPERA. 35 

ceeded for the triviality of renouncing my ad- 
vantage. I washed for that ring, because I 
knew it to be the thing you prized beyond every 
other earthly possession ; — I obtained it, — I shall 
keep it; ay, — while I live. — Time was, Mr. 
Maldyn, when you dealt with me on a similar 
principle ; excepting that the pledge so eagerly 
obtained — a warm and confiding heart — was too 
worthless a prize to require forcible detention. 
You cast it from you with scorn, sir — ^with in- 
sult ; but / shall keep your ring." 

" I should have imagined, Stephanine," re- 
plied Adrian, haughtily, " that your pride would 
prevent you from affixing value to an object 
obtained by fraud, — retained by violence — .'' 

With all her practised artifices, she started at 
the sound of her name, — that name recalling so 
many degrading, so many precious associations; 
but to the taunts revealing Mr. Maldyn's sense 
of inj ury at her hands, she showed herself ut- 
terly insensible. 

" I do value it !" said she; "it is a talisman 



36 THE OPERA. 

which may yet afford me a mastery ove lyour 
destinies. Potent as you conceive yourself, you 
are incapable of wresting it from my possession. 
Sigh for it, — plead for it, — pray for it, — rage for 
it, — revile, oppress me — I tell you, Schatzerl! 
you shall never repossess yourself of Cecilia 
Perceval's pledge of love." 

They were conversing in German; and, in 
pronouncing these few last words, Stephanine, 
either unconsciously, or involuntarily, assumed 
the peasant dialect in which all her familiar 
tenderness towards Adrian had formerly been 
expressed ; and there was something almost 
preternatural to his apprehensions, in the con- 
nexion of that voice and words with the gorge- 
ous magnificence of the beautiful being by his 
side ; as well as in the knowledge incidentally 
avowed by Mademoiselle Sandoni of his present 
attachment and distresses. 

" And will you, for the gratification of an 
idle whim — " 

" It is 710 idle whim ! " rephed Silvestra, with 



THE OPERA. 37 

one of those radiant smiles which the admiring 
gaze of hundreds at that very moment hailed 
as the spontaneous expression of youthful 
gaiety and sportive innocence ; " it is the tri- 
umph of malice, — revengeful, abhorrent malice. 
— I keep your ring, because, as the gift bestowed 
by your cousin upon the impostor Adrian von 
Elzstein, it was peculiarly precious in your eyes ; 
I keep your ring, because, as Adrian, the son of 
Lord Abbotscourt, you will never more receive 
a pledge of affection from her hand." 

Adrian von Elzstein! He trembled as he 
listened. — By what art less than magical had 
the creature he was addressing possessed her- 
self of all these secrets ? — He trembled as he 
listened ! — 

" Stephanine ! — Silvestra ! — Mademoiselle 
Sandoni ! — whatever you choose to be called ! " 
he exclaimed, in a faltering voice ; " since you are 
thus versed in the mysteries in which my fate 
is enveloped, you probably know more ! You 
know that my heart, soul, hand, faith, honour. 



38 THE OPERA. 

are in the keeping of another; that I have 
sworn to Hve for Ceciha, or resign the vain 
hopes and unavailing prosperity of my destiny. 
You know that my existence hangs upon her 
will ; — that the air she breathes, the ground she 
treads on, are holy in my sight ; — ^that I will sur- 
mount the obstacles which disunite us, or cast 
from me every anticipation of earthly happi- 



ness I 



I " 



" I do know more," answered his partner, — 
still gracious, still smiling, still unmoved by 
the ardour of his looks, the intensity of his 
expressions ; — " I know that Cecilia, in giving 
you that ring, regarded you with an affection 
scarcely less irrationally vehement than that 
which now inflames your fickle heart. But I also 
know that the dreams excited by its influence 
have faded away ; that she has learned to 
estimate you at your real value ; that this very 
night she fled from your approach as from that 
of an enemy. She came here believing you had 
quitted Donningwell; she saw you among the 



THE OPERA. 39 

idiots who were labouring, from mistaken vanity, 
through the duties which I am compelled to 
adopt for hire ; she observed you bending the 
knee and intruding your foppish antics on the 
endurance of Constantia Fitzgerald — of the 
wealthy heiress to whom you have so readily 
transferred your homage; and, disgusted and 
indignant, she quitted the house." 

" Great God ! " exclaimed Maldyn, shrinking 
as if from the infliction of some assassin-like 
wound, as these scornful accusations were 
poured into his ears. "How have I merited 
these taunts? Tell me — answer me — satisfy 
my misgivings — from whence do you derive 
this vile inteUigence ?*' 

" I will not satisfy you," replied his com- 
panion, with a formal inclination of the head ; 
(for the dance, which had again and again inter- 
rupted their conversation, was now concluded ;) 
" from me you have nothing to obtain but vin- 
dictive wishes, and injurious dealings. I fear 
you not, Adrian ! — say your worst of me, if you 



40 THE OPERA. 

dare, in retribution of my conduct ; — no one will 
listen to you, no one believe you. — I fear you 
not ; Adrian Maldyn ! — I defy you ! You know 
how I have loved you ; it remains for me to 
prove how 1 can hate.*' 

Already the Duke of Cardigan was by her 
side, eager to claim her hand and conduct her 
to the banqueting room. But she had nothing 
to apprehend from his presence. She was aware 
that he had no acquaintance with the German 
language ; she knew that, although his eyes 
had been intently fixed upon her during the 
mazurka, the steadiness of the smiling com- 
posure she had assumed must have completely 
deceived him as to the interest of her conversa- 
tion with her partner. She saw that he was even 
more eager than usual to secure her by his 
side and engross her attention ; and while 
Adrian retired to his own apartment, to muse 
with shuddering horror over the fiendish pas- 
sions which seemed to inspire her angelic form, 
Mademoiselle Sandoni, seated in triumph beside 



THE OPERA. 41 

the lordly ruler of the feast, already appeared 
invested with the privileges and precedence be- 
coming the wife of the Duke of Cardigan. 



42 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER III. 



To raise the thought and touch the heart be thine, 
That charm shall grow when what fatigues the ring 
Flaunts and goes down an unregarded thing : 
So when the sun's broad beam has tired the sight, 
All mild ascends the moon's more sober light, 
Serene in virgin modesty she shines, 
And unobserv'd the glaring orb declines. 

POPE. 



Although the appointed period was arrived 
for the dispersion of the Donningwell party, and 
the return to town of the Manningfields and 
their friend, the majority of the Duke of Cardi- 
gan's guests were too happily established to 
dream of departure. Lady Emily Willesden 
found the ruins and the shrubberies highly pro- 



THE OPERA. 43 

pitious to her tete-a^ttte wanderings with Lord 
Fieldingham ; — Lady Clara Charleville had com- 
menced an eager flirtation with the Chevaher 
de Villevargues, while Lord Brabazon suc- 
ceeded in appropriating an acute and admiring 
auditress for his bonmots in Lady Sophia; — 
and above all, the incomparable Silvestra judged 
it expedient to exhibit in their utmost force, so 
splendid a variety of talents and accomplish- 
ments for the general amusement, that it appeared 
probable Easter might prolong its gaieties at 
the Castle, in defiance of parliamentary duties 
and the pleasures of the metropolis. 

But on the very day succeeding the ball, just 
as the duke was meditating the extension of his 
hospitality, an express from town terminated his 
own projects, and produced a singular re-action 
in those of many of the set. It announced the 
arrival of the duchess and her two daughters 
from the Continent ; and before night, nothing 
was left at Donningwell of all its various and 



44 THE OPERA. 

brilliant crowd but a few jaded domestics, and 
the owls in the old turrets. Colonel Sandoni 
and his daughter were the first to depart, — her 
engagements at the opera admitting of no fur- 
ther delay ; and Adrian considered himself for- 
tunate in escaping on his journey home the pre- 
sence of Sir Herbert Manningfield, who had 
accompanied the duke to town immediately on 
the arrival of the express. 

Had not Adelberg been his companion in the 
carriage, he would perhaps have ordered it 
round by Neville Hill, for the possible chance 
of encounterino' Mrs. Perceval on the road. 
But he was unwilling to render his friend too 
famihar with his weakness; particularly since 
Gustavus had managed to ascertain from Ana- 
stasio Pignatelli, Cecilia's voluntary and positive 
renunciation of all intercourse with her cousin. 
He had nothing however to dread on the pre- 
sent occasion from the young baron^s allusions 
to his hopeless attachment. Adelberg was 



THE OPERA. 45 

wholly engrossed by an enthusiastic passion for 
the gentle Constantia Fitzgerald, which had 
just begun to inflame his own imagination. 

Without interest in the force of character 
and conversational powers so attractive to the 
mind of Adrian, Gustavus justified his ado- 
ration of Sir Herbert Manningfield's niece, by 
a declaration that her abilities as a musician 
were secondary only to those of the syren par 
excellence, — La Silvestra ; and as it never entered 
into the mind of a baron of sixteen quarterings, 
(albeit as music mad as the late sovereign of 
Ober-Hesse) that a prima donna of the Italian 
opera was capable of being elevated to his 
barony by any thing like a right-handed 
union, he felt himself called upon to descend 
an octave in the chromatic scale of matrimony ; 
— to put up with a young lady of birth and 
fortune, lacking the^rt, sol, la, si, which placed 
Mademoiselle Sandoni at the head of the Euro- 
pean gamut, rather than debass himself by 
an orchestral alliance. 



46 THE OPERA. 

It was extremely irritating to poor Adrian, 
as they bowled in his travelling chariot along 
the Colnbrook-road, to listen to Adelberg's 
incessant citations of the charming Constantia's 
trill in the descending thirds of " Ah ! perdona!" 
— or of her cadence in G minor, in the cavatina of 
" La buona Figliuola." — Instead of allusions to 
her sweet countenance and graceful air, Gusta- 
vus's rhapsodies were excited by her air with 
variations on the harp — on her sweet touch on 
the pianoforte; till Maldyn ventured at last to 
suggest to him the eligibility of making his 
proposals in score. Adrian was evidently net- 
tled by his friend's pretensions ; and at length 
took refuge from his own ill-humour by ac- 
quainting the baron that the smiles of the 
heiress were already secured by the suit of 
Anastasio PignateUi. 

" I observed her myself," said he, as they 
passed the last turnpike into town, " blushing 
and hesitating while he pressed his attentions 
upon her in the ball-room last night. As I 



THE OPERA. 47 

predicted, 'Stasio has grown weary of Lady 
Neville ; and has been moved by his experience 
of her virtues to select anEnglish wife.'' 

Fortunately for poor Adelberg, the German- 
icity of his character preserved him from the 
sense of desperation which so afflicting a piece 
of intelligence might have produced in a less 
exalted imagination ; the character of the 
northern Germans exhibiting the most sin- 
gular combination of sensuality and spiritu- 
ality of animalism and ideaUsm to be found 
in any European nation. Baron Adelberg 
was most Werterially in love with Miss 
Fitzgerald, and next to the joy of finding 
himself an accepted admirer, was inclined 
to prize that of despairing and dying for 
her sake. Immediately on his return to 
Chapel-street, he took to enditing a metrical 
version of his woes ; but the rhyme and reason 
of the case proving at variance, he ended by 
taking down a volume of Goethe, and attempt- 
ing to console himself with a tissue of sublime 



4S THE OPERA. 

incomprehensibility more rhythmical than his 
own. 

Meanwhile Mr. Maldyn's first occupation in 
London was to ascertain at the residence of 
Lord Neville whether the family were yet re- 
turned ; when finding that they were to pass a 
few days longer at Neville Hill, he determined 
to defer, till Mrs. Perceval's appearance in 
town, those explanations which circumstances 
rendered indispensable. On receiving the 
affecting letter she had deigned to address 
to him at Donningwell, Adrian had, in fact, 
formed a determination to submit implicitly to 
her commands, and refrain from any attempt at 
further intercourse. But now, though wholly 
unsuspicious of the elaborate treachery prac- 
tised against him by Stephanine in the affair of 
the ring, he felt that some explanation, some 
apology, was due to the neglected Cecilia. He 
knew she was about to settle in London for the 
season; that Lady Wroughton, eager for her 
re-estabhshment in the world on a more illus- 



THE OPERA. 49 

trious footing, was bent on forcing her daughter 
into society; that, frequenting the same cir- 
cles, they must inevitably be thrown together ; 
and it seemed important that, although fated 
to refrain from more familiar intercourse, they 
should meet on terms of courtesy. He resolved 
therefore to seize the first moment of her arrival 
in town, to vindicate himself from the charge of 
levity and negligence he had innocently in- 
curred. 

But the meditations expended by Mr. Maldyn 
on his line of duty towards his cousin, might 
have been altogether spared. There was nothing 
in his previous experience of London society 
nor even in the lively delineations with which 
Constantia Fitzgerald had occasionally enhght- 
ened his mind, that could impart any just esti- 
mate of the peculiarities of a Season in town; 
of that vortex, — ^that excitation of mind, body, 
and estate, — which renders the months of May, 
June, and July a crisis to the year-i-a dream 
illuminating the darkness of human destiny — 

VOL. III. D 



50 THE OPERA. 

a struggle invalidating the exercise of the human 
faculties. He had not the slightest conception 
of the peremptory nature of its frivolous en- 
gagements; of the deadening influence exer- 
cised by its levities over every loftier impulse 
of the soul, — every more genuine feeling of 
the heart. He had no suspicion of the extent 
of that epidemic of frivolous folly to w^hose con- 
tagion he was about to expose himself. 

But his experience of the vicissitudes await- 
ino* him, though gradual, was sufficiently 
rapid to put an immediate end to his misan- 
thropic lucubrations. Instead of finding time 
to note the history of his observations, or per- 
petuate the kalendar of his feehngs, he had 
scarcely leisure to feel, and none to philosophize. 
The numerous connexions he had formed in the 
gay world, — under sanction of the Duke of Car- 
digan's friendship and the intimacy of Bra- 
bazon, Pignatelli, and the Romford set, — 
were daily augmented by the arrival of the 
spring flight of Parisian butterflies, com- 



THE OPERA. 51 

mended to his notice by letters from Sir Henry 
Bagot. Adelberg's liaisons meanwhile com- 
manded the circles of the diplomatic depart- 
ment; and, as if by some magic incantation, 
the handsome and opulent heir of Lord Abbots- 
court found himself on his arrival in town after 
Easter, immediately initiated into all the most 
distinguished or occult mysteries of fashion- 
able dissipation. Cards of invitation were 
showered upon his table, illuminated by honour- 
able or right honourable names, more or less 
familiar to him ; and notwithstanding his rash 
verdict upon the monotony and coldness of 
London society, he was soon enabled to deter- 
mine that a good fortune and good connexions, 
good looks and good manners, are quite as 
potent in dispelhng the reserve of a circle in 
St. James's, as in the Chaussee d'Antin. In- 
stead of renewing his complaints against the 
inhospitality of his countrywomen, and the for- 
mality of his countrymen, the handsome 
and distinguished Adrian soon began to appre- 
d2 



52 THE OPERA. 

heiid that he might be torn in pieces by 
contending Countesses, and crammed to exter- 
mination by the festivals of divers club-veterans 
and Newmarket ruling-elders. He was scarcely 
established as a man of fashion, before he 
learned to mistrust the pleasures of that onerous 
distinction. 

But however inclined to call in question the 
advantage of an excess of fashionable popu- 
larity, there was one avenue of the Elysian 
Fields of London he felt strongly tempted to 
explore, and which now afforded a prospect of 
unmixed attraction. The arrival of the Duchess 
of Cardigan promised to familiarize him with 
that high caste of English society, which remains 
undegraded by the deteriorations inevitable to 
a circle actuated, like that of Lady Romford, 
by petty interests and paltry designs. In her 
grace's two daughters, Lady Mary and Lady 
Georgina Ellerby, he beheld indeed a singular 
contrast to the Charlevilles, whose lively cor- 
diality of manner had induced him to form so 



THE OPERA. 53. 

undue an estimate of their merits on his first 
arrival in England. 

The Ellerby girls were cheerful, without the 
slightest tincture of flightiness, — ^warm-hearted, 
without any exaggeration of sensibility. They 
were Constantia —without that acute intelligence 
elevating her so much above the ordinary tribe of 
cavatina-ing, mazurka-ing, transfer-varnishing 
young ladies ; their understandings reached the 
level of good plain useful sense, and nothing 
more. They were Cecilia, — without that fervid 
glow of feeling rendering her so powerful 
in the heart to which her influence was 
directed ; their bosoms were warm with all the 
common charities of life, and nothing beyond. 
Lady Mary Ellerby was an object of regard to 
some half-a-dozen rational men, each of whom 
had vainly attempted to induce her to quit a 
beloved mother, and preside over his household 
happiness. Lady Georgina, after declining the 
alliance of Mr. Willesden and Lord Brabazon, 
was pretty generally suspected of a predilection 
in favour of Lord Fieldingham, whose flirtation 



54 THE OPERA. 

with Lady Emily Willesden had induced her to 
renounce his society. Both were moderately 
handsome, — moderately clever, — moderately ac- 
complished ; — yet from the general exercise of 
good sense and good feeling, a total neglect of 
the hollow artifices of society, and a high tone 
of principle and honour, they had acquired a 
degree of standing in the great world rarely 
accorded to women previous to their establish- 
ment in life. The Charlevilles called them old- 
fashioned ; th^ Pignatellis pronounced them 
hornees ; Lady Emily Willesden declared them 
to be linen dolls, stuffed with saw-dust; and 
Lord Brabazon ralUed them on their frigid 
nationality. But every one respected the Eller- 
bys ; every one knew them to live in the prac- 
tice of the "right" instead of the '' expedient;" 
and among their young companions it was the 
unacknowledged practice to appeal to the 
sympathy of Lady Mary and Lady Georgina 
in all cases of distress, — to their friendly counsel 
in all cases of perplexity. — So powerful is the 
influence of moral rectitude ! — 



THE OPERA. 5^ 



To them and to their mother, the duchess,— a 
woman rich in the virtues of her own degree, 
and remarkable for the firmness and vigour of a 
mind superior to the emergencies of any,— the 
very name of Adrian Maldyn was a novelty. 
They had known and avoided Lady Wroughton, 
while she pursued her giddy and heartless ca- 
reer, as the wife of the lunatic Lord Abbots- 
court ; they had known, and pitied, and almost 
loved Ceciha Maldyn, when they saw her driven 
by the intrigues of a worthless mother into a 
marriage with the profligate Perceval. But 
they were ignorant that the viscounty of Ab- 
botscourt had a living representative; or that the 
husband of their dear Lady Harriet had been 
united by the ties of early friendship with any 
member of the family. On their arrival in 
England, therefore, they were surprised to find 
the name of IVongtonpaw presented to them by 
an infinite variety of persons, with an infinite 
variety of explanations and commendations. 
The Duke of Cardigan bespoke their kindness 



56 THE OPERA. 

for his new friend " Mr. Maldyn ; '* Sir Herbert 
Manning-field announced the personal attrac- 
tions of his old friend "Adrian Maldyn;*' 
Lady Harriet assured them that Constantia 
Fitzgerald's inclinations were evidently fixed 
on " young Maldyn ; " Lady Emily Willesden 
insinuated to them that the Duke of Cardigan, 
was secure from any further matrimonial ma- 
noeuvres on the part of the Marchioness of 
Wroughton, now that she had made up her mind 
to marry her daughter to her cousin " Maldyn ;" 
Harry Crawford informed them that Lady Rom- 
ford was divided during her Easter skirmish at 
Donningwell, between an attack upon the noble 
host for Lady Clara, and her views for Lady 
Sophia upon " that Mr. Maldyn ; " and, finally, 
the whole town (by which is implied some forty or 
fifty gossips of fashionable supremacy) protested 
within their hearing, that his Grace of Cardigan 
was on the point of throwing himself away on 
an opera singer ,• and that nothing could secure 
him from so ruinous an union but the manifest 



THE OPERA. 57 

preference of La Silvestra for a certain " Mr. 
Adrian Maldyn ! " 

It was, therefore, with no trifling degree of 
curiosity, that the three newly-arrived ladies 
directed their attention to a person so univer- 
sally interesting, on his appearance at the 
dinner-table of Cardigan House, the day after 
his return to town ; and eager as Lady Harriet 
Manningfield's representations of her nephew's 
infatuation in Mademoiselle Sandoni's favour had 
made them to accomplish any measure likely to 
estrange him from so dangerous a connexion, 
they readily acknowledged that Adrian was far 
too gentlemanly, too spirited, and too promising, 
to be rendered up a prey to such a person. 
Lady Mary trembled for the success of her pro- 
ject of making Miss Fitzgerald Duchess of 
Cardigan, while she listened to the brilliant ori- 
ginality of his conversation; and Lady Geor- 
gina, after having lent her ear to some beautiful 
duets executed by Adrian and his friend Gus- 
tavus, was scarcely surprised to learn, as a pro- 
D 3 



58 THE OPERA. 

found secret from Lord Neville, that Mrs. 
Perceval, whose genius for music she had been 
accustomed to regard with admiration, should 
incline in favour of one whose endowments 
were so congenial with her own. 

Unfortunately for the object of their partial 
interpretation, the person seated between them 
(to whom they addressed the favourable judg- 
ment induced by the observations of the 
evening), was of all others the man best qualified 
to excite a disparaging suspicion in their minds. 
Anastasio PignatelH, in spite of his volatiUty, 
was established as a favourite with the sober 
matter-of-fact LadyEllerbys, by the frank gene- 
rosity of his character. They had great reliance 
upon the ingenuousness of his disposition ; and 
when, in answer to their comments on Mr. 
Maldyn's attractive manners and intelhgent 
countenance, he replied, " Yes ! very true ; I 
remember I was prodigiously captivated by his 
address on our first acquaintance. — Never was I 
more strongly induced to put my trust in the 



THE OPERA. 59 

external evidences of nature ; nor do I wonder 
that Maldyn's fine person and air de romance, 
should impress your sex in his favour;" — his 
auditresses were fully sensible of the importance 
to be attached to the preterite tense in which 
these commendations were conveyed. Unwilling, 
however, to imbibe an opinion prejudicial to 
any man honoured with the regard of the Man- 
ningfields, and by their brother's friendship, 
they forbore to pursue the inquiry suggested by 
Count Anastasio's faint praise and strong im- 
plications. They knew not that his affection 
for Lady Neville induced him to become the 
partisan of her friend ; nor that Cecilia herself 
was suffering deeply from her unadvised pre- 
dilection for her cousin. 

Nor was there any thing in Mrs. Perceval's 
countenance or demeanour, when she re-appeared 
in society as one of the planets of the London 
season, calculated to enlighten their ignorance. 
Lady AVroughton, having now renounced all 
pretension to the heart of her repining lord, and 



60 THE OPERA. 

consequently overcome her repugnance to ap- 
pear the mother of a daughter in her twenty- 
first year, was considerably mortified by the 
ravages effected in CeciUa's appearance by her 
recent illness; and immediately insisted that 
the youthful widow, on her return from Neville 
Hill, should take up her abode in her own 
splendid residence. It was in vain that Cecilia, 
mistrusting her mother's motives, and aware of 
her fierce animosity to Adrian and Adrian's 
father, attempted to assert her independence; 
partly by flatteries', — partly by invectives, — 
partly by the inalienable influence of a mother's 
authority, — the Marchioness succeeded in induc- 
ing her to renounce her own inclinations ; and 
the first certainty acquired by Mr. Maldyn of 
his cousin's return to London, arose from meet 
ing her face to face in Lady Southford's ball- 
room, — leaning on the arm of Lady Wrough- 
ton, and arrayed in all the tinsel emblazon- 
ments of fashion ! — ^What a disappointment to 
the illusions of his imagination ! — to the sugges- 
tions of his vanity ! 



THE OPERA. 61 

There was a sweet composure in her coun- 
tenance, as much at variance with the position 
in which she was placed, as with the emotions 
Adrian had dreamed of finding depicted there. 
Her former vivacity was gone ; but it was re- 
placed by a pensive but contented expression 
a thousand times more attractive. — He recol- 
lected Silvestra Sandoni's announcement of 
Cecilia's indifference, — and recoiled from this 
confirmation of the intelhgence ! — 



62 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER IV. 



Ne vouliez vous pas lire au fond de ma pensee 1 
Ne pretendiez vous pas d'un regard indiscret 
Percer le voile obscur qui couvre mon secret 
Vouz I'osiez soulever, — et moi je le dechire. 

Ancelot. 



Of all the avowals a man is required to 

make to his own heart, there is perhaps none 

more unwelcome than a confession that he has 

over-rated his influence in some female bosom, 

I 
which he had been apt to regard as subjected 

to his own immediate jurisdiction and authority. 

But on the present occasion it was not alone 

the self- conviction of his vanity that was 



THE OPERA. 



63 



wounded by the smiling sweetness of Cecilia 
Perceval's countenance when directed towards 
the general mass of mankind,— its stony cold- 
ness when turned upon himself. He was aware 
that he had exposed his weakness to the rebuke 
of others;— that he had many times, in his 
letters to Sir Henry Bagot, declared his con- 
viction that CeciUa would not survive their se- 
paration ; and what was far worse, a letter was 
already en route across the continent, to ac- 
quaint his father with the rise and progress of 
his attachment to his cousin ;— with the in- 
tensity of Mrs. Perceval's affection for himself; 
—with his determination to abide by the decision 
of Lord Abbotscourt on the subject;— and with 
the indisputable certainty that its unfavourable 
tendency must prove fatal to both ! 

Poor Maldyn found himself growing sick 
with vexation while he recognised the error of 
his judo;ment, and anticipated the possibility 
that his father's might be favourably influenced 
by his declarations. Heaven only knew to what 



64 THE OPERA. 

extent Lord Abbotscourt might be tempted to 
carry his sympathy. He might perhaps address 
a letter of acceptance to his niece, — of remon- 
strance to the marchioness ; — while Bagot, with 
the usual candour of a bosom friend, might be 
induced to render his folly a theme for the 
amusement of a large circle of mutual friends. 
But neither his anticipations of the compassion 
of his father, nor of the raillery of his confidant, 
were comparable with the deep mortification of 
his own feelings. Amid all the animation and 
cheerfulness by which he was surrounded, he 
felt depressed into nothingness. Previous to 
his visit to Donningwell he had experienced the 
strongest excitement of mind from the critical 
situation of Cecilia; during his stay in Berk- 
shire, the constant society of Miss Fitzgerald, 
and the perplexing presence of Stephanine 
Hashnger, had filled his heart with alternate 
satisfaction and dismay. But these contending 
emotions were now at rest. Mrs. Perceval had 
taught herself to regard him as a stranger; 



THE OPERA. 65 

Constantia, when they met in society, restrained 
her intercourse to the coldest monosyllables; 
while Mademoiselle Sandoni, on her return to 
town, naturally became anew " La Silvestra ;" 
and was once more engrossed by her professional 
duties and popularity. In the midst of his morn- 
ing rides and evening dances, — in defiance of 
Almack's, opera, park, gardens, — of dinner 
parties and music parties, — of excursions to 
Richmond and fetes at Greenwich, — he began to 
find himself lonelier than ever, — an isolated 
and unhumanized being. 

It was in vain for a man of Adrian Maldyn's 
refined sensibility to take refuge from himself in 
the vulgar gratifications of libertinism. He had 
lived too long on the continent to be susceptible 
of the pleasures of wine ; the gaming table had 
inflicted too severe a lesson on his debut at Got- 
tingen to present an attractive prospect ; female 
society w^as wholly distasteful to one rejected from 
that in which he had recently experienced such ex- 
alted enjoyment; and the ordinary dissipations 



66 THE OPERA, 

of society, with all their laborious flirtations and 
affectations, were incapable of diverting his atten- 
tion from the moral vacuity of his existence. It 
was under these circumstances that Mr. Mai- 
dyn, who for some time past had left Gustavus 
undisputed command of his box at the opera, 
became conscious of the advantages of a position 
whence he could fix his eyes on the persons in- 
teresting to his heart, without being exposed to 
the coldness of their indifference, or called upon 
for any conversational efforts in favour of others 
who were indifferent to himself Accustomed 
to find in Adelberg a sympathising but unobtru- 
sive spectator of his desponding moods, he esta- 
blished himself night after night where the shel- 
tering interposition of the curtains secured him 
from observation; and where he could gaze 
unmolested, — unsuspected, — on the exquisite 
beauty which drew a host of fashionable visitors 
to Lady Wroughton's box, and look with envy 
upon the select few, whom Constantia deigned 
to enliven with her animating discourse, in that 
of Mrs. Fitzgerald. 



THE OPERA. 67 

In this disposal of two evenings of the week, 
the real attractions of the spot had not the 
slightest influence. For many preceding months, 
indeed, Adrian had abjured his passion for 
music J — unless when Miss Fitzgerald renewed 
the thrill of early predilections by taking 
up her guitar in some twilight hour, or other 
listless unoccupied moment, to give utterance to 
some touching melody or ballad, — the spoken mu- 
sic of her own heart. He had stood with closed 
ears and a sealed bosom, absent, unhappy, and 
inattentive, amid some of those masterly concerts 
which vary the diversions of the London season; 
and even the Silvestra herself had put forth her 
magic powers in vain, except when engaged at 
Donningwell in the performance of Cecilia's com- 
position. The first night which saw him esta- 
blished in the opera box, his fine countenance 
by a character of mournful despondency, the 
disfigured performance was a matter of as much 
indifference to Mr. Maldyn as if it had been 
the hooting of a tribe of Narraganset Indians. 



68 THE OPERA. 

The curtain was down for the e}iti acte when he 
entered the theatre; and he sat leaning his 
head on his hand, with his arm planted on 
the back of a chair, utterly unconscious of all 
that was passing around him. 

The " Pi RATA '^ of Bellini, which happened 
to occupy the stage, is rendered familiar to every 
English ear by the affinity of its pathetic horrors 
with those of Maturin's Bertram; and when 
the curtain rose for the commencement of 
the second act, the mournful invocation of 
Imoo'ene's attendant maidens 

o 

Prolunghi, o ciel pietoso ! 
11 breve suo riposo ; 
Pace per lei sia questa 
Che desta aver non pud, 

stole plaintively and soothingly into his ears. 
In the ensuing scene Imogene presents herself 
to the impassioned frenzy of the pirate; and 
when La Silvestra's mellow voice, in reply to his 
proposals of escape, gave expression to the eja* 
culation 



THE OPERA. 69 

All ! no, giammai ! 
Son rea, Gualtiero, ed infelice assai. 
Parti ! 

the tremulous pathos of her accents penetrated 
the inmost recesses of his heart. He hung 
entranced upon the tenderness of her tones 
and demeanour; till in the duet which ex- 
presses her final negative to the proposition of 
Gualtieri, the fervoiu' of 

Taci ! rimorsi amari 
Ci seguirian per I'onda ! 
Lido che a lor ci asconda 
I/immenso mar non ha ! 

seemed to spring with an irrepressible impulse 
from the desolate depths of her own wounded 
heart. Even Adrian felt his soul expand 
within him at the sublimity imparted by the 
cantatrice to this touching appeal ! From that 
moment his attention was riveted on the stage. 
The ravishing beauty of the Duchess of Caldora 
in her picturesque costume, — the deep inspira- 
tion of genius lending intensity to her expres- 
sions, — the touching, the almost unearthly plain- 
tiveness of her voice, gave a degree of interest 



70 THE OPERA. 

to the piece such as he had not conceived any 
mere vocal exhibition capable of producing. 

No sooner did Imogene, frantic with the 
horror of her guilty vv^idow^hood and of her pity 
for the condemned Gualtieri, advance to the front 
of the stage holding the orphan of Ernesto by 
the hand, than the sympathy of the audience 
was riveted by the grief-struck immobility of 
her countenance, by her fixed gaze, — her marble 
paleness. While the first ravings of insanity 
burst from the lips of the sufferer, 

O ! s'io potessi dissipar le nubi, 

Che uri aggravan la fronte ! — e giomo o sera ! 

the almost whispered concentration of tone in 
which she strove to exemplify the delirium of 
a broken heart, exhibited the very perfection of 
art. But a greater effort was still to come. 
The burst of tenderness with which she snatched 
her child from the ground, and the agony ex- 
pressed in her recitative entreating its interces- 
sion with the spirit of her murdered husband — 

Deh ! tu innocente, tu per me Timplora ! 



THE OPERA. 71 

was beyond all art, beyond all impulse but 
that of intense human feeling ! — While the tears 
burst from Adrian's eyes, and a rhapsody of 
paneg-yric from the lips of Adelberg, — Maldyn 
felt inclined to retract every evil opinion he had 
conceived of the prima donna. A woman so 
tremblingly alive to the best sensibilities of 
human nature, could not be the worthless being 
he had lately pictured to himself. His heart 
throbbed with emotion while the curtain fell 
amid the enthusiastic plaudits of the crowded 
theatre on the woes of the Duchess of Caldora» 
and the triumphant efforts of La Silvestra. 

" I must — I must go and talk to Miss Fitz- 
gerald about it ! '' cried Gustavus, rising to leave 
the box ; " you see she has been moved to tears I 
I long to Hsten to her eloquent tribute to the mi- 
raculous powers of her favourite. Won't you 
come with me, Maldyn? '' 

" No ! I will remain here, and admire the 
display of her sensibility from a distance." 

*' But what excuse shall I make for you ? 



72 THE OPERA. 

She sees you, and will observe you sitting here 
sulky and alone ; — what shall I say in apology 
for your want of empressement ? " 

" It is your business to merit her approbation 
by your own ; — never mind me. The Fitzgeralds 
are quite at liberty to write me down a bear; 
unless you think proper to plead indisposition 
on my part, by way of excusing yourself for 
being the friend of so discourteous a knight.*' 

Adrian was in fact delighted to get rid of the 
restraint of Adelberg's presence, in order that he 
might summon around him, unmolested, all the 
charms evoked by the recent appeal to his 
feelings. Never before had he been truly sen- 
sible to the enchantments of music ; never 
before had he perceived the exquisite effect pro- 
duced by the union of that 

Blest pair of syrens ! — pledges of Heaven's joy, — 
Twin-born harmonious sisters, voice and verse. 

No ! it is not " the savage breast " so much as 
the sorrowing one, which music hath charms to 
soothe ; it is not so much " the knotted oak " 



THE OPERA. 73 

which it hath power to bend, as the soft myrtle, 
whose blossoms that gentle movement disperses 
to the breeze. It has been specified as the only 
sensual enjoyment without vice; but it might 
also be defined as an enjoyment depending on 
the perfect attunement of the senses. There are 
moments of moral torpor when music is heard 
without one correspondent emotion; — when 
the sweetest harmonies " come like shadows, 
so depart," without touching one responsive 
chord of the soul. But there are others when 
the thrilling bosom welcomes the excitement of 
heightened emotion arising from its influence ; 
while warm tears start unbidden, but unchidden 
from their sources. 

Such was the case with Adrian! He was 
suffering all that anguish of mind which springs 
from a sense of injury at the hands of those we 
love. He felt himself aggrieved by his own 
Cecilia; capriciously rejected by his friend 
Constantia ; and the spell of musical enchant- 
ment which still lingered in his ears, seemed to 

VOL. III. E 



74 THE OPERA. 

unclose the iron girdle with which the unkind- 
ness of both had encircled his frame. He was 
soothed, — consoled, — gratified ; and the sweet- 
ness of those first moments of relief from pain, 
determined him to return again and again, and 
drink with renewed eagerness from that salu- 
brious spring, which had afforded so inebriating 
a draught. 

Notwithstanding the varied and varying plea- 
sures to which every day gave birth, notwith- 
standing the brilliant festivals with which the 
Duke of Cardigan hastened to welcome the 
return of his family, Adrian found the time hang 
tediously on his hands between Saturday and 
Tuesday, between Tuesday and its following 
Saturday. He no longer cultivated any means 
of amusement, no longer attempted any new 
method of distraction. The Opera afforded him 
a temporary, but sure suspension of his vexa- 
tions; the Opera presented him with a threefold 
source of enjoyment. But above all, it served 
to develope the more than human powers, and 



THE OPERA. 75 

unveil the more than earthly loveliness of the 
extraordinary being, whom he was sometimes 
tempted to regard as a gem redeemed by his 
efforts from the darkness of the mine; some- 
times to abhor as an evil spirit, attached to 
his own destinies. While she was hailed by the ado- 
ration of the public, at once as its property and 
idol, she seemed to Adrian's eyes exclusively and 
solely his ; — while she addressed her exertions to 
the ears of an enraptured multitude, she seemed 
to Adrian's feelings in especial communication 
with himself. — Other hearts might thrill beneath 
her accents ; — other souls glow with enthusiasm 
as the light of Silvestra's genius shone upon 
their obscurity. But Adrian knew that hers 
had beat, perhaps was still beating, responsive 
to all his emotions; and that the tears her 
pathos wrung forth from other eyes, had started 
at his bidding from her own. Denied all other 
sympathy, debarred from intercourse with those 
who engrossed his heart, he felt himself irre- 
sistibly attracted towards the scene of Silvestra's 



76 THE OPERA. 

triumphs; and not even the Duke of Cardigan 
himself was a more sedulous attendant at the 
Opera than Adrian Maldyn. 

Meanwhile the conduct of the duchess relative 
to that unfortunate infatuation on the part of her 
son which had been the means of hastening 
her back to England, was characterized by her 
usual firainess and discretion. Instead of pro- 
crastinating her advice while the duke was 
striving to gain courage to address her on so 
unwelcome a point, or rushing with impetuous 
precipitation into a discussion of the affair, she 
waited a few days to determine, by her own 
observations, the extent to which he had already 
pledged himself; and then mildly and affec- 
tionately acquainted him, that the rumour of 
this strange attachment had already reached her. 

" I could neither hope nor wish that it should 
be otherwise," was his reply. " If I have re- 
frained from addressing you on the subject, my 
silence, dearest mother, has proceeded solely 
from a reluctance to give you pain ; not from 



THE OPERA. 77 

any expectation that you will judge me with a 
severe judgment. You shall remonstrate with 
me, however, as long and as harshly as you 
please; I am anxious to hear every argument 
that can be brought against me." 

" You are neither a boy nor a fool," was his 
mother's reply. " You are as well aware as 
myself of all that can be urged against the 
madness of expecting from a person accustomed 
to exhibit her person and talents on a public 
stage, that decent modesty of mind which most 
men covet in a wife ; or from a woman accus- 
tomed to assume, for hircj the tone and sem- 
blance of every passion, good and evil, that 
delicacy of feeling and sentiment you have ever 
professed to exact in the choice of your female 
friends. If the attractions of Mademoiselle 
Sandoni be sufficiently powerful to prevail 
over your own repugnance to the degra- 
dation of such an alliance; — over your reluct- 
ance to introduce an opera-singer into the 
dwelling of your fathers, the presence of yo 



78 THE OPERA. 

mother, the society of your innocent sisters, 
I dare not hope that my own eloquence will 
suffice to move you from your determination." 

'' You are right, mother, — you are right ; 
always right, — always judicious ! " replied the 
duke. " I have said all these things to myself; 
I have pondered deeply and long over the dis- 
honour of engrafting a public performer upon 
my family. I should have thought that my 
pride would have secured me from such a 
temptation ; I should have hoped myself to be 
the last man in England likely to be fooled into 
the commission of such an extravagance. Judge, 
then, of all it costs me to declare to you that 
I feel the happiness of my life to be in Made- 
moiselle Sandoni's keeping ! I have seen no 
woman in any walk of life so beautiful, so 
graceful, so gifted, so gentle ; or capable of so 
great an act of self-devotion as that of sacri- 
ficing every feeling of her heart, every inclina- 
tion, every prejudice, to secure the comforts of 
life to the old age of a somewhat petulant fa- 



THE OPEEA. 79 

ther. Tell me, dear mother, is there any thing 
in the world's wonder, or the conventional 
forms of life, worthy to be balanced against 
the joy of calling such a being one's own?" — 

" Heaven forbid, " replied the duchess, " that 
I should permit my worldly pride, or any feel- 
ing equally unchristian, to interfere with your 
happiness ! — But I own I am inclined to survey 
the affair with greater caution ; with eyes un- 
prejudiced by the extraordinary influence of 
Mademoiselle Sandoni's attractions. All I ask 
of you is to avoid precipitation. Ere you 
commit your honour by a proposal to this girl, 
inform yourself whether the tenour of her hfe 
justifies the high opinion you have formed of 
her. We already know, from your friends Prin- 
cess Roccabella, Prince Giustiniani, and several 
other persons of high respectabihty, that her 
character at Rome and Naples stood eveiy test, 
and procured her a degree of public esteem 
rarely accorded to those of her profession. But 
in making her your wife, my dear Cardigan, 



80 THE OPERA 

you ought to know more. You ought to make 
yourself acquainted with the habits of her 
youth, — the authenticity of her history, — the 
real character of Colonel Sandoni. For my own 
part, I cannot augur well of the virtues of a 
man who would purchase luxuries for himself 
at the cost of such a sacrifice on the part of an 
only daughter/' 

" It is too true !" replied the duke, ruminat- 
ing over his mother's suggestions ; " I ought 
to do, — I will do all this." 

" That I should find myself counselling my 
son to adopt such precautions in the choice 
of a wife as are usually taken in that of a 
hired servant ! " — involuntarily exclaimed the 
duchess, clasping her hands meekly on her 
bosom. 

" My dear mother," cried the duke, seating 
himself by her side, " command me to desist 
from this connexion, tell me that it will insure 
your misery, and I will give it up for ever." 

" I have no rioht to claim such a sacrifice at 



THE OPERA. 



81 



your hands/' was her tranquil reply. " A 
mother has nothing to render in exchange for 
such an act of resignation. In the course of 
nature, my son, I must one day leave you ; and 
why should I deprive you of a consolation for 
your latter years ?— No, Cardigan, no ! Examine 
this business dispassionately. Prove to me and 
to yourself that it is likely to secure your per- 
manent happiness,— that you are justified by the 
brightness of the exception in breaking through 
all the established rules of society, — and I will 
withdraw my opposition, will accept the daugh- 
ter you have chosen for me. But do not for 
the sake of an idle predilection sacrifice your 
own respectability, and the comfort of all your 

family." 

" My dear mother shall be obeyed,'' answered 
the Duke of Cardigan, respectfully raising her 
withered hand to his lips. " I feel all the force 
of her forbearance in deigning to argue, where I 
admit her right to interdict. But believe me," 
he continued, in a lighter tone, " you have a 
E 3 



82 THE OPERA. 

coadjutrix you little suspect in all these opinions. 
Silvestra herself instead of profiting by my in- 
fatuation, to hasten my proposals, has carefully 
avoided all occasions for the declaration of my 
passion. I have never been permitted for a 
single moment to see her alone ; nor does she 
exert herself for my amusement, or seek to 
engage my attention so much as that of various 
persons whose admiration cannot be the object 
of a matrimonial speculation. Young Maldyn, 
for instance, — whose encreasing attachment to 
Miss Fitzgerald, she cannot but perceive, and 
on whose regard she can have no design, except 
as the friend of Constance; — whenever he 
enters the room, let her be sunk into the most 
profound reverie, or wearied and dispirited by 
her professional exertions, she instantly brightens 
into a cheerful mood, and unveils those brilliant 
powers of address so much beyond the mere 
routine of her theatrical triumphs." 

" A coquette, then, by your own avowal," 
observed the duchess. " Well, my dear son ! 



THE OPERA. 83 

remember I exact your promise, — yom* word of 
honour, — to address especial letters of investiga- 
tion to your Italian friends ; and to desist from 
any serious engagement till you are secure of a 
satisfactory result." 



84 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER V. 



I am his sister — 
The eldest daughter of his father's house, 'Z 
Calm and unwearied is my love for him. 

JOANNA BAILLIE. 



But although the good duchess was thus 
prudently moderate in the expression of her 
disapprobation, (a dignity of conduct which 
only tended to confirm her influence over the 
mind of her son,) his sisters were far more ex- 
plicit in the acknowledgment of their regrets 
and mortification. 

'' We shall lose you, my dear Cardigan, we 
shall lose you f cried Lady Mary, throwing 



THE OPERA. 85 

down her work with a desponding air, as he 
was passing the morning in their dressing-room. 
" We cannot love you, nor feel on the same 
confidential footing with you again, when we 
know your affections to be engrossed by a 
person whose habits, views, and connexions 
have previously allied her with so many de- 
graded objects." 

" How, my dear brother," said Lady Georgina, 
" how could I ever receive your affectionate 
embraces with satisfaction, when I reflect that 
that they have been recently bestowed on a 
woman who, were she the wife of any other 
man, T should shrink from in disgust? — ^Think 
of the secret principles — the secret sentiments 
of such a person." 

" You are unjust! — youy my dear sisters, on 
most subjects so liberal, ought to be aware that 
it would not be in nature for Silvestra Sandoni 
to assume, as she does on the stage, the fervour 
of every heroic passion, every generous emotion, 
unless the germ were pre-existent in her own 



86 THE OPERA. 

bosom.— Do not condemn her unheard, unseen ! 
— From my box at the Opera youmay acquaint 
yourself with the excess of her beauty, the. 
extent of her talents : and if 1 have any real 
influence with you — Mary ! — Georgina ! — if 
you have any love for me beyond the form 
of calling me by the name of brother, you will 
so far overcome your prejudices as to meet her 
at Mrs. Fitzgerald's — (I will not say at my 
house, — that might dispose you against her) 
— and form a just estimate of her character." 

"Character — the character of an Italian 
prima donna !^' involuntarily exclaimed Lady 
Georgina. " AVe heard only too much of such 
people during our stay on the continent ; but at 
least we were never required to submit to the 
indignity of holding them hand to hand, and 
hailing them as sisters." 

" Do not ask me to meet her ! " exclaimed 
Lady Mary in her turn. " I am determined not 
to place myself within reach of her incantations. 
Constantia Fitzgerald acknowledged to me last 



THE OPERA. 87 

night that on Mademoiselle Sandoni's first in- 
troduction into society, she was at least as much 
prejudiced against her as ourselves ;— but that 
a few evenings passed in La Silvestra's presence 
had enrolled her among the most ardent votaries 
of your favourite." 

" Constance is an honest, generous girl," 
cried the duke, with enthusiasm ; " superior to 
all the narrow-minded notions and paltry 
jealousies of her sex." 

"Would that you had become a convert to that 
opinion in time to secure you from your present 
dangerous connexion ! " replied his sister. 

" Nay ! there my dear girl, I am altogether 
blameless," said the duke, smiling at her 
eagerness ; " you are well aware that I never 
could extract the least grain of sentiment out of 
Constance, to prompt my attempting the voca- 
tion of a lover. Before you left England, Mary, 
you acknowledged that Miss Fitzgerald seemed 
to have adopted a sisterly frankness of de- 
meanour towards me wholly inconsistent with 



OO THE OPERA. 

the growth of any thing Hke tenderness. 
Georgina ! — I appeal to your candour ! — Did 
you not admit that I had no encouragement to 
attach myself to Constantia ? '' 

"Not so much, perhaps, as you meet with 
from an opera-singer," cried Lady Georgina, 
provoked at being thus convicted. " I was not 
aware, at that period, of the sort of woman you 
were inclined to make the companion of your 
fireside.''' 

" Come, come ! " said the Duke of Cardigan, 
taking his sister by the arm, and drawing her 
towards him ; " I must not have my two little 
sisters grow quarrelsome and malicious because 
/ am weak. Do not give me reason to fear, my 
my dear girls, that I shall meet with severer 
judges in you than in the rest of the world. '* 

"You will indeed," replied Lady Georgina, 
with the tears in her eyes, while she stooped 
over him, and affectionately kissed his forehead. 
" Wtj you know, my dear Augustus, are con- 
cerned only for your happiness and honour. The 



THE OPERA. 89 

' rest of the world/ as you are pleased to term 
the fashionable society of London, will be quite 
content to let you marry your housekeeper, or 
any one else whom they can decently pretend 
to believe respectable, provided your balls, din- 
ners, and breakfasts, are as frequent and as good 
as ever. We have seen of late years what out- 
rageous breaches of decorum have been perpe- 
trated, midenounced, by givers of fetes. Nay, 
when I reflect on the sort of persons who have 
been welcomed and caressed in the great world 
solely in honour of their brilliant hospitality, I 
begin to think — " 

" No ! don't begin to think ! — I do not wish 
you to waste a single reflection on the matter. 
Begin to feel as soon as you please; and let it 
be in favour of a brother who loves nothing 
better (no ! not even Silvestra herself) than the 
two dear companions of his childhood." 

" Well, well ! — since you refuse to listen to the 
voice of the charmer, amuse us with something 
better than this most distasteful to ic. How 



90 THE OPERA, 

has the world been going on? — Sir Henry 
Bagot spent an evening or two with us of 
the week we passed at Paris, and gave a 
wretched account of you all." 

" He told you, I suppose, Georgy, that Field- 
ingham is more than ever engrossed by Lady 
Emily?" 

'' He did ; and assured me that she is con- 
sidered one of the most attractive women in 
society." 

" On the grounds, I suppose, that a bramble 
may be pronounced attractive ; you must stick 
to her, or be torn to pieces in venturing to dis- 
engage yourself. Lady Emily is piquante far 
beyond the charm of piquancy. I never saw so 
spiteful a person." 

" Aha ! — has she been venturing her criticisms 
on Mademoiselle Sandoni ?" 

" No ! my guignon against her is of an older 
date. I have never forgiven her for disposing 
my sister against a man so likely to make her 
happy as Lord Fieldingham/*' 



THE OPERA. 9i 

" And the Charlevilles, — as handsome and gay 
as ever ? Has Lady Romford given up her 
manoeuvres in your favour ?" 

" Don't abuse Lady Romford; I like her. 
Nay, Mary, I did not say esteem her ; but her 
good humour, and good breeding, and good 
looks, and aptitude to amuse and be amused, 
make her a very agreeable companion. If she 
were about to have her arm amputated, I am 
persuaded she would not consider the affair of 
sufficient importance to be intruded on other 
people to the interruption of the amusements of 
the day. She considers that no one has a right 
to ruffle the smooth surface of society ; and her 
greatest regret in dying will be the necessity 
such an event must entail upon her daughters of 
laying aside their pink satin, and going into 
mourning." 

" Fie ! Augustus ! — how can you plead in 
favour of such a heartless person ?" 

" I rather think I prefer heartless people as 
mere acquaintance. One is so much more sure 



92 THE OPERA. 

of finding them cheerful and pleasant, than 
people who are convulsed with sensibility 
at all the minor accidents of life. Now there 
is that pretty httle Mrs. Perceval !— some 
mysterious event — (the nature of which I 
know not, for I never could prevail on 'Stasio 
Pignatelli to explain the affair) — threw her into a 
nervous fever about six weeks ago, and her 
woes, real or imaginary, literally reduced her to 
the brink of the grave. She came to Donning- 
well with a face as pale as that of Seneca's wife ; 
and instead of the lively animated creature she 
used to be as Cecilia Maldyn, — when you were 
all as apprehensive of my falling in love with Lady 
Wrough ton's daughter as you now are of my 
allying myself with a public performer, — I found 
her 'like Niobe, all tears.' I was quite glad 
that I had promised Lady Harriet not to invite 
her to be of the party in the house." 

"Lady Harriet? — What objection has my 
aunt to Mrs. Perceval ? " 

" None on her own account. But young 



THE OPERA. 93 

Maldyn, whom by the way, you will find one of 
the most delightful persons you ever met with, 
is her cousin; and Sir Herbert Manningfield 
seems mightily anxious to prevent any nearer 
connexion between them. Maldyn is son to 
that Austrian general, of whom you have heard 
Manningfield speak with so much affection, and 
whom he visited just before his marriage.'' 

" The present Lord Abbotscourt? " 

" Exactly ! — It appears that some old family 
feud renders it desirable my young friend 
Adrian should form no acquaintance with the 
Wroughton set." 

" And Lady Wroughton, — is she as handsome 
as ever ? " 

" I conclude so ; for I hear her universally 
abused ; but I fancy poor Wroughton is be- 
ginning to be of my opinion, that there never 
existed a more imperious, disagreeable woman. 
He looks heartily ashamed of himself whenever 
I meet him ; and rarely appears in society." 

" So much as he used to be sought after and 
courted ! " — 



94 THE OPERA. 

" That he still is. Lady Wrougliton acting 
upon Mary's view of things, that a cloth of da- 
mask is the true drapeau-hlanc of ancient re- 
nown, makes it her banner, and finds a brilliant 
crowd always at hand to fight under her ensign. 
She is immensely rich ; and no one gives such 
rechercht dinners to such excellent parties. By 
the way, I am going there to-night. Mrs. 
Perceval has come to town to spend the spring 
with her mother ; and her ladyship seems re- 
solved to exorcise the fiend ennui, or whatever 
other blue devil has taken possession of her 
pretty Cecilia. She is to give Saturday supper 
parties after the opera; and balls alternately 
with my own Thursdays." 

" We shall have a merry season ; — Anastasio 
Pignatelli was here the day we arrived (a 
greater mad-cap than ever), and told us his 
mother had soirees - every Monday, and that 
Lady Romford was going to establish a night 
for charades and tableaux." 

" Aha ! — I thought I saw symptoms of ma- 



THE OPERA. 95 

temal anxiety beginning to arise in her mind ! 
This is Lady Sophia's fifth season, Lady Clara's 
fourth ; and not a proposal for either, these two 
years past, except Sir Henry Bagot, who was 
frowned away as quite beneath their notice. 
But the worst mortification attending poor Lady 
Romford's labours, has been Constantia's rejec- 
tion of her son. Have you heard that Miss 
Fitzoerald refused Lord Bruton down at Don- 
ningwell ? — I myself overheard the proposal 
made and declmed, as they were taking shelter 
from an April shower under a beech tree in 
Windsor Forest ; and though I coughed as loud 
as I could without choking myself, I found it 
impossible to make Bruton understand there 
was an auditor of his professions." 

" And Constance refused him ! — Yet he is 
very highly spoken of, and a very attractive 
young man. I wonder which of her admirers 
she does really like ? " 

" At that time 1 thought her disposed to 
favour Adrian Maldyn ; and the Manningfields 



96 THE OPERA. 

are most anxious to promote a marriage between 
them. But Mademoiselle Sandoni informed me 
last night she had good reason to know that 
such a match is quite out of the question ; and 
she, you know, is in Constantia's confidence." 

" I trust, then. Miss Fitzgerald''s choice of a 
lover, will be more rational than that of a 
friend." 

" And there is a young Hanoverian," con- 
tinued the Duke of Cardigan, " a remarkably 
gentlemanly fellow, living at present with Mal- 
dyn, who is most melo-dramatically enamoured 
of poor Constantia." 

" Baron Adelberg ? — Pignatelli spoke of him 
as a highly accomplished, elegant person." 

"And so totally unsophisticated by the march 
of affectation, that he sits listening to Miss 
Fitzgerald's singing, with the tears streaming 
down his face. Poor girl ! it must annoy her 
amazingly to be made ridiculous by his absur- 
dity." 

" Were I in her place, it would not annoy me 



THE OPERA. 97 

SO much as to find half the men in London 
paying their addresses to my thirty thousand a 
year." 

" Ah ! here is Lady Harriet, who will let us 
into the secret. My dear aunt, pray inform us 
whether Constance is likely to be moved by the 
tears of Baron Adelberg, — or the smiles of the 
Chevalier de Villevargues, — or the fastidious 
yawns of Ugo Pignatelli?'^ — 

"I trust by neither; — Sir Herbert will be 
miserable if his niece should marry a foreigner. 
We were in hopes at Donningwell that some- 
thing was going on between Adrian Maldyn 
and Constantia, — (I am not sure that Manning- 
field did not write to give his father a hint of 
the business) ; but Mrs. Fitzgerald assured me 
this morning we were mistaken, and that Lord 
Abbotscourt's son had actually formed another 
engasfement." 

" Indeed!" cried the Duke of Cardigan. 
" With whom, I wonder? — He hves entirely in 
our set, and I have never seen him pay parti- 

VOL. III. F 



98 THE OPERA. 

cular attention to any woman but Miss Fitz- 
gerald." 

He started ! — for at that moment the famili- 
arity between Mr. Maldyn and Silvestra Sandoni 
at the Donningwell ball recurred to his remem- 
brance. Could it be ? — was he forestalled with 
the object of his rash attachment, and by the 
man he had himself forced upon her notice ? — 
And why not? — Adrian was young, handsome, 
brilliant, — younger and handsomer, and far more 
brilhant than himself; — opulent too, though not 
in proportion to his own wealth, but sufficiently 
to dazzle the imagination of a foreigner ; and of 
a rank in life at least worthy the ambition of an 
opera singer. Yes ! — he no longer doubted that 
Maldyn, profiting by his own indecision of pur- 
pose, had pressed his suit upon Silvestra, and 
had already the happiness to call her his own ! 

The colour rushed into his face, and as 
quickly deserted it, as this idea took possession 
of his mind. But without giving utterance to 
a conjecture which he knew would elicit from 



THE OPERA. M 

his sisters and aunt expressions of triumph and 
congratulation such as must necessarily prove 
vexatious to himself, he took up his hat to leave 
the room, and pursue his own inquiries on the 
subject either by a direct interrogatory addressed 
to Adrian, or an appeal to the candour of 
Mademoselle Sandoni. 



F 2 



100 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER VI. 



A wide chasm ensues 
Pilled up at last with interesting news : 
Who danced with whom, — and who are like to wed, 
And who is hanged, — and who is brought to bed. 



" What is this business between your 
brother and the Nevilles ? '' — said Crawford to 
Ugo Pignatelli, as they were dining together 
at Lord Brabazon's with a large party of 
fashionable men. 

*^ Faith ! I hardly know.— I make it my bro- 
therly duty to interfere as little as possible in 
'Stasio's affairs. I have no money to lend him 
when he gets into debt, — no pity to bestow on 



THE OPERA. 101 

him when he gets into love ; and am not even 
available as a second when he gets into a 
quarrel. He could not find a more useless 
personage for his Pylades than myself." 

" Well, well ! we are all aware of his beino- 
in love. 'Stasio's passion for that statue of 
snow, Lady Neville, has been a matter of won- 
der to the world these two years past ; and I 
understand we are soon hkely to hear of his 
being in the third dilemma you have instanced. 
Lord Neville, after exhausting all the ordinary 
and most approved modes of being disagreeable, 
has now hit upon that of jealousy. Some wise 
person or other, naturally anxious to get rid of 
his society, has persuaded him to stay at home 
and worship his household gods with more de- 
votion, lest he should chance to find Anastasio 
PignatelU kneeling at the altar." 

" I am sorry for that," said Ugo, musingly. 
" 'Stasio has been very much out of sorts lately, 
I could not guess why. But next to the provo- 
cation of finding oneself honoured by the friend" 



102 THE OPERA. 

ship and good opinion of a brute like Neville, I 
am inclined to class that of being the object of 
his malevolence. He is a man I am half afraid 
of; — an ape vs^hich bites you in jest, but the 
wound festers and destroys you.*" 

" He must not be allov^^ed to bite your brother 
then," observed Lord Brabazon, eagerly. " Ana- 
stasio is one of the finest fellows in England ;— »• 
high-minded, honourable, and the best compa- 
nion in the world. No, no ! we must keep him 
out of the hug of Neville the bear." 

" For my part I have always been anxious to 
keep him out of the society of Neville's wife,*' 
cried Lord Bruton. " She reminds me of the 
Goddess of Reason in Tommy Moore's ballad ; — 
her very shadow chills one to death. There is 
nothing so dangerous for a man as one of those 
right-earnest matter-of-fact liaisons ; — possess- 
ing all the gravity and formality of marriage 
without its decency — " 

" All the peril of lawless love without its 
charm, I suppose you are going to add," inter- 



THE OPERA. 103 

rupted Harry Crawford. " Well, Bruton, you 
may at least console yourself with the certainty 
that Lord Southford will never shoot you 
through the head ; there was nothing the least 
matter-of-fact in your flirtation." 

'' Since you choose to speak of it in the past 
tense, I have no answer to make; but you 
would oblige me still more by talking of some- 
thing more amusing to the company and more 
agreeable to myself" 

This rebuke was uttered so gravely, that 
Harry Crawford did not dare persist in the 
persiflage he was accustomed to lavish on 
similar occasions. Lord Bruton, though a gay 
thoughtless fellow, was deficient neither in 
sense nor spirit ; a person not to be trifled with 
by the flippant double of Lord Brabazon. 

To the early part of the conversation mean- 
while, no person present had lent a more 
anxious ear than Adrian Maldyn. Like Count 
Ugo, he had noticed a peculiar air of irritation 
about Anastasio Pignatelli, which he had been 



104 THE OPERA. 

apt to attribute to disapprobation of his own 
conduct towards Mrs. Perceval, and to resent 
accordingly. But, although relieved from the 
suspicion that the frank and warm-hearted 
'Stasio cherished any unkind feelings towards 
himself, he was scarcely less concerned to trace 
this angry mood to a disagreement with Lord 
Neville. Adrian had seen enough of Gertrude's 
husband, daring their intimacy at Paris, to be 
aware that he was a man of dangerous temper. 
Having been unfortunately engaged as auditor 
to one of Brabazon's gastronomic rhapsodies 
while the recent explanation w^as going on, he 
was only half informed on the subject; but now 
that all objection to his visits was removed by 
the residence of Mrs. Perceval w ith her mother, 
he resolved to call on Lady Neville the follow- 
ing day ; with the view of making himself inci- 
dentally acquainted with the cause of misunder- 
standing between Pignatelli and her lord, and 
offering his services as mediator. 

But while these intentions occupied his mind, 



THE OPERA. 105 

a subject was in discussion among his com- 
panions, scarcely less interesting, and still more 
misatisfactory. 

" I own I saw nothing conclusive between 
them at Donningwell," said Bruton, in answer 
to a question from Lord Fieldingham. " I have 
not the least notion that Cardigan is the man 
to venture on so independent a measure as to 
marry an opera-singer. Among us all, there is 
no one so much under the influence of the pro- 
prieties of life. He is the most prudish fellow 
on earth ; completely managed by his mother 
and sisters and the Manningfields, yet without 
any suspicion of his subjection." 

" It does not follow because he lives on 
happy terms with them all, that their authority 
goes for much with him. 'Stasio and I, for in- 
stance, have the greatest confidence in my mo- 
ther, and never had a moment's dispute with 
her in our lives : but it is precisely because the 
countess never dreams of interfering with our 
affairs," observed Usro Pio-natelli. " Were one 
f3 



106 THE OPERA. 

of US to emulate this extravagance of Cardigan's, 
and marry an opera-singer, I doubt whether she 
would do more than shrug her shoulders at 
such a preposterous piece of absurdity.'' 

" And that simple gesture of contempt would 
not be without its authority," observed Lord 
Fieldingham. '^ Whatever forms the extreme 
evidence of disapprobation from a person we 
love, obtains importance in our eyes. Unless 
Cardigan's measures are already taken, unless 
he is positively engaged, even his mother's un- 
expected arrival will startle him from his pur- 
pose for a time. The duchess is so charming a 
person, so amiable, so gentle, so reasonable, 
that it will require some courage on his part to 
decide on a step calculated to assure the misery 
of her future years." 

" And his own ; — what can exceed the mad- 
ness of such an alUance!" cried Lord Brabazon. 
" A man of Cardigan's tenacious honour to 
choose a wife whose profession must inevitably 
expose him to the most injurious suspicions, 



THE OPERA. 107 

even if her conduct hereafter should be of a 
nature to satisfy his mistrust." 

" Do you mean/' inquired Adrian, almost 
trembling for the answer he was about to re^ 
ceive, " that the Duke of Cardigan is likely to 

carry his infatuation so far as — to — to ." 

" Marry Mademoiselle Sandoni ? " said Craw- 
ford, who had too often seen Mr. Maldyn in 
Silvestra's company without any demonstration 
of intimacy between them, to suspect that he 
entertained any particular interest on the sub- 
ject. '^ They say so ! — He is with her every 
day, — the old colonel dozing over his snuff-box 
and the foreign papers, while they pursue their 
courtship ; and unless the Lady Ellerbys' pre- 
dications and the denunciations of the duchess 
should prevail against the eloquence of Sil- 
vestra's blue eyes, we are likely to see her in 
crimson velvet and minever at last/' 

'' Cardigan is determined to bid a high price 
for his opera-singer!'' said Brabazon, contemp- 
tuously. 

" Nay ! " interrupted Lord Bruton, " we 



108 THE OPEEA. 

have no right to form one injurious conclu- 
sion against the lady. Mademoiselle San- 
doni is a woman of the most undeniable cha- 
racter. I was at Naples last winter ; where, in 
defiance of all the calumnies of that most scan- 
dalous place, she preserved the reputation of a 
saint." 

" She is a wonderful creature," observed 
Lord Fieldingham. " T am half inclined to re- 
joice that Cardigan is going to make a fool of 
himself on her account, lest I should be tempted 
to do so myself To me, there is a positive 
enchantment about her ; a spell like that which 
fixes our eyes upon some fine intense old 
picture, — some Titian or Vandyke ; — or our in- 
terest upon some powerful story — some Boc- 
caccio-ism." 

'^ And after all," observed Harry Crawford, 
eager to coincide in the opinions of Lord Field- 
ingham, who passed for one of the cleverest 
men of the day ; " after all when an actress has 
preserved so spotless a character as the Sandoni, 
and through a career of such unexampled temp- 



THE OPEKA. 109 

tation, where is the risk of making her one's 
wife ? — Surely the gold is a safer purchase 
which has passed through the crucible ? " 

" I would stake my life on the purity of her 
conduct !'* cried Lord Bruton. " I was relat- 
ing to Cardigan the other day, an affair which 
fell under my own obseiTation at Naples ; and 
which proves her to be one of the most sensi- 
tively delicate beings in existence. I have no 
idea of mistrusting a woman, simply because 
she is placed in the w ay of mischief.*' 

" He comes too near, who comes to be denied ! '* 
quoted Lord Brabazon, with emphasis. 

" Too near our sister, our daughter, or our 
wife," persisted Lord Bruton. " But an actress ! 
— what can possibly protect an actress from the 
intrusion of the idle coxcombs of the day ?" 

" Then why select our wives in such a quar- 
ter?" cried Brabazon. "Think you we shall 
any of us respect the Duchess of Cardigan the 
more that she has been subjected to the inde- 
cent courtship of a set of libertines ? ** 



110 THE OPEEA. 

" I know nothing about respecting/^ cried 
Ugo Pignatelli ; " but admire her I both shall 
and do ! I never saw any one so beautiful, I 
neyer felt any one to be so captivating." 

" Maldyn says nothing on this delicate sub- 
ject?" cried Brabazon, conscious that his fa- 
vourite guest had remained silent during the 
debate. 

" You must remember that having always 
resided on the continent, I am no judge of your 
manners and customs." 

" I suspect that within the pale of your 
church there is no salvation for such alliances. 
Your Catholic will neither bury nor marry an 
actress in consecrated ground." 

'^ We are obliged to be more cautious than 
you Protestants," said Adrian, anxious to evade 
the topic; " We have no facility of divorcing 
ourselves from a bad wife, to diminish the im- 
portance of our choice." 

Enough, however, had already transpired on 
the subject of his friend Cardigan's engage- 



THE OPERA. Ill 

ment with the Sandoni, to produce the strongest 
uneasiness in his mind. He had long been 
aware from the communication of Lady Harriet 
and the Fitzgeralds, of the pecuUarly amiable 
character of the Ellerby family, and of the con- 
sequence universally attached in society to the 
choice of the duke. He knew that such a misal- 
liance as that meditated by his grace, was' likely 
to prove a source of discord among persons hitherto 
united by the strongest bonds of affection, and 
the origin of dishonour to one who now stood de- 
servedly high in popular opinion. No one could 
be more generally liked than the Duke of Car- 
digan, — no one more universally' esteemed ; — 
but with Stephanine Haslinger as the wife of 
his bosom, what changes might not be effected 
in his character ? — 

" And all this," thought Adrian, while the 
brilliant discourse of the surrounding guests 
subsided into an indistinct murmur, in his ears, 
" all this mischief has arisen from my want of 
decision — my want of candour ! Had I boldly 



112 THE OPERA. 

stepped forward to confront this artful woman, 
she would not have dared persist in her impos- 
ture; had I frankly avowed to Cardigan, my 
doubts, my certainty of the giddiness of her 
conduct — but no ! how would it have been 
possible — how would it have been honourable 
for me to undertake such a task ; or how, with 
Cecilia lying upon a bed of sickness, could I 
be at the trouble of seeking out this opera 
singer, on her first arrival, and threatening her 
with exposure? — Long before I met her atDon- 
ningwell, the mischief was accomplished, — her 
reputation fixed, — her conquest effected ! It is 
only myself I have committed by seeming to 
sanction her fraudulent manoeuvres; I have 
done nothing towards augmenting the infatua- 
tion of Lady Harriet's nephew, — nothing 
towards the establishment of Silvestra's fair 
fame. Rash indeed was it of my father to con- 
fide me to my own unadvised guidance in this 
land of eccentricity; of which the habits and 
singularities are equally strange to my modes of 



THE OPERA. 113 

thinking and feeling. — Why, why did he not 
accompany me to England ! " 

Such were the reflections of Maldyn, as he 
escaped from Lord Brabazon's Burgundy, to 
fix himself in his usual place at the Opera, 
with his eyes, and heart, and soul engrossed by 
the charms of its prima donna. Even irritated 
as he was by the notion of the pernicious influ- 
ence they were said to exercise over the Duke 
of Cardigan, he could not listen to the melli- 
fluous accents of Silvestra's voice, without 
feeling his bosom thrill responsive to the appeal. 
Her very step as she traversed the stage, 
seemed measured by the purest inspirations of 
natural grace; her very glance to be irradiated 
by native loftiness of soul ! 

Of all the adventitious attractions which tend 
to the captivation of the human heart, perhaps 
there is none more powerful than that of popu- 
larity. It is this, rather than youth, beauty, or 
ability, which lends enchantment to the actress. 
To rivet, in our turn, the favour and admiration 



114 THE OPERA. 

of one on whom all eyes are turned with favour 
and admiration, — of one whose slightest move- 
ment, — ^whose slightest word — has power to call 
forth the rapturous plaudits of an adoring 
multitude, is a vulgar triumph, sought and 
valued by many besides the vulgar. Among 
females, a similar sentiment attaches itself to 
illustrious men. A great statesman, — a great 
commander, — a great poet, — a great any thing, 
may be ugly, old, dull, ungraceful; — he cannot 
be unattractive. WelHngton in the bloom of 
his fame, — Byron in the flush of his triumphs, — 
Sheridan, — Fox, — what woman was sufficiently 
philosophical to remain indifferent to the homage 
of such sons of genius ? — In both sexes vanity 
may be the secret instigator of this worship of 
the laurel; but it is not the less universal, — the 
less fatally devout. 



THE OPERA. 



11^ 



CHAPTER VII. 



The precipice she stood on was immense ; 
— So was her creed in her own innocence. 

BYROV. 



It was a singular coincidence, that while 
Adrian Maldyn thus secretly bewailed the ab- 
sence of his father, and his own lack of counsel 
in his difficulties. Lord Abbotscourt was quietly 
seated in the easy chair of a small library in a 
mansion overlooking the Regent's Park, secured 
by Sir Herbert Manningfield for his use ; — with 
Draunzt lying at his feet, and Corporal Arm- 
brust smoking a pipe in the hall below. — 

No sooner had the recluse of Elzstein received 



116 THE OPERA. 

from his old comrade a hint of the predilection 
entertained for Miss Fitzgerald by his son, than 
surmounting at once all the inertness, natural 
and acquired, of his mind and body, he resolved 
to visit England in person, without delay and 
strict incognito; to watch unsuspected over 
Adrian's further measures, — ascertain unob- 
served the character of the lady he was likely to 
receive as a daughter-in-law, — and be at hand 
the very first moment his sanction was required 
for the event. Difficult as the veteran would 
have found it to have quitted Elzbach at the in- 
stigation of any interest secondary to that of 
watching over the welfare of his boy, he had so 
hastened the preparations for his departure, and 
so mysteriously concealed its motives and ob- 
ject, that the wondering Hiob found himself 
traversing^ a certain island of the Rhine which 
presents the frontier between Germany and 
France, before he found leisure to close those 
paralysed jaws, outstretched by wonder at the 
precipitation of his master's movements. It was a 



THE OPERA. 117 

far different errand which had originated his last 
triumphant march across the vineyards of Cham- 
pagne; — it was a very different cause which had 
induced his preceding visit to Paris, among the 
legions of victorious Germany ! 

Lord Abbotscourt found the pause of a few 
days in that city requisite to enable his infirm 
frame to meet the fatigues of his remaining 
journey ; and desirable in order to give some 
intimation to his friend Manningfield of his ap- 
proaching arrival and ensuing projects. This 
timely warning sufficed, indeed, to prepare a 
commodious residence for his stealthy visit to 
the great Babylon ; but it could not screen the 
anxious father from the unsatisfactory tidings 
which awaited him in taking possession of his 
new abode, relative to the supposed partiality of 
Adrian for the niece of his old friend. 

" I fear we must renounce all hope of a con- 
nexion between them," observed Sir Herbert, 
after his first burst of welcome to the beloved 
friend of his early years. " I was a fool to trust 



118 ' THE OPERA. 

SO sanguinely to the prompting of my own in- 
clinations ; but I own I did fancy your lad was 
beginning to pay particular attention to Con- 
stantia. My sister and Lady Harriet were both 
of the same opinion, and both as anxious as 
myself for a favourable result. But in the midst 
of all my hopes and expectations, we went down 
together to a country-house of the Duke of 
Cardigan's to pass the holidays ; and whether 
the young people came to know each other 
better on so close an acquaintance, and so con- 
ceived that mutual contempt which is prover- 
bially said to be the offspring of familiarity, I 
cannot say. But certain it is, that Adrian has 
never once visited my sister's house since their 
return to town: and that his name never so 
much as escapes Constantia's lips.*' 

Lord Abbotscourt was too deeply vexed and 
disappointed to venture on any expression of 
his feelings on the subject. He strove to speak 
of other things, — of his journey, — of foreign 
politics, — of the satisfaction experienced by his 



THE OPERA. 119 

old friend Baron Adelberg that Gustavus's visit 
to England was drawing to a close. But sud- 
denly and, as it were, involuntarily reverting to 
his mortification, he exclaimed, 

" Well, well ! it is perhaps fortunate that I 
should have lent a too easy credence to your 
suggestion of Adrian's passion for Miss Fitz- 
gerald. Nothing of less moment, I suspect, 
would have spurred my indolence to forsake my 
old crow's-nest on the Traun, or to have un- 
rooted the corporal out of his quarters at Elz- 
stein. Yes ! I am glad you fell into the error, 
my dear Manningfieid, since it has brought me 
hither." 

" If such a result were not compassable by 
any other means," said his friend, *' I have still 
more reason than yourself to rejoice in my own 
blunder. But tell me, — since you are here, — why 
renounce the happiness of your son's society? 
— why deprive him of the advantage of your 
guidance ? — why — " 

" Oh ! that we had a rational answer to bestow 



120 THE OPERA. 

on all the whys that suggest themselves in the 
various vicissitudes of our destiny ! Mine, were 
I to give it candidly on the present occasion, 
would only move your scorn. '* 

" My dear Maldyn — my dear Abbotscourt ! 
(for I love you best by the name that is most 
familiar to me) believe me I have not been so 
long estranged from the sound of your voice, 
without finding myself inclined to accept un- 
questioned, any argument it may serve to convey 
for some time to come." * 

" Well, then ! — since I have no right to hope 
you will assist in the maintenance of my secret 
without being made aware of its motive, — know 
that independent of my desire to form a delibe- 
rate and unbiassed judgment on the disposi- 
tions of my son, I have a prejudice weighing 
on my mind ; — ^but, no ! Manningfield ! — I dare 
not, even with yow, discuss the subject! For- 
give me, I cannot speak more explicitly !" 

" If you intend any reference," said Sir 
Herbert, gravely, " to those singular opinions 



THE OPERA. 121 

on the subject of fatality formerly entertained 
by poor Wrottesley, you have nothing to fear 
either from my ridicule or powers of reasoning. 
Even in his lifetime/ 1 thought them singularly 
confirmed by the circumstances of his destiny, 
— of your own ; and a more extended view of 
human life has not weakened the impression. 
But tell me in what way this notion operates 
against your visit to England ?" 

" I am in hopes that the evil fate of the 
Maldyns may have expended itself on that ge- 
neration of which, since the death of the late 
Lord Abbotscourt, I form the sole living re- 
presentative. Adrian belongs to a younger, 
and, I trust, a happier race ; nor am I willing 
that the shadow of my destiny should extend 
its gloom over his own. I am anxious to sever 
my existence as much as possible from that of 
my son, till the fortunes of his life are deter- 
mined. When I know him to be happy as a 
husband and a father, I may venture to ap- 
proach him." 

VOL, III. G 



122 THE OPERA. 

" That determination is the inspiration of 
true love," cried Manningfield ; " enthusiastic, 
generous, disinterested ; but very doubtful in 
its soundness of judgment. I cannot put my 
trust in the vv^isdom which deprives a young 
man of Adrian's inexperience of the counsels of 
your riper years." 

" Ah !'' cried Lord Abbotscourt, shaking his 
head ; " we talk and feel like greybeards ; but 
I am often tempted to doubt v^rhether the honest 
impulses of youth are not better guides than 
the w^orldly-wise craftiness derived from the 
bitter schooling of society. They may be less 
admirable in the eyes of man ; but they are 
surely more acceptable to Heaven." 

" And pray, my dear Abbotscourt," cried his 
friend, " hov^^ vv^ould you have reconciled your- 
self to these ^ youthful impulses' had they in- 
stigated an attachment between Adrian and his 
cousin ?" 

"What cousin?" 

" Cecilia Perceval, — the daughter of Katha- 



THE OPEEA. 123 

rine Darley. You may remember that I an- 
nounced to you, three years ago, the marriage 
of your brother's widow with the Marquis of 
Wroug;hton ?" 

" You recal the circumstance to my remem- 
brance ; but she is a person who, for charity's 
sake, I always labour to drive from my recol- 
lection." 

" Fortunately she does not seem inclined to 
refresh them* You will find in Lady Wrough- 
ton one of the leaders of London ton ; and her 
daughter, Mrs. Perceval, is now a widow, and 
certainly one of the prettiest women to be met 
with in our gay circles. At one time the mo- 
ther made a bold cast of the net in her behalf 
at the Duke of Cardigan ; — but it would not do. 
/ have not sufficient charity to drive from my 
remembrance those revelations of your unfor- 
tunate brother, which serve to place her cha- 
racter in its true light ; and therefore spared no 
pains to circumvent her plans. People speak 

well, however, of Cecilia ; — and were she not the 
G 2 



124 THE OPERA* 

child of sucli a mother, — the scholar of such an 
adept — " 

" And Adrian has been .thrown into the so- 
ciety of these people!" interrupted Lord Ab- 
botscourt. " I was wrong, — decidedly wrong, 
— to send him from Germany till his fate was 
secured against them by some strong attach- 
ment elsewhere/' 

" Nay ! you have nothing to fear," replied 
his ancient comrade. " Lady Harriet has re- 
peatedly seen them together, — and can bear 
witness to the ineffable disdain practised upon 
your son by the marchioness." 

" And her daughter?" — 

" Has been dangerously indisposed ever since 
my arrival in town for the season : — Adrian can 
scarcely have even seen her." 

" But they will now frequently meet?" 

" And I have therefore judged it necessary to 
forewarn him against her attractions. Trust 
me, I have said every thing on the subject 
which I thought would fall from yourself on 



THE OPERA. 125 

such an occasion; — and judging by the man- 
ner in which he received my exhortations, I am 
convinced you have nothing to fear. To say 
the truth, — though I have no grounds for alarm- 
ing you on the subject, — I fear his sudden 
change of feehng towards my niece arises from a 
very different cause." 

"Indeed!" 

" Ay, indeed, my dear Abbotscourt ! The 
world is not what it used to be in our young 
days. Society was bad enough then; but it 
had the decency to take some pains to conceal 
its sins. Noiv it glories in its shame ; or rather 
acknowledges no shame on any grounds, — at 
any instigation." — 

" You alarm me ! Adrian is not exempt from 
the giddiness of his age ; but I never thought 
him a profligate." 

" Nor is he, as far as I am acquainted with 
his habits. But you are to know that it has be- 
come the fashion among our fine gentlemen to 
marry actresses ; and that now-a-days, no degree 



126 THE OPERA. 

of infamy is too glaring to exclude a tolerably 
good-looking woman from the honours of the 
peerage." 

" Actresses ? " 

" Actresses and opera singers ! There is just 
now a girl in London who has turned the head 
of every young man of fashion." 

" Ay, ay, La Silvestra ! — I have heard of her. 
Her professional reputation is great on the Con- 
tinent." 

" It appears that her 2«zprofessional reputa- 
tion is equally unimpeachable; and foremost 
among the fools her attractions have bewitched, 
appear my wife's nephew the young Duke of 
Cardigan, — and your son." 

" My son ! — ^and you seriously apprehend 
that he has thoughts of making her his wife ? " 

" I am unwilling to suspect my friend Adrian 
of such egregious folly ! But even if he have, — 
my nephew, I grieve to say, is beforehand with 
him ; and there appears little chance that an 
English duke should be refused by an Italian 
prima donna." 



THE OPERA. 127 

'' For the love of God ! my dear Manning- 
field, interrogate him on the subject." 

" Such is my intention ; it was only this 
morning that I heard the circumstance acci- 
dentally discussed at my club." 

" Already the talk of the town ? " 

" That is no evidence of the truth of the 
rumour. My horse once started at a review in 
the park, — or perhaps I mig;ht make it prance a 
little to attract the notice of a certain Lady 
Harriet Ellerby ; — and I was killed, vi'ith a broken 
leg and several severe contusions by all the 
newspapers, before breakfast the next morning. 
After all, your son may have done little more 
than fix his eye-glass on Mademoiselle Sandoni 
from his box at the Opera." 

" Perhaps they confound him with Baron 
Adelberg, who has an inveterate passion for 
music ; or — " 

^" I observed Adrian Maldyn and the mis- 
chievous girl playing forfeits together at Don- 
ningwell Castle ; and at that time I never saw 



128 THE OPERA. 

two persons on less companionable terms. By 
the way, Abbotscourt, was he ever in France ?" 

" Certainly ; on his way to England." 

" But not previous to his journey last 
Christmas ? " 

" No ! Why do you ask ? " 

" Singular enough ! — Did you ever hear him 
mention his Italian friend Count Anastasio 
Pignatelli ? "— 

" His letters have occasionally alluded to 
the Pignatelli family in general; relations, I 
conclude to our old acquaintance Princess 
Bagnagliori." 

" But he had no connexion with the count 
durino- his residence at Gotting-en ? " — 

" None, I should imagine." 

" Very strange ! " again observed Sir Herbert 
Manningfield. '^ There is no accounting for the 
freaks and fancies of young men. But tell me, 
since the object of your sudden visit to Eng- 
land has so unluckily failed, what are your pre- 
sent intentions, — when do you think of seeing 
Adrian ? '^— 



THE OPERA. 129 

" Not yet ! Unless on further inquiry you give 
me reason to believe an interview between us 
desirable, I will maintain here the same seclu- 
sion I should have preserved at Elzstein; 
hoping you will occasionally tear yourself from 
your cheerful fire-side to enliven my own, as a 
substitute for the good old Brother Remigius 
whom you used to rally so unmercifully during 
your visit to Elzbach." 

" As often, my dear fellow, or perhaps oftener 
than you will. But Lady Harriet ? — If you 
consider it advisable to avoid my house so long 
as you wish to keep the secret of your arrival 
in England, you must pemiit me to bring my 
wife to visit you." 

" If she will deign to honour the retreat of a 
cripple ! " said Lord Abbotscourt, glancing at 
his crutches. " And your children too — let me 
see them all — ^let me love them all ! " 

" Well, well," cried Manningfield, taking 
leave, '' we will be with you to-morrow, to 
bring you, I trust, more satisfactory intelligence ; 
G 3 



130 THE OPERA. 

while you will probably tell me that my friend 
Hiob has quaiTelled with the bevy of fair 
dames which I see my agent has provided for 
your establishment, for being somewhat better 
looking than the ogresses who used to do his 
spiriting and yours in the old Scliloss." 

While this conversation, so interesting to the 
feelings of Adrian, was passing in unsuspected 
secrecy within a short distance from his own 
dwelling, he was proceeding to fulfil his pur- 
posed courtesy towards Lady Neville. Perhaps 
unwittingly to himself he might entertain some 
little expectation of learning from her lips 
something more than the cause of misunder- 
standing between Anastasio and her lord ; — per- 
haps some allusion to Count Pignatelli's views 
on the hand and fortune of Miss Fitzgerald. 
Although Cupid is portrayed as the blindest 
among the gods, jealousy is supposed to be 
more clear-sighted; and it was highly improba- 
ble that the cold and stately Gertrude should 
have lost an admirer so long exclusively her 



THE OPERA. 131 

own, without clearly ascertaining his induce- 
ments to such treacherous fickleness. 

As Maldyn ascended the stairs to be introduced 
into her presence, it suddenly occurred to him that 
Brabazon and Bruton's allusions to Anastasio's 
dissensions with the Nevilles, might refer to the 
wife rather than to the husband ; and even that 
the embarrassment of his friend in his presence 
might be attributable to a consciousness of the 
detection of his scheme upon Constantia. There 
was nothing, however, in Lady Neville's mode 
of reception at all tending to encourage a flow 
of confidence between them. Although the 
natural pride of her sex had prevented Cecilia 
Perceval from confiding to her friend the un- 
generous use made of her ring by the recreant 
Adrian, Lady Neville had a general idea that 
his conduct towards his cousin had been highly 
blameable. Herself debarred from indulging 
in the inclination of her heart by the existence 
of a hateful and permanent barrier, — by the op- 
posing claims of a sacred duty, — she could not 



132 THE OPERA. 

conceive that any motive less povy^erful w^as 
capable of preventing two persons really at- 
tached, from devoting their lives to each other. 
She was tempted to consider that love as trifling 
and superficial which put forth any other than a 
legal or sacred obstacle as a sufficient plea for 
the abandonment of its rights. While still 
believing Adrian's absence, and Adrian's silence, 
during their sojourn in Italy to arise from the 
delicacy that forbids the advances of an ob- 
scure man to a rich widow, she had been his 
eager and unfailing advocate; but on finding 
him established in England, rich, noble, and 
distinguished, and learning from Cecilia that 
some family disagreement was the sole cause 
of disunion between them, — she dismissed 
Count Pignatelli's friend from her regard, as 
cold, and cautious, and worldly-minded. Still, 
however, she had daily expected his arrival at 
Neville Hill ; daily prophesied that he would 
find it impossible to reside so near Cecilia, and 
refrain from rushing to the presence of one who 



THE OPERA. 133 

had recently endured so much for his sake. But 
when the time passed away, and still he came 
not, — and when, on occasion of their unsatisfac- 
tory visit to Donningwell, she saw him engaged 
in familiar intercourse with La Silvestra, and a 
dramatic flirtation with Miss Fitzgerald, — and, 
moreover, after she had supported her friend 
sobbing upon her shoulder from the court-yard 
of the castle to the swing-gate of her own 
lodge, — she began to form a still more degrading 
opinion of her former favourite. 

But Adrian Maldyn was not a person against 
whom any woman w^as likely to retain an evil 
feeling, to whom he permitted himself to exhibit 
the real warmth of his heart, — ^the real candour 
of his character. He had ever entertained a 
high opinion of Lord IN^eville's wife, — he re- 
garded her with deep interest as the friend of 
Cecilia, — as the companion of their mutual days 
of romantic happiness ; and in spite of the for- 
mahty of her reception, he could not feel towards 
her otherwise than as a woman of real merit, 



134 



THE OPERA. 



whom circumstances tended to make peculiarly 
interesting to himself. He did not at first ven- 
ture so much as to name Mrs. Perceval. He 
knew that the subject was little likely to create 
a kindlier feeling between them ; but at once, 
and boldly, and frankly, spoke of Anastasio. 

It was astonishing how, at the sound of that 
beloved name, the current of Lady Neville's 
blood appeared to melt from its congealment, — 
or how assiduously she seemed to labour for the 
repression of the miracle. But nature was too 
strong for the effort ; and in spite of herself she 
began from that moment to look on Adrian as 
a friend, — as the friend of her friend, — as the 
favourite of one who was far more a favourite 
with her than the strictness of her principles 
dared avow. But as the words " have you seen 
Pignatelh to-day?' escaped his own lips, he 
noticed an involuntary, apprehensive glance 
round the apartment from the eyes of Gertrude, 
as if she feared the very walls might hear the 
inquiry, and understand its implications. 



THE OPERA. 135 

" No ! — not — not for many days," — she replied, 
the crimson flush which had for an instant over- 
spread her cheek, subsiding as she laboured to 
render her voice articulate. The attempt was 
ineffectual. In spite of herself it trembled ; — nor 
could the industry with which she now ad- 
dressed herself to the task of cutting asunder 
the leaves of a new work that lay on the table 
beside her, avail to conceal the confusion of her 
countenance. 

" Indeed !" exclaimed Adrian, detemiined to 
push his inquiry, but with all the tenderness of 
a kind and feeUng nature. "Then you have 
had no occasion to notice what / have seen 
with regret, that he is looking ill and un- 
happy. — I never saw him so out of spirits — so 
out of health." — 

This was spoken in a somewhat interrogative 
tone; but Lady Neville, instead of replying, 
inclined her head only the more diligently over 
her book ; and but for the witness borne by its 
rustling leaves to the tremour of her hand, while 



136 THE OPERA. 

the paper-knife remained unconsciously clenched 
in her grasp, Adrian might perhaps have sup- 
posed her engrossed by the undertaking. 

" I was about to inquire last night of Mrs. 
Fitzo-erald (by whose side I saw him sitting for 
an hour or two at the Opera) what could be the 
origin of his distemperature ; but she had left 
her box before I made my way thither." 

Lady Neville's agitation diminished. No ! 
she was certainly not jealous of Constantia; for 
before the termination of this speech she found 
calmness sufficient to reply in pretty nearly her 
usual tone of voice. 

^' Count Pignatelli's health suffers from the 
chmate of England : he was better at Naples, 
and talks of returning to the Continent." 

'^ Indeed !— Not very shortly, I trust?— I 
shall do my best to persuade him to remain till 
the close of the season. He arrived so late, that 
I have seen nothing of him. No, no I— he must 
not quit us again so soon." 

" I, on the contrary, sincerely hope he may 



THE OPERA. 137 

not be induced to delay his journey !" said 
Gertrude, in a faint voice, — yet not actuated by 
a tone of pique or jealousy. 

Nay!" cried Adrian, resolved to bring her 
to some more ample explanation. ^^ Let it then 
be a trial of influence between us. Your lady- 
ship will do your utmost to prompt Anastasio's 
departure ; and / shall exert all my powers to 
detain him here." 

" Not if you love him !" faltered Lady Ne- 
ville; suddenly letting fall the object over 
which she had attempted to conceal her face, 
and raising her eyes, unreservedly, to that of 
Adrian. " No, no ! — not if you are really his 
friend ! — There is danger for him here, Mr. 
Maldyn !— " 

" Danger?" 

" What avails it to maintain this hypo- 
crisy between us!" cried Gertrude, clasping 
her hands together, as if in a paroxysm 
of emotion wholly beyond her own con- 
trol. " You are in his confidence; — you 
know, perhaps even more explicitly than my- 



138 THE OPERA. 

self, the idle hopes which have so long attached 
him to my side, the weak partiality which has 
so fatally endeared him to myself.'' The tears 
streamed from her eyes as she spoke; and it 
seemed to be through a convulsion of her very 
heart that these confessions were impelled from 
her hps. " Heaven knows how eagerly I have 
striven to subdue such dangerous feelings in 
him, — in myself. Yet severe as has been the 
task, its failure is doubly painful ; and the grief 
which bewilders me, and disgraces me at this 
moment, suffices to prove that I have striven 
in vain." — 

She covered her face with her hands; and 
Adrian, embarrassed and distressed, — embar- 
rased by the singularity of his own position, 
and distressed by the sight of a woman's 
tears, — already repented the perseverance 
by which he had provoked so strange a 
scene. 

"In a word, Mr. Maldyn," she continued, 
again glancing round the chamber, as if appre- 
hensive of being overheard, '^ since I saw you 



THE OPERA, 13Si 

last, Anastasio's intimacy here has been made 
the subject of idle scandal in the world, — of 
dispute between Lord Neville and myself. He 
is no longer admitted as a visiter to this house; 
and instead of submitting himself for my sake 
with patience and prudence to a measure which 
perhaps our own folly may have justly origi- 
nated, he seems determined to provoke some 
further mischief by the vehemence of his re- 
monstrances, and the ungraciousness of his 
demeanour towards Lord Neville. — Oh ! Mr. 
Maldyn, — if you love Anastasio, dissuade him 
from this folly ; — represent to him the wisdom 
of absenting; himself from Ens^land till he shall 
learn to regard this affair with indifference, — 
till he shall have formed connexions inconsis- 
tent with — with — " Involuntarily she shrunk 
from the utterance of words revolting to her 
delicacy; yet unconsciously threw into her 
tone and manner a fervour of tenderness 
more expressive than the fullest confes- 
sion. By a silent gesture equally involun- 



140 THE OPERA. 

tary, Adrian Maldyn testified his sympathy in 
her emotions. 

"Tell him to go!" she exclaimed. "Tell 
him to leave this country ; — or Heaven knows 
what evil, what fatal consequences may wait 
on his delay. — Can it be any gratification to 
himself, does he imagine that it is any consola- 
tion to me, to meet him as a stranger in the 
nightly crowds of society; — to see his mourn- 
ful face, to witness his failing health, his lost 
cheerfulness ? — No ! it is wretchedness ; it is 
misery; — and though I have subjected myself 
to no greater reproach than the infirmity of 
character which suffered this lawless attach- 
ment to obtain a dominion over us both, I feel 
that I am guilty ; — I know that I am miserable ; 
— and blame him as the origin of all my afflic- 
tions. Mr. Maldyn! I beseech you, persuade 
Anastasio to quit this country !" 

" I will do every thing you desire," replied 
Adrian, anxious at least to pacify her distress. 
" But, alas, since the fatal period ofmyahena- 



THE OPERA. 141 

tion from Mrs. Perceval, Pignatelli has regarded 
me with a most unkind judgment. He 
cannot tolerate in another any thing less un- 
compromising than the ungoverned violence of 
his own passions." 

" Surely he has reason, — surely we have all 
reason," said Lady Neville, subsiding into a 
calmer tone, " to consider that you decided 
too rapidly, too conclusively, against the accom- 
plishment of your marriage with my friend ? " — 

" Did you but know," replied Adrian, " yow 
who have a mind so conscientious, how 
terrible, how insuperable are the obstacles 
which suddenly made themselves apparent, 
you would rather inchne to applaud the 
courage with which I have decreed my own 
wretchedness." 

" Areyousincere ?"— said Gertrude, gradually 
regaining her ordinary serenity of voice and 
features, — though her swollen eyelids still bore 
testimony to recent tears. " Do you then still 
and truly love Cecilia?"— 



142 THE OPERA. 

*' Still! — ever! — most truly, — most fer- 
vently!" cried Adrian. " But she has already 
assumed the cold sternness of indifference. 
I meet her in the world. I saw her at the Opera 
only last night, — surrounded by a train of 
votaries ; and if not encouraging, at least en- 
during their pretensions. She never loved me 1" 

" Have you forgotten the song which my 
friend Silvestra so unceremoniously made public 
that detestable night at Donningwell ?" — 

" Ah ! that song I — ^those precious verses !" 
interrupted Maldyn. " Dear Lady Neville, — 
can you, — will you oblige me by bestowing them 
upon me ? — I heard them only once, — and most 
imperfectly." 

" Willingly," said Gertrude, opening a little 
travelling - desk which stood on the table. 
" Since the mischief is done, — since you, who 
of all others were to be debarred from a perusal, 
are already acquainted with the ballad, I have 
no hesitation in complying with your request. 
Here," she continued, taking a folded paper 



THE OPEEA. 143 

from the desk, and giving it into his hands, 
" copy these pages and return them to me ; — 
they contain a few stanzas, referring to that 
disastrous epoch at Paris." 

Adrian rose to receive the precious gift. 
And as he stood by Gertrude's side, his cheek 
flushed with emotion, the doors of the drawing- 
room were suddenly thrown open; and Lord 
Neville burst into the room ! — With fluttered 
consciousness, Mr. Maldyn thrust the papers 
hurriedly into his bosom ! — 



144 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER VIII. 



Patient in suffering, she had learned the art 
To bleed in silence, and conceal the smart ; 
And thence, though quick of feeling, had been deemed 
Almost as cold and loveless as she seemed ; 
Because to fools she deigned not to reveal 
Wounds they would probe, without the power to heal. 

A. A. WATTS. 



Nothing can be more provoking than to 
feel that we are looking guilty, where we know 
ourselves to be eminently innocent. Adrian 
Maldyn was well aware that his face was as red 
as scarlet, and his eyes bewildered by an ex- 
pression of dismay, even before Lord Neville 
gave vent to the coarse irascibility of his nature. 



THE OPERA. 145 

" I have to thank you, sir/' cried his lordship, 
after fixing his eyes for some seconds with a 
contemptuous sneer upon his wife and her guest, 
'* to thank you for your obUging subservience 
to Lady Neville's views. I might have sup- 
posed that she would find no emissary more 
active, more zealous in her service than the 
bosom-friend of Count Anastasio Pio;natelli» 
I might have imagined that the correspondence 
between them would scarcely be entrusted to 
a less confidential messenger." 

" My lord ! " exclaimed Adrian, more aston- 
ished than indignant on finding himself the 
object of a charge so wholly unmerited, "you 
must allow me to wait till your present ex- 
citement — your present illusion has subsided, 
ere I demand an explanation of this most extra- 
ordinary accusation." 

" Explanation ? — are not my words sufficiently 
clear ? — Do I not plainly make it evident that I 
have detected that lady's — that woman's — means 
of communication with a man whose society I 

VOL. III. H 



146 THE OPERA. 

have compelled her to renounce, — and to whom 
she seems inclined to adhere, till I have ex- 
posed her conduct to the world by turning her 
out of my house ? " — 

Lady Neville grew paler and paler, and 
trembled from head to foot, with an air of guilty 
consciousness, such as might have condemned 
her in the opinion of a more lenient judge than 
her husband. 

'^ She, forsooth, who was so prodigiously 
demure and godly," persisted Lord Neville, 
" that not a hazardous w^ord must be dropped 
in her presence, — not a person of equivocal re- 
putation appear in her society ; — she, who was 
shocked by the levity of the times, and carried 
her sanctified hypocrisy with so much ceremony 
to church, to pray for the amendment of sinners 
far less flagrant than herself! — Hateful V cried 
he, with still louder vehemence, stamping en the 
ground as he spoke, " I have no patience to 
think of my own credulity — " 

" Your ladyship will permit me to retire," 



THE OPERA. 147 

said Adrian, bowing with profound respect to 
Lady Neville, " that I may not be made an mi- 
willing auditor of accusations I know to be so 
wholly groundless, without having authority 
to confute. I leave you, madam, in the earnest 
hope that you have a better support than my 
good wishes, to enable you to confront this un- 
merited harshness. At some other time, my 
lord, I shall be more exphcit in my explanations 
with yourself." 

Adrian Maldyn gained the door of the apart- 
ment, while Lord Neville interrupted the mut- 
tered grumblings of his rage, to express that he 
was ready, — willing, — eager, — to give Mr. Mal- 
dyn any explanation, in any manner, he might 
judge necessary ; and Gertrude, pale and cold, 
and rigid as marble, — with her arms meekly folded 
on her bosom, — stood expecting that the frantic 
violence of her husband's w^ords would end 
with the injury of a blow. — Adrian had already 
opened the door, — was already in the vesti- 
bule, — when a similar apprehension, an involun- 
h2 



148 THE OPERA. 

tary horror of leaving that gentle and unprotected 
woman alone with the infuriated brute who 
called her his own, induced him to pause, — to 
return, — to address himself in terms of depre- 
cation to the man who had so unprovokedly in- 
sulted him. 

*' It occurs to me, Lord Neville," said he, 
" that the extraordinary accusations in which 
you have been pleased to indulge, may possibly 
originate in the circumstance of my receiving a 
letter from her ladyship's hand as you entered 
the room. You saw me conceal a paper ! — I was 
a fool to do so, not only because it has exposed 
Lady Neville to your unjust suspicions, but be- 
cause my susceptibility on the subject is be- 
neath the firmness and dignity of a man. Here 
it is, — take it, — peruse it;— you are probably 
acquainted with my cousin Mrs. Perceval's 
hand-writing; — nay, that very document has 
probably already met your eye. Li what does 
it confirm the charge you prefer against your 
wife, or me ? " 



THE OPERA. 149 

Lord Neville, swelling with sullen rage, was 
obliged to accept the paper so frankly offered ; 
and for a moment a gleam of humanity seemed 
to soften his nature, in the delight with which 
he hailed the removal of his suspicions. But 
the influence of a vile temper, and a harsh soul, 
overpowered the dawning impulse ; and he re- 
lapsed into the sullen self-conviction of having 
been unjust. He felt himself bound to offer 
some apology to Mr. Maldyn, more especially 
when he remembered the air of scorn with 
which Adrian's spirit had repelled the attack ; 
but as to his wife, she was at present only excul- 
pated from a trifling portion of the guilt and 
shame he had learned to attribute to her conduct. 

" I have to beg your pardon, Maldyn," he 
exclaimed bluntly, as he refolded the paper, 
and returned it. " You may one day learn to es- 
timate the irritation of a husband's feelings, who 
has as much cause for suspicion as myself. I see 
I have no concern in this ; but you will admit 
that appearances were strongly against you." 



150 THE OPERA. 

" I will admit nothing that implicates the 
honour of Lady Neville/' cried Adrian, with 
spirit. " For myself, as you express regret for 
the offence offered, I have no further resentment 
to appease." 

He hastened to quit the room, w^here his 
presence served as an additional embarrassment 
to the parties ; but on quitting Lord Neville's 
house, he could not but revert to the torment 
Cecilia Perceval must have experienced during 
the lifetime of her husband, if indeed his mo- 
rose and jealous temper resembled so closely 
as was said the disposition of Gertrude's lord. 
Nor could he consider, without infinite regret, 
the affliction betrayed by Lady Neville, previous 
to this untoward incident. To behold a virtuous 
mind struggling with the frailties of human 
nature is a distressing spectacle; — to see it 
insensibly yielding beneath their influence is an 
appalling one. — He saw^ that the object of 
Anastasio's lawless attachment, was still faith- 
ful to her duties, — still pure in heart, — still sin- 



THE OPERA. 161 

cere in good intentions. But he knew that she 
had sheltered a destroyer in her bosom ; and 
icho might fix the limit to which his ravages 
would extend ? — 

Still more perplexing were his meditations on 
the probability of a serious issue between Pigna- 
telli and the irritated husband, who was so fiercely 
disposed towards him. Without recurring for 
a moment to his own suspicions concerning the 
young count's views on Constantia, he deter- 
mined on expostulating with him, and seconding 
the entreaties of the unhappy Gertrude that he 
would absent himself for a time from England. 
But on reaching Anastasio's lodgings, he was 
informed that his friend was engaged in ful- 
fiUing his duties at the embassy ; and on reach- 
ing the embassy, found him engaged (as diplo- 
matists of five-and-twenty may be occasionally 
found), in gossipping away the morning with 
Adelberg and Villevargues. Instead of a dis- 
cussion on international law, or a dissertation on 
the demolition of the fortresses and the obliga- 



152 THE OPERA. 

tions of the barrier treaty, they were busy with 
a critique on the ball given the preceding night 
by Lady Wroughton ; and the chevalier, wholly 
unaware of any family connexion between Mal- 
dyn and her ladyship, was prompt to display 
the flippant arrogance of his Parisian foppish- 
ness, in retailing all the Lady Charlevilles' sar- 
castic commentaries on the ftte and its giver, 
and in expressing his own genuine admiration 
of her beautiful daughter. Adrian could wil- 
lingly have ejected him from the room either by 
the door or window, while he amused himself 
with a glowing description of the charms of 
Mrs. Perceval and of his own sentiments to- 
wards her. 

" Do you know, my dear Pignatelli," said he, 
" 1 was stupid enough to fancy when we met in 
Italy that she was attached to yo?/, and to won- 
der that you did not prefer her soft, gracious, 
flowing loveliness to the grandiosity of Lady 
Neville ? — Always, under your forgiveness, that 
woman reminds me of nothing but Mont- 
Blanc." 



THE OPERA. 153 

" She reminds you then of one of the most 
subhme and purest objects in the universe; I 
can have no hesitation in forgiving you such a 
comparison; — more particularly as you are 
enough of a traveller to have witnessed the 
beauties of the hour when 

Sunset into rose-hues sees it wrought I ^ 

and consequently to appreciate the charm de- 
rived from the exclusive blushes of a woman, 
naturally the most reserved and frigid of her 
sex.'* 

'^ Ay, ay ! — but I have seen you bask very 
contentedly in the rose-hues of la petite Perce- 
val's smiles, for all these heroical flights. She 
certainly was in love — either with you or some- 
body else. It could not be that great hippopo- 
tamus !Xeville — it was not Bagot — nor Bruton ; 
— I never could exactly make it out," 

" And why should you ? " — said Pignatelli, 
abruptly. " You had no pretensions to her 
favour. You, my good Villevargues, are philo- 
H 3 



154 THE OPERA. 

sopher enough to ' worship the echo/ — to adore 
the bibble-babbling gossip of the Charlevilles." 

" I certainly prefer the sprightly animation of 
Lady Clara to the soft, sighing, sentimentality 
which does not happen to be dedicated to my- 
self; — and which, in Mrs. Percevars case, 
seemed consecrated, like the Ephesian altar, to 
an ' unknown deity.' " 

" You will oblige me, Villevargues," inter- 
rupted Maldyn, who had been suffering martyr- 
dom during these flippant allusions to Cecilia, 
" by mentioning that lady's name less freely in 
my presence. I have the honour to call her a 
near relative." 

" Ay, indeed ? '' cried Villevargues, leaping 
from the floor to dislodge a moth which had 
settled on the chandelier ; *' then you have an 
indisputable right to claim that obligation at 
my hands : though for my part there is no name 
in whose honour I am less inclined to betake 
myself to my spear and shield, than those of my 
own kindred. Should you ever visit Gascony, 



THE OPERA. 15l» 

my dear Maldyn, (and your countrymen are apt 
to perform that pilgrimage when led by their 
thermomania as far as Barrege and Bagneres), 
you will find a set of antediluvian uncles and 
aunts of mine, barons and baronesses en crac, 
who I bequeath to your good will and pleasure. 
Quant aiix Villevargues, — mercy be thanked, 
there is but one in the world." 

" Mercy be thanked ! " secretly reiterated 
Baron Adelberg, to whom the unsentimental 
egotism of the chevalier was an object of inex- 
pressible disgust. 

" Mrs. Perceval will not be long in need of 
a champion," observed Pignatelli, secretly de- 
lighted to notice the ardour with which Maldyn 
entered into Cecilia's cause. " Lord Bruton 
has declared himself her suitor in form : and I 
should think nothing would eventually impede 
so unexceptionable a connexion. Louisa of 
Savoy, and Margaret of Austria have already 
signed their ratification of the treaty ; — Lady 
Romford being enchanted (since Miss Fitz- 



156 THE OPERA. 

gerald is not to be had) to accept a daughter- 
in-law with such prospects as the heiress of the 
Templetons ; and Lady Wroughton being satis- 
fied (since the Duke of Cardigan is otherwise 
disposed of) to put up with an earl expectant." 

'^ And Bruton ? " — cried Villevargues. " They 
said at Naples he had been despatched thither 
by his family to break off his attachment to 
Lady Southford ; and on my arrival here, I 
found him on his knees to la belle Constance." 

" Very possible, — nay, very true ! '"* replied 
Anastasio, drily. " Bruton is the sort of fellow 
who lives on his knees ; — a votary of Venus to- 
day, Minerva to-morrow; — and all the nine Muses 
in succession — as a nine day's wonder. Some 
people insist on roses all the year; you, Ville- 
vargues, cannot do without fine weather ; you, 
Adelberg, cannot dispense with the concord of 
sweet sounds. Poor Bruton's peculiar taste is 
equally engrossing ; it is necessary to him to be 
always in love with the prettiest woman of the 
society in which he moves.*' 



THE OPERA. 



157 



" He is a good-natured free-hearted fellow/' 
said Villevargues, " almost as animated as his 
charming sister." 

" Well ! I hope he will prove half as agree- 
able as his charming wife,— for wife I doubt not 
she will become before the season is over. 
There is every thing in favour of such alliance ; 
parity of age, rank, religion,— no two people can 
be more unexceptionably matched." 

" No two people could be more unexcep- 
tionably matched," faintly re-iterated Adrian, 
when he perceived that Anastasio's chief ob- 
ject in these declarations, was to probe his own 
bosom to the quick. " It would be an alliance 
equally honourable to herself and to her family." 
Gustavus Adelberg looked at him for a mo- 
ment in amazement; but satisfied that Mal- 
dyn was instigated by a most heroical impulse 
of magnanimity,— a fever of self-immolation,— 
he felt it his duty to applaud so sublime a sa- 
crifice. Perhaps for his own part, he was not 
sorry to learn that the adored Constantia was 



158 THE OPEKA. 

thus positively delivered from the suit of one 
among her legion of adorers. 

" Who is going to Lady Romford's to-night? " 
cried Anastasio. ^' Who belongs to her ta- 
bleaux ?'' 

'* I do," replied Maldyn, with affected list- 
lessness. 

" And I." 

" And I/' replied Villevargues and Adelberg. 
" We shall have leisure to admire the progress 
of the courtship ; Lady Wroughton v^^ill be 
there in full force." 

" And the Fitzgeralds," said the baron. 

" And / am to take iEneas in Guerin's Dido; 
and Lady Clara ." 

" Is to be the Queen of Carthage. Well, 
w^ell ! I dare say we shall all make asses of our- 
selves in the course of the evening. Mips Fitz- 
gerald has undertaken Portia in the Casket 
scene, after a sketch by Briggs ; and I am the 
Prince of Morocco." 

" And this morning — " inquired Maldyn — 
'* What are you all going to do ? " 



THE OPERA. 159 

" I have promised to look in and see whether 
a rehearsal is wanted in Arlington-street," said 
the chevalier, carefully arranging a rose-bud in 
the button-hole of his cachemere waistcoat, with 
the hope that some of the party would make 
particular inquiries into its origin or destination. 

" And I," said Adelberg, ^' have promised 
Miss Fitzgerald to search through the ware- 
houses of all the foreign music-sellers, for a 
copy of Thekla's Lament, — ^ Der Ekhivald 
hransetJ " 

" And yourself, Pignatelli ? " inquired Adrian, 
with some earnestness. 

" Myself am going to inquire after Lady Ne- 
ville ; after which I am to ride with Mrs. Per- 
ceval and Bruton." 

" Will you allow me to accompany you as 
far as the Nevilles' ? I have not had half an 
hour's conversation with you since you returned 
from DonningwelL" 

*' With pleasure. But are you sure you have 
not promised to chaperon the Duke of Cardigan 
to Colonel Sandoni's?'' 



160 THE OPERA. 

'^ They say, my dear Maldyii/' cried Ville- 
vargues, " that your friend takes prodigious 
care of his own reputation, and has made you 
promise you will never leave him tete-a-tete 
with La Silvestra/' 

" Thei/ say ! — who say ? " 

" The fools and knaves of course," inter- 
rupted Anastasio Pignatelli, anxious, in spite of 
all his indignation against Adrian, to keep him 
from a quarrel with his Gascon guest : — " ' On 
dif — ' si dice' — ' man sagt' — what would you 
have more in invalidation of all the sayings and 
doings upon earth ? " 

" I will go with you as far as Arlington- 
street," said Gustavus Adelberg, taking his hat 
and the arm of Villevargues, with similar views. 
" Perhaps 1 may be wanted in the grouping." 
And a few minutes afterwards Pignatelli and 
his friend were left alone. 

Just however as Adrian was on the point of 
commencing his warning, Count Ugo, accom- 
panied by one or two diplomatic attaches, 



THE OPERA. 161 

rushing into the room in the highest levity 
of boyish spirits, effectually frustrated his in- 
tentions. 

" Come with me a moment to my mother's 
apartment/' whispered Anastasio, drawing him 
aside, " or we never shall get rid of these people. 
I have a note to write previous to going out, 
which I wish to leave on my way." 

Too determinately bent on a private inter- 
view with Anastasio to be disheartened by these 
frequent interruptions, which seemed as if a 
fatahty were attached to the affair, Mr. Maldyn 
patiently followed his guidance into Countess 
Pignatelli's morning room; where he was greeted 
with the graciousness ever bestowed by that 
lady upon the friends of her favourite son. 
He was provoked, indeed, to find that while 
'Stasio was engrossed with his billet, her excel- 
lency, by way of rendering herself agreeable to 
his visiter, began a series of rhapsodies on the 
merits of the Silvestra; to whom, during her 
stay at Donningwell, she had chosen to fancy 



162 THE OPERA. 

him enamoured. But after exhausting her vein of 
extravagant commendations, Adrian was inchned 
to pardon all the irritated feehngs her error of 
judgment had roused in his bosom, when he 
noted the affectionate manner — affectionate, 
without any parade of maternal tenderness — 
with which she leaned over Anastasio's chair 
while he was sealing his letter, to remind 
him of a promise he had made his father 
to complete some despatches before dinner- 
time, as a courier Avas likely to be sent off in 
the course of the evening. 

" Benastelli has undertaken the job," replied 
he, pleadingly ; ^^ and both the secretaries are at 
home; so I am going with Maldyn to Lady 
Neville's," 

"But your father, mio amico?'' (What a 
soothing name does the title of " friend " appear, 
as bestowed by the parents of the continent 
on their grown sons !) 

" You, dearest mother, will excuse me to my 
father." 



THE OPERA. 163 

" Ah ! 'Stasio ! — do I not too often excuse you 
to your father ? — does he not too often overlook 
your neghgence ?" 

" Tme, mother, true ! I am a trespasser on 
his patience — on yours. But this time I will 
follow your advice. — I icill stay at home and 
finish the despatches, if you can prevail upon 
Maldyn to be as forgiving as you render the 
rest of the world, and persuade him to give up 
the happiness of my society." 

"Willingly, — on condition that I have your 
promise to visit my house before you enter any 
other. Or, shall I stay and sit with you while 
you accomplish your task?" 

" No, no ! — I bar intruders," cried the coun- 
tess. " I must not have our bureau disgraced 
by the carelessness which would ensue from 
your gossipping. / undertake to promise you, 
Mr. Maldyn, that Adrian shall be with you for 
an hour's ride before dinner." 

" You see how it is, my dear Adrian ? — You 
see I am kept a close prisoner by these unduti- 



164 THE OPERA. 

f ul parents of mine. Well, take your hat and 
wish us good-bye, that I may the sooner shuffle 
through the business of the day. An revoir, — 
I shall be with you as soon as I can." 

And he slipped away through the door by 
which they had entered from the official side of 
the house ; while Adrian, vexed and disappointed, 
took a ceremonious farewell of the graceful and 
gracious Countess Pignatelli. 



THE OPERA. 165 



CHAPTER X, 



La ville est partagee en direrses societes, qui sont comme 
autant de petites republiques, qui ont leurs lois, leurs usages ; 
leur jargon, et leurs mots pour rire : tant que cet assemblage 
est dans sa force, et que I'entetement subsiste, Ton ne trouve 
rien de bien dit, ou de bien fait, que ce qui part des siens, et 
Ton est incapable de gouter ce qui vient d'ailleurs : cela va 
jusqu'au mepris pour les gens qui ne sont pas inities dans 
leurs myst^res. 

DE LA VILLE. 



Satisfied that his friend was provided with 
an employment which must secure him from all 
chance of an encounter with Lord Neville, 
Adrian returned home to enjoy, without further 
delay, the perusal of those papers which had 
been so innocent a cause of dissen,sion with that 
choleric gentleman. 



166 THE OPERA. 

With what tremulous deUght did he ensconce 
himself in the seclusion of his dressing room, — 
close the jalousies to shut out the importunate 
sunbeams, — retreat to the most remote chair, — 
and having issued express commands to Ludwig 
and Ebene that he might experience no interrup- 
tion, and bolted his door against their own intru- 
sion, — draw forth from his bosom the precious 
manuscript; — every word, every letter of which, 
seemed instinct with the sweetest associations 
that memory could conjure. — That beloved 
handwriting ! — How well did he remember the 
formal note of invitation w^hich first placed it 
before his eyes ; the second, less ceremonious, 
which instead of comphments presented, com- 
menced with the vague but welcome familiarity 
of ^' We are going to the Francais to-night ; 
will you join us there? Mars in ^ La jeune 
femme coUre^ is better than any thing you will 
see on your return to Hanover. — C. P/' And 
then the gradual — the minutely gradual pro- 
gress from courtesy to kindness, — from kindness 



THE OPERA. 167 

to tenderness, — from tenderness to the fearless 
confidence of perfect love, — a progress imper- 
ceptible to any casual reader; — to himself 
how dearly — how preciously — how plainly 
manifest ! — And now, as he unfolded the page, 
and gazed anew upon those characters which 
recent circumstances had tended to remove from 
his observation, the thousand reminiscences they 
served to awaken, crowded round his heart till 
all was indistinct. It was some time before he 
sufficiently regained his composure to decypher 
the following lines : — 

No ! tell me not that there was guilt in such a lore as mine ; 
I will not dream an idol soiled what seem'd so bright a shrine ; 
I will not fancy that the sighs I breathed were base or sinful; — no! 
Mine was a love as passionless as human heart may know. 

I loved a spirit that appeared to share my visions wild ; 

I loved a breast fi'om vulgar frailties pure and undefiled ; 

I loved a mind that seem'd inspired with brightness from. 

within — 
Show me in such a love as this the trace of mortal sin ? 

'Tis true one only step I marked where countless thousands 

roved; 
Tis true one voice I heard where thousand busy tongues were 

moved ; 



168 THE OPERA. 

'Tis true one hand I sought whei-e nianj strove my own to 

press ; 
'Tis true one only glance shone out — my sun of happiness ! 

But what of that ? — I knew my heart could wrestle with its 

pain; 
I knew that step was going where we could not meet again ; 
I knew if sleepless nights I bore, they would be borne alone, — 
That my o-wn grief shed not a care on that beloved one ! 

Yet still I loved — all helpless, hopeless, joyless — still I loved ! 
Not much, yet something I would be, — not worshipped, but ap- 
proved ; 
Nor will I fancy such devotion base or sinful ; — no ! 
Mine is a love as passionless as human heart may know. 

" I must go to her ! — I cannot — I will not 
suffer circumstances to obtain a mastery over 
our destiny. The world — my father — no, no, 
no ! — nothing has, nothing s^flZ/have the power 
to disunite two persons thus pledged in every 
thought, in every feeling, in every earthly tie — 
in every hope for futurity. — I will go to her ! — 
What is Lady Wroughton to me ? — oh ! nothing, 
nothing ! — Even Katharine Darley shall be 
nothing— I wdll blot out at once, and for ever, 
the remembrances connected with that fatal 
name," cried Maldyn. 



THE OPERA ^°° 



He started up,-rang for his horse -and in ten 
minutes was at the door of the Marquis of 
Wroughton :— that mansion which, since his 
discovery of the identity between the Marchio- 
ness and the hated Lady Abbotscourt, had 
seemed to his eyes a spot for loathing and 
avoidance !— AVithout hesitation he asked for 
Mrs. Perceval. " Just gone out riding with my 
Lord Bruton ;-and my lady particularly engaged 
with Lord and Lady Romford." 

Adrian's enthusiasm subsided in a moment! 
—He remembered, for the first time, that in 
seekmgto knit anew the ties which had once 
bound him to his cousin, he had something to 
surmount beyond the world's approval of his 
caprice,-beyond his father's displeasure,-be- 
yond even the upbraiding of his own conscience. 
He remembered that the unoffending Cecilia 
could not be more repugnant to Lord Abbots- 
court, than his father's son to the sister of Cecil 
Darley,-to the mother whose alliance he had 
rejected both for her daughter and herself. He 



VOL. III. 



170 THE OPEKA 

turned his horse's head from Lady W.'s door, and 
rode off leisurely towards Kensington Gardens ; 
summoning to his mind's eye the contemptuous 
glances with which she had passed him by in 
public, — the triumphant sneer with which she 
had regarded him the preceding night, while 
with Cecilia on her arm, she collected round 
her the homage of the most distinguished men 
of the day. He had reason to believe her still 
ignorant of the affection which had for a time 
united him with his cousin ; and to attribute her 
manifest aversion to the rage with which she 
resented the insult of a legal prosecution prac- 
tised against her by the brother of her hus- 
band, — the husband of her sister. But he 
felt, — bitterly, despairingly felt, — that there 
still existed between them a mighty gulph, which 
to overleap too hastily would be dangerous and 
alarming. 

It w as, however, a severe trial of his patience, 
when, in the course of his morning's ride, he 
repeatedly encountered Cecilia Perceval, among 



THE OPERA. 



117 



the gay equestrian groups, crowding the ride. 
Aceompanied by her father-in-law the marquis, 
and surrounded by Brabazon, Lord Fielding- 
ham and Ugo Pignatelli, while Lord Bruton 
remained assiduously attendant at her side, 
she displayed the elegance of her figure to the 
gaze of admiring multitudes; and though 
Adrian felt himself at present interdicted from 
approaching her or marking his consciousness of 
her approach otherwise than by respectfully 
hfting his hat, he was unprepared for the cold- 
ness,— the more than coldness, — the indignant 
disdain with which she returned the ceremony. 
What — what could have so far influenced her 
gentle nature, — what could so far change her 
cautious and feminine demeanour ? — Again and 
again he reverted with regret to the accident 
detaining Anastasio Pignatelli at the embassy, 
and depriving him of his only medium of expla- 
nation with Cecilia. 

Meanwhile, as he slowly lounged along by 
the waters of the Serpentine (those waters which 
i2 



172 THE OPERA. 

are as the waters of oblivion to many an eternal 
passion) musing on the strange inconsistency of 
woman's nature, and wholly forgetful of that 
which had appeared to influence his own en- 
gagements with his beautiful cousin, he was 
suddenly recalled from his etherial dreams of 
love and constancy, to the commonplace realities 
of life, by the sight of a '^ little round fat oily 
man" of the law, his friend and quondam patron, 
Mr. Meriton, mounted on his well-known white 
pony, and trotting accurately along his daily 
line of well-defined equestrianism. According 
to his use and wont, Maldyn strove to exchange 
a formal salutation with his father's man of 
business as they passed. But the stuffy httle 
hero reined up so briskly, that there was no 
evading the jerking familiar nod which accom- 
panied his " Good day, good day. Don't be 
in Hanover-square later than half-past six. 
Mrs. Alfred and the girls have set their hearts 
on hearing the whole of the Opera." 

Poor Maldyn was aghast ! — He now remem- 



THE OPERA. 173 

bered that when last visiting that hospitable abode 
on his return from Berkshire, Miss Henrietta 
had expressed so eager and so pointed a desire 
to behold and hear the wonderful Silvestra, and 
had so pathetically bewailed papa's want of syni- 
pathy in denying them an Opera-box, that he 
could not hesitate to place his own at her dis- 
posal. A certain Tuesday, the 14th of May, 
was specified for this act of courtesy ; and Mrs. 
Alfred Meriton, the vulgar, flashy chaperon, 
thought to improve upon the occasion by re- 
questing " Mr. Malting would dine with them, 
and oblige them with the favour of his company 
at the Opera.'^ 

In the embarrassment of having no excuse at 
command, " Mr. Malting" had accepted the 
proposal, with the hope that some interposing 
obstacle would annul the whole arrangement. 
But the 14th of May at length, insensibly to 
himself, made its appearance, — and he was still 
unprovided with an apology, and actually en- 
gaged to dinner with the Meritons; actually 



174 THE OPEEA. 

tied down to them by the politeness unavoidably 
due to a friend of his father j while he would 
have given worlds for hberty to pass the 
remainder of the morning with Anastasio, and 
devote the evening to Lady Romford's tableaux. 
But the evil was too close at hand for a remedy. 
He had nothing now to do but hasten home, 
leave an apology for Pignatelli who probably 
would not make his appearance till seven o'clock, 
and trust to his own ingenuity to get away from 
the Opera as early as possible. His toilet was 
quickly accomphshed ; and not venturing to 
wait till his carriage could be got ready, Mal- 
dyn set off to walk to Hanover-square ; a feat 
he had never happened to undertake before in 
evening costume on a sunshiny spring after- 
noon, and by which, on the present occasion, his 
servants were kept in ignorance of the nature 
of his absence. They knew he was gone out to 
dinner, but " nothing wherefore." 

But although this inopportune engagement 
was of so little account in Adrian's eyes as to 



THE OPERA. 175 

escape his remembrance till reminded of it by 
Meriton, it was not regarded with similar in- 
difference by Miss Augusta and Miss Henrietta; 
who had seldom seen among the Captain 
Browns and Mr. Thomas Martins, of their Glou- 
cester-place and Wimpole-street quadrille par- 
ties, a figure or a face equalling those of the young 
foreigner, who, on his first visit, had been an- 
nounced by their father as heir to an Irish 
Viscounty, with an estate of thirty thousand 
per annum ; and who, independent of such in-^ 
iluential qualifications, was the most accom- 
plished and graceful man of their acquaintance. 
As the opera scheme rendered it impossible to 
gratify a guest so honoured with one of the 
large " dinner parties,' ' they were accustomed 
to regard as the only fitting mode to welcome 
an illustrious stranger, they were forced to 
content themselves w4th demonstrating their 
hospitality by an extra investiture of chains, 
necklaces, Sevignes, bracelets, Ferronieres, rings, 
and girdles, — their brightest satin, and most 



176 THE OPERA. 

sweeping seduisantes ; and papa having already- 
expressed his disinclination to quit the nightly- 
whist of his club for the annoyance of listening 
to "a pack of Signor Squallinis/' they, more- 
over, judged it necessary to enlist the services 
of one of their fashionable beaux, a Mr. 
Howard Tapham, to officiate as the escort of 
Mrs. Alfred Meriton. 

Although the calm and unpretending Maldyn 
augured ill of the over-dressed, over-shoe- 
bowed, over-curled, over-perfumed young gen- 
tleman, who capered through an infinite variety 
of fancy bows as he stood, hat in hand, on the 
hearthrug of Mr. Meriton's fireplace, eager to 
play his part in the ceremony of a formal in- 
troduction with which that Lord Chesterfield, 
of the third estate was in the habit of favour- 
ing his guests, — yet when he turned his eyes 
upon Mrs. Alfred, whose face, rouged to the 
complexion of a red-morocco dining-chair, was 
enchased in a blonde cap, forming an out- 
stretched framework round her head like the 



THE OPERA. 177 

Graundee of a female Gowrie, he was grate- 
ful to the providence of the young ladies in as- 
signing their aunt to the protection of a gentle- 
man so much more ambitious than himself of 
attracting public notice. 

Mr. Howard Tarham was, as it may be 
conjectured, oiSicial ; — for the sponsorial distinc- 
tions of an aristocratic name prefixed to a 
plebeian one, imply that the young Christian, 
so favoured, is intended and expected to rise 
in the world under shelter of its influence. A 
Mr. Addington Thomson, or Bathurst Roberts, 
is sure to be a man within reach of the benefits 
of the Treasury; nor does it create any surprise 
in the public mind to see '' Mr. Wellesley Tit- 
mouse, gent." gazetted as one of his Majesty's 
new ensigns ; or *^ Mr. Beresford Creepmouse" 
promoted to be second lieutenant. So well 
are these things understood in modern society, 
that even Howard Tapham was pretty generally 
pointed out as a rising young man ; though no 
one was at present enabled to attach higher 
i3 



178 THE OPERA. 

significance to his Whitehall duties than that 
he mended a swanquill with singular dexterity, 
and could manufacture an old woman riding 
to market out of half a sheet of folio and three 
inches of red tape. His salary was doubtless 
commensurate with these ambitious labours of 
the state ; and every day he took his modest 
bun at Farrance's, talked largely of the fatigues 
of the session, and blamed himself, as a public 
man, for keeping such abominable hours; ex- 
cited the envy of his brother clerks by the an- 
nouncement, that he had been gallopping till 
dayhght at Mrs. Johnson's ball in Montagu- 
place ; and was engaged to three soiipers dau" 
sa7its after Vaiixhall the following week. 

Howard Tapham had, in fact, passed a severe 
apprenticeship of third-rate London life, from 
sixteen till nine-and-twenty ; and was now 
master of the craft. He was a surprisingly 
popular young gentleman; and possessed the 
art of making a small income go further in the 
vaiiety of his waistcoats, the excellence of his 



THE OPERA. 179 

Sunday hacks and hired cabriolets, and the 
mystery of an unsuspected hackney coach, 
than most clerks of his standing. He was 
a showy-looking fellow, to be had all the year 
round as a j9zVaZ/er for a halting dinner party; — 
and ready and willing to make himself useful to 
the elderhes in taking boxes for the play, or 
securing a good stall at the Opera. Moreover, 
he was not on too good a footing with the 
world to resent being thrown over to an aunt, or 
country cousin, whenever a man of higher pre- 
tensions took the field; though on a suffici- 
ently good footing with himself to appropriate a 
prominent part in the conversation of any din- 
ner-table where he might happen to sit sim- 
pering over his soup, — whether political or 
scientifical,— theological, or zoological ; having 
no more hesitation in pouring forth his wishy- 
washy superficiality before the most eminent 
men of the day, than in lisping sentiment to the 
very young ladies in muslin frocks, let out for a 
school-room holiday. He was, in fact, a most 



180 THE OPERA. 

useful and estimable acquaintance ;— zwesti- 
mable to Mrs. Alfred -Meriton, who employed 
him to expound the identity of the O. P. Q. and 
L. S. D. contributions to the annuals j and the 
illustrious personages designated as the Duchess 
of '^^^^^ and Lord , in the Sunday news- 
papers; — as well as of some importance to 
her nieces, as an untirable partner where no 
better was to be had, — and a prodigious col- 
lector of Parliamentary franks, hterary auto- 
graphs, and other hieroglyphics for the use of 
their scrap-books. 

" Any news to-day, Mr. Malton ?" he in- 
quired, pertly, of Adrian, as soon as the fussy 
ceremony of ' handing' down to dinner was 
concluded. 

" I fancy not, — there was nothing particular 
in the house.*' 

" Did you bring us any thing from the city, 
Mr. Meriton ?'' 

" The evening papers say that Bryzynckewicz 
has crossed the Elbe." 



THE OPERA. 181 

" The evening papers say ! — I have invented 
a new phraseology for myself; — with me it is 
always the papers lie that the Archduke Ferdi- 
nand is at Bayonne/— Eh ! Mrs. Alfred? ' The 
morning papers lie that the Countess of Rho- 
domontade intends giving another fete cham- 
petre.' — A good notion, eh ?" — 

The three ladies laughed immoderately, and 
old Meriton, who himself possessed a horrible 
view of jocularity, was delighted. Tapham was 
such a vejy original fellow i 

" I leave you to take care of the ladies, 
Tapham, — we all know you are used to the duties 
of the home department," said their host — his 
standing joke whenever Howard Tapham was of 
the party. " Pray, Mr. Maldyn, may I inquire 
whether we are likely to have the honour of seeing 
my Lord Abbotscourt in England ? There are 
many important points to be decided concerning 
his Irish estates, for which he referred me to his 
arrival here; and his lordship neither comes 



182 THE OPERA, 

nor writes. It is now a fortnight since I 
received any advices from him." 

Upon reflection, Adrian was enabled to make 
a correspondent declaration; and though this 
corroboration seemed to dispel the uneasiness of 
the injured Mr. Meriton, it produced a very 
unsatisfactory impression in the mind of his son. 

** Not come to me, — not write to me, — not send to me !" 

Like the distracted Bianca, he began to augur 
evil from all this neglect. His father might 
be ill, — unhappy, — displeased ! His father 
might be already on his journey to England ! 
— and this last contingency oppressed him 
with apprehensions and regrets, such as he 
had never expected to derive from the prospect 
of a meeting with his best — his only friend. 
But he was not long left to the indulgence of 
his reverie. Mr. Howard Tapham having now 
discovered him to be the son of a lord, — a piece 
of intelligence perhaps designedly conveyed by 



THE OPERA. 183 

their host, — became most uneasily anxious to 
drink wine with and produce a favourable im- 
pression upon his opposite neighbour. He 
knew but two lords in the world; who, by 
dint of his incessant reference to " My friend, 
Lord Hardinton/' — and the commencement of 
his anecdotes with " As I was walking along 
Regent-street t'other day with Growther, his 
lordship observed/' — had become somewhat 
threadbare among his fair Lauras and Marga- 
rets, and a standing jest among his brother 
clerks. Under this consciousness of destitution, 
a Lord Abbotscourt was quite a godsend. 
The title seemed fresh, euphonious, and avail- 
able. What might be the pretensions of its 
inheritor, Howard Tapham had no notion ; but 
after all Hardinton was but a bankrupt Scotch 
peer ; and Growther was only the eldest son of 

. But let us not be personal. 

" Are you going to Almacks to-morrow night, 
Mr. Malton? " — said the pen-mender, with an 
uncouth smirk. 



184 THE OPERA. 

" I hardly know," replied Adrian, " what my 
engagements may be. Probably I shall be 
there." 

" Oh," rephed Howard Tapham, conceiving 
that uncertainty about getting a ticket could be 
the only possible cause for hesitation on such a 
point. " Then you are not a regular sub- 
scriber ? " 

A regular subscriber — (that favourite alias 
of newspaper correspondents) being a phrase 
on the present occasion somewhat incompre- 
hensible to Adrian, he replied, " This you 
know is the second ball of the subscription ; 
I was prevented going to the last, but I hope 
to be more fortunate with the other two.^' 

Tapham was puzzled in his turn. But he was 
too wise to proclaim the bliss of ignorance ; he 
kept it all to himself; and having now some- 
what diminished his admiration for the " ho- 
nourable," who appeared doubtful of his interest 
with the King-street patronesses, assumed a 
bolder touch of what he considered his fashion- 
able " off-hand " manner. 



THE OPERA. 185 

" So Cardigan's going to be married at last. 
Well I did think he'd have shown better 
taste !" 

" Indeed ! " exclaimed Mr. Maldyn, shocked 
by what appeared so decided and authentic an 
announcement, until his face glowed with emo- 
tion. " When was it decided ? — I had not heard 
of it ! "— 

" Had'nt you ? Well, I wonder at that ! Its 
been the talk of the town this week past. I saw 
him myself up in a box with the girl and 
another lady, at the French play, full three 
weeks ago." 

" Why you don't mean, Mr. Tapham," ex- 
claimed Mrs. Alfred, stopping short with her 
mouth full of oyster pate, " that the ' certain 
illustrious nobleman' in the Magnet of Fashion, 
referred to the Duke of Cardigan ; and all 
those references to ' an approaching misalliance 
in high life,' — in all the papers ? " — 

" Who else could be meant ? — What other 
duke has got the estates in Yorkshire and un- 



186 THE OPERA. 

paralleled villa in the vicinity of the metropolis, 
to which the paragraph alluded ? *" 

" Oh ! several have estates in Yorkshire, and 
fine villas," observed old Meriton, "as the 
usurers and mortgagees know full well." 

'^ Ay, ay, that does very well for your joke," 
said Howard Tapham, rather nettled at finding 
his authority impugned ; " but still every body 
about town is aware that it is the Duke of Car- 
digan who is going to be married to this famous 
opera-singer." 

" Goodness ! how very shocking ! '' cried 
Miss Henrietta. " One would have thought the 
Duke of Cardigan might have married any 
body." 

*' That is the very reason he chooses to marry 
nohodi/ i' said Howard Tapham, shrinking from 
the applause due to the good thing he supposed 
himself to have uttered, by manghng another 
* good thing' of far more certain merit, and in- 
humanly attacking a fricandeau with a huge 
carving knife. 



THE OPERA. 



187 



" Well, I do think," said Mrs. Alfred, pa- 
thetically," that there are plenty of women of a 
certain rank to be had, without any occasion 
for a nobleman stooping to an opera singer." 

" Of a certain rank ! " simpered Tapham, " a 
very ambiguous definition ; eh! Mr. Maldyn?'' 

'' But is this marriage really announced ? " 
inquired poor Adrian, gazing with absent list- 
lessness, interpreted by the Whitehall dandy 
into admiration, on the elaborately puffed, plaited, 
and puckered muslin fagade displayed by the 
opening of Tapham's chrysophrase waistcoat,— 
and confined by three studs of a fancy and in- 
vention which would have made the fortune of 
a Jew pedlar at the Frankfort fair. 

<^ Announced?— my dear sir, it has been m 
all the Sunday papers." 

" But I have the honour of remembering your 
own strictures on the inaccuracy of similar dis- 
closures." 

« Well, I don't know what more you'd have ; 
there's nothing else talked of to-day in St. 



188 THE OPERA. 

James's-street ; and, for my own part, I feel 
quite vexed with Cardigan for doing such a 
thing. He seemed so much above such a piece 
of low absurdity." 

*' The duke's friends seem so universally sur- 
prised by the report," said Adrian, conceiving 
from T.'s familiarity he was acquainted with 
his grace, " that at present we may hope it 
will never be realized." 

'* Ah ! it may be all very well for h\^frie)ids to 
put a good face upon the matter j but depend on it 
the public will form its own opinion of a man who 
chooses to violate decency in such a manner." 

" The public are surely very little concerned 
in the matter," observed Maldyn, still believing 
himself to be addressing one of Cardigan's 
friends ; " and surely it is our business to dis- 
credit the rumour so long as incredulity be 
possible." 

" Oh ! certainly," said T. hastily, somewhat 
pacified by the we; " as long as he leaves us 
Silvestra for our amusement on the boards, we 



THE OPERA. 189 

will give him leave to make a fool of himself 
behind the curtain." 

Mr. Maldyn began to think that the brilliant 
young gentleman in the malachite and lapis 
lazuli studs was deaUng with great impartiality 
towards their friend the duke; but he had 
often been called upon to admire a similar de- 
gree of candour among the Damons and Pythi- 
ases of the great world. " I can only say/' 
observed he, by way of concluding the subject, 
'' that when I quitted Donningwell last week, 
nothing had transpired to confii-m the report ; 
and that Lady Georgina Ellerby assured me 
last night she knew nothing of the matter." 

" Mr. Malton, shall I have the honour of 
taking Champagne with you?" cried Howard 
Tapham, in the enthusiasm of discovering his 
opposite neighbour to be so illustriously es- 
tablished in society. 

" Well," said Mrs. Alfred, anxious to silence 
the personal inferences of the dispute, " if his 
grace does really marry Sandoni, of course she 



190 THE OPERA. 

is not long for the stage ; and we are the more 
obhged to you, Mr. Malting, for accommodating 
us with your box to get a glimpse of her." — 

" Before she retires to court ! " interrupted 
Tapham, delighted by all he had heard. It was 
plain that his new friend 'young Malton, Ab- 
botscourt's son,' was the proprietor of an opera 
box ; — while Lords Hardinton and Growther had 
hardly so much to boast of as a pew in a church. 
Howard Tapham's attachment to his distinguish- 
ed young friend was already on the increase. 

" Mr. Malton, pray allow me to recommend 
you Cayenne with your pease ! " quoth he. 
" My friend, Growther (probably you know 
Lord Growther) declares that Cayenne is the 
only thing used for petty poys at the Roshay de 
Concoliy I 



4 



THE OPERA. 



191 



CHAPTER X. 



Then came a dark-browed spirit, on whose head 

Laurel and withering roses loosely hung : 

She held a harp, amid whose chords her hand 

Wandered for music, — and it came. She sang 

A song despairing, and the whispering winds 

Seem'd envious of her melody, and stream'd 

Amidst the wires to rival her, in vain. — 

Short was the strain but sweet. Methought it spoke 

Of broken hearts, of still and moonlight seas. 

Of love, and loneliness, and fancy gone, 

And liopes decay'd for ever. 

PROCTOR. 



Heartily sick of Tapham's familiarity as well 
as of the dispiriting reserve of the monosyllabic 
belles whom he was destined to bear on either 
arm, (like Hercules ogling the goddesses of virtue 



192 THE OPERA. 

and vice in the frontispiece of the Polite Precep- 
tor), Adrian Maldyn resolved that the moment 
he had fulfilled his promised duty of depositing 
Mrs. Alfred and her nieces in the opera-box, he 
v^^ould make his escape from the party. But in 
the course of the few minutes he was compelled 
to sacrifice to politeness by remaining with them 
to satisfy their universal curiosity, he was struck 
by the entree of Cecilia, — unwatched by Lady 
Wroughton's presence, — leaning on LordBruton's 
arm, — alone with him in the opposite box ; — yes ! 
absolutely alone ! — From that moment he be- 
came riveted to his place. Vainly did Tapham 
remind him, in a jocose whisper, that now was 
their time to escape ; in the hope of fastening 
himself to " Malton's " side for a tour of fop's 
alley. Not even the prospect of securing so 
eligible a companion had the effect of moving- 
Adrian from his post. 

His eyes were upon her! — There she sat; — 
her ivory arm, in all its perfection of graceful 
symmetry, carelessly reclining on the crimson 



THE OPERA. 193 

cushion. Her eyes, without even an affectation 
of interest in the business of the stage, glancing 
through her glossy curls at some man who was 
seated in one of the less ostensible chairs of the 
box : — her small and delicately rounded waist 
displayed as occasionally she lifted her glass, or 
turned her beautiful head towards the persons 
standing in the back ground. 

" What a beautiful woman opposite ! " ex- 
claimed Henrietta Merit on, opening for the first 
time her prim thin lips. 

" It is my cousin, Mrs. Perceval," observed 
Adrian, with a view of forestalling the embar- 
rassment of any personal comments. 

" Lovely woman — singularly lovely woman !'' 
cried T. arranging with both his hands a bor- 
rowed and unfamiliar lorgnette. " Fine man, 
too; — Mr. Perceval, I conclude ?'' 

Mr. ?" 

" They seem a most domestic couple ! " cried 
Mrs. Alfred. 

" Can't we get away ? " again whispered the 

VOL. III. K 



THE OPEEA. 

194 
offidalbeau;-a„datthatve.y— the 

• ^ +>iP door, informed ivir. 
box-keepev, opening the do 
Maldyn, that "the servant of a fo.e,g 

wished paxtic'lar to speak to huB. 

«My compliments,-! am engaged mat 

,endanLonsomeladies.homlcannotposs.Wy 

ave Tell the servant 1 wUl call early o- 
rw/'sa.dAdr.a.,infemng,insomeconfu- 

Xrtht the foreign lady of the opera-house 

r;d he none other than the SUvestra her- 

t Pray don't let,, he your hmderance"s^d 
Mrs Aid, who had overheard the .hrs^er, 

"\rr:"r;Ulforane.euseto 

" Thank you— 1 am gi 

^ho little suspected that tire 



THE OPERA. 195 

the companionship of the tiger Tapham, who 
was more importunate than either. 

" The man says, sir, as he has partic'lar 
orders to see you, sir,'* said the box-keeper, in- 
truding for the second time ; his keys of office 
in one hand, and a bundle of books of the ballet 
in the other, which he hoped to have an oppor- 
tunity of disposing of, to the very unusual looking 
ladies in possession of the box. 

" Be so good as to take my answer a second 
time," said Adrian, angrily. 

" And to avoid troubling us a third," exclaimed 
Howard T., provoked by his pertinacity. 

The man instantly retired, snapping the door 
after him in all the indignation of injured inno- 
cence; and Maldyn returned to his task of 
observation, — fixing his glass as intently on the 
opposite box as if the spectacle it presented 
were not a source of the deepest anguish to his 
bosom. Every smile bestowed by CeciUa on 
her companions seemed an injury expressly 
practised against himself; and the low earnest 
k2 



196 THE OPERA. 

intense manner in which Lord Bruton sat lean- 
ing over towards her, now holding her bouquet 
in his hand, now listening with rapt attention, 
now exactuig her own in return, appeared in- 
tended as an ordeal of agony to his own feelings. 

Short sighted mortals that we are ! — If there 
should indeed exist an order of immortal beings 
of other than a benignant nature, how must 
they deride the pompous precaution with which 
we affect to arm ourselves against the evils of 
life, — the presumption with which we dream of 
affixing a scale or limit to our own misfortunes, 
■ — the idiotism with which we laboriously over- 
step the mole-hill at our feet, blind to the moun- 
tain impeding our farther progress ! 

Oh ! why is no inspiration, — no presentiment 
vouchsafed us, in those critical moments when 
the last grain of sand that marks the expiration 
of the hour, becomes the balance of our des- 
tinies, — of the destinies of those we love ! — Why 
does no whispered warning suspend the hand, 
when in the wantonness of unconcern we sign 




THE OPEr^. 197 



our own condemnation ! — Why — why, does the 
common course of things gUde on so smoothly 
around us, when the slightest manifestation of 
divine interposition — a sound — an omen — a 
mysterious impulse of the soul, — might startle 
us into vigilance ! — How trivial did the officious 
summons he had just rejected, appear in the 
ears of Adrian Maldyn ; — how fatally, to the 
last moment of his life, was he destined to 
rue his thoughtless indifference to the appeal ! 

But if his suspicions were correct that the 
messasce orio^inated with Mademoiselle Sandoni, 
he had no reason to suppose that his want of 
courtesy had produced any peculiar emotion in 
the bosom of the prima donna. She appeared 
even more elated, more animated than usual ; 
more at home in her part, more keenly alive to 
its situations. Never had her performance of 
Semiramide been more brilliant, never applauded 
by a more enthusiastic audience. Adrian him- 
self, — albeit strongly disposed to indifference 
towards its merits by the spectacle of Mrs. 



198 THE OPERA. 

Perceval's flirtation, and to a sentiment of per- 
sonal irritation against herself by the intelligence 
imparted by Mr. Howard Tapham of the public 
avowal of her marriage with the Duke of Car- 
digan, — could not but listen with ravished atten- 
tion when her skill was displayed in that un- 
rivalled delicacy and scope of execution, by 
which she had long secured the award of Europe; 
or in that tremendous assumption of mingled hor^ 
ror and tenderness which imparted to Semiramide 
at once the dignity of a woman and a queen, the 
air of a guilty and an innocent victim. He almost 
trembled when the full tide of her impassioned 
smiles streamed upon the shuddering Arsace; 
he almost wept when the piteous confession of 
. — her guilt was mingled with the agony of her 
blighted affections. 

" What a vastly indelicate costume !" cried 
Mrs. Alfred, glancing at the exposed and clas- 
sical shoulders of the Assyrian queen ! 

" I wonder if all those stones are real?" 
said Howard Tapham, fixing his eyes on 



THE OPERA. IS® 

the imperial diadem that circled her noble 
brows. 

''Is there going to be any firing ? " — cried 
Augusta Meriton, shrinking behind the curtain, 
and holding her hands to her ears as the por- 
tentous roll of supernatural sounds announcing 
the apparition of Ninus, roused her to a crisis 
of nervous emotion similar to those she was 
accustomed to experience among the detona- 
tions of an Easter piece at Astley's. 

'' How can you be so silly, Augusta I'' cried 
Mrs. Alfred, " surely you cannot be so ignorant 
as not to know that gunpowder wasn't invented 
in the time of the Romans.'' 

" Dear me, those people opposite are going 
away ! " cried Henrietta. 

" No ! they are only getting up because of 
the man in the star." 

" The man in the moon, — I should think by 
• the confusion his entrance has excited," cried 
Howard T. " Oh ! I see it's one of the royal 
dukes." 



200 THE OPERA. 

'^ By the fuss, one may easily guess which,'' 
observed Mrs. Alfred. 

" My dear madam, you need not be a witch 
to guess ! '^ cried T. 

" They're all setting down again/' said the 
lady. 

" His royal highness has given them a setting- 
down, did you say?" 

" Now really Mr. Howard Tapham you are 
too bad," cried Mrs. Alfred Meriton, enchanted 
with his vulgar snip-snap. 

" Oh ! if I am come to the worst I must 
mend. Miss Henrietta will you give me leave 
to ask what you are listening to so gravely ? " 

" To the Opera," replied Henrietta Meriton, 
without intending an epigram. " It is seldom 
I have an opportunity of hearing such music." 

Pleased to find one person of the party really 
gratified by the sacrifice he had made in their 
favour, Adrian placed himself by her side in 
the hope of enjoying at least the luxury of 
silence ; when T. finding it impossible to decoy 



THE OPERA. 201 

him away " for a lounge," at length sallied 
forth alone ; and Maldyn had soon the conso- 
lation to see his unsatisfactory friend lean- 
ing in an attitude against the back railing of 
the pit, — his cane negligently dangling by the 
tassel, — his sparkling and gloveless hand en- 
tangled amid his redundant and perfumed curls. 
Many a furtive glance did he bend towards 
the surrounding boxes, to ascertain whether any 
tiara'd marchioness or garlanded Lady Julia 
was bending an admiring eye on his pensive 
elegance; and little did he suspect that one 
or two whispers of "Wlio/.s- that new man? " — 
"I really cannot say — some tiger!" — " What a 
mass of affectation !" — limited the interest he 
laboured so hard to excite. 

Yet welcome as had been the relief of his 
departure from the box, that of his return was 
fifty times more delightful, — for it preceded by 
only a quarter of an hour the end of the ballet; 
and as Mrs. Perceval and her set had vanished 
previous to its commencement, Adrian had been 
K 3 



202 



THE OPERA. 



enduring a long dull hour of Mrs. Alfred's 
sycophancy, and the still-life inanity of her 
two impracticable nieces. Although Adrian 
Maldyn had none of that supercilious dread of 
standing committed in the public eye by fami- 
liarity with some obscure individual, which ex- 
cruciates so many pseudo fine-gentlemen about 
town, he had no particular inclination to'endure 
the May mob of the crush-room, while the ladies 
to whom he was fettered chose to turn a deaf 
ear to the announcement of their carriage. But 
he miscalculated strangely in supposing Mr. 
Howard Tapham would patiently accede to his 
proposal of calling the servants and making a 
quiet exit by the chair-door; and found himself 
reluctantly compelled to stand guardian over a 
group of three flashily dressed women, huddled 
together back to back in an awkward corner, 
like the three pelicans supporting the Newdi- 
gate tripod; but ever and anon "glowering 
fra' them" with an air of wondering enjoy 
ment. 



THE OPERA. 203 

But at length the link-boys had pity on his 
patience. " Mr. Merrydrum's" carriage stopped 
the way; and although Howard T. and the 
young ladies seemed anxious to wait for more 
specific intelligence, he succeeded in conducting 
them scatheless through the phalanx of foot- 
soldiers and footmen, choking up the entrances 
and exits of the theatre ; and in escaping to his 
own carriage amid a volley of vociferous thanks 
chorused through the window of Mr. Me- 
riton's. 

It was but a step from the opera to the splen- 
did residence of Lady Romford ; yet it seemed a 
tedious step to Adrian, even at the best pace of 
his high-mettled horses. He entertained no doubt 
that Cecilia's motives for quitting the opera so 
early, were connected with the arrangement of 
the tableaux; and perhaps her own share in 
the representation might be already accom- 
plished, — perhaps she had already quitted the 
party, — perhaps all possibility of an interview 
was again denied him. He let down the window, 



204 . THE OPERA. 

and ordered his coachman to drive faster — faster 
still, — as this apprehension occurred to his mind ; 
and flew along the stones like the despatch- 
bearer of some great victory, till on reaching the 
end of Bennett-street a string of carriages an- 
nounced the approach to Romford House. For 
some minutes he resolved to wait his turn ; and 
went on jerking and jogging, step by step, as the 
coachfuls of Lady Sophias and Lady Sarahs 
were slowly deposited with due regard to the 
disentanglement of their blonde mantillas, and 
the purity of their white-satin shoes. But at 
length his eagerness got the better of his philo- 
sophy; and desiring the carriage door to be 
opened, leapt out, and was soon under the awn- 
hig covering the ascent to Lord Romford's door; 
where, little lacking his insignia of office to pro- 
claim his civic autocracy, stood the far-famed 
and redoubtable Townsend, receiving the breath- 
less report of one of his sub-delegates. 

" Do you belong to the tabbyloes, sir?'' — in- 
quired one of Lady Romford's Patagonian foot- 



THE OPEKA. 



205 



men of the new comer; and Adrian, putting 
his hand to his pocket, silently drew forth the 
Uttle pink card distinguishing him as a member 
of that honourable corporation. 

" Have the goodness, then, to walk this way," 
resumed the man, guiding the privileged person 
towards the back stairs; instead of allowing 
him to ascend the state staircase under the pro- 
clamation of the groom of the chambers. 

" Tabbyloes !— Monsieur Janin !'' vociferated 
the footman, giving the pass word to the Swiss 
stationed on the landing. 

" Ludovico ! eneo' iin mousir j^oiir gli tablio,'' 
cried Janin to a page holding the lock of Lady 
Romford's boudoir, which he instantly threw 
open to admit the stranger into the sanctuary 
of the temple, 

Adrian Maldyn was now tolerably familiarized 
with the localities of the tabernacle, and the 
habits of its presiding deities; so that it was no 
matter of surprise to him to observe the tables 
heaped up with draperies, yellow, pink, and 



206 THE OPERA. 

blue ; Roman helmets, spears, and shields ; the 
tinsel wings of a whole covey of Cupids, — the 
Grecian sandals of a prodigious group of nymphs, 
and all the paraphernalia of a property room, 
without its tawdry meanness. But it did sur- 
prise him, — it did startle him, — ^w^hen, instead 
of any of the Charleville family at hand to wel- 
come their guests, he found in the room only 
Mrs. Perceval, half reclining on the sofa, sob- 
bing aloud in uncontrollable distress of mind, 
with Lord Bmton hanging over her .' 

Half anxious — half angry — he hurried through 
the boudoir to a drawing-room beyond, splen- 
didly illuminated, and crowded with persons of 
his acquaintance costumed for a tableau, on 
whom his entrance produced no more effect 
than if he had been invisible. Consternation 
was on every brow — tears in every eye — inquiry 
on every lip ; — while a little knot, including the 
Lady Charlevilles and Lady Southford, was 
gathered round Mr. Crawford, who seemed to 
have been the herald of some piece of intelli- 



THE OPERA. 207 

jgence plunging the whole party into affliction. 
Unsuspicious of the motive of their distress, he 
could not but remark the singular incongruity 
displayed in the countenances and costumes of 
the figures before him ; of the real tears stream- 
ing down cheeks disfigured by rouge and pearl- 
powder ; — of the union of horror-struck looks 
with glass beads, tinsel, and all the trivial ac- 
cessaries of dramatic representation. But what 
could be the origin of this strange discrepancy? — 
** Ah ! '' shrieked Lady Clara Charleville, 
who was the first to notice his appearance, 
"Thank God !— here is Mr. Maldyn !— then it 
cannot be so bad as we thought." 

" What did you think ? — what do you mean?" 
cried Adrian, amazed in his turn. 

"Oh! pray tell us — is it true?" exclaimed 
Lady Sophia. But he was prevented from re- 
plying, by an outcry raised for air and a^glass 
of water at the other end of the room. Lady 
Emily Willesden had fainted. 

" What can be the meaning of all this V in- 



208 THE OPERA. 

quired Maldyn, becoming every moment more 
mystified by the inexplicabilities of the scene. 

"Ugo went off instantly; — he has promised 
to send back word," said Crawford, mysteri- 
ously." 

"Ugo?"— 

'^ But I know it to be melancholy fact. — I was 
standing by Townsend when a Bow-street run- 
ner brought the news." 

Adrian grew agitated in his turn. Yet why 
should he tremble ? — Had he not seen Cecilia, 
safe, alive, well; — and what had he to appre- 
hend elsewhere? — 

" The ball must have gone through the head 
or heart!" exclaimed Lord Fieldingham; who, 
having deposited Lady Emily in the boudoir, 
now returned to obtain the details of this mys- 
terious affair. 

" Certainly !" replied Crawford, with an air 
very different from his usual disputatious incre- 
dulity. " He just leapt from the ground, and 
fell dead; — never spoke — never breathed!" 



THE OPERA. 209 

" So much the better/' said Fieldingham, in 
a solemn but broken voice ; " since it was to be 
— thank Heaven he suffered nothing !" 

*^ What is the meaning of all this?" cried 
Maldyn, a sudden dew overspreading his face, 
and his heart seeming transfixed within him. 

" Good God ! — have you not heard this dread- 
ful news !" said Crawford — repeating his tale 
for the twentieth time. " Neville has just shot 
poor 'Stasio Pignatelli in a duel V 



210 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER XL 



The heart is, like the sky, a part of Heaven, 
And changes night and day, too, like the sky ; 

Now o'er it clouds and thunder must be driven, 
And darkness and destruction as on high. 

But when it hath been scorched, and'pierced, and riven, 
Its storms expire in water-drops : the eye 

Puts forth at last the heart's blood turned to tears, 

Which make the English climate of our years. 

Byron. 



It was on the day, so replete with momentous 
incidents to Adrian Maldyn, that Sir Herbert 
and Lady Harriet Manningfield, and their two 
elder children paid their first visit to Lord Ab- 
botscourt, at his remote residence on Cumber- 
land-terrace. Having promised to dine with 



THE OPERA. 211 

him at the early hour suited to his valetudi- 
narian habits, they all proceeded together, after 
dinner, in a drive round that populous wilder- 
ness of the unknown world, the Regent's-park. 
Sir Herbert having ascertained in Chapel-street 
that Adrian had a dinner engagement, and was 
therefore secure for the evening, had persuaded 
his infirm friend to take the air, and accompany 
the children to the flower-garden in the ring. 
It is true Lord Abbotscourt was indolently 
averse to the exertion; but when little Ran- 
dolph and little Florence united their entreaties 
to those of his friends, he was easily moved to 
acquiescence, and soon found himself seated 
with Sir Herbert, under the favourite mulberry- 
tree of the garden, while the children and their 
mother went off in the direction of the straw- 
berry-beds, so popular among the fashionable 
cockneys of the west-end. 

For more than half an hour the worthy gene- 
ral contrived to interest his friend in conversa- 
tion, so deeply as to render him insensible to 



212 THE OPERA. 

the evening dew he had announced as prejudi- 
cial to his gout. But at length Lord Abbots- 
court grew impatient to return to the carriage ; 
and Manningfield set off in pursuit of the 
truants, promising to return in a moment. 

Scarcely, however, had he taken his depar- 
ture, when Sir Herbert was struck by the ex- 
treme beauty of a lady who had been seated for 
some time under the shade of the verandah, 
and the wide leaves of its Aristolochia plant ; 
and who now crossed the lawn within a few 
paces of the tree where he was stationed. There 
was something more than admiration, — more 
than surprise, — more than even interest in the 
intense gaze he felt inclined to rivet on that 
lovely face, that delicate figure ; — something, — 
some unaccountable reminiscence connected with 
the name of " Cecil,*' — which spontaneously rose 
to his lips. The earnestness of his look did not 
escape the beautiful stranger; she half paused 
half smiled, as if by a similar impulse ; and as 
she passed onwards, that smile completed the 



THE OPERA. 213 

spell of enchantment her countenance and de- 
meanour had begun. 

Who shall presume to deny those sympathies 
of mortal nature which startle us with a shock 
like that of electricity amid the most ordinary 
scenes of life : — or speak amid the tumults of 
the world, in the still small voice which over- 
powers the raging of the tempest ? — In the strug- 
gle of a crowd, a face glances before our eyes 
to shed an everlastins; shadow over our hearts ; 
in the clamour of society a word, an expres- 
sion, serves to rouse every dormant passion into 
life. We confess an overpowering impulse, — 
a master spell, — a spirit invisibly attracted 
towards our own. 

Lord Abbotscourt — 

awaking with a start, 
Felt the quick pleasure smite across his heart, < 

when this gentle vision glided before him; 
soft as the second rainbow, whose hues reflecting 
the first, so faintly adorn the dulness of an 
overcast sky. A younger Cecil, a beauti- 



214 THE OPERA. 

ful reflection, a twin-shadow of his early love, 
seemed animated to life for his gratification. It 
was Cecil — Cecil herself — as she glided through 
the stately saloons of Dublin castle j — Cecil, as 
she bent in matronly tenderness over his own 
lowly couch of sickness ; — Cecil — as she — but 
no ! he could not pursue the resemblance fur- 
ther ! — He could only wish, secretly and fer- 
vently, that the destinies of the lovely stranger 
might in nothing resemble those of Lord Tem- 
pleton's daughter ! 

While he was still breathing these kindly 
aspirations. Sir Herbert approached with Lady 
Harriet on his arm, and the children hanging 
together to his left hand ; and the party imme- 
diately proceeded towards the gate. But on 
arriving there, its further progress was impeded 
for a few seconds by a carriage which preceded 
their own, into which the servants were con- 
veying a beautiful bouquet. 

" Ah ! there is my charming unknown ! " 
cried Lord Abbotscourt, supporting himself 



THE OPERA. 215 

between his stick and Manning-field's arm, 
while he stood gazing on the splendidly em- 
blazoned equipage, as it rolled away amid 
the audible comments of the crowd lingering 
round the gate on the beauty of its fair 
occupant. 

"There i^ your niece T^ replied Sir Herbert 
in a lower tone; almost apprehensive of the 
effect such an announcement might produce on 
the invalid. But Lord Abbotscourt betrayed 
no further sm-prise at the discovery than by a 
slight tremour perceptible to the arm which lent 
itself to his assistance ; nor was it till they were 
all seated in the carriage that he replied in a 
tone of voice equally subdued, " I might have 
known it, — I might have guessed it ! — It is only 
the sympathy of kindred blood which warms the 
heart to a stranger, as mine glowed in her pre- 
sence. My niece ? — I had no need of any to 
tell me so ! — The living image of my lost Cecil !" 
After this unlucky rencontre, Sir Herbert 
was not s u'prised that his old friend remained 



216 THE OPERA. 

silent and sorrowful during the remainder of 
their drive ; and though they had previ- 
ously decided on returning with the children, 
it was tacitly decided between Lady Harriet 
and her husband, that they would pass the 
remainder of the evening with their friend. 
Little Florence and Randolph were accordingly 
despatched home; and Manningfield lent his aid 
to the experienced ccrporal in assisting Lord 
Abbotscourt to the drawing-room. As they 
entered the apartment, Lady Harriet noted a 
most ominous expression of delight on the 
countenance of the surly Hiob ; who, maugre 
his accustomed taciturnity, burst forth into 
a strange confusion of tongue, to inform his 
lord that letters from Germany were lying on 
his table. 

" Aha \" cried Lord Abbotscourt, gradually 
assuming an air of cheerfulness, as he took up a 
large packet addressed in Ad Hand's hand-writing 
to Elzstein, and re-addressed by Brother Remi- 
gius to the residence of Sir Herbert. " These 



THE OPERA. 217 

are from my son. Let us read them, and form our 
judgment of the candour of his character by the 
honesty of the account he gives of himself. Let 
us see ! — what have we here? — " Balls at Lady 
Romford's — parties at the Duke of Cardigan's 
— best of the season — beautiful debutante — 
macedoine — mazurka — " Rubbish and trump- 
ery ! — Ah ! here is something more to the pur- 
pose : — Lady Harriet's name — Manningfield, 
this is your affair." 

" Pray let us hear what ugly stories he has to 
tell of my wife," cried Sir Herbert, looking 
affectionately into her expressive face. 

"' Lady Harriet Manningfield, is'— "May 
I read it, madam ? — Have I your permission ?" — 
" If you think it fair to your correspondent." 
" ' Lady Harriet Manningfield, my dear 
father, is, without exception, the least selfish, 
least affected, and most rational woman in town. 
Her kindness to myself is inexpressible ; nor 
need I express it, for I am satisfied it is not 
prompted by any desire to have it known to 

YOL. III. L 



218 THE OPERA. 

yourself. She is the best mother and the best 
wife to be found among those heartless circles 
in which I am fated to move, — and with regard 
to myself, I am privileged also to pronounce her 
the best friend. — You, my dear sir, would adore 
her ! ' " 

" A very pretty history I " cried Sir Herbert, 
affecting: to look at the letter over Lord Abbots- 
court's shoulder, " I must insist on ascertaining 
that you do not improvisate these fine flatteries 
in Adrian's name. — Where am I to find this 
magnificent string of superlatives ? Ah ! I see; — 
' My dear father would adore her !' — But what 
have we here, Abbotscourt ? — Pray read on ! — 
we are coming to something respecting Con- 
stance." 

'^ Great God !" exclaimed Lord Abbotscourt, 
whose eyes had more rapidly compassed the 
well-known hand-writing of his son, — " confes- 
sions long due to you, — attachment to my 
cousin. — What in the name of Heaven is all 
this ? '' 



THE OPERA. 219 

He laid down the letter for a moment, as if 
to secure breath and arm himself with fortitude 
for the worst. 

^^ Do not agitate yourself thus ! " said Sir 
Herbert, mildly. " You must misconceive 
his meaning. Read on, and you w411 find 
that—" 

" I cannot ! " faltered Lord Abbotscourt, 
gasping for breath ; " I have not courage. My 
forebodings, and the sight of that beautiful 
creature just now, conspire to — no ! I cannot 
read the letter. Do you, dear Manningfield, 
after a perusal of the contents, acquaint me 
with all it is necessary I should know." 

He threw himself back on the sofa, coverino- 
his face with his hands ; while Sir Herbert dis- 
entangled the perplexities of the long and ill- 
omened detail by which Adrian Maldyn at- 
tempted to reveal to his father — the rise and 
progress — the intensity — the desperation of his 
passion for Cecilia! — And Lady Harriet, who 
sat opposite with her eyes intently fixed on her 
L 2 



220 THE OPERA. 

husband's face, plainly decyphered in its varying 
expression, his amazement — disgust — despair ! — 
For some minutes after finishing the last lines 
of the voluminous despatch, he remained as 
startled and confounded as Lord Abbotscourt 
himself. 

" And w^hat have I to hope?" — faltered the 
agitated father, in a scarcely audible tone, 
perceiving the reluctance of his friend to afflict 
him with evil tidings. 

" I must not allow you,'' observed Manning- 
field ; *' to regard a case with such profound 
distress, whose worst aspect only threatens you 
with one of the most pleasing women in Eng- 
land for your daughter-in-law !" 

" Nay ! then, I see how it is ! — By presenting 
me at once with so revolting an alternative, you 
hope to reconcile me to the idea of this unna- 
tural attachment. Oh ! Herbert — Herbert — - 
you, with whom I have so often taken counsel — 
you, to vv^hom I have communicated the whole 
extent of my wrongs and wretchedness, can 



THE OPERA. 221 

you imagine by what secret sin I have provoked 
the Almighty to — ", 

" Abbotscourt ! — my dear friend ! — compose 
yourself — " 

" She ! — so good — so lovely — so gentle — " 

" Right, right ! it is thus you should speak 
of your niece, — it is thus every one speaks of 
her." 

" It is thus I speak of my wife, — of my mur- 
dered Cecil. Manningfield ! were I to consent 
to this marriage, her blood w^ould array itself 
against me in the veins of her son, and render 
it accursed ! — All will end in strife, and bitter- 
ness, and ruin !" 

'' Pronomice not too hastily ; — not while your 
feelings are so strongly — so painfully excited. 
My dear Abbotscourt, be patient ! The evil 
may not yet be irremediable." 

" That he should so deceive me !" cried the 
agonized father, regardless of Sir Herbert's ex- 
hortations. " That he should deliberately mis- 
lead, — coldly and calmly prolong my error, — 



222 THE OPERA. 

ay ! and leave me with specious promises on his 
lips while already meditating this treacherous 
step." 

*' You wrong^ him ! — Adrian seems to have 
been thrown upon a most perplexing ca- 
reer '' 

" So full of hope — so full of trust as was my 
affection for that boy ! — However prolonged his 
absence from me, I experienced no anxiety on 
his behalf. His candid disposition seemed to 
satify me that I was still near him, — still fa- 
miliar with all his thoughts, all his intentions.*' 

" And you probably were ; but on this occa- 
sion he seems hardly to have understood them 
himself. Harriet, dearest ! speak and satisfy 
my friend here, that when once a woman is con- 
cerned in the business, no man is answerable 
for his views from hour to hour." 

" I certainly feel," replied Lady Harriet, 
gravely, " (though I must own myself in some 
degree displeased by the manner in which he 
devoted his attentions to Constantia, while he 



THE OPERA. 223 

knew his hand and affections to be engaged 

elsewhere) that — " 

" Nay," cried her husband, *' if this is the 
manner in which you choose to consider the 
case, I will not listen to a word you have to 
say on the subject. At least inform Lord 
Abbotscourt of the amiable character borne 
by Mrs. Perceval in the world ? — " 

" For myself I know little of her, besides that 
prepossessing sweetness of look and manner 
which has already captivated his own admira- 
tion. During the lifetime of a bad husband, 
she was esteemed for the discretion and for- 
bearance of her conduct ; and the only fault I 
ever heard imputed to her, (that of a tone of 
satirical levity,) I can bear testimony that she 
has conquered since her return to England." 

" She was educated by Lady Abbotscourt — 
what can I have to hope from her principles? — " 

" Of late years she has seen but little of her 
mother ; — Mrs. Perceval has chiefly resided with 
Lord and Lady Neville. The latter is her 



224 THE OPERA. 

bosom-friend, and I conclude, a woman of merit; 
for though notoriously indifferent to a pro- 
fligate and disgusting husband, and followed 
from place to place by the idolatry of a most 
devoted admirer, I never heard of a whisper in- 
jurious to her character." 

** Harriet, Harriet — you have breathed one 
yourself,'' cried Manningfield. "A woman, 
however pure, however virtuous, has no right 
to sanction the adoration of any ass of a fellow 
who chooses to run after other men's wives." 

" Most true !" rephed his wife, forgiving the 
little petulant touch imparted to his reply by 
the severity of his rigour on such points ; " but 
it argues singular excellence on her part; if, 
having once ventured among the burning plough- 
shares, she quit the ordeal without injury." 

" It is not from such a school I could wish 
to receive a daughter-in-law." 

" Ah ! my dear Abbotscourt! — how few among 
us are blest with the liberty of choice in such 
connexions. Ask Lady Hairiet what are the 



THE OPERA. 225 

feelings of the Ducliess of Cardigan in accept- 
ing an opera-singer as the bride of her only 
son/' 

" I could almost prefer such an alliance to 
one so revolting to every feeling, every principle 
of my life. There is but one woman throughout 
the earth, of whom I would have said to my 
son ' Adrian ! your union with her would 
break my heart!' — and that very one is to be 
thrust into my fireside circle, — my veiy bosom, 
— ^my heart of hearts ! — Manningfield ! what 
further confirmation do we need of the fatality 
attached to the name of Maldyn ! — '* 



l3 



S26 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER XII. 



Does he sleep ? alas I 
What means this paleness and yon stream ? — No, no ! 
It is not blooJ^ for who would shed his blood ? 
Oh, Heaven ? what's this ? — Who hath done this ? — He 

moves not, — 
He breathes not ; and his hands drop down from mine 
With stony lifelessness ! 

BYRON. 



Adrian Maldyn lost not an instant in 
quitting Lady Romford's, after the horrible 
shock conveyed by Crawford's information. 
Townsend was driving from the door in a hack- 
ney-coach when he rushed down the steps 
in search of his own carriage; and having 
ordered his coachman to follow the police-ofR- 



THE OPERA. 227 

cer's vehicle, which he knew must be directed 
towards the fatal spot, he threw himself back — 
unable to weep — unable to breathe ; — but with 
that oppressive consciousness of a girdle of iron 
encircling the heart, whose agony teaches us the 
luxury of tears. 

He did not even observe in what direction he 
was going ; and at some moments was scarcely 
able to understand the purport of his own pre- 
cipitation. He felt that something horrible had 
occurred, — something overpowering ; and pressed 
his hands wildly on his forehead, as if to shut 
out all clearer perception of the fact. Anastasio ! 
the gallant, — the gay, the bright-hearted ; — the 
adored son, — the honourable man, — the cordial 
friend, — the devoted lover! — Anastasio! — so 
young, so gifted, so rich in the prosperities of 
life ; — admired, esteemed, beloved ! — Anastasio I 
whose wild frank laugh still vibrated on his ear, 
— whose cordial pressure still lingered on his 
hand, — whose satirical but unmalicious glance 
still seemed searching into his heart. — Could it 



228 THE OPERA. 

be ? — ^were those warm impulses chilled for ever 
— that buoyant spirit crushed into the nothing- 
ness of the grave, — that manly promise swept 
from the path of human activity ? Anastasio ! 
his own, own friend, — his dear Anastasio ! — was 
he indeed no more ? — 

The carriage stopped ; and so suddenly, that 
the self-abandoned mourner was thrown with 
violence against the front glasses. He looked 
from the window ; and saw that they were in 
some strange by-road among gardens and fields ; 
where the moon shone with a sort of cold ghastly 
derisive smile upon a small white house, stand- 
ing among some straggling poplars. It struck 
him with a painful contrast that the air came 
fresher and sweeter than that which he had 
quitted. The atmosphere of that dreaded, that 
dreadful spot, was fragrant with the flowers of 
the surrounding gardens ! 

Adrian was out of the carriage in a moment, 
and following Townsend and his comptoion 
up a rough narrow path towards the house.— 



THE OPERA. 229 

" What are you doing here, sir? Who are 
you ?" — cried the officers on finding themselves 
joined by a stranger. 

'•' His friend V repUed Maldyn, in a low sub- 
dued voice ; and not a word more passed be- 
tween them. — The claim was recognised. — 

The mansion they now entered was evidently 
a public house of that mean, but not profligate 
order, which invites the holiday people of the 
metropolis to take their Sunday recreation 
among the brick-fields of the suburbs. It was 
not free from the stain and exhalation common 
to such places; but a spirit of decency was 
maintained in the silence accompanying the 
bustle consequent on the occasion. A number 
of strangers of the lower class were assembled 
in the tap-room, as if they had indirectly parti- 
cipated in the event; and the rough-looking 
master of the house, who held a glimmering 
candle to light the new comers up the narrow 
creaking stairs, where he informed them " the 
body*' was lying, bore on his countenance a 



230 



THE OPEKA. 



natural and vivid impression of horror. Two 
dirty, half-clothed v^^omen, stationed on the nar- 
row landing of the staircase, whispered as they 
went by, that " the young gentleman was taking 
on terribly;" and in another moment the half- 
shrieking sobs and ejaculations of a pitiful dis- 
tress warned them that Ugo Pignatelli had 
already reached the fatal scene. 

Adrian's first impulse was to rush into the 
room, pointed out by the landlord as the chamber 
of death. But the thought that he was about 
to visit not the dying, but the dead, — the thought 
that haste was useless, — that he was come too 
late, — ^that he had nothing now but the frail 
remnant of mortality, the body of his friend 
whereon to wreak the anguish of his heart, — pa- 
ralyzed his steps. His breath came short, — a 
strange grasp seemed to make prisoner his heart, 
— his soul, — ^his very reason 1 — 

Even the officials strove to tame down the 
strut of authority as they charily opened the 
door of the fatal chamber; advancing slowly 



THE OPERA. 231 

while Adrian remained motionless on the thres- 
hold. — What a sight was before him! — Sup- 
ported on tressels, stood the narrow board that 
usually ministered to the low conviviality of the 
spot ; over which hung a white sheet, defining 
the outline of the body, to whose last glow and 
moisture of mortal existence it had closely ad- 
hered. Two fetid flaring candles were burning, 
on adjacent chairs ; and on a low stool beside it, 
his countenance hidden in his lap, sat the proud 
and supercilious Ugo, — levelled by the touch of 
nature to all the common impulses of humanity. 
— He had not yet ventured to remove the bloody 
cloth from the face of his brother; but the life- 
less, nerveless hand, still hung do\Mi from the 
table whence, with averted eyes, he had with- 
drawn it — to press it to his heart, his eyes, his 
lips, — to bathe it with his tears,— to render it 
the token of his oath of vengeance ! — For a mo- 
ment he half raised his head, disturbed by their 
entrance. — Ha ! — a sound ? — breath, human 
breath so near him ? — Vain delusion ! — the 



232. THE OPERA. 

sheet maintained its formal marble folds above 
the dead ; — it was not there the impulses of life 
were stirring. — 

" Ugo ! " whispered Adrian, bending over 
him. But no answer escaped the brother's 
lips. 

" Ugo ! " faltered he again ; and the count, 
without raising his head, without a spoken word, 
seized his extended hand, united it with that of 
his brother, and pressed them convulsively 
within his own. Adrian\s tears burst forth as 
he encountered the marble touch of those clay- 
cold fingers. 

In the mean time the explanation proceeded, 
unmarked of either. *' The doctor who fetched 
this here gemman (when fother as shot him 
and the two seconds made off) is gone back to 
town to break it to the family," whispered the 
landlord. 

^^ And was no attempt made to detain the 
parties concerned ? " 

" Two carriages and four was a waiting, 



THE OPERA. 233 

Muster Townsend, and the gemmen dmv' of in 
a twinkling/' — 

But as the interrogations of the poUce officer, 
addressed to the persons in custody below, were 
prompted rather with a view to the judicialities 
of the affair than its origin, it may be as well to 
enter into such details as were still undeveloped 
by the survivors. 

An hour or two after Maldyn's departure from 
the embassy. Count Pignatelli having released 
his son from his official durance by the intelli- 
gence that the departure of the courier was de- 
ferred, Anastasio profited by his liberty to ac- 
complish his engagement in Chapel-street. But 
it was already six o'clock; Adrian had just 
quitted the house, without informing Adelberg 
of his destination; and some jealous fancy con- 
nected with his interdictory counsels of the 
morning occurring most unluckily at that 
moment to Pignatelli's mind, he flew to Lady 
Neville's with a view of satisfying his mis- 
givings. Either by chance, or by the design of 



234 THE OPERA. 

Lord N. he was admitted to Gertrude's pre- 
sence; when, having indulged largely in the 
irritation of a lover's petulance, the overcharged 
heart of Lady Neville relieved itself by a violent 
flood of tears. What could be more natural than 
that Anastasio should address his tenderest sooth- 
ing to assuage the sorrows he had excited ? — 

He was still seated beside her, with her hand 
in his, — her swollen eyes bearing testimony to 
the painful interest of their conversation, — when 
Lord Neville, backed by two of his upper 
servants as witnesses, burst into the room; 
venting his indignation in so coarse an exag- 
geration of his wrongs, and in such foul abuse of 
his wife, that Anastasio, however conscious of 
his own fault, was compelled to retort, and speak 
loudly and warmly in her defence. The furious 
husband became still more enraged, still more 
intemperate; and having at length seized the 
arm of Gertrude, and attempted with unmanly 
violence to thrust her from the room, Pignatelli 
rushed madly to her defence. A scuffle ensued, 



THE OPERA. 236 

—a blow was given, — retaliated, — repeated; — 
and from that moment it was evident that 
nothing but blood could wash out the stigma 
mutually incurred I 

But not blood alone ; — not the ordinary repa- 
ration sought and demanded by men of honour 
labouring under a sense of inj ury, could appease 
the malignant irritation of Lord Neville. It was 
life he asked in atonement. He felt that the 
breath of existence must be hateful to him so 
long as it was shared by the favourite of his 
wife — of the wife whose affections his own cru- 
elty had alienated; and being aware that an 
affray occurring in the presence of servants, and 
the presence of Lady Neville, would create an 
immediate suspicion of some fatal result de- 
manding the interference of the guardians of 
public peace, he so hastened, — so e?iforced every 
necessary preliminary, that within two hours 
from the dispute, every thing was arranged for 
a meeting ! 

The first impulse of Anastasio had been to 



236 



THE OPERA. 



seek the assistance of Mr. Maldyn, — but no satis- 
factory information could be obtained in Chapel- 
street relative to the probability of his return ; 
and, being well aware that neither Brabazon, 
nor Fieldingham, nor any of his immediate 
friends would consent to be parties in so intem- 
perate and precipitate a business, he next ad- 
dressed himself to Monsieur de Villevaro^ues. 
To the ear of the rash young Gascon the very 
name of a blow was a sufficient excitement ! — 
He became as clearly convinced as Lord Neville 
himself, that nothing less than blood— than lifej 
could repay such an insult ; and the gentleman 
selected by his lordship as second, a fire-eating 
Colonel Felix O'Donnaghty, being of a similar 
way of thinking, every thing was speedily con- 
cluded. Accompanied by surgeons, and with 
post-horses in waiting, they met in a brick-field 
adjoining the Granby Head, near Putney; where 
the calm and holy moonlight, so little calculated 
as a witness to scenes of bloodshed, shone out 
upon the ground measured by their misjudging 



THE OPERA. 237 

companions. Before midnight, the lifeless body 
of Anastasio was borne on a plank into the 
public house ; — and the accessories to the fatal 
event were already on their way to another 
kingdom. 

Meanwhile Lady Neville, horror-struck by 
the scene she had witnessed in the course of 
that ill-omened morning visit, yet unable to 
quit the house so long as her husband re- 
mained there, profited by his departure to fly to 
that of Countess Pignatelli, intending to avow 
her belief that ahostile meeting was on the point 
of taking place between these deadly foes. But 
by one of those fatal coincidences which seem 
destined to confirm certain of the disastrous 
chances of life, the count and countess were from 
home, — Ugo too absent ; and it was to an old 
Italian maggior cVuomOf familiarly known to her 
through Anastasio as a faithful retainer of the 
family, she ventured to unfold the truth. The 
first suggestion of the poor man, distracted on 
learning the danger of his young lord, was to 



238 THE OPERA. 

apply to Mr. Maldyn, who would probably act 
as his second ; and while Lady Neville, scarcely 
retaining the use of her faculties, w ent in search 
of a near relative of her lord's to give the 
alarm, Guiseppe recollecting that it was opera 
night, hastened thither, and despatched ^that 
message to Adrian, which was so imperfectly 
communicated, — so inauspiciously received. Had 
the old man been announced as the servant of 
Countess Pignatelli, instead of a " foreign lady'* 
(as he chose to describe himself, in order to baffle 
the curiosity of the box-keeper,) it is probable 
that a more reasonable arrangement might have 
been effected, — and a less horrible result — but 
no ! — the result was in the hands of Providence ! 
And thus Ugo Pignatelli, abruptly sum- 
moned from Lord Romford's by the surgeon to 
whom the unfortunate victim had been con- 
signed, heard not a hint of the affair till 
the worst was over. On passing the threshold 
of the house to which he was brought on pre- 
text that his brother had received a slight 



THE OPERA. 239 

wound — a severe — a hopeless wound, — he was at 
length told to prepare himself for the sight of the 
lifeless body! — Till the arrival of Adrian Mal- 
dyn he had been almost stupified by so sud- 
den a blow. But it afforded some consolation 
that he had a patient and interested ear into 
which to pour his invectives against Lord 
Neville, — his murmurs against the intemperance 
of Villevargues, — his threats of vengeance 
against both. — And Gertrude ! how did he 
name — how did he qualify her offence? — No 
matter! — He was the brother of Anastasio, and 
standing beside his bier !— 

During the wild outburst of his excitement, 
Adrian uttered not a word ! Although he felt 
the tumult of Ugo's rage to be a sacrilege to 
the solemn presence of the dead, he could not 
speak even to pacify his resentment; till the 
sound of an approaching carriage startled him 
with new trepidation. The bereaved parents 
were probably at hand ! — It was some relief to 
his own feelings, that neither Coimt nor 



240 THE OPERA. 

Countess Pignatelli had been allowed to make 
the attempt. Crying aloud for the embraces of her 
living son, for the corpse of her lost Anastasio, — 
the mother, the proud fond mother was still 
incapable of tears, and the father oppressed by 
a frightful immobility of grief Giuseppe came 
to implore his young master to hasten home ; 
and Adrian offered to stay and watch be- 
side the body, till the completion of the ne- 
cessary forms and the award of a jury enabled 
them to remove it from its present degraded 
receptacle. Count Ugo, satisfied with Maldyn's 
promise not to quit the house, — the room, — 
while it contained the sacred deposit, was per- 
suaded to re'turn to his afflicted family. 

The surgeon had not ventured to re-enter the 
house : the single constable left in charge of 
the ^body, had retired with the people of the 
house, to a room below : and Adrian, still in the 
full array of evening dress, — still reeking with 
the perfumes of the chamber of festivity, — soon 
found himself a solitary watcher in the chamber 



THE OPERA. 241 

of death ! — The landlord pressed hard to stay 
with him, on the plea that he was used to 
" them things ; " but Adrian wished for no com- 
panion but his own afflicted heart. He placed 
the candles on the landing-place ; and having 
gently closed the door, drew aside the ragged 
curtains, that the moonshine might serve as a 
substitute for their fleckering light. — He seated 
himself close beside the awful object of which 
he had undertaken the guardianship : — already 
there was something unearthly, — something 
shroud-hke, and cold, and sepulchral, in the 
whiteness and stillness of that sheet ! — No ! it 
was no sleeper, no object of ordinary inanima- 
tion, that lay beneath. — The dead alone assume 
that thriUing aspect ! — 

Adrian Maldyn turned aside his face. — He 
wished to think, — to review, calmly if he could, 
the events of the day; — to recall to his ear every 
word uttered by Anastasio, — to his mind, every 
gesture of warning breathed by himself. — Oh ! 
that some better angel had prompted him to speak 

VOL. III. M 



242 THE OPERA. 

more explicitly, to disemburden his mind fully 
and at once, with regard to Lord Neville's perilous 
state of feeling towards him. Why had he 
quitted the embassy without fulfilling the 
object of his visit? — Why had he gone to dine 
at Meriton's without leaving a few lines of ex- 
planation ? — 

So many hearts as had pledged their happi- 
ness on that of the beloved Anastasio ! — His 
father, to whose pride the promise afforded by 
his strengthening faculties, whispered such 
fond expectations ; — his mother, who loved him 
with the implicit and doating tenderness which 
characterizes the matron's exultation in the man- 
hood of her son ; — Gertrude, combating with all 
the fervour of a virtuous mind that fatal predi- 
lection which, had it been lawful, might have 
been cherished by both as an ennobling and ex- 
quisite sentiment ; — even the poor old faithful 
attendant of his childhood, who had diverted 
his allegiance from the first-born of his master's 
house to lavish it on the fine, frank, generous 



THE OPERA. 243 

character of the second son, — the youngling — 
what would be, what must be, their indignation 
against his fatal apathy ! — 

Aloud, — with tears, with unchecked tears, — 
did he denounce his own passive inertion, and 
invocate the spirit of his friend for pity and 
forgiveness. Yet, no ! not the spirit ; — it was to 
those cold remains he turned. — He had not yet 
learned the terrible lesson, or passed the first 
ordeal attendant on the death of those we love ; 
that of dismembering in our perceptions the 
bright soul which constituted their existence 
in our hearts, from the form of clay through 
which they became dear to our eyes ; — that form 
of clay we prized so tenderly, as the medium of 
their own impulses of happiness ! — Ah ! cold 
and repellent notion of a disembodied futurity ! 
— ^but for the sanguine promises of faith, vague 
and unconsolatory would be the joys of thy 
foreshowing ! — 

How could he yet attemper his mind to the 
idea that it was not indeed his friend who lay 
M 2 



244 THE OPERA. 

before him ?— Beneath that gory sheet were the 
lips from whence he had been accustomed to 
hail those generous and feehng sentiments which 
formed the Anastasio of his heart ; — the half- 
closed ej^es, so lately animated by glances of 
Tivid and sparkling fancy; — the brow so lofty and 
commanding ; — the clustering curls so cherished 
by the hand of love ;— the breast on which, in 
the midst of their slight dissensions, he had 
often longed to throw himself and weep ; — the 
hand which, amid the formal and hurrying 
ceremonies of society, had ever instinctively 
souo-ht his own! — Yes! these were Anastasio! 
—it was on them, not on the evaporate thing sug- 
gested by his better reason as now emancipated 
from its prison of clay, that his yearning fondness 
rested.— TAe^ were Anastasio !— Yet even these 
he must soon resign ;— even these were, for the 
last time, vouchsafed to his sight. The grave 
—the hollow voiceless grave,— the narrow cof- 
fin,— the noisome . Away with the thought ! 

—Shrinking back in his chair the mourner wept 
aloud. — 



THE OPERA. 245 

Nor till two hours of silent reflection had 
sobered the first intoxication of his grief, and 
given time for the OTowth of that chastened 
mood of affliction which looks upon an event 
from afar in its position relatively to the wdde 
world — to the one great cause, — rather than in its 
insulated importance to ourselves, — did Adrian 
gain courage to admit how soon those precious 
remains would assume the revolting hues of 
mortal nature ; and to determine on one last look 
upon the dead, ere yet the human intelligence 
impressed by the departed soul on the mould it 
had abandoned, should fade into vacancy. 

He drew near with a calm and reverent step : 
— with a trembling hand uplifted the heavy 
covering from the face — stooped down im- 
pulsively to imprint the kiss of an eternal part- 
ing upon the brow of one, whose loss was to his 
young heart as the first disenchantment of his 
dream — as the first memento of the fragile na- 
ture of existence ! His heart was swelling with 
the mighty consciousness of one who, amid all 



246 THE OPERA. 

the bitterness of his disappointment, looks for- 
ward to an eventual compensation — to a future 
reunion with the loved and lost ! 

But as his fevered lips rested upon that cold, 
dank, dewy brow, a sudden chill seemed to 
penetrate to his very soul. He became vnld — 
bewildered — desperate ! — He encircled the form 
of the dead within his grasping arms: — with 
sobs of frenzied despair called aloud upon 
Anastasio — pressed him to his heart — bade him 
speak, breathe, smile; — while the cold moon- 
light looking in upon the scene, revealed the 
still, impassioned smile, with which the dead 
Anastasio seemed to hsten to his adjurations ; 
and displayed on his own dress, his own 
hands, many a frightful trace of the half-con- 
gealed blood of his friend ! 

In another minute, the people below were 
startled by the sound of a heavy object falling 
to the ground in the fatal chamber. — Adrian 
had fainted. — 



THE OPERA. 247 



CHAPTER XIII. 



Is he not with the dead — the quiet dead ! 
Where all is peace ? — Not e'en the impious wretch 
Who tears the coffin from its earthly vault. 
And strews the mouldering ashes to the wind ' 
Can break their rest. 

JOANNA BAILLIE. 



Perhaps no event ever occasioned a more 
vivid impression in the great world — the 
exclusive great world — than the fatal catastrophe 
of Lord Neville's duel. The victim was young, 
handsome, gay, prosperous ; — the error which 
provoked his fate came home to many a bosom, 
and had displayed itself in the sight of all,— . 
even in the midst of those giddy circles which 



248. THE OPERA. 

were for a moment paralysed by its retribution. 
And above all, London was in the zenith of its 
season ; — delirious with its spring vanities ; — and 
the excitement of a new horror was secondary 
in attraction only to that of a new pleasure. 

It was not that Almack's was less crowded, 
— the park, the opera less thronged with their 
usual gaudy mob. As many dinner parties 
and as rtchercM drew together the stars of 
fashionable life ; — as many carriages were broken 
in achieving the court-yards of Arlington-street 
or Piccadilly. But wherever two or three were 
gathered together, Lord Neville's name was 
made the theme of execration ; and torrents of 
superlatives were poured forth in commiseration 
of his dead and his living victim. Poor dear 
Anastasio Pignatelli was'pronouncedto have been 
the most charming of mankind, and poor dear 
Lady Neville to be the most injured of woman- 
kind : — had his lordship shown his face in 
St. James's Street while the jury was sitting, 
it is probable that the very stones of the club- 



THE OPEEA. 249 

houses would have leaped down for his lapida- 
tion. Every one had some horror to relate of 
him ; — every one had always prophesied he 
would live to expose himself by some flagrant 
delict. One of his particular friends had seen 
him shoot a favourite old dog for making a false 
point; — ^another had detected him breaking a 
stick on a restive horse in some unsuspected lane. 
He was in the daily habit, it appeared, of pinching 
his wife and knocking down his servants ; — and 
was even recorded to have amused himself with 
eating live spiders, while yet an unpromising 
boy at a petticoat preparatory-school. Such 
were the iniquities related ! — of those implied 
it would be difficult to speak. Many a head, 
was shaken in his dishonour, with an emphasis 
equal to that of Lord Burleigh's; and half-sen- 
tences uttered, and hands outspread, and shud- 
ders pantomimed, such as might have graced 
the enormous crimes of a Nero or a Thurtell. — 
But to what did the fads amount ? — Lord 
Neville, however limited in his capacity, dis- 
m3 



250 THE OPEBA. 

agreeable in his manners, and ungraceful in his 
person, was a man of honourable principles, 
according to the vulgar acceptance of the term. 
A young foreigner eminently distinguished by 
his attractions, was pointed out to him as the 
minion of his wife, and confirmed to him by his 
own observations as her warm adorer : she, the 
wife of his bosom, was avowedly the object of 
lawless attachment to Anastasio Pignatelli. He 
remonstrated with her ; coarsely perhaps, — for 
his whole nature was coarse. But it was not 
one degree more refined when his rank and 
fortune induced her to swear to him at the altar 
the love and duty of a wife. His remonstrances 
were fruitless ; the intimacy between Gertrude 
and her lover was still kept up. 

Lord Neville knew that he was marked out 
by the ridicule of every friend of the guilty 
parties. He saw himself caricatured, he heard 
himself lampooned, he believed himself an 
object of contempt to men more fortunate than 
himself in their matrimonial destinies. And 



THE OPERA. 251 

when at length his wife and Anastasio presented 
themselves to his eyes under circumstances of 
familiarity which he firmly believed criminal (even 
to that point which justifies an Englishman in 
the eyes of the law in inflicting summary justice 
on the offender), humiliated, frantic, mad, he 
had rushed upon them, insulted and been in- 
sulted in his turn — and finally shared with his 
enemy the chances of a mortal combat. 

Who will deny that had the original aggres- 
sor's aim proved fatal instead of his own, Ana- 
stasio's would have been the sentence of ex- 
communication, — his the complicated infamy. 
He would have been upbraided by the 
newspapers as a seducer, a trespasser on the 
laws of God and man, — an infringer on the 
charities of lifej — he would have shot the 
spaniel, and eaten the spiders at Tumham 
Green. — Society would have been just as per- 
verse in its interpretation — as insane in its 
judgment against him, as against " that hor- 
rible monster Lord Neville." In either case it 



252 THE OPERA. 

would have exceeded its right of condemnation, 
and formed its verdict on false premises. 

But while the random statements and guesses 
of the great world were so actively employed 
in a misrepresentation of the affair, the friends 
of the victim maintained a decent silence. They 
said nothing to offend, or to defend. If they 
believed him guilty of provocation, they felt that 
he had amply atoned the wrong ; and if per- 
suaded that Lord Neville had virulently and 
malignantly accelerated the event, they knew 
that Anastasio could not be held wholly blame- 
less. Those who loved him saw that a close 
examination into the business might vilify 
others, but could not exonerate himself. Not 
one of them would have remained in the same 
room with the perpetrator of the deed ; — no ! 
not even of those who under similar irritations 
would have conducted themselves in a precisely 
similar manner. 

For a whole week (and a week in June 
equals in importance the united months of No- 



THE OPERA. 253 

vember and December) the names of Neville 
and Pignatelli were in every one's mouth. All 
London had met them on the very day of the 
event, or spoken to them the day before. In 
the secondary circles, a man became of import- 
ance who was acquainted with either; in the 
third, to have even seen them was something. Mr, 
Howard Tapham found his dinner list extended 
to twice its usual length in honour of the fact of 
having dined in company with Adrian on the 
day of the catastrophe ; and the shopman of an 
Italian printseller at the west end, actually 
rose into notice on the strength of his imputed 
resemblance to Anastasio Pignatelli ! — Anecdotes 
and personal traits of both parties were adver- 
tised in all the periodicals. — 

But on the eighth day the waters of strife 
subsided. — The remains of the Neapolitan 
ambassador's son were announced among other 
fashionable departures, as having sailed in the 
Phocion brig for Naples. It was understood 
that the family declined prosecuting. The count 



254 THE OPERA. 

and countess, accompanied by Ugo, crossed Lord 
Neville and Colonel O'Donnaglity in Calais har- 
bour; and the whole affair was dismissed and 
forgotten. From a monstrous atrocity it be- 
came a shocking business ; before the end of 
the month, it was " that affair of Neville's ;" 
and before the close of the season, few persons 
could distinctly remember whether Pignatelli 
or Villevargues had been the principal or the 
second, — the living dog or the dead lion. — 

Oh ! hideous levity of modern hfe ! — corroding 
leprosy of fashionable egotism ! — will nothing 
avail to force the responsibility of the individual 
on the acknowledgment of the multitude? — will 
nothing humanize the hard hearts which pros- 
perity has indurated ? — Must a volcano rise 
at our feet ere we recoil in our wild career? 
— must the destiny of Lisbon topple down our 
mighty Babylon, ere the survivors tremble in 
their turn ? — " Will such things be believed ? " 
say the writers of history — and compilers of me- 
moirs in treating of some breach of moral law^ 



THE OPERA. 255 

Believed? — do we not see iniquities of every 
shape, — public and private, — foreign and do- 
mestic, proceed day after day amid the giddy 
— laughter of the world ? 

But there was one person in the midst 
of that gay and tumultuous metropolis, to 
whom the warning was not sent in vain. In- 
stead of seeking to prove herself less guilty 
than she was adjudged by the voice of the 
world, instead of bringing evidence as she might 
have done that the stone was unjustly cast at 
her, Gertrude Neville remembered only that she 
had sinned in giving ear to the confession of an 
adulterous passion, — in loathing her husband and 
loving Anastasio, — in being the instrument of 
death to one, and crime to both, — ^The sack- 
cloth and ashes in which her spirit invested 
itself for the remainder of its mortal bondage, 
were sincerely and permanently adopted. In 
withdrawing herself for ever from her husband's 
house, she had resolved that the dwelling to which 
she retired should be consecrated to sorrow and 
remorse. 



256 THE OPERA. 

Such was the end of two persons rich in all 
the endowments which heaven or earth could 
lavish on their heads. Youth, prosperity^ 
beauty, health, the favour of the world, nay ! 
even virtuous intentions, were marred by the 
wanton violation of a religious covenant, a moral 
obligation. — They had loved with an unholy 
love ; and grievous was the expiation ! — 

About to retire to the humble establishment 
of a distant relative in the north of England, 
Lady Neville previous to quitting London, re- 
quested an interview with the friend of her 
victim. There was something she wished to 
ask, something she vv'ished to tell, not incom- 
patible with the rigorous self-mortification to 
which she had condemned herself. Adrian had 
already been a witness of her errors ; and she 
felt that he might be permitted to behold her 
remorse. To his ear she felt privileged to 
breathe the name of the dead ; to his sympathy 
confide her desire for some detail of the con- 
signment of his remains to the tomb ; and 



THE OPERA. 257 

Maldyn, notwithstanding his involuntaiy pre- 
judice against the cause of so awful a catas- 
trophe, was scarcely less anxious to mingle his 
lamentations with those of the woman who had 
been so fatally dear to Anastasio. Prepared to 
behold in the countenance of Gertrude those 
deadly ravages which mental anguish requires 
so limited a period to effect, — the wasted cheek, 
the quivering lip, the cadaverous aspect, — he had 
no pre-conception of the dignified humility 
her repentance would assume. There was 
the pride of self-respect, which she knew 
she had not forfeited according to the decrees 
of man ; — there was the lowly self-prostration 
which she felt was demanded by the righteous 
judgments of the Almighty. She was not hope- 
less ; — she trusted her offence might be pardoned, 
but pardoned through the blameless and hal- 
lowed tenour of her future days. The patient 
serenity of submission pervading all her words, 
and looks, and movements, touched the spec- 
tator far more deeply than any vociferous 



258 THE OPERA. 

burst of grief. On entering her house, Adrian 
encountered the eyes of a departing guest, and 
a token of grave recognition passed between 
them ; he regarding his cousin as the affianced 
bride of Lord Bruton, — she recognizing in Adrian 
the paramour of Silvestra Sandoni. 

Among the numerous circles in which the 
catastrophe of Count PignatelU's son afforded a 
topic for grave discussion, was that of the Du- 
chess of Cardigan. Without making it an oc- 
casion for officiously pointing out to her son the 
perils of an unhallowed attachment — to her 
daughters the sinfulness of encouraging the 
devotion of an unprivileged lover, she fervently 
thanked God, in their presence, that he 
had spared her the wretchedness endured by the 
mother of Anastasio, and the shame experi- 
enced by the parents of Gertrude ; and set forth 
with mildness and firmness of the danger of a 
woman's incurring even the shadow of re- 
proach. 

Meantime the infirm Lord Abbotscourt, in 



THE OPERA. 259 

spite of the soothing attentions of Sir Herbert, 
and the almost sisterly kindness of Lady Har- 
riet, experienced no amendment of health — 
no renovation of the exhausted and dispirited 
state of mind into which he had been gradually 
subsiding. Introduced as a stranger to Con- 
stantia Fitzgerald in the domestic circle of her 
uncle, he was too much captivated by the good 
sense and good feeling evident in her tone and 
demeanour, to submit patiently to the idea of 
renouncing such a daughter-in-law ; and be- 
came every day more averse to Mrs. Perceval, 
on hearing the name of his niece mixed up on 
all occasions in the strictures on the conduct of 
Lady Neville. All who beUeved, or affected 
to beheve, that Anastasio Pignatelli was in 
truth the lover of Gertrude, could not but re- 
gard the friend who had accompanied them on 
their Itahan tour as the confidante of their at- 
tachment ; and many of the more prudish spoke 
of Cecilia with a sneer which her conduct 



260 THE OPERA. 

throughout the business little merited. It 
was hardly to be wondered at, however, that 
Lord Abbotscourt should unite with the severest 
of her reprobators on this occasion. He was 
unaware of the high tone of moral principle 
professed and acted upon by Gertrude in all the 
relations of life; and knew not that, even in 
their closest intimacy, the name of PignateUi 
had only been pronounced by Lady Neville as 
that of a highly appreciated acquaintance; 
while Gertrude was never mentioned in 
Cecilia's presence by Anastasio unless as a 
tutelary saint. Lord Abbotscourt was little 
inclined to attach the idea of profligacy to a 
countenance so sweet, — an air so femininely 
gentle — as that which had caught his attention, 
unprejudiced by all partial association, in the 
circle-garden of the Regent's Park ; but the 
opinion of the public respecting the inculpation 
of Lady Neville's friend, inevitably tended to 
confirm his own preconceived opinion respect- 



THE OPERA. 261 

ing the heartlessness of Lady Wroughton's 
pupil. 

The information afforded by Sir Herbert of 
the seclusion in which Adrian was livino- with 
the Pignatelli family during their season of af- 
fliction, satisfied him that he had nothinsr im- 
mediate to apprehend from a renewal of inter- 
course between the cousins ; that his son was 
either waiting a reply from Elzstein, or less 
ardent in his views on the subject; and he was 
therefore content to preserve his own incognito, 
and render his determinations as deliberate as 
possible. The attention of his friend Manning- 
field, meanwhile, was almost wholly engrossed 
by the publicity of the Duke of Cardigan's ho- 
mage to Silvestra, and the opinions generally, 
but erroneously, entertained in the world, that 
she was already his wife. The two veterans 
were in the habit of sitting together evening 
after evening, railing at the perils to be appre- 
hended from the manoeuvres of the mischievous 



262 THE OPERA. 

or weaker sex; and expressing their opinion, 
that nothing less than the immediate instigation 
of Satan could have so closely attached Adrian 
Maldyn to Cecilia, — the Duke of Cardigan to 
Mademoiselle Sandoni. Sometimes, after a 
long tissue of invectives lavished by either party 
on his son or nephew, both would grow ir- 
ritable and retract their accusations; Lord 
Abbotscourt thanking Heaven that at least his 
son was incapable of allying himself with a 
public performer — a stage-player, — and Man- 
ningfield eagerly protesting that her character 
was spotless as some wilderness of snow ; while 
the General would in his turn attack the reputa- 
tion of Lady Wroughton, and by implication 
that of Cecilia, — till her uncle, firing up for the 
lady of Adrian's love — the beauty bearing so 
singular a resemblance to Cecil Darley — would 
remind him, that although the sins of the father 
are visited upon the child, those of the mother 
are not necessarily inherited by the daughter. 



THE OPERA. 263 

It was one evening in the midst of these angry 
discussions, that Sir Herbert received a note 
from Adrian, acquainting him that Adelberg 
having been suddenly summoned back by his 
father to enter upon the functions of a place to 
which he had received an unexpected nomi- 
nation, he had determined to accompany his 
friend to Harwich, and witness his departure 
for his native country. 

" I am not sorry," wrote young Maldyn, " to 
have an opportunity of changing air and scene. 
The recent circumstances of mournful interest 
in which I have been implicated, have reduced 
me to such a state of languid depression, that I 
long to be in the country. A week's tour will do 
wonders for me ; and on my return to town, I shall 
have reason to hope that letters from my dear 
father will be waiting my arrival. Next to the 
pleasure of perusing them, my dear sir, I shall 
be eager for that of presenting myself once more 
in your society ; and offering my personal thanks 
to Lady Harriet and the Fitzgerald family for 



264 THE OPERA. 

the flattering kindness of their inquiries. I have 
heard from Count Ugo Pignatelli since his ar- 
rival at Calais; and feel persuaded it will gratify 
you to learn that the count and couittess were 
about to proceed on their journey, in a more 
tranquil state of mind than might have been ex- 
pected." 

" Tranquil state of mind !" cried Sir Herbert, 
peevishly. " I doubt not they have already 
centred ail their affection on that contemptible 
jackanapes, their heir apparent. They were 
scarcely deserving of a fine, open-spirited lad, 
like that 'Stasio of theirs. To be sure he was 
educated in England from his childhood ; or 
one might have been puzzled to guess whence 
he derived that noble, candid, thoughtless cha- 
racter, which rendered him so great a favourite 
with us all." 

" I have known Italians all that you describe," 
observed Lord Abbotscourt. 

"Ay ! you are thinking of Bajabella,— of Ana- 
stasio's unfortunate relative, Dorothea. But 



THE OPERA. 265 

remember the paltry, narrow, finessing character 
of his grandmother, the old princess.'* 

" His grandmother?'' 

** Do you not remember how pompously she 
used to quote ^ my daughter, Princess Camilla ; 
now ambassadress at the court of Spain ? ' " 

"And that Princess Camilla was parent to 
Adrian's friend— to this unfortunate young 
count, Anastasio Pignatelli?" 

" Exactly ! " 

" Adrian's friend — the friend of a Maldyn !" — 
ejaculated Lord Abbotscourt, with an involun- 
tary shudder. " And was that enough to seal 
his death-warrant ?" — 

"My dear Abbotscourt !" cried the general, 
affecting to laugh him out of his prejudice, 
" for the love of Heaven oblige me by recanting 
this horrible heresy of yours, or I shall begin to be 
afraid of clasping your hand in mine. It is not that 
1 apprehend its influence on my own account; but 
if you prove yourself to be such a dispenser of 
evils, what will become of poor little Flo and 

VOL. III. N 



266 THE OPERA. 

Randolph, whom I have indirectly placed within 
reach of the charm?" 

"Do not jest upon it !" replied his friend, 
laying his hand on Sir Herbert's arm. " Expe- 
rience is a preceptor not to be derided. I have 
proved — have suffered — ^have seen others suffer ! 
How know I that the cup has been permitted to 
pass away ? — Look at this strange attachment 
between my boy and his cousin — between Adrian 
and a person from whom my own prej udices — 
his own — appeared so peremptorily to disunite 
him!" 

" I do look, and see nothing to fear ! Let the 
worst happen, and your son will secure for his 
wife a woman whose very countenance sufficed 
to incline you in her favour, and who is guiltless 
of all association in those family frailties which 
you justly regard with abhorrence." 

" The worst ?-— Have you then heard any thing 
to induce an opinion that he will persist in the 
connexion?" — said Lord Abbotscourt, with a 
faltering voice. 



THE OPERA, 267 

" On the contrary, I am persuaded that were 
it in any thing like a serious train, Adrian 
would have little inclination for rattlino^ about 
the country in a postchaise with that horse-hair- 
and-catgut mad Baron Adelberg, like two dice 
in a box. I am beginning to fancy he is 
playing the traitor with the fair Cecilia whom 
you seem inclined to love and loathe so strangely* 
After all, perhaps, that cursed Mademoiselle 
Sandoni will catch a viscount instead of a duke 
in her fowling nets! — Who knows, my dear 
Ab/' cried the general, trying to divert the me- 
ditations of his friend from the gloomy topic to 
which they were straying, — " who knows but 
you may have Signora Silvestra Sandoni for a 
daughter-in-law ? — She and Adrian were mighty 
busy whispering in corners and exchanging 
rings at Donningw^ell, I can assure you/' 

" Indeed I " replied Abbotscourt, listlessly. 

" Ay, indeed ! — I begin to suspect that 
nothing but his regard for the Duke of Car- 
digan induced him to resiga his pretensions to 
N 2 



268 THE OPERA. 

the hand of the prima donna of the Italian 
opera." 

" A singular way of evincing his friendship.'' 
^* Aha ! — I have brought you to reason ?• — 
Thank me, thank me, for convincing you against 
your will that there are many things more to be 
dreaded than his union with Lady Wroughton's 
daughter. Take my advice, my dear Abbots- 
court, — make up your mind to become acquainted, 
during your son's absence, with the person who 
has thus entangled his affections; and then, 
unless you have reason to think her personally 
unworthy, make them happy by the sacrifice of 
your prejudices." 

a Were my own happiness the only cost of 
the concession, I should not hesitate ; but I dare 
not sign the warrant of what I believe to be my 
Adrian's ruin. Let him only delay this hateful 
marriage a few years, — a few months, — nay, 
perhaps a few weeks, — and he may be spared 
the guilt of fihal rebellion. I feel that the springs 
of this shattered frame are unequal to cope with 



THE OPERA. 269 

further suffering. I shall not long be an ob- 
stacle to his happiness.'^ 

Again Sir Herbert attempted to treat with 
raillery the terrors of his friend ; but on raising 
his eyes to the countenance of Lord Abbotscourt, 
he could not but note that since his arrival in 
England a material change had occurred. It 
had been already pointed out to him in mono- 
syllables by Hiob Armbrust, with the intelli- 
gence that the Herr Graf neither slept nor ate 
in Cumberland Terrace as he had been wont to 
do at Elzstein ; and the suggestion, that Brother 
Remigius should be immediately imported as 
leech, and Frau ]Michelchen as cook, to the new 
establishment, without a word of reference to 
his master. To these disinterested counsels Sir 
Herbert turned a deaf ear ; satisfied that the 
termination of Lord Abbotscourt's anxieties on 
Adrian's account would at least restore him to 
the same moderate state of health he had en- 
joyed for some years past. In the mean time 



270 THE OPERA. 

the general resolved to profit by the son's ab- 
sence, to draw his veteran friend more frequently 
from the dispiriting isolation of his present 
existence. 



THE OPERA. 271 



CHAPTER XIV. 



Pleasures the sex, as children birds pursue. 
Still out of reach but never out of view ; 
Sure, if they catch, to spoil the toy at most, ' 
To covet flying, and regret when lost. 



"Does not Lady Romford intend to have^any 
more tableaux this season?" inquired Lady 
Southford, of one of the Charlevilles to whom 
she was acting as chaperon the following night 
at the Opera. " Your house is the best calcu- 
lated for that sort of thing of any in London. 
I don't think the tableaux at Cardigan House 
are half so good as yours.'* 



272 THE OPERA. 

" Not so degage perhaps," replied Lady Clara, 
graciously : for now tliat her brother had been 
persuaded to resign his post at her little lady- 
ship's Cinderella feet, Lady Southford had be- 
come once more a favourite in the family. " But 
that business of poor Count PigTiatelli's threw 
a cloud over ours ; and mamma fancies it would 
not do to begin them again. Wait till we get 
to Romford Park." 

" Oh ! but that will not be for this hundred 
years. Parliament is to sit a month longer, 
and how in the name of patience are we to get 
rid of ourselves all that time ! " 

" Surely there are enough odd things going 
on in the world to amuse any reasonable being ? 
— There is Mrs. Perceval pretending to look 
penserosa on her friend Lady Neville's account, 
and to deliberate about accepting Bruton's 
proposals, though she well knows that Lady 
Wroughton has promised them ten thousand a 
year down, and that she must forfeit half her 
jointure marry whom she will. It diverts me be- 



THE OPERA. 273 

yond measure to watch her playing at bob-cherry 
with a coronet." 

*' And me no less," cried Lady Southfo rd 
spitefully, " to admire the audacity with which 
your brother carries his empty coffers from 
heiress to heiress, to see who will bid most for 
him." 

*' What else can he do ? — I know he has not 
a shilUng, and you know^ he has not a heart to 
offer," cried Lady Sophia, by way of pacifying 
her pique. " And then there is Lord Fielding- 
ham ; after shutting himself up in a wasp's nest 
these two years past, making love to Lady 
Emily Willesden, he has actually buzzed his 
way back again to that drone Lady Mary 
Ellerby." 

'^ Extremes meet," observed Lady Clara. 
'' Besides, although a man may swallow a sword- 
blade by way of experiment, he would scarcely 
wish his fare to be limited to such ed^ed 
tools for the remainder of his days. And who 
could ever feel interested in Lady Emily after 
n3 



274 THE OPERA. 

her horrid treachery in showing up poor Ana- 
stasio to Lord Neville and making him believe 
that he was always wandering about the grounds 
at Neville Hill, when she knew very well it was 
only that moonstruck knight of romance, young 
Maldyn, making grimaces at his cousin, Mrs. 
Perceval, who thought proper to decline his 
visits/' 

"Proper? — ay! just as Lady Mary and the 
Duchess thought proper to decline Fieldingham's 
alliance, before they quitted England ; yet you 
see he has found his way into Cardigan House 
at last," said Lady Southford. |" I have no pa- 
tience with people who make such a profession 
of propriety ! " 

'' I fancy they want him to use his interest 
with the duke against marrying this abominable 
Silvestra. Fieldingham has a prodigious deal 
of plausibility ; and will manage to talk plenty 
of hummy-drumray good sense to the poor 
foolish man, about his uncles and aunts, and 
grandfathers and grandmothers.'' 



THE OPERA. 275 

" I wish he would talk a little sense to him 
about giving us another ball, or a breakfast," 
cried Lady Clara, yawning. '' It is really too 
bad, because that monster Lord Neville takes it 
into his head to shoot *a man of whom he is 
jealous, that all our season should be spoiled. 
Poor mamma has never been herself since that 
business. You know how she hates spending 
an evening alone • and it was thought a proper 
piece of delicacy for us to stay at home for 
nearly a week, only because Ugo chanced to be 
at our house, when the event took place. I de- 
clare I never was so bored in my life." 

*' And then Villevargues being obliged to go 
oif in the sudden way he did ! " — said Lady 
Sophia, blushing deeply. 

" Do not lament that branch of the business, 
my dear," cried Lady Southford, giggling. " If 
he had staid here another month, perhaps you 
might have been tempted to go off with him your- 
self. Think, my dear Sophy, what a descent it 
would have been from the Duke of Cardigan to 



276 THE OPERA 

a Gascon baron, with his tumble-down tower on 
the Garonne ! — You would not have had so 
much as a carnage to go to mass in the next 
village ; unless like the fairy in the tale, you 
could convert some of the legion of rats running 
about the Chateau de Villevargues into a set of 
coach-horses." 

" Thank you, — I am in no hurry to quit Rom- 
ford Park, on any such temptation." 

" You intend to see the issue of Constantia 
Fitzgerald's heroical attachment to Mr. Mai- 
dyn?" 

" She has already refused that German friend 
of his, who used to act so well in our charades/' 
observed Lady Clara, coming to her sister's as- 
sistance; " I fancy Constance is waiting to 
ascertain the result of Cardigan's liaison with 
the Sandoni, before she decides on rejecting 
young Maldyn." 

" It is right and proper for young ladies to 
avoid precipitancy on such occasions ; as I told 
yon J my dear Clara, when you behaved so bar- 



THE OPERA. 277 

barously to poor dear Bagot. You would have 
done better to marry him ; here is the end of the 
season, you know, and neither of you with any 
chance of o-ettino^ off." 

" My dear Lady Southford ! " exclaimed Lady 
Clara, provoked beyond endurance by her dea*" 
fiiend's impertinence, " do but consider how 
little temptation one has to range oneself among 
the matrons of the day ! Look what lives they 
lead ; and how incessantly they expose them- 
selves for the sake of some young man or other, 
like Bruton or Fieldingham, who at last throws 
them off ; — or are forced to retire to the shades, 
like the super-excellent Lady Neville." 

" But why follow our vile examples ? — Have 
you not better guides before your eyes ? — Lady 
Romford, for instance ; — who ever accused her of 
any penchant^ except for the knave of spades ? 
— or Lady Wroughton; for whom or whose 
Derbyshire estates your family has just now 
so decided a penchant — " 

'' Well, well ! '^ cried Lady Sophia, eager to 



278 THE OPERA. 

interrupt the pointless, but not stingless epi- 
grams of her giggling friend ; " only let us do 
something to make the end of the season a 
little more amusing than its commencement, and 
never mind who dies or who marries." 

*^ But you see it is the dying and marrying 
which puts a stop to our proceedings. First 
Anastasio Pignatelli ; — and now poor Cardigan. 
I was at RundelFs this very morning, and 
nothing would induce them to tell me for whom 
they were making up the most magnificent 
tiara you ever beheld. Now you know the 
very mystery of the thing proves that it is for the 
new Duchess of Cardigan.'* 

"We do not know that it may not be for the 
new Lady Bruton. Lady Wroughton has all 
the Abbotscourt diamonds, if she chooses to 
give them to her daughter." 

" How shameful ! — they ought to be made an 
heir loom, and go with the title." 

" Oh ! are you there, my dear Lady Sophia 
Maldyn?" 



THE OPERA. 279 

" Lord Brabazon !'* cried Lady Clara, " Come 
and tell us whether the Duke of Cardigan is 
really getting his family jewels reset for Sil- 
vestra ? " 
• '^ For his wife, perhaps — " 

*^ But she will be his wife you know." 

" Will she?— Do I?"— 

" Now you must know about it ! — You, who 
are always with them, could tell us if you chose 
the very colour of their hammer cloth, and the 
the date of the special license." 

" If I could, I would not ; — ^but I am happy 
to say I cannot. It does not occur to me, how- 
ever, that the Lady Ellerbys would be in such 
good spirits if such an event were likely to take 
place." 

" Oh ! that is on their own account ; Lord 
Fieldingham has returned on both his knees, 
to Lady Mary, — like a pilgrim doing penance." 

" He deserves to do penance for having 
warmed a frozen asp in his bosom. It remains 
to be proved whether he deserves Lady Mary 



280 THE OPERA. 

Ellerby;'* cried Brabazon, with so much earnest- 
ness, that the Charlevilles were reminded that 
his own suit had met with rejection in the same 
quarter. 

" What a wretched Opera to-night." 

" Every thing is wretched in which the San- 
doni does not make her appearance. But we 
are to have the ' higanno f dicey instead of the 
second act of the opera." 

" What is the matter in the Duke of Cardi- 
gan's box?" — cried Lady Southford ; when at 
length the overture ended, and Nice made her 
appearance. 

" Only some one fainting — it is such a very 
hot night!" 

It happened that at the moment when Lady 
Clara announced this circumstance, Adrian 
Maldyn and his friend Adelberg were descend- 
ing the stairs of the theatre towards the travel- 
ling carriage which was to convey them to 
Harwich. Accidentally prevented from starting 
the preceding night according to their original 



THE OPERA. 281 

plan, Maldyn had willingly complied with the 
desire of Gustavus to console himself, previous 
to his return to Hanover, with a last sight of 
Constance, — a last adieu of the Sandoni. — They 
agreed to visit the theatre incos.. and take their 
departure from its very door. And after gratify- 
ing themselves — Adrian by the pleasing specta- 
cle of Mrs. Perceval's undisguised familiarity 
with Lord Bruton — the Baron by that of Con- 
stantia's air of indisposition — they had the 
additional mortification to find that Made- 
moiselle Sandoni did not appear till the second 
piece, and to be summoned away before the 
termination of her first aria. 

Passing near the door of the saloon, they 
w^ere met by a breathless box-keeper carrying a 
glass of water; an incident which failed to 
excite their interest, — for Adelberg's heart was 
engrossed by the consciousness that he was 
visiting a place for the last time — probably the 
last time of his life — dear to him through its 
association with his Constantia's presence, and 



282 THE OPERA. 

the highest musical gratification he had ever yet 
received ; and Adrian, who had resolved on ab- 
senting himself from London for a time, w^s lost 
in a reverie connected with the events likely to 
follow his departure. 

*' Some one is ill,'' said Gustavus, jumping 
into the travelling chariot. . " Nor would that 
glass of water have been unwelcome to myself; 
I am sick at heart. — It is difficult to say adieu 
to places which have become dear by nourish- 
ing our false hopes V* — 

" For my own part," cried Maldyn, as they 
rolled away from the door, " I abhor the Opera- 
House. I have not set foot in it since the night 
of that dreadful business ; and if I am to be 
guided by my own inclinations, will never visit 
the place again. It is connected in my mind 
with almost every painful event of my life. The 
Opera! — I shudder at the very name !" 

Poor Gustavus was already reclining in a 
corner of the carriage, in sorrowful meditation 
on the fact that he had gazed for the last time 



THE OPERA* 283 

on the face that was dearest to him upon earth, 
and on the surmise that he should never gaze 
again on any face half so interesting to his feel- 
ings 'j while Maldyn, as they passed through the 
eastern suburbs of the metropoUs to the Essex- 
road, could not but reflect on his rashness 
in quitting London without a word of explana- 
tion with the Duke of Cardigan or the Sandonis. 
He was fully aware of the importance of the 
omission; and had promised himself, day after 
day, to break through the artificial barriers by 
which the business was surrounded, and make 
himself clearly understood by both parties. 
But his time had been engrossed by the claims 
of the Pignatelli family, and his anxieties by 
the silence of his father and the favour publicly 
accorded to Lord Bruton by Ceciha; — and he 
was now leaving town, for a week's absence, 
without having fulfilled his duty. He deter- 
mined to write. Perhaps, after all, it would be 
better to explain himself by letter, than expose 
himself to the vehemence of Stephaaine's indig- 



284 THE OPERA. 

nation, or the still more perilous influence of her 
entreaties. Yes ! — he would write ! 

Meanwhile the talk of the friends was of 
other, though scarcely of less interesting topics. 
Adrian, notwithstanding his pre-occupation of 
mind, had so many messages of gratitude, of 
kindness, of recollection, to dispatch to his 
Hanoverian friends, so many reminiscences to 
connect with the departure of Gustavus, so 
many lamentations to breathe over the melan- 
choly events which had embittered his sojourn 
in England, that Baron Adelberg had scarcely 
a moment for the indulgence of his own sorrows. 
At length, in his turn, he implored Adrian to 
become his advocate with Constantia — his re- 
membrancer, — to speak of him during his ab- 
sence, his exile ; to watch over her movements, 
and apprize him of the first smile accorded to 
any other adorer; nor could he be wrought 
upon to admit the improbability that Mrs. 
Fitzgerald would ever be tempted to sanction 
her daughter's marriage with a foreigner. To 



THE OPERA. 285 

say the truth. Lord Abbotscourt's son, who en- 
tertained so high an opinion of the merits and 
attractions of the heiress^ found it difficult to 
forgive the presumption which induced his 
Achates to imagine himself worthy the pre- 
ference of a woman who found all England 
sighing at her feet ! — He was too well acquainted 
with the precarious splendour of a household 
dependent for its existence on the generosity of 
a secondary German court, to think with 
patience of the accomplished Constantia limited 
for the remainder of her days to the sphere of 
the old chamberlain, Baron Adelberg, in all its 
magnificent obscurity. 

On all other points, however, the feelings 
and opinions of the friends were more congenial ; 
and when they reached their destination, — had 
slept, breakfasted, visited the packet, and found 
themselves on the very point of separation, — both 
became sensible, how contentedly and happily 
they had lived together, and how difficult it 
would be to each to replace the other in his 



286 THE OPERA. 

heart. Adrian did not, it is true, experience for 
Gustavus the passion of friendship he had be- 
stowed on the chivalrous and attaching cha- 
racter of Anastasio PignateUi; but he loved 
him as a companion with whom his honour was 
safe, as the sharer of many a boyish exploit 
and many an affecting incident of his latter 
years ; and was moreover well assured of the 
sincere regard cherished by Adelberg for him- 
self. They parted almost with tears ; and when 
after two days' delay, the vessel which was to 
convey him to Germany, actually commenced 
its course, Adrian gazed upon the filling sails 
as if they bore away the sole remaining relic of 
his early happiness. — 

Nor was the project he had carved out as a 
motive for absenting himself from London till 
the arrival of more explicit intelligence from 
Austria, at all calculated to elevate his spirits. 
During his frequent meditations on the singular 
connexion of the fortunes of his family with 
those of the house of Darley, and his solemn 



THE OPERA. 287 

reflections on the horrible events which had 
placed such mighty obstacles between Cecilia 
and himself, a desire had often presented itself 
to his mind to visit Derbyshire, — Havresbury ; 
to behold the scene of his mother's sufferings, 
— the place of her interment. He fancied that if 
any local influence could avail to steel his heart 
against the child of Lady Wroughton, it must 
be that of Cecil's grave ; and of the cottage in 
which his own motherless infancy had been 
concealed, after his removal from Dublin. On 
quitting Harwich, he turned his wandering 
course towards the north westj and on pretext 
of a tour through some of the loveliest scenery 
in England, took his circuitous route towards 
Derbyshire. 



^89 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER XV. 



*' Truly, I walk in pleasant places !" 

" And what are the cares— the perils that bear thee com- 
pany ? — Who readeth not in Quintus Curtius of the pleasant 
groves and woods, the secret walks and shady arbours, 
planted by the hands of the Median kings for their own and 
their courtiers* delectation ?— Yet even there, at the command 
of a drunken and frantic young king, was slain the venerable 
Parmenio, the Macedonian Captain ! Who knoweth not 
Cajeta and the bending of the shore there ? A fairer and 
pleasanter place is not beneath the cope of heaven ! — Yet there 
fell the murdered Cicero I — Such are thy pleasant places." 

Petrarch's view of human life. 



And which among us has not felt his heart 
warm to that bounteous and beauteous season 
of the year, which nowhere dispenses a fuller 
exuberance of loveliness and fertility than amid 



THE OPERA. 2g9 

the " hedgerow elms and hillocks green" of 
our own England ?--When every thorn is lite- 
rally and figuratively hidden by the wonder- 
working hand of nature ;— when the woods are 
all song, the fields all blossom, the plains a 
waving sea of golden promise ;--when the hus- 
bandman wears his healthful smile of summer 
competence ;— when the earth sends forth its 
roots and fruits, and the atmosphere breathes 
warmth and gladness around, till even the 
starveling beggar is recalled to a remembrance of 
the mercies of Providence ! — 

It was the first time Adrian Maldyn had 
ever traversed the interior of his native coun- 
try; the first time he had beheld its thriving 
towns, — its lordly parks, — its commodious 
farms, — its hamlets lurking among the wood- 
lands, enlivened and refreshed by the little 
nameless streams beside whose banks their 
white tenements are scattered. It was the first 
time he had seen humble cottages surrounded 
with flower-gardens and orchards; and the 

VOL. III. O 



290 THE OPEKA. 

dwellings of the rich by school-houses and 
alms-houses for the poor. It was the first time 
he had seen the bright, laughing, verdant, 
blessed aspect of England in the wholesome 
pride of her rustic triumph, — in the harvest 
prime of her year. 

Never before had he beheld the giant oaks 
which uplift their reverend heads in the pre- 
cincts of many of our noble mansions ; — where, 
in spite of the sneers cast by the nobles of other 
countries on the deficiencies of our chivalrous 
descent, a higher order of baronial dignity may 
be observed than in any less than royal residence 
on the Continent, — even that dignity which is 
connected with opulence and enlightenment of 
mind. The mere timber of the parks and 
groves of England suffices to place them above 
all competition vnth. the staring, unsheltered, 
chateaux and castles of France, Italy, or Ger- 
many ; nor could the young stranger gaze with- 
out emotion on those sturdy veterans of the 
forest, which the necessities of other countries 



THE OPERA. 291 

condemn to the axe for fuel, or the march of 
conquering armies sacrifices to the wantonness 
of their triumphs. 

" Yes ! " exclaimed Adrian, — as the cross- 
roads he was compelled to take in traversing 
the country towards Havresbury, conveyed him 
through the heart of many a village consecrated 
to comfort and cleanliness by the habitual resi- 
dence of its esquire and his family, and among 
woodlands exuberant with the growth of their 
summer foliage, — "this is indeed home! — this is 
the land to live and die in : — to live, in the en- 
joyment of its unambitious tranquillity, — to die, 
with the remembrance of having upheld its laws, 
maintained its rights, and cherished the desti- 
nies of its less fortunate children. The favour 
of Heaven is upon it ; — ^the hand of the victor 
or the tyrant has wrought no defeatures in its 
beauty.'^ 

Such were the sentiments, such the emotions 
with which he approached that picturesque 
county, which was dear to him as the birth- 
o2 



292 THE OPERA. 

place of Cecilia, — of his mother, — of their an- 
cestors and his own. Its wild crags startling 
the eye amid the rich cultivation of a fair land- 
scape ; — its dark pine groves, unlike those of a 
harsher climate which extend their dark arms 
from rocks or horrible caverns, but rather re- 
sembling the raven tresses clustered round the 
brows of beauty ; — its sparkling torrents leaping 
and rejoicing in their channel ; — its deep valleys, 
its hill-sides white with flocks, — all were lovely 
in the eyes of Adrian. And as he was warned 
by the postilions of his approach to Havres- 
bury, and saw by the courtly sweep of the 
woods and gradual extension of the pastures 
that they were on the confines of the park, he 
looked out occasionally among the vistas opened 
through the vast plantations, for the first glimpse 
of a mansion associated with so many precious 
interests ;— for a spire peeping through the 
trees, which might indicate the spot sacred to 
the memory of his mother! 

Mr. Maldyn was aware that Lady Wroughton 



THE OPERA 293 

never resided at the place, and rarely visited 
Derbyshire ; — that conscience had made a 
coward, even of the hard-hearted Katharine. 
Lady Harriet Manningfield in describing to him 
the beauties and attractions of the residence 
purchased by Sir Herbert on his marriage, had 
alluded to Havresbury among the magnificent 
seats of the neighbourhood, as being deserted 
by its owners; although, in accordance with the 
will of the last Lord Templeton, it was main- 
tained from year to year in all its original per- 
fection. xSothing, she informed him, was per- 
mitted to go to decay, — nothing to indicate the 
distaste conceived by the IMarchioness for the 
home of her fathers ; but the elaborate trimli- 
ness and elegance of the place tended to make 
its loneliness a thousand times more remarkable 
— its silence more mournful. " I never visit 
Havresbury,'* said she, ^' without contracting a 
heartache for the remainder of the day." 

It is not to be supposed that the youthful 
descendant of its former lords entertained a 



1294 THE OPERA. 

more cheerful view of the place. It was, how- 
ever, a holy grief which dimmed his sight and 
weighed upon his soul as he drove along the 
avenue; nor did he recover his self-possession 
sufficiently to be aware of what was passing 
around him, till he found the carriage stopping 
before the lofty portico, with the drivers en- 
quiring whether he wished to see the house. 
On answering faintly in the affirmative, the 
great hall bell was sounded by the postilion, 
till it seemed to rouse the sleeping echoes of 
the hollow mansion. A long pause ensued, 
during which the men were busied in pitying 
their horses, and themselves, — in bewailing the 
heat of the weather, and the length of the stage. 
No one, however, came to unbar the doors ; and 
again, and angrily, the postboy repeated his 
summons; venting a few oaths on the tardiness 
of the servants, and expressing his satisfaction 
that but few travellers on the cross-road trou- 
bled themselves and him by turning out of 
their way to visit Havresbury. — Still no one 
appeared. 



THE OPERA. 295 

Ludwig now volunteered his services to go 
round to the stables, and find some mode of 
ingress to the offices. But after an absence of 
many minutes, he returned w^ith the unsatisfac- 
tory intelligence that nobody was to be seen or 
heard of. All the doors were locked — all the 
windows closed. — 

" This is most extraordinary !" cried Adrian. 
" In which direction lies the church? — Perhaps 
it will be better if I proceed thither on foot ; 
while you remain here to wait the arrival of a 
servant." 

One of the drivers offered to guide him as far 
as it was necessary, through the park ; and with 
a beating heart, the traveller followed his direc- 
tions across the turf, among herds of beautiful 
deer, and groves of magnificent trees, towards the 
spire which he had already noted at intervals 
rising over the plantations. And when at length 
he caught sight of it, — detached from the secluded 
glen in which it was sheltered, — Lord Abbots- 
court's description of the spot, and the solem- 



296 THE OPERA. 

nity with which it was connected, recurred to 
his mind, — his heart ; — his father's voice seemed 
-murmuring in his ears ; and covering his face 
with his hand, to conceal the falling tears, — he 
blindly staggered along the path pointed out to 
him by the guide, whom he despatched back to 
the carriage. 

At that moment a startling sound swung so- 
lemnly through the air, and was echoed back by 
the tall cliffs of the neighbouring defile ; — even 
the harsh but hallowed peal of a death-bell, — 
measured, — impressive, — appalling ! — He drew 
aside his hand, — paused heart-struck upon the 
path. — The sound seemed to enter into his very 
soul. — 

Again he advanced a few paces, — turned the 
angle of a projecting coppice — came full upon 
the grassy precincts of the little temple; 
with the brook, as described by his father, 
skirting the knoll on which its hoary walls 
stood calmly defying the mockeries of time. — 
Again he starts, — again covers his face with 



THE OPERA. 297 

his hands. What horrid spectacle hath driven 
back the warm current of life into his paralyzed 
heart ? — 

Who, — who shall describe the impressive 
scene ! — Instead of the tranquillity anticipated 
by Adrian in the loneliness of that sacred spot, — 
instead of the solemn silence interrupted only by 
the rooks circling round the ancient tower, or 
the chafing of the stream fretting along its rocky 
channel at the base of the hillock, — the whispers 
and murmurs of a vast multitude were buzzing 
there. A hundred horsemen, in mourning 
cloaks, lined the road from the village; mar- 
shalled by mutes with their staves of office, and 
ushers with the nodding plumes of funeral 
array. — Again the bell tolled solemnly ! — A pro- 
cession advanced : its pages carrying banners and 
escutcheons emblazoned with the bearings of 
the houses of Maldyn and Darley ! — 

Again the bell tolled. — Two mutes appeared 
in sight, followed by an usher with a coronet 
and cushion ; and lo ! six pursuivants with 
o3 



298 THE OPERA. 

heir wands of office, preceded a stately 
hearse nodding with sable plumes, — drawn by 
six horses arrayed in the solemn trappings of 
sepulchral pageantry. — Adrian clasped his hands 
till the blood started. — Again the bell tolled ! — 
the venerable figure of Sir Herbert Manning- 
field, apparelled in a scarf as chief mourner, 
met his view. — He did not venture to breathe. 
He felt as if labouring under the influence of 
nightmare. A horrible thought had suggested 
itself to his imagination, — but he had still the 
luxury of doubt. 

Adrian pressed forward across the turf, 
crushed into unusual fragrance by the tread of 
the mighty multitude of footsteps whose tumult 
it served to muffle into silence. — The balmy air, — 
which stirred not a feather of those huge unna- 
tural plumes, so little in accordance with the 
summer sweetness and beauty of the scene, — 
was instinct with whisperings. Adrian reached 
a group on the verge of the crowd ; — a country 
woman gazing open-mouthed on the solemnity* 



THE OPERA. 299 

while two terrified children were hiding their 
tears in her apron. 

"I wonder, father, my lady should allow a 
Papist man to lie in the family vault ?" said she, 
to a trembling old man who stood with his gray 
head uncovered by her side. 

Again the bell tolled. 

" How could she gainsay him ? — My lord was 
the husband of our own Lady Cecil," faltered 
the aged retainer of the house of Darley. 

"My father !" burst like a thunder peal 
from the breast of Adrian Maldyn. 

Again the bell tolled ! But he heard it not : — 
Heaven had pity upon his sorrows !— 



300 THE OPERA. 



CHAPTER XVI. 



On Conrad's stricken soul exhaustion prest, 
And stupor almost luU'd it into rest. 
So feeble now, his mother's meekness crept 
To those wild eyes, which like an infant's wept. 
None saw his trickling tears. Perchance if seen, 
That useless flood of grief had never been. 
Nor long they flowed ; he dried them to depart. 
In helpless, hopeless, brokenness of heart ; 
The sun goes forth, — but Conrad's day is dim ; 
And the night cometh — ne'er to pass from him. 

Byron. 

A GRIEF SO astounding, so appalling, as that 
experienced by Adrian under his present inex- 
plicable misfortunes, is too slow to connect itself 
with the realities of life to deal in explanations. 
Many hours after he had been recalled to the 
consciousness of existence, it seemed impossible 
to convince him that all he had seen, all he had 



THE OPERA. 301 

heard was not some hideous phantasm invented 
to delude his soul. 

But incredulity was unavailing. The fact 
that he was lying on a strange couch, — in a 
strange chamber, — with Sir Herbert Manning- 
field seated by his side in all the stern compo- 
sure of venerable affliction, — with Hiob Arm- 
brust on his knees at the foot of the bed, hiding 
his face in the coverlid, — the fact that he loas at 
Havresburi/, — sufficed to attest the truth of that 
terrible vision. 

"My son! my dear Adrian !" whispered the 
good general, in answer to his incoherent in- 
quiries ; " Say, — are you well enough to quit 
this place ? — My owti home lies but a few miles 
hence ; you will be anxious to leave this scene 
of family misfortune.*' 

" No !" replied the paralyzed Maldyn, in a 
concentrated whisper. " If my senses do not 
deceive me, — if Havresbury is indeed the sepul- 
chre of my father, here will I stay, — here live, 
— ^here die, — that all may be atoned. Tell me, 



302 THE OPERA. 

sir,— tell me by a look, — a sign, — a gesture, — 
was that his — " 

He could not achieve the sentence ; but Sir 
Herbert, compassionating the agonies of his 
suspense, replied by an affirmative token. 

" / killed him !" resumed Adrian, in the same 
low voice. " I might have known that he 
would not survive those tidings ; — I might have 
known that I was about to murder my father ! 
Quit Havresbury ? — never — never — never ! 
Here will I render back to my mother suffering 
for suffering, in atonement of my sacrilege 
against her memory ; — here will I propitiate my 
father by the lingering horrors of my dying 
hour. — He perished without a child to smooth 
his pillow, — to comfort his departing soul. — J, 
too, will die unsolaced, — unabsolved, — hope- 
less, — friendless, — that the curse of our race may 
expend itself and be forgotten !" — 

"Adrian! my dear young friend!" said Sir 
Herbert, solemnly, " you owe a higher duty to 
the memory of your parents. You owe it to 



THE OPERA. 303 

your father to prove to the world that the cares 
lavished upon you were not thrown away ; you 
owe it to him to show that his fame as a soldier, 
his honour as a man, have not descended to a 
weakling. Exert yourself. Meet this stroke 
of affliction with the dignity that so well be- 
came himself throughout the vicissitudes of 
his own miserable career. Exert yourself, 
Adrian ; and do not shame the name of Abbots- 
court!" 

"Abhorred name !" cried the afflicted mourner, 
writhing at the sound, " connected with all the 
miseries, — all the errors of our race !" 

" Not so ! " replied his aged friend -, " it was 
consecrated in its application to himself — puri- 
fied when borne by him. — Adrian, let me live to 
see its credit extended by the son he loved.'' 

" Oh ! why did you not warn me of his arrival ? 
I would have flown to his feet, pleaded my own 
cause, remonstrated, pacified, restored him to 
light and life. — Why — why — was he suffered to 
die with the impression of my disobedience 



304 THE OPERA. 

rankling in his mind. How easily could I have 
satisfied him that I would have renounced 
Cecilia for his sake : — alas ! alas ! that I had 
already renounced her ! '' — 

" It is now a month since the arrival of my 
friend/' replied Sir Herbert, in a mild tone of 
expostulation. " During the latter half of that 
period, he appeared gradually inclining to with- 
draw his opposition to your union with Mrs. 
Perceval ; and anxious to form his decision on 
the subject uninfluenced by your personal en- 
treaties. He insisted that his sojourn in Lon- 
don should be kept a secret from you: even 
after the physicians, who deliberated in consul- 
tation on the alarming state of his health, de- 
creed that an aneurism of the heart left him 
little to hope, and that the prolongation of his 
days depended on the tranquillity of his mind. 
He was not incensed against you, Adrian ; he 
was not inveterate in his prejudices against your 
cousin ; — he saw her, admired her, and I was 
already beginning to foresee a probability that 



THE OPERA. 305 

all would terminate satisfactorily ; — that his de- 
clining years would be happy and peaceful." 

"Thank Heaven!" cried the young Lord 
Abbotscourt, fervently. " Thank Heaven, I am 
spared the sin of parricide ! — I conceived, — I 
feared that the first inteUigence of my unfortu- 
nate attachment was the cause of this horrible 
event! — Oh ! sir, could I but express the weight 
of wretchedness, of remorse, from which you 
have redeemed me ! — " 

" I know not," continued Sir Herbert, " what 
madness possessed me, on finding that you had 
quitted town, to persuade him to accompany 
Lady Harriet and myself to the Opera. We 
had both been witness to the favourable effect 
produced on his feelings by the air and counte- 
nance of Mrs. Perceval, — by her resemblance to 
your mother. — I was then ignorant of her en- 
gagement and approaching union with Lord 
Bruton ; and knowing she would be in the box 
opposite to the Duke of Cardigan's, prevailed 
on him to quit his retirement for a night, and 



306 THE OPERA, 

come with us quietly and unobserved to see 
his niece and hear this wonderful Silvestra." 

" Ha I" cried Adrian, raising himself on his 
pillow. 

*^ To my surprise he consented to the scheme ; 
and without admitting that his object in the 
visit was similar to my own, I could perceive 
that his attention was most favourably riveted 
on the graces of Mrs. Perceval. He scarcely 
took his eyes from her face during the whole 
performance. I have since had an interview 
with Lady Bruton, — ay! Adrian, even on her 
cheerless wedding-day, for the arrangement of 
the solemnities of this morning; and she admits 
having been struck by this earnest attention on 
the part of the venerable stranger/* 

*' And were those solemnities arranged by you 
—by his friend,'' — faltered Adrian. " You, who 
knew his aversion to this place, — his enmity to 
the Templeton family !" 

"Think you, my dear boy, I should have 
acted without his especial instructions ? — A clause 



THE OPERA. 307 

in your father's will (which your absence on 
an unexplained journey from Harwich hither, 
compelled me to open and as executor enforce) 
contains an appeal to the surviving heir of Hav- 
resbury, to sanction his interment in the family 
vault by the side of his own Cecil. Such too 
was the eager desire of the late Lord Temple- 
ton, and frequently expressed in the presence of 
his family.'* 

" I remember !" — faltered Adrian — " I remem- 
ber learning from his own lips, my grandfather's 
entreaties to that effect. But I did not know— I 
did not dream — that my dear father^s animosities 
were so far extinguished as to induce him to 
compliance. But I dread to pursue my in- 
quiries ! — You say he looked with favour on my 
cousin ?" — 

" He did, Adrian ! And feeling that the 
contrast between her character and position in 
society, and that of the woman to whom Cardi- 
gan is about to unite himself, could not fail to 
produce a satisfactory consciousness in his 



308 THE OPERA. 

mind, I was pointing out to him the possibiUty 
that yourself, instead of the duke, might have 
fallen into the snares of those cursed Sandonis. 
I told him how much you were with them, — how 
ardently you admired the Silvestra ; — and then 
acknowledged that the Ellerby family were 
sometimes tempted to blame your enthusiasm 
in her favour, as one of the sources of Cardigan's 
attachment." 

"You told him—" 

"At that moment she appeared on the stage; 
and your poor father, uttering an exclamation 
of horror, — fell back in his chair— I hoped, in 
a swoon. We called for water — assistance — 
medical aid ; — he was bled before we quitted 
the theatre. But it was all in vain, my dear 
Adrian, — all in vain ! the first seizure was mortal. 
It was only the breathless remains of my friend 
we conveyed back that night to his own habi- 
tation." 

Adrian uttered not a w^ord. His anguish was 
too profound for words. He saw it all ; — his 



THE OPERA. 309 

father had beheved him guilty of sanctioning 
Stephanine Haslinger's familiarity with the 
pure and the virtuous ; — of caballing to introduce 
as a wife into the bosom of a noble friend, his 
own degraded and deserted paramour! — His 
father had detected the hnposture of the San- 
donis, and imagined him a confederate ! — No 
wonder that his overcharged heart should break 
in the discovery of such base dishonour in the 
child of his affections ! — 

He indulged not in another tear — another 
lamentation. He rose from his bed, — suffered 
them to conduct him to the carriage, — to convey 
him to Manningfield park, — to watch over his 
wasting health, — to console, to comfort, to re- 
monstrate. His grief was tearless, voiceless, 
hopeless. — Cecilia was lost to him for ever ! — He 
knew himself to be a parricide, — but he knew it 
not long. Within a few weeks from that terrible 
day, the grave of the Darleys was reopened to 
receive its last victim. — 

* * # * 



310 THE OPERA. 

On this occasion, the London world of bab- 
blers had little to say: — even the separation 
that shortly afterwards took place between 
Lady Wroughton and the marchioness, was 
enveloped in mystery. — They knew nothing of 
the terrible revelations forced out of the heart 
of the obdurate Katharine by the terrible des- 
tiny of the two last inheritors of the name of 
Maldyn; — they knew nothing of the arts by 
which she had, a second time, entangled her 
daughter in a detested marriage ; — they knew 
nothing of her unceasing taunts to Cecilia on 
her passion for a man who despised her — who 
had betrayed her for the sake of an hireling 
opera-singer j or of the stupor by which Mrs. 
Perceval's mind and heart had been rendered 
reckless from the moment of discoverng hex 
cousin's treachery to all the world can give or 
take away. He was pledged to another; he had 
deceived her ; he was heartless and bad ; — what 
availed resistance against her mother's plots, or 
her lover's supplications? — Lord Bruton pro- 



THE OPERA. 311 

mised her immediate removal to a southern 
climate; and she felt that she could die in 
peace, if screened by his protection from her 
mother's violence and incessant recurrence to 
the worthlessness of Adrian. 

While Constantia Fitzgerald, for the sake, 
and under the counsels of a wise and tender 
mother, combated a similar partiality, and was 
sustained by a sense of duty, and stern moral 
principle in the ordeal, — Ceciha resigned her- 
self to the sway of circumstances. Partly in 
the desperation of wounded confidence, — partly, 
perhaps, in the trivial desire to prove her indif- 
ference to Mr. Maldyn, — she bestowed her hand 
on Lord Bruton. Scarcely was the ceremony 
concluded, when she was startled by intelligence 
of her uncle's death; — scarcely had she been 
removed by her husband from the spectacle of 
Lady Wroughton's remorse, when the tidings of 
Adrian's atoning destiny decided her own!— 
Lord Bruton hastened the departure of his bride 



312 THE OPERA. 

for Italy, — but despair and death had already- 
set their seal upon her frame ! 

But to all these things the gossips of the 
beau monde were indifferent. The men were 
busy preparing for the 1st of September, — the 
women in wondering over Mademoiselle San- 
doni's rejection of the hand of the Duke of 
Cardigan ; — a miracle welcome to all, but utterly 
incomprehensible, excepting to those privileged 
members of his family who were admitted to a 
perusal of the following letter : 

" You say you love me; — you would prove it 
by outraging, for my sake, all the bonds of 
family union, all the claims of state and station, 
the prejudices of society, the pride of your own 
heart. You say you love me — that you cannot 
live without me — that one smile of mine, one 
sigh of affection, are worth the united homage 
of the world I — Infatuated, miserable man ! — 
listen to my reply. — I loathe you ! — There is 
not an atom of dust lying at my feet more 



THE OPERA. 313 

worthless in my sight than yourself; — there is 
not an atom of dust at your feet one half so vile 
as / should appear to youy did you know me in 
my real character ! — Suffice it for the extinc- 
tion of your hopes that I am the wife of ano- 
ther; — suffice it, that I was the happy mistress of 
Adrian Maldyn — that I am the repining, misera- 
ble, degraded slave of Colonel Sandoni. — I have 
taught you to believe him my father; know him 
henceforward as my ruffian taskmaster, — my 
hateful husband ! — 

" I was born a peasant, in the obscure village 
where Count Maldyn — Lord Abbotscourt — pre- 
sided over the education of his only son. 
Having discovered our attachment, he thought 
it enough, for the security of his darling 
Adrian, to remove me to a distant part of 
the country and qualify me for the theatrical 
profession. What cared he that the mischief 
was done, — that my heart was withered by 
shame, — ^my conscience seared by that guilt 
which, in a woman's heart, becomes the source 

VOL. III. P 



314 THE OPERA. 

of every other vice ? — What cared he that my 
young existence vs^as blighted, my honest pa- 
rents dishonoured ?— He had secured his heir 
from a marriage with one ignobly born — and was 
not that enough ? — 

" But I was created with higher aspirations, 
with stronger qualities than to be made the 
toy of a libertine passion. 'Had I been 
allowed to become his wife, I would have 
adorned that name with deeper devotion than 
ever yet impelled the career of woman. Happy 
in his arms— at his feet — I would have shown 
the world an example of conjugal humility, of 
conjugal devotion. . But driven by his father 
with scorn from my native home — abandoned by 
himself, — one master-feeling grew within my 
heart. I swore to devote my life — my faculties 
— to the accomplishment of my revenge ! — And 
I have done so ! — 

" While visiting a Milanese relative serving in 
the Austrian army at Prague, Colonel Sandoni 
saw me. He was poor as well as profligate : 



THE OPERA. 315 

and fancying me deceived into reliance on 
his attachment, persuaded me to elope and 
live with him in retirement in Piedmont, in 
furtherance of his project to complete and 
Italianize my musical education. He believed 
me blind to his mercenary views in the con- 
nexion ', but my craft surpassed his own. 
Little did he imagine that my designs were 
actuated by the hope of filling Europe with my 
reputation, — and obtaining a mastery over the 
destinies of one who, in abandoning me, had pos- 
sessed my soul with the passions of a demon ! — 
" Sandoni was an experienced villain : and 
speculated largely on the profligacy of his fellow 
men. He knew that as the wife of an honourable 
man — the faithful wife — my attractions would 
say little in my favour. He announced me there- 
fore as his daughter; — put me forth in the world 
as open to the addresses of the libertines of the 
day,— and thousands crowded to my itiii. He 
calculated wisely. You, my lord, can tell how 
extensively the spell operated on the fools of 



316 THE OPERA. 

society. — There is not a court in Europe where 
I might not have formed some illustrious 
alliance. — 

'^ Such then is the Silvestra ! — Such the woman 
you would have worn as a treasure in your 
bosom, — as a wife in your heart of hearts ; — 
whom you have placed hand in hand with your 
sisters — your venerable mother — your pure and 
spotless female friends! — Take warning, my 
lord duke ; — and, in acknowledging that I have 
dealt candidly with your proposals, refrain for 
the future from such rash and selfish preci- 
pitancy ! 

" It is not yet too late for the redemption of 
your error. A mourner, — a desponding mourner 
is beside you, whose tears will not flow for ever ; 
— whose love, like all unrequited love, will soon 
grieve itself to rest ; — whose mind and heart, the 
master- works of a virtuous and discerning mother, 
will, at some future time, reward your suit with 
the gratitude of a conscientious affection. Con- 
stantia Fitzgerald has experienced the hollow- 



THE OPERA. 317 

ness of youthful enthusiasm, and will one day- 
appreciate the value of your homage. 

" For me, I am about to leave this country ; — 
to leave it triumphantly — to leave it with that 
dreaij desperation of a broken heart, which feels 
that its purposes have been accomplished — its 
triumph sealed upon the grave of all that was 
dear to it on earth. — Farewell for ever ! " — 



THE END. 



C. WHITING, BEAUFORT HOUSE, STRAND. 



■^ 





J 



yNIVERSITY OF ILUN0I8-URBANA 




3 0112 046407372 










