                   MYSTERIOUS

                  FRIENDSHIP :

                 
                  A TALE.


               IN TWO VOLUMES.


                 VOL. II.




     To strike out the friendly affections from the moral world,
would be like extinguishing the sun in the natural; each of
them being the source of the best and most grateful satisfac-
tions that Heaven has conferred on the sons of men.

                                           CICERO,



                   LONDON :

 Printed by Knight & Compton, Middle Street, Cloth Fair,

                     for

EARLE AND HEMET, 47, ALBEMARLE STREET,

           PICCADILLY.

           1801.
              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP


                          CHAP. I.


                            Hope.

     SHORT as the distance was to 
Mr. Barton's, William and his friend, 
nevertheless, found an opportunity to 
discuss those interests that were ulti-
mately nearest their hearts.

     "What a fortunate occurrence," said
young Baldwine, "will the introduc-
tion of Lady Caroline be at Mrs. Ne-
ville's, as I can then have an opportu-
nity of dropping in sometimes, to see, 
and, possibly, to speak to her!"

      VOL.II.            B.                   "Yes,"
6          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

 " Yes," answered William, faintly
smiling, "and it will also be the occa-
sion of bringing Lord Dalton there; so
that I may truly say, with the Frogs in
the Fable, 'What affords you pleasure
will be death to me.'"

 -"Good God! how you delight to
torment yourself, my dear Bannet!
Don't you see that Flora detests him?
At the same time, if you were not blind,
you might plainly perceive her par-
tiality for you; but your cursed mo-
desty renders you blind to every thing."

 Though William could not forbear
smiling at the latter part of his friend's 
address, he replied:


 "My discernment, I must confess, 
in this particular, is not quite so clear
as your's, and I am afraid that you only 
see with the eyes of friendship; but,
even admitting what you say to be
                                 true,
       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   7

true, how could it possibly advance my
presumptuous wishes?"


    —"Why, do you imagine either Cap-
tain or Mrs. Neville, who are rational
sensible people, will oppose the happi-
ness of an only child? for, you may
say what you will, I am sure Flora
loves you; therefore, be cheerful, and
leave every thing to time and for-
tune."

     "I have, indeed, no other alterna-
tive," said William, who now, having
reached home, concluded the conver-
sation.

     The next morning, our young gen-
tlemen took their accustomed ride, and,
having reviewed the purlicus of Ather-
stone-Hall, returned by the dwelling
of the honest sailor.—Ben, having dis-
covered his masters, as he called them,
at some distance, came out, and re-
                B 2            ceived
8            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

ceived them with an air that betrokened
he was big with some important busi-
ness.

 "My good dear Sirs," said he, "I
am so glad to see ye!-will it please ye
to alight, because I have something to
tell ye."

The friends hung their horses'bridles
at the door, and entered the little man-
sion, where, having scated themselves,
they waited with no little impatience
for Ben's narration. Ben, however, was
not one of those straight-forward story-
tellers who come to the point at once.
He was now favoured with the company
of his benefactors, and every thing he
had in his power must be produced, to
shew his gratitude, and make them wel-
come.

 "Will you take a sup of rum, my 
worthy masters?" said Ben; "no of-
fence, I hope?"
 
                              "You             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIT.           9

  "You give us no offence, honest
Ben," said young Baldwine; "but a
draught of your spring-water will be
quit as acceptable this warm day."

  "Water!" retorted Ben; "Lord love
your heart; why, now, that is just like
the young lady yester morning. I
couldn't persuade her to put a little sup
of rum in ir, thof I told her it would
be all the better for it."

  "Well, and is this all you had to
tell us, Ben?" said William.

  "Lord help you, no," replied Ben;
  "I wanted to tell my master Baldwine
about Lady Caroline-"

  "About Lady Caroline!" exclaimed
young Baldwine, starting up in a rap-
ture, and catching hold of Ben's hand
-" About Lady Caroline, did you
say?"

                     B 3               "Yes,
10               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  "Yes, master," said Ben--"she was
here much about this time yester morn-
ing; and, while I fetched some cool
water from the spring, sat in that very
chair."

  "In this chair!--in this chair, Ben?"
said Baldwine, resuming his seat.

  "I'll take my oath on't," replied
Ben--"because, for why, it has never
since been moved from the place--and
so, she said, says she--but, avast! let
us get upon the right tack, and not
begin where we ought to stop. Yester
morn, I had just finished my mess, and
stowed away, when I bethought me it
was high time to give the poor pigs
their allowance, about which I was for
some time occupied. Now, what with
the grunting of the poor hungry beasts,
and my not thinking any thing of the
matter, I suppose the gentlemen had
been waiting for the gate to be opened.
However, happening to hear somebody
                               hail

             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.            11


hail me with a salute of Holla! fellow !
I hastened forward, when behold ye,
who should it be, but my Lord Dalton
and the clergyman-'Damme,' said
his holiness, 'you hopping son of a
-, must we wait all day, till you
please to open the gate? -'God bless
your grace !' said I, 'I was only serv- 
ing  my poor pigs.'-' Serving the 
devil, says he.-'God forbid ! your
reverence,' says I. -' Hold your re-
probate tongue,' says he, taking God's
name in vain.- To be sure, I now
stood convicted, and so I said, I now
but opened the gate. Well, in about
halt an hour after this, I was standing
at the door, to enjoy the benefit of a 
little breeze,  when, who should ride up,
but Lady Caroline, and her servant.
God bless her! she always speaks to me.
  ' Well, honest sailor,' said she,' how
do you do ? Can you give me a little
water this morning?- ' Yes, my
lady, says I; 'will you please to alight,
                                 and
 
12          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

and sit down? And would you believe
it, Sirs, if she did not come in, with no
more ado than if I had been her equal.
Well. after i had fetched the water,
says she-' You have built yourself a
comfortable little dwelling; and, I must
confess, I was curious to see it.'-' I
build it !' says I-'no, no, Lord love
you, my lady,' says I, 'I believe I
may thank your ladyship for it.'-
' Thank me!' said she, greatly sur-
prised.-'Yes,' says I ; and so I up and told her all about it-how you 
made the gate more commodious-and 
how comfortable and happy you had 
made me-and that all the return you 
asked, was, for me to take care that
no unlucky accident befel her, for the 
future, when she passed the gate.'-
' And has Mr. Baldwine done all this
on my account?' she answered : and
then she looked so tenderly, and i sighed!
Well. then, she sat down, and wiped
her eyes with her handkerchief, and I
                                thought
         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       13

thought she would have swounded,-
and I was so frighted, that, having no-
thing better to offer, I asked her to
take a sup of rum, for I had a bottle
given me by a brother seaman. How-
ever, she would not touch it, thof I
am sure it would have done her good.
Well, after a little time, she appeared
better -and asked me, If you often
came this way?. I told her Every morn-
ing-and then, she took out her purse,
and offered me a guinea; and because I
refused it, and told her I did not want
it, as you had been so good to me, she
left it upon the table; and, when she
went out, said, with a smile, that She
should insist, in future, on contributing
towards making me comfortable."

  " And here, Ben, is another guinea,"
said Baldwine.-" Nay, I will not be re-
fused: be sure you tell me every time
you see her, and remember every word
she speaks. Farewell, my good fel-
                B 5            low.-
14               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

low. --Come, my friend, let us pursue
our ride, and indulge no other ideas
than those pleasing ones of successful
love and future happiness."

  In the afternoon, the friends visited
the mayor, where William found a very
cordial reception; that gentleman pro-
testing he was inclined to keep him, and
send back his son, whom he called a 
runaway, to Mr. Barton's. However,
on William's promising to come and
pass, at least, as much time at Mr.
Baldwine's, he consented that his son
should return with him. Having stayed
until the evening, in their way home,
they called at the cottage, where they
learnt that Lord Dalton, agreeably to 
his promise, had, that afternoon, intro-
duced his sister, and that both parties
were mutually pleased with each other.

  The account of this visit caused both
gentleman to assume an air of gravity, 
                                though
              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           15

though from different motives-young Baldwine regretting his excursion to his father's, as having deprived him of a sight of his Caroline.  However, he consoled himself with the hope, that, as an acquaintance with the Neville-family was now formed, he should often have opportunities of enjoying that pleasure.  William's uneasiness proceeded from another cause-the probable frequency of Lord Dalton's visits.  Fully occupied by the different sensations that took an early leave, and returned home.           














                        

                  B 6               CHAP.
16     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.




         CHAP.  II
          
         A Tale.

         ON the morrow, the young gen-
tlemen enjoyed their usual ride; and,
according to custom, were holding a
few minutes conference with honest
Ben, when the fair Caroline made her
appearance, and soon reached the gate.
After mutual compliments had passed
on both sides, the whole party rode
down the lane together.

       "I have had the pleasure," said Lady
Caroline, "to commence an acquaint-
ance with some particular friends of yours,
gentlemen, since I saw you last; and, I
assure you, in our conversation, you
were both frequently mentioned: were
                               I to



             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     17

I to repeat in what manner, I am afraid.
it would make you vain."

  "If any thing," replied William,
"could render me so, it must be the
very partial approbation of three such
charming and accomplished ladies, to
whose goodness and condescension we
stand more indebted that to any merit
we can boast."

  "Why, I protest, you are a down-
right flatterer," returned Lady Caroline.
"I was taught to believe that you were
a composition of artless truth and sin-
cerity. Well, I shall not fail to repre-
sent you in your proper colours, when
I revisit the amiable inhabitants of the
cottage: but don't let this courtier cor-
rupt you, Mr. Baldwine."

  "Could I but once attain his merit
and qualifications," said young Bald-
                                 wine,
18               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

wine, " I should have but one thing
more to covet."

  --"Which, I presume, is to possess
his happy knack at compliment?"

  --"No, Madam."

  --"What then, Sir?"

  --"My presumption might then possi-
bly urge me to entertain a desire of not
being thought totally unworthy the
good opinion lf Lady Caroline Wy-
vile."

  This answer caused a momentary gra-
vity in the countenance of Lady Caro-
line, but in which nothing of displea-
sure could be traced.

  "Mr. Baldwine's character and dis-
position," returned she, "at least, as it
                                appears

        MYSTERIOUS fRIENDSHIP.                    19

appears to my unskilful judgment, can-
not fail to entitle him to the good opi-
nion of Lady Caroline Wyvile."

The lane ending at Atherstone-Park
wall, the gentlemen were constrained
to take leave, and returned home, where
the satisfaction they had before expe-
rienced received an addition from the
presence of Mr. Baton, who had just
arrived before them. His return had
also produced a congratulatory visit from the Neville-family. the usual
greetings having taken place, Mr. Bar-
ton, addressing Mr, Neville, said :

"I have increased my household esta-
blishment, since i have been in London;
though, faith," continued he, laughing,
"I cannot at present decide what parti-
cular department to place them in. -The
group consists of three persons, one of
whom I engaged out of Newgate.
That, perhaps, you will say was not
                               quite20         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

quite so prudent--but then, consider
my temptation : the fellow had a charm-
ing smiling black eyed, cherry cheeked,
dimpled mouth, rogue of a sister, whose
winning looks pleaded powerfully for
the young jail-bird.  Then, again, the
mother--egad ! I assure you, she had
her attractions too : so I thought I could
not do better than undertake the whole
family--and now, let me invoke all the
powers of rhetoric, to aid my descrip-
tion.

" The lad is about fifteen years old ;
his sister about twenty-three----months;
but, as I expedt them down by this 
evening's coach, and that you may be
as much prepossessed in their favour as
I was, take a little sketch of their 
history.

" The husband and father of my tri-
umvirate, an honest industrious cot-
tager, having been employed to drive
                               some           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP        21

some cattle from a distant part of the
kingdom to the capital, was, by the arts
of one of those infernal villains, deno-
minated crimps, betrayed into intoxi-
cation; and, in that state, conveyed on
board a tender.  In a few hours, he
awoke to all the horrors of his situa-
tion, and was told to prepare for actual
service.  The ignorant peasant, how-
ever, had no taste; foolishly preferring
his wife and flock-bed, to having Glory
for his mistress, and sleeping in the
bed of honour.  But, no matter, a
boat was brought alongside, and he,
with several others, he all the while,
in bitterness of spirit, loudly cursing
all the authors of his misfortune.  To si-
lence these effusions, the officer in com-
mand smartly retorted with the forcible
rhetoric of a Bamboo cane.  This was
an impressive argument, with which
our sturdy countryman was hitherto un-
acquainted, and which he replied to,
                                  by22        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

by bringing his fist in contact with
the lieutenant's temple, with so much
force, that the unfortunate officer im-
mediately performed an unwilling pros-
tration. As soon as the confusion aris-
ing from this skirmish was a little sub-
sided, the peasant was overpowered, and
hand-cuffed; and, in that condition,
conveyed on board his destined ship,
where he was thrown into irons, and
closely confirmed. At the end of
three weeks, he was arraigned by a se-
lect party of his officers, and adjudged
to suffer death. This sentence, how-
ever, was mitigated to a severe flogging,
in consideration that the crime had been
committed by a mere raw land-lubber,
pressed into the service; and, conse-
quently, a stranger to the laws of sea-
men.

   "While our new-formed mariner was
thus initiating, the poor wife was by no
means idle; for, having sold off what
                                 they



        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       25

they possessed in the country, she re-
paired to town, and proffered her little
all to redeem her husband; but, alas!
the sum was too inadequate, and she
had the mortification to hear that the
ship in which he was had sailed, while
she was vainly exerting her utmost ef-
forts to gain his release.  Grief and
despair brought on a premature labour;
and, though both mother and child sur-
vived, yet the recovery of the former
was so slow, that her finances were,
long before her convalescence, quite
exhausted, and she must inevitably have
perished with the infant at her breast,
had not the boy begged a bare suffi-
ciency to support nature.  In a few
months, her health being in some mea-
sure restored, she, at times, procured
work; and the lad being also employed
in a shop, for which he received his
food and two shillings a week (which he
constantly brought home to his mother),
she was enabled to subsist herself and in-
                                     fant.24 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

fant. News, at length, arrived, that an
engagement had taken place between the 
enemy's fleet and that of which her
husband's ship formed a part. You
may readily suppose that she was eager
to learn her husband's fat. Alas! the
tidings reached her too soon; for he was 
reported to be among the number of the
slain. Losing all fortitude,she became
frantic, and had put a period to her
woes, but for the unwearied attention
of her son, who never left her. This 
prevented him from procuring the ne-
cessary means of subsistence, and they
were presently in a state, which must
inevitably have finished their wretched
existence, had not the mother, in a
few days, given signs of returning sense;
an event which was probably hastened
by her having almost fasted the whole
time.

   "The boy now mingled his tears with
her's, and entreated her to have patience,
                                     for
            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   23

for his little sister's sake, who was al-
most starved, saying, He would go and
beg something to support them.  The
poor lad was, however, unsuccessful;
for, his distress and long fasting had
rendered him incapable of being an 
importunate beggar.  Having wandered
some hours, in the most poignant
anxiety, he, at length, beheld a corpu-
lent Dignitary, preparing to ascend his
carriage.  His heart bounded at the 
sight--’ Ah!‘--said he--’ our curate
used to say that rich clergymen were
God's stewards: he will surely give me
something.‘--Hope gave him alacrity--
he almost flew across the street, and
implored assistance; but, lo! this dis-
ciple of the meekest and most humane
Master beheld his misery with apathy;
called him a lazy young rascal--bade
him begone, and work; and, finally, con-
cluded his exhortation by threatening
to send him to the house of correc-
tion.

                                ” For26                Mysterious Friendship.

     "For some moments after the carriage 
had wheeled off its humane load, the 
poor lad remained rooted to the spot, 
in a paroxysm of grief and astonishment. 
At length, recollecting himself, and 
turning to go away, his attention was 
suddenly arrested by perceiving some-
thing glistening in he kennel, which, 
on stooping, he found to be a curious 
snuff-box, which he instantly took up, 
and, no one being by to claim it, he 
deposited the shining serpent in his 
bosom, and immediately hastened into 
a baker's shop, where, in an humble 
tone, he requested they would favour 
him with a loaf, and take the toy which 
he produced in exchange.

     "As the honest tradesman was well 
aware how much the balance would be 
in his favour, he immediately acquieseed, 
contenting himself with asking the poor 
lad How he had obtained the box? and 
where he lived? both which questions
                                                      he         MYSTERIOUS FRIENdSHIP.

    he answered with great simplicity and veracity.

    "The boy having atchieved his grand object, returned joyfully to his mother and infant sister;  concealing, however, the means by which he had prevented their perishing.

    "In the mean time, the reverend owner had missed his gold snuff-box; for, it was of that 'right damning metal. ' Rage and avarice instantly lighted a deeper glow on his rubicund visage. What a loss, for a man, whose income and emoluments but just reached five thousand pounds per annum!The bell was rung with a violence that instantly summoned half the domestics, who apprehended nothing less than his reverence being seized with a mortal malady.

     "Run
28      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

"'Run, fly, search the chariot for 
my snuff-box.'

"'Not to be found,' resounded from
every quarter

"' Not to be found!' exclaims his
reverence, almost choaking with pas-
sion-'But the young rascally raga-
muffin, who begged of me, as I was
getting into my chariot, shall be found,
if he is above ground, for he has cer-
tainly picked my pocket.- Yes, yes, it
must be so-here, John, reach my
standish-I'll ferrit the young scoun-
drel.'

"John immediately obeyed, and an ad-
vertisement was produced, in less time
than his reverence usually said grace, or
pronounced a benediction.

"As ten guineas was the bait, no 
marvel that the supposed culprit was 
                                soon         Mysterious Friendship.           29

soon entrapped, and committed to pri-
son, mangre all his protestations of in-
nocence, or the tears and swoonings of
the unfortunate mother who pleaded
in vain for mercy, his reverence de-
claring, 'That he could not answer it
to his conscience, for that justice should 
ever take the place of mercy; that hu-
manity, in this instance, would be 
weakness, and only serve to encourage 
vice.'

     "It was on a return from a visit, next 
door to this conscientious gentleman, 
that I met the unfortunate mother, with
the infants in her arms. The grief and 
distraction which so strongly marked 
this daughter of woe, pleaded power-
fully in her favour, and prompted me
to present her a palliative for ordinary
misery. To my infinite surprise she
put aside my hand, with such a look of
despair, as penetrated the inmost re-
      VOL. II.              C                cesses30              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

cesses of my soul. I bade her take
comfort.

  "'Alas!' said she, ' 'tis not gold
now can give me comfort--Mines of
wealth cannot restore my husband, nor
give me back my innocent, my impri-
soned child.'

  "With some difficulty, I learned her
story--made a note of her miserable
dwelling, and, the next day, visited the
mansion of misery and guilt, where I
saw the boy, and, from his artless tale,
which I made him repeat over and over,
obtained a clew for further proceeding.
In fine, I gained intelligence where the
reverend prosecutor's visit was directed,
at the time he lost his bauble; and, by
dint of a few days' trouble, and much
enquiry, at length, fortunately disco-
vered two respectable witnesses, who,
on the day of trial, declared on oath,
                                  that          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     81

that Being, luckily for the boy, looking
out of the window, at the next house,
they perfectly remembered his reverence
coming out of the adjoining one, and
the poor lad's addressing him in a sup-
plicating posture; during the whole of
which time, he kept at an humble dis-
tance; that, on the chariot's driving
off, they were preparing to bestow some
halfpence on the supplicant, when they
saw him suddenly stoop, and take up
something, which he thrust into his
bosom, and with which he instantly
disappeared.

  " As both persisted, on being re-asked
the question, That they must unavoid-
ably have seen the whole transaction,
had the box been purloined from the
prosecutor's person, the boy was of
course acquitted. To paint the scene
which immediately followed between
the mother and her son, far exceeds
my descriptive talents. I shall, there-

              C 2                 fore,32       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

fore, conclude their history by saying,
you will seldom meet with three more
interesting objects."

  If Mr. Barton's hobby had been flat-
tery, here was a sufficient scope for
praise, without even hazarding a sus-
picion of adulation. - For the present
party, their hearts nore such powerful
testimony of their friend's virtues, that
it caused their bosoms to throb with
pleasing emotions, and their eyes to
glisten with an effusion, which I doubt
not many have experienced, on being
present at a similar recital; especially if
they have ever been the happy instru-
ment of alleviating the sorrows of a fel-
low-creature.

  The conversation ow bore a more gene-
ral complexion, as it related to the avoca-
tions, amusements, and improvements of
the friendly families. With the progress
of young Baldwine, Mr. Barton ex-
                          pressed           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP
pressed himself particularly pleased,
promising to afford him every advice
and assistance; a condescension which 
procured the most grateful returns from
the young man. These, however, were
soon put a stop to by the arrival of 
Mr. Barton's new friends, as he termed
them, who, as that gentleman predicted,
at first sight, interested each individual
in their favour; for, not even the pre-
sence of strangers could prevent those
ebullitions of almost adoration, that 
beamed from their eves, and warned
their hearts, when they addressed their
benefactor. -This Mr. Barton endea-
voured, as soon as possible, to put a
stop to, by saying:

    "Well, Mrs. Burdock how did little
Sal bear her journey?- I suppose Dick 
has, as usual, been principle nurse."


     "Burdock!-Sal-Dick!" hastily
exclaimed young Baldwine.- "Pray,
                 C3          what.
 
 94     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

 What is Mrs.  Burdock's Christian
 name?"


    "Why, hey-day! young gentleman,"
  replied Mr. Barton; " of what conse-
  quence can the knowledge of that be
  to you?"


     "Nay, dear Sir," interrupted Wil-
   liam-" I beg Mrs. Burdock may sa-
   tisfy us in this particular, and likewise
   whether she once lived near Bidde-
   ford."


      With a countenance wherein surprise
    was strongly depicted, and a Voice ren-
    dered tremulous by the recollection of
    past circamstances, the woman replied:



       " My name is Sarah; I, indeed,
     passed some of the happiest year of
     my life there, with my poor husband,
     Benjamin Burdock, before he was
                               cruelly               
              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       35
erelly torn from me and sent to sea where-where he lost his life!"

   " perhaps he may yet be alive, Mrs. Burdock; for,I have known many as strange things come to pass," said Mrs. Neville, who was struck with the similitude of the poor mutilated sailor's story, with the corroborating circumstance of names, and their place of residence.-" However", continued she,
   " I must insist that you sit down, and endeavour to compose yourself, while I have a little conversation with Mr.Barton:- whom she now called aside, and, in a few words, acquainted him with William and young Baldwine's first meeting with Ben,his little history, and subsequent settlement in the neighbourhood by the two friends. From this recital, Mr. Barton himself scarce entertained a doubt that the sailor was the identical husband and father of his late distressed triumvirate; but, being

                                            unwil-
36        Mysterious Friendship.

unwilling to raise hopes, whilst there
was a bare possibility, though scarce a
probability, of their being disappointed,
he said, on re-entering the apartment
where his pensioners were, "He should
take a little walk with the young gen-
tlemen; and Dick," continued he,
"maycome with us, as I believe I
shall have occasion to employ him for
a few minutes." As soon as they were
at some distance from the house,

    "Dick," said Mr. Barton, " have
you any relations at Biddeford?"

   "No, Sir, not now," answered Dick;
"my mother had a brother there, but
he died before father was pressed."

    -"And what was his name,Dick?"

   -" Richard Coulter,Sir; he was also
my godfather, and I was called Richard,
after him."


                                 "Very
 


        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP         37

   "Very well, Richard-----William,"
continued Mr. Barton, "do you and
honest Dick walk slowly after us to-
wards your friend's new building, by
the gate that leads to Atherstone-Park,
and be within call--perhaps we may
want you."

   Young Baldwine, with Mr. Barton,
walked forward, and soon reached the
sailor's cottage.

   "I have brought you a visitor, Ben,"
said young Baldwine--"Mr. Barton."

   "God bless you, you are very good,
Sir," replied the sailor: "will you please
to sit?"

   "No, not now, friend Ben," an-
swered Mr. Barton; "but, pray, tell
me, did you ever know a man named
Richard Coulter?"

        C 5

   A pause38         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  A pause of a few moments ensued--
the sailor drew a corner of his neck
handkerchief across each eye, then
falteringly replied :

    ” Once I did--my--wife's brother!“

    ” Bravo!“ exultingly exclaimed Mr. 
Barton : ” I find we are right.  Well,
honest Ben,“ continued he, ”I honour
your affection and sensibility ; but re-
member, you are a man; nay, more--have
been a sailor :--it is not in my power to
restore your brother-in-law--but, sup-
pose those that are still dearer to you
should be living!“

    ” O Lord!--O Lord!“ roared poor 
Ben--”don't go to--and yet that face
cannot--Oh, no--tell me, then--if--
if you know any thing of my poor--
dear wife--and children--and I will
bear it like--like--a man--I will.--In-
deed--you see I do--“ sobbed poor
                             Ben,   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    39

Ben, dropping on his knees, and hold-
ing Mr. Barton's skirts; while the tears
coursed each other down his cheeks.

  "Well," replied Mr. Barton, Smiling,
"as I perceive you possess fortitude to
bear good tidings, this so far I will
premise, that the whole of your family
are alive and well; and for this, Mr.
Baldwine, as well as myself, will pledge
our words; may, more—if you will pro-
mise to keep your joy within bounds,
you shall see your boy, Dick, in less
than ten minutes."

  Ben sobbed out the exacted promise—
young Bladwine stepped to the door,
nd, after having held a few minutes
explanatory conversation with Dick,
led him to his father, who fondly
pressed him in his arms, while the
tears of both mixed in one friendly
stream, and spoke more to the huma-
nized hearts of the standers-by, than
                C 6              all
40          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

all the laboured graces of studied elo-
quence. 'Twas the language of Na-
ture-of uncorrupted affection, softened
by calamity, raised at once, and height-
ened into the extremities of joy and 
gladness.

   At length, reflection dictated other 
duties-those of reverence, love, and
gratitude ;-nor could Mr. Barton and 
the young friends prevent or check 
their effusions, until the formerly jocosely
told Ben to shut up his house, and then
he would conduct him to his other lost
sheep. Very little time served for this 
purpose. William and young Baldwine
were sent forward, to acquaint Mrs.
Neville, and prepare the poor woman
for the meeting, which, suffice it to
say, was, at least, as affectionate and
pathetic, as if the parties had possessed
the sublime benefits of fine feelings,
education, and gentility ; nor were their 
                                 raptures,

           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         41

raptures, though less elevated, less sin-
cere.

   Ye noble few, whose ample means,
and more ample hearts, like the good
Barton's, are employed in fostering the
unfortunate-drying the widow's tear-
succouring the orphan-relieving the
prisoner-protecting the oppressed, say,
what prompts you to lavish your trea-
sure, and wound each tender nerve and
fibre of sensibility? Delight ye in tales
of woe?-Ah! no,-'tis the Deity that
moves within ye; and, with his glo-
rious attributes, leads ye on to perfec-
tion.

   "Come, Goody Welford," said Mr.
Barton, "see what your larder can af-
ford; and let us be merry, and celebrate
the return of a poor disabled son of
Glory, who has escaped from the exten-
sive field of honour, to limp among
ignoble clods, and wear out what is left
                                      of42            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP,

of him, if not at case, at least in 
safety."

  "Might I advise, Sir," said Mrs.
Welford, "I am sure your must be fa-
tigued, and--"

  "A fiddlestick for your caution,
Dame Welford," interrupted Mr. Bar-
ton; "it bespeaks you a very old wo-
man; we, boys, like to be merry. --I
tell thee, Mother Prudence--that, next
to being happy myself (which I own is
a little selfish), nothing refreshes me so
much, after fatigue, as seeing others
comfortable. Flora, and the young
men, too, I see, are all on my side."

  "Nay,--then the old woman must 
perforce yield to so potent a league,"
said Mrs. Neville; "So, Mrs. Welford,
say no more about it."

                          Mr. Barton
        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP   43

   Mr. Barton then requested newly
united family to make a hearty meal in
the adjoining apartment, while himself
and friends also took some refreshment;
after which, he again ordered them into the parlour, where he made each take a 
couple of glasses of wine.  The bash-
fulness of Dick would fain have de-
clined drinking, as he expressed it, be-
fore his Honour; but Mr. Barton, with
his usual good-humour, insisted on
being obeyed, saying---- "It is not
the first time I have drank with as poor
dogs as thee, Dick; though thou hast 
been the inmate of a prison."

   "Of a prison!" --groaned Ben.

   "Yes," replied Mr. Barton-- "a 
prisoner in a dismal dungeon's gloom,
with all its concomitant horrors of bolts,
bars, and chains-- nay, more; he has
stood an awful and solemn trial.  All
these evils has poor Dick encountered,
                               and,











44         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

and, what is still more, without any
very striking marks of discomposure.
Now, you must, doubtless, suppose
some terrible crime alone could pro-
duce such punishment.--Mark, then,
Ben--it was for procuring one small
loaf of bread, for a famished mother
and sister."

   "I am glad it was for nothing
worse," sobbed out Ben, whose tears
had plentifully coursed each other down
his cheeks, during the recital.  "Though
--though--continued he--"if it had 
been for me, instead of his mother and
sister, I would rather have starved,
than he should have got me a morsel
of bread dishonestly."

   "With these sentiments, pity thou
should'st ever want a morsel"--said Mr.
Barton;--"but, come"--continued he:
"after having asked Dick one ques-
tion, we will have done with this me-
                             lancholy
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.              45


    lancholy subject, as you will, doubt-
    less, have a full relation from Mrs.
    Burdock, at a proper season.-Now,
    for my question-How came it to pass,
    honest Dick-for, I must confess, I
    remarked it with some surprise-that,
    when led into a solemn court of jus-
    tice, and all eyes upon you, neither
    the terror of your situation, nor the
    dread of an sayful sentence, should be-
    tray in you the least emotion of fear?"




        During this address, Dick, for a
     moment, raised his eyes, and with a
     side-glance, caught those of Mr. Bar-
     ton; then fixed them on the ground,
     and remained silent.


        " Do you not understand what I
   asked?" said Mr. Barton.


         " Yeas-yeas, Sir"-stammered Dick- 
       " and I ll tell you, as well as I can-
       for, I would sooner die than offend

                                       you.

46          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

you. Our curate, in the country, Sir,
used to make the poor children come to 
him on Sunday nights, and make them 
read to him, and tell them to be good;
and, moreover, he said, That the inno-
cent, though poor, had nothing to
fear, while the wicked, if ever so rich,
could neither sleep easy, nor have any
peace ; and, among other things, he 
told us as how one Daniel was thrown
into a lion's den; and, because Daniel
loved and served God, the lions had
no power to hurt him-and as how a
poor young woman was accused of a
bad crime by two wicked old men,
for which she was going to be put to 
death; but that she put her trust in
God, and so God raised up a judge
that caused the wicked old men to be
put to death in her stead. And so,
Sir, when they took me up for steal-
ing the box, I, at first, cried sadly,
being afraid my poor mother and lit-
tle Sal would be starved-when, all at
                                 once,          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      47

once, what our curate said came into
my head; so, I kneeled down on my
straw, and prayed to God-after that, I
slept as well as if nothing had been the
matter. In the evening, I said my
prayers again, and continued to do so
as often as I could. On the day of my
trial, I again cried very much, and
prayed that God would protect me,
and comfort my mother.-Well, Sir,
after this, I felt quite light-hearted
and-and this is all that I know of the
matter, Sir."

   -"And a very good account you have
given, Dick; and, though not graced
with any elaborate flourishes, may
one day prove much more satisfactory
than your prosecutor's narration of his
share of the business."

   As the hearts of every one present
coincided with Mr. Barton's opinion,
and yearned with compassion, they did
                                  not
'48        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

not think themselves degraded, through
the course the evening, in endea-
vouring, by every species of kindness
and attention, to make this poor family 
forget their past misfortunes.

  On their parts, all was silent joy and
reverential gratitude; nay, it was al-
most the tribute of adoration, which 
the overcharged bursting heart of de-
spairing misery pays to the benevolent
few, who, in this iron age, nobly feel 
for their fellow-mortals.



                  CHAP.           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.               49





                CHAP. III.


     Fine Feeling. - A Settlement, and a 
                  Plot.

    On the ensuing day, Mrs. and
 Miss neville dined with Mr. Barton,
 and, in the afternoon, they were fa-
 voured with a visit from the senior Bald-
 wines, Mr. Barton recapitulated the story 
 of his new friends, as he styled them,
 which Miss Bab declared would make a 
 pretty little novel.

   "This girl's head is always gadding
 after a parcel of lies," interrupted the
 mayor; " besides, there is plenty of 
 them there things printed already. To
 be sure, their story is moving enough,
 and I should not dislike seeing it in 
                                  black 
   50          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP
   
   black and white, provided as how it was
   a little more entertaining; for you
   know, Mr. Barton, one doesn't like to
   be always a-crying: now, if the poor
   fellow, instead of losing his leg, bad
   been cast away, like Robinson Crusoe,
   and lived all alone eight-and-twenty
   years, upon-"



       " A fiddlestick!" exclaimed Mrs.
    Baldwine; " there is no dignity of sen-
    timent, no elevation, no feelings in your-
                 -all ulgar narroatine idears.
    No charmingn flusterings and swound-
    ings, such as Pamaler, and the poor dear
    delicot Miss Clarissar Harlor felt.-
    There was womwn for you !- I am sure I
    never reflects on their sufferings, but it
    brings tear into my eyes; for, says I,
    suppose it was my own case-"
  

        " My dear, good Madam," hastily in-
      terrupted Mr. Barton, "spare my feel-
      ings, or I am sure,  the efforts I shall be
                                     constrained

               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           51

constrained to make will infalliby bring
tears into mine."

  "O dear!  O dear!" exclaimed the
mayor, laughing until almost convuls-
ed; "methinks I see my wife violently
assaulted by Squire Lovelass.--Oh! oh!
oh---"

  As Mrs. Baldwine's countenance, dur-
ing this latter speech, had been gradu-
ally changing from the assumed soft-
ness of a supposed suffering heroine, un-
til it flamed into the florid hue of an
enraged Turkey-hen, Mr. Barton thought
it high time to interpose; and, by some
well-timed compliments on her fine feel-
ings, put a period to a discourse that
threatened to destroy the harmony of 
the meeting.  These he applied so effect-
tually on both sides, that Mr. and Mrs.
Baldwine agree, nay, appeared pressing,
to take a walk to the sailor's cottage, and
see the lately distressed family.
                                   William52       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  William and his friend preceded the
coach a few minutes, discoursing by   
the way on those interests ever upper
most in their thoughts, and congratu-
lating each other on the elder Mr.Barton, 
to let his son continue some time longer
at his residence.

   During the walk of the other party,
the future destination of the poor fa-
mily engrossed their whole discourse;
towards which Mr. Baldwine, who, by-
the-way, was neither niggardly, nor pos-
sessed a bad heart, desired he might
contribute.

   On their entrance, after the overflow
of acknowledgements, tears of gratitude,
&c. had subsided, Mr. Baldwine senior
stepped forward, and, tapping Ben with
with his stick,

                              " HonestMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                     59
"Honest felow," said he, "we must
endeavour to make you a little comfort-
able, after your sufferings; what busi-
ness can you do?"

-" I have been used to labour on a 
farm, an' please you, before I went to sea,
and Sal understands cows and pigs main
well."

-"Very good; why, then, it hap-
pens for all the world pat to the purpose:
I have about forty acres of grass-land,
untenanted, in good condition, not a
stone's throw from where we now stand,
and which surrounds that old ruined
castle, I think they call it, which you
see there. Now, suppose we set you 
up among us, with a few cows and pigs,
and I let you sit rent free for a couple of
years, do you think you could get on> - 
Come, don't stand blubbering there, but 
speak."

VOL II.     D  "BLess                MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
    
    "Bless you!- God bless you!" was all that Ben could articulate.
     
     "Why, then." continued Baldwine, "silence gives consent, I suppose; therefore we have only to think of a dwelling; and, as a cart-way of communication can easily be made from the land down to the road, here, I think, if a few more rooms are added to this cottage, and a little bit more ground fenced in, for homestall, & c.  it will be far better than moving."

     "Abundantly so," replied Mr. Barton.

      " Why, then," returned Baldwine, "It'll set the necessary workmen about it to-morrow."
      
      "And, I", rejoined Barton,  "will furnish half a dozen cows, a cart, horses, gear, faring utensils, pigs, poultry, and household furniture."

                                            To
            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.               55

   To paint the effect of this sudden transition from indigence to comparative wealth would be impossible; and, indeed it proved so powerfully distressing to most of the visitors, so as to occasion them to return sooner than the proposed; Mr. Barton having told Dick to repair every evening to his house, as there was s yet neither bed nor room for him to sleep in his father's habitation.

   In about three months the little mansion wore a different aspect; a decent kitchen, dairy, cheese-room, and larder being added on the ground-story with necessary appendages of cellar, brewhouse, stable, cowhouse, woodhouse, henhouse and pigstye, over which were three bedrooms, and another large store ditto, overall; and, until the whole was complete, Mr. Barton took special care to victual the family.  He then, according to promise, sent in all necessary and useful furniture, linen, &c. farming and dairy
56          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

dairy utensils, stocked the racks with
bacon, the granary with flour for bread,
and corn for the poultry, the larder with
edibles, salt and fresh, enough for two
month's consumption. Without doors,
a cart and two horses, with gear for four.
Six cows, two sows with pig, half a dozen 
hens, and a cock, &c. Honest Ben now
went to work with that spirit of indus-
try and alacrity, which, under the pro-
tection of Providence, boded future
wealth and prosperity. During this pe-
riod, the young gentlemen were alter-
nately at Mr. Barton's or Mr. Baldwine's,
though mostly at the former's, where
young Baldwine pursued his studies with 
as much ardour as William had done be-
fore, and, for the term, made as rapid
a progess, scarcely allowing himself
time for a ride by Atherstone-Park wall.
Not that his passion had in the least
subsided, only the object had changed
her residence, having accompanied her
parents to the capital.

                             Letters
             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.            57

   Letters were also, about this time, received from America, which painfully awoke every tender feeling.  The account received before from Captain Neville reported his being at a distance from the seat of war;-but these, alas! set forth that Captain Neville and his gallant friend Bennet were in the hands of enemy, and were sent up the country.  The packet, likewise mentioned that Bennet had been previously severely hurt by the stroke of a tomahawk, aimed by an Indian at the captain, whom he had the address to shield from injury, by throwing himself on the savage, though he could not prevent receiving a dangerous wound, which was now cieatrized; and that both remained in perfect health, and experienced every indulgence prisoners of war could possibly expect.

   After the first emotions had a little subsided and mutual condolements taken place, 
58             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

place, Mrs. Welford and William expe-
rienced the most tender caresses, Mrs.
Neville affectionately embracing the lat-
ter, and calling him her dear child; nor
did the blushing gentle Flora hesitate to
pay the son the debt she owed the fa-
ther, by a modest salute, at the same
time bedewing his face with her grateful
tears; while the fond mother exultingly
folded both in her arms, with speechless
transport.  All parties, at length, be-
coming more tranquil,

"Thanks be to Heaven that it is no
worse," exclaimed Mr. Barton; "though,
perhaps, you will say that is cold com-
fort; but no such thing.--Look here,"
taking a packet out of his pocket; "this
is from a sage enchanter, a friend of
mine on the spot, one on whom I can
rely:--see, 'tis dated one month later
than your dispatches, although they
came together.  It sets forth, that A
part of the British army having been
                                 sur-        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP       69

surrounded, a capitulation has, in con-
sequence, taken place, by which it was
stipulated that they should be sent home, 
on condition of not serving again; and
that your husband, and Bennet, who, it
seems, is by some unknown interest, 
raised to the rank of lieutenant, are in-
cluded in this treaty.  They will, of
course, soon be restored to their 
friends."

     Though sincerely grieved at the mis-
fortunes of their country, yet mutual
joy and congratulation took place, at
the happy idea of their dear relatives
being again restored; and with the ad-
ditional satisfaction, that, from the na-
ture of the treaty, they would, to a cer-
tainty, be precluded from, at least, all
dangerous service during the continu-
ance of the war.

     The social families were by these con-
siderations restored to tranquillity, when
                   D4                their
60        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

their harmony was again interrupted by
the following curious epistle.

                 "Mr. Bartone.

  "Sir,

  "THIS comes hopping you are in helth,
as I be alsow, thank God and his good
saints for it, though they have nothing
at all to do with whot I am goieing to
speake aboute. - I tell you what, my Lord
Daton and the cloregymon be domned
rowges - becase for why - they nether
care for God nor his santes, no nor the
divil himself - now the divil go with
them, for they have entured into a wick-
ed conspiracy against the vartur of
that sweete crature Miss Flowry Niavel,
the business I dont at prisant thourely
understand - therefore thought proper to
send the hole particklar akoant, that
you might all be upon guard, becase I
knows loves and respects you hall for
                              raisens          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                 61

raisens best none to myself only, who I
ham you must know at presant.
     " From
       " Your
         " Loving Friend
           " and Humbill Sarvant,
             " unto death. Q-."

   This curious epistle Mr. Barton first 
communicated to William, whose hi-
therto gentle spirit kindled into such a
pertubed paroxysm of rage and avowed
vengeance against the personages ac-
cused, that Mr. Barton, for the first 
time, was obliged to exert all his elo-
quence and authority to allay it. Nor
was young Baldwine less vehement, in
avowing himself the champion of in-
sulted innocence, doubly aggravated, as 
the injury was pointed against the dear-
est interests and hopes of his friend-his
second self.  " Were Lord Dalton,"
said he, "to put into practice any out-
rage against Miss Neville, even the for-
                                 feiture   62            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
feiture of my own life to the laws of my 
country, no, nor even his relationship
to Lady Caroline, should screen him 
from vengeance-and, for that vile par-
son, were I assured that he only medi-
tated such atrocity, I would trans-
plant a few of those teeth, which he so
fond of shewing, down his throat, and
 spoil his supercilious grin for ever."
  "I perceive, young men," said Mr. 
Barton, "that ye are both very far gone
 in love and heroics: but, mark me, 
Orestses-and you, Pylades, attend also; 
where rest our proof? Upon a slender 
thread-an anonymous epistle. But what 
could induce the author? say you. Why, 
perhaps the superlative pleasure of ren-
dering a family or two uneasy-a mere 
bagatelle, which the witlings of the pre-
sent age term quizzing. Now, on the
other hand let us suppose there is a real 
foundation in this business; the requi-
sites for its defeat are coolness and vigi-
                                    lance,        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         63

lance, which, of course, must insure that
kind of detection, that at once throws
every individual, who sall dare trans-
gress, into our power, and makes them
amenable to the laws of their country.
I had some thoughts of totally suppress-
ing this letter; but, on maturer reflec-
tion, think it is better to communicate
it to Mrs. Neville only, and concert with
her the proper means, should there be 
any danger of rendering it nugatory.“

  There was so much solid reasoning,
though mixed with pleasantry, in this
harangue of Mr. Barton, that both the
young men could not help giving their
assent; and Mr. Barton immediately
repaired to Mrs. Neville's, where, to his
great surprise, he beheld the identical
subjects of his epistle--Lord Dalton and
his profligate tutor, whom he actually
supposed to be in London, and, on that
supposition, had given less credence to
the letter.

                                 A cold

  64            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
  

     A cold formal salutation took place
  between the gentleman-for, custom
  hath indiscriminately bestowed that ap-
  pellation upon all that make a certain
  appearance-but it was plain, even to a
  less curious observe than Mr. Barton,
  from the significant glances that my
  lord and his companion exchanged, that
  they were not the least pleased with his
  company; notwithstanding which, he
  was resolved to sit them out, a task which
  he, at length, accomplished; when, tak-
  ing the opportunity of Miss Neville's
  absence, he explained, in few worlds, the
  occasion of his visit, and was not a little
  alarmed to find that Mrs. Neville seem-
  ed inclined to give more credit to the
  intelligence than he had done, as Lord
  Dalton's behaviour, prior to Mrs. Bar-
  ton's entrance, had been of that assum-
  ing and light tendency to corroborate
  the veracity of the informant, and which
  Mrs. Neville said would be a sufficient
  excuse for being denied to him and his
                                 colleague
  
                MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.          6

colleague in future. Miss Neville's en-
trance put a period to a conversation
that would, if explained, have wounded
her delicacy, without her being any
ways benefited by the discovery.




















                                   CHAP.


              CHAP. IV.
The Monastery; or, Meditations of a
          Lord and his Tutor.

      THE next day's intelligence,
however, made it necessary to change
the purposed arrangement, and not only 
acqauint Miss Neville with what they
had already heard, but also to take mea-
sures for her future safety. It has been
already remarked, that, on the land 
which Mr. Baldwine so generously agreed
to let to Ben Burdock, there stood an old 
building, which formerly covered an acre
of ground, and was what the mayor de-
nominated a castle, but had, in fact,
been a monastery of Carthusian friars,
until they were expelled at the Refor-
mation. It then was transformed into
a family dwelling; the sober refectory
                             changed
                  Mysterious Friendship.     67

changed into a kitchen; their quiet dor-
mitory, a range of lodging-rooms for
grooms and drunken lackeys; even
their last, and, as they fondly supposed,
peaceful, mansion, became a repository
for liquors; and the scattered fragments
of stones, indented with many a resurgam
and hic jacet, in the hands of drunken re-
vellers, served only to batter the moulder-
ing relics they were placed to protect.
After the death of Charles the First,
from its proximity to the seas, it often
became the hiding-place for, and afforded
shelter to, the royalists; for which rea-
son it was, with many other buildings 
that had given similar offence, ransacked
and laid in ruins, its vast fragments
scattered over the wide domain, exhi-
biting a melancholy picture of former
greatness.

      But, though the principal part of this
vast structure was demolished, yet the
foundation of the whole remained tole-
                                                    rably68          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

rably perfect, the wall in some places, particularly at each end, rising to near its original height.  That nearest the village had sustained the least injury; it had been the main entrance, and formed a lofty hall, still arched over: the sides, at regular distances, contained a number of projections from the wall which formerly had composed several recesses or cells, probably devoted to solitary meditation.  At the top of one of them was a kind of hollow tunnel, for the purpose, as supposed, of drawing up or letting down goods and neccessaries: and,under this, was also another square hole, or vavancy, which communicated with the cellar, the bottom of which was about twenty feet below the original flooring of the hall, which had long since been demolished; but the projecting side-walls, some boards had of late years been laid across, and slightly nailed, Mr. Baldwine's labourers having hay-time made this
                                    part                    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.            69

part of the old building a receptacle for
their tools, as well as a place of shelter
in showery weather. At every other
time it was totally deserted, from a su-
perstitious notion entertained by the
country people of its being a nightly
rendezvous, not only of the monks,
whose bones plentifully bestrewed the
cellar underneath, but also that the spi-
rits of certain cavaliers, who were re-
ported to have been slain there during
the civil wars, nightly kept watch and
ward on the broken walls, enclosed in
glittering armour, brandishing flaming
swords, and menacing all that dared to
approach.

  But, dreadful as this place appeared
to the affrighted imagination of the rus-
tics, it had no such terrors to honest
Ben Burdock, who, the day after Mr.
Barton received the letter, happened to
be at work in that part of the ground
immediately adjoining the old building.
                                  Having70             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

Having finished for the evening, and 
deposited his utensils in one of the re-
cesses of the old hall, until the follow-
ing day, he was about to depart, when,
raising his eyes, he beheld, through an
aperture, where there had formerly been
a casement, Lord Dalton and Mr. Sup-
ple hastening towards the place, to shel-
ter themselves from the effects of a smart
shower.  Ben knew there was no other
spot where they could gain cover, but
the one where he then was; but, not
being willing to pass them, he, by the 
aid of some holes in the stone-work,
mounted the before-mentioned tunnel,
and concealed himself in a situation
above, where, free from observation,
he could hear and see every thing that
passed underneath.  Ben had hardly
seated himself on a piece of projecting
wall, when they both entered.

  ” Damned spiteful this rain!“ said
Mr. Supple.

                                ” It         mysterious friendship

    "It is, by G-!" replied his lord-
ship, "particularly so; for, I should
have liked to watch, as I shrewdly su-
spect Mother Nerville has denied herself
and the little prudish b----."

        "For which you may thank your-
self," interrupted Mr. supple, " as i
told you before, by not properly mask-
ing your designs-Depend upon it, you
gain no farther access there."

     "Why, then nothing now remains
but to pursue my first plan, and carry
her off," returned his lordship.

   "I should not in the least object to
it," said Mr. supple, " only on account
of the hubbub it will create."

    "No matter; we can only take a
trip to the continent, until it is blown
over;- and, you know," continued his
lordship, laughing,"my father has 
                           wanted72           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

wanted me to make the grand tour, for
some time past."

   -"Well, then, when do you mean
to put your project into execution?"

   -"Oh, the sooner the better; but
the completion of the business must de-
pend upon circumstances. From the 
village, to yonder coppiee, is, it seems,
her favorite walk; now, as she must
necessarily pass this building, you and I
can hide ourselves securely where we
now are, while my rascals wait, with the
chaise, at the coppiee side, and whirl
her off to our little retreat on the fo-
rest."

    -"But I am going to start a very
formidable objection to this business."

    -"What, in the devil's name?"

                              -"Why,            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           79

-"Why, you forget that she never
walks out, unless accompanied by her
mother, one of the maids, or some of 
the Barton crew."

-"True, that's devilish unfortunate:
we must, then, watch until she has only
the maid with her, whom we can lower
down into the cellar, where she may lie
at her ease, upon some good soft hay,
which I will take care shall be provided
to receive her, when she glides through
the tunnel-you know, Supple, I like
to treat the fair sex tenderly."

-" So it seems, by lodging a woman
in a cursed golgotha, where, ten to one,
she dies, out of mere conceit, before
morning."

-" Yes, but I don't mean to carry
the joke so far as that, neither; for, you
know, I can makey my scrupulous Irish
scoundrel be coming by, accidentally,
                                     and74     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

and release her, when we have carried off
the prize. 'Tis strange that the rascal
should refuse being concerned in this 
affair."

   --" That, I suppose, is owing to the
conscientious qualms with which he has
been troubled, ever since his fall, when
Barton took him up. But, are not you
afraid he should blab?"

   --" No, I have him pretty fast in my
clutches; our friend Wolf holds him in
terrorem, by a note of hand, the money
I advanced to pay for a bastard child."

   --" Why, my lord, I really did not
suspect I was honoured with so hopeful
a pupil; you are a perfect Machiavel in
politics, and seem already to understand
perfectly the true balance of power."

   --" Good Mr. Supple, your very
humble servant; you would not surely
have me disgrace so able an instructor.

                                   But,             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      75

But, see--the shower is over; to-morrow
I will order the chaise and the fellows to
be in waiting at the coppice, from five
till nine, which they shall repeat every
evening, until our plan succeeds; and,
in the morning, one of them shall bring
our black masks and dominos, that Miss
Neville's attendant may not know us.
Stop a little--let us look for a hole to
hide them in----Oh! here is the very
place, formed by daddy Time, or old
Noll's myrmidons, for the express pur-
pose.  Come, let's away : if this plan
does not succeed, we must then----“

  The conclusion of the sentence Ben
lost by their departure.  He, however,
had heard enough to convince him that a
diabolical plot was formed against Miss
Neville, and, consequently, levelled
against the peace of the two friendly 
families.  Big with the importance of
the event, Ben stumped away, at no
common rate, and reached Mr. Barton's,
who, with the two young gentlemen,
                              were76         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

were just seated at the tea-table, so out
of breath, as evinced to that gentleman
that something more than ordinary had
occasioned his disorder, as, contrary to
his usual custom, without any previous
ceremony, he burst into the parlour,
with mouth wide open, and nostrils dis-
tended, like a fish out of his natural ele-
ment, labouring for breath.

 "How now, Ben?" exclaimed Mr.
Barton: " is any body in labour?"

 "Lord Dalton, and the parson," re-
plied Ben.

 -" Heaven send them a good deli-
verance then."

 "Amen ! With all my heart-at-
the gallows," gasped out Ben.

-" That wish is not of the most cha-
ritable kind, Ben."

                             -"Lord!

                         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         77

      " Lord! Sir, they don't deserve cha-
rity, nor mercy either.-I beg pardon
for my rudeness;-but this vile plot
made me forget every thing."

      -" Come, honest Ben, sit down, and
endeavour to recover yourself, for which
purpose you shall have a cup of ale,"
ringing and ordering some in. " I be-
gin to give a shrewd guess at the pur-
port of your hasty visit."

        Ben was going to reply, but Mr. Bar-
ton insisted he should first finish his ale,
notwithstanding the yound gentlemen
exhibited every symptom of strong im-
paience ; after which, having made a
pause of a few minutes to recollect him-
self, he gave his relation, much in the
above recited manner, concluding his
narrative with saying:

      That as how he might be mistaken in
regard to some of the words, but that,
to every tittle of the matter, he would
    VOL. II.           E              take78     	MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
take his book-oath, bating a score or
two of dammes which he thought might
as well be left out-" For, my lord,"
continued Ben, " is quite a dab at it-
and the tutor, too, swears a tolerable
good stick for a parson, and beats the
chaplain of our ship quite hollow."


" And shall such baseness go un-
chastised?" exclaimed William, " Oh!
Sir! I conjure you-"

	
"William," returned Mr. Barton, "I
charge you not to interfere in this bu-
siness, further than I know and shall ap-
prove, as you value my future favour
and affection. ’Tis sufficient that we
are aware of their vile intentions, which,
with God’s good pleasure, shall he coun-
teracted. Honest Ben," continued he,
" keep this matter secret for a few days,
even from your wife; and, should you
see the parties, don’t let a word or ac-
tion betray any knowledge of then base-
ness."

                                  -“God
         MYSTERIOUS FREINDSHIP.        79

   -" God bless you, Sir ! to be sure I
will obey you ; for, you have a right to 
command me and mine, in this and every
thing else; bu, by the Lord ! - God
forgive me for swearing-If I was left
to my own free will, I'd get into my old
hiding-place, watch their coming, and
belabour them, till they had not a whole
bone in their skins."

      -" Oh ! Sir ! permit me to proclaim
their villany to the world, then dare
them to a meeitng, and extirpate them
from the earth."

      -" And are they, or you, William,
prepared for exirpaio? Lay your hand
on your breast, I adjuce you, solemnly,
and answer me with sincerity-Would
you hurl two such wretches into the pre-
sence of their justly incensed God? nay,
would you, on serious reflection, wish
to appear before him yourself?-your
last moments breathing wrathful ire, and 
                  E2                      fell80                Mysterious Friendship.

fell revenge? Duelling I hold in abhor-
rence;-'tis a premeditated thirst of
blood; nor can any injury received be
pleaded in extenuation of so barbarous
a custom. Learn to curb those impe-
tuous sallies, which, if indulged, must
lead you on to ruin and endless remorse ;
and seek not to invade the province of
the Almighty, to whom alone belongs
the right of punishing erring mortals."

     William confessed his fault, and pro-
mised to be guided, in that and every
thing else, by Mr. Barton's superior
judgement.  This was also repeated by
Ben, who, having received proper ac-
knowledgments from all parties, took his
leave, and returned home.

     From this intelligence, as before hint-
ed, it was thought proper to let Miss
Neville have some knowledge of what
was transacting, on account of her per-
sonal security ; to insure which, it was
                                              thought              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             81

though necessary, for the present, what
she should refrain from her usual walk,
and sleep at Mr.Barton's with Mrs.Wel-
ford, as, besides the gentlemen, there
were three men servants in the house.
Mr.Barton also, without its being no-
ticed, took care to have the fire-arms
put into order, and loaded, in case any
knowledge of Miss Neville's being there
should transpire, and, in consequence,
they should be inclined to take any des-
perate step.

  These were the measures pursued by
the Neville and Barton families the even-
ing Ben came with his intelligence; nor
did any'thing happen on that night, to
disturb their repose. We will, therefore,
take our leave of them for a few hours,
and return to the old monastery.

              E3                        CHAP.      

                    CHAP. V.

      A terrific Retaliation.--Bloodshed.

       LORD Dalton, true to his word,
the next morning, dispatched one of his
myrmidons, who, according to order,
placed the disguises in the hole de-
scribed, and retired.  Soon after five in
the evening, his Lordship and his reve-
rend friend made their appearance, and
waited, with no small degree of impa-
tience, until near sunset, when Mr.
Supple made a motion for their retiring
for that evening.

    ” Unless,“ continued he, ” your
lordship has a mind to make your bed
on the soft hay you have provided for
Mrs. Abigail, and place one of the old
                               friar's         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP         83

friar's noddles under your head, for a
pillow--"

  "Damme, if I do," replied my lord,
"without I had Flora here; and then,
perhaps, I might be tempted---"

  His lordship would have proceeded,
but a tremendous crash, as if the old
walls were falling about their ears, in-
terrupted their speech, and horrid to
relate!  the before firm boarding gave
way, and precipitated them into the
frightful abyss beneath.  Like Satan
and his fellow-partners of perdition, asto-
nished and speechless, they crouched to
the earth, gasping with dismay, each
hair starting up in fearful battalia--
Their throbbing hearts vibrating against
their coward bosoms--cold sweats be-
dewing their limbs; and their trembling 
knees refusing to support them.  In this
dire calamity, they fain would have
spoken, but their clammy tongues,
                              parched
              E 484        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

parched with horror, refused to articu-
late. All they dared attempt was, to
seize each other's hands, as if in the
convulsive grasp of death, and groan in
unison.

   Thus for a while lay, almost absorbed
with affright, the noble heir and his
worthy tutor, silent and crest-fallen.
At length, recollection began to take
place in Mr. Supple, who faintly and
tremulously ejaculated--"Lord have
mercy upon us!"

   "Amen!" audibly responded a hoarse
voice at some distance.

   My lord and Mr. Supple's hands as
instinctively relaxed as they had before
united, and from the same cause--terror;
that of the former dropping upon a
round substance, which he grasped, and
raised in contact with Mr. Supple's
nose, who, by this time, had seated
                           himself              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           85

himself on his breech.  A sudden glare of light, at that moment, appeared and presented-O horrible!-a fearful skull, grinning ghastly in the face of the almost petrified parson.-Fear had hitherto performed the part of a torpedo, and almost benumbed every sense-but death, immediately staring him in the face, compelled nature to make a last effort; and, with a convulsive scream, dash the evil from him, until it encountered the visage of the noble pupil-a coalition, which, for the present, put a period to his sufferings, his lordship fainting, and falling across the body of his already entranced companion.

   The spirits of the cavern beholding from their hiding-places this dreadful catastrophe, and, apprehensive that it might end more tragically than they wished, by the assistance of real not aerial ladders, raised the fallen                 heroes,  
86          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

heroes, and caused them, once more,
to revisit " the pale glimpse of the
moon," which soon burst forth in full
splendor, and, amazing to behold !
exhibited the identical persons of Mr.
Barton-his two servants-Ben Bur-
dock and Messrs. Bennet and Baldwine.

   It has already been remarked, that
Mr. Barton was an enemy to that kind 
of revenge, which usage has stamped
with the false appellation of honourable,
though, at the same time, he was by 
no means averse from wickedness meet-
ing its proper punishment. He knew, 
also, that fear ever accompanies guilt ;
and that real courage and villany are 
rarely, if ever, companions. Thus im-
pressed, a retaliation, in kind to what
the culprits meant to inflict on the in-
nocent maid, at once struck him, and,
by the aid of Ben, who was no bad
schemer in the business, it was imme-
                              diately 
     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     87

diately put into practice; the boards
being so contrived, that, by cutting
some strong cords, they should instant-
ly tilt at one end -- surrender their load,
and then return to their place.  A large
dark lantern furnished, on turning the
slide, just light enough to make dark-
ness fearfully visible.  The skull had
been placed beneath the descent, pur-
posely to encrease the terror, if per-
chance they should stumble on it; and 
Fortune, in one of her freakish moods,
made it become a principal performer in
the piece.

  For some minutes after their resurrec-
tion, all animal sensation appeared at
a stop, and Mr. Barton began to fear
they had carried their punishment too
far.  In a little time, however, they
began to open their eyes, stare wildly,
and gulp the air, with a greedy, yet
stupid, kind of satisfaction.  An inco-
herent effort to speak succeeded; but 
the

                E688           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

the surest indication of their recovery
was prognosticated from the attention
with which they surveyed every indi-
vidual present.

   Lord Dalton was the first that re-
gained his speech. " Is that, indeed,
you, Supple?" said he, in a fearful,
low, and tremulous tone-"and Mr.
Barton, I think. Oh! I have had such
a shocking dream!" Then, chancing to
cast his eyes on the old building, he
screamed-" Hide me! hide me from
that dreadful place! Oh! the skull-
the skull!"-"Where?" roared Supple;
and, not awaiting an answer, began to
crawl away on his hands and knees,
in so ludicrous an attitude, as would,
at any other time, have excited laugh-
ter, but now drew commiseration even
from William himself, who, with the 
rest, endeavoured to calm those emo-
tions, which, if continued, threatened
to overturn the understanding. Haw-
                                 ing  

          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                 89

ing raised them on their feet, they led them from the seat of disturbance. Supple spoke not; but Lord Dalton, after some time, appeared inquisitive to know exactly on what spot, and in what state, they were discovered; and was answered by Ben - that, In this way home, through the fields, hearing a great noise towards the old ruins, he went nearer, and, to his astonishment, beheld his lordship and Mr. Supple lying upon the stones, without sense or motion ; "whereupon," continued Ben, "as I could not manage without assitance, I got these gentlemen to help me, who, I suppose, like your lordship, had been taking a walk; and so we lugged you both into a more comfortable situation upon the grass - and then you awoke."

     By the time they had reached the avenue, within Atherstone-Park, which immediately led to the house they were 
                 so  90       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
so far recovered as to be left under the
guidance of Ben, and one of Mr. Bar-
ton's servanta; Mr.  Supple silently
bowing an acknowledgement.  Lord Dal-
ton said but little, but that little was
servilely abject.

   " Well, now," said Mr. Barton, on 
their return home- "is not this better
than fighting? Besides, I hope this will,
if not produce an entire reformation,
at least, hinder them from attempting
such atrocious projects for the future,
and render Miss Neville free from in-sult."

  William and young Baldwine per-
fectly acquiesced, and owned that he
had not only brought the business to
a happy termination, but, in all pro-
bability, saved them from the mischiev-
ous effects of unbridled rashness.  Mrs.
and Miss Neville also bestowed their
warmest acknowledgements, and mixed
                              a por-         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         91

a portion of pity with the repeated bursts
of laughter occasioned by Mr. Barton's
ludicrous account of the adventure.

  A report, soon after, became current
in the village, that the diabolical spirits,
who, for a time, had been pretty quiet
in the monastery, had again broke forth,
and committed such freaks, that neither
man, woman, nor child, would come
within a stone's throw of it.  Nay, it
was even whispered That my Lord Dal-
ton and Mr. Supple were confined to
their beds, in consequence of having
gone too near, at the time the ghosts
were performing their gambols.

  The parties most interested did not
think proper, for obvious reasons, to
contradict the report, which, like all
other reports, gradually died away, in
order to give place to others; for,
country villages, as well as great towns,
are seldom free from scandal: but these
were matters that did not at all affect
                                    the92        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

the three social families, whose har-
mony received no interruption, after
the adventure, for near three months.
About the termination of that period,
young Baldwine returned to her father's,
and, Mr. Barton being indisposed with
a slight cold, William took her morn-
ing excursions alone.  Returning from
one of these, through the thickest part
of the coppice, he was suddenly fired
at, and wounded, by some one unseen.
Although much hurt, he had presence
of mind sufficient to quit the direct
path, and guide his horse from the
covered into the open country, where he
slackened his pace, to thrust his hand-
kerchief into the wound, to stop the
violent effusion of blood.  He then
clapped spurs to his horse, and rode, as
fast as possible, to the surgeon's, being
fearful of creating a sudden alarm at
Mr. Barton's.  The surgeon lived at
the end of the village, in a house tht
stood alone, and to which there was a
                             passage            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP        93

passage across some waste land; so that
William reached it, unperceived, though 
weak and almost fainting with loss of 
blood.  It happened, fortunately for 
William, that the present practitioner
of the village was not only a man of
skill, but also of honesty.  He, there-
fore, instead of shrugging his shoul-
ers, shaking his head, and talking
learned and unintelligible, simply told
him, that, Though the would was a bad
one (the ball having passed clean 
through the flesh above the hip), yet
he saw nothing, at present, to appre-
hend any danger from.  The proper
probings and dressings, therefore, hav-
ing been applied, it was thought pro-
per that Mr. Barton and Mrs. Welford,
should be prepared, lest too great an 
alarm should take place.  Mr. Vincent,
the surgeon, undertook that affair;
and, as he did not put on the melan-
choly visage of an undertaker, whose
sad countenance conceals a rejoicing 
                           heart,04             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

heart, he happily succeeded; Mr. Bar-
ton and Mrs. Welford visiting William
with as much composure as could be
supposed, the occasion considered.

But, though Mr. Barton communi-
cated the intelligence at the cottage
with all due caution, it was not received
with the same calmness, both ladies
sinking into a state of inanimation;
from which, however, Mrs. Neville
was speedily recovered; but Flora re-
lapsed into frequent faintings, which
terminated in a delirious fever; and
Mr. Vincent told Mr. Barton he appre-
hended her situation highly danger-
ous.

In her delirium, she incessantly re-
peated the name of William, whom
she averred to be dead, killed by Lord
Dalton, who would also kill her and
her mother.  "But, then," with appa-
rent satisfaction, she continued, "Mr.
                                 Bennet            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP        95

Bennet and my papa, when they come
home, will kill him--and William and
I, and papa and mamma, shall all meet
again--yes, we shall meet again."

  William had been immediately moved
from Mr. Vincent's, and, in a few days,
was well enough to walk about the
house; in which time, Mrs. Neville had
several times been to see him, though
her visits were always short, and
marked with strong dejection, which
he could not help thinking a little ex-
traordinary, and noticed accordingly
to young Baldwine, who had been with
him from the day he was wounded.
 
  "I am almost well"--said he to his
friend--"and yet, Mrs. Neville's con-
cern for me, instead of wearing off,
appears daily to encrease--I hope no 
bad news from  America."

  "Oh! no"--replied young Bald-
wine--"they have not received any
letter, since those you knew of."
                            "Miss96       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   --" Oh! yes, perfect--ly we--well"--
forcing a cough, and putting a hand-
kerchief to his face, to conceal the
confusion he felt in telling his friend
a lie.

   --" Is it not strange--I say, is it not
strange, then, that"--William stopped.

   --" What is strange, my dear Wil-
liam?"

   --" I say, is it not strange--that is,
would it--have been---indelicate, if---
if Miss Neville had accompanied her
mother?--if, but for once?"

  --" O Lord!--Oh! yes--that is to
say--to be sure, it would be highly in-
delicate, quite derogatory, and all that;
for, what would people say?--Oh, it--it
is much better as it is."

                                William,        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      97

   William, for the fist time since his
acquaintance with young Baldwine, was
seriously displeased with him, and re-
mained silent; and poor Baldwine felt
himself so much hurt at the friendly
deception, as to render his situation a
very disagreeable one.98  MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

CHAP. VI

Dissatisfaction succeeded by Love - Re-
venge, and a Discovery.

THE entrance of Mr. Barton,
however, broke a little upon the awk-
ward situation of the young men.

"Why, heyday ! gentleman," ex-
claimed he - "what is the reason of this
cloud?  William, you are tolerably well, 
I hope?"

William Bowed.

"Mr. Bennet, Sir, I believe, is
vexed, sir," said young Baldwine-
"that he has not seen miss neville
since his illness."

                               "Mr.     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    99

" Mr. Bennet!"-repeated Mr. Bar-
ton-" I am assured, my young friend,
by your making use of that unac-
customed formal appellation, has some-
what displeased you: he	cannot,	I
think, have behaved unkind to one he
so sincerely esteems."


" I have, indeed, Sir"-replied Wil-
liam.-" Forgive me, Sir-forgive me,
my dear Baldwine!"


" I love you sincerely"-said the lat-
ter-" and would not, if I could help
it, give you a moment’s pain for the
universe."


" My dear William," replied Mr.
Barton, "until these few days past, we
seemed to be walking in a smooth path;
nay, we appeared almost to have forgot
that there was also a thorny road. I have
felt affliction, and trust I have met it as
a man not bereaved of hope. 'Tis my
                               most
100    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

most assured belief, that "whatever is, is
right."-The evils that we often deplore
are not unfrequently productive of fu-
ture happiness. I say this, my dear
William, that you may arm yourself
with courage and fortitude; for, though
you are yet young, you may not be to-
tally exempt from all the rubs and tur-
moils to which frail mortality is sub-
ject."

  -" Nor do I expect it, Sir-and I
trust it is not a vain boast to say, that,
in my late accident, wherein I expe-
rienced some pain, I did not betray any
violent symptoms of unmanly weak-
ness."

   " You did not, William, although
you underwent some violent searchings;
but, believe me, the feelings of the
body and mind are widely different; so
are their effects upon different objects;
and, as you can endure pain, so also I
                                  hope     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    101

hope you can listen to the voice of
reason, especially when you bring to
your recollection, that, by so doing,
you may possibly produce a great good,
and avoid a permanent evil. And now,
William," continued Mr. Barton, "hav-
ing said thus much, it remains with me
to tell you, the Miss Neville's affec-
tion for you is not a whit inferior to
your's for her. This, at any other 
time, or under any other circumstances,
I should not think myself justified in
discovering, at least, until I knew her
father's sentiments on the subject:
those of her mother, if his coincide,
are ultimately in your favour.----Miss
Neville has been very--very ill; your
late misfortune the apparent cause:--'tis
supposed your presence may allay, or 
possibly remove, some little wanderings,
that her illness and perturbed imagina-
tion, under a prepossession of your
death, has----Nay, William ; is this
your boasted resolution? Recollect your-
    V  o l.  II.        F            self,
102           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

self, and attend your beautiful patient:
how many young men would rejoice to
be the retained physician in such a
case."

   "Oh! Sir," exclaimed William--
"I would almost give up the transport-
ing idea, on condition of her being re-
stored to health."

  --"Here's a disinterested lover, Mr.
Baldwine!  does not this speech de-
serve to be recorded?  I have a good
mind to have it transcribed over my
dining parlour chimney-piece in--Chalk,
that it may the more easily be rubbed
out on the lady's recovery, as I am
sure he will then change his mind."

   "And do you, then, think she will
recover, Sir?" said William.

   --"If you conduct yourself properly,
I hope she will; for, within this hour
                                 I have

        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP_                103


   I have heard she is better, and gives
   symptoms of recollection."


     -" Come then, my dear Sir; let us
    go instantly."



     -" Not so fast, William; let us first
   send word we are coming."


       A servant was then dispatched, and,
   in a short time, the two gentlemen fol-
   lowed young Baldwine being left at
   home. They found Mrs. Neville's de-
   jection considerably abated; she rejoiced
   them with a smile, tenderly saluting
   William, and calling him her dear son,
   saying, She hoped, and did not doubt,
   that Mr. Neville would one day give
   his sanction to that title; that she had
   long observed both William's and Flora's
   growing affection with pleasure, and
   had lately written on the subject; and
   that, from her knowledge of Mr. Ne-
   ville, she did not think it would be re-
                      F 2             ceived
104    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

ceived with any other emotions but
those of satisfaction, as he was ever
mentioned by him with the same terms
of affection as his own daughter.

   Nor will this appear at all strange,
when it is recollected, that William's fa-
ther had twice saved Caption Neville's
life; and, though neither Captain nor
Mrs. Neville were ever known to evince
a sordid or mercenary disposition, yet,
William being Mr. Barton's avowed
heir, could not, in point of worldly
matters, be any other than a recom-
mendation, exclusive of his possessing
a fine person, good sense, and every
desirable accomplishment.

   On the gentleman's being introduced
to Miss Neville, they found her recol-
lection perfectly restored; the fever had
also subsided, but had left her very
weak, and to greatly exhausted to

                                bear         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     105

bear much discourse. Their visit, how-
ever, seemed to afford her much satis-
faction: this they promised to repeat on
the morrow, and then took their leave.

The following day, they also found
her much better, and, in two more, she
was pronounced out of danger; though
their diurnal visits continued, until she 
was able to go abroad. One of her first
walks was in their own garden, where, 
from her weakness, she supported her-
self on William's arm, to her favourite
arbour.

   " You are very good," said she, "to
take so much trouble with a poor in-
valid; and I am afraid you must have 
sustained much inconvenience and pain, 
from your daily visits, before your hor-
rid wound could possibly support such
an exertion."

   " Believe me, Miss Neville," said
William, "the only pain I experienced,
                 F3              that106         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

that caused me any strong emotion, was
that of being debarred your presence.--
Alas! I knew not then you were ill,
and thought---"

  --"What, William?"

  --"That Flora was unkind.--Pardon,
charming maid! the freedom of that ex-
pression"--dropping on his knee, and
bathing her hand with an involuntary
tear.--"I thought Miss Neville had for-
gotten William Bennet, and distraction
must have followed the confirmation of
that supposition."

  "And I thought William was dead,"
said Flora, averting her face, and blush-
ing like the damask rose; "and distrac-
tion, nay, almost death, did follow the
supposition."
  
  "Rapturous, yet painful, declara-
tion!"--exclaimed William.  "Em-
perors might envy me so glorious a
distinction; yet, to be obtained at the
                             hazard             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.            107

hazard of such a life!-Horror, and al-
most annihilation, is in the idea-yet,
once more charming maid! let me be assured-"

 "Let us, at present, William"-in-
terrupted Flora, "drop the subject.
You are, I understand, acquainted with
my mamma's sentiments in your favour:
my father's sanction given, you cannot
greatly doubt of mine."

 With these words, Flora now rose,
presented her had, and slowly ap-
proached the dwelling, where they found
Mrs. Neville, Mr. Barton, and young
Baldwine, in whose eyes there appeared
much satisfaction. Nor were they
long left to conjecture the occasion, he
informing them that Lord Atherstone
and family were arrived in the coun-
try.

 Various Conjectures had been formed,
in regard to William's being wounded,
and various steps taken to discover the
                             atrocious
108         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

atrocious perpetrators of so vile an ac-
tion; but, hitherto, without effect,
although a large reward had been im-
mediately offered by Mr. Barton. The
general opinion pointed at some smug-
glers, who, at times, visited that part
of the country, and were supposed to
have mistaken William for some other
person.

   Lord Dalton and Mr. Supple, for
some time after their adventure, whether
from fear, shame, or both, were con-
fined to their respective chambers.
They then repaired to the capital, and
returned from thence, with Lord Ather-
stone, prowling about the country, as
undaunted as ever notwithstanding the
contempt they met with from every
quarter; for, some way or other, the
Monastery story had taken wind, and
they were honoured with the titles of
Lord Goblin, and Mr. Skull, from every
quarter.

   "But,           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    109

  But, as they did not presume to re-
peat their visits at the cottage, nor, by
any means, annoy either Mrs. Neville's
or Mr. Barton's family, their being in
the country created no uneasiness, as
Mrs. Neville, Mr. Barton, and their
friends, took every precaution for Miss
Neville's security.

  William, too, since his late accident,
thought it necessary to be more careful
of his route, especially if he had to
pass near any cover.  He was generally 
accompanied by a servant, and always
rode with pistols, as did also young
Baldwine, who seldom or ever failed
being of the party; for, this young
man was no common favourite of Mr. 
Barton's, who, with great pleasure, still
continued to instruct him in every use-
ful and polite branch of literature.

  Miss Bab, whom Mrs. Neville would
have undertaken upon the same scale,
                              proved110        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

proved incorrigible, setting at defiance
every art and attempt that she made
to lure her to her purpose.

   Soon after Lord Atherstone's arrival
in the country, William and young
Baldwine, who slept in adjoining cham-
bers, being just about stepping into
bed, were suddenly surprized, on cast-
ing their eyes to the window that over-
looked the part of the country where
Ben's farm was situated, to see a great
light; and, on a closer inspection, dis-
covered, from the individual dwelling,
a violent flame burst forth. Shocked and
alarmed at their humble friend's misfor-
tune, they dressed themselves with the
greatest speed, and, only stopping to
acquaint Mr. Barton and the family,
they, with Mr. Barton's servants,
hastened to poor Ben's assistance,
who they supposed must have been
long retired to rest. On their arrival,
they found the whole building in one
                              entire           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     111

entire blaze, though, luckily, the whole
family had saved their lives.  In the
space of an hour, the outhouses and all
were destroyed, together with a barn
full of straw, where it was plain the
mischief had begun; though, all the
while, the family averred no fire had
been near that place for two months.
At the time the accident happened,
the wind blew very strong, and set
from the barn to the house, to which
it wasnearly contiguous.  But what
was the most remarkable, a large stack
of hay newly got in was also consumed,
though at the distance of two hun-
dred yards, and impossible for the wind
to convey any sparks towards it, it
having constantly, for some hours,
blown in a contrary direction.

  In about a quarter of an hour after
the young men reached the shocking
scene, Mr. Barton also arrived.  Young
Baldwine had already comforted the
                              poor112 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

poor sufferers, by assuring them, that
he would take upon him to say the 
building should be again restored the 
same as before ; and Mr. Barton pro-
mised to make good the other losses.
On enquiry, he found that the cattle
and live stock were safe, and ordered
Ben and his family to repair, for the
present, to his house, and endeavour
to recover from their alarm, while he 
employed some of the bye-standers to
college and take care of a few scat-
tered materials and fragements that had
escaped the wreck.

vvWhile busied in this office, one of the
men picked up near the barn a new
tinder-box, in the shape of a pocket
pistol, and a bundle of matches. These
he brought to Mr. Barton, and they
immediately afforded sufficient room to
conjecture that the fire was not an ac-
cidental event. He, however, for the
present, concealed his surmises, and, 
                                early          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      113

early the next morning, rode over to
the town already mentioned, where Mr.
Baldwine resided, and where the assem-
blies were held.  That gentleman had
already heard of the fire, and agreed
with Mr. Barton in his suspicions, as
the implement found upon the spot was
not a common one, and not to be pur-
chased at an ordinary dealer's.

  They then agreed to send for an emi-
nent hardwareman, who resided near,
and who, on sight of the instrument,
declared that, to the best of his know-
ledge, it must have been purchased at
his shop, the maker's name being on it,
with whom he dealt for that particular
commodity; at least, he was certain 
none was sold within many miles, and
it was what himself was seldom, if ever,
asked for.  Being asked, Whether he 
could tell if one had been sold lately
out of his shop, he said that he could
not, but would immediately enquire,
                              which114           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

which he was desired to do, and to en-
join secrecy to his people.

     In about ten minutes, he returned,
with one of his shopmen, bearing a
small package, which, when untied,
contained eleven more exactly similar
to the one in question.  This man de-
clared that They had originally a dozen
from the maker, three years back, dur-
ing which space, they had not sold
one, until the last week; that, if this
was the same, it had a flaw, or
small crack, on the inside of the pan,
which of itself was no detriment as to
the instrument's use; and, what had
made him so particularly notice it, it
was usual to get rid, if possible, of any
little flawed article first.

     On examining the instrument, the
mark appeared, which the man said he
could swear to.  It now only remained
to know to whom it had been sold, and
                                 this           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    115

this proved to be the identical person
to whose wife Mr. Barton had given
the money to pay the five punds for
killing the hare, as before related. A
warrant was directly procured for his
apprehension; in consequence of which,
he was immediately secured, on suspi-
cion, and, strange to tell! in less than
an hour, bail in any sum was offered
by his late opponent, Mr. Wolf. This,
however, it was thought proper to re-
fuse, though, on the first examination,
nothing further appeared, notwithstand-
ing it was proved that he bought the
tinder-box; a charge which he did not
attempt to deny, but insisted that he
had lost it three days before the accident
happened, of which there was undoubt-
edly a possibility.
  
   The parties concerned were now deli-
berating, Whether, as nothing but the
circumstance of his buying the instru-
ment appeared, they had any right to
                              detain        
  116          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  detain him, or, at least, refuse his
  being bailed. Amongst those who were
  for his discharge, was Mr. Barton, upon
  the plea, that it was better for ten
  guilty persons to escape, than for an
  innocent one to suffer unjustly. That
  gentleman was also ruminating upon
  what recompense to make the man for
  his imprisonment, when he received a
  letter, which occasioned a total change
  of sentiment, and, likewise, threw an
  unexpected light upon not only this,
  but also another business.MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                    117

"Hunnered Sar,
   
"I have been concernd in a num-
ber of rogereas which I am sorry for;
I hears how Andrew Walsh is taking
hup for firing Burdox his house.  Now, 
if your honour will henshure my safety,
I will not only get him hengd, but
also quaint your honur with who shot
the yung genteelman.  So no more at
present form

"Your honhust humbil sarvant.

"Direct for Ralph Brackley, and my 
poor mother, who hevery body nows hin
the villag, will tak kare I shall get hit."

                                       On118            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

    On reading this letter, Mr. Barton
rung his bell, and told the servant to
desire Mrs. Welford to step in.

    On her entrance,

    "Mrs, Welford," said he, "do you
know a woman of the name Brackley,
in the village?"

    "Yes, Sir," replied she; "she is a
very honest pains-taking woman, but
has a bad son."

    "Poor woman!" said Mr. Barton,
"I am very sorry for her; but do you
think you can go and bring her hither,
unnoticed? for, much depends on it,
which you shall know hereafter."

    Though Mrs. Welford entertained some 
little curiosity to know the cause, she,
nevertheless, instantly executed Mr.
Baron's desire, and returned by the back
                                     way,      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 119

way, with Mrs. Brackley, unnoticed,
who, as soon as the parlour-door was
closed, and Mrs. Welford withdrawn,
fell on her knees, and burst out a cry-
ing.

   " Mrs. Brackley," said Mr. Barton,
" arise from that posture, and sit down.
There is no time to be lost; I have or-
dered the coach to be sent to town for
Mr. Stapleton, my attorney, to whom
your son must commuinicate every par-
ticular of the intelligence mentioned in
his letter; and, if it appears that he was
not a principal in firing Burdock's house, 
and wounding Mr. Bennet, and that he
will be an instrument in bringing the
actual perpetrators of both to justice, I
will not only ensure his personal safety,
but also give him,--what I fear be little
deserves,--a recompense."

   Mrs. Brackley thanked him, with many
tears, for his goodness and lenity to her

                                      son,  120         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

son, who, she said, had assured her,
that, Though privy, and actually pre-
sent at both pieces of villainy, he, ne-
vertheless, did not execute either. She
further owned, that she believed it to be
owing to a fear of punishment, rather
than from penitence, that had made him
be willing to come forward in this con-
fession; and concluded by saying, that,
If Mr. Barton would exert his interest
to get him sent out of the kingdom,
she should owe her life to him; for, that
he was connected with so bad a set, as
would infallibly bring him to an untimely
end.

   Mr. Barton gave his word for every
thing requisite, and, soon after, the at-
torney arrived, who, on hearing the cir-
cumstances recited, informed them, that
the only mode to ensure Brackley's safety
was to get him admitted an evidence
for the crown, for which purpose, he
must, for the present, be committed to
close             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    121

close custody. These terms were com-
plied with, Brackley surrendering him-
self, and declaring upon oath that He
was not only witness to Andrew Walsh's
firing the house, but also to his shooting
at Mr. Bennet.

    This was a charge so unexpected to
Walsh, that the effrontery he had shewn
on his first examination quite forsook him,
desiring also to be admitted evidence, as
he said others were concerned with him;
but this he was told was impossible, he 
being to be indicted as principal.

    On the day that was to determine his
fate, to the amazement of every one, not-
withstanding his own confession, and the
positive and presumptive evidence that 
appeared against him, he pleaded Not
Guilty, and put himself upon his trial;
but, notwithstanding he had ever assist-
ance of able counsel, and it appeared no
money had been spared, he was clearly
                               convicted,
123         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
convicted, and ordered for almost im-
mediate execution; the judge observing,
That the atrocity of his complicated
crimes deserved no favour.

   
     The wretched criminal, now finding 
there was no further reliance on money
or promises, the day before his execu-
tion, sent for Mr. Barton, and in his
and the clergyman's prescence signed an
ample confession, That he had been in-
stigated and hired, with the sum of one
hundred pounds, by mr. Supple, to way-
lay and kill Mr. Bennet, for which, if
he had perfectly succeeded, he was to
have had another hundred; that he was
also paid one htindred pounds for setting
fire to Burdock's house; and that he was
also employed in an attempt to carry oft
Miss Neville, and actually waited se-
veral nights for that purpose; but that 
scheme failed, by her not walking as
usual :-this last he was only paid twenty-
five guineas for. That Ralph Brackley

                                  was
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP               123

  was with him in all three schemes, and
  was paid only twenty-five guineas each
  time; that be would also have persuaded
  Brackley to fire at Mr. Bennet; but,
  though he had a loaded piece, he refused.
  The clergyman, who was a man of real
  piety, was much affected and hurt at the 
  recital of Supple's villany, whom he justly
  termed a scandal and reproach to his sa-
  cred function. The officers of justice
  were forthwith dispatched, to take him
  into custody; but the birds were already
  flown; for, on the first intelligence of 
  the man's conviction, not only Mr.
  Supple's but also Lord Dalton, and their
  friend Wolf, had suddenly decamped,
  and no tale or tidings of them transpir-
  ed, until about two months after. The
  papers announced Lord Dalton's arrival
  at Genoa, from whence they said that 
  young nobleman meant to make the tour
  of Italy.



                                    It
124        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   It may easily be conceived that Lord
and Lady Atherstone were not a little
surprised at the sight of an armed posse
entering their domains, with such an
accusation. Nor could they well be
persuaded of the facts, until the war-
rant against Mr. Supplel, and a copy of 
the criminal's confession, were exhibited
to their view. That Supple had winked
at their son's foibles they were well
aware of; but we must so far do them 
justice to say, that the extent of these
foibles, much less his crimes, they were
unacquainted with; they standing in
much the same predicament as an in-
jured husband, namely,--benig the last
acquainted with his own, or rather his
wife's, disgrace.

   But, though they had never openly
encouraged Lord Dalton in what might
be termed dishonourable, nevertheless,
they might very fairly be deemed acces-
saries, by fondly and blindly indulging,
evenMYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     125
even from his infancy, every whim, ca-
price, and extravagance; suffering him
to lavish what sums he pleased; to range
about where he liked, and with no other 
curb than a man, whose chief recommend-
ation was his being a tolerable adept in
flattery, and their son's special favourite.

     However, as some part of the charge
appeared to implicate their hopeful heir,
namely, the attempt to carry off Miss
Neville, his lordship coldly promised to
enquire about it; that is to say, when he
could trace his son's motions, which, in 
the present situation of things, did not
appear an easy task.

     The wife of the unhappy criminal had
been obliged to leave him some months
before, on account of his savage treat-
ment of her; and the children were, at
the same time, taken care of by her pa-
rents, Mr. Barton now allowing a weekly
stipend for that purpose. That gentle-
     Vol. II.     G               man
126    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

man also procured a situation for Brack-
ley, with a gentleman who was going to 
settle in one of the West India islands,
and who engaged several people that had
been brought up to the labouring part of
agriculture.

  It was no arduous task to guess from
what quarter the money issued for the 
diabolical purposes already recited, al-
though the party had art enough to keep
in the back ground, by employing an
agent equally vile, and , consequently, 
adequate to defending causes which ho-
nest men would shrink from.

  I believe it has already been noticed,
that the adventures in the old Monas-
tery had transpired, which happened 
from one of Mr. Barton's servant boast-
ing of the share he had in the business, 
while under the influence of intoxica-
tion. But, as this was only a retaliation
in kind, none but the most abandoned
                                 and           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           127

and degenerate could be supposed to
have entertained, nay, ever attempted,
to carry into execution such a species of
dire and black revenge.

   A thorough developement was, how-
ever, now rendered impossible by the
flight of the party accused, which, at
least, had one good effect, namely, the
restoration of tranquility in the two fa-
milies, and of peace to the whole neigh-
bourhood.  Ben Burdock's new mansion,
also, like another phoenix, arose from
its ashes, more complete and better
finished than before, every loss being fully
supplied, even to his stack of hay.  Lord
Atherstone generously contributed two
hundred pounds, possibly wishing to
wipe away some part of the odium at-
tached to his son's fame; for, by this
time, Lord Dalton's whole transactions
had also reached that nobleman.

                  G 2           CHAP.128     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

        CHAP. VIII.
    Villany punished, and an Arrival.

  EVERY thing now, amongst the
villagers, appeared to wear a smiling as- 
pect; for, Mrs. Neville received a letter
from her husband, importing that He
was well, and hoped soon to embark for
England; that he should have been with
her before, but had been detained by a
severe fit of illness, in which he had in-
curred fresh obligations from Lieutenant
Bennet, who had never quitted him;
that he had received her letter, and, in
the place of being  surprised at the affec-
tion she mentioned to have taken place
between William and Flora, he should
have wondered had it been otherwise,
especially where two young and amiable
people were constantly in the habit of
                                seeing        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      129

seeing and conversing; that, so far from
receiving his dissent, they appeared, he
said, from her account of William, form-
ed for each other; and, therefore, when
their affections were more matured by a
thorough knowledge of each other's
tempers and dispositions, their union
should not meet with any opposition from
him, as he still retained the idea, that
no felicity coud be compared with that
which arose from domestic happiness.

  The packet also contained letters of
acknowledgment from Bennett to Mr.
Barton, one to William, another to Mrs.
Welford - likewise one from the captain
to Mr. Barton, and also one to William;
the contents of which being only inte-
resting to the parties, are of course
omitted.

  Mr. Barton was, one morning, accost-
ed by the Irish servant whom he had
taken into his house, when hurt by the
               G3                fall,130 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

fall, as before-mentioned. This man in-
formed him, that He had been recently
discharged from Lord Atherstone's; for,
as he had, for some time past, refused
to be concerned in Lord Dalton's enter-
prizes, he had, on quitting the country,
been left behind, and other servants less
scrupulous taken with him. He con-
cluded this account by saying, "Did not
your honour receive a letter consarning
about running away with Miss Neville?"
Mr. Barton replying in the affirmative,
the Irishman told him that he wrote it,
in order to prevent any mischief, as he
could not notice the intention any other
way, because for why, he was in Lord
Dalton's power, by reason of a note o
hand. He then told Mr. Barton, that,
on his peremptory refusal to join him in
that scheme, he had never been in his
lord's or Mr. Supple's confidence, and,
consequently, was a stranger to all their
succeeding measure.

                                 " Though
       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   131
   "Though I am afraid, Patrick," said
Mr. Barton, "you have been guilty of
some indifferent actions in serving such
a master, yet I think myself so far be-
holden to you for writing that letter,
that, if I thought you could leave off
your ill habits, I would hire you my-
self."

   "And I beg you would, Sir," said
Patrick. "I am sure you can't do a 
better thing for me."

   --"But, how shall I be assured of
your good behaviour?"

   --"Oh! Sir, you may venture your
oath on it; for, it takes so much pains 
to be bad, and so little trouble to be
good, that it is like serving the devil for
nothing at all, and he is a very bad master
at best."

               G4          --"Well,132 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  --"Well, Patrick, that sentiment
shall, at present, be your recommenda-
tion: come along and, if you act up to 
the sample, we will not part in a hurry."

  There appeared now but one disturbed
being amongst the whole friendly group,
and that was young Baldwine. Since
Lord Atherstone's arrival in the coun-
try, he had scarcely been able to catch
a glimpse of his fair Caroline. He Saw
his friend blessed in the smiles of Miss
Neville, and happy in the approving
equally enamoured, was thrown at an
awful distance, by the pride of family,
the lovely object of his wishes scarcely
knowing of his flame, at least, from any
thing but his constant watchings, and
the hint that Ben had once thrown out.
To add to his chagrin, she had not lately
visited Mrs. Neville, which was sup-
posed to be owing to a prohibition from
Lord and Lady Atherstone, thought there 
                                   had       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         199

had been no offence, but what proceed-
ed from their own family.

   While things remained in this state at
the village and its environs, the public
papers announced, from time to time,
the enormities and follics that a certain
young nobleman and his tutor were com-
mitting in the Italian states, from some
of which they had been expelled with
ignominy; and these paragraphs left no
room to doubt that the persons so al-
luded to were any other than Lord
Dalton and Mr. Supple.

   Lord Atherstone had, for some time,
been so well convinced of the impro-
priety of Mr. Supple's conduct, as to or-
der his son to dismiss him, and had, with
much difficulty, persuaded a worthy cler-
gyman to go over and accompany him
in the rest of his tour. This gentleman
carried over some remittances; for, Lord
Dalton's drafts upon his father had been
                G5                    of
134           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

of such magnitude, since his arrival in
Italy, that Lord Atherstone had, at length,
thought proper to restrain his hand.
But, though the gentleman who was go-
ing to him had bills of credit for a large 
sum, they were nevertheless only to be 
delivered on the consideration that Sup-
ple should be instantly discarded.

  This prohibition was, however, ren-
dered nugatory by a incident that took
place just two days before he reached
Naples, from whence his intended charge
and his companion had removed; and
where, in an attempt to carry off the
mistress of an Italian marquis, he met
with so warm a reception from the sti-
lettos of the attendants, that Mr. Supple
was left lifeless on the scene of action,
and his lordship was carried to his hotel,
in a state that did not promise his sur-
viving many hours.

                               Contrary,        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   135

     Contrary, however, to the expecta-
tions of the Neapolitan surgeons, he
lived to the fifth day; and, such are the
wondrous effects of a death-bed, endea-
voured the greatest part of that time to
make reparation for his past bad con-
duct.

   For the last three days, the clergyman
sent by his father was continually with
him; and, at his own express desire, the
English consul was also sent for, the
day before he died, in whose presence
he signed a paper, which was scaled and
witnessed by the consul, and which was
to be delivered to his father by Mr.
Saunders.

   Thus disgracefully perished a young
nobleman, who, under proper restraint and
authority, might have proved a blessing
to his parents, and an honour to his
country.
      
                           Virtue
136          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

Virtue belongs to no particular station in life, 
and seeks no favour but that of Heaven. " tis is 
only permanent quality - kings may confer titles;
but he who is master of himself. and can conquer
his passions, possesses a superior coronet- he is 
self-ennobled.


Mr.Saunders, for that was the clergy-man's name,
had now only one melancholy duty to fulfil-the 
conveying the unfortunate remains to the afflicted
parents, who, while they deplored their son's tra-
gical fate, would be doubly tortured by the 
agonizing reflection, that his life fell a sacrifice
to false indulgence, and a neglected education.


Ill news, 'tis said, travels apace; for, before 
the packet which Mr. Saunders had dispatched could
arrive, and which was sent to a friend of the
family, in order that the mournful tidings might
be gradually unravelled, the daily papers
            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     197

pers had forestalled the intelligence, and
given it to the eyes of the father, with
all its train of aggravating circum-
stances.

    A packet containing the newspapers
arrived, while Lord and Lady Ather-
stone were at breakfast ; and the fatal
paragraph, like a sight of Medusa's head,
transfixed the unhappy father, for a
while, motionless to his chair, the pa-
per, dropping from his hands. In an
instant, Lady Atherstone also caught
the alarm, and recognized the fatal tid-
ings, which at once levelled their hopes
with the dust. Where now was the pride
of birth, pompous titles, or hoards of
wealth? The first crest-fallen, the se-
cond a few years would sink in oblivion,
and the third flow into other channels.
Poor epitome of human greatness-
proudly elate from empty baubles-de-
jected by a single stroke of Fate!

                                     The
138     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

The news of Lord Dalton's death pro-
duced different effects with the friendly
villagers, their contempt now almost
subsiding into compassion; for, though
strong our indignation against vice, yet,
with its punishment, our hatred to the
object is forgotten, and pity alone pre-
dominates.

The arrival of Lord Dalton's remains
renewed these sensations, and also the
grief of his afflicted parents and sister,
who removed form the spot, until some
time after they were deposited in the fa-
mily resting-place.

Mr. Saunders did not arrive until two
months after, having been detained by a 
severe illness.  Immediately on his land-
ing, he proceeded to Atherstone-Hall,
and requested an audience, on business
of great importance.  Lord Atherstone's
health and spirits not having sufficiently
recovered          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                139

recovered the recent shock, and suppos-
ing Mr. Saunders only wished to recapi-
tulate his proceedings, and, perhaps, de-
liver some painful remembrances from his
unfortunate son, he for the present de-
clined the interview, desiring to see him.
on a future day, of which he would give 
him timely notice.

   At this precise period, Mrs. Neville
received a letter from the captain, im-
porting that He and Lieutenant Bennet 
were arrived, and should be at the vil-
lage almost as soon as the letter.

   Joy now illumined every visage be-
longing to the two happy families, and 
mutual congratulations took place, young
Baldwine and Ben Burdock, with his
wife and children, partaking the general 
satisfaction.

   The morning following conveyed the long absent friends to each other's arms,
                          the
140      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

the captain repairing first to the cottage,
and Bennet directing his steps to Mr.
Barton's, where, after he had affection-
ately embraced William, and his sister,
he politely and warmly thanked Mr.
Barton for the uncommon friendship and
attention he had shewn his family.  Lieu-
tenant Bennet was not a different being
from what he was on leaving the country;
for, with the open frankness of the man,
he exhibited the ease and deportment of
a gentleman.

Mutual compliments, and the first
effusions of love and friendship, had
scarcely subsided, before a peremptory
summons from the cottage obliged them
to direct their steps thither, where Lieu-
tenant Bennet received a warm embrace
from Mrs. Neville, and a no less affec-
tionate one from Flora.

The captain then paid his compliments
to Mr. Barton, which were returned by
that

             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         141

    that gentleman. He addressed William
    in the most polite, thugh affectionate
    manner; nor was young Baldwine for-
    gotten.


       A general recapitulation of events
     now took place on the park of Mrs.
     Neville and Mr. Barton, which drew
     from the captain and Mr.Bennet scnior
     a train of moralizing reflections; but,
     much to the surprise of the narrator,
     without either the captain;s or the lieute-
     nant's expressing those marks of indig-
     nation, which fathers must be supposed
     to feel at the insults and injuries of their
     children. "Tis. true, at those parts of
     the relation thet recited Lord Dalton's
     inteution of carrying off Miss Neville,
     and William being wounded, both gen-
     tleman exchanged some very serious
     looks, but endeavoured, as soon as pos-
     sible, to alter the subject, which did not
     escape the notice of any of the parties,

                                           and142       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

and equally excited the wonder of each.
William, too, found himself hurt and 
dissatisfied, fancying that he perceived
more formality and politeness than he
either wished or expected. "My fa-
ther, too," said he mentally, "appears to
blend distance with affection. Does his
being now a gentleman annihilate tender-
ness? If so, I had much rather he had
remained a farmer, and I a poor boy.-
But, then, I should never have known
the good Mr. Barton, Mrs. Neville, or
my adored Flora-Perhaps, too, the cap-
tain repents his sentiments in my fa-
vour."

    William's further reflections were here
interrupted by Mr. Barton.

    "You are grave, my dear William,"
said he: "the joy of seeing your friends
has, I fear, too much overpowered your
spirits."

                                    "Mr.
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      143

  "Mr. Bennet," replied the captain,
"is young and ardent, and his heart un-
vitiated with the world's dissimulations,
open and susceptible of every tender
impression. - But tell me, Sir," address-
ing William, "on the supposition that
you were to exchange your present si-
tuation for pomp and splendor, is it
not possible that you might look with
contempt on those very wishes and
desires which you now so fondly che-
rish?"

  "And can Captain Neville, for a mo-
ment, harbour so mean an opinion of 
me?" replied William, the tear of sen-
sibility starting in his eye.

  "On my life, no!" exclaimed the
captain, starting up, and folding him in
his arms - "I did not, would no think
it."

            " He
114      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP
                                                                                    
      "He does not, indeed, deserve it,"
said Mr.Barton, gravel ; " for, if he
did, he would be no friend of mine; and,
as it is, did I possess millions, he should
inherit them.''


      " Mr.Bennet's good qualities and
disposition, I prefer to kingdoms, Sir,"
answered the captain, pleasantly. "But,
how have we got upon this grave sub-
ject? I believe it is my fault, and I beg 
pardon for it: on a future day, I mean 
to entertain the present company with 
some surprising incidents that Bennet 
and I met with in America, while up the
country on our parole, and in our voy-
age to England.''  
                                                                 
                                                                     
      " And I," said Mr.Barton. "will
also, then, in my turn, recite what may 
possibly make some of us better ac-
quainted."                                                                     
                                                  
                          
                                     -The                                                                                              
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             145

     The conversation now took a more
general turn, and alluded mostly to the 
future pursuits and pleasures each indi-
vidual looked forward to, in the society
thus happily united.

                                            CHAP.146           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

                  CHAP. IX.

                 A Surprise.

  ON the morrow, Mrs. Neville
gently chid the captain for the discourse
of the former evening, saying, She was
afraid he did not regard her dear William
as much as his letter had taught her to
expect.

  "Quite the contrary," replied the cap-
tain; "for, though much prepossessed
in his favour from your warm eulogiums,
yet, I think you have scarcely done him
justice.--But, my dear Arabella, I have
to request one favour, which I think
you will the more readily grant, as I ne-
ver hitherto have had concealments;
and, if I have any now, depend upon
it, three or four days at farthest shall put
                                          an         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP               147
an end to them. I have, therefore, to
beg, if my behaviour in that time should
appear a little ambiguous, that you will
not question me, but rest assured that I
am acting perfectly conformable to my
own honour, and the future happiness
of all concerned. For this purpose, the
lieutenant and myself are to-morrow
going on a little excursion, from which
we shall return on the day following."

   Mrs. Neville could not refrain from
looking a little grave at the conclusion
of the captain's address. however,
wisely concluding that three, or even
four, days would soon pass away, she re-
solved to restrain her curiosity, which
was nevertheless very much excited.

   Early on the morrow, Bennett senior
and the captain set off on the above-
mentioned excursion, from which they
returned rather late the following even-
ing, when it was remarked the Bennett
                             appeared   
 
148      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP
appeared very dull, but the captain seemed to enjoy a more than usual flow of spirit.
Bennet retired early to Mr.Barton's, soon after which the captain said;"My dear Arabella,I have been engaged in a piece of knight-chantry,in conducting a distressed and sick lady,whom we went purposely to meet,to a retreat near this place,where she wishes to remain perfectly in cog.;for which purpose,I have with some difficulty persuaded your old friends,the Burdocks,to let her have an apartment,on condition that you ratified agreement;though,I am sure,if they had given themselves the trouble of moment's reflection, they could not have possibly entertained any idea of improper intrigue,as I should suppose the poor creature is far more likely subject for a tomb."
                                         "I must       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       149

"I must confess you have thoroughly
awakened my curiosity," said Mrs. Ne-
ville.

" And mine also, papa," said Flora.

-" Forty-eight hours patience, and
both shall be gratified."

" 'Tis a long trial for a woman's pa-
ticnce," answered Miss Neville; " but
we must, perforce, submit."

  On the ensuing morning, every indi-
vidual of the friends met to breakfast at
the cottage. During the repast, a ser-
vant of Lord Atherstone's was intro-
duced, who, in the most repectful man-
ner, delivered his lord's con pliments to 
Captain Neville, Mr. Barton, and Lieu-
tenant Bennet, and entreated they would
immediately favour him with their com-
pany, on an affair of the utmost con-

   Vol,,  II           II  
                                 sequence150     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

sequence to his lordship's future peace
and happiness.

  This message appeared to create but 
little surprise in Captain Neville, or the
senior Bennet ; but had a contrary effect
on Mr. Barton and the rest of the com-
pany. The three gentlemen, however,
instantly prepared to obey the summons,
and,soon after, stepped into his lordship's
coach, sent for that purpose, and which,
in a short time, conveyed them to Ather-
stone-Hall.

  The company that remained behind
were lost in a labyrinth of fruitless con-
jecture, and passed about six hours in
no very agreeable situation.  Nor were
they a whit more relieved, at the end 
of that period, when the coach returned
a second time, with a line from Mr. Bar-
ton, peremptorily desiring William would
instantly come to Atherstone-Hall.

                               " Good     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   "Good God!" exclaimed Mrs. Neville, when the servant delivered the note, " I hope nothing is the matter. The gentlemen that went from here-are they all well?"

   "They are, Madam," answered the servant; "for, they all came out of the parlour to me, when i received the note, and desired I would tell the young gentleman to make haste."

 " Is there any thing extraordinary occurred at Atherstone-Hall?

 " Upon my word, I don't know, Madam; though the house has been in an odd racket this morning, and my lord has been fainting; and a strange sickly looking woman, whom two of the gentlemen went to fetch, she has been fainting too; and our old house-keeper, she has been crying and running about in strange confusion; so, what with my lady.132	MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
lady, who, they say, has been dying for
some time past, and one thing and an-
other, the house appears turned upside
down, almost as bad as when my lord
was out of the way, and Lord Dalton
and his racketing companions were
there."
  As the note expressed a desire for Wil-
liam's immediate presence, they would
not detain the messenger by asking any
further questions; so, after bidding Wil-
liam adieu, and following the coach with
anxious eyes, until it was out of sight,
they again resumed their seats in the
parlour.
  
  A pause of a few minutes succeeded;
at length Mrs. Neville broke silence—
" What a perplexing lot," said she,
" is that of poor mortals; continually
the children of delighted hope, or chill
ing fear! But a few hours, and fancy
portrayed almost the height of human
                               happi-
                MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP          153

 happiness-now, I dread I know not
 what.-Assuredly, there is no true feli-
 city on this side the grave."

   "I cannot think, my dear Madam,"
 said young Baldwine, "you have any
 real reason to distress yourself thus, be-
 canse you do not, at the present mo-
 monet, comprehend the transactions of 
 this morning. Besides, Madam, did you
 not remark that Captain Neville and 
 Lieutenant Bennet did not appear the 
 least surprised at the hasty suminons?"

   "Mr. Baldwine is right, mamma," said
 Miss Neville. "It cannot, any how,
 at least, disagreeably affect, and, per-
 haps, not concern us."


  -" I will endeavour to thik so, my
 dear; and, to chace away, perhaps, vain
 fears and idle curiosity, we will dine, and
 the take a walk, unless you prefer a
 little melody first, to attune and har
                 II3              monize

154           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

monize our souls, that we may the bet-
ter enjoy the beauties of Nature."


"Upon my word, a very good mo-
tion-so, let us have a little food, a great
deal of music, and a long walk; that is, 
if the gentlemen don't first break in, and 
alter our plan," said young Baldwine.

This resolution was accordingly pur-
sued; for, after having dined, and Flora
had entertained them on the piano-fote,
the gentlemen not returning, they set out
on their walk, and, in about two hours,
came back to the cottage.


                                      CHAP.
               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         155


                   CHAP.  X.
                       
                   
                   A Discovery.


               THE gentlemen were not return-
  ed ; but Mrs. Welford had sent to in- 
  from them, that her brother was arrived
  from the Hall, much indisposed, and was
  gone to bed, desiring that he might not
  be disturbed until morning, and that
  the gentleman would be home speedily.
  Several hours, however, passed before
  their arrival, and Mrs. Neville began to
  be at the utmost stretch of her patience,
  when the noise of a carriage stopping at
  the door calmed her perturbation, parti-
  cularly when she saw stepping out Cap-
  tain Neville and Mr. Barton.


     " You are welcome home, gentle-
   men, " said she ; " I began to think the

                       114            time
  156           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

time very tedious."  Then, looking round
with an enquiring eye - "But where is
William?  Have you set him down at Mr.
Barton's?"

  "No," replied Mr. Neville; "we
have left him behind us, at Lord Ather-
stone's express desire."

  - "That is very strange!"

  - "It is, my dear Arabella; and,
what is still more so, when you speak of
him in future, you must call him - "

  - "What? in the name of wonder!"

  - "Lord Dalton."

  "Lord Dalton!" echcoed Mrs. Ne-
ville.

  "Lord Dalton!" re-echoed Flora,
turning pale.

                             "Even,         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         157

   "Even, and truly-so," answered the
captain, "as Mr. Barton here can tes-
tify; and now, my dear, you have a
clew by which you may, in some mea-
sure, unravel my conduct in regard to
what I said to William-I mean Lord
Dalton-the other night; for, I knew
it then, and so did his father-pugh! I
mean Lieutenant Bennet.-Come, my
dear Flora, don't look grave; for, ho-
nours have not as yet changed his dispo-
sition, except I think he is a little less
timid; for, before we left him, he con-
trived to whisper in my ear- 'May I
presume, Sir, to entreat you would carry
my most respectful duty to your dear
lady; and may I also have the presump-
tion to beg you would say tomy beloved
Miss Neville, I only rejoice in this
change, if it affords her pleasure; for,
if I had crowns, the only satisfaction
they would bestow, would be to lay them
at her fect."

               II 5               Flora's158      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   Flora's face assumed a crimson hue,
but it was a pleasurable tint.

   " I must own," said Mrs. Neville,
" whatever had been his situation, to
have united him with my dear Flora
would have been my ultimate happiness;
but I am afraid his father----"

   " Will not, I trust, be blind to Miss
Neville's perfections," interrupted Mr.
Barton, " whom, from this day, I adopt.
I knew she is essential to my dear boy's
happiness. Therefore, if Lord Ather-
stone shuts his eyes, if fifty thousand
pounds with her will restore his vitiated
sight, the dross is her's to-morrow."

   " And, should he not think that suffi-
cient," said young Baldwine, " I hereby
pledge myself to enter into any security
to share the half of what I may in future
be possessed of, to make up the defi-
ciency."

                             " Generous,

       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
  
  "Generous, incomparable friends!"
exclaimed Mr. and Mrs. Neville.

    "Poor Bennet!" said Mrs. Neville, " I do not wonder he is affected at the idea of felinquishing such a son."

  " He is, indeed, affected," returned 
the captain; "but, though that may, in 
some measure, prey upon him, he has 
other griefs."

  --" But how, in the name of wonder, 
has this event been brought about? In-
deed, I am still in amaze; and can scarce 
believe what you tell me to be real, but
rather the effect of illusion, or disturbed 
fanny."

  --"Of the truth, my dear; you may
be well assured; as for the circumstances,
it is now too late to recount them: to-
morrow, Mr Barton and Mr. Saunders,
the clergyman who was with the unfor-
               II6              tunate.160     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

tunate young lord at his death, will be
here to breakfast, after which you shall
have every particular.  Besides, I am
now, from the events of the day, too
fatigued and confused to digest and put
the story in proper order."

   "And, upon the whole, I do not
know whether that may not be best," said
Mrs. Neville; "for, my mind appears
in a perfect chaos, and every thing I
hear seems like a dream."

   "The transactions of the day have
had the same effect on me," said Mr.
Barton; "therefore, we will, without
ceremony, immediately retire; for, I
apprehend a little rest will be serviceable
to all.  Come, Mr. Baldwine -- good
night, ladies -- good night, captain."

   A silence ensued during the little way
between the cottage and Mr. Barton's;
for, both the gentlemen found them-
selves             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           161
selves dull and out of spirits at the ab-
sence of their young friend, although
the change was such an exalted one.
Neither choosing any refreshments, af-
ter having enquired how the lieutenant
did, they retired to rest, and, the next
morning, according to appointment, all,
but Bennet senior, rendezvoused at the
cottage.

   In a few minutes, Mr. Saunders ar-
rives, and was introduced to the ladies,
as a gentleman not entirely unknown
to the captain, and one whom he much
respected.

   "You will, perhaps, my dear, be
surprised," said he, "when I tell you
our acquaintance is of some weeks
standing. How it commenced you shall
hear in proper order. I shall only now
observe, that I hope it will not end un-
til that event which disunites every tie."

                                      Mr.
162    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  Mr. Saunders accorded in the wish, and
breakfast proceeded in due form, after 
Mrs. Neville had enquired Weather the
lieutenant was not to be of the party? to
which the captain replied in the negative;
adding, It would be highly improper, as 
she would perceive, that he should be
present at a recital, that would so much 
wound and distress him.

Breakfast being ended, and every
thing removed, the captain gave orders
to the servants that no one should be
admitted, nor any interruption given,
until he rung the bell. Mr. Saunders
then took a packet from his pocket,
which he laid on the table, and, for a few
minutes, a profound silence ensued.
This was at length, broken by the cap-
tain, saying:


“ I believe no one present is desirous
of‘ having an account of‘ our disastrous
campaigns in America recounted, parti-
                               cularly         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 163

cularly as they have already been so fully
discussed in all public prints. I
shall, therefore, confine myself to those
incidents I wa concerned in, or, more
particularly, that part which tends to 
elucidate the business in question."





















                                             CHAP,164 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

CHAP. XI.

A STORY.

"YOU may remember, Ara-
bella," continued the captain, "I wrote
to you of my being attacked by a severe
illness, while on my parole, and how
much I was indebted to Bennet for his
care and attention.  On my recovery, 
being impatient to return, as soon as
our route was fixed, we set off and jour-
neyed through one of the most pleasant
parts of North America, and where fell
War had not shewn her face.  Being yet
weak, we travelled by easy stages, not-
withstanding which, at the end of the second day, I found myself so disor-
dered, as to apprehend a relapsc, Ben-
net, therefore, insisted upon going up to genteel house, which now opened to 
                                         our
                MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP    165

our view, and requesting a night's en-
tertainment. This was granted as soon
as asked, on producing our passports,
by the overseer of the estate, the mis-
tress being from home. However, the
next morning she arrived, and, on being
told that two English officers were at her
house, one of whom was ill, she imme-
diately came into the room where I rest-
ed, accompanied by the overseer, to ten-
der her services. She had barely ap-
proached the bed, enquired of my health,
and was in the action of feeling my 
pulse, as I complained of fever, when a
sudden exclamation of Bennet fixed her
attention on his face, and she dropped
lifeless on the floor. Bennet was almost
in the same situation, and could scarcely
tell me that, in the mistress of the house,
he had recognised his banished wife. The
sudden alarm had acted as a kind of 
electric shock, and thrown off my indis-
position; so that, soon after Mrs. Ben-
net had been removed into another cham-
                                   ber,
166 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 

ber, I insisted on getting up, and, from
that hour to this, I have never had any 
relapse.

  " For the space of three hours, we
scarcely saw a soul, and were most of that
time revolving how to act, whether to
quit the house, or wait the farther eclair-
cissement of so unpleasant an adven-
ture, when our meditations on that head
were put a stop to by the entrance of the 
overseer, who, bowing politely, and
turning to Bennet, said:

  "  'I understand that I now address
the master of this estate, --I am no
stranger to Mrs. Bennet's story.--Be-
lieve me, Sir, she is truly penitent, and
only wishes to make atonement for her
past crimes.'

  " Bennet liere interrupted the over-
seer, by saying--' Is not, then, your
                             mistress.         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      167

mistress married in this country, or has
been so?'

   "-'To no one but yourself, I pre-
sume, Sir.  How she became possessed
of this estate, will, I believe, reflect no
dishonour.  Luckily, no one but my-
self regards her present disorder to arise
from any thing but accident:-how I
came to enjoy her confidence, you will
in future learn, and, I believe, not dis-
approve.'

   "There was an open ingenuous man-
ner about the overseer, that could give
no room for doubt or suspicion; even
the mildness and humanity with which
he addressed the negroes of the planta-
tion the night before, had greatly inte-
rested us in his favour.

   "'My mistress, gentlemen,'said he,
'entreats that you would spare her a few
hours, which she means to employ in
                            imploringimploring God to give her strength to
bear an interview with her injured hus-
band, at which she begs you will also
be present; and, in the interim, I need
not remind you, I hope, that you com-
mand every thing here.'

  "As we did not seem inclined to
avail ourselves of this authority, at a
proper time, he returned, and ushered us
into a room, where a genteel entertain-
ment and different wines were set out.
We both are but little, and then retired
to another chamber, where Bennet, in a
state of extreme pertubation, awaited
the summons for the promised inter-
view.

  "The overseer, at lengthm, came to
conduct us to the door, which he ope-
ed, and then closed it upon us, and re-
tired.  The unhappy woman, on our
entrance, threw herself at her husband's
feet, in speechless agony.  Bennet rais-
ed,             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         169

ed, seated, and spoke comfort to her.
She recapitulated her faults-exposed
them in their most heinous colours-
confessed what, until that hour, he had
not even suspected-a deception almost
unparalleled-a piece of iniquity that-
But we will, at the present, suppress this
part of the story, on account of its 
being so strongly connected with the
latter part of the recital.

   " 'From the hour,' continued she,
'that I first embarked for my place of 
destination, I had no peace either by
day or night, my tortured fancy conti-
nually reflecting that I might, but for
my own wickedness, have been inno-
cent and happy. Time, instead of al-
leviating my misery, only encreased it
to such a horrid fit of despair, that I
attempted to destroy myself, which I
should have effected, but for the timely
assistance of the man who is now my 
overseer, and who hazarded his own
                            life170 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHir.

life in saving mine,by plunging info 2
deep lake,where i had thrown myself.

  '' ' this man had been a convict,but
  had the good fortune to serve a worthy
  man and a christian,who,in consider-
  ation of his behaving irreproacbaby,had
  given him up some years of his time.
  my fate was different:I served a cruel
  master,who repaid want of ability,nay,
  want of strength,with chains,hunger,
  and stripes.'

 '' ''wretch!'said he,sternly,as he
 drew me forth from the water,'what
 do you propose to yourself by this rash
act?'
  '' '' An end to my miscries,'answer-
  ed I.


  ''-''But,are you sure,blind,un-

  fortunate woman,that will end them?
  do you not rather suppose you will af-
                                    tewards       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.  171

terwards be plunged into a pit of end-
less punishment?'

       " 'His words struck through my
heart—I shricked with horror—' Ah!'
cried I, 'hide me—hide me from that
fatal pit——(), God! what can I do?
too surely that lake will not end my mi-
sery.'
        
         " "Go home, poorwretch,' cried he,
in a milder tone; 'labour with patience
and faithfulness in the service of that
hard master, whom your crimes have
subjected you to ; and humbly sue to
the great Master and Searcher of hearts
for pardon and forgiveness.'
          
          " 'His words sunk impressively into
my heart; for, his accents seemed those
of an angel. 'Yes,' said I, 'I will go
home, thus dripping and shivering—
nay, more, I will court the stripes I am
sure to receive for this rash—this wicked 
                                 attempt 170     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
attempt - 'tis right-'tis fitting-it
will perhaps,save my soul from eternal
perdition.'

 '' 'With these new sentiments ,I
reached home,and underwent without
a murmur the expected punishment,I
then retired to my straw,and,for the
your time in my life,prayed with fer
the justice of my situation ,and thanked
the Almighty for his awakening cor-
rection.
   '' 'The next day,I was called from
the field where I was at work and told
bu my master that I was no longer his
servant: then,delivering me to  the man
who had the day before saved my life,
and giving him,at the same time,my
imdenture of servitude ,he added ,with a
grin:'I give your master joy of his
dear-bought purchase.'


                              " 'Mr.



        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.        173

   " 'Mr. Thompson, for that was his 
name, then bade me follow him, and 
led the way to his master's, Mr. Jefferson,
who, if not the most opulent, was the 
most benevolent man in the country.
To this gentleman I was immediately in-
troduced.

   " " Thou lookest but weakly, poor
creature,' said he; 'and, no doubt, hast
been severely treated.  Thompson has
told me the situation from which he
rescued you, and entreated I would en-
deavour to mitigate your sufferings---I
hope you have repented of your medi-
tated suicide.  Consider, that despair,
such as your's, is the worst of crimes, as
it excludes repentance.'
   
   " 'I could only answer this mild and
benevolent address with my tears, which
he put a stop to, by ordering in his house-
keeper, into whose charge I was put,
with an injunction to see me properly
   VoL.II.            I   clothed174     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

clothed and comfortably fed.  'She
will be an useful assistant to you, Mar-
tha,' said he; 'and, i dare say, will
not prove ungrateful for your kindness
to her'

  " ' 'Bless you! - bless you! - I do
not deserve kindness,' I at length sob-
bed out.

  " ' 'Ah! well-a-day!' returned Mar-
tha, 'if we had all our deserts, God
knows what would become of us. - But,
come along; for, as master says, you
seem to stand in need of something com-
fortable, and, I can tell you, he is
not such a brute as your first master,
old Jenkins.'

  " ' 'Mr. Jefferson smiled, and put her
in mind that she seemed in no hurry, or
had forgot that I probably stood in need
of some refreshment.

                          " ' 'Forgot!        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       175

  ” ’Forgot! ay, marry, have I, and
I always forget, where you are, for it
does one's heart good to hear you--‘

  ” ’--’ Well! but, Martha, I don't 
want to hear you now.‘

  ” ’--’ No, I know that; I know you
never like to hear your own praises, and,
yet, you must, in spite of your teeth,
for, every one's mouth is full of them,
and, if they did not out with them;
they deserve to be choaked.--Well!--
well!  I have done--come along.‘

  ” ’ I only give these traits of Mr. 
Jefferson, to show you how much he
was loved, nay, deservedly adored, even
by all ranks.  My condition here was a
perfect paradise, and, could I have for-
got my past crimes, and the undeserved
tenderness of my husband, whom i re-
quited with such black ingratitude, I
might have been happy--but it was too
                               late ;176       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP
late; his image continually dwelt on my
remembrance, and painted in strong co-
lours the felicity I had for ever lost.
 

  " 'In a little time, Martha, who was
stricken in years, died, and I succeeded
her; and, soon after, my master fell
dangcrously ill, and remained in that
state, with little or no hopes of amend-
ment, for three month; during which
period, I scarce ever left him, and under-
went such fatigue, that I was worn down
to almost skin and bone: for the best
part of the time, he was insenible, and
required as much attendance as a young
infant. At length, it pleased God to
restore him.


   " 'On his recovery, he, out of gra-
titude for my care of him, would not
let me remain any longer in the capa-
city of a servant, though it was impos-
sible for me as yet to return to Europe.
Nor did he, it seems, wish it; for,
                               soon             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             177

soon after his restoration to health, he
made me an offer of his hand and for-
tune, concluding with telling me, that
he had never been inquistive in regard
to the particulars of my unhappy situ-
ation, nor did he desire to know; he
was, he said, well convinced that, let 
it have been what it would, a sincere and 
perfect reformation had taken place: he
did not know of a single relation he had
in the world; and he intended, if i was
the longest liver, exclusive of a few le-
gacies, to make me his sole heiress.

" 'Surprise, for a while, rendered me
silent. At length, being pressed to
speak, I told him, that, Independent of
the wretch I had been, I was already mar-
ried, and to a man whose worth I had
found out too late, and to whom I had
behaved with the greatest barbarity and 
ingratitude, having not only ruined his 
prospects, but destroyed his peace of 
mind for ever. A food of tears here
                Is               put178      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

put a period to my discourse, which he
would not let me again resume, telling
me that, If that was the case, he should
mention the subject no more, but when
my indenture was expired, I should be
sent home, with enough to render my
life comfortable, and also with sufficient
testimonials of my good behavior; that, 
in the mean time, if I was desirous of
rendering my husband any assistance,
I might command it.  I had before writ-
ten to Lord Atherstone; I now wrote
to you, but, not receiving an answer,
concluded that you had justly aban-
doned me, which, though I knew I well
deserved, nevertheless occasioned me a
severe illness, from which, however, I
at length recovered.  But, alas! a dis-
order, which soon after seized Mr. Jef-
ferson, did not prove so favourable; for,
in a few days, it joined his soul with the
blessed.  By his will, he bequeathed me
this estate, and five thousand pounds in
the bank of Genoa.  He also left Mr.
                            Thompson          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                179

Thompson two thousand pounds, and
the right of refusal to rent the estate,
should I be desirous of leaving it, which
I was preparing to do, the term of my
banishment being expired ; and I had
already taken a passage in a neutral
vessel bound to Genoa, where i meant
to go first, and settle my money con-
cerns, and from thence proceed to Eng-
land, endeavor to find my husband,
implore his forgiveness, and then seek
some solitary spot, where i might pass
the remainder of my life in penitence
and sorrow for my past sins.'

   " ' Thy sufferings have more than 
atoned for them,' exclaimed Bennet,
folding her in his arms-' thou art once 
more my wife, and dear as ever.'

   " ' Never-never shall such a wretch
again acknowledge that sacred name,'
said she, sinking at his feet.-' Thus-
thus hourly will I implore thy forgive-
                                  ness-180 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
ness-thus serve thee as they slave; but
never, God be witness for me! shall they
honest name by stained with such pol-
lution."

"To paint the distress," said the cap-
tain, "or to recount the arguments to
alleviate it, would be useless.  Suffice
it, then, to say, that Mrs. Bennet,
without relaxing from her determined 
purpose, having settled Mr. Thompson
on the estate, embarked with us for Ge-
noa, where we arrived, after a very pros-
perous passage.

"Fortune, in one of her favourable
moods, on our landing, conveyed us
into the same hotel where Mr. Saunders
lay sick.  Being our countryman, and
in a strange land, is always a sufficient
line of introduction.  Our's was affliction
-and our hearts sympathised.  Mrs.
Bennet was his nurse; her heart was
softened by sorrow, and she become a 
                              tender,              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    181

tender, a successful one.--Mr. Saunders
was restored to health; but, while this
was accomplishing, the names of Ben-
net, Barton, and Neville, became fami-
liar to his ear.

  ” ’There is a strange and almost un-
accountable affinity of sounds,‘ said he,
one day, ’in regard to your names, and
some I have by me on record--Pray, do
you know any of the same appellation in
Devonshire?‘

  ” ’As well, doctor,‘ I replied, ’as I
know my own.‘

  ” ’Are you immediately from Thence?‘
said he.

  ”--’We are just returned from Ame-
rica.‘

  ” ’Good God!‘ exclaimed Mr. Saun-
ders--’ and you, then, Madam,‘ ad-
                           dressing182           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

dressing Mrs. Bennet, 'perhaps, know
Lord Atherstone and Lord Dalton?'

  "'Oh! spare me, my God!' said
Mrs. Bennet, dropping on her knees;
'for, surely, like another Cain, I am
so accursed, as to bear my guilt on my 
forehead.'

  "-'That God, Madam, whom you
have just now invoked, is the God of 
mercy, and will most assuredly spare
and forgive the repentant sinner.  But
let me not be too precipitate; for, though
names and circumstances strangely point,
there may yet be a mistake.  God bear
me witness! I mean not to encrease your
distress; but one question is necessary:
Did you, some time back, send a letter
from America to Lord Atherstone, in
order to unravel a deception, in which
the peace and happiness of that noble
family are involved?'

                                 "'I did           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    183

  "'I did, - I did!' exclaimed Mrs.
Bennet, in agony.

  "'The paths of God are just and
wise, but often intricate and perplexing
to us poor mortals,' said Mr. Saun-
ders.

  "This gentleman, then, for the first
time, told us of the supposed Lord Dal-
ton's and Supple's fatal end; that he was
then at Genoa, in his route to England,
for which place he should have embarked
before, had not his illness prevented.

  "Mr. Saunders's health being esta-
blished, we took our passage together in a
vessel bound for London, where he land-
ed, and immediately proceeded to Devon-
shire.  Mrs. Bennet being ill and weak, we
journeyed by easy stages to within thirty
miles of this place, where we left her for
the present, until we had secured a re-
tired abode, where she might remain un-
                 I6              known.

184     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

Known. Yesterday, Mr. Saunders waited
on Lord Atherstone by appoitment,
and, with all neccessary caution, made
the discovery, to corroborate which we
were also sent for.


  "Immediately after our arrival, the
packet which had been consigned to his
lordship's solicitor in London was opened.
It bore both Mr. Saunders's and the con-
sul's signstured. Here is a true copy;
for, Mr. Saunders had his lordship's con-
sent to transcribe both that and Mrs.
Bennet's letter."









                                    CHAP.
          
       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      185

             CHAP. XII.

             The Packet.

 ' My dear Lord and Father,

       ' AT the awful close of an ill-
spent life, when even the levities and 
follies of youth stand in fearful array,
think, O think, what must be the sen-
sations of that being, whose numberless
crimes have, at length, provoked a justly
merited retribution. Oh! that I could
recall one short year--a month--nay, a
week--for, I have work that requires an
age, and know not that I shall be al-
lowed an hour. Forgive me, my dear
father--forgive me, my mother, all
the uneasiness I have occasioned you
by my follies--and, oh! forgive me the 
vile and now detested combination,
                             which186     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

which I entered into against the life and 
happiness of an amiable brother-for,
most assuredly, my father, I have a 
brother.-The letter which you will 
find enclosed within a private drawer,
in my escrutoire, was sent to you, my 
father, from America, and contains
every particular of that dear brother,
whom I would now give worlds to em-
brace, and to implore his forgiveness.
The permission you had given me to 
open all letters addressed to you in your
absence, caused me to learn the con-
tents; and the wicked advice of supple
according with my own wishes, prompt-
ed me to conceal it. Buy his advice,
too-dreadful advice!-I consented to 
the murder of my brother, and bartered
for his blood.-I also agreed to, and 
sanctioned, his base revenge against
poor Burdock, the detection of which 
caused our sudden flight, and speeded
our polluted souls, now almost ripe for
vengeance, to justly merited destruc-
                               tion.-         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.	187

tion.-Mercy, gracious God! Supple-
horrid idea!-had not one short hour
to implore mercy, but shut his eyes to
the light, howling and gnashing his
teeth! How will he open them before
his incensed Maker!-no repentance-
no restitution!-But let me not forget
my own-let me make all the poor sa-
tisfaction that now remains.-I entreat,
my father, that you will make Burdock
amends, as far as pecuniary satisfaction
will do it, for the injury sustained by
our more than savage fury.-My too
partial aunt bequeathed me her jewels.-
I meditated the worst of insults against
an amiable young woman; permit them,
therefore, to be equally divided between
Miss Neville and my sister Caroline.-
Farewell, my father-pray for your now
repentant son, who truly signs himself

                       ' JOHN WYVILLE.'

                                  "The188         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

    "The letter alluded to, written by
Mrs. Bennet to lordship, was next
examined, and ran thus:

     'My Lord,
   'Although shame, and the natural in-
famy ever attending a discovery of
guilt, would fain persuade me to conceal
my crimes from you and the world, yet
that secret monitor, Conscience, with
its sharp, though invisible goad, assures
me, there is no such thing as lying or
prevarication in the sight of God, be-
fore whom I must one day appear, and
be perforce and evidence against myself.-
What, then, my lord, is the alternative?
-Either to openly proclaim and confess
my sins, in the face of the whole world,
though I should incur the pains and pe-
nalties of an earthly tribunal, or hazard
an everlasting condemnation, by that
great Judge, from whose fiat there is 
neither appeal nor extenuation. 

                                  'Your
         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      189

  ’ Your lordship and Lady Atherstone,
doubtless, will recollect one Susan Ben-
net, to whom her ladyship put your
young heir to nurse.--I am that serpent
in human shape, who basely and wick-
edly took the opportunity of your lord-
ship's and Lady Atherstone's six months
absence in London, to take your infant
and my own to another part of the 
country, namely, to that where my
sister-in-law resided, and upon whom,
and every one else, I imposed my in-
fant for your's.  This I easily effected,
as she had never seen either, and I had
only to exchange their clothes, their
ages being the same.

  ’ Your lordship will, perhaps, wish to
know my motive; it was a diabolical
one--it was pride and malicious envy.
--” Why,“ said I, one day, when the
smiling infants lay in their respective
little beds--” why should this child be
born to better fortune than mine?  What
                                    has190      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

has he done, that he should not be a
lord ?"--From that dire hour, the same
thought constantly recurred, until I,
at length, resolved and put the wretch-
ed scheme into execation. The deceit
succeeded, and I carefully concealed
both infants from every eye that I
thought might discover the fraud. A
little time, in young children, causes
great alternation, and, on your return,
the deception was not suspected either
by you or your lady. But Heaven soon
frowned on my wickedness, and smote
my child, while he innocently per-
sonated your heir.--From that time, I
became a savage, not only to my bus-
band, but also to your harmiess babe.
One wicked action imperceptibly led to
another, until, at lenght, God's wrath
fell heavily upon me.

         ' It has pleased the Almighty to bring
me to repentance. I have long implored
his forgiveness, and now unfeignedly

                           entreat            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      191

entreat your lordship's, lady Ather-
stone's, and the young gentleman's;
         ’ and am the truly repentant
                       ’SUSAN BENNET.‘

  ” During the reading of this letter,
his lordship was much agitated, and, at
the close, desired his son might be in-
stantly sent for.--’ But, stay,‘ conti-
nued he--’ I well remember being told
that our child had three remarkable
red spots on his left shoulder.‘

  ” ’The young gentleman has three
spots,‘ said Bennet--’ though I never
knew it, until an accident happened to
his arm, some time after your lord-
ship's supposed son died of the small-
pox.‘

  ” ’What was that accident?‘--said
his lordship.

                            ” ’--It192          MYSTERIOUS FRIEDSHIP.

   "_ 'It arose from a burn, by his clothes
catchig fire; and, in dressing him arm,
I first saw those spots.'

   " Our new Lord Dalton was now im-
mediately set for ; but, before his in-
troduction, Mr. Barton took him into
another apartment, to prepare him for
the discovery. A scene, then, of pa-
rental joy and filial duty succeeded, that
may be better conceived than de-
scribed.

    "Lady Aherstone was, all this time,
ignorant of what was transacting, her
ill state of health rendering conceal-
ment necessary.

     "I believe U forgot to tell you," said
Captain Neville, "that Mrs. Bennet
was, all this time, in the house, being
there a her own particular request, in
order to make full expiaion, by being 
                                   ready       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.  193

ready to confirm any thing that required
her testimony.
   
    "All, however, appeared so perfectly
satisfactory to Lord Atherstone, that
he, for a while, declined seeing her; but,
as she still continued to persist in her
request to be admitted, to entreat for
Lord Atherstone's forgiveness, and to
see Lord Dalton, as she said, for the
last time, at the desire of the latter, it
was, at length, granted. On her ap-
proach, Lord Atherstone's looks be-
tokened harshness and severity; those
of Lord Dalton, pity and commiseration.
With a kind of mild, yet humble, for-
titude, she approached Lord Ather-
stone, and, sinking on her knees, with
uplifted hands, and streaming eyes, si-
lenthly implored his pardon.

    " 'May God forgive thec, woman'—
said he—' as sincerely as I do!'
             
                               "She194              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

     "She next attempted to kneel before 
Lord Dalton.

     "'Gracious God!'exclaimed he-
'can I suffer this humiliation from one
whom I have called mother?  If you
have injured me, let me thus accord my
forgiveness'-at the same time, raising,
and kissing her cheek.

     "A faint smile of complacency, for a
moment, appeared to illuminate the
sunken features of Mrs. Bennet; but
her feelings were too far stretched for
human nature to bear, and live.  Her
eyes glanced on all around her; then,
with clasped hands, and uplifted eyes,
as if wrapped in more than mortal me-
ditation, she sunk to the earth, and ex-
pired without a struggle!"

     "I do not wonder, ladies"-said
Mr. Saunders-"at your being so much
affected at the sudden termination of
                                 this
          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         195

this poor creature's existence; but
it was the will of the Almighty: let
us, therefore, think that her voluntary
humiliation and repentance were ac-
cepted."

     "This melancholy event," continued 
the captain, "caused an universal
alarm and commiseration. As for poor
Bennet, he was obliged to retire, and 
has ever since been confined to his 
apartment, refusing to hear even the
soothing voice of comfort.

     "The body, by Lord Atherstone's or-
der, was immediately removed; and so
much did this event soften his anger,
that he expressed a desire to take upon
himself the ordering and expence of her
interment.

     "When the bustle attending this me-
lancholy catastrophe had, in some mea-
sure, subsided, Lord Atherstone ad-
                             dressed196         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

dressed Mr. Barton in the politest man-
ner, saying, His gratitude must be
ever inadequate, even if repaid to the
utmost extent of his abilities, for his
care and attention, in thus forming a
son, who would be the pride of his f
ture days.--' And be assured, my
lord--replies Mr. Barton, 'that I
will be fully repaid for this exaggerated
care and attention; no less a price, than
still to retain my full share and interest
in his affections.'

  "This answer produced a strenuous
embrace from Lord Dalton, and a cor-
dial exchange of friendship between
Lord Atherstone and Mr. Barton. All
was now joy, love, and friendship, and
we partook of some refreshment, with
a serenity and harmony that, for a
while, almost threw an oblivion on the
late melancholy events; or, when they
were recalled to memory, seemed more
than to counterbalance them.

                              "Lord             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP            197
       
     "Lord Atherstone and Mr. Saunders
 have taken upon themselves the task of 
 preparing Lady Atherstone, as the worst   
 consequences might be apprehended, in
 her weak state, she having been con-
 fined to her bed for some time past.

   "These matters being arranged, and 
 it growing very late, we took our leave;
 Lord Dalton remaining with his father,
 whom we left hanging over him with 
 that degree of satisfaction which a con-
 nousseur exhibits, when surveying a 
 fine picture- and, faith!" continued
 the captain, laughing, "when we were
 about to retire, Dalton appeared almost
 as inanimate as one; for, notwithstand-
 ing his filial duty and affection, I
 shrewdly suspect his heart was at a cer-
 tain little village."

    "What strange ans unlooked-for
 events hath a little time brought 
 forth!" -said Mrs. Neville.- "I do
   Vol. II.       K              not198        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
not think the acquaintance of Lord 
Dalton will reimburse me for the loss
of my dear boy, William."


  Flora heaved an involuntary sigh.

  "Come, no pining"-said Mr.Bar-
ton-"I'll venture all I am possessed
of to a groat, if Augustine ever changes 
of forgets his old friends, though he has
changed his name."

  "Is his real name Augustine?"-said 
Miss Neville.

  -"It is, and a very pretty name; 
what do you think, young lady?"

  "I think-I think"-answered she,
hesitatingly-" I like that of William
better."

  "Ah! that "- said he, laughing, "is
because you are not yet so well used to 
                                    it:
        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     199
it: depend upon it, you will like it
better shortly."

  "That I am sure--that is, I mean--
I think--I never shall"--said Flora.

  --"Well! I am glad, at least, you
have palliated a little, or I positively
would have told him what you say; for,
sure as fate, here the dear boy comes."

  The whole circle were now on their
feet, each striving, Miss Neville ex-
cepted, who should first strain him in
their arms. He, on his part, returned
each warm embrace in a manner that
bespoke his pleasure in being once more
re-united with his old friends.

  He then advanced to Miss Neville,
who had turned towards the window,
and, taking her hand, respectfully con-
veyed it to his lips.

        K2        "May200    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   " May I hope"--said he--" that
Flora has not forgot William?"

   " Oh! no, my Lord"--said Flora,
blushing.

   " I have, unsought indeed, gained 
that formal appellation; but my heart
will ever be--unchangeably William's.
My dear Baldwine"--continued he,
" my father knows and is pleased with
our mutual friendship, and insists that,
at your pleasure, you will make his
house your dwelling----and I have it
also in commission to invite the whole
of this loved circle for the day after to-
morrow, but not as a visit of cere-
mony; for, my dear father says, He
will expect you all to breakfast.--To-
morrow, for the first time, I am to em-
brace a mother. She has cautiously
been informed of these unexpected
events--wished to know her son--and
press him to her maternal bosom.
                           Teach              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP. 201

Teach me, my good Mr. Saunders, and
my other parent, my dear and honoured
Mr. Barton, teach me to bear this over-
flow of happiness with moderation."

  "My dear young friend," said Mr.
Saunders, "When I perceive you need
reproof, it will then be time enough to 
urge it. For the present, it seems more
necessary to guard you against a keen-
ness of sensibility, that may not only
injure your own health, but likewise
produce fatal effects on your mother,
whose irritable nerves seem incapable of
sustaining too great a shock."

  --" I will endeavour, my dear Sr, to
observe your friendly counsel. But,
how is my other dear parnet? and my
aunt Welford? for, never shall those
appellations be obliterated from my
heart."

               K 3 "The 202         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  "The lieutenant," said Mr. Barton, " is indeed muc h affected, and so is Mrs. Welford; but the lenient hand of Time will, I hope, close their wounds."

  -" Will my presence, Sir, increase his affliction?"

  " No ; on the contrary"-replied Mr.Barton- " he will, by the attentive remembrance of one so dear to him, think he has still a hold on life."

  -" Then, without any ceremony, I will go this minute; and I shall soon return."

  " With what a graceful ease and frank demeanour," said Mrs. Neville, " he fills his new station in life!"

  Every tongue present was now in motion to recount his praise, and every heart accorded to each other's testimony;         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             203

mony; in fine, the theme appeared in-
exhaustible, and was only interrupted
by his return.

  "Well! my dear William--plague
on't!" said Mr. Barton--"I believe I
shall never be able to recognize any
other than--"

  --"William, my dear Sir--William,
by all means."

  --"Why, then, William be it; but,
how did you find our friends?"

  --"A great deal more composed, Sir,
than I expected: I hope a little time
will alleviate their affliction."

  After some hours passed with the utmost
satisfaction, Lord Dalton-rose to bid
them adieu, having promised to return
to the Hall to dine.  "How strange it
appears," said he, "to quit this happy
                                 circle!
                  K 4204              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

circle! You, my friend Baldwine, will,
perhaps, accompany me home?"

  Mr. Baldwine immediately sent to
Mr. Barton's for his horse, and the in-
tervening time was passed in Lord Dal-
ton's recounting the affectionate inter-
view that passed between him and his
sister, Lady Caroline.

  "Lady Caroline, I fear, has forgot-
ten us," said Mrs. Neville.

  "Oh! no--it was I, so much in-
toxicated with the happy fleeting mi-
nutes just passed, that forgot to present
her warm remembrances, in which you
were also included, Mr. Baldwine, "said
Lord Dalton.

  The gentlemen then mounted their
horses, and, as they turned to depart,
Lord Dalton said to Mr.Barton: "Do
                               not      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    205

not forget, Sir; an early hour, you
know."

  "My dear Baldwine," said he, a
they rode along, "I hope Atherstone-
Hall will prove as auspicious to love and
friendship at Mr. Barton's."

  "I hope so, too" - replied young
Baldwine - "though, with any body
but you, I should feel in rather an
awkward situation."

  - "How so?"

  - "Why, when I made you acquainted
with my love for Lady Caroline, I must
confess, I little expected you were her
brother."

  - "And can you think, then, that be-
ing the brother of Lady Caroline has
                 K5              dimi-206              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

diminished my affection and friend-
ship?"

   -"No, I do not think so; but yet I
should be sorry if the pride of family
should cause either a breach of duty
on the one side, or of friendship on the
other."

    -"Which, I hope, will never be the
case; for, believe me, Lord Atherstone
has either been much misrepresented, or
is now an entire new character, and
seems thoroughly aware of the errone-
ous education of my unfortunate bro-
ther. I am, therefore, much deceived, 
if happiness now will not claim a de-
cided preference over rank; and this is
so firmly my opinion, that I mean
shortly to put it to the test, and lay
open my whole heart. Indeen, he ap-
pears so kind a father, that to have
concealments would be dishonourable,
                                and          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    207

and repaying his tenderness with base
ingratitude."
  
   With such discourse, the way seemed
short that carried them to the Hall,
where Lord Atherstone was awaiting the
arrival of his newly discovered son with
some impatience; and also gave young
Baldwine a very polite and friendly re-
ception.

   "I am doubly in arrear to you,
Mr. Baldwine," said that nobleman-
"having many thanks to tender on the
score of my daughter's safety, and more
apologies to make for not having per-
sonally given them before."

   "The honour and happiness, my
lord"-said young Baldwine- "of be-
ing serviceable to so charming a young
lady, is of itself a sufficient recompense;
your lordship's goodness and conde-
               K6           scension208          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

scension lays the favour upon my
side."

  Before dinner, the fair subject of
their discourse entered, and Mr. Bald-
wine was formally introduced to her by
his lordship's saying: "Your brother's,
and my friend, Caroline; but, I believe
you have seen the young gentleman be-
fore."

  Young Baldwine had now the full
and unrestrained satisfaction of sitting
at table with his fair mistress, and of
contemplating those charms at leisure,
of which before he could only catch a
transient glance.

  " I hear," said Lord Atherstone,
after the servants were withdrawn,
"that you and my son were insepara-
ble; I hope he will not now have to
complain that you loved William better
than Augustine."

                                 --"There         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.            209

-"There is but little danger of that,
my lord, since in the same person
there are united the virtues of two dis-
tinct characters; one part formed from
that perfect model of human nature,
Mr. Barton, the other-an hereditary
entail."

 The latter part of young Baldwine's
reply was so pointedly addressed, as to
preclude all possibility of mistake; his
lordship, therefore, bowing in return,
said:

" I have been made to believe that
Caroline's champion was a mere rustic'
but I find him a perfect courtier. Good
God! could it be possible that my un-
fortunate boy, and that villain Supple,
should associate with the vile scourings
of the community, when two such
youths wer so near? But, may I not
also"-added he-"reproach myself for
suffereing my ear to be poisoned with
                                     vile210        MYSTERIOUS FRIEND SHIP.

vile and malicious insinuations, which
prevented my cultivating such truly re-
spectable neighbours as Mr. Barton and
the Nevilles? and, apropos, Mr. Bald-
wine, I hope, in future, your family
and mine will no longer be stranger."

  "Your lordship's condescension," said
young Baldwine, "will give them
inexpressible pleasure."

  "Notwithstanding your late bro-
ther's depravity, Augustine" - conti-
nued his lordship-" I cannot forget
that he was my son. A few more weeks
of oblivion, and the world shall see that
I have now one that is my pride, as
much as the other was my disgrace. I
shall then give a general invitation, and
usher you into life, with that eclat you
are so deservedly entitled to."

  "Your lordship's affection" - replied
Lord Dalton -" will have infinitely
                                  more

  more charms to me, than all the pomp and glare of shew and fashion."

    -- "You are a very extraordinary person indeed, Augustine, in wishing to reject, at your time of life, what most young men of fashion plaice their supreme delight in. --But, come, let us hear what is your ultimatum; for everyone hat his own idea of human felicity."

    --"My idea of happiness, my lord, in the eyes of these young men of fashion, would, perhaps, have no charms--for, next to the affection of my friends, a moderate competence and retirement, would best accord with my wishes."

    --"Nay, but I am now sure, Augustine, there are a few trifling appendages in your catalogue, which you have omitted."

    --"What

212         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

   -"What are those, my lord?"

   "Why, perhaps, a flock of sheep,
and, at all events, a fair shepherdess."

   -"Your lordship has forgot that the 
moderate competence I mentioned would
purchase the one-"

   -"True; and the other would as na-
turally follow, as your bleating lambs
would the ewes. Well! Caroline, what
say you? Do you think your rural bro-
ther has yet looked out for the necessary
appendage, or must we be obliged to 
provide for him?"

   -"Really, my lord, I have not known
our dear Augustine long enough to dis-
cover; and, for my own part, I have
only seen one in this quarter I would
wish to recommend."

                                -" And      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   213

--" And who is that one, Caroline?"

--" Miss Neville, my lord."

   " How much do i feel myself hurt,"
said Lord Atherstone, " When I reflect 
on the insult that was meditated in that
quarter. She is, I understand, very
charming in person, Augustine."

   Lord Dalton bowed an assent.

   --" And perfectly accomplished ; is
she not?"

  Lord Dalton bowed again, and re-
plied: " She is, my lord; and the sweet-
ness of her temper, joined with the mild
humanity of her disposition, and great
good sense, more than equal her charms."

   --" Bravo! Augustine; this must be
the shepherdess; we will look no fur-
ther. However, I must first see this
                             prodigy,
214   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

prodigy, and then, perhaps--But I am
now going to visit your mother; her
spirits are surprisingly amended, ever
since she knew that she had yet a son.
She longs to see you, and yet wishes to
familiarize her mind to the loved object,
before she strains him in the maternal
embrace--To-morrow, she means, if her
spirits will permit, to make the wished-for
effort. The day after is dedicated to our
friends, the female part of whom, if
Lady Atherstone's health will permit,
we will introduce her."

During the interval of Lord Ather-
stone's absence, the two gentlemen and
Lady Caroline amused themselves by
walking in the Park and about the gar-
dens, and discoursing on the pleasures
they should reciprocally receive from
the now uninterrupted society of all their
friends. On their return, they amused
his lordship for the remainder of the
evening, in the music room, perfectly
to    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.        215

to his satisfaction.  From thence, they
removed to partake of a slight supper,
and retired the earlier to rest, on ac-
count of the next morning's expected
interview.



                         CHAP.               CHAP. XIII.
               An Interview.

      WHEN Lord Dalton and young
Baldwine were retired to their apart-
ments, which were contiguous , the for-
mer asked his friend If he did not now
perfectly coincide with him, in respect
to Lord Atherstone's sentiments being
altered?

  "Your happiness, indeed," replied
young Baldwine, "appears opening to
your view; but I greatly fear the pride
of birth will still throw an irremovable
bar in my way."

"Do not despair, my dear Baldwine,"
said Lord Dalton. "My happiness
would be incomplete, did you remain only
                                 a droop-
     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    217

a drooping spectator of it.  Be assured,
therefore, nothing shall be wanting on
my part to it; and I believe I have a
thought occurred, which, if not the
main spring will, at least, be a leading
machine to bring it into action - don't.
however, ask me now what it is. - Good
night, my friend; I will try to rest, and
compose my spirits for the dear expected
meeting."

  On the morrow, Lord Dalton was
early dressed, and, by his desire, break-
fasted in his own apartment; at the
door of which, in about an hour, Dr.
Saunders gently tapped, and led them to
the apartment of Lady Atherstone.

  Her ladyship had been up and dressed
some hours, and, through the care and
attention of Dr. Saunders, and Mr.
Vincent, the before-mentioned surgeon,
exhbited uncommon fortitude, consi-
dering her weak spirits.  Augustine
                              would218           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

would have thrown himself at her feet,
but her ladyship caught him in her arms,
and pressed him to her enraptured bo-
som, alternately bedewing his face with
her tears, and hanging over him with 
speechless transport.

" And is it allowed me, " said she,
" to again embrace a son? one whom
I so long thought numbered with the
dead? one whom I, barbarous mother!
left to be fostered by a stranger? O
shame! shame!-elated with pride, and
intoxicated with a new title, to desert
my innocent babe!- O God! thou hast
most righteously chastened me with
sorrow, and restored me to my sense of
feeling."

"O my dear, my honoured parent,"
exclaimed Augustine, "I have not been
deserted: until it pleased God to restore
me to you, I have found other parents,
who have taught me to respect, to love,
                                  and

             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             219

and to revere my own; who have bent
my mind, while yet pliant; who have
taught me to respect virtue, and detest
vice.--Oh! say not, then, my mother,
your son has been deserted."

  "Yes, my son"--said she-- "I now
see the hand of God in it all.  He gave
me a son--I cast him from me--in-
trusted him to the hand of strangers--
he became lost--as I thought, for ever
lost--I consoled myself with folly.--
Another son was born--him I fondly
cherished, nay, indulged in every weak-
ness, until, with maturer age, it dege-
nerated into vice--infamy--and, at
length, destruction. The same God
has now carefully restored my poor re-
jected one, and restored him all my fond
overflowing heart could wish."

  Again the mother pressed him in her
arms, with all the transport of agoniz-
ing joy, until, at length, Dr.Saunders,
                                    the  220               MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

the surgeon, and Lady Caroline, were
obliged to interfere, in order to calm
that excess of delight, which they ap-
prehended might bring on a relapse.-
The surgeon then tendered her some
drops, which he had prepared; and, in
the mean time, Mr. Saunders had placed
chairs, and endeavoured, by the dint
of reason and religion, to check those
extravagant ebullitions, which, if longer
indulged in, might possibly have a fatal
tendency.

     Lord Atherstone, who had declined
being present at the meeting, now
joined in the happy scene, which soon
became more settled; the delighted mo-
ther contenting herself with fondly
gazing on her son, and asking him a 
hundred questions in a breath.

     At the expiration of about two hours,
Mr. Vincent proposed that the company
should retire for a while, and that Lady
                              Atherstone        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP           221

Atherstone should lie down, and endea-
vour to compose herself.  This she pro-
mised to comply with, on condition
that her son should return and take his
dinner in her apartment; a requisition
with which he most readily complied.

  In about four hours, her ladyship
was much refreshed, and her agitated
spirits were now perfectly calm and se-
rene; so that, when her son, Lord
Atherstone, and Lady Caroline, entered
the apartment, though she received
them with delight, yet it was of that
placid kind, which threatened no injury
to her health.

  Mr. Baldwine had, in consequence of
this meeting, retired to Mr. Bartin's,
and was to return with him, and the 
Neville-family to the Hall, on the
morning following.

                            Lord222      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  Lord Atherstone acquainted his lady
with this arrangement, telling her, at
the same time, that, on a future day,
when her health was a little better, he
meant to introduce Dalton's charming
friends, as his lordship styled them, to
her acquaintance.  She, however, in-
sisted on seeing them soon, saying, Such
angels as they were represented, would
be the most certain means of restoring
her.

  On the following day, Mr. Barton,
Captain and Mrs. Neville, Miss Ne-
ville, and Mr. Baldwine, arrived at the
Hall, by nine o'clock, and were receiv-
ed by Lord Atherstone in the most po-
lite and friendly manner.  His lordship
particularly noticed the ladies, and ap-
peared absolutely charmed with Miss
Neville, whispering his son, a short
time after their entrance, "Indeed, I
think this must be the shepherdess,
Dalton."

                                   Lady      MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     223

Lady Atherstone was also stirring
very early, as she insisted, notwith-
standing every remonstrance, that the
whole company should breakfast with
her; and would absolutely have come
down stairs for that purpose, had not
the friends entreated they might wait
on her in her own apartment. 

  Lady Atherstone received them in her
dressing-room, with a degree of polite
affection, saluting them all round. As
to the ladies, she embraced them warm-
ly, styling Miss Neville her own lovely
girl, and saying, She should no longer
wonder how her Dalton became so po-
lished, while he had such charming
models to copy from.--—Mr. Barton she
addressed in the highest degree of gra-
titude, telling him She should ever rank
him in the same degree of estimation as
her own family.

               L 2                The 

          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

The day passed with the utmost
satisfaction on all sides; for, all were
pleased and happy, discontent only ap-
pearing when the hour of seperation
approached. this was, however, alle-
viated by a solemn promise that death
only should render this now-cemented
friendship dissolute.

Miss Neville, by the express desire
of Lady Atherstone and Lady Caroline,
was left behind, as her ladyship said,
for a hostage, until she was convinced
they meant to ratify the agreement.

  After the departure of their guest,
the ladies and young Baldwine being in
Lady Atherstone's apartment, his lord-
ship took the opportunity to say to Lord
Dalton,

   "In truth, Miss Neville is a most
lovely girl.  I wonder, Augustine, how
                                    it

            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     225

it was possible you could guard your
heart against such a little sorceress.“

  --” Had I aspired to Miss Neville, Sir,
under the disadvantages with which I
then laboured, would it not have been
almost deemed presumption in the poor
humble William Bennet?“

  --” Or, egad! I think almost in Lord
Dalton himself, Sir, though son and
heir to the Earl of Atherstone.“

 --”  And yet, my lord, I had that
presumption.“

  --” The devil you had--why, then, I
must confess you had--a pretty modest
assurance.“

  --” Oh, my lord, was it possible to
see, to converse with Miss Neville, and
not adore her?“ 

                              --” True,226              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  --” True, true; and pray, how was it
received?“

  --” Most favourably, Sir.“

  --” And shall I, then, be left at an
humble distance in generosity; nay, in
rectitude, by the Nevilles, especially
when I owe them so much, and my
heart, likewise, so well accords in the
business.  No, my dear Dalton; if in-
deed, Miss Neville's young affections
are in unison with your own, expect
as speedy a completion of this business
as is possible.  Your mother, as well as
myself, have had vexation enough with
your brother's foibles; therefore, you
have no reason to fear even a dissenting
voice.  She will wish to see you tho-
roughly domesticated : if possible, I
will speak to her upon the subject to-
night--But, come, she will think you
are lost.“

                                Lord         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.           227

Lord Daltou would have thrown him-
self at his father's feet, to acknowledge
his kindness; but he withheld him, say-
ing-"My dear boy, you oblige me as
well as yourself in this affair; so, re-
serve your raptures for your mistress-
and come along."



                L4                    CHAP.
                 CHAP. XIV.

                   Proposals.

LORD Atherstone acquainted
his lady with their son's attachment the
same evening, an information that
seemed to afford her much pleasure.
His lordship, therefore, the next day,
ordered his coach to Mr. Barton's,
where, having first kindly enquired after
the health of the Lieutenant and Mrs.
Welford, he desired Mr. Barton to ac-
company him to Captain Neville's, who,
though much pleased, was not a little
surprised at his early appearance.

"I believe, my dear Madam," said
his lordship to Mrs. Neville, "that this
is rather an unfashionable visit; but
both myself and Lady Atherstone are
                            resolved              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             229
resolved to do away all ceremony in
future; and, unless you forbid it, con-
sider ourselves on the footing of inti-
mate friends."


  ――" Your lordship and Lady Ather-
stone will then confer on us a singular
honour, as well as pleasure; her lady-
ship is well, I hope?"


  ――" Her health and spirits are much
amended――she now only wants one sa-
tisfaction, to complete her restora-
tion."


  ――" Which I hope is not unattainable,
my lord."


  ――"'Tis a jewel of price, I assure you,
Madam, and in your possession; at least
at your disposal."


  ――" My lord!"


               L 5              ――" Come,

           HOWARD CASTLE.                 145

   ings, and regretted when he saw her quit
   her scat.

     Lady Elenora Montague and Clemen-
  tina had no part to act they therefore en-
  joyed an uninterrupted tete-atele. There




  230            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  -"Come my good Madam, and my
  dear Captain, We will drop all ambi-
  guity at once. The young loves of
  Miss Neville and William Bennet, I
  understand, had early taken root, and
  since have flourished, under your's and
  the benevolent Barton's fostering bands.
  Shall I, then like a blighting mildew,
  or chilling frost, check, and unimely
  kill, their now matured affection? Ho-
  nour gratitude, principle, all forbid !
  Nay, my own heart accords with his
  wishes. Behold me, then, the plenipo-
  tentiary of my Dalton; and I enteat
  that you will permit him to lay
  himself and future fortunes at the feet
  of your charming daughter, and that
  he may retify in his own person the
  treaty entered into by William Ben-
  net."


    
      " Upon my word, my lord," said
   Captain Neville, " you have taken us
   quite by surprise: this is an honour-"
       
                                  " Equally              MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    231

  "Equally conferred on me"-eagerly 
interrupted his lordship.--"You and
your forefathers have gallantly served
your king and country, without stain 
or reproach; no family, therefore, how-
ever noble, need disdain your alliance."

  --"Your lordship is, doubtless, well
aware that the appointment of a Captain
of industry in not splendid enough to 
accumulate--"

  --"Fortune, captain? True; we want 
it not--we only look for happiness."

  "But, hold, gentleman"--interrupted
Mr. Barton--"this friendly squabble--
pardon the expression--shall not be 
settled without my interference. You,
my lord, have robbed me--you have 
taken my boy from me; now, you
want my girl: I do, therefor, insist
on an equivalent, a kind of composi-
tion, of I positively cannot give my
                          consent.
232     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

consent. My William would have had
all I possessed; it is now in another
channel-the principal part will centre
in Miss Neville: her marriage portion
will be fifty thousand pounds."

   " Generous friend !"-exclaimed the
captain-" how shall i ever repay-"

   "You owe me nothing"-interrupted
Mr. Barton ; "for, some day, we will
strike the balance."

   "Well!"-said his lordship-" Mr. 
Barton, though we want not fortune,
shall have his own way. Are we, then,
to consider, my dear Madam, this 
union as receiving your's and the cap-
tain's approbation ?"

   " It is, my lord," answered captain
Neville, "too pleasing a proposition to 
be rejected, or even to hesitate upon ; 
therefore, your lordship need not doubt
                                   that                     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.      233

that Mrs.Neville and myself entertain
the most lively satisfaction at the 
pleasing prospect of such a happy dn
noble alliance."

-" And now,Captain Neville, con-
sidering myself from this moment as
one of your family, I shall take the li-
berty to salute Mrs. Neville, and be
the first to wish her joy and happiness
from this union."

 This was followed by the two gen-
tlemen, after which, they all partook 
of a hurried kind of breakfast, his
lordship insisting on their accompany-
ing him immediately to the Hall.

 On their way thither, Lord Arther-
stone desired they would not let the bu-
siness of the morning transpire, as he
wished to take the young people by sur-
prise. To this, Mrs. Neville, though
unwillingly, consented, and gave his 
                               lordship234        Mysterious Friendship.

lordship the requested promise of se-
crecy.

 Lord Atherstone took the first oppor-
tunity of acquainting his lady with
what had passed at the village; and,
soon after dinner, which was again in
her ladyships's dressing-room, she desired
Lady Caroline to open her cabinet, and
bring her a particular case she would
find there.

  "Augustine"-said her ladyship, "it
remains with you to execute your bro-
ther's last request, and present Miss
Neville his small atonement, which,if
she refuses it, will evince that she can-
not forgive, much less retain, a me-
mento from one, who, I hope, has ex-
piated his errors by a late, though, I
trust, unfeigned, repentance."

   Augustine presented the casket, and
Miss Neville, having consulted the
                              looks                MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       235

looks of Mrs. Neville, received and
dropped the tear of pity and forgiveness
on it.

"This was not intended for a melan-
choly meeting," said Lord Atherstone;
"nor do these bawbles require such pre-
cious pearls in exchange.  Let us change
the subject to one of joy and gladness--
if these trifles excite sorrow, for the
present, let them be removed; and do
you, Augustine, offer the lady in re-
turn--"

"My hand!" exclaimed Lord Dal-
ton.

"your hand--your heart!  Dalton,"
said Lady Atherstone, "which, if she
accepts, and renders her's in exchange,
Lord Atherstone's felicity and mine will
be complete."

                                      In236         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

    In a moment, Lord Dalton was at
her feet, and Miss Neville was ready to
sink with surprise and confusion.

      "Forgive me, my dear love," said
Lady Atherstone, rising and taking one
hand, while her mother supported her
by the other-"Forgive me, and con-
sider, we have none here but your
friends-your William-your parents-
and those whose utmost happiness is the
being so.  Say, then, my sweet girl,
may I not present this hand to your
William-your Augustine-your Dal-
ton? Did I think it would be offered
reluctantly, or that Dalton would prove
unworhy, I would not solicit it."

       "Oh! my dear Madam," hesitatingly
answered Miss Neville, "surprised-
confused, what can I answer? Thus
sanctioned, it is impossible-I cannot
give it-unwillingly-Take it, then,
Madam, and bestow it-as you please."
    
                              Augustine          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP           237

  Augustine seized the fair prize with 
rapture, and triumphantly conveyed
it to his lips.  Transport, joy and mu-
tual satisfaction, dilated each heart,
until, at length, the tidings reached the
servants' hall, where rejoicings kept 
double pace with those above stairs--
their's being abundantly more tumul-
tuous.

  The expiration of the family mourn-
ing was the time fixed for the nuptials
to take place; and, in the intermediate
time, every face of the united families
were marked with gladness, except 
young Baldwine's, who, at present, saw 
no nearer prospect of accomplishing the
wishes of his heart, though he had now
an uninterrupted access to his fair 
mistress.

  An habitual melancholy, at length,
became so obvious, as not to pass unre-
marked by Lord Atherstone himself, 
                                who,238        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

who, one day, being seated with William,
in a pavilion of the garden, perceived
young Baldwine, in a contemplative
mood, his eyes fixed on the ground,
pass the pavilion, and strike down an-
other walk.

 " That young man is in love, I be-
live"-said his lordship.

-"He is,my lord, I also fear hope-
lessly so, which I must confess is, at
present, the only ally to my happi-
ness; for, I love him as a brother, re-
vere his matchless worth, and rectitude
of heart. His generosity of soul is also
boundless; he was the sole friend that
I trusted with my then presumptuous
love, while only the humble Willaim
Bennet, the supposed son of a serjeant
-my mother a convict-what could
then be my hopes?-and yet this friend
-this inimitable friend-proffered to
be bound in the most firm and valid 
                                security,
       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.                 239

security, to enable me to accomplish
the desire of my soul, when he should 
inherit his fortune. He has also, I un-
derstand, since, in the presence of Mr.
Barton and Captain Neville, offered, at
taht period, to furnish no less than fifty
thousand pounds, and add to the same
sum which Mr. Barton proffered for
Miss Neville's fortune--on the suppo-
sition that your lordship should be
averse from my union with her."

  --"This is exalted friendship, indeed !
He must have an excellent heart; and,
pray, what prevents him from accomp-
lishing his wishes? He is a very hand-
some, sensible, accomplished young fel-
low, and will have a prodigious fortune,
I am told.--But, àpropos, who is the 
lady? She must be very nice."

  --" First, let me acquaint your lord-
ship, that, before he became enlightened
by love, he was mere unlettered rustic;
                                   but,    240   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
but, the first time his fair mistress un-
veiled the radiance of her eyes to his
astonished sight, the mist was dispelled
that clouded his intellectual faculties;
in a word, he loved, gave reason fair
play, and become a man."

-"It must be a female devil to reject 
him; but, I say again, who is she? and 
where dis he first see her?"

-"By accident, my lord, Riding
down the lane which lead to your
lordship's house, one morning, he per-
ceived some horse that had run away
with a chaise, in which he seated a
lady.  He stopped the horse, and took
from the chaise__"

-"Caroline, I suppose. And, so, this
clever fellow is a lover of my daughter?
Upon my word, another Cymon and
Iphigenia's story! Why, the young
lady has conducted this affair with great
                                skill             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             941
skill and secrecy; neither her mother
nor myself had the least idea of this
business."

  ――" I hope my dear father does not
think so meanly either of Baldwine or
myself, to suppose that the one would
carry on, or the other connive at, a
clandestine correspondence. Upon my
honour, Caroline as yet knows not of
his affection."


  ――" Generous, noble-minded young
man! Depend on it, it shall not be the
worse for him. Oh! here he comes.――
Baldwine, I――I respect you. Do you,
Dalton, take a walk with your friend,
while I have some discourse with your
mother and sister."


  Baldwine was not a little surprised
at lord Atherstone's address, until Au-
gustine had recited the preceding dis-
                                course,242 MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

course, from which the young men
augured nothing unpropitious.

  The whole conversation was immedi-
ately related to Lady Atherstone, and the 
comments upon it were by no means un-
favourable; Lady Caroline corroborating
her brother's testimony, that no ad-
vances had ever been made by young
Baldwine; nor had she any reason to
suppose an attachment, further than his
constant attendance where she took her
morning rides, from the time of the ac-
cident, and,likewise, from an item
once given by Ben, that the gate had
been re-erected for her greater secu-
rity.

Lady Caroline,however,did not need
any thing to persuade her that young
Baldwine was her stedfast, though se-
cret, admirer. Every look, nay, every
action, spoke more plainly than the 
most elaborate eloquence; nor was she
                           insensible            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.              243

insensible to his merits, though her pre-
dence rendered her predilection in his
favour unremarked by all.

  On Captain, Mrs. Neville's, and Mr.
Barton's next visit, this business was,
in the absence of the young people,
fully discussed; and so much urged in
favour of the young man, that Lord
and Lady Atherstone, having previously
procured a confession from Lady Caro-
line that he was not indifferent to her,
came to a determination in his favour;
their only disapprobation before being
merely occasioned by the absurdities of
Mr. Baldwine senior and his lady,
which they apprehended might some-
times involves themselves in ridicule.

  A messenger was immediately dis-
patched, requesting Mr. Baldwine se-
nior's company, as soon as convenient.
This was complied with in as little
                             space244 MYTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.
spaced as he could equip himself for so distinguished a visit.

  The overtures for an alliance with
such a noble family was not heard with
pleasure alone-it was received with
rapture; and old Baldwine, in the ful-
ness of his heart, declared that he would immediately make purchases for his son,
to the annual value of five thousand
pounds-besides presenting him with a
sum of money to figure away, as he ex-
pressed it.

  Lord Atherstone replied, That he did
not doubt that he would make an ample
provision for his son; but there was
no necessity for him to be so very pro-
fuse; "Or," continued my lord, "as
the common phrase is, give the staff out
of your own hand."

  --"Oh! no, my lord; hold you there
a bit; I don't intend any such as thing.
                                            I shall 
         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.       245

I shall still keep enough to make the
pot boil, ay, and to cut a bit of a dash,
too, myself: for, if so be my son mar-
ries your daughter, I shan't take it as
I have done-folks shan't say she has
matched among blackguards: and yet I
shan't give away quite all till I tie:and
then,you know,my lord,I can keep it
no longer-hey! hey! hey! - why, how
much, my lord, do you think I am
worth now?"

   -"Upon my world, I have not the
least idea: I have heard a hundred
thousand pounds."
   -"Ay, but tell them,my lord,when
they say so again,that they shall not
purchase the really only, for two-be-
sides a little bit of land, and a pretty
stock of merchandize into the bargain."

   -"you are a rich man,Mr.Bald-
wine."       
                           -"pretty     

246   MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

-"Pretty well-pretty well, my lord.
Well ! when shall we set the layers,
and all those sort of folks to work? for,
I know you great people do nothing
without them."

-"Why, sir, your solicitor may con-
sult with mine whenever he chuses. I
mean to present my daughter with a 
handsome fortune-about fifty thousand
pounds; so that, Mr. Baldwine, I think
you may very well spare your ready, as 
you call it, for they will have enough to
figure with."

-"Why, look you, my lord; I think
you may as well keep your fortune, and
let every one be in his own way : all the
honour comes on your side, you know;
so, let the money come from our's. I
don't like to be mercenary, and grasp
at every thing."

                                -"Mr.           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.          247

   --"Mr. Baldwine, I admire your ge-
nerosity, and like your plain dealing
much; however, as we are agreed in
the main business, we will discuss these
matters hereafter."

   Mr. Baldwine was then introduced to
Lady Atherstone and his intended
daughter-in-law, with whom he was
much delighted; and, having paid his
compliments, in his own peculiar style,
to Lord Dalton, Miss Neville, and all
the family, he departed in triumph, to
communicate at home the pleasing oc-
casion of the summons.

   Young Baldwine was now at the ex-
tent of his hopes, which lately he had
almost despaired of attaining--he and
his friend being upon equal terms, lov-
ing and beloved, and their affections
sanctioned by all.

                  M 2            CHAP.248         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.


  

          CHAP. XV.


       Mystery unravelled.

    IN the midst of universal joy,
Bennet was not forgotten.  All visited,
all caressed, and all endeavoured to 
sooth his distress ; nor were their efforts
ineffectual. After his wife's funeral,
the lenient hand of Time, and Mrs. Wel-
ford's attention, called him forth again
to witness and partake his friends' satis-
factio.

    During his seclusion, Augustine and
Mr. Barton paid him every attention ;
the former never letting a day elapse
without seeing him-the latter never
quitting him, except when invited to 
the Hall.          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.         249

 At the close of one evening, when the original members of the united families were assembled in one happy group, at Mr. Barton's, namely, Captain, Mrs. and Miss Neville, Augustine, Bennet, and young Baldwine, the postman brought a letter, which was given to the lieutenant:  it was from Mr. Thompson, his late wife's overseer and agent.  The packet contained sundry papers on business, and amongst others, a letter from a brother officer, known by Captain Neville as well as himself. On this account, he read the letter aloud, and, at length, came to this passage:

 "You may remember, my dear lieutenant, that you have often, with Captain Neville, expressed a strong surprise at a number of essential kindnesses which you both received from some unknown hand, more particularly your two several promotions.  Know, then,

          M 3                and

250             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

and I can vouch for the veracity of my
information, that they came from the
hands, or rather from the purse, of a
Mr. Barton, of--, in Devonshire."

  The letter dropped from Bennet's
hand, and his eyes remained fixed in
astonishment on Mr. Barton's face. 

  "Well!"--said Mr. Barton--" and
what is there in all this?"

  "In Mr. Barton's doing it, no-
thing"--replied Bennet;--but, where-
fore--what have I done to deserve this
matchless, this Mysterious Beneficence--
say why?"

  Mr. Barton started from his chair,
and, for a minute or two, traversed the
room with disordered steps--then sat
down, covered his face with his hands,
and remained silent.

                                 After         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.              251
 
 After a pause, he again lifted up his 
head.

-"Why have I done this?-My God!
let this be the last painful recollection
for the remembrance is far more bitter 
than death. Have you, then, forgot the 
time, when, borne down with woe, you 
yet could feel for another's misery?
-could commiserate and relieve a
stragner?-delay your own most urgent
occasions, to suspend the dying breath 
of my hapless wife-my sainted
Frances?"

"Good God! Mr. willoughby!"

-" Ay, my souls' brother-Wil-
loughby, whose better part your gene-
rous pity, for a time, recalled to 
life-whose sacred dust the humanity
of Captain Neville rescued from insult,
and consigned to rest."

             M4                       "Is252    MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

" Is it, then, possible" - said Captian
Neville, "that Mr. Barton and the un-
fortunate gentleman, whom Bennet
encountered in London, should be one
and the same person?"

-"Spare me, spare me, my much va-
lued friends, and I will endeavour, in
as few words as possible, to clear the
mystery.

 "My father, Francis Willoughby,
was bred to the church. In early life, 
he married, contrary to the approbation
of her friends, the daughter of an opu-
lent Bristol merchant, named Barton.
I was their only offspring-for, my
mother died a few months after my
birth. My father only survived her 
about seven years. At his death. I
had but one relation left, my maternal
uncle, Benjamin Barton, who had just
succeeded to his father's large concerns,
and who, as I was left destitute, was
                             persuaded        MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   253

persuaded to bring me up. As his at-
tention was totally engaged in traffic,
he contented himself with putting me
to an excellent public school, where no
pains, nor money, were spared in my
education, or to render me master of
fashionable accomplishments. From
this seminary I was removed to the
university, my uncle designing I should
be bred to the church, and his inten-
tion being to purchase me a living,
when I became properly qualified; after
which, he used to say, he should have
done with me, having then enabled me
to shift for myself.

   " During one of the vacations, I vi-
sited my uncle, and found at his house 
an amiable young woman, lately ar-
rived from Barbadoes. Her father had
held a lucrative post on the island, un-
til his death :--his wife had been dead
some years before. As he had lived to
the extent of his income, his affaires
                M 5               were

  254         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP

were much involved, there only remaining a balance of about three hundred pounds in my uncle's hands, with whom the deceased had formerly some dealings.

     " Miss Charlton's (for that was her name) intention, in coming to England, was to endeavour, with that trifling sum, to get into some kind of business or employ, that might enable her, at least, to exit. My uncle was a widower, had two sons men grown, who were abroad, in the mercantile line, and his house was under the superintendance of an elderly woman, his housekeeper; so that, until her business was settled, there appeared no impropriety in her accepting his invitation to reside in his house.

     " A much longer time, however, elapsed than seemed necessary for his settling her accounts, and numberless excuses.          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.            255

excuses formed.-But I will not tire
your patience; suffice it to say, that at
this perios, unfortunately for my dear
Fanny, I gained her affections, and we 
were privately married; an event that 
had not taken place more than a fort-
night, when the real motive transpired 
that occasioned the delay in my wife's 
business-namely,my uncle himself
making her a formal tender of his
hand.

  "My wife's confusion, at the time,
prevented her giving any other than a
vague answer. However, to cut off
all future address of this kind, it was 
resolved that I should write, and confess
our marraige.


"For two days after, we neither saw
nor heard any thing of my uncle. On
the third, a packet was delivered by one
of the clerks; it contained a few lines,
desiring that I and my wife would forth-
                    M6              with
256         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

with quit his house; and on a large
sheet of paper, was regularly drawn
debtor and creditor, by which it ap-
peared, that after my wife's money had
been deducted, there remained due to 
my uncle from me upwards of fifteen
hundred pounds.

" I must remark here, that it had
been my uncle's practice lately, for every
sum he paid or advanced on my account,
to take my note for it, to remind me, he
said, of my obligations, should I, in 
future, prove ungrateful, or be inclined
to forget them.

"Like the First unfortunate pair, we
were now driven out. The wide world
lay before, us; but we had no choice, no
determined pursuit. We possessed a
large stock of love, but very limited
means; our utmost resources, exclusive
of apparel, scarcely amounting to twenty
guineas.

                                    "Our          
             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

" Our first cure was to procure a
lodging, where, before we could settle
any plan, the whole of our money and
part of our clothes were disposed of. I 
then, luckily, procured a few pupils, to
whom I was to give lessons in different
branches of polite education. By this we
were not only enabled to exist, but I had
also saved five-and-twenty guineas; when,
lo! this humble cup of tranquillity was
dashed from me, by an arrest from my 
uncle, on one of my own notes, for
twenty pounds.

  " By this proceeding, it was easy to 
see his intention was not only to ruin,
but to harass me to death; for, he had
several notes for larger and smaller sums.
Though I knew not whether this might
not be followed immediately by another,
I directly paid it; then instantly left
Bristol, and proceeded to London.

                                   "For
258         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

  "For several years, we there under-
went a number of vicissitudes.  Some-
times, by the means of industry and
true pains, both on the part of my wife
and myself, we lived easy, though never
affluent.  At other periods, we shared
together keen distress and chilling indi-
gence, all of which my dear Fanny bore
without repining.

  "It was near twenty years from our
union, when a severe fit of illness had
rendered both unable to procure neces-
saries, or even food, and the last spark
of life seemed quivering on the lips of
my dear partner in sorrow, when, al-
most frantic at her situation, I rushed
into the street, resolving, like a wild
and raging beast of prey, to fall on the
next passenger, and tear by violence
that assistance which a few moments
would render useless.  Alas! you know
what followed." - 

                                 Mr.     MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.     259
  
  Mr. Barton was for some minutes too
much affected to proceed; but, some-
what recovered, he continued:

  "My beloved companion soon rested
from sorrow; but, to describe to you
what I felt, while I surveyed the still
dear, though inanimate clay, is impos-
sible.  'Is this, then, all that remains of
thee, my only beloved?' exclaimed I; 
-'and yet I live!-What, then, is this 
mighty gift-this life?-O! 'tis to drag
the galling chain of pain and misery-
I'll not endure it!'  One glance which
I caught of the mild placid countenance
before me, at once restored my almost
annihilated reason.  'She is at rest!' ex-
ultingly said I.  'Great God!  I thank
thee; my Fanny will feel neither pain,
sorrow, nor poverty.  In the bosom of
the Father of Mercy, she rests from her
labours.'  I had still another-a bitter
pang-a few days, however, removed it.
-Your letter, my friend, and Captain

                            Neville's260         MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.


Nevillc's humanity, proved a sovereign
balm to my heart.

  "After the funeral, I became almost
torpid; even my grief sunk into that
kind of apathy, in which the eye sur-
veys all around without being moved-
Palaces, equipage, splendor, and po-
verty, appeared to form only one vast
group; but I was neither charmed with
the one, nor affected by the other. Sur-
rounded by my fellow-creatures, I was
lonely as in a desert; for, in all Nature's
extended chain, there was not a single
link I could catch at.

  "The human heart is a void - a
bland - without social affection. Real-
tive or moral duties may alleviate dis-
tress, or sooth ordinary feeling; but
affection alone can attune and harmo-
nize the chords of keen sensibility.

                                     "In
           MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.   261

  " In this state, as I was, one day,
perusing a piece of an old newspaper,
scarcely knowing what I read, my eye
glanced on an advertisement, which was
as follows:

  " ' If Mr. Francis Willoughby, late
of Bristol, in the county of Somerset,
be living, on applying to Mr. Atkins,
solicitor of the same place, he will be in-
formed of something greatly to his ad-
vantage.

  " ' N. B. Mr. Willoughby was ne-
phew to the late Mr. Benjamin Barton.'

  " My mind was, at this period, in that
kind of insensibility, that, though I
had a confused idea of the name, yet no-
thing particularly struck me, until I had
mechanically read the same thing seve-
ral times over.

  " 'He is gone to his account, at
length,' said I: 'God forgive him!'--I

                                   then
262       MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

then read again--’ If Francis Willough-
by,‘ &C.--’ And, what does Francis Wil-
loughby now want?‘ said I,  ’unless a
very small portion of earth to rest his
wearied bones.  Perhaps, even at this 
distant period, my uncle's enmity still
continues, and he has only formed this 
snare to entrap me again.  Be it so; the
world is only one vast dungeon, and
'tis of little consequence whether our
chains be limited, or miles extended.‘
My eye again was fixed on the paper,
and I again read--’ The late Mr. Ben-
jamin Barton.‘--’ Assuredly,‘ said I,
’this would not have been inserted with-
out--but what use have I for money
now?‘  A ray of joy, however, suddenly
flashed on my soul.  ’Mr. Bennet--
Captain Neville!‘ cried I, aloud.  ’Per-
haps, I may yet have some hold on
life--to evince my love--my gratitude.‘
Again I examined the paper, then thrust
it in my bosom, and retired to my
humble dwelling.  From thence I wrote
                                to
             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.             263

to Bristol, and, by return of post, re-
ceived an account That Mr.Barton and
his two sons were both dead; that the
latter, dying before him, and he relent-
ing his severe treatment, had, by his
will, left me sole heir to his large for-
tune, on condition of changing my name
to that of Barton. I have now only to
observe, that, having complied with the
conditions, settled my concerns at Bris-
tol, where I procured recommendations
to Mr.Everard, the banker, I then
hastened to a spot, which I unfortu-
nately reached too late, as you were
both embarked for America; but you
are now, however, happily returned to
the arms of your expecting friends--to
the man who longed to tender his love,
his friendship, and to recount the story
of what Mr. Bennet terms MYSTERIOUS
BENEFICENCE."

  The whole company mingled tears of
commiseration with Mr. Barton; but
                             neither
264             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

neither Mr. Bennet nor Captain Neville
would allow that the trifling services they
had been fortunate enough to render him
could any ways be brought in compe-
tition with the many benefits he had
and was still bestowing.  As this was a
controversy not likely to be yielded on
either side, they, at length, mutually 
agreed to give up the friedly contests.

  The preparations for the double union
went on briskly, as there was no impe-
diment, of either money or dissatisfaction,
among the parties--Mr. Baldwine hav-
ing, in the interim, a new house planned
for him, and which was to be erected on
the site of the old monastery, for the
future reception on his bride, who was
to reside at Atherstone-Hall until it
should be ready.

  It was also fixed that Lord Dalton
should remain at the Hall; for, though
his retinue would be much enlarged, yet
                                    the             MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.    265

the building was sufficiently adequate to
the purpose.

  Mr. Barton, Mrs. Welford, and the
lientenant, were to reside together, as
usual; though it was stipulated and
agreed that they should often visit, and
alternately take up their quarters, at the
Hall, and at Mr. Baldwine's.

  The whole country resounded with the
news of this double union, and, what is
most extraordinary, every one appeared
pleased; for, they had now no Wolf among
them to sow dissension, and poison the
minds of the otherwise peaceful rustics.

  Some days previous to the ceremony,
the new carriages, clothes, jewels, and
all other necessary and splendid para-
phernalia, arrived, and were arranged in
due form. Nor were the culinary and 
other preparations by any means neg-
lected, as it had been settled That a
                               suitable266            MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP.

suitable entertainment should be pro-
vided for all ranks of visitants.

    The happy long-expected morn, at
length, arrived, which put a period to 
Augustine's and Baldwine's solicitude.
All was joy, hilarity, and congratula-
tion. By five o'clock, Atherstone-Park
was crowded, and the lively strains of 
fiddles, pipes, and flagelets, hailed the
festive day, and bade a jocund good-
morrow to the brides and bridegrooms.
By nine, the hospitable tables, both 
within and on the outside, groaned be-
neath the pressure of substantial viands,
and flagons of stout old English be-
verage. For the more delicate, tea,
coffee, chocolate, confections, fruits,
and wines, were served in unlimited quan-
tities.

     Soon after eleven o'clock, the indis-
soluble knot was tied by Mr. Saunders, 
with a dignified solemnity, that im-
                              pressed          MYSTERIOUS FRIENDSHIP                 267

pressed the numerous auditory with awe and reverence. Not even the mayor himself presumed to venture on a single joke. Mrs Baldwine, also, was profoundly silent; only she was once heard to say, that, To her thinking, matrimony was a wast serus bisness. Whether Mrs Baldwine, who was though to be a sagacious matron, wished to insinuate that it was the beginning of trouble, or that it was an ordinance not to be ventured on " lightly and unadvisedly," we will not take upon us to determine. We will, however, venture to give it  as our firm and unalterable opinion, that, Where Virtue, Love and Reason, are united, it is the basis of all HUMAN HAPPINESS.



                  THE END.



Knight and Compton, Printers,
Middle Street, Cloth Fair.
