





                HOWARD CASTLE.



                   A ROMANCE.












  Printed by J. Dailing, Leadenhall-Street, London.
                HOWARD CASTLE;

               
                   ROMANCE

              FROM THE MOUNTAINS.


               IN FIVE VOLUMES.


               BY A NORTH BRITON.


   What is vain life? an idle flight of days,
   A still-detorive round of sickly joys,
   A seed of little earned and trifling passions,

   If not enabled by someone deeds of virtue. 
                                       THOMSON.


                     VOL.II


                     LONDON

        Printed at the Minerva Press for
      H.K.NEWMAN AND CO. LEADENHALL-STREET.

                      1817.

               HOWARD CASTLE.



                 CHAPTER I.


At a late hour next morning, Cle-
mentina entered the breakfast-room, where
.she found many of the company seated
at the table; the party was very large,
and consisted chiefly of strangers. The
duchess kindly inquired after her health,
adding—" I was sorry to find you were
over-fatigued last night; I suppose many
of the dancers are incapable of exertion
this morning."

  Clementina looked round the table,
where she hardly recognised an acquaint-,
ance; after having a nod from her father,
and a shake by the hand from the duke
and lord Radnor, who expressed pleasure

   VOL. II.         B2 HOWARD CASTLE.

at seeing her apparently no worse for her
evening's amusement, she quietly seated
herself: is a few minutes after, lady Rad-
nor and lady Elenora entered, and soon
after all the party, except lord Montague,
were assembled : the marquis expressed
the pleasure which Clementina's restored
looks occasioned him, and Mr. Stopford
quietly whispered-" Have you really
had repose? or is it a feverish heat which
glows in your countenance and satisfies
your friends?"

"Why should you suppose such a
thing?" said she, smiling.

He shook his head-" You know I am
a conjurer, and can dive deep."

"You are a dangerous man," said she,
"if you can develop both the mind and
countenance."

"Yours," replied he, with quickness,
" need not fear the most skilful phy-
siognomist; I believe it the true index
by which your feelings may be deci-
phered; you are now, at this very moment,
occupied by an individual's absence, and
that individual has in a wonderful man-
           HOWARD CASTLE.        3

ner engrossed your attention and your cu-
riosity."

  "And what," said Clementina, "is to
compare to that sensation in the female
breast, or more painful than ungratified
curiosity?"

  "Certainly," he replied, "particularly
where the object is so very interesting."

  "Unless I was interested in the person,
I should not feel curious in any of his
concerns, or in his welfare; I know who
you allude to, and I own my cousin does
occupy, in a great degree, my mind; have
you seen him this morning?"

  Mr. Stopford was delighted that he had
so far accomplished his plan, in regard to
a Platonic friendship with Clementina;
he was resolved, if possible, not to aspire
to a more tender interest in her con-
cerns; he should be thankful if he was
admitted on any footing to a share of her
confidence; he readily answered—"He
had not; but," added he, "I was lazy
this morning; he may be gone out on
horseback, as it is now considerably past
midday."4         HOWARD CASTLE.

  A servant at that moment delivered a 
message to lady Radnor, who, with pre-
capitation, left the room.  Clementina's
eyes followed her, and a sigh escaped her.
Mr. Stopford suspected what she did, that
lord Montague was ill; he found there
was nothing he could say on that subject
which could raise her spirits; he attempted
others, but all were fruitless; at last she
quitted the room, and retired to her own
apartment.  She sent her maid for infor-
mation, which did not at all tend towards 
composing her feelings.  Lord Montague
was ill, and a physician was sent for,
which was all the intelligence Mary could
collect from the servants, and which was  
sufficient to fill Clementina's bosom with
a thousand fears; she wished to have
more information, but she could not pre-
vail upon herself to join the party, who, she
hoped, would soon quit the castle: she
seated herself in her room, and gave way
to a train of melancholy reflections; she
took a retrospect of the various conversa-
tions which she had had with lord Mon-
tague, and almost convinced herself that
the housekeeper's account was correct, and               HOWARD CASTLE.                 5

that there was a foreign lady in some
way connected with his happiness; the 
hints had thrown out of his own folly,
and the gloom which generally hung over 
him, all confirmed her in the suspicion
which now filled her mind; the extreme
agitation he had been in during their last
conversation, and the emphatical manner
in which he said-" I am wretched beyond
all relief," could not be, as she had sup-
posed, owing to her fancied engagement
with the marquis; she had given him 
different opportunities to declare his sen-
timents, all of which he had evidently
avoided; his illness, she believed, was the 
result of agitation he had been in, and
that a dreadful disclosure was probably 
upon the point of being revealed. Her
thoughts were thus employed, when lady
Elenora entered; the tears, which almost
stopped her utterance, convinced Clemen-
tina she had a mournful account to give 
her; she at last said-"My brother is very
ill. I think his senses wander, as he has
asked me twice if you were really married
to the marquis."

" I hope you assured him to the con-

6            HOWARD CASTLE.

trary; the marquis has never said any
thing to me upon so serious a subject, nor
do I believe he ever will."

  Lady Elenora shook her head—" My
brother is not singular in his opinion—it
is a general one, and what you cannot be
ignorant of; but I must not remain here
—I am miserable in every place, but
where I am not permitted to be; my mo-
ther is afraid of infection, as his complaint
is evidently a fever."

  " Then why will you leave me?" said
Clementina; " your spirits will sink more
if you are alone."

  " I am in expectation of the arrival of
doctor Wallace; from him I hope to gain
some comfort, that his life is not in dan-
ger; his servant assures me he was seized
exactly in the same manner at Geneva; he
believes his illness there was brought on
by agitation of spirits. I observed that he
quitted the room last night in a very
abrupt manner—it was in consequence of
conversing with you; I believe he is
strongly attached to you."

  " I have no reason," replied Clemen-
tina, " to suppose that he is; our conver-              HOWARD CASTLE.         7

sations have generally tended to nothing,
or rather ended in nothing; he has at dif-
ferent times thrown out hints of my en-
gagement with lord Clemaire, which I
have taken pains to convince him did not 
exist; and I would even have gone fur-
ther, by assuring him it never would; but
the subject was generally dropped by him:
what creates such uneasiness in his breast.
I cannot divine; but I can assure you, it
does not arise from his conversing with
me."
  "It has arisen," said lady Elenora, "from
meeting with you; his attachment in your
early days was forgot, but, I believe, not
extinguished."
  "Then why does he not declare his pre-
ference for me?"
  "Honour to his friend," returned lady
Elenora; "he has heard from the mar-
quis himself of his intentions toward you;
he has admired you from the first moment
he met with you; what a treacherous part
my brother would act, were he to steal the 
heart which lord Clemaire flatters himself
is his own! no, my dear Clementina must8             HOWARD CASTLE.

allow that it would be dishonourable in the
highest degree."

   A tap at the room-door put a stop to
lady Elenora; it was a messenger to ac-
quaint her that the physician was arrived:
promising to return to Clementina, with
the much wished-for information, she
quitted the apartment, and left her friend
in the greatest distress.  Nearly an hour
expired before lady Elenora could relieve
her anxiety; at last she appeared, with ra-
ther more animation in her countenance, as
doctor Wallace did not apprehend danger, 
if the complaint yielded to the medicines
he had prescribed- "He," said she, "is
extremely ill, and looks and speaks so
quick, it is quite painful to see him.  The
doctor immediately inquired if any thing
had happened which could have agitated
his mind violently?  Nothing, my mother
answered, that she knew of.  Le Brun
was interrogated, if any letters had been
delivered to him?  but sill no clue to his 
agitated nerves, which is the seat of his 
complaint; his fever is pronounced not in-
fectious, so I am to have the satisfaction of                 HOWARD CASTLE.     9

watching by him, and the mournful plea-
sure of supplying him with any thing he
may want."

   Clementina could not speak; tears com-
pletely denied her utterance; she was
shocked with the amount, as she had dread-
ed a fatal termination; from all the melan-
choly hints he had given, she feared his
mind was not likely to be eared, and if it
remained diseased, his bodily amendment
could hardly be expected; she could not
think that lady Elenora's suspicions of his
attachment to her were well founded, or
that delicacy to his friend could prevent
his revealing his sentiments to her; she
had so often, in almost plain terms, de-
clared there was no engagement between
the marquis and her, that it could not have
been a breach of honour, had he avowed a
partiality for her; but she believed no
such sensation existed, or if it did, there
was some other impediment in the way
than lord Clemaire; he must have formed
an engagement abroad, which now inter-
fered with his wishes.

   Lady Elenora merely gave her the little
10           HOWARD CASTLE.

history of his situation, and hurried away;
so that Clementina had full leisure to in-
dulge her tears and her thoughts; she
wished, above all things, to have the liberty
of remaining in her own room, but she
was so afraid of Miss Osburn's remarks,
and of making her father uncomfortable,
that whatever pain the exertion required,
she was resolved to obey the summons to
dinner:  her maid told her that all the
strangers were gone, except the party who '
were there before the ball; she likewise
have her a piece of information which par-
ticularly pleased her, that her father had
told his servant they were not to leave
Carnsworth Castle the following day:  this 
intelligence seemed to remove a load from 
her mind, as she had lamented with bitter
regret that she should never again see lord
Montague; if his life was spared, she still
might have the mournful satisfaction of
bidding him perhaps a last farewell, as he
had often mentioned his intention of going
abroad; if it was as lady Elenora suspect-
ed, there might be an explanation, if they
had an opportunity to converse, which
might be productive of happiness to both,
             HOWARD CASTLE.          11

as she was now convinced, from the agony
she endured on his account, that he was
far from an indifferent object to her. She
felt more composed than she had done all
the morning, and joined the party in the
dining-room with apparent tranquillity;
her countenance betrayed what anguish
she had suffered; it was pale, and her eyes
looked dead and heavy; the tears she had
shed had totally robbed them of their lus-
tre: all appeared infected with the com-
mon cause of sorrow, as never was there
a more silent meal.

   The marquis, who placed himself by
Clementina, teased her with tender inqui-
ries; he pressed her to partake of the va-
rious good things on the table, but a nega-
tive to most of his solicitations convinced
him that Miss Bouverie was seriously indis-
posed. Doctor Wallace, who was placed
at no great distance, heard the marquis
aver that she required medical aid, as much
as lord Montague did.

   "I hope not, my lord," said doctor Wal-
lace; "I should be sorry to have two pa-
tients so ill; this young lady's complaints,
I hope, are only sympathy; as his lordship12             HOWARD CASTLE.

recovers, she will be restored to health
and spirits. I trust that a few hours will
dispel the gloom which seems to hang over
all the party; lord Montague's pulse is
more composed, and his nerves less agi-
tated, than when I first arrived."

  The tears were stealing down the cheeks
of lady Elenora during this account of the
doctor's; she believed it was made on pur-
pose to throw a more cheerful aspect over
the party, as she feared her brother was no
better.

  The general looked at his daughter with
the utmost anxiety; the languor of her ap-
pearance alarmed him; he could not be-
lieve it was her feelings which had worked
the change; she had perhaps a slight de-
gree of the fever which was endangering
the life of lord Montague; he saw she eat
nothing, and that the marquis's attentions
were lost upon her. When the ladies re-
tired from the table, he imparted this fears
to doctor Wallace, and in spite of his say-
ing there was no infection in the com-
plaint, he insisted upon his feeling her
pulse.

   "That," replied the doctor, "I will          HOWARD CASTLE.       13

most certainly do, as you could not have
appointed me a more agreeable office, per-
ticularly as I hope there is no ailment but
what will be easily cured; a few words
of comfort will, I think, set all matters
right, and that the young lady's counte-
nance will soon be restored to its wonted
animation."

   When lady Radnor went to her son's
apartment, her alarm increased, as his
burning hands, and the agitation of his
manner, were visibly worse, and a mes-
senger was sent for doctor Wallace; he
was not surprised with his patient's ap-
pearance; he had evidently more fever, but
he hoped the complaint would soon give
way to the means which were used--"It
probably," said he, "will be some hours
before the disease comes to the crisis, 
which I trust will be favourable." In the
mean time, he forbid all noise in the house,
and only one person to be in the patient's 
room.

   Clementina was languidly reclining on
a sofa, when doctor Wallace entered; she
was surprised as his accompanying lady
Radnor and lady Elenora, as she supposed

14      HOWARD CASTLE.

they would not have so soon quitted lord
Montague's apartment; she eagerly in-
quired if there was any change on the in-
valid? Lady Radnor shook her head.

  "No material change," said doctor Wal-
lace, as he seated himself by her; "I am
now come to visit my fair patient;" at
the same  time taking he hand--"I am
ordered by general Bouverie to feel your
oulse, and to find out the seat of your ma-
lady."

  He smiled so pleasantly, and had such an
agreeable countenance and manner, that
Clementina replied to his interrogations
with more animation than he expected--
"My father has assigned you a very diffi-
cult task, to discover complaints where
there are none; my pulse beats as quietly
as possible."

  "Too quietly perhaps," said doctor Wal-
lace, at the same time counting the pul-
sations; "I hope I may satisfy your fa-
ther, that you are not in a high fever,"
said he as he clasped the bracelet round
her wrist. "I understand there was a
ball here last night; and as I dare say you
were never a moment an idle spectator, I               HOWARD CASTLE.  
                   15
attribute a great deal of your mdisposition
to fatigue: as I mean to stay here all
night, I shall hope to see you quite well,
and the roses reinstated in your face, and
your nerves exhilarated ; they are, from
late hours, bodily fatigue, and some other 
circumstances, rather in a deranged state ;
a good night's repose, and a comfortable
account of the invalid, which, I trust, I
shall be able to give you in the morning,
will completely set you to rights."
  Clementina plainly perceived where his 
suspicious pointed; she smiled, as he very
emphatically said-"I hope you will be
the bearer of good news; you know, I sup-
pose, that lord Montague is a very near
relation of mine, and, of course, that I am
deeply interested in his welfare."
   " Whatever the cause may be," said
doctor Wallace, "I was perfectly aware
you sympathized in a very feeling manner
in his sufferings ; your consanguinity to
each other perfectly accounts for your anx-
iety, if it is necessary it should be ac-
counted for. I do assure you, I think it is
the most natural thing in the world,that16                 HOWARD CASTLE.

such relations should be attached to each
other."

He left her, and again returned to lord
Montague's apartment, where Mr. Wal-
ker was in close attendance. Doctor Wal-
lace distinctly heard the name of Clemen-
tina pronounced by his patient - "Does
he ask for any particular person?"

"No," replied Mr. Walker; "he fre-
quently names Louisa, and seems much
disturbed in his mind about her; he some-
times calls on Clementina, but not often."

"And who are Louisa and Clementina?"
asked the doctor.

"I do not know who the first is; Miss
Bouverie's name is Clementina."

A new medicine, and a stronger than
any they had given, was resorted to; but
his malady increased, and before the fa-
mily separated for the night, doctor Wal-
lace was alarmed: the high character he 
bore, both as to abilities and practice, put
every hope that he might be mistaken out
of the question; the evident effect his
opinion had upon all the family proved
their high sense of his professional skill;                HOWARDD CASTLE.         17

prudence and great humanity he was
famed for; he never alarmed the friends
of his patients, when he was not confident
there was danger, to enhance his own me-
rit by the recovery. He told lord Rad-
nor, that his son was considerably worse,
and that the violence of the complaint
had baffled all the medicines they had
tried; he still hoped there would be a fa-
vourable change; if he should continue in
the same state he was then in, for a few
hours longer, he should greatly fear his
strength failing.

   Lord Radnor received the dreadful in-
formation with perfect composure; he
thanked the doctor for the attention he had
paid, and trusted that there might be a
happy termination to it, in the recovery
of his beloved Frederick.

   At a late hour, Clementina retired to
her apartment; lady Augusta had pre-
vailed with her to spend an hour in her
dressing-room; after the rest of the party
had separated, she hoped some information
might be gained; but all seemed so still
and quiet, and had been for such a length
of time, that they flattered themselves he
18       HOWARD CASTLE.

was not worse.  When Clementina got
to her own room, he anxiety increased,
and she found it was impossible for her to
compose her spirits, without some tidings
from below; she was afraid of betraying
the extreme misery which she felt to lady
Augusta; as the marquis had, in her pre-
sence, teazed her with the evident effect
his illness had upon her mind, she durst
not shew to the full extent how much she
was interested; she waited for half-an-
hour, in hopes lady Augusta and all the
family would be in bed, when she sent
her maid to the housekeeper for informa-
tion; she was certain to get intelligence
from her, as she was to be ready to prepare
any thing that was wanted.

  Mary set off with alacrity on her embas-
sy, in hopes it would be in her power to
give peace to the agitated feelings of her
beloved mistress; but even the tidings of
returning health could not restore the
tranquility which she possessed when she
entered Carnsworth Castle, although a 
good account of lord Montague, which 
was more than she durst allow herself
to expect, would undoubtedly remove her                HOWARD CASTLE.            19

anxiety, but could not the uneasiness
which his behaviour had created--"Oh!"
exclaimed she, clasping her hands toge-
ther, and tears chacing each other down
her pale checks, "sweet, calm, envied
convent! in thy hallowed walls all was
peace--no jealous female to watch my ac-
tions, no painful emotions to agitate my
bosom; whilst I remained under thy sa-
cred roof, I was happy and contented--I
knew nothing of the world or its inhabi-
tants beyond our own community; gay
and cheerful from morning until the hours
dedicated to sleep, when no frightful pre-
sages broke in upon my slumbers, and
rendered my pillow comfortless; light as
air, every pursuit was an amusement,
and every study a pleasure; the idea of
quitting my beloved monitress never
conveyed joy to me; would to Heaven I
was still under her protecting care, or
rather that I had never quitted it! were
I to return, with the agitated bosom which
I now possess, I should seek in vain for
that happiness I was in pursuit of; my
prospects, I fear, are for ever blasted."

   The agony Clementina worked her spi-20      HOWARD CASTLE.

rits into made her regardless of the passing
moments, till her candle sinking into the
socket, and her fire being nearly extin-
guished, made her doubly anxious for
Mary's return. Her little companion,
Frolic, stood trembling by his mistress,
and, from his wistful looks in her face,
seemed to participate in her distress. She
opened her room-door and listened, but
not the least sound was to be heard; the
lamps in the passages were mostly gone
out--one only remained to give a faint
light at a great distance; she stood upon
the top of the staircase, irresolute what
she should so; she advanced a few steps,
and retreated, from want of courage; but
as she found she should soon be left in
total darkness, she resolved to venture
in pursuit of her attendant. Having
shut Frolic in her apartment, she pro-
ceeded to the solitary lamp she had so
long looked at; it was nearly opposite to
lord Montague's room; she stopped and
listened, but all seemed perfectly quiet.
A light in the hall attracted her attention,
as she could not explore the lower re-
gions, where she supposed Mary was, in            HOWARD CASTLE.     21

total darkness; she found it was a lamp
which was considerably above her reach,
and that either her idea of returning to
her apartment, or going in search of her
maid, were equally out of the question;
she threw herself upon a chair, undeter-
mined how she should proceed, when,
to her surprise, the marquis entered the
room; he started when he saw her, and
exclaimed—"What can this mean? Miss
Bouverie watching here, in the dead of the
night, is certainly wonderful solicitude; is
it anxiety to hear tidings of lord Monta-
gue, which can induce you to endanger
your own life?"

  He looked at her during this address
with so scrutinizing a look, that she was
almost incapable of giving him an an-
swer. At last she faintly said—"I am
not watching here, my lord, as I have this
moment entered; a light is what I am in
want of—I did not observe my candle
until it was nearly extinguished."

  "Had you no attendant," was his an-
swer, "to procure you what you wanted?"

  "I had not," was her answer, "and
I durst not ring my bell."22                 Howard Castle.

  "But how comes it," replied he, "that
you, who were worn out with the fatigue
of the preceding evening, should be out of 
bed at this hour? I hoped, Miss Bouverie,
that you were enjoying the repose which
appeared so necessary for you; your al-
tered looks alarm me, and this anxiety distracts me." He took her trembling 
hand-"Oh!" exclaimed he, with energy,
at the same tie sinking upon one knee,
"why does all this solicitude exist for lord
Montague! This whole day I have watched 
your countenance, which has conveyed
more pain to me than I can express."

  "Is this," said she, "a proper time or
place for you to forcibly hold me, and to 
insist upon an explanation of my feel-
ings? Release me, my lord-you alarm me
beyond measure."

  "Pardon me, Miss Bouverie; the agony
of the moment, seeing you seated in this
cold room, at such an hour, and in so thin
a dress, struck me forcibly; unless it was
to gain information about lord Montague,
why did you sit up so late-why did you
leave your apartment, as a severe cold must be                 HOWARD CASTLE.                  23

the result? Oh! Clementina, I cannot let
this opportunity escape, without my de-
claring to you that you possess my
whole heart. For these two days past I
have wished to converse with you, and
to make an avowal of my attachment;
but you have so carefully avoided me,
that I now cannot relinquish the moment
when you seem in my power: say that
affections are not engaged, and that
this evident inquietude about lord Mon-
tague only arises from your relationship
to each other."

  "Are you, my lord,"said Clementina,
in the utmost agitation,"to put questions
to me whilst I am wholly in your power,
and to dictate my answers?"

  "Let your heart dictate," replied he,
"and be not rash in your decision."

  At that moment, Clementina was re-
lieved by the sight of her maid, whose
steps had raised lord Clemaire from his
humble posture, and released the hand
which he had held.  Clementina flew to-
wards her, and expressed surprise at her
long absence. When she reached her
apartment, Mary gave her the following
24          HOWARD CASTLE.

account:-She had remained long in the
hall, watching for some one's coming out
of his lordship's apartment, as she thought
she should gain in that way the most
 certain information: but every thing re-
maining perfectly still, she proceeded be-
low stairs, where she found, seated with the
housekeeper, lady Radnor's maid.

     She was interrupted by Clementina-
"What account have you brought me of
lord Montague?"

     "I was going to tell you, ma'am, that
we waited until Mr. Le Brun came; his
 master had awoke from a comfortable sleep, 
perfectly composed and collected."

     An ejaculation of thanks escaped the
lips of Clementina at this intelligence; and
Mary continued, as she assisted her lady
to undress, in her narration-"Mrs. Bur-
nett had orders to remain until  some one
came from lord Montague's room; I
thought I should gain the very best in-
formation; so lady Radnor's maid, Miss 
Osburn's maid, the housekeeper, and my-
self, sat by the fire, waiting most anxiously
for intelligence.  I satisfied myself that
you would go to bed, as you often do,              HOWARD CASTLE.       25

without my help. I was greatly surprised
when Miss Osburn told me you were sit-
ting in the hall with the marquis, and
to be sure there I found you; I am afraid
you have got cold, as it is a bitter night."
   
  "Did you say Miss Osburn told you?"
asked Clementina, whose thoughts had
wandered during Mary's recital.

   "I was going up to your room, expect-
ing to find you in bed. Miss Osburn's
maid followed my example; but just as
we were turning on the passage from the
backstairs, I saw a lady coming along in
a dressing-gown, very much like yours; I
turned to Mrs.Gray, and said--'Here is
my mistress.' 'N0,' said she, 'that is
mine;' and she proved right. I was going
on my way, when Miss Osburn called--
'If you are in search of Miss Bouverie,
you will find her in the hall, with the
marquis of Clemaire. I once thought of
waiting in your room for you, as it might
be wrong to disturb you; but when I re-
collected the hour, I suspected you had
gone below to search for me."

  "You were right," said Clementina; "I

VOL. II.
26            HOWARD CASTLE.

was in pursuit of you, and by accident met
with lord Clemaire."

   Mary saw that the information she had
given her, and which she had believed
would set all to rights in her mistress's
heart, and not the expected effect; the
tremor she was in, and the distress which
was still marked in her countenance, sur-
prised her attendant, as it proved plainly
that there was another cause for inquie-
tude besides the illness of lord Montague.

   In the morning, Mary was the bearer 
of good tidings to her mistress; the in-
valid was considerably better; but she per-
ceived it had little power to raise her spi-
rits, which seemed sunk to the lowest ebb:
the trust was, Clementina was extremely 
ill; she had passed a miserable night -
every thing that was disagreeable crowded 
upon her diseased imagination, and she
seemed to be beset with danger and diffi-
culties.  The avowal of the marquis's love
would involve her in disobedience to her
father's commands, as she was convinced
he would be most anxious for her accepting
of so splendid an offer; perhaps she might
offend her parent by her seeming obsti-

HOWARD CASTLE.   27
nacy; but to marry where her affections were not placed, was what she was resolved against ; probably the marquis would in-form the general, that he had declared himself to her, and would bring upon her, before she could converse with lord Montague, a whole train of misery. Miss Osburn's seeing her in the hall, with lord Clemaire kneeling at her feet, would be exactly suited to that lady's disposition ; she knew that she was a declared enemy of hers, and that she would be rejoiced at having such an account to give ; she re-collected hearing a noise, but the mar-quis had so greatly alarmed her, that her attention was taken off by her own un-pleasant situation ; all those ideas pre-cluded sleep. Added to her mental an-guish, she had got a most severe cold, which was accompanied by fever and headache; she sent a message to her father, to inform him she was unable to appear at the breakfast-table ; she wished to be perfectly quiet, as a little sleep would probably restore her to health, and enable her to be at dinner; she was not sanguine 

c228            HOWARD CASTLE.

in her expectations, as her throbbing pulses
and burning skin convinced her that she
should not be able to join the party, but
she hoped to escape from the kindness of
her friends, who, she was certain, would
visit her, and overwhelm her with ques-
tions and remedies—she wished for solitude
and silence.

  Past midday, a gentle tap at her room-
door attracted her attention; she heard
lady Elenora whispering her concern to
Mary at her mistress's illness, and that
the general was miserable about her. Cle-
mentina was forced to exert her voice, as
the idea of keeping her father n torment
shocked her; lady Elenora advanced, and
expressed, what she really felt, sorrow at
her indisposition.

  "Let me congratulate you," said Cle-
mentina, stretching her hand towards her
friend, "on your brother's amendment;
I hope he continues to improve?"

  "He does," replied lady Elenora; "but
there are such strict injunctions against
conversation, that a simple yes or no is all
that he is allowed to say; his room is kept
dark and quiet; his doctors flatter us he               HOWARD CASTLE.          29

will soon be able to talk, and again en-
joy the society of his friends: were he to 
know of your being an invalid, all would 
be undone; but I will bring the whole 
medical host upon you, as I am convinced 
you will have saline draughts poured into 
you, till those hands are cooler, and those 
heavy eyes relieved of their load."

 Clementina entreated, but lady Ele-
nora was not to be turned from her pur-
pose, as she was convinced it was abso-
lutely necessary; she promised not to
alarm the general, or any of the party, 
but to introduce the charming doctor
Wallance, who had gained her heart; he
had shewn such attention, such skill, and
such sympathy, in lord Montague's short, 
but very severe attack, that she should
ever feel grateful to him_" And if he
quickly restors you, my dear Clement-
tina, I shall be doubly thankful for his
healing art to both a brother and sister."

This little speech was kind and gratify-
ing, yet it brought a sigh from Clement-
tina; the relationship struck her forcibly;
her affection for lady Elenora was great,30              HOWARD CASTLE.

but she feared she should never be nearer
allied to her than she was at present.
  Lady Elenora was quickly back, attend-
ed by the worthy physician-"What have
you been doing?" said he, as he put the
curtains aside. " I recommended sound
sleep to you, but you have nor obeyed 
me; you were rambling at an early hour
this morning, thinly clothed, and ill-
prepared for the pinching cold of these
passages."
   "How have you come by that informa-
tion?" said Clementina.
   "From a lady," replied he: " when she
found your could not come to the break-
fast-table, and that your father had a thou-
sand fears in a moment, she, with the
best intention in the world, assured him
it was only a cold, in consequence of your
imprudence, which I hope, will be easily
removed. But you must learn to obey:
perhaps I shall confine you for two or
three days to your apartment, to punish
you, and, in the mean time, I shall order
you draughts and potions." He felt her 
pulse-"I should have known from this   HOWARD CASTLE.    31

little tell-tale that you had not done ac-
cording to my orders; keep quietly in
bed, and do not attempt to be agreeable.
I preclude company, and charge you,"
addressing Mary, "to turn all visitors
from the door: if I find the general ex-
tremely unhappy, I will permit him to
look at you for five minutes; but no exer-
tion to convince him you are well, which
you are not. I will see you again in the
evening; in the mean time, you must take
what I order you."
   He quitted the apartment, and took lady
Elenora with him; there could not have
been a more agreeable order to Clemen-
tina than perfect stillness; she felt unequal
to conversation, as her spirits were more
and more depressed.
   Doctor Wallace, accompanied by her
father, paid her a visit in the evening—
"I have brought this gentleman," said the
former, "to satisfy him that you have not
death imprinted on your countenance;
my forbidding your young friends free ac-
cess to this apartment has convinced others
that you are dangerously ill of an infec-
tious disorder."32       HOWARD CASTLE

   The general had seated himself on the
bed without speaking; he pressed the hand
which Clementina had extended to him,
and inwardly prayed that she might be
preserved to him.

   Dr. Wallace congratulated him on her
pulse being more composed, and flattered
him that she would be soon well--"We
have her now perfectly secure that she takes
none of her nocturnal rambles, and your
mind may be much more satisfied, when
I tell you, my other patient is considerably
better this evening; there appears a secret
sympathy between you--your pulses seem
almost to beat in unison, and I hope they
will keep pace in improvement."

   The general shook his head, and looked
so melancholy, that Clementina made an
effort to speak cheerfully; it had the desired
effect, and he retired much better satisfied.
after he heard her answer doctor Wallace
with a degree of animation which he feared
was totally gone.           CHAPTER II.

The general's spirits were relieved of a
load, when he received intelligence, at an
early hour, that his daughter was con-
siderably better; the composing medicine which she had taken gave her a good
night's sleep, and she awoke refreshed and 
comfortable. Doctor Wallace was pleased
 with the chang on his fair patient, but
still restricted her from company, or any 
exertion; she was to do what he ordered
for one day more, and probably the next
he should give her perfect liberty to en-
tertain who she pleased in her own apart-
ments: he again assured her that lord
Montague recovered, but his confinement
would be of longer duration than hers-
"His," added the doctor,"was the real 
disease, your sympathetic; of course, the
ailment was of a slighter kind, and more
easily cured."
34             HOWARD CASTLE.

 Clementina smiled- "You are mis-
taken," said she; "I am rejoiced that lord
Montague is better, but a severe cold has
been the cause of my illness."

 "I grant it," was his answer; "sym-
pathy led you from your apartment-
sympathy kept you in the cold hall; in
short, it has been the groundwork of much
mischief, and much conversation."

 Soon after doctor Wallace left her, she
had, in spite of his orders, many visitors;
her father would not be prevented from
expressing his joy at the good account he
had received; the duchess, lady Radnor,
lady Augusta, and lady Elenora, all made
personal inquiries after her; but none
were permitted to remain long. Clemen-
tina was sensible, from her own feelings,
that doctor Wallace's orders for quietness
were perfectly proper, as even the variety
of faces, which had merely peeped in
upon her, disturbed her; she felt drowsy,
and almost slumbered away the remainder
of the day in a pleasing kind of stupor,
the effect of the anodyne she had taken.
She knew not what lulled her senses in
so strange a manner, as she felt unwill-
              HOWARD CASTLE.        35

ing to be roused by conversing with her
most intimate friends; and even if she
was awake, her ideas seemed incapable of
reverting to the past, or of anticipating
the future; an indolence was over her
faculties, which was odd, but not uncom-
fortable.
  Clementina was soon able to quit her
bed but, with returning health, all her fears
came across her mind; her interview with
the marquis, and the terror of his again
speaking to her on the hateful subject of his
love, made her resolve to continue longer
in her own apartment than was absolutely
necessary; there only could she be per-
fectly safe, as she would give the world to
meet with lord Montague for a few minutes
before she had any conversation with lord
Clemaire.
  Lady Augusta spent a great deal of
her time in Clementina's dressing-room,
which was no become the resort of her
friends, who brought books, and every
thing they thought could amuse her.
  Doctor Wallace bid her farewell, at the 
same time laying strict injunctions upon
her to keep her feelings in due subjec-36 HOWARD CASTLE.

tion ; if her relation were sick, she would
never be in good health, if she participated
in their sufferings as she had done in
lord Montague's. He good-humouredly
smiled, and added-" But perhaps your
cousin's indisposition might affect you
more than your uncle or aunt's would."

He gave her no time to answer, but
kindly shaking her extended hand, quit-
ted the apartment, and soon after the
house.

Clementina questioned lady Augusta,
if her brother had mentioned how she
had been distressed by being left in dart-
ness in her own apartment, and having
met with him, when in search of her maid?

Lady Augusta quickly replied-"We
have hardly had any other topic of con-
versation since you quitted the lower re-
gions. Miss Osburn has teazed Clemaire,
offended your father, and shocked my mo-
ther."

" And am I the cause of all this mis-
chief?" asked Clementina.

" You most undoubtedly are; although
you look so mild and gentle, I find there
is much duplicity in your appearance."
           HOWARD CASTLE         87

   "From those insinuations," said Clementina, "I must entreat a full, methodical account of my crimes".

   "Crime is a strong expression," replied lady Augusta; "your great fault lies in being a very dangerous rival to all pretty misses; and to none have you more powerfully awakened the uneasy sensation  of jealousy, than in the bosom of Maria Osburn. Your not appearing at the breakfast-table spread an alarm that something uncommon had happened to you.  A remark from the duchess-you were seldom so late in leaving your own apartment, gave an opening for Miss Osburn to account for your seeming laziness.  You had been watching at lord Montague's bedroom-door at two o'clock; and near three, you were seated in the hall, with  lord Clemaire kneeling at your feet, listening, she supposed, to very tender vows and protestations.  Your very thin dress, and the extreme coldness of the night, made her shiver at the idea; but she supposed the warmth with which you were addressed kept off external feelings.
38              HOWARD CASTLE.

Just as she had finished this history, your
father's servant delivered your message,
and the marquis entered the room; all
were in consternation--you precluded per-
sonal inquiries; none of us durst intrude
until it was supposed you had enjoyed
some repose. Clemaire was in great mi-
sery, and I am covinced his feelings hage
been most uncomfortable, and they will
continue so until he sees you. I have a
whole budget of messages from him to
you, and petitions that he may be permi-
tted to attend your morning levee in your
dressing-room: but to return to my nar-
ration. Miss Osburn has continued to
teaze and torment my brother in the
most tiresome manner. What can be
so dreadful in the breast of man as
jealousy! she tries to convince him you
are attached to lord Montague, and that 
solicitude for his health had made you en-
danger your own life. I suppose, if she
could see lord Montague, she would tell
him, she saw you with complacent smiles
listening to Clemaire, who was kneeling at
your feet; she has the happy art of tor-
menting."    HOWARD CASTLE.   39

  "And loses no opportunity of display-
ing her powers," said Clementina: "has
Mr. Stopford been a silent spectator?"
  "He is capable," replied lady Augusta,
"of silencing Maria; but he is generally
acting a part—he has been so solemn, so
studious and grave, that he has not spoken
ten word since the ball. I verily believe
he lost hie heart or his understanding on
that memorable night."
  "I hope he is in pursuit of improve-
ment," was her answer, "and that he is
considering how he may become a more
useful member of society." 
  "I believe," said lady Augusta, "he will
always be the same strange, capricious mor-
tal nature made him; if he was captivated
by any being, she must be unlike all others
of her race, as there never was so odd a
composition as he is. I should be highly
delighted and amused to see him in love."
  "I understood," said Clementina, "you
suspected it was the case?"
  "No," said lady Augusta, "he is too
composed and tranquil to be seriously
smitten; he would have made such a bus-40  HOWARD CASTLE.
tle and confusion in the house, that you
feverish patients would have had no rest."
  Clementina smiled, and remarked—" It
was a thousand pitics Mr. Stopford did not
make more use of the talents he was pos-
sessed of, than acting the part of a merry-
andrew."
  "He has been one all his life," replied
lady Augusta, "and will be one to the end
of the chapter; what an odd peer of the
realm he will make!"
  "A title is as good covering," said Cle-
mentina; "but Mr. Stopford will be a
brilliant lord, as he has uncommon talents;
a whimsical lord will not signify; was he
obliged to gain his bread steadiness might
be necessary."
  Lady Augusta again petitioned that her
brother might accompany the general in
one of the frequent visits he paid her; but
a positive refusal put a stop to all solici-
tation.
  Clementina found she could no longer
seclude herself from the public rooms;
the perfect restoration of health obliged
her to quit her apartment; her father in-  HOWARD CASTLE   41

formed her, if her strength was sufficiently
restored, he meant to proceed on their
journey in two days; their visit, he
added, had been protracted much be-
yond his intention; but so many different
circumstances had combined, he could not
keep to his original plan. "I hope, my
love," taking his daughter's hand, " that
this excursion will be productive of much
happiness to us."

  Clementina sighed, but gave no answer;
she feared it would be a source of uneasi-
ness to both. She accompanied her father
to the drawing-room, where there was as
much joy expressed at seeing her, as if she
had been raised from the dead.  The duke
and duchess seemed to welcome her
with kindness, and the whole party, except
Miss Osburn, and her echo, Miss Pelham,
appeared delighted at seeing her. The
day passed without the marquis having an
opportunity of speaking to her alone; she
always contrived that she should be in the
midst of her friends.  Mr. STopford was of
much use, as the temptation of conversing
with her was so great, he would not let a
42                 HOWARD CASTLE.

moment escape; she gave him such a wel-
come reception, that had he not been pos-
sessed of a considerable share of penetra-
tion, he might have been intoxicated with
the hope that a preference for his society
induced her to give him the encourage-
ment he had received; but he saw through
her motive, and enjoyed even acting the
part of a Cerberus only : he guarded an
angel, instead of the gates of hell--it was
a pleasing office, although a dangerous one.
The marquis was too happy in seeing her
apparently well, to resent, or even feel
hurt, with her time being so occupied.
He conversed with her--he contemplated
her lovely countenance, and hope filled his
bosom that she soon would be his.  He
felt no alarm at her listening to the flights
and fancies of Stopford; his mind was per-
fectly eased of the unpleasant sensations
which had taken possession of him the
evening of the ball; they had not lasted
long, as the good opinion he entertained of
himself came to his aid, and convinced him
she listened with complacency to lord
Montague as an old acquaintance and near             HOWARD CASTLE.              43

relation, and that his success could meet
with no obstruction.
  The next day Clementina felt her heart
sink within her; it was the last probably she
should spend under the same roof with lord
Montague, and she feared there was no like-
lihood of her meeting with him, as he was still
too weak to leave his apartment. There was
much expostulation used to persuade the
general to remain where he was for one
week longer; but he had been too long 
accustomed to regularity in his actions, to
depart so very much from his plan; he had
already staid above double the time he in-
tended: the urgent solicitations of the
whole family, particularly the marquis's
earnest manner, she supposed, would get
the better of his firmness; but she was
mistaken - he adhered steadily to his inten-
tion, and gave orders that all should be in
readiness at an early hour the following
morning.
  The general secretly wondered no de-
claration had been made to him by the
marquis; nothing but hints had passed
from the duke, and those had ceased in a
great measure. If Miss Osburn's account44     HOWARD CASTLE.

was correct, that she had seen lord Cle-
maire kneeling at his daughter's feet, a de-
claration of love most have been made,
and he thought he ought to have been 
consulted; a little feeling of anger made 
him resolve to quit the mansion-if there
was trifling with his Clementina's happi-
ness, he should lament having staid so long 
in such a dangerous society as he believed
the marquis to be.

  She retired to her apartment soon after
breakfast, and remained there till the lun-
cheon bell summoned her below. Lord
Clemaire took her hand as she entered the
room, and tenderly chid her for having, in
a most cruel manner, secreted herself all
the morning-"I must," said he, "entreat
a little conversation with you; this is the
last day you are to be at Carnsworth Cas-
tle; I shall soon see you at Bath, but in
the mean time I must be heard."

  Clementina attempted to pass on with-
out giving an answer. Mr. Stopford saw 
that he could be of use to her, as he was 
such a physiognomist as instantly to per-
ceive she wished for a third person; he
advanced to her relief, and saved her from          HOWARD CASTLE              45

the painful dilemma she was in; her cham-
pion was never at a loss for a subject. He
immediately engaged lord Clemaire, and
Clementina seated herself at the table;
she was pleased with the escape she had
made, and hoped to get off equally well, the
rest of the day, from the vigilance of her
watchful friend. She remained with the
party until near the hour for dressing; the
marquis had walked out with Mr. Stop-
ford, which gave her perfect liberty; she
resolved to go to the library, in search of
her book, the gift of lord Montague; she
wished to have it in her possession, more
for the sake of the giver than for Werter:
she therefore bent her steps towards it, in-
stead of her own apartment, and was ad-
vanced a considerable way across it before
she perceived lord Montague, who was ex-
tended upon one of the couches reading.
He rose and approached her- "Can I flat-
ter myself you knew of my being here,
and that you have kindly come to make
personal inquiries after me; or is it to
chance I am once more indebted for seeing
you? Elenora has told me that you are to 
leave this place in the morning; I meant to46              HOWARD CASTLE.

have exerted my strength, and spent his evening in the drawing-room."

Clementina stood motionless during this address; the appearance of lord Montague, who she had not heard had been able to quit his room, his emaciated figure, pail countenance, and the nervous, weak voice with which he spoke, struck her in such a manner that she was unable to answer him. He took her hand; she felt his tremble, and she perceived he was so agitated, he could with difficulty stand.

"I am indeed very much surprised, my lord-agreeably so, to see you are able to quit your apartment; but much shocked at your altered appearance-you must not think of going to the drawing-room."

"I believe I should," was his reply; "if I had died at your feet, I could not bear the idea of your leaving Carnsworth Castle, without my once more seeing you-without my taking probably a long farewell."

"Do be seated, my lord," said Clementina; "you have not strength for any exertion."        HOWARD CASTLE.      47

  "Then will you give me ten minutes of
your company?"

  "I will," replied she, "with the greatest
pleasure; but why talk of taking so long a
farewell--you surely will not put your
threats in execution, and quit this country?"

  "As soon as I am able for a journey, I
certainly shall, and perhaps never return;
I think it would make the pain of separa-
tion less severe, if I could flatter myself I
should hold a place in your remembrance."

  "Remember you!" exclaimed she, with
quickness; "do you think it is possible I
should ever forget you? No! believe me,
the renewal of our acquaintance has been
far too pleasing to me, to admit of ab-
sence obliterating you from my memory."

  "Beward of flattery, Miss Bouverie; I
am not in a state of either body or mind
to bear it from you; although I know
you mean no more than to raise my droop-
ing spirits, yet every word you utter
thrills through my veins, and acts as poi-
son."

  "Then I had better leave you," said
Clementina, smiling, "if my conversation
has such a baneful effect upon you."48                Howard Castle.

  "No!" cried he, "your presence may
sooth me, but the prospect of being for
ever separated is distraction. I have often
wished, Clementina, that I had never seen
you, or rather, that I had never been sepa-
rated from you. Had we been betrothed
to each other in our happy days, I should
now have escaped this misery; you would
never have thought of forming any other
engagement, and it should have been the
study of my life to have insured your feli-
city. Oh my Clementina, why might
not this bewitching dream have been re-
alized?

  "And why may it not? said she; "I
have formed no engagement."

  "Not engaged to marry lord Clemaire!"
cried he, with vehemence; "how could I 
doubt it, when he told me himself you
were to be his wife?"

  "And will you believe me, when I so-
lemnly assure you, I never shall be nearer
connected with the marquis than I am at
present?"

  "Do my senses wander?" exclaimed he;
"no longer ago than yesterday, Miss Os-
burn told me your severe illness was occa-            HOWARD CASTLE.       49

sioned by your sitting in the hall, with the
marquis, in the dead of the night; and
not an hour ago he told me, you probably
would be introduced to the world as the
marchioness of Clemaire, before the winter
was concluded."

  "Miss Osburn;s representations," replied
she, "I fully expected would be as horrid
as possible.  I was forcibly held by lord
Clemaire, very much against my inclina-
tion, and forced to listen to protestations
which I wish may never be again repeat-
ed; the reason of my being out of my own
room at so late an hour was my anxiety
on your account, as you were then in dan-
ger: he certainly terrified me, but he could
extract no promise from me."

  "Is that heart at liberty," exclaimed
lord Montague, "which I have envied
Clemaire the possession of in so high a
degree? Did you say anxiety on my ac-
count induced you to quit your apartment
at an unseasonable hour, and was I the
cause of the illness which you have just
recovered from? Ah, Clementina, what
does this lead to? When your tender com-

      VOL. II.          D50              HOWARD CASTLE.

passion was moved at my sufferings, when
my fever raged with the utmost violence,
when my life was nearly annihilated, I
was an enviable object to what I am at this
moment.  My love for you is beyond lan-
guage to express; it has been the cause of
all my sufferings, and, God knows, they
have been severe."

  He would have thrown himself at her
feet, had she not with difficulty prevented
him; he grasped her hand with a convul-
sive motion, and the wild expression of his
countenance alarmed her.

  " I must leave you, my lord; you are
very ill, and I am sure not in a fit state
for conversation."

  He sunk upon the couch, evidently
overcome by the most poignant sensations;
after a few moments silence, he raised his
head, and exclaimed, in a faltering voice
--" I am weak, very weak, in every sense
of the word; my strength of mind is to-
tally gone--I can fix upon nothing--all
seems the wandering of a diseased imagi-
nation : did I avow my passion to you?
did I tell you how much I had suffered?
did I work upon your feelings, by describ-             HOWARD CASTLE.        51

ing my wretched situation? Oh, Clemen-
tina, pity me, and pardon me!"

  She had no opportunity to answer, as
before he had quite finished the sentence,
his servant entered the room with candles,
and a parcel of letters, which, he said, a
messenger had brought from Colnbrook.
Clementina found the book she had been
in search of when she entered the library,
and was going to quit the room, when she
perceived lord Montague had dropped a
letter; she picked it up and presented it to
him, at the same time saying—" It must
be from an interesting correspondent, the
superscription is so fair and delicate;" she
likewise observed a foreign postmark upon
it. The quickness with which lord Mon-
tague took it, the colour which flushed
across his countenance, and the inward
and fervent expression of" Heaven defend
me!" which, although hardly audible, was
distinctly heard by her, all combined to
perplex and astonish her. She quitted the
room without any opposition from him, as
he seemed lost to every thing; the fatal letter
which she had given him, and which had

                      D2  52           HOWARD CASTLE.

worked such a tumult in his mind, ap-
peared to him as an intervention of Pro-
vidence; the very woman for whom he
entertained the most fervent passion, to
deliver him a packet from his wife, was a
most striking coincidence; the crown of 
disagreeable ideas which rushed upon him
seemed completely to overpower his rea-
son; he became almost unconscious of his
existence; he was incapable of reflecting
even on his wayward fate, or of lamenting
his having involved the most amiable of
her sex in his misfortunes.

Clementina reached her own apartment,
in a state of mind not to be described; the
interview she had so much wished for
and which, she believed, would have 
cleared up all her difficulties, had involved
her mind in the greatest perplexity; a
mistaken idea of her engagement with the
marquis could no longer actuate lord Mon-
tague's behaviour; she had, in the most
open and explicit terms, declared herself
at liberty; but what explanation had it 
produced? certainly a protestation of love,
but at the same time claiming her pity 
and pardon-"What!" thought she, "am
HOWARD CASTLE.               53

I to pardon him for? is it a crime to love
me? if it is, I am equally criminal, unless
he has a prior engagement."

 The letter, and the visible agony with 
which he received it, almost convinced her
there was a fatal mystery, which would
involve her in much distress, but which
time alone could develop. She prepared
for dinner, with a heavy heart, which was
quickly perceived on her entering the
room by the marquis, who was eager in 
his inquiries if any thing was amiss? She
assured him she was perfectly well, and
strove, as much as she possibly could, to
rally her spirits, and appear cheerful. She
felt relief in the solitude of her own apart-
ment, where she indulged her busy fancy
in accounting, in various ways, for her re-
lation's strange behaviour; but in no way
could she clear up the dark cloud which
seemed to envelop them, and which she
feared would soon burst with relentless
fury. She probably had parted with lord
Montague for ever, as he had not even ex-
pressed a hope of seeing her again before
she quitted Carnsworth Castle; he per-
haps might explain himself more fully by54     HOWARD CASTLE.      

writing to her, than he could do by con-
versation, as there certainly was a tale to
unfold.

As soon as the ladies quitted the eating-
room, the marquis retired to the library,
with the intention of sitting an hour or two
with lord Montague; he found him ex-
tended on the couch, where he had lain, in
a kind of stupor, from the time Clemen-
tina had left him: his servant had carried
his dinner off untouched, and his wine
stood equally neglected.

Lord Clema?re's entrance roused him
from a dismal train of reflections, and an
exclamation of—"How very cold and
comfortless this room is!" made him turn
his eyes towards the fire, which was nearly
gone out.

"I felt no cold," was his answer: "I
would not suffer the servant to stir it, as
the gloom suited the mood I am in; my
mind is not in unison with any thing that
is cheerful, and my body requires no exter-
nal warmth."

"I am afraid your fever has returned,"
replied the marquis, "as certainly this
room would freeze any person in ordinary
              HOWARD CASTLE.     55

health; and sitting here alone, and I may
say, almost in the dark, would sink any
common flow of spirits."

   "I believe the fever has returned," re-
plied lord Montague; "my beating tem-
ples and throbbing pulses convince me it
has, and I rejoice in it. I was in an en-
viable state when my recollection was an-
nihilated; I had then no remembrance of 
the past, nor could I anticipate the misery
I have in prospect."

   "Your spirits," said the marquis, "keep
pace with your body; you are weak from
your recent illness; we must not suffer
you to sit alone; the library shall be con-
verted into the drawing-room, and you
shall have more society."

   "I have refused the company of my mo-
ther and sister, not an hour ago; I thought
they would be alarmed with my uncon-
querable languor and melancholy; was
the party to have free access to this room,
I must confine myself to my own apart-
ment."

   "Has no one the power of cheering
you?" asked the marquis.

   "Not a person in existence," exclaimed56      HOWARD CASTLE.

lord Montague; "the seat of my distem-
per is my mind, and for that there is no 
cure.  I have ordered my servant to put
my pistols away, as I am often terrified
with my srange thoughts.  I have of late
suspected my reason to be affected, as I
have had the strongest temptation to put 
a period to a miserable life.  I could never
have reconciled my mind to such wicked-
ness, had I been possessed of my senses."

     "You shock me," replied lord Clemaire, 
"with those wild expressions; you must
have a secret cause for sorrow, which preys
upon your mind.  Can you not confide in
my honour?  Believe me, I will not be-
tray the trust; adn revealing your distress
to a friend, will relieve the load which evi-
dently oppresses you."

     "I have a load here,"  cried he, laying
his hand upon his heart, "which no one
can do away; I have irretrievable ruined
every prospect of happiness: but to show
you I do not deem you unworthy of my
confidence, and that I am grateful to you
for participating in my feelings, i will dis-
close my sad situation to you.  Know then


              HOWARD CASTLE        57

that I am married to one woman, and adore
another."
  "Married!" repeated the marquis.
  "And miserable." added lord Montague;
"if I live, I must ruin the peace of an an-
gel, and break the hearts of my parents and
sister."
   "What part of the world shelters this
fair incognita? asked the marquis.
   "Fair she is," was his answer, "and
worthy to be loved; would to Heaven I
was capable of it! but my heart never beat
for her but as a pretty innocent girl. I
gained her affections---I gained her person,
and rendered her wretched; she pined in
silent sorrow, but too eloquent for me to
bear; the beauteous bloom of seventeen
withered in her cheeks; she sought retire-
ment, ard hid her melancholy in her own
breast; she compalined not of or to me--
she, the most injured by me, softened off
my crimes, and never would cease till she
had rendered me white as snow, when I
had acted a treacherous part to her.  Her
father loved me; he, good man, suspected
not what a serpent he was cherishing, till
he was stung in the most tender part; his
                    D358             HOWARD CASTLE. 

Louisa, the pride, the joy of his life, was a
fallen prey to my giddy imprudence.  Par-
don me. Heaven, for all my offences! and, 
Clemaire, pity my weakness!  this tear,
my Louisa, is dropped on the reflection of
my conduct of thee.  The period for my re-
turning to England drew near; I concealed
it from the family as long as possible, but
the quick, penetrating eye of love soon
discovered my intention; still she did not
urge me to marry her; a sorrowful sadness
was fixed on her once lively countenance,
the sparkling of her eyes was gone, a dull
heaviness succeeded, and the evident marks
of tears were often seen upon her pallid
cheeks.  Pity, the sister of love, took pos-
session of my soul; I watched the havoc I
had made with horror--marrying her was
the only reparation I could make; and
who was it I should take for my wife? a
tradesman's daughter in Berne, brought up
in obscurity and ignorance, her only re-
commendation sweetness and beauty.  My
pride [......] at the idea--I banished the 
thought, and resolved to set out next morn-
ing for Geneva.  I had formed the resolu-
tion and determined, as I thought, to keep        HOWARD CASTLE.     59

steadily to it. I was on the point of re-
tiring to my apartment, to give my ser-
vant orders to prepare for my departure,
meaning to spend the remainder of the day
with a friend, that I might avoid a family,
the sight of whom I could no longer sup-
port, when Louisa entered the room,
where she did not expect to find me; the
surprise of meeting with me gave a ver-
million tint to her cheeks--'I beg par-
don, my lord,' said she, 'if I intrude upon
you, tell me, and I will retire.'

   "I told her I was going out to execute
some business; I took her hand as I was 
moving towards the door; she earnestly
pressed mine to her lips and to her heart;
tears choked her utterance; I carried her
to a seat, and begged of her to be com-
posed. 'What agitates, my love? tell me,
Louisa, what is the cause of this distress?'
I spoke to her in the most soothing man-
ner I could--Pardon me, Clemaire, if I
am prolix, but every word is engraven on
my memory."

   "And I would not lose a syllable of it
for the world--I am strangely interested
for Louisa."

   "She kept my hand in hers," con-60           HOWARD CASTLE.

tinued lord Montague, " bathing it
with her tears, and casting her eyes
frequently on any face, with the most
expressive, agonizing looks; at last she
said-'You are going to leave Berne, my
lord-I know you are; but your gentle
nature would not allow you to render the
lost Louisa completely wretched; you
suppose me distracted at the knowledge of
your quitting me, but you are mistaken;
I have looked forward to this period, and
laid my plans-I retire to the mountains
of Savoy, from whence I came; there I
shall live the life of a recluse, forgetting
Berne and all the world, except you, my
lord, who shall ever possess my heart; I
shall cherish your image-death shall alone
crase it; my career is quickly finished,
though but a bud hardly opened; my
prayers shall ever be offered for you, and
that you life may be free from briars and
thorns, which have so soon crossed mine. 
May you, my lord, marry an English-
woman, every way worthy of you; but
sometimes think of Louisa, who so fondly
doted on you.'

  "During this speech, I was unable to
utter a word; she had taken me unawaresHOWARD CASTLE.  61

--my resolutions were shaken--I loved her
more at that moment than ever I had done
before; her tears were dried up; she again
pressed my hand, and bid me farewell. I
could not part with her, so I bid her stay
and be my wife. She pointed out in
strong colours the misery I should inflict
upon myself by taking such a step. A
man of my high rank, to unite himself to
one in her situation, would, in all probabi-
lity, separate me from ever from my family
and friends. Her sentiments were so no-
ble, so disinterested, that I overcame all
her scruples and my own; we were pri-
vately married, her father and proper wit-
nesses being only present. After the ce-
remony was performed, the step I had
taken struck me with full force; my mo-
ther's haughty, proud spirit would never
stoop to call a low-born girl daughter--she
will disclaim me for her son, and I 
and the poor Louisa may retire to some
sequestered spot, and live neglected and
forgot. I argued too late with myself; the
step I had taken could not be retrieved;
the only comfort I had was, that I had 
rendered a family happy, who must have62               HOWARD CASTLE.

been wretched, had I acted as a dishonor-
able part; I was the victim, but deserved-
ly so. The day after my marriage, I went
to Geneva, meaning to proceed from
thence to England; but I found my mind
was not in a fit state to appear before my
relations, I trifled off my time, in hopes I
should recover, in some degree, that com-
posure which, I fear, is for ever fled. The
kind letters I received from my family,
and the high expectations which my fa-
ther expressed of meeting with me, in
every way calculated to give him and my
mother the highest satisfaction, stung me
to the quick; that the accounts he had
heard of me from various people were flat-
tering in the extreme, and that they look-
ed forward to my return with pride and
job. Oh! how those expressions touched
my feelings! how dreadful to think that
the intelligence of my death would be far
less afflicting than the imprudent step I
had taken! The dreadful state of my mind
was in soon affected my health; a fever
seized me, and I became unconscious of all
my sorrows.

   "Louisa (who was not to take my                 HOWARD CASTLE.        63

name) heard of my illness, and flew with
the ardour of love; but her care and at-
tention were in vain; the complaint in-
creased, and my life was despaired of.  My
servant, alarmed at my situation, wrote to
Colnbrook a most dismal letter, giving
them little hopes of my recovery; youth
and a strong constitution conquered.

  " When my family arrived, I was bet-
ter; my senses had luckily been restored
for some days, otherwise my mother
would have found what a young, lovely
nurse I had, which would have created
suspicion.  Poor Louisa left me with a 
heavy heart, and retired to the mountains
of Savoy, to live with her grandmother,
who had brought her up.  I have heard
frequently from her, and of the birth of a
son.  Now, Clemaire, I have unfolded
my sad story to you; but the most griev-
ous part is, I am convinced that pity for
Louisa, and gratitude for her unbounded
love to me, where all that prompted me to
a step which I shall ever repent having
taken."

  Lord Montague was greatly exhausted
by giving this little history, which haddeeply interested the marquis; he thanked
him a thousand times for the confidence he
had placed in him, and prognosticated hap-
piness in store for him.

Lord Montague shook his head, but
the marquis kept steady in his opinion
--"I am convinced," said he, "that lady
Montague is no common character; she
appears to have strength of mind, with the
utmost sweetness and mildness of temper;
when her understanding is cultivated by
you, she will prove an ornament to your
family, and a treasure to you."  A deep
sigh was all the answer he obtained.
"The admiration you feel for another wo-
man," continued lord Clemaire, "must
give way to reason; she is out of your
reach."  He hoped in every way, as he sus-
pected who the beloved object was.  "Go
abroad as soon as your health will permit--
seek out your Louisa--take her and your
son under your own care--amuse your mind
by cultivating hers; it will expand under
your tuition in a wonderful manner--you
will have a companion formed by yourself,
and who will both interest and gratify
you; your son will be a source of delight                 HOWARD CASTLE.       65

to both his parents; and belive me, when
lord and lady Radnor find that you are
happy in the connexion you have formed,
they will soon be reconciled to your wife;
the plebeian's offspring must inherit the
title of your ancestors; if they banish you
theirsight, still their blood must be contami-
nated; they will follow their inclination,
and receive you and yours to their bosoms."

    Lord Clemaire might have talked for
hours without meeting with any interrup-
tion; his companion was fatigued both in 
body and mind, and could not lay plans
for either the present moment or the fu-
ture; he was too ill for conversation; the
marquis saw the state he was in, and left
him, with the promise that he would retire 
to his own apartment, and seek that repose
he feared would be denied him. Lady 
Radnor was dreadfully shocked by finding
all the alarming symptoms were again re-
turned. she feard, with redoubled violence.
66         HOWARD CASTLE

               CHAPTER III.

The general kept steady in his plan of
quitting Carnsworth Castle, much to the
mortification of his daughter, who was mi-
scrable at leaving lord Montague in so pre-
carious a state. Dr. Wallace was again
sent for, but was not expected to arrive till
after their departure. Lady Elenora, who
was the only one of the family Clementina
saw in the morning, gave her a very indif-
ferent account of the poor invalid, who had
passed a restless night, but she did not tell
all her fears. During the illness of lord
Montague, different circumstances had led
her to believe that Clementina and he were
much attached to each other; and she was
likewise convinced there was an impedi-
ment in the way, but of what nature she
could not develop; she tenderly loved her
brother, and her affection for her cousin
was great; she would not willingly hurt
her by imparting her apprehensions, as she
                HOWARD CASTLE             67

soon must be beyond the reach of regular
information. An early breakfast was pre-
pared for them, at which Clementina sat
an idle spectator. The marquis, who had
been waiting their appearance,urged her 
to partake to no purpose; tears stole down
her cheeks as she gave a negative to his
solicitations; he now felt no uncasiness at
the tender anxiety she expressed for lord
Montague's health; no harm could arise
from their attachment, which more than 
once had caused unpleasent sensations in
his breast, but which his late conversation
with his friend had entirely done away: he
was convinced that she was acquainted
with his marriage, as he had too high an
opinion of his honour to allow him for a
moment to suppose he had in any way de-
ceived her; the tender sympathy she dis-
played in her cousin's sufferings proved
that she was possessed of a feeling and as
affectionate heart:he hoped that he night
have a chance of addressing her alone,but
the general was particularly alert, and en-
tered the breakfast-room nearly at the same
moment with his daughter, and they were
soon after joined by lady Elenora, which
68    HOWARD CASTLE.

completely precluded the marquis's inten-
tions. To speak to the general upon so
tender a subject before he had declared
his sentiments to the young lady, was
what he would not do, unless necessity
drove him to it; he had been particularly
unlucky in his attempts to have a private
interview with her, that he was resolved
to follow them to Bath, and to have every
thing settled as speedily as possible, as he
was perfectly convinced his affections were
fixed for ever.
   He whispered his intention to the ge-
neral, as he assisted him to get into his
carriage; he pressed the hand of Clemen-
tina to his lip with fervour,and they drove
off. Although the general did not know
the insuperable barrier there was to lord
Montaugue's ever being nearer connected
with him, still he had no great dread of
his child's preferring him to the marquis,
who, be thought, more likely to succeed
with her, and in every point of view far
exceeded his most sangnine expectations.
For splendour of situation as to rank and
fortune, he was very far beyond what she
was entitled to look for; his person was un-          HOWARD CASTLE.          69

doubtedly good, his talents above medio-
crity, and his disposition, as far, as he could
judge, unexceptionable.  What a match
for his beloved Clementina!  and how
grateful to Providence ought he to be, if
he should see her so disposed of!

     Thus the general sat, pleased with his
own reflections, and his daughter's great
prospects; he was grieved to see her so
much depressed, but he hoped that ere
long she would regain her wonted cheer-
fulness; her spirits had suffered a material
change since she had been an inmate of
Carnsworth Castle; to the gloomy conver-
sation of her cousin, who had certainly oc-
cupied a good deal of her time and atten-
tion, he attributed the altercation.  He lit-
tle suspected the deep impression which
they had made on each other; he watched
her pensive countenance, and heard the
frequent sighs which she gave, with a de-
gree of surprise:  she might feel sad at
parting with her friends, but as she had
the prospect of meeting with certainly the
principal one, in a short time, he began to
be impatient at her long silence and de-
jected air.70          HOWARD CASTLE.

  "You have gone through a great deal,
my dear girl, since we launched into the
world at Carnsworth Castle, and by the
depression of your spirits, I should fear
you had experienced more pain than plea-
sure; or is it being separated from your
friends which thus overwhelms you with
sorrow?"

  Clementina was unable to answer; she
was not prepared for the sudden attack
from her father, and she could not account
to him for the unusual depression which
hung over her; she continued silent, and
the general proceeded.

  "I cannot say this introduction to gaiety
has improved you as a travelling compa-
nion; cheer up, I pray you;" at the same
time taking her hand; "my spirits are won-
derfully changed by this excursion, and
why yours should be so low, I cannot
imaging; the same cause should actuate
both our feelings."

  Clementina gave a faint smile; she
wished she could converse, but tears con-
tinually rose and stopped her utterance;
her nerves were in so irritable a state, that
she durst not trust her voice.                 HOWARD CASTLE.       71

  The general persevered-" We shall
soon have the pleasure of the marquis of
Clemaire's company at Bath ; you will feel
happy in the prospect of seeing him."

  "I shall be very glad to see him,"
faintly answered Clementina.  She could
command her feelings when the marquis
was the subject.

  Her father watched her countenance,
but could perceive no alteration; he could
not pursue the conversation, as Mary was
present; he believed he could have roused
her from her torpor, could he have ex-
pressed what he expected, and ardently
wished-" I have some hopes," added he,
"that we shall likewise have the Radnor
family with us."

  A deep sigh from Clementina struck his
ear.

  "If lord Montague can be removed
with safety, and if his medical attendants
should think it proper for him, we may
perhaps be surrounded by our friends."

  The tears traced each other quickly
down her cheeks; the general was deter-
mined to probe her feelings-" Lord Mon-
tague is certainly in a very precarious state;72                 HOWARD CASTLE.

it will be a severe stroke upon the family
if they should lose him."

An hysterical sob from Clementina made
him repent the experiment he had tried;
alarmed beyond measure at seeing his
darling so affected, he began seriously to
fear that the dull, phlegmatic Montague
had worked the change on her which had
surprised him so much. She might be
deeply interested in her cousin's recovery,
but he feared there was more feeling dis-
played than their consanguinity could
sanction.

Lord Montague had never strove to
make himself agreeable to the general; his
spirits were not in a state to pay attention
which did not particularly gratify or in-
terest him; his lovely cousin awoke him
from a degree of apathy and indifference,
which he firmly believed, before he saw
her, no human being could rouse him
from. After he became acquainted with
the bewitching object, he was hardly con-
scious there was another being in exist-
ence; every faculty was absorbed in the
misery of his own wayward fate, which
had never appeared so cruel, until he knew              HOWARD CASTLE.          73 

the treasure, which he believed might
have been within his reach, had he not by
his own folly and imprudence completely
prevented all hope of happiness; his mind,
in such a state of misery, it was not likely
he should attempt to be agreeable to any
person, excepting the one who engrossed
every idea. When he avoided her con-
versation, still she was occupying his
thoughts, and precluded every other per-
son from them; no wonder that the ge-
neral could not credit his own senses,
which certainly pointed at lord Montague,
but who, he thought, most unlikely to
supplant lord Clemaire in his daughter's
affections.

    The marquis had much attention in his
nature; he was polite to all his father's
guests, but particularly to general Bou-
verie; his conversation he admired; the
bravery of his exploits, which he narrated
in a very agreeable manner, pleased him;
and above all, he was the father of Clemen-
tina, which insured the most unwearied
assiduity.

   When the general found that all at-

VOL. 11.

74           HOWARD CASTLE.

tempt at conversation was fruitless, and
that his daughter was again completely
absorbed in her own reflections, ho deter-
mined to torment her no further; but
wrapping his coat tight round him, laying
his leg in an easy position, and flapping
his hat over his eyes, he reclined in a cor-
ner of the coach, and composed himself to
sleep, resolving in his own mind that Cle-
mentina's happiness should be the leading
object with him ; at the same time, he fer-
vently prayed that lord Montague was not
the person she had fixed her affections
npon. Their journey was as silent a one
as possible, and they reached Bath with-
out any accident or adventure; the lodg-
ings which had been recommended to them
by the duchess of Beauelaire, were as com-
modious and comfortable as possible; the
open, airy situation of the Crescent pleased
the general, and the prospect of enjoying
a little exercise on the pavement was de-
lightful.

  Clementina's whole ideas centered in
her expccted letter from lady Elenora; she
quickly passed her father, who was ad-
miring the beauty of the place, and which                Howard Castle.                 75

had no interest for her, and flew to the at-
tendants, in eager hopes her anxiety might
be relieved; she was not disappointed; a 
few lines from her friend gave her the
satisfactory intelligence that the poor in-
valid was more composed, and that doctor
Wallace flattered them he would soon be 
better. She gave he few particulars; the 
whole party were dull and out of spirits;
lord Montague was again enjoined to
silence; she seldom quitted his beside:
she promised to give her daily informa-
tion, which gave Clementina the greatest
satisfaction. The terror which lord Mon-
gue's relapse had thrown her into was
greatly abated by this account; her mind
again reverted to the cause of his illness,
which she firmly believed was occasioned
by extraordinary agitation; or could the 
agitation and strange expressions which
had shocked her so much be the effect of
that illness? Alas! he had shewn so much
caprice of manner, from the first of their
meeting at Carnsworth Castle, she durst
not flatter herself with the hope that an
explanation could be satisfactory to her.

                     E276           HOWARD CASTLE.

  A little cold which she had got on the
journey was a good pretext for keeping
the house; she disliked the idea of joining
in the motley group whom she saw moving
before their windows, until her spirits
were stronger, and she was better able to
join in the bustling crowd which every
fine day was collected in the Crescent.
She sent two letters of introduction, which
the duchess had given her, one to lady
Hillyard, and the other to Mrs. Conway,
the day after her arrival; each had left
cards of Clementina, but she was too ill
to see company: an invitation to a ball
was likewise sent from lady Hillyard,
which was to be given in ten days after.
The general interfered, and literally in-
sisted on her accepting, and that she should
return the visits. She could plead indis-
position no longer; the pleasing intelli-
gence of lord Montague's recovery daily
arrived, and her spirits once more regained
a degree of their former cheerfulness; she
hoped all would yet end well. She first
drove to Mrs. Conway's, and was admitted;
the restraint she felt at entering into the
presence of a total stranger soon wore off;             HOWARD CASTLE.               77

she was delighted with the elegant man-
ners and easy affability with which she
was received by the most pleasing woman
she had ever seen.

  Mrs. Conway was equally delighted with
her new acquaintance, whose unaffected
simplicity pleased her, and her beautiful
form and face surprised her; she thought
she had never seen such a combination of
charms as the lovely Miss Bouverie pos-
sessed; they were formed by nature for
the friendship which they strictly pre-
served for each other during the remainder
of Mrs. Conway's life: they were struck,
almost at first sight, with a regard for each
other, and they never parted without a
strong wish to meet again.

  Mrs. Conway had been a very beautiful
young woman, and had not with all the 
attention and admiration which is so apt
to intoxicate a votary of fashion; she
graced the highest circles, and was a gene-
ral favourite with both sexes.  She mar-
ried early in life the heir to the noble
family of Howard; the title her husband
did not live to inherit; he died and left her
a young and rich widow to lament his loss,78                 HOWARD CASTLE.

which she sincerely mourned; many splen-
did offers she rejected, as she was resolved
her children, a son and daughter, should
never have a second father; she dedicated
her time entirely to those sacred pledges
of an union which had been founded on a 
sincere affection; her love for her husband
centered in his offspring, whom she doted
on with all the ardour a fond mother could
feel: she suffered the most severe trial
Providence could inflict upon her, by the
death of her daughter, who inherited her
mother's beauty, and her mother's talents.
Mary, the pride, the joy of her heart, was
snatched from her at the interesting age of
seventeen. Mrs. Conways' spirits had not
recovered the dreadful stroke, although
she had mourned her loss for four years,
when Clementina was introduced to her;
her age, her appearance, her gentle unas-
suming, yet elegant manners, struck her
forcibly with a similitude to her departed
darling: her heart clung to her, as a being
Heaven in its goodness had sent, in some
degree, to fill up the dreadful vacuum in
her heart. Her son, lord Howard, was
abroad at the time of his sister's death; he                HOWARD CASTLE.           79

wished to have returned,to have cherished,
by all the soothing attentions an affec-
tionate son could pay,the drroping spirits
of his mother; but she positively denied
herself that satisfaction; no personal gra-
tification would make her consent to what
she believed would be a disadvantage to
him; she, with grateful affection, refused
the offer,and he remained for three years
visiting foreign courts, and improving his
talents, which were by nature brilliant.
He had been in London for a few months
the preeeding winter,with his mother,but
had again returned abroad in the summer.
   Clementina had spent an hour with
Mrs.Conway, before she believed she had
been half the time with her; her watch
convinced her how pleasantly the moments
had passed; she rose to take her leave,
saying she found she had indulged herself
too long in agreeable company; she feared
she had intruded upon her morning. This
speech produced a very flattering answer,
and they parted with the hope of meeting
soon again.
   Her next visit was to lady Hillyard,
who was likewise at home. Clementina

had been so charmed with the animated
and delightful conversation of Mrs. Con-
way, that she felt prepossessed in favour
of both the ladies who the duchess had
introduced her to; but she very quickly
was convinced that their interior qualifica-
tions were as different as their exterior.

Lady Hillyard was a little, insignificant,
deformed figure, with a face the very
counterpart of her person; a sharp coun-
tenance which betrayed all was not right
in her form, with small black eyes, which
were as quick in their motions as her
tongue was rapid in performing its office;
a lively inquisitive manner, asking a hun-
dred questions without ever listening for
an answer; busy in every body's affairs,
offering her assistance whether it was
wished for or not, and always giving her
advice and opinion upon every subject;
whether it lay within the compass of her
understanding or not, it was all one to
lady Hillyard, who would talk, right or
wrong.  To be a fashionable leading cha-
racter was the summit of her wishes; and 
if giving the greatest parties, and the best
balls, constituted high ton, she had attained            HOWARD CASTLE          81

to the highest pinnacle of celebrity; her
rooms were crowded with the most dash-
ing votaries of fashion, who enjoyed the
amusement; of course, she was invited to 
every gay throng, so that not an evening
passed without its engagement, and lady
Hillyard, without a single friend, was the
busiest woman in the world.

A very large fortune had gained her the 
honour of sir James Hillyard's hand; her
money was all he wished for; it enabled 
him to keep a pack of hounds, and to have
his stables filled with the finest horses;
whilst she was miserable, confined in the
country, contrary to her inclination, with-
out any internal resource for amusement;
he, engrossed with his sport, neglected her.
For fifteen years they dragged on a miser-
able existence, till a fortunate tumble from
a favourite horse released her from her
prison. an old, dull family-seat, and from 
her holrid jailer. She removed to Bath, 
with her only child, sir James, where they
lived in all the splendour wealth could
purchase; the splendid balls and costly
entertainments gained her attention

                E 382       HOWARD CASTLE.

she longed for; all flocked to lady Hill-
yard's room; there they were sure to meet
with every body, and to enjoy every luxury
which money could procure; she was de- 
lighted with her won consequence, and 
never for a moment suspected that the 
love for her society was not the attraction 
which assembled the beau monde around 
her; she was pleased, and the world was 
pleased; so matters went smoothly on.
  
  Sir James followed the steps of his fa-
ther, and at twenty-one was reckoned an 
uncommonly good sportsman: the only
knowledge possessed, and of which he 
was very vain, consisted in the stables,
kennels, an a cockpit; the example of his 
faster had early initiated him into the so-
ciety which is generally to be found in
such places.

  When sir James died, his son might
have been led to nobler pursuits, but his 
mother was too intent on her own amuse-
ment to bestow a thought on his improve-
ment; he continued to associate with
grooms and huntsmen, until he had no
relish for any other society; he seldom

           HOWARD CASTLE.        83

visited Bath, which was not a place at all
suited to his taste.

  The duchess did not introduce Clemen-
tina, from an idea that she would he in
any way either instructed or amused by
lady Hillyard's acquaintance; but she
knew she would be useful in introducing
her to the best company in Bath. Her
grace was not mistaken; the ball which
she had received an invitation to was to
be extremely splendid, and all the fashion-
able world was to be assembled; the sub-
ject was soon started, as it appeared to oc-
cupy her ladyship's thoughts. When she
saw Clementina, she was charmed that she
should have such a magnet id her festive
scene, and the pleasing idea of her own im-
portance, in having the introduction of
such exquisite beauty and high fashion,
delighted her; the report of her intended
marriage had reached Bath, and lady Hill-
yard felt still more grateful to the duchess
lor her soliciting her patronage for her
lovely daughter, who she determined to
lead in the tonish circles.

 Clementina was astonished at the volu-
bility with which she was. addressed, and84               HOWARD CASTLE.

with the complete charge a total stranger
appeared to take of all her concerns, very
different from Mrs. Conway's reception.
Lady Hillyard put a torrent of questions,
which confused her, as she hardly knew
which to answer, till she was relieved from
the embarrassment by finding no reply
was necessary; in five minutes after she
had entered the house, she wished exceed-
ingly to take her leave, but that was not so
easily accomplished; she watched in vain
for a moment's cessation, but no opportu-
nity offered; at last a question was put
which required an answer.

  "Had she been with a milliner?"

  The moment the word no escaped her
lips, lady Hillyard proceeded--" Then, by
all means, you must be put into madam
Monte's hands; she is by far the smartest
milliner and dress-maker in Bath; I have
brought her into fashion; since I have
employed her, all the world have run after
her."

  Clementina smiled at the idea of so odd
a looking being bringing a millner into
repute; she should have supposed it would
have been the greatest disadvantage pos-              HOWARD CASTLE.           85

sible for her to shew off any piece of
dress; but lady Hillyard seemed perfectly
satisfied with her own appearance; her lit-
tle person was arrayed with the most stu-
died exactness; no pains were spared to
improve her shape, or to render her as
smart as possible; after all the exertion,
nature could not be changed, although she
is often wonderfully improved by art; but
nature was so extremely perverse when
she formed lady Hillyard, that she defied
all the art of man or woman.

   Clementina believed there never was so
strange a combination formed as the one
she was now with; a proposal to drive to
madam Monte's, and a bow of assent, de-
cided the matter, and they were, in the
course of a few minutes, seated in the car-
riage. The moment she had given her or-
ders where to drive, she turned to her silent
companion--"Her grace informs me this
is your introduction to the world; I al-
most wonder she would entrust you to any
one."

   "Entrust me!" repeated Clementina;
"why should she take any particular charge
of me?"86     HOWARD CASTLE.

   Lady Hillyard heard what she said, and,
with great quickness, replied—"It would
have been nothing strange had you not
come out until you had been introduced
at court as her daughter. What a blaze
you will cut. as the marchioness of Cle-
marie! I quite envy you—you will have
every thing in such high style. I hope you
will invite me to some of your smart par-
ties—I enjoy the gay months in London.
and shall spend some pleasant evenings. I
expect, at your house; I used to know
your lord extremely well, and shall be de-
lighted to see him; of course, he will soon
be in Bath, and must attend you at my
ball."
   Clementina had often attempted to in-
terrupt her, but to no purpose; at last she
resolved to stop the torrent, if possible, by
saying—"I must entreat that your ladyshop
will allow me to contradict what you have
just now asserted; I declare there is not a
word of truth in the report you have
heard."
   "Oh!" cried the incorrigible lady, "I
am not to be deceived in this manmer; it
is past a doubt; I heard the whole affair
           HOWARD CASTLE      87

last night at lady Gayville's card-party; it
was told us from undoubted authority-
your settlements are to be quite in the no-
ble style, suitable to the high rank you will
have, and to the great fortune which you
are heiress to; your jewels were described;
the number of carriages which are ordered
were mentioned; in short, every particular
is known; lord Montague's love for you-
your having refused him-his attempting
to take improper liberties with you-"

  "For God's sake stop," exclaimed Cle-
mentina.

  "I know I am right," cried lady Hill-
yard, "and that your lord is a charming
creature; so say nothing in defense of the
other, who is utterly unworthy of you, and
you ought never to speak to him as long
as he lives."

  "Your ladyship is perfectly misin-
formed."

  "Not at all, not at all; everybody says
so in Bath; and the letter I have had from the duchess convinces me that every thing
is fixed, and that we shall soon have a
wedding."

  Clementina was more astonished, and88                HOWARD CASTLE.

more overpowered, than ever she had been
before; she heartily repented accompany-
ing lady Hillyard, as she was completely
worn out both in mind and body. When
they arrived at the milliner's, she felt ab-
sent, and indifferent to all the gay trap-
pings which were exposed to her view,
and the comments upon fashion which the
courtesying milliner was delivering to lady
Hillyard, who treasured up all the impor-
tant information: this was the only time
she had listened since Clementina had been
in her company; but the milliner seemed
to vie with her ladyship's articulating
powers, as her words succeeded each other
with the utmost rapidity.

   Clementina found she was obliged to fix
upon some of the sparkling finery which
was displayed before her; she heard the
milliner, in a half-whisper, ask lady Hill-
yard the name of her friend; but what
were her horror and mortification, when the
following history was given, in rather a
lower voice than she generally spoke--
"She is the great heiress, Miss Bouverie,
who is on the point of becoming the mar-
chioness of Clemaire; she is particularly            HOWARD CASTLE.         89

introduced to me by her mother, that is to
be, the duchess of Beauclaire; the mar-
riage is to take place here; so I have
brought a famous customer to you."

   The milliner's knees were now exerted
to their utmost stretch of politeness; her
courtesies were a third lower, since she heard
what a prospect the lady had; the goods,
which Clementina had been perfectly satis-
fied with, were not half rich enough-
 
   "Here, "eried the milliner to her attend-
ants, " reach the two large boxes which
arrived last from Paris-bring in the full
dress which was finished this morning for
the duchess of D-;it is lucky it is not
yet sent off: perhaps it may suit you,
ma'am, " turning to Clementina; a little
more gold in the hemming, I think, would
have a good effect, and rather a richer
finishing upon the whole."

    Clementina assured her it was in a more
showy style than she admired, and fixed
upon the dress she had at first chosen.

    The milliner instantly agreed that her
taste was perfectly elegant; nothing so
charming as simplicity, where there was
such beauty to set off the dress. She. con-

90        HOWARD CASTLE.

eluded by assuring her that all her things
should be made of the finest materials.

During madam Monte's harangue, lady 
Hillyard had been as busy giving all the
important information to a sister news-
monger, who unluckily entered the room
just before they quitted it, and had not
reached a seat before the whole history
was imparted to her. A glass was soon at
her eye, and the finery minutel) examined,
which was all ordered by the marchioness
elect, every pin in whose drcss. was exa-
mined, as she knew her information would
be greedily devoured at a rout, where she
was to be in the evening.

Clementina, with the greatest difficulty,
prevailed on lady Ciillyard to get into the
carriage, who would willingly have re-
mained half-an-hour longer, in hopes of
having further scope for her insatiable lo-
quacity; she was unwilling to part with
her companion, and pr posed spending an
hour in the pump-room—" You, of course,
have been there," said she "it is a plea-
sant lounge in a morning, as one is always
sure of meeting with amusement; so we
will take a peep to see what is passing; and
                   HOWARD CASTLE.                91

if you will go to the rooms to-morrow, I
shall be happy in having you of my party;
you must return with me to supper, and
go with me afterwards to lady B----'s
masquerade, where all the smarts are to be
assembled."

At last Clementina succeeded in giving
a negative to all her proposals, by saying
she must return home immediately, and
was engaged the following evening; if her
ladyship chose to go to the pump-room,
she would with pleasure take her there, or
put her down at her own house; but po-
sitively she must return home.

Lady Hillyard preferred the latter, as
she had just recollected an engagement she
was to have at three o'clock. Clementina
was resolved, before they parted, to con-
vince her tiresome companion, if possible,
that the report of her marriage was com-
pletely without foundation; she seized the
first moment that she could to entreat, that
instead of spreading such strange falsities,
she would contradict them; but she soon
repented the experiment, as she found she
might as well speak to the winds as to
lady Hillyard; and they parted without99    HOWARD CASTLE.

her being able to make the least impres-
sion on the most tiresome woman she had
ever met with.

  Soon after they had left the milliner's, a
busy scene took place; lady Hillyard
knew she had put the news of her own
importance, in having the whole manage-
ment of Miss Bouverie intrusted to her,
by her friend the duchess, into the best
hands for propagation.  A lady and three
daughters entered the shop as the carriage
drove off; the old lady, who believed she
had received all the information she could,
was quitting it, to spread as fast as possible
the news; she could not resist so fair an
opportunity to display her knowledge;
she therefore returned with the party, to
re-examine the finery, which was scattered
about, and which was all ordered by the 
marchioness that was to be.

  Madam Monte was of too obliging a dis-
position not to impart to her customers
any intelligence she could pick up from
common report; but this was beyond a 
doubt; she heard it from the lady's part-
cular friend, who, of course, had it from
herself.HOWARD CASTLE. 93

"And is she really going to be married
to the marquis?" said the matron; "what
luck attends some folks!"

"Undoubtedly," replied the good-na-
tured informist, "some are born under a
fortunate planet; but if you will permit
me, ladies, I will give you the whole ac-
count as I had it from lady Hillyard."

"Do, pray, dear madam Monte," cried
the eldest young lady;" general Bouverie,
I understand, is keen for the marriage."

"No wonder," said the mother; "there
is not such another match in the kingdom."

"And as a bribe," continued the mil-
liner-

"I understood she was handsome," said
one of the young ladies, who believed her-
self so.

"Beauty will not do alone," replied the
eldest, who was very plain; "but you were
at the bribe, madam Monte; pray pro-
ceed."

"He gives her twenty thousand pounds
on her marriage day, and settles all his
great fortune upon her; she is to have five
thousand a-year jointure, and her own pro-
perty for pin-money; the family jewels94             HOWARD CASTLE.

are resetting, and Thorp Abbey, their
beautiful seat in Shropshire, is preparing
for them, and very splendid carriages are
ordered, and part of her wedding-clothes
have been bespoke this morning."

  Envy produced sighs from the young
ladies; and before they left the shop, it was
fixed the marriage was to take place in a
month.


                 CHAPTER IV.
                   ------

CLEMENTINA returned home, much fa-
tigued with the hour she had spent with 
lady Hillyard; she narrated to the gene-
ral, as near as she could, the conversation,
or rather information, which she had heard;
laughing at the ridiculous idea which had
spread, she feared, in a most wonderful
manner; as how such a report could get
into circulation, she could not imagine.

  The general answered in a grave tone
of voice, he was no way surprised by
the news reaching Bath before they did;    HOWARD CASTLE    95
there had been a great variety of company
at Carnsworth Castle, who could not be
blind to the marquis's partiality, which be-
trayed itself on every occasion; probably
some of them might have correspondents
in Bath; and what was so natural as to men-
tion their suspicions? and how easy were
suspicions converted into certainty? "Per-
haps," continued he, "some of those who
witnessed the marked attention the mar-
quis paid you, may be in the gay crowd
who are assembled here, and may have
anticipitated what I hope will soon hap-
pen. The duke, my dear girl, mentioned
the subject to me, that the marquis was
exceedingly attached to you, and that it
was an alliance both he and the duchess
approved highly of; the first overtures, of
course, must be from the marquis, who, I
make no doubt, has imparted his hopes to
you."
  "He merely said he should soon join us
at Bath, as I was getting into the carriage."
  "You, I dare say, perfectly know his
plans; why do you look so astonished?
why this agitation? the marquis surely
made his sentiments known to you; even96                 HOWARD CASTLE.

the flippant Miss Osburn convinced me
of what I had suspected, from the first
moment I saw you together; why will
you hesitate in giving me pleasure?"

"I have no hesitation in answering you,"
replied she, "as I am sensible I am ad-
dresing a person who is deeply interested
in my welfare, and who cannot be swayed
by either title or riches, when my peace,
my happiness, is at stake. I own that lord
Clemaire has honoured me by declaring a
preference for me, but his love I never can
return. Will you pardon my thus openly
avowing my sentiments, when they are so
opposite to your own? but indeed, my
dear father, I could not marry lord Cle-
marie without sacrificing every prospect
of comfort. I trust that you are not offend-
ed with my open declaration."

"No," replied the general, "I am not
offended, but I am sensibly hurt by hear-
ing such sentiments; as I own it has been
a favourite wish of mine, ever since I knew
the marquis, that I might live to see him
your husband. I have watched with heart-
felt pleasure the evident attachment on
his side, and which I hoped was reciprocal;             HOWARD CASTLE.           97

but do not be too hasty in your determi-
nation; consider well before you give a de-
cided answer; weigh, my dear child, the
great advantages of such a splendid con-
nexion; he is unexceptionable in every 
respect, and his appearance and manners
are such, that few young women could
hear him plead in vain : if you lose my
protection, and God knows how long I
shall be spared to watch over you, where
have I a friend or relation to confide my
treasure to? you have already experienced
lady Radnor's unpleasant temper--I could 
not be satisfied to leave you under her
care; was the marquis your husband, I 
should not have one anxious thought on
your account."

  Clementina's eyes were streaming during
this address of her father's; at last she ex-
claimed--" Oh, talk not of the possibility
of my losing you, my parent, my friend;
why should I risk the happiness of my
whole life, to guard against what, I trust,
may not happen for years--perhaps a loss
I may never experience?  oh, urge me no
longer on a subject which must be painful98    HOWARD CASTLE.
to us both; and, believe me, on no other
shall I prove disobedient."
  The general, with the utmost emotion,
pressed his beloved child to his bosom,
promising to urge her no longer in behalf
of his favourite plan—"But," continued
he, "I must conclude, form your deter-
mined refusal of lord Clemaire, that a more
favoured lover has a place in your affec-
tions; I am surely entitled, if I give up
this point, to interrogate you, and to ex-
pect a candid answer."
  "Will my father not think it strange,
when his daughter prays him, in the most
earnest manner, not to urge her farther on
a subject which can only tend to give both
uneasiness; I am not at liberty to explain
myself more, than that my affections are
engaged; only I will swear to you, I will
never give my hand, but with your appro-
bation."
  The general felt disconcerted; her de-
termined, steady manner left him no room
to hope for a change in her sentiments;
he had no hesitation in regard to the ob-
ject of her affections, as lord Montague
undoubtedly had gained her heart; but           HOWARD CASTLE.        99

why their engagement should require such
secrecy, he was at loss to account for.
That lord Radnor should wish for the con-
nexion, he could not for a moment doubt;
he, of course, must think Clementina a
suitable match for his son, when the duke
of Beauclaire had wished to see her the
wife of the marquis.
   The general was disconcerted and dis-
appointed; he had looked forward with
joy to the splendour of his daughter's sitna-
tion, and he firmly believed he should see
her as happy as the most affectionate and
the most indulgent husband could make 
her; his gay plans fell to the ground with
an unlooked-for termination; his spirits,
which had been raised with pleasing ex-
pectation, now sunk into mortified dejec-
tion.
   Clementina saw with grief what an
effect the explanation had upon the gene-
ral; but she was determined no exertion
on her part should be wanting to restore
his wonted animation, and she hoped to
hear no more of the marquis's love, as she
was convinced her father would prevent
                      F2
100         HOWARD CASTLE.

his having the painful mortification of a
refusal, by making known to him her de-
termination: her not being forced to ex-
plain the situation of her heart gave her
unspeakable satisfaction, as it was a sub-
ject, above all others, she wished to avoid.
The letters she regularly received from
lady Elenora continued to give her good
accounts of lord Montague's recovery, but
that his spirits were as low as ever.

  The pleasure which Clementina had felt
the first time she had been in Mrs. Conway's
company increased each day they met,
and theirs was nearly a daily intercourse;
at all moments she was a welcome guest
at Mrs. Conway's, and her company was
equally agreeable to the general, as it was
to his daughter; there was an animation
in her ideas and conversation, which was
uncommonly agreeable, without the least
tincture of satire in her disposition; she
was extremely amusing, and could display
the foibles of her acquaintances without
the smallest degree of ill nature; but at
the same time, nothing escaped her obser-
vation; her quick development of charac-
ters rendered her extremely formidable;but with all her discrimination, she never
was a bitter enemy; she generally could
discover some good points, and was always
ready to apologize for defects.

Clementina described the visit she had 
paid to lady Hillyard, and amused Mrs.
Conway with the number of questions she
had asked, and of the fatigue she had en-
dured.

"Lady Hillyard," replied she, "is a
very necessary woman in Bath; she is the
sole mover of all the amusements, and
keeps herself in perpetual employment to
divert the world, and the world is un-
grateful; she spends her money and her
time to very little purpose, as it is the
fashion to crowd her rooms and laugh at 
her, which I think is extremely hard; and
I find Miss Bouverie is inclined to join the
party.  You mean to attend her ball, I
presume, and where I hope to have the
pleasure of meeting with you; but would
you not prefer the gay scene without lady
Hillyard's presence?  She was, I suppose,
in the same situation as I was very much
inclined to be your friend the first time
she saw you, and became interested in all
102       HOWARD CASTLE.

Your concerns; only she unfortunately im-
parts her thoughts, and unluckily gives
her intended kindness the appearance of
inquisitive interference".
  Clementina could not agree in the opi-
nion that lady Hillyard's intentions could
be good ; if she tormented her company in
the way she had teased her, she entreated
Mrs.Conway Would her to accom-
pany her, and that she wold guard her
during the evening from any attack which
might be made upon her bt her leadership,
as she declared herself perfectly unequal to
the contest-" Had the ball been given by
you," said she, "I should have felt more
Pleasure in the prospect".
" I am not half so good-humoured," re-
plied Mrs. Conway, "as I make no such
exertions to please the multitude ; she is 
in a continual tumult ; as soon as her ball
is over, she will be planning a masque-
rade; and so it goes on the year round:
she moves to London when the gaiety is
over here, and there she exists in the same
routine of hurry and bustle. Brighton is the
next scene for her exploits, where she again
leads scene for her exploits, where she again
leads the gay world : she is now making


 
up for the dull life she spend in the country' her extreme wish to see every
body happy and merry induces her, I really believe, more than her own amusement,
to spend her money and her time in the way she does: had lady Hillyard the same
stupid turn that I have, Bath would not have half the charms to the young and
gay which it now has; dinner-parties and routes are humdrum meetings; when my
son is with me, I become a second lady Hillyard; last winter I shook off all the
feelings of an old woman, but upon his leaving me they returned, and kept quiet
possession ever since, nor shall I strive to dispossess them until urgent
necessity obliges me.  I think it a duty on all parents to study, in some
degree, the pleasure of their children; I make my house as cheerful as possible,
the lord Howard may never dread spending a day at home; and I enter into every
amusement which I think he would like.  When he is absent, I do not retire from
the world, as it probably would become a punishment upon me to return to it;
I enter into gaiety with moderation, merely for practice; was I to in-
104               HOWARD CASTLE.

dulge myself, I should become rusticated 
in the highest degree."

Clementina smiled. and shook her head:
she believed no retirement could wear off
the elegance and grace which attended all
she said, and all she did: and that after
the most complete seclusion, she would re-
turn to the world with the polish and at-
tractions nature had gifted her with, had
she been banished into the wilds of Sibe-
ria; still she would retain her native dig-
nity and ease of manner: but all the per-
vail upon her young friend to accompany
her to the rooms; her spirits still were de-
pressed, as not a word of explanation had
come from lord Montague.  Every day
she dreaded the marquis's arrival, as she
feared again being interrogated by her fa-
ther, on a subject which seemed more and
more involved in perplexity; not even a
message was sent to her in lady Elenora's
letters.

    Lady Hillyard's ball was fast approach-
ing; only one day was left for her spirits
to be relieved, before she was obliged to
make her appearance in public; she felt

 
             HOWARD CASTLE.             105

unequal to it, and lamented the engage-
ment; she could not in any way get off,
as the general would immediately suspect
the cause. Mrs. Conway would think
her capricious, and, above all things, she
wished to retain her good opinion; and
she should lay herself open to lady Hill-
yard's animadversions, which she dreaded;
in whatever state her feelings were, she
must make one of the festive scene, and
appear cheerful, probably with a heavy
heart, as her hopes every day became less
sanguine of the eclaircissement which must
soon be made. At last a letter arrived,
which gave her unspeakable pleasure; it
was from lady Elenora, fixing the very day
of the ball for their being in Bath; her
brother, she said, was extremely weak, but
it was his wish which guided the family;
he seemed determined to make the at-
tempt, and she hoped he would accomplish
it without suffering materially from the
exertion; but that his mind seemed terri-
bly depressed, and his looks were wretch-
ed; if he could bear the fatigue of the
journey, she had hopes change of air and
scene might do him good.

106          HOWARD CASTLE.

Clementina sincerely echoed the wish,
and fervently prayed his health might soon
be perfectly restored. She imparted the
contents of her letter to her father, who
evidently saw the effect it had upon her;
he was pleased to see her more animated,
but he secretly wished that her joy had
flown from a different source; had the ex-
peetation of receiving the marquis given
her such satisfaction as her manner be-
trayed, how delighted he should have
been!

  The sanguine temper of Clementina was
always willing to seize on every circum-
stance which could be productive of plea-
sure. Lord Montague would not come to
Bath, unless he could lay open his heart to
her without the least disguise: he had, in
the most unequivocal terms, assured her of
his love; he now took the first return of
health, to make his proposals in form to
the general; had there been the impedi-
ment which she had feared, he would have
avoided her sight; fir otherwise was his
intention; even before his strength was
equal to the journey, his impatience
prompted him to set off.HOWARD CASTLE. 107

Thus were her thoughts employed, when
Mrs. Conway was announced; she was
pleased with the change on the features of
Clementina, which was obvious to her the 
moment she entered; and to her astonish-
ments, she proposed accompanying her to
the pump-room-"I have so often refused
your solicitations, that I am now resolved
to be the inviter."

The plan was agreed to, and they set
off; it was the first time she had walked
on the streets; all the air and exercise she
had enjoyed had been in the carriage with
her father; he had drank the water, but
she had never accompanied him into the
room; she remained in the coach until he
returned, and proceeded on their airing; 
she had refused all invitations to even Mrs. 
Conway's parties, so that she was perfectly
unacquainted with every body they met;
the singular beauty of her form, and the
peculiar lightness and elegance with which
she walked, attracted general observation; 
a veil which was hung over her face, and
partly shaded her person, hid her lovely
countenance from the gaze of the passing
throng; but her figure was generally ad-108       HOWARD CASTLE.

mired, and all wished to see the face more
distinctly which belonged to it: uncon-
scious her her own appearance being any
thing extraordinary, she remarked to Mrs.
Conway how odd it was a stranger should 
be so easily discovered in a place where
there was such a fluctuation of company.

  Mrs. Conway smiled, but made no an-
swer; she was the magnet which attracted
all eyes knew not why such general ob-
servation was fixed upon her. When they
entered the pump-room, she still found her
very interesting companion created much
speculation; she was determined to taste
the sparkling water, which looked so clear
and inviting; approaching the pump, she
threw back her veil, ready to drink what
she was was preparing for her.  All the
beaux wished to be supplied with water 
at the same moment, and crowded round
the blushing Clementina; the pump-wo-
man pressed the glasses, but most of the
gentleman forgot their intention, and quit
ted the spot when the lovely stranger did.

  Mrs. Conway was addressed by many, and introduced some of those she was well
acquainted with to her friend; a very great,               HOWARD CASTLE.           109

bustle at the room-door attracted their at-
tention, and from the prodigious flow of
words, Clementina feared she should soon
see lady Hillyard; she was not mistaken,
as her ladyship made her entrée, surround-
ed by innumerable gentlemen, who hoped
to find, from her general knowledge, who
the divinity was who accompanied Mrs.
Conway.

  Lady Hillyard suspected that she could
give them all the information they wished
for; she led them on, full of expectation; as
soon as she was within reach of her voice
being heard, she called out--" Miss Bou-
verie, how do you do? I am glad to see
you have at last ventured to be looked at?
Mrs. Conway, I assure you, you are highly
honoured; this lady would not accom-
pany me to the pump-room, all I could
say.  Pray have you been at the rooms?  I
have been so engaged with private parties,
I could not be there, except the evening I
invited you to go.  I assure you there was
a very genteel party, and a great deal of
good dancing; of course, Mr. K----- has
waited upon you, as no doubt the general
is a subscriber--I am more than half110          HOWARD CASTLE.

pleased your first introduction will be to-
morrow night at my ball; after that is
over, you must not bury yourself alive. I
hope your father has found great benefit
from the water--does he bathe, or perhaps 
only comes for a little amusement? is he
fond of cards? I often have parties which
will suit him; I will send him an invita-
tion for my next, which will be in a few
days; old people ought to be entertained
as well as the young. Let me ask you one
question." coming at the same time close
up to Clementina, saying in an audible
whisper, and with a very significant look,
"when do you expect the marquis?"

   She made a pause for the first time, in evident expectation of an answer, which 
was given in a grave tone of voice--"I 
know nothing of his intentions."

   "What a hypocrite you are!" said she,
laughing; "he is to be here to-morrow,
and is to be at my ball, and will be Miss
Bouverie's partner."

   So saying, she tripped away to speak to
some other friends, fully meaning to re-
turn and join Mrs. Conway and Clemen-
tina, who in the most earnest manner                HOWARD CASTLE.           111

urged their departure. The intelligence
she had received surprised her a good
deal, as how should lady Hillyard know
when the marquis of Clemaire was to ar-
rive in Bath? it was not likely the Rad-
nor family and he should travel together,
as their movements would not suit any
one in health. It was odd lady Elenora
had not mentioned who was to accompany
them, if it was their intention to come to-
gether; in short, she could not account in
any way for the information, but she satis-
fied herself that she should not be involved
in trouble by his visit, as probably every
thing would be immediately settled with
lord Montague. This pleasing dream of
happiness continued the whole day; the
evening she spent with Mrs. Conway, who
had a small party of rational, agreeable
people; the general had become a mem-
ber of a whist club, which occupied him
almost every night, and was a source of
amusement to him; there he met with
some old military friends, and enjoyed the
satisfaction of talking over past scenes of
their lives, of fighting battles over again,
and of canvassing politics.
112             HOWARD CASTLE.

  Clementina awoke in the morning with
the most tranquil feelings; she was pre-
pared to see lord Montague, the shadow
of what lie had been the last interview she
had with him; she was shocked with his
altered appearance .so much, that she be-
lieved it hardiv possible he could be more
reduced; she then thought him the most
interesting figure she had ever seen. The
post-hour passed without any letter, which
was u confirmation to her hopes of soon
seeing the party; the flutter of expecta-
tion was visible to the general, who watch-
ed her varying looks; every rattle on the
street arrested her attention; at last Frolic
barked, which announced a stranger's ap-
proach: the room-door was thrown open,
and tlse marquis entered.

 Clementina's countenance, which was
animated beyond description, betrayed the
disappointment she felt: she received him.
however, with much politeness, and eager-
ly inquired where he had left the travel-
lers?

  " I must first," said lie, " express the
pleasure I feel in seeing you." He took her
hand, and pressed it to his lips. " I will               HOWARD CASTLE.           113

not attempt to paint to you how heavily the
time has passed since you left Carnsworth
Castle; to follow you has been the summit
of my wishes; business alone confined me,
but it was making arrangements which, I
trust, will be conducive to my permanent
happiness. I have a letter," turning to the
general, " from my father for you; I have
one, Miss Boaverie, for you,  from my mo-
ther," at the same time presenting them,

"and which, I believe, will express what
they both sincerely feel; and I have like-
wise a packet from lady Elenora."

     "Are they not upon the road?"

     "They are," replied he, " but it is the
road to Colnbrook they are pursuing;
their plans have been fluctuating . Lord
Montague at present leads the party; he
thought his strength unequal to the hurry
and bustle of Earth, he hopes to gain
health in the calm seclusion of the coun-
try."

Clementina sunk upon a sofa, nearly
overcome by this severe and unexpected
blow.

     The marquis saw the agitation she was
in, but still he was not alarmed; her cou-


 114    HOWARD CASTLE.

sin was a married man, for whom she could only feel the affection which their relation-ship sanctioned_" There is not the least occasion for you to be alarmed ; if you will read lady Elenora's letter, she will account you for their change of plans."

The general was astonished with the marquis's composure; he thought his daughter had betrayed, in the plainest manner, the state of her heart; yet it seemed to create no alarm; he appeared anxious to explain why lord Montague had behaved in so capricious a manner,and to remove, if possible, all blame from the house of Randnor.

As soon as Clementina's feelings would permit, she retired to her own apartment,where she gave way to the most gloomy thoughts; all her bright prospects had changed; she was now perfectly convireed she must for ever give up lord Montague.His sister's letter gave her no information,but that his spirits had sunk to such a de-gree, they were obliged to abandon their intention of visiting their friends in Bath.Lord Montague's courage had failed when they were prepared to set off, and they.                    HOWARD CASTLE.              115

were forced to change their rout to Coln-
brook, very much to her mortification;
her brother's strength had returned in
some degree, but his mind appeared more
and more agitated- "he now talks of going
abroad. I fear," continued lady Elenora,
"that his nerves have received a shake
from those repeated attacks, which they
will never recover; his temper even is al-
tered; sometimes we fear his intellects are
affected, he is so strange and capricious."

"It is not caprice," exclaimed Clemen-
tina, as she threw down the letter; "there
is a dreadful cause for his conduct, which
must be explained before long; and what-
ever his situation is, from the bottom of
my heart do I pity him."

She firmly believed she was the cause of
the sorrow which seemed to overwhelm
him; and however it was accounted for,
she was convinced he was not culpable.
The whole morning she spent in her own
apartment, indulging her melancholy re-
flections, and expressing to lady Elenora
the disappointment she had expereienced.

When she appeared at dinner, she found
her father alone; he looked astonished,116 HOWARD CASTLE.

when she entered the room in her morning
dishabille, and with evident dejection in
her manner-"I was not uneasy at your
absence, as I concluded you was preparing
for your evening's amusement; I am dis-
appointed and surprised to see you look so
forlorn and disconsolate; I thought you had
been busy at your toilet, otherwise I should
have expected you to have gone an 
with me; but perhaps you have been pre-
paring your smart ornaments?"

"No," replied Clementina, "my time
has been occupied in writing to lady Ele-
nora Montague, from whom I have had a
long letter; had you sent a message for
me, I would have accompanied you with
the greatest pleasure. I believed you were
engaged with the marquis."

"He did not remain five minutes after
you left me, as he had some business of
importance to execute; he has offered to
breakfast here to-morrow, when he hopes
to find us disengaged."
'I wish you had given him a hint," re-
plied Clementina, "of what he has to ex-
pect from the conference"

"I wish you had given him a hint," re-
plied Clementina, "Of what he has to 
expect from the conference."
"I had a reason for being silent on the                    Howard Castle.           117

subject," was his answer; "I still hope he
may be successful; the events of this day
may perhaps work a change in his favour;
he is sincerely attached to you, and would 
be devoted to your happiness."

  "It is impossible," she replied; "hap-
pines with the marquis of Clemaire is in-
compatible; I wish most ardently that I
could teach my heart to yield to your
wishes, but it is stubborn to a great de-
gree, and I have no power over it, but to
lament that I must give you uneasiness."

  "I have one favour to ask," said the
general.

  "And surely it will be granted," inter-
rupted his daughter; "where a command
might be substituted, a petition so mildly
made cannot fail."

  "Then," continued the general, "go to
the ball to-night; do not shew by your
manner that lord Clemaire is unfortunate-
ly disagreeable to you; if he has an op-
portunity of conversing with you, evade 
the subject of his love, without giving him
a positive refusal-I entreat you will; if,
after mature deliberaton, you still con-
tinue determined in your resolution, I will
118 HOWARD CASTLE.

take the painful task upon myself, which
will inflict a wound, I firmly believe, will
not be easily cured, and which will disap-
point my most favourite plans. Has the
duchess been very flattering in her expres-
sions to you?"

" I dare say she has," replied Clemen-
tina, " but I have not opened her letter;
the truth is, I entirely forgot it."

Nothing could have proved more fully
to her father her sentiments than this in-
stance of indifference; he said nothing
more, until they had finished their dinner,
and the servants had withdrawn ; he ob-
srved with sorrow that she eat nothing,
and appeared lost in thought. She was
roused from her reverie by the general
abruptly asking, if lady Elenora had
attempted to account for her brother's ca-
pricious behaviour?
" His health," she faintly answered,
" has prevented them coming as they in-
tended."

" His whimsical disposition is the real
cause," was his reply ; " he appears to me
to be a very undecided character-all by
fits and starts-one moment tolerably

                    HOWARD CASTLE.              119

cheerful; the next, without any apparent
cause, abstracted and gloomy; at no time
he ever appeared agreeable in my eyes."

As no comment was made on the re-
mark, the subject dropped, and she retired
to her own apartment. The ball, which
the day before had been a prospect of plea-
sure, now appeared a burthen to her; she
had promised her father to dance with the
marquis, which would, of course, confirm
lady Hillyard in all she had asserted; the
sorrow which she must give to her father
by her apparent obstinacy weighed heavily
on her thoughts; she took up the letter
from the duchess, and broke the seal; the
contents were what she expected, very
civil and flattering, but not making the
least doubt of her son's success. A few
lines were inclosed from lady Augusta, ex-
pressing the joy which filled her heart, at
the idea of embracing her dear friend as
her sister.

"All the family are confident," thought
she, "that I shall joyfully accept of this
great offer; and the world in general will
blame me for refusing such rank and af-
fluence; but without the most decided120               HOWARD CASTLE.

preference for the man I marry, no temp-
tation will tempt me to act contrary to
my feelings."

   She finished her letter to lady Elenora,
by entreating a speedy answer, and a par-
ticular account of her brother's health; she
felt more relieved when it was sent off,
and calculated the exact time when she
could receive an answer. Her maid did
not let her enjoy the pleasure of being
alone; the now toilsome task of the toilet
must be attended to; the milliner had
exerted all her powers of taste to ensure
the business of so great a person as the
marchioness of Clemaire elect. She
thought not of examining the various or-
naments which were to adorn her person;
her only wish was, that she might be re-
lieved from the trouble of having them
put on.

   Mary dressed her as a child does a doll;
her total indifference excited the curiosity
of her attendant, who secretly wondered
what had worked the change on her mis-
tress's spirits since the morning, when she
was all life and animation, preparing for
her evening's amusement with alacrity, now             HOWARD CASTLE.          121

so dull, so melancholy; the marquis too
was arrived, which must be agreeable, as
all the servants believed him to be their
young lady's lover.

  Mary was lost in wonder, and was obliged
to contain her surprise; but her thoughts
were as busy, although not in the same
tumult as Clementina's were; she hastened
her, with a quickness of manner unusual
to her, declaring she was particularly slow,
because she was tired of the fatigue, and
perfectly indifferent as to her appearance.
The peevish tone of voice with which she
was conscious she had spoken, vexed her,
as it betrayed the agitation of her mind;
she apologized, in some degree, for her im-
patience, by saying she was not well, and
felt unfit either for dressing or going
abroad.  When the arduous task was com-
pleted, she went in quest of her father;
she was afraid she had left him in rather
an abrupt manner; and as she felt more
composed, she wished to sit an hour with
him, to convince him that her spirits had
regained, some degree, their usual cheer-
fulness; she was resolved to conquer her122          HOWARD CASTLE.

feelings, as she saw how anxious and un-
easy the general was upon her account.
She was disappointed in her intention, as
his servant told her he was gone out for
the evening; she seated herself by the
drawing-room fire, and soon her busy fancy
was at work, when a carriage stopping at
the door, and the bell being rung violently,
made her conclude it was later than she
had imagined; and that Mrs. Conway,
who was to call for her, was arrived; to
her surprise the servant announced the
marquis of Clemaire.
  Clementina evidently shewed he was an
unexpected visitor; she immediately said
_____"This is an unlooked-for honour, my
lord; had the general known your inten-
tion, he would not have been absent."
  "I knew his daughter would be at home,
as it is not yet the hour for going to lady
Hillyard's; and I did hope fate would fa-
vour me, by giving me a little of your com-
pany. I knew your father was engaged,
and I am happy to see the important task
of the toilet is over; you are most elegant-
ly and becomingly dressed, quite in the
Paris mode."             HOWARD CASTLE.          123

  "My taste," she replied, " has no merit
in the dress I wear; the milliner has the
entire credit of composing it, and my maid
that of putting it on. I was quite indif-
ferent as to the effect, and wholly uncon-
scious that it is the Paris fashion."

   "They certainly," replied the marquis.
"deserve praise; but where could they
have found such a block?"

  He gazed at her with the most earnest
attention, which distressed and confused
her; he was more struck with her uncom-
mon beauty than ever he had been before,
and exulted in the hope of soon possessing
such an assemblage of charms. Never
did Clementina wish so much for a third
person as she did at that moment; she
felt unequal to supporting a conversation
on indifferent subjects with the marquis,
and alarmed at the idea of his touching
upon one which would distress her above
all others: was she at liberty to have
openly avowed her sentiments to him, she
could have been at no loss, as she never
felt more in the humour for repulsing him
than on the present occasion; but the pro-
                    G 2.   124                  HOWARD CASTLE.

mise she had given her father obliged her
to have a guard upon her expressions;
why he should have made such a request
she could not imagine, as no circumstance
could happen which could change her sen-
timents. She wished exceedingly to con-
verse- she dreaded the hated subject, as
she was convinced it was his intention not
to let so good an opportunity slip; she felt
like lady Hillyard, ready to ask questions,
without the smallest wish to hear his an-
swer; her manner was so odd, that he was
surprised; there was an absence and an agi-
tation which he had never perceived be-
fore, and which he wished exceedingly to
have explained. At least he said-"I hope,
Miss Bouverie, I am upon that footing of
intimacy with you which may sanction a
question which interests me deeply; has
any thing happened to disturb your mind?
Your manner this morning gave me un-
easiness; this evening it is so strange, that
did I not see you look better than ever I
did in my life, I should be afraid you were
ill. Oh, Miss Bouverie, you are not a
stranger to my feelings! and I trust I shall
soon have a title to watch with tender care                    HOWARD CASTLE.         125

over your happiness; to-morrow I intend
to spend with the general, when I hope
every thing will be decided, and that a
period will be fixed for making me one of
the happiest men in existence."

   A servant entered, and stopped the mar-
quis in his harangue, by inquiring id Cle-
mentina would choose to have ten before
she went out; an assent was with the
greatest readiness given, and an order to
bring it immediately. She was charmed
with the interruption, and hoped there
would not be time for further conversa-
tion, as she was resolved to detain the ser-
vant in the room until Mrs. Conway's ar-
rival. She took no notice of the speech
which the marquis had just made, but
inquired if he was acquainted with the
friend she expected?

   "I am," was his reply; "but I must
not waste those precious moments in in-
different subjects, when there is one so
very interesting to me. Out engagement,
I find, is the general topic in Bath."

   "That is strange," said Clementina, "as
certainly no engagement exists between
us."126 HOWARD CASTLE.

" You have long known my senti-
ments," replied the marguis; "and I more
than once attempted, when you were at
Carnsworth, to impart them to you. You
Know the disappointments I met with;
the intention I had of following you to
this place, prevented my explaining by
letter the sanction I had from my father to
declare the situation of my heart. I have
now the most convincing proof to give,
that my choice meets with the warmest
approbation of both the duke and duchess,
which I suppose the letter has expressed
to you."

" I am highly honoured," said Clemen-
tina, bowing, " by the condescension of
the noble family."

" They admire you," said the marquis
" as you deserve, and they exult in the
happy prospect of their son."

He was again interrupted by the ser-
vauts entering with tea, in his pompous
declaration of how very graciously she
would be received : no sound of her con-
sent was ever hinted at ; that he supposed
was a matter of course. Mrs. Conway's
praise was again sounded by Clementina,
                     HOWARD CASTLE.             127

who was resolved he should not have an
opportunity of impressing her with the
honour he meant to confer upon her. She
desired the servants to wait, whilst she
trifled with a cup of tea.

The marquis agreed in all she said in
commendation of her friend, who was ex-
tremely intimate with his mother- "My
acquaintance is with her son, who, he be-
lieved, was to be in England soon."

Clementina replied- "Mrs. Conway
hoped to have him with her in the spring."

"Then," said he, smiling, "you will be
introduced to quite a hero of romance;
lord Howard, I understand, is every thing
that is charming; his person, his face, his
manners, his talents, are beyond compa-
rison; in short, I believe he has been
spoiled at foreign courts, where he is held
up as a paragon of perfection."

"If he has his mother's art of pleasing,"
said Clementina, "no wonder his is ad-
mired; she has had beauty of form and
face, and is still a very handsome woman;
if his lordship possesses an exterior in any
way equal to hers, with her manners, ta-128          HOWARD CASTLE.

lents, and disposition, he must indeed be a
paragon."

   "His father," replied the marquis, "was
thought the handsomest man at court; the
duke has often said, he never saw so fine,
or so graceful a figure as Mr. Conway's;
lord Howard, I believe, is equally so. Miss
Conway inherited her mother's beauty; I
remember seeing her before I went abroad,
and was exceedingly struck with her lovely
appearance; she was a luminary which
dazzled the world for one winter; all ad-
mired her; her manners were equally in-
teresting, as her form and face were
pleasing."

   The marquis was interrupted by the ar-
rival of Mrs. Conway, who appeared dis-
concerted at intruding on a tête-à-tête, but
the pleasure Clementina expressed at see-
ing her took off, in some degree, the un-
pleasant feel of being an unwelcome guest.
She had not seen the marquis since his re-
turn from his travels; finding him seated
with Miss Bouverie confirmed the report
of their marriage being on the point of
taking place; she felt pleased that her              HOWARD CASTLE.        129

young friend had such a prospect of rank,
and, she hoped, of happiness. She was
prejudiced in favour of the marquis, who
she thought had shewn uncommon discri-
mination in his choice; the extreme beauty
of Clementina, she was more perfectly con-
vinced each time she met with her, was
her least attraction; she almost envied the 
duchess the prospect of being possessed of
such a daughter.

   Lord Clemaire, soon she was seated,
inquired after lord Howard.

   Mrs. Conway smiled--"You have anti-
cipated my question; as you have so re-
cently come Paris, I expected infor-
mation from you; my son was certainly in
the capital of France when your lordship
was."

  "Lord Howard," replied the marquis,
"is too conspicuous a character for me not
to have heard of him, had he been where I
was; I was so unfortunate as to be always
a few days too late; I heard of him at va-
rious places, but met with him at none;
it is several months since I left Paris."

  "It is only a few weeks since he arrived

                  G 3130                HOWARD CASTLE.

there," replied she; "so your meeting was
impossible; from his last letter he gives me
hopes of being soon in London, if he can
accomplish some business which he has to
transact in France; he has always a pur-
suit which interests and amuses him."

   "And which has been of the utmost
importance to his country," added lord
Clemaire; "he does not bury his talents,
but employs them in the most advan-
tageous way; his universal knowledge of 
men and manners, and of the plans and
machinations of foreign courts, must make
his remarks always attended to, as of the
highest consequence."

   Pleased with the compliment, which, al-
though nothing more than the truth, was
gratifying beyond expression, Mrs. Con-
way bowed--"Lord Howard," she added,
"has many partial friends; amongst the
number, I am happy I can add the mar-
quis of Clemaire."

   "I believe," rejoined he, "it is a very
general idea; I heard his praises sounded
wherever I went, and it will afford me the
utmost satisfaction to renew a friendship
formed at school,and at the university. We                                                 HOWARD CASTLE.         131

have not met for several years, but I hope
we shall be settled as decided English cha-
racters, as lord Howard's foreign researches
must be nearly over; and I trust I shall 
not again quit my native land."

"No,"replied Mrs. Conway: "had my
son such a prospect, I am confident he
would not ramble far from his happy 
domestic circle: had he such a prospect, I
should be the happiest woman in the world."

The marquis bowed, his countenance
animated with the pleasure which sparkled
in his eyes; he saw the lovely tint of con-
fusion which overspread Clementina's
averted face; he construed it into bashful
timidity; and all in his own favour.

Vexed at the evident belief which Mrs.
Conway had shewn, that her fate was de-
cided, she betrayed such embarrassment
as converted the rumour her friend had 
heard into certainty; and she was as 
thoroughly convinced that the marriage
was immediately to take place, as if she
addressed Miss Bouverie by th title of
marchioness of Clemaire; she exulted in132     HOWARD CASTLE.

her gay prospects, as she never for a mo-
ment could doubt her love for the mar-
quis, whose manners were pleasing to Mrs.
Conway, and his appearance, she thought,
uncommonly prepossessing.
   The hour appointed for attending lady 
Hillyard's festive scene was past. Cle-
mentina, who wished above all things to
break up the conference, reminded her
friend of their engagement, Mrs. Con-
way looked at her watch, and was sur-
prised to find how the time had stolen
away, much more agreeably, she believed,
than it would do in the hurry and bustlc
they were going into: she turned to the
marquis, and hoped he would accept of a
seat in her carriage. "Miss Bouverie is to
accompany me, which, I think, will be an
inducement."
   The pleasure which this invitation gave
to lord Clemaire was quickly checked by
Clementina saying--"His lordship's car-
riage is in waiting; why should you be
crowded?"
   "If it is not inconvenient to you," was
his reply, "I certainly should prefer        HOWARD CASTLE.     135

agreeable society to being alone; the in-
vitation I received me you must
decide my fate."
 
 "Then most certainly you do not ac-
company us."

  So saying, she moved towards the door,
and she heard him say, in a low voice--
"It is her command--I must obey."

  Mrs. Conway secretly wondered if he
would continue so acquiescent to her
whims, which, she thought, she exercised
in the present instance; she rather felt sur-
prised with the quickness of her manner,
and the decided voice with which she de-
termined his fate. He, with the utmost
good humour, handed them to the coach,
humbly soliciting the hand which he con-
tinued to retain in his, pleading that it
might be his for the evening. A positive
refusal brought a remark of--"How cruel
you are! but you cannot debar my eyes
from watching you, which is the next plea-
sure to dancing with you;" so saying, he
tenderly pressed it, and they drove off.

  "Never for a moment since I have had
the pleasure of knowing you," said Mrs.
Conway, "have I wished to see an action134         HOWARD CASTLE

changed, or a word altered, which you 
have uttered, till this evening."
     "And what have I done or said to-night
that you disapprove of? I had been teazed
with lord Clemaire's company before you
came; if you think my manner to him was
odd, you yourself were alone to blame, by
hinting at a report which I know is in cir-
culation here, that I am to marry him."
     "And I believe it a true one," replied
Mrs. Conway.
     "Then you are like all the Beauclaire
family--take it for granted, the moment
the request is made, that I shall drop a
courtesy, express my gratitude for the
high honour, and joyfully give my hand,
let my heart say what it will. A decal co-
ronet on my coach must quiet its feelings,
and be a substitute for love, which it never
shall be: when I marry, it must be to a
being calculated to make me happy ; if 
he is of the same rank in society as myself,
with a moderate fortune, and formed by
nature to please me, how different would
be my prospect of happiness to this al-
liance, which certainly, in point of splen-
dour, is far beyond what I am entitiled to!"      HOWARD CASTLE   135

    This speech of Clementina's seemed to
open a new prospect to Mrs. Conway, who
felt as if a sable curtain had been drawn
from before her eyes; the first day she had
seen the fascinating Miss Bouverie, she
wished her son had been present; the next
moment she rejoiced in his absence—the
beautiful siren was engaged. What were
nore her wishes may be readily supposed.
Could her son succeed where the marquis
of Clemaire had failed? She firmly believed
he might; but was there no obstacle in
the way which could make her cruel to
the marquis? that heart which she seemed
so resolved to please, might have met with
an object to place its warmest affec-
tions upon; it might be engaged, and
she might expose her darling Howard to
misery by the introduction she wished for.
All she could do was to watch with the
utmost vigilance, and discover, if possible,
whether the treasure was disposed of or
not. The conversation ended by Mrs. Con-
way's saying, in the most earnest manner
—"It is not my wish to pry into your
feelings or your engagements; all I can 136             HOWARD CASTLE

say may be summed up in a few words:
had I been blessed with a daughter---"
here a deep sigh seemed to come from 
the bottom of her heart--" I could hardly
have been more interested in her happiness. 
I applaud your sentiments highly, as they
are rarely to be met with".
   They arrived in the circus, where the 
crowd of carriages impeded their progress
to lady Hillyards door.



                   CHAPTER V.

The marquis was in readiness to hand
Mrs. Conway and Clementina from the
carriage; he appeared to feel no resent-
ment to the latter for the solitary drive he
had manner, she would be his partner;
she kept perfectly steady in her refusal;
she could not obey her father; in her be-
haviour to him, she had no duplicity in
her nature, and felt such a repugnance at
        HOWARD CASTLE.     137

deceiving any one, that she was perfectly
resolved to follow the dictates of her own
feelings.

  She observed lady Hillyard look at her
with the utmost significance, when she
saw their attendant; and congratulated
her, in an audible whisper, upon his arri-
val--"I told you in the pump-room he
would be here, and you pretended such
ignorance, as if you did not know, much
better than I did, all his plans and mo-
tions."

  More company entering forced lady
Hillyard's attention from Clementina, who
slowly advanced towards the upper end
of the room with Mrs. Conway; there
were so many of both sexes she was ac-
quainted with, that their progress was
much impeded. Clementina was intro-
duced to a number of smart people; her
beauty attracted general admiration, and
her high rank in prospect, which had been
sounded on all sides by lady Hillyard,
made her the first object of attention; no
one wondered, when they saw her appear,
at lord Clemaire's choice; his taste was ge-
nerally allowed to be uncommonly good,138          HOWARD CASTLE.

as his lovely bride-elect shone with unri-
valled splendour.  The young ladies ob-
served with surprise, that she did not seem
in the least degree elated with her charm-
ing prospects; her features were pensive,
and her manner grave; there was no
haughtiness of carriage towards any one,
else her gravity might have been attri-
buted to pride; there was a degree of po-
liteness to all, which insured their appro-
bation.

     Mrs. Conway left her with a party of
young ladies for a few moments, as she
had seen at a little distance a particular
friend of hers, who she was surprised to
find was in Bath.  The room was crowded,
and Clementina proposed to wait for her
return.  She observed a very elegant-look-
ing man, who appeared much pleased at
meeting with Mrs. Conway:  she inquired
of the young ladies if they could inform
her who he was?

     "Bless me!" exclaimed one of them.
"do you not know sir Theodosius Sid-
ney, one of the most fashionable men in
London?  he has been only three days in
Bath."         HOWARD CASTLE.          139

    "He is extremely handsome," said Cle-
mentina.

    "Oh, perfectly charming" was re-echoed
by the group.

    "I wonder who he will dance with?"
said one of the young ladies, who had
heard the history of Clementina from the
milliner, and who was secretly pleased
that she would not be a competitor for the
prize.

   Expectation filled every breast, and
every heart fluttered as they saw Mrs.
Conway advancing towards them, attended
by sir Theodosius; but soon their emotions
were turned to envy, when they heard her
introduce him to Clementina, at the same
time saying-" I did not promise you suc-
cess; I think you are too late, as I believe
Miss Bouverie is engaged."

    "If there is a chance for me," said sir
Thcodosius, gracefully bowing," I cer-
tainly will make the attempt: are you
engaged for the two first dances?"

    She smiled, and with the most animated
manner answered-" I am at perfect liber-
ty, and will dance with you with much
pleasure."


 
140          HOWARD CASTLE.

   Sir Theodosius looked at what he ex-
pressed, pleased beyond measure, and
proudly handed his partner to her place.
The marquis had been deeply engaged
from the moment he had entered the room,
and had listened to many congratulations
on his happy prospect, with the greatest
delight, bowing and smiling assent to all
the plans which were fixed for him; the
very day he found was appointed by the
world, on which he was to turn benedict;
he feared they were rather premature, as
settlements, &c. could hardly be adjusted
in so short a time, otherwise the marriage
really might have taken place at the period
lady Hillyard mentioned.  He abruptly
broke off the conversation, as he saw a set
was forming.

   "Ah!" cried lady Hillyard, "you are
too late; Miss Bouverie has stood up with
sir Theodosius Sidney; matters are too far
advanced between you, for you to be her
partner.  I was surprised when I saw you
of her party, as young ladies in general are
rather scrupulous on these occasions.  Her
beauty is much admired, I assure you, and
you are exceedingly envied by all men, 

         HOWARD CASTLE.          141

who call her the divinity; she certainly is
a lovely creature—you will be a most ele-
gant couple, by far the handsomest in the
beau monde."

  Flattery generally is listened to, and by
110 one with more attention than by the
marquis; lie was not unconscious of his
own personal merit, and he had peculiar
delight in hearing that other people agreed
with him. Lady Hillyard's attention was
required in another part of the room, and
the marquis approached the dancers, where
lie saw his Clementina the magnet which
attracted every eye; her dancing, her light
elegant form, and the grace and ease of her
attitudes, made all the other ladies in the
set appear to the greatest disadvantage.

  Mrs. Conway had refusal joining in a
card-party, that she might see if Miss Bou-
verie still bore the palm from her contem-
poraries ; she was soon convinced there
was not one who could enter the list with
her. She saw the marquis lost in admira-
tion ; he seemed totally insensible of the
crowd which surrounded him; one object
moved before his eyes—one object en grossed
his senses. Mrs. Conway roused him from142          HOWARD CASTLE.

his reverie, by asking why he was an
idle spectator? "I dare say you excel as
much in this amusement as Miss Bouverie
does?"

   "You heard her object to being my
partner--I have no inclination to dance
with any other person."

   "At a private ball," replied Mrs. Con-
way, "private feelings should not be stu-
died; there are several young ladies with-
out beaux; and as you are so intimate
with lady Hillyard, you should endeavor
to make yourself extremely agreeable;
look around you, and fix upon any young
lady who is walking about without em-
ployment or amusement, and I will intro-
duce you."

   The marquis shrugged up his shoulders,
as a token he would obey; but that he
would rather remain as he was, at liberty
to employ his eyes as he chose.

   Mrs. Conway urged him to make choice
of a fair lady; he assured her they were
all perfectly alike to him. Miss Delia
Clements stood with a companion or
two, watching those who were busily em-
ployed footing it away to a lively Scotchtune: they were beating time upon their
hands with their fans; their heads were
moving in the same measure, and it was
with difficulty they could keep on the 
same spot. All expectation of partners
was over; they were resigned to their fate,
but hoped it would prove more propitious
for the next set. Many young men were 
sauntering about the room, enjoying their
own consequence, as they contemplated
the young ladies who were without part-
ners; it was too great a bore to dance;
they could not conceive what pleasure a
man could possibly have in running about
till he was worn out with fatigue, and
broiled with heat, sitting down for a few
moments gasping for breath, and farming
his partner, who was almost fainting from 
the exertion of twisting and turning twen-
ty couples; no man had strength for it; it 
was a barbarous custom, and what they
would not practise.

The marquis was not one of the delicate
tribe; he professed his love for the amuse-
ment, and always joined in it when he
could; he never before felt unwilling either to render himself agreeable to the144      HOWARD CASTLE.

fair sex, or of obeying the summons to the
merry dance. He could not have Clemen-
tina for his partner, and he did not wish
for any other, but he would do as Mrs.
Conway wished him; he therefore quietly
handed the fair lady along, and placing
her in a proper situation, prepared himself
to watch the sylph-like form which was
dancing, and which occupied all his
thoughts; he found to his mortification,
that Miss Delia Clements was not satis-
fied with her feet being employed; her
tongue wished to be equally active; she
would not permit him to be a moment
idle; he begged pardon again and again
for being so inattentive, but no sign of 
fatigue could procure him a cessation from
her eloquence. Her spirits were exhila-
rated by dancing with the marquis of Cle-
maire, and she had a mind to make good
use of the precious moments, which she
did, as she talked him to death; even when
Miss Bouverie was within two couples of 
him, and when his whole senses were oc-
cupied, Miss Clements never allowed him
a moment's respite; if she was busily em-
ployed in the figure, still she found an op-


HOWARD CASTLE. 145

portunity for conversation; her volubility
of tongue could not be equalled, in the
marquis's opinion, even by lady Hillyard.
Worn out with the exertion he had made 
to pay his fair partner decent attention, he
rejoiced when the music ceased, as with it
ceased his misery; he led the young lady
to a seat, and with quicker steps than he
used in dancing, flew to the part of the
room where he saw Mrs. Conway and Cle-
mentina.

Sir Theodosius was busily employed
bringing Miss Bouverie a glass of orage-
ade, which she received with a smile of 
thanks. Lord Clemaire felt no uneasiness;
he believed himself perfectly secure, and
was thoroughly convinced, if she really
followed the dictates of her heart, he was
the one she would have conversed and
danced with: he ventured again to solicit
her hand, but was with politeness re-
pulsed; she was engaged.

Sir Theodosius, who never in his life
had had so agreeable a partner, watched
her countenance, as she answered lord Cle-
maire; he felt pleased, as he was almost

VOL. II.
146              HOWARD CASTLE.

convinced he might profit by a slight de-
gree of hesitation he observed. As soon
as an opportunity offered, he said--" I am 
afraid Miss Bouverie will think me the
most inquisitive and impertinent stranger
she ever met with; but the reward , if I
succeed,would be so great, that I cannot
resist making the attempt; are you really 
engaged for the next dances?"

   "Why should you think I am not?"re-
plied she,smiling.

   "Because I am a very good physiogno-
mist, and your countenance, which is a
most bewitching study, betrayed to me
what I hope is the case, and that you
will continue to be my partner for the
evening."

   "Lavater himself," cried she, " could 
not have developed my face better than 
you have done; I certainly am not en-
gaged, and will accept of your offer with
much Pleasure."

 "Could I go on with my skill," replied
he," and find there was real pleasure in
dedicating this evening to my happiness,I
should be in a very dangerous situation;I
will therefore cease to dive into your feel-
          HOWARD CASTLE.               147

ings, as I fear the investigation would pre-
ponderate miserably against myself; I will
do, as I have often done before- banish
thought and enjoy the present moment. I
am aware of the danger of conversing with
you, and came prepared to contemplate 
charms at a distance which are destined
for another. I have done more than I ex-
pected- I have found you at liberty - you
have danced with me- you have conversed
with me; and I am convinced the account
I heard given of you was not exaggerated."

 "Who have you met with," said Cle-
mentina, with surprise, "who could give
you any tidings of me? I have been only
a few months in this country; it is strange
that I should be known by any body."

 "Do you forget the friends you met
with at Carnsworth Castle? I shall almost
accuse you of ingratitude; they have not
forgot you; and I believe, I may add,
never will."

 That sir Theodosius was a friend of lord
Montague's, she did not for a moment he-
sitate in concluding; she felt unequal to
name him; perhaps he might know his
history, and could account for his strange148        HOWARD CASTLE.

behaviour to her, but she could not gain
courage to ask him; and probably he
would not, particularly at a ball, impart
any thing which could agitate her; she
firmly believed he knew the peculiar situa-
tion she was in.  Clementina was mis-
taken in her suspicious; sir Theodosius
was not at all acquainted with lord Mon-
tague; Mr. Stopford was the person who
had raised his curiosity; he descibed Miss
Bouverie as a paragon in every way, but
at the same time added--" She is neither
within your reach or mine."  This was all
sir Theodosius knew of her history.
  He was informed she was on the point
of marriage with the marquis of Clemaire;
he cared not for the information, nor after he
knew her, he thought her a most fascina-
ting woman. But sir Theodosius was not
a marrying man; he was a great admirer
of beauty, and of the sex in general; but
he was too gay to be hampered with a
wife.
  Clementina was pleased with his man-
ner, which was completely that of a man
of the world; his conversation was lively
        HOWARD CASTLE.     149

and entertaining, as he knew all on the
list of fashion; he had been a great deal
abroad, and always spent his time in the
best society. The gay life he had led had
involved his extensive estates in consider-
able debt; but still there was sufficient left
to give him all that he wished for--amuse-
ment. Many different topics were started
by him; at last he asked her how long she
had been acquainted with Mrs. Conway?

   "Not ten days," was her answer; "yet
I feel as if I had known her all my life."

   "She is," replied sir Theodosius, "an
ornament to her sex; her judgment so
good, and her manners so pleasing, that
she is well calculated to fill with credit the
office of friend and companion to Miss
Bouverie, which is the highest commen-
dation I can give her. I have," continued
he, "been intimate with her in all the differ-
ent situations in which she has been placed,
and in each has acquitted herself in the
happiest manner. I knew her in Mr. Con-
way's lifetime, and never was there a more
amiable or agreeable wife than she was;
she studied his temper, which was hasty;150            HOWARD CASTLE.

his health, which was indifferent; and
his amusement, in every way.  Before
his marriage, I have understood, as my 
own knowledge does not reach so far back,
he was a morose, abstracted young man,
particularly elegant in his address and in
his appearance, but was seldom inclined to
render himself agreeable in society; she
brought him out, drew his talents, which
were brilliant, into notice, and which from
a peculiar shyness would have continued
in a dormant state; her active mind ani-
mated his, and he became a leading charac-
ter in the cabinet.  It was generally be-
lieved her quick perceptions and extraor-
dinary abilities were often consulted in
matters of great moment by her husband,
whose opinion of her was proved by his
will.  He left her sole guardian to his chil-
dren, and she has, with the utmost ability 
and integrity, fulfilled the trust.  Lord
Howard's immense property was managed 
with all the wisdom and skill by (certain-
ly I may say) a young woman, as she 
was not more than thirty when her hus-
band died.  She rejected many spendid 
offers, as her beauty was very little dimi-               HOWARD CASTLE         151

nished from age; she attended with all
the care a mother (and such a mother as
she was) could to the education of her
children; their minds expanded under her
watchful eye, and never had a parent more
reason to be proud of her offspring; their
beauty and their extraordinary attain-
ments were quite a topic of conversation.
You have no doubt heard that she lost her
daughter, the first year she was presented
to an admiring world."

   "I have," replied Clementina.

   The pleasant manner in which sir Theo-
dosius gave her this little narration
charmed her, and she regretted an inter-
ruption to it; the sound of dancing again
put all in agitation. Clementina was to
lead off, which made their being in their
places necessary; she was pleased when 
she was again at liberty to be seated, as sir
Theodosius never for a moment quitted
her; many attempts were made to share
in her notice, many beaux were intro-
duced, but all were unsuccessful. The
marquis joined them for a few minutes;
the restraint which his presence threw over
her was obvious to him, and to every other152       HOWARD CASTLE.

person who observed them; it made him
less willing to intrude himself upon her,
convinced that the general remark was 
true; she was conscious, from the peculia-
rity of their situation, they were watched 
by the gay throng, and therefore declined 
what they were convinced would have 
been most gratifying to her--the marquis's
attention.

  The subject which sir Theodosius had 
been discussing, when he was interrupted, 
so much to her regret, was the most in-
teresting he could touch upon. She wished 
to hear every particular, if it related to 
Mrs. Conway, who was busily employed
in the card-room. Clementia again led 
to the subject, by saying, she hoped lord
Howard had proved a son worthy of such
a mother?

  "He has repaid her," replied sir Theo-
dosius, "in the most ample manner; and 
his behaviour has been so affectionate and 
kind, that he has, in a great measure, closed
the dreadful wound her daughter's death
occasioned; he is all she can wish him to 
be, and all she deserves."

  "You cannot express in the English HOWARD CASTLE. 153

language," said Clementina, "a more ful
description of his character than you have
comprised in these words; and I am per-
fectly satisfied she appreciates his merit,
and is happy in her son."
Lady Hillyard had long permitted Cle-
mentina to be at peace-"You appear,"
said she, as she approached her, "to be
settling the affairs of the nation, so serious,
and so deep in conversation; very unlike
the general manner for a young lady to
spend her time at a ball. I hope you have
bene well amused?"
"Extremely well," replied she. 
But lady Hillyard made no pause, nor
listened to an answer to her kind inquiry;
she lowered her voice, and in a half-whis-
per said-"You have excited much more
observation by your cold manner to the
marquis, than if you have done sir Theo-
dosius. I wonder the former is not jea-
lous; but, of course, you understand each
other."
"It is extremely disagreeable to be so
watched," said Clementina.
II 3154                Howard Castle.

  "You will always attract general notice
wherever you go," cried her ladyship;
" and I assure you, I have heard lord Cle-
maire envied by many of the smartest men
in the room; but you absolutely have be-
haved cruelly to-night, only every body
knows that it is a copy of your countenance."

  Sir Theodosius at that instant returned,
with a glass of lemonade for Clementina-
"What," asked he, "does lady Hill-
yard accuse Miss Bouverie of wearing two
faces? only continue the one I have con-
templated this evening-it is the model of
perfection."

  "I do not dispute that," rejoined she;
"but beware how you admire it, as it is
not her own to dispose of."

  "You kindly guarded me, before I saw
Miss Bouverie, to beware of her charms;
but I almost forgot your instructions.  I
gazed, I listened, and you may judge
what the consequence must be.
  
  "Not love, I hope," said lady Hillyard;
"that perogative belongs to lord Clemaire
alone."

  "Upon my word," said Clementina               HOWARD CASTLE.             155

"this is a very instructing and amusing
conversation; the marquis should certainly
know how he is disposed of."

   "That is not at all necessary," cried her
ladyship; "he is too sensible of what an
enviable lot his is, to require reminding of
it. I certainly did wish him joy upon his
delightful prospect, and I likewise told him
why you looked so shy, and would not
dance with him; he is afraid that he will
be the laughing-stock of the beau monde,
he will be so indulgent; but I assured him
to the contrary. I am convinced he will
soon get into that happy negligent state
all tonish husbands adopt, and that he will
not be so shocking as to attend his wife in
public. I told him you would have your
engagements independent of each other,
and perhaps might not meet for a week;
then you would be new to each other
again; and that is being, in my opinion,
extremely happy."

   She was determined not to hear Cle-
mentina's answer; after she finished the
sentence, she moved off to another part of
the room. When the supper-rooms were
thrown open, she saw Mrs. Conway ap-156         HOWARD CASTLE.

proaching, handed by the marquis; pleased
that he was so engaged, she willingly ac-
cepted the arm of sir Theodosius, and fol-
lowed her friend.

  Lady Hillyard was so accustomed to
giving such entertainments, every thing
was conducted with the utmost regularity
and elegance; the tables were spread with
all the delicacies which could be procured.
Clementina admired the whole, more than 
she did the lady of the feast; she was pro-
voked with her unseasonable raillery, and
teazed beyond measure by her being so
incorrigible.  If she spoke to the marquis, 
who was place between Mrs. Conway and
her, a smile was ready from lady Hillyard.
She was astonished how she had time to
attend to her numerous guests, and watch
her, as she seemed to do, with all the vigi-
lance possible.

  Soon after they returned to the ball-
room, Mrs. Conway proposed to Clemen-
tina to go home; her carriage had been
in waiting for some time.  Lady Hillyard
was most eloquent to prevail upon them
to stay a few hours longer.  Mrs. Conway
begged that she night not hurry Miss             Howard Castle.              157

Bouverie, who declared she had danced quite as much as was agreeable to her. 

  The marquis whispered-"Will you allow me to have a seat with you? my carriage is not come. If you will not permit me to have the wished-for place, I will contrive to accompany you, and see you safe."

   "You ask permission," said Clementina, smiling, "and set my refusal at defiance; if you are determined to to in Mrs.Conway's carriage, I certainly have no right to prevent you."

  "Why do you not substitute the word inclination for right?" whispered sir Theodosius; "who can wonder at the marquis's request, and who could wonder at Miss Bouverie' granting it?"

   "It all depends upon her fancy," said she, "or, more properly speaking, her feelings."

  She was handed into the coach by both the gentlemen, sir Theodosius wishing her good night? he could have pleaded with all his heart for the fourth place; but, alas! he was noway entitled; he saw the happy158                  HOWARD CASTLE.

marquis spring in after her, and they
drove off.

                     CHAPTER VI.

The marquis arrived to breakfast before
Clementina had quitted her apartment;
the crowd and bustle she had been in the
evening before, and the variety which had
amused her, had in a great measure pre-
cluded her own unpleasant reflections;
they returned with solitude, and she had
passed a sleepless night; towards the
usual time of her quitting her pillow, she
fell asleep, and did not appear until a very
late hour; her father supposed the fatigue
of the preceding night was the cause, and
betrayed no uneasiness. The marquis
could not miss so good an opportunity of
speaking on the subject nearest his heart;
he found to his surprise that the general
appeared rather unwilling to enter into
what he had flattered himself would have               HOWARD CASTLE.   159

given equal pleasure to both. The truth
was, the former was not at all inclined to
give a decided negative to the marquis's
hopes, until he had again conversed with
his daughter colours, all the advantages attend-
ing the connexion; her ideas might have
changed upon lord Montague's odd beha-
viour, which visibly hurt her; if there was
an engagement between them, in all pro-
bability it would now be broken off; that
impediment removed, the marquis might
succeed. As he was perfectly convinced
her heart could not be very deeply inte-
rested, he believed firmly that it was more
a fancied attachment than a real one,
founded upon an idea of their childish love
for each other being a tie nor easily broken.
Had he nor known the marquis, or his
partially for his daughter, lord Montague
would have been received by the general
as a most desirable son-in-law; in compa-
rison to the heir to a dukedom, he was
certainly very inferior in point of splendour,
and in every way he preferred lord Cle-
maire to lord Montague.
   The working of the general's mind
160            HOWARD CASTLE.

threw a constraint over his manner; he
wished, above all things, to delay an expla-
nation, which he feared would mortally
offend the marquis, and probably he should
have no opportunity to argue the point
when he was made acquainted with the
obstacles: he longed for Clementina's join-
ing them, and ventured to send a message
of inquiry after her health, and to inform
her the marquis and he were waiting for
breakfast; it had the desired effect, as she
entered the room soon after, apologizing
for having been so lazy. These words 
were accompanied by a smile, but both the
gentlemen were struck with her heavy
eyes and pale countenance; the marquis
took her hand, and, with the most earnest
manner, asked if she was well?

   "Why should you doubt it?" said she,
at the same time disengaging herself from
him, and seating herself at the table. "I
am perfectly well."

   "Late hours," said the general, "are
not friends to beauty; your colour is gone,
and your eyes look as if you had not been
in bed for a week."

   "My countenance," replied she, "is                HOWARD CASTLE.     161

not to be credited, as we returned home 
early."

    Very early," rejoined the marquis;
"there were carriages at lady Hillyard's
door this morning between six and seven
o'clock; many of the party, I dare say,
breakfasted there. Mrs. Conway is always
the first who moves off-Miss Bouverie,
to my surprise, moved with her; and I, of
course, accompanied them. Attending
such sedate people gave me a good night's
sleep; I arose at my usual hour, and could
have been here much earlier, had I not been
afraid of disturbing the family."

     "What folly," said the general, "for
all kind of amusements to be made as in-
convenient as possible! I should think a
family had plague enough with two hun-
dred people in the house, and to provide
them with all kind of refreshments, in-
cluding tea and supper, without having a
breakfast to prepare. Why they cannot
meet at seven, and separate as they do at
the rooms, I cannot innagine."

     "The very reason," said the marquis
"why they stay so late; they are stopped
  162         HOWARD CASTLE.


in dancing, at a certain hour, by the mas-
ter of ceremonies, which is deemed ex-
cessively hard; and they make up for the 
privation at the private parties."

  "They fatigue themselves, incommode
those who entertain them, and certainly
injure their health by such ridiculous
hours," said the general.  "I should not
be willing that you should go to many
balls in Bath, Clementina, if there was any
chance of your remaining to breakfast;
the idea is absurd beyond measure."

  "If I accompany Mrs. Conway, my time
will always be regulated by her."


  She was interrupted by sir Theodosius
Signey being announced; her father looked
surprised, the marquis disconcerted, as he
was afraid his conference might be post-
poned, from a stranger's presence. Cle-
mentina expressed the pleasure which she
felt, in answer to his apologies for so early
a visit; she told him he could not be afraid
of intrusion, when he saw a visitor was 
already there.

  "That visitor," replied he, at the same
time shaking the marquis by the hand,

  
            HOWARD CASTLE.       163

  has the happy privilege of familiar
friendship, for which he is generally en-
vied."

  After being introduced to the general,
and politely hoping Miss Bouverie was no
worse for the fatigue of the evening, he
took his scat; the agreeable countenance
of sir Theodosius, and the easy elegance of
his address, could not fail to please the ge-
neral ; he supposed lie had been one of his
daughter's partners at the ball; lie received
him in the most gracious manner possible.
Mrs. Conway soon after joined the party,
and proposed a walk to the pump-room,
which was very readily acceded to by Cle-
mentina. The marquis pleaded an en-
gagement; he was determined even the
pleasure of accompanying them should not
interfere with his plans; he remained with
the general, and saw the ladies set off,
escorted by sir Theodosius.

  The moment he was at liberty, he be-
gan by saying—" I must again entreat of
you to converse with Miss Bouverie upon
the most interesting subject, I hope, to us
all; as 1 trust our marriage will give uni-
versal happiness, I have authority from164        HOWARD CASTLE.

my father for settlements, and the arrrange-
ments in which he is concerned.  I have
only to plead with your angelic daughter,
that as early a period as the necessary pre-
parations can be made, may be fixed for
our marriage; it is the topic of general
conversation here, wwhich I hope will in-
duce her to shorten, as much as she possi-
bly can, the time of our separation."

  The general listened, but no opportu-
nity was given for him to explain Clemen-
tina's sentiments; he had not had a mo-
ment in which he could speak to her, since
the disappointment which she received by
lord Montague's changing the plans of the
family; nor could he wait longer for it; he
was heartily sorry to give a deathblow to
the marquis's hopes, but he had no alter-
native left-"You must have seen, my
lord, that I have been unwilling to enter
upon a subject which has occasioned me
considerable pain. I candidly speak the
truth to you, when I tell you, the most
earnest wish I had was to see my treasure
entrusted to your care. I should then have
been confident of her happiness."

  "To what does this prelude lead?" said

                 HOWARD CASTLE.  165

the marquis, with a considerable degree of
alarm in his countenance and manner.

   "It leads to what gives me the utmost
pain to unfold-that my daughter's affect-
tions are engaged>"

   "Engaged!" repeated the marquis, his
voice almost choked with contending 
emotions.

   "Becalm, my lord," said the general,
"and do not allow this unfortunate at-
tachment to sink too deep on your feel-
ings."

   "To whom is Miss Bouverie engaged?"

   "That she will not reveal; she has en-
treated me, in the most earnest manner,
not to interrogate her on the subject."

   "Pardon me," cried the marquis, "for
this seeming impertinence.  I have received
such a shock-such an unexpected mortifi-
cation. that I hardly know what to say.  I
have certainly no title to inquire into Miss
Bouverie's engagements-alas! no claim
upon her in any way, if her heart belongs 
to another.  She made me no promise, but evidently, at different times, has shewn an
unwillingness to listen to my protestions.
I never for a moment was alarmed, but



166                   HOWARD CASTLE.

believed her affections were mine; and
that her cold, averted manner, when I ap-
proached her, was merely the effect of mo-
dest timidity, and that she endeavoured to
hide what I was convinced she felt. I have
foolishly misled myself, and am alone to
blame."

The general was really sorry for the mar-
quis; the agitation of his manner, and the
distress which was imprinted on his coun-
tenance, grieved him beyond expression;
he wished, above all things, he could con-
vey comfort to him; but it was impossible;
he feared in his doom was irrevocably fixed.
The marquis seemed to derive a degree of
consolation in which Clementina had been in-
terested, and with which the general was
unacquainted; in all, lord Montague seemed 
to be concerned.

"My suspicions," said the general,
"have led me to her cousin, as the person
she is attached to."

"I trust you are mistaken," cried the
marquis, with great quickness; "but it is
utterly impossible; lord Montague is too
honourable not to have disclosed his situa-        HOWARD CASTLE.     167

tion to her; he is not the person who has
robbed me of her heart."

"I must beg an explanation," said the
general ; " if lord Montague is not worthy
of her love, which I have great reason to
suspect he poses, may there not be a
prospect of success for you, my lord?"

"Could I be satisfied," replied he, "with
being a secondary object in Miss Bouverie's
affections—could I accept her hand, when
I knew her heart was in a state of mortifi-
cation? The temptation would be great,
but. I believe I would forego it. I could
not bear the idea that she married me, be-
cause she was disappointed in her hopes
with another. I recollect feeling uneasi-
ness at the very particular attention which
at times lord Montague paid to her; and
I once or twice fancied those attentions
were received with pleasure by her; but
the imposvibility of' any attachment sub-
sisting between them completely did away
all suspicion. I foolishly believed I was
beloved, and vainly thought myself secure
in possessing an angel."

"But why are you so confident that 
168              HOWARD CASTLE.

lord Montague is not the person who has
gained her heart?"

  "Because I know that he is already
married."

  The general was struck dumb; the mi-
sery which he was convinced would be the
result of this discovery to his daughter oc-
cupied all his senses.  At last he asked, if
the marquis was certain as to his informa-
tion?

  "Perfectly so," he replied, "and only
the agony of the moment extracted a se-
cret which he had promised to keep; lord
Montague himself was his informer; but,"
added he, "unless I have the intelligence
from Miss Bouverie, I cannot think he
would have concealed from her situa-
tion.  If you think it is necessary to ac-
quaint her with her cousin's marriage, I
consent to your doing it; but I must en-
treat no one else is entrusted with the im-
portant truth."

  The general promised that he would
pay the strictest attention to his injunc-
tions.

  The marquis's feelings were in too great        HOWARD CASTLE.        169

a tumult to permit him to remain with the
general; he wished him good morning,
and returned to his lodgings, mortified and
dejected; he was resolved to return in the
evening, as he dreaded the blow would be
most severe on Clementina, whom he still
fondly loved.

  She returned from he walk in tolerable
spirits. Mrs. Conway had made her pro-
mise to accompany her to the theatre in
the evening,  and to the rooms the nightt
following: she had received several invi-
tations to parties and private balls, but she
returned a negative to most of the cards,
as she found her friend was unacquainted
with the families; she resolved to keep, in
a great measure, to Mrs. Conway's circle,
which was entirely confined to a select 
party of the first fashion. Lady Hillyard
was busy in all sets; in her assemblies
was a motley group-all had free access;
some she patronized, as she flattered her-
self she had power sufficient to establish
any person she chose as the high ton: 
others were useful to her in various ways;
in short, lady Hillyard had a reason for all
   VOL. II.170               HOWARD CASTLE.

her invitations, besides the love of seeing
her rooms more crowded than her neigh-
bours. Mrs. Conway had no such plea-
sure, nor did she enjoy being in a mixture
of company; she very seldom attended
lady Hillyard's routes, as there was nothing
to make up to her for the fatigue.
  Clementina told her father of the en-
gagements she had formed; he gravely
answered, he hoped nothing would happen
to interrupt her pleasure.
  She felt afraid of asking when the mar-
quis had left him, or of naming him at all,
for fear of a disagreeable explanation. No-
thing was said until the servants had re-
tired from waiting at dinner, when the
general gravely addressed her - "The
marquis, you know, remained with me this
morning, and we have had a long conver-
sation. I almost wish you had been pre-
sent, as I think his expressions would have
moved your pity."
  "I dare say I should have felt regret, if
lord Clemaire expressed himself sorry for
my determination," replied Clementina;
"but as that feeling has nothing to do with
the heart, it could have made no difference            HOWARD CASTLE. 171 

on my sentiments—I should not wish to 
hear the marquis's complaints." 
  "Could nothing work a change in his 
  favour?" 
 "Nothing," was her reply. 
 "Was lord Montague to prove unwor-
thy of the high place which, I believe,he 
holds in your regard, would you still be 
cruel to the other?"
  "I should be cruel, indeed, was I to 
give lord Clemaire my hand without my 
heart, winch he never can possess." 
  "Who does possess it, my dear child?" 
said he,with a considerable degree of agi-
tation; "it is a duty incumbent upon me 
to insist upon your informing me." 
  Alarmed by her father's manner, 
she answered—" You have already named 
him; in our childhood, lord Montague 
and I were attached to each other; upon 
our meeting at Carnsworth Castle, the par-
tiality which bad lain so long dormant was 
renewed." 
   "And did he make professions of love 
  to you?" interrupted her father.
   "He certainly did," was her reply; "but 

                     12 
172             HOWARD CASTLE.

if you will patiently listen to me, I will
tell you, as it is impressed upon my me-
mory, what passed in our last inter-
view."

   "Listen to you!" said the general, with
visible emotion; "what subject can inte-
rest me so much as where you are con-
cerned?"

She then recapitulated, in nearly the
very words, lord Montague's avowal of his
passion for her. The general listened with
profound attention; there appeared to him
to have been a combination of circum-
stances which had led him to declare his
sentiments. She had discovered to him
the situation of her heart; he had evident-
ly a violent struggle with his feelings,
which had endangered his life; he had
made no attempt to engage her affections;
and had not accident brought them toge-
ther, nothing further would have passed
between them; he intended to have seen
her, to have taken a long farewell, as he
had upon all occasions declared his inten-
tion of going abroad. Clementina had cer-
tainly put a different construction from
what was the real one; she believed it was

               HOWARD CASTLE       173

the fancied engagement between the mar-
quis and her. The General believed lord
Montague had meant the insuperable bar
to their ever being united; he was not so
much to blame as he had supposed; at the
same time, he condemned his encouraging
a love which was criminal; he ought to
have left such dangerous society, if he had
not perfect command over his feelings.
   Clementina, in her narrative to her fa-
ther, had in many instances sunk little cir-
cumstances, which she thought might in-
cur censure upon lord Montague; she was
confident there was a disclosure to take
place, which, she feared, would involve his
character in the opinion of the general.
When she had given him the necessary
information, she felt her mind relieved of
a lod; her father, with all the ardour of
affection, pressed her to his heart, and ex-
pressed what he really felt---sorrow that he must
inflict pain on her gentle bosom---
"I expect to hear," said she, with the
greatest composure, "that I am for ever
separated from lord Montague; his own
manner at various times alarmed me, but

174                 HOWARD CASTLE.

the last interview we had received my hopes
that all would end well."

"It was an unfortunate interruption,"
said the general, "as I confidently believe
he would not have suffered you to have
departed, without acquainting you that he
never could be nearer allied to you than
he now is- he is, my dear Clementina, al-
ready married."

"Married!" repeated she; "oh, Heavens!
why did he keep me in such ignorance?
why did he permit me to indulge in a cri-
minal affection? why did he tempt me, by
the melancholy state he was in, to pour
balm into wounds which I firmly believe
his love for me occasioned? Oh, my fa-
ther, what has this fatal prepossession led
me into! to have permitted my heart to
have dwelt with rapture on the idea that
I was beloved by a man who had sworn
eternal fidelity to another-who had plight-
ed the most solemn vows to his wife!"

Her feelings entirely overcame her; the
general was aware the trial would be very
severe; he suffered her to remain silent
and did not attempt to make any com-ment upon lord Montague's conduct.  He observed that her distress seemed to arise chiefly from an idea of the guilty passion she had encouraged;  he hoped to absolve her from that crime, as ignorance was a full apology;  he was likewise resolved to take the first opportunity to plead the cause of the marquis;  he was relieved when he saw her dissolved in tears, and hoped reason and a little time would reconcile her to herself, as he saw no cause why blame should be attached to her.
    Her engagement with Mrs. Conway never on occurred to her,until  her carriage stopped at the door;  she had retired to her own apartment,, and was indulging in melancholy retrospection, when Mary informed her Mrs. Conway was below, and desired to know if she was ready.  Grieved at her inattention, and vexed at the trouble she had given her friend, as she was convinced it was her amusement that she had consented to attend the theatre, what could she do to apologize for her behaviour?  She sent Mary to beg Mrs. Conway would indulge her, by coming for a few minutes to her apart-
 ment; she was afraid of her father being
present. as she was resolved to preserve the
strictest silence on the subject of lord Mon-
taque's fatal secret; and as she had not en-
treated her father to that purpose, she
dreaded their meeting.

When Mrs. Conway saw Clementina's
pale countenance and swoln eyes, she was 
alarmed beyond measuew--"What has
happened," exclaimed she, " to have agi-
tated you in this strange mannner?  It is 
only a few hours since we parted; some-
thing very unlooked for must have created
this change."

"I expected all I have heard," replied
she; "the marquis of Clemaire has made
his proposals fro raising me to high rank
and splendour, and I have mortified my 
father by my refusing such and offer.  I am 
vexed to be forced to vex him, and I now
fear my foolish inattention may have of-
fended you--my engagement to go to the
play with you, I totally forgot; my mind
has been in tumult since we parted, not
to be described."

"I can eaxe it of part of its burthen,"
said Mrs. Conway; "you have not, in the
            HOWARD CASTLE.        177

smallest degree, offended me; but I will
give up my plan—I sliall find no amuse-
ment without you—1 had formed no party;
sir Theodosius Sidney will look in vain for
Miss Houverio, and he will not find out
that I am not present; so, if you will give
me leave. I will dismiss my carriage, and
spend the evening here. I thing , the gene-
ral and you will be better for having a third
person."

  Clementina felt deeply the kindness of
her friend, and accepted with gratitude the
charitable offer; an exertion was necessary
for her to make, otherwise it wotdd be
suspected that more than feeling for her
father's disappointment actuated her. The
general whs agreeably surprised to find
his daughter seated in the drawing-room
with Mrs. Conway, and that she was per-
fectly composed; her looks shewed evi-
dently she had been exceedingly agitated,
but he hoped her disappointment would
be much less severe than he expected: he
still was resolved to make one effort for
the marquis, as soon as he deemed her spi-
rits sufficiently recovered from the shock
178               HOWARD CASTLE.

they had received; he had little hopes of
success; but if there was the very least
chance, he would make the attempt.

Mrs. Conway's cheerful and amusing
conversation animated both; they reco-
vered in a great degree, from the heavy
gloom which had evidently depressed their
spirits; she thought she might, without
impropriety, impart a plan, which had been,
ever since the night of lady Hillyard's ball,
a very favourite one of hers; it was for
Clementina to accompany her to London.
The general seemed pleased beyond mea-
sure with the proposal, and, in the most
decided terms, thanked her for the kind
idea, and immediately acceded to it.

Clementina was surprised with her fa-
ther's readiness to promise for her; she
ventured to start and objection, and declared,
in a very positive manner, that she would
not upon any account leave him; and she
assured him the solitude of Roachwood
would be far more delightful than the
hurry and bustle of London.

"You have," said Mrs. Conway, "at 
different times flattered me with profess-
ing a regard for me, and a partiality for my
                HOWARD CASTLE.         179

company; am I to look upon Miss Bou-
verie as not sincere in those expressions
of regard which have given me such infinite
pleasure? were they merely words with-
out meaning?
  "They were not indeed," said she. "I
feel much more for you than ever I ex-
pressed; and were you going to Howard
Castle, instead of the metropolis, I would
accompany you with the greatest pleasure;
but I am not formed for gaiety - it wears
out my spirits, and would very soon wear
out my strength."
  "Not in the way I enter into it," said
Mrs. Conway. "I will answer for restoring
you to the arms of your father, with your
body and mind in high preservation. If
you wish to spend a little time at Howard
Castle, I am obliged to be there, as I have
business to transact with the steward; if
you accompany me, I can almost answer
for it, you will be willing to quit it for the
busy world; it is like a county jail, only
without prisoners. I shall rejoice if you 
will go with me, as I am seized with me-
lancholy from the moment I pass the por-
ter's lodge, and I continue uncomfortable180            HOWARD CASTLE.

all the time I am there; but it is a duty I
am obliged to perform two or three times
a-year, to see that all is properly regulated.
I hope soon to give up my trust to my son,
but until he returns to his native country,
I must act for him.  My plans," continued 
Mrs. Conway, " are all arranged.  I sup-
pose," turning to the general, " you will
not object to remaining a fortnight longer
in Bath?"

  " It is my intention," replied he.

  " Then will you bring me this lady, and
let me do with her what I please? you
shall either accompany us to London, or
go quietly home and enjoy her discrip-
tions of all she sees and all she hears."

  " And all she feels," rejoined Clemen-
tina, smiling.

  " That part," said Mrs. Conway, " will
be, I believe, the most interesting.  I hope
you will be very well amused, and will not
find a moderate share of public places too
much for you to bear."

  Clementina shook her head; but the
general kept steady in his determination;
he would accept of Mrs. Conway's invita-
tion, when he should part with his trea-              HOWARD CASTLE.          181

sure without reluctance--" I am not to be
thwarted in all my favourite schemes;
you shall, my dear girl, enjoy the society
I know you prefer to any other; to this
kind friend I entrust you, with the most
perfect confidence; only I have one bar-
gain to make," turning to Mrs. Conway,
"you must deliver my Clementina into my
arms, and you must promise to spend part
of the summer with us at Roachwood."

  Mrs. Conway readily granted the re-
quest; she promised, and fully intended to
perform it.--In a short time what a change
in Clementina's prospects! she had looked
forward to their returning to Roachwood
with peculiar delight, although it would
deprive her of the society of her beloved
Mrs. Conway.  The retirement of the
country she longed for, in spite of the
bleak season of the year; she thought with
pleasure on a solitary ramble, instead of 
parading on the streets; how much more
delightful to wander out when she pleased,
and indulge her own meditations!  She 
was now teazed with a number of acquaint-
ances of both sexes, who would not even
let her pursue her way quietly to the lodg-182            HOWARD CASTLE.

ings of Mrs. Conway; they would walk
with her when she wished to be alone,
and tormented her with anecdotes of peo-
ple who she had never seen, or ever wished
to see.

  Sir Theodosius Sidney was an excep-
tion; she always felt pleased when he was
of the party of beaux who generally sur-
rounded her.  The marquis called, as he
had intended, to inquire after the health
of Clementina; but upon being answered,
when he inquired if the general and Miss
Bouverie were alone, that Mrs. Conway
was with them, he returned to his lodg-
ings, and spent a dull, melancholy evening.
He did not expect to have his spirits
cheered by the sight of Clementina, as he
feared hers were as much depressed as his
own; he could not bear to see her pine in
sorrow, because lord Montague was un-
worthy of her affections; he could not
contemplate her charms without the pros-
pect of possessing them, nor could he bear
the raillery of lady Hillyard, and many
others to whom he had almost confessed
the happy footing he was on with the ad-
mired Miss Bouverie; he believed that he              HOWARD CASTLE.         183

had better fly like a coward, before his
mortifying refusal was whispered in the
circles of fashion; he at last resolved to or-
der his carriage to be in readiness at an
early hour, that he might quit the scene of
his unexpected disappointment. He oc-
cupied the long evening in writing a fare-
well letter to the general, in which he ex-
pressed his utmost gratitude for his good
opinion, and lamented, in moving terms,
the unfortunate termination to his hopes.
He addressed Clementina, and exhorted
her to support her spirits, and to take care
of her health: he had too much pride to
describe the anguish of his mind, or to ex-
postulate with her in his own behalf; he
could not bear the humiliating idea of being
a secondary object in her heart, when he
had flattered himself he had an unrivalled
place.

   Those letters were not delivered till the
marquis had gone a considerable way on
his journey; he left them in charge with
one of his servants, who had some business
to execute for him, as his very sudden de-
parture prevented him fulfilling many en-
gagements which he had made.184         HOWARD CASTLE.

   Mrs. Conway left the general and Cle-
mentina at an early hour, as she thought
her young friend ought to enjoy a good
night's repose; she entreated that she
would retire immediately, and she hoped
to see her next day with restored looks
and spirits-"I will not again be disap-
pointed,; said she, as she was leaving them;


  "remember that you are to accompany me
to-morrow night to the ball."

Clementina durst not refuse; she was
afraid of giving her father an opportunity
of explaining more than she chose, the
cause of her dejection; he was astonished
when he heard her, with more than usual
cheerfulness of manner, consent to the pro-
posal; it convinced him that her attach-
ment to her cousin was more ideal tham
any thing else; if her heart had been
deeply interested, she could not have made
such an engagement so immediately after
her disappointment. A train of pleasing
hopes rose in the general's breast; he wished
Mrs. Conway good-night, but was resolved
his daughter should not immediately retire
to her own apartment, upon her quitting
them-"I find," said he, again seating 

          HOWARD CASTLE.          185

himself, "that the marquis was here this
evening; upon hearing we had company,
he would not come in, which I regret ex-
ceedingly."

     "Do you?" said Clementina. "I won-
der Mrs. Conway's being here should have
prevented him; as I suppose you gave
him a decided answer this morning, he
could have nothing to say, but what she
or any indifferent person might have
heard."

     "Do you entirely preelude all hope,"
said the genereal, earnestly, "both for the
marquis's happiness and mine? I was de-
lighted to see you behave with so much
propriety as you have done in this ex-
traordinary business; your composure led
me to flatter myself your affection for lord
Montague might perhaps not have sunk
so deep in your heart as I feared it had;
and that it might be transferred to ano-
ther, who I really think is deserving of
you."

     "Never," replied she, with the utmost
firmness of manner, "unless it is the com-
mand of my father, will I transfer my
heart to the man I marry; he must pos-186     HOWARD CASTLE.
sess it entirely, and undivided affection
with any human being, otherwise he
never can possess my hand. I am grate-
ful to the marquis of Clemaire for his pre-
ference, but that is all I can ever feel for
him; nor do I suppose he would accept of
me, when he know so well the vow I
must make of loving him was false. Do
not therefore, my dear sir, urge me to the
commission of a crime-I never will pro-
mise what I cannot perform; suffer me to
return to Roachwood with you, where I
will spend my days in seclusion, and never
wish to quit it; and I will solemnly swear
to you that I will not marry without your
consent-without you approbation."

Tears were tracing each other down her
face; the expression of supplication and
earnest solicitude, which was marked in
her countenance, struck him to the heart;
he rose and folded her in his arms, and
promised to teaze her no more on the sub-
ject of marriage; but that he insisted on
her accompanying Mrs. Conway to Lon-
don. Clementina would not contend every
point with her father, who had kindly
yielded on his most favourite subject, but             HOWARD CASTLE.         187

she had one question to ask, and which had
occupied her thoughts——how had he heard
of lord Montague's marriage?

  " From the marquis," was his answer.

  " How had he come to the knowledge
of it?"

  " From lord Montague himself."

  " How strange," said she, " that I am
kept in ignorance——that he should not have
written to me, and explained his horrid
situation!"

  After some pause, she asked if the mar-
quis had mentioned who——she stopped,
she could not say his wife; nor could she
say lady Montague.

  The general understood the question——
" He did not name the person, nor where
she was; but he entreated that the utmost
secrecy might be observed; so I suppose
it is a connexion he has formed, probably
abroad, which will be disagreeable to his
family; for the marquis's sake I will never
divulge it."

  And for lord Montague's, though Cle-
mentina, it should be buried in her bo-
som; had she not often suspected that he
had an entanglement from his manner,

188        HOWARD CASTLE.

she should not have credited the marquis's
account; but his having a wife, she never
for a moment could have supposed.. She
was resolved to banish him as much as she
could from her thoughts, since her love was
become a crime.


             CHAPTER VII.


Next morning the marquis's letters were
delivered; the general was exceedingly
surprised when he found the writer was
then many miles distant; he had, before
he opened it, supposed it was filled with
hopes that Clementina would relent in his
favour; but no such hope was hinted at;
it was giving up the pursuit, in the most
decided manner. W hen he had perused
it, he folded it up, and put it in his pock-
et, without speaking; he watched his
daughter read her epistle, and saw her
countenance brighten; she made no com-
ment, but put the paper into her father's
hands; he found it contained nothing at        HOWARD CASTLE.     189

all, but good wishes for her health and
happiness. The general returned her the
letter, still without any remark.

  Clementina suspected he was disappoint-
ed in his expectations, and in some degree
mortified by the termination of the mar-
quis's attachment; she was pleased beyond
measure that it had so ended, and that her
father could not regret her perfect deter-
mination on the subject. She was ready
to attend Mrs. Conway at the appointed
hour, who was charmed to find as great a
change on her appearance as on her man-
ner: the evening before, her spirits were,
by fits and starts, sometimes lost in
thought, at other moments a forced cheer-
fulness; evidently a weight hung upon
her mind; she ventured to make the re-
mark, and Clementina quickly imparted
to her the cause, that she had received a
final adieu from lord Clemaire.

  "How perverse we are!" was her an-
swer; "had you accounted for your low-
ness in that manner, I should not have
wondered; but to rejoice in a separation,
certainly surprises me."

  "I was hurt beyond measure," replied190                 HOWARD CASTLE.

she, "that I could not comply with my
father's wishes; now those feelings are re-
moved, as the marquis, I suppose, is of-
fended with me; as upon knowing my
sentiments were unfavourable to his suit,
he has set off to Carnsworth Castle, to re-
cord to the family what will astonish them
exceedingly, that I have presumed to re-
fuse their splendid offers, and their darling
Clemaire."

"I cannot yet believe you are so very
odd," said Mrs. Conway; "hardly any wo-
man durst do so bold a thing as to spurn
so great a connexion but yourself. I do
firmly think it is the only offer you will
ever have, as no man will have self-conceit
sufficient to venture his humble proposals,
after a marquis and such a marquis, has
failed of success. You must, in my opi-
nion, when you meet with a congenial
soul to your own, make the first advance,
otherwise you will remain ---"

"A peaceful virgin," interrupted Cle-
mentina; "a state I have no objection to,
and what I firmly believe, will be my lot."

Mrs. Conway shook her head, and they
arrived at the rooms. As soon as they en-HOWARD CASTLE. 191

tered, they were surrounded by beaux. 
Sir Theodosius, who knew nearly the time
they would come, was waiting below, in 
order to secure the prize, for which he
suspected there would be much competi-
tion. Clementina readily promised him to
be his partner; what was her surprise,
when she saw Mr. Stopford in the crowd,
who impeded their course!

Mrs. Conway observed the flush of plea-
sure which overspread her face, and a very
unusual degree of agitation in her manner.
The expectation of hearing of lord Mon-
tague created it: Mrs. Conway feared a
more tender cause; yet the appearance of
the stranger would contradict the suspi-
cion which her joy at seeing him had 
raised.

Mr. Stopford firmly believed that the 
lovely Miss Bouverie would soon be re-
lated to him, as the marquis had made no
secret of his intentions when he quitted
Carnsworth Castle, or of the certainty of
their success; the family had spoken open-
ly of the intended marriage; even prepa-
rations he knew were going forward, in
expectation of the great and pleasing192          HOWARD CASTLE.

event; there was no room for doubt. Mr.
Stopford was as thoroughly convinced of
the marquis's happiness in prospect, as if
he had been addressing the marchioness.

   Clementina regretted her engagement;
she was almost immediately busily em-
ployed, as she was to begin the ball; she
would have preferred conversing on what
had passed at Carnsworth after they had
quitted it; she wished to hear in what
state lord Montague was, when the family
returned to Colnbrook. Mr.Stopford had
no wish to dance, when he found Miss
Bouverie was engaged; he met with a suf-
ficient number of acquaintances to employ
himself until she was at liberty.
   Mrs.Conway inquired who the gentle-
man was who had been so graciously re-
ceived by her friend? She was surprised at
hearing he was an honourable, as she little
suspected he was at all allied to the peer-
age; she thought never was there a more
ordinary specimen of nobility, and she
hoped the marquis of Clemaire had not
met with a repulse to make way for Mr.
Stopford. She saw Clementina return to
her seat, and she likewise observed that sir              HOWARD CASTLE.          195

Theodosius made room for her new ac-
quaintance, who very readily took the va-
cant place by her, and apparently an in-
teresting conversation immediately com-
menced, which continued without any in-
terruption till the hour for tea.

   Sir Theodosius asserted his right, and
handed his partner to the tea-room; Cle-
mentina's curiosity was in some degree sa-
tisfied; she attended to both her beaux,
and spent a very pleasant evening, al-
though the intelligence she had heard from
Mr. Stopford was not the most satisfactory.
Lord Montague was in a very bad state of
health, which injured his spirits exceed-
ingly; he was so capricious and whimsi-
cal, that it was hardly possible to please
him in any way; one moment he would
go to Bath, the next he would go home; 
and as soon as he could bear travelling, he
meant to go abroad. She found the idea
of her marriage was converted into a cer-
tainty; she took no pains to convince Mr.
Stopford to the contrary, as she was confi-
dent her stupid determination would be
soon whispered abroad; he fully expected
194             HOWARD CASTLE.

to meet with lord Clemaire, and expressed
his surprise that she had not hit lordship
in waiting; but his astonishment increased,
when she told him he had that day left 
Bath.

   "His return was not expected at Carns-
worth," was his answer, "as he had
brought a packet for him from the duke;
perhaps he was gone to London on busi-
ness."

   She believed not, but gave him no
clue to find out why he made so precipi-
tate a retreat.

   There was party engaged to sup at
Mrs. Conway's, after the ball, and Clemen-
tina promised to go home with her. Mr.
Stopford heard the plan, and wished that
he might be included; he whispered to her,
as he handed her to the carriage--"Pray
introduce me to your friend, as a relation
just arrived from the country, and she will
surely have the charity to invite me to her
house."

   "I disclaim you for my cousin," said
she.

   "I soon shall be on the list; why not
admit me now, when our consanguinity        HOWARD CASTLE.     195

will be of such use to me? perhaps you
may not have another opportunity of
serving me"

   As the carriage could not immediately 
be drawn up, they were detained for a few
minutes in the entrance-room. Clemen-
tina did as she was desired, and introduced
Mr. Stopford to Mrs. Conway, who treated
him with her usual politeness, but gave
him no invitation to visit her, either that
night, or at any future period. He in-
quired where the general lodged, and re-
solved to make up, as far as he could, for
the mortification of being separated from
Clementina, by calling upon her the next
morning. He did not fail in his inten-
tion, but the object of his pursuit was un-
able to see him; her father delivered to
her, as soon as breakfast was finished, a
packet, which he suspected came from
Colnbrook Abbey. She took it with
visible emotion, and retired to her own
apartment to peruse the contents; the di-
rection was written in a hand she was per-
fectly unacquainted with; she was sur-
prised with the agitation it threw her whole

            K 2196            HOWARD CASTLE.

frame into, as she had long expected to re-
ceive a confirmation from lord Montague
himself of his marriage; she was con-
vinced the letter she held in her had was
from him, but she trembled so, she could
not break the seal; she sat down for a few
moments till she was more composed.
There were two sheets of paper inclosed;
on one was written, "to be read first:" it
was the history he had given the marquis
of Clemaire, and nearly narrated in the
same words, of his first acquaintance with
Louisa, and of his marrying her: the
other sheet of paper was a letter to her-
self. The little history touched her feel-
ings; the struggle he had before he could
bring himself to marry Louisa, plainly
proved his heart was not hers; it was ho-
nour and pity which had driven him to a 
step which, she feared, had for ever ruined
his happiness.

   The letter was extremely ill written,
and in many places, she believed, the pa-
per had been wet with his tears. Hers
flowed upon perusing his sad story; no
feel of anger for a moment took possession
of her; and the more she reflected, the
          HOWARD CASTLE.             197

less she blamed him for his conduct to her-
self; she now recollected all the expres-
sions he had used, and which she might
have been alarmed at—he compared his
situation to Werter's, which was almost
telling her, in plain terms, he was married;
but she seemed wilfully to misunderstand
him. His letter contained the following
words:—

                -----

       " Have you perused my sad story ?
will you, with the goodness of an angel,
pity me, and read this incoherent letter ?
Yes! 1 know the tender sensibility of
your heart too well, to doubt your feeling
for the wretch, who now, in the humblest
terms, solicits your forgiveness. Oh, Cle-
mentina, do not deny me the only request
I have now to make; condemn me not, I
beseech you, rashly; upon your pardon
hangs the little chance I have of future
tranquillity; listen to the melancholy apo-
logy ; it is short, but all I have to offer in
defence of my own conduct, and which I
can comprise in these words, my passion
for you. Can I call it a misfortune ? yes,
198     HOWARD CASTLE

it is not too harsh a name, for it blinded
me to every sense of propriety.  I married
Louisa, not from love, but pity; and that you
have kindled that love in my breast, which
my wife ought to possess, is too evident.
I quickly discovered the impression my
love made upon your young heart, which,
innocent and artless angel that you are,
you took no pains to conceal, at the tender
moment (which is forever engraven on my
memory)I made an avowal of my pas-
sion; all engagements were erased from 
my recollection now; but the bewitching
idea that I was beloved by you remained
in my thoughts; but, alas! the momen-
tary delusion vanished; reflection, like a
fiend, darted across my imagination, and
blasted all at once my felicity—I was mar-
ried.  What may be the consequence of
my yielding to those impetuous feelings,
which for the moment robbed me of my
reason? the happiness of the woman I
adore, and for whom I would willingly
sacrifice my existence.  A long melancholy
night, uninterrupted by repose, confirmed
the frenzy of my brain; in the morning I
was insensible to all around me, and to my         HOWARD CASTLE.            199

own misery; happy state! envied from
being incapable of retrospection. I inquired
for you, but my sister told me you were
gone. I then resolved, as soon as my
strength would permit, that I would write
to you, and explain my dreadful situation;
but how long has my courage failed me!

At this moment, whilst I write these
words, I posses your love; and this bit of
paper, like a magic spell, will force you to
renounce me; honour requires the sacri-
fice, and I am deservedly the victim. I
meant to have visited Bath, and told you
all my wretchedness- I meant to have
thrown myself at your feet, and implored
your pardon and pity, but my courage
failed me; had you shewn the compassion

I solicited, had you looked upon me with
mildness, and upbraided me not-but I
required no new proof of your amiable
sensibility to make me more bitterly la-
ment the angel I have for ever lost: my
mind wanders-this subject touches too
tender a chord, to be longer supported by
the distracted                 MONTAGUE."
                       HOWARD CASTLE.      200

This letter occasioned a variety of sen-
sations in the breast of Clementina; 
she was sorry to see the despondency which
every line breathed; but lord Montague
had, from his own strange infatuation,
brought all the misery upon himself,and 
had involved her in much sorrow;her 
love for him was completely obliterated; 
she felt strongly interested for his happi-
ness,and would do all in her power to pro-
mote it.She would certainly answer his 
letter,and would readily forgive him;and 
she could likewise assure him, that her 
peace of mind would depend very much 
upon his,that she should be interested as 
a sister in his tranquillity,and as a sister
should regard his wife. She immediately 
occupied herself in writing to him,and 
filled a sheet of paper with advice,which 
she was thoroughly convinced, if he would 
follow,he would again be happy.She 
never for a moment, after she knew his 
situation,suffered her thoughts to dwell 
upon him,otherwise than as a friend: the 
idea of encouraging sentiments injurious 
to another, and inimical to virtue, was
             HOWARD CASTLE.          201

what her pure mind could not understand.
She believed lord Montague sincerely re-
pented his improper conduct to her, and
that he had suffered sufficient punishment
from his own feelings.

   The general was again surprised with
his daughter's behaviour; she came to din-
ner with perfect composure of manner,
when he expected to have seen her quite
the reverse. She put the packet she had
received into his hands--"You know so
much of lord Montague's situation, it is no
breach of trust, my shewing you his little
history and the letter which accompanied
it."

   Her father took the papers and perused
them; he was affected by the simple nar-
rative, and felt more for his nephew at that
moment than he had ever felt before; his
anger was in some degree, blunted by the
agony of his letter. As soon as he had
finished them, Clementina gave him her
letter, as she wished, on so delicate a point,
to have the general's approbation. He
was charmed with every line contained in
it; so much purity of sentiment, strength
202 HOWARD CASTLE.

of argument, and elegance of expression,
he never saw combined together—" This
composition, my love," said he, " ought to
be published ; never was any thing more
to the purpose° than it is; you do not spare
his errors, which certainly are glaring, yet
you sooth him with all the tenderness of
your nature, and give him such advice as
may secure his future happiness. I admire
your letter," continued he, kindly pressing
her hand, as he returned it, " and I ad-
mire your behaviour upon the trial you
have had; your firmness of mind, and eor-
rect sentiments, gratify me beyond my
power of description continue, my child.
always to act in this manner, and be
strictly guided by doing to others as you
would be done by, and God will bless you
and protect you."

Clementina was gratified by her father's
kind expressions ; at the same time, she ra-
ther wondered how he could attach any
degree of merit to her upon the occasion,
as surely lie could not suppose her so
wicked as to continue to love her cousin,
with any other than a sister's affection.
She knew not that the marriage ceremony
                     HOWARD CASTLE.             203

was often so lightly regarded by both
sexes; her nature shrunk from the idea of
the appearance of flirtation with a married
man.

The general informed her that Mr. Stop-
ford had called, and that he had told him
she was engaged-"He regretted," said
the general, "his not seeing you, but hoped
to meet with you in the evening at lady
Hillyard's rout; as I knew nothing of
your engagements, I could give him no
information. You are meaning to prac-
tise gaiety before your appearance in the
great world."

"I have no intention of going out this
evening." was her answer; "to-morrow I
am to attend a ball at the York-House;
the next night we are engaged to be at
lady Greystock's; in short, during Mrs.
Conway's stay in Bath, I mean to enjoy, as
much as I can, her company; when she
goes, I shall give up all engagements, as I only relish being of her party."

"Then _____ spending a few weeks in
her house has ceased to be a burthen upon
your mind," said her father.

"Sir Theodosius Sidney's account alarm-103            HOWARD CASTLE.

ed me, and the unpleasant idea of our
being separated rendered me quite un-
comfortable. Lord Howard is expected
ina short time ; then all is hurry and bus-
tle ; and I shall feel a very strong inclina-
tion to be with you in the peaceful shades
of Roachwood."
   "Why does the ides of Mrs. Conway's
son alarm you? his mother is your greatest
favourite ; why may not her son inherit
her agreeable qualifications, and share in 
your regard?"
  "Oh," replied she, "lord Howard may
be a very charming character; I hope he is,
for his mother's sake ; but I am convinved
I shall always feel a restraint in his pre-
sence."
  "That is an odd determination,: said te general; "I should have thought you
would have been prepared to have admired
what, no doubt,your friend does in a very
high degree."
  "And by all accounts," replied she, "he
is worthy of her admiration ; he stands
high in the opinion of the world; and
surely his mother will ne sensible of his 
qualifications. He, I suppose,is so learn-            HOWARD CASTLE.          205

ed, and so occupied with deep researches,
that he will not condescend to make him-
self agreeable, but to the learned and the
wise; the society of women, in all proba-
bility, he will hold in utter contempt."

  " Then he will be unlike most of his
sex," said  he; " great minds enjoy hours of
relaxation; and what can be greater than
the elegant conversation of well-educated
females? their remarks are good, and there
is a life and spirit in their ideas, which
must amuse and please the most abstruse
and learned man.  Lord Howard is, I dare
say, endowed with good abilities, which
have been highly cultivated; but I should
doubt both, if he should pretend he could
not be amused in conversing with you."

  Clementina was pleased with the com-
pliment; at the same time she attributed it
to a father's partiality.

  The day for Mrs. Conway's leaving Bath
arrived; the prospect of meeting with her
young friend, in ten days, which was the pe-
riod fixed for their joining her at Howard
Castle, prevented the very unpleasant sensa-
tion which parting would have given to both.
Sir Theodosius Sidney had been suddenly
206          HOWARD CASTLE.

called away by the death of a relation,
and Mr. Stopford had unwillingly been
obliged to obey a summons from his fa-
ther, requiring his presence at Almonton-
Hall.

   Miss Bouverie had refused so many in-
vitations, which lady Hillyard had sent
her, that her ladyship knew not what to 
make of her; she undoubtedly was ex-
tremely beautiful, but so haughty and re-
served, and had in so determined a man-
ner repulsed her attentions, that she would
cut the acquaintance; she had even left
two cards at the house, and there had not
been one returned; very rude, certainly;
it was generally known that she had re-
fused to be the marchioness of Clemaire.
which had been a never-failing source of 
discourse for lady Hillyard. The reason
very evidently was, that she was in love
with sir Theodosius Sidney; after his ap-
pearance at Bath, she would not speak to
the marquis, although they were engaged 
when she left Carnsworth Castle.

   Thus was Clementina roughly handled
by the restless tongue of lady Hillyard;
she was a woman in no way calculated to
            HOWARD CASTLE.        207

please her; she therefore avoided her so-
ciety as much as she, with any degree of
decency, could; hut, at the same time, had
no intention of offending her, as the force
of her tongue she dreaded. She hoped
she might escape, as she could not think
she was of consequence sufficient to excite
her animadversions: she was surprised
one morning, in the pump-room, where
she had accompanied a party of young
ladies, to see lady Hillyard in a silent
mood; she passed and repassed without
deigning to take any notice of her; and as
there was very little company, at least of
the dashing kind, she soon after quitted
the room.

  Clementina supposed that her refusal of
the marquis had occasioned the change;
she felt no way distressed, and resolved
her ladyship should please herself, without
any interference on her part.

  A letter at last arrived from lord Mon-
tague; she had secretly wondered if he
would write again to her; she opened it
in the presence of her father, and read the
contents aloud; it was as follows:—208            HOWARD CASTLE.


                 ---------

         " How gently have you soothed
the turbulent feelings which had possession
of me! the mildness of your language, and
the kindness of your expressions, have tran-
quillized the emotions which distracted 
me; my feelings are more composed; I
am calm and resigned to my fate.  Oh,
Clementina! you have, in a wonderful man-
ner, reconciled me to myself; your assur-
ance of forgiveness, and that you harbour
no resentment against me, have rendered
me less miserable that I have ever been 
since I parted with you; but yet will you
exert your goodness still further, and listen
to a request which perhaps is presumptive,
but what I cannot refrain from making?  If 
I could at this moment kneel at your feet,
bathe your hands with those tears which
are dropping on the paper (I blush not
to own my weakness); if you saw the me-
lancholy, altered figure that I am, and wit-
nessed the dejection of my manner, you
would exclaim involuntarily--' Yes, poor
wretched Montague, I will be your friend--            HOWARD CASTLE.       209

I will correspond with you in your Swit-
zerland solitude, and ease with every little
art the pain of separation.' This is my re-
quest, and was your answer such as I have
ventured to anticipate, I should again taste
serenity, if not happiness. I will promise
our correspondence (if you will listen to
my petition) shall be merely that of a bro-
ther and sister, pure as it is sincere; your
letters will be companions to me in my re-
treat; mine must be dull to you, as there
will be nothing interesting to mark the
quickly-gliding time, but the arrival of
your packets. Oh! wake me not from this
dream of tranquillity, which is the favou-
rite wish of my heart. I shall leave Coln-
brook as soon as my strength will permit;
at present I am very weak: the body is a
curious piece of mechanism, the mind
being the principal part of the machinery;
the torture mine has endured of late has
deranged my whole frame. I have fixed,
in idea, upon a beautiful romantic spot,

Where I think I shall retire to; it is se-
cluded from the world; there I shall have
leisure to ruminate on the past scenes of 210               HOWARD CASTLE.

my life-to think of you, and, I hope, to
write to you. Until I receive an answer
to this letter, I shall be in a state of anxiety
not to be described. I know I am unwor-
thy of your commiseration; but trusting
to your favourable decision, allow me to
subscribe myself your grateful
                             MONTAGUE."
               -----
   When she finished reading the letter,
her father made no remark. Clementina
was disappointed, as she wished to know
his sentiments; at last she said-" I should
wish to be guided by you in what reply I
should give to this request."

  "I leave it solely to your own inclina-
tion and judgment," replied he; "in what-
ever way you determine to act, I can reply
upon your prudence; follow, therefore, my
dear Clementina, the dictates of your heart,
as I am thoroughly convinced it will lead
you right."

   She replied without any hesitation-
"Since you put such confidence in me, as
to suffer me to follow my own wishes, they
certainly point towards dispensing comfort;

              HOWARD CASTLE.         211

if my correspondence can sooth, or in any
way render lord Montague's banishment
more bearable, I will comply with what he
solicits; and perhaps I may be the means
(without being self-conceited) of restoring
happiness to him. I shall strongly recom-
mend his amusing himself by cultivating
the talents of Louisa, who must be a most
interesting creature; and I do firmly hope
to see him as much attached to her as pos-
sible."

   The general believed, in his heart, that
there never was so perfect a human being
as his Clementina; he approved of her in-
tentions, and hoped she would succeed.

   In spite of lady Hillyard's odd behaviour,
Clementina left a farewell card for her: two
days were fully occupied in preparing for
their departure from Bath, which she did
with much better spirits than when she
entered it; she had become reconciled to
the bustle of a town, and enjoyed the
amusements more than she believed at
first was possible; upon her arrival, her
mind was tortured between hope and fear;
she now was free from that distressing212             HOWARD CASTLE.

situation, and had got rid of the marquis's
proposals in a wonderful,  happy manner.

   The general found the change on his
travelling companion was most agreeable,
and was charmed to see her as animated
and cheerful as ever. They travelled
slowly, the shortness of the days allowing
them only time for two stages; they were
several days in reaching the princely man-
sion of the Howard family.


                 CHAPTER VIII.

Mrs. Conway had not raised Clementina's
expectations, either in regard to the beauty
or cheerfulness of her son's principal dwell-
ing; when they arrived at the porter's
lodges, she almost fancied they had got to
the Castle, they were so large, and looked
so black and gloomy. A very high arch,
with the family arms finely carved in stone,
connected the buildings; and old grey-
headed man, in livery, threw open the          HOWARD CASTLE.     213
massive iron gates, and they entered into
the park, which was finely wooded; the
general remarked that the timber alone
was a fund of wealth. They continued for
a considerable time driving along a smooth
road, sometimes in thick plantations of 
evergreens; at others, in fine open ground,
with distant views of the neighbouring
country.

  Clementia was suprised with the great
extent of the park, as they had not seen
any thing of the Castle: a large and beau-
tiful building attracted her attention; at 
first she believed it was the house they
were approaching, but her father informed
her it was for shelter for the deer; the 
lightness of its appearance, as it consisted
of pillars and open arhces, was much ad-
mired by both the travellers; they drove
through the very centre of the building
under another high arch. Soon after a fine
piece of waster was seen, which was lost in 
woods; on it were several boats; beyond
it, on a rising ground, surrounded by 
shrubs and evergreens, stood an clegant
temple: many other buildings were seen in various parts of the park; and a lofty214          HOWARD CASTLE.

obelisk, in a conspicuous situation, shewed
they were approaching a place of con-
sequence.  At last the general called his
daughter's attention, as the principal front
of the Castle was exposed to their view.

     "It is indeed a noble county jail," said
Clementina, smiling at Mrs. Conway's
idea; "she certainly meant to surprise us
with the grandeur of this magnificent
place."

     "Yes," said the general, "it certainly is
a princely dwelling; but I can easily con-
ceive it a very dull one; if Mrs. Conway
comes here without a party, solitary and
alone, as she is at present, I cannot sup-
pose a more dismal situation; a moderate-
sized house is much more to my taste than
this great pile of building."

     They drove under an arcade supported
by massive Corinthian pillars, from which
they entered a hall of immense dimensions;
it was paved with black and white marble,
and a number of valuable marble statues
were placed in niches; the walls were ele-
gantly finished in bass-relievo.  Clemen-
tina was struck with the size of the saloon,
and the extraordinary noise their feet made                   HOWARD CASTLE.        215

upon the marble gave her the idea she
was entering a church.

   The porter who admitted them was a
contemporary with the one at the porter's
lodge. At last one of Mrs. Conway's ser-
vants appeared, and shewed them the way
to his mistress; two elegant staircases
branched from the saloon in different di-
rections; they followed their guide, not 
with the quick pace he seemed inclined to
move in; the general, on even ground,
could walk with tolerable celerity, but in
ascending stairs he was retarded by his
lameness; Clementina had time to view
the great scale that every things was upon.
At last they entered a very long gallery,
which was hung with pictures of warriors
and frightful figures, which seemed so an-
cient, that they were ready to drop from
their frames; they crossed this apartment,
and the servant throwing a door open, an-
nounced general and Miss Bouverie.

   Mrs. Conway rose at this welome in-
telligence; she folded Clementina to her
heart, and with all the sincerity of it, ex-
pressed the joy she felt in seeing her at
Howard Castle.
216     HOWARD CASTLE.

 The general was gratified by the kind-
ness of their reception, and felt pleased
that he had accompanied his daughter to
(he believed) one of the finest places in
England; and he was convinced, no where
could he have met with a more cordial, or
a more hearty welcome: they expressed 
their admiration of the place.

 "Did you not think of my description
of it," said Mrs. Conway, "when you
passed under those arches? did you not feel
that you were going to a place of confine-
ment?"

 "No," replied Clementina, "I had no
idea but of pleasure; not one disagreeable
thought crossed me; my sight was grati-
fied by the most delightful variety of ob-
jects, and my heart was elated by the near
prospect I had of meeting with you."

 Mrs.Conway was charmed with this lit-
tle flattering speech; she saw a most pleas-
ing change on both the appearance and
manner of her favourite, so much anima-
tion played on her beautiful features, and
enlivened all she said. She felt sensibly
the change which agreeable society made;
the day had passed rather heavily; she ex-              HOWARD CASTLE.                     217

pected her friends, which had made her usual pursuits appear irksome; she never spent a more delightful evening.

   Clementia gave her all the occurrences which had happened in the gay world after she had quitted it: some marriages in the beau monde were talked of, and some deaths expected.

   "And what," said Mrs. Conway, "did you make of your attendants?"

   "That is an inquiry," said the general, "will be difficult to answer."

   Mrs. Conway smiled at the inference, and explained that she meant sir Theodo-sius and Mr. Stopford.

   "They both were called away on me-lancholy occasions," said Clementia; "the first to attend the funeral of a favourite aunt."

   "Ah!" exclaimed Mrs. Conway, "is old Mrs. Harper dead? then sir Theodo-sius has got his long-expected fortune; she was extremely rich, and saved every far-thing for her nephew."

   This intelligence set her busy fancy at work; she feared he might interfere with 

   VOL.II.              L218       HOWARD CASTLE.

her favourite plan, as he now had, she be-
lieved, a splendid fortune, and, she sus-
pected, would lay it all at Miss Bouverie's
feet; he certainly would be a most formid-
able rival. She thought no more of Mr. 
Stopford; the first piece of news occupied
her attention.

  "Are you not anxious to hear something 
of my other beau, as you are pleased to style
him? I shall accuse you of being like lady
Hillyard--ask questions, and not attend to 
the answer."

  "I beg both yours and Mr. Stopford's 
pardon," said Mrs. Conway, smiling; "sir 
Theodosius being an old acquaintance,
made me forget my new; have you such
another melancholy tale to tell me, that a 
rich old relation of his is dead?"

  "No," replied Clementina, shaking her
head, "it was the reverse with him; his 
father durst not trust him in Bath, which,
I rather suspect, has been the scene of a 
great deal of his gaiety, and he has lost con-
siderable sums at the billiard-table. What 
the reason was, is best known to the family;
he was recalled in a very peremptory man-
ner, and most reluctantly obeyed; he was                HOWARD CASTLE.          219

engaged to be at lady Hillyard's masque-
rade, where he would have been a most
incomparable mask, but the fates decreed
it otherwise."

  "He does not appear to be just from
under his tutor's care," said Mrs. Conway;
"I wonder at his submitting to be ordered
home by his father."

  "There are secrets in all families," said
Clementina; "Mr. Stopford has displeased
lord Almonton in some serious points; as
he is a most eccentric genius, he is at pre-
sent in a very submissive mood, and obeys
upon the first word of command being
given."

  When the hour for separating arrived,
Mrs. Conway led the way to a noble suite
of apartments, but all upon a large
scale, and furnished in the old-fashioned
style.  Clementina thought of her father's
remark that a moderate-sized house was
more agreeable; the rooms were so spa-
cious, they appeared to her uncomfortable.
Mrs. Conway observed her countenance,
which did not express pleasure as she 
viewed the immense space; it looked dark220                Howard castle.

and dismal. A velvet bed, which by can-
dle-light. appeared to be black, and upon
its lofty cornices were large ornaments,
which represented plumes of white fea-
thers, struck her, who had never before
seen an old fashioned state-bed, as a more
fit receptacle for the dead than the living.
The walls were hung with tapestry, which
Clementina did not know was the finest in
England; she surveyed it, not with the eyes
of admiration, but with secret wonder,
that any thing so frightfully ugly should
have found a place in Howard Castle.

    "This room," said Mrs. Conway, "I
ordered might be prepared for you, being
the nearest to my own, and there is a bed
in the dressing-room for your maid; your
countenance brightens upon this information."

    "I OWN," replied Clementina, " that the
magnificence of this Castle carries me into
wonderful tales of enchantment; that bed
looks as if a princess had lain asleep in it 
for a hundred years, and it is all guided by
an enchanted wand; these ghastly figures
(looking at the tapestry) seem as if they
were under the influence of the magician,
        HOWARD CASTLE.     221

and as if, by a nod or a touch, they would
all begin to move."

  "What a frightful party has your ima-
gination conjured up for you to pass the
night with!" replied she; "you are in ex-
ceeding good company, which royalty has
deigned to visit. If it will enhance your
idea of them, I can assure you they bring
a great many visitors to this old mansion,
and are always as quiet and stationary as
you at present see them. I shall insist
upon your examining them by daylight,
as they are famed for beauty, and you
must admire them."

  "I am no antiquarian," replied Clemen-
tina, "nor do I wish to comprehend the
merits of those hideous figures; I hope to
pass the night undisturbed, either by them,
or by my own imagination."

  They parted; and Clementina, in spite
of the dismal grandeur she was surrounded
with, had most comfortable repose. She
tried if daylight could produce any beauty
in the tapestry, but still she could discover
nothing to admire. The furniture of the
room was extremely magnificent; the lofty
bed was hung with the finest Genoa vel-222                  HOWARD CASTLE.

yet, of a dark brown colour, lined with yel-
low satin, and trimmed with a deep fringe
of brown and gold; the cornice was richly
gilt, and the ornaments, which she took
for plumes of feathers, were carved to cor-
respond with the rest, and were almost en-
tirely burnished gold: the massive chairs
and heavy curtains were exactly suited, as
to costly splendour, with the rest of the
furniture. The toilet in the dressing-room
(which was fitted up in precisely the same
style as the bedroom) struck her with its
peculiar splendour; the beautiful lace dra-
pery, the splendid filagree dressing-boxes,
and the highly-chased silver branches,
which were fixed to a noble French mirror
all arrested her attention. The walls were
likewise covered with tapestry, which she
thought was not quite so frightful as the
bedroom, the figures being upon a very
small scale; still the idea of enchantment
attended all she saw, as all was totally dif-
ferent from what she had ever seen before.
 
Mary saw her mistress was as much sur-
prised as she had been, and ventured, as
she assisted her to dress, to make a few
comments on the antiquity of the mansion;                 HOWARD CASTLE.                 223

from the mansion she got to the master,
on whom her encomiums were still greater
than on the Castle--"He is,"said Mary,
"adored by the servants; so good and so
thoughtful for all his dependants. Would
you believe it, ma'am, that his lordship has
built a most beautiful village, about a mile
from this house, for the old servants who
have lived from their childhood in this
Castle; they were in his grandfather's fa-
mily, and are to remain in it till their mas-
ter settles in this country; then they are
to remove, if they choose it, to Frederies-
town, and each to have an annuity settled
upon them, and each a pretty cottage, fit-
ted up and furnished; he spends much of
his time in foreign countries, but he docs
not forget to do good in his own, a every
letter the steward gets, has some charit-
able idea in it."

  "Do they expect he will live at this
place when he returns to England?"

  "They do," was her answer,"as he has
ordered the houses to be perfectly ready,
that they may be well aired, and comfort-
able for their reception, in the course of
next summer; they are all to be furnished224       HOWARD CASTLE.

exactly the same, except Mr. Smith's and
Mrs. Reeves's, the butler and housekeeper,
who are to have superior houses to the rest. 
Poor Mr. Smith is so lame he cannot now
wait on Mrs. Conway, which grieves him 
exceedingly, and makes him almost wish 
to get to his cottage, where the cook is to
wait upon him. The servants hall is like
an hospital for old people, as there is hard-
ly a person in it under seventy; they all 
look as happy and comfortable as possible,
and each day drink the health of Mrs.
Conway, and their beloved lord, in a bum-
per."

Clematina was plases with this little
simple account, as it convinced her the
son of her friend had a feeling heart, and
would certainly study the happiness of his
amiable mother. She found her maid had
an endless source of information, and that
lord Howard was to be hero of her tale,
as he seemed to be of her admiration.
Mrs.Reeve, the housekeeper, was a most 
intelligent companion, and had not allowed
an opportunity to escape without impress-
ing on her andience the extraordinary qua-
lities of her masters.              HOWARD CASTLE.          225

  Mrs. Conway's maid had been fatigued
with hearing his praises sounded every
visit her mistress had paid at Howard Cas-
tle; she was relieved when Miss Bouverie
arrived, as Mrs. Reeve had a fresh person
to expatiate to; and as Mary knew it
would give her lady pleasure to hear such
a charming character of Mrs. Conway's
son, she listened with attention to the old
housekeeper, who never tired on so inte-
resting a subject.

  The history Clementina had heard was
perfectly correct; lord Howard's generous
nature could not be exaggerated; even his
mother knew not the extent of his bene-
volent heart, or how far he exerted his am-
ple fortune to make all his dependants
comfortable and happy.  When Clemen-
tina found her way to the breakfast-room
(which was not without difficulty), she was
kindly greeted by her friend, who express-
ed pleasure in seeing her apparently in
good health--" No frightful dream dis-
turbed your repose, I hope?" said she,
taking her hand.

  " I had nothing but pleasant visions
dance before my eyes," said Clementina.
226         HOWARD CASTLE.

   " Then they shall be realized," replied
Mrs. Conway, who presented at the same
time two letters.
   " Letters do not always convey happi-
ness," was her answer; at the same time
a gentle sigh escaped her, as she took them
from her friend; she saw they were from
Colnbrook, one from lord Montague, the
Other from lady Elenora.  She was putting
them into her ridicule, when Mrs.Conway
begged she would peruse them.
   " It is treating your correspondents with
great indifference, not at least to take a
peep of their health and pursuits."
   " I anticipate the contents," said she;
"they may perhaps check the comfortable
feelings I entered this room with."
   Mrs. Conway's eyes, she observed, were
stedfastly fixed upon her, as she proceeded
.to open the one which she had believed
was the most interesting; the seal had
convinced her it was from her cousin; an
M in the Roman character, with a cornet
over it, left no doubt that lord Montague
was the writer.  Clementina was sorry
there was such a proof of who the letter
wad from, as Mrs. Conway had often         HOWARD CASTLE                   227

hinted a suspicion that a more favoured
lover had made her cruel to the marquis;
she was resolved that even to her friend
the secret which had been extorted should
never be divulged by her; even were she 
convinced an engagement subsisted be-
tween them, it could be of very little con-
sequence; time would explain what she
certainly should not. She slightly looked
it over, with a glow in her face, which did
not escape the penetrating eyes of Mrs.
Conway, who attributed it entirely to
what she had read, not to the real cause. 
Being watched by a friend from whom
she would willingly have no concealments, 
she lamented creating suspicion, which she
very much feared was strongly impreg-
nated in her breast. She treated lady Ele-
nora's exactly in the same way as she had
done her brother's; she found he was re-
stored to health and serenity, and that he
was on the point of setting off for Switzer-
land. Lady Elenora seemed filled with 
wonder at his again quitting his native 
land; but Clementia resolved to peruse 
them with attention in her own apartment. 
She was Mrs. Conway's inquisitive look;
228          HOWARD CASTLE.

but as she had no news to impart, she
seated herself at the breakfast-table, with-
out making any comment.

  Her father soon after made his appear-
ance, and conversation became general.
There was ample amusement for the morn-
ing, in surveying the various parts of the
Castle, which had been, in former days, of
considerable strength, but happily the port-
cullis was no longer necessary; marks
where it had been suspended still remain-
ed ; the donjon was converted into useful
purposes; no longer was it kept as a sale
retreat for the inhabitants.

  Clementina shrunk as her father pointed
out to her the various contrivances for tor-
menting and destroying her fellow-crea-
tures, of which there were still visible traces
to be seen; the general seemed to forget
his lameness, so much was his curiosity
awakened, as he had never before seen
such perfect remains of antiquity, blended
with all the magnificent grandeur and com-
fort which Howard Castle exhibited. The
beauty of the environs was next explored
and admired; the walks and rides were
beautiful. The weather, for the season of
            HOWARD CASTLE.           229

the year, was mild and delightful; the
spring flowers were shewing their gay co-
lours, and the various bulbs were bursting
forth from their winter's bed; the open
weather brought them into maturity too
early, as even before the visitants at How-
ard Castle quitted it, the hypatica, crocus,
and snowdrops were drooping their heads,
and all vegetation was checked.

  The time approaching for lord Howard's
arrival in London made Mrs. Conway de-
termine to quit the country for the gayer
scenes of the metropolis. At the end of a
fortnight from the time of the general and
Clementina's joining her, they separated;
the former returned to Roachwood, and
the two ladies pursued their journey to
London; still the prospect of retirement
would have been preferred to the hustle
of the great world by Clementina, who
parted from her father with sorrow; he
would not suffer her to express the wish
she had to accompany him, but insisted
upon her cheerfully acquiescing in Mrs.
Conway's kind invitation, desiring, at the
same time, that she would not return,
without her friend came with her.230                  HOWARD CASTLE.

"You hear," said Mrs. Conway, laugh-
ing, "upon what terms you are to be re-
ceived by your father; I now have you
totally in my power, and I assure you I
shall exert it."

"Perhaps," said Clementina, "the exer-
tion will be to take me home; I may not
conduct myself in the beau monde accord-
ing to your approbation, and you may be 
very glad to deliver up your charge, in a
much less time than you now suppose."

"I should be ashamed," replied Mrs.
Conway, "to return you upon such terms:
if you behave ill, I will keep you, in hopes
of improving you; if you behave well, I
shall retain you for my own pleasure; so,
at all events, you have no prospect of
escaping from me."

"I am convinced it will be a happy
bondage," replied Clementina, "if living
with you can be so termed; my only re-
gret in this excursion is being separated
from my father. I was recalled from
France to be his companion at Roach-
wood; he, I believe, to amuse me, quitted
his retirement for the gayer scenes of Bath;
ought I to permit him to return alone,             HOWARD CASTLE.     231

and to spend the long evenings as he did
before my arrival? Solve that question.
and my uneasiness will completely cease,
in indulging my own feelings at the ex-
pence of his."

   "The solution, my dear Miss Bouverie,
is the simplest in the world," replied Mrs.
Conway; "in going to London, you obey
your father's commands; had you kept
steady in your negative to my request,
you would have forfeited my friendship,
and broken one of the commandments.
Obedience to parents is strictly enjoined."

   Clementina smiled at the way her friend 
reconciled her present journey with her
duty; she was thoroughly convinced that
she was with one of the most agreeable
companions she ever had met with, and
one for whom she felt the strongest affec-
tion was returned with all the warmth
possible; and she was likewise convinced
that the society and conversation of Mrs.
Conway were highly advantageous, and
might improve her in every respect; she
therefore bowed to her superior judgment,
232             HOWARD CASTLE.

and never after murmured at the sepa-
ration.




                CHAPTER IX.
                  ~~~~~~~

THr. journey from Howard Castle to Lon-
don, Mrs. Conway and her fair companion
accomplished easily in two days; their en-
trance was, however, so late on the second
day, that the streets were lighted, and tlie
brilliant shops exhibited their showy ap-
pearance, with their various lamps and gas
lights. Clementina was astonished with the
beautiful perspective which the long dou-
ble line of lamps exhibited, and the rich
display of the shops surprised her. At
last they arrived at another splendid man-
sion of lord Howard's, situated in Picca-
dilly; all was prepared for their reception;
the general air of comfort, which the mo-
dern style of furnishing gave each apart-
ment, struck her forcibly.

  The great rooms at Howard Castle, which              HOWARD CASTLE.             233

had received no addition from an uphol-
sterer's shop for at least a century, sunk
in the comparison with the elegant furni-
ture which she was now in the midst of.

Sofas, couches, ottomans, all invited re-
pose, had her eyes not been arrested with
every species of splendour; immense mir-
rors reflected her figure in every direction,
unique cabinets, beautiful tables of every
description, bronze figures supporting in-
numerable lights, vases, china of the most
rare kinds, all crowded on her for admi-
ration-"This," said she, to Mrs. Conway,
"is enchantment of another kind; How-
and Castle belongs to a legendary tale;
this delightful mansion to one of modern
times."

  "Ah! my dear Clementina," said Mrs.
Conway, with much warmth, "were you
to approve as much of the possessor as
you do of his possessions, how charmed I
should be!"

   "Would you?" replied she; "would
my friend rejoice in what would probably
be my greatest misfortune?"

   The extreme gravity of his speech
struck Mrs. Conway, as fatal to her most



234             HOWARD CASTLE.

favourite plan. She feared the engage-
ment, which she now almost believed ex-
isted between Miss Bouverie and her cou-
sin, was what she alluded to. Clementina
had no allusion at all in what she said;
she merely answered from the impression
of the moment, how unfortunate for her
to admire, where probably there would be
no admiration in return.

   There was no explanation, as Mrs. Con-
way thought it too delicate a subject to
joke upon; and unless Miss Bouverie vo-
luntarily imparted her engagement to her,
she would not by any hint disclose her
suspicions. She feared she should intro-
duce her son to a very dangerous acquaint-
ance, as every day she thought her more
fascinating; and, of course, the wish of
seeing her united to her darling Howard
became stronger; her amiable temper, and
the never-failing source of amusement,
which she was possessed of, rendered her
the most desirable companion in the world.
She was convinced he would admire her
beauty, and she firmly believed it was the
least of her attractive qualities: her mind
and manner greatly surpassed even her        HOWARD CASTLE.     235

face and graceful person; the latter time
would injure, but the former there was
no risk of fading.

  Mrs. Conway believed nothing could be
so conducive towards happiness in the
married state, as a well-regulated mind, an
equal temper, good sense, which had been
properly cultivated, and a cheerful, lively
disposition; such a wife she hoped her
son would possess, and such a wife she
believed Clementina would make, as she
had every requisite to be a friend and
companion to her husband, capable of ad-
vising him, and capable of amusing him;
but she feared there was no chance for his
ever being possessed of such a treasure as
she firmly believed Miss Bouverie was.

  Mrs. Conway was soon immersed in bu-
siness, as her numerous acquaintance
pored in upon them. Clementina was
surprised with the constant succession of
carriages which stopped at the door; many
left cards, and many made personal inqui-
ries after the health of her friend, who
seemed as general a favourite with the
world as she was of hers. She was con-
vinced all the names in the court-calendar236              HOWARD CASTLE.

were upon the list who had called; she
had been introduced to numerous votaries
of fashion, who all admired her, and pro-
nounced at the next house they called at,
that Mrs. Conway had brought a divinity
to town with her.

  Sir Theodosius Sidney was soon an at-
tendant at the morning levee; he rejoiced
in again seeing Miss Bouverie, in even bet-
ter looks than when he parted with her at
Bath; and Mrs. Conway was convinced,
from his manner, he meant to be a never-
failing escort to her party; she was deter-
mined to keep as quiet as possible, until
lord Howard's arrival, from whom she ex-
pected to have a letter, fixing the day for
his being in town.  She was resolved he
should have an equal chance with sir Theo-
dosius, or any other beau who might ad-
mire the meteor, who, she believed, would
dazzle the world.  Numerous invitations
were rejected; the apology, lord Howard's
expected return.

  At last the long-looked-for packet ar-
rived--" Now," said Mrs. Conway, " I
shall have the pleasure of introducing my
son to my friend."        HOWARD CASTLE.     237

  She broke the seal, and perused the let-
ter, with evident disappointment; Clemen-
tina, who had watched her countenance,
expressed a hope that he was well.

  "He is in perfect good health," she re-
plied, "but to my great sorrow is pre-
vented coming to England; affairs of im-
portance detain him in Paris, which I own
is a serious mortification to me."

  Clementina was grieved to see her
friend so chagrined; she felt no regret on
her own account, as she was convinced she
should by much more comfortable in his
lordship's house, if he was absent. The
repeated  hints which Mrs. Conway had
given, how much she should wish them to
meet, and she suspected she would be gra-
tified, if there was a mutual admiration
to ensue, made her feel relieved beyond
measure on hearing the contents of the
letter, as she was perfectly certain her si-
tuation would have been most disagree-
able. In all probability lord Howard would
have discovered his mother's wish, and he
might be led to suppose she entered into
the scheme, and would be mortified and
disappointed if he did not do as he was
bid, and make an offer of his hand, heart,238                   HOWARD CASTLE.

and fortune to her. Not only lord How-
ard, thought she, but the world, would pity
me, if the plan did not succeed.

All was now happily settled; lord How-
ard remained where he was, and she should
enjoy the society of her friend, unmolested
by projects, which, in all probability, would
have failed on either one side or the other.
She now felt at perfect liberty, having no
restraint of any kind over her actions; she
was charmed with her friend, with her
situation, and with the society she met
with; those who visited at the house were
people of the first fashion, but were not
equally agreeable, as they were not blessed
with the same powers of rendering them-
selves so; but there was not one who was
not polished as much as education and
every external embellishment to the high circles
they were to move in: in some, nature
had not been so liberal as others, either
in intellects or temper.

Clementina's beauty was not approved
of by all; many of the bosoms of her con-
temporaries were torn with contending
emotions; envy and jealousy were predo-
minant feelings; even the unaffected sim-              HOWARD CASTLE.       239

plicity of her manner was torn to pieces
without mercy.  "She knew it suited her
appearance to be so gentle; her winning
softness was put on to attract attention."
She was willing to believe the good hu-
mour and kindness which were expressed
were sincere; the joy which seemed to ani-
mate those of her own sex and near her
own age, at meeting with her, pleased her
exceedingly.  Her ingenuous heart could
not for a moment suppose, that all the kind
things which were addressed to her, were
not really felt by those who were so earnest
in assuring her of their regard; she was
surprised with the expressions of friend-
ship she heard, where she thought herself
hardly acquainted; she was not ready in
declaring her sentiments, nor was she ready
to class every stranger under the same de-
nomination with her beloved Mrs. Con-
way; she was civil to all who were civil
to her, but she felt very little inclined to
select a friend from the gay crowd who
fluttered round her.

  There was no longer any reason for Mrs.
Conway or Miss Bouverie refusing the
many invitations which were sent to them.240                   HOWARD CASTLE.

The day that lord Howard's letter ar-
rived had been fixed on for their attend-
ing Covent-Garden. Mrs. Conway's dis-
appointment hung rather heavily on her
spirits, and made her unwilling to fulfil
her engagement. Clementina wished ex-
ceedingly to remain at home with her, but
her friend would not listen to the proposal;
she had letters to write, both to her son,
and on his affairs, which should occupy
her during the evening. She knew lady
Pembroke would be happy to accommo-
date Clementina, both with a seat in her
carriage, and with a place in her box; she
immediately wrote a note to her ladyship,
who promised to call for Miss Boverie;
so, in the course of a few minutes, all was
settled and for the first time the friends
were separated in public.

Lady Pembroke and her daughters had
been very profuse in their expressions of
civility to Clementina, hoping to meet
with her very frequently, and requesting
that she would visit them upon the easy
terms of familiar friendship. She felt ex-
ceedingly obliged by their polite profes-
sions, but she neither admired the mother        HOWARD CASTLE.      241

or the young ladies sufficiently to return
the compliment.

  Lady Pembroke appeared haughty and 
reserved, and the Miss Pembrokes affect-
ed and ridiculous. Miss Celina was ex-
tremely pretty, nad was very thoroughly
convinced of her superiority; her sister
had no beauty to boast of, but her interior
qualifications were thought by the family 
be be far above mediocrity; her manners 
were flippant and pert, always straining to 
have a quick, clever answer, without the 
smallest share  of wit or repartee in her 
composition.

  The party greeted Miss Bouverie with
their usual expression of joy at seeing
her--of the pleasure they felt in having 
her with them--and how much gratified 
they had been, by Mrs. Conway's confer-
ring such an honour upon them as having 
her in their box.

  Clementina bowed, expressed what she
really felt, very grateful for their flattering 
speeches; and they proceeded towards the 
theatre, all as agreeable as possible. The 
house was extremly full, and as they 

  VOL.II.          M242               HOWARD CASTLE.

were very late, their entrance attracted ge-
neral observation; the party still conti-
nued in good humour, until they were 
perceived by sir Theodosius Sidney, who
was at no great distance, and who was evi-
dently watching for some one's entrance;
he quitted his place and soon was in lady
Pembroke's box. Her ladyship was one
of the good active mothers, who are always
on the alert for the benefit of their fami-
lies; she had, from the moment of Mrs. 
Harper's death (who she understood had
left her great fortune to sir Theodosius),
been doubly attentive to him. He had
been a general admirer of beauty, and the
pretty face of Miss Celina Pembroke had
attracted his notice; he had repeatedly
danced with her, had attended her at the
theatres, and rode with her in the Park.
His fortune was then supposed to be in-
volved; the young lady admired him, but
her prudent mother did not then deem
him a good match, and checked the flirta-
tion, which was very evident to the family.
His situation was now altered, and lady
Pembroke was as active in encouraging
him, as she had been the reverse; she had                    Howard Castle               243

invited him to be of her party, but had not
succeeded.

  Sir Theodosius was engaged; he was re-
solved to be at liberty to attend to the
magnet whose charms had sunk deep the 
first night he danced with her at Bath, and 
who had never been absent from his
thoughts; he was surprised at seeing her 
appear as Miss Bouverie, and rejoiced to 
find that lord Clemaire had no claim upon
her.

  Lady Pembroke was pleased to see
him, and expressed what she felt, by good-
humoured smiles and nods of approbation.
Miss Celina was seated behind the rest of 
the party; Lady Pembroke, her eldest
daughter, and Miss Bouverie, were in the 
front, who, as soon as the bustle was over,
was listening with profound attention to 
the melodious voice of Miss ------, who
was acting the part of Isabella in the Fa-
tal Marriage; she heard sir Theodosius so-
liciting a place, and she supposed him
anxious to hear what was passing on the 
stage, she moved towards Miss Pembroke.
He took advantage of the moment, and

                  M2244            HOWARD CASTLE.

nimbly seated himself where he most
wished to be; he inquired why their plans
had been changed, and hoped illness had
not prevented Mrs. Conway's keeping to
her intention.
  Clementina explained the cause of her
being with lady Pembroke, that lord
Howard's change of plans had in a great
degree deranged his mother's; she had
now business to employ her; which she had
hoped would have been transacted by her
son.
  Sir Theodosius expressed his surprise -
"But at the same time," added he, smil-
ing, "I believe the male sex may rejoice:
had lord Howard appeared, all the beaux
on the list of fashion might have hid their
willow-bound heads."
  "Is lord Howard so general a flirt," said
she, "that every swain would be unsuc-
cessful? he could only pay his devoirs (if he
is so inclined) to one lady, so why should
all mourn his return?"
  "True," replied he, "lord Howard is
no male coquet; his character is unblemish-
ed; but had he been in London this win-
ter, with such a visitor in this house, could
           HOWARD CASTLE.          245

even his guarded heart withstand such
charms? It is impossible, and we might
sue in vain, when there was such a compe-
titor. It was whispered he was an admirer
of lady Caroline Seymour, and that pro-
bably it would be renewed on his return;
but I am convinced lady Caroline's chance
would have been extinguished, had he seen
his mother's friend."

    Clementina found what she suspected
would have happened, and rejected more
than ever in lord Howard's absence. She
wished the subject dropped, as she had no
inclination to listen to the gay speeches sir
Theodosius seemed inclined to pay her.
She turned her eyes to the stage, but still
her ears were forced to hear what he said,
and her attention was completely arrested
by his asking if she had observed the
Carnsworth party? 

   She quickly answered in the negative,
at the same time looking in the direction
he described; there she saw the duchess,
lady Augusta, Miss Osburn, the marquis,
and the duke of Bridgenorth, with several
other gentlemen she did not know; they
were at a considerable distance, and Cle-246               HOWARD CASTLE.

mentina thought, would in all probability not observe that she was present; she was mistaken; the quick eye of the marquis had fixed upon her movement she entered the house; her unrivaled beauty had drawn much observation and admiration, and from no one more sincere than from lord Clemaire; his heart recognised her as the most lovely being in existence; he feared for his own strength of mind, as humbly again to sue at the feet of the haughty fair one was more than his pride could submit to. He resolved, if his feelings were unconquerable, to take refuge in flight; be he would stand his ground with manly firmness, if possible. 

The duchess, who was highly offended with the presumptive Miss Bouverie, was determined to humble her, if completely cutting the acquaintance would have that effect; she resolved lady Augusta should shun her society, and she hoped her son would have a proper spirit, and punish her by contemptuous neglect. The duchess expected to see her, in some degree, mortified, as she firmly believe the girl had been spoiled at Carnsworth Castle, and that she
HOWARD CASTLE. 217

probably would expect to be followed in
London with the same admiration as she
had been in a private party.

How much was her grace mistaken!
Clementina had so humble an opinion of
her attractive powers, she believed she had
almost entirely escaped observation, and
that the Beauclaire family had not seen
her. The duke of Bridgenorth convinced
her she was mistaken; he quitted lady
Augusta, by whom he had been placed,
and entered lady Pembroke's box at the
third act. Her ladyship's acquaintance
with the duke was so slight, she was sur-
prised when he joined her party; but she
was more so, when he eagerly pressed for-
ward, and expressed the utmost pleasure 
at seeing Miss Bouverie in town. Cle-
mentina evidently was pleased, as she
wished to hear tidings of her friend, lady
Augusta.

"Be not surprised," was his reply, "if
you see her with stiff manners and avert-
ed looks; both foreign, I assure you, to
her own feelings: but you have," added
he, in a low voice, "wounded the pride of
the family in the most vulnerable part;248          HOWARD CASTLE.

the duchess resents your refusal of her son,
and will not permit her daughter (who
has the best heart in the world) to shew
the regard for you she sincerely feels."
  Clementina thanked him for the infor-
mation, as she should have been mortified
had she received a repulse from her old
companion, without having it explained.
She had long suspected the duke meant to
make an offer of himself to lady Augusta ;
she was now convinced, from the high opi-
nion he entertained of her, that it would
not be his fault if she did not become the
duchess of Bridgenorth ; he was many
years her senior, and the gay life he had
led made him appear older than he really
was; but great gaiety of manner, and a 
never-failing flow of conservation and spi-
rits, made him a most entertaining, agree-
able companion.
  He returned to his party when the cur-
tain drew up, and Clementina observed
him whispering to lady Augusta, she sup-
posed, an account of his conference with
her.
  As soon as the play was over,lady Pem-
broke proposed quiting the house, which
















        HOWARD CASTLE.     249

was very readily agreed to by the party,
who were soon in motion. The carriage
was in waiting, and sir Theodosius was
most assiduous in the care he took of Miss
Bouverie; there was a number of beaux
in the box, but the one whom lady Pem-
broke and her daughters would have pre-
ferred to all others was busily engaged, in
a manner they did not at all approve of.
The evening had been fraught with disap-
pointment, as they evidently saw there
were no hopes of the gay baronet; his ad-
miration was fixed where they least
wished it to be.

   During the drive to Mrs. Conway's,
Clementina was surprised with the change
on her companions; in going to the play,
they were striving who should shew her
the most civility, all conversing with cheer-
fulness and gaity, anticipating the amuse-
ment they should have; on their return,
the most determined silence was pursued;
no remark of any kind was made, except-
ing Miss Celina's wondering why the
coachman drove so slow, as they should be
monstrous late for lady Main's party.

250         HOWARD CASTLE.

  Clementina was relieved when they
stopped at Mrs. Conway's door; thanking
them for their polite attention, she quickly
descended from the coach, and flew to her
friend, to impart the strange behavior of
the Pembroke family.

   Mrs. Conway smiled--"Was there no
beau in the case?"

   "There were many," was her answer,
"and the Miss Pembrokes had their full
share; I did not interfere with them in the
smallest degree; sir Theodosius was my
attendant."

   "You have explained the mystery," said
Mrs. Conway; "he has lately got an acces-
sion of fortune, and would be a good spe-
culation for one of the young ladies; you
have, in some way or other, disappointed
them in their hopes."

   After all the occurrences of the even-
ing, the silence of the party, the arrival of 
the Beauclaire family, and the information
which the duke of Bridgenorth had given
her, were narrated, they separated for the
night.

   Mrs. Conway was not in her usual spi-
rits, and Clementina was very willing to                   HOWARD CASTLE.               251

retire to her apartment, when the most of
the fashionable world were beginning their
round of amusements; the carriages were
thundering along the streets, as she was
preparing for her pillow; she felt no wish
to join the giddy multitude, as one public
place in an evening, she believed, was as
much as she should ever attempt.

Clementina was happy to find Mrs. Con-
way's spirits were restored to their usual
cheerfulness, when they met at breakfast,
and that she had determined to pay some
morning visits, and at night to attend the
opera.

"I will," said Clementina, "most will-
ingly remain at home, when you are so
inclined; but I will not again venture
from under your protecting wing."

"Do not make any rash determination,"
replied her friend, "as in all probability
you will be obliged to break it."

"Certainly not obliged," was her an-
swer; "it must be optional, and I will
not willingly be again separated from you."

"Then will you accompany me this
morning to the duke of Beauclaire's? The
duchess honours me by the appellation of252                   HOWARD CASTLE.

friend, and I must express pleasure at her
arrival in London; she is a sensible woman,
and an agreeable one; her resentment to-
wards you is flattering in a high degree,
as she plainly shrews she wished you for a
daughter, and the disappointment bears
hard upon her; had you been the mar-
chioness of Clemaire, she would have
adored you as a superior being. As you
have behaved in so strange a manner, and
proved that you have no heart-discrimina-
tion or ambition in your composition, she
will have nothing to do with so odd a
mortal."

"I certainly shall not call on the du-
chess," replied Clementina, "but if you
could contrive to introduce me to lady
Augusta, without seeing her grace, I would
willingly go with you; but I must give
up the pleasure of her acquaintance, as I
could not encounter her mother's haughty,
proud spirit. I am thankful I am in no
way connected with her; her patronage
and interference, had I been her daughter,
would have been insupportable to me:
let me rejoice in the plain name of Cle-
mentina Bouverie, with my liberty uncon-            HOWARD CASTL.E.   253 

strained; how miserable to have been 
watched by the whole family, and every 
word I uttered criticised and weighed in 
the scale of formal propriety! What should 
I have had to have compensated for such 
constraint? a husband who was not form-
ed to please me, and a title I cared not a 
straw for. It would have been no gratifica-
tion to me, to have had• the pageantry of 
greatness, without the happiness which 
ought to attend the married state. Why 
you should think me a strange being for 
consulting my heart, and leaving pride 
and vanity out of the question, astonishes 
me, asi am convinced you would have done 
exactly the same thing." 
   "Can you have so odd an opinion of 
me," replied Mrs. Conway, smiling,"as to 
suppose me like you in any one respect? 
All the comment I can make is, happy is 
the man whom you bestow your affections 
upon." 
   "My heart is my Own, my will is free," 
exclaimed Clemontina, as she rose from 
her seat; and taking Mrs. Conway's hand, 
with much gaiety of manner, "I will in-
254               HOWARD CASTLE.

trust the secret to you, when i am in dan-
ger of losing the little treasure."

  A servant entering, and delivering a
card to Miss Bouverie, stopped their con-
versation.

  "An invitation," cried she, "from sir
Theodosins Sidney, to a ball; if there is
not one for you, I will not accept-I will
not again put myself under the protection
of lady Pembroke, or any capricious ma-
tron."

  Mrs. Conway laughed at the idea of her
refusing to join a gay party, if she was not
to make one of the number-" Your com-
pany will be often very acceptable; but if
you are always to be clogged with an old
woman attending you, the world will na-
turally suppose you are not to be trusted
without an Argus to watch you: accept
of the invitation, and do not be so unlike
other people; few of your age would hesi-
tate a moment, as certainly the pleasure of
a ball cannot depend upon a female com-
panion; and shall take care of you do not
join lady Pembroke's party, if they are in-
vited."                 HOWARD CASTLE              255

    Clementina reluetantly obeyed her friend.
and a note of acceptance was returned to
sir Theodosius; the carriage was soon after
ready, and they set out on a round of 
visits.

    Mrs.Conway told her,there were two 
ladies whom she almost wished might be
at home when they called,as she could
shew her mothers of very different descrip-
tions;one so tender over her offspring,
that she rendered her husband miserable;
the other so much the reverse, that it
created uneasiness to the wethist man in 
the world. - If we are admitted, I will
shew off their nursery feibles to amuse
you. The first on my list is lady Isabella
Strafford, who will I do believe, sacrifice
her life to her exquistie feelings for her
progeny;the other is the honourable Mrs.
Dorrington, up to the cars in gaiety, and 
leaves poor Mr.Dorrington to be head-
nurse."

Soon after they stopped at Mr.Straf-
ferd's door, and were admitted; they were 
shewn into a very elegant marks of the young
party who had recently quitted it; a hob-256     HOWARD CASTLE.

by-horse stood in the middle of the apart-
ment, cards were thrown about in differ-
ent directions, a table stood with joining
maps spread upon it, and the sofas were
covered with dolls, and various marks of
juvenile amusements.

"This," said Mrs. Conway, "is quite in
character; generally there are a few bot-
tles, pots, and boxes from the apothecary's,
blended with the elegant ornaments you
see."

She was interrupted by the entrance of
lady Isabella, and two of her children, both
wrapped up, and apparently invalids; their
pallid countenances and meagre figures
expressed bad health and delicate consti-
tutions.  Her ladyship languidly welcomed
Mrs. Conway's return to town, and assured
Miss Bouverie she was happy to see her,
but with so melancholy a countenance and
voice, that they positively contradicted
what she asserted.

The usual inquiries after her family
brought the usual answer-"The children
had all been sick, and she was almost worn
out with attendance and anxiety."

"I am extremely sorry," said Mrs. Con-           HOWARD CASTLE.              257

way, " to hear such a dismal account; but
your ladyship ought not to take so great a
share of the fatigue; you absolutely save
your nurses, and injure your own health."
  "My dear madadam," replied lady Isabel-
la, with the tears trembling in her eyes,
" I am miserable when I am away from
the dear angels; I am convinced it injures
my health more to be from them, than
being constantly with them. I have even
a bed in the nursery, that I may know
constantly what passes; but I will order
my poppets to be brought."
  Clementina attempted, whilst the mo-
ther descanted upon her miseries, to get
acquainted with the puny master and
miss, who hung upon their mamma, and
seemed to add to her oppression. She
asked them as to their amusements;
which of them rode upon the hobby-horse,
and how far they could travel in a day?
What they wanted in strength and robust-
ness, she found was amply made up in con-
versation; their little tongues seemed re-
joiced to be set at liberty, and she had the
full history of all their pursuits and plea-
sures: she discovered from their conversa-258              HOWARD CASTLE.

tion they very seldom went out of doors;
if they did, their mamma would be vexed,
as they always got cold, and cold brought
on fever; and then they had such nasty
stuff to take from the doctor's, that they
liked better to play in the drawing-rooms,
and in their mamma's boudoir, than in the
square.

   The entrance of the other children drew
their attention from the history they were
giving to Clementina; they ran to their
younger brothers and sisters; and soon the
noise was such, that Mrs. Conway was
obliged to leave the lively party, in self-de-
fence, as their lungs, lady Isabella was
forced to confess, were strong, although
their bodies were weak.

   "What a tiresome wife!" exclaimed Cle-
mentina, as they drove from the house.
"If Mr. Strafford is possessed of feeling, he
must be a most wretched man, to spend
his time with a continued lamentation,
and with such a melancholy cadence of
voice."

   "It is unfortunate," replied Mrs. Con-
way, "when a woman sacrifices her hus-
band's comfort to foolish affection for her
                   HOWARD CASTLE.         259

offspring; those poor children we have
just now seen, will never be reared to men
and women's estate; they are dosed by 
rule, not by sickness - fed in the same man-
ner; natural appetites have nothing to do
with their meals, and the wind of heaven
is never to blow upon them; you see the
effects, what little white miserable-looking
things they are, absolutely killed by care.
Poor Mr. Strafford has not the same cause
for complaint, as there is no care for either
his comfort or amusement; he is driver
into company, and I understands spends
very little of his time at home, as he has
no domestic enjoyment, for which nature
made him."
  Mrs. Darrington was out, so that Cle-
mentina did not see the contrast between
the mothers, which Mrs. Conway had pro-
mised her. After leaving numerous cards,
and paying a few visits, they returned
home, and found a long list of company
who had called in their absence; amongst
the number was sir Theodosius.
  "He is a daily guest," said Mrs. Con-
way.
  "And is by far the most agreeable of260          HOWARD CASTLE.

the male sex I have met with in the great
world," said Clementina; "he is not wrap-
ped up in himself, as most of the beaux
are."

 "Whom does he seem to prefer," asked
Mrs. Conway,"to his own dear self, as he
certainly has an object to fix his affections
upon? Neither a sweet myrtle, or melan-
choly cypress, according to Sterne's idea,
would do for him."

 "Were he in a desert," replied Clemen-
tina, "it would alter his nature; but in
this gay city, a fair maid is more easily
met with than either a myrtle or a cypress.

 Mrs. Conway suspected who the fair
maid was, but she still believed that lord
Montague would frustrate all their hopes.


            
             CHAPTER X.


Clementina was delighted with the
opera; the music and dancing charmed
her, and she confessed to her friend that
she was a complete convert to spending               HOWARD CASTLE               261

the gloomy months of winter in the me-
tropolis; no bad weather interfered with
their amusements; no dark nights, or bad
roads, kept the inhabitants of London pri-
soners in their houses; the winter's blast
might affect the servants and the horses,
but not those who were in pursuit of plea-
sure; all seemed animated with the same
delightful round of gaitey and mirth.
What situation could be more agreeable
than Clementina's? She had regular letters
from her father, who appeared in perfect
health and spirits, and expressed the hap-
piness he enjoyed by hearing from her,
and the amusement he derived from her
histories of the busy world.


   Lord Montague was restored by her let-
ters to reason, and she hoped to(at least)
tranquillity; he had quitted colnbrook, 
and she expected, when she heard again 
from him, it would be an account of his 
arrival in switzerland, and of his meeting 
with Louisa and his son. Her affection
for her beloved friend Mrs.Conway in-
creased, as she experienced, in every in-
stance, the strongest marks of regard and 
parental love;every action,every word262          HOWARD CASTLE.

she uttered, seemed to give satisfaction
and pleasure to the person she most wished
to please.

   When she appeared in public, she was
followed by the gaze of admiration; her
extreme beauty insured her the greatest
attention from the male sex, and envy was
greatly weakened in the females; her
pleasing manners disarmed, in a great mea-
sure, the ill-nature which her uncommon 
personal attractions had created; if they
met with her prepared to pull her face
and form in pieces, on which they had
heard unbounded praise bestowed, they
quitted her company with all their en-
mity blunted; they were convinced she 
was extremely handsome and extremely
agreeable. The adulation of the world
had no power to change her nature; she
continued the same unaffected, unassum-
ing Clementina, that she was in the con-
vent, when surrounded entirely by her
own sex, beloved by all who experienced
her pleasing attentions and playful cheer-
fullness.

   Miss Osburn heard her name mentioned
in the first circles of fashion with admira-           HOWARD CASTLE.        263

tion and praise; she found there was no
opportunity for the malignant spirit which
still marked in her bosom, to have the
power of lowering the paragon in the eyes
of the world; she was introduced by one
of the most respectable women in high
life; under her auspices she had no hope of
humbling the provoking place Miss Bou-
verie had assumed in society, whilst she
was with the honourable Mrs. Conway;
but an opportunity might offer, when she
might have sweet revenge for robbing her
of the attention which had gratified her
more than any other she ever had received:
from the moment of her appearance at
Carnsworth Castle, lord Montague had
changed his manner to her, and she fully
believed, that by Clementina's means she
had lost the heart and hand of her rela-
tion—a crime which could not be frogiven,
when both pride and lover were mortified.

  Clementina was not aware of the extent
of Miss Osburn's hatred towards her; nor
if she had, would she have felt alarmed;
she had no cause to fear the strictest scru-
tiny, and her own principles were too up-
264        HOWARD CASTLE.

right for her to dread false insinuations
could be meditated against her. Very
soon after the removal of the breakfast-
table, sir Theodosius was announced.

  " Here again!" said Mrs. Conway.

  Clementina had no time to answer, as
lie quickly followed the servant—" I
come," said he, " first to inquire after your
healths; and I am satisfied upon that point
by your looks, without receiving an as-
surance, you got no cold last night."

  Mrs. Conway smiled, and he proceeded
—" I do not deny that I am willing to find
an apology for coming here; my motive
for this early visit was to inform you, the
day is changed unavoidably for the ball,
which you," turning to Clementina, " kind-
ly promised to grace with your presence;
it is put off for a week longer."

  He paused, and Mrs. Conway, smiling,
said—" I have had to use a good deal of
persuasion to make this 5ady accept of your
invitation; I must now beg to know what
it means; are you to give the ball, or do
you merely solicit Miss Bouverie to be
your partner? as I have the young lady       HOWARD CASTLE.     265

under my care, I think I ought to know
the propriety of the plan."

"It is all arranged," replied he, under
high authority; and if I was certain I
should not disturb the feelings of Miss
Bouverie, I would most willingly explain
the whole affair."

"How can any plan of yours disturb
my feelings?" cried she, with quickness.

"I dare not flatter myself," replied he,
"had I been the only person engaged,
that it would have created much interest
in your bosom; the idea is a whimsical
one, and will make much speculation."

"The more I am resolved to have the
affair fully investigated," said Mrs. Con-
way.

"And if it will involve me in public ce-
lebrity," rejoined Clementina, "I am
equally resolved to decline the engage-
ment.  I suppose we are to appear in mas-
querade habits, and I must support a cha-
racter, which I am perfectly unequal to do."

"Wear only the loveliest face that na-
ture ever made; let it be decked with the sweetest smile that ever played on the face

VOL. II
266         HOWARD CASTLE.

of mortal; and let no disguise either shade
your form, your countenance, or your man-
ner, and I shall be certain of success."

   "If I am obliged to smile," said Clemen-
tina," for a whole evening, it will be a
most painful ball; I am convinced there is
something which will make me solemn
and sad; if that is the case, I cannot obey
your injunctions; so you had better choose
another partner."

  "There is no other in the world could
supply your place."

   Mrs. Conway began to suspect the sub-
ject of the ball would lead to an avowal of
sir Theodosius's sentiments; it had cer-
tainly produced, in very plain terms, how
much her external charms were admired.
Clementina's perfect composure of manner
pleased her; the compliments seemed to
make no impression upon her; there was
neither any flirtation in her behaviour, nor
prudish reserve; it was her friend
highly approved of.

   At last, after much conversation, sir
Theodosius was obliged to confess, "that
the first idea of a ball was formed at the
club. where each gave his favourite fair.



          HOWARD CASTLE.          267

in a bumper, with, of course, many pane-
gyrics on their different charms; much
contention ensued concerning the fashion-
able beauties; at last it was resolved that
we should give a ball, at which the P-----,
whose taste is generally allowed to be the
criterion, is to be umpire; he is to clasp
the zone of Venus round the waist of the
loveliest woman in the room, and all agree
to be perfectly satisfied (or apparently so)
with his decision; the gentleman whose
partner bears off the prize is to be at no
share in the expence of the entertainment,
or of the girdle; and splendid, I assure you,
it will be."

     "And do you think it is possible," said
Clementina, "that I can really accept of
your invitation? no, sir Theodosius, you
must choose another partner.  I am great-
ly flattered by the honour you have done
me, but you must excuse my making one
of the party."

     "Pardon me," replied he, "for wishing
you to do any thing that is disagreeable to
you, but you are now engaged.  I cannot
possibly change my partner, without a cer-

                    N 2268            HOWARD CASTLE.

tainty of being unsuccessful; you were the
person who occasioned the whole; many
of the party—indeed, I believe all, except-
ing myself, had never seen you; if they
had, I am convinced there would have
been no competition; my requesting the
honour of your hand explains my senti-
ments more than words can; and the zone
will clearly shew who bears off the triumph
from the beaux, and envy from the belles."

  "Will you not, my dear Mrs. Conway,
plead for me, as you must agree with me
in thinking it ridiculous in me to join such
a party?"

  "There is one prize," replied Mrs. Con-
way, who was rather amused with the
fancy; "therefore there must be many dis-
appointments. Go to the ball without any
expectation of success, and enjoy it an any
other amusement of the kind; you are in
no scrape; nobody can deem it presumptive
in any lady being there; her partner only
will be accused of bad taste, and must pay
for it."

  Still Clementina could not be reconciled
to the plan; and sir Theodosius, for the
first time, gladly wished them good morn-                    HOWARD CASTLE.              269

ing. He hoped Mrs. Conway would set
all matters right with the fair object of his
thoughts, who continued agitated and dis-
tressed.

"Believe me, my dear Clementina, it is
conceit which is filling you with all this
alarm; you think how dreadful it will be
to see the waist of another bound with
this envied girdle; go without thinking of
it, and do not be discomposed when you
see, probably, lady Almeria Villyers, or
my son's favourtie, lady Caroline Seymour,
adorned with it; go without the least ex-
pectation, and then you are sure of not 
being disappointed."

"It is not the ornament," said Clemen-
tina, "I care for, but the inquiry, who is
this entering on the list of beauty, and
claiming admiration? A total stranger to
every one in the room, except to sir Theo-
dosius, no one can even account for who
I am, or where I come from; dropped
from the clouds into the P---'s party;
had you been invited, I should have felt
much less repugnance to this scheme. How
much more willingly would I return to270             HOWARD CASTLE.

Roachwood, than prepare for this horrid
ball!"

" And shock your father by your ap-
pearance; he will, of course, suppose you
have committed a misdemeanor, to be so
suddently sent home; and those you are
acquainted with in town will conclude 
you are so disappointed at not receiving an
invitation, that you have flown into the
country to hide your mortification in soli-
tude. Pluck up your spirits, and prepare
for this splendid affair; I will change my 
plan; I had intended calling this morning 
on her grace of Beauclaire, but I will ac-
company you to the milliner's where you
may order your gay attire; for gay it must
be."

Mrs. Conway had another reason for
changing her course from Portman-square;
the general had sent her all lady Clemen-
toma's diamonds, desiring that she would 
have the goodness to order them to be
new set for his daughter; at the same 
time empowering her to add to them what
she pleased, and to present them to his be-
loved child, with his blessing. A beauti-
             HOWARD CASTLE.          271

ful tiara she kept in her own possession,
as she admired its peculiar richness; it was
a present from lord Radnor to his sister
upon her marriage; there were likewise an 
elegant necklace and earrings, which she
thought required a little alteration, de-
posited and Rundle and Bridge's, where
she had ordered a few additions, to make a
very complete and valuable set of jewels;
she determined Clementina should wear
them on the night of the cestus ball.  She
left her busily employed at the milliner's,
and proceeded to Ludgate-hill, where she
had the satisfaction to find they were ready,
and more superb than she expected to see
them: the tiara had been cleaned, and ap-
peared uncommonly brilliant, and she
hoped would cut a very conspicuous figure
in the gay crowd, where she made no
doubt the lovely wearer would eclipse all
competitors.

   Mrs. Conway found that she had ample
time to take Miss Bouverie home (as her
business was very quickly dispatched), and
to pay her visit to the duchess, who ex-
pressed much pleasure at seeing her; in272              HOWARD CASTLE.

the course of conversation the ball was
mentioned, and her grace inquired if she
had heard any particulars of it?

   Mrs. Conway answered that she had.

   "I understand," said the duchess, "it
is to consist of the Prince's party."

   "Is lady Augusta to be there?"

   "She has not yet got an invitation; I
suppose the cards are not sent out."

   "Oh," answered Mrs. Conway, "Miss
Bouverie received hers yesterday."

   "Is Miss Bouverie to be there?" said
the duchess, with evident chagrin.

   "She is," replied Mrs. Conway; "why
does it surprise your grace?"

   "At the moment I had entirely forgot
that she was with you, which made me
wonder she should be in that circle; but
certainly, with your introduction, there is
nothing extraordinary in it."

   "I have had to use much persuasion to
make her accept of the invitation; I am
sure she would willingly transfer her card
to any one, as she dislikes the idea of it ex-
ceedingly."

   "I should suppose," replied her grace,
        HOWARD CASTLE.     273

"that she would feel very awkward in
such a party, as she has been so little in
the world."

   "Pardon me for entertaining a very
different opinion," said Mrs. Conway, with
quickness. "Miss Bouverie is so perfectly
beautiful in her person, and so elegant in
her manners, that she never could appear
awkward; her knowledge of the world is
certainly not great, but a first introduc-
tion seldom takes place at an earlier age
than hers; and certainly her birth entitles
her to be in the best society."

   The duchess found Mrs. Conway was a 
warm advocate for Clementina; she was
perfectly conscious that she had been the
same, when she with pleasure looked for-
ward to her being the marchioness; her
refusal of that title had changed her looks,
her manners, her birth, her prospects, in
the opinion of the duchess, whose proud
mind could not bear the idea that she had
spurned the connexion; she had hoped to
see the haughty beauty humbled, but she
feared, from this proof of her being noticed,
that her wishes would not be gratified.

                   N 3274               HOWARD CASTLE.

She was sensible Mrs. Conways's great partiality(which she quickly discovered) would insure her much respect and attention;she almost, in the bitterness of her wrath, lamented the introduction.Had she returned with her father to Roachwood, she might have bloomed and withered in retirement, unknown, and probably unnoticed.

The entrance of Miss Osburn, who bounced into the room,interrupted their tête-à-tête; her eyes were sparkling with pleasure---"Oh!" cried she,"what news I have to impart to your grace!" at the same time bowing to Mrs.Conway: "there is the most elegant ball to be given, I believe by the P---,and I have heard just now, from Mrs.Biddulph, who had it last night at lady Pembroke's route, that I am to be invited; all the fashionable world are to be there, if they have a competent share of beauty. I drove this morning to see the zone which the P-- has bespoke; it is to be most superb, and will exactly fit me, as if it had been made on purpose for me. I am quite charmed with the prospect---is lady Augusta at home?"

HOWARD CASTLE.   275

"She is not," replied the duchess; "I
expect a whole budget of information
when she returns; but I am afraid lady
Pembroke is mistaken, in regard to your
invitation, as Mrs. Conway informs me
Miss Bouverie has had a card."

"Is Miss Bouverie to be there?" said
Miss Osburn; "her pretty face is a good
passport. I have no reason to suppose lady
Pembroke is mistaken; hers is exceeding 
good authority; so much so, that I have
bespoke my dress to suit the girdle."

"Set not your heart upon it," said the
duchess, "as lady Almeria Villyers will
eclipse you all; her beautiful Madonna face,
and sylph-like form, will surely be unri-
valled: lady Caroline Seymour is very
handsome, but I think she is inferior to
lady Almeria."

"That will depend entirely on the
P--'s taste; whoever gaius his admira-
tion must be the reigning fashion for this
spring at least," replied Miss Osburn.

Mrs. Conway thought it unnecessary
longer to listen to Miss Osburn's ideas on
the subject; hers were very different, but
she was determined to keep them to her-276             Howard Castle.

self; she wished the ladies good morning.
As she had spent a very short time with 
the duchess, she was resolved to pay ano-
ther visit before she returned home, which
was to lady Carberry; she wished that Cle-
mentina might be of her party, as sir
Theodosius had informed her that she was
one of the four matrons appointed; and
she was confident of her most polite atten-
tion being shewn to any protégé of hers.
She found a large party of beaux and belles
assembled, all busy with the general topic
of conversation; there were no doubts or
fears, as all the ladies had received cards of 
invitation; several of the gentlemen who
formed the gay group were of the set who 
gave the much-talked-of ball.

  Mrs. Conway was surprised with the
extreme beauty of most of the ladies
present, but particulary with lady Alme-
meria, who had brought a fresh store of good
looks from the country; before she saw
her, she thought there could be no compe-
titor with Clementina; she now feared
there would be a formidable rial: lady
Almeria evidently betrayed that she be-
lieved herself superior to all around her;          HOWARD CASTLE.    277

not a motion, not a word could she utter,
without the most apparent self-approba-
tion; but manners were not to be the eri-
terion, and she still hoped her lovely friend
would bear off the palm. She succeeded
in her embassy, as lady Carberry expressed
much pleasure, if she could be of the least
use to her, and promised to call on Miss
Bouverie next day.

   Mrs. Conway made a faithful narration
of all she had seen and heard to Clemen-
tina, who most earnestly wished that even
Miss Osburn might be there, as feeling
herself a stranger to every one in the room
would be more than she could support.
 
   "I can rely on lady Carberry's paying
you every attention, and the good humour
of lady Caroline Seymour, Who is their
guest, will prompt her to be as civil as pos-
sible: if you should presume to carry off
the prize, i will not answer for the polite-
ness of your party; lady almeria will feel
her rights infringed on."

   "I may go with perfect safety," replied
Clementina, " and be confident of at least
creating no envy or jealousy. Sir Theo-278                HOWARD CASTLE.

dosius has drawn himself into a dilemma
by his foolish choice."

     "I cannot think he has betrayed any
folly," was her answer: "I suspect he will
endeavour to engage you to be his partner
for a longer dance than one evening."

     " I think," replied Clementina, "you are
seldom mistaken in your remarks and ob-
servations; but in this instance I hope you
are. I should be sorry if sir Theodosius 
should entertain any other views than I 
do; he is a pleasant companion in common life,
but no further; nor do I believe he is a
man who would ever think of having an.
incumbrance; he is too gay to marry; his
flattering speeches are not the result of so-
ber deliberation, but the sudden effort of the
moment."

     " And in one of those sudden efforts," 
said Mrs.Convay, "as you style his gal-
lantry,he will make an offer of himself, 
and deliberate upon it after; the more he
thinks upon the subject, the more he will
wish for you to accept."

     "Thank you, my kind friend, for your
          
             HOWARD CASTLE.           279

partiality; but I assure you, it would give
me pain, were sir Theodosius to entertain
the same sentiments. I should be sorry to
give him uneasiness, but still more so to be
his wife."

   Mrs..Conway was secretly pleased with
this determination, if it could be styled
one; if the question should be asked, which
she strongly suspected would be the case,
she hoped she would keep steady to the
sentiments she had just sported. Some-
times ideas changed in a wonderful man-
ner, and sir Theodosius might become
much more charming when lie avowed his
passion, and might even interest her by a
piteous talc of sufferings, which she be-
lieved he would feel, if she was cruel, and
work upon her gentle heart, if it was in
her own possession: her ingenuous na-
ture, and open temper, made her hope
there tern- no engagement between her and
her cousin, as during their many conversa-
tions, she probably would have confessed
that her heart was not hers to bestow; she
had even declared it free, and she was tho-
roughly convinced that neither hypocrisy
or guile were harboured in it; she was cer-280             HOWARD CASTLE.

tain her interior was as pure as her exte-
rior was beautiful.

   Mrs. Conway's ideas of Clementina were
as exalted as they could be of any human
being; and she would flatter herself it still
might be in the power of possibility that
her son might be her husband.

   The following day lady Carberry, lady
Almeria Villyers, and lady Caroline Sey-
mour, called at Mrs. Conway's. Lady
Carberry was one of the extreme good-
humoured mothers who never interfered
with her children; their education had
been trusted to a fashionable governess,
who vied with her pupils in elegance of
dress, and smartness of appearance; the
more material points were wholly neglect-
ed, and lady Carberry never found it out.
Lady Almeria played a little upon the
harp, for which accomplishment much
money had been expended; she sung with
her instrument, but she did not always
make good harmony.

   Lady Carberry moved her head, she be-
lieved in time, and was pleased with the
noise she heard, but she knew not whether
it was an Italian or an English air which
was sung.  Almeria's figure looked well,
and her fine-turned arm and taper fingers
were shewn to advantage; all other know-
ledge was unnecessary; to be able to con-
verse on the fashionable topics was all that
could be required by lady Almeria, who
perfectly agreeed in the idea, that when she
did open a book, a novel was by far the 
most amusing, and she thought more in-
structive than abstruse studies; she found
how heroines conducted themselves in cri-
tical situations--how they got out of ex-
traordinary scrapes--how they got into
others--and how at last they extricated
themselves, and always ended well.  Those
histories suited her comprehension and her
imagination, as she was always the heroine
of the tale she read.

Lady Julia, it was determined, should 
be kept in the back-ground, until lady
Almeria had run the course of fashionable
amusements for two winters, being two
years younger, and much inferior in point
of beauty.  The governess who had in-
structed lady Almeria, happily for lady
Julia, had gone off with an officer; and a  282     HOWARD CASTLE.

very sensible, well-educated woman was
accidentally stumbled upon to fill the si-
tuation; they were left in the country to
be out of the way.

  Lady Carberry very willingly allowed
her daughter free scope to do what she
pleased; she formed her own parties, and
where and with whom she chose; she ac-
companied her mother to visit the young
lady who was to be of their party, as she
was resolved not to appear in company
with a quiz. Lady Carberry might oblige
her friend, Mrs. Conway, but she and lady
Caroline could easily go with another
party. The moment lady Caroline entered
the room, the recollection of seeing Miss
Bouverie at Carnsworth Castle struck her;
and the history of the marquis's disappoint-
ment at Bath, and of lord Montague's ill-
ness the night of the ball, were fresh in
her memory; the admiration she so gene-
rally heard bestowed upon her, and the
encomiums on her beauty, she was con-
vinced were not exaggerated; she had ad-
mired her appearance at Carnsworth Cas-
tle, but she had no opportunity to be ac-            HOWARD CASTLE.          283

quainted with her; she was now delighted
to find it would be in her power to culti-
vate so pleasing an intimacy.

   After Clementina was presented to lady
Carberry and lady Almeria, lady Caro-
line said--"It would be presumptuous in
me to claim an acquaintance with Miss
Bouverie, never having had the pleasure
of being introduced to her till now; have
you entirely forgot having seen me be-
fore?"

   "I should certainly not have claimed the
honour of knowing your ladyship, but I
have a perfect recollection of your being at
Carnsworth Castle on the duke's birthday;
we dined at different tables, and I was
never fortunate enough to be presented to
you."

   "I feel a strong inclination," cried lady
Caroline, taking her hand, "to believe
that we were known to each other; I
have heard so much of Miss Bouverie, I
can almost fancy myself long acquainted
with you."

   Clementina was charmed with the good-
humoured address and pleasing appearance
of lady Caroline. With lady Carberry,284 HOWARD CASTLE.

whose easy deportment precluded all stiff-
ness and formality, she felt no restraint,
and was almost from the first moment re-
conciled to the idea of accompanying her
to the ball. Lady Almeria she thought 
the prettiest creature in the world, but her
extreme affectation surprised her; the con-
trast with the pleasing manners of lady
Caroline made her have no wish to address
the former, who languidly reclined on a 
couch, and seemed not at the trouble to
make the leaste exertion. After many civil
things had passed, lady Carberry rose to
depart.

Lady Caroline, again taking Clemen-
tina's hand, asked her if she was to be
at the Hanover-square concert in the
evening?

"Mrs. Conway was to have a large
party at home."

"I hoped we should have met you
there," added lady Caroline; "I have 
heard a great deal of your musical powers,
and supposed the delightful notes of Cata-
lani would have attracted you."

After their departure, Mrs. Conway said
-"You concealed your powers from me;                     HOWARD CASTLE.             285

you shall have no excuse, as I will order
an instrument for you immediately- I am
particularly fond of music."

A sigh accompanied those words; her
daughter's fine voice vibrated on her heart,
and brought the recollection of past days
fresh to her mind.

Clementina saw a pianoforte and harp
at Howard Castle; but both being covered
up, she suspected they had belonged to
Miss Conway, and would not for the
world have touched either, as she was well
aware the poignant feelings of a mother
would have been wounded, as probably
neither had been opened since her death;
her fingers were, in all likelihood, the last
which had pressed the keys, or swept over
the strings of the harp; she thought them
sacred.

Ms. Conway continued the subject of
music-"Why have you deprived your-
self of such an amusement?"

"I required none," replied she; "in
your society I felt no blank; and certainly
in London there are no vacuums to fill
up; every moment brings its pursuit."

"At Howard Castle there were many,"286            HOWARD CASTLE.

said Mrs. Conway; "there were instru-
ments and music, and many dull hours
to pass; you would have amused yourself,
and delighted me.  I probably might have
betrayed feelings which would have
wounded your heart; but after the first
sound, I think my strength of mind would
have conquered, and you would have been
no more teazed, but by entreating you,
perhaps too frequently, to indulge me with
harmony."

  She immediately sent a servant to order
a pianoforte and harp, of the very best
quality, to be sent from Broadwood's, and
a list of music which Clementina made
out.  The second drawing-room was de-
dicated to St. Cecilia; in the space of a
few hours there were two capital instru-
ments placed in it, and a cargo of music.

  "How delightful," said Clementina, as
she run over the keys, "to be supplied, in
so short a time, with every luxury which
the mind can wish for!"

  The pianoforte was in perfect tune, and
had the sweetest tone.  Mrs. Conway ap-
peared perfectly composed; she was asto-
nished with the powers Miss Bouverie           HOWARD CASTLE.     287

was mistress of to please ; the compass of
her voice, the uncommon sweetness of it,
and the extreme taste with which she
managed it, made Mrs. Conway exclaim
—"Why were you born to fortune? why
did nature bestow such rare endowments
upon you?"

  "For your amusement," said Clemen-
tina, smiling.

  "I rather fear the contrary," replied her
friend; " the more I know of you, the
more I probably shall me mortified."

  "What can you mean?" exclaimed she;
" how is your friendship for me to be at-
tended with mortification? do you doubt
my sincerity, or do you doubt my affec-
tion?"

  "Neither," replied Mrs. Conway; "I
believe every word you utter—I believe
your heart to be one of the best in the
human composition—I believe you every
thing I could wish you to be; but there is
no end, my dear Clementina, to a woman's
wishes; they often stray beyond reason;
mine will wander, and will perhaps get
into a labyrinth of sorrow and mortifica-
tion. Your voice is so charming, that pos-288              HOWARD CASTLE

sessed of it alone, you would have been
sure of wealth."

    "Had I been poor," said Clementina,
"and my father could not have bestowed 
money on my education,my voice, of 
course,would have been uncultivated, and 
the talents nature has kindly given me 
would neither have tended towards my
profit or amusement; so it is much better
as it is; if my lot should be to spend my 
life in the country, I have the means of
entertaining myself."

    " And the ample means of entertaining 
others," said Mrs.Conway.

Clementina was convinced that her
friend had a meaning in what she had 
said; how she could in any way affect her
happiness, she could not divine; she trust-
ed it never would be her inclination to in-
jure her in thought, word, or deed; but,
on the contrary, that it might be in her
power to evince the affection she sincerely
felt for her;she revered her as a mother,
and loved her as the most agreeable com-
panion she ever had.

The party at Mrs.Conway's was very
large, and consisted of many people whom
       HOWARD CASTLE.          289

Clementina had never seen before. Mr.
Strafford and lady Isabella were expected,
but the former only made his appearance;
he apologized for his coming alone—" I
believe lady Isabella was perfectly ready to
fulfil her engagement, but an unfortunate
derangement amongst her infantry obliged
her to remain at home, to set her little
troops in order. She hoped," added he,
" that you would pardon her—she really is
to be pitied."

  Clementina secretly believed that he
was likewise an object of commiseration;
she was pleased with his appearance and
his cheerful animated countenance, very
different from his care-worn rib. Mr.
Strafford made his selection, as Miss Bou-
verie's pity rendered her (at all times
pleasing) manner still more attractive; she
thought it was the duty of every one who
knew his unfortunate situation, to be as
agreeable and amusing to him as possible,
without once reflecting that she had al-
ready injured the peace of a married man,
or that Mr. Strafford was quite as likely to
be dazzled by her charms as her cousin

   VOL. II.            O290       HOWARD CASTLE.

had.  He had come early, and as he was a
declared enthusiast in his love for music,
Mrs. Conway proposed that Miss Bouverie
should charm him with a song.  The fold-
ing-doors were thrown open between the
rooms, which were very brilliantly lighted.
The harp was placed under a beautiful
drapery of pale blue satin, which was the
furniture of the room, and which was ele-
gantly hung over a Grecian couch, to
form a termination to the eye from the
great drawing-room.

  Clementina was placed upon the couch,
and playing the symphony, when sir
Theodosìus entered; the long and beauti-
ful perspective, as he approached, struck
him with admiration; but the sweet notes
of Miss Bouverie, and the elegance of her
form, rivetted him to the spot; he stood
doubting whether he really saw and heard a
mortal, or if it was a fair sprite who ravish-
ed his senses; she raised her eyes, and
seeing him stand aloof, smiled as she
paused.

  Mrs. Conway turned round, and as the
song was finished, spoke to him.  He ad-
vanced towards the siren, declaring to                 HOWARD CASTLE.          291

Mrs. Conway, he could hardly credit his senses that there could be such a combination to please as there was in fair companion.

Some ladies being announced, Clementina put her harp aside, to the no small mortification of Mr. Stafford, who had been charmed with what he heard- both his ears and eyes had been gratified in the highest degree; he continued the whole evening to pay homage at the shrine of beauty, and Clementina found that her pity had been moved for a person who seemed not at all sorry for himself: he was gay and lively, and bore no visible marks of oppression. There were so many solicitations for music, and so many performers amongst the young ladies, that the company were, to the mutual satisfaction of all, divided into two sets. Card-tables were arranged in two apartments, for those who preferred the discord of a cassino or whist party to the harmony o Miss Bouverie's notes. She was joined by others who had tolerable voices, and many duets, trios, and even quartettos, were preformed. 292    HOWARD CASTLE.

   Mr. Stafford bore a principal part, as he
had a good voice; but Clementina in-
wardly lamented that Mr. Stopford was
not present; his fine, deep, mellow tones
made a beautiful second, and his uncom-
mon taste rendered an ordinary composi-
tion of consequence; she had not seen the
eccentric being in London—she concluded
he was still in durance vile at his father's
country seat.
   The evening passed pleasantly—Clemen-
tina was in excellent spirits, and diffused
cheerfulness around her; none felt dull,
nor did they feel from whenee the lively
conversation flowed; she had the happy
art of possessing much animation, and a
fund of amusement, without making others
sensible of their inferiority, or of engross-
ing too much the attention of the company.



           END OF VOL. II.