MISS FERPJER'S NOVELS 



DESTINY 

OR 

THE CHIEF'S DAUGHTEE 

BY THE AL'THOR OF 

' MARRIAGE ' akd ' THE INHERITANCE ' 

'What's in a name?'— Shakspeaee 

(Etitnburgfj Ctiition 




IN TWO VOLUMES 
VOLUME L 

LONDON 

RICHARD BENTLEY ,\: SON 

^uWis'^Ers in ©rtiinarg to ^tx iHajcstg Hjz <i^mzn 

1882 



Printed by R. & R. Claric, Edinhnrgh. 



TO 

^iv (lalaltec ^cott, Baroncr 

THESE VOLUMES 

ARK RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED 

BY AX OBLIGED FRIEND 

THOUGH ANONYMOUS 

AUTHOR 



Edisbi;k(;h, March }<', 1831. 



DESTINY. 



CHAPTER I. 

All the world knows that there is nothing on earth 
to be compared to a Highland Chief. He has his loch 
and his islands, his mountains and his castle, his piper 
and his tartan, his forests and his deer, his thousands 
of acres of iintrodden heath, and his tens of thousands 
of black-faced sheep, and his bands of bonneted clans- 
men, with claymores and Gaelic, and hot blood and 
dirks. 

All these, and more, had the Chief of Glenroy ; for 
he had a family tree upon Avhich all the birds of the 
air might have roosted. Doctor Johnson, to be sure, 
has said that there are no such things as family trees 
in the Highlands ; but the Doctor's calumnies against 
trees of every description, or rather of no description, 
throughout Scotland, are too well known to require 
refutation. 

Glenroy, therefore, had a tree ; and as for his 
rent-roll, it was like a journey in a fairy tale, " longer, 
and longer, and longer than I can tell." However, 

VOL. L B D. 



DESTINY. 



as the Chief himself was not particular in ascertaining 
the precise amount of his income, but lived as if the 
whole Highlands and Islands, with their kelp and 
black cattle, had been at his disposal, it would ill be- 
come his biographer to pry into the state of his affairs 
for the gratification of the curious. Suffice it there- 
fore to say that the Chief of Glenroy lived in a style 
which was deemed suitable to his rank and fortune 
by all — and they were neither few nor far between — 
who partook of his hospitality. In person, as in for- 
tune, Glenroy had been equally gifted. He Avas a 
tall handsome man, with fine regular features, a florid 
complexion, an open but haughty countenance, and 
a lofty though somewhat indolent air. The inward 
man was much what the outward man denoted. He 
was proud, prejudiced, and profuse; he piqued him- 
self upon the antiquity of his family, the heroic deeds 
of his ancestors, the extent of his estates, the number 
of his followers, their physical strength, their devoted 
attachment. On the other hand, he was of an open 
temper, of a social disposition, liberal to his tenantry, 
generous to his dependants, and hospitable to all. 
His manners, though somewhat coarse, were by no 
means vulgar; and, when a little under control, he 
could be both pleasing and gentlemanly in his deport- 
ment. 

His supremacy being universally acknowledged 
throughout the extensive district where his posses- 
sions lay, he bore his faculties vntk that sort of in- 
dolent pomp which betokens undisturbed power. He 



DESTINY. 3 

felt himself a great man ; and though he did not say, 
even to himself, that he was the greatest man in the 
world, he certainly wonld have been puzzled to say 
who was greater. 

Such was Glenroy ; and with all these advantages, 
it was naturally expected that he would form an 
alliance worthy of himself and his clan, all of whom 
identified themselves with their Chief, and conse- 
quently looked upon his marriage as an event in 
which they had an undoubted interest. As it Avas 
impossible, however, that any one so great in himself 
could make a great marriage, his friends and followers, 
being reasonable people, merely expected that he 
would make the best marriage possible. 

Greater speculation could scarcely have been ex 
cited at the court of King Ahasuerus as to a successor 
to the rebellious Vashti, than that which prevailed 
amongst the clan on the subject of forming a suitable 
alliance for their Chief. Each had his favourite and 
exalted fair, in one or other of the most illustrious 
Scottish families, on whom he conceived that Glenroy 
should place his aftections. But vain are the schemes 
of man ! Instead of these glorious results, Glenroy 
did Avhat many wiser men have done before him ; he 
fell in love, and made what was called a " most un- 
accountable marriage ;" for he married a merely pretty 
girl, of neither family nor fortune, the orphan daughter 
of a poor hundredth cousin of his own. The fact was, 
Glenroy was too proud to consider it a matter of much 
importance whom he married : he could derive no 



4 DESTINY. 

consequence from his wife ; his wife must owe all her 
dignity to him. This was a blow to the clan, which 
all the youth, beauty, and sweetness of the lady could 
not reconcile them too ; and it was not till the birth 
of an heir that they recovered their spirits. But 
then bonfires blazed, bagpipes played, tartans waved, 
whisky flowed — all, in short, was done to welcome to 
this vain world an heir to its vanities. Alas ! how 
short-sighted are sometimes even second- sighted 
mortals ! 

At the end of two years a daughter was born, but 
far otherwise was her birth commemorated, A life- 
less mother, a widowed father, a funeral procession, 
tears, regrets, lamentations, and woe — these were the 
symbols that marked her entrance into life, and cast 
a gloom upon her infant days. The child was chris- 
tened Edith after its mother. And so ended Glenroy's 
first attempt at connubial happiness. 



CHAPTER 11. 

Glenroy mourned tlie loss of his wife as much as it 
was in his nature to do; but he was not the man 
either to live with a breaking heart, or to die of a 
broken one. In due time, therefore, it occurred to 
him that, great as his loss appeared to be, it was 
nevertheless one which might be repaired. But, too 
proud and indolent to take any measures for the ac- 
complishment of his design, he left it entirely to time, 
chance, or circumstances, to carry it into effect ; and 
these did seem to conspire to bring it to pass. During 
an occasional visit to London, he more than once hap- 
pened to find himself in parties, where he was so much 
in the background, that but for the notice of the Lady 
Elizabeth Waldegrave, he would have passed almost 
unobserved. Great as Glenroy was, he therefore 
found he was capable of being still greater : yet 
greatness by means of a wife — a woman — and that 
wife an Englishwoman ! this was a startling thought 
to the proud Chief. But his stay in town was pro- 
tracted : he continued to meet the Lady Elizabeth, 
who was so very affable and agreeable — such an en- 
thusiastic admirer of tartan and Hiohland bonnets 



6 DESTINY. 

and Highland scenery — that Glenroy was captivated ; 
and he even came to the conclusion that he Avould 
not be the worse for being connected with some of 
the highest families in the kingdom. Then, although 
Lady Elizabeth was somewhat passde, she was still a 
showy-looking woman, quite suitable to him in point 
of years, and more likely to make a good staid step- 
mother than a younger wife would have been. To be 
sure, she was not very bright; but Glenroy hated 
clever women, they were all so managing and man- 
oeuvring : in short, from an admirer the Chief became 
a suitor, and thought himself a lucky man when he 
was the accepted lover. Had Glenroy been better 
acquainted with the character and circumstances of 
the lady, he would not have been quite so much 
elated with his good fortune. 

Lady Elizabeth Waldegrave was sister to the 
Marquis of Heywood, and widow of the Honourable 
Edward Waldegrave, a fashionable spendthrift, who 
had closed a brief career of folly, leaving his widow 
and infant daughter to the charity of relations. It 
may be supposed, then, that Lady Elizabeth's circum- 
stances were anything but affluent. She was, in fact, 
struggling to keep her place in society upon a small 
annuity from her father-in-law. Lord Waldegrave, 
who, having had to pay largely for the extravagance 
of his son, was little inchned to be liberal to his 
u-idow and child. Glenroy's proposals, therefore, 
came in good time; and the union being of course 
warmly approved of by the lady's family and connec- 



DESTINY. 7 

tions, no obstacle stood in the way ; so that, as soon 
as the lawyers and milliners had done their parts, 
the marriage was celebrated with the utmost idat. 
On the one side, there was a special license, the 
presence of a prince of the blood, the benediction of 
an archbishop, with peers and peeresses, lace and 
pearls, a magnificent saloon, an elegant dejeuner, a 
line of splendid equipages, etc. Such was the scene 
in St. James' Square; while at the Glenroy Arms 
the event was celebrated by a numerous meeting of 
the tenantry and vassals of the Chief with "barbaric 
pomp ;" a roasted ox, and half a score sheep, barrels 
of ale and bowls of whisky, long speeches, loud shout- 
ing, toasting, cheering, bonfires, bagpipes, and the 
Highland fling. 

Much as Glenroy loved pomp and retinue, he was 
somewhat startled at the magnitude of his lady's 
bridal train. In addition to his own travelling car- 
riage and servants, there followed Miss Waldegrave's 
equipage, containing that young lady, about five j'ears 
of age, her French governess and English sub-gover- 
ness, and attended by her own maid and the Lady 
Elizabeth's footmen. Glenroy thought less might 
have served her ; but it was too soon, or rather too 
late, to say so ; and Lady Elizabeth expatiated largely 
upon the goodness of old Lord Waldegrave in allow- 
ing her to take his favourite son's only child to Scot- 
land with her. The Chief tried to feel sufficiently 
grateful for the favour conferred upon him in this 
addition to his family ; but in spite of himself he 



8 DESTINY. 

felt something like shame at this importation to 
Glenroy. The arrival of the new -married pair was 
celebrated with great rejoicings. Lady Elizabeth 
was dressed in the clan -tartan, wore a Highland 
bonnet, looked well, made a speech, and was at once 
pronounced to be a most charming woman. 

But scarcely were the rejoicings over before Glen- 
roy began to suspect that he had not drawn the capital 
prize in the marriage-lottery ; and these his first faint 
misgivings began to assume a less questionable shape 
as the features of the lady's post-nuptial character 
became to be more fully developed. At length they 
boldly resolved themselves into tastes, habits, and 
pursuits of the most decided dissimilarity from her 
husband's. 

How it happened that this discovery had not been 
made before marriage instead of after was one of 
those mysteries which, though of common occurrence, 
have never yet been fully cleared up to the satisfac- 
tion of single-minded people. Whence it is that two 
persons who seem to have been born only to hate each 
other, should, under any circumstances, ever fancy 
that they actually love each other, is a phenomenon 
which even philosophers may have encountered, but 
which they certainly have not yet explained. 

No two human beings born and bred in a civilised 
country could be more different than the Chief and 
his lady; and as both were independent, and both 
had arrived at years of discretion, it seemed but 
natural that they should remain as fate seemed to 



DESTINY. 9 

place them — perfect antipodes. The lady had been 
accustomed to a gay London life, and she had also 
lived abroad. She had seen much of the world, and 
the world had seen much of her. She had been 
admired for her talents, her manners, her music, her 
taste, her dress ; and although the admiration had 
long been on the wane, the craving still continued. 
She was, in fact, when Avithout her adventitious aids, 
a mere showy, superficial, weak Avoman, with a fretful 
temper, irritable nerves, and a constitution tending 
to rheumatism, Avhich she imputed entirely to the 
climate of Scotland. 

In direct opposition to all this, Glenroy detested 
London ; depised every part of the globe save Scot- 
land ; hated all music except that of the bagpipe ; 
had little enjoyment in any society but that of his 
friends and followers ; and Avhen he spoke of the 
world, meant only his own county and clan. He 
had also become subject to attacks of the gout, which 
he ascribed to his visits to London, and therefore 
vowed he never Avould set foot in it again. 

Although Glenroy saw much good company at his 
hospitable mansion, yet it was only during a short 
period of the year ; for the Highlands may be said to 
open for the season as the King's Theatre shuts ; and, 
thanks to grouse and deer, the one has become almost 
as fashionable a place of amusement as the other. 
During this season, therefore. Lady Elizabeth lived 
pretty much in her own element ; but when that was 
over, a long and dreary interval ensued : not that the 



10 DESTINY 

house ever emptied of visitors, bo the season or 
weather what they might, but the company was not 
suited to her taste, for it must be o^vned Glenroy was 
not nice in the choice of his associates. Although his 
vanity was gratified with occasionally entertaining 
the best in the land, still the same principle, together 
with his love of ease, made him prefer in general 
being what is called the king of his company. 

Amongst sundry of his adherents whose persons 
and manners were particularly obnoxious to the Lady 
Elizabeth, the most offensive was the Laird of Ben- 
bowie, a friend and clansman of the Chief's, who, 
from having been all his life in the habit of paying 
long and frequent visits at the Castle, had gradually 
become domesticated there, to the infinite annoyance 
of its mistress. The Laird of Benbowie Avas an 
elderly man, of the most ordinary exterior, possessing 
no very distinguishing traits, except a pair of volu- 
minous eyebrows, very round shoulders, a wig that 
looked as if it had been made of spun yarn, an 
unvarying snuff-coloured coat, and a series of the 
most frightful waistcoats that ever were seen. Ben- 
bowie's mental characteristics were much upon a par 
with his personal peculiarities. He was made up of 
stupidities. He was sleepy-headed and absent. He 
chewed tobacco, snored in presence, slobbered when 
he ate, walked up and down with a pair of creaking 
shoes, and drummed upon the table with a snufiy hand. 
Nay, more ; with that same obnoxious snuffy hand 
he actually dared to pat the head or shoulder of the 



DESTINY. 11 

elegant, refined Miss Waldegrave, as often as she 
came within his reach. But all these things Avere 
mere leather and prunella to his Chief, whose feelings 
and perceptions were by no means so refined as his 
lady's. Benbowie was the very apple of his eye, for 
he Avas devoted to him. He never contradicted him, 
or rather he invariably coincided with him. He rode 
with him, or walked with him, or sailed Avith him, 
or sat still Avith him. He played at backgammon 
with him, and when there was no one else, did well 
enough to be beaten at billiards. Yet no one could 
call BenboAvie a hanger-on ; for he had a good estate 
and a pretty place of his OAvn, both of which he 
neglected for the sake of living Avith his friend ; and 
although he Avas not profuse of his OAvn money, yet, 
to do him justice, he was equally sparing of his 
Chief's. 

What pleasure or profit Glenroy could find in Ben- 
boAvie's company no one could discover. But so it 
Avas, and Glenroy could have better spared a better 
man ; although, if pressed for a reason of his prefer- 
ence, he could only have resolved it into that un- 
answerable argument, " Je I'aime parceque c'est lui," 
etc. Lady Elizabeth had at once attempted to expel 
BenboAvie from the house ; but she might as well 
have attempted to move one of his OAvn broAvn moun- 
tains. BenboAvie Avas inAoilnerable in his stupidity 
and obtuseness, and nothing less than the united 
eftbrts of the fairy and the genie Avho lifted vip Prince 
Camaralzaman, and carried him a thousand leagues 



12 DESTINY, 

without waking him, could have made Benbowie 
dream of leaving a house where habit had completely 
domesticated him, and where his instinct made him 
feel comfortable and happy. 

Some one has well said, "Lorsqu'on ne peut 6teindre 
une lumi^re, on s'en laiss6 6clairer ; " but Lady Eliza- 
beth did not adopt this wise maxim. She could not 
extinguish Benbowie's light, faint and dark as it was, 
neither would she permit it to shine even in its native 
dim eclipse. The consequence was that poor Benbowie, 
who seemed to have been born without a single spark 
of fire in his composition, became a sort of smoulder- 
ing brand in the family of his friend. As neither the 
Chief nor his lady were young enough to be moulded 
anew, or wise enough to make the most of what each 
mutually thought a bad bargain, it may be supposed 
their lives did not glide away like that of Parnell's 
Hermit, in one clear, unruffled stream, but rather 
resembled the course of their own mountain torrents, 
which chafe, foam, murmur, and take their own way. 



CHAPTER III. 

Time rolled on, but did nothing to smooth the asperi- 
ties of Glenroy and his lady. Pride was the ruling 
passion of both ; and unhappily there was no mutual 
object on which they might concentrate this pre- 
dominant principle. The Lady Elizabeth added no 
branches to the family tree ; and thus the unjust and 
overweening partiality of each parent for tlicir own 
separate ofiFspring continued to grow with their growth, 
and strengthen "with their strength. 

Such was the state of the Chief's family when he 
received a visit from his brother-in-law, Sir Angus 
Malcolm, with his only son, a spoiled handsome boy 
about the same age as his cousin Norman. Sir Angus 
was a widower, and had been recently appointed to a 
high command in India, whither he was to proceed 
when he should have found a situation for his son, 
suited to the anxieties of a fond parent. But that 
was a matter of difficulty, as indeed it must be to 
any one to part mth his choicest treasure, and commit 
it to untried love and alien tenderness. Why did he 
leave it? For wealth — that which tempts so many 
to "leave each thing beloved most dearly," Sir 



14 DESTINY. 

Angus had a fine estate, but it was loaded with debt. 
Time, self-denial, and management might have re- 
trieved it ; but to wait on the one and submit to the 
other was not in the nature of an impetuous, open- 
hearted, open-handed Highlander; and he preferred 
the easier task of retrieving his fortune by methods 
more congenial to him in a foreign land. His onlj^ 
care was to secui-e a safe and happy asylum for his 
child ; and as, besides being allied to Glenroy by 
marriage, he was also his nearest kinsman by blood, 
he flattered himself the Chief would take charge of 
his son, and educate him with his own. His only 
doubt was with regard to Lady Elizabeth, of whom 
he had not heard the most favourable reports ; but 
he was a sanguine, good-natured, undiscerning man, 
and his little misgivings were quickly dispelled by 
the affectionate and gracious reception he met with. 
Glenroy was more than hospitably Idnd ; and his lady, 
Avon by the admiration expressed for her darling, and 
the beautiful presents bestowed upon her, acted a most 
amiable and delightful part. Glenroy at once antici- 
pated the subject uppermost in the breast of the 
parent by inviting him to leave his boy with him 
during his absence; and in a few minutes all was 
settled to the mutual satisfaction of both parties. 
Lady Elizabeth was flattered by seeing that it was 
to her the father looked for care and protection to 
his son; and her vanity was gratified at becoming 
the patroness of the young heir to an ancient title 
and noble fortune. But above all, her favour was 



DESTINY. 15 

secured by the predilection evinced by tlic young 
Reginald towards Florinda. Ujion being asked by 
his father which of his two cousins he would choose 
for his wife, he declared instantly in favour of Flor- 
inda, as being by far the prettiest ; he then followed 
up the avowal of his admiration with an offer to 
marry her, which was no less promptly agreed to on 
the lady's part, especially when she heard of the gold 
and diamonds and pearls that were awaiting her. 

The little Florinda was indeed an uncommonly 
pretty child, with a skin of dazzling whiteness, a 
profusion of golden ringlets, large blue eyes, a syli)h- 
like figure, and an air of distinction which, although 
not always the accompaniment of high birth, is rarely 
to be seen except among the true patrician orders. 
She was also of a gay, sportive disposition, and 
Avinning manners ; thus her natural endowments and 
early acquirements rendered her a perfect epitome of 
feminine grace and beauty. Edith, on the contrary, 
possessed no uncommon attractions for the superficial 
observer. Her features Avere soft and delicate, her 
countenance mild and thoughtful, and her manners 
more grave than is usual at her age ; for no fond 
mother's heart had ever pillowed her infant head, no 
tender mother's hand had wiped away her childish 
tears, and even a father's arms AA-ere seldom open to 
her, for Norman's place Avas there. Disregarded or 
checked in the natural expression of her feelings, she 
gradually learnt to repress them Avithin her oavti 
breast; and Avhile to careless observers the feelings 



16 DESTINY. 

themselves seemed Avanting, the roots had only struck 
the deeper into the heart, while the shoots were thus 
carelessly trodden down. 

Edith was too much accustomed to see Florinda 
preferred to her to feel any of the envy and heart- 
burnings of an offended rival, but meekly yielded up 
the prize. Lady Elizabeth was silly enough to feel 
gratified at this childish fancy, and continued so kind 
and caressing to her little son-in-law (as she styled 
him) during the week his father remained, that he 
departed with a mind relieved from all doubts and 
fears as to the situation in which he had left his son 
and heir. 



CHAPTER IV. 

For a little time all went on smoothly in the youth- 
ful circle of Gleuroy ; but, unhappily, inconstancy is 
known in childhood as well as in manhood, and 
Reginald began to discover that even the beautiful 
Florinda had her faults. She Avas very greedy, and 
was too much petted, and wanted everything her own 
way ; and as he had been accustomed to be no less 
despotic, many a childish squabble ensued. At 
length, not having the fear of damages for breach of 
promise of marriage before his eyes, he in a transport 
of indignation one day declared that he had quite 
changed his mind ; that she was not to be called his 
wife any more, for that he was going to take Edith ; 
she was much better tempered, would part with any 
of her playthings to him, and never cried when she 
was contradicted ; and, at any rate, brown hair and 
pale cheeks were much prettier than yellow hair and 
pink ones ; in short, " for any other reason why," his 
affections were transferred. Lady Ehzabeth was weak 
enough to resent this affront, and to enter into all the 
childish feuds that followed, aggravated as they often 
were by nurserymaids, to whom a spoiled unruly boy 
VOL. I. C D. 



18 DESTINY. 

is always a subject of torment, and, of course, of 
blame. 

The consequence was, her fondness for Eeginald, 
which had always been of a very precarious nature, 
now turned into downright aversion ; while he, un- 
used to control at home, and encouraged by Glenroy 
in all his freaks, set her authority completely at defi- 
ance. Even Benbowie, his tobacco, his snore, his 
shoes, and his waistcoats, almost all ceased to be 
objects of animosity compared with this new annoy- 
ance. At length matters came to a climax, and 
threatened to add one more to the many proofs that 
great events do often spring from trivial causes. 

One day, when the two boys and Edith were 
engaged in some play in which Florinda was deemed 
incompetent to join, to get rid of her importunities 
Eeginald lent her his watch, the parting gift of his 
father ; receiving many assurances in return that she 
would take the greatest care of it. These promises, 
however, were soon forgotten ; the watch was opened, 
examined, Avound up, and broken. Summary revenge 
is always the first impulse of the childish heart ; and 
Eeginald, in his rage, shook Florinda Avith all his 
might, slapped her on the cheek, and even left the 
print of his nails on her arm. Her shrieks soon 
brought Lady Elizabeth to the spot, Avhen she found 
her darling almost convulsed with terror and indigna- 
tion at this rude assault. The extreme fairness and 
delicacy of her skin rendered the slightest touch at 
all times perceptil^le, and on the present occasion 



DESTINY. 19 

showed the offence in glowing colours, and told a tale 
of outrage that raised all the mother in Lady Eliza- 
beth's breast. In vain did Norman and Edith attempt 
to palliate the offence by detailing the provocation, 
and declaring that Eeginald had not meant to hurt 
her. They were sure he had only just given her a 
slap for breaking his watch. Lady Elizabeth would 
listen to nothing but the sobs and exclamations of her 
darling ; till at length she worked herself up to assert, 
and of course to believe, that her child had been 
seriously hurt, and would have been killed, had not 
she come to her rescue ; the whole was wound up 
with the soothing assurance to her angel that the 
savage should be sent from the house that very day. 

" But this house is not yours," retorted Reginald 
with equal warmth ; "it is my uncle's house, and I 
am to stay here till my papa comes home, and then I 
shall make him send that wicked monkey to prison 
for breaking my watch. The little wretch ! I hate 
and despise her for telling lies, — yes, you shall go to 
prison and be fed on bread and water, you little 
lying, yellow-haired wasp !" And he shook his hand 
at her with renewed vehemence. 

"This is past all endurance," cried Lady Elizabeth, 
with violence; "begone, all of you!" And in the 
recklessness of her anger she pushed Edith, who had 
been upon her knees caressing and soothing Florinda, 
as she lay in her mamma's lap. Edith fell, and struck 
her temple against the corner of the chair, but she 
uttered no cry. 



20 DESTINY. 

"There!" cried Eeginald, as he flew to help her 
up; "see what you have done to Edith, and how 
good she is ! But Betty M'lvor says you are very bad 
to Edith, and don't love her, because she is not your 
child ; but / love her, and she is to be my wife, and 
she shall be all covered with gold and diamonds that 
my papa is to bring me. Yes, that you shall, Edith ! 
But she shall have nothing but dirty old rags to wear, 
and good enough, too ; for Betty M'lvor says her skin 
is just hke cream cheese, and her hair like a lint-tap." 

A fresh burst of screams and tears from the fair 
Florinda made Lady Elizabeth hastily withdraw with 
her from the scene of action. In the tumult of exas- 
perated and exaggerated feeling, she hastened to 
Glenroy ; and, denouncing Reginald as the destroyer 
of her child, demanded that both he and Betty M'lvor 
should be sent from the house. A scornful and per- 
emptory negative was of course returned. The lady 
persisted, as she commonly did ; and rising in her 
passion at the contemptuous indifference her com- 
plaints met with, she at last declared her determina- 
tion of leaving the house and taking her child along 
with her, unless her demand was complied with. 
This threat being treated with anger and derision, led 
to a scene of altercation and mutual recrimination. 
When people are ready primed for quarrelling, a very 
little matter will serve the purpose, just as a single 
spark applied to a train of gunpowder will do the 
business of an earthquake. So it was with Glenroy 
and his lady. It had been touch-and-go with them 



DESTINY. 21 

for many a day ; and now, from less to more, from 
bad to worse, it ended in a threatened separation. 
The lady declared she tcould go, and the Chief would 
not ask her to stay. Glenroy would have been the 
last man to have turned his Avife and her child from 
his house, however obnoxious they might have been, 
and he felt rather annoyed at the thoughts of such a 
thing being said ; but he was too proud to betray his 
feelings or to make any concession ; he merely con- 
tented himself with remarking to Benbowie that if 
her Ladyship chose to go she might go; she was 
welcome to go or stay for him. 

"Very right, Glenroy; on my conscience, that's 
very right," responded Benbowie; "but if she goes, 
I wish you may not have to aliment hei-." 

The acrimonious feelings of the parents could not 
fail to keep alive the resentment of the children. A 
spirit of absolute hatred towards each other seemed 
to burn in the young hearts of Reginald and Florinda ; 
and they never met without mutual provocation 
being given and taken in full measure. In vain the 
gentle Edith strove to reconcile them ; no sooner was 
an old offence patched up than a new one broke out ; 
and the only thing they both agreed in was in liking 
her. 

It was at this crisis that an afflicting dispensation 
in the Waldegrave family accelerated the separation 
between the Chief and his lady. At the time of their 
marriage Lord Waldegrave had two sons, then in the 
prime of life ; but nearly about the time that the 



22 DESTINY. 

eldest was killed by a fall from his horse, the youngest 
died of the yellow fever in the West Indies. Thus 
the young Florinda became at once presumptive heir 
to her grandfather, who, broken-hearted and paralytic, 
was not likel}^ to stand long in the way of the succes- 
sion ; and as the title and estates descended in the 
female line, she might now be considered as future 
Baroness of Waldegrave. With such prospects before 
her, Lady Ehzabeth felt as if there were degradation 
in her remaining longer under the roof of a coarse- 
mannered, overbearing Highlander ; and she therefore 
signified her intention of immediately removing her 
daughter to England, in order to be near her aged 
grandfather. She yielded so far, indeed, as to say, 
that, provided Glenroy would send the boys to school, 
and engage to spend eight or nine months of the year 
in or near London, she would have no objections to 
pass the other three or four in the Highlands. But 
an indignant refusal being returned, arrangements 
were immediately made for a final separation. The 
approaching departure of the mother and daughter 
caused universal satisfaction throughout the house, 
which had long been divided into two parties as 
fierce as the Montagues and Capulets. Glenroy's 
adherents did not of course hke his lady, and his 
servants had long looked with fiery indignation on 
the importance attached to IMiss Waldegrave, and the 
airs of superiority assumed by that young lady's suite; 
while the governesses and ladies' maids hailed with 
transport their emancipation from a long dull Avinter 



DESTINY. 23 

at Glenroy, as the contrasted gaieties of London rose 
to their mind's eye. Gleni'oy's own sensations were 
of a mixed nature ; he felt that liis lady's absence 
would be an inexpressible relief ; but there was some- 
thing of wounded pride which alloyed the pleasure of 
the parting. Edith shed many tears at the thoughts 
of losing Florinda, to whom she was really attached ; 
for her warm and affectionate heart Avas ready to love 
everything that did not repel her by harshness or 
indifference ; and Florinda loved Edith as much as a 
spoiled child can ever love anything beyond self. 

"Do not cry, Edith," said the little future baroness, 
with a patronising air ; " for when I have a house of 
my own in London, I shall make a point of having 
you to stay with me ; indeed I shall ; but I will not 
invite you, nor you" to the boys. 

"If you did, we should not go," retorted Reginald; 
" we are too glad to get rid of ugly lint-tops to follow 
them to dirty, smoky London." 

"How happy I am to leave this ugly dull place," 
exclaimed the indignant Florinda ; " and Jenkins says 
it is quite inconceivable how we have been able to 
exist here so long ; only, dear Edith, I am very sorry 
to leave you ; but I hope I shall never see Glenroy 
Castle again !" 

"And we hope we shall never see you here again," 
retorted Reginald, as Florinda skipped past him to 
the carriage, from which, with an air of insolent 
triumph, she smiled and waved her little white hands. 

Edith was the only one of the family who grieved 



24 DESTINY. 

at the separation which had taken place. Her warm, 
tender heart had fondly attached itself to Florinda ; 
and her only consolation at parting had been Floriuda's 
promise of Amting her a letter whenever she got to 
London. Poor Edith had watched from day to day 
for this letter — hevjirst letter ; and all may remember 
the anticipations of their first letter — anticipations 
fully realised by the actual receipt of it. What a 
new world broke upon us Avith the breaking of the 
first seal ! What glorious \asions unfolded themselves 
as Ave for the first time unfolded a letter to ourselves, 
containing perhai3S some few words of full text ! 
Who ever received a first letter that did not spell and 
con it fifty times over ; Avho did not lay it under their 
pilloAV at night, and fall asleep, longing for morning 
that was to give the treasure again to their eyes'? 
But these A\^ere joys only pictured to Edith's imagina- 
tion, as each day she rose in fresh hopes that that 
Avas the day her letter would arrive. Thus " dupe of 
to-morroAv," days passed away, till at length jjoor 
Edith's expectations died the natural death of " hope 
deferred.'"'" 



CHAPTER V. 

The lady's departure was the signal for a gathering 
of the clan, who, as uj^on all occasions either of con- 
dolence or congratulation, failed not to rally round 
their Chief in full force. Even Benbowie, although in 
general obtuse as a hedgehog, seemed to feel this as 
an epoch to be commemorated; and he therefore 
ordered a new waistcoat ten times more hideous than 
any of its predecessors. His characteristics also began 
to expand more freely, and as if they owned some 
genial influence. He slept more and snored louder 
than ever ; he inhaled his soup with an inspiration that 
might have sucked in a fleet ; his wig grew more small 
and wiry ; and when his feet were not creaking up and 
down the room, they were to be found reposing on the 
bars of his neighbour's chair. Halcyon days ensued ; 
Glenroy was himself again ; and a never-ending, still- 
beginning, course of revelry was kept up, till the Castle 
more resembled a petty court than a private dwelling. 
A tutor had been provided for the boys by Sir 
Angus before leaving Britain, and to his care they 
had been committed. He was an Englishman, a first- 
rate scholar, a man of elegant, refined manners, fond 
of study, yet skilled in lighter accomplishments, some- 



26 DESTINY. 

what epicurean in his taste and habits, and altogether 
such a one as was calculated to . form the perfect 
gentleman, and nothing more. 

At first Glenroy gTumbled a good deal to Benbowie 
at what he called the insufferable airs of the fine 
English dominie ; but as they did not interfere much 
with his own ways, he was too indolent to resent 
them; and at last he became gradually accustomed 
to bear with ]\Ir. ElHs as the most consummate puppy 
he had ever known. 

A governess was talked of for Edith ; but that was 
such a secondary consideration that Glenroy could not 
be troubled to make any exertion to procure one. So, 
in the meantime, she received lessons from Mr. ElHs 
in the solid branches of education along with the 
boys ; while the more feminine accomplishments were 
supposed to be communicated through the medium of 
a sort of half-and-half gentlewoman, the widow of one 
of Glenroy 's factors, and herself the fag-end of his 
clan, being a cousin not many degrees removed from 
the Chief himself. JVIrs. Macauley was now an elderly 
woman in years, but in nothing else. She was plain, 
but pleasing in her looks : she had a little thick active 
figure ; a broad, clear, brown face ; and two of the 
happiest, merriest, little black eyes that ever lighted 
up a head. She had an agreeable voice ; but her 
accent and pronunciation were provincial, and some 
of her phrases were altogether peculiar to herself, 
which rather gave a zest to her conversation. 

But Mrs. Macauley's great charms with old and 



DESTINY. 27 

young were her unconquerable good-humour and her 
unceashig good spirits. She was one of those happily- 
constituted beings who look as if they could " extract 
sunbeams from cucumbers," and who seem to have 
been born sans nerves, sans spleen, sans bile, sans 
everything of an irritable or acrimonious nature. But 
with all these Avants, there was no want of a heart — 
a good, stout, sound, warm heart, which would cheer- 
fully have given itself and its last drop for the honour 
and glory of the race of Glenroy. She had also just 
as much religion as an irreligious man could tolerate ; 
for her religion was a compound of the simplest 
articles of belief, and certain superstitious notions of 
second -sight, visions, dreams, and so forth, which 
sometimes aftbrded amusement, or, at any rate, always 
served for ridicule. As for her accomplishments, they 
were many and various; and being mostly self- ac- 
quired, they possessed a sort of originality, which in 
some degree compensated for other deficiencies. She 
was a perfect adept in the now much-despised art of 
needlework; and, besides the more vulgar arts of 
hemming, running, stitching, splaying, basting, etc., 
she had a hand for 

" Teut-work, raised-work, laid-work, frost-work, net-work, 
Most curious pearls, and rare Italian cut-work, 
Fine fern-stitch, finny-stitch, new-stitch, and chain-stitch, 
Brave bred-stitch, fisher-stitch, Irish-stitch, and queen-stitcli, 
The Spanish-stitch, rosemary-stitch, herring-bone, and maw- 
stitch, 
The smarting whip-stitch, back-stitch, and cross-stitch."^ 

1 " The Needle." 



28 DESTINY. 

Not satisfied with these her supreme excellences, 
Mrs. Macauley also aspired to the knowledge of music 
and painting. She had a good ear, a tolerable voice, 
and a great collection of old Scottish songs, which she 
sang to herself in very blitheness of heart. 

Her performances in drawing were no less limited, 
as all the efforts of her genius had been concentrated 
in one single view of Glenroy Castle, which, after 
much toil and trouble, she had accomplished to her 
o'^m satisfaction, and to which she had faithfully ad- 
hered for upw^ards of forty years. From this parent 
view had descended an innumerable progeny of various 
shapes and sizes, but not of aspect ; as all, to a leaf, 
were impressed "«dth the self-same features. These, 
mounted in the several forms of letter-cases, pocket- 
books, watch-papers, etc., were most liberally dispensed 
by her to the friends of the family, including every 
one who had ever set foot in the castle. 

Mrs. Macauley's A^anity was so inoffensive, and she 
contributed so largely to the amusement of every one, 
that her company was in great request, and by none 
more than by the Chief himself. In proof of this, 
besides many other acts of liberality towards her, he 
had not only fitted up for her a cottage in the vicinity 
of the Castle, but had likewise assigned her an apart- 
ment there ; from which, however, in Lady Eliza- 
beth's time she had been wholly banished, but in 
which she Avas now become a fixture. This chamber 
was the favourite rendezvous of the children, who 
delighted in beating upon her old spinnet, and in 



DESTINY. 29 

being allowed to daub paper, dirty their fingers, and 
look at cloth-dogs, calico-peacocks, tinsel-grottoes, fili- 
gree figures, birds made of real dyed feathers, and all 
the rest of Mrs. Macauley's monstrosities ; -while she, 
her good-humoured face beaming \dt\\ pleasure, was 
no less happy in the belief that she was rendering the 
most essential benefit to her benefactor in thus im- 
parting her accomplishments to his children. 

Glenroy, to be sure, scouted the idea of her teach- 
ing them anything but her own brogue, and took 
great delight in ridiculing her accomplishments even 
to herself; but then, as he said to Benbowie, Mary 
Macauley, although a great idiot, was a kind-hearted, 
well-meaning body, and was fond and careful of the 
children; and if they learned little good from her, 
they would learn as little evil, for she was a simple, 
honest creature as ever breathed : to which the usual 
affirmative, or rather confirmative, was returned. 

"That's very true, Glenroy; on my conscience 
there's a great deal of good sense in that. Molly 
Macauley is a very decent girl, and costs nothing." 

Such was the preceptress of the Chief's daughter,, 
and in the genial warmth of her social love and sjon- 
pathy Edith's young heart expanded as a flower to 
the sun. 

It is a trite remark that the most important part 
of our education is given by ourselves. If Edith was 
not so regularly and well instructed as she might have 
been, she escaped the still more dangerous error of 
havins; her mind overworked and overloaded with 



30 DESTINY. 

premature knowledge : and how many a mind has 
been worked perhaps to the weakening of those very 
powers which it was the aim of the teacher to 
strengthen and expand ! In the moral, as in the 
physical constitution, Nature is the best guide; and 
Nature spoke wisely even by the lips of Mrs. ]\Iac- 
auley when she said, " Childer will be childer, let us 
do as we will ; we cannot put gray heads upon green 
shoulders!" 



CHAPTER VI. 

Scarcely had Glenroy begun to enjoy his emancipa- 
tion from one species of domestic tyranny, when he 
found himself groaning under another of a very dif- 
ferent description — that of the minister of the parish ; 
and if the Chief and his lady could have agreed even 
in their antipathies, Mr. M'Dow might have had the 
merit of reconciling them. But Glenroy had not even 
the luxury of openly complaining of this torment; 
for, like his former one, it was one of his own provid- 
ing, placed there not merely with his consent, but by 
his own free will. Mr. M'Dow was the man of his 
o\^Ti choice ; the chosen of many candidates. The 
chiu-ch having become vacant by the death of the 
former minister, much canvassing and competition 
had of course ensued; and at least twenty "hcensed 
graduates " had presented themselves, each with testi- 
monials and credentials enough to have entitled them 
to a bishopric. 

But of the two whose recommendations carried 
most weight, the one Avas the present pastor, the 
Reverend Duncan M'Dow, and the other was of the 
Evangelical side — a party whom Glenroy, although 



32 DESTINY. 

professing Christianity, held in the utmost abhorrence. 
Not that he knew very well what it Avas they did pro- 
fess; he only guessed it Avas something he did not 
practise. He had a vague, confused apprehension 
that an Evangelical pastor was a sort of compound of 
a Popish priest, a stiff-necked Presbyterian, a sour- 
faced Covenanter, a lank-haired Seceder, a meddling 
Jesuit, a foul-tougued John Knox, a Avhat-not, that 
had evil in its composition. 

No reasonable person surely can doubt that there 
have been, and still are, many bright ornaments of 
the Church amongst both parties of Christians ; and 
it is much to be lamented when prejudice runs high 
on either side, and a man is applauded or defamed, 
not according to his practice, but his profession. As 
little may it be questioned that in their respective 
congregations the wheat and the tares grow promiscu- 
ously even to this day. But this was not the view 
Glenroy took of the subject ; and he was loud against 
all high-fliers, new-lights, gospellers, bigots, zealots, 
enthusiasts, saints, and so forth. 

Being a moderate man, he, like all moderate people, 
was most Aaolently opposed to the admission of any 
person of that description within the precincts of the 
parish. As the other heritors were few in number, 
the patronage in this instance was conceded to him ; 
and his choice fell upon the present minister, who 
had been twenty years tutor in the family of the 
Laird of Kindullie, and who never had been branded 
with any of these appellations, but bore the character 



DESTINY. 33 

of being an easy, good-humoured, sensible, moderate 
man, who troubled nobody, but minded his own 
aflairs. This last qualification he certainly possessed, 
as Glenroy soon found to his cost. 

The Eeverend Duncan M'Dow was a large, loud- 
spoken, splay-footed man, whose chief characteristics 
were his bad preaching, his love of eating, his rapacity 
for augmentations (or, as ho termed it, Oirf/mentations), 
and a want of tact in all the hienscances of life, which 
would have driven Lord Chesterfield frantic. His 
hands and feet were in everybody's way : the formei', 
indeed, like huge grappling-irons, seized upon every- 
thing they could possibly lay hold of ; while the latter 
were commonly to be seen sprawling at an immeasur- 
able distance from his body, and projecting into the 
very middle of the room, like two prodigious moles, 
or bastions. He dealt much in stale jokes and bad 
puns; he had an immense horse-laugh, which no- 
thing ever restrained, and an enormous appetite, which 
nothing seemed to damp, and which he took care 
always to supply with the best things at table. He 
used a great quantity of snuff, and was for ever hand- 
ing about his mull, an ugly cow's-horn, with a foul 
dingy cairngorm set in silver on the top. To sum up 
his personal enormities, when he spoke he had a prac- 
tice of always advancing his face as close as possible 
to the person he was addressing. Although a strong- 
bodied, sturdy man, he was extremely careful of his 
health ; and even in a fine summer's day was to be 
seen in a huge woolly greatcoat that reached to his 

VOL. I. D D. 



34 DESTINY. 

heels, trotting along on a stout dun pony, just high 
enough to keep its master's feet off the ground. 

Such were the outward man and beast : the inward 
man was very much of the same stamp. Mr. M'Dow's 
principal object in this world was self, and his con- 
stant and habitual thoughts had naturally operated 
on his outward manners to such a degree as to blunt 
all the nicer perceptions of human nature, and render 
him in very truth his o"\vn microcosm. He was no 
dissembler ; for a selfish dissembler is aware that in 
order to please one must appear to think of others 
and forget self. This fictitious politeness he had 
neither the tact to acquire nor the cunning to feign ; 
consequently he was devoid of all the means of pleas- 
ing. Not that we mean to recommend dissimulation, 
or to insinuate that Mr. M'Dow would in reality have 
been a better man had he been able and willing to 
form himself on the model of the Chesterfield school. 
He would merely have been less ofi"ensive in the 
ordinary intercourse of life, and would have sinned less 
against the common observances of society. But had 
he been earnest in his calHng, had he sought to have 
his mind enlightened by the knowledge of those divine 
truths which he professed to teach, their unction would 
have softened and refined even the ruggedness of his 
nature, and have rendered him an object of respect 
instead of a subject of ridicule. 

From the moment he was "ordained" minister of 
the gospel, Mr. M'Dow had done nothing but make 
demands for augmentation of stipend, enlargement of 



DESTINY. 35 

glebe, additions to the manse, new offices, and so on. 
Now there was no way in which his money could go 
that was so unsatisfactory to Glenroy as when it was 
claimed as a matter of right, more especially by the 
clergy, whom he looked upon as the worst species of 
land-tax Besides, like all idle, indolent people, he 
had an utter abhorrence of everything that occasioned 
trouble, or was a lore, and Mr. Duncan M'Dow was a 
bore that beset him on all sides. He was a stum- 
bling-block in his path, a thorn in his side, a weed 
that had taken root in the very heart of his estate, 
and which it was impossible for him to extirpate. 
True, he was not molested with spiritual admonitions, 
plans for building churches, subscriptions for establish- 
ing schools, or schemes for employing the industrious, 
or relieving the indigent, or reclaiming the wicked; 
but then he was haunted with estimates for enlarging 
the manse, and repairing the barn, or hints for re- 
building both house and offices ; or he was beset with 
a copy of the new locality, or an extract of the last 
decreet, or a notice of a second summons for aug- 
mentation, or an interlocutor of the Teind Court in 
favour of some other minister; one or other, if not 
all, of which missiles Mx. M'Dow bore as constantly 
about his person as a highwaj-man does his pistols. 
But what provoked Glenroy even more than all this, 
was the utter impossibility of overawing the minister, 
or keeping him at a proper distance ; for Mr. M'Dow 
possessed that sort of callous good -nature which 
rendered him quite invulnerable to all rebuffs : as 



36 DESTINY. 

well might a needle have been applied to the skin of 
a rhinoceros as a gibe or a taunt to the feelings of 
the minister; they were all received as good jokes, 
which only called forth roars of laughter in return. 
Besides, the impression was so completely implanted 
in his brain of Glenroy's extreme predilection for 
him, from having appointed him his pastor in spite of 
all opposition, that anything he now said or did could 
not possibly remove it. In a word, Henry the Second 
and Thomas a Becket were a joke to Glenroy and 
Mr. Duncan M'Dow. 



CHAPTER VII. 

Glenroy's property was too princely in extent to 
admit of any very near neighbours who could vie 
with him in state and consequence. Yet two of his 
nearest kinsmen had dwellings Avithin a short distance 
of him ; or rather the distance was reckoned short in 
a country where stormy firths and pathless mountains 
oppose no such obstacles to social intercourse as arc 
enjoined by the flimsy forms of fashion and etiquette. 
All that Glenroy's eye looked upon of hill and glen, 
lake and forest, were his own, with the exception of 
one single feature in the landscape, and that the fairest 
in all the goodly scene. Tliis was a beautiful richly- 
wooded promontory, which stretched far into the 
bosom of the estuary that almost surrounded it, and 
gave it the appearance of a sylvan isle. It had once 
formed part of the Glenroy estate, and had even been 
the original seat of the family, as was indicated by 
some gray, ivy-grown walls which crowned the sum- 
mit of one of its green knolls. But by one of the 
many mutations land is subject to, it had been severed 
from the greater part of the property, and had passed 
to a younger branch of the family, by whom it had 



38 DESTINY. 

for generations been possessed. This younger branch 
had now dwindled away to one " sear and yellow leaf," 
a rich and childless old man, who had lately succeeded 
by the death of a nephew, whose first act, upon com- 
ing of age, had been to repair and furnish such part 
of the old castle as could be rendered habitable for 
the shooting season. His successor was not personally 
known in the country, as he had left it at an early age 
to push his fortune in a remote provincial town in 
England, and had only visited it once since. Glenroy 
had long looked with a wistful eye towards this pro- 
perty, which, indeed, was the very crown jewel of 
the family, and for which he would gladly have ex- 
changed many thousand acres of muir and mountain ; 
but hitherto he had coveted in vain. All his over- 
tures had been rejected ; for, to tell the truth, Glen- 
roy had everything but money to offer for it ; and 
money, unfortunately, is the only thing that ever 
induces people to part with their lands. But now he 
seemed in a fair way to gain possession of it, not by 
conquest, as the law terms purchase, but by gift, or 
inheritance, as he said he was the nearest heir to the 
childless old man who was now the proprietor. Even 
if it had been otherwise, it was of little consequence, 
as the property was not entailed, and it was but 
natural to suppose he would leave it to him as the 
rightful owner and the head of the family ; especially 
as he could have nobody else to leave it to, ha\ang 
quarrelled with all of the clan with whom he had 
ever come into contact. 



DESTINY. 39 

At a more respectful distance from the proud tur- 
rets of Glenroy stood the humble dwelling of his 
cousin, Captain Malcolm, a half-pay officer in delicate 
health, the possessor of a paternal farm, and the father 
of eight children. In early life he had made a love- 
marriage with a lady of good family and great beauty, 
but no fortune. This step had of course displeased 
the friends (so called) on both sides, and the young 
pair had been left to struggle through hfe as they 
best could — and a hard struggle it had been. But, 
as has been truly said, "unfitness of minds, more than 
of circumstances, is what in general mars the marriage 
union ; where these are suited, means of contentment 
and hapjDincss are within reach." And in this in- 
stance so it had proved. JVIrs. Malcolm, though highly 
born and delicately bred, had followed her husband 
through all the changes of a soldier's Hfe, had shared 
his hardships and privations Avith cheerfulness, and 
had now retired with him to a bleak Highland farm, 
with that contentment which was ready to find good 
in everything. If their claims had been strictly in- 
vestigated, it would probably have been found that 
Captain Malcolm was still more nearly related to the 
Inch Orran branch of the family than the Chief him- 
self; but his chance of the succession was such a 
hopeless one that he never had allowed himself to 
indulge the sliglitest expectation. In his first outset 
in life he had disobliged Mungo Malcolm, the present 
proprietor, by refusing to be received into his office 
and bred to his profession — that of a scrivener. One 



40 DESTINY. 

offence was quite sufficient to make an enemy for life 
of Mungo Malcolm ; but when this act of disobedience 
was followed up by a rash and imprudent marriage, 
assurance was made doubly sure : the door was com- 
pletely closed and barred against him, and it seemed 
as if little less than a miracle could ever open it again. 

When this family first came to the neighbourhood, 
Grlenroy had shown them considerable kindness and 
attention, in an ostentatious, patronising w^ay; and 
they had received his favours as people wiUing to be 
obliged, because they felt that in similar circum- 
stances they would have been happy in obliging 
others. But, at the same time, the Chief's pompous 
civilities were met with a simple courtesy, which, 
while it showed they were not insensible to them, 
yet denoted minds of too elevated a cast to be over- 
whelmed by condescension, or oppressed by trivial 
favours. This, however, Avas Avhat Glenroy could not 
understand, and did not like. He was more lavish 
than generous; he gave freely, but he loved to 
brandish his favours, and always looked for an im- 
mediate return in gratitude or adulation. 

The calm manner and moderate expressions of 
Captain Malcolm were therefore ill calculated to 
feed the cravings of his vanity. Boast as he might, 
his boastings never called forth any bursts of admira- 
tion or applause from his poor kinsman ; nor did all 
the display of his wealth and state appear to excite 
the slightest envy, or even astonishment, in his breast. 
Yet there was nothing sour or cynical in this plain- 



DESTINY. 41 

ness ; nothing that betrayed a contempt for what he 
could not attain. On the contrary, his manners were 
mild and pleasing to all who could value simplicity 
and sincerity; and he was ever ready to commend 
and admire when he could do so consistently with 
truth. 

There is, perhaps, nothing more baffling to pride 
than when it meets with contentment in a humble 
station ; it is then like the wind wasting its strength 
where there is nothing to oppose it, or the waves 
spending their foam upon the smooth, printless sand. 
In like manner, the lofty bearing and arrogant pre- 
tensions of the Chieftain met neither Avith encourage- 
ment nor opposition in the quiet Init independent 
satisfaction of his poor cousins. 

Pride is easily instilled oven into generous natures ; 
and the Glenroy children were not slow in learning 
hoAv greatly they were thought superior to the young 
Donald Begs, as the Chief contemptuously nick- 
named his kinsman's family. This knowledge, how- 
ever, availed them little in practice ; for the young 
Malcolms, though gay, good-humoured, and obliging, 
were free from that servile spirit which denotes the 
mercenary dependant, and in their childish inter- 
course preserved an ease and equality as remote from 
false shame as from vulgar forwardness. Educated 
])y pious and enlightened parents, their young minds 
were imbued with that most elevating of all prin- 
ciples, the genuine spirit of Christianity ; and by it 
they were early taught to distinguish between those 



42 DESTINY. 

things which the world despises, and those things 
which are in themselves despicable. Though poor, 
they therefore attached no degrading ideas to poverty, 
nor affixed undue importance to wealth. Their minds 
were kept free from sordid passions and vulgar pre- 
judices, while all the nobler equalities of their nature 
Avere strengthened and improved by the constant 
exercise of the mind's best attributes. Love, charity, 
contentment, fortitude, temperance, and self-denial — 
these were the treasures the parents sought to lay up 
in the hearts of their children ; and if they did not 
always succeed in raising these plants of heavenly 
growth in that strange and wayward soil, the human 
heart, the very attempt produced a wholesome in- 
fluence in displacing pride, prejudice, and selfishness — 
those bitter roots of envy, hatred, and malice. 

There was something so sweet and attractive in 
Mrs. Malcolm, and so pleasing in the whole family, 
that Edith was never so happy as when allowed to 
spend some days at Lochdhu; but she would have 
been ashamed to acknowledge how much she loved 
them all, for she was accustomed to hear them spoken 
of in a slighting and somewhat contemptuous manner. 
Thus is many a pure and generous feeling stifled in 
the young heart by the withering breath of ridicule. 



CHAPTER VIII. 

It was at this time that the new Laii'd of Inch Orran 
was expected to take possession of his inheritance, 
and nothing else was talked of throughout the district, 
while many and various were the rumours afloat con- 
cerning him. The only point they all agreed in was, 
that he was a very particular man — which is the next 
thing to being called a Hydra. But particular men, 
and particular women too, well deserve a chapter to 
themselves, which they shall perhaps have at another 
time ; but this one must be devoted to the particulari- 
ties of Inch Orran. Of that " particular man," then, 
it was generally reported, that he was of a very capri- 
cious bad temper ; or, according to the nursery phrase, 
that he was very apt to have the black dog on his 
back. When that happened, it was said he was in 
the practice of sitting in profound silence all the time 
the fit lasted, Avith a red nightcap on his head ; which 
red nightcap he would not have Hfted for the king 
himself till the black dog had taken his departure, 
and then it was hung up on its own particular peg 
till the return of the said black dog. Another edition 
was, that he always allowed his beard to grow with 



44 DESTINY. 

the growtli, and strengthen with the strength, of the 
fit ; till at length, in a melting mood, he had again 
recourse to the razor, and came forth with a new- 
mown chin ready to salute all the world. Others 
said that Inch Orran hung out no dead-lights on the 
approach of a storm, nor hoisted any signals by which 
the enemy could be warned of their danger. His 
black dog, it was said, was seldom off his back, and 
went and came just as it happened, without saying 
by your leave. That he had a black dog, nobody 
doubted ; and that he was most thoroughly disagree- 
able was never disputed. Whether he had a wife 
Avas not so certain : some said they had seen her ; 
others had never even heard of her ; a third reported 
her dead ; and a fourth in confinement. There was 
also much speculation as to how he would come, 
when he would arrive, where he would reside, whether 
he would entertain the county, etc. Glenroy had 
written a pressing invitation to his kinsman to take 
up his abode for the present with him ; but a very 
brief dry refusal had been returned, which had fired 
the Chieftain's blood, till he recollected that he was a 
particular man : and even a great man must give way 
to a particular man, inasmuch as the one is sometimes 
a poor man, and the other is always a rich man. 
Glenroy's next step was to have scouts stationed to 
give him the very earliest intelligence of Inch Orran's 
arrival ; and no sooner was that announced than he 
ordered his barge to be manned, and, accompanied by 
Benbowie, he embarked on the smooth surface of a 



DESTINY. 45 

summer's sea to welcome the old Laird to the seat of 
his forefathers. It is sometimes difficult to believe 
that all things are in their right places in this round 
world. Certainly Glenroy and Benbowie did not 
seem in character with the scenery, as they were 
borne along on tlie bosom of the blue waters, whicli 
reflected, as in a mirror, the varied beauties that 
skirted their shores; the gray rocks, the graceful 
pendent birch, the grassy knolls, the gushing stream- 
let, the fern-clad glens, the lofty mountains glowing 
with heather, save here and there Avhere patches of 
tender green relieved the rich monotony of colour ; 
while, above all, 

" the gorgeous sphere 

Lit up the vales, flowers, mountains, leaves, and streams, 
"With a diviner day — the spirit of bright beams." 

To the eye of taste and the feeling heart there 
would have been rapture in every beam of light and 
breath of heaven on such a day and amid such scenes. 
But Glenroy and Benbowie cared for none of these 
things ; though the woods and waters, hills and dales, 
suggested ideas to them, such as they were, as they 
sailed along, and they were pleased holding parley in 
their own way. And "as imagination bodies forth 
the form of things," so the two friends " turned them 
to shapes," and gave to "airy nothings a local habita- 
tion and a name." Glenroy and Benbowie, then, 
although they could not be said to find " sermons in 
stones, tongues in the trees, or books in the running 
brooks," yet found much profitable matter of discourse 



46" DESTINY. 

in the various objects of nature that presented them- 
selves. The crystal depths of the limpid waters over 
which the sun was shedding his noonday effulgence 
suggested to their minds images of herrings, fat, fresh, 
or salted, with their accompaniments of casks, nets, 
and busses ; the mountains in their stern glory, with 
their lights and shadows and lonely recesses, to them 
showed forth heath-burning, sheep-walks, black-faced 
wedders, and wool. The copsewood, tender and 
harmonious in its colouring, free and graceful in its 
growth, was, in their language, " hags and stools " of 
price and promise ; and as they touched the shore of 
Inch Orran, they broke into no idle raptures about 
the water-plants, the fern, the wild flowers, the tall 
foxglove, the gray rocks and bright mossy stones, half 
hid beneath the broad-leaved coltsfoot, that formed 
the rich and variegated foreground ; for they were 
casting searching looks for "black tang" and "yellow 
tang," and "bell wrack" and "jagged wrack," and 
such other ingredients as enter into the composition 
of that valuable commodity called kelp. Such were 
the speculations which came most home to the busi- 
ness and bosoms of the friends; so grovelling and 
sordid are the results of human pride and selfishness. 
Although the ruins of Inch Orran Castle had an 
imposing effect when viewed from a distance, the 
respect they excited was considerably diminished on 
a nearer survey. They stood on the summit, and 
close to the edge, of a romantic eminence which rose 
abruptly from the Avater, and gave them an air of 



DESTINY. 47 

grandeur to which they could not have otherwise 
aspired. The building had been originally in the 
form of a square, with a court in the centre ; but two 
sides of it were now mere shapeless, weather-stained 
masses of stone, Avhich time was every day crumbling 
into more picturesque forms, and mantling Avith ivy 
and Avall- flowers, thus "making beautiful what else 
were bleak and bare ; " while such parts of the build- 
ing as had fallen down were overgrown with creeping 
plants and briers, that gave it an appearance of intri- 
cacy, and thus heightened the interest which the 
mouldering and dilapidated remains of a human 
dwelling never fail to excite. One side of the square, 
that next the water, had been rejiaired, and now 
formed the dwelling-house ; but it was so sombre, 
and so perfectly in harmony with the rest of the 
building, that it gave no offence, for it conveyed no 
impression of any modern usurper having invaded 
the precincts of the departed ; it rather seemed as if 
some of its former inmates still hngered there amid 
the wreck of former ages, Glenroy knocked at the 
door; but it was some time ere his summons was 
answered. At length a very corpulent, red -faced, 
sour-looking serving-man appeared, and after a little 
seeming hesitation in his own mind, acknowledged 
that he helieoed his master was at home ; then with a 
slow, toddling, reluctant gait, he led the Avay to the 
apartment where sat the Lord of the Castle. 



CHAPTER IX. 

It was a spacious room, panelled with oak, and hand- 
somely furnished in the modern-antique style. Three 
windows looked upon the loch, and one at the end of 
the apartment confronted an ivy-mantled tower, Avhich 
admitted few of day's garish beams at any time, much 
less at present, when there stood stationed there the 
huge person of Mr, Duncan M'Dow. 

On the entrance of the Chief he instantly hastened 
towards him with his grappling-irons extended ; and 
before Glenroy knew where he was, Benbowie and 
he were actually led forward in a triumphant manner, 
and presented by the minister to the master of the 
house. 

"I am amazingly proud," said he, in his loudest 
and most emjohatic manner, "that it has fallen to my 
lot to introduce my respected friend and pawtron, 
Glenroy, to you, Inch Orran, and likewise my very 
worthy friend, Benbowie ; this is really a treat ! " 

Glenroy certainly had been struck dumb, else he 
never could have borne this in silence ; but he began 
to rally his forces, although he refrained from break- 
ing out before his kinsman. He therefore merely bit 



DESTINY. 49 

his lip and cast a look at Mr. Duncan, which, if looks 
could have killed, woidd certainly have laid the pastor 
senseless at his feet. He then turned to Inch Orran, 
who had risen to receive him from before a table, on 
Avhich lay some law books, ledgers, bundles of papers, 
and parchments. 

Inch Orran was a little, meagre, sickly -looking 
man, with a sharp, bitter face, a pair of fiery, vindic- 
tive eyes, and a mouth all puckered up as if to keep 
in the many cutting things Avhich otherAvise would 
have got out. And indeed it must be owned that 
but few escaped in comparison of the multitude that 
lodged within ; for he was one of those gifted indivi- 
duals who have "un grand talent pour le silence." 
Neither red cap nor black dog was visible ; but, on 
the contrary, the marks of the razor were still visible 
on his chin, and he welcomed his visitors with some- 
thing that approached to bare civility. However, 
people may be thankful when they meet with even 
bare ci\dlity from a particular man, and Glenroy was 
not one to be daunted even by l^are civility ; so he 
shook his kinsman heartily by the hand, and expressed 
his pleasure at seeing him in a very cordial manner. • 

" You are welcome to the Highlands, Inch Orran," 
said he warmly ; " and I hope you Avill like us well 
enough to remain amongst us." 

" Sir, I thank you," was the reply, Avith a full stop. 

"When did you arrive, Inch Orran f 

"On Tuesday evening, at a quarter past six, sir," 
in a loud, sharp, cracked voice. 

VOL. I. E »• 



50 DESTINY. 

" I wish I could liave prevailed upon you to take 
up your quarters at Glenroy," said the Chief; "I 
think I may venture to say you would have found 
yourself comfortable there." 

" There, sir, you must allow me to judge for my- 
self," Avas the reply. 

Here, Mr. M'Dow thought, was a fit opportunity 
for him to strike in. 

"I assure you, Inch Orran," said he, "however 
little Glenroy may think of this house in comparison 
of his own, yet I can only say I would be very Avell 
pleased if I had a room half the size of this in the 
manse." 

' You are very moderate, sir," returned Inch Orran, 
with a bitter sneer, which was quite thrown aAvay upon 
Mr. IVI'Dow, who went on — 

"This house has been wonderfully well repaired 
and improved ; it's really a most commodious, com- 
fortable dwelling, and most handsomely furnished : 
but in general it's my opinion a man should not think 
of adding to or repairing an old house. A man will 
never make his plack a bawbee 1iy repairing : for in- 
stance, there's the estimate of the addition and repairs 
for the manse and offices that I was mentioning to 
you when my worthy and respected pawtrons came 
in. My house is really a poor affair ; my byre's in a 
most dreadful state, and my stable's not a great deal 
better; and by -the -bye," as if recollecting himself, 
" I'm not sure but I slipped the estimate into my 
pocket before I came awaj." Diving into an enor- 



DESTINY. 51 

mous pouch, like a sack, he drew forth a large bundle 
of papers, which he tui'iied over, as if to ascertain 
their identity, although every letter Avas as familiar 
to him as his own fingers. 

" Ay, here it is — estimate of the necessary repairs 
for the manse, offices, etc., of Auchterbruckle. You 
can take a glance at it any time you are at leisure. 
Inch Orran;" upon which he laid it on the table, and 
making another dive, fished up his snuff'-muU, which, 
shaking and patting, he ofi"ered to Inch Orran, who 
in the same dry, caustic manner, said — 

" Sir, snuffing is a practice which I despise and 
abominate." 

" Hoot toot, Inch Orran, you must not say that," 
cried the undaunted Mr. M'Dow, with a great roar of 
laughter ; " here's my excellent friend, Benbo^vie, has 
no objections to a snuff any more than myself." Here 
BeuboAAae and he exchanged boxes. "And, by-the- 
bye, that puts me in mind of a hong mote I read in the 
Edinburgh Caledonian Mercury of the 29 th ultimo 
that I was very much taken with — I thought it really 
very good — I really had a good laugh at it — hach, 
hach, hach, ho. Two snuffers happened to meet one 
day, at the Cross I think it was. Says the one to the 
other, as they exchanged their mulls, just as we have 
been doing, — saj's the one to the other, 

" 'A friend's a good thing at a pinch.' 

" ' Yes,' says the other, ' but is it not still better 
for friends to be laying out their money this way, at 
scent per scent 1 ' " 



52 DESTINY. 

Here a tremendous volley of laughter broke forth, 
peal upon peal, roar upon roar, while he rubbed his 
hands, rocked upon his chair, and threw his body- 
about in all directions, in perfect ecstasy. " Cent per 
cent, Benbowie, would soon build the manse and 
mend my byre ! " And this witticism was followed 
by another roar, in which no one joined except Ben- 
bowie, who did not know at any time what he laughed 
at. But Mr. M'Dow and his mull were not done yet. 
"Though you are no snuffer. Inch Orran, you may 
perhaps admire the setting of my mull ; it's a topeuss 
on the top, a Highland cairngoreum, an uncommon 
large fine stone. It was given to me in a present by 
my excellent friend, Kindullie, on the occasion of my 
leaving his familj^ It was a very gratifying token of 
his regard for me, and of the manner in wliich he 
was satisfied I had performed my duty in educating 
of his seven sons. Our Highland mulls and cairn- 
goreums are all the fashion now, Inch Orran." 

" I am no lapidary, sir," said Inch Orran, without 
deigning even to cast his eyes upon it. 

"That's just my own case. Inch Orran!" quoth 
the undaunted minister. "I know very little about 
these things myself ; I have always had other things 
to mind, and I have never given much attention to 
your fashionable gim cracks." 

" It's a pity, sir ! " said Inch Orran, in that signifi- 
cant tone which would have conveyed the most cut- 
ting sarcasm to every ear but that of Duncan M'Dow. 

Glenroy all this time was fuming to himself at the 



DESTINY. 53 

laconic drjniess of his host on the one hand, and the 
facetious familiarity of his minister on the other; 
and indeed a more discordant party scarcely ever met 
together in friendly semblance ; and it seemed in vain 
to expect anything pleasant from such a compound. 
However, Glenroy thought of the family seat and 
the fifty thousand pounds, and he made another 
attempt to be agreeable. 

" You have been a great stranger in Scotland, Inch 
Orran ; it must be a long while since you have visited 
your own country f 

"Forty years, sir, and upwards." 

" Forty years ! That is a long time ; what wonder- 
ful changes you must see ! " 

"I do see a change, sir; but that is not wonder- 
ful." 

"The impertinent old cur!" thought Glenroy; 
"what does he mean by snarling at my words 1" 
And he sat in sullen silence, while the old man kept 
his scrutinising eyes fastened upon him with that 
terrific expression which eyes sometimes have, of 
being not only eyes, but ears. 

" Forty years is a long time," said Benbowie ; " on 
my conscience, it is a very long time." 

" If there were any ladies present, Benbowie, you 
and I, who are bachelors, would not be very keen, 
maybe, of kenning anything about forty years," said 
Mr. M'Dow, with a sly wink and a loud laugL Then 
paused, in hopes of being rallied on the subject of his 
celibacy, but in vain; so he went on — "Many's the 



54 ■ DESTINY. 

gibe I get from my excellent friend Kindullie, about 
not having provided a dow for my nest yet — ho, hoch, 
ho ! But I tell him I must first get my dookit before 
I think of providing a dow for it. Don't you think 
I'm right there, Inch Orran?" with a thundering 
peal of laughter. 

"Sir? " 

" Oh, it's entirely a joke, on both sides — you un- 
derstand it, Glenroy ? I must get my addition, if not 
an entire new manse and offices, before I can ask a 
lady to come and preside there. I can give you no 
Mrs. M'Dow till you give me my drawing-room and 
my byre, at all events. Don't you think that's but 
reasonable. Inch Orran?" 

" Eeally, Mr. M'Dow, this is not a time to intro- 
duce your private affairs," said the Chief haughtily, 

" I beg your pardon, Glenroy ; but I really must 
diflfer from you there. Only consider, here's a meet- 
ing of my three principal heritors ! Who knows when 
I may have such another opportrmity ; though, I am 
sure, I trust we may have many pleasant meetings for 
all that. But, however, since I have the pleasure of 
seeing my principal heritors convened, I think there 
can be no harm in just taking a slight glance at my 
Summons of Augmentation, which, with the interim 
locality, I happen to have by mere chance about me." 
And, plunging his arm into the other bottomless gulf 
of a pocket, out came a huge bunch of papers, from 
which even Benbo'SAdc instinctively drew away his 
chair. "You see it is no great bulk; you'll soon 



DESTINY. 55 

glance over it. There's first the Summons — that's it, 
No. I. Summons, at the instance of the Eev. Duncan 
M'Dow, minister of Auchterbruckle, for an augmenta- 
tion of stipend, etc. Then there's the interlocutor of 
the Court, with the interim locality and decreet ; for 
you see, although my allocation is upon the teinds 
of " 

" I hope you have brought IVIrs. ISIalcolm with you, 
Inch Orranl" said Glenroy, making a desperate 
attempt to get the better of the teinds. 

" Certainly, sir," was the laconic replj'. 

"I trust I shall have the pleasure of paying my 
respects to her, then, if convenient?" 

"Do you wish to see my wife, sir?" demanded 
Inch Orran in no very sweet accent. 

"If quite convenient and agreeable, I should be 
happy to welcome your lady to the Highlands." 

Inch Orran rang the bell, which was answered by 
the fat serving-man. " Be so good, Simon," said he, 
in a voice like a lamb, "as desire IMi's. Malcolm to 
come here." 

" She is dressing, I believe," said Simon. 

"Send her here when she is ready, Simon." And 
Simon, with a l)ang of the door, Avithdrcw. 



CHAPTER X. 

In a few minutes the door opened and the lady 
entered. She was aiTayed in a bright amber silk 
gown, a full-dress cap, decorated with scarlet ribbons, 
and even more than the usual number of bows that 
tied nothing, and ends that evidently had no ends to 
answer, save that of sAvelling the milliner's bill. She 
had a mean, vacant countenance, and a pair of most 
unhandy-looking hands crossed before her, clothed in 
bright purple gloves, with long empty finger-ends 
dangling in all directions. All artists admit that 
there is as much character displayed in hands as 
in heads, and Mrs. Malcolm's hands were perfectly 
characteristic ; they proclaimed at once that they 
could do nothing — that they were utterly helpless, 
and morally, not physically, imbecile. 

Inch Orran seemed instinctively aware of her 
approach, for Avithout looking the way she was, he 
merely said, "Mrs. Malcolm, gentlemen;" and Mrs. 
Malcolm, advancing in an awkward, trailing manner, 
made sundry low curtseys to her guests, and extend- 
ing her empty finger-ends (which were eagerly caught 
at by Mr. M'Dow), she, in a peaking, monotonous 
voice, expressed her pleasure at sight of them. 



DESTINY. 57 

A^Tiy Mr. Malcolm had manned Mrs. INIalcolm 
was one of those mysteries which had baffled all 
conjecture, for she had neither beauty, money, con- 
nections, talents, accomplishments, nor common sense. 
Not that she was ugly, for she would have looked 
very well in a toy -shop Avindow. She had pink 
cheeks, blue eyes, and a set of neat yellow curls 
ranged round her brow. She was much younger than 
her husband, and looked still more juvenile than she 
really was, for not all the contempt and obloquy that 
had been poured upon her for upwards of twenty 
years had ever made her change either countenance 
or colour ; in fact, she had neither passions, feelings, 
nerves — scarcely sensations. She seemed precisely 
one of those whom Nature had destined to "suckle 
fools and chronicle small beer;" but fate had denied 
her the fools, and Inch Orran had debarred her from 
all interference even with the small beer; for such 
was his contempt for the sex in general, and for his 
own portion of it in particular, that he deemed a 
woman quite incompetent to regulate a household. 
His domestic concerns were therefore conducted 
ostensibly by himself, but virtually by his fat serving- 
man, who was his foster-brother, and had been his 
factotum long before he married. Even his dress, to 
the most minute article, was all of Simon's providing. 
Simon alone knew to a hair the cut and colour of 
his wig, the pattern of his pocket-handkerchiefs, the 
texture of his shirts and neckcloths, the precise latitude 
and longitude of his flannel waistcoats, with various 



58 DESTINY. 

other particulars incident to a particular man. Now, 
the chief occupation of Mrs Malcolm's life was 
trailing from shop to shop, in search of anything or 
nothing, and she would have liked to have the 
dressing of Mr. Malcolm for the pleasure of buying 
bargains for him. She had therefore attempted to 
wrest this privilege out of Simon's hands, but in vain ; 
she had picked up a pennyworth of a wig, which she 
said "looked remarkably neat on the head," but 
which Simon turned up his nose at, and his master 
threw into the fire. She had haggled till she was 
hoarse about a dozen of cotton pocket-handkerchiefs, 
which after all Simon pronounced to be perfectly 
useless, as they were of the diamond pattern, and his 
master would not blow his nose with anything but a 
spot. Her improvements upon flannel jackets had 
very nearly caused a formal separation, and from that 
time her active energies, not being permitted to exer- 
cise themselves either upon her household affairs or 
her husband's wardrobe, had centred entirely in her 
own person. She lived in a perpetual, weak, impotent 
bustle about nothing, spent her money in buying 
hoards of useless clothes, and her time in looking 
at them, folding and unfolding them, airing them, 
locking them up, protecting them from the moths in 
summer and mildew in winter, and so on. To crown 
the whole, she set up for being a sensible woman, 
and talked maudlin nonsense by the yard; for she 
was one of those who Avould ask if the sea produced 
corn, ratlier than hold her tongue. Here it may be 



DESTINY. 59 

remarked that it requires a great deal of mind to 
be silent at the right time and place. True, there are 
some few gifted individuals whose conversation flows 
like a continued stream, fertilising all around, enrich- 
ing others without impoverishing themselves ; but how 
different from the idle chatter of empty heads, whose 
only sounds are caused by their own hoUowness. " Two 
things there are, indicative of a weak mind," says Saadi, 
the Persian sage, "to be silent when it is proper to 
speak, and to speak Avhen it is proper to be silent." 
Such was the helpmate of Inch Orran. 

" I am happy to see you, gentlemen," said she, in 
her little tiresome croaking voice ; " indeed I'm thank- 
ful to see anybody, for this is such a lonely out-of-the- 
way place. I was just saying this morning what an 
improvement a towni would be on the water-side ; it 
would be a great ornament, and of great use in making 
a stir and giving employment to poor people, and 
very convenient too. I'm surprised it has never 
struck anybody to set such a thing a-going, when 
there's such a Avant of employment for the poor." 

" Eome was not built in a day, you know, ma'am," 
said the facetious Mr. M'Dow, with one of his loud 
laughs ; " but if you mil use your influence with Inch 
Orran, and prevail upon him to begin, there's no say- 
ing Avhere it may end " — another peal — " and I hope 
the kirk and the manse will not be forgot, Inch Orran." 

"Still less the stipend, sir," said Inch Orran, with 
one of his vicious sneers, 

" I'll answer for it the stipend will no get leave to 



60 DESTINY. 

be forgot," returned the incorrigible Mr. M'Dow, with 
one of his loudest roars ; " you may trust the minister 
for keeping you in mind of that." 

"I believe t may, sir." 

" And let it be a good one at the first. Inch Orran, 
that he may not have such a battle to fight for his 
augmentation as I have had. I really think the Teind 
Court has taken an entire wrong view of the subject 
there, or they would have given me the decreet at 
once. You'll no go along with me there, Glenroy?" 

But Glenroy disdained to reply, so the little old 
man said, " It was the saying, sir, of one of the "wisest 
judges who ever sat upon the Scottish bench, that a 
2)007' clergy made a pure clergy ; a maxim which de- 
serves to be engraven in letters of gold on every manse 
in Scotland." 

" 'Deed, then, I can tell you. Inch Orran, the gold 
would be very soon piket off," returned Mr. M'Dow, 
with redoubled bursts of laughter. "Na, na, you 
must keep the gold for your fine English Episcopalian 
palaces, where it's no so scarce as it's among us ;" and 
Mr. M'Dow perfectly revelled in the delight of this 
jeio cTesp'U. Mrs. Malcolm now struck in. " I'm quite 
tormented with these midges. I don't think they'll 
leave the skin upon me. I wish they would bite you, 
Mr. Malcolm." 

" Perhaps, sir, you would wish some refreshment," 
said Inch Orran, addressing Glenroy, in a voice louder 
and shriller than that with Avhich Punch denounces 
Polly. The Chief, who was still under the influence 



DESTINY. 61 

of a late and luxurious breakfast, declined ; but upon 
the same offer (if offer it could be called) being put to 
Benbowie, he was so little in the habit of refusing 
anything, except to give money, and besides had such 
a willing appetite, that he at once greedily assented. 
Mr. M'Dow rubbed his hands, drew out his pocket- 
handkerchief, placed his hands upon his knees, and 
began snuffing the air, as though he already caught 
the scent of some savour}^ mess. 

The bell was faintly rung by Inch Orran, but some 
minutes elapsed, and no one answered. 

"That's always the way with that Simon," said 
Mrs. Malcolm; "I'm sure I wish we had a well- 
behaved, clever, active boy, for " 

But a bitter look, and a sh — sh from her lord, 
stopped her tongue, Avhile a fierce tingle of the bell 
brought forth Simon. 

"Eefreshmcnts, if you please, Simon," said his 
master, in a softer tone and manner than he had yet 
evinced. 

"Refreshments, sir?" repeated Simon, putting his 
hand to his forehead, with an air of great perplexity. 

" I think some Avarm broth would be the best thing 
in such a warm day," said Mrs. Malcolm; "for when 
people are warm they should never take anything 
cold, it's very dangerous ; I had an aunt once " 

" Something cold, Simon," said his master de- 
cidedly. 

"Cold, sirf repeated Simon; then, seeming to 
recollect himself, he withdrew. 



62 DESTINY. 

Then ensued a great deal of heavy tramping to 
and fro, and a mighty clattering of plates, knives and 
forks, which was music to the ears of Benbowie and 
Mr. M'Dow. 

At length entered Simon, and, with much seeming 
exertion, began to rub down a table (although there 
was neither speck nor spot upon it) in the most osten- 
tatious manner, puffing and blowing all the while, as 
though he had been in the tread-mill. 

"Take care of the carpet, Simon," said his mistress; 
but Simon seemed as though he heard her not. He 
then unfolded and carefully laid a table-cloth with 
mathematical precision, retiring a few paces to judge 
of its general effect, and then returning to adjust 
what his eye pronounced to be amiss. 

"I think the cloth should be rather more this 
way, Simon," said his mistress, drawing it towards 
her, with an air of great importance. 

"Tut," muttered Simon, as he jerked it in the 
contrary direction. 

Once more he withdrew, and another pause ensued, 
during which Glenroy made another attempt to draw 
his host into conversation. 

" This is a beautiful situation of yours. Inch Orran," 
said he, — "I really know nothing finer." 

"It is a very desirable property, sir," returned the 
old man, with marked emphasis. 

"You have one of the noblest views in Scotland 
from these windows," said the Chief proudly, as he 
looked on his own princely domain. 



DESTINY. 63 

"It may be, sir; but I have other things to look 
to than fine views on this neglected jiroperty," replied 
Inch Orran. 

" That's precisely my ovm case, Inch OiTan," said 
Mr. M'Dow. "One person has been saying, when 
they came to the manse, ' Oh, what a beautiful situa- 
tion, Mr. M'Dow !' Another says, 'Oh, such a grand 
view, Mr. M'Dow!' Another cries, 'I really think 
you beat Glenroy himself in your prospects, Mr. 
M'Dow.' ' That may all l)e,' says I; ' but the best pro- 
spects I have in view are a comfortable manse, an 
addition to the glebe, and the decreet for my aug- 
mentation,' Ho, hoch, hoch, ho." 

Neither Glenroy nor Inch Orran took the smallest 
notice of this sally; and the former continued to 
address the latter. 

" I have the advantage of you in one respect, Inch 
Orran ; for this place of yours forms one of the finest 
features in the view from my drawing-room windows; 
though, without vanity, I may say Glenroy is also a 
very fine ol)ject from yours." 

" Probably, sir, you may have more pleasure in the 
view of my property than I have in contemplating 
yours." 

Glenroy felt his cheek flush at this palpable hit ; 
but just then the door was thrown wide open, and 
Simon appeared with his arms at full stretch, bearing 
a tray, which he deposited on a side-table, and then 
proceeded to arrange its contents with the same bust- 
ling importance. 



64 DESTINY. 

At the top of the table was placed the wizened nib 
of a tongue, and vis-a-^s the almost bare blade-bone 
of a shoulder of mutton ; on one side a thin slice of 
bread was confronted with a few potatoes; at the 
corners were a jug of whey and another of water ; a 
decanter containing a few glasses of port, and a bottle 
of currant wine, stale and sour, and tasting, as currant 
wine sometimes does, of brown sugar, blue paper, 
yellow soap, cork, candle, twine, and \dnegar. 

The two expectants had felt their appetites con- 
siderably damped at sight of the cheer provided for 
them ; they, however, seated themselves, though with 
rueful faces. To do them justice, neither of them 
was nice, but they both loved a savoury mess, some- 
thing to make a slop with; something to eat with 
their knives — what they ought to eat with their forks. 
But, alas ! here was no room for such a display ; for, 
though Mi\ M'Dow, as the younger and stronger man, 
contrived both to cut and chew the inflexible remains 
of the tongue, poor Benbowie was completely baffled 
in the attempt ; and all he could do was to crumble 
down a bit of bread, and spill half a glass of wine on 
the table-cloth, after which he declared he had had 
enough — quite enough, on his conscience. While the 
master of the revels drank to the health of his guests 
very graciously in a glass of green whey. 

"I shall let the old miser see what good living is!" 
thought Glenroy, as he began a pompous and pressing 
invitation to his kinsman to spend a few days with 
him, accompanied by ostentatious offers of barge, pin- 



DESTINY. 65 

nace, carriages, horses, servants, etc. "It is my in- 
tention to spend a couple of days with you, sir, before 
I leave the country," replied Inch Orran ; " and, if 
agreeable to you, when I can make it convenient to 
myself, I shall not fail to apprise you." 

This was more than Glenroy had expected, or 
perhaps wished for, now that he had experienced the 
nature of the man ; but of course he was all pleasure, 
gratification, and so forth. A hope was then expressed 
that Mrs. Malcolm would join the party. 

"Most certainly, sir," replied Inch Orran. "/ 
keep no separate establishment for my wife." 

"I'm sure I shall be very happy to go," said she ; 
" for I'll be thankful to go anywhere — this is such a 
dull place. Onlj', if the ladies here dress much to go 
out to dinner, I'm sure I don't know what I shall do, 

Mr. Malcolm, for a cap for " But a "sh — sh," 

and a wave of his hand from her husband, stopped 
her mouth, and the visitors took leave. 

As they traversed the long passage, they descried 
Simon at the other extremity, waddling along with a 
foaming tankard in one hand, and a long-necked bottle 
in the other ; and, at the same time, the nostrils of 
Benbowie and Mr. M'Dow were assailed with the 
smell of some very gusty viands, towards which Mr. 
Simon seemed to have been steering his course. 

The half-open door of a housekeeper's room, from 
whence issued the fragrance, induced them both to 
thrust in their heads; and there stood disclosed a 
table neatly laid for two, with a smoking tureen of 

VOL. I. F D. 



66 DESTINY. 

hodge-podge, and a magnificent jowl of salmon. At 
this sight the two stood as if entranced, with open 
mouths and outstretched necks ; but it was of short 
duration ; for directly a quick foot, an invisible hand, 
and the door was shut with an angry slap. 

" On my conscience ! but I would rather be the 
man than the master," said Benbowie, with a grunt 
of dissatisfaction, as he followed his friend to the 
barge. 

"At least, I would rather take pot-luck with him," 
said Mr. ]\I'Dow, with a faint attempt at a laugh, as, 
with a discomfited air, he betook himself to his 
Amailye (as he had christened his pony, in honour 
of the Lady Kindullie), and trotted away in quest of 
better cheer. 



CHAPTER XL 

Glenroy returned home much dissatisfied with his 
visit. He had been provoked at the dry imperti- 
nence of the old man, disgusted A\ath the tiresome 
weakness of his wife, and incensed beyond measure 
at the innumerable offences of Mr. M'Dow. Neither 
was his ill-humour appeased when, at the end of a 
week, he received the following despatch, written in 
the plainest and squarest and most inflexible of 
hands : — 

" Mr. Mungo Malcolm presents his compliments to 
Mr. Norman Malcolm of Glenroy, and if still con- 
venient for him to receive a visit, Mr. Mungo Malcolm 
will, in pursuance of his original intention, wait upon 
him on Wednesday next, the 20th inst., in the course 
of the afternoon, and purposes to be his guest till the 
following Saturday forenoon, when he positively takes 
leave. Mr. jVl Malcolm will be accomj)anied by his 
wife and male servant." 

Glenroy chafed like a boar at being thus addressed 
as Mr. Norman Malcolm, and scouted the whole style 
of the billet ; but it is much to be wished that the 
world in general, and many very worthy people in 



68 DESTINY. 

particular, would follow the example of Mr. Mungo 
Malcolm, in thus precisely marking the limits of their 
intended stay. 

All householders, whatever they may pretend, 
must at some period or other have groaned under 
the indefinable misery of an undefined length of visit, 
and every family must have felt the want of a chro- 
nometer for ascertaining the respective ideas of both 
parties as to the reasonable latitude and longitude of 
a visit. In good old times Scotland had its regular 
standard measure for \'isiting, as it had for its oatmeal 
and potatoes. A rest day, a dress day, and a press 
day, were the appointed measure of a visitor's days. 
The first was consecrated to repose, after the fatigues 
of the journey, whether there had been a journey or 
not ; the second was allotted to showing ofi the full- 
dress suit, prepared perhaps for the occasion ; and 
the third Avas delicately appropriated to the pressing 
sohcitations of the host, and always conferred as an 
act of bounty over and above. Thus both parties 
were pleased, the presser and the pressed ; the presser 
at having conquered, the pressed at having conceded ; 
and thus they parted, happy to part, happy to meet, 
and happy to part again. 

But since this barrier has been broken down by 
modern innovation, visiting has no longer any limits, 
except such as exist in the minds of the respective 
parties ; and accordingly " there's the respect " that 
makes cavitious people pause before bringing upon 
themselves a visit. A visit ! How vague, how undo- 



DESTINY. 69 

fined, how dark, how humeasurable, how obscure, 
how unfathomable, how mysterious, is a visit! A 
visit may be meant for a day, or a week, or a month ; 
and it may be taken for a winter, or a summer, or a 
year ! A visit may be the cement of friendship, or 
it may be the bane of domestic happiness ! A visit 
may be like an angel's coming, brief and rare, or it 
may be like a wounded crocodile, drawing its slow 
length along. 

But none of these evils could befall the host of 
Mr. Mungo Malcolm, for the day and hour and 
minute of his departure were always settled, as upon 
this occasion, long before his arrival. Glenroy antici- 
pated anything but pleasure from this visit, but he 
comforted himself by considering it as a compliment, 
and the next thing to being declared heir to Inch 
Orran. He therefore resolved to pay all honour to 
his guest, and to win his heart by the good cheer and 
gaiety he would provide for him. 

The appointed day arrived, a raw, bleak, chill, un- 
happy-looking day ; not stormy enough to be grand, 
but just rough enough to be disagreeable. The hills 
were covered with mist, the sky with clouds, the sea 
mth foam, and doubts were entertained whether the 
old man would venture forth in such a day, when, in 
the midst of mist and clouds and rain and foam, a 
little black dripping boat was descried rowing along, 
which being run ashore, out stepped Inch Orran, his 
aspect completely harmonising with that of nature. 
Next was dragged forth Mrs. Malcolm, a mass of 



70 DESTINY. 

cloaks and shawls. Next followed Simon, AAath a 
small bundle under his arm, his person snugly en- 
sconced beneath a large umbrella, which he affected 
to hold carefully over his lady, but of which she got 
only the droppings. 

The Laird and his lady were Avelcomed by Glenroy 
Avith every demonstration of courtesy and good-will. 
They were received by him in his great hall, decorated 
with banners and broadswords, and dirks and clay- 
mores, and targets and deers' heads, and warlike 
trophies of every description, amidst which a conse- 
quential, full-plumed piper paced to and fro. Alto- 
gether, the effect was grand and imposing, but it was 
quite lost upon the guests. Inch Orran, if he noticed 
at all, noticed only to hate such trumpery, and his 
lady did not know a dirk from a deer's horn. Glen- 
roy's attempts at striking them with aAve on their first 
entrance were therefore all in vain ; it was to no 
purpose that he pointed out the stately banner of one 
chief, and the singular dirk of another, and related 
anecdotes pertaining to each. 

Inch Orran's horrid listening eyes were bent straight 
upon him, but he never opened his lips unless to utter 
a monosyllable. But still more enraging was his lady's 
commotion upon discovering that she had lost one of 
her gloves ; it was a new glove, a pink glove, a French 
glove, a habit glove ; it was the fellow of the glove she 
had on ; she must have left it in the boat, or it must 
have fallen into the sea, or she must have dropped it 
on the road, or Simon must have seen it, or it must be in 



DESTINY. 71 

Mr. Malcolm's pocket, for it could not be lost, and it 
was not about her ; and she shook herself round and 
round in testimony thereof. These her surmises and 
lamentations were uttered in a low, slow, monotonous 
tone to Benbowie and Mrs. Macauley, as with a de- 
mentit air she looked all round about, and not seeing 
her pink glove, she saw nothing else. Mrs. Macauley 
and Benbowie bestirred themselves with all their might 
in search of the stray glove, for it was a case that 
came home to both their bosoms ; they had each lost 
gloves at different periods of their lives ; they therefore 
knew what it was to lose a glove. They entered into 
the nature of the loss ; they did not idly sympathise 
in it, they exerted themselves to seek for it, they 
wondered for it, they lamented for it, they poked 
about for it in all improbable as well as impossible 
places; in short, all the energies of their heads, 
hearts, and hands were put in motion for the recovery 
nf the glove, but in vain. 

Simon was next summoned, and he ended the 
matter at once by boldly declaring that he had seen 
the glove drop into the water as his lady Avas coming 
out of the boat, and that just as he was trying to re- 
cover it, a monstrous wave had swept it away, and he 
could see no more of it. 

"I'm sure I never know whether to believe Simon 

or not," said the lady to Mrs. JMacauley ; " for I think 

he'll say anything just to save himself troul^le."^ 

^ It will doubtless be a relief to the compassionate reader to 
learn that the glove was all this while in Mrs. Malcolm's own 
pocket. 



72 DESTINY. 

A rich repast, under the head of kmcheon, was 
now served up ; but this Inch Orran refused point- 
blank even to approach, and upon being pressed by 
his host to partake in a manner that savoiu'ed more 
of hospitality than of free will left to his guest, he 
said in his most peremptory manner, " Sir, I make it 
a rule to dine but once a day." This was uttered in 
a tone not to be disputed ; but he added in a some- 
what softer key, " But I request, sir, I may be no re- 
straint on your usual practices ;" and motioning his 
host towards the table, he betook himself to a far-off 
corner of the room, the most remote and inaccessible, 
where he began to read a newspaper ; and Glenroy, 
already boiling at his dogged impertinence, left him 
to chew the cud of his own reflections, while he did 
the honours of the banquet. 



CHAPTER XIL 

The party were scarcely seated wlien young Norman 
came bounding into the apartment in all the exu- 
berance of unchecked animal spirits, just let loose 
from the restraints of the schoolroom, and evidently 
master of his own actions everywhere else. He was 
a handsome sprightly boy, with a haughty, careless 
air, that showed he was already aware of his own 
importance. He eyed Inch Orran for a moment, 
with a look that seemed to say, "Who are you?" as 
he brushed past him to the table, followed by a large 
greyhound. 

" Go and shake hands with that gentleman, Nor- 
man," said his father; "that is Inch Orran," But 
Norman heard as though he heard him not, 

"I am so hungi-y, papa," said he, casting a wander- 
ing glance from dish to dish all over the table ; "I 
hope you have got something good for me. Oh, do 
make haste, pray. No, no, I won't have a mutton- 
chop," drawing away his plate quickly as Mrs. Mac- 
auley was preparing to help him ; then, as suddenly 
retracting, "Yes, you may give me one for Fingal, 
Here Fin, Fin, my pretty fellow, here is a mutton- 



74 DESTINY. 

chop for you ; now eat it like a gentleman, and don't 
grease the carpet." 

" Norman, did you hear me desire you to go and 
shake hands with oiu' friend Inch Orranf said 
Glenroy, in a more authoritative tone. 

" Yes, papa, I will presently, but " 

"Go, then, sir, when I desire you," cried the Chief, 
in rising displeasure. 

" Yes, papa — ah ! ham-pie, that is so good ! " and 
he jumped and shook his hands in ecstasy. " Now, do 
give me some, papa; there is nothing I love so much." 

"Unless you do as I desire you, sir, deuce a bit 
of anything you shall taste to-day," cried Glenroy 
angrily ; his authority over his son always requiring 
to be backed by a threat, or a bribe, or an oath — 
sometimes by all three. 

"Well, then, remember you promised me some 
ham-pie, papa;" and slowly approaching Inch Orran, 
with his head riveted to the table and his eye upon 
the dish, he extended his hand to him ; but it met 
with no corresponding movement on the part of Inch 
Orran, whose hands remained firmly closed before 
him. Nowise disconcerted, however, his young Idns- 
man made a sort of snatch at his hand ; and then, 
satisfied he had done his part, sldpped away back to 
enjoy the reward of his obedience. Glenroy took a 
glance at the old man in the corner, but he did not 
like his look. His lips were drawn in till they Avere 
invisible ; his cheeks were distended like bolus's bags, 
and his eyes glared like a cat's in the dark. His lady 



DESTINY. 75 

was all this while seated between Benbowie and Mrs. 
Macaidey, and enjoying herself to her heart's content 
in conversing with them. 

" What's become of f Reginald and Edith to-day 1" 
inquired Glenroy, and at that moment the sound of 
young voices in the hall seemed to answer the ques- 
tion. Fingal pricked up his ears and wagged his 
tail, while his master sprang up and bounded away, 
followed by his favourite, who almost jumped over 
Inch Orran, in his eagerness to gain the door. 

"What are these children about?" demanded 
Glenroy angrily, as the uproar increased. 

" You onust come in — you sltall come in — don't let 
him go — hold him fast," resounded through the hall, 
and presently entered a youthful group, consisting of 
the three children of the house, all hanging round a 
fine, manly-looking boy, dripping wet, and evidently 
of a different stock from his more dainty -looking 
companions. 

"There is Eonald, papa," whispered Edith, as she 
ran up to her father. 

"Well, and what of that?" answered he in a dis- 
satisfied tone. " Do you see no greater strangers than 
him here, that you should be making all this noise ?" 

Edith blushed, and turned to Mrs. Malcolm ; then, 
but Avith still more timidity, went to Inch Orran, who, 
relaxing from his sternness, took the little hand ^lat 
was held out to him, and even bestowed a pat on the 
head, as if to make up for the rebuff she had met with 
from her father. Meanwhile the two boys had com- 



76 DESTINY. 

pelled their guest to approach to the table, quite 
unconscious of the haughty looks with which Glenro}'- 
regarded him. 

"Now you are our prisoner," cried jSTorman ; "so 
sit down, and you shall have something to eat, though 
you deserve to be fed on bread and water for attempt- 
ing to escape. Here, Fin, at him, if he offers to stir 
without my leave." 

"How your dirty shoes have stained my trousers," 
said Eeginald pettishly, as he rubbed some spots of 
mud from his white trousers; "I wish I hadn't gone 
near you; and I am so hot," putting his fingers 
through his hair ; and throwing himself at full length 
upon two chairs, he began to fan himself with a 
napkin. 

"So, Master Eonald, what has brought you here 
this bad day?" inquired the Chieftain, in no very 
encouraging accent. 

The boy coloured, as if he felt the rudeness of the 
inquiry ; then answered, " I came to return Norman's 
fishing-rod. " 

"Phoo; there could be no hurry in that," said the 
Chief, still more coldly. 

"I had jyromised to bring it to-day," said Eonald. 

"Pshaw, what signified that?" said Norman care- 
lessly; "you needn't have got yourself wet for a 
promise, if that was all." 

" I would rather have to svv-ini for my life than 
break my word," said Eonald warmly. 

The two boys burst into a fit of laughing. 



DESTINY. 77 

" On my conscience, but there's a great difference," 
said Benbowie, with a look of alarm. 

" Come, come, let us have no more nonsense," said 
Glenroy impatiently ; "and if you're for anything to 
eat, boys, make haste, for everybody's done." 

Eonald declined the ungracious invitation, and was 
retiring, when he was again seized by his two friends. 

"Oh, you know, you are our prisoner; so you 
needn't attempt to get away. You must stay, and 
you shall eat. So sit down." 

^^ Must and shall?" repeated Eonald, with a smile ; 
while his open countenance and fine intrepid air 
showed that he yielded more from good-humour than 
from false shame or fear ; for he wore 

" upon his forehead clear 

The freedom of a mountaineer ; 
A face with gladness overspread, 
And looks by human kindness bred." 

Altogether there was an air of noble, artless sim- 
plicity about the boy extremely prepossessing, and 
rendered still more striking when contrasted with the 
more artificial elegance of his companions, and the 
saucy capricious airs of superiority which marked the 
children of consequence. 

"Now, although you are a prisoner," said Norman, 
I shall allow you to choose for yourself. What will 
you have ? Here is a ham-pie which I can recommend. 
Papa, I told Barclay that I thought he had put rather 
too many truffles and morels in the last, and not 
enough of eggs; and, by-the-bye, plover's eggs are 



78 DESTINY. 

much the best. If you hke venison, Eonald, here is 
a hash, which is by far the best way of eating venison, 
at least in my opinion." 

"I'll take a mutton-chop," said Eonald, helping 
himself to what was next him. 

" A mutton-chop ! horril:)le ! — that's Fingal's dish ; 
but he wouldn't eat them now, for they are almost 
cold." 

"It is very good," said Eonald, eating with a 
hearty appetite. 

"Perhaps you choose a cold potato too," said 
Eeginald contemptuously, holding one up. 

"Warm ones are better," said Eonald, taking a 
potato; "but I don't care — it doesn't signify." 

" No ; to be sure, if people have no taste, it does 
7iot signify," said Norman, piqued at the indifference 
of his guest, and bent upon showing his power and 
consequence, especially before such queer-looking 
people as Inch Orran and his lady. 

" You are quite wet, Eonald," said Edith softly, as 
she put her hand on his arm. Then whisj^ered to her 
father, "Pray, papa, give Eonald a glass of wine." 

" Here's a glass of wine for you," said Glenroy, 
pouring it out ungraciously, and as if he wished to 
end the scene ; but Eonald decHned taking it. 

" Do take it, dear Eonald," said Edith. 

"We shall make him take it," said the young 
heir, whose hospitality was of the most peremptory 
nature. 

" If I were to take it for anybody, it would be for 



DESTINY. 79 

Edith," said Eonakl j "but I don't choose any wine, 
thank you." 

"Come, drink it oft', and go away and amuse your- 
selves somewhere else," cried Glenroy, in a very bad 
humour. 

Ronald instantly rose, but was again seized by his 
two tormentors. 

" Oh you shall not stir till you have drunk it to 
the last drop." 

And Norman, taking the glass of wine, would have 
forced it to his lips ; but he shook him off". 

" Nothing will make me drink wine," said he 
firmly. 

" Oh, you are a Turk, a Mussulman ! — a Turk, a 
Turk ! " shouted the two boys in derision. 

"He is an obstinate dog," said Glenroy; "let him 
alone." Eonald's colour rose, but he said nothing. 

"What is the reason you refuse to drink, my boy?" 
demanded Inch Orran, emerging from his corner, 
where he had been an attentive spectator of all that 
had passed. Ronald met his sharp inquisitive glance 
with the clear ingenuous expression of his full blue 
eye ; but he was silent for a moment, then said — 

"Because my father wishes me not to drink wine." 

"And why?" 

Ronald cast doAvn his eyes. 

" Oh, I know the reason now," whispered the two 
boys, nodding to each other with half-sui^pressed 
smiles, then whispering, "it's because they're so poor." 

Ronald instantly shook off his embarrassment, and 



80 DESTINY. 

looking up, said, " He can't afford to give us wine at 
home." 

" On my conscience, and that's the very reason you 
should get leave to take it when you can get it else- 
where," said Benbowie. 

"Well, well, we have had enough of this," cried 
Glenroy impatiently ; " go away, and divert yourselves 
elsewhere, children. — Good morning, Mr. Eonald." 

And Ronald, in spite of the forcible attempts of 
his friends to detain him, shook them off with ease, 
and darted away in the midst of a heavy rain. 

"That's the son of Jack Malcolm of Lochdhu?" 
said Inch Orran, fixing his inquisitorial eyes full 
upon Glenroy, who felt that an apology Avas due for 
this ill-timed meeting with the son of the man he de- 
tested, and he replied, "Yes. I'm sorry this should 
have happened. Inch Orran ; but the father is a 
tacksman of mine ; I couldn't be off letting him 
have a farm that joined to his own bit of property, 
and that boy has got a sort of footing here through 
the children; they're glad of companions near their 
own age." 

"How many children has Jack Malcolm f asked 
the old man abruptly. 

"About a dozen, I believe," said Glenroy con- 
temptuously. 

"And that is his eldest sonf 

" Yes ; and if he had been mine, and I had been 
in his father's situation, he shouldn't have been idling 
away his time at home. I gave them my advice, 



DESTINY. 81 

which was to send that boy to some cheap public 
school in England, Avhere he would learn something 
of the world, which is the thing for a boy that has 
his way to make in it. But they wouldn't hear of 
it ; said they would rather live upon bread and water 
than send any child of theirs to a great school. How- 
ever, they are not just at that, for they can at least 
give them kail and porridge;" with a laugh of derision. 
A spark shot from the corner of Inch Orran's eye 
as he turned abruptly away, muttering something 
between his teeth. The rain fell without intermis- 
sion for the rest of the day, which seemed of endless 
duration to both parties, and Glenroy was at last 
obliged to have recourse to Mrs. Macauley's much- 
despised musical powers to wile away the time. 



VOL. I. 



CHAPTER XIII. 

The following day cleared up, and there was a bright 
sun and a sweet blowing wind, and everything looked 
gay and everybody pleased except Inch Orran, who 
minded neither sun nor wind, and was alike insensible 
to the charms of nature and the influence of weather. 
Glenroy had invited a large party — that is, he had 
summoned all who were within call to do honour to 
his kinsman's visit — and the house (which indeed was 
seldom empty) had continued to fill during the whole 
morning with invited guests, as also with chance 
droppers -in of various descriptions. The Chief felt 
as if there was safety from his kinsman's ill-humour 
in the multitude that surrounded him ; his courage 
rose, his spirits revived, and he was himself again. 
But it was a transitory calm. The dinner-hour was 
drawing near, the guests Avere all assembled, when 
suddenly, borne on the breeze, came the distant 
neighing of a steed. Glenroy started and turned 
red ; another and another loud and long and shrill 
and joyful burst ; it was the well-known happy neigh 
of Amailye, announcing the ajiproach of Mr. Duncan 
M'Dow ! Had the Castle possessed a drawbridge it 



DESTINY. 83 

certainly would have been raised on the instant, but 
as there were neither javelin-men nor moat to oppose 
him, the minister rode boldly on, arrayed as usual 
in his large woolly greatcoat and red worsted com- 
forter. 

Mrs. Malcolm caught the sovgh of his name, and 
thereupon thought proper to address Glenroy. 

" Is that the Mr. M'Dovv that was so good as to 
call one day at Inch Orran? What an uncommon 
pleasant, sensible, well-informed man he is ! I was 
really very much pleased with him; he's so polite 
and well-bred, and has so much to say ; he seems a 
very superior man ; it must be a great advantage to 
have such a man for a clergyman, and I'm sure you 
have great credit in your choice, for there's really 
something so very — ahem — a — so uncommonly — a — 
a — so much of the gentleman about him." 

Glenroy disdained to reply. 

Here the announcement of Mr. M'Dow put a stop 
to the remarks, and presently his heavy foot announced 
itself. Although there was a large assemblage of ladies 
and gentlemen present, Mr. M'Dow as usual made a 
point of grappling with each individually, right and 
left, here and there, cross hands and down backs, in 
the most indefatigable manner. Then fastening upon 
his host, he burst out with one of his avant courier 
roars of laughter. 

" Well, Glenroy, there's one thing, I'm sure, you'll 
not say of me, as was said of a poor friend of mine, 
who was thought rather neglectful of his parish in 



84 DESTINY, 

the visiting way, and something too metapheesical in 
his discoorses from his pulpit; it was really very 
neatly said — ho, hoch, how — that he was a most 
wonderful man, for he was invisible six days in the 
week, and incomprehensible on the seventh ; very 
clever, rather severe, to be sure, but it was really 
just the truth — how, how, ho, hoch." 

Glenroy was not like Hamlet. He could have 
used daggers, but he could not speak them. He did 
not excel in repartSe at any time, for, when provoked, 
he was instantly in a passion ; and not daring to give 
scope to it in the present instance, all he could do 
was to dart a furious glance at the intruder, and turn 
on his heel. But heel or toe, it was all one to the 
minister, who was quite insensible to all rebuffs, 
especially as he met with a warm reception from such 
of the party as, being more remote and inaccessible 
in their dwellings, and having nothing to say as to 
the augmentation, were not favoured with so much of 
his company in their own houses. 

And as one person of easy manners — no matter 
how vulgar — is always acceptable to the guests, what- 
ever he may be to the host, Mr. M'Dow's bad jokes 
and hearty laugh were very palatable to some of the 
party, who found them much more relishing than the 
overbearing pomp of Glenroy, or the morose silence 
of Inch Orran. Mr. M'Dow, therefore, was very soon 
riding on the rigging of his own good spirits ; and 
peal upon peal, roar upon roar, followed in quick 
succession, and raised many an echo from the lower 



DESTINY. 85 

orders of the company. His staying to dinner was a 
matter of course. In the first flush of his gratified 
feelings, at having got the man of his choice — a moder- 
ate man, an honest fellow, and also pleased Avith the 
convivial habits and jolly manners, which he saw 
would be no restraint on his own, Glenroy had in a 
rash moment given him a general invitation to his 
house, which the minister had not been slack in avail- 
ing himself of, particularly if there was anything 
going on that promised better cheer or more amuse- 
ment than common. As surely, therefore, as Glenroy 
had any new arrivals of consequence, or a larger or 
more ceremonious party than usual, or an extraordi- 
nary influx of company, or any strangers of great dis- 
tinction, he might depend upon Mr. M'Dow's dropping 
in. It was quite wonderful how and where he acquired 
such speedy and certain intelligence ; for in a remote 
and thinly-peopled country, where dwellings were few 
and far between, it could neither be by seeing nor 
hearing nor smelling. But so it was ; no wild Indian 
could have tracked his prey with greater certainty 
and finesse than Mr. M'Dow did a good dinner; 
indeed, nothing could surpass the accuracy and suc- 
cess with which he followed the trail of a jolly party, 
or what he termed " an innocent recreation." 

Glenroy having surmounted the first shock of his 
appearance, though still boiling with wrath against 
him, resolved to make it plain that his company was 
not expected at dinner, and therefore said, in his 
stateliest manner, "You are too late for luncheon, 



86 DESTINY. 

Mr. M'Dow ; but if jou wish for any refreshment, I 
shall order some to the eating-room for you." 

" You are really extremely kind and considerate, 
Glenroj^," replied his guest, with much hearty warmth 
of manner ; " but it is quite unnecessary in you to put 
yourseK to that trouble, as I had a snack at your 
friend Captain Malcolm's ; and indeed I was pressed 
to stay still there, which I would have done, if I had 
not previously intended myself the honour of taking 
my pot-luck with you, as you were so very polite as to 
assure me of being always welcome ; a piece of kind- 
ness and hospitality which I am sure I shall never 
forget. " 

"That's just as it should be," remarked a laird 
who had three ferries between him and Mr. M'Dow. 
"There ought always to be an open door to the 
minister." 

"It's a pleasant thing to see the heritors and 
ministers on a friendly footing," said another, whose 
teinds were valued and exhausted. 

" In that respect, I have really reason to be proud," 
said Mr. M'Dow, rapping his mull with an air of 
modest importance; "for ever since my induction, I 
have met with uncommon attention and hospitality, 
not only from my respected pawtron here, but likewise 
from the very gentlemen who thought proper to 
oppose the presentation. There's Captain Malcolm, 
for instance, he was very keen against me ; more so, 
indeed, than what many men in my situation would 
have overlooked. But he's a little of the high-flier : 



DESTINY. 87 

the very — hem — the unco gude — hoch, hoch, how ! 
one o' your gospellers, in short ; what one of my 
worthy brethren calls your saunts — hoch, hoch, ho ! 
but I believe he is a well-meaning man for all that, 
so I made a point of showing him that I bore no ill- 
will against him, and that I had no objections Avhat- 
ever to be on a friendly footing with him," with 
another long, self-sufficient pinch of snuff. 

" He's a very honest man, Captain Malcolm," said 
a good-natured bluff laird ; " and has as fine a family 
as I ever saw, and as Avell brought up, too. There's 
not a prettier girl in all the shire than Lucy Mal- 
colm ; and he'll be a lucky man that gets her for his 
wife." 

Mr. M'Dow now addressed Inch Orran. " I was 
just saying, sir, that I had the plecshure this forenoon 
of paying my respects to a very worthy gentleman, a 
clansman, and, I believe, a relation of yours — Captain 
John Malcolm." A slight, stiff bend from Inch Orran 
was the only reply; but Mr. M'Dow went on. "My 
principal object in calling on him to-day was, that I 
wished particularly to see a set of farm offices which 
I heard he had lately built, and also some improve- 
ments which he had made upon his house ; and I 
thought I might pick up some useful hints from them, 
to lay before my excellent pawtron here, especially 
in respect of a byre. There's nothing in my remem- 
brance that there's been greater improvements in than 
in byres. However, I must say I was disappointed ; 
he has made no addition of any signification to the 



88 DESTINY, 

house; and the offices are really upon a very moderate 
scale — very much so; extremely moderate, indeed." 

" I understood, sir, moderation had been a favour- 
ite virtue of yours," said Inch Orran drily. 

" Ay — yes — to be sure, in some things — indeed in 
most things, I may say; moderation is the safest 
coorse. Moderation will never lead a man far wrong, 
Inch Orran." 

" Yes, sir, it leads a man far wrong, if it keeps him 
from doing his duty," returned Inch Orran. 

" There I quite agree with you. Inch Orran — there 
can be no doubt of that. But, in respect of the offices 
— it's really my unprejudiced opinion, that when a 
man has his hand in the mortar tub, a little money, 
more or less, is ill saved, when the question is between 
a good, handsome, complete building, and a poor, 
paltry, insignificant thing. I used the freedom to say 
something of that sort to the Captain himself, but 
he only laughed and shook his head, and said he had 
eight strong reasons against extravagance — pointing 
to his children. ' Ay, to be sure, there's no arguing 
against such facts as these, Captain,' says I ; ' they're 
the next thing to the Ten Commandments' — hoch, hoch, 
hoch ! — how, ho ! " Here, strong in conscious freedom, 
Mr. M'Dow roared and laughed, rapped upon his mull, 
drew in about a quarter of a pound of snufF, and dis- 
played all the extent of a Pulicat handkerchief. 

At dinner things were, if possible, still worse. 
The manse and the byre, to be sure, were forgot, 
while he revelled amidst a profusion of fish, flesh, 



DESTINY. 89 

fowl, and game of every description, with the ardour 
of a man v>ho, with all the inclination, had not the 
means of faring sumptuously every day. The rest 
of the party ate, drank, talked, and disputed in the 
usual manner, all save Inch Orran, who ate little, 
drank none, and preserved a profound silence, except 
when now and then provoked to utter some sharp 
and biting sarcasm. 



CHAPTER XIV. 

There is something very appalling in the silence that 
precedes a storm. At such a time the imagination 
and the conscience are left to the full and undisturbed 
exercise of their powers; and, however vague and 
undefined may be their operations, they nevertheless 
continue to oppress us with that deadliest of all fears 
— "the fear of something yet to come." 

It was probably this instinctive dread which had 
made Glenroy hitherto shun every approach to a Ute- 
a-tUe with his silent guest; but as the hour of his 
departure drew near, he began to muster his courage, 
and to consider that it was due to himself to come to 
some sort of understanding with the old man, as to 
the strange bearing he had held ever since his arrival. 
It was impossible he could have met with any real 
ground of offence, for everything had been done to 
grace his visit and gain his good-will ; but something 
might have occurred which he Avas not aware of, or 
there might have been some imaginary failure that 
had given umbrage, and a few words of explanation 
might set all to rights. For this purpose, therefore, 
Glenroy sought a private interview with his guest, 



DESTINY. 9 1 

the morning of his departure, and began in the usual 
terms, by expressing his regret at the prospect of los- 
ing him so soon, mingled with gentle upbraidings at 
the shortness of his stay, hopes of his speedy return, 
and of being favoured Avith a longer visit. Then Inch 
Orran spoke, and he said very deliberately, 

" Sir, this is my first visit, and it will be my last." 

This was coming to the point with a vengeance. 
Glenroy was startled, l^ut draAving himself up he 
said, "I flatter myself. Inch Orran, you have found 
nothing wanting on my part to make your stay here 
pleasant?" 

"Have I made any complaint, sir?" was the true 
Scottish answer. 

" I should be sorry if you, or any man, had any- 
thing to complain of in my house," replied the Chief- 
tain proudly. 

Inch Orran smiled — that is, he uncurled his little 
piu"se-mouth for the first time since his arrival ; but 
it was a scornful, ill-omened smile. 

" I — I'm at a loss to understand you, Inch Orran — 
'pon my soul I am. I am used to speak my mind to 
every man, and I expect every man to do the same 
to me," said Glenroy, waxing warm. 

"I have no objection to speak my mind to you, 
sir," said Inch Orran, with a horrid gleam of his little 
vindictive eye ; " but are you quite sure you have 
none to hear if?" 

"I don't know why I should," returned the Chief, 
affecting great coolness, to conceal the abhorrence 



92 DESTINY. 

which all men, women, and children, feel at that 
awful and portentous threat, whether from friend or 
foe, of speaking their mind. It is then " conscience 
makes cowards of us all," as it did of Glenroy, who, 
in spite of the high opinion he had of himself, felt an 
instinctive dread at the idea of Inch Orran speaking 
his mind, either to him or of him. And, indeed, 
speaking the mind is generally understood to mean 
neither more nor less than that the speaker means 
to be most thoroughly disagreeable and abusive. 

There was, however, no escaping Inch Orran's 
mind, or rather matter, as he looked exactly hke a 
tiger cat who had got his claw stuck hard and fast in 
his prey, and was in no hurry to despatch it. 

" Then, sir, on what particular point is it that you 
wish me to speak my mind^" demanded he, with 
the firmness of a rock. This was much too precise 
for Glenroy, Avho w^ould rather have kept in vague 
generals than have been brought to particular points, 
and who, moreover, had expected the questions to be 
all on his side, the answers on the other. 

"I — don't think — in — a — I, in short, I — don't 
think you seem to have been pleased with something 
or another. Inch Orran 1" said Glenroy, with some 
awkward hesitation. 

"I don't say that I have, sir." 
" Then, sir, I wish you would have the goodness 
to say what it is you complain of ; have you met with 
anything to offend you in me or any of my family?" 
demanded the Chief, strong in conscious importance. 



DESTINY. 93 

Inch Orran was silent for a moment, then answered 
in the most decided manner, "I have, sir." 

" I'm sorry to hear it, Inch Orran ; very sorry in- 
deed that you or anybody else should have met with 
anything unpleasant in my house, or should consider 
yourself as having been ill-used by me or any of my 
family." 

" Sir, you mistake me ; I never said I had been ill- 
used." 

"I beg pardon ; but I certainly understood you to 
say so, Inch Orran." 

" Then, sir, you wi/'.sunderstood me." 

" I'm happy to hear it, Inch Orran ; for I assure 
you I should have been very sorry if any misunder- 
standing had taken place between us ; for there are 
few men for whom I entertain a higher respect than 
I do for you." 

"Excuse me, sir, there is a misunderstanding." 

" Sir," said the Chief, " I am really at a loss to under- 
stand you. If I have failed in any attentions " 

"No want of attention, sir," in a tone as much as 
to say, "Kather too much of it." 

" Has there been anything in any of the company 
to offend you. Inch Orran 1" 

" Much !" pronounced in a most emphatic manner ; 
then, after a little pause, " Everything, and in all of 
them, sir." 

" Indeed ! upon my soul, sir, you are ill to please ! 
You have met with some of the first gentlemen in the 
county, I can tell you, whatever you may think." 



94 DESTINY. 

Again his mouth was contemptuously curled, while 
the Chief took a turn up and down the room to cool 
himself; he then stopped, and having gulped down 
his anger, said, "Come, come, Inch Orran, I see how 
it is; you are a sober man yourself, and you have 
been a little scandalised at seeing some of my friends 
take their glass so freely ; but every country has its 
own customs, you know, and I didn't suppose you ex- 
pected to find a company of hermits in the Highlands 
of Scotland." ' 

"Sir, if by hermits you mean anchorites or holy 
hypocrites, I despise them as much as you do ; but I 
was not prepared to "witness such excesses in eating 
and drinking." 

" Excesses ! that's a very strong expression ! I 
have always been used to keep a full table, and to 
make my friends welcome to it; people must live 
according to their station ; my style of living is per- 
haps different from what you have been accustomed 
to." 

"Very different, sir," quickly interrupted the old 
man ; " my life, sir, has been a life of labour, of 
frugality, of abstinence. Your life, sir, is one con- 
tinued idle, extravagant, intemperate soss." 

"Anything else, sir?" demanded Glenroy, boiling 
with indignation. 

"There is something else, sir." 

" Then you had better go on, sir ; much better say 
all you have to say; you have already found fault 
with the company I keep, and the style I live in." 



DESTINY. 95 

" Sir, you mistake ; I find no fault, I only speak 
my mind." 

" Call it what you please, sir ; you object to my 
friends and my table." 

"Excuse me again, sir. I object to neither. I 
have sat at the one, and associated with the other, 
though they were both highly offensive to me." 

. "And I can tell you, sir, your behaviour has been 
no less offensive to me and my friends. By heaven, 
there is not another man on the face of the earth I 
would have suffered to stay in my house, and sit at my 
table for three days without opening his lips. Sir, let 
me tell you such behaviour is more like that of a spy 
than anything else." And Glenroy's passion was now 
at its height. 

"Exactly, sir," said his antagonist, pursing up his 
mouth with an air of sovereign contempt. " I came 
to your house not as a babbler and winebibber ; but 
as a noter and observer, and I have accomplished my 
purpose. " 

By a violent effort Glenroy regained his temper, 
and, seeing all was at hazard, he resolved to humour 
the old man, and let him go his way in peace ; he 
therefore said with a laugh, " Well, well, Inch Orran, 
you've hardly dealt fairly by us, considering that we 
were met to celebrate your arrival, and drink to the 
Laird of Inch Orran. Perhaps we did exceed a little 
last night; but, since that's all, we shall part good 
friends, I hope." 

" No, sir ; it is not all." 



96 DESTINY. 

" What else offended you, sir 1 The boys have been 
rather noisy, perhaps; but you know boys will be boys." 

" Noisy and disagreeable all boys are," replied Inch 
Orran ; " but epicures and puppies all boys are 7wf. 
Sir, your son is an epicure, and I look upon an epicure 
as little better than a drunkard. I have known 
drunkards, sir — that is, men who what you call liked 
their glass (degraded as they Avere to a level with the 
brutes) — who still retained some manly feelings ; but 
I never knew an epicure who cared for any one thing 
on the face of the earth but his own inside." 

Glenroy had stood the attack upon himself, his 
friends, and his table, with wonderful equanimity; 
but this invective against his son and heir, the very 
apple of his eye, was too much for him ; and, uttering 
an oath, he stalked away to the window. But there 
lay full disclosed the seat of Inch Orran — the family 
seat! — its venerable towers, its green uplands, its 
noble woods, all reflected on the bosom of the clear 
waters. 

" There's the respect " that made him pause ; and 
after a severe struggle, he recovered himself and said, 
"I'm sorry. Inch Orran, you should have taken up 
such a prejudice against Norman; for, although I 
say it, there is not a finer or more manly boy in the 
country than he is. And as for his eating, if he is a 
little nice, it's all owing to that English dominie, who, 
by Jove, beats all for gormandising that ever I met 
with. I've a good mind to give him his dismissal 
this very day." 



DESTINY. 97 

" As to that, sir, you may take your own time, for 
it is now too late. Epicurism is a vice that never cures. 
Yom- son, sir, is an epicure, and an epicure he will re- 
main, in spite of your teeth." 

Here Glenroy could scaircely refrain from seizing 
the old man by the nape of the neck, and whirling 
him out at the window, which stood most invitingly 
open. While he stood irresolute how to testify his 
fury and contempt, Inch Orran proceeded : 

"Now, sir, I have spoken my mind to you, and I 
have done it with deliberation. I have spent nearly 
three days, sir, under your roof, in the midst, I may 
say, of a human hog-sty, for the purpose of studying 
your son, and the result of my observations is, that 
he is an epicure. Allow me, sir," as Glenroy was 
about to interrupt him ; " I am aware, sir, that you 
look forward to your son succeeding to my estate — 
sir, I beg I may not be interrupted — the expectation 
is perfectly natural, and in your situation I should 
probably have done the same. The wish to regain the 
inheritance of your forefathers is also luiblamable; 
I find no fault with it." 

Glenroy brightened up a little, and began to breathe 
more easily. 

" But, sir, I think it right and proper to undeceive 
you. Your son will never inherit a foot of my land, 
or a farthing of my money." 

Glenroy was absolutely dumb Avith rage and aston- 
ishment ; the old man therefore proceeded : "But, sir, 
you have another child, who, although of the wrong 

VOL. I. II D. 



98 DESTINY. 

sex, promises fair. She is a quiet, inoffensive, tem- 
perate creature, wliich is all that can be expected of 
a female. My intention, therefore, is to settle the 
property upon her and her heirs-male." 

" This is a most extraordinary proceeding," cried 
Glenroy, interrupting him, as he suddenly recovered 
from the shock he had sustained; "upon my soul, I 
don't know what I am about. It is a proposal so 
wholly unexpected, so very unnatural and improper, 
to pass by the boy for no reason whatever. I, sir — I 
can't possibly agree to such a thing." 

And he walked hastily up and down in great agita- 
tion, while the old man sat looking as demure as a 
cat. "Sir," continued he, "I don't deprive you of 
your son, or your son of anything he has any right 
to; so neither you nor he has any business to say 
buff or sty in the matter. My intention, sir, is to 
mend the breed, which has degenerated, and is still 
degenerating." 

Bursting with half-restrained rage, Glenroy uttered 
some unintelligible ejaculations, and allowed his kins- 
man to go on. 

"Sir, the one to mend a degenerate breed is he 
who speaks the truth, who keeps his word, who 
honours his parents, who is no gormandiser, who 
minds neither wind nor weather, and Avho has been 
born and bred in wholesome poverty. Such a one is 
the lad I saw scorned and browbeat at your table ; 
and provided he, Konald Malcolm, will, at a proper 
age, consent to take your daughter to wife, and she 



DESTINY. 99 

has sense enough to accede to the j^roposal, the pro- 
perty shall be settled upon their heirs-male ; on the 
other hand, should he refuse " 

But here an oath burst from Glenroy's lips Hke a 
thunderbolt, and the flood-gates of his long-repressed 
fury were opened — loud and fierce was the torrent 
that broke loose ; but the old man sat and bore it all 
with the most perfect composure, and even seemed as 
if he enjoyed the storm he had raised. 

At that moment a servant entered to say that the 
boat was ready, and the tide answered. Inch Orran 
rose. 

"Time and tide will no man bide, Glenroy. I 
have now spoken my mind to you, and I shall leave 
you to deliberate on my proposal." 

" I would rather see any daughter of mine in her 
cofiin than the wife of any beggarly tacksman's son," 
cried Glenroy, in a perfect foam. " I have other views 
for my daughter, and I will dispose of her as I think 
proper." 

"Quite right, sir, if you can." 

" Sir, I both can and u-ill." 

" You are a lucky man, sir, it seems. I have no 
more to say." 

"Sir, I have something to say to you. This 
behaviour of yours is not to be borne ! " 

"That is unfortunate, sir, for I am no duellist. I 
wish you good morning," was the cool reply ; so, dis- 
regarding all remonstrances. Inch Orran walked off; 
and was joined by his lady and Simon. 



CHAPTER XV. 

Opposition whs. a thing Glenroy was little accustomed 
to at any time ; but to be thus bearded and got the 
better of in his own house, in the very heart of his 
friends, guests, and countrymen, was an indignity he 
could not away with : for a time he gave full play to 
his passions, and like a very dragon of old, breathed 
fire and fury all around. But as what is violent is 
never lasting, he soon cooled down to his usual tem- 
perature, and being of a sanguine disposition, he even 
began to look upon what had passed as a sort of bad 
joke, or ill-natured whim of the old man's, which would 
go no farther, and would not be followed by any bad 
consequences. The calm, however, was of short dura- 
tion. The first intelligence he heard was that Ronald 
Malcolm had been invited to Inch Orran, and was 
actually living there in high favour with his kinsman. 
This went so far beyond Glenroy 's worst anticipa- 
tions that he disdained to be in a passion about it. 
He was perfectly cool and composed, as everybody 
might see, only his colour was considerably higher 
than usual ; and though he hummed a song, it was 
much out of tune, and when he laughed very heartily 



DESTINY. 101 

nobody knew very well what it was at. In short, he 
had all the gaiety and indifference which people com- 
monly have -when very much agitated and discom- 
posed. It was only by fits and starts that anything 
like ill -temper showed itseK ; but upon his son, as 
usual, choosing the richest dishes at table, he was for 
the first time in his life checked with an angry excla- 
mation and an oath, followed with, "And I'll be 
hanged if I'll suffer any epicures in my house. I 
hate an epicure, and you shall not be an epicure, sir. 
You shall live upon porridge and mutton as I did, or, 
by Jove ! you shall starve." 

This threat was, of course, null and void the very 
next day, when the young Chief was to be seen, as usual, 
picking his way amongst the intricacies of the luxurious 
board ; but that day had brought new matter to light 
which made it unnecessary for Glenroy either to sing 
out of tune, or laugh out of time, or contradict his son, 
or do anything out of the common course of nature. It 
was reported that Konald Malcolm, so far from having 
been invited to Inch Orran, had been sent there by 
his father to try to bring about a reconciliation ; that 
instead of that, he had met with a very bad recep- 
tion, and been even turned from the house late one 
stormy night, when he had lost himself amongst the 
hills, and had been glad to take refuge in the shieling 
of Duncan Macrae, the hind on Benvalloch, from 
whom the deponent had his information. 

Glenroy was not a malignant man, but different 
passions often lead to the same result. He was a 



102 DESTINY. 

proud and a selfish man; but his pride was called 
family pride, and his selfishness natural aftection ; 
and both these much-admired qualities operated pre- 
cisely as envy and malice Avould have done. 

His pride had been galled and his self-love wounded 
at the thoughts of his poor despised kinsman's son 
being preferred to his; and now his heart uncon- 
sciously exulted in the downfall of his hopes, and he 
felt ready to patronise and befriend him in any way, 
except that of becoming Laird of Inch Orran. Flushed 
with his own generous feelings, he resolved to pay a 
visit to the family at Lochdhu, and offer him his advice 
and assistance in the disposal of Eonald. Perhaps a 
little curiosity to hear a true account of Ronald's visit 
to Inch Orran mingled with the motives, for he had 
heard so many various statements as to what had 
passed between the old man and his young kinsman, 
that he was at a loss what to believe. In one parti- 
cular, however, they all agreed, and that was the 
main point, that a violent quarrel had taken place ; 
but whether Eonald had left the house in dudgeon, 
or been turned from it in disgrace, had not been 
clearly ascertained. Whichever it was, it mattered 
little to Glenroy ; the result would be the same, and 
the restoration of his son would follow, as a matter 
of course ; he therefore flattered himself that it was 
simply the desire to arrive at the truth which lay at 
the bottom of his curiosity. Accordingly, one fine 
summer's day he set forth on his ride. 

Lochdhu was as ugly as any Highland place can 



DESTINY. 103 

be ; but there was a wild grandeur in its dark moun- 
tains and roaring streams and trackless heaths, and 
a varying interest in the lights and shadows of its 
stormy firth, which atoned for the want of more 
florid beauties. There was perfect neatness, and 
even some embellishment, around the house ; but the 
shrubs were yet in their infancy, and the flowers 
were not so luxmiant as in brighter climes, and be- 
neath more costly culture. 

As the Chief drew near, he descried Captain and 
Mrs. Malcolm, with their children, on the little lawn 
before the house, Avhich Avas strewn with coils of new- 
mown hay. Mrs. Malcolm, though no longer young, 
still bore a fair and youthful aspect, and seemed like 
the elder sister of the sweet, Madonna-looking girl, 
the senior of the family, who sat by her side. Cap- 
tain Malcolm had been a very handsome man, but 
the hardships of Avar and varieties of climate had 
impaired his looks as Avell as health. What he had 
been Avas noAV pictured in young Eonald — 

" By his ingenuous beauty, by the gleam 
Of his fair eyes, by his capacious brow, 
By all the gi'aces with which nature's hand 
Had bounteously array'd him." 

The younger cliildren looked healtliful and bright 
as opening buds and blossoms. 

Mrs. Malcolm and her daughters Avere seated Avith 
a book and their Avork. Captain Malcolm and the 
bigger boys Avere turning over the hay, and the little 
ones Avere frolickinu about. 



104 DESTINY. 

But Glenroy saw no beauty in this family picture 
on which his eye could long dwell ; for he despised 
women, and never was amused with any children but 
his own. The first brief salutations over, he there- 
fore walked apart with his host, expatiating upon 
hay-mowing, making, stacking, etc., and describing 
the magnificent manner in which these operations 
were j^erformed on his model of a farm. He then 
entered upon the subject uppermost in his mind, by 
inquiring of Captain Malcolm if he had seen Inch 
Orran since his arrival in the country. A simple 
negative was all the reply. 

"Your son would tell you he had met him at my 
house," said Glenroy, with some hesitation. 

"Konald was then ignorant who he was; but I 
suspect he was indebted to your good offices upon 
that occasion." 

Glenroy coloured, and stammered out something 
in the way of denial. 

"I am very sensible of your kind intentions," said 
Captain Malcolm, "although " 

"Not at all, not at all," interrupted Glenroy 
hurriedly. " I did not — that is to say, I — I — " 

" You did all you could, I believe, Glenroy," said 
his kinsman ; " but all would not do." 

" I assure you — you give me more credit — than I 
am at all — entitled to," said the Chieftain, in increas- 
ing confusion. 

"No, no," cried Captain Malcolm. "The fact 
speaks for itself; it could only have been to your 



DESTINY. 105 

friendly offices Eonakl owed his invitation, for no 
sooner had Incli Orran returned from his visit to you, 
than he sent for him to his house." 

"And he went, of course?" inquired Glenroy, 
eager to pass over any more undue compliments. 

"Yes, he did; his mother and I saw no reason 
against it ; on the contrary, we were both in hopes it 
might lead the way to a reconciliation, and I trust 
we were actuated by something better than mere 
worldly motives in wishing it, though, no doubt, these 
had their influence too ; but whether as Christians or 
as mere seK-interested parents, we certainly did most 
earnestly desire it; it has, however, been otherwise 
appointed, and we are satisfied." 

"It was reported," said Glenroy, "that your son 
had been taken into high favour ; was there then no 
foundation for that?" 

" He was well received and kindly treated," said 
Captain Malcolm ; " but " 

"But it didn't last?" cried Glenroy, with some- 
thing of triumph in his tone ; "I could have told him 
that, for, between ourselves, the man's as mad as a 
March hare. But how came Ronald to quarrel with 
him, for at one time he seemed to have got into his 
good graces?" 

"Thanks to you for that, Glenroy," said Captain 
Malcolm; "and he might perhaps have been there 
still if he had not preferred his parents to a fortune. 
It was such a strange, unnatural proposal the old man 
made him, that I can only account for it on the plea 



106 DESTINY. 

of insanity : he kept Eonald for three days, showed 
him all his property, told him of all his wealth, and 
then' offered to adopt him, to make him his heir, and 
settle his whole fortune upon him, on condition of 
his renouncing all intercourse with his own family ! " 

" Ay, that's just of a piece with his threatening to 
disinherit Norman for asking for the back of a moor- 
fowl one day at dinner ; the man's certainly mad ! 
And what did your son say to that ? " 

"Few boys, I believe, would have been base and 
sordid enough to have yielded to the temjjtation, but 
some of them might have listened to it more calmly ; 
instead of Avhich, Eonald, whose temper and feelings 
are warm, was so indignant that he instantly left the 
house, and set out to walk twenty miles in a dark 
stormy night." 

"He should have come to me," cried Glenroy 
warmly ; " my house was all in the way, and I would 
have made him welcome at any hour of the night ; 
for, I assure you, I approve highly of his behaviour ; 
he did just what he ought to have done ; it gives me 
a very good ojjinion of your son, it does, indeed— very 
good !" 

This was uttered with great emphasis, and as if his 
encomium would be the making of Eonald's fortune. 

" We have indeed reason to thank God that he is 
deserving of our afi'ection," said Captain Malcolm, 
with emotion. 

"Yes, he seems really a promising boy, and he 
acted in that matter just as he ought to have done ; 



DESTINY. 107 

to be sure, it would have been very bad if he had 
done otherwise. And, by-the-bye, what are you going 
to make of him ? Is it not full time you were think- 
ing of that?" 

"I have had many an anxious thought on that 
subject," said Captain Malcolm, with a sigh. 

"Ay, to be sure, it's no joke setting out a lad in 
the world, now every profession is so overstocked; 
Ijut it's time Ronald should learn something." 

" I trust he has learnt something, and is every day 
learning more," said his father. 

" Oh, I have no doubt you have done all you could 
for him," said the Chief slightingly; "but we all 
know there are few gentlemen fit to educate their 
sons." 

" Yet I believe it is from their parents that children 
receive by far the most important part of their educa- 
tion,"^ replied Captain Malcolm. 

" The deuce you do ! then I for one can assure you, 
I take no sort of charge of my son's education. I pay 
four hundred a'^year, which I think a pretty fair allow- 
ance for a dominie, and I should think it rather hard 
after that if I was expected to educate him myself !" 

Captain Malcolm smiled, perhaps at the ostentation 
with which this was uttered, then replied, "Yet his 
habits and opinions will be much more influenced by 
you than by his tutor, and these are what I consider 
as the most important parts of education." 

"Do you so? then education must be a very easy 
^ See Mrs. Barbauld's admirable Essay on Education. 



108 DESTINY. 

matter with you, it seems ; if that were all, I might 
have saved my four hundred a year. Habits and 
opinions ! I really never happened to hear of boys' 
habits and opinions. I should like to know what 
sort of things their habits and opinions are ! " 

Captain Malcolm was quite accustomed to hear his 
Chief talk "high nonsense," loud, arrogant, overbear- 
ing nonsense, the most insufferable of all the varieties 
of nonsense, and he had the merit of ahvays answer- 
ing him as calmly as though he had been conversing 
with Plato himself. 

" The actions of each day and hour are what form 
the habits," he replied, " and the taste and affections 
are what influence the opinions ; both combined, are 
Avhat insensibly form the character. Ronald is defi- 
cient in many things, but I trust he has imbibed good 
principles. I am sure he possesses kindly affections ; 
he is not wanting in solid learning, and his habits are 
those of a hardy Highland boy, who minds neither 
wind nor weather, hunger nor thirst, and who can 
climb the rock, swim the water, and sleep among the 
heather. " 

" My good sir, any herd's son in the country can 
do all that," said Glenroy contemptuously. "But 
that's nothing to the purpose ; we were talking of 
your son's education, which is quite a different thing. 
There's my own boy ! although I say it, I don't believe 
there's a boy in the kingdom farther advanced in his 
education than he is." 

" Those who can afford to purchase instruction for 



DESTINY. 109 

their children are in the right to do it," said Captain 
Malcobn mildly; "for a liberal education is a great 
advantage ; but those who cannot, ought to be satis- 
fied with giving their children a virtuous and a useful 
one. You and I, Glenroy, are difTerently circum- 
stanced ; wealth educates your son, but poverty must 
train mine, and the best education a poor man can 
give his son is to make him know and feel betimes 
that he is the son of a poor man." 

"That's all very true," said Glenroy; "but what 
are you to make of him ? WTiat would you think of 
making a preacher of him 1 I could be of some use to 
you there ; I have a good deal of patronage of my 
own, as well as something to say in other quarters." 

" I thank you, but Eonald's lient does not lie that 
way, and no motive of worldly interest will ever 
prompt me to urge any son of mine to enter on so 
sacred a vocation. Ronald has decided for the sea." 

" A very good, sensible choice," cried the Chief, 
"just the very thing for him, and the sooner he goes 
the better; 'learn young learn fair,' is, you know, a 
good old saying." 

"He will go, I expect, next year," said Captain 
Malcolm. " A cousin of his mother's, Captain Stanley, 
a worthy man, and gallant officer, has offered Eonald 
a berth in his ship." 

" Ah ! that's very well, but you ought to send him 
in the meantime to a public school ; it's a great ad- 
vantage for a boy who has his way to push in the 
world to have had some training before he begins, and 



110 DESTINY. 

he'll learn more of the world in one year at a great 
public school than he will do all his life at home." 

" I am no friend to a premature knowledge of the 
world ; it comes soon enough to most of us. I greatly 
prefer the safety which results from good principles 
and virtuous habits, to that purchased by an early 
knowledge of vice." 

" Most of our great men, however, have been edu- 
cated at public schools," continued Glenroy. 

" That is an opinion which has been completely 
refuted,"^ said Captain Malcolm; "and even were it 
othenvise, I should prefer having my son a good man, 
rather than a great one." 

" Oh ay, that's fine romantic talking," said Glenroy 
contemptuously," but it's a great deal too fine for me ; 
I have no notion of your romantic schemes." 

"Then we are agreed," said Captain Malcolm, with 
a smile ; " for I too think the plainer and simpler the 
system of education, especially for the children of a 
poor man, so much the better ; however, I thank you 
from my heart for the interest you take in Eonald ; if 
you knew him better, I flatter myself you would not 
find him so deficient as you suppose. He has his 
faults, but he has many a hard lesson yet to learn 
before the system of moral discipline will be com- 
pleted. I trust God will order all for the best, and 
when the time comes, to His care I will with confi- 
dence commit his future destiny." 

" Well, I Iwpe it may answer, for Eonald's a good 
^ See Edinhurgh Review. 



DESTINY. 1 1 1 

boy, and I shall ahvaj's be ready to assist him ;" and 
with a shake of the hand to his kinsman, and a 
hurried adieu to the rest of the family, Glenroy re- 
turned home, satisfied that he had nothing to fear 
from Ronald's rivalship. 



CHAPTER XVI. 

The goofl-natured laird's recommendation of Ijucy 
Malcolm had not been thrown away upon Mr. M'Dow, 
and from that time he had been very frequent in his 
visits at Lochdhu, much more so, indeed, than was at 
all agreeable to any member of the family, for between 
his mind and theirs there was a gulf which seemed 
impassable. But, never dreaming that he could pre- 
sume to cast his eyes upon their fair sweet Lucy, the 
parents ascribed his frequent visitations to better 
motives, and flattered themselves that, faintly as their 
own light shone, it might yet prove the means of 
enlightening the still more darkened steps of Mr. 
M'Dow. He seemed to them to be kind-hearted and 
well-meaning in his own coarse way; at least so 
Captain and Mrs. Malcolm construed the many 
attentions he was now in the habit of paying them, 
together with the softened tone of his conversation at 
times, and the anxiety he evinced to make himself 
useful and agreeable to the young people. At one 
time he would amble over on the back of Amailye, 
his huge pockets filled to the brim with nuts from his 
own premises, "most uncommonly sweet and delee- 
chuz," which he would take out in large handfuls, 



DESTINY. 113 

and deposit on the ladies' work-table ; anothex* time 
he would arrive laden on each side with apples from 
his garden, " uncommonly high-flavoured and jisey ; " 
on another occasion he appeared with a basketful of 
small fresh-water trouts, which he had caught him- 
self, and which he said would be " most uncommon 
delicate picking," but he hoped Miss Lucy would 
take care of the bones. But the consummation of all 
was, when he entered with his shooting-bag over his 
shoulder, containing a brace of " most beautiful young 
termagants," ^ trophies of his prowess on the moors. 
It often fell to Lucy's lot to receive these testimonies 
of the minister's good-will, which she did ^vith her 
usual sweetness of manner; and though few things 
could be more offensive to her than the company of 
Ml-. M'Dow, she yet behaved towards him with that 
polite endurance which, to one of his gross ken, was 
equal to the most flattering encouragement. 

" There are some uncommon fine prospects about 
the manse, ]\Iiss Lucy," said he, as he found her one 
day sketching the view from the pai'lour window ; 
"I think you would make a fine hand of them." 

"The views in your neighbourhood are indeed 
very beautiful," said Lucy; "and I have long wished 
to take a few sketches there, if it were not too pre- 
sumptuous in me to attempt it." 

" Oh, Miss Lucy ! " exclaimed Mr. M'Dow, " how 
can you say thati But I'm really happy that you 
admire the situation of the manse." 

^ Ptarmigans. 
VOL. I. I D. 



lU DESTINY. 

"Everybody must admire it," said Lucy; "it is 
quite charming." 

"I'm delighted to hear you think so," cried Mr. 
M'Dow ; " for it's rather a remote, sechided situation, 
though, to be sure, the prospect's much more animated 
than it was, now that the steamboat comes our way regu- 
larly twice a week, and touches at the village, which 
is not above a gunshot from the manse. She's an 
amazing convenience, besides making a most interest- 
ing object in the view ; for instance, I get my tea and 
sugar brought to my very door by her for a mere 
trifle. I can even get a loaf of bread from Glasgow, 
Avithin four-and- twenty hours after it's out of the 
oven, for a penny or so additional, which is no con- 
consideration to me, in comparison of the comfort of 
the thing; it's uncommon fine bread, too." 

A pause ensued, for the minister's communications 
called for no reply ; and Lucy busied herself with her 
drawing. Mr. M'Dow resumed : 

" Eh, ]\Iiss Lucy, if I might l)ut hope for the 
honour of seeing you at the manse some day, you 
would really make me very proud." 

"I should be sorry if a visit from me were to have 
that effect," said Lucy, smiling ; " but certainly I 
shall be very happy, some day when papa and I are 
taking a ride, to bring my sketch-book to Auchter- 
bruckle, and carry off, if I can, some of its beauties." 

Before the minister had time to utter his raptures, 
Captain Malcolm entered the room; and, after the 
usual preliminaries, Mr. M'Dow began : " I have 



DESTINY. 115 

just been admiring Misr^ Lucy's painting," pointing 
to her pencil -sketch; "I'm no great conwjshure, in- 
deed ; but it strikes mc as being uncommonly well 
executed ! " 

"And, in return, I have Ijeen praising Mr. M'Dow's 
fine views, papa," said she ; " and have even been bold 
enough to talk of attempting to sketch some of them." 

" I assure you, sir, I am very much flattered with 
Miss Lucy's approbation of my prospects ; and I was 
just requesting, as a most particular favour, that she 
would do me the honour some day to come over with 
you, and take a look of my premises. There's not 
much to be seen, to be sure, just now about the 
manse ; but the prospects all round are much admired ; 
and Avhen I get my decreet, things \\\\\ be made more 
decent about the doors than they are at present." 

*' You little know what you are about, when you 
invite such a noted sketcher as Lucy to visit you," 
said Captain Malcolm, with a smile ; " she is such 
an enthusiast, and you have so great a variety of fine 
views in your neighbourhood, that, I warn you, you 
will find it difficult to get rid of her again." 

" I'll take my chance of that, Captain," with a pro- 
digious roar of delight; " I'll take my chance of that; 
and now. Captain, will you not just do me the favour 
to fix a day when Miss Lucy and you will ride over, 
and take a look of my premises'?" 

" We had better take our chance of a fine day," said 
Lucy, who privately thought the minister's absence 
was not the worst that could befall them. 



116 DESTINY. 

"I beg your pardon, Miss Lucy; but really the 
disappointment would be dreadful, if I was to miss 
the honour of a visit from the Captain and you — ■ 
perfectly dreadful ! And it might happen, for I have 
occasion to be a good deal from home; in fact, I 
consider it as a principal part of my duty to visit a 
good deal, and to be on the best footing with the 
heritors of my parish. It's a discreditable thing 
when the minister and the gentry are no just at one ; 
and wherever I have been, I have always made a 
point of keeping the very best company," 

" A clergyman who faithfully discharges his duty 
must see great varieties of company," said Captain 
Malcolm; "and ought neither to consider himseK as 
elevated by the notice of the higher orders, nor debased 
by mingling occasionally with the lowest and poorest 
of his flock." 

"There I perfectly agree with you, Captain," re- 
plied Mr. M'Dow, with much hearty warmth ; " these 
are precisely my oa\ti sentiments on the subject. From 
the honourable nature of my office, I have always- 
looked upon myself as upon a footing — if not rather 
shoopmjreor to gentlemen of larger fortune, and who 
may, perhaps, make a greater dash in the world than 
I do ; and, on the other hand, I never refuse, when 
properly called upon, to attend to the poorest man or 
Avoman in the parish." 

This was uttered with a modest air of self-appro- 
bation, and concluded with a long, seK- complacent 
pinch of snufF. 



DESTINY. 117 

" There is, indeed, a reverence due to the clergy as 
a body," said Captain Malcolm; "and in a Christian 
country they are always siu-e of meeting with it ; but 
that is a feeling which operates very slightly upon the 
minds of the community ; and, unless ministers can 
claim individually the respect due to superior piety 
and excellence, I fear collectively it is of little avail." 

"You're perfectly right, Captain. I agree with 
you entirely. Every clergyman is called upon to keep 
up the dignity of his station, and to cut a respectable 
figure in the world. It doesn't do for a man to let 
himself down too much." 

" In my opinion, a clergyman who is in the way of 
his duty never can lot himself down," said Captain 
Malcolm ; "for he must be endeavouring to raise the 
minds of those around him to the highest standard of 
moral excellence." 

" That's really not an easy matter, Captain," said 
Mr. M'Dow; "for the common people are a bad set. 
But here comes Mrs. Malcolm ; I hope I'll get her on 
my side to fix a day for the visit to the manse." 

And herewith Mrs. Malcolm was assailed Avith 
entreaties to use her influence for that purpose, or, as 
the minister elegantly expressed it, " just to nail the 
lousiness at once." Mrs. Malcolm was jileased at the 
thought of a little excursion for Lucy; so she seconded 
the minister's proposal, and, to his great delight, a day 
was fixed when Captain Malcolm and his daughter were 
to pay a morning visit at the manse of Auchterbruckle. 



CHAPTER XVII. 

Glenroy's anger against Inch Orran had much abated 
since he had ascertained what he called " the defeat of 
the Donald Begs." 

"After all, Inch Orran is not a bad body," he 
would say to Benbowie ; " he knows what he's about, 
and will not be easily taken in, or I'm much mistaken. 
I begin to think I was rather short with him when he 
was here, though the wretch was most confoundedly 
provoking too ! But he's an old man, and a particular 
man, and he has such an idiot of a wife ! I really 
believe, after all, he meant nothing." 

" On my conscience, I believe so," responded Ben 
bowie. "Nothing — nothing — nothing at all." 

Still this nothing had left an awk^vardness, Avhich 
Glenroy did not know very well how to get over. 
Something ought to be done to prove there was 
nothing ; but what that something was he could not 
tell. After what had passed, he could not possibly 
renew the overtures in person; still less could he 
send Benbowie as his ambassador. Had Inch Orran 
been like anybody else, he might have felt his pulse 
with a haunch of venison ; but that most likely would 



DESTINY. 119 

only lead to fresh hostilities ; so difTicult is it to 
manage people who have no weak side, or rather no 
favourite sense to gratify. 

Inch Orran had a weak side, indeed, l)ut that Avas 
rather his strong point ; for the love of money Avas 
his prevailing passion ; and, of all besetting sins, that 
is perhaps the most difficult to gratify. Harpagon, 
to be sure, had his Frosine ; but in general the diffi- 
culty of administering to the pure love of gold must 
be greater than that of pampering any other evil pro- 
pensity. 

Glenroy was, however, relieved from his embarrass- 
ment, by receiving the following despatch from his 
kinsman : — 

" Mr. Mungo Malcolm of Inch Orran presents com- 
pliments to Mr. Norman JMalcolm of Glenroy, and 
recjuests the favour of his company, and that of his 
friend, Mr. Lachlan Malcolm of Benbowie, at his house, 
on the afternoon of Wednesday the 24th instant, to 
remain till the forenoon of Saturday the 27th instant. 
Mr. M. Malcolm begs to intimate that he can also 
accommodate Mr. N. Malcolm's body servant." 

An invitation to Inch Orran was what Glenroy 
had not looked for ; and though the manner in which 
it was couched was highly offensive, yet that was 
passed over with a slight oath or two. The visit 
itself, indeed, would be an act of the severest penance, 
both to mind and body. Ill-humour, impertinence, 
and starvation, to be endured for three days — even 
Glenroy's stout heart quailed to think of ! But to 



120 DESTINY. 

refuse would be at once to renounce all hopes and 
expectations. It was a golden opportunity for bring- 
ing matters to the point. It was evident Inch Orran 
was making up in his own way. It would be mad- 
ness to refuse to meet him — go he must, even in the 
face of the blade-bone of mutton ! Benbowie at first 
made a faint resistance, as even his dull fancy pic- 
tured to itself the " flesh-pots " of Glenroy, in mourn- 
ful contrast with the bare bones of Inch Orran ; but 
he was so little in the habit of opposing his Chief, 
that he soon succumbed. So, after much considera- 
tion, the following answer was despatched : — 

" Glenroy returns kind compliments to Inch Orran, 
and assures him he will allow no engagements to 
stand in the way of his accepting his friendly invita- 
tion for Wednesday the 24th; and will, if possible, 
make such arrangements as may enable him to remain 
till the 27th with his worthy Idnsman. Benbowie 
begs his best respects, and will do himself the honour 
of Avaiting upon Inch Orran at the same time." 

"Well, for my part," said Mrs. Macauley, when 
she heard the invitation discussed, "I cannot say I 
like it. Three people invited, and for three days. 
There's something — I cannot tell what — in such an 
invitation ! " 

" You are a complete goose, Molly Macauley, and 

if you had just as much sense as would stick on the 

point of one of your own needles, you never would 

open your mouth," was the Chief's courteous reply. 

" Well, Glenroy, you know it is not so much sense 



DESTINY. 121 

that I set up for liaving, as just a sort of a something 
else — I cannot tell what it is — that makes me see 
things that people a great deal wiser and sensihler 
than I am do not see." 

"You pretend to the second-sight, do youf 

"Oh no, 'deed I am not so favoured as that; but 
if you would be guided by me, Glem-oy, you would 
not go to that cankered body's house." 

" I suppose you think there will be a boar's head 
served up, as a signal to despatch Benbowie and me, 
with knives, and perhaps forks f 

"No, Glenroy, I have more sense than to think 
that Inch Orran would behave in such a way as that ; 
but I don't like people being so perjink in pajdng 
back their entertainments. You see there was him- 
self and his wife, and Simon his servant, all came 
here on a Wednesday afternoon, and stayed till the 
Satui'day forenoon ; and then he asks you and Ben- 
bowie, and your servant, just to do the same thing ; 
and is not that saying, I'll give you neither less nor 
more than what you gave me " ? 

"Oh, you're a soothsayer — a diviner, are youl 
You can tell what's passing in people's minds 1 But 
I would advise you, Mrs. Mary Macauley, to stick to 
your needles and thread ; for you know no more of 
mankind than one of your own worsted monsters." 

"Well, well, Glenroy, I know you're a great deal 
wiser than me ; l^ut we'll see who's right for all that." 

Wednesday the 24th arrived, and looked most 
auspicious. Tlie Chief and his friend having made a 



122 DESTINY. 

hearty luncheon, and sighed to think it was the last 
plentiful meal they should behold for three days, 
embarked with a favourable gale, and were in due 
time safely landed at Inch Orran. 

If Glenroy had any misgivings in his o^vn mind 
as to the sincerity of the reconciliation, they were 
soon dispelled by the courteous reception he met 
with. No symptom of displeasure appeared either 
in the looks or manners of his host ; on the contrary, 
he was studiously j)olite, and even accosted him with 
a smile, or something intended for such, though of so 
suspicious a character that it would have made any 
one else instinctively bethink him of the canny old 
Scottish motto — "Touch not the cat but a glove." 
However, Glenroy was not the man to be daunted 
by a smile, so he returned it in full measure, and a 
most cordial greeting took place. Inch Orran even 
inquired, in a mild and courteous manner, after the 
health of young Norman, which Glenroy considered 
as the next thing to declaring him his heir. 

" I have had three gentlemen residing with me for 
some days," said Inch Orran, addressing the Chief, 
"whom it was my wish that you should see here. 
One is my law-agent, or man of business, Mr. Mel- 
drum ; another is my factor, Mr. M'Farlane ; and the 
third is Mr. Crowfoot, an eminent land-surveyor. 
Their business with me has been of an important 
nature, and has proved highly satisfactory in its re- 
sults. It Avas concluded this morning ; 1)ut tlie 
gentlemen remain with me till to-morrow, in order to 



DESTINY. 123 

celebrate the termination of our labours, and also to 
afford you, sir, an opportunity of acquiring any infor- 
mation j'ou think proper on the subject." 

This went far beyond Glcuroy's most sanguine 
anticipations. In fact, what did all this amount to, 
but that, having had his estates valued, his rent-roll 
proved, and his settlement made, he now took this 
method of declaring him his heir 1 In common deli- 
cacy, therefore, he could do no less than waive all 
appearance of curiosity or interference on the subject, 
which he did, but in a manner that plainly showed 
what was passing in his mind. At this Inch Orran's 
mouth was curled up in a most suspicious manner ; 
and one better acquainted with the character of the 
man would have felt rather distrustful of this super- 
natural sweetness and openness after what had 
passed ; and to those who knew him, this " faire 
seemlie pleasaunce " would have been anything but 
an "augur of good purpose." It was one of Inch 
Orran's peculiarities that whenever his mind had 
settled into a fixed hatred or contempt for an indivi- 
dual, from tliat time his manner towards him was 
marked l)y the most scrupulous attention to the 
ordinary'rules of politeness ; not with any design to 
deceive, for he despised all duplicity and double-deal- 
ing, but from a certain malignant delight, akin to 
that with which a cat gently strokes the victim she is 
preparing to immolate. 

But Glenroy was too superficial himself to be at 
all aware of the depths profound of others. He 



124 DESTINY. 

could not see beneath the surface, and when that was 
smooth, he judged all was sound ; he therefore drew 
the most flattering conclusions from his kinsman's 
behaviour, and -without pretending to the second-sight, 
he already beheld, by anticipation, the long-coveted 
property in his possession, the family honours again 
fixed in the family seat, and a clear five thousand 
per annum added to his rent-roll. They were now 
joined by the men of business, who were each intro- 
duced with marked emphasis to Glenroy. Next 
followed Mrs. Malcolm, " in outward show elaborate," 
and as sensible and edifying as usual. The dinner 
hour arrived, and, to the agreeable surprise of Glen- 
roy and his friends, they sat down to a most plenti- 
ful and excellent repast, such as would not have 
disgraced even the Chief's OAvn board, while Avines of 
the best quality were liberally dispensed. The most 
perfect good-humour prevailed. Glenroy's gascon- 
ades passed without comment ; and even Mrs. Mal- 
colm's sottises escaped with impunity. 

The agent and factor were silent, ironbound-look- 
ing persons ; Ijut Mr. Crowfoot, the surveyor, whose 
more active habits had probably given a greater free- 
dom to his tongue, discoursed largely upon the survey 
he had made of Inch Orran, its pertinents and pen- 
dicles, the prodigious rise in the rent when the leases 
should fall, which would happen in a year or two ; then, 
if there should prove to be a seam of coal, of which 
Mr. Crowfoot was very sanguine, there was no saying 
what might be the value of the property ; and so on. 



DESTINY. 125 

" Whatever the value may prove," said Inch Orran 
mildly, " one thing is certain, sir, that it will prove 
of more benefit to my heir than ever it can to me." 

Glenroy's face flushed with the consciousness that 
he was the man; and he expected the next thing- 
would be the proclaiming of him; but though he 
could have decreed, and even assisted at the apothe- 
osis of Inch Orran, he was not prepared to make a 
speech upon the occasion ; for, fond as he was of talk- 
ing, he was not gifted with eloquence. He, however, 
showed by his manner that he took the hint to him- 
self : his spirits rose ; Inch Orran's smiles redoubled ; 
and, strange to say, the day passed pleasantly, and 
the evening closed peacefully ! 



CHAPTER XVIII. 

According to Mrs. Macauley's theory, things looked 
still Avorse the following da}', Avhen there arrived in 
rapid succession the self- same party who had been 
convened by Glenroy, when he did the honours of his 
house to Inch Orran. There were lairds of every 
description — good-natured and ill-natured, fat and 
lean, tall and short, red and blue, rich and poor, 
some with wives, and some Avithout. Nor was Mr. 
M'Dow wanting, though he protested that nothing 
but respect for his worthy heritors would have brought 
him there that day, as he had just received the 
melancholy accounts of the death of his sister Mrs. 
Dr. M'Fee's youngest child, a most uncommon stout 
infant, named after himself, M'Dow M'Fee. It had 
died of the cutting of a back tooth very suddenly ; a 
severe stroke upon liis poor sister and the worthy 
doctor. Under these circumstances, Mr. M'Dow 
thought proper to be rather in a pensive mood, 
though, as he owned to a touch of the rheumatism 
" up one side " of his head, and testified an immense 
swelled jaw, it was at least doubtful whether his 
spirits were most affected by his ovni cheek, or the 
catastrophe of little M'Dow M'Fee. 



DESTINY. 127 

•So it was, he was less obnoxious tliau usual, and 
uttered no honcj motes worthy of being recorded. If 
Glenroy had been surprised with the dinner the pre- 
ceding day, he was confounded at the banquet round 
which the company were assembled. It had evidently 
been got up by an artist of the first eminence. The 
sough went round the table that Inch Orran had 
brought a cook all the way from Glasgow — Edinburgh 
— London — Paris, to dress the dinner. Be that as it 
may, the dinner was evidently dressed by no mean 
hand, and all testified the work of man, and not of 
woman. Certainly not Mrs. Malcolm's, who, between 
her own finery and that of the dinner, seemed quite 
bewildered, and, like Mr. M'Dow, was more silent 
than usual. Such of the party as could not be ac- 
commodated within the walls of Inch Orran, found 
lodgings, some at the factor's, some af the Clachan, 
and some in the hay -loft; but all returned to the 
charge the following day, like giants refreshed. Even 
Mr. M'Dow's cheek had fallen, and Mrs. Malcolm's 
tongue was unloosed. 

Everybody who has made one of a party in a large 
house in the country must have observed how great 
a portion of time is consumed in what is pohtely 
called the pleasures of the table ; and upon this occasion 
the prevailing practice was duly observed. The host, 
indeed, continued his own abstemious mode as usual ; 
but he begged his rules might be no restraint upon the 
company, and that they would, in all things pertain- 
ing to good cheer, take their Chief as their example. 



128 DESTINY. 

The intervals between the meals were filled up in 
the usual manner, by sauntering out of doors, walking 
up and down the rooms, playing at billiards, reading 
newspapers, discussing politics, canvassing county 
meetings, etc. 

" Here's a most entertaining game," said Mrs. 
Malcolm, drawing forth a large sheet of pasteboard, 
on which was displayed the royal game of the goose ; 
" it's a thing I brought with me in my trunk ; for I 
thought it would be a fine amusement for JMr. 
Malcolm and me in the country, when we had nothing 
to do ; but I can't get him to play at it, if I would do 
ever so." 

" Most men find it enough to have played the fool 
with a wife, without having to play the goose with 
her next," said Inch Orran, with one of his bitter 
smiles. 

A burst of laughter from the unmarried part of 
the company testified their approbation of this senti- 
ment. 

" That's really very severe. Inch Orran," said Mr. 
M'Dow, coming forward as the champion of the ladies ; 
" very severe, indeed, upon the fair sex, and I'm sure 
most extremely misapplied in your own case, with 
such a lady as j-ours," bowing to IVIrs. Malcolm, who 
sat quite unmoved with her goose spread out before 
her. 

"A man may learn a useful lesson even from a 
goose, sir, if he can take a hint in time," said Inch 
OiTan sarcastically. 



DESTINY. 129 

'A well and a prison are pretty broad hints, to he 
sure," said Mr. INI'Dow, surveying the detail of the 
goose ; " but I hope there's nobody here that will ever 
have occasion to take such hints ; for my own part, I 
don't think I'm in any danger cither of the one or the 
other, even if my decreet should go against me — hoch, 
hoch, hoch, ho ! " 

"These, sir, are emblematic, I presume, of Trutli 
and Reflection," said Inch Orran ; " the one is said to 
lie in the bottom of a well, and the other, I believe, 
is often found at last witliin the bars of a prison. 1 
know few men who may not profit by such hints;" 
and a small fiery spark shot from the corner of his 
eye at Glenroy, on whom it fell harmless, so intrenched 
was he in the firm belief that all was doing and saying 
in honour of himself. Not Haman, when he seemed 
to be at the pinnacle of his wishes, felt more secure 
than Glenroy. 

The third day arrived, which Avas to wind up the 
Inch Orran festivities, and nothing remained but that 
the guests should now take their departure. The 
usual stir had begun amongst them, as their several 
conveyances were successively announced. 

" I assure you. Inch Orran," wheezed a fat laird, 
who was the first to move, " I am sorry to be the first 
to break up this party ; for I can with truth declare I 
never, in the whole course of my life, spent two plea- 
santer days ; and I am sure I speak the sentiments of 
the whole party when I say so." 

"I beheve you, sir," replied Inch Orran, -wath one 

VOL. I. K D. 



130 DESTINY. 

of his little horrible smiles ; " but the credit of these 
revellings is clue to our Chief. Had it not been for 
him I should have entertained you in a difierent style ; 
but he has given me a lesson which I hope I shall not 
soon forget ; and I have only been discharging the debt 
I had incurred to him by his splendid hospitalities 
towards me." 

Glenroy was not prepared for this eulogium, and 
his face glowed and his whole person distended Avith 
the proud triumph of having the meed of praise thus 
publicly awarded to him ; but while he was preparing 
a suitable reply, ]\Ir. M'Dow, as usual, broke forth 
with a tremendous hach, hach, ho ! 

"Well, Inch Orran, for my part, I can only say 
that I hope from my heart this innocent rivalship 
between my two worthy pawtrons may long continue 
to subsist; and I daresay I may answer for all present, 
as I do for myself, that, like the Swiss troops, we shall 
always be ready to lend our assistance to either side, 
and serve both to the best of our power for the time 
being — hoch, hoch, hoch, hoch, ho !" 

A clamour of mirth succeeded, which drowned 
Inch Orran's reply, as, ■^vith one of his bitterest looks, 
he said, "Sir, your services are not likely to be re- 
quired by me in a hurry." Then, as the roar still 
continued, he muttered, " I would at any time rather 
sit down to table with two devils than vdili twenty 
angels." 

The guests had severally departed, all save Glenroy, 
who still lingered in hopes that Inch Orran would now 



DESTINY. 131 

come to the point, and disclose the deeds that had 
been done ; but Inch Orran's lips seemed now as if 
hermetically sealed, and he heard all Glenroy's hints 
and innuendoes in profound silence. At length the 
Chief saw it was time to take leave ; and as he did 
so he expressed a hope of soon seeing his kind host 
at his house. 

"Never, sir!" was the reply, with a look and an 
emphasis that made even Benbowie start. 

The Chief was confounded ; but he was now out- 
side the door, Avhich was already closed upon liim. 

"He is a very particular man," said Glenroy. 

" On my conscience, it would not do for everybody 
to be so particular," said Benbo^vie. 

" It's just his manner," said Glenroy ; " I'm con- 
vinced he means nothing." 

And his echo answered, " Nothing." 



CHAPTER XIX. 

The day airived for the long-promised visit to the 
Manse, and a most propitious one it was, worthy of 
the lovely scenes on which it smiled. The father and 
daughter set out early on their excursion, and after a 
ride of about five miles found themselves in the en- 
virons of the Manse. These were of the grandest and 
most romantic description ; there were lofty heath- 
covered moimtains, softened by gently-swelling green 
hills, diversified and enriched by patches of natural 
copsewood, which completely supplied the place of 
trees; here and there were openings to the bold 
rocky shore, Avith its gray cliffs and broken fragments 
mingling in peaceful amity with the dark-blue waters 
that curled around them, Far as the eye could reach, 
the sea was studded "svith isles and islets, some gleam- 
ing through misty showers, some glancing in the full 
blaze of sunshine. In short, nothing could be more 
varied, animated, and picturesque, yet beautifully 
tranquil and secluded, than the scenes which presented 
themselves, at every step seen under diflferent aspects. 
Lucy was enchanted, but the enchantment fled on ap- 
proaching the IVIanse. It was a thin tenement, built 



DESTINY. 133 

of rough gray stone of the usual pattern, a window 
on each side of the door and three above. At one 
side was the garden, with cabbages and marigokls 
growing pell-mell, and in the rear was the set of con- 
demned offices, partly thatched and partly slated. 
There were no attempts at neatness in the approach 
to the house, which was merely a rough jog-trot road, 
flanked on each side by a dyke. Presently Mr. M'Dow 
was seen hurrying to the door to meet his guests, and 
there, as they alighted, he was ready to receive them 
with open hands. 

Great was the joy expressed at this honour, as Mr. 
M'Dow led the way to the interior of his mansion, 
which was just such as might have been expected from 
its outward aspect. There was a narrow stone passage, 
with a door on each side, and there was a perpendi- 
cular wooden stair, and that was all that was to be 
seen at the first coujxVml. But if little Avas revealed 
to the eye, the secrets of the house w'ere yielded with 
less coy reserve to the other senses ; for there was to 
be heard the sound of a jack, now beginning mth 
that low, slow, mournful whine, which jacks of sensi- 
bility are sure to have ; then gradually rising to a 
louder and more grating pitch, till at length one 
mighty crash, succeeded, as all mighty crashes are, 
by a momentary silence. Then comes the winding- 
up, which, contrary to all the rules of the drama, is, 
in fact, only a new beginning, and so on, ad infinitum, 
till the deed is done. With all these progressive 
sounds were mingled the sharp, shrill, loud voice and 



134 DESTINY. 

Gaelic accents of the chef de cuisine, with an occasional 
clash or clang, at least equal to the fall of the armour 
in the Castle of Otranto. 

Then there issued forth with resistless might a 
smell which defied all human control, and to which 
doors and windows were but feeble barriers or outlets ; 
till, like the smoke in the Arabian Nights, which re- 
solved itself into a genie, it seemed as if about to quit 
its aerial form, and assume a living and tangible sub- 
stance. 

Lucy would fain have drawn back as she crossed 
the threshold, and, quitting the pure precincts of sun- 
shine and fresh air, found herself in the power of this 
unseen monster — this compound of fish, fat, peats, 
burnt grease, kail, leeks, and onions, revelling, too, 
amid such scenes, and beneath such a sky ! 

"You see I have brought my sketch-book, Mr. 
M'DoAV," said she; "so I must make the most of my 
time, and be busy out of doors." 

"You'll have plenty of time for that. Miss Lucy; 
it's early in the day yet ; you've had a long ride, and 
you'll be the better of a little refreshment ; pray sit 
down, and do me the favour to take a mouthful of 
something;" and he handed a plateful of shortbread, 
which, with a bottle of wine, stood ready stationed 
on a side-table. "You'll find it uncommonly good. 
Miss Lucj^ ; it comes all the way from Glasgow ; it's 
made by my mother, now in the seventy-eighth year of 
her age ; she sends me always a bun and half-a-j^eck of 
shortbread for my hogmanay, and it's surprising how 



DESTINY. 135 

it keeps. This is the hast farl of it, l)ut it's just as 
good as the first was ! " helping himself to a piece 
which would have qualified anybody else for six 
weeks of Cheltenham. "And, by-the-bye, that's a 
picture of my mother, taken when she was a younger 
woman than she is now," pointing to an abominable 
daub of a large, vulgar, flushed-looking, elderly woman, 
sitting on a garden-chair, with a willow at her liack, 
her hands crossed before her, and a large hair ring- 
on her forefinger. " That's reckoned a strong like- 
ness of my mother ; she was an uncommon fine woman 
when in her prime ; she measured five feet ten and 
three-quarters on her stocking soles, which is a remark- 
able height for a woman, and she carried the breadth 
along with it; yet she was the smallest of six daughters. 
It's told of her fawther, JMi*. M'Tavish (who was a man 
of great humour), that he used to say he had six-and- 
thirty foot of daughters — hoch, hoch, ho ! — it was 
very good ! very good ! " Here Mr. M'Dow indulged 
in another fit of laughter, while his guests turned 
their eyes to another picture, but it was no less 
obnoxious to the sight. " That, again, is my fawther, 
and a most capital picture ! there's a great deal of 
dignity there ! for though extremely affable, he could 
assume a great deal of dignity Avhen it was necessary." 

This dignitary was a mean, consequential-looking 
body, vnth lowering brows and a bob-wig, seated in 
an arm-chair, with a flaming Virgil, portrayed in red 
morocco and gold, in his hand. 

"I am no conmjshure myself, but they strike me as 



136 DESTINY. 

being very good pictures ; and I can vouch for theii 
being most capital likenesses." Neither Captain Mal- 
colm nor Lucy could violate sincerity so far as to 
bestow a single commendation on the pictures; so 
Mr. M'Dow went on — " That book which you see in 
my fawther's hand was a present made to him by his 
scholars when he was master of the Myreside School. 
I confess I look at it with great pride, as a most 

flattering testimony of the honourable and " 

Here a prodigious crash from the kitchen, followed 
hj very loud and angry vociferations, arrested Mr. 
M'Dow's harangue ; and opening the door he called 
in a very high, authoritative tone, "What's the mean- 
ing of this noise f upon which the tumult ceased. 
"Make less noise there, and keep the kitchen door 
shut ! " A violent slam of the door was the only 
answer returned. " I understand it's all the fashion 
now in great houses to have the kitchen as near the 
dining-room as possible," said Mr. M'Dow, wishing 
to throw an air of gentihty over his manage. " But 
for my o'wn part I must confess I would prefer it at 
a little distance, for it's impossible, do what you will, 
to get servants to be quiet ; and it's really not plea- 
sant, when I have a friend or two with me, and we 
are just wishing to enjoy ourselves, to be disturbed 
as we were just now. "Wliat I want in my addition 
is this : I M^ould turn my present kitchen into my 
drawing-room or study, just as it shuted, for there's 
an exceeding good light scull erj^ off it, which I could 
make my own closet, and keep my books and papers 



DESTINY. 



137 



in. The kitchen I would throw to the back, with a 
washing-house and small place for the lasses. Then 
upstairs I would have a pretty good family bed- 
chamber, and a good light closet for keeping my 
groceries within it, besides a press fitted up for my 
napery (of which I have a pretty good stock), and " 

" You would have a very comfortable house, I 
have no doubt," said Captain Malcolm, Avho, although 
rarely guilty of the ill-breeding of interrupting any 
one, yet could not refrain from cutting short these 
ministerial arrangements. " Even as it is," added he, 
" you don't seem to ])e ill off— this is a very good room, 
and such a view from your window ! Will you dare 
to attempt it, Lucy 1" 

"Not before witnesses," replied Lucy. "So I 
shall look about me elsewhere, and perhaps I may find 
something better adapted to my pencil." And she 
was leaving the room, when Mr. M'Dow stepped for- 
ward, and interposed his huge person between her 
and the door. 

" Oh, Miss Lucy, you're not going to run away from 
us, I hope 1 You'll find it imcommonly warm out by, 
just now ; the sun's extremely powerful on the rocks." 

" A noted sketcher, as papa calls me, minds neither 
heat nor cold," answered Lncy ; " and I shall easily 
find either a shady spot or a cool breeze." 

" Well, then, since you mil go out, trust yourself 
to me, and I'll take you where you'll find botli, and 
the most beautiful prospect into the bargain." 

At that moment the door opened, and a thick yellow 



138 DESTINY. 

man, with no particular features, dressed in a short 
coat, tartan trews, and a very large ill-coloured neck- 
cloth, entered the room, and was introduced by the 
minister as his cousin and Ijrother-in-law, Mr, Dugald 
M'Dow, from Glasgow, then on a visit at the Manse. 

" We're just going to take a turn in the garden, 
Mr. Dugald," said his host ; " will you get your hat 
and join usf 

" With the greatest pleasure," replied Mr. Dugald, 
with a strong accent and a stiff, conceited bow ; then 
popping do^vn a seal-skin cap from a peg in the pass- 
age, he was instantly accoutred, and the party set 
forth. 

"I wish it had been earlier in the season. Miss 
Lucy," said Mr. M'Dow, as he ushered her into his 
kailyard by a narrow, slimy path, overrun with long 
sprawling bushes ; " a month ago I could have treated 
you to as fine berries as perhaps you ever tasted. 
They were uncommonly large and jisey, and at the 
same time extremely high-flavoured. I have a little 
red hairy berry that's very deleeshus ; and there's the 
honey-blobs, an uncommon fine berry — a great deal 
of jise in it. I was rather unlucky in my rasps this 
season ; they were small and wormy, and a very poor 
crop ; but my currins were amazingly prolific and 
uncommonly jisey. In fact, I coiddn't use the half 
of them, and it was really vexatious to see them abso- 
lutely rotting on the bushes. The want of a lady at 
the berry season is a great want, and one that's sorely 
felt; for though my lass is an exceeding good plain cook, 



DESTINY. 139 

yet she's not mistress of the higher branches of cook- 
ery, such as the making of jams and jeelHes, and these 
things ; but I would fain flatter myself, by the time 
the berry season comes round again, I may have a 
fair lady to manage them for me. Do you think I 
may venture to hope so, JMiss Lucy f 

Lucy was not aware of the nature of the minister's 
hopes, nor even conscious of his faltering accent and 
tender look ; for she was considering Avhether she 
might not make a sketch from the spot where she was 
standing ; and at the same moment Captain Malcolm 
turned round and directed his daughter's attention to 
some particular beauty in the landscape, that had 
attracted his own. And again Lucy's book was 
opened, and her pencil in her hand, ready to begin, 
when again Mr. IM'Dow struck in. 

" Now, before you begin, j\Iiss Lucy, I would beg 
as a most particular favour, that you would just take 
a look of my offices ; they are in a shameful state, to 
be sure, for a lady to visit, but the instant I get my 
decreet, they. shall be all clean demolished ; and what 
I'm very desirous of, is to have your opinion as to the 
most proper situation for the new ones." 

"I don't think Lucy's opinion will be at all a 
sound one," said Captain ]\Ialcolm ; " she is too fond 
of the picturesque ever to consider the useful, so you 
had better leave her to her sketch." 

" I'll not take your word for that. Captain ; I have 
a great respect for a lady's opinion, and there's no 
lady whose opinion I set a higher value on than Miss 



140 DESTINY, 

Lucy's. Ah ! Miss Lucy, you'll really oblige me if 
you'll give me the benefit of your fine taste ;" then, in 
a lower tone, and with great (intended) softness, " I'm 
really extremely anxious to please you ! " 

And Lucy, good-humouredly laughing at the idea 
of Mr. M'Dow's desiring to please her in a matter so 
perfectly indiff"ercnt to her, again put up her sketch- 
book, and suffered herself to be conducted over the 
localities of the glebe. 



CHAPTER XX. 

Having given lici- assent to all the projected improve- 
ments, Lucy flattered herself she should now be free 
from further molestation. Again she attempted to 
rid herself of the assiduities of Mr. M'Dow, and was 
gliding away, as she hoped unperceived, when, strid- 
ing after her like a seven-league ogre, he called, 
" Miss Lucy — IVIiss Lucy ! you're not running away 
from us, I hope 1 this is just about the time I ordered 
a slight refreshment to be ready," pulling out his 
watch ; "you'll do me the honoiu' to partake of it, I 
hopef 

Lucy declined, on the plea of having already had 
ample refreshment, and being much more inclined to 
sketch than to eat ; but Lucy must have been made of 
stone and hme to have been able to withstand the 
importunities of Mr. M'Dow : he was as urgent as 
though his very existence had depended upon her 
partaking of his " slight refreshment," and she was at 
length compelled, much against her inclination, to 
return to the salle a manrjer. During their absence a 
table had been covered, but the arrangements were 
not finally concluded, for a stout, ruddj-, yellow-haired 
damsel was rattling away amongst knives and forks 



142 DESTINY. 

as though she had been turning over so many down 
feathers. 

"I expected to have found everything ready by 
this time," said Mr. M'Dow; "what have you been 
about, Jess 1" But Jess continued to stamp and 
chxtter away without making any reply, 

" I'll just .show you the way to my study, till the 
refreshment's put upon the table," said Mr. M'Dow; 
and finding all remonstrance in vain, his guests sub- 
mitted with a good grace, and were conducted to a 
very tolerable room upstairs, where were a few shelves 
of books, a backgammon board, a fowling-piece, and 
a fishing-rod, with shot, lines, and flies scattered 
about. There was also a sofa, with a dirty crumpled 
cover, where Mr. Dugald seemed to have been loung- 
ing Avith a flute and a music book. In one corner 
stood a table with a pile of books, some of them in 
bindings very unlike the rest of the furniture. 

"That's a parcel of books," said Mr. M'Dow, "that 
I bought at the Auchnagoil rouping, I just bought 
the lot as you see them. I believe there's a good 
deal of trash amongst them, but I've had no time to 
examine them yet." 

Lucy began to examine the books, and opening a 
little volume of Gambold, she exclaimed to her father, 
" What a charming picture of a clergyman, is it not, 
papa?" And Captain Malcolm, taking the book, 
read the passage aloud — 

" He was a man so jmre in private life, 
So all devoted to tlie things above ; 



DESTINY. 143 

So mere a servant both of Christ and men, 

You'd say he acted without spark of nature, 

Save that each motion flow'd with ease and beauty." 

"Oh, as to that," said Mr. M'Dow, throwing one 
of his huge arms over the back of his chair, and 
swinging himself to and fro, " I can truly say, for my 
own part, I should think it due to myself to feel at 
my ease in all companies 3" and a long, self-complacent 
pinch of snuff followed. 

"Don't you think, papa, that is exactly the de- 
scription of our good Mr. Stuart '? " said Lucy, as she 
again looked over the volume. 

"Mr. Stuart certainly does bear a strong resem- 
blance to this pictui'e," said Captain Malcolm ; " and it 
is always pleasing when we can recognise in a living 
character the lineaments of such a portrait — we are 
so apt to look upon it as the hccvu ideal. You are, of 
course, acquainted with Mr. Stuart," added he, address- 
mg Mr. M'Dow, " and can also bear testimony to the 
likeness % " 

"I am acquainted with Mr. Stuart," replied IVIr. 
M'Dow coldly; "but I don't know how it is, we 
don't often meet ; he's not a very social man. But I 
wonder if that woman's going to give us our refresh- 
ments to-day ^ " Then going to the door, he bawled 
down, "Jess, woman, for any sake, what are you 
about '? I've no bell in this room, which is a great 
inconvenience ; and I don't think it worth my while 
to be at any expense till I get my decreet." 

" Ah, here is my favourite Goldsmith ! " exclaimed 



144 DESTINY. 

Lucy, trembling for a dissertation upon teiuds, locali- 
ties, and decreets; "familiar as his Deserted Villcuje 
is, I never can refrain from reading it whenever I 
meet with it." 

'■^Apropos of clerical pictures," said Captain Mal- 
colm, no less sick of his host's vulgar egotism, "I 
don't know a more delightful one than tliat of his 
parish priest." 

"I'm really amazed what that woman can be doing 
with our refreshments," said ]\Ir. M'Dow, pulling out 
his watch, with visible marks of impatience. 

" In the meantime, we may refresh our memories 
with an old acquaintance, the Village Clergyman," 
said Captain Malcolm, reading the following lines : — 

" His house was kuo^\^l to all the vajjrant train, 
He chid their -wanderings, but relieved their pain ; 
The long-remember'd beggar was his guest, 
Whose beard descending swept his aged breast j 
The ruin'd spendthrift, now no longer proud, 
Claim'd kindred there, and had his claim allow'd ; 
The broken soldier, kindly bade to stay, 
Sat by his fire " 

Here Mr. M'Dow burst forth with, " Well, Captain, 
I'm really amazed how, with your excellent abilities 
and good principles, you can tliiuk that man a pattern 
for a dignified clergyman ! His house must have been 
a perfect receptacle for blackguards. I would think 
it highly improper in me to allow one of those vagrants 
to set their foot mthin my door ; if they want to hear 
me, let them come to my church." 



DESTINY. 145 

"But they would rather wish yon to hear them," 
said Mr. Dugald. 

"I've no doubt of that," said Mr. M'Dow em- 
phatically ; " but I would have little to do if I was 
to sit up listening to all the worthless vagabonds that 
come in my way." 

"Perhaps," said Lucy timidly, "their vices are 
often the effect of their ignorance, and a word spoken 
in season might go far to enlighten and reclaim 
them.'" 

" Oh, Miss Lucy," said Mr. M'Dow, with an air of 
gallantry, " there's nothing I admire more in your sex 
than your gentleness and softness ; Ijut I'm sorry to 
say, it exposes you very much to be imposed upon, 
and most shamefully taken in ; and I'll just appeal to 
you yourself, now, how it would answer in a house, 
I'll suppose you're the mistress of, to have your 
kitchen filled with all the clamjamphray of the 
country— drunken soldiers, randy beggars, ill-tongued 
tinklers, and so on — how it would do, I say, for a 
young lady of your delicacy and refinement going 
down to order your dinner, to find the very scum of 
the earth sitting, perhaps, on your kitchen-dresser ? " 

"That is, indeed, a climax to be avoided," said 
Captain Malcolm, laughing ; " and I'm afraid, Lucy, 
you must admit that, charming as your favourite 
picture is, it is one which in these days it would not 
do to copy too closely. We may i^lease ourselves by 
such representations of primitive manners ; bub I fear 
they no longer exist, except in the poet's page, or 
VOL. I. L n. 



146 DESTINY. 

your imagination. Steamboats and stage-coaches 
have now brought each village and hamlet in close 
contact with some great town, even with London it- 
self ; and the evils the poet so beautifully predicted 
are, I fear, coming on apace. I doubt we should 
now in vain seek from the Land's End to John-o'- 
Groat's House for a 'sweet Auburn,' whose 'best riches' 
are 'ignorance of wealth.' But I see Lucy won't give 
up her love for beggars, for all we can say." 

Lucy smiled as she replied, "Mr. M'Dow's repre- 
sentation of Christian charity is certainly very dif- 
ferent from the poet's ; but I am still inclined to side 
with him, and to think that much may be made of 
human nature, even in its worst state, by kindness, as 
Mrs. Fry has testified ; and so I believe good Mr. 
Stuart has often found it. The lines that follow are 
still more descriptive of him. Pray, papa, read them ;" 
and Captain Malcolm went on — 

'■ Thns to relieve the wTetched was his pride, 
And even his failings lean'd to virtue's side ; 
But in his dutj' prompt at every call, 
He watch'd, and wept, and felt, and pray'd for all ; 
And as a bird each fond endearment tries, 
To temjit its new-fledged oflspring to the skies, 
He tried each art, reproved each dull delay, 
Allured to brighter worlds, and led the way. " 

"Allow me, in the meantime, to lead the way to 
something more substantial, Miss Lucy," cried Mr. 
M'Dow, seizing her hand, as Jess put her head in at 
the door; and having given a glare with her eyes, 
and wide opened her mouth, emitting a sort of gut- 



DESTINY. 147 

tural sound, importing that "aw's ready," galloped 
doAvnstairs again as hard and fast as she could. 

" Give me leave, Miss Lucy ; but the stair's rather 
narrow for two ; you know the way ; turn to the left 
hand of my trance.^ It's very easy for these poets to 
preach ; but it's not so easy always for us preachers 
to practise — hoch, ho ! " 

This sentiment uttered, a grace was hurried over ; 
and the company seated themselves at table, which 
was literally covered with dishes, all close huddled 
together. In the middle was a tureen of leek soup, 
alias cocky-leeky, with prunes ; at one end, a large 
dish of innumerable small, clammy, fresh-water trouts ; 
at the other, two enormous fat ducks, stuffed to the 
throat with onions, and decorated with onion rings 
round their legs and pinions. At the corners were 
minced collops and tripe, confronted with a dish of 
large old pease, drowned (for they could not swim) in 
butter ; next, a mess of mashed potatoes, scored and 
rescored with the marks of the kitchen knife — a weapon 
which is to be found in all kitchens, varying in length 
from one to three feet ; and in uncivilised hands used 
indiscriminately to cut meat, fish, fowl, onions, bread, 
and butter. Saucers full of ill-coloured pickles filled 
up the interstices. 

"I ordered merely a slight refreshment," said Mr. 
M'Dow, surveying his banquet with great compla- 
cency; "I think it preferable to a more solid mail 

^ Trance— iu England, a deep swoon ; in Scotland, a narrow 
passage. 



148 DESTINY. 

in this weather. Of all good Scotch dishes, in my 
opinion, there's none equal to cocky-leeky ; as a friend 
of mine said, it's both nectar and ambrosia. You'll 
find that uncommonly good. Miss Lucy, if you'll just 
try it ; for it's made by a receipt of my mother's, and 
she was always famous for cocky-leeky; the prunes 
are a great improvement ; they give a great delicacy 
to the flavour ; my leeks are not come to their full 
strength yet, but they are extremely sweet ; you 
may help me to a few more of the broth, Captain, 
and don't spare the leeks. I never see cocky-leeky 
without thinking of the honest man who found a 
snail in his : 'Tak ye that snack, my man,' says he, 
'for looking sae like a plum-damy ;' hach, hach, ho ! 
There's a roasted hare coming to remove the fish, and 
I believe you see your refreshment ; there's merely a 
few trifles coming." 

Lucy had accepted one of Mr. Dugald's little 
muddy trouts, as the least objectionable article of the 
repast; and while Mr. M'Dow's mouth was stuffed 
with prunes and leeks, silence ensued. But having 
despatched a second plateful, and taken a bumper of 
wine, he began again : " I can answer for the ducks. 
Miss Lucy, if you'll do me the favour to try them. 
A clean knife and fork, Jess, to Mr. Dugald to cut 
them ; I prefer ducks to a goose ; a goose is an incon- 
venient sort of bird, for it's rather large for one person, 
and it's not big enough for two. But my stars, Jess 1 
what is the meaning of this 1 The ducks are perfectly 
raw ! " in an accent of utter despair. " What is the 



DESTINY. 149 

meaning of it 1 You must take it to the brander, and 
get it done as fast as you can. How came Eppy to 
go so far wrong, I wonder ! " 

Jess here emitted some of her guttural sounds, 
which, being translated, amounted to this, that the 
jack had run down and Eppy couldn't get it set 
agoing again. 

"That's most ridiculous !" exclaimed Mr. M'Dow 
indignantly ; " when I was at the pains to show her 
myself how to manage her. She's the Auchnagoil 
jack, which I bought, and a most famous goer. But 
you see how it is, Miss Lucy ; you must make allow- 
ance for a bachelor's house; there's a roasted hare 
coming. Jess, take away the fish, and bring the hare 
to me." The hare was herewith introduced, and 
flung, rather than placed, before her master. "Oh, 
this is quite intolerable ! There's really no bearing 
this! The hare's burnt to a perfect stick! The 
whole jise is out of its body !" 

"Your cook's not a good hare-dresser, that's all 
that can be said," quoth Mr. Dugald. 

"Very well said— extremely good," said IVIi-. 
M'Dow, trying to laugh off his indignation; "and, 
after all, I believe, it's only a little scowthered.^ Do 
me the favour to try a morsel of it. Miss Lucy, with a 
little jeelly. Jess, put do^vTi the jeelly. Oh, have 
you nothing but a pig 2 to put it inf demanded he, 

^ Scorched. 
" Pig — ill England, an animal ; in Scotland a piece of 
crockeiy. 



150 DESTINY. 

in a most wrathful accent, as Jess clapped down a 
large native jelly-pot upon the table. "Where's the 
handsome cut crystal jeelly-dish I bought at the 
Auchnagoil roup?" 

Jess's face turned very red, and a downcast look of 
conscious guilt told that the "handsome cut crystal 
jelly-dish" was no more, 

" This is really most provoking ! But if you'll not 
taste the hare, Miss Lucy, will you do me the kind- 
ness to try the minced collops ? or a morsel of tripe 1 
It's a sweet, simple dish — a great favourite of my 
mother's ; both you and the Captain are really poor 
eaters, so you and I, Mr. Dugald, must just keep each 
other in countenance." 

And another pause ensued, till at last an order was 
given to take everything away, " And bring the few 
trifles — but will you make less noise 1 there's no hear- 
ing ourselves sjDeak for you ; " but Jess rattled away, 
nevertheless, till she vanished, leaving the door wide 
open. A few minutes elapsed before she reappeared, 
with the greasy apparition of Eppy at her back, stand- 
ing on the threshold with her hands full 

"Now, take the pigeon-pie to Mx. Dugald; bring 
the puddin' to me ; put the puffs and cheesecakes at 
the sides, and the cream in the middle. I'm sorry 
I've no jeellies and blaio mangiys for Miss Lucy. If 
you won't taste the pie, do me the favour to take a 
bit of this puddin' ; it's quite a simple puddin', made 
from a recipe of my mother's." 

Lucy accepted a bit of the "simple puddin'," which. 



DESTINY. 151 

as its name implied, was a sort of mawkish squash, 
flavoured with peat-reek whisky. 

"I'm afraid the puddin's not to your taste, Miss 
Lucy ; you're making no hand of it ; will you try a 
jam puff? I'm sure you'll find them good, they come 
from Glasgow, sent by my good mother ; I must really 
taste them, if it were only out of respect to her. 01 1 ! 
Miss Lucy, will you not halve a puff with me 1" 

The minister and his friend having now ate and 
drank copiously of all that was upon the table, Captain 
Malcolm said, "My daughter has not yet accomplished 
the object of her visit here, and we nmst soon be re- 
turning home, so you have no time to lose, my dear," 
to Lucy, Avho started up from table like a bird from 
its cage, " if indeed it is not lost already," ho added, 
as Lucy and he walked to the window. The bright 
blue sky had now changed to one of misty whiteness, 
showers were seen diifting along over the scattered 
isles, and even while they spoke, a sudden gust of 
\vind and rain came sweeping along, and all the 
beauteous scenery was in an instant blotted from the 
sight. 

Captain Malcolm was not a person to be discon- 
certed by trifles; but on the present occasion he 
could not refrain from expressing his regret, as he 
every moment felt an increasing repugnance to the 
company of Mr. M'Dow and his friend, and still more 
on Lucy's account than his o^wai ; it seemed like con- 
tamination for so fair and pure a creature to be 
seated between two such coarse barbarians. Mr. 



152 DESTINY. 

M'Dow affected to sympathise in the disappointment ; 
but it was evident he was exulting in the delay. 

Shower after shower followed in such quick suc- 
cession that Lucy found the object of her visit com- 
pletely defeated. At length the clouds rolled away, 
but the day was too far advanced to admit of further 
tarriance ; and besides, both the father and daughter 
were impatient to extricate themselves from the over- 
powering hospitalities of Mr. M'Dow. 

" I hope you will have many opportunities of tak- 
ing drawings here," said he, "svith a significant tender- 
ness of look and manner, as he assisted Lucy to mount 
her pony ; " and when the manse is harled, and I get 
my new offices, the view will be much improved." 

Lucy bowed as she hastily took the bridle into her 
own hands, and gladly turned her back on the manse 
and the minister. 



CHAPTER XXI. 

The showers had passed away ; the rainbow w\as 
"smiling on the faded storm;" the fragrant air was 
mild ; the herds and flocks were cropping the dewy 
grass ; the declining sun shot " a slant and mellow 
radiance;" and all things seemed imbued with new 
life and beauty. Captain Malcolm and his daughter 
proceeded for some time in silence ; each felt the 
beauty and the harmony of nature, and as they slowly 
paced, side by side, amongst the windings of the green 
hills, they needed not words to utter the feelings of 
their hearts. Captain Malcolm was the first to speak. 

"You are unusually meditative, Lucy," said her 
father. " What is engaging your thoughts so much ?" 

"I have been thinking, papa," said Lucy, rousing 
herself from her reverie, " what a sweet thing silence 
is." 

" That is to say, you admire silence as La Bruy^re 
(lid solitude?" 

"Oh, certainly, silence is sweeter when shared 
with another Avho can understand its beauty. But 
after such a day, such a coarse unpleasant day as we 
have spent, even soUtary silence would be sweet and 



154 DESTINY. 

grateful. Had Mr. M'Dow given us some nice clean 
well-boiled potatoes and milk, and have allowed us 
to Avalk about and enjoy the beautiful scenery, how 
much more pleasantly and profitably the day would 
have been spent ! " 

"Mr. M'Dow is, indeed, a coarse specimen of a 
coarse propensity," said Captain Malcolm, "and has 
fallen into a common error, that of seeking to raise 
himself by appearances ; as if these could exalt the 
character, especially of a minister of the gospel — of 
one who is ' as poor, yet making many rich; as having 
nothing, and yet possessing all things.'" 

" One is always pleased with the humble fare of a 
cottage," said Lucy ; " and I am sure most people 
would feel additional respect for the simplicity of a 
clergyman's, or indeed any one's style of living, when 
proportioned to their means." 

"Certainly," said Captain Malcolm; "poverty in 
itself is never despicable or ridiculous except to vulgar 
or thoughtless minds. It is only when it carries pre- 
tension along wdth it that we feel privileged to laugh 
at so preposterous a union. We are also apt to be 
more disgusted with a coarse gourmand than with a 
refined epicure, though there certainly is not more 
moral or intellectual superiority evinced in the love 
of turtle and venison, or even fricandeau and hlanqiiette, 
than in cocky-leeky and ducks." 

" Oh, how much I lament having lost this day ! " 
sighed Lucy, as she stopped her pony to admire a 
lovely peep between the hills. 



DESTINY. 155 

" I fear your lost day is not to be understood in 
the same sense as the Emperor's was," said her father. 
"I susj^ject it is only your lost sketches you lament." 

Lucy smiled as she acknowledged the fact. " But 
surely, papa," she added, "you must allow it was 
rather hard, instead of roaming amongst rocks and 
glens, and filling my portefeuille with sketches, to be 
shut up all day with Mr. M'Dow ! Indeed, papa, his 
company is anything but agreeable." 

"I am aware of that, my dear, but as a clergyman, 
I wish to show him all the respect in my power. His 
sacred office I consider the most important in which a 
human being can be engaged, and the most difficult, 
Avhen one considers what various states of mind a 
faithful pastor must be called upon to minister to." 

"But you surely cannot call him a faithful pastor, 
papa ? I cannot possibly conceive any one consulting 
him about spiritual matters, or even asking him for a 
prayer; I am sure I could not." 

" I never heard you so severe upon any one, Lucy. 
When you have lived longer in the world, you will 
find there are worse characters in the church than Mr. 
I\I'Dow, though, happily, there are also others whose 
genius, learning, and piety shed a lustre over the age 
in which they live. Mr. M'Dow is not an immoral 
man, otherwise I would not have gone to visit him." 

" The most offensive part of his character, I think," 
said Lucy, " next to his love of eating, is his constant 
jocularity ; not that I should like a morose, austere 
pastor, who would look upon all gaiety as sin, but I 



156 DESTINY. 

should like to see one, as Cowq^er says, ' serious in a 
serious cause.' " 

"I agree with you," said her father, "that when a 
clergyman views in its true light the importance and 
the responsibihty of the office he has undertaken ; an 
office which, as an old writer says, is ' a weight under 
which angels' shoulders might shrink,' his great object 
will be to get men to think seriously, not to laugh 
lightly ; though wit being a natural talent, Uke every 
other, it may be turned to good account." 

"All! there is old Sandy!" exclaimed Lucy, as a 
sudden turn of the road gave to view an old gray- 
haired shepherd on the hillside, basking in the rays 
of the evening sun, with his book and his dog. 
"How finely he is in keeping with the landscape ! I 
wish we were nearer, to have a little conversation 
with him, for I find both pleasure and improvement 
in conversing with him ; he is simple and artless, but 
not vulgar, for he knows his Bible, and that truly 
'maketh Avise the simple.'" 

"He is indeed a very favourable specimen of 
humble life," said Captain Malcolm; "for I have 
always found that where common education is built 
on solid religious principles it never fails to elevate 
the mind, and give that contented and independ- 
ent spirit which is a nation's truest strength and 
safety." 

" How perfectly he realises Grahame's picture of a 
Sabbath evening shepherd," said Lucy, still gazing on 
the picturesque tii^ure of her old favourite : — 



DESTINY. IT). 



' Behold the man ! 



The grandsire and the saint ; his silvery locks 
Beam in the parting ray ; before him lies, 
Upon the smooth-cropt sward, the open book, 
His comfort, stay, and ever new delight." 

" And there is a setting sun," said Captain Malcolm, 
as they emerged from the glen, and the blazing lumi- 
nary burst upon their sight, "that would defy all 
painting, for, as Wordsworth says, 

" Such beauty varying in the light 

Of living nature, cannot be portray'd 

By words, nor by the pencil's silent skill ; 

But is the prox)erty of him alone 

AVho hath beheld it, noted it with care, 

And in his mind recorded it with love ! " 

" Oh, papa, do let us alight here for a few minutes 
to feast our eyes with this lovely sunset," cried Lucy, 
when they had gained the summit of a hill ^\•hich 
save to view all the glories of the scene — the sun, 
with all his retinue of flaming clouds, sinking to rest 
in the bosom of the waters. 

Captain Malcolm loved to encourage in his children 
a taste for the beauties of nature ; a pleasure so cheap, 
so pure, and so elevating, and he readily assented to 
his daughter's request. Seating themselves on a 
grassy spot by the side of a wild mountain brook, 
they gazed "with eyes intent on the refulgent spec- 
tacle." At length Lucy said, "How perfectly Barton 
has realised such an evening as this, with all its accom- 
panying feelings, in that sweet poem of his, ' Morning 
and Evening;' every verse seems to nie a pei^fect pic- 



158 DESTINY. 

ture in itself, and a picture, too, that excites such pure 
and holy thoughts ! " Afid her soft blue eyes shone 
with an ex^jression of love and adoration as she con- 
templated the glories of the heavens, and recalled the 
beautiful imagery of the poet. 

" It is a comparison he draws between the rising 
and the setting sun, is it not 1" said Captain Malcolm ; 
"my memory for these things is not so good as it 
was, Lucy; but I daresay you can repeat it to me 
word for word, and this is just the time and place for 
hearing it." Lucy, in a sweetly-modulated voice and 
simple manner, then recited the last stanzas of Bernard 
Barton's "Morning and Evening" : — 

' ' 'Tis when day's parting light, 

Dazzling no more the sight, 
Its chastening glory to the eye is granting, 

That 'thoughts too deep for tears,' 

Unearthly hopes and fears, 
And voiceless feelings, in the heart are panting. 

" "While thus the western sky 

Delights the gazing eye, 
With thrilling beauty, touching and endearing ! 

What still of earth is fair, 

Borrows its lieauty there, 
Though every borrow' d charm is disappearing. 

" Ere yet those charms grow dim. 

Creation's vesper hymn. 
Grateful and lovely, is from earth ascending ; 

Till, with that song of praise, 

The hearts of those who gaze 
With solemn feelings of delight are blending. 

" Then from those portals bright 
A farewell gleam of lijrht 



DESTINY. 159 

Breaks willi unearthly gloiy on the vision ; 

And through the folding doors 

The eye of thought explores 
Seraphic forms and fantasies elysian. 

' ' These pass like thought away ! 
Yet may their hallow'd sway 

Rest on the heart — as dewdrops round adorning 
The drooping silent flowers, 
Feed theni through night's' dark hours, 

And keep them fresh and living till the morning. 

" Thus should the sunset hour. 

With soul-absorbing power, 
Nurse by its glories the immortal spirit ; 

And plume its wings of flight 

To realms of cloudless light. 
Regions its God hath form'd it to inherit. 

" Fair, bright, and sweet is Morn ! 

When daylight, newly born, 
In all its beauty is to sense appealing ; 

Yet Eve to me is fraught 

With more tincarthly thoiKjlit, 
And purer touches oi iynmortal feeling !" 

The shades of evening began to gather around, 
l)ut the gloom was still enlivened I)}' streaks of sun- 
shine on the mountain tops ; the silence and solitude 
that reigned, and the stupendous objects that sur- 
rounded them, filled the hearts of the father and 
daughter with solemn thoughts, and as they journeyed 
slowly home they felt this was indeed the time for 
"unearthly tliought" and "immortal feeling." 



CHAPTER XXII. 

Little more was heard of Inch Orran for some 
weeks. He had gone upon a voyage of discovery to 
two of the Isles where the principal part of his 
property was situated, and was actively employed in 
detecting abuses, redressing grievances, making sur- 
veys, getting estimates, quarrelling with his neigh- 
bours, discarding his factor, threatening his vassals, 
and so forth, and all in the face of the worst and 
stormiest weather that ever was seen, even on a 
western island. At the end of some weeks, he re- 
turned to Inch Orran, and Glenroy and he soon after 
met at a county meeting. The Chief, as well as every 
one present, was immediately struck with the change 
that had taken place in the old man's appearance 
since his first arrival in the country ; in fact, he more 
resembled a livid skeleton than a living man. 

" I am glad to see you safely returned to us. Inch 
Orran," said Glenroy, accosting him with much cor- 
diahty. "I'm afraid you have had but a fatiguing 
expedition ? " 

" Sir," returned his kinsman, " I desire to be ex- 
cused from being either congratulated or interrogated." 



DESTINY. 161 

And with a slight wave of his hand he turned 
away. 

Glenroy could scarcely keep from strangling him 
for his insolence ; but he saw death in the old man's 
face already, and he refrained. So, swallowing the 
indignity, even although put in open court, he con- 
soled his wounded pride by anticipating the rich 
reward that soon awaited his forbearance. Indeed, 
to all human appearance, the time was not far distant 
when the possessor of the long-coveted lands would 
be called on to relinquish them. It was evident he 
was then labouring under severe indisposition, though, 
when some one remarked to him that he appeared to 
have caught cold, he denied the fact with much 
asperity. Then, as if to give the he to the offensive 
insinuation, he mounted his horse, and rode home ten 
miles in a pour of rain, without greatcoat or umbrella. 
The following day he was still worse ; but, neverthe- 
less, being in one of his invincible fits of ill-humour 
and obstinacy, he chose to stand out for six hours in 
wind and rain, seeing his potatoes lifted, carted, and 
measured, that he might take his measures accord- 
ingly- 

The cold, bad as it was, might perhaps have ended 
like other colds, had it been treated in a gentlemanly 
way ; but it was not Inch Orran's mode to treat any- 
thing gently, or give place to any of the beggarly 
elements of human nature. He had likewise an utter 
contempt for doctors, without having a well-grounded 
faith in anything else, unless it were in that phantom 

VOL. I. M D. 



162 DESTINY. 

called Nature, which was the only thing (Simon 
excepted) that had any control over him. To Nature 
then he, in the first place, committed himseK; but 
the cold grew worse and worse, in the most natural 
way possible. He then submitted himself to Simon, 
who boldly undertook the cure ; but Simon had only 
two recipes in the world, the one was ale saps,^ the 
other was Atholl hrose.'^ 

In sj)ite of nature and Simon, and saps and brose, 
Inch Orran's case became desperate, and then a doctor 
was called, but came in vain. Another was summoned, 
but with no better success. Glenroy was most atten- 
tive, but to no purpose. The patient grew gradually 
worse and worse, till at the end of a few weeks, all 
sohcitude was vain, for Inch Orrau ceased to breathe. 

Mrs. Malcolm behaved "as well as could be ex- 
pected " on this trying occasion. She said it was just 
to be expected, for Mr. Malcolm was an old man, and 
a very particiilar man, and it was no wonder he died, 
for he never minded a word she said ; and w^th Mrs. 
Macauley to sit by and assent to all her propositions, 
and listen to her complaints of Simon, and concert 
with her about her mourning, and talk over the cere- 
monials of the funeral, Mrs. Malcolm was soon " won- 
derfully well." 

It is a tormenting law wliich exists in Scotland of 
keeping the will of the deceased a dead secret until 
after the interment, especially as wills are things so 

^ Porridge made with ale. 
* A composition of lioney and whisky. 



DESTINY. 163 

capricious in their nature as to defy the speculation 
of the living, and bafSe all their attempts at anticipa- 
tion. During that dread interval, how are the hearts 
of the nearest of kin of a childless miser, or a wealthy 
old bachelor, or a saving elderly spinster, agitated 
with the emotions of hope and fear ! Doubts resolv- 
ing themselves into certainties, and certainty fading 
away into doubt, as their omissions of duty and com- 
missions of offence rise successively to view. In the 
present instance, the only parties Avho seemed privi- 
leged to entertain either hopes or fears, doubts or 
certainties, were Glenroy and Captain Malcolm, as 
the nearest relatives of the deceased, and both stand- 
ing much in the same degree of propinquity. But 
the latter waived his pretensions in favour of the 
Chief, who therefore took upon himself the arrange- 
ment of the funeral, and also bore the whole burden 
of the fortnight's suspense which intervened between 
the death and bnrial. Having seen the last remains 
of Inch Orran safely deposited in the family vault, 
Glenroy returned to the mansion of the departed to 
unseal the repositories, and cause them to render up 
their secrets. The search was soon ended. The first 
thing that presented itself was Inch Orran's settlement, 
or general disposition, new and neat, formally drawn 
up, and regularly signed and attested in the most 
business-like manner possible. But as the reading of 
a settlement is a tax too heavy to impose upon any 
save those who are to profit by it, it will be sufficient 
to extract the kernel from the voluminous husk in 



164 DESTINY. 

which, for wise piuposes, the law has thought proper 
to encase it, but which it is not every one's jaws that 
can penetrate. Suffice it therefore to say that the 
settlement set forth, in the usual strain, for good 
causes and considerations, gi\ing, granting, assigning, 
and disponing all houses, lands, heritages, debts, move- 
ables, goods and chattels, writs and evidents, etc. etc. 
etc., to Christopher Blancow, Isaac Knipes, and Mark 
Lipptrot, attorneys and scriveners, in trust, for behoof 
of Eonald Malcolm, eldest son of Captain John Mal- 
colm of Lochdhu, and his heirs and assignees, the 
proceeds during the life of the said Eonald Malcolm, 
until he shall have attained the age of twenty- six 
years, to be invested in the three per cent consols, 
there to accumulate. Not a farthing of the money 
was to be touched under any pretence ; and the said 
Ronald Malcolm was not to be alimented or subsisted 
therefrom, but to be considered as having no right 
whatever in the premises, until he should have attained 
the aforesaid age. Failing the said Ronald Malcolm, 
his heirs, etc., the whole was to go to his father, 
without restriction of any kind. A small jointure 
to Mrs. Malcolm, five hundred pounds to each of 
the trustees, a legacy of a thousand pounds, and an 
annuity of thirty, to Simon Small, for his faithful ser- 
vices, were the sole bequests contained in this incon- 
sistent and capricious "disposition." 

Glenroy was too much confounded at first to be 
able to be in a passion ; it was only when he had col- 
lected his senses that his energies were roused, and 



DESTINY. 165 

he was able to articulate, with his face in a flame, 
and his eyes flashing fire and fury, "Eonald Malcolm ! 
Oh, certainly, a very proper person — very — I — hem — 
I wish you joy, sir," to Captain Malcolm, stamping 
his foot as he spoke. " Your son is very welcome !" 
in a voice of thunder — "perfectly welcome for me !" 
and with a muttered oath the Chief took an abrupt 
leave of the party of mourners ; and, tearing off his 
crape and weepers, threw them into the loch, and 
returned home. 



CHAPTER XXIII. 

Although everybody declared they had expected a 
most extraordinary settlement from Inch Orran, still 
this far surpassed the anticipations even of the most 
experienced, and afforded an ample field for animad- 
version to all. Yet perverse, unjust, and capricious 
wills are things of such common occurrence, the only 
surprise is that people should vstill continue to be sur- 
prised at them. Surprised, however, every one was, 
and none more so than the family at Lochdhu, who 
were perhaps the only people of the name who had 
not dreamt of either lairdship or legacy. Neither 
Captain nor Mrs. Malcolm were people to be much 
elated with any portion of mere worldly prosperity, 
and this succession of their son's was not such as to 
call forth any very exulierant demonstrations of joy. 
It could be of no immediate advantage to themselves 
or their children ; for, situated as they were, with a 
narrow income and a large family, necessarily endur- 
ing many privations, a single year's rent of the estate 
would have been more beneficial to them now than 
the accumulated treasures of a long minority might 
prove hereafter. But, above all, they dreaded the 



DESTINY. 167 

effect this seducing prospect might have upon the 
mind of their son, with wealth and consequence thus 
placed before him, as the goal at which he must 
ultimately arrive, without any exertions of his own. 
Convinced as they were that the moral part of our 
nature is best developed amidst struggles and diffi- 
culties in the outset of life, they dreaded the various 
temptations to ease and pleasure which would beset 
his path. Yet, in spite of these sobering reflections, 
they hailed with gratitude the prospect that was still 
afar off, even though it neither gilded the present 
nor cast any delusive glare on the future. 

As for the young heir, he felt much as any other 
generous, warm-hearted boy would have done upon 
such an occasion, and many were the romantic schemes 
which passed through his mind and burst from his 
hps in the first ardour of youthful emotion. Great 
was his disappointment at finding he could not, till 
the appointed time, dispossess himself of a farthing 
of his nominal wealth, and his heart revolted at the 
injustice that had been committed against his parents. 
He loved his mother with that deep and earnest love 
which a mother's virtues only can excite in the hearts 
of her children; and, contrasting the poverty and 
privations she endured with the comforts and luxuries 
he witnessed elsewhere, he was indignant at the 
l^arricrs that were opposed to the gratification of his 
wishes. 

Bent upon discovering some means by Avhich his 
future wealth might be turned to the immediate 



168 DESTINY. 

benefit of his family, Konald's mind became restless 
and dissatisfied ; and his thoughts, occupied with vain 
wishes and impracticable projects, wandered far from 
the daily occupations he was wont to pursue with 
ardour and alacrity. Yet his was the restlessness of 
a noble mind, aiming at good which he could not 
realise. 

He Avas beginning, as usual, one day with, "Oh, 
how I wish ! " when his father gently stopped him. 

"My dear Eonald," said he, "I was in hopes your 
good sense would, before now, have suggested to you 
what a dangerous habit you are acquiring of constantly 
wishing. " 

" Dangerous, papa ! " repeated Eonald; "how can 
that possibly be"?" 

" I consider it very dangerous," replied his father 
mildly ; " and so will you, I am very sure, when you 
come to reflect upon it. It is positive waste of time 
and thought and contentment. Wishing has been 
called the hectic of a fool. If it is not the proof of a 
dissatisfied mind (which, in your case, I trust it is 
not), it inevitably leads to it ; for wishing is not very 
far from murmuring. It is not to inculcate an im- 
provident habit, but a contented mind, that we are 
charged to take no thought of to-morrow." 

"But in my situation it is scarcely possible to 
avoid wishing," said Ronald. 

"You surely do not mean to say it is scarcely 
possible for you to avoid indulging in an idle and 
foolish habit f said his father mildly. "We have 



DESTINY. 169 

indeed little control over circumstances — these are 
regulated by a higher power ; but as rational and re- 
flecting beings, we are accountable for the exercise of 
our faculties." 

•' But my wishes are not so much for myself as for 
others," said Ronald, reddening a little at the reproof. 

" I am aware of that, my boy, for yours is not the 
sordid spirit that would merely seek its own gratifica- 
tion; but, nevertheless, you can do us no good by 
indulging those vain wishes of yours ; perhaps, event- 
ually, you could do us none had you the power of 
giatifyiug them, as it is very certain we know not the 
things that are best for us, and were our wishes 
granted, it might often be to our ruin. One thing 
you may be assured of, your mother and I would 
rather see you poor, if possessed of a grateful heart 
and contented mind, than master of millions with a 
restless and dissatisfied spirit. I forget what philo- 
sopher it is who says, ' It is better to be born with a 
cheerful temper than heir to ten thousand a year.' 
For my part, I think its value is incalculable, when it 
springs from the right source — faith and love. Such, 
I am sure, I have found it in your mother. You 
know but little of the privations she suffered in marry- 
ing me ; but never have I even heard her utter a wish 
for any mere temporal benefit. Her wishes, Eonald, 
have been prayers; and we flattered ourselves we 
should, by the blessing of God, be enabled to make 
our children rich in contentment, if in nothing else. 
You will not, then, disappoint us, Ronald f 



170 DESTINY. 

Eon aid could not answer, but his feelings were 
depicted on his open countenance, as he wrung his 
father's hand in silent emotion. From henceforth he 
sought to stifle his murmurs amid the sober realities of 
practical duties, kept in wholesome exercise through- 
out the daily walks of life. 

But Konald seemed destined only to feel the dis- 
quiet of riches without partaking of their enjoyments. 
The news of his succession had spread far and wide 
throughout the district ; but the particulars were (as 
all particulars are) very variously and imperfectly 
stated, and of course much error and exaggeration 
prevailed, particularly amongst the lower orders of 
the more remote vassals and tenants. The conse- 
quence was, the young heir was assailed from all 
quarters with petitions for, and remonstrances against, 
this, that, and the other evil, while a hoard of griev- 
ances, that had lain slumbering for many a year, were 
now brought to light, and laid before him, in the sure 
and certain expectation of being all speedily redressed. 
Wives came from afar to speak for the renewing of 
their husbands' leases ; and mothers walked many a 
weary mile to get a word of the young laird about 
the enlarging of their sons' crofts ; and widows crossed 
many a rough ferry, and climbed many a long hill, to 
petition for a cow's grass, or to claim favour, in right 
of their husbands or their fathers having lost an arm 
or a leg, serving under a Captain Angus Malcolm 
(some tenth cousin of the last laird) in the American 
war. In vain did Konald protest to these poor people 



DESTINY. 171 

that he possessed no more power than they did them- 
selves. He was heard with sorrowful incredulity, or 
renewed entreaties that, if he could not help them 
himself, he would speak a word for them to those who 
could. But Eonald had already found of what stuff 
Messrs. Blancow, Knipes, and Lipptrot were made, 
and that it was in vain to attemjit to seek favour at 
their hands. Faithful to the trust confided in them, 
that of turning everything to money, they had already 
commenced their operations in the most systematic 
manner, and were deaf as adders to all appeals that 
came merely recommended by mercy or liberality. 
But it was in vain Ronald sought to convince the 
malcontents. It is at all times difficult to convince 
the poor that those they deem rich and powerful can- 
not relieve them, if they choose ; but with the lower 
class of the Highlanders, it is next to an impossibility 
to make them comprehend how their superiors should 
not have the power to redress every grievance and 
sujiply every want, as promptly as it is made known. 
Many was the slow reluctant step Ronald saw at 
length turn away from him, as if still lingering in the 
expectation of being recalled ; and many was the 
groan, and the sigh, and the shake of the head, and 
the shrug of the shoulder, and the discontented 
"weel-a-weel !" he received in aiaswer to his protesta- 
tions. Such was the young heir's initiation to his 
inheritance. 



CHAPTER XXIV. 

But Eonald's cares, had they been weighed in a balance, 
would have been found hght as feathers compared to 
Glenroy's A^Tath. Not even the pains of the gout, which 
ensued, coidd drive the disappointment from his mind. 
There are people — alas for those who know them ! — 
who have never done Avith a subject, especially if it is 
of a disagreeable nature. " They feed upon disquiet " 
themselves, and force others to partake of the same 
sorry fare. 

Such was Glenroy's practice ; and upon this occa- 
sion his colloquial powers had received an impetus 
which seemed likely to keep them going to the last. 
It was a still-beginning, never-ending theme ; — morn- 
ing, noon, and night, he spoke of the injury he had 
sustained, as though he had been robbed, and his son 
murdered ; till, by dint of hearing the same thing so 
constantly repeated, he at length talked himself and 
all around him into the firm belief that he had been 
cheated and circumvented in the most shameful 
manner l)y the Lochdlui family ; and as his head was 
none of the clearest, or his I'easoning powers of the 



DESTINY. 173 

strongest, the proofs, for or against, were all mixed 
up in one solid mass of invective, 

" It is not the value of the property that I care 
about," he would repeat, at least ten times a day, to 
his all-enduring friends, Benbowie and Mrs. Macauley, 
as they sat by his gouty chair, the one with his 
tobacco-box, the other with her work-basket, shaping- 
scissors, and spectacles. " But I hate the dirty, under- 
hand way these people have gone about the business ; 
I was completely thrown off my guard by them ; but I 
never knew one of these canting dogs that wasn't a 
complete hypocrite." 

" On my conscience, that's very true, Glenroy," said 
Benbowie. 

" I'm as sure as I am of my own existence," con- 
tinued the Chief, " that there was a regular laid down 
plan, from the moment of the old man's arrival in the 
country. You may remember he had hardly entered 
this house when that Ronald — that young saint — was 
at his heels ; sent to play the spy, and show off before 
him. The father knew better than to face the old 
dragon himself, and so he set his son to dodge him 
and fawn upon him ; he had his lesson, and knew 
what he was about the day he came here. I saw 
through them even then." 

" On my conscience, I really believe so," said Ben- 
bowie. 

" I have no doubt it was these incendiaries that 
were at the bottom of that insane proposal the old 
scrivener made me about Edith ; but I would rather 



174 DESTINY. 

a thousand times have seen her in her grave than the 
wife of any beggarly tacksman's son — and to cut out 
her brother, too !" 

"Well, now, is not that very curious!" said Mrs. 
Macauley ; " are not these just the very words that 1 
heard Mr. Eeginald using the t'other day 1 ' Edith,' 
says he, ' I would rather see you killed a thousand 
times than that you should have disgraced yourself by 
marrying the tacksman's son.' — 'Oh, Eeginald,' said 
she, ' you know that could not be, for I am engaged 
to be married to you, and so I would not marry 
Eonald even if he were a king.' '' 

" You'll really make these children as great fools as 
you are yourself," cried Glenroy impatiently. " How 
can you put such nonsense into their heads !" 

" Me, Glenroy ! 'deed I never put anything into 
their heads. I would be very sorry; so far from 
that, when the boys said that you hated Eonald, for 
he was a bad boy, I said to them, ' Well, childer, your 
papa may say what he pleases, and you ought to mind 
everything he says, when it is good and fit to be 
remembered; and when he happens to say what is 
maybe not just so right, then you must be sure to 
forget it.' " 

" I really don't believe there is such another fool 
as yourself in existence," cried Glenroy ; " and I only 
Avish you had this gout of mine in your tongue, to 
silence it." 

" Well, I'm sure I wish I had, if it would take it 
out of yoiu- toe, Glenroy ; but wait till you hear. 



DESTINY. 175 

' Oh,' says Norman, ' I shall take care never to forget 
that he cheated me out of an estate.' — 'Nor I,' says 
Eeginald, 'that he had the impudence to want to 
marry Edith; a pretty husband indeed for Edith, a 
poor tacksman's son ! ' — ' Childer, ' says I, ' I fear you read 
your Bible to little purpose, or you would not speak 
evil of your neighbour, or be so scornful of anybody 
for being more humbly born than yourselves ; for we 
are such curious creatures, we cannot tell what may 
happen to us. You ought to remember how Joseph, 
that was sold for a slave, came to be a ruler over his 
proud brethren ; and was not there King David, the 
greatest of all the kings of the earth, — A\'hat was he but 
a poor shepherd boy 1 But it pleased God to make him 
a great king, and if it please Providence to appoint 
that Ronald should live to become a great man, who 
knows but he may be married to Miss Edith ' " 

" Providence ! — appoint ! What is it you mean, 
]\Irs. Macauley ? do you know Avhat it is you are say- 
ing 1" cried Glenroy furiously. 

" 'Deed I do, Glenroy, and I'm sure so do you, that 
it is Providence that appoints our lot " 

" Providence ! — appoint ! — lot ! Do you mean to 
make my children predestinarians?" cried Glenroy 
passionately. "I thought you had been merely a 
simpleton, but I see you're a most mischievous crea- 
ture, and I cannot suffer you in my family, if you 
sport such doctrines as these." 

"Well, Glenroy, if you think so, I cannot help it ;" 
and poor Mrs. Macauley's heart rose at the thoughts 



176 DESTINY. 

of having to choose between her Chief and her con- 
science. 

"But I don't believe you know yourself what it is 
you mean," cried he, somewhat mollified at sight of 
her distress. 

" 'Deed, then, but I know very well, Glenroy." 

" Then I say you are a very dangerous and mis- 
chievous woman," cried Glenroy, enraged that she 
would not take advantage of the loophole he had 
opened for her escape. 

" Well, maybe I am, Glenroy," was the humble 
reply ; " but I'm very sure I do not mean it." 

" You are really not fit to associate with either men 
or children," cried the Chief, striking his crutch on 
the floor as he spoke. 

"Well; maybe not," was said in a very dejected 
tone; "but you may say what you please of me, 
Glenroy, for there's no harm in that; but I do not 
like to hear you casting out with Providence." 

" Who's casting out, as you call it, wdth Providence, 
you old goose?" 

" Well, I really thought you was afixonted at my 
saying that we did not get everything our own way in 
this world, but that Providence appoints our lot for us." 

" Then I tell you again, Mrs. Macauley, that I will 
not suffer such doctrines in my family ; I'm for none 
of your predestinarian notions here. I suppose you'll 
have my servants cutting my throat, and saying it 
was appointed. I — I — it's really a most infamous 
doctrine." 



DESTINY. 177 

" Oh ! Glenroy, that is not the Christian notion of 
the thing at all ; it's only poor ignorant heathen craa- 
ters, or them who do not take pains to read their 
Bible, who can misuse it that way ; for how can we 
think we are appointed to do mischief to one another, 
when does not He tell us that we are to love our 
neighbour as ourselves? 'Deed, if an angel were to 
tell me the contrary, I would not believe it," 

" You really — you know nothing about the matter, 
and I desire I may hear no more such doctrines; 
there's no knowing where it would end." 

" 'Deed, then, I think it would just end in our 
being of contented minds, and learning to walk 
humbly with God, casting all our care upon Him who 
careth for us." 

" Oh, you are setting up for a saint too ! but I'm 
for no saints in this house, remember." 

" Well, you know, if you wish me to go my way I 
cannot help it ; it is my duty to go." Here tears 
streamed down Mrs. Macauley's cheeks. 

"Yes, yes, you're ready to go, and leave me at 
the very time when you might be of some use ; you 
might at least have the discretion to stay till I have 
got somebody to take your place; but do as you 
please." 

" Oh, Glenroy, how can you think it would please 
me to leave you and your children !" cried poor Mrs. 
Macauley, quite overcome. 

"Well, stay where you are," cried Glenroy, some- 
what softened ; " only don't go and fill the children's 

VOL. I, N i>. 



ITS DESTINY. 

heads with these pernicious doctiines of yours." Mrs. 
Macauley's face fell at the couclusion of this sentence. 

" I must speak the truth to them, Gleuroy," said 
slie, with a sigh, " Avhatever may come of it ; and I 
think we are such curious craaters, and know so little, 
that we cannot tell Avhat may happen to us. It may 
be Grod's will to raise us up, or to cast us down." 

" Areyouat it again," interrupted Glenroy furiously; 
"when I tell you, Mrs. Macauley, I will not suffer 
these doctrines in my family?" 

" Well, Glenroy, I am sorry it should be ray lot to 
displease you, for I owe you a great deal of kindness, 
and I would lay down the hair of my head for you 
and your childei', but I cannot give up my principles." 

" Who's meddling with your principles V demanded 
Glenroy, again softened at sight of her distress. 

" Well, I thought it was not like you to do it ; you 
who have such good principles of your own." 

"It's my opinion," said Glenroy, "you know nothing 
about principles, I don't believe you know what they 
are ; are they tiesh and blood, or are thc}^ skin and 
bone r 

" Oh ! Gleni'oy, I wonder to hear you, who have 
so much good sense, speak that way, when you know 
what respectable things principles are, and what poor 
craaters we would be without them. No, Glenroy, 
when I die, I will leave those things behind me ; but 
I expect to carry my principles along with me, for no 
doubt they will be of use to me in the next world." 

" That's very true," said Benbowne, waking out of 



DESTINY. 1 79 

a doze ; " on my conscience, we should keep all we 
can." 

" I don't believe there's a man on earth but myself 
that could put up A^ath two such idiots," muttered 
Glenroy. 

"Oh! 'deed, we have all our appointed trials, 
Glenroy," said Mrs. Macauley, looking in his face with 
the most perfect good-nature and sympathy; "but 
we have all a great deal to be thankful for, too, and 
myself most of all, for ' man proposes but God disposes,' 
and so He has disposed you to be a good and kind 
friend to me, Glenroy." 

"You speak a great deal of nonsense," said the Chief, 
whose wrath, having had its full swing, now evapo- 
rated ; " but I don't believe you know what you say, 
and I daresay you mean well; and there's the children 
calling you." And he graciously extended his hand, 
which received a kindly pressure from the placable 
Mrs. ]\Iacauley. 

" Oh, Glenroy ! " cried she, while tears of joy twinkled 
in her eyes ; " is it not a great blessing that you have 
not cast out ^^^th me, and that from no power in me 
to hinder you? — Well, my dears, I'm coming," as 
another call from the children made her hasten to join 
them in a little excursion. 



CHAPTER XXV. 

If it is difficult to impress truth upon the minds of 
children, it must be owned there is nothing so easy 
as to instil prejudice. The effect produced by these 
and similar invectives, which the young Glenroys 
were in the daily habit of hearing, may therefore be 
easily imagined. The Lochdhu family became gradu- 
ally associated in their minds with everything that 
was base and treacherous ; while Eonald in particular 
was the object of a sort of undefined ill-"W'ill to the 
two boys, who had already learnt to ape the Chieftain's 
tone and adopt his sentiments. Even the gentle, 
timid, loving Edith was insensibly borne along in the 
stream. She was still too young to comprehend the 
nature of the case, or to conceive how pride, prejudice, 
and envy, may distort the fairest and simplest state- 
ment. Neither could so monstrous a supposition ever 
enter into her young imagination as that her papa 
could be in the wrong. She could therefore only 
grieve in silence that her once dear friends should 
have been so wicked as to have told lies and cheated, 
and that Ronald, dear Ronald ! — who had given her 
a white owl, and was training a starling for her — 



DESTINY. ' 181 

should have been such a bad boy as to rob Norman, 
and to want to have her for his wife, when he was 
only a poor tacksman's son and she was the daughter 
of the Chief. 

Such was the taint already communicated by pride 
and i?rejudice to the young and simple heart, by 
nature "rich in love and sweet humanity." 

With all Glenroy's violence and gasconading, he 
nevertheless did not proceed to open hostilities with 
the Lochdhu family. When they met, which was but 
seldom, he even felt his spirit so rebuked beneath the 
mild and unassuming, yet open and fearless aspect of 
Captain Malcolm, that his blustering subsided into a 
dead calm, or merely showed itself in a still haughtier 
deportment. His kinsman was at no loss to guess 
that this accession of dignity in his manner was occa- 
sioned by anger and disappointment, and he was aware 
how unavailing argument or exjiostidation would be 
against prejudice so unreasonable and inveterate. He 
also knew that offended pride is only to be propi- 
tiated by the humiliation of the object of offence. 
To attempt, therefore, to conciliate the Chief, on the 
footing of equality, he perceived would only exasper- 
ate him the more ; and as there was nothing on his 
})art which called for concession, he deemed it the 
wisest plan to allow matters to take their course, 
without either seeking or avoiding an explanation. 

Although Captain and Mrs. Malcolm were not so 
Utopian as to attempt to bring up their children 
in utter ignorance of the -wdckedness of the world in 



182 DESTINY. 

general, still less were they given to point out par- 
ticular living instances of it, as they found quite 
enough on record to serve their purpose, without 
applying the scalpel to the characters of all their 
acquaintances. Glenroy's behaviour, therefore, called 
forth no animadversions from them in presence of 
their family. They knew that reason, and the im- 
provement of the understanding, nay, religion itself, 
are often insufficient to destroy prejudices imbibed in 
early life, and that childi-en cannot possibly discrimi- 
nate or comprehend the vast variety of shades which 
are to be found in the same character. With them 
everything and everybody is either good or bad, and 
of course either loved or hated with all the ardour 
of unregulated minds. They were therefore unwill- 
ing to impress their young hearts vdth. feelings of 
enmity and aversion against one, who, with all his 
pride, vanity, and littleness of mind, nevertheless 
possessed claims upon their forbearance and good-will. 

Some childish disorder which showed itself in the 
family soon afforded a plausible excuse for the con- 
tinued estrangement, and Captain Malcolm trusted 
that by the time that was over, the Chieftain's dis- 
appointment Avould be somewhat mollified. And so 
it gradually was in some degree, although, for Avant 
of something better or worse to say, he had got into 
the habit of regularly abusing the whole family at 
least five times a day, imless otherwise engaged. 

Such was the state of afiairs when Captain ]\Ialcolm 
received a letter from Captain Stanley, ofl'ering to 



DESTINY. 183 

take Eoiiald on board his own vessel, the Brilliant, 
then under orders for North America. The com- 
mander and the voyage were Ijoth unexceptionable ; 
liut Captain and Mrs. Malcolm, who had never been 
very desirous of their son's entering on a seafaring- 
life — a life of such hardship and danger — wei'e now 
decidedly averse to it, wlien, by the change of circum- 
stances, a profession had become a very secondary 
consideration. But in vain they endeavoured to 
combat this inclination. Konald had conceived that 
strange and unaccountable predilection for the sea 
which, like all extraordinary propensities, when once 
it has taken possession of the mind, is not to be ex- 
pelled by anything short of dear-bought experience. 
He said, indeed, that he would give it up rather than 
distress his father and mother ; but he said it with 
sorrow, and the disappointment hung so heavily on 
his spirits that his parents thought it wrong to 
oppose so decided a predilection, and the point was 
yielded. They gave their consent, not without hope 
that a single voyage would do more to cure him of 
his naval ardour than all that could be urged agi inst 
it. Preparations were therefore immediately made 
for his departure ; but he said, before he went away, 
he must go to Glenroy to give Edith her starling, and 
to take leave of them all. They had been very shy 
of late. He did not know what was the matter, but 
he would go and see them, and make it up whatever 
it was. And full of kind feelings, Ronald set forth. 
At a little distance from the house he met the 



184 DESTINY. 

two boys and Editli at play upon the lawn, and his 
heart bounded at sight of them. He accosted them 
with all his wonted gladness and frankness of manner, 
but the boys reddened and looked at each other, 
while Edith cast down her eyes and looked sorry. If 
children are sometimes slow to speak the truth, they 
are commonly quick to show it in their behaviour. 
The tongue seems in childhood the only member 
which can yield a ready assent to falsehood. The 
kindling or downcast eye, the blushing cheek, the 
constrained air — all speak the feelings of the heart, 
and 'tis long ere the ingenuous mind is tutored to 
regulate and control them. 

The young party met Eonald's salutation Avith cold 
averted looks, unlike the familiarity of their usual 
manners. 

" You look as if you did not know me," said Eonald, 
with some surprise, as his friendly greeting met with 
no return; "although it is a long while since we 
have met, surely you cannot have forgotten me?" 

"Oh, no! — we have not forgot you," said Master 
Norman scornfully. 

"Then why don't you speak to me, and shake 
hands with mel" 

No answer was returned, 

"And why do none of you come to Lochdhu? 
You need have no fears of the measles now, for the 
little ones have been quite well for more than a 
month ; and " 

"It isn't for that," said Reginald haughtily ; "but 



DESTINY. 185 

it's of no use to ask any questions ; we don't choose 
to answer them, and that's enough. So, good morn- 
ing to 3'ou." 

"No !" cried Eonald in some agitation. "I won't 
go till you have told me why you are not friends with 
me. I'm sure I never did any of you any ill !" 

" You have, though ! " reiterated Norman passion- 
ately ; " and papa says we are never to speak " 

"Hush, Norman!" said Edith, putting her hand 
on his lips, and whispering softly. " You know papa 
told us we were not to repeat anything he said ; and 
I'm sure he would not be angry if we were to Ijid 
Ronald good-bye." 

" I wish you would tell me what it is I have done 
that has made you quarrel with me ; for I'm sure I 
don't know," said lionald, in vain trying to recall any 
oftence he had committed. 

" \Ye shall perhaps ma]:c you know some day," 
said Norman. 

" The sooner the better," said lion aid !)oldly ; 
"for I am going away." 

" Where are you going f 

"To sea." 

"And what have you got in your hand ?" 

"It is Edith's starhng," said Ronald, displaying 
his captive. 

Curiosity got the better of pride. Edith uttered 
an exclamation of pleasure, and the boys drew near, 
with looks of eager expectation. 

"Can it speak, Ronald?" cried she, in a flutter of 



186 DESTINY. 

deliglit, and quite forgetting her reserve. Eonald 
answered by opening the little cage he held in his 
hand, when the bird flew out and perched upon his 
wrist, jabbering something, which he said was, " For- 
get me not ! " Init which rather puzzled the uninitiated, 
and certainly was not so plain as the "Can't get out" 
of Sterne's sentimental starling. 

Such as it was, it was a novelty, and consequently 
hailed with eagerness by the young group, who, one 
and all, for the moment forgot their animosity. 

" Give it to me — make it come to me — let me have 
it," cried all three at once, eagerly extending their 
hands to it. 

" You are frightening it," cried Ronald, raising his 
arm to save the starling from its assailants. 

"Well, but I won't frighten it," cried the two 
boys, again attempting to get hold of it. " Give it to 
me — give it to me !" 

"No, no, I won't give it to either of you. It 
is Edith's Ijird, and I will give it to nobody but 
her." 

"If it is Edith's bird, why don't you give it to 
her?" cried Reginald. 

"Well, stand aAvay both of you," said Ronald, 
"for it is frightened. It is rather wild yet to 
strangers ; but see how it stays with Edith ! " 

"Now, Edith, give it to me!" cried Reginald, 
darting forward to seize it; but Ronald hastily 
stretching out his arm to ward him ofl", the shock 
threw him back, and his head striking against the 



DESTINY. 187 

branch of a tree, he fell, and the blood sprang from 
his nostrils. 

Edith screamed, while Norman sought to stanch 
the blood with his handkerchief, and Eonald flew 
aAvay for some water, which he brought in his cap. 

"I am very sorry for this, Reginald," said he, as 
he returned breathless with haste. "Here is some 
water — drink a little of it; it will do you good." 

But Eeginald pushed away his hand with indigna- 
tion. 

" Tm sure I didn't intend to hurt you, Eeginald," 
said he earnestly; "I was only trying to save the 
starling from you." 

"You had no business to keep it from me," said 
Eeginald passionately. " Yuu had given it to Edith, 
and she had promised it to me, and you ought to 
have been very proud of our touching your bird, or 
anything belonging to you." 

"Proud!" repeated Eonald. 

"Yes, very proud," added Norman; "but we shall 
not demean ourselves any more, so you may take av»ray 
yoiir ugly stupid starling; Edith is not to take it." 

"Edith is not to be dictated to," said Eonald 
warmly ; " she is to do as she likes, and I know very 
well that she would like to have the starling. Would 
you not, Edith?" 

" Edith, I shall never speak to you if you take his 
bird," cried Eeginald; " so take your choice." 

Edith, with tears in her eyes, looked imploringly 
at her tyrants, and then at the starling. 



188 DESTINY. 

" You are not to take his bird, I tell you, Edith," 
cried Norman, in a passion. "It will tell lies and 
cheat." 

"What do you meanf cried Ronald, kindling. 
" Do you mean to say I tell lies' and cheat ? Who- 
ever says so is a liar, and if either of you Avere as 
strong as I am, you durst not say so ; but you know 
I won't fight with a less boy than myself." 

" If you hadn't given me this cowardly IjIow," said 
Reginald, " I should have fought you on the spot, and 
so I will yet some day." 

"I did not intend to strike you," said Ronald. 
" I told you I was sorry for it. I didn't come here 
to fight you : I came to be friends with you all, and 
to shake hands with you before I go away ; but if you 
are determined not to do it, I can't help it." 

The boys looked a little ashamed, and Avalked 
sullenly on, while Edith lingered, and cast many a 
loving look to her starling. 

" I shall carry home the bird for you, Editli," said 
Ronald, " and give it to you there, and Mrs. Macauley 
Avill take care of it for you ; at least, you will part 
friends with me, won't you?" and Edith, Avith down- 
cast eyes, uttered a faint affirmative. The party 
walked on in silence till they reached the Castle, when 
Ronald said, " Here is your starling, Edith ; take it, 
and let us be friends before I go." 

Edith looked with soft earnest eyes, as if she longed 
to be reconciled, and her hand was extended, when 
Reginald interposed. 



DESTINY. 189 

" You must choose, then, between him and me," 
said he passionately. "I shall never speak to you if 
you are friends with him." 

If Edith had followed the dictates of her heart, 
she would most probably have chosen the unvarying, 
kind, generous, protecting friendship of Ronald to 
the somewhat capricious and often tyrannical prefer- 
ence of Reginald ; but, too timid and gentle to dare to 
have a Avill of her ova\, she trembled at the thouglits 
of even betraying her good-will towards him, for fear 
of the displeasure it would draw down upon her. 
Thus early is " the fear of man a snare " for the young 
lieart. 

"I cannot take it, Ronald," said she, bursting into 
tears ; and all three walked into the house, and shut 
the door in Ronald's face. Ronald felt both anger and 
sorrow at such unkind behaviour, and, deeply morti- 
fied at Edith's joining against him, in a paroxysm of 
disappointment he tossed up the starling in the air. 
"There," cried he, "you may go ; since Edith won't 
have you, no one else shall;" and in bitterness of 
heart he retraced his Avay to his own kindly home. 

It may be supposed what a sight and a story tliis 
was for Glenroy ; his children all dabl )led over with 
]jlood — the noble blood of his nephew shed by the 
plebeian hand of the tacksman's son — his own blood 
boiled to think of it ! Dire were the anathemas 
uttered against the perpetrator of this outrage ; and 
though not naturally a sanguinary man, yet, had the 
power of former days been in his own hands, there is 



190 DESTINY. 

no saying in Avhat manner he might have thought 
proper to avenge this iiidignity. Most hkely in the 
Rob Roy strain — 

" And to Ms sword he would have said, 
Do thou my sovereign will enact ; 

Judge thou of law and fact." 

But after Reginald's face had been washed with 
vinegar', and his dress changed, there appeared no 
injury to redress. The traces of it did not, however, 
pass so easily from Glenroy's mind ; he was never 
weary of detailing and denouncing the exaggerated 
statement of Ronald's enormities, till his name became 
a byword and reproach throughout the family. 



CHAPTER XXVI. 

But Eonalrl wai5 soon to be beyond the reach of Glen- 
roy's contumely, for the day and hour of his departure 
liad arrived. The parting hour ! that hour which, 
even in all its bitterness, we would yet fondly pro- 
long, and when past, would many times gladly — oh ! 
how gladly — recall ! There is something peculiarly 
aftecting in the first separation that takes place in a 
family, which, amidst many difhcidties and privations, 
has ever preserved in its own bosom the elements of 
happiness — of sweet domestic happiness; those precious 
elements which, once scattered, are so seldom, if ever, 
united again ! 

" My home of j'outli ! oh, if indeed to part 

With the sonl's loved one be a mournful thing, 
When we go forth in buoyancy of heart, 

And bearing all the glories of the spring 
For life to breathe on — is it less to meet 
When these are faded ? who shall call it sweet ? 

Even though love's mingling tears may haply bring 
Balm as they fall, too well their heavy showers 
Teach us how much is lost of all that once was ours. " ' 

Yes ; search as we will, let us ransack east and 

west, earth and sea, for their peculiar treasures ; it is 

1 Felicia Hemans. 



192 DESTINY. 

not these, even in their fullest attainment, that bring 
joy to the heart, which can only find its happiness in 
the exercise of its best affections ; and which, when it 
survives these, lives but to sigh over its withered 
hopes, its buried love. Alas ! if in the long and 
dreary interval of separation, it were foreseen what 
griefs were to be borne, what ties were to be severed, 
what hearts were to be seared or broken; who of 
woman born could bear the sight and live 1 But 'tis 
in mercy these things are hidden from our eyes ! 

No foreboding of evil greater than the present 
filled the hearts of the sorrowing family who were 
now assembled to part with him who was the loved 
one of all ; for his parents' hearts were strong in faith 
in that Almighty Power, in the shadow of whose 
wings there is safety for all who put their trust in 
Him. They knew that it was not in an arm of flesh 
to save when the decree had gone forth to smite ; for 
they had seen — as who has not 1 — the child of a thou- 
sand cares, the hope of some noble house, the heir of 
some mighty name — the only, the all, the idolised one 
— whose pillow had been a mother's heart, whose 
safeguard a father's arms, smitten even when pressed 
to their hearts, and torn from their unavailing grasp 
by the stern hand of Death ; while the wet sea-boy, 
whose cradle had been the waves, who had been 
bufieted by the stormy winds, and tossed on the 
raging billows, with none to watch over him, none to 
care for him, had l^een upheld and preserved by Him 
whose "way is in the sea," and whose "path is in the 



DESTINY. 193 

great waters," and in whose "hands are the issues of 
hfe and of deatli." 

It was this heavenly confidence which gave forti- 
tude to the father and resignation to the mother as 
they blessed again and again the object of their love 
and their prayers, and gazed upon the treasured 
features, dimmed as they were by their parting tears. 
Years might pass away liefore they should behold 
them again, but the remembrance of them, they felt, 
would never pass away till the last hours of life. 

But difierent from the calm and holy sorrow of 
the parents are the feelings of the young and imagina- 
tive upon these solemn occasions. Amidst their grief 
there is still a spirit of joy within them, and their 
hearts beat high with fond anticipations of a world 
their fancy has pictured so fair, and which is fraught 
to them with all, with more than all, the world ever 
gave, or has to give. 

And what though there be error and exaggeration 
in their romantic dreams ? And what though dangers 
and disappointments are sure to quell their towerin"- 
hopes of youthful enthusiasm 1 The delusion springs 
from a lofty source, from which all that is great in 
thought and noble in action has its rise ; from those 
aspirations after a higher destiny than that of mere 
everyday existence, which seem inherent in minds of 
noble stamp, and 

" Speak their high descent and glorious end." 

Such were the feelings of young Eonald as the pic- 

VOL. I. O n 



194 DESTINY. 

tured joys of a sailor's life dwelt upon his imagination, 
and braced his heart to leave all those beloved most 
dearly. The stately ship, the swelling sails, the dash- 
ing waves, the freshening breeze, the unknown lands, 
the excitement, the perils, the renoAvn, over all these 
his ardent spirit had cast a charm wliich he longed to 
realise. Yet when the time came, still he lingered 
amidst the encircling arms and the linked hands, and 
the fond tones, and the tears, and the kisses, and 
mutual promises not to forget. But last and longest 
did he remain locked in his mother's arms — that 
mother so loved, so adored ; must he then leave her 1 
It was a mighty effort to break away from all he 
had ever known and loved ; the tender parents, the 
happy playmates, the dear familiar faces, and scenes 
which had stamped the first impressions on his heart. 
His very dog, his faithful Bran, how his long, mournful 
howl rang in his ear as the boat put oft" from land, 
and he was left ! For the moment Ronald's bright 
prospects all melted av:ay beneath the warm gush of 
tender aff'ection, as he thought, "Why have I left 
them ? I might have stayed ; and now, perhaps, I may 
never see them more ! " But the day was one to chase 
all sadness from the heart ; the blue waters glittered 
in sunshine ; a summer breeze filled the sails of the 
little boat, which skimmed along like a thing of life ; 
and other and fairer scenes soon met Ronald's eye 
than those of his mountain home and native shores. 



CHAPTER XXVII. 

By the succession of his son, and his o\\'n eventual 
inheritance, Captain Malcohn Avas now in a different 
situation from what he had hitherto been, as the pro- 
jirietor of a small farm, and the tenant of his proud 
Chief. But although he met with all that deference and 
attention which ever waits upon worldly prosperity, 
there was no alteration in his simple habits and 
demeanour, to the surprise of those selfish, sordid 
spirits, who look upon wealth as the sunimum honwn 
of human felicity. Whether Mr. M'Dow was of the 
number we do not pretend to say ; but at this time 
the following letter arrived from him : — 

" My dear Sir — The preparations for the depart- 
ure of your son, and the consequent bustle and con- 
fusion which such an event unavoidably creates in a 
family, prevented my having the honour of communi- 
cating with you sooner upon a subject of an extremely 
delicate and most interesting nature. From the vari- 
ous small attentions I have for some time past been 
in the practice of paying to your eldest daughter. 
Miss Lucy, I have no doubt you will be pretty fully 
prepared for the communication I am about to make 



196 DESTINY. 

to you, looking upon this mode of proceeding as by 
far the most honourable and manly on such an occa- 
sion. From the first period of my entering on the 
ministry it was my firm determination to embrace 
the earhest opportunity of entering into the married 
state, not only as being most conducive to my o\m 
comfort and respectability, but as what the world 
would naturally expect from me when placed in inde- 
pendent circumstances and in an elevated station in 
society. I was very soon captivated with the modesty, 
good temper, beauty, and accomplishments of your 
daughter; but the difficulties which I found myself 
involved in, in consequence of having to raise a 
summons for augmentation, together Avith the uncer- 
tainty as to the final result of my reclaiming petition, 
made me at once resolve to act as became a man of 
honour and integrity, by refraining from paying my 
addresses until such time as I should have obtained a 
final decreet. I have now the pleasure of informing 
you that by last night's post I received the agreeable 
intelligence that the Court has found me entitled to 
my augmentation, and also decern for a small addi- 
tion to the manse and thorough repairs to my offices, 
which, although not what I by any means think my- 
self entitled to, yet, upon the whole, will make things 
pretty decent. That being the case, there no longer 
remains any necessity for my concealing the attach- 
ment I have for a considerable time entertained iot 
your daughter, and for soliciting her hand in marriage. 
From what I have observed, I think I have every 



DESTINY. 197 

reason to flatter myself with a favourable response 
from her, although, in justice to myself, I must again 
assure you that I have made no direct appeal to her 
affections but such as you have been privy to. With 
regard to my family connections and private fortune, 
I beg leave to subjoin the following statement for the 
satisfaction of yourself and Mrs. Malcolm. 

"My father, as is well known, w^as for upwards 
of forty years schoolmaster on the mortification of 
Myreside, and although the emoluments Avere not at 
that time what they are now, still they were such as 
enabled him to live like a gentleman, and to cut a 
good figure in the world. I need scarcely add that 
he was a man of a most highly respectable character, 
and of uncommon learning and abilities — in fact, cpiite 
a superior man ; he Avas nearly related to the great 
M'Dow of M'Dow. At the same time he set no great 
value upon these things himself, and for my own part, 
I am no genealogist either, and have never given 
myself any trouble to prove the antiquity of my 
family. With respect to my fortune, I have not 
been much in the way of amassing wealth, but what 
I have is vested in the three per cent consols, and 
amounts to something upAvards of £200. I have 
likewise two substantial top fiats in the Gallowgate, 
Glasgow, one of which my mother hferents; the 
other I let off for £16 per annum. I am far from 
expecting, my dear sir, that, with your numerous 
family, you should be able to afford splendid fortunes 
to your children ; at the same time, as your prospects, 



198 DESTINY. 

my dear sir, are very materially improved, I have no 
doubt you will at once see the propriety of doing all 
that lies in your power to enable your daughter to 
cut a good figure in the world as my wife. But as it 
is well known that money has never been the prin- 
cipal object with me, I think I may safely trust to 
your own good sense and liberality, and gentlemanly 
conduct, for a suitable and genteel portion with your 
daughter. On my part, I am willing to make such 
settlements as may be deemed just and reasonable on 
my wife, who in addition will, in the event of surviv- 
ing me, be entitled to <£30 per aiiAium from the 
Widows' Scheme.^ I beg the favour of an acknow- 
ledgment of this per bearer, and I hope I may be 
permitted the honour of waiting on the ladies in the 
course of to-morrow forenoon; in the meantime I 
request you will do me the favour to deliver my 
respectful compliments to them, with my most special 
devoirs to Miss Lucy, and with the utmost regard, 
" I am, my dear Sir, 
" Your most faithful humble Servant, 

" Dun. M'Dow. 

"P.S. — For your further satisfaction, I think it 
proper to hand you over a sight of the testimonials of 
my character, which, in justice to myself, I thought 
it necessary to procure at the time when I was apply- 
ing for the presentation. D. M'D." 

^ In English, a matrimonial design ; in Scotch, a pecuniary 
compensation. 



DESTINY. 199 

The " Testimonials " were, as usual, such as might 
have entitled the testified to the honours of an apothe- 
osis, and the eulogy uttered by Mark Antony over the 
dead body of Julius Caesar would have sounded tame 
and cold in comparison of the panegyrics lavished 
on Mi\ M'Dow to his own face. From a voluminous 
mass of evidence, the following may serve as a slight 
specimen : — 

"My dear Sir — It is with the most unfeigned 
satisfaction I take up my pen to bear my public testi- 
mony to worth such as yours, enriched and adorned 
as it is with abilities of the first order — polished and 
refined by all that learning can bestow. From the 
early period at which our friendship commenced, few, 
I flatter myself, can boast of a more intimate acquaint- 
ance with you than myself ; but such is the retiring 
modesty of your nature, that I fear, were I to express 
the high sense I entertain of your merit, I might 
wound that delicacy which is so prominent a feature 
in your character. I shall therefore merely affirm, 
that your talents I consider as of, the very highest 
order ; your learning and erudition "are deep, various, 
and profound ; while your scholastic researches have 
ever been conducted on the broad basis of Christian 
moderation and gentlemanly liberality. Your doc- 
trines I look uj)on as of the most sound, practical 
description, calculated to superinduce the clearest and 
most comprehensive system of Christian morals, to 
which your own character and conduct afford an apt 



200 DESTINY. 

illustration. As a preacher, your language is nervous, 
copious, and highly rhetorical; your action in the 
pulpit free, easy, and graceful. As a companion, 
your colloquial powers are of no ordinary description, 
while the dignity of your manners, combined with 
the suavity of your address, render your company 
universally sought after in the very first society. In 
short, to sum up the whole, I know no man more 
likely than yourself to adorn the gospel, both by your 
precept and example. With the utmost esteem and 
resjject, 

" I am, dear Sir, 

" Most faithfully and sincerely yours, 

" KODERICK M'CrAW, 

Professor of B dies Lettres." 

But Lucy was not dazzled either by the Testi- 
monials, or the Decreet, or the Augmentation, or the 
flats in the Gallowgate, or the Widows' Scheme ; and, 
to Mr. M'Dow's astonishment and indignation, a 
polite though peremptory refusal Avas returned to his 
modest proposals. 



CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Life seemed to be now holding its most even tenor 
both at the Castle and the farm, for both showed so 
little variety beyond the most common casualties that 
for some time not a single occurrence in either family 
would have served to adorn a tale, scarcely even to 
point a moral. The Chief, although his rancour was 
gradually abating, still preserved a stately distance 
towards his kinsman ; and as their habits and pursuits 
were quite opposite, they seldom came in contact with 
each other. Glenroy, in spite of the downfall of his 
hopes, still pursued his course of revelry and reckless 
profusion, while Captain Malcolm, undazzled by the 
glare of future wealth and consequence, continued his 
former simple, frugal mode of life; his chief aim 
being to render his children happy, virtuous, and in- 
dependent. 

But the blank Ronald had left in the domestic 
circle remained a dreary chasm for many a dull day 
and long night ; for Ronald had been the beloved of 
all, and all missed him, from the eldest to the 
youngest. The accounts that had hitherto iDcen re- 
ceived, both of and from him, had been highly satis- 



202 DESTINY. 

factory. His captain and he were mutually pleased 
with each other, and the young sailor's naval ardour 
had suffered no diminution during the time the ship 
had remained at the Nore, after he had joined. But 
soon after that its destination had been changed, and 
instead of being despatched, as Avas originally intended, 
on a six weeks' voyage to a healthy climate, it had 
been ordered to cruise in distant seas, and in another 
hemisphere. This was a disappointment to Captain 
and Mrs. Malcolm, and an aggravation to the anxiety 
they naturally experienced on their boy's account — an 
anxiety which, even under the influence of pious trust, 
could not fail to be felt by fond parents for a son of 
such promise. Their hearts were indeed occasionally 
cheered by letters from both Eonald and his captain, 
when they happened to hail a ship in their progress, 
and the contents were always of a gratifying nature. 
Captain Stanley was delighted with Ronald, and 
Eonald was delighted with the sea, and said he would 
not exchange his hammock for all Inch Orran. All 
he wanted was to witness a battle and a storm, and 
when he had seen these, he should be satisfied. 
"Heaven forbid his wishes should be soon gratified !" 
said his mother, as she read the young enthusiast's 
letter ; but it seemed as if Heaven, in its mysterious 
decrees, had otherwise ordained. 

Many months passed after this, without either 
letters or tidings, and the anxiety of the parents 
became gradually more intense. Winter days and 
stormy nights and summer suns rolled on, and still 



DESTINY. 203 

all w^as silence. To the watchfulness of expectation 
now succeeded the feverishness of apprehension, and 
then came that awful stillness, the oppressive Aveight 
of time which we have loaded with our own dread 
presentiments — when all nature seems to be wrapped 
in silence and in gloom, when every object appears to 
proclaim the downfall of our hopes, when the gayest 
scenes only move us to tears, when the gladdest tones 
only sound as the death-knell of our happiness. Oh ! 
many were the midnight prayers breathed from a 
sleepless pillow wet with a mother's tears, and duly 
were the streaming eyes and supplicating hands raised 
to Heaven, while "Thy will be done !" yet trembled 
on the lip. In vain the anguished parents strove 
to hide from each other the dismal forebodings which 
filled their souls. The averted look, the stifled sigh, 
the listless step, the sudden start, the vacant yet 
searching eye, all betrayed the secret of those hearts 
which for the first time Avere closed against each other. 
At length the bolt fell, and by one stroke these hearts 
were laid bare. The ship had foundered, and every 
soul on board had perished ! A plank, on which were 
a few letters of her name, and a shattered boat, had 
been picked up, and all was told. In the ocean depths 
all had gone down, and many a wave since then had 
dashed over the trackless spot where lay the young, 
the brave, the loved — their tale a secret till that day 
when the seas shall give up their dead. 

" Oh, were her tale of sorrow known 

'Twere something to the breaking heart, 



204 DESTINY. 

The pang of doubt Avould then be gone, 
And Fancy's endless dreams depart. 

It may not be ! — there is no ray 

By which her doom we may explore ; 

We only know she sail'd away, 

And ne'er was seen, nor heard of more !" 

Ah ! who can tell the anguish of a parent's heart 
sorrowing for the loss of their child? He only to 
whom all hearts are open, and who, remembering we 
are clay, forbids not those fond and mournful recollec- 
tions with which we invest the perished form of the 
object of our love. Alas ! how does our startled fancy 
recoil from the first dread thought, and seek to cheat 
itself, by conjuring up, and enthroning anew, that 
image in our hearts which our reason sternly tells us 
is no more. No more ! the being all life and motion, 
and strength and beauty, whom we have so lately 
held to our breasts — whose voice even now sounds as 
sweetest music in our ear — in whose eyes we were wont 
to read as in a book — whose vacant seat still stands 
before us — whose thousand mementoes lie scattered 
around us — is that being indeed gone from the face 
of this bright earth for ever? Still, still would we 
seek the living among the dead ! In vain does 
human sympathy seek to pour its oil on the dark and 
troubled waters of affliction. 'Tis a hand divine can 
alone stem the torrent which overflows our soul ; 'tis 
a voice from heaven alone that can speak peace to our 
stricken hearts, Avhen it tells us the dust we so loved 
on earth, Avhether it be scattered o'er the trackless 
desert, or be buried in the dark and fathomless abysses 



1 



DESTINY. 205 

of the ocean, Ho will again Ijuild up in immortal 
beauty, and restore to that divine inheritance, where 
there is no more sorrow or death. Oh, blessed are 
they who, even in the anguish of their spirits, can 
bring their fainting hearts to His footstool, and there, 
with meek submission, say, " Not my will, but Thine 
be done." With such, "weeping may endure for a 
night, but joy cometh in the morning." 



CHAPTER SXIX. 

In the affliction of the bereaved family it would have 
been no small comfort to them to have been visited 
occasionally by a faithful and spiritual-minded pastor, 
one who could have soothed their downcast spirits, 
and have strengthened their religious faith, and have 
recalled to their startled minds those cheering pro- 
mises which in the first moments of anguish are so 
apt, even by the best, to be forgotten or but faintly 
remembered. But it was not in the house of mourn- 
ing that Mr. M'Dow's presence was wont to shine. 
He called, indeed, but he saw only Captain Malcolm. 
" Sorrow is a sacred thing," not to be subjected to the 
common eye, and Mrs. Malcolm and Lucy felt as 
though the presence of Mr. M'Dow would only have 
profaned the memory of the departed, and harrowed 
up the feelings of the living. Sorrow had indeed 
sunk deep into the soul of the bereft mother. Eonald 
had been unconsciously the idol of her affections, and 
in the anguish of losing him she felt that he had 
been the dearest to her of all her children. She 
bowed, indeed, Avith meek submission to the will of 
Heaven, but the elasticity of her mind seemed gone. 



d 



DESTINY. 207 

All was calm and resigned, but it was the calm of 
deep suffering, the resignation of a silenced heart. 
Often in the dead of night there seemed to break 
upon her startled ear the sound of the raging sea, and 
the tempestuous winds, and the cry — the piercing cry, 
of her dro\vning boy; and then to wake to silence 
and sad conviction that all was not a dream ! But 
prayer would again bring down its holy calm to the 
troubled mind, and the pious mourner would meekly 
confess that it was good for her to be thus brought, 
even by the hand of sorrow, to the throne of grace. 
It was at this time that a visit from the good Mr. 
Stuart came to cheer and invigorate her drooping 
spirit. 

He was a man whose whole appearance and deport- 
ment were so emblematic of the sanctity of his char- 
acter, that even a child would have felt that there 
was a holy man. He was of a pale, thoughtful cast of 
countenance, but his thoughts were evidently such as 
savoured more of heavenly things than low-born 
cares, for its expression was at once elevated and 
benign. He 

'* Bore his gi-eat commission iu his look," 

and the sense of that sacred trust gave a certain 
dignified humility to the apostolic simplicity of his 
demeanour. 

It is difficult to describe a piety so consistent in 
all its parts, and so unvarjdng in its practice, which 
sheds a Hving unction over the whole character, 



208 DESTINY. 

whose influence is deeply felt in the dail}' intercourse 
of life, but whose results do not dazzle by any sud- 
den or powerful impression. Human life, indeed, is 
composed of such an unceasing succession of minute 
occurrences and humble duties and undignified occu- 
pations, that it would seem tedious and trivial to 
narrate the course of even a good man's one Avell- 
spent day ; but, as some one has well observed, it is 
fidelity in the aggregate of these little things that 
forms the true solidity and greatness of the Christian 
character. Even so it was with the venerable pastor 
of Auchnagoil. Grandeur, worldly grandeur, would 
have heard with a disdainful smile the simple annals 
of his obscure life ; but how much of moral grandeur 
was there in the self-immolation of his Christian 
course — a course at once humble and sublime ! He 
was indeed a " living sermon " of the truths he taught, 
and to inculcate these truths by precept and example 
was the sole aim of his consecrated office. To succour 
the distressed, to minister to the sick, to help the 
poor, to comfort the mourner, to cheer the penitent, 
to reclaim the wanderer — for this he laboured in the 
far-extended district which his parish contained ; for 
this he \dsited the distant village and the lonely hut, 
seeking out each individual of his widely -scattered 
flock ; for this he braved the winter's flood and sum- 
mer's heat ; for this he crossed many a rough and 
tempestuous ferry, and climbed many a rugged and 
dreary mountain, and traversed many an unfrequented 
glen. 



DESTINY. 209 

'* Yet would not grace cue spark of pride allow, 
Or cry, ' Stand off, I'm holier far than thou !'" 

For he was no wikl enthusiast, nor narrow-minded 
sectarian, nor hot-headed zealot ; but he was a man, 
plain, artless, and simple in deed and word : his high- 
est gifts meekness, temperance, patience, faith, and 
love, and the highest words wherein he taught them 
were words from the Book of God. 

But though Mr. Stuart's character Avas thus fair 
and consistent in the eyes of others, in his own esti- 
mation how differently did he view it ! "Unworthy 
and unprofitable servant that I am," he would exclaim 
to himself, " how mixed are all my motives ! How 
selfish are my best intentions ! How polluted my 
purest aftections ! How deficient are my best works ! 
But Thou hast told the weary troubled soul to come 
unto Thee, and Thou wilt give it peace :" peace, how 
different and how superior to the outward satisfaction 
of the vain, seK-satisfied, worldly mind ! 

Such are the feelings of the true Christian. His 
warfare is within, and in proportion as lie is enabled 
by the eye of faith to discern the holiness and purity 
of God, so shall he also perceive the guilt and frailty 
of his own imperfect nature. 

He spoke, and his words came like balm to the 
wounded hearts of the sorrowing parents, for they 
came fraught with cheering promises, and glorious 
hopes, of eternal hfe. He bade them turn their 
thoughts from the contemplation of that on which, 
at such a time, our thoughts, alas ! are too prone to 

VOL. I. p D. 



210 DESTINY. 

dwell, even the material part of that immortal being 
once so precious in our sight. 

He had known Ronald, and he knew the good seed 
that had been soAvn in his young heart, and felt con- 
vinced that in the hour of peril that would not have 
failed him. 

"I am far from sajang that you ought not to weep 
for him you have lost," said the good pastor, while his 
own eyes Avere moistened with sorrow. " Such a 
state, even if attainable, would be far from desirable ; 
it would defeat the purpose for which God hath been 
pleased to bestow upon us warm and kindly affections. 
We know that afflictions are sent not as punishments, 
but as messengers of love to lead us unto Hinx" 

"I feel it is so," said Mrs. Malcolm meekly; "but 

still, my rebellious heart " She stopped, but 

struggling to overcome her emotion, added, " Alas ! 
I often think, had my boy but died in my arms, I 
could have yielded him up with less reluctance to the 
will of God. I feel as if I could then have said with 
greater sincerity than I fear I do now, 'The Lord 
gave, and the Lord hath taken aw^ay ; blessed be the 
name of the Lord.' " 

" That is a natural feeling," said Mr. Stuart ; " the 
horrors of death always come aggravated to our minds 
when accompanied, as in this case, with anything of 
suddenness or mystery ; we are then apt to imagine 
it more dreadful than any reahty, forgetting that 
' the Lord is mightier than the noise of many waters, 
yea, than the Avaves of the sea.' True, 'the silver 



DESTINY. 211 

cord is loosened, and the golden bowl is broken,' and 
the dust has returned to the dust, but the spirit has 
also returned to God who gave it. What matters it, 
then, hoio we enter on the valley of the shadow of 
death, when we know we are to pass through it by 
the light of those Divine footsteps which have trod 
it before us ? They still remain, and will remain till 
time shall be no more, to guide us to our heavenly 
home, Avhere tliis 'corruptible shall put on incorrup- 
tion, and this mortal shall be clothed with immor- 
tality ; ' where we shall enter on ' glory such as eye 
hath not seen, nor ear heard, and which it hath not 
entered into the heart of man to conceive.'" 

" With such glorious prospects of perfect and end- 
less felicity at the end of the Chi'istian course," said 
Captain Malcolm, "it indeed matters little whether 
we enter upon them by lingering decay, or by a stroke 
of the sword, or the shock of a wave ; whichever it is, 
we must believe that it is the means our Heavenly 
Father deemed the best; and in that belief let us 
humbly acquiesce." 

"And in that simple act of acquiescence we shall 
feel a sure and certain rest for our souls," said Mr. 
Stuart. " Time, it has been truly said, indeed obli- 
terates sorrow from the worldly heart, and leaves it 
no better than it found it ; but religion beautifies and 
sanctifies affliction in the heart of the Christian, and 
causes it even to bring forth new and more abundant 
graces ; the fountain of bitter water may yet become the 
well of living water springing up to everlasting life." 



212 DESTINY. 

" Feeling and acknowledging as I do the truth of 
these things," said Mrs. Malcolm, "how weak, how 
sinfid, it seems to allow my soul to be thus cast down ! 
I laiow the conditions on which every blessing is 
bestowed— that we must one day part with it ; and 
I believe that God knows best when that parting 
should be ; and yet," she added, while the tears 
flowed silently down her cheek, " my son ! my 
son!" 

" Do not judge yourself thus strictly," said the 
good pastor; "you do not mourn as those who have 
no hope ; the spirit is willing to believe all things, 
though the flesh is weak to endure them. You 
believe that God gkes in love, believe that He also 
takes in love, and your heart will not be troubled 
beyond measure ; for ' light is soAvn for the righteous, 
and gladness for the upright in heart;' be of good 
courage, then, for God's promise is not made in vain : 
' They who sow in tears shall reap in joy.' " 

Such, though imperfectly detailed, was the tenor 
of the faithful minister's conversation with the afilicted 
parents ; and he left them soothed by his visit, and 
cheered by the promise of repeating it as often as his 
wanderings brought him near their dwelling. 

Perhaps the first pleasurable emotions of an out- 
ward kind to which the bereaved heart is awakened 
are to be found in the deep and simple enjoyment 
of the beauties of nature. And where to the reflective 
mind and cultivated taste are not these beauties to be 
found 1 Even on the barren mountain and the dreary 



DESTINY. 213 

moor, on the ever-flowing waters and the ever-changing 
clouds, 

" No plot so narrow, be but Nature there, 
No waste so vacant, but may well emplojr 
Each faculty of sense, and keep the heart 
Awake to love and beauty ! " 

To those whose eyes and hearts have long been closed, 
whether by sickness or sorrow, but are again opened to 
the sootliing influence and gentle harmony of nature, 

" The meanest floweret of the vale, 
The simplest note that swells the gale. 
The common earth, the air, the skies," 

are indeed to them "as opening paradise," and in- 
sensibly they " feel that they are happier than they 
know." 



CHAPTER XXX. 

While the mansion of Loclidhu was thus darkened 
by the shadow of death, we may turn to the habitation 
of Glenroy, which was basking in the full blaze of 
prosperity. Ronald's mournful fate, however, had not 
failed to excite its due share of sorrow and of sympathy. 
Even the Chief's animosity had been greatly softened, 
and the two boys remembered with shame and com- 
punction their unkind treatment of him at their last 
meeting ; while Edith shed many a tear of remorse 
and regret over the memory of the loved companion 
of her childhood. She was again permitted to renew 
her intimacy with the family at Inch Orrau, and her 
affectionate heart felt as though its only reparation 
could be in devoting herself to the consolation of the 
mourners. 

Years rolled on, and the young people either gradu- 
ally outgrew their childish faults, or exchanged them 
— as is often the case — for others less obvious to 
common perception; but so it was, the spoiled, for- 
ward, petulant boys were now transformed into 
handsome, spirited, pleasing youths, the pride and 
delight of the Chieftain — the admired and applauded 



DESTINY. 215 

of all his friends and followers. Not that Norman 
possessed any distinguishing traits of excellence in 
himself, for he inherited much of his father's character, 
along with his features. He was proud, overbearing, 
and selfish, but he was handsome, light-hearted, active, 
and brave, Avhich, with his figure and fortune, Avere 
requisites sufficient to ensure his popularity as a future 
Chief. Had it been possible for him to have been 
eclipsed in his father's eyes or house, he certainly 
would have been so by his cousin Reginald, who was 
a perfect model of manly beauty, and seemed in his 
person to have realised all that Grecian sculpture had 
imagined of faultless form and feature. The materials 
of his mind and character seemed also of a richer and 
nobler stamp than Norman's. He had good feehngs, 
great sensibility, an ardent, romantic imagination, and 
a high-spirited scorn of everything mean and base ; 
and although he was at the same time headstrong, 
self-willed, and impetuous, the slave of impulse and 
the sport of passion, yet, as his impulse often led him 
to what was good, and his passion was a mere gust, 
these in eai'ly life showed scarcely as defects, but 
seemed merely the natural exuberance of youthful 
blood and unchecked spirits. The seeds of many 
good qualities had been sown in him by nature, but 
not much had been done by education to bring them 
to maturity ; the tares had been suff'ered to grow up 
with the wheat, and both were now so completely 
blended together that it would have required no 
common skill and pains to have distinguished and 



216 DESTINY. 

separated them. The attempt, however, had not 
been made, and which should predominate, would 
depend upon the circumstances in which he might be 
placed, and the temptations to which he might be 
exposed. Hitherto, nothing had occurred to call forth 
any of the latent feelings of the heart, or proclaim the 
master-passion of the soul, for his life had merely 
been that of an indulged and pampered boy, who had 
never kno^vn a trial, or had a wish ungratified. So 
bright and sunny an existence, then, could scarcely fail 
to produce a pleasing influence on the naturally good 
temper and high spirits, as the soil will bo richest in gay 
flowers where the harrow has never entered. But, 
" not only by the warmtli 



And soothing sunshine of delightful things 
Do minds gi'o\y up and flourish." 

Alas ! who has ever beheld the endowments of 
nature and the advantages of fortune realise in the 
happiness of their possessor the splendid visions they 
seemed destined to fulfil 1 

Mr. Ellis had frequently urged on Glenroy the pro- 
priety of sending the young men to finish their studies 
at an English university : but his remonstrances were 
always answered by a quotation from Dr. Johnson, 
the only one the Chief had ever burdened liis memory 
with, that " an English education could only tame a 
Highland Chieftain into insignificance." — "And, sir, 
my son shall not be tamed into insignificance at any 
of your English universities." 

Mr. Ellis was therefore obliged to give up the 



DESTINY. 217 

point ; and having written on the subject to Sir 
Angus, he only waited to receive his instructions as 
to the future plans to be adopted for the completing 
of Eeginald's education before he took leave of his 
pupils, and relinquished what was now a mere nomi- 
nal office — that of their preceptor. 

Glenroy liked his daughter as well as he could like 
anything incapable of holding or transmitting the 
chieftainship, yet still she was rather an insignificant 
person in his estimation. He Avas, however, pleased 
to hear on all hands that Edith was reckoned the 
prettiest girl in the county, and that Ecginald and 
she had already formed an attachment to each other ; 
as that was at once securing a good establishment for 
her, and saving himself all trouble as to her future 
disposal. Although it has been said, the love which 
grows by degrees is more nearly allied to friendship 
than to passion, nevertheless the attachment of the 
cousins seemed to form an exception to this general 
rule, for their love had continued to grow with their 
growth, and strengthen with their strength. 

As the attachment Avas sanctioned by both sides of 
the house, the course of their love, contrary to that of 
all other loves, seemed destined to run in a very 
smooth channel, and it Avas already settled that the 
marriage should take place upon Reginald's attaining 
the age of twenty-one. No envious cloud, therefore, 
maiTed the brightness of their horizon ; they stood 
on " the threshold of life," and all life's fairest pro- 
spects lay spread out before them. 



218 DESTINY. 

A too strict similarity of character is perhaps not 
favourable either to love or friendship, and the differ- 
ence of disj)ositions in the young lovers seemed only 
such as would give greater charm to their attachment. 
Reginald was all fire and impetuosity, while Edith 
was all gentleness and timidity. With her father 
and brother she found little congeniality of mind, or 
interchange of sentiment, for their characters were 
cast in a different mould from hers ; but there was 
much of a kindred nature in the more romantic and 
imaginative mind of her cousin, and she loved him 
with her whole heart, as the only being with whom 
she could hold unreserved communion. Possessed of 
deep sensibility, and dwelling with the object of her 
earliest affection amid scenes of grandeur and beauty, 
calculated to call forth and nourish all that was 
romantic and tender in her nature, it was not sur- 
prising that Edith should yield to the dominion of an 
artless affection, unsullied by the tarnish of the world, 
and live in a creation of her own. Outwardly calm 
and serene, all the powers of her mind were concen- 
trated in those feelings, which, hidden from the 
common eye, had entwined themselves with every 
fibre of her heart, and choked each plant of humble, 
wholesome influence. 

Her mind, though sensitive and feminine, was 
naturally strong, but it was relaxed and enfeebled 
from the constant habit of looking to Reginald as the 
ruler and arbiter of her very thoughts. The materials 
of excellence and happiness had been largely bestowed 



DESTINY. 219 

upon her, but she was ignorant of their vaUie, and 
confided them wholly to the keeping of another. It 
was to Eeginald she looked for her daily portion of 
happiness ; it was in his heart she anchored her trust, 
and there sought her abiding place of rest and refuge. 



CHAPTER XXXL 

One of the many gifts Mrs. ]\tacauley had received 
from nature was her faculty of dreaming, which she 
piqued herself upon in no small degree ; and although 
it never had been productive of any good either to 
herself or others, yet she nevertheless entertained the 
utmost respect and veneration for this endowment, 
and placed the most perfect reliance on her own 
oracles. 

Glenroy, of course, affected to treat her dreams 
and visions as he did herself, with great contempt, 
but secretly he had rather a relish for them, especially 
as Mrs. Macauley was not a public dreamer; her 
dreams always related to his house and family, and 
there was therefore a sort of importance annexed to 
the idea of having his own peculiar dreamer in his 
household. It was a piece of state almost equal to 
that of keeping a dwarf, or a fool, or a henchman, or a 
piper, or any other of those prerogatives of grandeur. 

The natui'al contempt, however, which is felt in 
this enlightened age for old wives' dreams, and even 
for young women's fables, together with the profound 
respect we entertain for the understanding of our 



DESTINY. 221 

readers, witliholcis us from relating upon this occasion 
the cabalistic narrative with which Mrs. Macauley 
one morning regaled the breakfast table ; suffice it to 
say, it was all a dream should or could be. It was 
grand, confused, dark, incoherent, contradictory, sense- 
less, and sublime ; and in spite of the ludicrous tones 
and gestures of the narrator, it produced more or less 
an impression upon the minds of her audience. From 
the cloud of her misty imagination various distinct 
images emerged. There was a large raven with a 
wedding-ring in its mouth; there was a troubled 
sea, and a dove A^dth a bleeding breast ; there was a 
shroud, two coffins, and a grave ; and there was the 
minister, Mr, M'Dow, all dressed in white, standing 
in the kirk with Miss Edith, who was all dressed in 
black, and somebody else, with such a mist upon 
them she could not make out who it was, etc. etc. etc. 
A few days after this memorable dream there 
arrived accounts of the death of Sir Angus Malcolm. 
He had died of the fever of the country, just as he 
was on the point of embarking for Britain. He had 
had sufficient warning of his danger, however, to 
admit of his making arrangements as to the manage- 
ment of his affairs, and the disposal of his son. Sir 
Angus seemed to have felt that Eeginald had been 
left too long to Glenroy's superintendence, for he 
directed that he should as soon as possible be entered 
at one of the English universities, under the superin- 
tendence of Mr. Ellis, After spending two years at 
collofre, he was to set out on a tour to the Continent, 



222 DESTINY. 

accompanied by Mr. Ellis, to remain abroad until he 
came of age. He was then to return home and cele- 
brate the event among his own people, in a manner 
befitting the heir of an ancient house and noble 
property. A sanction was given to his marriage with 
Edith, and a hope expressed that he would then settle 
for life in his own country. 

" Oh, what a mercy it is I had the good sense to 
tell my dream before tliis came to pass ! " whispered 
Mrs. Macauley to Benbowie ; "for if I had not told 
it, nobody would have believed me now. Oh ! what 
wonderful creatures we are ! the great black raven ! 
I cannot forget it ! Little did I think that was Sir 
Angus, poor man ! and the wedding ring that he had 
in his mouth too ! was just to show like, that he was 
coming over to marry his son to Miss Edith." 

" On my conscience, he was a very lucky man, to 
have cleared his estate before he died!" responded 
Benbowie, 

Reginald showed much warmth of feeling on the 
occasion of his loss ; but from the length of the separa- 
tion that had taken place between the father and son, 
it was not to be expected that his sorrow should be 
lasting ; and in due time he was comforted. 

Glenroy had now arrived at the period of life when 
any change in the domestic arrangement is dreaded 
as the severest of evils, and the more so, as the gout 
had now become so frequent in its attacks as to 
render him more than ever dependent on domestic 
society. It may therefore be supposed Sir Angus's 



DESTINY. 223 

injunction did not accord with his inclinations, and 
he as usual vented his displeasure in apostrophising 
Benbowie. 

" Finish his studies ! finish his fiddlesticks ! /never 
finished my studies — / never was at any of their 
English universities. I should be glad to know Avhat 
my son could learn at an English university ! Eegi- 
nald may go if he chooses, but I'll be hanged if I'll 
allow Norman to accompany him. He shall not be 
tamed into insignificance if I can help it. It is a fine 
preparation for a Highland Chief to be cooped up in 
one of their musty colleges with a pack of priests and 
dominies, and sailing about their plainstones in a 
black gown and a trencher skull-cap ! " 

"Very true," responded Benbowie, "on my con- 
science, it's all very true — a philabcg would set him 
better." 

"A fine thing, to be sure, for a Highland Chief to 
have B.A. tacked to his name !" 

" On my conscience, a man need not go so far to 
learn to cry BA ! " said Benbowie. 

" And then the scheme of sending him to the Con- 
tinent is, if possible, still worse," continued Glenroy. 
"What can he learn there but to dance and speak 
gibberish, or to be running after old bridges and 
broken statues, when he ought to be building new 
bridges and entertaining the gentlemen of the county? 
Statues ! a pack of rubbish. I would not let one of 
them within my door." 

"On my conscience, I think you're quite right, 



224 DESTINY. 

Glenroy. I would not give a three-year-old stot for 
any stuccy babbies that ever were made." 

Such was the style of colloquy held by these two 
worthy gentlemen ; and had Reginald been inclined 
to disregard his father's dying injunctions, plausible 
pretexts would not have been wanting for him to 
have at least postponed the fulfilling of them. But 
Reginald was eager to enter upon the course pointed 
out to him, and Mr. Ellis lost no time in taking the 
necessary steps for getting him entered at Oxford, 
whither he was to accompany him. Nothing could 
induce Glenroy to part ^vith jSTorman ; and as Norman 
attached no great ideas of pleasure to a student's life, 
he was easily prevailed ujion to relinquish it, and to 
remain at home his own master, so called, though 
still more the master of all around him. 

Edith beheld with meek and silent sorrow the 
time approach for the departure of Reginald : to be 
separated from him for more than a few days was an 
evil she had never contemplated; and now weeks 
and months were to drag their slow course along, 
while Reginald and she were to dwell apart. Oh ! 
Avhat a solitude would hers be ! the dreariest, the 
saddest of all solitudes — the solitude of the heart. 

Reginald's sorroAv at parting with Edith, it might 
be supposed, was pretty much swallowed up in the 
anticipated novelty and variety that awaited him; 
and he strove to comfort and reassure her, as he 
talked cheerfully of the shortness of the time of his 
probation. Three years were nothing ; besides, he 



DESTINY. 225 

should certainly make a point of seeing her often 
again before he left England ; and, at any rate, he 
should write to her constantly, every day, that she 
might never for a single day forget him. He would 
then reiterate his own vows of eternal love and con- 
stancy, and call upon Edith to repeat the same, while 
each favourite haunt was visited and hallowed in 
their imaginations by the pensive thought that it 
would be long ere they should again revisit them 
together. Thus the intervening days glided away 
with the rapidity of a stream, and thus feeling 
stamped the value of ages upon the duration of 
moments. Then swiftly came the parting hour — 

" tliat liour, 

When love first feels its own o'erwheliniiig power." 

" This, Edith, is a ring of betrothment," said 
Reginald, as he placed one upon her finger. "Re- 
member, there it must remain till I exchange it for a 
bridal one. Edith, do you promise V and he held 
her hand locked in his, while Edith tried to smile an 
afl&rmative through her parting tears. 

Again and again the farewell was spoken : again 
and again Edith was pressed to his heart, and now 
he was gone, and she was left alone. 



VOL. [. 



CHAPTER XXXII. 

By degrees the loss of Reginald's society was almost 
atoned for to Edith by the new enjoyment of corre- 
sponding with him. It was a different, a more 
abstracted and concentrated feeling, but scarcely a 
less delightful one than that which she used to enjoy 
in his presence. True, he was no longer with her; 
but then, what though the image itself was gone? 
The impression remained almost as vivid as the reality, 
and she had his ring, his picture, his letters — those 
mute but eloquent pledges of his faith ; the almost 
daily assurances of his love, the oft-repeated vows, 
the fond anticipations of their future happiness. 
Deep and earnest in her love, but timid and reserved 
in her manners, her heart expatiated more freely upon 
paper than ever it had done in the daily intercourse 
of her whole life, so that she was ready to exclaim — 

" Fortune, 

thou canst not divide 

Oui" bodies so, but that our hearts are tied, 
And we can love by letters still, and gifts, 
And thoughts, and dreams." 

Thus was her mind kept in a state of constant 
excitement, more inimical to its repose than the 



DESTINY. 227 

presence even of the object of her affection. Imagi- 
nation left to itself had awakened in her that extreme 
sensibility so destructive to happiness, which, in seem- 
ing to give us " a sweet existence in another's being," 
is only fixing more firmly its barbed arrow in the 
heart. 

So passed days, weeks, and months ; and when 
the college vacations permitted, Reginald revisited 
with delight his early home. Absence, so far from 
abating the attachment of the youthful lovers, seemed 
if possible to have augmented it, and the lapse of time 
had only added new attractions to each, in the eyes 
of the other. 

But now a longer period of absence was to inter- 
vene, and seas were to divide them. The time for 
Reginald's visit to the Continent had arrived, and 
painful was the parting of the lovers. Yet the san- 
guine spirit of Reginald imparted comfort to Edith, 
as he fondly reminded her that two out of the three 
years of their probation were over, and that this 
parting should be the last. 

Many was the fond and impassioned letter she 

received from Reginald, and many were the tender 

\ and confiding ones she Avrote in reply. At length his 

I letters became less frequent, but that was not surpris- 

j ing, considering that he was constantly moving from 

I one place to another ; and then when they did come, 

they were as affectionate as ever. He still reminded 

Edith of their engagement ; he still assured her that 

jtime and absence only rendered her dearer to him, 



228 DESTINY. 

and that he longed impatiently for the time when he 
was to return to her to part no more. But after 
receiving one of those letters, breathing all that a 
fond lover could say to the idol of his heart, a long- 
pause ensued ; and then, when the next came, Edith 
thought, but it must be fancy, that the style was 
changed. It was short, too ; but he pleaded a head- 
ache- — perhaps he was ill and concealed it from her ; 
o-nd many an anxious day and sleepless night she 
passed, till another arrived ; it was still shorter, but 
he was just setting out ujDon an excursion, and had 
not time to write more than a mere line, to assure 
dear Edith he was well. Other long and dreary 
chasms ensued, and were but faintly attempted to be 
filled up by meagre letters, full of little else than 
apologies for their rarity, and promises of writing 
oftener and longer ones. But the same excuses con- 
tinued ; one time the heat was so excessive he could 
scarcely hold the pen, then he was interrupted by a 
friend, or he was just returned from a fatiguing excur- 
sion, or he was setting out upon a pleasure tour, or 
the time was now drawing near when he should be 
returning to Scotland, and therefore it was unneces- 
sary to say much more at present. 

So absorbed was Edith in anxiety about Eeginald, 
that she was quite unconscious of the attentions, or 
rather intentions, of another lover, in the person of 
the young Lord Allonby, who, from partaking occa- 
sionally of Glenroy's hospitalities, had now become a 
more frequent visitor, and, having no small opinion of 



DESTINY. 229 

himself, he concluded he had only to pay his addresses 
to have them instantly accepted. Edith's ideas of 
love were much too romantic to enable her to construe 
the flimsy gallantry of a modern fine gentleman into 
anything like a serious passion, and her surprise at 
his lordship's hasty and self-assured proposals could 
only be surpassed by his amazement at the rejection 
of his suit. It was one that, in other circumstances, 
Glenroy would have been gratified with, but as Edith 
was engaged to Reginald, he could only have the 
satisfaction of chuckling over it in private, or throw- 
ing out innuendoes in public. 

Thus wore away time ; but still Reginald came not, 
and his birthday, the day of his coming of age, Avhich 
his father had recommended him to celebrate at home 
among his own people — that day which he himself had 
so fondly anticipated, and which Edith had looked for- 
ward to with no common interest — that day passed 
unnoticed, unheeded on his part, and on hers only 
recorded as a day of disappointment and gloom. 

Glenroy chafed and fumed at this disrespectful 
delay. Norman, still more sanguine and impatient 
in the self-assumed anticipations of his cousin's return, 
had scarcely been restrained more than once from set- 
ting out to meet him. Mrs. Macauley dreamed and 
wondered in vain. Neither dreams nor w^ondcring 
could solve the mystery. Edith sighed and feared, 
she knew not what, for her heart was too simple and 
guileless to harbour suspicion. She had heard and 
read of such a thing as inconstancy, but to associate 



230 • DESTINY, 

it with the idea of Reginald never entered her ima- 
gination, or if it did, it was instantly dismissed. She 
had only to recall the remembrance of past days, to 
look at his picture, to meet the gaze of those fond 
eyes, to read his letters fraught with vows of ever- 
lasting love, and all her doubts fled as by the touch 
of a talisman. Thus imagination still held svv^ay over 
her, while time, as it moved slowly along, 

" Deposited upon the silent shore 
Of memory, images and precious thoughts," 

which it was the delight of her solitary hours to 
treasure up in the inmost recesses of her heart. She 
knew not — who in early life does know 1 — that such 
treasurings up of the frail records of human love 
prove but as landmarks to note where the tide of 
passion and of sorrow hath been. 



CHAPTER XXXlll. 

Years had passed away since Eonald Malcolm had 
left his native home, when, one bright summer's day, 
a tall and sunburnt youth, coarsely and scantily clad, 
but with something wild and noble in his air and 
aspect, stood on the shores of Lochdhu, and for a 
moment surveyed its dark mountains and roaring 
waters, with the look of one to whom they bore no 
common interest. 

That youth was Ronald, and many a sad sight his 
young eyes had looked upon since last he left the 
spot where he now stood, and many " a strange and 
moving accident " burned within him, to relate to the 
dear ones he had left. He had to tell of the wonders 
of the raging sea and the angry heavens, which had 
shivered the stately ship, and sunk so many "high 
hearts and brave" beneath the devouring billows. 
He had to tell of his own escape, with others of the 
gallant crew, and of the hunger, the thirst, the cold, 
the heat, the hardships, and privations they had 
endured, and under which many of those brave spirits 
had sunk. He had to tell of the survivors reaching 
the coast of Africa, only to become captives to the 



232 DESTINY. 

Avild and lawless natives, by whom they were driven 
as slaves to the interior of those wild, desert, and 
unexplored regions, where his companions, one by 
one, fell victims to the severity of their lot. But his 
youth and dauntless spirit, his habits of endurance 
and activity, the flexibility and sweetness of his 
temper, had, under the blessing of a superintending 
Providence, enabled him to bear the heavy load 
assigned him, and had even gained him favour in the 
eyes of his barbarous captors. How many a summer's 
day and winter's night would it take to tell of all 
that he had seen and thought, and felt and suff'ered 
and done, during his dreary captivity ! and how, even 
in the depths of his desolation, he had ever cherished 
that trust divine which a mother's lips had early 
breathed into his infant soul ! Then came his escape, 
with all its dangers and privations, his wanderings by 
land, his perils by sea ; all these, and much more, had 
Ronald to tell ; but all was forgotten in the tumult 
of his feelings as he stood once more on his native 
shore, and looked on his father's house, and recalled 
the dear familiar scenes of his childhood. 

Memory flew over the intervening years, and all 
faded from his mind save the loved ones, whose looks 
and tones had sometimes haunted his very heart to 
agony, as fancy pictured the joys of home to the far- 
distant captive. iVnd now in a few minutes he should 
behold them again ; already he seemed to feel their 
kisses on his lip, their tears of gladness on his cheek, 
their arms enfolding him ; once more he was pressed 



DESTINY. 233 

to a mother's beating heart ! All these thoughts 
rushed through the young adventurer's mind, as he 
gazed for a moment on the well-remembered features 
of his mountain home. These were unchanged, for 
their stern and massive outline was unchangeable ; 
but something of a still wilder, a more desolate and 
mournful cast, seemed to dwell upon them, for all was 
silent and voiceless. Ronald stayed not to conjecture 
or to fear, but in an instant he was at the house — his 
father's house ! He had crossed the threshold of his 
once-happy home, but still there was none to meet 
him, none to welcome him. Everything was dis- 
placed and in disorder, and he sought in several of the 
rooms before he discovered an old purblind woman, 
who seemed the sole inhabitant of the house he had 
left so full of life and joy, and youth and beauty. 

In this ancient crone he recognised an old pensioner 
of his mother's, more famed for her fidelity and attach- 
ment to the family than for the sweetness of her 
temper or the urbanity of her manners. In a voice 
choking with agitation, he inquired for Captain Mal- 
colm, for the family ; but he had to repeat the ques- 
tion three times before he could obtain an answer; for, 
though not positively deaf, her ear was slow to catch 
a strange accent, and Ronald's voice and accent were 
both so totally changed that his own mother could 
scarcely have recognised them. At length, in a sharp 
Highland tone, he received the satisfactory reply of — 

" Captain Malcolm ? — ay ! Avhar should he be but 
in his ain hoose ?" 



234 DESTINY. 

" But this was his house," said Ronald, reviving at 
this information, scanty as it was. 

" Ay, and wha says it's no his hoose, noo ? but it's 
no his dwelling-hoose, if you mean that ; he's ower 
great a man to dwell here noo — ay, that lie is !" 

The truth now flashed upon Eonald, and, witli a 
pang he said, " What ! — he now lives at Inch Orran, I 
suppose?" 

" To be sure — whar else should he live 1 But sit 
down, sit down. You maun be a stranger here, it 
seems, frae the Low Country ? Maybe, a friend o' 
the faamily V 

" Thank you ; but first tell me, is Captain Malcolm 

well, and my , and all of them, are they all welll" 

And Ronald's lips quivered as he put the question. 

" Oo, surely, surely — they're all well. What should 
ail them ?" 

" Nothing, nothing. And my " Ronald's heart 

fluttered as he thought of his mother ; and he could 
not find voice to name the name dearest to his heart. 

The old woman went on. " No, no, there's nothing 
ails them noo ; they've gotten a'thing they can want. 
Och ay, God be praised ! they are very prosperous 
noo, an' very happy." 

" They have met with some good fortune, then, it 
seems V said Ronald, trying to speak with composure. 

" Och ay ! 'deed an' they have done that, and 
well they deserve it. Not but what they paid for it, 
too, poor craaters ! ay, that they did. God knows, 
their fine fortune cost them sore hearts at the time ; 



DESTINY. 235 

but that's past— ail' noo, what should they be but 
pleased an' happy?" 

Ronald's heart heaved, and he was silent a few 
moments, then said, " But they have been afflicted — 
they have suffered?" 

" Och ! 'deed they were that ; they were sore dis- 
trest, poor people ! at the droonin' o' their boy — a fine 
boy — a pretty boy he was — och ay!" Here old 
Nanny groaned, and wiped her eyes with the corner 
of her apron. 

"But you say they are happy now — they have for- 
gotten him?" said Ronald, with emotion. 

" Oh ! surely, surely — God be thank't, he's for- 
gotten noo, an' it's time — 'deed is it — och ay ! And 
we little know what's for our good in this world ; for 
it was God's merciful providence, after all, that the 
boy was ta'en, or they tell me they would ha'e been but 
a puir needfu' faamily the day — 'deed would they !" 

A strange pang shot through Ronald's heart. 
"What a vile unfeeling creature," thought he, "to 
talk in such a manner!" and he was about to leave 
the house, when old Nanny resumed — 

" Och ay ! Providence was really kind in that 
particular, for the droonin' o' the boy, poor thing, 
(that ever I should say't !) has been the savin' o' that 
whole faamily, 'deed has it ! And weel they deserve 
it, for they're a worthy well-doin' faamily ; and Inch 
Orran himself is a good man, and does a deal o' good, 
that he does ; and he is a reall blessin' to the country 
— that he is ! " 



236 DESTINY. 

" But he might have been a blessing to the country 
although his son had not been drowned," said Ronald. 

" No, no — they tell me not. That if the boy had 
lived, he would have keepit his father a poor man a' 
his days; and wou'dna that have been a sin and a 
shame ! No that it wad hae been the poor boy's fault, 
poor thing, but the fault o' them that would have 
made him keep his father's head below the water. 
Och ! it was God's providence to tak' the boy out of 
his worthy father's Avay; and noo a'thing's as it 
should be, and he has gotten his ain, honest man ; 
and long, long may he enjoy it !" 

" And you say they are all quite well, — and 

happy?" said Eonald, his heart swelling, in spite of 
the contempt he tried to feel for the unfeeling nar- 
rator. 

" Ay, ay ! they are that. Happy they are, and 
happy may they be; and shouldna they be happy 
when there's gawn to be a grand marriage amang 
them 1 Miss Lucy, that's her that's the eldest o' the 
faamily, isna she gawn to get a husband, and a braw 
one, too — no less than the young Laird of Dunross 1 
No but what Miss Lucy is well worthy of him and the 
best in the land — a}', by my troth she is ; but she 
wadna ha'e gotten him wantin' the tocher; for the 
auld Laird's ower fond o' the siller to let his son tak' 
a tocherless lass. Och ay, shame till him ! Wasna 
poor Miss Lucy maist broken-hearted because he 
wouldna let his son get her when she was the poor 
man's daughter ? And the Captain wouldna let him 



DESTINY. 237 

tak' her wantin' his father's will ; and the poor young 
craaters were just beside themselves like ; and so the 
young man went into the army, and has been in the 
Indies, but noo he's come l)ack ; and they're so happy. 
And the Captain — that's Inch Orran — is to give her 
five thousand gold guineas on her weddin'-day, they 
tell me, forbye this hoose that they're comin' to dwell 
in ; and him paintin' it all from top to bottom, and 
makin' everything so genteel for them ; and all comes 
o' the drooniu' o' the bonny laddie ! Och ay !" 

Many little circumstances that had taken place 
before he left home here darted into Ronald's mind, 
in confirmation of old Nanny's words. Young Dun- 
ross and Lucy had been lovers even then, and want 
of fortune on her part had been the only obstacle to 
their union ; and now that was removed, and he had 
returned only to blast their hajipiness ! 

"But what if he has not been drowned — what if 
he should yet return?" said he, with agitation. 

" Och, sorrow bit he'll ever return noo, poor bairn ; 
and it would na do for him to come back in the body 
noo — 'deed, an' he wad be but a black sight ; no, no, 
that it would not — he's been owre lang dead to come 
back noo — 'deed has he, och ay ! he's dead and gone, 
an' it would na do to bring him back again — no, no ; 
wae I was when I heard o' the poor thing's droonin', 
but I was ignorant then. I did not know that it was 
God's providence to set up the faamily like by that 
same means, and make them all so comfortable and 
genteel and happy, och ay ! " 



238 DESTINY. 

"And my mother?" said Ronald faintly, as he 
covered his eyes with his hand, while his whole frame 
thrilled with emotion. 

"The mother?" said Xanny, catching the sound 
imperfectly. "Ay, his mother — that's the leddy her- 
sell, you'll mean ? och, God only knows the mother's 
sorrow, och ay ! But she's a quiet craater, and she 
knew whose hand it was that was upon her — ay, 
that she did — and so she demeaned hersell like a good 
Christian as she is ; but they tell me she has never 
had her ain colour since." 

Tears forced their way through Ronald's fingers ; 
he started up, and was hurrying away, when Nanny 
interposed, rather unwilling to part so soon with a 
visitor from whom she had as yet extracted no infor- 
mation in return, and visitors to Nanny were few and 
far between. 

"And what's taking you away, my lad, in such a 
hurry 1 canna you sit doon a wee and rest you, and 
tak' a drap this warm day?" 

" The day is far spent, and I have a long walk 
before me," said Ronald. 

" Ay ? maybe ye'll be going to Inch Orran ? I'm 
thinking you'll be a friend o' our young laird's ? 
— that's Mr. Angus — for I guess by your tongue you're 
a gentle." 

" Is he at home ?" asked Ronald, waiving the ques- 
tion and the compliment. 

"I'm thinkin' so that he's at home the noo; but 
he goes away for months and months at a time to one 



DESTINY. 239 

o' their places in the Low Country, Avhere young gentle- 
men go to learn everything — they're no schools — 
they're universals, or something like that ; you'll 
ken what I mean ; for he's very bookish, and they 
tell me he will be a great man yet, since his father 
can give him such a grand education ; but he's no such 
a fine, roving, spirity craater as the 'tother poor boy 
was — what a craater that was ! Nothing feared him, 
and he was so good-natured and so kind to everybody, 
och ay ! he would ' have run a mile to flit a sow,' as 
they say. But, no doubt, he has got his reward noo, 
though we cannot see it ; for if he can but see what 
a great blessin' his death has been to his faamily, I'm 
sure he'll no begrudge it, wherever he be." 

" Surely his family would be happier to have him 
back again?" said Ilonald, after a pause. 

" Troth then, and to tell the truth, I'm no sure o' 
that — no but what they were very fond of him, and 
thought much of him when they had him ; but now 
you know, like good Christians, their minds are made 
up to want him, and maybe they could na want other 
things so well — och no. No, it would never do for 
him to come back in the body, for they tell me if he 
was to come alive again, the money would be all ta'en 
from Inch Orran ; and would not that be very hard 
noo, when he's doing so much good mth it ? forbye 
keepin' such a genteel hoose, is na he ga'en to build a 
grand new one, and does na the leddy ride in her 
own coach noo, and is na he setting out his childer so 
well in the world, and himself upon a footin' wi' the 



240 •DESTINY. 

best in the land ? ay, and the good that he's doin' is 
no to be told. No but what he's ower keen o' what 
they ca' improvements. — Och, sorrow tak' some o' 
thae improvements ! They'll no leave a bunch o' 
heather in the country ; but nae doot, he's doin' good, 
for a' that. Och ! hunders and hunders are blessin' 
the day that made Inch Orran a rich man — 'deed are 
they ; but for that, mony's the poor craater that would 
ha'e been trailin' owre the saut sea wi' their wives and 
their childer, awa' frae a' their kith and kin, and 
toilin' their hearts out in a far-off land, if it had not 
pleased God to give Inch Orran the hand and the 
heart to help them — och ay, he's the one that will 
never drive the poor man off his land, as long as the 
water rins, and the heather grows — och, he's a blessed 
man, and blessed he will be, and the poor lad's death 
was a great blessing — och ay, 'deed was't." 

Ronald's heart was brimming high ; he abruptly 
wished old Nanny good day, and quitted the house. 



CHAPTER XXXIV. 

The young wanderer proceeded on his way, bat his 
mind was a chaos of contending emotions, for there are 
hearts of so generous a natui'e as to be more keenly 
aHve to the sufferings of others than to their own. 

"This, then, is my welcome !" said he to himself, 
in bitterness of spirit; "already forgotten, or rather 
remembered only as a riddance ; and ray return, it 
seems, instead of bringing joy, will only be felt as a 
misfortune ; my very death to be the cause of rejoic- 
ing to hundreds ! and they — they to be all so hajjpy, 

while I " Tears burst from his eyes as he thought 

how his heart had pined for the dear ones he had left. 
" And my mother ! my mother ! can she too have for- 
gotten me 1 " 

And on the bare supposition, he threw himself 
on the ground in an agony of grief, mortification, 
and disappointment, while a thousand wild thoughts 
rushed through his mind. 

"And am I so selfish, then, as to Avish to cause 
soiTow to those I love? and can I not bear to see 
them happy at my expense 1 But I will see them, I 
will satisfy myself that they are happy, and then — ■ 

VOL. T. R I.. 



242 DESTINY. 

they shall remain so, were it at the price of my heart's 
blood ! " 

Starting up, he pursued his course towards Inch 
Orran. As he came within the extensive bounds 
which he knew pertained to it, he everywhere read a 
confirmation of old Nanny's words, in the improve- 
ments he beheld. The glens were more thickly 
peopled, and with more comfortable -looking dwell- 
ings ; mountains, which had once frowned in heather, 
were now smiling in verdure ; dreary moors were now 
covered with young plantations; a neat church and 
schoolhouse stood where a wilderness had formerly 
spread ; all denoted that the stream of wealth was 
indeed flowing in the channel of beneficence, and every- 
where sj)reading its riches over the land. He entered 
several of the cottages, and all told the same tale — 
a happy and thriving peasantry had been redeemed 
from poverty and exile, and even while his own home 
was fondly remembered, and his sad fate lamented, 
still his death was regarded as a blessing. 

"And all this I am come only to blast," thought 
Ronald, as he surveyed the goodly scene that stretched 
around him. "I come only to bring poverty and 
sorrow and exile to all these poor people, and to my 
OAvn home ! Oh ! that is Avorst of all, even there I 
can bring no joy ! But happen what will, they shall 
]iot have cause to mourn that I still live — if they are 
happy, if they are indeed happy, to them I will still 

be dead " And, dashing the tears from his eyes, 

he hastened on his Avay. 



DESTINY. 243 

Years had passed away, and with them the bitter- 
ness, though not the remembrance, of sorrow; for 
Eonald's name was still pronounced with emotion in 
his family circle, and the lilank he had left still re- 
mained a dreary chasm to the eye and the ear, accus- 
tomed to the animation of his presence, to his generous 
affections, to his kindly accents, to his bright smiles, 
to his "sweet laughter, and wild song, and footstep 
free," and to all the charms and the treasures of his 
opening mind. But there is no anguish, however 
severe, that time and religion and reflection will not 
gradually soften into a resignation so entire, as to the 
casual observer to appear almost like forgetfulness. 
And times there are — else who could bear the constant 
woe and live 1— when even the mother forgets the child 
over whose grave she has shed so many a bitter tear, 
and whose image, though shrouded from the common 
eye, still lies buried in the depths of her ovm heart. 

It was evening when Eonald reached Inch Orran, 
and the setting sun Avas shedding its last glories on 
the scene. His heart Avas keenly alive to outward 
impressions, and dull must the soul have been that 
could have gazed unmoved on such a spectacle. But 
how doubly sweet to him, who had been the ship- 
Avrecked sea-boy, the captive in a far-distant land, the 
slave beneath a burning aky, the wayworn houseless 
wanderer, to stand upon his native land, and look on 
such an earth, and such a heaven ! The sun seemed 
as if melting away beneath its own bright effulgence. 
The mountains gleamed with ever-changing hues of 



244 DESTINY. 

gold and crimson and purple ; each tufted isle and 
rock and tree shone in the " rich sadness " of eve's 
last splendour. Not a breath ruffled the surface of 
the water ; not a sound broke the stillness of the air, 
save the distant bleating of the sheep, and the soft 
rippling of the Avaves as they crept gently along the 
shore, or broke with faint effort upon the bare fantastic 
roots of some stately beech, whose stem rose hke a 
mast of gold from the bosom of the waters. But not 
all the i^omp and glory of the scene could arrest the 
gaze of him whose eyes were fixed on the walls that 
contained the treasures of his heart, the first, the only 
objects of his young affections ! He hastily drew 
near, then stopped, as if to restrain himself from rush- 
ing at once into their sight, and casting himself into 
their arms. And then the one cruel thought came 
like ice upon his heart to chill the warm gush of 
nature. 

" I come to bring them all to poverty ! Oh, if 
they have ceased to think of me — if I am forgotten — 
if my place is filled — would that I had died rather 
than that I shoidd live to see them rue the day of my 
return ! But they shall not. I will dig, toil, starve, 
but they shall be happy !" 

He now stood amidst the ruins of Inch Orran, but 
the hand of taste had been there since he had visited 
them. A still greater portion of the old walls had 
fallen; but the rubbish had been removed, and the 
large openings gave light and air and cheerfulness 
to the dwelling-house, which was half hid by the 



DESTINY. 245 

jessamines and honeysuckles and roses that clustered 
around its windows. Eonald, with throbbing heart, 
leant against a part of the ancient tower, where once 
had been a window, but which Avas now merely an 
opening curtained with ivy. His heart beat as though 
it would have burst from his bosom. At one moment 
he had jnelded to the passionate impulse to make 
himself known ; but, long inured to habits of self- 
command, by a mighty effort he subdued the yearn- 
ings of nature, and repressed the feelings which strove 
for mastery. "I will wait — I will wait," he said to 
himself, while every fibre quivered to agony, and he 
gnawed his lip as if to enforce its silence. Opposite 
to where he stood was the family sitting-room, and 
from the spot he could plainly discern all that was 
passing within. But it was some time ere he could 
dispel the gathering mists from his eyes, so as to 
enable him to single out each dear one numbered in 
his heart. Ah ! 

" There are no looks like those which dwell 
On long remember'd things !" 

His eye was first attracted to his father, who sat 
nearest to him reading, but his back was towards 
him, and he could only perceive that his figure was 
thinner, and his hair grayer, than when he had parted 
from him. At one end of the room Lucy was seated 
at a piano, but it seemed as if merely an excuse for 
the lovers to be a little apart, for young Dunross 
leant on the back of her chair, and her sweet face 
was turned to him in conversation, while now and 



246 DESTINY. 

then slie carelessly touched a few notes of the instru- 
ment. A tea-table was in the middle of the room, 
at which a lovely girl, whom Kouald recognised as 
his sister Flora, was presiding Avith the younger part 
of the family, who were gaily chatting and laughing 
together. 

Over all these Konald's eyes wandered in search 
of his mother, till they riveted themselves upon that 
cherished image. She sat apart at a window which 
looked out upon the lake and the setting sun ; her 
pale brow and still lovely profile pencilled against the 
deep flush of the evening sky. Her air betokened 
"the careless stillness of a thinking mind." One 
hand hung listlessly on the shoulder of a little boy, 
her youngest born, the image of her long-lost Ronald, 
who, with head of curUng gold, stood by her side, 
feeding with bits of bread Ronald's fondly-cherished 
dog. 

Oh, how pensive was the look with which she gazed 
on the still water, and the silent beauty of the skies ! 
It might be that her thoughts were then of sad but 
holy import ; that they were of him who had found a 
grave in the deep sea, a home in the mansions of 
those glorious heavens ; of him whose place at hearth 
and board still to the mother's eye stood vacant. 
Scarcely could Ronald restrain himself as his heart 
heaved almost to agony, and the large tear-drops 
gushed from his eyes, and he thought what rapture it 
would be to fall on his mother's neck and weep ! 
" No — oh no ! she has not forgotten me ; I am 



DESTINY. 247 

sure she has not. Even now perhaps she is thinking 
of me !" and in a second he would have been in her 
anns. But at that moment his mother turned towards 
her httle boy : a bright sweet smile lighted up her 
face at something he had said, and she looked and 
spoke fondly to him, as she parted the fair curls from 
his sunny brow. 

Presently the young party of tea-drinkers started 
up and flew towards her as if with some petition. 
They spoke with eager childish gesticulation. They 
hung upon her with looks of loving entreaty, and one 
little fair girl, climbing upon the back of her chair, 
laughingly threw her arms round her neck, and kissed 
her. Lucy, recalled from her aberrations, struck up 
a lively air ; the tea-table was pushed aside, and all 
were in motion for a dance. 

"Yes, yes, they are happy, and I am forgotten!" 
exclaimed Eonald in a burst of passionate emotion, 
as he rushed from his hiding-place, and fled far from 
Inch Orran, and all he loved. 



CHAPTEE XXXV. 

Thus Ronald came, saw, and was gone — unseen, 
unknown. 'Who can tell what a day may bring forth 
— what a moment may auniliilate ! Ere the sun com- 
plete its diurnal course, what clouds of events pass 
and repass o'er the surface of Time's dial ! Surely 
man differs little from the atoms which sport in the 
sunbeam, and well may his life be compared to the 
vapour that passeth away — to the shadow which 
mocketh the eye — to the dream that scareth by 
night. He is born, and grows uj) like the grass, 
and like the grass he withers before it is noon, or 
falls before the scythe in all its pride and freshness. 
How vain are all our schemes for futurity ! Human 
wisdom exhausts itself in devising what a higher 
power shows to be vanity. We decide for to-day, 
and a passing moment scatters our decisions as chaff 
before the wind. We resolve for to-morrow; to- 
morrow comes but to root up our resolutions. We 
scheme for our works to remain monuments of our 
power and Avisdom, and the most minute, the most 
trivial event is sufficient to overturn all our purposes, 
and cast down to the dust the thoughts and the 



DESTINY. 249 

labours of a life. Truly, " it is not in man that 
walketh to direct his steps." 

Though none may have been so foolish or so 
daring as to hope they might escape the final doom 
of mortality, yet there are many to whom the King 
of Terrors appears as an obscure, indistinct vision, 
seen at the termination of a long vista of years, whose 
dart is indeed uplifted, but out of the power of which 
their youth, their health, their strength, and other 
adventitious aids, have far removed them. 

Such and so remotely was the pale monarch viewed 
by Glenroy, when Norman, the pride of his heart, 
the prop of his house, the desire of his eyes, was sud- 
denly seized with a violent and dangerous malady. 
Expresses Avere sent in all directions, and doctors 
came full speed from all quarters — but in vain ; the 
fever continued to increase, and poor Glenroy was 
at his wits' end. Yet, that his son, the heir of his 
house, the chief of a mighty clan, should actually die, 
was an apprehension too horril^le to be admitted ; it 
was a mere vague, nameless fear that took possession 
of him, and made him walk about the house, and 
talk to everybody as loud as he could, and bustle 
unceasingly, as though he were striving by his rest- 
less activity to get the better of some unseen evil. 
But, alas ! Death was the evil, and vain the attempt to 
repulse him from whom all hearts recoil ! After three 
weeks of racking suspense, the son of many hopes, the 
heir of many honours, was a lifeless lump of clay ! 
"The eye that hath seen him shall see him no more." 



250 DESTINY. 

It was some time ere Glenroy could fully compre- 
hend the fact that Norman — the gay, the blooming, 
the healthful, the active, the brave, should have been 
cut off in such a manner ; the thing was inconceiva1)le, 
impossible ! Had he fallen in battle, or been killed 
in a duel, he could have better understood it. But 
death thus to have invaded his mansion, even as he 
visits the cottar's hut, the peasant's clay-built shed ; 
to have been thus bereft by the hand of disease, under 
his own roof, beneath his own bright skies, amid his 
own mountain solitudes, where sickness seldom came 
— with all that wealth and skill could do to save — 
poor Glenroy was confounded ! 

In vain his benighted soul strove to picture to itself 
another state of existence for the perished idol of 
his affections ; his eye had never sought to pierce the 
dim opacpie of mortal life, for that had hitherto been 
the boundary of his hopes, his wishes, his joys ; and 
now all was gone — but where? He gazed upon 
nature as though he sought his son amidst its bright 
manifestations ; but he was not on the hills raising 
the wild bird, for the heather stood untrodden in its 
lonely brightness, and his dogs roamed around as if 
seeking their master ; he was not on the plain chasing 
the deer, for they lay in their silent wildness beneath 
the shade of the green boughs; he was not on the 
waters guiding his boat, for it was rocking idly on 
the blue waves that curled gaily to the suminer breeze ; 
and the sun poured forth his meridian splendour, and 
all creatures seemed exulting in the joyfulness of 



DESTINY. 251 

existence. Could all these things be, if he, who in 
his father's eyes had given life to all, was dead 1 he, 
the heir of all this goodly scene, laid in his cold grave, 
his eyes closed for ever — his the narrow house and 
the deep sleep of death 1 " There is hope of a tree, 
if it be cut down, that it shall sprout again, and the 
tender branch thereof shall not cease ; through the 
scent of water it will bud and bring forth boughs like 
a plant. But man dieth and wasteth away ! yea, man 
giveth up the ghost, and where is he V 

Glenroy's mind reeled beneath the stroke — all was 
dark within ; his head became confused, his memory 
imperfect ; his was the grief of warm affections and 
proud hopes blasted and overthrown. His gourd had 
withered, and he knew not where to look for shelter 
for his gray head ; his cistern was broken, and he 
sought not the fountain from whence he might draw 
living waters to revive his soul. He was laden with 
grief, and " the darkness of age came like the mist of 
the desert." In vain did Edith struggle against her 
own sorrow, in attempts to mitigate the grief of her 
wretched father. In vain his two faithful adherents 
sought in their own way to turn his mind from the 
gloomy object on which it dwelt in a sort of panic- 
struck stupor — "One is not, and all seem to have 
departed." 



CHAPTEE XXXVI. 

And where was Eeginakl, that he was not with the 
mourners to mingle his tears with theirs, and by his 
presence to cheer and support them in the hour of 
sorrow 1 Alas ! Edith could not answer ; for although 
he had been "WTitten to, on the first alarm of Norman's 
illness, no answer had been received, and many weeks 
had passed since she had heard from him. Thus the 
fever of anxiety was now added to the endurance of 
anguish, and the tears that fell for her brother Avere 
rendered doubly bitter by the neglect of her lover. 
Yet still, not even to herself would she acknowledge 
that she distrusted him; it was imjwssihle that Ee- 
ginald could be false, and that single word was the 
sheet-anchor of her soul : to that she clung with fear- 
ful tenacity, and worlds could not have wrested it 
from her. True, it was equally impossible to account 
for Eeginald's conduct; but that, she felt assured, 
would one day be fully explained. She would not, 
she said, she could not, an instant doubt it ; but un- 
consciously the poison of distrust was creeping slowly 
and silently into her heart, and corroding her very 
life-spring. To add to her suffering, Glenroy, having 



DESTINY. 253 

surmounted the first shock of his son's death, now 
became impatient for Reginald's return; and, as if 
eager to turn his thoughts to another channel, he 
talked unceasingly of him, and all that Avas to be 
done for and by him ; for Reginald was now the heir, 
not only of his honours, but of his whole estates, as 
all were entailed. The natural impatience of his 
temper was also aggravated by his personal infirm- 
ities ; gout and indolence and high living, and mental 
afiliction, combined, had all done the work, and more 
than the work, of time; for time alone would not 
have made him the old and broken-down man he 
now was. To add to his disquiet, he had no proper 
object for his irritation to work upon at that particu- 
lar time, for Benbowie was at all times too passive to 
serve his purpose, and Mrs. Macauley had gone for a 
few days to pay a marriage visit to a niece of Mr. 
Macauley's, who had lately married, and settled in 
the neighbourhood. At least a dozen times a day he 
would ask Edith if there was no news of Reginald 
yet, and then he would ring the bell, and order the 
servants to go to the ferry, or to the clachan, and see 
if there were any signs of him; and he would call 
the housekeeper to Imow if Sir Reginald's rooms were 
ready yet, for that he expected him home that day ; 
then, as he dozed and nodded in his arm-chair, he 
would suddenly start up with, " Was not Reginald to 
have been home before now, and what's keeping him 
then 1 And where's Molly Macauley, that she's not 
in the way 1" (From the first hour of her departure. 



254 DESTINY. 

that had Ijeen the constant demand.) Or, worst of 
all, he would turn to Edith with a dreamy bewildered 
look, and say, " Ay, ay, it's well you're to be married 
to Eegin aid— very well ; it will be all his own. But 
where is he ? When are you to make out the mar- 
riage 1 You'll surely be married soon now, my dear, 
will you not?" 

At length— agitation unspeakable ! — Edith re- 
ceived a letter in the well-known handwriting of her 
lover. It bore a foreign post-mark, and the black 
seal denoted that the intelligence of Xorman's death 
had reached him. Edith's hand trembled, and the 
tear-drops swelled in her eyes. "He knows all," she 
thought, " and yet he comes not to us ! He can calmly 
Avrite. Perhaps it is to tell us that he is not coming. 
Ah, how cold seems written condolence at such a 
time ! " and she remained for some moments passive, 
under the mute agony of apprehension. 

At length she opened the letter, and her doubts 
were dispelled. It Avas brief and agitated, and evi- 
dently written under the greatest anguish of spirit. 
He had only just learnt the sad tidings of Norman's 
death, and the expressions of his grief were frantic 
and full of self-upbraiding that he had not set oft' on 
the first accounts of his cousin's illness. He said he 
never could forgive himself for having been absent at 
such a time ; but he was just setting off for Britain, 
and would be at Glenroy almost as soon as his letter. 
A sentence had been begun, "And if you still love me 
as I " But his pen had been drawn through it, and 



DESTINY. 255 

he abruptly added,. " ^^'ould to Heaven I had never 
left you ! " Altogether, it Avas evidently written 
under all the incoherence of the most passionate and 
unsubdued emotion. 

Such as it was, it was welcome — oh, how welcome ! — 
to Edith ; and its tone of excitation seemed to her the 
surest pledge that the Avarmth of his affection con- 
tinued unabated. "And if I still love him," she re- 
l)eated, as she deciphered the half-obliterated letters 
— " Ah, how could he then doubt me ? And what 
can he mean by Avhat foUoAvs, 'Would that he had 
never left me'?" 

In vain Edith read OA^er and OA^er again this strange 
expression. She could make no more of it at the 
last than at the first ; so she concluded that Reginald 
himself kneAv not Avliat he Avas Avritinff in the ancruish 
of his heart, for the loss of one AA'ho had been to him 
as liis very brother, heightened too, it seemed, by the 
bitterest self-reproach at his own absence. 

The intelligence of Sir Reginald's expected arrival 
gave a fresh stimulus to Glenroy's impatience, and he 
strove, poor man, in the bustle which he himself 
created, to drown the still small voice of secret Avoe, 
Avhich yet spoke daggers to his soul. 

So passed several succeeding days in the feverish 
excitement of hope deferred. It Avas the evening of 
the fourth day of Avatching and disappointment, AA'hen 
Edith, having left Glenroy and BenboAvie dozing over 
their bottle in the dining-room, sat alone in the draAv- 
iug-room, Avith her eyes fixed on the Avaters AA-hich 



25G DESTINY. 

she expected to bear the truant to her heart. As- 
suredly he would cross at the ferry. It would shorten 
the time and distance so much, instead of travelling 
the tedious and hilly road with tired horses, at the 
end of a long and dreary stage. It Avas the w^ay he 
used to take even in boisterous weather, when absent 
only for a day, and many a time she had softly chid 
the impatience which urged him to trust the slender 
boat and stormy sea. Now the evening was fair and 
sweet, and her father's pinnace had been stationed at 
the ferry to receive him ; but Edith sighed as she 
saw its white sails, gilded by the setting sun, still 
flapping idly in the evening breeze. All at once she 
heard the sound of a carriage advancing. Her heart 
beat as it drew nearer and nearer ; and as it swept 
round the enti'ance, her eye caught a glimpse of an 
open travelling carriage, containing one gentleman, 
something — yet so unlike to Eeginald ! A single 
glance had sufficed to show that he was pale, that he 
leant back in the carriage Avith an air of languor, and 
eyes half closed. Could this be the gay, blooming, 
impetuous Eeginald ? But in a few seconds all doubts 
■were removed, as the door was throAvn open, and Sir 
Reginald Malcolm was announced. What a tide of 
mingled emotions rushed o'er Edith's heart as she rose 
to receive him to whom she had plighted her faith 
and love, but who now came thus late to claim them ; 
— him from whom, on that very spot where she now 
stood, she had parted !— and oh, how differently did 
they now meet ! 



DESTINY. 257 

And one was gone, the playfellow of their child- 
hood, the companion of their youth, the brother — the 
friend ! Pale and motionless, Edith stood in silent 
emotion ; in the tumult of her own feelings uncon- 
scious of the still more apparent agitation of Keginald, 
as he advanced, then took her hand, and pressed it to 
his lips. It was the hand on which he himself had 
placed the ring of betrothment. He started, and 
suddenly dropping it, walked with hurried steps to 
the end of the room ; then as quickly returning, he 
clasped Edith in his arms, and tenderly kissed her 
cheek, but while he did so tears burst from his eyes. 
The hearts of both were too full for utterance ; a spell 
seemed upon their lips, and they remained in deep 
and silent emotion. Yet an unconcerned spectator 
would have remarked that Sir Eeginald's embarrass- 
ment was equal to his emotion, and that somethino- 
more than sorrow struggled ia his bosom and choked 
his utterance. But Edith was too much under the 
influence of powerful feeling herself to be a nice ob- 
server of what was passing in the mind of another. 
Her tears continued to flow, from the mingled tide of 
grief and joy which swelled her heart. 

A long pause ensued. At length Sir Reginald, as 
if by a violent effort, spoke. 

" I have been delayed by illness," said he. The 
tone and accent, though beautifully modulated, were 
languid and mournful, and they sounded so strange, 
that Edith could scarcely have recognised in them the 
gay familiar tones which still dwelt in fond memory's 
VOL. I. s 



258 DESTINY. 

ear. Still it was Eeginald that spoke, aud these few 
simple words at once dispelled all the vague doubts 
which had arisen from his unaccountable delay. 

"You have been ill !" she exclaimed; "and I did 
not know it — and you have hastened to us even before 
you are recovered ! " 

" But it is too late," said he bitterly. 

"No — no, dear Reginald, do not say so — we still 
need your sympathy." Her voice faltered, and again 
her tears fell. A sigh, almost a groan, broke from Sir 
Reginald's heart. He rose and traversed the apart- 
ment, then resumed his seat, and leaning his head on 
a table, tears forced their way through the fingers 
which shaded his brow. But again he roused himself, 
and strove to speak calmly and firmly, while he in- 
quired — "How is Glenroy?" 

"You will find him changed, much changed," 
replied Edith, striving to subdue her emotion also; 
" but the sight of you will, I am sure, do him good. 
Ah, Reginald, you are now his only hope." She 
stopped, for her firmness was forsaking her. 

"And you, Edith — and you," gasped he, as he 
again buried his face in his hands, and his whole 
frame shook with emotion — "what am I to you'?" 

Edith was silent. Reginald heavily raised his 
head, but his inquiring gaze met only the deep blush 
and the downcast eye of love revealed, though not 
avowed. Then, in a tone of forced composure, he 
said — 

"Edith, should you have known me again? Am 



DESTINY. 259 

not I changed 1" he added, attempting to smile, while 
he grew very pale. 

"We are all changed," said she sadly, "for we 
have all known affliction since we parted; hut you 
have been ill in health, and you concealed it from 
me! while I — ah, Keginald, had you but guessed 
what " 

"I Aare been ill," interruj^ted he hurriedly ; "but 
that is past, — at least the worst. But you say Glen- 
roy is much altered ? Had I not better go to him 1 
The sooner the meeting is over the better." 

"Perhaps so," said Edith, "if you feel able for it. 
But you are fatigued; had you not better rest 
and " 

"No — nothing — I wish it over," said he im- 
patiently. "I will do anything — everything for you 
both," he added, with emotion 

" I am sure you Avill," said Edith, with simple 
earnestness, " and if you Avish to comfort us, you will 
yourself be comforted. Now go, dear Eeginald ! " She 
extended her hand ; he took it, pressed it in his Avith 
a sigh, then sloAvly quitted the apartment. 



CHAPTEE XXXVII. 

Edith remained motionless and bewildered — her 
heart sank, she knew not why^her tears flowed, she 
could not tell for what. Reginald was returned, 
ought she not to be happy 1 But was it her own — • 
her long-loved, her loving Reginald she had beheld ■? 
Oh, surely he was changed. Others might think him 
improved, but no change could improve that image so 
deeply impressed upon her heart. Edith loved too 
profoundly to admire. 

A long time elasped ere she heard her father's slow 
and shuffling step crossing the hall to the drawing- 
room, which he entered leaning on, or rather clinging 
to, Reginald, as if afraid he would again desert him. 
The traces of agitation were still visible in his face, 
for his grief for the loss of his son had been all 
awakened at sight of his nephew, that son's once in- 
separable playfellow and companion, now come to fill 
his place, and succeed to all that should have been his. 
But the first burst of sorrow was over, and he again 
talked in his usual rambling, desultory way, of the 
worldly objects to which his soul still cleaved — his 
estates, his rents, his woods, his cattle, his improve- 



1 



I 



4 



DESTINY. 261 

ments — everything, in short, which could still minister 
to his pride. 

" Glenroy has lost none of his hospitality since I 
left him,'' said Reginald, addressing Edith, as he 
])assed, supporting her father to his seat; "and I 
daresay you can guess how unavailing remonstrance is 
at those times.'' 

" He has only been making up for my omission, 
then," replied she, " as I forgot to ask whether you had 
dined — perhaps," she added, with a slight blush, " that 
is because I had never before had occasion to treat you 
as a stranger." 

" Treat him as a stranger ! " exclaimed Glenroy 
angrily; " I'll have no strangers here. I never desire 
to see the face of a stranger within my door — remem- 
ber that, Edith ; and to treat Reginald as a stranger ! 
my own nephew — the man that you're to " 

" Oh, papa," interrupted Edith hastily, " I beg your 
pardon, but you have quite misunderstood me. I did 
not mean — I " 

"No matter whether I've misunderstood you or 
not," cried Glenroy ; " I say, once for all, that Regi- 
nald's not to be treated as a stranger in this house- 
he's to do as he pleases. Remember that, Reginald — 
you're to do exactly as you please. I'm getting old 
now, Reginald, and I've lost him that " 

Here grief for a moment got the better of his anger, 
and he groaned in the bitterness of his heart. 

" My cousin does herself injustice," said Reginald, 
trying to soothe the weak and irritated feelings of the 



262 DESTINY. 

old man — " she received me with more kindness than 
I deserved," and he sighed as he said it. 

" How could that be 1" cried Glenroy impatiently ; 
" and to treat you as a stranger, too ! And what 
would become of me, if it was not for you, Reginald, 
and of her tool Eemember, Reginald, you're just as 
much master here as if — as ever my oAvn poor boy 
was." Here another momentary gush of sorrow 
checked him, but quickly mastering it, he called— 
"Ring the bell, Benbowie — he's groAvn as deaf's a 
post. Ring it again — give it another tug ! What the 
plague are these lazy dogs about?" 

Then when the summons was answered by the 
butler and deputy, bearing tea and coffee, "It wasn't 
that I rang for, but you all make one errand answer 
for two, if there should be a dozen of you. There, 
Boyd, remember I desire you, and all of you, to treat 
Sir Reginald with the greatest respect, and to obey 
him the same as myself. You hear me 1 And desire 
Mrs. Pattison to give us a supper like a dinner, and 
that quickly. Xow don't you interfere, Reginald," as 
his nephew was about to remonstrate ; " I'm master 
here, and I'll do as I please ; and it is my pleasure 
that you should be well treated, and do as you please 
— remember that, Edith. And, Boyd, let all the 
servants have as much drink as they choose to-night, 
to drink Sir Reginald's health and welcome home. 
Where's that idiot jMolly Macauley, that she's not in 
the wayf 

"I have missed my kind-hearted, good-natured 



DESTINY. 263 

old friend," said Sir Eeginald. "I hope she is not far 
off?" 

But before Edith had time to answer, Glenroy, 
with the rambling garrulity of an infirm mind, had 
started another subject. " You would see, Eeginald, 
that my tenants had got the principal premiums from 
the Highland Society this year. M'Laren, that's he 
that has the farm of Kildrunnach, you know, up 
CUendochart, the same land M'Taggart had a lease 
of before your time ; he got no fewer than three 
premiums ; one was for the draining of the Dhu Moss 
— you remember the Dhu Moss, Reginald, up beyond 
the Roebuck Park ? Many a time you've shot a roe- 
buck there, and the very last time Norman was out, 
he shot three Avith his own hand. He had become 
the very best shot in the country — yes he had ; but 
there was not his match for anything — nothing — 
nothing." Here another tide of fond recollection for 
a moment stopped the current of poor Glenroy's words ; 
but he quickly rallied, and resumed — "You would 
observe the plantation on the Skirridale Hill, as you 
came along, Reginald? That's all new, and I'll venture 
to say, you never saw a finer plantation ; and, by-the- 
bye, Reginald, there's been some thinning of the wood 
since you were here, and I must cut some more ; 
they're too thick — too thick a great deal. I'll give 
you a good portion with Edith, out of the thinnings 
of the Glenhausseu Wood, and you shall mark the 
trees yourself, Reginald ; we'll ride up to-morrow and 
look at them, if you'll put me in mind. Benbowie, 



264 DESTINY. 

ring the bell. Do you hear, Boyd ■? you'll send one of 
the men directly to the stables, to desire M'Nab to 
have my horse ready for me to ride to-morrow. I'll 
let him know at what hour — and he's to go directly. 
And stay, do you hear, Boyd 1 he's to bring the black 
mare for Sir Reginald — the black mare," repeated he, 
as the servant left the room ; " that was Norman's, 
and the handsomest creature I ever saw. M'Nab tells 
me Lord Allonby would give any money for her, but 
I'll not part -with her ; for what's money to me, now 
that he's gone? But it's yours now, Reginald; you 
shall have anything that belonged to him — you shall 
— you shall, Reginald. Ay, Lord Allonby wanted 
to have her, so M'Nab told me ; that's he, you know, 
that courted Edith, when " 

"Oh, papa!" exclaimed Edith in a deprecating 
tone, and blushing deeply, as Reginald turned upon 
her a look of surprise, which fixed into a piercing gaze 
of most earnest scrutiny. 

"It's no secret, I'm sm-e," cried Glenroy angrily; 
" and if it was, I'll have no secrets here, for the con- 
ceited puppy thought he might have her for the 
asking, I believe. But, upon my honour, Reginald, 
I would rather you had her, than any man living. I 
would, upon my soul ! What's Lord Allonby, or any 
lord amongst them, to me? The king can make a 
lord any day, but I defy him to make the Chief of 
Glenroy ; and that's what you'll be, Reginald, when 
I'm gone ; and you're more to me than all the lords 
in the creation, now that I've no son of my own," 



DESTINY. 265 

grasping his nephew's hand in strong emotion. " And 
Edith shall be yours as soon as we can get everything 
settled ; and, in the meantime, we'll take a ride 
to-morrow and see the trees marked ; and, Edith, is 
there no word of that Molly Macauley jetV 

In this sort of bald, disjointed chat the evening 
wore heavily away, w'ithout the lovers having an 
opportunity of conversing for an instant apart; for 
Glenroy would not suffer Reginald to stir from his 
side, and seemed even loath to lose sight of him Avhen 
they separated for the night. 



CHAPTER XXXVIII. 

Hitherto Edith had felt chilled and disappointed. 
Reginald, it was true, had been so engrossed by her 
father, that it had not been in his power to devote 
himself to her, but he had not even looked as if he 
wished it. His air had been sad and abstracted, and 
only once had she seen his eye kindle with its wonted 
fire, and that was at the mention of Lord Allonby as 
her lover. The report had gone abroad (though 
without foundation) that he was an accepted one, and 
it might have reached Reginald, and hence all the 
mystery : he had been piqued, angry, jealous ; and 
her father's words had merely conveyed the impres- 
sion that she had rejected him as a suitor. But could 
Reginald then have believed her capable, even in 
thought, of breaking her plighted faith, and renounc- 
ing her first, her only lovel And would he have 
yielded her up to a rival without a word ? Yes, gen- 
erous and high-minded as he was, he would have dis- 
dained to remonstrate, but, oh, how he must have 
despised her ! And Edith's cheek burned even at the 
thought. Then the strange expressions in his letter, 
his unaccountable delay in returning, his agitation at 



DESTINY. 267 

meeting, his abstracted and gloomy air — were all 
these to be referred to the same source 1 Yes, partly to 
that, and partly to the mournful circumstances under 
which they had met ; the loss of Norman, the infirm- 
ities of her father, both in mind and body, must have 
shocked one who had so much cause to love him as 
Keginald had. And thus Edith strove to soothe her 
wounded feelings, and bar her breast against the 
admission of doubts worse than death. But all these 
reflections did not enable her to meet her lover with 
that easy, artless confidence of manner which had 
formerly rendered their intercoui'se so delightful. 
When they met at the breakfast-table, there was 
mutual embarrassment. Eeginald seemed less sad, 
indeed, than on the preceding evening ; but still there 
was none of that gaiety and playfulness of manner 
which had been so often wont to call up the smiles 
on her cheek. His manners were all elegance and 
suavity, but they lacked the affectionate warmth of 
former days, and though his countenance was more 
than ever expressive of the fire and sensibility of his 
mind, still no bright or tender glance repeated the 
oft-told tale of fond, happy, youthful affection — " the 
kind sweet smile of old." 

The conversation, or rather talk, was carried on 
by Glenroy in the same strain of mingled pride, 
vanity, lamentation, and tautology. There was all 
the detail of the premiums and the Dhu Moss, and 
the account of the new plantations greatly enlarged, 
and the anticipation of the thinnings, with the purpose 



268 DESTINY, 

for which they were to be apphed ; and then came 
the black mare, and Lord Allonby ; and, at the men- 
tion of his name, Eeginald, who had been sunk in a 
reverie, suddenly started, and again cast on Edith a 
look which seemed as if it would have pierced into 
her soul, and again the blood mounted to her temples 
at the suspicion it implied. 

" I hope, Edith, you will be of our party to Glen- 
haussen?" said he gaily. "What a charming morn- 
ing this is ! " 

"I have been little in the jiractice of riding for 
some time," replied she; "and am become such a 
timid horsewoman that I fear I should only be an 
encumbrance." 

"Where is it we're going, Eeginald?" cried Glen- 
roy. " Oh, ay ! to look at the Glenhaussen woods. 
But what would take her there? Hiding's not the 
thing for a lady. Lord Allonby, that's he that wants 
the black mare that I was talking about (he courted 
Edith, too !), that belonged to my Norman — as if I 
would part with it to any man breathing, but your- 
self, Eeginald; and that's not parting with it neither, 
for I hope you and I will never part, Eeginald. You 
shall be as much master here as I am; and when 

you're married to Edith What have you dropped, 

Eeginald? Edith, will you mind what you're about, 
and not set the table in a swim? And — and — why 
is that idiot, Molly Macauley, not here to make the 
tea wiselike ? And we were speaking about riding, 
or what was it? For I don't know what I am about; 



DESTINY. 269 

not that it's your fault, Keginald; but, Edith, you 
really have not been yourself since that puppy. Lord 
Allonby, put nonsense in your head." 

Poor Edith was aghast at this accusation, accus- 
tomed as she was to the capricious garrulity of her 
father's temper. But the fact was, Glenroy, by one 
of the inexplicable contradictions of nature, even 
while indulging his spleen in chiding and censuring 
his daughter, sought at the same time to give her 
consequence in the eyes of his nephew, by perpetually 
adverting to the noble and wealthy suitor who had 
courted her alliance. Reginald seemed to feel for 
her confusion, for, taking her hand, he said, with a 
look of almost fond entreaty, "Come now, Edith, 
don't refuse my first request ; do go with us ?" 

"I will," said Edith softly; "if you really wish 
it." 

"Can you doubt if?" replied Reginald in the 
same tone. 

But Glenroy seemed so bent on monopolising his 
nephew's comj^any and conversation, as to grudge 
even a portion of it to his daughter, for he said peev- 
ishly, "It's not a woman's business we're going about; 
we're going to look at the Glenhaussen woods — are 
we not, Reginald 1 Then what can she know about 
the thinning of woods 1 she knows enough when she 
knows she's to have them for her tocher, and not a 
bad one either, Reginald; M'Intosh tells me seven 
thousand pounds worth will never be missed— and as 
many more as you like. But I'll be hanged if I 



270 DESTINY. 

would have given a single stick to that lord of yours, 
Edith. What cared I for him, and what was he to 
me ■? a bit lowland lord, that has hardly a hill in all 
the Highlands now. But, Edith, dear, do as you like, 
and you shall have the first thousand of the cuttings 
to buy your wedding trumpery, and you'll get that 
fool, Molly Macauley, to help you. What the plague's 
come over the creature 1" 

Eeginald said nothing, but his countenance was 
overcast, and when Edith rose from the breakfast- 
table, he neither repeated his request, nor reminded 
her of her promise ; but as she was leaving the room, 
she heard him say with quickness, " There can be no 

hurry as to marking the trees, Glenroy ; and if " 

But here Glenroy, with his usual impatience of con- 
tradiction, broke in — " No hurry ! but I tell you there 
is a hurry, Eeginald ; and if it had not been for Nor- 
man's death, which I shall never get the better of 

" Here a passionate burst of grief concluded 

the sentence, and Edith only learnt how the discus- 
sion had ended when an hour afterwards she saw her 
father and lover ride off without her. 

That Eeginald was piqued and jealous she thought 
was now certain, for how could she otherwise 
account for such capricious inequalities? From the 
moment of his arrival, her mind had been in too 
great a tremor to admit of her marking accurately the 
sudden changes of his manner ; if she had, she would 
have drawn a very different inference. Edith's feel- 
ings were all too pure and devoted to allow her 



DESTINY. 271 

enjoying any womanish triumph at this supposed dis- 
covery ; on the contrary, her gentle, guileless heart was 
pained at the thought that she was the cause of un- 
easiness to Reginald. A few words from her lips, she 
was sure, would instantly remove it, and she therefore 
resolved to take the first opportunity of coming to an 
explanation with him, and of undeceiving him as to 
her fancied predilection for another. 



CHAPTEE XXXIX. 

But it seemed as if Eeginald avoided all opportuni- 
ties of being alone with her. When he returned from 
his ride, he withdrew to his own apartment on the 
plea of having letters to write ; and when he appeared 
at dinner, his air was still more melancholy and 
abstracted than it had yet been. Two or three chance 
visitors who had arrived rendered the conversation 
rather more general, and by their county news diverted 
Glenroy's attention from being quite so exclusively 
directed to his nephew, though every subject that 
was started still bore some reference to him — to the 
Dhu Moss, the planting of Skirridale Hill, the thin- 
ning of the Glenhaussen woods, the Highland Society, 
the black mare, Norman, and Lord Allonby. 

Edith flattered herseK when she left the dinins- 
room that Eeginald would soon follow her ; she knew 
he disliked sitting long at table, and the party was 
not one to be upon any ceremony with : her father 
had a habit of remaining long after dinner, and as he 
became drowsy and confused, it would be an easy 
matter for Eeginald to make his escape from him. 
But she waited in vain — Eeginald came not; but 



DESTINY. 273 

soon she caught a glimi^se of him from the window, 
as he slowly crossed the lawn, and disappeared in the 
woods that skirted it on one side. Edith could not 
restrain her tears at this new proof of Eeginald's 
estrangement from her. "Oh, cruel that he is!" 
thought she, "thus to torture himself and me— could 
he act thus if he loved me as I love him ? No, no ; 
surely he would seek an explanation, and end this 
mystery ; and yet it is I who may he unjust. This 
fancied mystery may be nothing more than grief and 
self-reproach, and he is unwilling to give me pain by 
communicating his feelings. All, did he but know 
how sweet it would be to me to share in his every 
sorrow, he would not thus withhold them from me ! " 
Thus did Edith mournfully commune with herself 
till the evening was far advanced, when she was 
roused by the sound of an arrival, and in a few 
minutes Mrs. Macauley's jocund tones saluted her ear, 
and presently she entered, all bustle, calling, " So he's 
come — where is he 1 — let me see him ; " then suddenly 
stopping — "But bless my heart, my dear!" she ex- 
claimed, as she surveyed Edith with a look of sur- 
prise, "what is the matter with you? Is not your 
papa well, and your true love come home ; and what 
makes you look as if you had been crying, then 1 " 
" Oh, Macky, how can you ask 1 " said Edith 

mournfully, " considering " 

" Well, my dear, I know what you mean, and it's 
very true, and I consider everything, and you know 
very well yourself what a sore heart it gave me when 

VOL. I. T D. 



274 DESTINY. 

it happened. But you have sense to know, my dear, 
there's a time for everything, and this is not the time 
for you to be crying for them that's gone, when you 
ought rather to be rejoicing at them that's come back. 
'Deed I think so ! " 

"I am sure your return will rejoice us all, Macky," 
said Edith affectionately ; " papa has missed you very 
much," 

" 'Deed, and I thought he would do that, for he 
has always been so kind to me — and I thought some- 
times when I was away, 'Oh,' thinks I to myself, 'I 
wonder what Glenroy will do for somebody to be 
angry with ; for Benbowie's grown so deaf, poor 
creature, it's not worth his while to be angry at him ; 
and you're so gentle, that it Avould not do for him to 
be angry with you ; but I'm sure he has a good right 
to be angry at me, considering how kind he has 
always been to me.'" Then uttering an exclamation 
of joy as Sir Reginald entered the room, she flew 
towards him, and precipitated herself round his neck, 
uttering expressions of joy and delight, which were 
returned on his part with all the hearty warmth and 
ardour of his more refined welcome. 

"And now," said she, releasing him from her 
embrace, and holding him at arm's length, "let me 
look at you — well, I declare you are ten times hand- 
somer than ever you were, and you hold yourself up 
so well, you might pass for a prince; and I would 
know that smile of yours among a thousand. Oh, I 
hope my eyes will serve me to take j'our picture some 



DESTINY. 275 

day — 'deed I cannot help looking at you, for you are 
like, and yet you are not like, what you was ; you 
have not just the bonny bloom on your cheek that 
you had when you went away. What do you think, 
Miss Edith, dear?" 

" I think Reginald is changed," said Edith, with a 
low sigh. 

"All things change, you know," said Reginald, 
assuming an air of gaiety ; " it was not to be expected 
that I alone, of all created things, should remain un- 
changeable, and return precisely the same individual 
I was a year ago ; even you yourself, dear Macky, are 
somewhat changed ; you are become still more embon- 
point — still more youthful and merry and kind-hearted." 

"Now, are you not flattering me. Sir Reginald? 
for though I like to be praised, I do not want to be 
flattered." 

"You did not use to think me a flatterer, Macky?" 
said Sir Reginald, with a smile. 

" 'Deed, then, I don't think you are one now, my 
dear, for you always spoke the truth when you was a 
boy, and it is not likely you would change now, when 
you have got more sense and good principles. Now 
you need not colour up. Sir Reginald, for I'm not 
flattering you — I'm only just saying what I think; 
but oh, my dears, what a happy meeting you would 
have ! except, to be sure, that there was a reason for 
its not being so happy as it should have been ; and 
indeed it would be a shame to us if we were to be as 
happy and merry all at once," — and tears twinkled in 



276 DESTINY. 

her sunny eyes as she spoke. " But then, as 1 was 
telling Miss Edith, when I found her with the tears 
on her cheek, the time is gone by now, and we should 
not accustom ourselves to be melancholy, for it is a 
very bad hal)it; but once the distress is over, we 
should just wipe our eyes, and thank God for His 
mercies ; and I'm sure I do it with all my heart," 
wiping her own eyes as she said it. 

"I wish I had your philosophy, Macky," said Sir 
Keginald, with a sigh. 

"Now, what for should you wish for anything 
belonging to mef said Mrs. Macauley, with a strong 
mark of interrogation, from which there was no escape. 

"Don't be afraid," said Eeginald, evading the 
question ; "I would not rob you of it, even if I could ; 
it sits so well upon you — you make such a good use 
of it." 

" Now, as sure as anything, you are flattering me, 
Sir Reginald ! But I want to know what use you 
could have for what you please to call my philosophy 
— though, 'deed, to tell the truth, I do not know very 
well what philosophy is ; but if you mean my con- 
tentment, I'm siu-e you cannot want that, when you 
have everything to make you so contented and happy : 
you yourself so handsome, and with such a grand for- 
tune, and a beautiful place, and an old family, and a 
title, and your own true love there, that " 

"True," exclaimed Reginald abruptly — " what a 
charming evening this is ! Have you not been out, 
Edith?" 



DESTINY. 277 

" No," replied she in a tone of forced composure ; 
"but I should like to take a stroll now." 

" Then I hope you will allow me to attend you," said 
Eeginald, colouring, and evidently embarrassed. 

"Certainly," said Edith, in the same tone, and 
rising to prepare for her walk. 

"But, my dears, have you had tea and coffee^" 
cried Mrs. Macauley. 

"I beg your pardon," said Edith, "I had forgot;" 
and she rang the beU. 

" I own myself too much of a Frenchman to dis- 
pense with my coffee," said Sir Eeginald, seemingly 
relieved by the delay, while Edith left the room for 
her shawl. 

" I really think that sweet creature's looking very 
ill," said Mrs. Macauley in a low voice to Sir Eeginald, 
after dismissing Boyd and his sateUite. " I thought 
the sight of you would have brought back the roses 
to her cheeks, and the smiles to her pretty mouth ; 
but I think she looks almost as pale and mournful 
as she did before you came, and that's very extra- 
ordinary, is it not ! " 

" She certainly is much changed," said Sir Eeginald, 
with a sigh. 

"Ay, well, but for all that, I'll wager you have 
not seen the like of her among all the fine French 
and foreign ladies you have seen — tell me truly, have 
youl" 

"Edith certainly was very pretty," replied Sir 
Eeginald, in a tone that betrayed emotion. 



278 DESTINY. 

"Well, my dear, but don't you be frightened for 
all that, and she'll soon be as pretty as ever she was ; 
for she has a very good constitution, although maybe 
she does not look so stout as some of your great big 
fat people ; and you know it is natural for her to be 
looking not so well, considering what distress she has 
suffered; and then, you know, she was so anxious 
about you, and so wearying for you to come home " 

"In sjDite of Lord Allonby?" said Sir Reginald, 
with a forced laugh, 

" Oh, so you have heard about that already ! But 
it would not be from Miss Edith herself, for she does 
not like the way Glenroy speaks about that at all." 

Sir Reginald remained silent for a few moments, 
as if struggling with his emotion ; then, sipping his 
coffee, he said, with affected carelessness — "Ladies 
seldom dislike having their conquests known, and 
my cousin has no cause to be ashamed of hers." 

" 'Deed, I think not, for Lord Allonby is a very 
fine, handsome man, though he has no clan ; he has 
a very good fortune too, they tell me, though it is 
but in the Low Country, which makes Glenroy look 
down upon him so much ; many a one would not be 
so particular in these things as he is. Not that it 
was for that he refused him for Miss Malcolm, but 
you know she was as good as married to you." 

"Edith liked him, did she not?" said Reginald 
hurriedly. 

" 'Deed, I don't know whether she did or not," 
replied the innocent, unsuspecting Mrs. Macauley; 



DESTINY. 279 

"but you may ask her yourself," as the door opened 
and Edith entered. 

"Pshaw — nonsense," cried Eeginald, crimsoning, 
while he tried to prevent Mrs. Macauley from pro- 
ceeding. 

But if it is dangerous playing with edged tools, 
it is no less so to tamper with simplicity, so Mrs. 
Macauley went on. " Well, if it is nonsense, where's 
the harm of it, for I declare I can't see it?" Then 
addressing Edith — "We were just speaking about 
you, my dear, and Sir Eeginald was asking me if I 
knew how you liked Lord Allonby ; 'deed, I said I 
did not know, but he might ask yourself." 

Sir Eeginald and Edith were standing almost 
opposite to each other ; a slight blush and an expres- 
sion of wounded feeling were upon her countenance, 
while strong agitation was depicted upon his, and if 
any one so graceful could possibly have looked awk- 
ward, he must have done so at that moment. 

"If Sir Eeginald wishes to know, he has only to 
ask myself," said Edith calmly; and turning away, she 
seated herself at one of the farthest off windows, while 
he remained standing, as if still dawdling over his 
cofiee, but with a flushed cheek and downcast eye. 

"Well," cried Mrs. Macauley, "I know very well 
you are both Avishing me, as Glenroy, honest man, 
sometimes says, sticking on the point of one of my 
own needles, just now when you have so much to say 
to one another ; so now that I've had my dish of tea, 
I'll just go and make myself a little wiselike before 



280 DESTINY. 

Glenroy comes in, or he'll be noticing my cap, as 
sure as death, for you see how it is crushed with my 
bonnet. " 

" I — I — thought — were you not proposing a walk 1" 
said Sir Reginald, trying to detain her. 

" 'Deed, then. Sir Eeginald, I have a great deal too 
much sense to think of troubling two tender young 
lovers with my company, but I'm sure it is very dis- 
creet in you to ask me. Now, go your Avays, my dears 
— and let me see you walking arm-in-arm, so lovingly 
as you used to do — well, I daresay I'm almost as happy 
as you are yourselves !" 

And away trotted Mrs. Macauley singing, with the 
tears still upon her cheek. 

A pause of some minutes ensued ; at length Regi- 
nald approached Edith, and in a voice which vainly 
strove to appear calm, said, "I thought you had been 
going to walk, Edith'?" 

Edith made no answer, her heart seemed too full ; 
but she tiu-ned upon him a look so soft and tearful, 
that Reginald involuntarily caught her hand, but as 
suddenly dropped it as he again encountered the ring 
his own had placed there, Avhile the flush on his cheek 
turned to an almost ashy paleness. 

At sight of his agitation, Edith mastered hers, and 
though her voice was almost inarticulate from her 
emotion, she said, " Reginald, what is it you seek to 
know?" 

Reginald made no answer, and his agitation in- 
creased. Then aeain takins; her hand, he almost 



DESTINY. 281 

crushed it in his, while, in a low suffocated voice, he 
murmured — " How I can best make you happy !" A 
thrill of joy ran through Edith's heart at the words ; 
for, blinded by her tears, she did not perceive the 
mute anguish of her lover's features, and for a few 
minutes both remained silent. But she was already 
happy, for her hand was locked in Reginald's, and she 
felt assured that the time was now come when all would 
l)e cleared up. But at that moment Glenroy and his 
party came thronging into the room, and as he shuffled 
along, supported by a friend on one hand, and a stick 
in the other, he called — "Sir Eeginald, you're here, 
and I did not know it ! What made you leave me 1 
But that's always the way, now ! Have not you plenty 
of time to be courting, without leaving me alone this 
way ? But, now that he's gone, nobody comes near 
me," as his friends placed him carefully in a sofa. 
"And Where's Molly Macauley?" 

" She will be here presently, papa," said Edith, try- 
ing to soothe him. " She is returned, and is merely 
making herself a little smart for you." 

"What do I care for herl" cried Glenroy peev- 
ishly; "or what do I care for any woman 'i Ee- 
ginald, come here and sit down beside me. Reginald, 
you're more to me than all the rest of the world put 
together ; and you must never leave me. She shall 
be married to you as soon as you " 

"Your coffee waits, papa," said Edith, laying her 
hand softly on his, as if to stop the current of liis 
discourse. 



282 DESTINY. 

" Well, let it wait. Set it down, Boyd ; aud — 
and — Eeginald, I'll tell you what I'll do. You know 
the Skirridale woods, the — the Glenhaussen woods? 
M'Nab tells me I may cut ten thousand pounds worth 
to-morrow, if I choose ; and — and " 

" Well, my dear imcle, we shall talk about that to- 
morrow," said Reginald impatiently; "but some of 
us were projecting a walk — the evening is so fine." 
And he looked to some of the company as though he 
expected to be seconded. 

" A walk ! " cried Glenroy contemptuously. " Who 
but silly women would think of walking at this time 
of night? Edith may go, if she Hkes, but I cannot 
part with you, Reginald, and, Auchnagruel, you may 
go with her" — to a bashful, shining, red-faced laird, 
with large white ears, and a smooth powdered head, 
who awkwardly mumbled out his acquiescence, which 
Edith waived, while Reginald made another effort, but 
in vain, to disengage himself from his uncle's grasp. 

"Stay you still, Reginald," cried he, holding himfast; 
" and — and you shall have the black mare to-morrow. 
She's the greatest beauty — there's not her match in 
the country. I could lay a thousand guineas her 
match is not to be found in Scotland. That Lord — 
what do you call him, Edith? he that had the im- 
pudence to propose to me for her, and he would have 
taken yon, too !" 

"There comes Mrs. Macauley, papa," said Edith, 
as that worthy entered, and with all her speed made 
up to her beloved Chief. 



DESTINY. 283 

"Oh, Glenroy, how happy I am to see you!" ex- 
claimed she, seizing both liis hands. "And I hope 
you are happy to see me, too?" regarding him with 
an expression of unmingled delight. 

"What should make me happy to see youf de- 
manded Glenroy, with a stare of astonishment — " the 
woman that I see every day of my life — -that I've 
seen every day these forty years f 

"Well, but, Glenroy, for all that, you have not 
seen me for well on to a week." 

"A week! Where have you been'? I never 
missed you !" 

"Oh, Glenroy, I was told, then, you had missed 
me very much," said poor Molly in a tone of dis- 
appointment. 

"Miss you!'" repeated Glenroy. "I — I've some- 
body else that I miss. Reginald, you know who it is 
I miss ; and you are to me now what he was when 
I had Jiim. Old Molly Macauley, where have you 
been 1 Can you not settle yourself at home, but you 
must be going about sorning on people that you've 
no business with 1 You should stay away altogether, 
since you're so fond of it." Then, pushing away his 
cup — "That coftee's not drinkable; ring the bell for 
the tea-things; and, Mrs. Macauley, you'll make tea 
for me, for that woman Pattison can no more make 
tea than she can shoe a horse. And sit down here at 
my hand, for I knoAv you like to scuttle with the tea- 
things, Molly; and, Reginald, you'll stay where you 
are on the other side — there's room for us all." 



284 DESTINY. 

And thus, with a debilitated mind and despotic 
temper, Glenroy maintained an ascendency over all 
around him, and rendered them subservient to his 
will. Thus another insupportable evening was com- 
sumed ; but Reginald's Avords had taken a load from 
Edith's heart, and she felt assured that another sun 
Avould not set without seeing them restored to their 
former happy state of mutual confidence. 



CHAPTER XL. 

With this hojie she repaired to the breakfast-table 
the following morning ; but Reginald was the last to 
join the party, and when he did, he had the appear- 
ance of one who had passed a sleepless night. He 
looked pale and thoughtful, and did no justice to the 
good cheer Glenroy and Mrs. Macauley heaped upon 
him with unsparing hand. 

"What's the reason there's nothing at the table 
Reginald can eat, Edith 1" demanded Glenroy sternly. 

" There is only too great a variety of good things," 
said Reginald, trying to deprecate the Chief's unjust 
displeasure. "I have been little accustomed to see 
such substantial breakfasts for some time." 

" Substantial !" repeated Glenroy, still more indig- 
nantly; " it's no breakfast at all. Why is there no 
herring, Edith? Ring the bell, Benbowie— that 
woman Pattison's good for notliing. We never have 
a proper meal, now that your brother's gone. He 
looked better after these things. He would not have 
set you down to such a breakfast. Boyd, what's the 
reason there's no herring at table? I never saw a 
breakfast without herring. Not in season yet? 



286 DESTINY. 

Don't tell me any such nonsense ; I desire they may 
be in season to-morrow, and that tliere may be plent)' 
of herring on the table after this. And no game — is 
that not in season too 1 A prettj^-like breakfast for 
hungry men ! Not in season ! not in fiddlesticks ; 
everything must have its season now ! in my day 
there were no seasons." 

Reginald said nothing, but looked as if annoyed 
and oppressed by his uncle's overl^earing hospitality. 

"Well, Glenroy," said Mrs. Macauley, "for my 
part, I think this might satisfy a dozen of hungry 
men, and a score that are not hungry. But maybe 
Sir Reginald does not think so much of our Heiland 
breakfasts, now that he has seen so much of the 
world. I have heard that in some strange countries 
they eat pine-apples and grapes and peaches to their 
breakfasts." 

"And why have we not pine-apples and peaches 
and grapes here, Edith f cried Glenroy. "What is 
the use of my having all these things, if they are not 
produced at proper occasions 1 But you give yourseK 
no sort of trouble to please your cousin now. But 
ring the bell, and I'll send to the hothouses for some 
of those things. Now, Reginald, you need not say a 
word. Boyd, you'll desire M'Nicol to have every 
kind of fruit for breakfast after this. And bring 
some grapes directly ; and I desire there may be fresh 
herring every morning. Is it because that puppy — 
that Lord AUonby — turned up his nose at herring that 
we never see them now ? And he had the imj^udence 



J 



DESTINY. 287 

to want Norman's black mare ! as if I would have 
parted with that to any man breathing but yourself, 
Reginald. She is yours now, and we shall take a ride 
to-day. What time will you be ready to goV 

. Reginald looked embarrassed, and as if wishing to 
decline, without having an apology ready. 

"Perhaps you would prefer a walk," said Edith 
softly ; then blushed, as if she thought she said too 
much. 

"A walk!" repeated Glenroy scornfully; "women 
are never happy but when they are walking. / can 
hardly walk a step now for that confounded gout; 
but I'll take a ride with you, Reginald, and we'll go 
to see the Dhu Moss — that's what M'Kinnon has 
drained forty acres of, and got a premium from the 
Highland Society. You — you remember the Dhu 
Moss, Reginald 1" 

Reginald coloured as he said, "I am afraid I shall 
be a dull companion for either a Avalk or ride — I 
have got so much of a headache this morning." 

" A headache !" repeated Glenroy, in alarm ; " how 
is that ? But I very often have a headache myself, 
Reginald. But I'll tell you what, we'll not go out to- 
day — we'll just sit quietly here, and talk over some 
things that I Avant to speak to you about, and " 

"Excuse me, Glenroy," interrupted Sir Reginald 
impatiently; "but I am still more indisposed for 
business this morning. I suppose," he added, trying 
to force a smile, "I had taken too much of your 
champagne yesterday. " 



288 ' DESTINY. 

As he spoke, Edith passed into the drawing-room, 
and Mrs. Macauley rose to follow ; but first going 
round to Sir Reginald, she laid her hand upon his 
arm, and whispered, " My dear Sir Reginald, take 
my word for it, the best cure for both your head and 
your heart will be to take a little walk with your own 
true love. I doubt there's something not right be- 
tween you, for she's away with the tear in her ee — 
'deed is she, and it makes me wae to see her." 

" What is it you are whispering about, Molly Mac- 
auley 1" cried Glenroy angrily ; "can you not speak 
out?" 

" 'Deed, Glenroy, I was just saying that you ought 
not to hinder two tender young sweethearts from tak- 
ing a walk together. Think how much they must have 
to say to one another after such a long separation." 

" You are really a most officious goose, Mrs. Mac- 
auley," cried the Chief. " What can they have to say 
to one another, that they may not say before my face 
as well as behind my back, all the times of the day, 
if they like 1 Who hinders them from saying what 
they please ? — I'm sure, Reginald, I've told you, you 
are as much master here as I am myself. You may 
say and do exactly what you please, for you're now 

the man that's to come after me " Here his voice 

sank at the thought of his lost son. 

"I am very sensible of your kindness, Glenroy," 
said Sir Reginald, shaking his uncle's hand, as he rose 
from table ; " and I wish I could make a better return 
for it," he added with emotion. "In the meantime. 



DESTINY. 289 

I shall try to get rid of mj^ headache, and be ready 
to attend you on a short ride before dinner." And 
he hastily left the room, as if to avoid all further dis- 
cussion. 

He entered the drawing-room, where Edith and 
Mrs. Macauley were, but the latter immediately van- 
ished, singing — 

" The luve that I ha'e chosen 
Therewith I'll be content, 
The saut seas shall be frozen 
Before that I repent. 

" Repent it sail I never 
Until the day I dee, 
Though the lawlands o' Holland 
Ha'e twined my luve and me." 

Edith was arranging her drawing -materials, pre- 
paratory to copying a drawing which lay before her, 
and wliich she had already begun. 

" I ought perhaps to feel ashamed of your seeing 
my poor attempts," said she, as Eeginald looked at 
the outhne she had begun ; "but," she added, looking 
on him with the clear and innocent expression of her 
soft eyes, " I do not wish to hide anything from you, 
Reginald, however painful it might be. " 

" You have no cause," replied he, bending over the 
drawing, and seeming to examine it very attentively. 

"To you, who have lately been seeing so many 
fine pictures in Italy, it must be a penance to be 
obliged to look at my poor scratches; but I don't 
even wish you to praise them. I should think you 

VOL. I. x; D 



290 DESTINY, 

were either laughing at me, or deceiving me, if you 
did so." 

Sir Eegiuald stood with his eyes still fixed on the 
drawing, but his thoughts were evidently more pro- 
found ; at last he said, in a voice of deep emotion — 
"It would be difficult to laugh at you, Edith; and, 
Heaven knows ! I have no wish to deceive you ! " 

"I am sure you have not!" said Edith, with 
tenderness of tone and manner. " But, dear Reginald, 
are you not deceiving yourself?" And she blushed 
to crimson, as though she thought she had said too 
much. 

Reginald made no reply, but shaded his face with 
the drawing he still held in his hand. After a pause, 
raising his head, he said in a voice that vainly 
struggled at composure — "I will not attempt to mis- 
understand you, Edith. You would tell me— that you 
" He stopped, as if suffocating with emotion. 

" Yes, Reginald," said Edith tenderly ; " I would 
tell you how much you have \ATonged yourself and 
me, if you ever supposed I, for an instant, could for- 
get — Ah, Reginald, do you think I should have con- 
tinued to wear this ring, if I had ceased to " love 

you, she would have added, but the words died on her 
lips, and she bent her head to hide the blush which 
gloAved even to her brow. 

Reginald took the hand she had half extended to 
him, and pressed it in silence to his lips, but some 
minutes elapsed ere he spoke ; then, in a deep and 
faltering voice, he said — " I beheve you, Edith ; my 



DESTINY. 291 

doubts are now ended. Say, when ^vill 3'ou become 
mine 1" 

Edith started ; for the accents in which this fond 
interrogatory was put were anything but those of 
hope and joy. She looked on her lover, and his face, 
even liis hps were pale, and his featiures were con- 
tracted as if in agony. 

" What is this V exclaimed she Avildlj^ " You are 
ill, Reginald ! Oh, tell me why do I see you thus 1" 

"I am ill, Edith," said he, faintly attempting to 
smile ; " but do not be alarmed — it is a mere spasm, 
to which I am occasionally liable ; but it is past for the 
present, let us think no more of it." And, assuming 
an air of gaiety, he sought to quiet Edith's fears, and 
remove her suspicions, if she had any, as to the nature 
of his emotion. Edith was, of course, strenuous for 
medical advice : but Eeginald assured her it was 
merely the effects of the malaria he had had when at 
Eome, and consequently a disorder not understood by 
the physicians of this country. " But time, and your 
good management, will perhaps enable me to get the 
better of it," he added, with difficulty suppressing a 
sigh, " if you are not afraid to undertake the cure." 

" You had the malaria, then, and concealed it from 
mel" said Edith reproachfully. "All, Eeginald, if 
you had known what your silence cost me ! but it was 
your tenderness for me made you conceal it from me ; 
and you were ill while I was unjustly blaming you, 
perhaps " 

" No, no," cried Eeginald, in agitation ; " I ought 



292 DESTINY. 

— But — oh, Edith, had I flown to you at the first, it 
might not then have been too late ; I should not have 
been the wretch I am !" 

"Dear Eeginald, do not reproach yourself so 
bitterly ; you could not foresee how fatally our dear 
Norman's illness was to terminate." 

" Fatally indeed ! " re-echoed Eeginald, as he leant 
his head on the table, and buried his face in his 
hands. 

" Had you been here, you could have done nothing 
for my poor brother," said Edith; "he would not 
even have known you ; and you see you are not too 
late to be a comfort to us." 

Eeginald looked up, and spoke more calmly, as he 
said, " You Avere always gentle and forgiving, Edith ; 
but you know not the depth of my self-reproach," he 
added, Avith renewed agitation. " Edith, you see me 
broken in spirits, oppressed Avith remorse — the victim 
of a hopeless — malady," gasped he, striking his bosom ; 
" yet, if I can but make you happy — I can bear it all 
— Edith, a brighter, happier destiny might be yours — 
but if you will unite yourself Avith me — let it be 
quickly — let there be no idle delay — there has been 
too much already." 

A painful surmise noAv darted into Edith's mind ; 
she had heard of the baleful effects of the pestilential 
fever at Eome, in even affecting the mind of the 
sufferer long after the cause had apparently ceased ; 
and trembling at the dread suspicion, she kneAv not 
hoAv to reply. 



DESTINY. 293 

'• Speak, Edith," he cried impatiently, " do you 
repent f 

Edith cast her streaming eyes upon him with a 
look of tenderness and affection, while she sloAvly and 
distinctly uttered, " Never ! " 

"Enough!" cried Reginald, as he pressed his quiver- 
ing lip to her hand ; then, after a short pause, he said 
with calmness, "And now, Edith, I again entreat that 
there may be no trifling delays on your part ; on mine 
everything shall be done to accelerate matters; for 
that purpose I must now leave you for a time. I 
must go to Dunshiera ; there must be much for me to 
do there, and the more that I have now to prepare 
it for its future mistress." His voice now faltered a 
little, and he stopped, but soon went on. "I have 
too long neglected it, but I must now live there for a 
part of the year if I can. I am aware of the opposi- 
tion this will meet with from Glenroy ; but, much as 
I owe him, and desirous as I am by every means in 
my power to discharge my debt of gratitude, still I 
cannot devote myself wholly to him," 

" It would be too much to expect," said Edith, with 
a sigh ; " and yet, my poor father ! how shall I leave 
him in his present state of mind? and still worse, 
how will he bear your absence — you who are now 
everything to him?" 

"Yes," cried Reginald, again relapsing into agita- 
tion ; " my father's mistaken tenderness for me has 
placed me in a cruel situation. I have incurred a 
load of gratitude to Glenroy, Avhich crushes me to the 



294 DESTINY. 

earth; his house hitherto has been my home — but, 
Edith — I cannot — I ■\\nll not continue to drag out a 
useless existence here." 

Glenroy's voice was at that moment heard loudly 
calling "Reginald," and presently he came slowly 
shuffling into the room, talking to himself, as he Avas 
wont to do. At sight of Reginald and Edith, he 
exclaimed, " What's the meaning of this, Edith — you 
taking up your cousin's time this way 1 I have been 
wanting you, Reginald, about something of more 
importance than anything she can have to say to 
you. Here's a letter from M'Gillivray, that's he that 
has the farm of Invercardnish — the sheep-farm, you 
know, that M'Intosh had, and made such a hand of, 
and " 

"I beg your pardon, Glenroy," interrupted Regi- 
nald hurriedly ; " but I can scarcely attend to that 
business at present — I — I — find I must go to Dun- 
shiera." 

" Go to Dunshiera ! " repeated Glenroy, in astonish- 
ment ; " what would take you to Dunshiera in such a 
hurry?" 

" I ought to have been there long ere now, Glen- 
roy," said Reginald; "I know I am much wanted, 
and more especially now," he added, with a forced 
gaiety, " that Edith has just consented to be mine as 
soon as the arrangements can be made for her recep- 
tion there." 

" Consented to be a fiddlestick ! " cried Glenroy 
angrily. "Is that you, Edith, that's putting such 



DESTINY. 295 

nonsense in your cousin's head?" But Edith had 
made her escape as her father entered, to be spared 
the scene she feared Avould ensue. " Arranaiements 
for her reception ! What reception, and what arrange- 
ments can she want 1 Haven't you this house to live 
in, and as much room as would hold a dozen of you 1 
and are not you just as much master here as I am, 
Reginald'? and what would take you to a house of 
your own, then? Consent! — reception! — arrange- 
ment ! — What the plague ! there's no hurry in your 
marrying, liegiuald; you must wait till we get the 
woods thinned at all events ; and — and whatever you 
want from your own house you can send for it here ; 
and bring your servants, and your horses, and all here ; 
and — and — but you must not leave me, Eeginald," 
grasping his nephew's hand in his. 

" Only for a few days," said Eeginald. 

"Only for a few days!" repeated Glenroy; "ami 
what am I to do without you for a single day ? I'll 
tell you what, Eeginald, if you'll wait till this con- 
founded gout's out of my toe, I'll go with you myself 
(if you must go), and we can take Edith and Molly 
Macauley with us, if you like, and I'll stay with you 
as long as you please ; I will, upon my honour." 

Eeginald certainly showed no symptoms of delight 
at this proposal, though he strove to utter some 
general expressions about happiness, gratitude, plea- 
sure, and so forth. 

"But my house and establishment cannot be in 
order to receive guests ; only consider, my dear uncle, 



296 DESTINY. 

that I have scarcely been there for more than a day 
at a time, smce I left it a mere child." 

"And what's to have put it out of order, then, when 
there's been nobody living in it ? Come now, Regi- 
nald, don't be obstinate, stay where you are, and do 
exactly as you like — you are completely your own 
master here, Eeginald, as much as if you were in your 
own house ; but I can't part with you, now that my 
own poor lad's gone. So stay where you are, and you 
shall have everything you can desire — you shall have 
his black mare, Eeginald, that— that— Lord— what do 
you call him, had the impudence to think I would sell 
to him." 

Reginald saw it was in vain to attempt to use 
argument with Glenroy ; he therefore conceded so far 
as to give up his intention of setting off the follow- 
ing morning, and even allowed him to remain in the 
belief that he never should leave him for a single day. 
Of course, the poor Chief became ten times more tire- 
some and exacting than ever, under this accession of 
gratified affection; and though Reginald submitted 
with the best grace he could, it was obvious he was 
writhing under the weariness and torment of being 
the engrossing object of a blind, despotic, doting 
attachment. Although politely attentive to Edith in 
as far as he was permitted to attend to anything but 
Glenroy and his never-failing themes, nothing particu- 
lar occurred to call forth any marked demonstrations 
of the nature of his feelings towards her. Edith some- 
times thought he looked sadder than anything she 



DESTINY. 297 

had ever seen ; but that she imi^uted to the poignancy 
of his feehngs regarding Norman. Though she loved 
him the more for this proof of his sensibihty, she 
trusted that time, and her tenderness together, would 
gradually diminish his sorrow and self-rej)roach. 



CHAPTER XLL 

"Do you remember your courting clays, Benbowiel" 
said Mrs. Macauley one clay to the worthy Laird, as 
he sat, with a face of solemn stupidity, chewing his 
quid. 

"Surely, surely," cried Benbowie, starting at the 
c|uestion, as some faint reminiscences of a rejected 
suit wandered through his brain. 

" Because I don't know how it is, Benbowie — may- 
be the fashion's changed in that too, like everything 
else, and that it's not genteel for people to look as 
happy as they used to do ; but, as sure as death, if I 
Avas Miss Edith, I would not be pleased to see my 
sweetheart look so dull as he does sometimes ; he has 
not the canty face my good Mr. Macauley had when 
we were going to be married — the laugh and the joke 
were never out of his mouth; and, I daresay, you 
yourself, Benbowie, Avas merrier when you were think- 
ing of matrimony than you are nowf 

" True, true ; it's a serious matter — it is, upon my 
conscience." 

" Oh, now, Benbowie, that's not what I mean at 
all." 



DESTINY. 299 

Benbowie's eyes grew rounder, but he made no 
attempt to come to an understanding. 

" What is there serious," continued Mrs. Macauley, 
" in two handsome, rich, accomplished, sensible, well- 
born, well-principled young creatures going to be 
married'? I declare I think they ought both to be 
ready to jump out of their skins for joy." 

" On my conscience it's very true, so they ought," 
responded Benbowie ; "and it will cost nothing — her 
money will not go out of the family." 

"Oh, who cares for the money, Benbowie? that's 
not the thing at all — it's true love I was thinking of, 
and that's a far better thing. I'm sure my Mr. Mac- 
auley and I were as poor as two church mice when 
we were married, and for all that, we were as merry 
as two fireside crickets. Oh ! how I wish I saw Sir 
Eeginald look upon his own true love ^vith that heart- 
some smile that he had before he left her ! " 

" He's a fine young man," said Benbowie ; " he is — 
he is — he is a very fine young man, Mrs. Macauley, 
and he has a very fine property — on my conscience 
he has." 

"Well, well, Benbowie; but I don't think you 
understand me, — I would rather see his smiles than 
his gold just now," raising her voice, as though the 
obtuseness lay in the physical, not the intellectual 
part of her auditor. But Benbowie only looked still 
more bewildered. 

" Oh, BenboAvie, I wish I could make you under- 
stand what it is I mean ! and then I could know 



300 DESTINY. 

whether it is my own fancy, or whether it is the real 
truth, that — (for you know it would not do for me to 
give a whish of that, either to Glenroy or Miss Edith, 
for fear of distressing them, and there is nobody else 
I would like to say it to) ; but I would give all I 
have to be quite sure that Sir Eeginald is as hai)i3y 
as he ought to be !" 

" His own estate is now quite free," said Benbowie, 
trying to look wise, " and he is next heir of entail to 
Glenroy." 

"Oh, the stupid body!" thought Mrs. Macauley, 
" how shall I ever get him to understand the difference 
between love and land 1 But maybe, after all, I am 
just putting nonsense in his head, and that it is just 
as Miss Edith thinks — sorrow for him that's gone, 
that makes her own true love look so mournful some- 
times. How do I know what is in his heart? and 
then, when he catches Miss Edith looking at him, 
how he brightens up, and smiles and jokes in his 
own way, as he used to do. But then, again, I do 
not like to hear young people sigh — it is not naatural, 
whatever they may say of lovers' sighing, for I know 
my good Mr. Macauley sighed none, for as happy as 
we were ! " 

Such were the ])ros and co7is with which Mrs. 
Macauley strove to solve the mystery of Sir Eegi- 
nald's dejection ; but the result of all her speculations 
only amounted to this, that Sir Eeginald and Mr. 
Macauley had been quite different lovers. But it 
was not Mrs. Macauley 's nature to stop there. 



DESTINY. 301 

Having made nothing of Benbowie, she next began 
to wonder Avhether Glenroy had observed anything. 
One day that she found herseK alone with him she 
began to sound her way. Seating herself beside her 
Chief, as he sat in his easy -chair, she wiped her 
spectacles, put them carefully on her nose, and began 
to ply her needle, while she said, "Well, Glenroy, are 
not we all very happy at having got Sir Reginald 
back again f 

" What earthly difference can his coming or going 
make to you, Molly Macauleyl — You're not going to 
be married to himi" was the peevish reply. 

" 'Deed I am not ; but surely, Glenroy, I may be 
very happy, though I am not going to be married V 

" I know no business you have to think anything 
about happiness. If you had my gout in you, you 
would not be so happy, I can tell you." 

"'Deed, and I beheve that's true, Glenroy; but 
though I am very sorry that you have it, yet ought 
I not to be thankful too that I have it not?" 

"Well, don't torment me with your thanks, and 
your this, and your that. A\Tiere's Reginald ?" 

" I'm sure I cannot tell, Glenroy. I hope he may 
he taking a little walk with his OAvn true love, and 
that it will do him good ; for as I was now saying, I do 
not think him quite — just — that's to say, I think — but 
maybe I'm wrong — that he's a little dowff" just now." 

"Dowff ! what do you mean by dowfF? I wish, if 
you will chatter, you would learn to speak intelligibly. 
What do you mean by dowft"?" 



302 DESTINY. 

"Just dull, Glenroy ; as if he was not " 

"Was not Avhati" demanded the Chief, still more 
angrily. 

"Was not — 'deed, I don't know how to express 
myself to please you, Glenroy ; but I think he is not 
just so — just in such good spirits as I have seen him." 

" Good spirits ! " repeated Glenroy, bursting forth 
in all his majesty — "Good spirits! 'pon my soul, 
you're the most unfeeling — hegh — good spirits, too ! 

and you, IMrs. Macauley, that pretend to but I never 

knew one of you women that were better than another. 
There's not one of you knows what feeling is ; you 
think of nothing but your own idle amusements. 
Where's that girl gadding to now, and keeping Re- 
ginald from me 1 — Good spirits ! good spirits in this 
house, after what I've lost ! if you must have good 
spirits, Mrs. Macauley, you must go somewhere else 
for them, for there's to be no good spirits here. — Good 
spirits ! I really believe you, Molly Macauley, have 
just as much feeling as one of your own needles," 
stamping his stick upon the floor. 

" Well, well, Glenroy, do not be so angry, for you 
Imow very well how bad my own spirits were at the 
proper time; — and — but you know there is a time 
for everything, Glenroy. Now that it is past, I want 
everybody to be happy, looking to Miss Edith's 
marriage." 

" And what's Miss Edith's marriage to me, in com- 
parison of the loss of my boy ? And if she's to take 
away Eeginald from me in this manner, what good 



DESTINY. 303 

will lier marriage do to me 1 Can't you go and see 
where he is? I want to speak to him about that 
tack of M'Kinnon's. — JFill you go?" he exclaimed, 
with redoubled impatience, as Mrs. Macauley care- 
fully folded up her Avork, and then trotted off, not 
daring to dispute the commands of her despotic 
Chief. 

"Well, there's no making anything of Glenroy," 
thought she. "I wish I could find out from Sir Re- 
ginald liimself what ails him, that I might try to do 
him some good." 

Entering the library, she found the object of her 
anxiety seated with a book in his hand, on which his 
eyes were fiixed, but with the air of one whose thoughts 
are afar off. He either did not observe, or took no 
notice of her entrance ; but stepping up to him, she 
accosted him, "So, Sir Eeginald, you are here all by 
youi'self, when I figured you gallanting your own true 
love." 

"If you are in search of Edith, you will find her, 
I believe, in the drawing-room, with some visitors," 
said Sir Reginald coldly, and without looking up. 

Mrs. Macauley stood irresolute for a few seconds, 
then looking him full in the face, she said, in a strong 
tone of interrogation, " Oh, my dear, I hope you are 
not angry?" 

" Not angry," replied Sir Reginald, forcing a smile, 
"only a little bored." 

" Oh, well, if that be all, that's nothing to signify ; 
maybe you'll be so good as tell me what it is that 



304 DESTINY. 

bores you, for I hope it is not me 1" vnth the same 
interrogatory accent. 

Sir Reginald made no reply but by a slight gesture 
of impatience. " Well, I cannot think what I could 
say that did not please you, my dear ; I only said I 
thought you would have been taken up with your 
own true love, and I'm sure that could not anger you." 

"Surely, Mrs Macauley," said Reginald, speaking 
very quickly and impatiently, "you have lived long 
enough to know, what every child knows, that the 
best things become stale and tiresome by constant 
repetition." 

"My dear!" exclaimed Mrs, Macauley, in an 
accent which testified she did not in the least compre- 
hend the drift of this observation. 

"You and everybody else, I believe," said Sir 
Reginald in the same impatient manner, "are aware 
of the engagement between Edith and me ; the delay 
in fulfilling it is now on her part," added he, wdth in- 
creased agitation, " In the meantime, it is unpleasant 
to me, and must be painful to her, to have it made 
the perpetual theme of conversation, and for ever 
aUuded to in the broadest manner, not only before 
strangers, but before the very grooms and footmen." 

"And so that's the story, is it!" exclaimed Mrs. 
Macauley, in astonishment. " Well, how could I ever 
have guessed that, when my good Mr. Macauley liked 
so well to be joked about his marriage, and to have 
everybody coming and rubbing shoulders with him ! 
But I'm glad to think that, when you was looking so 



DESTINY. 305 

•lull, it was only because you was not pleased ; and 
now that I know what it is that angers you, I Avill 
never let on anything about Miss Edith and you, and 

maybe it's genteeler not " Here a furious peal 

from Glenroy's bell recalled ]\Irs. Macauley to a sense 
of her dutj'. " Oh, and I forgot ! there's Glenroy sit- 
ting in his dressing-room waiting for you all this time, 
and here's that Avorthy man Mr. M'Dow coming," as 
the door opened, and the head of Mr. M'Dow pro- 
truded itself, quickly followed by his whole person. 
Sir Keginald, scarcely able to conceal how much he 
was annoyed, was hastily passing him with a slight 
bow, and a sort of murmured apology, but he might 
as easily have attempted to escape from the arms of a 
man-trap after having touched the fatal spring. 

"How do you do, Sir Reginald f Avith a \aolent 
shake of the hand. " I rejoice to see you back again 
— better late than never, hoch, ho ; — but I can't say 
you've brought any Italian beef upon you. I doubt 
you've been rather ailing ; but I've no doubt the air 
of the Highlands, and the sight of a certain fair lady, 
will set you all to rights again." Sir Reginald bit 
his lip, and made no replj'. Mr. M'Dow^ Avent on — 
" I'm afraid you must think I've been rather deficient 
in my duty, in not having waited upon you before 
now ; but the fact is, I've suffered a great deal from 
the toothache this summer, and at last I was obliged 
to get my tooth taken out. A most dreadful thing it 
is the pulling of a tooth, and mine Avas an uncommon 
strong one ! 'Pon my Avord, I thought at first my 
VOL. 1. X D 



306 DESTINY. 

head was off. However, I was much amused with an 
anecdote the dentist told me — for I went all the way 
to Glasgow to get it taken out in the best manner — 
though bad's the best, hoch, hoch, ho ! But, as I 
was going to tell you, the dentist, JNIr. Bain, really 
made me almost laugh; though, to tell the truth, I 
was very much down in the mouth at the time — hoch, 
hoch, ho ! — A gentleman (he would not tell me his 
name, but he's a justice of the peace) had come to 
him to get a tooth taken out, but after Mr. Bain had 
him fairly in the chair, there he sat with his lips 
screwed together like a vice. 'Be so good, sir, as 
open your mouth a little,' says Mr. Bain, ' and allow 
me just to put in my finger to feel your tooth.' 

'" Na, na,' says the Justice, ' I'll no do that ; you'll 
bite me ! ' — hach, hach, hach, ho ! " Even Sir Re- 
ginald's features relaxed for a moment into a smile, 
at the overwhelming, vulgar jocularity of Mr. M'Dow, 
Avhile he made another attemj)t to extricate himself 
from his grasp, but in vain. 

"Excuse my detaining you for one moment. Sir 
Keginald," said he, grasping him still more firmly; 
" but I think it proper to let you know that I shall 
have occasion to be absent again very shortly for a 
few days — it's upon a most agreeable occasion, to be 
sure — no less than a marriage that's to take place in 
our family — my niece. Miss Alexa M'Fee — that's the 
eldest daughter of my sister, Mrs. Dr. M'Fee — is on 
the point of marriage with a very fine young man 
just set up in business in London, Mr. Andrew 



DESTINY. 307 

Pollock ; it's been a long attachment, like some others 
that I know, Sir Eeginald — hach, hach, ho ! — but the 
means were wanting ; however now they think they'll 
1)6 able to do ; and so the marriage is fixed to take 
place this day se'ennight, and nothing will satisfy 
them but that I must perform the ceremony; but 
then, on the other hand, I consider my old engage- 
ment to you as paramount to everything else of the 
same nature, so I wish to ascertain that the one may 
not interfere with the other, for that Avould really 
place me in a most awkward dilemma." 

Reginald's face had graduallj^ been crimsoning dur- 
ing Mr. M'Dow's speech, and, with a haughty bend of 
the head, he merely said, " I beg, su-, I may not stand 
in the way of any of your engagements ;" then quickly 
extricating himself from him, he left the room. 

"Ay," exclaimed Mr. M'Dow, in a tone of amaze- 
ment, " I don't know very well what to make of that ; 
I suspect the Baronet's not over and above well 
pleased at my not having Avaited upon him sooner. 
I'm sure I'm at a loss how to act, for it will be a 
dreadful disappointment to 'Lexy, poor thing, if I 
should fail her ; and yet I Avould be very loath to dis- 
oblige Sir Eeginald and my excellent pawtron, Glen- 
roy, to say nothing of the disappointment to myself." 

"Oh, Mr. M'Dow," said Mrs. Macauley, "that's 
not the thing at all, things are not just come to that 
yet ; but what's made Sir Eeginald not just so well 
pleased is, that he does not like to be joked about his 
marriage ; he says it's not genteel." 



308 DESTINY. 

"Oil, that's it, is iti" cried Mr. M'Dow, in a tone 
of surprise. " Ay, ay ! I had no notion of that 
giving any offence ! and yet I don't think I said any- 
thing that could be taken amiss ; for I'm sure the 
allusions that I made Avere of the most delicate nature. 
But there's a fashion in these things ; it's one that I 
don't think I'll ever be tempted to follow — though 
there's no saying; for, as m^^ worthy mother says, 
there's nothing so catching as fashion ; and as I live 
much in fashionable society now, perhaps I may just 
grow neebor-like, and become a fashionable myself — 
hach, hach, ho !" 

"Well, for my part," said Mrs. Macauley, "I hope 
I may never turn into a fashionable ; for I think one 
had better be merry and happy, even though it should 
not be the fashion, than be mournful and genteel, as 
Sir Reginald is grown. Do jou know, Mr. M'Dow," 
in a confidential whisper, " I did not just Hke his look 
sometimes ; I was beginning to think — -I don't knoAV 
what!" 

"Oh, you're quite wrong there, my good lady," 
said Mr. M'Dow, with a seK-sufficient air, taking a 
pinch of snuff as he spoke — " quite wrong ; it's mere 
fashionable awpathy, nothing else ; I've always kept 
free from it myself, for I can't say I admire it, but it's 
creeping in. There are some young ladies in this 
country that I could mention, that I've kno^vn give 
themselves great airs of awpathy." 

"By-the-bye, Mr. M'Dow, have you seen the young- 
Lady Dum'oss, pretty Miss Lucy Malcolm, since her 



I 



DESTINY. 309 

marriage'?" said IMrs. Macauley, quite unaware of Mr. 
M'Dow's susceptibility on that score. 

" Oh yes," returned he, with an air of contempt- 
uous indifference ; " she has got well married, which 
was more than I thought she would, for she was very 
high set, and rather gave herself airs above herself at 
one time ; but as I've come to spend the day with my 
worthy friend Glenroy, and it's getting near dinner- 
time, I suspect I must be going to clean myself a little 
before dinner." And aAvay he stalked to the chamber, 
which, from frequent occupation, had now become in 
a manner his own property. 

Glenroy's gout confined him to his own apartment 
for the rest of the day, but Sir Keginald took his place 
and did the honours with so much grace and spirit, 
and exerted himself so eff'ectually, that it must have 
been a more accurate observer that any that were 
present Avho could have discerned the force he was 
putting upon himself. 



CHAPTER XLII. 

One of the many acts of penance the Chief thought 
fit to impose upon his family was that of reading the 
newspapers to them every morning during a long pro- 
tracted brealcfast. 

" And labour diro it was, and weary woe," 
for quick ears to keep pace with his tedious utterance 
and intermingled comments, although he rarely conde- 
scended to read the fashionable intelligence, so called. 
One morning he chanced to stumble on the following 
paragraph. "We have to congratulate the noble 
youth of Britain on the arrival of the beautiful and 
fascinating Baroness Waldegrave at her mansion, St. 
James's Square, after an absence of several years on 
the Continent. Her Ladyship is accompanied by her 
mother, the Lady Elizabeth Malcolm." Here Glenroy 
made a full stop, as if he had come suddenly upon 
some unlooked-for and unwelcome object; then 
muttered — " Ay, that's my pretty lady, and that other 
— that's the what-do-you-call her — the bit white-faced 
lassie that she had here with her — the creature you 
never could bear, Reginald 1" Reginald's head was at 
that moment resting on his hand, which shaded his 



DESTINY, 311 

face, but he had the air of being too deeply engaged 
by a letter which lay open before him to hear himself 
thus called upon ; at least he made no answer. 

"You mean Florinda, papa," said Edith. "Oh, 
how I should like to see her again ! " 

" I never desire to see the face of her," cried Glen- 
roy — "an upsetting, spoilt brat. What was it you 
used to call her, Eeginald 1 The skim-milk cheese, 
wasn't it?" 

But Eeginald still looked upon his letter, and was 
silent. 

" Is that a cess letter that you've got, Eeginald 1 
I've got one too, and so has Benbowie. It's from 
IM'Intosh, is it not?" 

" I — I — beg your pardon," said Eeginald, looking 
up, and speaking very fast — " yes, I suppose — I believe 
— I think — yes — I mean M'Intosh is the name." 

"Ay, I thought so ; it will just be the same as my 
own, and I'm not at all satisfied as to the collecting: 
of the cess. I think there's great mismanagement — 
and " 

"Oh, you have not read the whole paragraph, 
papa," cried Edith, glancing at the paper which Glen- 
roy had laid down. " It adds, ' The young Baroness 
is said to be the Venus of Apelles realised, and com- 
bines with the beauty and delicacy of the English fair, 
the softness and grace of the Italian, vnth the gaiety 
and brilliancy of the French. AVe may therefore 
anticipate the Mat which will attend so rare and per- 
fect a combination, Avhen it bursts on an astonished 



312 DESTINY. 

world ! ' Did you never happen to meet with Flor 
inda, when you were abroad, Eeginald?" inquired 
Edith, as she still scanned the paper. 

" Yes," answered Eeginald hesitatingly ; then 
turned to Glenroy, and resumed the subject of the 
cess. 

" And I hope you made up your old quarrel, and 
were friends?" said Mrs. Macauley. 

But Eeginald was too much engrossed with his 
subject to hear the question. Edith took advantage 
of the first pause to say, "How came you never to 
mention her to us, Eeginald 1" 

"Mention an old tobacco pipe!" cried Glenroy 
angrily. "What was there to mention? I daresay 
Eeginald had more sense than to trouble his head 
about such an insignificant creature as that — a spoilt, 
troublesome monkey, that there was no living in a 
house with." 

"Oh, but, Glenroy, you must not speak that Avay 
of her now, that you hear she has turned out so well," 
said Mrs. Macauley, always charitable in her judg- 
ments, and credulous in her belief; "and I daresay 
Sir Eeginald will give her a very good character now ; 
I'll wager anything they would make it all up — am 
I not right. Sir Eeginald?" 

"Lady Waldegrave was much admired," said 
Eeginald, in a cold, constrained manner. 

"What a cautious answer, and how unlike you, 
Eeginald," said Edith, with a smile ; " but don't 
expect to get off so easily ; I must have a fidl and 



DESTINY. 313 

particular description of her— for, in spite of you, I 
always loved Florinda. I scarcely think she met 
with justice from you." 

" Perhaps not," replied Sir Eeginald, in the same 
abrupt, laconic manner. 

"Well, then, you will make it up now by giving 
us a faithful representation of her, or, as dear Macky 
says, by giving a good character of her." 

"What the plague does it signify whether her 
character's good or bad?" cried Glenroy, in one of 
his transports ; "the character of the man that's to 
be collector of oiu- cess is of more consequence, I think, 
than the character of an idle dancing dorrity like that 

— a creature that your brother Here, Sir Reginald, 

come back ; 'pon my soul, this is insufferable ! you 
women, Avith your chatter, you've driven him away 
from the table ! I really wish you would learn to 
hold your tongues when you see we're engaged in 
business. Reginald ! — ay, there he's off, and he's 
away out without his hat ! You women really are — 
hem " 

And Glenroy was obhged to break off, for want of 
words to express his indignation. 

"Well, then, as sure as death, Glenroy," responded 
Mrs. ]\Iacauley, "I think we behave ourselves very 
well, and speak very little, considering. I'm sure I 
could speak a great deal more than I do, if it was not 
for fear of angering you; and I'm sure Miss Edith 
speaks less than anybody. But wasn't it naatural for 
her to be rather inquisitive about the little creature 



314 DESTINY. 

she used to be so fond of ? 'Deed, I think it was ; for 
how was she to think that Sir Reginald and she had 
not made it up, the spiteful thing that she must be 1 
for I know it would not be his fault — he is so good- 
natured and generous, and forgiving to his enemies." 

But Benbowie, having found some knotty point in 
his cess letter, was now applying to his Chief to solve 
it for him; and thus Glenroy's wrath was for the 
moment appeased, and his attention excited, and the 
abuses of the cess seemed to afford them what is called 
subject-matter for some hours to come. When Regi- 
nald joined Edith in the drawing-room, he looked ill 
and dejected ; and, in answer to her timid and gentle 
inquiries, he admitted that he had had a slight spas- 
modic attack during breakfast, but that it was nearly 
over for the present. 

"I flattered myself," said he, "they had left me, 
as I have been less subject to them of late ; but one 
is commonly the prelude to others. Now don't be 
alarmed," he added, with a faint smile, " although you 
see me what you ladies would call somewhat nervous, 
occasionally — in time, I trust, I shall get the better 
of it," and he sighed as he said it. 

" I fear your feelings are too acute for your peace, 
Reginald," said Edith mournfully, as she gently laid 
her hand on his arm. Reginald looked on that hand 
for a moment, with a strange contraction of brow, 
and something like a recoil ; then, suddenly changing, 
he took it in his, and said, in a voice that faltered 
with emotion — 



DESTINY. 315 

" ^Yhen once this hand is fairly mine, I shall be 
better, much calmer — I am sure I shall." 

" You know it will ere long be yours," said Edith, 
and her colour deepened while she added, with simple 
earnestness, "and in the meantime, you cannot doubt 
that my best affections — that my heart itself, is wholly 
— solely yours." 

"Oh that I were worthy of it, Edith," said he, in a 
melancholy accent; "and yet," he added, with emo- 
tion, "if you could but read mine, you would there 
see that its first desire is for your happiness." 

" Yes, I am sure — I feel — it is !" said Edith ; " but 
the way to make me happy is to be happy yourself." 

"Well, then, let us now settle something, Edith," 
said he rapidly; "I shall go to Dunshiera soon ; but 
since it is your desire, I shall make no alteration upon 
it. The credit of the improvements shall be yours. 
Glenroy expects his lawyers in a few days, who will 
arrange all matters of business, and then — and then, 
Edith," added he, with a strong gasp, "you will 
surely put it out of the power of fate to divide us ?" 

Edith sighed, even as she smiled an assent ; for the 
time she had fixed for her marriage was the expiry of 
her mournins; for her brother. 



CHAPTER XLIII. 

Although Glenroy's gout was much on the decline, it 
still confined him to his couch for the greater part of 
the claj', during which either his bell or his voice was 
to be heard resounding, indicative of the restlessness 
and impatience of its master. The following morning, 
as the family sat at breakfast, a peal was heard from 
the bell, which surpassed all the peals that had yet 
been rung, followed by another, and another, in such 
quick succession, that only a flash of lightning could 
possibly have had time to answer the summons. 

"I think I hear Glenroy's bell," said Beubowie, 
holding up his ear, and looking wise. 

" 'Deed, Benbowie, we may all hear that at the 
deafest side of our heads," said Mrs. Macauley ', "as 
sure as death, he'll ring down the house." 

"Something more than common has surely dis- 
turbed him," said Edith, rising, when, at that moment, 
the Chief's valet entered to say that Glenroy wished 
to see Sir Eeginald immediately. 

" Something about a new lease, or an old bridge, 
or some such parish matter," said Eeginald carelessly, 
and he rose, and was sauntering out of the room, 



DESTINY. .317 

humming an air to himself ; then looking back, as 
he saw Benbowie groping in the direction of his plate, 
he called, " May I beg, Edith, that you will not allow 
Benbowie to mistake my cup for his own V 

Edith sat patiently waiting Reginald's return for a 
considerable time ; but still he came not, and all was 
silent. 

" Oh, this is really not fair in Glenroy to keep Sir 
Reginald from his breakfast," said Mrs. iNIacauley. 

"Is Sir Reginald not coming back to his tea?" 
inquired Benbome, with a face of solicitude, for it 
was one of his peculiarities to cast a sheep's eye at 
other people's viands, even when surrounded by a 
profusion of untouched dainties. So, balked in his 
design, he betook himself and liis newspapers to his 
own corner. 

Mrs. Macauley was too busy and active to indulge 
long over the pleasures of the table, and she likewise 
trotted awaj^, weary of wondering what was keeping 
Sir Reginald. 

At length Reginald returned, but his features still 
Ijore the marks of recent agitation ; and although he 
had a perfect composure of manner, either real or 
affected, yet his hand trembled as he raised the cup 
to his lips. 

"I have had another of those foolish sjiasms," said 
he, "occasioned, I think, by the heat of Glenroy's 
room, though he would fain persuade me it is flying 
gout, and we have consequently had a long and in- 
teresting discussion on gout and malaria. He tells 



318 DESTINY. 

me my father had it in his constitution, ^vhich I never 
knew. But I beg pardon, Edith, you are waiting for 
me. Oh, by-the-bye, Glenroy has had a letter from — 
from Lady Elizabeth ; a letter offering to pay him a visit 
here, which has of course agitated and annoyed him." 
"An offer of a visit from Lady Elizabeth!" ex- 
claimed Edith ; " that is indeed very strange, after so 
long a separation. Don't you think so ?" 
"Rather," replied Reginald. 
" How does papa take it V 

"I can scarcely tell. He seems both for and 
against it. He is, you may believe, very unwilHng to 
receive the visit, and yet still more unwilling to decline 
it. He begged me to mention it to you, and talk it 
over." 

"What can have prompted such an offer at this 
time ?" said Edith, still rapt in amazement. Reginald 
was silent 

" Does she assign no reason for so strange a pro- 
ceeding f inquired Edith. Reginald hesitated for a 
moment ; then, with a deepening colour, replied — 
"Sympathy is the motive assigned. She wishes to 
condole personally with your father and you in your 
affliction ;" and he sighed deeply. 

"Ah, how very kind!" said Edith; "much more 
so than I should have expected from Lady Elizabeth, 
either from my own recollection of her, or from any- 
thing I have ever heard of her. Perhaps she is 
much changed, and, if it is so, papa and she may yet 
live happily together — and then, you know," she added, 



DESTINY. 319 

with a rising colour, "he could better spare you 
when " 

" Oh, impossible ; they are so totally different, and 
Lady Elizabeth is such an invalid, so constantly com- 
plaining ; their habits are so dissimilar — so — in short, 
their ever living together is out of the question ; she 
only proposes remaining for a week or two." 

" At least there can be no harm in trying the ex- 
periment for a week or two ; that will soon pass away, 
whether pleasantly or not. But does she say nothing 
of Florinda ? Won't she come too 1 " 

" I suppose — I believe — of course — here, Fido," to 
his dog, as he placed a saucer on the floor, with some 
milk and Avater, and bent down, as if deeply inter- 
ested in the common action of Fido's lapping his 
breakfast. 

'* Oh, how delighted I am ! " exclaimed Edith, her 
eyes sparkling with animation. " I cannot tell you, 
Reginald, how much I have longed to see her again, 
my recollection of her is so vivid ! I am sure I shall 
love her, she was such an engaging creature ; and you 
remember how often I used to make up your little 
quarrels together ? I am resolved to make you both 
good friends for evermore." 

Reginald made no immediate rej^ly, for he Avas still 
occupied with his dog. At length he said in a cold, 
constrained manner, but Avithout raising his head — 
" Excuse me, Edith ; but we view this matter quite 
differently. I have already advised Glenroy to de- 
cline the visit." 



320 DESTINY. 

"Ah, Reginald! how could you bo so unkind 1" 
exclaimed Edith, in a tone of reproach. 

"Because I thought it my duty," he replied, almost 
sternly. 

"But you may have mistaken it, dear Reginald, " 
said Edith gently. Reginald was silent. " And will 
papa, then, not receive themf inquired she, with a 
sigh. 

" I cannot tell. He was much perplexed, and asked 
my advice, which I gave him, although it was not 
pleasant for me to be the umpire in such a matter." 

" Tell me, Reginald, is it your dislike to Florinda 
that makes you so averse to receiving the visit*?" 

Sir Reginald did not immediately reply ; when he 
did, he said very coldly — " I never said I disliked her." 

"No; but I suspect you do," said Edith, looking 
at him with a soft smile; "and I long to reconcile 
you." 

" You had better not try," said Reginald sternly ; 
then added, in a voice of repressed emotion — "This 
visit can be productive of no pleasure ; they are so 
different — they are both so unsuited to this place." 

" But, for a short time, it matters little," said Edith. 

"Even for a short time I am sure the visit will 
annoy your father, they will bring such a sitite 
along Avith them. Lady Elizabeth has her travelling 
physician — and — and — there is a French lady — a 
friend " 

" But there is plenty of room, and we are accus- 
tomed to receive everybody. How unkind, then, it 



DESTINY. 321 

would be to refuse such near connections ! Now, 
come, clear Eeginald, do persuade papa to accept the 
visit." 

" That might be the test of my obedience, but not 
of my love," said he bitterly. While he spoke, Glen- 
roy's bell had been sounding a larum, and now a 
servant entered in all haste, to say Glenroy wished to 
know what was detaining Miss Malcolm, and to desire 
she Avould bring the letter immediately. 

" Oh, by-the-bye !" exclaimed Sir Reginald, in some 
confusion, " I had almost forgot Glenroy charged me 
to show you the letter, and to request of you to answer 
it." And he drew forth a letter, and laid it before 
Edith. She took it from its envelope, and at the first 
glance exclaimed — "Florinda Waldegrave ! I thought 
the letter had been from Lady Elizabeth." 

" 'Tis much the same thing, is it not," said Regi- 
nald, " whether I ^vrite a letter, or you do it for me 1 
The letter is virtually Lady Elizabeth's." 

" What a pretty, elegant little hand she writes ! " 
exclaimed Edith, as, without further comment, she 
began to read as follows : — 

" My dear Sir — At mamma's request, and in ac- 
cordance with my own feelings, I beg leave to express 
to you the deep sympathy we feel on the mournful 
event which has taken place in your family. The 
early recollections of your kindness to me, and the 
tender affection I always cherished for you, and my 
dear brother and sister (for such I ever considered 

VOL. I. Y D. 



322 DESTINY. 

them), remain indelibly impressed upon my heart; 
and I wish nothing more earnestly than to be allowed 
an opportunity of proving to you how sincerely I par- 
ticipate in your affliction. Mamma is equally desirous 
of convincing you that, however circumstances may 
have unfortunately separated her for so long a period 
from you, she has ever retained a lively interest in 
youi- welfare, and that of all dearest to you. Should 
it not, therefore, be deemed an intrusion on your grief, 
we shall have much pleasure in being allowed to join 
your domestic circle, and pass a week or two with 
you qiuetly at Glenroy ; when it will be our most 
earnest study to endeavour to mitigate your sorrow, 
by every means in our power. Mamma unites with 
me in every heartfelt wish for your health and re- 
turning happiness. And, with kindest love to my 
dear sister Edith, I have the honour to be, my dear 
Sir, 

" Your very sincere and obliged servant 
and daughter, 

"Florinda Waldegrave. 

"P.aS'. — Mamma entreats you will not put yourself 
to the slightest inconvenience on her account; for, 
although somewhat delicate, she is not at all particular 
as to her accommodation ; and as for me, you may 
put me in the turret, with which you used to threaten 
me when I was a naughty, troublesome little girl." 

" It is a very kind letter," said Edith, with a sigh, 
as she finished it, "And yet " She stopped. 



DESTINY. 323 

Here another message from Glenroy admitted of 
no further delay, and Edith was hastening to satisfy 
his impatience, when Reginald stopped her. 

" Do not allow anything I have said to prejudice 
you against Lady Waldegrave," said he, in agitation. 
" I ought not to have given an opinion — I — do not let 
me think I have injured her in your estimation, Edith." 

"No, no," cried Edith hastily, as a perfect volley 
of bell-ringing caused her to fly. 

" Ai'e you to be all day -^viiting that letter, Edith 1 
is it not done yet?" were the queries that greeted her 
on her entrance. 

"I beg youi- pardon, papa; but I have not had 
time." 

" Not had time ! you've had time to write at least 
a dozen of letters — it's really intolerable ; what's the 
use of you women learning to write at all 1 you should 
all keep to your needles and thread, like that idiot, 
Molly Macauley, and not torment people Avith your 
trash of letters this way. Have you not written the 
one I desired you yet?" 

"It is not five minutes, papa, since Reginald 
showed me the one you had received from Lady 
Waldegrave." 

" That's not the letter I am speaking aliout ; it's 
the one I desired you to write in answer to that." 

"I understand you, papa; but I really have not 
had time since." 

" I tell you, the letter might have been half-way 
to Loudon 1>y this time." 



324 DESTINY. 

" My dear papa, you know the post does not leave 
this till the evenin;^." 

"That's nothing to the purpose; your business 
was to write the letter when I desired you." 

"I will write it directly, papa, if you will be so 
good as tell me what I am to say." 

" How often am I to tell you what to say 1 I told 
you already, or at least I told lieginald, which is the 
same thing." 

"Eeginald said you did not seem inclined to re- 
ceive the visit." 

" How can I be inclined to receive a visit, lying in 
my bed here? It's a most senseless and unfeeling 
proposal." 

"It must be Idndly meant," said Edith gently; 
" and, dear papa, sympathy ought always to be kindly 
taken." 

" Sympathy ! what good wiU all the sympathy in 
the world do to me ? it will not bring back him that 
I've lost." 

A pause of some minutes ensued. 

" Youmaybe quite well before Lady Elizabeth comes, 
papa," said Edith ; " and if not, you will at least have 
shown your hospitality and good- will ; but yet, if the 
thought of it is so unpleasant to you, to be sure the visit 
had better be refused than that you should suffer." 

"You don't know what you're speaking about! If 
I'm well, and if I'm not well ! How can I tell whether 
I'm to be well or ill? I wish both these ladies of 
quality had my gout in their fingers and toes, to 



DESTINY. 325 

settle them, and keep them from disturbing me in this 
manner. And there's Reginald, he has got the gout too, 
or I'm mistaken ; his father had it when he was not 
much older than he is now ; but if he could get it to fix 
in his foot, there would be no fear of him. But what's 
the reason you have not \\antten that letter, Edith ?" 

" I will write it now, papa, if you will only tell me 
what you wish." 

" How can I tell you what I wish ? Can't you ask 
Reginald, and he'll tell you what I wish." 

"Reginald and I don't quite agree about it, papa." 

" Reginald and you don't agree ! And do you 
really pretend to disagree with the man you're to be 
married to 1 and before you're married to him ! I 
never heard of such a thing in my life as people not 
agreeing before they were married — not agree with 
the man that's to come after me !" 

" Reginald and I are very good friends, papa, and 
we shall be quite agreed when we know your wishes 
on this subject ; but he is of opinion that it would be 
better to decline the visit ; and I " 

" He's quite right — much better — what the plague 
brings them here now ? After staying away so long, 
they'd better have stayed altogether. The mother not 
particular ! — there's not a more troublesome, particular 
woman in the kingdom than she is ! " 

"Then I shall Avrite and say the state of your 
health prevents you receiving their kindly meant \^sit 
at this time, or something to that purpose, papa?" 
said Edith, and she was leaving the room. 



326 DESTINY. 

"The state of the fiddlestick!" cried Glenroy 
peevishly ; " I wish you would not be in such a hurry 
—what's the matter with my health? You women 
are always so impatient and so ready with your pens ! 
What is there in the state of my health to keep people 
from coming to the house 1 — you speak as if I had the 
plague ! I've had a touch of the gout in my toe, Avhich 
is now almost gone, and I'm better than I've been for 
months, and how can I tell people they're not to come 
to my house 1 It's a thing I never did in my life, 
and I'm not going to begin now ; I wonder how you 
could propose such a thing, Edith, to refuse to admit 
a woman of rank, and my own wife too, within my 
door, and for two or three days ; and her taking such 
a journey, poor thing, on purpose, and all for my 
poor boy ! It's a piece of respect to him, and it says a 
great deal for her, and she shall be welcome to the 
best in my house for his sake." 

Here poor Glenroy began to weep, and Edith, dis- 
tressed and perplexed, after soothing him as well as 
she could by turning his thoughts to another channel, 
left him to have again recourse to Eeginald for advice 
and assistance. But Eeginald had set off to join a 
shooting party, and had left Avord he should not re- 
turn till late in the evening. Edith had therefore to 
write the letter without further communing. Upon 
showing it to her father, he of course scolded and 
protested against it, and swore he would not receive 
any such visitors ; but, at the same time, desired the 
letter might be sent off, accepting the visit. 



CHAPTER XLIV. 

Mrs, Macauley's astonishment on being made ac- 
(painted with this revolution (or rather restoration) 
was excessive. 

" Well, Glenroy," cried she, as she repaired to his 
sitting-room, brimful of the subject, "I'm sure we 
may Avell say, wonders will never cease ! As sure as 
death, I could hardly believe Miss Edith when she 
told me ! To think of your lady coming back to you 
of her ovm accord, after staying so long away from 
you. Of all the wonderful things I've met with, and 
I have met with a good many in my day, this is the 
most extraordinary," 

" I see nothing in the least extraordinary in the 
matter," said Glenroy, with dignified composure. 

"Oh, that must be because you are so wise, Glen- 
roy ; for I have heard that very wise people arc never 
surprised at anything, which I think very extra- 
ordinary, considering what curious creatures we are, 
and what wonderful things we meet with both by 
day and by night. It was but just the night before 
last I had such a curious dream ; — but I'm not going 
to tell it to you, Glenroy," — as she saw a volley ready 



328 DESTiin", 

to burst forth — " though I must always think it very 
uncommon that I should have dreamed such a dream 
at the very time your lady was coming back to you. 
I'm sure I hope she will behave herself now." 

" Behave herself ! " repeated Glenroy wrathfully ; 
" I wish, Mrs. Macauley, you would learn to behave 
yourself, and not give your tongue such a license." 

" Well, what did I saj^ was Avrong there, Glenroy ? 
for 'deed I do not think she behaved so discreetly as 
she might have done to you ; but now that she has 
seen her fault, to be sure we should not speak about 
what's past; and I daresay she ^vill make you a 
good and an obedient and a well-behaved wife in all 
times to come ; for once she comes here, I doubt if 
she'll be for going away again. 'Deed, I wondered at 
her leaving you when she did." 

"And what right had you to wonder anything 
about it, Mrs. Macauley ? And where was the wonder 
of her going to look after her daughter's fortune at 
the time she did 1 She acted like a sensible, prudent 
woman : and now that she has secured that, and got 
the girl properly educated, the first thing she does is 
to show her respect for me by bringing her back to 
me : but, I daresay, one reason of her leaving this was, 
that the child might not be corrupted by you. You 
would have been a fit person to have educated a 
peeress, to be sure ! You've made a fine hand of 
Edith, to be sure." 

" Oh fie, Glenroy," cried Mrs. Macauley, kindling 
a little at these aspersions, " I wonder to hear you ! 



DESTINY. 329 

'Deed, I don't tliiiik it sets you to speak in that dis- 
paraging way of your own daughter, and her so sweet 
and pretty and genteel, and so much admired; and 
I wonder you should set up the other one, considering 
what a little spoilt, impudent monkey she was, and, 
'deed, I don't believe she's much better yet ; for you 
see Sir Keginald has never said a good word of her, 
and I really think he cannot bear the name of her." 

" You're an old goose, Molly Macauley, and don't 
Imow what you are speaking about. I asked Regi- 
nald if he had any fault to find with her, and he said 
none in the world ; and he said as much as that they 
had been upon a good enough footing when they met ; 
and I know it was only his fear of their disturbing me 
that made him umvilling to admit them here, for he 
thinks more of me than any of you, I know that ; and 
he's everything to me now; so take you care, Mrs. 
Macauley, that you behave yourself properly." 

"Oh, Glenroy, as if ever I could behave myself 
improperly to anybody, especially to your lady and 
your stepdaughter. I'm sure I shall put my best 
foot foremost to please them. And I'm just thinking 
what little marks of my respect I can contrive for 
them, that will be something out of the common." 
After much deliberation, she at last decided upon what 
she deemed a meet and appropriate offering for Glen- 
roy's lady, in the form of a visiting card -case with a 
view of " The Castle " on one side, and on the other, 
a full-length representation of the Chief in the High- 
land dross ; while Lady AValdegrave was to be made 



330 DESTINY. 

happy with a go-\\-n, tamboured iu coloured silks, with 
what the artist called a running pattern, of heather 
and thistles, of her own contriving. Benbowie, who 
had only one mode of testifying emotions either of 
grief or joy, ordered a new waistcoat for half mourn- 
ing, which even Mrs. Macauley declared was ugly 
enough "to spean a bairn." 

Edith waited impatiently for Eeginald's return, 
but instead of himself, she received a note by the 
gamekeeper who had attended him, to say that he 
had been prevailed upon to take a night's quarters, 
and spend a day or two with his old friend Dunross, 
at Lochdhu, and that as he was now so far on his way 
to Dunshiera, he would probably visit it before his 
return; he therefore desired his servant and horses 
might join him the following morning, and begged 
Edith would write him a hne to say how Glenroy was, 
etc. All this was quite natural, and yet Edith felt a 
little mortified that Eeginald should voluntarily absent 
himself from her even for a few days ; it might be 
chiefly on her account, indeed, as it was probably a 
mere excuse to get to Dunshiera with a view to pre- 
pare it for her reception, and she was angry with her- 
seK for the momentary chagrin she had given way to. 
She wrote him a few lines in reply, and told him Avhat 
answer had been returned to Lady Waldegrave's letter, 
by her father's desire; then added a hope that he 
would not be long absent, and a request that he would 
do nothing to Dunshiera on her account. 

There was of course a violent storm from Glenroy, 



DESTINY. 331 

when he heard of his nephew's departure ; but upon 
the whole he bore it better than could have been ex- 
pected. The fact was, there was always some one 
subject that reigned paramount in his mind, and for 
the present that Avas the approaching visit of his lad}^ 
It was something to excite him, to confuse him, to 
keep him in talk, and make him fancy himself in a 
bustle, as the letter was scarcely gone before he began 
to watch for the arrival of his expected guests. But 
he soon began to weaiy of expectation and preparation 
— not even steam itself could have kept pace with his 
impatience — how much less the tardy movements of 
even the fleetest of post-horses, and the best paid of 
post-boys, when they depend upon the movements of 
fine ladies ! He did not indeed pretend to say that he 
anticipated any pleasure from the arrival of his guests 
— on the contrary, he loudly declared that there 
ought to be an Act of Parliament to prevent women 
from travelling, and that he only wished his visitors 
would come that they might go away again, 

"I really wish this visit was over," he would 
exclaim twenty times a day. " Why can't they come 
and have done with it 1 Do they think I'm going to 
sit up this way, day after day, waiting for them? 
Haven't had time?" — to Edith. "\Vhatdo you call 
time ? I know I have had time to repent that ever I 
listened to such a madlike proposal. What is it they 
mean to do after they come here ? Are they to take 
up with Benbowie and Molly Macauley ? for I can tell 
them, they're much mistaken if they think I'm to 



332 DESTINY. 

gallant them aloout. They're coming to your mar- 
riage, are they ■? But they'll surely have the discre- 
tion to write before they come." 

Edith assured him they would, as she had required 
of Lady Waldegrave to let her know when they 
might expect them. 

" And what's the reason Reginald's not come back ? 
What am I to do if he does not come in time to re- 
ceive them 1 I really wish, Edith, you would write, 
and ask what's keeping him, and tell him that he must 
come directly. It's a pretty situation I'm landed in, 
with two strange women coming that I know nothing 
about. What do I know aljout your Lady Walde- 
grave 1 she's nothing to me ; and — and my own boy 
gone ! " 

At length a sudden and alarming attack of gout 
in the stomach put a stop to Glenroy's garrulous de- 
batings. All was confusion and dismay — expresses 
were sent off for medical assistance ; and Edith wrote 
a hurried line to Sir Reginald, informing him of her 
father's situation. She had heard from him from 
Dunshiera, where he said he had found so much to 
do, that the time of his retui^n was uncertain ; but the 
intelligence of his uncle's danger, she was sure, would 
bring him instantly to Glenroy ; and so it proved, for 
he lost not a moment in answering the summons ; but 
Ijefore either he or the doctor arrived, the disorder 
had taken a favourable turn — the gout had resumed 
its station in the feet. Thus the danger was past for 
the time, and Glenroy was himself again, and every- 



DESTINY. 333 

tiling and everybody resumed their former station and 
occupation. Eeginald alone seemed restless and un- 
uneasy — abrupt in his answers, and unequal in his 
spirits ; but whenever he caught Edith's eye, he in- 
stantly rallied, recovered his self-possession, and l:)egan 
to talk to her of Dunshiera, of all he was doing and 
had to do for her comfort and accommodation, and 
would then urge the necessity there was for return- 
ing there, having numerous work-people waiting his 
orders. But as the mention of such a purpose always 
threw Glenroy into an absolute paroxysm, and made 
lum gout all over, he at length agreed to remain where 
he was, until his uncle's health should be more firmly 
re-established. 

"You surely do not think of receiving Lady Eliza- 
beth nowl" said he to Edith, one day when she was 
exi^ressing her expectation of a letter from Lady 
Waldegrave. 

" No, I scarcely expect them now," said she, " as I 
wrote to Florinda when papa was taken ill ; but if 
they had set out, of course she could not have received 
my letter. However, I must hear from her soon, as 
she will at all events wiite to apprise me of the day 
of their arrival, if they are really coming." 

"If they should come," said Eeginald, in a tone of 
affected composure, " I shall take advantage of your 
having such good company to return to Dunshiera 
for a few days. Glenroy will probably be quite well 
by that time, and I am anxious to forward the opera- 
tions." 



334 DESTINY. 

" Surely, Eeginald, you Avill not think of leaving 
us at such a time?" said Edith; "how very unkind 
— I may almost say rude— it would seem to Lady 
Elizabeth and Florinda." 

"That is a very secondary consideration," replied 
he; ''seems signifies little to me in comparison of 
should. I ought to retui-n to Dunshiera at that time," 
he added, endeavouring to retain the same artificial 
tone. " Nay, more, Edith, why might not you accom- 
pany mel Why," he continued, with more visible 
agitation, "may we not make out our marriage 
quietly at least, if not privately, now, before these 
people come ?" 

" Surely you are not serious, Reginald," cried Edith, 
in amazement. 

"Perfectly so," returned he quickly. 

"I can scarcely believe you," said she ; "what can 
your motive be for so strange a proposal ?" 

"In the first place," said he, "I feel that I have 
been long enough exhibited as your lover. In the 
next, we should avoid the intolerable Mat which 
always attends on these things. And, lastly," he 
added, with a sort of mocldng air, " since your father 
is going to be reunited to his lady love, 'tis to be sup- 
posed he will be too happy to be dependent upon 
other society, and consequently he could more easily 
spare us. What have I said to offend you, Edith?" 
he continued quickly, as she remained silent, and the 
tears swelled in her eyes. 

" Much," said she, with emotion ; " and yet I am 



DESTINY. 335 

sure you did not mean to hurt me, Eegiiiald," she 
added tenderly. 

" If you ai-e hurt, the fault must be your own, not 
mine," said Reginald coldly. 

Edith's tears fell, but she made no reply. 

Reginald proceeded, in the manner of one who had 
worked himself up to be angry — " Since my return, 
two months ago, I have never ceased importuning 
you to fulfil your engagement. I have repeatedly 
besought you to become mine — publicly or privately, I 
cared not which; but there has always been some 
frivolous pretext or another for delay ; yes, even the 
colour of your gown has been made the excuse," he 
cried, Avith rising vehemence, " as if such weak, super- 
stitious fancies could have swayed you, had you really, 
truly loved." 

" Unkind, unjust that you are !" said Edith, choked 
with her tears. 

"No, the imkindness, the injustice is yours," cried 
he, still more passionately. "Heaven is witness, that 
I would have fulfilled our contract long before now. 
You must do me the justice to own that the moment 
I was assured your affection for me was unchanged, I 
woidd have made you mine ; you need not blame me, 
then, if your behaviour leads me at least to doubt the 
reality of that afi"ection." 

Edith was too much overcome to reply. She was 
accustomed to the querulous fault-finding of her 
father; and from that and other evils she had been 
wont to find a refuge in the tenderness of Reginald ; 



336 DESTINY. 

but this burst of displeasure was too much for her, and 
she wept in meek and silent anguish, Avhile he paced 
the room with the air of one who would rather be still 
more exasperated than mollified. 

At that moment Benbowie entered the room, and 
was making up to Sir Reginald with an open letter, 
and beginning something about commissioners of 
supply, when, hastily brushing past him with an air 
of reckless hauteur, he quitted the apartment. At 
the same time, the dressing-bell sounded, and Edith 
retired to her chamber, to compose herself as she best 
could for meeting her angry and unreasonable lover 
at dinner. 



CHAPTER XLV. 

Sir Reginald did not make his appearance in tlie 
drawing-room, and it was not till the party were all 
seated that he entered the dining-room, and then his 
looks and manner still betokened a mind ill at ease. 
He was silent and absent, inattentive to the company, 
and almost rude to poor Mrs. Macauley, when she 
attempted to coax him into a better humour by her 
simple and somewhat ill-timed allusions. 

Edith felt unequal to bear a part in the conversa- 
tion. It was all she could do to retain the tears that 
rose in her eyes, as she now and then encountered Sir 
Reginald's glance, which, if it did not speak positive 
displeasure, at least evinced a sort of impatient dis- 
satisfaction. The dessert had been just placed on the 
table when Boyd entered with a face of importance, 
and announced that two travelling carriages had just 
entered the avenue ; and while he yet spoke, the 
sound of approaching horses and wheels confirmed the 
fact ; in another second, they swept round and drew 
up. 

"Can this be Lady Elizabeth'?" exclaimed Edith, 
rising from the table in some agitation, while Sir 
VOL. T. z D. 



338 DESTINY. 

Eeginalcl, shading his face with one hand, poured out 
several successive bumpers of champagne, and drank 
them off unnoticed in the general confusion that pre- 
vailed. 

'"Deed and it can be nobody else," cried Mrs. 
Macauley, who had hastened to the window ; " there's 
the two ladies in a barouche, and a well loaded one too, 
and a gentleman — no, he's only a servant — behind; 
and there's two very smart-looking ladies' maids, I'm 
thinking, in the other carriage ; and oh what a sight 
of imperials and trunks and boxes ! it's a mercy 
Glenroy does not see them. But I declare I don't 
think it's Lady Elizabeth, after all, or else she's grown 
younger and handsomer than ever she was." 

" Sir Reginald, will you go and receive Lady Ehza- 
beth?" cried Edith; then, struck with the change in 
his countenance, she exclaimed, "But you are ill !" 

u No— no— nothing," he cried, starting up, his pale 
cheek and downcast eye suddenly flashing and spark- 
ling with false fire, while the sweetest and most melo- 
dious of voices was now heard in the hall, as if speak- 
ing to her dog, and presently Lady Waldegrave was 
announced. Edith flew to the door to receive her, 
but she started in surprise at the beauty, the surpass- 
ing beauty and brilliancy of the figure that met her 
view, and gracefully opened her arms to receive her 
embrace. 

For some moments, Edith's emotion rendered her 
unconscious of everything but that her once fondly- 
loved Florinda was restored to her. But, at the same 



DESTINY. 339 

time, the remembrance of her lost brother mingled 
with the tide of feeling, and rendered her unable to 
articulate the common expressions of welcome, 

" You are very kind, dear Edith," said Lady Walde- 
grave, as she raised her head and shook back the 
beautiful ringlets which shaded her face. " I scarcely 
deserve to be so well received, considering how I have 
broken in upon your family party. I am afraid I have 
disturbed you." 

" Oh ! do not think of apologies at such a time," 
said Edith, again tenderly embracing her, and gazing 
with looks of fond admiration through her tears. 
" Dearest Florinda ! how welcome you are to Glen- 
roy!" 

" I assure you I cannot be more welcome than I am 
delighted to return," replied Lady Waldegrave, with 
an earnestness of manner which left no doubt of her 
sincerity. 

Edith did not immediately answer, for her atten- 
tion was attracted to Sir Eeginald, who was standing 
with his back to them, talking and laughing strangely 
loud with the other lady, when Lady Waldegrave 
called to her — 

" Madame Latour, allow me to present you to Miss 
Malcolm." Then observing Edith's look of surprise, 
she exclaimed — "Ah! did I forget to mention Madame 
Latour to you 1 She was my governess, and is now 
my friend — she is a very charming, accomplished per- 
son, and excels in speaking broken English." 

Madame Latour, thus called upon, saluted Edith 



340 DESTINY. 

with all the ease and grace of her country, while Sir 
Reginald, for the first time recognising Lady Walde- 
grave, made a slight constrained l)ow, and then turned 
abruptly away. Edith was shocked at the rudeness 
of such a reception. Lady Waldegrave blushed, and 
said in a low voice, but sufficiently loud for him to 
overhear — 

" I scarcely expected to find Sir Reginald Malcolm 
at Glenroy." 

Such avowed marks of hostility at the very outset, 
and from persons of such high breeding and refine- 
ment, struck Edith with surprise and consternation. 
She knew not what to reply, and in some confusion 
said — "I — we — expected to see Lady Elizabeth; and 
I hope nothing has occurred " 

" Oh ! mamma will be here," said Lady Walde- 
grave; "but her carriage is heavier than mine, and 
I flatter myself," added she, with sweetness, "my 
impatience was also greater than even hers, to reach 
Grlenroy and its loved ones," gently pressing Edith's 
hand as she spoke. " But I am really shocked at having 
deranged your little party," as Mrs. Macauley and 
Benbowie remained in all the av.^kwardness of sus- 
pense, not knowing whether to sit or stand. 

" I daresay your Ladyshij) will not remember me," 
said Mrs. Macauley, on coming forward. 

"My dear Mrs. Macauley," said Lady Waldegrave, 
aff"ectionately embracing her — "how can you suppose 
I ever could forget you ? Indeed, I never do forget 
those I love," she said with much earnestness. "And 



DESTINY. 341 

you used to be so kind to me when I was a little, 
naughty, mischievous creature ! " 

'"Deed, then, my lady, and you was that," replied 
the simple Macky ; " but I'm sure one need only look 
at you to see that you are not that now." 

Lady Waldegrave laughed, and there was melody 
even in her laugh. "And, Benbowie, I hope I see 
you well?" extending the tip of her finger to him. 
" But where is Glenroy ?" looking round, as she missed 
him for the first time. Edith explained that he was 
confined to his own apartment with a fit of the gout. 

"How sorry I am!" said Lady Waldegrave, in a 
tone beautifully modulated to jiity ; then in a moment 
changing it to one of delight, she exclaimed, " Come, 
dear Fido ! " as Sir Reginald's dog entered the room, 
and flew to her with demonstrations of joy. 

"How kindly Fido welcomes me," said she, as 
she fondled it. " He has not forgot me — dear 
Fido ! " she repeated, as she continued to load it with 
caresses, unmindful of the jealousy testified by her 
own favourite. 

Sir Reginald made no reply, but with a heightened 
colour, called the dog to himself, and, striking it, 
sternly bade it be quiet. Edith was still more con- 
founded by Reginald's behaviour ; that he, who was 
so uniformly polite and well-bred, should behave with 
rudeness to any woman, but more especially to one so 
lovely and fascinating, was quite incomprehensible. 
His dog, too, of which he had hitherto evinced a care 
and tenderness that seemed almost ridiculous, to lift 



342 DESTINY. 

his hand against it, for no other reason, as it seemed, 
than because it had caressed Lady Waldegrave ! 
Surely this was carrying antij)athy to its utmost 
bounds ! Eousing herself from these reflections, how- 
ever, she said, "I need scarcely ask if you have 
dined; I can only apologise for the uncomfortable 
meal I fear you will now have." 

" Were I to answer you myself, I should say I had 
dined," replied Lady Waldegrave. "As I really don't 
mind dinner so much as many people do, and we had 
some not very bad mutton chops at the last stage — 
only they did taste a little of peats and whisky," she 
added, laughing. " But if you ask Madame Latour, 
she will tell you she has not dined since she left 
London." 

"Get dinner immediately for Lady — for Madame 
Latour," cried Sir Eeginald hastily, to a servant who 
happened to be in the room ; then colouring at his 
own impetuosity, he turned to Edith and said, "I 
beg pardon. Miss Malcolm, for presuming to anticipate 
your orders, — it is time Glenroy should resume his 
place, since I am already usurping his authority." 

" Oh no," said Edith gently ; " papa Avould be 
pleased to see you performing the duties of his proxy, 
by showing hospitality (which, you know, is all we 
poor Highlanders have to show) to those kind friends 
who have come so far to see us." 

" I think I might be prevailed iipon to eat some of 
these Alpine strawberries," said Lady Waldegrave, as 
she seated herself at table. A slight bend of the 



DESTINY. 343 

head was the only reply Sir Reginald vouchsafed as 
he helped the strawberries, without once looking to- 
Avards his beautiful guest. 

Glenroy's bell had Ijeen sounding vehemently at 
intervals for some time, and a message now came, de- 
siring to see Sir Reginald or Miss Malcolm directly. 

Sir Reginald instantly started up, as if glad of the 
summons, and merely saying to Edith, "I will save 
you the trouble," hastily quitted the room. 

" How extremement Saar Ragenall est change," 
exclaimed Madame Latour, addressing her friend ; 
" ce ne que I'ombre de lui-meme ! how he is pale et 
mornc, what you call painseeve. Miss Maulcomb, 
you most be sensible of an extraordinaire changement 
of Saar Ragenall?" 

Edith's attention had been so engrossed by Flor- 
inda, that she had Little to bestow upon Madame 
Latour; but, thus called upon, she considered her 
more attentively, and the impression made was not 
of a pleasing kind. Madame Latour, though rather 
past her prime, Avas still a showy, handsome brunette, 
\vdth quick black eyes, good white teeth, a well-got- 
up complexion, and an air of the most thorough self- 
possession. " Sir Reginald has not been very well of 
late," said Edith, casting down her eyes to avoid the 
piercing stare which accompanied the interrogation. 

"Ah! I am much inquiet for him," resumed 
Madame, with a shake of the head, " he was si joli, 
si charmant, vat you call pleesante — Ladi Waldegrave, 
n'etes vous pas frappe — strock with de change?" 



344 DESTINY. 

" I have scarcely yet had time to observe Sir Re- 
ginald's looks," replied Lady Waldegrave carelessly; 
"Ijut I thought you and he seemed very merry to- 
gether." 

" Oh, we talk — nous rions — laafFe for one moment, 
mais done il est si maigre — vat you call sin," 

Meanwhile a repast from the cUbiis of the dinner 
had been quickly got up at the other end of the room, 
and no sooner was it arranged than Madame Latour 
started up with great alacrity, and repaired to it. 
Lady Waldegrave declined partaking of it, saying 
she preferred dining on the dessert. Benbowie, whose 
appetite was of a most hospitable nature, instinctively 
stalked away, and took his place by her, as if intend- 
ing to do the honours of the banquet, which indeed 
he did, if devouring everything within his reach was 
deemed an exemplary mark of hospitality. 

"Cette grosse est excellente, excellente," said 
Madame Latour, after she had helped herself to the 
back and breast of a moorfowl, leaving the legs and 
pinions for Benbowie, who, like panting Time, toiled 
after her in vain. She flew like a butterfly or bee, 
from dish to dish, extracting the very heart and soul 
from each as she skimmed along, while at the same 
time she kept calling for every species of sauce and 
condiment that ever had been heard of, which she 
contrived to mix with the most admirable dexterity. 

"Madame Latour est une peu gourmande," said 
Lady Waldegrave, addressing Edith, "but otherwise 
she is the best creature in the world ; so perfectly 



DESTINY. 345 

good-hearted, and so devoted to me. I am sure you 
will like her." 

Edith could not violate sincerity so far as to say 
she thought she should, for she already felt what she 
rarely did, a strong prepossession against this " best 
creature in the world;" so she changed the subject 
by making a sort of apology for Eeginald's protracted 
absence — "But papa is so fond of him," she said, 
"that he finds it very difficult to get aAvay from him." 
Then, with an air of hesitation, she added, " Sir Re- 
ginald and you met abroad, I believe ?" 

" Yes, we met occasionally," i-eplied her Ladyship, 
slightly colouring. — "What very pretty china this is 
— Dresden, I am sure," examining her plate with 
great attention ; " after all, there is nothing so pretty 
as flowers upon china." 

Edith assented, and then timidly added, " Madame 
Latour seems much struck with the change in Eegi- 
nald's appearance?" 

" He does look rather triste,'' said Lady Waldegrave, 
as she drew another plate towards her; "Avhat a 
charming group — these carnations are perfect ! " 

" The loss of my dear brother," said Edith, with 
emotion, "has affected Reginald very deeply." 

"All, true," replied Lady Waldegrave, putting on 
a very soft, melancholy look. 

" That, and the remains of malaria which he had 
at Rome, will account to you for the present de- 
pressed state of his spirits." 

"Oh, perfectly," said Lady Waldegrave, biting her 



346 DESTINY. 

lip as if to repress a smile which lurked round her 
beautiful mouth, and shone in her large blue eyes. 

Madame Latour's devotion meanwhile had been 
dedicated exclusively to her dinner, and having done 
due honour to it, she was now on her way to the 
dessert, when Lady Waldegrave rose, saying, " Pray, 
dear Edith, let us go to the drawing-room ; the smell 
of two dinners is rather too much for those Avho have 
not partaken of either." Putting her arm Avithin 
Edith's, she then gracefully sauntered out of the 
room, stopping occasionally to remark upon some of 
the pictures, which she did in the style of one avIio 
was perfect mistress of the theory of painting. They 
Avere soon folloAved by the rest of the party, with the 
exception of Sir Reginald. 

An air of languid discontent was now insensibly 
stealing over Lady Waldegrave, in spite of Madame 
Latour's efforts to amuse by her broken English, when 
again the sound of wheels was heard. Presently a 
heavy-laden travelling coach dreAV up, from the 
AAdndows of Avhich dogs' heads were seen protruding 
in all directions. 

" There comes mamma and her tiresome dogs ! " 
exclaimed Lady Waldegrave in a tone of chagrin. 

At that moment the hall resounded Avith the sharp 
shrill treble of three lap-dogs, which Avas quickly 
accompanied by a deep running bass from the various 
dogs of the household, and then caught up by the 
imprisoned yells of the more remote inmates of the 
kennel, "in notes by distance made more sAveet." 



DESTINY. 347 

"Ah, I am happy to see Reginald has gone to 
receive Lady Elizabeth," said Edith, as his voice was 
heard in the hall giving orders to the servants ; and 
then flying down the steps, he presented his arm to 
Lady Elizabeth, as she alighted, and appeared to 
welcome her with the semblance of the greatest 
cordiality. 

" How diff"erently he met Lady Waldegrave ! " 
thought Edith, then hastened forward to receive her 
stepmother. 



CHAPTER XLVL 

Lady Elizabeth was now a thin, weak, cross, old- 
looking woman, dressed in the extreme of youthful- 
ness, with an unnatural profusion of flaxen ringlets 
dangling round withered, hollow, rouged cheeks. 
She but just touched Edith's hand, and laid her face 
to hers, then passed on to her daughter, and putting 
her arms round her, kissed her with a sort of hys- 
terical emphasis ; then, in a peevish, querulous tone, 
exclaimed — 

"You may thank heaven, child, you see me safe 
and toleralily well ! AVhat a frightful road for me to 
travel ! How could you leave me, my love ? I have 
been excessively alarmed — those dreadful precipices, 
and that shocking water ! " 

" Quite charming, mamma," said Lady Waldegrave. 
" It seemed as if Scott's beautiful description of the 
Trossachs had started into life;" and in a low tone, 
but with perfect modulation of voice and manner, 
she repeated some of those glowing lines. 

" Nonsense, my dear," exclaimed Lady Elizabeth ; 
"it is a frightful, a dangerous road, and it was very 
improper of you, my love, to leave my carriage so far 
behind." 



DESTINY. 349 

" I beg pardon, mamma ; but it did not appear to 
me there was the sHghtest danger," said her daughter. 

" My dear love, don't say so," cried her Ladyship 
impatiently ; "I never in my life travelled so danger- 
ous a road. If I had had the slightest recollection of 
it, I never should have attempted it, even to gratify 
you, my sweetest — those tremendous rocks on one 
liand, and the lake on the other — shocking ! I had 
forgot it entirely, else I certainly never should have 
dreamt of such a thing as coming here." 

" Don't you feel fatigued, mamma ? " inquired 
Lady AValdegrave. 

" Certainly, my love, excessively fatigued, and my 
nerves shaken beyond expression ; and those dear 
dogs ! Bijou was really quite ilL I'm surprised Glen- 
roy can suffer such a road — it ought not to be per- 
mitted. If I had been travelhng in the dark, or if 
my horses had taken fright — or a thousand things 
might have happened." 

" Don't you think mamma must be much fatigued. 
Dr. Price?" said Lady Waldegrave, turning to a 
sickly -looking, elderly man, in a black wig, green 
surtout, white trousers, pale hands, and a ring. 

" Unquestionably," replied the doctor, in a slow, 
hesitating manner; "her Ladyship has been much 
agitated, and consequently must be considerably ex- 
hausted. If her Ladyship is to dine now, I would 
recommend half-an-hour's repose after dinner, either 
upon a couch or easy-chair, whichever she gives the 
preference to ; or if there is to be any delay in the 



350 DESTINY. 

preparing of her Ladyship's repast, then I would advise 
the rest to be taken previous to partaking of it." 

Edith took the hint, and ringing the bell, ordered 
a third dinner to be prepared as soon as possible for 
her very considerate guests. Then, having procured 
some refreshments in the meantime, she offered to 
conduct Lady Elizabeth to her apartment. With a 
languid air she accepted Edith's arm, but as she was 
leaving the room, turned round and called — 

" Florinda, my darling, you must come too. And, 
Dr. Price, you will give Rosalie her directions about the 
drops, and do see that the dogs get their dinners, for 
they are almost famished, poor loves. Do, Florinda, love, 
come with me. I assure you I have been excessively 
alarmed ; it is all your doing, my dear — that road was 
really quite frightful — I shall never forget my alarm." 

Here Lady Waldegrave swept her fingers over a 
harp which stood near, and thus contrived to evade 
the proposal. 

Lady Elizabeth, after another ineffectual attempt 
to attract her daughter's attention, suffered Edith to 
lead her from the room; but it was with difficulty 
she managed to shufile along, in shoes evidently much 
too small for her feet. 

" Lady Waldegrave is a charming creature, is she 
notf said she, stopping in the middle of the hall, 
and leaning her whole weight on Edith. 

" Oh, beautiful ! " exclaimed Edith; "I could not 
have imagined anything so faultless, and at the same 
time so captivating." 



DESTINY. 351 

" Ah ! very true — her manners are very good. I 
have bestowed great pains upon her ; she is, perhaps, 
if anything — but it is scarcely perceptible — a single 
degree too much embonpoint; at least she may be, 
unless she is upon her guard. I was a perfect whip- 
ping-post at her age ; and even now I don't think I 
am larger than she is. It is a great matter to pre- 
serve the figure ; nothing makes people look so soon 
old as allowing themselves to grow fat, and get out 
of shape. Florinda's figure, to be sure, is perfection, 
— rather, if anything, too tall perhaps; she is taller 
than I am ; otherwise, as Monsieur Pei'pigoian said, we 
might very well pass for twins — a pretty thought, was 
it not?" 

Edith could scarcely restrain a smile as she looked 
at the old wrinkled scarecrow, who sought to assimi- 
late herself with her young and blooming daughter. 

Her Ladyship went on — "She has been prodi- 
giously admired and reclierchd wherever we went ; but 
I don't intend that she should marry yet, for, in fact, 
Lady Waldegrave has nothing to gain by marriage ; 
like myself, she may lose, but she can scarcely better 
herself ; it is very well for des filles sans dots to be 
eager about a settlement; but with my daughter's 
rank, beauty, fashion, and fortune, what is she to look 
for ? And if she were to marry now, she Avould have 
a daughter at her heels, while she herself was quite 
a young woman. I married a great deal too soon, and 
you see the consequence ! I may be a grandmother in 
the very prime of life ! Shocldng and foolish ! " 



352 DESTINY. 

They had now reached the door of her Ladyship's 
apartment, and upon entering the dressing-room, the 
floor was covered with imperials, wells, trunks, boxes, 
sacs de nuit, and packages of every description, which 
her maid and footman were busily employed in put- 
ting to rights. 

" Do, Rosalie, contrive to get my things unpacked 
and arranged as quickly as possible," cried Lady 
Elizabeth impatiently, and looking round the room. 
" Pray ask the housekeeper to let me have a chaise 
tongue, I rather prefer it to a sofa ; and bring up my 
dog-baskets and cushions ; let me have a larger table, 
and have that commode carried away. I shall not 
have room to turn about here." Then addressing her 
footman, "And, Eousseau, look to my guitar, and have 
it brought here with my music books and portefeuille : 
I brought my guitar and Eossini's last opera, as I 
thought it would amuse Gleuroy to have a little good 
music; but I am sorry to hear from Sir Reginald 
that he is so unwell. I shall make a point of Dr. 
Price seeing him; he is the best creature in the 
world; dresses so well; he is so skilful and gentle- 
manly, and is never out of the way. I have the most 
perfect confidence in him. It is very unfortunate for 
him, poor man, that he has such wretched health him- 
self. Had it been otherwise, indeed, he must have 
been devoted to the public, and I should not have 
had the good fortune to attach him to my establish- 
ment ; and I am in hopes change of scene and travel- 
ling may do him good. — How very tedious you are, 



DESTINY. 353 

Rosalie — do get my things ready, that I may begin to 
dress. " 

"I beg pardon," said Edith; "but I think Dr. 
Price recommended your taking a little rest before 
dinner ; and as we are quite a family party, I hope 
you won't add to your fatigue by dressing." 

"Oh, Dr. Price does not at all understand that 
sort of thing," replied her Ladyship ; "he is excellent 
in his way, but — I shall put on a black gown to-day, 
Eosalie — Florinda and I agreed to wear black at first, 
as a sort of proper compliment, you know " — glancing 
at Edith's deep mourning — "otherwise I never do 
wear black, it is so unpleasant, and puts such shock- 
ing thoughts in one's head ; but we won't talk of it — 
it makes me quite ill to think of such things !" Then, 
as Eosalie announced that her Ladyship's toilet was 
ready, she gently pressed the tip of Edith's fingers, 
and said, " Now, my dear, I shall join you in half an 
hour." And Edith gladly availed herself of the hint 
to withdraw. Wearied and sickened at the frivohty, 
heartlessness, and egotism already so fully developed 
in her stepmother's conversation, Edith bitterly re- 
pented having been accessory to bringing her to the 
house. 

"Reginald was right," thought she; "papa will 
never be able to bear this." And she trembled to 
think of the shock that wovdd ensue when two such 
antipodes came in contact. 

It was therefore with fear she returned into her 
father's presence, whom she found alreadv apprised 
VOL. I. 2 a d. 



354 DESTINY. 

of the extent of the party, Benbowie having twice 
counted them over to him on his fingers, and thus 
demonstrated to him that there was an individual to 
each, thumbs included. Edith had, of course, to bear 
a storm of reproach and invective for having brought 
such a crew to the house, interspersed with threats of 
turning the Doctor and Frenchw^oman, witli their 
attendants, out of it ; and of not seeing the face of 
one of them as long as the}' stayed 






CHAPTER XLVIL 

In the drawing-room Edith found only Lady Walde- 
grave and her friend. The former was reclining lan- 
guidly on a sofa, and IMadame Latour was seated on 
a low stool by her, discoursing with much energy in 
her native language. 

" Soyez sure qu'il est passionnement amoureux," 
exclaimed she vehemently, as Edith entered ; then, 
on perceiving her, she called, "Venez ici. Mile. Mal- 
comb — dites moi, croyez vous qu'il soit possible 
d'aimer cette dame ? n'est elle pas afFreuse — wat you 
call oglie?" And making a grimace, she put her 
hands before her eyes. 

Lady Waldegrave shghtly blushed, and smiled as, 
half rising from her reclining attitude, she extended 
her hand to Edith, and said, " You have been sadly 
bored, I fear, dear Edith ; but Ave must not allow 
mamma to monopolise you thus." 

There was something so sweet and fascinatmg in 
Lady Waldegrave's every tone and look and move- 
ment, that Edith, won by the charm, seated herself 
by her, and soon forgot her momentary dissatisfaction 
with Lady Elizabeth and Madame Latour. 



356 DESTINY. 

" How vivid my remembrance is of you," said she 
coaxingly to Edith ; " and how hke a dream it seems 
to find myself again here, where everything awakens 
some childish recollection ; most of them to my own 
shame, indeed, when I think what a httle saucy chit 
I was. And, by-the-bye, how very unkind and un- 
grateful you must have thought me, in never having 
written to you. But, indeed, you cannot conceive 
how much I have been under the control of guardians 
and governesses for the last twelve years. Thank 
Heaven, I am now pretty much emancipated from 
bondage ; but, I do assure you, it is a very tiresome 
thing to be trained up to be a person of consequence ; 
and I often thought Avith envy of the delightful liberty 
you enjoyed of rambling amongst your Highland hills 
and forests with the boys, while I was condemned to 
lessons from morning till night. My only relaxation 
was a walk in the Park with my governesses, or a 
still more tiresome drive with mamma. But you 
have forgiven me, dearest Edith, have you not?" and 
she put her arm round Edith's neck, and laid her head 
on her shoulder, and looked in her face with the most 
winning expression. 

"I have nothing to forgive — I am sure I never 
shall have anything to forgive you," said Edith, with 
fond afi"ection. 

" Non, non, c'est un ange, un parfait ange ! " 
exclaimed Madame Latour, putting her handkerchief 
to her eyes. " Mais, Ladi Waldegrave, ne f aites vous 
pas toilette ce soir?" inquired she, as she rose from 



DESTINY. 357 

the lowly seat, and glanced at herself in an opposite 
mirror. 

" No, I am too lazy ; will you excuse me, Edith, if 
I remain en ddshaUlUf 

"Ah, c'est le privilege de la jeunesse et de la 
beaut6, de se passer d'ornemens; mais lorsqu'on est 
un peu pass6e, ma belle," — Madame sighed atfectedly. 
" Ainsi je vais sonner pour ma femme de chambre." 
And to Edith's great rehef, Madame Latour retired to 
her toilet. 

" Apropos of dress" said Lady Waldegrave, " I 
hope you admire cameos, Edith, because I have 
brought you some, and I shall be sorry if you don't 
happen to like them ; I am very impatient to show 
them to you, so I shall send for them now;" and, in 
spite of Edith's remonstrances, she rang the bell for 
her maid, and in a few minutes the box was brought, 
and an exquisite set of cameos, of the most perfect 
design and execution, was presented to Edith, whose 
native good taste enabled her at once to appreciate 
tlie beauty and value of the gift. 

" How my heart overflows with affection and kind 
wishes !" said Lady Waldegrave. " I now feel so for- 
cibly the truth of that beautiful sentiment of Madame 
de Stael's, ' II y a en nous un superflu d'ame, c^u'll est 
doux de consacrer a ce qui est beau, quand ce qui est 
bien, est accompli.' Not that I can flatter myself with 
having accomplished the good," added she, with a 
smile, " le beau is so much more to my taste than le 
bien." 



358 DESTINY. 

" If to give pleasure is to do good, you hare suc- 
ceeded in one instance," said Edith, as she continued 
admiring the various beauties of the classic gems ; 
"but I am afraid there is too much of le beau here, to 
admit of much of h Men." 

Lady Waldegrave was silent for a few minutes, then, 
with a sigh, said, " Whether I shall ever do good is 
doubtful, but it is certain that I have already been 
the cause of much mischief. I cannot tell you how 
much I lament the unfortunate misunderstanding that 
took place between Lady Elizabeth and Glenroy. It 
grieves me more than I can express, to think that I 
should have been the cause, the unintentional one 
indeed, of their separation ! " 

"Do not distress yourself on that account, dear 
Florinda," said Edith tenderly, "for indeed Lady 
Elizabeth and papa seem so different, I do not think 
they ever could have lived happily together." 

" You are very kind and considerate to say so," 
replied Lady Waldegrave, pressing her hand; "but 
Ave cannot tell what habit might have done. I must 
therefore always look upon myself as the cause of this, 
I fear, irreparable mischief." 

"You blame yoiu:self unjustly," said Edith ear- 
nestly. " Young as I was at the time, from what I 
remember, I should suppose you had only been one 
of many causes of disagreement." 

" Perhaps so ; but still I feel as a guilty thing. 
Oh, how glad I should be if I could see them fairly 
reconciled ! " 



DESTINY. 359 

" To tell you the truth, I have often, especially of 
late, felt the same wish," said Edith, vnih a slight 
degree of confusion ; " but now I see — I fear — I do 
not think it will be practicable — they are so different." 

" Of that you must be a better judge than I," re- 
pHed Lady Waldegrave, " as my impression of Glen- 
roy is probably very imperfect. I only remember him 
a very tall, fine -looking man, with a loud voice, 
and an authoritative manner, of which I was a little 
afraid ; but perhaps circumstances may have softened 
these." 

Edith shook her head. *' Papa is very kind-hearted 
and affectionate," said she, " but he likes to have his 
own way, and Lady Elizabeth has, of course, been so 
long independent of control " 

'* Ah, true," interrupted Lady Waldegrave ; " mam- 
ma is not easily managed, and she is excessively fond 
of what is called a gay life, and therefore, I fear, we 
must be satisfied with a mere temporary reconciliation, 
without attempting a more solid union. It is unfoi-- 
tunate, for when I marry, mamma would be more 
respectable living with her husband than she will be 
l)y herself; and when you marry, Avhich, of course, 
you will also do — now don't blush, Edith, love — I am 
not going to talk of lovers ; I shall find out in good 
time whether you have any affaires dii cceiir, so pray 
don't make me your confidante — 'tis the office in the 
world I have the greatest dread of." 

Edith laughed and promised, and the conversation 
was ended by the entrance of Sir Eeginald and Dr. 



360 DESTINY. 

Price, looking like two people whom chance, not 
choice, had thrown together. 

Sir Eeginald drew near, as if about to address 
Lady Waldegrave, then stopped, and turned to the 
table where the cameos were, and taking up one of 
the bracelets, commended the beauty of it. 

"They are indeed perfect," said Edith; "each 
cameo is a picture in itself, and I should have thought 
myself rich with any one of them ; but Lady Walde- 
gi'ave insists upon my accepting the whole set." 

Sir Eeginald said nothing, but hastily put down 
the bracelet, and, joining Dr. Price at one of the win- 
dows, immediately began to talk politics with him. 
Edith coloured with shame at this proof of her lover's 
rudeness and dislike to Lady Waldegrave. "And 
yet," she thought, " how is it possible to hate anything 
so beautiful and captivating 1 What can be the cause 
of this coldness which he seems to feel for everything 
connected with a creature so lovely and engaging?" 

"How did you like my picture, Edith?" inquired 
Lady Waldegrave. " Should you have known me by 
it?" 

Edith looked at her with the air of one who is at a 
loss to comprehend the meaning of a question. 

"Your picture?" replied she; "I never saw any 
picture of you, except the little daub done by JVIrs. 
Macauley, which, bad as it is, has always hung in my 
dressing-room. You don't mean that?" 

"No — the picture I sent you from Florence. Whom 
did I send it by?" as if trying to recollect. "I cer- 



DESTINY. 361 

tainly did send it — how provoking that I should not 
be able to tell by whom ! There were a number of 
English there; but perhaps Sir Eeginald Malcolm 
might, if he chose, assist my memory." 

Sir Reginald took no notice, but continued talking 
with much energy with Dr. Price on the affairs of 
Europe. Edith called to him — " Sir Eeginald ! — Sir 
Keginald ! I wish you would come and assist Lady 
AValdegrave and me in our attempts to recover a 
picture she gave in charge to some one at Florence 
for me, but which I have never received." 

"Even if I guessed at the offender," said Sir Eegi- 
nald, in a low voice, " Lady Waldegrave surely would 
not have the cruelty to have his name exposed to the 
indignation which his conduct merits." 

Eeginald was behind Edith, Avho did not see his 
face as he spoke ; but he Avas opposite to Lady Walde- 
grave, who blushed deeply, while something hke a 
smile was upon her lip. 

" Is it Florinda or I whose indignation you think 
would be so excessive?" asked Edith. 

" Both," he replied, as he turned quickly and re- 
joined Dr. Price. 

"It must be from mere carelessness that it has 
not been delivered," said Lady Waldegrave; "but if 
it does not appear soon, you or I must draw up an 
advertisement for it, Edith. Seriously, it must be 
recovered, as a lock of my hair accompanied it, and it 
is not every one I should choose to be in possession of 
such things, valueless as they may be to the retainer. " 



362 DESTINY. 

Sir Ecginald and Dr. Price were busily engaged 
looking at an atlas ; and the two friends continued 
to converse together, till Lady Elizabeth made her 
appearance, dressed like fifteen for a first ball. 

"My dear Florinda!" she exclaimed, "what do I 
seel not yet dressed? How very uncomfortable it 
makes me to see anybody in a morning gown in the 
evening — it is so very trying, an angel could not stand 
such a test. I do assure you, my dear, you look very 

ill." 

"Thank you, mamma," said Lady Waldegrave 
coolly; and taking up a footstool cover, with Mrs. 
Macauley's needle still sticking in it, she began to 
work -wdth an air of unconcern. 

"Too ridiculous!" cried Lady Ehzabeth, with a 
shrug of her httle bare shoulders; "you only want 
a brass thimble to make you ciuite complete, Lady 
Waldegrave. Why should you wish to look like a 
dowdy, my love?" Then, in a whisper to Edith, 
" She is a beautiful creature, to be sure ! what a pro- 
file ! what a throat ! what hands ! Madame d'Aumont 
used to say she should have known her to be my 
daughter anywhere from the hands alone — hands 
and feet, you know, are the great criterions of birth. 
Heavens, how she was admired at Paris ! She is a 
little spoilt, perhaps, by the sensation she caused." 

Here her Ladyship's dinner was announced, and, as 
Edith rose to attend her, Lady Waldegrave exclaimed, 
" Poor dear Edith ! this is really too much, to do the 
honours of three dinners in one day. How you must 



DESTINY. 363 

hate ITS all ! Cannot good Mrs. Macanley relieve you 
from this duty? I am sure mamma will excuse you." 

"Mrs. Macauley and Benbowie are always Avith 
papa in the evening," said Edith ; " but, at any rate, 
Sir Eeginald and I would wish to welcome Lady 
Elizabeth to Glenroy ourselves, and as you did not 
partake of the first dinner, perhaps you will join our 
party." 

" No dinner ! IMy dear child," cried Lady Eliza- 
beth, " what do I hear 1 How very foolish. How 
could Madame Latour suffer such a thing? No wonder 
you look pale — quite ahattue. Come, my love, you 
shall dine with me : my dinner, you know, is a mere 
make-believe. Sir Eeginald, you will take charge of 
Lady Waldegrave" — putting her own arm within 
Edith's. Sir Reginald hastily recoiled at the pro- 
posal ; then quickly recovering himself, was advancing, 
when Lady Waldegrave said, with an air of coldness, 
"Excuse me, mamma; I have already dined, and I 
prefer remaining here." 

" But, my dear love, you will be alone — some one 
must stay with you. Not you," pressing Edith's 
arm; "I have much to say to you. Perhaps Dr. 
Price." But the doctor looked very glum at the pro- 
posal; and luckily at that moment jMadame Latour 
appeared, which settled the point, and the party pro- 
ceeded to the dining-room, leaving the two friends 
together. "I wish particularly to talk to you, my 
dear," said her Ladyship in a low voice to Edith, as 
she walked mincingly along. " There are many 



364 DESTINY. 

tilings very interesting to iDoth of us I have on my 
mind at present. By-the-bye, my dear, your hair is 
not dressed quite a- la -mode. It becomes you very 
well, but still it is too simple for the present style— 
the simple is now quite exploded ; and, indeed, I'm 
not sure that I like simplicity, though it does well 
enough now and then, l^y way of a little variety. 
Florinda, for instance, may simple now and then for 
a whim, but she may do anything she chooses. You 
have heard these pretty lines somebody made upon 
her? 

' Tender or free, in smiles or sadness drest, 
The reigning humour ever suits her best.'" 

Then, as she seated herself at table, she repeated, 
" Tender and free," etc. " Sir Eeginald, do you re- 
member who it was made these lines upon my 
daughter?" 

" I beg pardon," said Sir Reginald ; " but I beHeve 
the lines are to be found in Partenopex de Blois." 

"Excuse me. Sir Eeginald," replied the lady, with 
an air of displeasure ; " but the lines were made upon 
Lady Waldegrave, as any one may perceive at once ; 
and, as Mr. EUenton very well remarked to me, they 
were a perfect picture of her. Mr. Ellenton repeats 
verses better than anybody I know. — This soup is 
very good— it is very good,"— sending away her plate 
after taking two spoonfuls. "I know you don't re- 
commend salmon to me. Dr. Price, but that looks so 
particularly well, I will just taste it." Then, having 
taken a little of it, it was also sent off. " Pray, send 



DESTINY. 365 

me a pate, Dr, Price — ah, chicken j>a/t^, very well 
seasoned, though?" — putting down the knife and 
fork, after the first mouthful. " Yes, I will try the 
fricandeau," and so on with game, tarts, jellies, and 
dessert, in a manner enough to have raised the ghost 
of Lycurgus, or Dr. Gregory. No sooner had she 
finished, than, quickly rising, she again linked herself 
to Edith. "Now, let us go to the hbrary, or the saloon, 
or anj^where to be quiet, as I wish to have a little 
tete-a-tete with you, my dear. I have so much to say 
to you ; and, liprojws, do you know, I think Sir Eegi- 
nald Malcolm excessively disagreeable? How very 
rude to contradict me about these lines ! I know he 
is your cousin — but nobody minds cousins. To tell 
you the truth, I never did like him — as a boy, you 
know, he was shocking; he had very nearly killed 
my daughter, as you may remember; he had beat 
her in the most frightful manner ; in fact, had almost 
actually strangled her. I certainly never would have 
forgiven it ; and I did not approve of Florinda's hav- 
ing admitted him to her acquaintance. It began 
when she was absent from me, with her aunt. Lady 
Escott, at Naples, else I never would have permitted 
it." 

" Lady Waldegrave and Sir Reginald do not appear 
to be very good friends yet," said Edith, in some 
embarrassment. 

"Why, no — I am not sure; he certainly was 
admired; and he is rather handsome; don't you 
think so 1 But Florinda, though the sweetest creature 



366 DESTINY. 

in the world, is a little capricious — that between our- 
selves, though — and I blame Madame Latour entirely 
for whatever faults my daughter may have. I don't 
quite like Madame Latour ; she affects a style of dress 
which is absurd, and wears her petticoats so very 
short, to show her foot— which, by -the -bye — is not 
Avell shaped. Such display is very bad taste, and 
quite defeats the object," glancing at herself in a 
mirror with great complacency. " To tell you a 
secret, my dear — but this is quite in confidence — I 
half suspect her of a design upon Sir Eeginald. It is 
rather ridiculous, to be sure, for Madame Latour is 
by no means a yo\mg-looldng woman — in fact, that 
is one great advantage we blondes have over brunettes 
in general, we retain a youthful appearance much 
longer. However, it is certain he paid her great 
attention at Florence, and Avas much more in my 
house than I thought either proper or agreeable." 

Eeginald an admirer of Madame Latour ! Edith 
could not believe her ears ; and yet with what viva- 
city he had met her ! How she sickened at the thought 
— how degrading to Sir Eeginald, to herself, to har- 
bour it for a single moment ! While these thoughts 
passed through her mind, Lady Elizabeth went on. 

" Madame Latour is of a good family, and so was 
her husband — to be sure she is older than Sir Eegi- 
nald ; but that is nothing — a few years one way or 
other makes little difference, and he certainly did ad- 
mire her, and paid her great attention ; but, however, 
it may have been m.Qxe\y pour passer le temps." 



DESTINY. 3G7 

Could Keginald, her own betrothed, have conde- 
scended to flirt, pour passer le temps, with a Madame 
Latour? Oh, how Edith's pure and devoted heart 
rose at the suggestion ! 

" 1 should not be sorry to see Madame Latour well 
disposed of," continued her Ladyship ; " she is rather 
de trop now ; indeed I had no intention of keeping her 
so long, for in fact I merely engaged her for a year, 
as a sort of something between a governess and a com- 
panion for Florinda ; you understand the sort of per- 
son. My own health was wretched at that time ; but 
upon the whole she is objectionable — she talks so much, 
and is so extremely gross in her eating, quite shocking, 
and dresses with so much pretension — and, in short, 
she is become so unpleasant, that I do assure you I 
shall not be sorry to lose her ; but of course this is 
all a secret, and I don't wish to take any notice of 
it either to Florinda or Sir Eeginald just at present ; 
Init Ave shall see how they go on. Did you ever see 
anything so excessively recherchdSiS her style of dress?" 

In this manner she continued to babble on for about 
an hour, resisting all Edith's attempts to return to the 
drawing-room, from whence issued the most delightful 
sounds of music. 

" Yes, Florinda does play and sing very Avell," said 
she, in answer to Edith's remark ; "in fact, she would 
not have been my daughter had she not been possessed 
of all the requisites for a good musician ; but I think 
she has done enough now ; I don't approve of her 
singing too long at a time. Come, my dear, we shall 



368 DESTINY. 

return to the drawing-room. I have much to say to 
you, but we shall take another time, when we can 
have a little quiet talk together." 

On entering the drawing-room, they found Lady 
Waldegrave seated at the harp, pouring forth the full 
tide of song in strains of perfect melody. Her voice Avas 
rich, clear, and flexible, and she both played and sang 
with much taste and execution. 

"Florinda possesses every personal requisite for 
the harp," whispered Edith's tormentor, as she still 
leant upon her, "quite a classic bust, the most perfect 
hands and arms, and the prettiest foot in the world. 
How shocking to see women pawing the harp with 
great ill-shaped hands, or awkwardly showing their 
long waists and clumsy feet ! Such things ought not 
to be permitted; I have been obliged to leave off 
playing the harp since my health became delicate, it 
requires more muscular exertion than Dr. Price thinks 
good for me ; but you shall hear me on the guitar." 

Edith's attention was directed to Eeginald, who 
sat apart at a table, Avith an open book spread before 
him, his head resting on his hand, which shaded his 
eyes. Madame Latour sat by him working a purse, 
which was every noAV and then suspended, while she 
held up her hands, threw up her eyes, and sighed in 
ecstasy at particular passages in the song. Dr. Price 
was reading the newspapers. Mrs. Macauley was sit- 
ting with her hands on her lap, listening to what she 
did not understand. 

Scarcely was the song ended, when Lady Elizabeth 



DESTINY. 369 

exclaimed impatiently, " Now, my dearest, you have 
done quite enough for to-night — I must not suffer you 
to over-exert yourself ; I will relieve you now. Dr. 
Price, pray ring the bell for my guitar." 

" You forget how late it is, mamma," said her 
daughter, with an air of chagrin, "and that we are all 
beginning to get tired, even of music." 

" Nonsense, my love, 'tis not at all late — my fatigue 
is quite gone off. I feel as if I could even take a turn 
in a waltz," looking towards Sir Eeginald, who now 
fixed his eyes attentively on his book. "Of course 
you waltz, IVIiss Malcolm ? come, let us take a round 
together." 

" Your Ladyship must excuse me ; my spirits are 
not equal to dancing," said Edith ; and her eyes filled 
with tears as she thought, '' This is the boasted sym- 
pathy I was led to expect in our sorrow ! " 

" 'Deed, and I think it would not be decent to be 
dancing," said Mrs. Macauley in a low voice to Madame 
Latour, "considering the misfortunes of the family, 
and Glenroy himself laid up in his bed, honest man ! " 

Sir Reginald saw that Edith was hurt. Quitting 
Madame Latour, he hastily advanced towards her, and 
taking her hand, drew it within his arm, while he led 
her to an open window. "You are ill — fatigued, I 
fear, dear Edith," said he in a tone of compassion. At 
that moment Lady ^Valdegrave rose, and called to her, 
" Excuse me, Miss Malcolm, but I must wish you good- 
night ;" she was then retiring, attended by her friend, 
Avhen Lady Elizabeth, folding her in her arms, kissed 

VOL. I. 2 B B. 



370 DESTINY. 

her forehead, "Good-night, my sweetest, you do look 
abattm ; but a morning-goAra in the evening is too 
trying for an angel — good-night, my charmer; and 
here comes my guitar. Miss Malcolm, you will return 
when you have seen Florinda to her apartment, and 
we shall have a little soft music before supper." 

Sir Reginald opened the door for the ladies to with- 
draw, and as Lady Waldegrave passed, he made her 
a profound bow, which she noticed with a slight and 
constrained bend of the head. Madame Latour whis- 
pered a few words to him in Italian, then laughed 
gaily, and the door was closed. " Quelle grace dans 
son salut ! vat you call bow," said she, addressing 
Lady Waldegravc ; then turning to Edith, " Ah, 
Meess Malcomb, votre frere est charmant! il a fait 
tourner la tite a toutes les femmes d'ltahe." 

"Sir Reginald is not my brother," said Edith, with 
a blush. 

" Saar Reginaal n'est pas votre fr^re, your broder ?" 
exclaimed Madame, in well-feigned astonishment; 
"Vraiment je n'en ai pas doute, ven I do see ses 
aimables petites attentions pour vous ;— mais que je 
suis 6tom'die ! I do remember dat he talk of some- 
time his bonne petite cousiue Ecossaise." 

Edith's cheeks glowed, and her heart rose at this 
insolence. 

" Que je suis bete to meestak," continued Madame, 
as if in despair; "vous me pardonnerez, ma chere 
Meess Malcomb?" 

" Editli, I am sure, looks too good to resent any- 



DESTINY. 371 

thing," said Lady Waldegrave, suddenly restored to 
good spirits, "much less so harmless a meestak," 
laughing, as she mimicked IMadame's pronunciation ; 
"but your patience is heavily taxed, dear Edith — 
mamma has such an inveterate habit of sitting up half 
the night, that it is quite distressing to think of your 
having to keep her company." 

"How extraamement Ladi Elizabeth injure her 
estomac by so frequent eating," said Madame Latour 
in a tone of virtuous indignation ; " et il est si malsain 
de souper ! vat you call disealthy ; den she will ex- 
pose ses pauvres soldiers, ses 6paules, and they die of 
de rheumatisme." 

Edith embraced Lady Waldegrave, and, coldly 
saluting Madame Latour, returned to the drawing- 
room, where she had to sit for an hour listening to 
insipid madrigals and rondos, after which her Lady- 
ship, having pecked like a sparrow at everything that 
was at table, at length retired, and the house of Glen- 
roy was once more at rest. 



CPIAPTER XLVIII. 

When Lady Waldegrave appeared at breakfast the 
following morning, she looked still more beautiful than 
she had done the preceding evening. Madame Latour 
was as usual by her side, but Lady Elizabeth never was 
visible in the morning. Dr. Price was also there, as 
silent and sickly-looking as usual Edith had planned 
a little excursion by land and water, to show some of 
the beauties of Glenroy to her guests, and she intended 
that Reginald should take the management ; but her 
siu-prise and disappointment Avere great when she 
learnt that he had set off early in the morning to 
shoot. Here was a fresh act of incivility and unkind- 
ness, and Edith vainly tried to falter out some excuse 
for him to Lady Waldegrave, who heard her in silence, 
while an air of languid dissatisfaction gradually stole 
over her lovely features. 

" Ah, le pauvre Saar Reginaal ! " exclaimed Madame 
Latour, in a tone of deep commiseration, and heaving 
a sigh. 

"If you please, Madame, what do j^ou mean by 
that 1 " inquired Mrs. Macauley, \nth. her usual blunt 
simplicity. 



DESTINY. 373 

"Ah, que je le plains!" continued Madame 
Latour, as if not hearing Mrs. Macauley. 

The cough and the trot of Amailye were now 
heard resounding in the stillness of the warm sunny 
morning, and presently she was descried passing the 
Avindow with her load on her back. In another 
second, the loud broad tones of Mr. M'Dow were heard 
interrogating the servant, and next entered the gentle- 
man himself, his face " round as my father's shield," 
every line and lineament big with triumph and exulta- 
tion, standing out in bold alto relievo. The customary 
salutations were scarcely over, before it was obvious 
that Mr. M'Dow's exclamation would not be that of 
Hamlet — "Let me not burst in ignorance," but rather 
that of his father's ghost, "I could a tale unfold." It 
was also evident that the secret with which he was 
Ijurdened Avas of an agreeable nature, as not all the 
respect Avith Avhich he strove to address Lady Walde- 
grave could master the inveterate hoch, hoch, ho, 
which burst forth even on his introduction. Seating 
himself at table, he fixed his eyes on her with a stare 
of astonishment ; and while he stuffed one side of his 
mouth to its utmost extent, he discoursed at large 
with the other, and accordingly began, "It's most 
amazing to see how young people shoot up ! It seems 
no time since your Ladyship was a little fair-haired 
missy in a frock, with a doll in your arms, and now 
you are quite a full-grown lady ! It's really wonder- 
ful to see the changes a feAV years bring to pass ! " 

"I cannot apply that observation to you, Mr. 



374 DESTINY. 

M'Dow," said Lady Waldegrave, witli a smile; "for, 
as far as my imperfect recollection serves me, you 
have undergone very little change during those 
years. " 

Mr. M'Dow bowed after his manner, then, with a 
hoch, hoch, ho, replied, "That's precisely what some 
of my good friends find fault with me for, my lady ; 
they say that I ought to have changed (my state) 
before now — hoch, hoch, ho ! " 

"'Deed, then, and I think so too," said Mrs. 
Macauley, with her usual simplicity; if you had a 
wife you would maybe like to stay more at home. 
But better late than never. I don't think but what 
you'll get a wife yet, Mr. M'Dow." 

"Had you ever any doubts of that, Mrs. Mac- 
auley f cried Mr. M'Dow, in a tone of pique. "I 
was not aware that ever I had professed celibacy." 

"Well, then, I declare from your face I think 
you're going to get a wife now, Mr. M'Dow; you 
look so croose and canty," said Mrs. Macauley. 

" Oh, you're a witch, Mrs. Macauley ! just a 
witch," repeated Mr. M'Dow, with one of his exuber- 
ant roars. " If you had lived a hundred years ago, 
you would have stood a fair chance of being burnt ! " 

" Oh, as sure as death, then, that's just owning 
that you are going to be married, Mr, M'Dow," ex- 
claimed Mrs. Macauley, in that accent of joyful sur- 
prise which always attends the discovery of a marriage. 
"And was it not clever in me to find it out? 'deed, I 
think it was. I declare I'm glad of it, for I think it 



DESTINY. 375 

will be a great improvement to you, if she is a 
sensible, well-principled woman, which I hope she is," 

" Well, there's no keeping anything from you ladies 
— you really are most amazingly acute ! at the same 
time I'm not sensible of having committed myself in 
any shape — hoch, hoch, ho !" 

"Ah, comme il fait chaud!" exclaimed Madame 
Latour ; "le pauvre Saar Reginaal !" 

" By-the-bye, I was missing a certain gentleman," 
said Mr. M'Dow, with a significant glance directed 
towards Edith; "but I hope he's not to be long 
absent, as I'm anxious to come to an understanding 
^vith him regarding certain arrangements that shall 
be nameless, — as we're both bound for the same port, 
we must take care not to run foul of each other. He's 
had the advantage of me at the starting ; but I sus- 
pect I'll make the harbour before him — hoch, hoch, 
ho!" 

This metaphorical flourish was, of course, Greek 
and Hebrew to the whole party except Edith and Mrs. 
Macauley. The former coloured and was silent ; but 
the latter exclaimed, " Well, that's right of you, j\Ir. 
M'Dow, just to tell the truth, and not to think shame 
about it. What for should not people tell when they 
are going to be married?— and marriage such an 
honourable state ! As sure as anything, I'm very glad 
you're going to be settled at last. Benbowie, are not 
you happy that Mr. M'Dow's going to be married?" 

"Surely, surely," said Benbome ; "has she any 
money?" 



376 DESTINY. 

" Why, as to that," said Mr. M'Dow, with an air 
of great dignity, and conscious elevation of soul, " I 
have never made fortune my principal object ; I con- 
sider it beneath a man of honour and integrity to lay 
himself out for money; at the same time, I would 
not quarrel with it if it came in my Avay — and upon 
this occasion, the lady's fortune is sliootable ; indeed, I 
may say, pretty handsome." 

Edith tried to utter some complimentary words on 
the occasion, but found it very difficult to combine 
compliments with sincerity. Luckily Mrs. Macauley 
covered all deficiencies : " And what may be the 
name of the lady, Mr. M'Dow, if it is not a secret?" 

"Why, if it is, it will not be long one," returned 
Mr. M'Dow, still very consequential ; " indeed I 
strongly suspect the report had reached the country 
before myself, or I doubt if even my good friend Mrs. 
Macauley, Avith all her wit and shrewdness, would 
have taken me up so cleverly. It's amazing how a 
report of that kind spreads ! It was for that reason I 
wished to lose no time in communicating the event 
myself to my excellent friend and pawtron, for I only 
returned home last night ; but before this time to- 
morrow, I have no doubt it will be over the whole 
country. The lady's name is Miss Collina Muckle of 
Glasgow." 

" Well, I think it's a very honest-like name," said 
Mrs. Macauley. " I had once a sister they called Colin, 
but she died, poor thing, of St. Anthony's fire ; and 
Mr. Macauley had a cousin that Avas married a second 



DESTINY. 377 

marriage to a Mr. IMucklehose, a very decent man. 
I wonder if she can be any relation of his 1 He was 
Bailie Mucklehose, of Portneuk ; he was a " 

" The very same ! " interrupted Mr. M'Dow. 
"Bailie Mucklehose, of Portneuk, was the fawther 
(by his first vnie) of the lady in question ; but, at the 
time of their fawther's death, they dropped the Jiose, 
thinking the other a more fashionable name, which 
perhaps it is. The Bailie was a most highly re- 
spectable man, and left his daughters in good circum- 
stances." 

" "Well, is it not curious to think that you and I, 
Mr. M'Dow, who have been so long acquaint, are noAv 
going to be connected together by marriage 1 I declare, 
I think it is very extraordinary to see how things are 
brought about ! And I saw Bailie Mucklehose once, 
when I was in Glasgow, about five -and -thirty years 
ago. He was an honest-like, Aveel-fa'ured man, with 
a fine rosy colour. He was a " 

" Perhaps you may be able to trace a family-like- 
ness here," interrupted Mr. M'Dow, plunging his hand 
into one of his huge pockets, and drawing forth — not 
a decreet, or reclaiming petition, as in days of yore — 
but a small, oval, red morocco case, which upon being 
opened, disclosed the full-blown charms of Miss 
CoUina Muckle. 

"I am no great judge of painting, myself," said 
the exulting lover, as he handed it round; "but it 
strikes me as being most beautifully painted — ex- 
tremely high finished. I can't say I think the likeness 



378 DESTINY. 

altogether so favourable as it might have been. It 
is painted by a very young man, who has just set up." 

It is unnecessary to be so minute as the artist was, 
in depicting the charms of the original. Suffice it 
therefore to say there was the usual bad drawing and 
distortion ; there was a large ivory and vermilion 
cheek, and a smaller burnt umber one, a nose all on 
one side, round pale eyes of different sizes, a simper- 
ing mouth, a range of hair- dresser curls sitting on 
end, a wooden arm, a white gown, a yellow scarf, a 
blue cloud, and a coral necklace. 

Few and faint were the remarks passed upon Miss 
Muckle, as she made the round of the table; but 
luckily Mr. M'Dow's perceptions were too obtuse to 
enable him to feel any omissions. " I had, of course, 
to return the compliment in kind ; but I doubt the 
painter did not succeed quite as well with me. In 
fact, the clerical dress is not the most becoming, in 
my opinion, for a man to sit in ; the gown and bands 
are rather stiff and heavy, and not so fashionable- 
looldng as one could wish. However, the lady was 
pleased, and that was enough." 

"Apropos of pictures," said Edith to Lady Walde- 
grave, wishing to turn the conversation from the loves 
of Mr. M'Dow, "have you not yet been able to recol- 
lect by whom you sent your picture to me ?" 

Lady Waldegrave coloured, and in slight confusion 
answered, "Yes — no — not to a certainty. But I 
think I shall recover it yet ; and if not," she added, 
Avith mock gravity, "the loss will not be irreparable. 



DESTINY. 379 

It is one which I daresay Mrs. Macauley will be kind 
enough to replace. Won't you paint ray picture 
again, dear Mrs. Macauley*?" 

"'Deed and I will that," cried Mrs. Macauley, in a 
transport of delight. " I have painted Miss Edith's 
already, which I will show to you after breakfast; 
and I've been wanting Sir Eeginald to sit too for his 
picture ; and then when I've done your Ladyship, I'm 
sure I may be weU proud, for I'll have painted the 
three greatest beauties that ever were seen !" 

" Sir Eeginald should make a well-looked picture," 
said Mr. M'Dow ; " that's still a good likeness of him," 
pointing to a picture of him as a boy, that hung oppo- 
site, " though there's not just so much of the pickle 
in him now as there was then ; he was really a wild 
little dog in these days, as your Ladyship may remem- 
ber. You know what a work he had with you at the 
first, there was nothing like you; poor Miss Edith 
was thought nothing of ; you were his sweetheart and 
his wife, and I don't know all what, and I was to 
promise to marry him to you in my kirk, whenever 
his papa came home ; then you and he cast out about 
something or another, and I remember him coming to 
me one day that I chanced to be dining here, in a 
perfect passion. 

" ' Mr. M'Dow,' says he, ' you're never to marry 
me to Floriuda ; I shall never speak to her as long as 
I hve.' 

" ' Oh, but,' says I, ' Mr. Reginald, how can that 
be, when you have promised to marry Miss Florinda 1" 



380 DESTINY. 

'"No matter for that,' says he, 'I'm determined I'i] 
never marry her as long as I live, but I'm to marry 
Edith, and nobody else.' 

'"But if you're to change your mind this waj^,' 
says I, ' I don't think I can venture to marry you to 
anybody.' 

'"Oh, you may depend upon it, Mr. M'Dow, I'll 
never change any more, for Edith's very pretty, and 
she does whatever I bid her.' 

" ' Most capital and unanswerable reasons for 
choosing a wife,' says I, 'and I've nothing more to 
say, only you must take care that you're aff wi' the 
aidd love before ye tak' on wi' the new.' HoAvever, 
there's been no more changing, and it's aU well that 
end's well — hoch, hoch, ho ! " 

With an exclamation at the heat of the room, 
Lady Waldegrave abruptly rose, and taking Madame 
Latour's arm, passed into the adjoining apartment. 

"I hope I have not said anything that her Lady- 
ship or you could take amiss," whispered Mr. M'Dow, 
fixing his great goggling eyes on Edith, as she was 
also rising. " It was all a joke together, and amongst 
friends, of course, there's no secrets in these things. 
But, Miss Malcolm," in a still lower and more mysteri- 
ous key, " I'm really disappointed at not finding Sir 
Reginald, especially as it seems my worthy friend Glen- 
roy is not able to see me at present ; for this change 
that's going to take place in my own situation, I'm 
afraid may inconvenience Sir Reginald and you. I 
beg your pardon, Miss Malcolm, but I'll not detain 



DESTINY. 381 

you a moment," following her, and laying a great 
paw upon her arm ; " but I find I must be at the 
manse the gi^eater part of this week, and I also wish, 
if possible, to preach on Simday, though there's a 
certain awkwardness in appearing in the pulpit too, 
at such a time. And on Monday I had fixed to return 
to Glasgow, to be at the disposal of my lady fair, who 
has not positively fixed the day; but I'm in great 
hopes it will be between and the 27th, after which we 
must of course take a marriage jaunt, and when I 
return I shall be ready to do to others as has been 
done to myself — hoch, hoch, hoch, ho ! At the same 
time, rather than disappoint Sir Reginald, I would, if 
possible, endeavour to arrange my own affairs so as 
to be at his service when required. I'm really disap- 
pointed at not seeing him, for I've so much to do pre- 
paring matters at the manse that it's not in my power 
to spend the day here, and I doubt if it will be pos- 
sible for me to ride over again before I go, I've a 
mason, a wright, two painters, a sklater, and a semp- 
stress all hard at work at present, besides having all 
my OAvn papers and books to shift out of the way of 
my wife's caps and bonnets ; however, I take you 
bound. Miss Malcolm, that you're not to steal a march 
upon me in my absence — hoch, hoch, ho ! " 

Edith Avould have promised much more to get 
rid of Mr. M'Dow, and gi^'ing a hurried affirmative, 
she disengaged herself from him. And after going a 
little further into the depths of the Muckle family 
with Mrs. Macauley, he once more betook himself to 



382 DESTINY. 

Amailye, and trotted away to sui^erintend the adorn- 
ing of the manse. 

Edith found Lady Waldegrave seated at an open 
window, while the zealous Madame Latour was gently 
bedewing her with eau-de-Cologne. 

" Ah, ce vilain Monsieur Makedu ! " exclaimed she, 
turning to Edith on her entrance, " he talk so mosch, 
et sa voix est assommante ! Cette ch^re Miladi a 
les nerfs si d(§licats, he has made her vat you call 
seek!" 

Florinda gave a languid smile, while she said, " The 
truth is, I have a headache this morning — the break- 
fast-room felt oppressively hot, and Mr. M'Dow is 
certainly very shocking. All these causes combined 
have made me very useless, so not to bore you with 
my megrims, I shall confine myself to my dressing- 
room for the rest of the morning," rising as she spoke. 

Edith in vain assured her the sight of her never 
could be otherwise than pleasing, and begged at least 
that she might be allowed to attend upon her. It 
was evident that when Lady Waldegrave spoke of 
studying others, she meant only to please herself, and 
her pleasure was to shut herself up in her own apart- 
ment, where Edith left her reclining on a couch, A\ath 
a table before her, covered with flowers, poetry, and 
French novels, her lap-dog in her arms, and Madame 
Latour ever and anon touching her temples with eau- 
de-Cologne, while a soft breeze from the lake stirred 
now and then the beautiful ringlets which she had 
allowed to fall in graceful disorder about her face. 



DESTINY. 383 

It was impossible that Edith should not deeply feel 
the strange, capricious conduct of her guests, and be 
also aware that a scene was carrying on around her, 
the meaning of which she could not fathom. There 
was, on the one hand, Reginald's coldness and even dis- 
like to Lady Waldegrave ; his unwilhngness to receive 
them at Glenroy ; his anxiety to hurry on his mar- 
riage before their arrival ; his rudely absenting himself 
from them. On the other, there was a visit offered 
under circumstances certainly very peculiar, and a 
long journey undertaken for a purpose which seemed 
to hold no place in the minds of either mother or 
daughter. The latter had indeed declared her aim 
to be that of effecting a reconciliation between Lady 
Elizabeth and Glenroy ; but why, Avhile she thus laid 
open her own mind to Edith, had she avoided all con- 
fidence in return 1 Was it — could it be possible, that 
Reginald had formed an attachment to Madame Latour, 
or she to him, and that Florinda's real object was to 
accomplish a marriage between Sir Reginald and her 
favourite 1 Edith's pride and delicacy alike revolted 
at such a supposition — no, she could not think so 
meanly of either herself or him. The alienation be- 
tween Sir Reginald and Florinda seemed mutual, and 
how, then, could she be desirous of bringing about a 
union between two people — the one the object of her 
dislike, the other the friend, it appeared, of her 
warmest affections ? In vain Edith strove to unravel 
the strange heap of contradictions in which she felt 
her thoughts entangled. Never was one less fitted 



384 DESTINY. 

by nature and by education to thread the dark intri- 
cacies of the human heart. The path of love and duty 
had ever been plain before her ; she had trod it her- 
self in singleness of heart, and she dreamt not (even 
when she marked her lover's dubious steps) of the 
treacherous quicksands that lay beneath- 



CHAPTER XLIX. 

But it Avas not in the present state of the family that 
Edith could long indulge in vague reflections. She 
was soon summoned to attend her father in his study 
(so called), a room adjoining his dressing-room, into 
which he had caused himself to be wheeled in his 
gouty chair. To her surprise, she found ho had dis- 
carded his dressing-gown and night-cap, and all the 
insignia of the gout, excepting the fleecy stockings 
and cloth shoes. His countenance and manner were 
more than usually calm and benign, and altogether 
the change was no less agreeable than unexpected. 

" I am in hopes I've got the better of the enemy 
at last," said he, pointing to his feet; "the pain's 
almost entirely gone to-day ; and I've been thinking, 
that since that poor thing has taken the trouble to 
come so far to see me, it would be just as well to let 
her come here at once, and have it over, and then she 
can go when she likes, you know ; but if I'm laid up 
again, she may think herself obliged to wait, and 
there's no knowing when Ave may get rid of them ; 
and so, I think, Edith, the best thing will be for you 
just to bring them in here — yon can tell them that 

VOL. I. 2 c D. 



386 DESTINT. 

I've still a touch oi tlie gout. And, Edith, give me 
that cloak to lay on my legs, these confounded stock- 
ings make them look like posts. Stay a little, don't 
be in such a hurry. I wish from my soul it was over, 
— what the plague brought them here, and a doctor 
too 1 Eemember, I'm for none of their doctors — I'm 
neither for doctors nor ministers. And so M'Dow's 
going to get a wife ? she must have a fine taste ! They 
ought both to be sent to the treadmill. And how's that 
old goose Molly Macauley behaving herself 1 " — and so 
on, till he had landed in the Dhu Moss, and the Skir- 
ridale woods, Reginald, Norman, and the black pony. 

Aware that Lady Elizabeth could not understand, 
much less "minister to a mind diseased," her own 
being nearly in the same state, Edith was desirous, if 
possible, to prevent a meeting which she was sure 
could produce nothing but irritation on both sides. 
She therefore sought to turn his mind from the sub- 
ject altogether, or, at least, to prevail upon him to 
postpone the interview till near the time of their 
departure ; but, Avith all the obstinacy and perverse- 
ness of imbecility, Glenroy's wishes strengthened, and 
his impatience increased, under opposition even in the 
mildest form, and Edith was obliged to yield the 
point, and depart on her embassy. 

On craving an audience, she Avas admitted to Lady 
Elizabeth's dressing-room, where she found her Lady- 
ship in her robe de chamhre, holding a levee of Dr. 
Price, Eousseau, and Eosalie, and, like another Julius 
Csesar, dictating to all at once. 



DESTINY. 387 

"Dr. Price finds me pretty well this mormng," 
said she, squeezing the tip of Edith's fingers on her 
entrance; "and I have just been giving him direc- 
tions as to the sort of draught I should like to have 
to-day ; 'tis of great consequence to have these sort 
of things suited to one's taste and constitution. By- 
the-bye, perhaps Glenroy would like to have one of Dr. 
Price's draughts, they are really very pleasant, some- 
thing Hke lemonade, but not quite that neither. — Dr. 
Price, you -svill be so good as mix up a draught exactly 
the same as mine, and take it to Glenroy with my 
love. I am sure he will be pleased with this little 
mark of attention from me." 

Edith trembled at the very thoughts of such an 
embassy, and almost fancied she beheld the Chief's 
crutch upHfted to smite Dr. Price and his potion to 
the ground ; in great trepidation, she therefore en- 
treated that the kind intention might be at least post- 
poned, and then delivered the message with which she 
had been charged, though in rather softer terms than 
she had received it. 

Having come expressly, as was supposed, for the 
purpose of seeing her husband, it was naturally to be 
concluded that her Ladyship's mind would be quite 
prepared for the interview ; instead of which she fell 
into a childish flutter at the first mention of it. 

"You have taken me quite by surprise, my dear; 
I really feel quite overcome ; any sort of agitation is 
so dangerous for me in the present state of my nerves. 
Eosalie, fetch Dr. Price back immediately ; you shall 



388 DESTINY. 

hear what he says ; I am entirely guided by him. 
Eousseau, leave the guitar for the present, take my 
music, and look out — how my heart beats ! I do 
assure you, my dear, it will be a prodigious exertion 
for me to meet Glenroy, poor man, at present ! " 

Edith was so utterly void of affectation herself 
that she could not comprehend its effects upon others, 
and she therefore gave her Ladyship credit for the 
reality of her tremors ; she begged she would take 
her own time, was sure her papa would -wish to do 
what was most agreeable to her, and so on, till the 
return of Dr. Price. 

The Doctor was a stupid, inoffensive man, who, for 
two hundred a year, a luxurious home, and his travel- 
hng expenses, was contented to trot between his own 
room and Lady Elizabeth's about twenty times a day, 
to compound little harmless draughts and powders for 
her, and to have his advice constantly asked, and 
never taken. 

The result of the consultation however was, that 
her Ladyship heroically resolved to go through (as she 
termed it) with the part she had to perform. Dr. 
Price was again dismissed, and Edith desired to wait 
until she should be dressed. Eosalie was then sum- 
moned, and Lady EHzabeth, in spite of her tremors, 
betaking herself to the labours of the toilet, was soon 
so completely engrossed by them, that the dreaded 
interview seemed almost forgotten. 

"I always disHked black," said she, addressing 
Edith; "there's something so sombre about it, one 



DESTINY. 389 

never looks dressed ; otherwise I'm not sure that it is 
actually unbecoming to me. It sets off a fair skin, but 
then it obliges one to use a souprmi more rouge than 
I like. Apro])Os, my dear, one comfort is, that black 
satin shoes are the most becoming things possible for 
the feet — all men think so. These are made by Mell- 
notte, and I think are perfect," added she, while her 
maid, with great exertion, was forcing them on, " and 
fit me admirably. Florinda has got my foot. A 
model of it was taken for the Gallery at Florence — in 
fact. Princess Pauline was quite jealous of it. My 
large gold ear-rings and bracelets, Rosalie — and — 
what shall I put on my head 1 a cap looks so particu- 
larly dowdy in black. My purple hat and feathers — 
purple, my dear, you know, is a sort of mourning. 
There, I think, that looks very well — the feathers the 
least in the world more to the left side, and a ringlet 
or two pulled a little more down. Now," contemplat- 
ing herself from head to foot in the mirror, and jerk- 
ing her head and shoulders, "my gloves and shawl, 
Eosalie. Now comes the true test of taste," turning 
to Edith — " in fact, nobody that has not been abroad 
can put on a shawl." And at length, equipped like 
one of the dUgantes in " Les Modes cle Paris" her Lady- 
ship set forth, leaning on Edith ; then suddenly stop- 
ping, she exclaimed, " But I must have my dogs, and 
I am sure Glenroy will be delighted with them — 
Bijou is such a love ! " 

Here Edith was obliged to interpose, and, aware 
of her father's abhorrence of lap-dogs, with much 



390 DESTINY. 

difficulty succeeded in prevailing on her Ladyship to 
dispense with their attendance for the present. 

On arriving at the door of the study there was 
another demur. 

" I hope it is not necessary that I should say much 
to Glenroy of the death of your poor brother, my 
dear. Such a subject would quite overcome me at 
present. I must try to rouse and amuse him a little, 
poor man — don't you think so ? Another time I shall 
take my guitar, but perhaps it would be rather too 
much at first — indeed I don't feel equal to the exer- 
tion." 

Edith, with tears in her eyes, entreated she would 
make no allusion to the death of her brother, but 
merely converse on general subjects ; and after a little 
more delay they entered into the presence of the Chief. 
He made an attempt, with the help of his stick, to 
rise to receive his lady, who advanced, and with a 
very good grace, saluted him after her fashion ; then 
seating herself by him, laid her hand on his arm. 

" It's a long Avhile since you and I met, Glenroy, 
and I'm sorry to find you so great an invalid, though, 
'l5on my word, I think you look wonderfully well, 
considering. You find the gout very painful, I'm 
afraid. My poor brother, Heywood, is quite a martjrr 
to it. He really looks almost as old as you do. In 
fact, he is completely broken down ; and, do you 
know, I am much afraid his son. Lord Lanville, shows 
symptoms of it already, which is very alarming. He 
is a charming young man, not actually handsome, but 



DESTINY. 391 

extremely didingni in his appearance and manners. 
He is a great favourite of mine, and quite hi cheri des 
dajnes. He is so very sensible and attentive — quite 
amialde ; but he certainly is delicate, and I know my 
poor brother is at times "svi'etched about him. An 
only son ! Conceive how dreadful if he were to lose 
him!" 

Here Glenroy burst out, " And why should he not 
lose an only son as well as his neighbours 1 I know 
what it is to have lost an only son. My Norman 
was taken from me whether I would or not ; and — 
and " He could not go on. 

"Ah, true !" said his lady, in a tone of commisera- 
tion; "that was very sad. But we won't talk of 
these things, Glenroy ; they are too much for us. You 
must not allow yourself to get hipped — you ought to 
come to town for a little in the season. We are to 
have Pasta next winter, and I have already secured 
an excellent box. Her Medea is quite perfect. I am 
sure you Avould be enchanted with it. Her despair 
at the loss of her children Avas absolutely too much. 
I assure you I was quite overcome." 

Edith saw a storm ready to burst forth, and 
hastily interposed. 

"You have got a more pleasing sight to show 
papa in Lady Waldegrave. I am sure London con- 
tains nothing more beautiful." 

"Very true, very true," said her Ladyship, with a 
nod of approbation. "Floriiida ispeirie de graces, and 
she will cause a prodigious sensation in the world. 



392 DESTINY. 

In fact, wherever she has appeared, you can form no 
idea of the admiration she has excited. She has, of 
course, already had many splendid offers— at least 
what would have been splendid for any one else — 
but Florinda is too young to marry yet. Early mar- 
riages are foolish things, you know, Glenroy." 

A sort of growl was here ejaculated by Glenroy. 
" And late ones worse," he muttered to himself. 

" The weather is so fine, I hope you will soon be 
able to get out, papa," said Edith. Then turning to 
Lady Elizabeth, " Perhaps you will take a drive to- 
day in papa's low phaeton '2 " 

" No, thank you, my dear ; I seldom go out when 
I am in the country ; and besides, while I am here, I 
wish to devote as much of my time as possible to 
Glenroy; that, together with my letters and music, 
will fill up my mornings entirely. Apropos, I must 
bring my guitar next tiine. I have been practising 
that charming little romance to sing to you, Glenroy, 
' Vous me quittez pour oiler a la gloire/ I think you 
will like it." 

"I'm for no guitars, nor anything of the kind," in- 
terrupted Glenroy impatiently. "I take very little 
pleasure now even in my own piper, though he's the 
best in the country, and has carried off the Highland 
Society's i^rize three times at the competition. And 
he was his foster-brother too." Here Glenroy's voice 
faltered, and allowed his lady to strike in. 

" Ah, well, we won't say any more about that — we 
shall talk a little about my daughter." 



DESTINY. 393 

''Your daughter! what's your daughter to mef 
cried Glenroy peevishly. 

"There's no relationship, certainly," said her Lady- 
ship condescendingly, " but circumstances, you know, 
have formed a sort of connection, and I should have 
brought her with me just now to show her to you, 
but she has got a little of a migraine this morning ; 
she has become rather subject to them of late, and I 
should be very uneasy if I hadn't the most perfect re- 
liance on Dr. Price. You must allow me to present 
Dr. Price to you, Glenroy ; I am sure you will like 
him ; he is quite a superior person. I assure you 1 
consider my life perfectly safe in his hands." 

" I'll have none of your doctors," cried Glenroy ; 
" I desire never to see the face of a doctor — a set of 

ignorant, upsetting What did the doctors do for 

— for — for my Norman f 

"Ah, we won't say anything about that, Glenroy ! 
Let us talk of something else. You have never been 
abroad, I believe. Do you know, I really think you 
would find great pleasure in making a little excursion 
through France and Italy. You needn't stay long in 
one place, you know; and I think moving about 
might be of service to you ; and, by-the-bye, I can re- 
commend the best creature in the world as a courier 
for you, quite a treasure, — a Greek, and speaks six 
different languages. My nephew. Lord Lanville, 
certainly benefited very much by change of climate. 
I assure you I was quite uneasy about him when he 
first joined us at Paris ; for you know an only son 



394 DESTINY. 

one is always anxious about; and his poor father 
quite dotes upon him ; indeed he is deserving of it, 
for he is a most superior young man, and I have a 
real regard for him. Besides, to let you into a little 
family secret, he is distractedly in love with my 
daughter, and I think she is attached to him. But I 
don't wish her to marry yet. She can at any time 
form a brilliant alliance. In fact, with Florinda's 
rank, beauty, fortune, talents, she may unquestionably 
be considered the first match in the kingdom." 

"The first match in the kingdom!" exclaimed 
Glenroy, in a transport of rage; "what makes her 
the first match in the kingdom 1 A Avoman — a poor 
insignificant woman, to be the first match in the 
kingdom ! The first match in the kingdom is the 
man who Avill come after me, and that man's Regi- 
nald Malcolm ! And if my son had been alive, he 
would have been the first match in the kingdom ! A 
woman to be the first match in the kingdom ! " and 
Glenroy actually swelled out with passion. 

To this burst his lady gave a little weak, angry, 
aftected laugh, then said, "You certainly forget, 
Glenroy, who my daughter is ! Lady Waldegrave is 
a peeress in her own right, and " 

"A snuff" of tobacco in her own right! Pretty 
rights, to be sure ; I wonder what right she has to be 
the first match in the kingdom ! What are your peers 
and peeresses to me ! creatui'es made by a word of a 
mouth or a scratch of a pen ! The king could make 
a peeress of a turnip -shaw, if he chose — he could 



i 



DESTINY. 395 

make Molly Macauley a peeress, if he pleased, to- 
morrow ; but I defy all the kings on the face of the 
earth to make the Chief of Glenroy ! " 

"Certainly the king cannot make a savage," re- 
torted the lady, quivering with indignation, and rising 
as she spoke ; but Glenroy despised her too much even 
to hear what she said, but kept muttering and mur- 
muring to himself, " The first match in the kingdom ! 
A woman — any woman, to be the first match in the 
kingdom ! Who ever heard of a woman being a chief? 
A woman's just as capable of being a chief as — as this 
stick," stamping his own with an air of defiance on 
the carpet. "Reginald Malcolm, my heir and suc- 
cessor, is the first match in the kingdom, either of 
man or woman ! " 

Edith had made many ineff'ectual attempts to 
interpose her still small voice between the incensed 
parties, but in vain ; neither of them would listen to 
a word she had to say ; and all she could do was to 
follow Lady Elizabeth, as she tottered out of the 
room, her flounces and feathers vibrating, and her 
whole dress seeming as though it were a party in her 
exasperated feelings. She declared her determination 
of instantly leaving the house. She had been treated 
with the greatest disrespect ; her daughter most im- 
properly spoken of. It was impossible to remain 
another night under the same roof; go she would; 
she must see Dr. Price and Eousseau immediately, 

Edith strove to soothe her as she best could, but in 
vain ; till at length, with tears in her eyes, she alluded 



396 DESTINY. 

to the shock her father's mind had received by the 
loss of her brother, and feehngly deplored the little 
aberrations of memory he had been subject to ever 
since that sad event. 

" Oh ! now I understand," said her Ladyship, 
Ijrightening up all at once.^"I understand," tapping 
lier forehead significantly with her forefinger. " Poor 
man ! but I ought to have been made aware of that 
circumstance before. It was quite wrong to conceal 
it from me. Poor man ! I am quite sorry for him ; 
at the same time, nothing can excuse the very im- 
proper manner in which he spoke of my daughter. 
Sir Reginald Malcolm to be compared to her ! too 
ridiculous ! A person of no consequence whatever, 
and an uncommonly disagreeable man. He the first 
match in the kingdom ! Ha, ha, ha ! — poor man. I 
— but I must see Dr. Price directly. I have been 
excessively agitated and alarmed." And Dr. Price 
being summoned, Edith withdrew, and returned to 
her father. She found him still boiling over, like a 
huge caldron ; and she was immediately assailed 
Avith a toiTent of invective against his lady. Upon 
attempting to explain away the oflTence, it was im- 
mediately turned against herself. 

"I always knew you were a weak creature," said 
he, addressing her with an inflamed visage. " How 
could you be anything else, brought up by that idiot 
Molly Macauley ; though, to give her her due, she's 
a King Solomon compared to that other woman. 
What could you mean by bringing a woman that's 



DESTINY, 397 

not in her senses to molest me? — A woman that's 
mad ! And you're very Httle better, to bring her to 
me in the state of health that I'm in. She's enough 
to make any man mad ! I shall quit my house if I'm 
to be tormented in this manner. Her daughter the 
first man in the kingdom ! " 

" Match, papa. She only meant as " 

" Now, hold your tongue, and don't contradict me. 
Man and match is all one. I know what she said, 
and what she meant. Her daughter, forsooth ! 
What's her daughter? Keginald never could bear 
her. He showed his sense, and I should never have 
let them enter my door, considering how they behaved 
to him. And where's Eeginald? — And — and send 
Molly Macauley and Benbowie. Are then away to 
the shooting too, that I'm left alone all day?" 

Edith gladly consigned the Chief to the hands of 
his two faithful adherents, to whom he had the luxury 
of relating his injuries at full length ; more fortunate 
in that respect than his lady, who found less willing 
and sympathising auditors in her daughter and 
Madame Latour. 



CHAPTER L. 

Sir Eeginald returned from shooting, and on enter- 
ing the dining-room before dinner, he found only 
Madame Latour, Mrs. Macauley, Dr. Price, and two or 
three chance guests of no note, who kejDt apart with 
Benbowie. Lady Elizabeth was commonly the last to 
appear, and Edith was sitting with Lady Waldegrave, 
who chose to remain in her o^vn apartment, on the 
plea of continued indisposition, 

" I wonder what all you young people are made of 
now-a-days," said ]\lrs. Macauley, looking with eyes 
of affectionate comjmssion on Sir Reginald, who cer- 
tainly had nothing of the free and joyous air of the 
sportsman, but looked languid and dispirited. " You 
are all so tender now, so different from what young 
people were in my day, when we were so stout and 
hearty! There's Lady Waldegrave been shut up in 
her room the whole of this fine sunny day, not well ; 
there's you " 

"I hope — there is nothing " stammered Sir 

Reginald to Madame Latour. 

" Ah, oui," said Madame Latour, with a deep sigh, 
and a shake of her head. " Ladi Waldegrave est un 



DESTINY. 399 

pen malade depuis ce matin ; c'est sa sensibility ex- 
treme ! ah ! si elle avoit la tranquillity de Mademoi- 
selle Malconib, votre sceur ! " and Madame Latour 
heaved another sigh. 

Eeginald was silent for a few moments, as if 
mastering his agitation, then said in a calm tone, "I 
trust Lady Waldegrave's indisposition is not of a serious 
nature. Probably it is occasioned by the uncommon 
heat, Avhich has been almost too much for me. Miss 
Malcolm is not my sister," he added, in a less firm 
voice. 

" Ah, que je suis bete ! how I do meestak ! Assure- 
ment elle ne vous ressemble nullement, elle est si 
calme ! si tranquille ! What you call enseepede — 
n'est ce pas?" 

Eeginald coloured, and was silent ; but Mrs. Mac- 
auley had caught at the Avord insipid as somehow 
coupled with Edith, and she exclaimed, " Insipid ! 
You're not surely meaning to call IVIiss Edith insipid 1 
or I'm thinking you don't know the meaning of the 
word, Madame. Insipid, you know, means wersh, and 
iversh means insipid ; and I can tell you she's anything 
but icersh, though she's so sweet and gentle." 

"Ah, pardon, Madame Macalie, si — if I do speak 
of Mademoiselle Malcomb vat is not propaar — c'est 
une personne tres aimable, j\Iiss Malcomb ; et quoique 
sa beaut6 ne soit pas si eblouissante, si parfaite que 
celle de Ladi Waldegrave, elle est tres bien — vat you 
call prettie well." 

" Pretty well ! " repeated Mrs. Macauley, kindling 



400 DESTINY. 

u]) at this fresh insult. "Pretty well! did I ever 
hear the like of that?" Then softening down as 
quickly as she blazed up, " But though I'm thinking 
you're no just so ignorant of our language as you would 
make us trow, yet I see you cannot express yourself 
properly, or you never would speak in such a way of 
Miss Edith, and so I should not be angry Avith you. 
Pretty well ! I cannot think enough of it ! Pretty 
well means just well enough ; and to call Glenroy's 
daughter just Avell enough ! " 

Madame Latour either did not or affected not to 
understand Mrs. Macauley better than Mrs. Macauley 
understood her ; but seeing her displeased, pretended 
to conciliate her. 

" Pardonnez moi, chere Madame Macalie, assur^ment 
vous not onderstand — if you tink me capable to say 
de tings of Meess Malcomb pour vous offenser ; c'est 
une personne de beaucoup de merite dans son genre ; 
elle n'a pas les graces ni I'eclat de Ladi Waldegrave, 
ni son air distingu^, ni sa sensibihte extreme." 

"I don't very well know what you're saying, 
Madame," said Mrs. Macauley, rather impatiently, 
"for I'm no great French scholar; but I can tell you, 
though Miss Edith does not give herself any grand 
airs, she's as ladylike in her quiet genteel way as any 
lady in the land ; and though she may not be so show^^ 
and catching-like, for all that, hers is the face nobod)' 
could ever weary of, it's so good, and so sweet, and so 
sensible, and so loving too. I've often thought how 
siie answered to a verse of one of our Scotch songs. 



DESTINY. 401 

111 let you hear it, and see if it's not like Miss Edith." 

And she repeated, slowly and distinctly, the most 

l)eautiful, perhaps, of all Burns's beautiful verses : 

" As ill the bosom o' the stream 

The moonbeam dwells at dewy e'en, 
So trembling, pure, was tender love 
Within the breast o' bonny Jean." 

"Ah! quel amour ti\ansi !" said Madame Latour, 
with a shudder, as she turned to Sir Eeginald. At 
that moment Lady Elizabeth and Edith entered, and 
the conversation of course dropped. 

All traces of the matrimonial fracas had entirely 
disappeared from Lady Elizabeth's aspect, for the 
variety of her frivolous pursuits seldom allowed her 
mind to dwell long on one subject. Satisfied that 
she had amply fulfilled her duty by the visit of con- 
dolence to her husband, she Avas now decked out in 
pink and silver, and smiles, and short petticoats, and 
white shoes. 

"Florinda has not been quite well this morning. 
Dr. Price, and I think she is rather out of spirits; 
'tis dull for her, you know, to be in the country ; 
however, she has promised to join us in the evening, 
othermse I must make a point of her seeing you. Dr. 
Price. I wish I could have had her picture as I found 
her just now — in my hfe I never beheld anything so 
perfect ! She was sitting at a table, her cheek resting 
on her hand — you know her attitude — her hair falling 
over her shoulders — 

' Tender or free, in smiles or sadness drest. 
The reigning humour ever suits her best.' " 

VOL. I. 2 D D. 



102 DESTINY. 

" 'Deed, then, I think, begging your Ladyship's par- 
don, the fewer humours people have, so much the 
better," observed Mrs. ^lacualey. 

" II n'y a rien de plus ennuyeux que les personnes 
qui n'ont qu'un seul ton — N'est il pas vrai?" said 
Madame Latour. 

Su' Eeginald looked as if he understood the innu- 
endo, and he answered in French: "The human 
mind has often been compared to a musical instru- 
ment ; perhaps most minds may be capable of giving 
a variety of tones, but it is not every one who has the 
power of calling them forth." 

" Ah, oui, mais le jeu ne ^•aut pas la chandelle, to 
what you call draw out cette espece de personne ; les 
gens reservt^s ressemblent, a mon avis, a cet instrument 
de votre pays le bag-peep, which it take such a force 
to sound ;" and her glance was directed to Edith, who 
sat near, reading. 

" The analogy is not just," replied Sir Eeginald 
gravely; "there are minds like the organ, of great 
power and melody when skilfully called forth; but 
it is not every hand that can touch the right chords, 
or every ear that can appreciate their excellence." 
And he sighed as he said it. 

"Ah, oui, c'est vat I do say, — il faat de la syra- 
pathie dans le gout; sans sympathie I'^me ne pent etre 
d'accord, et sans harmonie le co?ur ne vaut rien." 

Sir Eeginald turned abruptly from JNIadame Latour 
to Edith, and, as if he felt that he owed her some re- 
paration for the innuendoes that had so evidently been 



DESTINY. 403 

levelled against her, he devoted himself to her until 
they were summoned to dinner. 

On leaving the dining-room, Edith was fastened 
upon by Lady Elizabeth, who again appropriated her 
to her own particular use, as an auditor. 

" You will go to Florinda, Madame Latour, and, 
with my love, tell her I desire to see her in the 
drawing-room by-and-by. — You, my dear," to Edith, 
" will accompany me to my dressing-room, where we 
shall be quiet, as I must have a little talk vnth. you. 
I have much to say, and I shall not have much time, 
as, of course, we cannot remain long here. And, by- 
the-bye, I have never properly introduced you to my 
darlings. I am obliged to keep them in my dressing- 
room for fear of your large dogs ; and that Avas one 
of the things I wanted to say to you ; you really must 
have those creatures shut up. You must know, I got 
Amor and Amoretta from Cardinal Caccia-Piatti, an 
uncommonly fascinating, fine-looking person. He paid 
me great attention when I was at Rome. I daresay 
you find this room rather warm, but I am obliged 
to have a large fire on account of my dogs ; they feel 
the cold of this climate di-eadfully. Dr. Price was 
of opinion that Araoretta's last attack Avas decidedly 
rheumatic. Unluckily her dog-basket has a Avindow, 
and I think the cold air had streamed in upon her, so 
I was obliged to have it closed up, which makes it 
dull, and I don't think she has ever liked it since. 
If it were not for my eider-down quilt, I don't know 
how I should have kept them alive. That Cardinal 



404 DESTINY. 

really was a delightful person ; he thought my pro- 
nunciation of the language quite perfect. When you 
go, you must make a point of getting introduced to 
him. I think Glem^oy would hke him." So flowed 
on the babbling stream of her Ladyship's eloquence ; 
and even Edith's patience, great as it was, was nearly 
exhausted before it could be brought to a cessation, 
or she could prevail on her to return to the dra"\ving- 
room. On entering the apartment, Edith beheld 
Lady Waldegrave and Madame Latour seated on a 
sofa, and Sir Reginald leaning over the back of it. 
A blush was on Florinda's cheek ; but traces of deep 
emotion were visible on Eeginald's features, as he 
bent his head towards her, and spoke in a low voice. 
Madame Latour was, or affected to be, engrossed by 
Fido, whom she was fondling with true French 
vivacity. A strange undefinable something, she could 
not tell what, struck 'Edith at the sight. "This 
odious Madame Latour," thought she. It was, how- 
ever, a mere sudden sensation, unattended by any 
train of reflections, for as Lady Elizabeth advanced, 
Reginald hastily broke off from Lady Waldegrave, 
and, turning abruptly round, joined the rest of the 
gentlemen, who were standing at some distance. 

" How charmingly you look, my love ! " exclaimed 
Lady Ehzabeth, quitting her hold of Edith for a 
moment, to embrace her daughter. "And what a 
very pretty dress! that is Madame Belcour, I am 
sure ; how I wish I had seen it, and I should have 
ordered one the same— how extremely becoming!" 



DESTINY. 405 

wath ail air of chagrin. Then in a i^eevish tone, 
" But you ought to have more flowers in your hair, 
my dear child; only look at the size of my head, 
which you know is far from being outri^." 

" You forget I have had a headache this morning, 
mamma," said Lady Waldegrave, evidently annoyed ; 
"consequently my head is not able to bear much." 

"Absurd, my dear!" in a peevish voice; "who 
ever heard of a headache, or anything else, being an 
excuse for being ill dressed ? If you choose to say it 
is your fancy to dress so and so, I can understand 
that, and it may pass ; but I do assure you it is very 
bad taste to make anything of that sort a matter of 
necessity. You must expect to be pitied if you do ; 
and when once a person comes to be pitied, there is 
an end of her consequence for ever." 

"Then pray, mamma, suffer me to hide my 
diminished head quietly in this corner," said Lady 
Waldegrave, trying to laugh away her mother's 
absurdity. 

" Ah, vous et moi, miladi," said Madame Latour, 
with an air of mock humility, " devons nous contenter 
de porter des fleurs sur la tete ; mais quant k Ladi 
Waldegrave, les fleurs naissent sous ses pas. Et, 
apropos, Saar Eeginaal, est ce que votre fleur favorite 
croit dans cette triste contree ? vat you call Forget-me- 
not?" But Sir Reginald was by this time deeply 
absorbed in a book, and made no answer. " Voyons 
done ce qui vous occupe," cried Madame Latour, play- 
fully drawing the book from before him; "de la 



406 DESTINY. 

poesie ! " and she ran over the lines, as if going to 
read them aloud; then handing the book to Lady 
Waldegrave, "Lizez done, chere miladi, votre voix 
charmante enabellira meme ces vers." 

Lady Waldegrave took the book without answer- 
ing, glanced her eye over the page, and as she closed 
it, exclaimed, "Ah, there tvas love !" 

The play was Count Basil; the lines v/hich had 
drawn forth the remark were those touching and 
beautiful ones, uttered as he gazes on Victoria for the 
last time — 

" To be so near thee, and for ever parted ! 
For ever lost ! what art thou now to me ? 
Shall the departed gaze on thee again ? 
Shall I glide past thee in the midnight hour, 
Whilst thou perceiv'st it not, and think'st, perhaps, 
'Tis but the mournful breeze that passes by ?" 

Sir Reginald's eyes had been fixed on Florinda 
intently as she read ; then suddenly starting, he said 
in a hurried manner, "Edith, won't you give us some 
music?" 

"Do you remember, Edith, you promised to sing 
me one of your Scotch songs f said Lady Walde- 
grave gaily. "Pray let me have one of your oldest 
of old ballads ; and don't lose time," she added in a 
whisper, " while mamma is busy talking to that very 
civil, attentive gentleman, who looks as if he would 
listen for half a century." 

Edith arose, and, as she turned towards the piano, 
she saAv and was struck with the expression of Regi- 
nald's countenance ; his eyes were fixed on the spot 



DESTINY. 407 

wliere Lady AValdegrave and Madame Latoui- weie 
seated, while she passed him unnoticed, unheeded. A 
«trauge pang shot through her heart ; her eyes filled 
with tears; she could not define the nature of her 
feelings ; she would have shrunk from the attempt, 
even had it been in her power, as she would have 
done from the point of a dagger. Slie began to busy 
herself in turning over the music, as if seeking for 
something, though she knew not what, till her agita- 
tion subsided; and having selected that most beau- 
tiful of all Scottish airs, Gilderoy, she began to sing a 
verse of the old ballad. She possessed from nature a 
melodious voice, a fine ear, and an intuitive refinement 
of taste — gifts which, if they did not constitute her a 
first-rate musician, rendered her at least a very touch- 
ing and delightful one. But on the present occasion, 
Edith's powers seemed all to have failed her — her 
voice was weak and tremulous, her ear Avas uncon- 
scious of sound, and all her perceptions Avere of a 
mixed and painful nature. Aware of her failure, she 
rose from the instrument, and faltering out an excuse, 
begged some one else would take her place. Lady 
Waldegrave attempted some faint commendations, 
then rose, and was led by Sir Reginald to the harp. 

Poor Edith's failure was only rendered more con- 
spicuous by Florinda's display. She was in brilliant 
voice, and, with perfect self-possession, played and 
sang several beautiful Italian and French airs, in the 
manner of a perfectly well-taught and highly-finished 
musician. Lady Waldegrave Avas much too Avell bred 



408 DESTINY. 

to practise any of the little, commonplace, paltry airs 
of coquetry ; at the same time, it might be discovered 
by a discerning eye that admiration was the aim and 
scope of all her actions, the stimulus to all her powers. 
Nothing could appear more natural and graceful than 
her movements and attitudes, nothing more simple 
and unstudied than her A^aried modes of charming. 
But as La Bruy^re says — "Combien d'art pour rentrer 
dans la nature ! " 

Symptoms of impatience were now visible in the 
countenance of Lady Elizabeth, and Rousseau and the 
guitar were summoned, which seemed the signal for 
her daughter to retire from the field. With an excla- 
mation at the heat of the room and the beauty of the 
night, she rose and passed into the small drawing-room. 
A few minutes elapsed "wdthout any one following. 

"Ladi Waldegrave a laiss6 ses gants," said Madame 
Latour, looking to Sir Reginald, as she held them up. 
Reginald extended his hand to take them, then turned 
hastily away, and addressed some remark to the per- 
son next him. 

"I will take Florinda her gloves," said Edith, with 
an elasticity of spirit she did not stop to analyse, and 
could not easily have accounted for ; and, without 
noticing Madame Latour's look of displeasure, she 
seized the gloves, and followed Lady Waldegrave. 
The glow of excitement which had so lately lighted 
up her beautiful face had fled, and the same expres- 
sion of languid dissatisfaction was visible which Edith 
had formerly observed. 



DESTINY. 409 

" I fear you have fatigued yourself by singing too 
much," said Edith. And she proceeded to praise her 
musical powers with all the ardour of a generous 
and sincere admiration. Lady AYaldegrave appeared 
but little gratified with the commendations, for she 
received them slightly, and her thoughts seemed 
wandering while Edith spoka 

" I fear you are unwell, dear Florinda," said Edith, 
at a loss to account for the coldness and abstraction 
of one Avho, but a few minutes before, had been all 
animation and brilliancy. 

" Oh no, not ill," replied Lady WaldegTave, in the 
accent of one who felt rather annoyed than soothed 
by the inquiry. 

"Then surely you can have nothing to vex or dis- 
quiet you," said Edith softly. " Ah, Florinda, if you 
have, would that you thought me worthy to share 
your confidence !" 

"You woidd be shocked were I to tell you the 
cause of my vapeurs" said Lady Waldegrave, with 
affected solemnity ; " how shall I own to you that I 
am a little whimsical ; and a little — the very least 
grain in the world — capricious?" Edith felt hurt at 
the taunting manner in which she was treated, and 
remained silent. 

"I see you are shocked, Edith, love, at such an 
acknowledgment ; most people would as soon confess 
that they lie and steal as that they are in the least 
degree capricious ; but for my part, I have none of 
that virtuous abhorrence to a little caprice; it certainly 



410 DESTINY. 

renders the character, or at least the manners, more 
piqiiant ; for example, I am tired of singing sentimental 
songs all the evening, and that you will call being 
capricious, and I now wish to amuse myself by talking 
nonsense ; but I fear you are too wise to talk nonsense, 
Edith r' 

"Not on proper subjects," answered Edith gravely, 
"but " 

" My dear Edith ! for heaven's sake, don't use 
such an old governess phrase as 'proper subjects!' 
But, indeed, I am not aware we were upon any 
important subject in particular — were we, Edith f 

" You had not thought it so, else you would not 
have asked the question," replied Edith, coldly but 
gently. 

"Ah, I am the most forgetful creature in the 
world, especially when there is such a moon — such a 
lovely moon, to gaze upon ! Come, let us enjoy its 
beams, and escape the tinkle of mamma's guitar out 
of doors." There was an old-fashioned glass door 
which opened upon a sort of terrace Avalk, and she 
stepped out. Edith and she took two or three turns 
backwards and forwards, admiring the beauty of the 
night, while Florinda occasionally warbled a few notes 
or repeated a line or two of Petrarch, then half pet- 
tishly exclaimed, " Have you nothing to say on the 
charms of moonlight, Edith 1" 

Edith, roused from the reverie into which she had 
fallen, replied, " Nothing of my own, but I could be 
eloquent in the words of Ossian, only I suspect you 



DESTINY. 411 

could not enter into my enthusiasm for our mountain 
bard. Do you remember the exquisite opening of 

Thalaba?— 

' How beautiful is night ! 
A dewy freshness fills the silent air ; 
No mist obscures, nor cloud, nor speck, nor stain, 
Breaks the serene of heaven ; 
In fuU-orb'd glory yonder moon divine 
Rolls through the dark-blue depths ! ' " 

"Such a description is quite illustrative of the 
night," said Florinda carelessly; "but it is too cold 
and abstracted for me — and so is the night itself, to 
speak the truth. It wants the charm of an Italian 
moonlight — the rich, warm, glowing, indescribable 
charm which there pervades the atmosphere and fills 
the heart ; as some one, Madame de Stael, I believe, 
has well said, the very perfume of the flowers in 
Italy produces something of melody on the senses, 
and, to use her own words, ' Vous eprouvez un bien- 
etre si parfait, un si grand amiti6 de la nature pour 
vous, que rien n'alt^re les sensations agT^ables qu'elle 
vous cause.' This is what she says of Naples — dear, 
dear, loved Naples ! " exclaimed she fervently, as at 
that moment they were joined by Madame Latour 
and Sir Reginald. 

"I cannot join in your eulogium on Italy," said 
Edith, " as it is still a sealed book to me. But here 
are those who will, I have no doubt. Were you, 
Reginald, as much enamoured of Naples as Florinda 
seems to be?" 

" Quite," he replied, in an emphatic tone. 



412 DESTINY. 

"And, like her, do you too look with something 
of disdain on the loveliest of our Highland nights?" 

" Not with disdain ; but with more of admiration 
than love." 

"I thought you had loved your own country, 
Eeginald," said Edith pensively. 

"I have a great respect for it," replied he ; "love, 
perhaps, is peculiar to Italy," he added, with a 
sigh. 

"Ah, oui," cried Madame Latour, "admirer, re- 
specter, c'est une chose, — aimer, adorer, e'en est une 
autre ! par exemple, j'ai un profond respect pour vos 
liautes montagnes, et pour vos sombres lacs — vat you 
call locks ; pour vos forets de pins — vat you call feers ; 
et que quelques personnes appellent 'le deuil de I'et^,' 
— et en verit6 il y a trop de deuil dans vos tableaux — 
ils sont tristes ; j'aime comme Saar Eeginaal le climat 
a la fois passionn6 et riant, tel que celui de la belle 
Italie." 

"And I," said Edith, "however much I might 
admire, and even enjoy, the fair skies and the flowers 
and the melody and the odours of Italy, am sure I 
should ever love the clouds and the mountains, the firs 
and the heather, of my own native land ; to me the 
very hooting of these owls has a charm, as associated 
in my mind with all that I love, or ever loved." 

She stopped, and blushed at her own warmth. 

" Ah, ma chere ! " exclaimed Madame Latour, 
gently pressing her arm, and looking in her face with 
a smile, " croyez moi, c'est de I'amiti^, non de I'amour, 



DESTINY. 413 

que vous avez eprouve ; le hibou est I'emblenie do la 
sagesse, jamais on ne I'associa avec Famour." 

Edith coloured deeply — she tried to laugh, but she 
could not succeed, for a sigh from Sir Eeginald smote 
her heart. He walked slowly away, then returned 
■\vith the air of one who is irresolute whether to go or 
stay. Madame Latoui^ now complained of " a frisson," 
and, shivering, hurried into the house. Florinda, 
Reginald, and Edith remained some time longer, but 
the two former showed no inclination to converse ; 
and after some fruitless attempts on Edith's part, 
they all followed Madame Latour's example, and soon 
after separated for the night. 



END OF VOL. I. 



Printed hy R. & R. Clark, EJinhurgh. 



BENTLEY'S EDITION, 



THE WORKS OF JANE AUSTEN. 

THE ONLY COMPLETE EDITION. 

Library Edition in Six Volumes, crown Svo, well printed and hound in cloth, 
with a Memoir and Portrait of the Authoress, and Five Illustrations on Steel 
by Pickering, 36s. Each Volume can be had also separately, price 6s. 



I. 

SENSE AND SENSIBILITY. 

"I have now read over again all 
Miss Austen's novels. Charming they 
are. There are in the -world no com- 
positions which approach nearer to per- 
fection." — Macaulay's Journal. 

II. 

PRIDE AND PREJUDICE. 

" The perfect type of a novel of com- 
mon life ; the story is so concisely 
and dramatically told, the language so 
simple, the shades of human character 
so clearly presented, and the operation 
of various motives so delicately traced, 
attest this gifted woman to have been 
the perfect mistress of her art." — 
Arnold's English Literature. 

" One of the best of Miss Austen's 
unequalled works. How perfectly it is 
vTitten ! "—Spectator. 

111. 

EMMA. 

" Shakespeare has neither equal nor 
second ; but among the writers who 
have approached nearest to the manner 
of the great master we have no hesita- 
tion in placing Jane Austen, a woman 
of whom England is justly proud." — 
Macaulay's Essays. 

IV. 

MANSFIELD PARK. 

" Miss Austen has a talent for de- 
scribing the involvements and feelings 
und characters of ordinary life which is 
to me the most wonderful 1 ever met 
with. Her exquisite touch, which 



renders commonplace things and char- 
acter interesting from the truth of the 
description and sentiment, is denied to 
me."— Sir Walter Scott. 

V. 

NORTHANGER ABBEY. 

" Read Dickens's ' Hard Times," and 
anotherbookofPlin\''s 'Letters.' Read 
' Northanger Abbey," 'worth all Dickens 
and Pliny together. Yet it was the 
work of a girl. She was certainly not 
more than 20. Wonderful creatui'e!" 
— Macaulay's Journal. 

PERSUASION. 

"Miss Austen's fame will outlive 
the generations that did not appreciate 
her, and her works will be ranked with 
the Englisli classics as long as the 
language lasts." — Atlas. 

VI. 

LADY SUSAN. 

"We do not know a more agrcable 
writer than Miss Austen. The great 
charm of her characters is their reality. 
They are the truest pictures of English 
middle and country life of her own 
time.'" — Literary Gazette. 

"Miss Austen"s merits have long 
been established beyond question ; she 
is emphatically the novelist of home." 
— Spectator. 

THE WATSONS. 

With a Memoir and Portrait of the 
Authoress. 

" Miss Austen's Life, as well as 
her talent, seems to us unique amoug 
the lives of authoresses of fiction."'— 
Quarterly Review. 



EICHAED BENTLEY & SON, 

NEW BURLINGTON STREET. 
