                  
                EARL OSRIC;

                   OR,

              The Legend of Rosamond.

                  A ROMANCE.

               BY MRS. ISAACS,
  Author of "  Tales of To-Day."-" Wanderings of Fancy," &c. &c. &c.

              IN THREE VOLUMES.
                 VOL. I

                London.

       PUBLISHED BY C. CHAPPLE, ROYAL SUBSCRIPTION CIRCULATING LIBRARY, 66, FALL-MALL, AND SIMPKIN AND MARSHALL, STATIONERS' COURT, LUDGATE STREET.

                   1820.                     EARL OSRIC;
                        OR, THE
                   LEGEND OF ROSAMOND.

                        CHAP. I.

"His nature is too noble for this world:
He would not flatter Neptune for his trident,
Or Jove for's power to thunder.

And being angry, does forget that ever
He heard the name of death."           SHAKESPEARE.

AMIDST some of the wildest scenes of
Nature, situated in a remote part of Great
Britain, towards the end of the thirteenth
century, stood the ruin'd remains of an an-
cient edifice, which had once been the seat
of Baronial pride and feudal greatness; but
the destroyer Time had robbed it of its
beauty, and despoiled it of the magnifi-
cence that had formerly distinguished its

    VOL. I.            B2                  EARL OSRIC.

lofty walls; and the numerous family who had inhabited it being long since consigned to the tomb, it had devolved to the heir of several united estates, who, éngaged in the busy scenes of active life, only occasionally visited this part of his paternal inheritance.

The name of Earl Osric was enrolled in the annals of chivalry; he was generous and brave, and had siganlized himself amongst the many nobles who accompanied Prince Edward in his memorable expedition to the Holy Land.

Scarcely had he attained his seventeenth year, when, urged on by a thirst for glory, and an ardour for fame, he enlisted beneath the banners of the cross, and attended his sovereign to Palestine.Lively, and for those times remarkably accomplished, in the first bloom of youth, he excited universal interest.The crusaders of all nations were friends and admirers; his genius and talents were brilliant,his education                     EARL OSRIC.                  3

had been extraordinary for that remote
period, having been conducted by a man
of singular attainments and wonderful
learning; and his person and manners
were by nature so dignified and engaging,
that he won general esteem; and irre-
sistibily interested all who know him.

He had returned to his native land
crowned with laurels; he had saved the
life of his Prince by his bravery and pru-
dence; and many were the Infidels who
had felt the force of his arm. Alike dis-
tinguished by his valour in war, and his
courtesy in peace, by every great and
noble quality, as well as by the softer vir-
tues, he had attained a character so ex-
alted, that could fame and glory have se-
cured his happiness, that of Earl Osric
would have been perfect; but the immut-
able laws of Providence had made no ex-
ception in his favour; and, in common
with the less deserving, he was destined
to find the imperfections of all sublunary
bliss.

                      B24            EARL OSRIC.

One circustance of no small import
to his peace, which was ordained to have
considerable influence over his future fate,
was connected with the desolated 
castle that had once been the scene of his ances-
tor's greatness. Quitting in privacy the
gaiety and brilliancy of a court, and tra-
velling alone and unattended, he would, as
often as his public duties would prmit
him, seek the ruined towers of his fore-
fathers, and devote a given period to se-
clusion. It was generally believed that
the castle was uninhabited, except by two
old domestics, long sinc grown grey in
the service; but the world was mistaken.

Amidst its awful solitude, its wild and
rocky scenery, was reared the young Al-
mina. She had from infancy known no 
other protector than Eral Osric, not had
she ever beheld a human being, save him-
self, the two old domestics who attended
her, and the monk, who from her child-
hood had been her spiritual director.
Under the superintendance of the Earl,
                 Earl Osric.             5

Father Andrew had also been her instructor in 
every branch of knowledge, and she had improved 
rapidly under his tuition, while she yet retained 
that artlessness of manners which characterized 
her as the unsophisticated child of Nature.  An 
apartment, consisting of several rooms, of which 
she had unmolested possession, was dedicated to 
her use, and a large garden, enclosed by a wall 
of tremendous height, was the only place she had 
ever entered without the building.

  During the absence of Earl, she was left with 
only Maud and her husband, neither of whom, 
obedient to the orders of Osric, ever conversed 
with their young charge on any subject but those 
their attendance required; and Almina knew not 
whether the castle contained any other 
inhabitant.  Her patron had ever behaved to her 
with the tenderness of a parent; yet as his youth 
seemed to prelude the possibility of his being her
6        EARL OSRIC.

right to the title, and often would he say
 to her, when curiosity prompted her to
 make inquiries concerning her origin-
" To me, Almina, you bear no affinity, 
yet you are dearer to my heart than any
human being who now exists, and pro-
bably will one day know why you are so,
and how Providence placed you under my 
protection. Meantime be happy and con-
tented, and rest assured, that in the
world, from which you have hitherto been 
secluded, you will never find the peace
you have enjoyed in this retirement."

 During the Earl's absence she read, she
played the lude, and she employed herself,
in the different works Maud had taught
her. The hours flew unheeded, and every
morning found Almina happy. She 
reckoned the time that might probably 
elapse, before the return of Osric, and her
joy at the meeting when he re- appeared,
could only be equalled by his own. She
often observed that the Earl contemplated
her features with an eye of eager anxiety,
      ERIC OSRIC.      7

and sat musing in silence, till some sudden
recollection seemed to rush athwart his
mind, when he would start from his seat,
and disappear.  He was particular in
teaching her every thing necessary in the
education of a female of the highest rank,
and during his stay at the castle was scru-
pulously approached for his quitting it, the
expressive manly countenance of Osric
was clouded with an unusual gloom.

  As she grew in years, these partings
became still more affecting, and she ob-
served that the periods of his absence
seemed to grow longer.  As he was one
day taking leave of her, and consoling her
that a short time would again restore him
to her, she sighed, and said, "Ah my
Lord, you know not how long the time
will appear-weeks are now changed into
months, and how many elapse ere I
behold you"

  "Do not, Almina," answered he in a8                EARL OSRIC:

voice of strong emotion, "do not afflict
me by this unavailing sorrow. I have
frequently told you that my time is not at
my own disposal. If it were, how gladly
would I not dedicate by far the greatest
part top tranquillity and Almina; but I am
employed in the service of my king and 
country, and their claims I dare not 
dispute."

 "Ah! pardon me, my lord," said his 
weeping charge; "pardon the involuntary
fault; I ought not to distress you, and in 
future will try to gain more fortitude."

 Her ingenuousness disarmed him of all
power to reprove farther, and once more
desiring her to be cheerful till his return,
he quitter her.

 A large parcel, containing books and
prints, which he had brought for her
amusement, had been left in his apart-
ment, and were by his orders conveyed to 
her after his departure. to look over,
and arrange them in her own small library,
would, be thought, be an employment
                    EARL OSRIC.

calculated to amuse her mind in solitude;
but though reared in total seclusion, Al-
mina was naturally so active, and pos-
sessed such an insatiable thirst for know-
ledge, that indolence was unknown to
her. Though confined within the narrow
boundary of the walls that surrounded
her, she knew there was a world beyond
them; and she had obtained information
enough from old Maud, and from occa-
sionally overhearing conversations between
her and Rowland, as well as from books,
to raise her curiosity to know more of it
and its inhabitants.
   Reading had from her childhood been
her chief delight; it was a resource that
never failed, and she began with anxiety
to examine the large package which her
considerate guardian had provided for her
entertainment. Amongst them she was
surprised to discover a large roll of parch-
ment. It seemed a manuscript, and she 
instantly discerned it to be in the hand
writing of the Earl.
                    
                    B 510                      EARL OSRIC.

 Now indeed it became interesting to 
her, and unable to defer the perusal, she
hastily deposited the remainder of the
books on the shelves, and resolved imme-
diately to gratify her ardent curiosity.

 With this intention she had seated her-
self at the window, with the manuscript
in her hand, when the door was suddenly
burst open, and the Earl, almost breathless
with haste and eagerness, entered the
room.

 Almina started, and dropping the book
on the floor, stood motionless with sur-
prise

 "What have I done?" exclaimed he in
an agitated voice; "you have, then, read 
it?"

"No," said she, perceiving he pointed
to the manuscript, "I have scarcely
opened it."

"Then I am yet safe," said he, more
tranquilly. "Pardon me, my dear Al-
mina, but that manuscript is of the greatest
consequence to me, it contains secrets of            EARL OSRIC.                11

a nature-I mean," added he, hesitatingly,
"it treats of private affairs of my own,
which I have particular reasons for wish-
ing may not be divulged."

  "You are then perfectly free from any
fear of discovery," returned Almina,
since I have not had time to peruse any
part of the manuscript; and if I had, as
I never speak to any one except you, there
could be little danger from any knowing
the secrets it contains."
  
  "I must hasten to be gone," said the
Earl, without seeming to notice the latter
part of her speech. "Adieu, dear Al-
mina; I have some reason to think my
absence this time will be shorter than
usual; I therefore quit you with less re-
gret, from the hope of a speedy return."-
As e spoke, he observed that she had
been weeping.-"Your eyes are red, Al-
mina," said he; "you are now of an age
to learn that you must endeavour to con-
quer this vain emotion."

  "Do you then wish," said she, with
                   n 612                  EARL OSRIC

her natural artlessness, "that I may ever,
at an age, learn to part from you without
sorrow? Oh! I feel that time will never
arrive."

 The Earl's countenance changed; he
seemed affected by the innocent expres-
sion of her grateful regard, and not suffer-
ing himself to hear more, he only affec-
tionately pressed her hand, bid her make
herself happy, and precipitately quitted 
the castle.

 The life of Earl Osric had been embit-
tered by a variety of concurring circum-
stances, which, had they been disclosed to
the world, would only have served to ren-
der his character a more perfect model of
virtue. He considered the young Almina 
as a sacred deposit; she had as yet known
no other friend: he had formed her infant
mind, and early discovered the excellence
of the heart and understanding he had to
cultivate. Her temper was lively, and
even volatile; and her disposition so
amiable that it scarcely even in childhood,




        EARL OSRIC.    13

needed the guidance of a monitor.  The
manners of the Earl, though elegant, were
grave and reserved; he seemed formed for
an hero; he possessed undaunted valour,
mingled with a generosity of soul which
no prejudice was ever suffered to overcome.
He was a rigid observer of the conduct of
other, and severe himself in the practice
of every virtue: he exacted from those he
could influence a strict observance of those
unerring rules by which his own actions
were regulated.  He had, in very early
youth, been contracted, by his father, to
the daughter of an ancient English Baron,
and though his heart had no share in the
engagement, yet he so far held hi honour
concerned in the fulfilling it, that had he
been sure the loss of life would have been
the consequence, he would not one mo-
ment have hesitated in the performance.
It was some years before Earl Osric was
brought to acknowledge to his own heart,
that a sacrifice, infinitely greater in his14                EARL OSRIC.

estimation than the mere deprivation of existence,would be made by this union.

His destined bride was the only daughter and heiress of the Baron Fitz-Oswald; she was celebrated for her beauty and wit, and the most famous Knights had sighed at her feet; but Earl Osric reign'd unrivalled in her heart. He had become its early possessor, and never had she felt a wish to bestow it on any other. Now that his duty permitted Osric to be once more resident in his native land, his time was chiefly passed between the castle of the Baron Fitz-Oswald and that of a friend a few miles from it, except when he visited the dilapidated remains of his paternal mansion.

The castle of the Fitz-Oswald family was the residence of luxury and elegance; he was always received there with delight by the noble Baron and his lady, and greeted with smiles by their lovely daughter. In her he beheld high birth and im-
                 EARL OSRIC.                     15

mense riches, united to the most dazzling beauty.Splendour and magnificence every where surrounded her, and all these attractions Osric new were devoted to him.Yet though the enviable possessor of all these advantages, though apparently encompassed by all that seemed to make life desirable, the Lady Eleanora Fitz-Oswald had an unknown rival in the heart of Osric, before whose unadorned loveliness the pomp of grandeur and parade of wealth shrunk into nothing.

In that secluded corner of Osric Castle which concealed Almina from the eye of the world, was hidden this powerful competitor. The flower he had so carefully reared, the blossom he had so sedulously cherished, had imperceptibly stolen into his heart. The hidden gem which he had so anxiously kept from every eye but his own, which, like the miser, he just viewed in its casket, and then closed it securely from the gaze of the world, was, in his estimation, a diamond worth all the jewels16            EARL OSRIC.
of the cast, and he preferred its native
beauty to all the polish art could bestow.
Yet he well knew the time must arrive 
when the dangerous idulgence he had
for so many years allowed himself must
cease, when he could no longer fearlessly
visit Almina, and when he must refrain 
even from thinking of her but as a daught-
ter.  To subdue each rising emotion,
which the recollection that this period was
fast approaching, of ten raised in his bosom,
was a task which the firm mind of Osric
had imposed on itself.  He had endea-
voured to wean himself gradually from
the society of his ward, by protracting his
absence from the castle; but this had not
passed unobserved by her, though she
forbore to mention it, till grief for his 
departure drew it involuntarily from her.

  When he quitted the castle in the
morning, he was met by a grey-headed
stewad, an ancient servant of the family,
who mentioned to him some affairs relat-
ing to the estate, which would require his                  EARL OSRIC.                   17

presence at the castle again in about two months. He could not, without a degree of pleasure he strove to repress, think of returning so soon, and was enjoying it in anticipation, when, by a sudden concurrence of ideas, he recollected having accidentally left a manuscript of great consequence, in his apartment, amongst those books which he had ordered should, after his departure, be conveyed to Almina's apartment, and instantly turning the direction of his horse's head, and ordering his servant to wait for him, he returned precipitately to the castle, as has been related. The last expression of Almina, as he a second time parted from her, proved almost too much for his resolution, and the first ten miles were traveled ere he was conscious he had gone as many yards from the castle gates. With recollection returned the bitterest self reproach, and all his native firmness of mind was restored long before he reached the castle of Sir Orlando de Mowbray, a brave18                  EARL OSRIC.
young knight, who had been reared in
habits of intimacy with Earl Osric; they
were early united in the firmest bonds of
friendship; they had been educated be-
neath the same care, and together had
braved all the horrors of war.

  The Castle of de Mowbray was situated 
within a few miles of that of Fitz-Oswald.
Sir Orlando had been married four years
to a lovely young woman, who by a col-
lateral branch was deseended from the
house of Osric.  She was in infancy left
an orphan, and bequeathed to the guar-
dianship of Osric's father, who gladly gave
his consent to her marriage with the gal-
lant de Mowbray, though he lived not to 
behold it celebration, which was deferred
till the young orlando succeeded to the estates of his ancestors by the death of an uncle.  From that period de Mowbray had been almost the constan tresidence of Earl Osric, except when his duty called him to 
the court.
  
  The amiable Constance shared his affec-                     EARL OSRIC.          19

tion with her husband, and never seemed
so happy as when he was their guest.
Yet, even from these chosen friends, had
he, from motives of honour, held himself
obliged to conceal the story of Almina,
which he now felt must in part be shortly
developed. By the time he reached de
Mowbray, his countenance had regained
its usual placidity, and his mind had reco-
vered its wonted firmness, and after re-
maining one night with his friends, he
purposed to visit Fitz-Oswald.

   20   EARL OSRIC.



         CHAP. 11.

Juliet. "How comest thou hither, tell me, and wherefore? 
       The Orchard wall are high and hard t climb.

Rom.  With loves' light wings did I o'er perch these walls; For atony limits cannot hold love out, And what love can do, that dares love attempt."
                                   SHAKESPEARE.

  IN the absence of Osric, Almina passed her days as usual in solitude.  She real all the books he had left her, and when tired with reading, applied to her needle, paced the often trodden walks of the garden, or beguiled the hours with her lute.  Thus passed three months ; to Almina they could not appear tedious, because she was always employed. - But the general monotpny of her days was at               EARL OSRIC.    21

length relieved by an adventure. One
evening, when the weather was remarka-
bly warm, and the moon uncommonly
brilliant, she so forcibly entered her
old attendant, to suffer her to walk out,
that though the hour was considerably
later, than she had ever before been per-
mitted to leave the house, old Maud was
prevailed on to consent. The air was
serene, and the sky glittered with stars ;
she remembered that the Earl had pointed 
out, to her observation, the solemn beauty
of the scene, at the same hour, from the
window of her apartment, during his last
summer visit, and she involuntarily sighed
to the recollection. While meditating on
this subject, some lines he had once
taught her to sing occurred to her, and 
she sang them aloud as she rambled round
her limited walks.

 She had just reached an abrupt turning
of the wall, as she pronounced the last
line, which to her utter astonishment she
heard repeated by another voice. She22             EARL OSRIC.

started round, and could just distinguish by the faint light of the moon, a human face looking over the wall a few paces from her. Alarmed, she obeyed the first impulse of terror, and fled precipitately to the mansion. She hastened with all the speed in her power to her chamber, where, as her guard never spoke to her except on necessary occasions, she found no one to whom she could impart the late incident, but she resolved to treasure it up in her memory to relate to the Earl at his next visit.

    " I shall now, thought she " have something in my turn to tell him for the many entertaining narratives he recounts to me." On the following morning she walked again round the wall, but all was as usual and for several succeeding days she saw nothing more to excite her surprise or alarm.

    In about a week, when the circumstances had lost its first effect on her mind, she discarded all fear, though as it was the             EARL OSRIC.              23

only event that had ever happened to her
it still daily recurred to her thougyts.
She had now began to reckon the time,
the might probably elpase before she
again beheld Osirc, and conjectured that
another month would restore him to the
castle. Indulging herself in anticipating
her expected happiness, she strayed into
the garden, and intent on the subject that
now engrossed her meditations, she had
nearly traversed the circular space, which
included all she had ever seen of the world
she inhabited, when a strange noise inter-
rupted her reverie, and she beheld the
figure of a man descending the wall into
the garden. At first she thought it was
the Earl, having never seen any other man
than him and old Rowland, except 
the confessor, but as he appraoched her she
discovered it was a stranger. She must
pass him to reach the mansion had that
been her intention, but the sudden sur-
prise had taken from her all power to24                  EARL OSRIC.

move, and she stood motionless with as-
tonishment. The person drew near her.
   Recollection and exertion seemed at
once restored, she attempted to fly, but
the voice of the stranger in a tone of en-
treaty reached her ear, and arrested her 
flight.
   "Oh stop lovely unknown and accord
your pardon for this remerity," he ex-
claimed as he advanced towards her, and
seizing her hand he gazed in her face with
eyes of delighted admiration, "pardon a
fault which your beauty has caused, and
say oh say sweet strange that you are not
offended."
  "Oh no," said Almina innocently, "I
am not at all offended, but pray go away,
because it is very probable that the Earl
may not approve your coming. I thought
you had been he, or I should not have
come to meet you, though I never saw
him climb over the wall."
  "No beautiful unknown," answered he
"the Earl is happy enough to possess the

               EARL OSRIC.            25

power of seeing you when he wishes, but
to me that felicity is denied. Wonder
not then at the means I have taken to be-
hold you. One long tedious month, heave I been affecting my purpose."

  "Did you then get, over the wall to see
me?" asked Almina, "it is very strange;
I can't imagine how you will get back
again, but as you must be all that time in
accomplishing it, and as you have now
seen me, you had better begin and I will
go in and desire old Maud to come and
help you."

  "Oh stay," uttered he reproachfully,
"and be not so deliberately cruel as to
jest at the passion that consumes me."

  
  "I do not understand what you mean,"
said Almina, "I am sorry if you are in
any passion, but as I am not permitted to
stay out after the sun is gone down, I
must leave you."

  "It is impossible, I cannot yet quit the
spot that contains you," exclaimed the
stranger still more vehemently, "and you

                      c26                    EARL OSRIC.

would not surely leave me alone, to
all the consequences of my despair."

"Oh no," said Almina, retreating to-
wards the house, "I will certainly send
old Maud to you, she, I dare say will stay
as long as you please. The Earl has not
desired her never to leave the house after
sunset." "And is it possible?" cried the
unknown, "that he can have imposed on
you such unreasonable commands?"

"Oh no," repled Almina, "nothing he
desires can be unreasonable, but here
comes Maud to call me in."

Maud, who advanced as she spoke,
seemed struck dumb at perceiving a stran-
ger with her, but he left her not long to
contemplate his figure, for almost immedi-
ately darting from them, he ascended the
wall and disappeared. Her old guard
hurried Almina into the house, determin-
ing she should no more quite it till the
Earls presence authorised it. The thoughts
of Almina naturally reverted to the stran-
ger, she asked a thousand questions con-    EARL OSRIC.    27

cerning him, but could gain no satisfac-
tory information from Maud, who whatever
were her suspicions she kept them to her-
self.

  Almina's confinement was not of long
duration. On the forth day from that
on which the late adventure happened,
she heard from her attendants that the
Earl was hourly expected: a servant being
arrived to announce his approach. The
heart of Almina beat high, with unre-
strained delight, and she counted the
hours by the glass, watching the sand with
an anxious eye till noon, when the door
of her apartment was thrown open by
Osric himself. She sprang from her seat
and flew into his arms, which were eagerly
opened to recieve her. For some mo-
ments incoherent expressions of pleasure,
were all that Almina could utter, but when
more composed she was amazed to per-
ceive an uncommon paleness diffused over
the manly countenance of Osric.

"Ah!" said she suddenly starting back
28          EARL OSRIC.

from him, "you have been ill or some-
thing is the matter, you do not look as you
were wont."

  "If I have not enjoyed my accustomed
health,"returned the Earl smiling, "tran-
quility and Almina will soon restore it. I
have been engaged in the busy world, and
need quiet and reflection." Then, as if
willing to change the subject, "but thou,
Almina, hast adventures to relate to me.
What is this I  hear from Maud of thy
meeting some person in the garden."
With her natural artlessness she instantly
told him what had occurred a few days
preceding. Osric seemed alarmed and
agitated.

  With his usual firmness however, he
endeavoured to appear calm, and after a
few moments pause, questioned her as to
all she had been doing in his absence.
She took up her lute, and drew from it
tones, that convinced him ; she had not
neglected it; she repeated the names of
the books she had read, and she showed

                   EARL OSRIC            29
him the works, in which she had been en-
gaged. Through all the pleasure he ex-
pressed, at the progress she had made, still she could discern an evident gloom lour on
the countenance of her benefactor, which
was generally expressive of every benevo-
lent virtue, while she played and sung, he
sat with his eyes rivetted on her face, and
several times he arouse and paced the room
as if occupied by some subject of peculiar
interest.
  At length he grew more composed and 
ere he parted from her for the night he 
appeared so tranquil that the sanguine
Almina flattered herself she had been de-
ceived in supposing he had been otherwise.
But she know no the conflicts which
shook the firm soul of Osric, who when
he retired for the night from her apart-
ment, went to his own, in a distant part 
of the castle. Throwing himself on the
first seat within it, he sunk into a profound
reveric. A great and important change 
was about to take place in the destiny of

                   C 3


30                 EARL OSRIC.

Almina, and his subject alone now en-
grossed his thoughts.
  The growth and improvement of her
person had never so much stuck him as
on this evening, her childish playful man-
ners had hitherto led him to consider her
as child, but her height and figure now
convinced him that she needed only an
acquaintance with the world to trasnform
her into an elegant woman.
  Anxious to divert his reflections into
another channel, he was preparing to retire,
when his eye rested on a massy casket,
that stood on the table; it had been con-
veyed there by his own order, and con-
tained the portrait of Lady Eleanora Fitz-
Oswald, presented to him by her own 
hand, in the presence of her father; the 
day previous to that, on which he had
quitted the castle. Osric's accustomed
firmness was shaken, he trembled, turned
pale, and for a moment lost all the forti-
tude of the hero: but the suspension was
merely temporary, he glanced at the pic-                     Earl Osric.                 31

ture as he took it from the case, and the
mild virtues which beamed from the coun-
tenance of the original seemed to speak in 
every feature. He traversed his chamber
great part of the night, and at length at-
tained calmness sufficient to retire, but
the hours he allotted to rest were very few.

  The time of action was approaching,
and he arose early, and repaired to Al-
mina's apartment, he found her engaged
in her accustomed mornings amusements.
After the first salutations he sat some mi-
nutes without speaking. At length, "Al-
mina" said he "you have often expressed
a desire to see that world with which you
are yet unacquainted-does that wish still
exist? "Oh yes;" answered she inno-
cently "If by having it gratified, I should
not be separated from you". Osric made 
no reply for some moments but at last in 
a grave tone he said. "I have some rea-
son to think your situation will shortly be 
changed and should any alteration take
place you will certainly be introduced to

                      C432                 EARL OSRIC.

the world which you are so eager to know"
"but I shall still live with you? said Al-
mina "That" replied Osric "is very un-
certain. I, you know, am devoted to the
service of my country and various are the
claims on my time which will prevent"-
  He paused, Almina's glistening eye was
fixed on his face. He arose. " I mean"
added he "that 'tis very probable I may
be called abroad, or if I continue here, I
shall nor, perhaps, have it in my power to
visit this castle so frequently as at pre-
sent. Your residence here when that is
the case, will nor only be improper but
unsafe." Almina's tears could no longer
be restrained. Ignorant as she was, a
dread of some latent some unknown cvil
seized her. "Ah;" said she mournfully
"do you not recollect how much I was
affected when I last parted from you? Yet
how little did I imagine what was in store
fro me-Oh, tell me my lord when, how
soon is the poor Almina to be discarded:
-"Discarded! exclaimed, the Earl, "No          ERIC OSRIC.   33

Almina, you little know the heart of Osric
if you do not suppose that your happiness
is one of the points requisite to constitute
his own.  But the subject is distressing,
I will quit you.  Rest assured of my con-
tinued regard.  At night I shall again visit
you, do no retire till you hear from me".
Saying this he left her in a frame of mind,
how different from any former feeling.  She
was restless and uneasy, she could not sit
for a moment.  The soothing powers of
her lute were in vain essayed; to read she
was equally unable.  She wandered through
her apartments which till now she had ne-
ver thought lonely.

  The words of Osric convinced her that
something material had occurred concern-
ing her and she awaited his promised visit
with impatience.  The evening passed but
Osric neither came nor sent any message.
At length Maud attended her, and in-
formed her that the earl would visit her
in an hour.

  Midnight however struck, before he ar-

34           EARL OSRIC.

rived, but soon after he appeared. He 
approached Almina and taking her hand
said.  "I am now Almina about two intro-
duce to a being of your own sex who
demands all your love and respect. One
one who ardently longs to behold you." Say-
ing this he'd let her from the room and for
the first time in her life she went through
the door-way at which Maud always en-
tered when she brought her meal. It 
opened into a spacious gallery, Osric led
her silently through it. At its termina-
tion they passed through an anti-room 
into a long passage which connected the
wing that contained  Almina's apartments
with the main body of the edifice. They
entered a noble saloon.

     "Stay here a moment" said the Earl,
"I will be with you again instantly."
He disappeared to the opposite door
and left Almina to contemplate the mag-
nificence that surrounded her with won-
der and admiration, accustomed to her
own plane need chamber, she had formed
 
              EARL OSRIC.               35

no idea of the high-arch painted ceiling
which now he held, the glittering cor-
nices and superb hangings. The sopha
on which she sat, though faded, had been 
made of the richest silk, and she gazed
with astonishment at the decorations
which adorned it; but she was left not
long to meditate on these wonders. Two
folding glass doors opened and Osric en-
tered, leading a tall graceful female. A
white robe displayed a thin elegant form,
and her black veil have thrown back dis-
closed a countenance of the most refined
beauty. She advance quickly but her
eyes had no sooner met those of Almina,
that she started, turned pale, and sunk
solving on the shoulder of Osric.

     "Any thing but this" exclaimed she
"I could have borne, oh Oric! You 
have destroyed the smallest remains of
peace left me."

     "Rather say" returned he "that I have
restored your tranquility by disclosing to
you that the representatives of her, once

                   c6
36          EARL OSRIG.

so fondly beloved, survives to renew the
affection that has thus long been sus-
pended. Look up i conjure you, and
receive this sweet cherub to your bosom."
     
     "Oh no" she exclaimed in a voice of
agony "never again can I look on fea-
tures once, so anxiously traced, so fondly
remebered."

     Osric endeavoured to soothe her, and 
at length prevailed with her to approach
Almina, who trembling and terrified re-
mained motionless on the sopha.  She 
arose as the stranger was hurried towards 
her by Osric, but no sooner did the for-
mer feel the pressure of Almina's hand, 
which Osric had joined with hers, than 
she started, examined her features for a 
moment with the most painful attention,
and then suddenly dropping her hand, 
she fell on her knees and resting her head
on the sopha, wept aloud.
     
     "Forbear this violent grief, Eloisa,"
said Osric "you alarm this timid damsel,
who I had hoped would have met fromEARL OSRIC.   37

you only gentlenss and kindness, a friedn
who would receive her to her heart."

   "I do receive her" returned the stran-
ger "for has she not claims on my love
which the hand of tyranny could never
force me to disavow, yes," added she with
energy " witness thou whose name is now
recorded in the register of angels I will
take this lovely child of sorrow to my
home, to my heart and from this time
shall she know no other protector.  But,
oh! Osric, after this, allow me to retire
and before another interview I will endea-
vour to acquire a share of fortitude suffici-
ent to support me through it with com-
posure."

  So saying and leaning on the arm of the
Earl, she slowly left the room, nor once
turned to regard the weeping Almina,
who sad and sorrowful, though she scarcely
knew why, bad again reclined back on
the sopha.  The Earl soon rejoined her
and led her back to her apartment.

  "I am disppointed my Almina," said
88       EARL OSRIC.

he "in the reception I hoped you would
have met with, but we must make allow-
ances for the anguish inflicted by painful
reminiscences. That excellent woman is
the victim of misfortune, and though she
thinks of you with the tenderness of a 
mother, the acuteness of her feelings will
not suffer her to prove it. You will pro-
bably soon see her again. Retire now
and endeavour to gain some repose. To
morrow early I will visit you."

He left her, and Almina retired in si-
lence to rest, but no longer was her sleep
undisturbed. She saw herself on the 
point of being separated from he Earl,
and though yet a stranger to the nature
of her own sensations, she felt that it
would cause her the most poignant grief,
nor was the rest of Osric more free from
disturbance. Though his plans with re-
gard to his ward were all arranged, the
most difficult task remained, that of an-
nouncing to Almina her change of resi-
dence, and preparing her for a final sepa-
     EARL OSRIC.     39

ration from himself and from the scene
of her childhood. The motive for the 
immediate change, was an unwillingness 
to present her to the family of Fitz Os-
wald, who had intimated an intention of 
paying him a visit at Osric, in order to 
view the ruins of his paternal seat, in 
their way to one of the estates of the Ba-
ron, and that he might avoid a discovery 
of Almina's residence there which he 
wished at present to remain concealed, it 
became necessary to hasten the comple-
tion of the plan, which had long been ar-
ranged; and lady St. Albert, the early 
and beloved friend of Osric, accompanied 
him to the castle, purposely to see his 
ward, and to be there on the arrival of 
the Fitz-Oswald family. Almina, hence-
forth, was to be consigned to her protec-
tion, and to become as one of her own 
daughters.

  An early hour of the morning was fixed 
on by the Earl for this disclosure, and it was received by Almina with silent resignation.40                Earl Osric

Immediate preparations for her departture were commenced by Osric's particular desire, and he left her, after informing her with caution and tenderness, that one day more only could be allowed her, before she must commence her journey.

    He at once resolved to do justice to Almina and fulfil with scrupulous honour his own engagement, though the pang it cost him, whenever the resolution was repeated in his mind, too plainly told him that the moment it was formed, peace took her flight from his bosom.  Yet firm in rectitude, no repining sigh found its way from his breast, nor did his heart in secret ever utter one sentence that might be construed into aught of regret.  He felt as if the  pang of death would be inferior to the agony of that with which he should part from Almina and know the separation was eternal.  Yet he knew his own fortitude, and was sure it would support him in the hour of trial, nor betray the inward workings of his soul.  Poor               EARL QSRIC          41
  
    Almina was not less at ease than her bene-
    factor; her heart throbbed with anxiety
    and pain whenever she reflected on  the
    seperation that was so soon to take place.
    She felt sure by the manner in which the
    Earl announced it, that it was to be per-
    manent, and her rich soul recoiled from
    the idea of never beholding him.
        Strong as was her curiosity to see that
    world she had read of, she yet felt loth
    for ever to quit the garden and apart-
    ments, where her years had hitherto gli-
    ded serenely on. She had enquired con- 
    cerning lady St.Albert of the Earl, and 
    found she was not to accompany them.
    The wound which the sight of Almina
    had inflicted on the feelings of that lovely
    and unfortunate woman, was not yet suffi-
    ciently healed, nor could Osric prevail on
    her to have another interview with her
    Young charge before she quitted the cas-
    tle. A deep and deadly blow had in early
    Youth been struck at the peace of the ill-
    fated Eloisa, it was too well aimed and
   42         EARL OSRIC.

by it the seat of reason was shaken.For many revolving years she had been subject to a periodical derangement,but though her intellects were restored her feelings were still so painfully acute,that the slightest touch on that chord,which could never bear vibration, threatened again to confuse her intellectual powers.In pity to her wounded mind Osric forbore to urge a second interview, and accompanied by his fair protegé, left her at the castle which she proposed quitting a few days after them.                     EARL OSRIC.                 43

                     CHAP. III.

"I pray thee leave me to myself to-night;
For I have need of many orisons
To move the heavens to smile upon my state;
Which well though know'st is cross and full of sin."
                               ROMEO AND JULIET.

A NEW world now broke on the won-
dering eyes of Almina; her amazement
at all she saw soon dried the tears she at
first shed on leaving old Maude and the
castle, and her eager inquiries and unceas-
ing expressions of surprize amused the mind
of the Earl, and insensibly drew him from
more baneful meditation. He wished to im-
press her with a favourable idea of the new
life she was going to lead, and those in
whose society it was to be spent. He
represented to her the delights of female44           Earl Osric.

friendship, and the pleasure she would feel
in having companions of her own sex and
age. He advised her to encourage an
intimacy with the daughter of Lady St.
Albert's, if on a knowledge of their cha-
racters she found them worthy. He had
been too little in their society, since they
had reached maturity, to be able to judge 
of their dispositions; but he could have
little doubt that the daughters of Eloisa
could be otherwise than amiable.

  On the evening of their third day's jour-
ney, the Earl and Almina arrived at the 
castle St. Albert: the lord of it was absent,
but they were shown to an apartment where
the Lady de Mornay, a bosom friend of
the Countess, who had superintended the 
education of her daughters, received them.
With the most encouraging gentleness did
Osric introduce his fair ward to Lady de
Mornay, who had been prepared to receive
and welcome her.

  "Ah, my lord!" said she, as she sur-
veyed the beautiful face of Almina, "little                 Earl Osric       45

need be said to recommend this sweet girl to my heart.  She bears in her countenance a passport to my affection, and equally shall she share it with the daughters of my friend."

   "With this assurance, madam," answered the Earl, "I rest perfectly contented; nor will one fear for my ward's safety embitter my repose while under your protection, and that of this noble family."

   He then affectionately embraced Almina, and taking his leave, quitted the castle, though then midnight, and took his way back to Osric, fearful of delaying his return, lest his expected visitors should arrive in his absence.  The conquest over himself was now, he hoped, complete; he had bid a final adieu to Almina, and, as he measured back the way to his own castle, his self-congratulations seemed to repay him for all the concealed agonies he had felt at parting from her.  A very short time he knew46        Earl Osric

would now elapse ere it would become a duty to think no more of her, when he must devote his time and affection to one who would have a legal claim to both; and he arrived at his own castle in a frame of mind calculated to receive his intended bride, and her noble parents.

    Almina mean time became, by the parental care of Lady de Mornay, more reconciled to her change of abode.  That amiable woman insisted on her retiring to rest, and on the morrow promised to introduce her to her pupil, the young Lady St. Albert.  Almina rose very early, and was soon joined by Lady de Mornay, with whom she breakfasted, after which the latter proposed a walk.  They traversed some extensive grounds belonging to the domain of St. Albert, and arrived at the entrance of a thick wood, in the centre of which stood a small moated building.

    "In that edifice," said Lady de Mornay, "you behold your future residence, my dear Almina.  In this small mansion             EARL OSRIC.               47
have the daughters of the Countess St.
Albert been reared, and there do I reside,
except when I am summoned to the 
castle."

  On ringing the great bell, a draw-bridge
was let down,to give them entrance.
Lady de Mornay led the way up a flight
 of stairs to a room where the soft notes of 
a lute reached the ear of Almina, nor was
she more enchanted with the melody than
with the form whence it proceeded.  A
 lovely girl, in whose mild blue eyes and
dazzling complexion she instantly saw a
 strong resemblance of the Countess, arose
to receive them, and was presented to
Almina as the Lady Elfrida St. Albert.
She received her new companion with the
utmost sweetness; and unaccustomed as 
Almina was to female society, she soon 
found herself as happy with Lady de
 Mornay and her pupil as she could possibly be under an estrangement from her early protector.

  The Lady de Mornay was younger48                 EARL OSRIC.
daughter of a noble family, who had been
early devoted by her parents to a monsatic 
life, but following the dietates of a youth-
ful attachment, she had united herself to
a young knight, Sir Egbert de Mornay,
whose only possession was his sowrd.  He
was one of the bravest knights, who bore
the Red Cross against the Infidels into
Palestine, where, amongst innurnerable
others, he lost his life.  By this catas-
trophe, left a widow, his lady having
been many years estranged from her own
family, was received into that of her bo-
som friend,Lady St. Albert, where she
undertook the education of the female
branches, a task which the unhappy state
of their mother's mind prevented her from
executing herself.  No substitute could be
found more proper for the employ.  Lady
de Mornay was well versed in all the ac-
complishments of that age, and her mild
sensible manner soon gave her all the ne-
cessary influence over her pupils.
 
  on the evening of the second day, as                     Earl Osric.                    49

Almina was walking in the long gallery
with the Lady Elfrida, the latter said 
she would lead her to her own favourite 
tower; they accordingly ascended a spiral 
stair-case, which brought them to a small
room, the narrow windows of which com-
manded a view of the adjacent country 
through the forest trees, which were 
planted so as not to obscure the prospect.
   "This window," said Elfrida, "is my 
frequent resort, because from it I can see
the walls of the monastery which contains
my beloved sister. Those high turrets
you see yonder are an abbey of nuns, of 
the Benedictine order, and there resides, 
in all the bloom of youth, my dear
Adeliza, already consigned to the solitude
of a cloister."
   Almina remembered that Earl Osric
had spoken of the daughters of the Coun-
tess of St. Albert in the plural number,
and had been surprised to see only Lady
Elfrida; but her native timidity of manner
had prevented her from making any in-
   VOL. I.              D
50              EARL OSRIC.

quiry, though it had not passed unno-
ticed.
   The Earl St. Albert was a man of high
birth, but his estates had been impaired by
his predecessor, and scarcely were they
sufficient to support the dignity of his
rank. That his son might enjoy at least
equal wealth, he determined to educate his
two daughters for monastic life, and
devote them to the cloister; but his plan
was frustrated by a young knight of rank,
who accidentally beheld the Lady Elfird
at a tournament, where she had been al-
lowed by her father to be present, previous
to her taking the veil. He was so struck
by her uncommon beauty, that he ob-
tained her father's permission to lay his
heart at her feet; and as wealth, he said,
was nothing in his estimation, he disdained
the idea of forgetting her merely from the
want of it. She was therefore com-
manded by her father to receive the vows
of Sir Ethelred Douglas, and now there
only remained the youthful Adeliza, and

          EARL OSRIC.            51

she was destined to experience the fate her
sister had so narrowly escaped.

It returned the utmost exertions of Lady
de Mornay to prevail on her young charges
to comply with the wishes of their father.
Reared from infancy together, they shud-
dered at the idea of an eternal separation.
The disposition of Adeliza was ill formed
for a religious life, and she implored Lady
de Mornay to try and alter her father's
resolution. This was, without success,
essayed :--Lord St. Albert remained in-
flexibly determined, and the young and
lovely Adeliza was consigned to the dreary
seclusion she had so much dreaded a few
months before Almina's entrance into the
family. Lady Elfrida could never pro-
nounce the name of her sister without
shedding tears, and her native vivacity
was lost in her grief at being for ever
parted from her.

"We will visit poor Adeliza," said she
to Almina, "and you will join with me in52                    EARL OSRIC.

the melancholy task of reconciling her to her dreary destiny."

Almina readily agreed, for she had no small share of curiosity to behold the unfortunate victim of ambition. They were received by the young and beautiful novice with almost breathless delight; her person was still more attractive than that of her sister, but the lustre of her fine dark eyes was dimmed by sorrow, and the natural glow of her complexion was now supplanted by the livid hue of despair. She seemed at first unable to articulate her joy at beholding her sister and friend; but when Almina was introduced by Lady de Mornay, who told her the former was to supply to Elfrida the loss she had sustained in her society, and was the ward of the lady her mother, she pressed the extended hand of Almina to her bosom. and faintly said,---

"Forgive me,lovely stranger, if I envy you the task of consoling my Elfrida, the              EARL OSRIC.          53

sister of my heart. Oh! should you but
be successful, and teach her to forget her
grief for Adeliza's fate, never shall my
orisons be offered up to that power, who I
trust will aid your generous purpose, with-
out including a prayer, a fervent prayers,
for your felicity; and you, Elfrida, loved
friend of Adliza's soul, try to forget she
is lost to the world; to you she still lives,
and in you her own happy prospects, and
in the society of the amiable Almina, lost
the remembrance of her griefs, though 
not of herself."

  The whole party were too much affected
to speak: event he rigid soul of te abbess
seemed moved.

  "Sister Adeliza is too melancholy,"
said she; she looks only to the dreary side
of her new avocation, nor contemplates
the glorious prospects of eternal happiness
that open to her view: be it our care to
point them out, and lead her to the path
which conducts to bliss eternal."

  After some time the abbess retired, and

                   D 354          EARL OSRIC.

Adeliza left alone with her sister and 
Almina, vented to them all the fullness of
her bursting heart. She declared a belief 
that she shoul finally bring herself to
obey hr parents with resignation; but as
she uttered the words, an unusual bril-
liancy flashed from her dark eyes, and
gave a degree of wildness to her counte-
nance that startled Almina.

" I must say adieu for to-night, my 
Elfrida," said she. " In my cell I will
pray for composure and fortitude, and in
my orisons shall the sister of my heart
and her sweet friend be remembered.
Alas! I need the salutary influence of 
devotion to subdue these rising tumults.
The night shall be devoted to penitence.
May your's happy sister, be crowned
with soft repose."

Being soon after informed that the con-
vent gates were to be closed for the night,
they took their leave, promising the youth-
ful nun to repeat their visit. She im-
plored them to do so, and added, that to              EARL OSRIC.                55

see Elfrida often and happy, would 
strengthen her own good resolutions, and
render her less unwilling to leave a world
in which she had been her greatest com-
fort.

The affection which subsisted between
the sisters, opened to Almina's heart all
the comforts of fraternal love, and she
longed to share an emotion that appeared
so delightful. This she soon experienced.
Lady Elfrida supplied to her the place of
a sister, and the warm heart of Almina
was soon fondly attached to her young
friend.

They were one day informed by Lady
de Mornay that she must leave them for a
few hours, having been summoned to at-
tend the Countess at the castle, where she
had arrived the preceding evening from 
Osric, and she advised them to pass the
time of her absence with Adeliza, whom
they had not visited for several days. 
With joy they received her permission, and
walked to the convent together with an
                  D456         EARL OSRIC.

attendant. They were received by Adelizn
with the same melancholy serenity.

 The monastery was situated in the 
centre of a thick forest, part of which,
enclosed by walls of an enormous height,
was the ground allotted for its inhabitants
to walk in. One desolate and dreary spot
was set apart for the most rigid of the
nuns, who here took the small portion
of air and exercise which the strict rules
of their order allowed, and into this part
of it the lay sisters, or accidental visitors,
were never suffered to intrude. The Lady
Elfrida, who, from infaucy, had been ac-
customed to pay long visits at the monas-
tery, was admitted to walk with her sister,
and Almina, as her friend, was allowed 
the same privilege.

 As they traversed the garden, which
chiefly consisted of close walks cut out of
the wood, Almina stopped one moment to 
play with the Lady Elfrida's lap-dog, who
ran after them, while the two sisters had walked on before, when suddenly she lost                   EARL OSRIC.                  57

sight of them, by the abrupt turn of a path close by. Being unacquainted with the grounds, she hastened after them, and as she imagined, turned down the same walk which she had seen them enter; but she felt rather surprised that she did not see them before her. She called aloud on the names of Elfrida and Adeliza; but her own voice, echoed by the neighbouring woods, was the only answer she received. 

   In the hope of overtaking them,she had ran a considerable way down the labyrinth, and the profound gloom which enveloped that part which she now reached made her tremble with affright. She heard no murmur of voices, and it now first occurred to her that she had taken a wrong path. Terrified, she stopped, and as she paused with an intention to return and explore her way back, she suddenly, with no small amazement, perceived the figure of a female close behind her. 

    Habited like a nun, a long sable veil enveloped her form, which as Almina was

                        D558               Earl Osric

about to ask a direction back to the convent, was slowly raised, and discovered a countenance resembling nothing human.  She spoke not, but motioning with her head, pointed with the livid remains of a skeleton hand to a narrow winding path, and then again bowing, she dropped her veil, and gliding quickly past her, disappeared.

     The wan sallow hue of her death-like countenance had struck Almina with involuntary terror, and had her mind been impressed with superstitious fears, the form she had just seen might have been mistaken for a spectre.  Concluding the nun had pointed to the way she ought to take, she flew down the path, and at its termination found she knew perfectly where she was.

    Elfrida and Adeliza were looking for her through the garden, and when at length they met, eagerly interrogated her where she had been.  She related to them her meeting with the strange nun.                EARL OSRIC.                  59
" Good heavens!" exclaimed Adeliza,
" you have then intruded on the hallowed
precincts destined to the recluse nuns, as
they are termed. We must carefully
guard this incident from the knowledge of
the lady abbess, or never again shall I
enjoy the comfort of your loved society
here. The recluse nuns are a rigid order,
who not only vow to seclude themselves
from the world for ever, but from all asso-
ciation with those who inhabit the same
convent. Their penances are very severe,
and frequently for several days and nights
they deny themselves the common com-
forts of rest and food. They are never
seen by any persons expect the lower order
of nuns,who are appointed to carry them
their food, without ever addressing them;
and not even with one another do they 
dare to hold converse. That portion of 
ground on which you, Almina, to-night
undesignedly intruded, is appointed for  
their exclusive use, and often do their

              D 6
  
   60              EARL OSRIC.

   butter groans and piercing sighs reach our
   cars, as we traverse the parts of the
   garden. It is therefore deemed a crime
   of the first magnitude for unhallowed feet
   to enter the holy precinct destined to re-
   ccive only the recluse nuns, one of whom
   I doubt not it was that you encountered,
   though it is not easy for any but thosc of
   the convent to distinguish them by their
   garb, which differs only in some small
   minutia from the other nuns

     Alarned by what they heard, Elfrida
  and Almina hastened to depart, but the
  latter could not efface from her memory
  the recollection of the réçluse nun- Her
  figure was still before her sight, and the
  emaciated countenance and hollow eyes
  had made such an impression on her mind,
  that in sleep the same image was presented
  to her view; it haunted her imagination
  in the visions of the night, and hovered
  over her pillow. The day brought her
  relief from dreams so harrassing, and with     EARL OSRIC.     61

it a letter from Earl Osric. With what
delight were the following words perused
by Almina:-

     TO ALMINA.

  "I address my beloved Almina in the
hope that ere this reaches her hands she
will be quite reconciled to her late change
of abode. I have the firmest reliance on
her proper ideas of right for conquering
any reluctance she might at first feel to
quit the residence of her early years, con-
vinced, as she must long since have been,
that the ultimate aim of every step I have 
taken with regard to her has her happiness 
for its object. Let me, my dear ward,
hear from your hand that this object has
been attained, and that you feel for 
the excellent family you are with that attach-
ment and veneration to which they are
justly entitled. When you know more
of Lady St. Albert, you will honour her as a mother: venerate the mild virtues of 
the good lady de Mornay, and love her62                 EARL OSRIC.

young pupils, whom it is the Countess's
wish that you should henceforth consider
as your sisters. Again I charge you, my
Almina, to be happy, for be assured that
a knowledge of your felicity is one of the
principal requisites to that of
                     "EDGAR EARL OSRIC."

     This valued epistle was eagerly perused
many times by the delighted Almina, who
for the first time in her life was to dictate
a letter in answer, which was to be con-
veyed by one of Lady St. Albert's servants,
who was going on business from his lady
to the castle of Osric. These were her
words:--

                TO EARL OSRIC.
     "Oh, my lord! with what joy did the
poor banished Almina receive and peruse
your kind, your soothing epistle. Pardon
me for saying banished. Alas! I must
consider myself so while absent from you,
and when I know the many long miles
                      EARL OSRIC.                63

that intervene to separate us, and am
given to understand the length of time
which may elapse e're I again see you.
Yet, think not that I am otherwise than
happy. No, believe me, I am too an-
xious to shew my grateful compliance with
every request of yours, not to endeavour
to make myself so. I admire and rever-
enece the good Lady de Mornay, and
am indeed attached to the kind Elfrida
and the hapless Adeliza. Their honoured
mother, I have not yet been permitted to
see. Though unknown, I venerate the
virtues of her character, and I feel an
interest about her greater than I can ex-
press. I have a thousand things, my lord,
to tell you, could I address you in person,
which I cannot, had I time, say on paper.
They tell me the Messenger waits, yet
how unwilling am I to cease writing, for
am I not addressing my first, my best, and
so late my only friend, and though I have
now found others who are truly kind to
me, and profess themselves interested in64     Earl Osric

my welfare - how far nearer, how far dearer must be ever be to the grateful heart of Almina."

    Such was the effusions which flowed from the warm heart of the youthful Almina to her pen, but how inferior were the emotions with which it had been written, to those that agitated the firm bosom of Osric, on perusing it.  In every line he read the youthful attachment which his read the youthful attachment which his paternal kindness had inspired.  "But would she not," exclaimed he, mentally, "have felt the same tenderness for any one who had reared and instructed her? secluded as she has hitherto been from the world.  Ah! doubtless, a little more knowledge of that world, will soon cradicate from her innocent breast all but the gratitude which native rectitude of principle will teach her to cherish."

   The family of the Baron Fitz Oswald, arrived according to appointment, at Osric Castle, and were received by the Earl with his accustomed hospitality.  The timid          EARL OSRIC.         63

eyes of the lovely Eleanora, glitened with
delight as Osric led her into the Mansion
of which she was so soon to become
the mistress. In honour of his guests
the different apartments had been
prepared for their reception. The ban-
queting room had been restored to its
original splendour, and once more was
Osric Castle the seene of gaiety.-Lady 
Eleanora was charmed, and her eyes, in
gratitude and delight, were east on her
noble lover, never otherwise than happy
when his presence illuminated the scene,
she enlivened the banquet by her cheer-
fulness, and excited the admiration of all
the attendant knights, who jouned in secret-
ly wondering at the apathy of the Earl,
when such a lovely young creature, whose
first affectious were devoted to him, was
destined to be the partner of his vows.
The sprightly dance succeeded the ban-
quet, and the grace and elegance of Earl
Osric's intended bride, was the theme of 
every tongue.66             Earl Osric.


               CHAP. IV.

 "There is fair behaviour in thee,
 And tho' nature with a beauteous wall
Doth oft close in Pollutions, yet of these
I will believe, thou hast a mind that suits
With this, they fair and outward character."
                            Shakespeare

     Soon after Almina had dispatched her letter to the Earl, she was sent for to the castle with Lady Elfrida.  They were informed by Lady de Mornay that the motive for their going, was to be present at an entertainment given by the Earl, to receive Sir Ethelred Douglas whose herald had arrived the preceding day to warn them of his arrival.  Lady Elfrida's countenance changed as she heard intelligence which so nearly concerned her, and Almina naturally timid and affectionate           EARL OSRIC.       67

trembled at the idea of a second interview
with the Countess.  They were both reas-
sured with the most soothing tenderness
by the kind Lady de Mornay, who accom-
panied them to the castle.  Almina enter-
ed it with pleasure, because its stately
walls and lofty towers reminded her of the
castle of Osric.  Her natural vivacity
returned and when decorated with a richer
habit than she had eveer yet worn, she sur-
veyed her elegant form in a mirror, and
wished the Earl could behold her.  They
were soon after visited by Lord St. Albert
who led them to the banquet in the great
hall.

  A general silence prevailed while every
eye was rivetted on them.  Their veils
were both thrown back, nor were the
flaxen ringlets and transparent complexion
of Elfrida more attrective than the auburn
tresses and blooming countenance of Al-
mina.  Each seemed to attract her share
of admiration and attention, while all that
of Almira was engrossed by Lady St. Al-
          68             EARL OSRIC.

bert to whom she was presented by the
Earl and who with Lady de Mornay by
her side were seated at the upper end of
the banqueting room. A hectic colour
crossed her cheek which was succeeded by
a livid paleness, as she took the hand of
Almina, and emphatically, but silently
pressed it to her bosom, she dropt a tear
on it, and then reliqueshed it. Almina
was seated next her and as she surveyed
with wonder the numerous knights in
their glittering armour and casting her
eyes towards the lofty gallery that sur-
rounded the hall, beheld the arranged
minstrels attuning their harps, she scarcely
belived herself awake, but could almost
have fancied it was all a dream. Natual-
ly lively and animated the novelty of the
scene, had the most forcible charms for
her, and the compliments of the knights
who attended, were heard by her with an
innocent unconsciousness that heightened
the effect of her beauty. They were
pressing to seat themselves at the festive             EARL OSRIC.            69

board, when a loud ringing was heard at
the great gates, and the bridge being let
down a herald entered the court and in
form notified the near approach of Sir
Ethelred Douglas, accompanied by the 
young, St. Albert, only son and heir of
the Earl who had been reared in habits of
intimacy with Sir Ethelred, and had ac-
companied him in an expedition to the
Holy land, from whence they were both
lately returned

  Lord St. Albert went forth to meet the
two young knights with a train of atten-
dants, and the minstrels all struck their
lyres as he re-entered followed by his son,
and Sir Ethelred, both of whom he con-
ducted to Lady St. Albert. She received
them graciously, and presented them to
Almina, who had no sooner met the eye
of Sir Ethelred, than her blushing coun-
tenance, crimsoned over with surprise on
recognizing the Cavalier, who had climbed
the walls of Osric castle to behold her.70            EARL OSRIC.

Impatient to pay his devoirs to Elfrida, he
had scarcely noticed Almina, when intro-
duced by Lady St. Albert, but as he was
in the act of kneeling at the feet of his
fair mistress, Almina's upraised eyes met
his, and a sudden recollection of her seem-
ed to dart across his mind. He started,
but in a moment recovering himself, for-
tunately unseen by Elfrida, he hastily
bowed on the hand she had given him,
and rising, seated himself by her. It was
evident, that Sir Ethelred recognized her,
even though the alterations which a dif-
ferent dress and deportment caused in her
appearance. Since her residence at the
Tower, she had shared all the instructions
given to Lady Elfrida, to prepare her for
her introduction to the world. She had
been taught to measure her agile steps to
the sound of soft instruments, and to
touch the strings of the lute with graceful
ease. But little tuition was requisite.
Nature had formed Almina in her most
perfect mould, and gace, in every motion,
               EARL OSRIC.        71

was to her natural. Ignorant as she was,
of the rules of society, her mind was fill-
ed with involuntary wonder at recognizing
Sir Ethelred Douglas, yet no perfidy
could suggest itself to a heart that knew
not of its existance, and the person of Sir
Ethelred was so fine, his air so frank and so
noble, that all who beheld him were pre-
possessed in his favour. The Countess
presented her son to Almina. "you be
hold, my son," said she, "in this sweet
girl, the ward of your early friend Earl
Osric. To me he has delegated the task
of watching over her, and she is become
to me a third and equally beloved daugh-
ter." "And to me a sister," said the youth,
gracefully bending his knee, and taking
her hand, "My heart claims kindred here,
and surely it will not be refused." Almina
spoke some words in a low voice, but she
saw the eyes of the whole assemblage
were fixed on her, and timidly kept her's
cast down. She was relieved by being led
to the banquet, after which te sprightly72               Earl Osric.

dance began. - She was conducted to it by Arthur St. Albert, and the Lady Elfrida led it off with Sir Ethelred.  The latter had not once addressed Almina, nor appeared (save in the first moment of introduction) to recollect he had ever seen her before.  The music, the universal hilarity which prevailed, the gallantry of the knights, the animated converse and assiduous attention of the young St. Albert, all conspired to raise the spirits of the lively inexperienced Almina, and the vivacity of her heart was in union with the agility of her steps.  Her light elegant form attracted general admiration, and the young Arthur was envied by most of the knights present.  They continued dancing till a late hour, and when they retired, Lady St. Albert took Almina with her to her apartment, where she kept her for some time in conversation, at intervals weeping over he in all the agonies of despair.  They were that night to sleep at the castle, and on the following morning                  EARL OSRIC.          73

were to accompany Lady de Mornay back
to the Tower. As she was taking leave
of the Countess, that amiable woman pres-
sed her fondly to her bosom, exclaiming,
"Adieu sweetest Almina, heaven grant thy
fortune may be as fair as they form, and
may it in its great mercy avert from they
innocent head. the woes of they family."
This was the first time Almina had heard
even the most distant allusion to her
parents. "Ah Madam," said she, " may 
I hope the mystery of my birth will be
at some perio clucidated.-Am I ever to 
know from whence I derive my origin."
"Enquire not my child," said the Coun-
tess, " concerning a circumstance which
too soom for thy peace thou wilt know.
Now my Almina retire, and the God of
mercies take you to his protection." She 
then directed her to the apartment where
she would find Lady de Mornay and 
Elfrida, and bade her a good night. Al-
mina had never been in the Castle before,
but following the direction given her, she
VOL 1.           E74                    EARL OSRIC.

had no doubt she should easily explore her
way to Elfrida. The lamp she carried
shed a pale and glimmering light, she
passed quickly a long gallery from whence
she was to ascend a flight of stairs. She
had just reached the top, when a long
shadow appeared on the wall of the gal-
lery, and a figure glided past her, in whom
she seemed to recognize the self same hor-
rid form of a Nun, whom she had met in
the grounds adjoining the Monastery. Al-
mina felt terrified, she knew not why, and
hurried on to Elfrida's apartment, to
whom she imparted her second rencontre
with the Recluse Nun. Elfrida was at
first inclined to discredit her account, but
on Alimina's repeated assurance, she could
only express her wonder, and declare that
if there was such a person in the Castle it
was unknown to her. On the following
morning, they were to return early to the
Tower, but as they were preparing to set
out, and waited for Lady de Mornay, who
had gone to take leave of the Earl andEARL OSRIC.                       75

Countess, she came to them ànd brought with her permission for them to remain another day at the Castle, which had been granted at the êarnest entreaty of Sir Ethelred. Elfrida, whose gentle heart was devoted to her future Lord, could not but rejoice, and Almina was too lively in disposition to regret that their return to solitude was deferred.Lord St. Albert and the young Knights pursued the chase during the morning, and Elfrida and Almina were permitted to spend it with the Countess. From the ramparts of the Castle they saw the train set out, the horses all richly caparisoned, and each Knight as he passed opposite the ladies, making a low obeisance. Elfrida and Almina, were both veiled by desire of the Earl, who was a rigid observer of every from of female reserve, but returned the courtesy of the Knights by a bow.As soon as the train had disappeared, they
 retired from the ramparts to the apartments of Countess, who desired Almina76                    EARL OSRIC.

t strike the lute, that she might judge of her skill in music.Almina readily obeyed , and the Countess drawing the veil, which always shaded her still beautiful countenance, more over her face, wept silently during her performance. The voice of Almina was melody itself, and Earl Osric had taken pleasure in cultivating her taste.When she had concluded, Lady St. Albert, in a low voice said to her friend, "Oh, Matilda, what a gem has been too long hidden in obscurity."

"Yes, indeed," answered the more lively Lady de Mornay, "I can scarcely pardon Earl Osric, much as I regard, him for having so long concealed from the world one, who, I trust, will live to be one of its greatest ornaments." "Oh, that he could ---Oh, that it was impossible," exclaimed the Countess, then suddenly pausing, she added, smiling through her tears,"But it is not, and I must retire, that dear girl's melody has opened every wound which will still bleed afresh as long as                  EARL OSRIC         77

there yet remains on earth one being who
can recall her woes to the agonized mind
of Eloisa." So saying, she arose and left 
them. Ladies de Mornay tried to divert
the minds of her young charges from
dwelling on the last words of the Coun-
tess, but they remain imprinted in in-
delible characters of the mind of Almina,
though from the respect and veneration
she bore her benefactress, she refrained
from noticing them. The Countess re-
joined them, more composed, and the
remainder of the morning was passed in
common and instructive conversation. At the
return of the Knights they were again
present at the splendid banquet, and as
before, joined in the lively dance. The
young St. Albert was an elegant and brave
youth, his manners were noble and his
person Hansen and Manley. The charms
of Almina, had, at their first interview
forcibly struck him, and every hour since,
has increased his admiration. The sim-
plicity and innocence in her deportment

              E378       EARL OSRIC.

were as engaging as the beauty of her
form, and Lady St. Albert seemed to
remark with pleasure, the impression she
had made on the heart of her son. The
evening flew swiftly away, and Almina
saw with regret, the hour of retirement
arrive. "To-morrow, charming Almina!"
said St. Albert, at parting, "Thou wilt
withdraw from the eyes of  the world, to
peace and seclusion." "It is the will of 
your noble parents, Sir Knight," she an-
swered, "and their commands it is no
less my duty than my happiness to obey."
"Andy may I hope," rejoined Arthur,
"that this regard is in some degree extend-
ed to their son? "Assuredly," replied
Almina, "Every branch of a family so
honoured, is entitled to a portion of my
regard and will possess it. Adieu, Sir
Knight, I must retire." " Farewell lovely
Almina," said he, "Be but heaven propi-
tious to my prayers, and my happiness is 
insured." Almina noe hastened from
him, and followed Lady de Mornay and
                  EARL OSRIC.            79

Elfrida, who had quitted the saloon while
she was detained by St. Albert. She flew
through the hall, but did not overtake
them, and she hastened towards their
apartment. A glimmering lamp lighted
the great gallery, she traversed it with
quick steps, but had not reached the ter-
mination, when a form suddenly emerged
from that part which was involved in
shadow, and the ghastly figure of the
Recluse Nun, seemed again to glide from
her sight.--Involuntarily alarmed, she dart-
ed forward, and to Lady de Mornay related
what she had seen, but so incomprehensi-
ble did it appear, that she was only gently
cautioned not to allow the illusions
of the imagination to obtain influence
over her reason. "Confined as you have
hitherto been, my dear child," said Lady
de Mornay, "within the narrow limits of
our apartment, these spacious galleries
and numerous halls, these lofty roofs and
winding staircases, perplex and terrify
you, and in every shadow you fancy you

                     E 480              Earl Osric.

behold a spectre.  Retire now to rest, the soothing office of religion will calm your mind, and banish all vain fears."  Almina was silent, because her respect and timidity would not suffer her to oppose her own opinion, to that of her kind instructress, but she felt internally convinced of what she had asserted, though she also resolved to endeavour to banish the subject from her memory, and no more to mention her alarms. 

    On the following morning, the Countess was seized with an indisposition to which she was subject, and her spirits being greatly depressed, she early sent to inform Lady de Mornay, that she should require Almina's company for the whole day, and as there were several Knights at the Castle, requested, that she and Elfrida would preside at the banquet.  Almina instantly obeyed the summons, and with alacrity endeavoured to raise the depressed spirits of the Countess.  Her mind was better stored with intellectual knowledge than      EARL OSRIC.     81

was common at that remote period, for
Earl Osric was esteemed a prodigy of 
learning, and soaring far above the pre-
judices of the comparatively unenlighten-
ed age in which he lived, he had taken 
pains to impart to his adopted child, some 
of his own store of knowledge. In teach-
ing her to read, he had created an insati-
able thirst for books, but in gratifying it
he had studied the cultivation of her
heart and understanding, as well as her
amusement, The numerous books of
Chivalry, therefore, the old Legends and
Romances, with which the library at Osric
Castle had abounded, were very sparingly
allowed, but with history in general, she
was early made acquainted. Her Confes-
sor, Father Andrew, was a man of erudi-
tion--happily for Almina, he was no nar-
row minded bigot, but knowing enough
of the world, to be aware that the minds
of women, as well as those of men, re-
quired to be strengthened against its inevi-
table trials, he coincided in all Earl Osric's
     E 582               EARL OSRIC.

plans for the instruction of Almina, assist-
ed her studies, and while he taught her
the divine truths of religion, he prepared
her by general information for an inter-
course with the inhabitants of the world,
in which she was hereafter destined to
move. Lady St. Albert was astonished
and delighted at the rich fund of amuse-
ment she found in the conversation of a
little recluse just emerged from seclusion,
she was charmed with her music, and her 
griefs were lulled to temporary oblivion, 
by the enchanting melody of her voice.
The day flew swiftly. Towards the even-
ing, St. Albert came to his mother's
apartment, under pretence of enquiring
after her health. He entered while Al-
mina was attuning her lute to a lively air,
which she was singing. He stoped, and
made a sign that he might not interrupt
her: she concluded it while he stood with
his eyes fixed on her face, as if entranced
by admiration. When she ceased, he came
forward, and addressing his mother said,            EARL OSRIC.         83

"I came,madam, to ask after your health,
and to tell you the regret of the company
below, at your absence, but I knew not
how far preferably you were engaged, I
knew not the charming resource that be-
guiled your hours." " I believe neither
Almina or I have found the day too long,"
answered the Countess, "though I almost
fear this dear girl has wearied herself by
her efforts to amuse me." "Ah, madam!"
said Almina, "how ungrateful should I
be, and how much must I be altered,
should the task of amusing you ever be-
come fatiguing." "You are very good
Almina," said her patroness, "and it is
mere justice to say, that next to my Lord
and my children, you hold the first place
in my heart." Almina answered in terms
proportioned to the gratitude she felt. St.
Albert solicited her for another strain, and
his mother seconding him, she complied.
The time passed so swiftly with the en-
raptured St.Albert, that he thought no
more of returning to the banqueting-room,

                   E 684            EARL OSRIC

till reminded by her ladyship, that the
Earl would be displeased at his absence.
Three times was she obliged to repeat the
hint, e're he arose, and took a slow and re-
luctant leave. At the hour of retirement,
Almina left the Countess. She could not
help feeling rather alarmed, at the idea of
again encountering the mysterious recluse,
and with a quick step hurried through the
apartments. In the galleries, she scarcely
dared to cast a fearful look around her, but
she passed them, and nothing appeared to
terrify her. Rejoicing in the idea that
she had escaped and appearance so terrify-
ing, she hasily opened the door of Lady
Elfrida's dressing-room, and was about to
enter when a rustling noise near her made
her start around, and the figure of the Nun
distinctly glided past her, uttering in hol-
low accents, the world "Beware," and
instantly receded from her view. ALmina
rushed into the dressing-room, and sunk
on a seat.-Lady de Mornay and her
pupil had not left the company; a melan-     EARL OSRIC.     85

choly half hour, was therefore passed 
alone, and when they retired they found 
her pale and trembling, but she evaded all
enquiry, for abashed by Lady De Mornay's
reproof, the preceding evening, she had
determined to conceal her terrors, and
Elfrida was too much engaged in thinking
and talking of Sir Ethelred, of hi gallan-
try and his attentions, to notice her silence
and tremor.               CHAP.V.

       "She never told her love;
But let concealment, like a worm;'th' bud,
Feed on her damask cheek; she pin'd in thought;
And, with a green and yellow melancholy, 
She sat like Patience on a monument,
Smiling at grief."
                    SHAKSPEARE'S TWELFTH NIGHT.

 ALMINA rose at an early hour, and
joined Lady Elfrida, from whom she learn-
ed that as soon as they had taken leave of
the Earl and Countess, they were to bid
a temporary adieu to Castle. She
added that Sir Ethrlred had been very
anxious to have their marriage immedi-
ately solemnized, but that her father had
objected her extreme youth: it was, how-
ever, decided, that it should take place
within the next few months. When they                 EARL OSRIC.         87

entered the saloon to take leave of the
Earl and Countess, they found with them,
besides Arthur St. Albert, Sir Henry
Macdonald, a young Knight, whose warm 
admiration of Almina had been declared
by his looks, nor had he been able to con-
ceal his mortification when St. Albert so
wholly engaged her. He now advanced
towards her, and while Elfrida paid her
duty to her parents and Lady de Mornay
had addressed St. Albert, he whispered,
"We are now to lose you beautious Al-
mina, and I am to be deprived even of the
poor delight of beholding you, of contemp-
lating a form so lovely, yet so dangerous."
Almina only bowed to this compliment,
and headded, "Not for one moment have I,
till now, been able to address you unheard,
to tell you the feelings of a heart, which
from the first moment I beheld you, was
devoted to you alone." At this embar-
rassing moment, Arthur, who had disen-
gaged himself from Lady de Morney, ap-
proched them, and interrupted the ardent88    EARL OSRIC.

speeches of this new admirer. He like-
wise deplored her departure, till his father
prevented all further converse, by sum-
moning Arthur to attend him, and Almina
accompanied Lady de Mornay and Elfrida
back to the Tower.

  Lady Elfrida was now busily employed
with her maidens in preparations for her
approaching nuptials. Her young heart
was fondly devoted to her future Lord, and
the hope of near advacing happiness,
seemed to have repressed the extreme grief
which her sister's fate had at first excited.
Almina having nothing to look forward to,
was sorry to quit the gaiety of the Castle,
and would willingly have remained there
some time longer. The life they led at
the Tower, was monotonous, and but for the
cheerfulness of her natural temper, she
might have thought it dull, had not the
solitary years she had passed from infancy
rendered the contrast delightful. In the
society of Lady Elfrida and her attendant
damsels, with them engaged at the loom,
                    Earl Osric.                   89

or the tapestry frame, her native vivacity
appeared, and her lute was a never failing
resource.  In the conversation of the
work room, she could seldom join, the
young companions of Lady Elfrida bit-
terly deplored their confinement to the
moated Tower, and anxiously anticipated
the period when their young Lady's mar-
riage would change the scene to Douglas
Castle, which doubtless the youth and
gallantry of Sir Ethelred, must render gay
and charming. Tilts, masques, and tour-
naments, swam before their sight, and the 
many knights they were to captivate, 
hints of expected conquests, and the hap-
piness that was to result from their new
mode of life, formed their principal sub-
jects. Almina listened to them with
wonder, and whispered innuendos, half utter-
ed, reached her ears, She did not com-
prehend their import, and the native dig-
nity of her air and manner prevented the 
tattlers from making her a party in their90             Earl Osric.

prattle, though her early youth and evident inexperience, took from them the restraint, which they would otherwise have felt before her as a stranger.  Wearied by their incessant chatter, she proposed on the day following, that of their return to the Tower, to visit Adeliza.  "We have not seen your sister for some time,"  said she to Elfrida, "shall we not visit her and relate our excursion to the Castle."  Elfrida, who was engaged with her favourite confident, in emboidering a scarf, designed for Sir Ethelred, declined it till the next day, but said she was sure Lady de Mornay would suffer an attendant to go with her.  "It may be best," said she, "Adeliza will be uneasy that she sees us not."  Lady de Mornay readily gave permission, and Lady Elfrida retired to pursue her labours with Isabel, her favoured companion, whom she had selected from all the damsels, for her confidential attendent.  The artful flattery, and obsequious attention of Isabel's man-                   Earl Osric.                 91

 ner,did not escape Almina,but she was
so new to the world,that it was impossi-
ble to pretend the duplicity of the con-
fidant,who,proud of the Lady Elfida's
favour,exulted over her companions an
affected superiority. Alima was often
amused with her airs of consequence,and
despised her for her mean adulation,but
as she preserved the same propriety and
affability in her deportment towards all,
she had nothing to fear or hope from them.

 Attended by Mabel, one of the most
simple and least assuming among the dam-
sels,and a man servant, Almina proceed-
ed to the convent. Adeliza rejoiced to
see her,she looked pale,thin and dejected.

 "How good you are dear Almina," said
she, "thus kindly to visit one lost to all
the charm of society,all the dear delights
you are destined to experiance." She then
inquired after her sister,and heard of her
approching nuptials with a calm despair
that shocked Almina. "Happy beloved
elfrida,"said she, "Oh,may her change92                EARL OSRIC.

of situation, insure to her that felicity,
her virtues, her sisterly affection to the
wretched Adeliza, so eminently merit; and may she, in her own innate happiness, lose 
all remembrance of the only alloy there
can be to her bliss, in the fate marked out
for her sister of hr heart, "then pausing,
she added, " I see your surprise, Alimina, 
but to you I may indulge the sad effusion
of a wretechedness that surely has no equal.
Never dare I suffer it to appear in the pre-
sence of my Elfrida, or my dear Lady de
Mornay, lest it should reach the ears of
an already offended parent; but your gen-
tleness will, I know pity and pardon me."
Almina soothed, and tried to offer her
consolation, but she seemed past receiving
any. She shed no tears, but the most
heart rending sighs escaped her, and the 
deep and deadly woe her still lovely coun-
tenance betrayed, evinced the inward
agony she endured. Young and inexpe-
perienced as Almina was, there still appear-
ed to her, to be some mystery in the deep-


  

               EARL OSRIC.          93

rooted aversion she avowed for a monastic
life. This she innocently mentioned, and
the colour that had so long fled her pallid
cheeks, immediately flushed the languid
countenance of Adeliza; for a moment, the
lustre of her now dimmed eyes was renewed,
and she arose and walked in evident con-
fusion up the room. At lenght returning
toward her. " Excuse, dear Almina,"
she cried, "this seeming perturbation, 
and indulge me with a promise that you
will not mention any onconsistency you
may have observed in me; your mild
sweetness of disposition, had endeared you
to my sorrowing heart, and when we meet
again, I will endeavour to account for 
what has doubtless surprised you. To-
day my mind is unusually disturbed; but
alas! that composure, which ought ever to
be the frame of mind most sought after
by those who engage in my scared voca-
tion, it has never yet been the fate of
Adeliza to attain. One impenetrable 
cloud of darkness hovers over my destiny,94             EARL OSRIC.

and my feeble endeavours are inadequate
to disperse it. Adieu for the present-
commend me to my loved Elfrida, and our
revered Lady de Mornay."

  Almina now too her leave, and set out
on her return to the castle. She walked
pensively through the forest that led to
the Tower, and had nearly attained the
centre, when as she passed a close embow-
ering thicket, she heard a rustling among
the bushes, and a voice close to her ear
exclaimed, "Almina, dear Almina, one
moment stop." She started and beheld a
figure much muffled up, emerge from the
thicket. He caught her habit, while
greatly alarmed, she struggled to get free,
Mabel and the servant who followed them,
now appeared, and the stranger, who
seemed to have expected to meet her 
alone exclaimed, "Unfortunate! my de-
sign is frustrated. Oh, beloved Almina!
Remember my voice, and do not banish
the speaker from your recollection." As
he pronounced these words, Mabel and the                    EARL OSRIC.                  95

servant drew near, and the stranger plung-
ed precipitly into the thicket, and disap-
peared. They hurried with as much 
speed as possible to the Tower, where the
terrified countenance of Almina betrayed
her late alarm. She related the incident,
and on conversing with Lady de Mornay
on the subject, she acknowledged that she
could only guess it to be either St. Albert,
or Sir Henry Macdonald, but their suspi-
cions chiefly rested on the latter, who
Lady de Mornay said, was a romantic,
though sensible young man, and should
he ever again attempt to address her in the
same clandestine manner, she herself
would undertake to prevent it in the future.
Almina in pursuance of her promise, men-
tioned not the melancholy frame of mind
in which she had found Adeliza, but re-
quested permission to visit her every
day alone, if Elfrida was engaged. The
latter was so wholly occupied in complet-
ing her work, and so fond of the indul-
gence of talking of Sir Ethelred to he96           Earl Osric.

favourite Isabel, that she readily acceded
to the proposal, and Almina, to whom
the work room conversation was more than
ever irksome, and whose natural humanity
led her sincerely to pity Adeliza's fate, lost no opportunity of trying, by her society,
and gentle friendship, to ameliorate its 
horrors. She was too young and inex-
perienced to be aware that Adeliza was
wrong in giving way to the spirit of repin-
ing, which it was evident she indulged,
nor though her strong mind was capable
of receiving every good impression, had it
been yet sufficiently enlightened to point
out to her the superior duties which ought
to have engaged the attention of the un-
fortunate novice, and taught her to sub-
mit with resignation, to the parental
decree.

  It was on a beautiful evening, that once
more she took her way to the Monastery,
guarded by the orders of Lady de Mornay,
by two servants, and enjoined to return
before the shades of light should expose          EARL OSRIC.     97

her to further alarms. In turning an an-
gle of the wall that surrounded the con-
vent, a figure abruptly passed them, which
she fancied resembled that of the person she
had met in the wood, but the view was tran-
sient and he was immediately out of sight.
She hastened on, and was received by the
Abbess with her accustomed stately polite-
ness. The holy mother greatly admir'd
the young protegee of the Countess, and
having heard as much of her history, as
was known to Adeliza, flattered herself
with the hope of so lovely an addition to
her sisterhood. She had in the occasional
visits of Almina, remarked the piety and 
innocence depicted on her blooming coun-
tenance, and said she seem'd formed for a 
conventional life, and influenced by her
wishes, she received her now as before
with as much affability as the general
formality of her manners would permit
her to shew. After some time she retired,
and send Adeliza; she looked hurried and98                 EARL OSRIC.

confused. At length "I have been greatly
shocked" said she "my sweet friend since
I last saw you, by a recollection of what
then passed and fear you must think me
very culpable, in declaring myself resigned,
to those who have a right to know the
real state of my mind, while I internally
nourish meditations so fatal to my repose,
but, you will judge I trust less harshly of
me when you reflect, that I endeavour to
appear happy, because I wish not to 
disturb the peace of a beloved sister, and
a mother whose value, my Almina, is be-
yond all estimate. You know lady St.
Albert, and may therefore imagine what
a woman of her exquisitely acute feelings
must have suffered on being separately
from a child she loved.
   The agonies of death can, I think, be
scarcely more excrutiating, than those
with which she tore herself from my arms,
on the fatal day I left the dear castle to be
immured within these walls. Of a dispo-                    EARL OSRIC.                  99

sition far more resembling her own than
my sister, I was always the favourite of
my adored mother. Elfrida has an excel-
lent heart, but she possesses, as you may
have observed a happy indifference of tem-
per which I can never hope to attain.
This she inherits from my father, as
well as a greater portion of his laudable
pride, than nature ever bestowed on me.
Our separation cost her at first many bitter
pangs, for never before had our fates been
divided, but that peculiarity of disposition
which I have mentioned, has reconciled
her to the loss, and her own complete fell-
city will soon, very soon, efface all recol-
lection of Adeliza's sorrows from her
breast."

She ceased and a deep drawn sigh burst
from her bosom

"I grieve" said Almina "to find you
are still so averse to the monastic life, like
Elfrida I hoped you had really be-
come reconciled to the duties it enjoins."

                       2100                 FARL OSRIC.

         "Ah! how evident is it that you know
but little of the heart of her you address,"
cried Adeliza, her fine eyes assuming a 
wildness of expression that almost alarmed 
Almina.

         "Oh Elfrida!" she added clasping her
hands. "Is it possible you can for a mo-
ment suppose that the natural ardour of
affection, the fine susceptibility of nature
can at once be extinguished by the fervors
of religious zeal and all my native sensibi-
lity sunk in the calm of devotion ? Alas!
how far am I from feeling that holy and
devout tranquility which ought to possess
the minds of those who devote themselves
to God. Never shall I be fit to approach
his altar, if a total renunciation of all
worldly attachments must first be made.
Yes, dear Almina," she added, her counte-
nance growing still more wild and dis-
ordered. "To you I will dare to avow all
my anguish. For oh, adored as is my an-
gel mother, fondly beloved as ever will be 
my darling Elfrida, much as I owe to the                EAL OSRIC.         101

revered friend who has reared me from
infancy; there is another, and a dearer
sacrifice which I am compelled to make.
Yes Almina there is a heart, which when
the last black veil shall for ever conceal
Adeliza from the eye of the world, will
assuredly cease to beat, and the moment
that confines me a nun will seal the miscry
of one for whom how willingly would I
resign that precarious blessing existence."
   She ceased, and Almina who trembled
at the agitation she beheld, and was too
artless to comprehend her whole meaning
sat in silent wonder.
  "I see" said Adeliza, "your utter amaze-
ment. I see you are shocked at my 
guilt."
  " Indeed," said Almina," I scarcely  
understand you, nor can I see any guilt
in your regret at parting from friends so
deservedly beloves."-
  Adeliza looked at her for a moment and 
then turning away her head.-"Alas my
innocent friend" said she "how little then

                     F 3





















102              EARLY OSRIC.

are you aware that there is another being
exclusive of my own family, from whom
it is more than death to part. Oh
Almina; how will you be shocked
when I tell you, that before the novice's
veil incircled the brows of the hapless
Adeliza, her heart ad fled from her
bosom, and sought shelter in that of a 
youth whom chance brought to my
knowledge, but whose fascinating 
still reigns in the mind, which unhappily
received and inedible impression of his
merit. Unlike Sir Ethelred Douglas, he
has it not in his power to offer wealth and
rank to the portionless object of his love,
or gladly would both have been laid at
my feet, nor would his circumscribed
fortune suffer him to address himself
publicly to the Earl of St. Albert, but
content in the humble vale of mediocrity,
till his ill fate made him known to me,
he sighed not for riches nor honours :
now, how joyfully would both beEARL OSRIC.                      103
purchased,that he might rescue her he loves from the destiny that awaits her.But never can it be;for the last time have thee eye beheld the form,that will ever live in my heart, while life animates my frame;---nor blame me I beseech you dear gentle Almina.---never, never, may you know the struggle I endure, never may you become the victim of a passion, destructive to the peace of those who once unwarily admit its banéful influence".

To Almina this conversation was entirely new;she could form no idea how it was possible for affection for those who deserved it to be the cause of wretchedness such as she now witnessed.Adeliza had only time to make her give a solemn promise of secresy as to what she had imparted, before the Abbess again appeared, and the novice bidding her a melancholy adieu she retraced her steps to the tower.But the late interview dwelt on her mind;in vain she tried to comprehend the situation of Adeliza, till ideally placing


                     F4104                    EARL OSRIC.

herself in it, at once the conviction of
her friend's extreme misery was felt.
  "For sure," thought she, "if I were
to be destined for a nun and at once to
lose all hope of over being restored to
the presence of my first my best bene-
factor, of ever being permitted to hear of,
or to address him, I too should be most
miserable; yet what in me would be duty
and gratitude, must in Adeliza be error,
because she cannot be attached by those
ties to this captivating stranger, and in
allowing herself to love him, she is dis-
obeying the will of her parents. Oh that
I too had parents to obey and love! how
different would be my conduct, I think,
from that of Adeliza."
   The reflection led her into a train of
thoughts the most melancholy and de-
pressing, which never failed to recur when
any circumstance brought the mystery of
her origin to her recollection, and vainly
she sighed for the knowledge of those to
whom she owed her existance. She had
               Earl Osric               105

ample time and opportunity to meditate on the late scene and to indulge the reflections to which it gave birth.

     Elfrida was more than ever engaged with thinking of, and preparing for her approaching happiness".  The insensibility she had lately shown to her sister's fate seemed gradually to increase, and Almina, in silence, wondered that she would anticipate felicity while the sister once so dear to her was wreched for ever; but Almina was new to the world and a stranger to the human heart - she was ignorant of the name and nature of the selfishness that degrades it, that too often deadens the feelings of affinity, and for ever expels those fine susceptibilities from the heart, which when corrected by reason, and governed by prudence, are the greatest ornaments of humanity.

                    F 5               CHAP. VI.

 I pray thee shepherd, if that love, or gold, 
Can in this desert place buy entertainment,
Bring us where we may rest ourselves, and feel a
Here's a young maid travel much oppress'd,
And faints for succour."

                         AS YOU LIKE IT.

 The image of the wretched Adeliza
was not effaced by sleep from the memory
of Almina. In her dreams she beheld
her, and she awaoke only to think of the
poor novice and her sorrows. She found
Elfrida novice and her sorrows. She found
Elfrida already arisen and employed in 
completing the broad gold border, which 
edged the rich scarf, that was to decorate
the figure of Sir Ethelred."Shall you not visit, dear Adeliza to-
day?" said Almina as she approached the 
window at which Elfrida sat with Isabel.

  "I fear" answered she "that my work
will not be finished, but if it be, I will 
gladly accompany you to the convent in 
the evening. Sir Ethelred will be at the 
castle to-morrow night, and my Lady Mo-
ther is to present him with the scarf on
his arrival." "Poor Adeliza!" said Al-
mina, sighing. "How I wish it was 
possible that she could partake in those 
rejoicings which will probably be the 
consequence of Sir Ethelred's next visit
to the castle."

  "Poor lady!" cried Isabel-"It must
be a dismal life to be obliged to pray and
tell one's beads from morning to night-
I would not be a nun for the world, would
you lady?"

  "Holy Virgin!" cried Beatrice, ano-
tgher of the damsels, "it is well for you,
Isabel, that Father Anthony is out of 
hearing, he would certainly penance you."

                      6

108           EARL OSRIC.

 "Heaven be praise," said the flippant 
Isabel, " we shall soon b out of the 
reach of his penances. I hope the con-
fessor at Douglas Castle will be more 
aggeeable, and better suited to my lady's
years, than poor old Father Anthony. I
am sure Sir Etherlred would not suffer
such an one to be a part of his household.
He is too gay and gallant to permit us to
be penanced and lectured, till we look as 
thin and as woe begone as the old Friar 
himself."

Everybody laughed at this from Isabel
whose ruddy countenance was the very
reverse of her own description.

"The severity of our father confessor, 
has not, however, had that effect on thee
yet Isabel," said Almina.-" No thanks
to him though," answered she,-" he is 
always lecturing me, on what he calls my
pertnesss, and read me a sermon of an 
hour and three quarters long, the other
day, by the great clock over the arched
gate way, only because I happened to say               EARL OSRIC.       109

that kneeling so much did not agree with
me."

  The entrance of the Father himself, in-
terrupted Isabel's further complains, and
immediately she was as mute and hum-
ble, as before she had been voluble and
per; for notwithstanding all her boast-
ing, she stood in complete awe of their
spiritual director, who had often found
it necessary to check her flippancy.

  The important task of Elfrida being
concluded, she prepared to accompany Al-
mina in the evening to the monastry. -
They were attended by Isabel and two men
servants. Adeliza met them with to-
lerable composure, but was soon as her eyes
met those of Almina, a crimson hue
flushed her interesting countenance, and
she turned her head away. The discourse
chiefly consisted of anticipations on the
part of Elfrida, and in repetitious of their
late gaiety at the castle.

  Inexperienced as she was, Almina
thought this conversation ill calculated to110     EARL OSRIC.

give comfort to Adeliza or to reconcile her
to a life of seclusion.  Her part in it was
evidently supported with difficulty, and
the words frequently died away unpro-
nounceà on her lips. And now Almina
plainly perceived that difference in the
characters of the sisters, which Adeliza
herself bad pointed out to her observation.
She saw that Elfrida, though she pos-
sessed much sisterly affection, had none of
that excessive acuteness of felling, which
unhappily was the distinguishing charac-
teristic of the poor recluse.

   The native pride of ancestry, which
the former inherited from her father, was
gratified by her approaching union, and
she would rather have seen the blooming
Adeliza consigned for life to the monastry,
than that she should have degraded her
noble birth by an inferior alliance.  Far
different would her sister have felt, had
their situations been exchanged, nor could
the sensitive Adeliza have enjoyed unal-
loyed peace, while that of Elfrida was            EARL OS RIC.           111
    
    endangered-Some thing of this kind had
    escaped her in conversation with Lady de
    Mornay, on the subject of the sisters, the 
    day before, after her return from the 
    convent, and the answer of that excellent
    woman, had at once silenced and con-
    vinced her.
         "Providence my dear Almina," said
    she "Knows what is best for us. Heaven 
    often sces fit to try us by aiming at the 
    predominant passion. The excess of even
    an amiable quality may be reprehensible;
    and the extreme sensibility of Adeliza
    needed correction. Resignation to her
    parents' will, would in her be no merit, if
    it accorded with her own. The piety of
    her early years had taught me to hope
    better things from her, than an indulgence
    of vain repining, and even now there seems
    some strange mystery in her conduct."
         Lady de Mornay did not look at Almi-
    na as she spoke, or she might have read
    in her varying countenance that her bo-
    som was the repository of Adeliza's secret.
112               EARL OSRIC.

Most unwillingly she kept it and deeply
she pondered on exhorting adeliza to
suffer her to disclose it to their maternal
friend; but no opportunity now occurred
to speak to her apart. silent and dejected 
the pensive novice sat listening to Elfrida's 
animated recitals, and occasionally casting
glances of strong anxiety at Almina. The
latter saw with pain the exertion it cost
her to disguise her innate wretchedness
from the eye of her sister, and to relieve
her from their presence, early proposed 
their departure. Adeliza contrary to her
usual custom did not press their longer
stay, and they arose to say adieu. Almi-
na lingered a moment behind to say some
words of consolation to her sorrowing
friend. Elfrida was gone forward with
the Abbess, who attended her through a 
spacious gothic hall. vast, lofty, and
gloomy one dim lamp cast a pale light
in the centre, but the extremities were
lost in darkness. Long arched passages
branched off from it, and as Almina with
                 Earl Osric.                     113

 light quick step flew on to overtake Lady
Elfrida,who had already reached the fold-
ing doors,a form rushed from beneath a
dark low arch in an obscure part of the
hall,and from amidst the folds of her dis-
mal veil the pallid haggard countenance of
the recluse nun once more met her view.
Her spectre-like hands were clapsed, and
as she darted past Almina her sepulchral
voice uttered distinctly these words:
"Beware and venture not from hence
to-night"

 She was instantly out of sight, and at
the same moment the Abbess re-entered
the hall,and told her that the Lady El-
frida awaited her at the outer gate. A
chilly dread came over Almina, and as the
Abbess did not pause but with stately
pace moved forward,she had no alterna-
tive but to follow her friend. Elfrida
called to her to hasten lest they should be
overtaken by darkness,before they could
reach the tower. They proceeded quickly
on, Elfrida was never very talkative,un-114             EARL OSRIC.

less Sir Ethelred was the subject, and Al-
mina's recent alarm inspired no inclina-
tion to converse ; but Isabel was not so
taciturn, she was no sooner clear of the
convent gates, than she began her usual
theme, her horror of a conventional life.
Pitying the Lady Adeliza, congratulating
Elfrida and ridiculing the Abbess in a
breath. "And then such a dismal place,"
said she, "can any thing equal that dun-
geon-like hall, with those dark arches,
and gloomy niches. - Holy Virgin! I
should expect the ghost of some old nun,
of friar, would pop out upon me every
time I passed them."

  This speech, of all Isabel had uttered,
only reached the ear of Almina, but she
seemed to ahve realized the apprehensions
of their thoughtless attendant, for the
ghastly form she had seen, certainly rather
resembled an inhabitant of the tomb, than
of the earth, and she shuddered at the
awful idea.

  Isabel's tongue, unchecked by Elfrida,                   Earl Osric.        115

who was amused by her rattle, ran on flippantly, till they reached the centre of the wood, when suddenly stopping, she asked the party if they heard no sound - They all answered in the negative, and in a few minutes the question was repeated "I do, your ladyship," said one of the servants who followed them, before any other answer could be given, "I have thought two or three times, that I heard the trampling of horse's hoofs, behind those high trees yonder."  Isabel declared it was the very sound that had alarmed her and Elfrida, entreated them to hasten on, but, hardly had she spoken, when a party of armed men rushed from a neighbouring thicket, and surrounded them. - Almina was seized by two fierce looking figures, while the rest attacked Elfrida and the attendants.  Poor Almina could only struggle in vain within the herculean grasp that compelled her forward through a thick close part of the forest.  A handkerchief was thrown over her head, and 116            EARL OSRIC.

confined her veil close over her face. She
attempted to scream, to beg for mercy,
but fruitless were all her efforts, her tongue
seemed mute, utterance was denied her,
and not the faintest murmur escaped her
lips. The extreme velocity with which
she was borne along, almost deprived her
of her senses, she was recalled to recolloc-
ation by being suddenly placed on a horse
before some person who rode off with her
at a full gallop. Her ideas were still con-
fused, and she only involuntarily attempt-
ed to loosen her veil, which was tied
tightly down over her head, but her arms
seemed confined, and she found she could
not raise them,

 The continued to proceed with a 
swiftness of motion that astonished, as
much as it alarmed her. Incessantly, and
without relaxing from the same speed,
they flew on for several hours, when, at
once, they stopped, she was taken from
her horse, conveyed into a building, and
her veil being loosened, she found herself                     EARL OSRIC.           117

in a small mean-looking room, with high
narrow windows. A table with some pro-
visions was placed before her, and a man
who held the door in his hand, bade her
partake of what was set before her, and
disappeared. But though exhausted by
fatigue and terror, she had no inclination
to eat, and placing herself on the only
seat the apartment afforded, she in vain
tried to guess, who could be guilty of such
an outrage, and unhackney'd in the ways
of men, she could not divine what motive
any human being could have for an action
so unjustifiable. While various conjec-
tures harrassed her mind, and bewildered
her ideas, the same man again appeared,
and told her they must be off, for that
they had to travel all night, before they
again stopped, and advised her as that
must be the case, to take some refresh-
ment, but this she declined, and while he
spoke, her eyes were rivetted with intense
earnestness on his person, but it was too
effectually concealed, by a close disguise
118     EARL OSRIC.

and a masque, to allow her to recognize it,
the voice too, was low and seemed to affect
concealment. She implored him earnestly
to tell her where she wat to be conveyed,
and for what purpose. "Excuse me, lady,"
said the man, "I can only tell you that
happiness and splendour await you, when
again we stop, I may be able to tell you
more."

   Again he threw the handkerchief over
her head, and led her from the room.
She heard no voices, and was placed as
before on a horse, and with the same
speed as before, he rode away with her.

  They seemed to traverse the air, so great
was the speed with which they travelled,
but at times Almina fancied she heard the
sound of more horses near them, though
not a word was spoken, and the journey
proceeded in profound silence.

   Almina's reflections far from soothing,
made her more and more miserable. What
would the Countess, what would Lady de
Mornay, and more than all, what would              EARL OSRIC.        119

the Earl say to her sudden disappear-
ance; She trembled for the fate of Elfri-
da, and was so overcome by apprehension,
and a combination of terrors, that when a
second time taken from her horse, she was
borne fainting through a paved court yard,
into a house, where she was deposited on
a couch, and on reviving found herself in
a handsome, though not a large room
richly furnished, and as before, refresh-
ments prepared for her. Her guide in-
formed her, that as it was now the dawn
of morning, she would remain there all
day, and was advised to try to repose. A
door was pointed out to her observation, 
which opened into a bed-chamber, evi
dently prepared for her reception. The
man told her, that if she required any
thing more, she must ring the bell, and
was moving to leave the room, but Al-
mina addressing him, said, "You told
me that when we again rested, you might
inform me for what place and purpose I
am destined. Oh! fulfil, I conjure you,120             Earl Osric.

your promise, and let me, at least, know what is to be my fate."

    "Your fate! lady," said the stranger, "must be enviable.  A Knight, who adores you, is waiting your arrival, many miles from hence, and to night we set out for the place where he is to meet you, and where all that grandeur and wealth can give, will court your acceptance.  At present, I shall say no more, you will doubtless, guess 'who it is that runs these hazards for your sake."
    
    "Oh! no," said Almina, "I know not any person who could thus cruelly tear me from my friends."

     "Lady," interrupted the stranger, "it is vain to talk further on the subject, and you must be content to wait, till our employer himself shall disclose the truth to you.  In a few hours you will know all, for before sun-rise to-morrow, I hope to deliver you to his care.  You had better now try to gain refreshment by sleep.  I am the only person you will see while you              EARL OSRIC.             121

remain here.-An hour after it is dark, we
shall again set forward."

  So saying, he retired, and Almina enter-
ed the bed-chamber. She was overcome
with fatigue and threw herself on the bed,
where apprehensions and uneasiness gave
way to weariness, and she sunk into a
slumber, which lasted for some hours.

  The sun shone into the room, and she
awoke, she arose and walked to the win-
down, it was securely grated, and looked into
an inner court of the building; but the
weather was fine, and all around looked
cheerful. With added bitterness she now
reflected on the anguish Lady. St. Albert
would endure on her account, and still she
hareassed herself with conjectures, as to
the author of the outrage; Sir Henry
Maedonald was the only one she could
suspect, and her stronger suspicions still
rested on him.

  Breakfast was prepared for her in the
next room, but no person appeared, and
all seemed as if conducted by enchat- 122               EARL OSRIC.

ment. The hours moved slowly on, her
guide did not re-appear, and as her eyes
wandered round her apartment, in search
of some employment or amusement, she 
observed a small door, which the resem-
blance to the tapestry hangings almost
concealed. She found it locked, and
rather from a desire to find some occupa-
tion, than from any other motive, she
tried the key which was in the door of
the other room, it turned in the lock, and
disclosed to her view a passage, at the end
of which was a window. She approached 
it, and was surprised to find that it looked
into a forest; it was nor grated, and very
low. It instantly struck her that it might
present the means of escape, and unmind-
ful of consequences, ignorant of the dis-
tance from Castle St.Albert, of of any
mode of conveyance there, she resolved
to attempt it, but the hope of liberty
made her cautious, and first she returned
to her chamber. Scarcely had she re-
entered it, and closed the newly found            Earl Osric.          123

door, when her conductor entered the outer room, and informed her that he expected her to be read in two hours, to re-commence their journey.  He set more provisions on the table, and disappeared.  The moment that the sound of his receding steps died on her ear,she flew again to the window in the passage, and forcing it open, stepped up, and with one leap jumped to the ground.  She felt at first stunned by the fall, but soon recovering, found herself unhurt, and fled into the forest.  The trees were thickly interwoven; but she heeded not trifling difficulties, and darted through the obscure and winding paths, with incredible speed.  She paused not to take breath, but continued to plunge into deep tangled thickets, and a pathless wild, almost impervious to the rays of a fine summer sun.

    Breathless and almost exhausted, she was at last compelled to rest, she felt faint, for she had refused to taste the repast prepared for her, and the exercise and anxiety124             EARL OSRIC.

had so completely fatigued her, that she
felt unable to proceed much further. "Oh,
for some friendly shepherd's hut, where I
might procure a drop of milk to allay this
parching thirst," thought she. Happy
sight! in another minute she saw the
thatched roof of a cottage, peeping
through the brushwood, and she darted
forward to implore the aid, which every
moment became more necessary; but at
this moment, loud voices reached her ear
in the same direction. Fear magnified
them into the hoarse tones of her pursuers,
and regardless of rest or refreshment,
thirst or fatigue, she sprang into another
path, and with the same unremitting dili-
gence, continued er weary way. Soon
the path widened, the forest trees were
less thick and entangled. Other voices
broke on her ear, and in another moment
she beheld through the bushes, a sight
which first arrested her weary steps. A
large party, who by the richness of their
habits, and number of attendants, were of        EARL OSRIC.    125

rank was seated on rustic seats, placed
in a circular green, formed out of the
wood.  Along table stood in the midst,
with a magnificent collation spread on it,
and all seemed mirth and gaiety.  Several
musical instruments struck up, and a sweet
female voice warbled a wild ballad, and
made the woods re-echo her melody.  Al-
mina listened in speechless astonishment,
while a friendly thicket concealed her
from the view of the strangers.  The
young female, who had been singing, ap-
peared to her, a fine model of beauty, her
lovely countenance, magnificent habit,
and waving plumage enchanted the poor
wanderer.

  A few minutes had elapsed, when a 
sudden and loud trampling of horses
reached her ear, and looking round, she
beheld a party of men on horseback, push-
ing through the brushwood, and in the
foremost, with inexpressible horror, recog-
nized him who had carried her off.  He
gave a loud shout at sight of her, and Al-
126    EARL OSRIC.

mina, uttering a piercing shriek, plunged
through the thicket, and rushed into the 
midst of the party, who at a sight so un-
expexted, all arose confussion. A voice,
a well known voice, exclaimed, " Great 
God! do I beholf Almina " She could 
not answer, but darting forward, she
sunk senseless into arms of Earl Osric.                 CHAP. V11.

"This shadowy desert, unfrequented woods,
I better brook than flourishing people towns."
                     TWO GENTLEMAN OF VERONA.

"To day, my Lord of Amiens and myself,
Did steal behind him, as he lay along
Under an oak, whose autique root peeps out
Upon the brook that brawls along this wood."
                         AS YOU LIKE IT.


RECOVERING from the temporary
insensibility into which fatigue, alarm, and 
agitation, had combined to throw her,
Almina found herself in a lofty chamber,
extended on a rich bed. The high cano-
py, under which she reclined, was of
velvet, trimmed with a magnificent fringe,
but all was strange to her eyes--Two
female attendants stood by the couch, and
a lady, of a beautiful and gentle aspect,
 128             EARL OSRIC.

was busied in applying restoratives, when
she saw the eyes of her patient unclose,
and that she cast an inquiring glance
around, she took her hand, and with an 
air of kindness, said, "Where am I ?" asked
Almina, anxiously-" You are in perfect
safety,"-the lady answered, " and under
the protection of your friend Earl Osric.
" Oh, where is he ?" cried Almina, look-
ing eagerly round. " He is under this 
roof," replied the stranger, " and when
you have sufficiently recovered the effects
of your late alarm will rejoice to see you,"
She now imposed silence, and gave her a 
reviving medicine. Almina soon found 
her strength and spirits revive, but as it
was late, was not permitted to rise that
night. " Not to keep you in suspense,"
said the lady, " I will inform you that
you are in the Castle of De Mowbray.
Sir Orlando de Mowbray,my lord, is the 
early friend of Earl Osric, and it was for-
tunately within the vicinity of our castle,

                     EARL OSRIC.          129

that you yesterday experienced the alarm,
which made you an inmate here. Anxi-
ous as the Earl is, to know the cause of
your sudden appearance, he submits to
remain in suspense till to-morrow, that
you may have time to recruit your ex-
hausted strength, and by me, charges you,
dear Almina, to think only of repose."

     Almina would have expressed her grati-
tude, but she was silenced by Lady de
Mowbray, who continued with her till a
late hour, when finding she was inclined
to sleep, she left an attendant with her,
for the night, and returned to the Earl,
who waited her report in extreme anxiety.
He was relieved by hearing the account
she brought, but it could not dissipate the
perturbation which an event so unexpect-
ed had raised in his bosom.

     He had been a constant resident at De
Mowbray, since Almina's admission into
the family of St. Albert, and had divided
his time between his friend Sir Orlando,
and the Fitz Oswald family. Grand pre-

                     G 5130     EARL OSRIC.

parations had for some time been making
for his nuptials, and every magnificence
that art could devise was destined to dis-
play the Baron's joy on the occasion. The 
future bride was the intimate friend of 
Lady de Mowbray, and was frequent visi-
tor to her. The Earl was every hour a 
more fervent admirer of her virtues, her 
sweetness of temper, and amiable disposi-
tion; and the respectful attention he 
showed her, was mistaken by the world,
for the passion which he ardently wished
he could have felt for her. Sir Orlando
had always been greatly puzzled on the
subject. He alone, was convinced that 
by friendship only, was the Earl attached
to Lady Eleanora. Yet he knew the heart 
of his friend to be warm and affectionate,
and his feelings, far to finely susceptible
for his peace. It was a mystery he could
not solve; nor had any event occurred that
seemed likely to elucidate it, till the 
moment of Almina's sudden appearance,
but to his own breast were his suspicions                  Earl Osric.           131

confined, and from his Lady was he more particularly anxious to conceal it.  Long devotedly partial to Lady Eleanora, never had she, for an instant, admitted a doubt, that she was the choice of Osric's heart, and her enthusiastic friendship for both, led her to rejoice at their approaching union.  It had been the custom of the Fitz Oswald family, to celebrate the anniversary of the day that gave birth to Lady Eleanora, with the utmost magnificence, but now, her Ladyship was unwilling to mix in concerts, or be brought forward to notice at the tournaments that must form a part of the rejoicings, and she prevailed on her noble parents to allow the poor to be regaled as usual, but to suffer only a select circle of their particular friends, to hail her natal-day, at the Castle.  SiR Orlando de Mowbray and his Lady, were of course included.

    The family minstrels were stationed in a beautiful wood, adjoining the Castle of de Mowbray, a favourite spot of Lady


             G6132    EARL OSRIC.

Eleanora, and a cold collation prepared
there. The banquet from its novelty and
privacy, was more delicious to the fair
Heroine of the day, than the sumptuous
repasts served up in the halls of her father,
her spirits were gay and elastic. They
danced on the mostly carpet, and alter-
nately contributed to the general hilarity.
Lady Eleanora sang, and all rapt in silence, 
listened to her melody, but scarcely had
her voice ceased when a shrill scream
broke on the ears of the party, the branches
of a neighbouring thicket were hastily
pushed asunder, and a female figure,
with hair dishevelled, and looks of terror,
rushed into the circle. The Earl, thrown
off his guard, uttered an involuntary ex-
clamation, and received the form of the 
terrified, teh senseless stranger, in his
arms.--She was motionless and cold, and 
Sir Orlando, who had witnessed with as-
tonishment, the evident emotion betrayed
by his friends, came forward to assist him
in supporting her. They placed her on a              EARL OSRIC.        133

seat, but she was quite insensible. Her
veil was torn and thrown back, and her
dress much disordered.

  "you know this young person, my
Lord," said the Baron of Osric. The Earl
had recollected himself, but his voice was
not so firm as usual, while he answered,
"She is the ward of my friend, Lord St.
Albert, but I can't form no idea of the
cause of her present appearance." "She
shall be conveyed to our castle, my dear
Constance," said Sir Orlando, " and you
shall accompany her thither." His Lady
readily complied, the attendants sum-
moned, and Almina was conducted to De
Mowbray, and put to bed as has been
related.

  Sir Orlando had beheld with amaze-
ment, the agitation of his friend, at sight
of Almina, and convinced, that in the
firm mind of Osric it could not be caused
by a mere casual surprize, a vague suspi-
cion obtruded itself, which long after he
retired, chased sleep from his pillow.134            EARL OSRIC.

Almina's appearance had broken up the party, the Earl attended Lady Eleanora home, and the returned to De Mowbray, where he heard that Almina was just recovered from her fainting; weakened, and nearly exhausted by fatigue and terror, she did not leave her bed till the following day, previous to which, the Earl had intrusted his friends with as much as her history as he deemed it right to reveal, and the suspicious of Sir Orlando, were rather confirmed than refuted, by the emotion which agitated the voice of Osric, while he spoke of her. The amiable ingenuous Constance, declared she had never beheld a countenance so prepossessing,as that of this beautiful young stranger."And you will find it a faithful index of her mind," said Osric, "but it shall unfold itself,suffice it that from whatever cause her strange appearance her proceeds, rely on it, no wilful error has produced an occurrence which even now I can scarcely believe real.Since she is her, to you, my good Con-               Earl Osric.          135

stance, I must intrust her.  At present, she is ignorant of every circumstance relating to her own birth, as well as of my approaching change of situation.  The former, I purpose very soon to elucidate to her by means of the manuscript in my possession, and the latter, my dear friend, you will undertake to explain."  Lady de Mowbray agreed to execute the commission, but the Earl said, he would first see his ward, and hear from her the tale she had to relate respecting herself. 

    Lady de Mowbray fetched her from her apartment - she had, in a great degree, recovered fro the ill effects of her terror, but her complexion was pallid, and the native bloom on her cheeks had been banished by alarm and agitation.  The Earl arose to receive her, and taking her extended hand - "I rejoice, my dear Almina," said he, "to see you thus restored."  "Oh! my Lord!" said she, in a faltering voice, "I have such a tale to tell you."  "Let me then hear it," said he, 136           EARL OSRIC.
"for most desirous am I to learn what
strange cause can have produced a visitor,
who I so little expected to behold." She
related with calmness, every circumstance
that had befallen her, and when she had
concluded, "You alarm and astonish me," 
said the Earl, "I know Sir Henry Mac-
donald well, and I also know that he is 
tenacious of his honour, which the breath 
of calumny has never yet assailed. He is 
of good family, and a young Knight of
undoubted bravery. I must think he
merits not your suspicion. The rash St. 
Albert, is a much more likely character to
be hurried on by his passions to commit
an action so unjustifiable, but even he, 
though warm and hasty, has ever been
esteemed a young man of principles, that
did not disgrace his noble ancestry. Time, 
I trust, will unravel the mystery. Lady
de Mowbray, my Almina, will protect
you beneath her sheltering roof, till I have
formed some plan to insure your future
safety. I am now going to Fitz Oswald,"             EARL OSRIC.       137

added he, to Lady de Mowbray, "and
leave my wart to your care, my dearfreind,
soon will she feel for you the regard your
virtues claim." He now bade them good
day, and quitted them.
   
   Almina felt bitterly disappointed, she
wondered who he was gone to visit at Fitz
Oswald, for the truth had been concealed
from her at St. Albert, by the Earl's de-
sire, and when alone with Lady de Mow-
bray, after a long silence, she asked, hesi-
tatingly, what distance the Castle of Fitz
Oswald was from thence, "It is only a
mile." answered she, "and a very fine
walk through the same wood, where for
the first time, I yesterday beheld you.
The Baron of Fitz Oswald's family were
of the party. we were assembled to cele-
brate the birth-day of Lady Eleanora, who
is my most particular friend, of whom you
have, doubtless, heard the Earl speak."
"No," answered Almina, "I know very
few of the Earl's friends, I never before
heard even the name of this family." Lady138     EARL OSRIC.

de Mowbray resumed, "The Baron Fitz-
Oswald has, from the Earl's infancy, been
his most intimate connexion, and their
friendship will, I hope, be shortly cement-
ed still closer."  She paused, Almina was 
attentively listening, and she went on,--
"All who know Earl Osric, must acknow-
ledge him to be the most perfect of human 
beings, he has all the wisdom and know-
ledge of maturer years, united with the 
elegance and proper vivacity of youth.
Nor are his person and manners, superior
as they certainly are, to those of the gene-
rality of the world, more truly admirable,
than that real excellence and integrity of
heart, those strict rules of the most un-
erring rectitude, by which every action of
his guiltless life is regulated.  In Lady
Eleanora Fitz Oswald, unbiassed by parti-
ality, I may truly say, he has found his 
counterpart, and there can be not the
smallest doubt, that they will prove an
ornament to the high sphere in which
they are destined to move, and an exam-               EARL OSRIC.         139

ple to the world in general. You will
have an opportunity of seeing her while
you are with me, and I shall feel happy in
introducing you to her notice.'' Almina
had listened in wondering silence to the
conversation, but she could make no an-
swer. She felt petrified-She longed to
ask some questions, as to the approaching
change in the Earl's situation, but she felt
as if she could die rather than utter one
syllable on the subject. Utterly unconsci-
cus of the nature of her own sensations,
she was only sensible to a fueling of ex-
treme intense misery, such as she could
never have formed any idea of. She saw
that Lady de Mowbray looked earnestly
at her, with an expression, which, though
she could not understand, she was assured
evinced kindness and compassion. She,
retired to her apartment, as soon as she
could summon voice to ask permission,
where in a sort of stupor, she sat insensible
to every thing, but the intelligence she
had just received.
140           EARL OSRIC.

For the horror and repugnance she felt 
at the recollection of the Ear;'s approach-
ing marriage, she could not possibly ac-
count. Lady Eleanora, was a total stranger
to her, she was told she was amiable, and
that Earl Osric loved her. Why should
she feel such insurmountable objections to
this attachment? Why should she feel 
miserable at the thought of their union?
She could not answer herself satisfactorily,
for her own feelings were a mystery be-
yond her power to solve.

  Lady de Mowbray did not leave her
long alone, she found her sitting pale and
immoveable, in an attitude of deep medi-
tation.

  "Almina," said she, " I must not suf-
fer you to indulge melancholy. You allow
the late perplexing circumstance to de-
press your mind, more than there is real
reason for. Osric will, doubtless, take
measures to secure you from farther
alarm. Come, as our Knights have left
us, we will seek our own amusement."         EARL OSRIC.                 141
  Almina, could with difficulty exert her-
self to answer, but Lady de Mowbray
compassionately excused her, and throwing 
her veil over her, she said, "There now
you are equiped for our expedition," and
leading her down the stairs by a private 
door, they attained the close paths of
a wood, and pursued their way through
it towards the rocky coast of the sea, near
which the Castly of de Mowbray was situ-
ated.

  On the declivity of a steep eminence, 
sheltered by a projectin gcragg, stood a small rustic dwelling, it was overgrown
 with ivy, which quite covered the walls,
and almost obscured the latticed casements.
"In this singular habitation," said
 Lady de Mowbray, "resides a younger brother
of Sir Orlando.  He is a young man of 
excellent understanding, and good abili-
ties, but unfortunately, has acquired
romantic habits of melancholy, and a love
of solitude, which lead him to shun all
society, and here, in seclusion, his days are       142     EARL OSRIC.

  It is remarkable, that having, of a numerous 
family, but one brother and sister, both have, by 
choice, renounced the world.

  In this solitary cabin, Edwin has become a 
voluntary recluse; and his sister, who early 
devoted herself to a monastic life, is already 
superior of a convent, in a distant part of the 
kingdom, she is an admirable women, and as her 
choice of a religious order was not dictated by 
any worldly disappointment, but from a sincere 
vocation, she still retains her native 
cheerfulness of temper.  Every year, she allows 
herself a short stated period to visit her 
brother, at her native Castle, and the time is 
always anxiously expected by us."


  They had ascended the eminence while she spoke, 
and had now reached the entrance of Edwin's 
cottage, Lady de Mowbray led the way to the room 
where the young recluse generally passed his 
solitary hours, but Edwin was not there.  An aged 
female was the only inmate, her
          EARL OSRIC.    143

master, she told them, was absent, and
pointing to a winding path among
the rocks said he had gone that way.

  Thither they directed their steps, and
beneath the almost leafless boughs of a
decayed tree, on that side of the eminence
that overlooked the sea, they descried the
object of their visit.  Stretched on the
turf, intent on a book in his hand, he
appeared unheard; his pale but
interesting countenance, was only partially
visible, as his hand supported his head.
The voice of her Ladyship at length arous-
ed him, and he arose.  A faint flush
crossed his creek when he beheld a stran-
ger; but, instantly recovering himself, he
gravely bowed to Lady de Monbray's in-
troduction of Almina, and led the way to
the cottage.

  "We expected to find you engaged in
some of your favorite amusements, Ed-
win," said her Ladyship.  "I have been
preparing my young friend for her recep-144          EARL OSRIC.

tion, lest she should expect to meet a gay  
young night. I have been describing
you as a useful term."   "An appella-
tion, exclaimed de Mowbray, in which I
glory, for long since have I convinced,
that true happiness, (if indeed she really
ever attained by mortals) dwells in the
retreats of solitude, the calm abode of
contemplation. For the world and its plea-
sures I have no relish. Why then should
I be forced into? why exchange the 
solid and permanent satisfaction I expe-
rienced here,for fading joys,for evanescent
delights? The combine powers of railing
and ridicule, I have successfully withstood, 
nor is there an allurement in the universe
sufficiently strong, to induce me to relin-
quish a retirement so suited to my taste,
so replete with actions, as this insolated
cottage."

     "From me, I assure you," answered
Lady D Mowbray, you will meet with no
further opposition. I have long since been
convinced, that you are far happier in it,
                   EARL OSRIC.                  145

than you would ever be in associating with
the world; but your brother who thinks
that active life is the proper sphere for
men, cannot, on this subject, be persuaded
to agree with us."

"Active life!" cried the youth in a tone
of enthusiasm, "and how am I formed for
the bustle of active life? With a mind
enervated by early habits of solitude, and a
heart devoted to the peaceful pleasures of
retirement, how should I be able to acquit
myself with honour in the world? No,
my dear Constantia, suffer me to wither in
the desart; which contains all of the world I
ever wish to behold; nor let its inhabitants
find in me an object for their contumely.
From no early disappointment, from no
mortified pride, have I sought this retreat,
but from a natural aversion to pomp and
parade, from a native taste for all those 
pursuits which here I can enjoy unmolest-
ed.

Well, my dear Alimina, said Lady de
Mowbray, "we must then leave this young146         EARL OSRIC.

stoic as immoveable as we found him. I 
hoped to have prevailed on him to accom-
pany us home, but such an excursion I 
suppose would quite derange his solitary
plans."

"Would you," said Edwin, "persuade
the miser to quit his treasure?'

"Oh! by no means,"answered Lady de
Mowbray laughing, "and you have the
great consolation of honouring that, while
it consists of this lonely cabin, and the
deleetable companions whom we beheld
on our entrance. You need have no fear
that it will be coveted by the world you
despise."

 " They comprise all I wish for" he an-
swered with an anti-sarcastic smile. "Leav
me then to the comforts they confer, nor
seek to draw me from the peaceful seclusion
where all my happiness is centered."

Lady de Mowbray now arose, and bid-
ding him good day they returned towards 
the Castle.

Had Almina's mind been disengaged,
                    EARL OSRIC.                 147

she would have beheld with wonder and
curiosity the eccentric Edwin: but she
was still under the dominion of those feel-
ings, which the overwhelming intelligence
communicated by Lady de Mowbray had
so powerfully excited. Scarcely did she
hear her Ladyship's lively remarks on their
late interview with the young anchorite,
as she termed him, and listened with an
absent countenance to her regretting a
young man of the talents and acquirements
Edwin possessed, should hide himself from
his fellow creatures, and determine to have
no communication with society. In vain
Lady de Mowbray tried to rouse her from
the stupor that seemed to enchain her
faculties; and, on their return, she so
assiduously requested permission to retire
to her apartment, that it was granted:
and, in the mean time, her new friend had
a long conversation with Sir Orlando, to
whom she revealed all her surprise and
suspicions, on the subject of their lovely
but mysterious young guest.  148              Earl Osric.


                   CHAP.VIII.

            "And sure the match
Were rich and honorable; besides the Gentlemen
Is full of virtue,bounty,worth,and qualities
Beseeming such a wife as your fair Daughter."
                     TWO GENTLEMEN OF VERONA.

 The effects of the intelligence which Al-
mina had received of the approaching
marriage of the Earl were such as might
be expected on a mind of sensibility,wholly
inexperienced and ignorant of the nature
of its own feelings. She seemed stunned,
and as if some dreadful misfortune had
befallen her; but she could not yet dis-
cover the cause of the repugnance, she felt
to the union.

 "It is strange," thought she, "and
when I know more of Lady de Mowbray,         EARL OSRIC.   149

and feel less restraint in her presence. I
will tell her all I think, and all I feel, and
learn from her whether I am wrong in 
cherishing this insurmountable dislike, to
which, I am told, is to insure his happi-
ness."

 On their return to the Castle, they
found Sir Orlando alone, the Earl re-
mained the whole day at Fitz Oswald,
and by Almina it was passed with her
new friends, whom every hour she more
fervently loved and admired. She saw
no more of Osric till the following morn-
ing, when he informed her, that he had 
dispatched a messenger to the Castle St.
Albert, to assure them of her safety, and
to relieve the minds of that excellent
family from the anxiety they must have
felt for her fate.

 Several days now elapsed, during which
the mind of Alumina was in the same state
of perturbation, nor was it relieved by the
evident alteration in the Earl's manner
towards her. Though still tender and 150                  EARL OSRIC.
affectionate, it was intimately more re-
served than formerly, and never since her
arrival at De Mowbray Castle, had she
for one moment seen him alone.  If he 
wished to converse with her, he scrupled 
not to speak before his friends.  If Sir
Orlando left him with the Ladies,he sel-
dom remained long with them, and if La-
dy de Mowbray quitted the room, he
constantly reminded Almina to follow
her.  This deportment though it cruelly
depressed the spirits, and in secret preyed
on the mind of his gentle ward, yet
served as a stimulus to try to concel her present feelings, till assured they were
not reprehensible.  Though reared in obscurity, and educated in ignorance of 
the world she inhabited, there was an innate principle of the right in the mind
of Almina, which told her that it was 
her duty to think henceforward of Earl
Osric but as a parent, and from him at
least, to hide the anguish which corroded 
her peace.  She dreaded the approach of                    EARL OSRIC.                151
the time, when the Earl had told her she was to be presented to Lady Eleanora, and though she felt some curiosity to see the woman chosen by Osric, she yet shuddered with apprehension and repugnance at the idea of beholding her.

      " Alas !" cried she, " till the name of this amiable Lady Eleanora reached my ears, in what a deceitful dream of happiness was I lulled, and how little was I acquainted with my own heart. Ah, how dreadful were truths that fatal moment revealed to my knowledge."

        She sat in the indented window seat, by one of the gallery casements, her eyes were cast from it on vacancy, for she saw no part of the prospect it presented, and her head rested on her hand, when she was aroused by a footstep, and starting from her reverie, heheld the young Edwin de Mowbray standing before her.

       " Pardon, Lady," said he, " this intrusion, and if it be a violation of established rules, impute it, I beseech ye, to152            EARL OSRIC.   

the ignorance of an anchorite, who has
only left his cell to entreat you will not
accuse him of a breach of hospitality,
when his hut was honoured by your pre-
sence. Believe me, the visits of my
friends there, and occasional society I
would court, but that whenever I seek
it, I am perpetually doomed to be teazed
with solicitations, to which it is not in my
power to yeild, unless I would sacrifice
my own happiness. Thus am I debarrod
the comfot of a rational conversation, be-
cause the only discourse I am fated to
hear, consists of persuasions to forsake
the one plan of life, which, to a mind
like mine, can alone give true and perma-
nent peace, and from mistaken kindness,
I am condemned to perpetual solitude.-
Yet sure I am not quite singular, since I
find even De Mowbray Castle can afford
an instance of the preference. How is it
that the sounds of gaiety salute not as
usual my ear? and that I find the fair
Almina possessed of those desired attri-               EARL OSRIC.      153

butes youth and beauty, alone in medi-
tation. The mirth-loving mistress of this
mansion seldom leaver her guests thus
solitary. I expected to find it thronged
with company, graced as it now is with a 
magnet calculated to attract all but a 
hermit."

 "You are quite mistaken," said al-
mina, "in imagining such would be the 
effect of my presence; nor would the ad-
miration of the world even add an atom
to my happiness--I have been a very 
short time drawm from seclusion, and if 
my own wished avail, soon shall I return
to it."

 Here, Lade de Mowbray entered and in-
terrupted the conversation. "What all-
powerful attraction, my dear Edwin," said
she, smiling, "can have possessed force
sufficient to draw you from your 'Bower of Bliss.'"

 "Simply," he answered, "to clear 
myself from the imputations of rudeness
and inhospitality, I came, for though de-
154           EARL OSRIC.

voted to retirement, by the few I osteem,
I would be judged of justly."

   "It is in Almina's opinion I perceive,"
said she, laughing, "that you are anxi-
ous to be justified, and I congratulate you
on having for once deviated form your ge-
neral practice."

   How strange is it?" said De Mowbray,
"that because I am professedly a recluse,
I am to be reckoned a savage, and that
having chosen a retirement contiguous to
the haunts of wild beasts, I am supposed to
have adopted their manners-but the stings
of ridicule are too powerless to wound me.
I fly to philosophy as an antidote to
its poison, and am completely sheltered
from its shafts, within the recesses of
my little but, where no satire would pur-
sue, nor raillery overtake me."

   Earl Osric here entered and inter-
rupted the conversation. After gravely
addressing Lady de Mowbray and Ed-
win, he turned to Almina, and said-
"the Lady Fitz Oswald wishes to see you,            EARL OSRIC.               155
  
    Almina, and I have appointed to-morrow
    for your introduction at the Castle. It
    would have taken place before, but the
    Lady Eleanora has been much indisposed;
    she is recovered, and Lady de Mowbray
    will, I know, take on herself the charge
    of conducting you."
       Her Ladyship assented, and the follow-
    ing day was named for the much dreaded
    interview. A great entertainment was to
    be given at the Castle of Fitz Oswald, and
    the Earl preferred introducing Almina
    then, rather than when only their own
    family party should be present. His mo-
    tives for this wish were hidden within his 
    own breast, but in a heart, where the
    strictest integrity guided every action
    they could not be otherwise than just.
    The young Edwin, at the entreaty of
    his brother, seconded by Earl Osric,
    passed the whole of that day with his
    friends.
       Almina, at the solicitation of Lady de
    Mowbray touched the strings of her lute,
                     H6
              156           EARL OSRIC.

and Edwin an enthusiast in music, lis-
tened with wrapt attention. no form could
be better calculated to strike with surprise
and admiration, the mind of a recluse,
than that Almina presented to his view,
as she bent gracefully over the instru-
ment. Her dazzling complexion, and
glowing cheek shaded, though not con-
cealed by the light veil in part thrown
back, and the long golden ringlets which
dividing, left her polished forehead ex-
posed to view, her eyes cast down, leave-
ing only the long lashed visible, the fine
turned hand and arm, as it swept the 
strings, all together offered in model, the
most, perfect for the painter and the sta-
tuary.

 Edwin had never admired beauty till
now, he had fancied himself impenetra-
ble to its effects, and he had hitherto re-
garded with contempt the legends that
told the power of love and its influence
over the heart of man. His looks cast
on Almina, and beaming with animated          EARL OSRIC.           157
delight, were not unobserved, and Sir
Orlando congratulated himself, that at
length the spell which had hitherto re-
sisted a like entreaty and persuasion,
would yield, and be broken by the capti-
vation of beauty. Earl Osric quitted his
friends at an early hour, and soon after-
wards the young Edwin bade them adieu.
  Often, in the course of the day had the
watchful eyes of Lady de Mowbray rested
on the face of her young ward, with an
expression of pity and sorrow, and after
the departure of their guests, she strove
by conversation to amuse and employ her
evidently wandering thoughts.   An al-
most constant resident in the great world,
her Ladyship possessed amply the power
to entertain and inform the minds of the
inexperienced.

  Sir Orlando, from his military prowess
stood high in the favour of his sovereign,
and his lady held a confidential situation
at court, near the person of the queen.-
The story of Eleanor of Castile, her158      EARL OSRIC.

faithful attachment to her royal consort,
which had led her to brave danger and
death in their most terrific forms, when
led by conjugal affection, she had followed
him to Palastine, her heroic fortitude,
her undaunted courage amidst scenes so
inimical to female tenderness and timi-
dity, had been dwelt on with enthusiasm
and delight, by Almina, as she listened
to the eventful narrative from the lips of
Osric.  From Lady de Mowbray, who was
sincerely attached to her royal mistress,
she heard it again with revived interest,
and her own individual regrets were ba-
nished from her recollection, while her
imagination was charmed by the splen-
did description of the Court, and the
events passing there.

  Her Ladyship possessed the happy art
of describing with accuracy, and em-
bellishing with wit, the scenes she deli-
neated.  She was evidently gratified by
the animated delight Almina betrayed.

  "Such my dear," she added, "is the









             EARL OSRIC         159

great world—and now Almina, tell me
truly, should you not like to witness some
of these wonders?-or is your taste so
congenial with Edwin's, as to prefer
the retirement in which you have been
reared?"

  "No indeed," answered Almina, "cu-
riosity is a cold term to express the anx-
ious wish I feel to participate in scenes
like those your Ladyship has describe.-
To know more of the world and of so-
ciety in general, has long been my most
ardent desire."

  "Then soon shall it be gratified," said
her Ladyship-"Osric has imparted to
me his intention of introducing you at
Court, and under my auspices, I trust you
will be received there with favour and pro-
tection. But previously it will be neces-
sary to inform you of the particular
events which combined to place you be-
neath his guardianship. The Period, at
which he had proposed to make this dis-
closure, is anticipated by the singular160              EARL OSRIC.

circumstance, which conducted you hi-
ther, but eventually, it may prove for the
best. My duty calls me to London
shortly, the queen will soon require my
attendance, but I shall leave you for a
very short period. That sister of Sir
Orlando, whom I mentioned to you, as
being the Abbess of a distant convent,
will supply my place to you, till the Earl
shall think the time proper for you to
join me in the metropolis. We expect
the good Dame Maddelina, within a few
days, and in her care I shall leave you,
white I attend my duty at Court. But
you shall now retire, to prepare by rest 
for your introduction of to-morrow. You
must learn to love my sweet friend Elea-
nora, for like yourself she is good and in-
nocent, and now good night."
   Almina retired, but the blessing of 
repose was long denied her. The next
day's interview, the long wished for ex-
planation, relative to her own birth, and
the promised and most unexpected pros-            EARL OSRIC. 161

peet of an introduction to the world, all
combined to banish sleep, and completely
answered the benevolent purpose of Lady
de Mowbray, by composing the mind of
her charge, and withdrawing it from more 
baneful meditations.  162               EARL OSRIC,
       



                  CIIAP. IX 
                   

Romeo, What Latly's that Which duth enrich the band
Of youder Knight?
  SERVANT. I KNOW NOT, sIR.
  romeo. O,she doth teach the rorehes to buru bright
Her leauty bang upon the eheek of night,
Like a rich jewel in an Eihiep" dear:
Beauty too rich for ure, for varth Wich erows,
As youder Lady O" er her fellows shows.

                                      SIIAKFEARB,




 TIIE much dreaded hour arrived, and
Aluina prepared to atend the alndy de 
Mowbray to Fitz Orlando . Sir Orlande
Was to accompany them,  and both Wishing 
their young charge to appear to advantage,
strove to inspire her With a cheerfuluess,
Which it was cvident she did not feel. Her
Ladyship had taken great pains adorn             EARL OSRIC.                163
the person of Almina, but it required no
adventitious aid.  Her fine countenance
and dark expressive eyes, evinced strength
of understanding and sensibility of heart,
but the innocent animation that once illu-
minated her speaking features had given 
way to a pensive cast. which if it added 
not to her beauty, increased it s interest.
A stranger to dissimulation, she could not
conceal he rtremor andagitation, when
the great gates of the Castle unclosed to
admit them.  The palpitation of her heart 
increased even to painful violence, when
the open portals admitted them beneath
the dome which sheltered her who was
henceforward to form the happiness of
Earl Osric, but she had no time for reflec-
tion.  They had entered a spacious gal-
lery, where a long range of minstrels were
stationed, who greeted their entrance,
with the melodious tones of their various
instruments.  At the end of the gallery,
large folding doors stood open into a mag-
nificent saloon, where the Baron, his164                     EARL OSRIC.

Lady and daughter, with a numerous
company of Knights and Ladies were as-
sembled. Earl Osric, who with a watch-
ful eye, and a deep, though concealed
anxiety, had expected their arrival, no
sooner beheld them, than advancing, he
took the hand of Lady de Mowbray, whil
Sir Orlando conducted Almina. The eyes
of the latter were bent in confusion on the
ground, and she trembled to raise them,
lest they should meet the countenance she
dreaded to behold, which she had pictur-
ed to herself as so terrific. She was first
presented to Lady Fitz Oswald, who sur-
veying her with scrutinizing eyes, received
her courteously, and placed her next to
Lady de Mowbray.

"And now, my Lord," said a voice,
firm, yet gentle, "allow me to claim your
promise of an introduction to your fair
young friend."

"Certainly," answered the Earl, "and
Almina, I doubt not, will be sensible of
the honour conferred on her, in being per-         EARL OSRIC.        165

mitted to hope for the friendship of Lady
Eleanora Fitz Oswald."

 At these words, he took Almina's trem-
bling hand, and presented it to Lady
Eleanora, who receiving it, answered, "If
thou dost represent my friendship as so
great in honour, my Lord, thou wilt
wholly frustrate my intention, and make
the sweet Almina fear, instead of esteem
me. I see thou hast already intimidated
her by an introduction so cermonious."

 Almina now endeavoured to call all her
courage to her aid, and raising her eyes,
they rested on a face so lovely, a form so
interesting, that scarcely could her beat-
ing heart allow her to entitle it, that Lady
Eleanora Fitz Oswald, of whom she had
formed an idea so fallacious, an image, so
far distant from the reality. The last
words of her Ladyship, seemed to call for 
some answer, and in a timid voice, she
tried to acknowledge her just sense of the
honour she received, but her faltering 
half-formed accents were, scarcely distin-

166        EARL OSRIC.

guishable, and her powers of articulation,
seemed at once wholly suspended. In pity
to her apparent confusion, the Earl led
her to a seat next that of Lad Eleanora,
whose sweet encouraging manner soon
raised the depressed spirits of Almina, and
in some degree, restored her presence of
mind.

The Earl quitted them to join the
other Knights, and shortly afterwards they
were summoned to the banquet. While
it was served, the minstrels, arranged in 
the superb gallery that overlooked the ban-
quetting-room, attund their lyrsm to re-
cord the heroic deeds atchieved by the for-
mer heroes of the ancient house of Fitz
Oswald. Almina shared, with Lady
Eleanora, the attentions of the numerous
Knights, who were there assembled, and it
was difficult to decide, on which the prize 
of superior beauty was bestowed. Lady
Eleanora's countenance was soft and win-
ning, and she insensibly stole the regard
of the beholder, while Almina's striking
               EARL OSRIC.                    167

form and face irresistably arrested immediate admiration. When the splendid banquet was finished, her ladyship took Almina with her to her own apartment, where she tried to draw her into conversation, and insensibly losing the restraint her fear of Lady Eleanora had at first thrown over her manners, her Ladyship became charmed with her, and a length said,"Indeed, Almina, I shall seriously reprove Osric presently, for so long keeping thee from my knowledge.Believe me, I tool well know how to appreciate the delights of friendship, not to regret the delay, but the future will, I trust, recompense me for having been thus long deprived of the pleasure thy society would have afforded me.An now, we must return to the company.When next we meet, I hope we shall be free from the restraint it necessarily imposes."

She now led the way back to the saloon,where the eye of the Earl eagerly watched168                 EARL OSRIC.

their re-entrance. He had marked their
retiring with deep, though latent anxiety;
he longed to know how Almina would ac-
quit herself in a private interview, and he
remembered, with satisfaction, the grace-
ful ease and uniform sweetness of  her
general manners. As Lady Eleanora led
her towards him, he observed that her
look was more tranquil and unembarrass-
ed, than at her first introduction, but a
strange pensiveness sat on her brow, and
an inexplicable gloom, seemed to his ob-
servant gaze, to over-shadow her features.
They were soon summoned to the ball--
it was held in a splendid hall, along the
sides of which, rows of stupendous pillars
were decorated with lamps, and a vast con-
course of Knights and Ladies were dis-
persed in different parts.

   Almina's hand was solicited and given
to a young Knight, presented to her by the
Earl, but her heart was no longer in
unison with the mirth and gaiety around
her, and the sweet sounds of the music,                EARL OSRIC.         169

as it rose to the vaulted roof, seemed to
increase the heavy weight on her spirits.

  "Exert yourself, Almina," said Osric,
in a low voice, as he passed her, " and let
me not imagine that my cares have been
bestowed on one who will not try to ap-
pear amiable in the sight of my most
valued friends."

  A speech so sever from the Earl, had
never before reached the almost unbeliev-
ing ears of Almina. To harshness, in any
form, she was a stranger, but in that of
Osric, it had double terror, and was heard
with a sensation bordering on agony. The
burning tear was ready to gush forth, and
her crimsoned cheek betrayed her deeply
wounded feelings, but pride arrested the
torrent, and forced it back to the heart,
and turning towards Sir Alexander Dum-
barton, who had claimed her hand, and
was awaiting her pleasure, she accom-
panied him to the dancers. Her extreme
youth, her graceful and beautiful figure,
which was exactly calculated to be seen

  VOL. 1.170              Earl Osric.

to most advantage in the dance, together
with the singular circumstance that had
made her an inmate of De Mowbray Cas-
tle, which had been a subject of general
animadversion, all together combined to
render her an object of peculiar interest;
and observations on her faultless form,
striking countenance and extraordinary
personal beauty, continually reached the
ear of Earl Osric, on this eventful night.
He saw that a full disclosure of Almina's 
situation, her claims on him and his pro-
tection, and her rank in life, must in ju-
tice to her and himself, immediately be
made.
   The time was indeed, arrived, when he
had always intended to present her to the
world, and though there were parts of her
history, which it would be improper and
hazardous to disclose, the principal event,
her paternal descent which would establish
her class in society, might now without
danger be known. He foresaw that her
beauty, her genius, and her talents, would                   EARL OSRIC.                171

soon render her conspicuous in the great
world, and that though they must infalli-
bly attract admiration, they were also cer-
tain to create enemies, but it was neces-
sary to secure her powerful protection,
since he could no longer afford it, and
already had he resolved to make her story
known to the Queen, and to procure for
her, if possible, the favour of the royal
Eleanora, whose character was precisely
such as he should choose for the patroness
and friend of Almina. Earl Osric stood
high in the esteem of her Majesty, for he
had saved the life of her adored consort,
and he knew that she would be disposed
to listen favourably to the request he in-
tended to prefer, on behalf of his ward.
Almina would then be presented at court.

In the present comparatively small cir-
cle, he saw every eye directed towards her,
and even Lady Eleanora, beautiful as she
was, undoubtedly lost by the comparison, 
- so exquisitely had nature formed
Almina.

                    12   172                EARL OSRIC,

     What then might not be expected, when attractions like her's graced a court? to what trials and temptations might she not be exposed, in scenes so dangerous to inexperienced youth and beauty?
     The dance was ended, and Osric was re-called from the reverie into which the accidental hearing the praise of Almina's appearance, had thrown him, by the necessity of attending Lady Eleanora to a seat. Almina seeing her ladyship engrossed by the company, who surrounded her chair, retreated from the compliments and assiduities of her partner, and the moment she saw him engaged in conversation with a Knight, who passed them, she arose to seek Lady de Mowbray. A row of lofty pillars at one end, divided the Gothic hall from a smaller apartment, where refreshments were spread on tables, for the company. Almina entered it. A few scattered attendants were seen passing  backwards and forwards, but at present it was deserted by the company. Restless and deject-     EARL OSRIC.     173

ed, even amidst this scene of grandeur
and gaiety, the spot seemed to offer a few
moments of quiet and retirement, gladly
availing herself of the first seat, she sunk
on it, and indulged the meditations to
which her late introduction led. The 
harsh words and harsher tone of the Earl,
recurred to her recollection, and again the 
tear rushed unbidden to her eye. Extreme
dejection oppressed her heart, but she
dared not indulge it, and the entrance of
Lady Eleanora, with a train of ladies,
completely aroused her.
  "Alone, and in meditation, Almina!"
said her ladyship, gaily, "in what seques-
tered desert, Osric," she added, turning to 
the Earl, who likewise attended her, "has 
this sweet girl been hitherto secluded? 
My utmost efforts have been exerted to 
enliven her, but she still seems to sigh 
for solitude and court meditation." 
  "Lamina, is yet new to the world," an-
swered the Earl, "and I think I may ven-
ture to assure your ladyship, that it rather174              EARL OSRIC.

proceeds from a native timidity of manner, than from intentional disrespect, that she appears thus insensible to your favour."

"Insensible, my Lord!" cried Almina, with more spirit than she had yet evinced,"No believe me , I am too perfectly conscious how impenetrable that heart must be, which could feel and emotion so cold towards Lady Eleanora Fitz Oswald, to merit the imputation."

"Insensible, is too harsh a word, my Lord," said Lady Eleanora, "it is rather dejection, but so young, I should hope, the fair Almina, has no real cause for depression."

The Earl, here interrupted the conversation, and again they joined the dancers.To avoid all further reproof, or observation. Almina exerted resolution to join in the amusements around her, and the remainder of the evening she appeared more enlivened, though the same weight still heavily oppressed her heart.She accompanied her friends to De Mowbray,but the Earl remained at Fitz Oswald.             EARL OSRIC.        175

  On the following day, a guest arrived
who greatly interested the feelings of the
family, and whose amiable manners and
character, attracted at once, the reverence
and esteem of Almina.

  This was the good Dame Maddelina de
Morville, who quitting, for a short season,
the scene of her retirement, came to visit
the seat of her ancestors. She was a tall
graceful figure, her countenance presented
the most perfect picture of serenity, and
the placid elegance of her deportment, be-
spoke the angelic mildness of her disposi-
tion. Far from the stiffness and formality
common to the superiors of religious
orders, her conversation was cheerful and
even animated. She seemed much struck
by the person of Almina, and from Lady
de Mowbray heard all the particulars of
her situation.

  Every day, the mutual partiality of the
good prioress, and her young friend,
seemed to increase, and there were mo-
moments when fascinated by the conversa-

                 I 4176                     EARL OSRIC

tion of the excellent Dame Maddelina, Almina could almost wish to renounce the brilliant prospect of an introduction at court, and the pleasures that awaited her in the great world, to retire to cloistered seclusion with her new friend; but these were only the visions of enthusiasm, at times when a despondence she could not always conquer,seemed to tell her that no temporal happiness was in store for her.Her mind daily expanded, and she became gradually more conscious of the nature of her own feelings, and in proportion, the natural strength of her understanding, taught her the necessity of hiding within the recesses of her own breast, every sentiment that tended to weaken its energies,so that instead of appearing more depressed,as she became better acquainted with her own heart, her wonted serenity of countenance,by degrees returned; her former cheerfulness was resumed, and in the privacy of entire seclusion only,was the deeply seated grief of her soul acknow-             EARL OSRIC.           177

ledged. There alone, was it to be depre-
cated, and in the holy retirement of her
oratory, did she nightly deplore the in-
voluntary offence, and in humility before
the altar of her God, the image of her
Saviour, implore pardon, and the avow her
 contrition. Deceived by her altered de-
portment, Lady d Mowbray began to hope
she had been wrong in the suspicions she 
had at first imbibed, and having received
the expected summons to court, she com-
mitted Almina to the care of Dame Mad-
delina, and prepared to obey the royal
mandate. Before her departure, she de-
livered to her young charge, a manuscript 
which contained the history of her own
birth, and thje disatrous events that had
led to it. It had been entrusted to her care
by Earl Osric, and had been already 
perused by herself.

"Very soon again, my dear Almina,"
said she, " I trust we shall meet in hap-
piness, I go to interest the royal Elea-
nora in your cause, and have no doubt of

                   15








178   EARL OSRIC.

securing for you in my gracious mistress
and Queen, a powerful protectress.  Mean-
time, I leave you in excellent hands. You
have an eventful and melancholy tale to 
peruse, but let it not depress your mind.
All human events are guided and governed
by the hand of Omnipotence, and while
you extract a useful lesson from the lives of
your unfortunate parents, be grateful to
the Power who raised up for you a guar-
dian and friend, so good and so able, in
our inestimable Osric."               EARL OSRIC.                  179


              CHAP. X. 

     Mir. "You have often
   Begun to tell me what I am ; but stopped,
   And left me to a bootless inquisition ;
   Concluding, " stay, not yet."
    Pros. The hour's now come,
   The very minute bids thee ope' thine car ;
   Obey, and be attentive."
                                    TEMPELT.

  
   THE Manuscript delivered by Lady de Mowbray to 
Almina, was the same the latter had once before 
opened, when by mistake the Earl had left it in 
her possession.  It was written by Osric himself 
for her perusal, and immediately after her 
ladyship's departure for the metropolis, with 
eagerness she began the interesting task.
180                  EARL OSRIC.

                          Legend
     Of the Ancient Family of Rosamond.

             =============

     THE last male descendant of the noble
and ancient house of Rosamond, was a
man of haughty demeanour and great
arrogance of disposition. Proud to excess,
and wrapt up in ideas of his own import-
ance, he lived in feudal magnificence,
within the precincts of his own dominion.
A zealous and loyal adherent of the crown,
he had shone conspicious in the reign of
Henry the third, by his uniform opposition
to the discontented Barons, and his firm
resistance of their innovations, in conse-
quence of which, his life was long a scene
of warfare, and his hereditary Castle liable
to the attacks of the rebellious Barons and
their parties. Till the commencement of
the civil wars compelled Earl Rosamond
at first, to act on the defensive, and finally
to call out his vassals and adherents in de-
fence of his sovereign, he had lived on his                 EARL OSRIC.           181
princely domain in almost royal splendour;
proud to excesa of the nobility and anti-
quity of his house, and rigidly tenacious
of every privilege, his rank and wealth
conferred; he was more feared than loved
by the neighbouring chieftains, with whom
he maintained little friendly communi-
cation.

  In his domestic character, the Earl was
not happy, thought possessed of immense
riches, and a numerious train of vassals,
obedient to his will, there was one cir-
cumstance wanting, without which his
felicity was incomplete.  This was a son 
and heir, to perpetuate the formidable
name of Rosamond, and to transmit to
posterity the honours of his house, but
this much desired gift was withheld by
Heaven, from the ambitious Earl, and two 
daughters were the only offspring of a 
marriage with a branch of his own family.
Though endowed with every qualification
to excite admiration, though beautiful in
person and excellent in mind, the fair182             EARL OSRIC.

heiresses of Rosamond, could never efface
from their parent's recollection his ardent
wishes for a male heir. He treated his 
daughters with a distance and coldness
the very reverse of paternal love; though,
at the same time, as they were fortunate
enough to be lineal descendants of the
house of Rosamond and the probable 
heiresses of all its honours, he exacted the
utmost submission and respect towards 
them from all his vassals and retainers;
but except when on occasions of ceremony
they were formally brought forward to 
notice, the young and beautiful ladies of 
Rosamond were kept secluded in their own 
apartment, nor suffered even to behold 
an person but the humble attendants on
their persons.

     In giving birth to her youngest daugh-
ter, the Countess resigned an existence,
which the extreme arrogance of her Lord,
had long rendered painful, and within a 
year, he a second time entered the nuptial 
state. Still a son was not granted to his


     EARL OSRIC.     183

prayers, and his temper sowered by re-
peated disappointments, rendered Rosa-
mand castle a scene of domestic misery.
The lady, whom he had introduced into
his family, was young and gay, she loved
splendour and magnificence, and to make
herself conspicuous at balla, masques,
and tournaments; and she reprobated the
privacy and retirement of the Castle.  She
soon obtained a considerable influnce
over the haughty Earl, and even won on
him, so as to permit her to attend the
court occasionally, and to receive at the
Castle more indiscriminate company than
had ever before been admitted within its
walls.

  The daughters of the Earl differed
widely from their mother-in-law.  Eloisa,
the elder, was fair and delicately formed,
her soul was the abode of innocence, and
her uncorrupted heart, the region where
every virtue flourished in its native soil.
 
  Rosalinda, the younger, was not less
lovely, though differing from her sister in

184             EARL OSRIC.

person, her eyes sparkled with animation
till they were almost too dazzling to con-
template, the ruddy bloom on her cheek
was contrasted by the snowy  hue of her 
complexion, and a regular, yet animated 
set of features, formed a countenance of
the most refined loveliness.  Though dif-
fering from Eloisa in form, their hearts
were early attached by similarity of tem-
per and disposition, and the sacred tie of friendship united them so closely, that
while they were together, the severity of 
their father was scarcely felt or regretted.
Hidden within the recesses of their native
castle, seldom were they exposed to the
gaze of admiration, and ignorant of the 
world its allurements, its pleasures, or its
cares, they had no wish to join in those
gaieties, with which the Castle frequently
resounded introduced by the Lady, their 
mother, who, from a desire to be herself
the first object of attention to the numer-
ous Knights in the Earl's train, rejoiced in 
that gloomy pertinacity, which induced     Earl Osric.     185
her Lord to confine his daughters to their
own apartment. But not always were
the lovely recluses destined to remain in
obscurity.

  The civil warfare in which the kingdom
was involved, rendered the situation of
Earl Rosamond, Daily more dangerous. A
devoted adherent to royalty, he had reso-
lutely opposed the incursions of the
Barons, and Rosamond Castle probably
owed its peace and safety to the remote
and isolated spot in which it stood, far
from the scene of war and devastation,
which had overrun most of the midland 
counties.

  By marriage, Earl Rosamond was dis-
tinctly connected with the family of De
Mountfort, whose present representative,
Simon de Montfort, Earl of Leicester,
had thus daringly raised the standard of
rebellion; but far from seeking to bring
Earl Rosamond over to his cause, he knew
the lofty and firm mind of the latter too
well to attempt it; and rather sought186                   EARL OSRIC.

allies in the many discontented nobles,
who at this time thronged the kingdom.
Endeavouring to render the fortress of
his Castle impregnable to all attack, by
encreasing the fortifications and entrench-
ments, the Earl was at length compelled
to quit it at the head of his vassals, to join
Prince Edward, at the decisive battle of
Evesham, where the brave but violent
Leicester lost his life. The time of his
absence was passed by his Lady and daugh-
ters, in the most terrifying apprehensions
for his safety, from which they were re-
lieved by the courier which brought an ac-
count of Leicester's death, and the victory
of the royal party. The succours, brought
to the Prince by Earl Rosamond, had
proved of the most signal service, and the
bravery and loyalty, of the Earl and his
attendants, had been mentioned publicly
by the Prince in terms the most grateful
and animated. The insolated situation,
strong fortifications, and natural entrench-
ments, for it stood on a lofty rock, acces-                     EARL OSRIC.                187

sible only on one side, rendered the Castle
of Rosamond particularly desirable for the
reception of prisoners of war. Thither
therefore, attended by a strong guard, 
and escorted by the Earl and his
people, the courier informed them,
some prisoners of consequence were
to be conducted, and would probably ar-
rive on the following day, when it was the
Earl's orders, that a grand entertainment
was to be prepared, to celebrate a victory
so important.

Every species of rejoicing was to hail a
conquest so important to the kingdom,
and open house for many days, tilts, tour-
naments, and balls, were to proclaim the
joy and loyalty of the Earl of Rosamond.
- Delighted with such an opportunity for
displaying her taste for revelling and
gaiety, the young Countess prepared to
obey with alacrity the wishes of her Lord.
Unambitious of aught beyond the retired
pleasures they experienced, the beautiful
sisters, in their secluded apartment, heard188         Earl Osric.

of the grand preparations for the approach-
ing festival, with scarcely a wish to be 
present at it.

  The Earl and his train arrived, but pre-
cautions were taken to prevent any view
being obtained of the captives. It was
near midnight when they reached the 
Castle, and ere the morning's dawn, all 
was securely arranged, so that on the fol-
lowing day, the sports were to begin, and
the doors thrown open to receive the guests
who came to celebrate the cessation of 
civil warfare, and the restoration of peace
to the kingdom.

  The Lady Eloisa, who was of a grave
and contemplative turn of mind, frequent-
ly accustomed herself to walk out late in
the evening, unattended, in the precincts
of the castle, but her sister, from natural
timidity, which taught her to dread un-
known dangers, seldom accompanied her.
The night after the Earl's return, having
dismissed her attendants, Eloisa, invited
by the refreshing breeze that blew cool                  EARL OSRIC.          180
              
from the river ther flowed beneath the
castle walls, after a sultty day, strolled 
forth to enjoi the beauties of evening,
Ieaving Lady Rosalinda engaged With her 
Iute. She enjoyed the clam of nature at 
this silent hour, and as the castle, she
gazed on its lofty turrets.The inhabit-
ants, all, save her sister and lierslf, were
probably hushed to repose. anxious to pre-
pare by rest for the revels of the succecd-
ing day. A tower of immense strength,
built drubtless, puposely to confine pri
soners of wae, overhung the river,and was
connected with that part of the fabric,
Eloisa now collted. She sighed at
recollecting, that its present inmates were the prisones made in that victory, Which
her father interded to celebrate with such
magnificence. "The tenderness of her na-
ture revolted at the thoughts of her rejoicng
she hoped, that the blackened and thick
Walls of the tower, Were impenetrable to190       Earl Osric.

the admission of sounds that must grate harshly on the ear of the imprisoned captives.  Yet, had she shuddered at the accounts she had heard from the Countess, of the conduct of the rebels, and the daring boldness of one of their chiefs, whose rebel bands had committed such devastation and outrage in the scene of warfare.  While these reflections occupied her mind, a strain of music suddenly stole on the profound stillness of the night, which seemed to proceed from the tower.  She listened attentively, and was convinced she was right in her first opinion.  A glimmering light faintly streamed from one of the lower windows, and thrence she fancied the sounds seemed to issue.  With light and curious steps she advanced.  A voice of the most enchanting melody, now met her ear, it accompanied the soft notes of a lute, and she was soon near enough to distinguish the words, which in tones the most pathetic, sunk deeply on the ear and the heart of the youthful Eloisa.              
              EARL OSRIC              191

      
        Condemn'd in solitude to dwell,
       Wiithin the time worn tower,
        The Cuptive in his prison cell,
       Who counts each dreary hour,
      Mournfully lists to the dreary blast,
  And singhe to the thoughts that cell of the past.


      The Voice ceased for a moment, While
   Eloisa, With suspended breath, awaited
   its continuance. The music was renewed,
   but the ineasurc was changed, and another
   stranger's tone, still more animated, reach-
   ed her.


        But chcer thee, Oh, Captive, thy bosom woe
      shall pass away, Bke the steps of the brave,
        For grief shall ne'er lay the warrior low,
      The banner of glory shall deek his grave.
     Again shall the trumpet awaken the blast,
     No more shall he sigh to the thoughts of the past.


     The Voice ceased, but Eloisa was still
   motionless. The window, though the
   howest in the tower, was too high, and too
   firmly secured, to leave any chance for
   obtaining a knowledge of the sorrowing
   captive, but a strong and insurmountable
   curiosity seized her, to know of whom the prisoners consisted. She resolved on the

192                    EARL OSRIC.
attempt, though aware of the innumera-
able difficulties, and fearing to remain
longer where she was, lest she should be
discovered by the centinels, who guarded
the great entrance, she softly retraced her
steps to the Castsle, un perceived, nor did
any farther sound, save the slow step of
the nightly guard, who paced the ram-
parts, reach her ear.  Rosalinda was re-
tired, but sleep fled far from Eloisa.  The
captive's song, yet vibrated on her memory,
and she long revolved in her mind the
means of knowing from whom it proceed-
ed.  Young and enthusiastic, she foresaw 
not the consequences, but arising with the
dawn, she sought Arno, an ancient and 
faithful domestic of the family, whose
tried fidelity was well known to her.  Of 
him she inquired concerning the prisoners,
but Arno could give her no satisfactory
information.  He only knew that several
captives had been brought to thecastle on
the night of his Lord's return, and that
they had been conveyed to the Strong             EARL OSRIC.       193

Tower, but of what rank they were, he
was utterly ignorant.
   "Though, I now remember," added the 
old man, "that I did hear Oswald, whose
father, you know Lady, is keeper of the
Strong Tower, say, that there was one
amongst them that seemed to be of quality,
superior to the rest, but that he had never
spoken, having maintained a sullen silence
from the time he was taken."
  "Would it, Arno," said Eloisa, in a low
and faltering voice, "would it, do you
think, be an utter impossibility to get 
admittance to the tower by the assistance
of this Oswald. I see, Arno, you are sur-
prised, and think me daring and adventu-
rous; but I commiserate the woes of
those unhappy prisoners, and would fain try
to alleviate them, as far as in my power.
The tower I know must be damp and un-
wholesome, from the length of time it has 
been uninhabited. Would I could get ad-
mission there! Oswald, I think, may be
trusted, he has been reared from infancy

   VOL 1.               K194       EARL OSRIC.

in this family, and we have ever es-
teemed him a youth of feeling and hu-
manity.  He need not fear that any ill
will ensue from procuring the entrance
of the Tower, at any hour, when I shall
least risque a discovery, since my sole
motive for wishing it, is to give such al-
leviation to the horrors of imprisonment,
as may serve to render that damp and
dismal Tower more habitable, and less
dreary to those whom the fortune of war
has made its inmates.  Entreat him good
Arno to influence his father on the sub-
ject, and give him this purse as an ear-
nest of my favour."

  Saying thus she gave her purse to the
hand of Arno, who looking at her, while
the big tear rolled down the furrows of
his aged cheek.

  "Ah Lady" said he, "I would not
check thy benevolence, and far be it from
thy vassal to dare to reprove the child of
his deplored, his lamented Lady, of her
whom I have nursed in those arms, and             EARL OSRIC.        195

whom, till death, I shall love and ho-
nour ; but may I not venture to suggest
the hazard though wilt wun of incurring our
Lord's displeasure, should it be known."

  "Heaven forbid," cried Eloisa, "that
it should ever reach my father's ear. In-
flexible in what he conceives to be his
duty, he terms the feelings of mercy and
humanity but weakness. Be it our care
to lessen the evils, his severity may
deem it but justice to inflict, Aid me I
conjure thee Arno, in the sacred task,
and may the blessed Virgin protect us
from harm or discovery."

  "Sweet lady," said the old man, "I
cannot refuse thee-I will see Oswald,
and e're night then shalt hear the
result."

  "Adieu then for the present good
Arno," said she, "this evening, be on the
north platform, were I will meet thee, and
learn the success of thy negociation with
Oswald."

  With those words she left him, nor

                   K 2196  EARL OSRIC.

did the good angel of the fair misguided
Eloisa interfere, to save her from lay-
ing, by this first indiscretion, the foun-
dation of future misery.  The day was 
passed in a state of restlessness and in-
quietude very unusual.  Unaccustomed
to conceal aught from the sister of her
heart, she related to Rosalinda her late
adventure, but the latter who possessed
more vivacity and far less of that roman-
tic enthusiasm which has eventually been 
the bane of the hapless Eloisa's peace, only
wondered, and then laughed at her sister's
gravity and anxiety.

  "And why my Eloisa," said she,
"shouldest thou thus anxiously seek the
hazard of thy own fair fame and my fa-
ther's eternal displeasure, to give succour
and comfort to some ferocious Brigand,
for of many such, I am informed, De
Montfort's troops consisted, or perhaps
some old bearded chieftain, wrapt up in 
his own pride and greatness, who may
disdain thy generous efforts."                     EARL OSRIC.          197

     But Eloisa could not be turned by ri-
dicule or persuasion from her purpose.
The voice and the words she had heard
could neither proceed from rage or fero-
city, and she still suffered her imagination
to dwell on the subject with renewed re-
solution to pursue the adventure. Had
she suffered herself to reflect on the un-
dertaking, even the chivalric spirit of the
age would not have encouraged her pro-
cedure, but the powers of reasoning, it
should seem, had a temporary suspension,
or rather Providence permitted not their
exertion, to give an aweful warning in the
fate of Eloisa, of the danger of temerity
to the young, of the fatal consequences
of listening to the suggestions of the ima-
gination, rather than the sober dictates
of reason. It is the blessed privilege of
the latter to convict the mind of error and
to clear it from the perplexed and be-
wildering mazes of the imagination, or
fairy region of enchanting visions, which
when examined by reason, prove mere

                     K 3198              EARL OSRIC.

illusions, calculated only to dazzle and
betray, Pause here Almina, and reflect,
that the first error of Eloisa was the fatal
origin of all her subsequent sorrows.                     Earl Osric.             199

Chap. XI.

Hamlet. There is nothing either good or bad, but thinking
   makes it so ,-to me it is a prison.

Ros. Why then your ambition makes it one ;- tis too nar-
   row for your mind.                       Hamlet.

   What he speak, tho' it lack'd form a little,
was not like madness.-There's something in his soul,
O'er which his melancholy sits on brood,
                                            Isid.

               (The Legend, continued)

   FAITHFUL to her appointment with 
Arno, Eloisa repaired, in the evening,
to the north platform, where she was
soon joined by the old domestic, who told her,
that he had, with some difficulty, pre-
failed on Oswald to speak on the sub-
jest she had mentioned to Owen, who had
given for answer, that were it to become
                   K4
200                  EARL OSRIC.
known to the Earl, that he had even
listened to such a proposition, his life
would be the forfeit.  "But I pleaded 
so strongly Lady," added Arno, :that Owen,
whose heart is as soft as a woman's, could
not refuse me, for, he said you were the
child of his dear Lady, and he could deny
you nothing; but it is an enterprise of dan-
ger.  The centinels must be evaded.  All
the passages about the Tower are guarded,
but the small postern gate nearest to the 
river, will admit you, to a flight of steps, 
which by a subterranean avenue,conducts
to the foot of the winding staircase in the 
centre of the Tower.  To the postern gate 
alone, and unattended, you must repair
at midnight, if you have courage to ven-
ture forth at such an hour, and then you
can only be admitted to see the prisoners
through the grated door of their dunge-
ons.  But if this will satisfy you, lady, 
and you will be silent and secret; to-
morrow at twelve, when the masquing
and revelling will engage every body in             EARL OSRIC              201

the Casle, Owen and Oswald will wait for
you at the postern gate."

  Eloisa fervently thanked Arno, and de-
siring him to go to Owen and inform him
she would be punctual, was retiring from
the rampart, when the voice of the old
man again arrested her steps.   "But it
will not be meet lady for you to go alone,"
said he.  "Let me, at least, attend you to
the postern."

  "No Arno," said Eloisa, "as there is,
at least, I fear, some danger in the enter-
prise, I will brave it alone, and then
should I be dicovered, I shall not have
the bitter reflection of having involved
others in my misfortunes."

She now left him and returned to her 
apartment, where she related to Rosalinda
the success of her message to Oswald.
Again were raillery and persuasion es-
sayed to dissuade her from the enterprise.

  "It will bw known my Eloisa," said she,
"and how then will you abide our stern
father's anger.  And for what do you
                  K 5202               EARL OSRIC.

incur such a tremendous risque? Ah, if 
the gallant Fitz Oscar, indeed were the
inmate of you dreary tower, even I 
would aid you in the task of emancipat-
ing him from imprisonment."

" And who my sister is this gallant
Fitz Oscar, whose name alone thus ani-
mates you? asked Eloisa.
"Alas?" cried Rosalind, " I remem-
ber me now, you were not present when
yesternight our Lady Mother enter-
tained myself and out attendant damsels,
with the tales my father had been relating
to her. The name of one great rebel
chief, whose valour had performed pro-
digies, and saved the lives of half his sol-
diery was ever on her tongue. The vali-
ant Fitz Oscar was her theme. Of every
narrative he was the hero, but over-
powered by numbers he was conquered-
whether among the slain or the captured,
she knew not."

"Tis pity," said the sympathizing 
Eloisa, "that one so brave should be a                  Earl Osric      203

rebel, and we may rejoice that such a capture would be of too great consequence to deposit in Rosamond Castle, lest you and I my sister should suffer our admiration to overstep our duty."
    The interval that succeded between this conversation, and the hour appointed for her visit to the Tower, was passed in vain persuasions on the part of Roaslinda, to induce her sister to desist from her enterprise, and on that of Eloisa in anxious anticipation.  The revels began and the loud sounds of gaiety reached the lonely apartment.  At near midnight, Eloisa prepared to the hour-glass, said, "since still determined my sister, I shall await your return, and ere half the sand is run, I trust you will be again in safety.  Be not too adventurous, and the Virgin guide your steps free from harm."
    Punctual to the time, exactly as the great clock sounded twelve, Eloisa was at the postern gate, it was caustiously un-

                         K6204              Earl Osric.

closed by Owen, and in silence he led her down the subterranean passage which admitted them to the interior of the Tower. 

    In a low and tremulous voice, she thanked Owen for his compliance with her request.  He begged her to be silent, and said he would lead her to the different apartments of the prisoners, whom she might view through the iron grating of the entrance.

   Her form was enveloped in a large mantle, and a close veil, concealed her countenance.  Silently she followed Owen through the private passages to the first cell.  It contained only an old man, worn down with years, and as Owen withdrew the pondorous bolts which gave her a view of the interior, she shuddered with involuntary horror at the strength of the fastenings which excluded the dear blessings of liberty. - In the second and third prisons they beheld not the person she sought.  Only one more cell remained for her to visit.  The rest of the captives were in                     EARL OSRIC.                205

the upper range of the Towers, to attain
which, they must pass the different cen-
tinels, and Owen dared not expose the
person of Eloisa to their observation. -
As they drew near the last prison door,
the sound of the music which had first
attracted her, stuck on the ear of Eloisa.

"This," said Owen, "is our chief pri-
soner. Oswald guards his cell at present,
therefore, Lady, I dare admit you. Ne-
ver has he spoken since his capture, to
any but his Page, who is allowed to at-
tend him, and it is his music you hear."

With trembling step Eloise advanced.
She beheld a dark damp apartment, dimly
illuminated by a single lamp. At the
farther end, appeared a small table, and
seated by it, in an attitude of deep me-
ditation, was the tall form of a warrior;
the sickly gleams of the lamp fell on the
figure of a slender boy, who reclined at
his feet. This was the Page. Owen had
mentioned-his eyes were fixed on the
melancholy countenance of his Lord,206              EARL OSRIC.

while he struck the chords of the lyre,
which had first drawn the attention of
Eloisa. The face of the captive, himself,
was half concealed by his hand, and only
the outlines of his person could be dis-
cerned. A few moments had elapsed,
but it was evident that the intrusion of
Own and his fair companion was yet un-
observed by the unhappy inmate of the
prison. The Page continued his strain,
till his master, waving his hand as if to
silence him, arose and began to pace the
narrow limits allowed him. On the floor,
at some distance laid a dismantled helmet,
its steely front was stained with blood, and
the once high plumage broken and torn,
lay by it. Part of a shield, no longer ca-
pable of defence to the wearer, appeared
to have been shattered at the same time.
With slow and measured pace, the pri-
soner advanced, till opposite the scattered
relics of his armour he paused, and now
Eloisa obtained a more distinct view of
of his tall majestic form - despoiled of his                   EARL OSRIC.               207

armour, his figure was habited in a loose
robe, and his hair hung dishevelled over
his shoulders. His air was noble and
warlike, and his countenance, though pale
with contending emotions, presented a
fine model of manly beauty. While he
gazed on the broken memorial of former
prowess, his look was wild and terrific,
and the fierce glance of his eye seemed
to betray pride, shame, and despair. The
interesting Page seemed to watch every
motion, and springing from his reclining
posture, as his master, with even frenzied
wildness, stuck his forehead in apparent
anguish, he seized his arm, and attempted
to lead him back to his seat. Not a word
was uttered, but a momentary struggle
appeared to engross the faculties of the
prisoner, and with a groan of agony, he
fell on the shoulder of his youthful at-
tendant. The pallid hue of his complex-
ion became more deathlike, and to the
terrified Eloisa, he appeared to be dying.
In supplicating accents, she besought   208                   EARL OSRIC.

Owen to permit her entrance within the
cell.

"He is ill," said she, "and needs
some assistance. For one moment, good
Owen suffer me to address him-only
one moment I ask."

Owen at first hesitated, and drew her
from the grating, but when in tearful ac-
cents she again besought him, he drew a
massey key from his girdle, and applying
it to the lock, "to oblige you Lady," said
he, "I do what may cost me my life-a
few minutes only I can allow-I will
summon Oswald and wait for thee here."

So saying he admitted her, and Eloisa
beheld herself within a few paces of the
mysterious prisoner. The harsh sound of
the dungeon bolts had even failed to recall
the attention of the captive from his indi-
vidual sorrows, or it might be, that he
conluded it was only the entrance of the 
keeper, for he raised not his eyes, and the
approach of Eloisa was unheeded. The
Page had seated his hapless Lord on the              EARL OSRIC.             209

half broken char, and again had thrown
himself at his feet. his eyes half filled
with tears were fixed on the loved coun-
tenance of his master, and in tones of the
most captivating softness, he exclaimed,
"now good my Lord, Cheer thee, I pray,
sure it shall not be said that the noble
spirit, which in prosperity blessed all
around thee, has failed to support thee in
the hour of adverse fortune."
   "If yet it sustain me, my Florio," an-
swered the fallen warrior, "it is to thee,
to thy unceasing efforts, I owe the small
remains of fortitude I possess. But for thy 
constant attachment, thy unwearied 
friendship what had I been? Perhaps
'ere now the prey of death or madness"
  Again he pressed his hand to his burning
forehead, and Florio springing on his
feet, seized the small lute which had be-
fore charmed the ear of Eloisa, and in the
act of drawing from it the strains with
which he was wont to sooth the sorrows
of his Lord, he first discovered the fair

210               EARL OSRIC.

intruder, who in an attitude of deep at-
tention, her countenance half concealed,
stood an unsuspected witness of the scene.

   Roused by the sudden start of Florio,
the prisoner looked round, and beheld the
bright vision, which, to his enthusiastic
fancy, seemed the angel of mercy, so
lovely was the form that burst on his
view. The sound of steps recalled Eloisa
to the power of speech, she knew it was
the return of Owen, and that no time
must be lost. Hastily she tried to ex-
plain, that not from weak or unjustifia-
ble curiosity, not from a desire to search
into the woes of the unfortunate, had she
intruded on a stranger's privacy, but from
a wish to alleviate the horrors of impri-
sonment, by such small comfort as her
limited power enable her to bestow."

   The captive looked, his wonder, his
highly wrought fancy seemed to deem 
her some immortal agent, sent to sooth
his wounded mind.--At length, "am I
awake?" said he, "and do I live once                   EARL OSRIC.        211

more to hear other accents of pity, than
those of my poor Florio?"

  The animated little Page was already
at the feet of Eloisa, blessing her huma-
nity.--"I must be brief, Sir Knight,"
said she, "time presses and I must be
gone. In me you behold the daughter of
Earl Rosamond, the Lord of this Castle,
but think not, that though in this in-
stance she deviates from those strict rules
of propriety, marked out for her sex,
that Eloisa is insenible to aught they 
enjoin; nor has any other motive, than
a desire to aid the unfortunate, drawn
hither my wandering steps. I came to
offer you the solace of books, of music, 
the comfort of better accommodations.--
You are fortunate in having, in the go-
vernor of this Tower, a man of humanity,
who will not refuse to convey to
you, through my means, these small
alleviations to cheer your solitude. Tell
me then, Sir Knight, that you will ac-
cept my offered benefits, and I will leave
        212     EARL OSRIC.

you to the meditations which my abrupt 
entrance may have interrupted."

 The stranger sprang forward, and. as
she retrented, he seized for robe, and
falling on the knee, exclaimed--" take
with you the prayers, the blessings of Fitz
Oscar--all now, alas, he has to offer."--
A shriek of surprise burst from the lips
of Eloisa, and the imprisoned cheif ad-
ded--" once more may not the blessing
of this night be mine.--One more may
I not presume to hope"--Owen here in-
terrupted him, and while the little gratc-
ful Florio clung to her, and on his knees
entreated her again to visit his honoured
Lord--Elosia was compelled to depart.--
Time was only allowed her to say in a low
voice--" In three nights, at the same 
hour, I will again attempt to gain en-
trance here," before she was obliged to 
quit the person.

 Having arranged with Owen for her re-
admission at the time appointed, and for
conveying books and other comforts to               EARL OSRIC.   213

the prisoner, she returned in silence to
her own apartment followed thither by
the visionary form of the noble warrior.
In vain she sought her couch, and tried
to gain repose. Fitz Oscar, the renowan-
ed, the valiant Fitz Oscar, degraded, im-
prisoned, haunted her imagination and
took possession of her hitherto spotless
mind.

 On the following morning, her first
care was to perform her promise to the 
captive chieftain, and by means of old
Arno, books and music were conveyed
to his dungeon. On her intercession,
fire and a comfortable couch were granted
him, while all the inhabitants of the Cas-
tle were too much occupied by the re- 
joicings, to notice her proceedings. From
their windows, the sisters saw the crowds
of Knights and Ladies, who came to
share the festivities. Eloisa sighed, and
exclaimed-" Ah, hapless Fitz Oscar, it
is to celebrate the victory whic has con-214            EARL OSRIC.

demned three to the horrors of captivity,
that all these, thy fellow beings are as-
sembled." She was rallied by-the more
lively Rosalinda on tthe subject of her ad-
venture, which had introduced her to the
famed Fitz Oscar. "He has lost one
victory my sister," said she, " but much
I fear me, he has gained another, which
kings may envy him."
     Eloisa blushed deeply, she was consci-
ous of the allusion, but she tried to con-
ceal, even from herself, the deep interest
she took in the fallen ortunes of the chief,
who had acted such a conspicuous part in
Dc Montfort's army. The horrid idea,
that stigmatized as a traitor, his life might
ultimately be forfeited, deprived her
nights and days of rest and peace; and
the faint bloom that had once animated her check, faded to a deadly paleness.-
An unexpected call on her presence of
mind, compelled her on the eye of the
day, when she was again to visit Fitz             
                   EARL OSRIC.          215

Oscar, to summons all her courage, to
conceal her feelings.

  An order from their father reached the
sisters, for their attendance at the ball held
that night by the Lady, their mother. Had 
they been inclined to disobey, they dared
not dispute the commands of the peremp-
tory Earl, who came himself to conduct
them to the company. He introduced them
to several Knights of distinction, and
among the rest, the young Earl of St.
Albert claimed the hand of Eloisa, for the
dance, which her father commanded her to
accept, and the evening flew gaily away.
  Rosalinda's striking form drew around 
her a crowd of Knights, but the young
St. Albert appeared to be wholly at-
tracted by the less dazzling, but more fas-
cinating beauty of Eloisa. When they 
retired for the night, Rosalinda, with 
the vivacity natural to her, repeated the 
compliment that had that night been
paid to her beauty, but Eloisa was intent216           EARL OSRIC.

on drawing comparisons between all the
Knights she had seen, and the less for-
tunate but more amiable Fitz, Oscar,
and it is scarcely needful to add how
far preferable in her opinion the latter
appeared.            EARL OSRIO             217


            CHAP. XII.


Lyeander. "If thou lovest me then
Steal forth thy father's house to-morrow night,
And in the wood, a league without the town,
There will I stay for thee."

   HERM. "In that same place thou hast appointed me,
To-morrow, truly, will I meet with thee."
                  MISSUMMER'S NIGHT'S DREAM

                 _______________________
                 _______________________

ON the night appointed, Eloisa again
visited Fitz Oscar, and heard from him
the tale of his capture. From this time,
her visits regularly made, tended consider-
ably to alleviate the miseries of captivity.
  The gratitude of Fitz Oscar, and the
little affectionate Florio, was unbounded as
her own benevolence. The consequence
was such as might be expected; her gentle
heart fell a prey to the dazzling qualities of 

  VOL I.                    L218       EARL OSRIC>

Fitz Oscar, and she soon became too sen-
sible of the influence he had obtained over
her mind.  Won by her gentleness of
manners, and that generosity which had
led her to risque her father's displeasure,
and her own fame, to soften the horrors
of his confinement.

  Fitz Oscar felt for her an attachment
which he had never experienced for any
of the ladies, who had sighed for him.
Young, ardent, and enthusiastic, a love of
arms, an insatiable thirst for renown, and
strong personal regard for the brave, but
daring De Montfort, had led him to join
the rebel army, but his breast was the
seat of honour, and his lofty mind aspired
to the heights of fame.  Now degraded in
his own estimation, the soft soothing of
Eloisa, came like balm to his wounded
heart,a and while she remonstrated with
him, on the part he had acted, and set
forth the crime and the evils of disloyalty,
he began to reason with himself, and to
think that he had been led into error by

                 EARL OSRIC           219

he sophistry of art and ambition, delight-
ed with the idea of having awakened him
to a sense of wrong, Eloisa persevered in
visiting him, and too soon she mentally
resolved never to bestow her hand on any
other, and Fitz Oscar vowed to live only
for her.

  Rosalina, as yet unwounded by the
passion which had destroyed the peace of
Eloisa, was sensible of the impropriety
attending this connexion, but fondly
attached to her sister, and eager to pro-
mote her happiness, she had suppressed
the arguments her reason had urged
against it, and only prayed it might not
be the bane instead of the promoter of
Eloisa's felicity The visits of the latter
to the strong tower, were now become
more frequent, but her sister forbore to
notice this circumstance.

  A Knight of rank, who had seen Rosa-
linda on the evening of the ball, solicited
permission from the Earl, to address her
at this period. Alike indifferent to all,

                 L 2220              EARL OSRIC.

she at first opposed it, from a dislike to be
separated from her sister, but finding it to
be the earnest wish of her father, she at
length acceded to it, and preparations were
already begun for the nuptials, Rosa-
linda had often heard and read of those
violent attachments which formed the
happiness or misery of those hearts that
imbibed them, but as she felt none of that 
romantic passion in her own breast, for
her future Lord, she treated it as a chimera,
engendered in the brain of those, who like 
Eloisa, were of a romantic turn of mind.
Little did she imagine, that the period
was near at hand, when she was to be 
convinced of the fallacy of this opinion
and to have fatal conviction, that it was
nothing less than chimerical. Lord Alwin, 
who was destined by her father to receive
her vows, she respected for his many vir-
tues, and certainly liked him better than
any one she had ever seen, but she neither
felf confused or delighted at his approach,                 EARL OSRIC.           221
and she saw him depart from her presence 
without anxiety or regret.

  The young Earl of St. Albert, had
been equally struck with the charms of
Eloisa, and had received from her ambi-
tious sire, all the encouragement he could 
wish, but Eloisa started appalled at his de-
claration of love, and shrunk with undis-
guised repugnance, from his voews.  Her
opposition excited the stern displeasure
of Earl Rosamond, and he demanded a 
private conference with his daughter, in
which he commanded her to receive the
addressed of St. Albert.  Trembling and
terrified, she sought Rosalinda, and sunk
senseless in her arms.  Continual-faintings
succeeded, and for many days she was
unable to rise from her couch.  As Rosa-
linda sat by her in tearful watching, Eloisa
suddenly, as if awakeing from a deep
sleep, started up, and seizing her sister's
hand, "I must go to him," saud sge, " he 
expects me, and perhaps he may seek me 
here."  She spoke and looked wildly, and
               L3 222 EARL OSRIC.

Rosalinda saw that the fever which had
preyed on her frame, had affected her in-
tellects. In vain she tried to soothe her.
The image of Fitz Oscar haunted her ima-
gination, and Rosalinda could only quiet
her perturbation, by promising to see him,
and to inform him of her inability to visit
him as usual. The promise was uttered
merely to calm the perturbed spirits of her
sister, but Eloisa forced her to compliance,
and some small degree of curiosity to be-
hold the far famed Fitz Oscar, perhaps
influenced her in the resolution, she un-
happily formed to visit the Strong Tower.
At the dead hour of night, as Eloisa had
before done, Rosalinda wandered forth on
an expedition ordained by fate to be the
sad commencement of a long train of sor-
rows. She saw the mighty chief, and
from that hour the bond of sympathy was
broken between the sisters. Eloisa re-
covered from her malady, and resumed
her interviews with Fitz Oscar, but blind-
ed as she was by her attachment, even she                    Earl Osric.     223

could not avoid seeing an alteration in the deportment of Rosalinda, she grew fretful and unsocial, and instead of retiring to rest at their wonted time, would wander out alone.  Little did Eloisa imagine the object of these midnight perambulations, nor ever did she suspect that Fitz Oscar had beheld her sister, save in the one short interview on the night of her illness.
     The crisis of the fair sisters' fate, drew near, the Lords Alwin and St. Albert were equally impatient, and solicitious for the nuptials, and Earl Rosamond commanded the obedience of his daughters.  At this period, an order arrived at the Castle of Rosamond, for the removal of the Chief, Fitz Oscar, to the Tower of London, previous to taking his trial; it had been long expected, and was to be executed on the following day.
    Owen, the keeper of the Tower, had been seized with a dangerous illness, which confined him to his bed, and Rosalinda, who always attended and prescribed for 
                          L4224           EARL OSRIC.

the sick in her father's Castle, had been
allowed free egress to the Tower, to visit
him. His son Oswald, had officiated
during his father's confinement, and it is
supposed, that he had been won to favour
the designs of his prisoners, by that fasci-
nation of manner which eminently dis-
tinguished Fitz Oscar, and by his own
warm attachment to the daughters of his
Lord. From the disturbed sleep, which
succeeded the intelligence brought her by
her damsels, of the order for Fitz Oscar's
removal, Eloisa was awakened by lour
cries, and the general confusion, that, at
the dawn of morning reigned throughout
the Castle. The great doors of the Strong 
Tower,were found unfastened. The 
prison of the Chief, Fitz Oscar, was vacant,
and Oswald has disappeared.

  The first emotion of Eloisa, was joy
that he had escaped the horrors perhaps
preparing for him, but short lived was the 
sensation. Anxiously she sought Rosalin-
ds, but her chamber was empty, and wore          EARL OSRIC. 225

no appearance of having been inhabited,
during the night. The Damsels were
hastily summoned, but all professed igno-
rance. At length, it was discovered, that
at a late hour, the preceding night, the
Lady Rosalinda had been seen by one of
the vassals, much muffled up, enter a
wood, at a short distance from the Castle,
accompanied by one who appeared like an
attendant. The truth seemed now to
flash on the minds of all, and too soon it
became evident, that Rosalinda was the 
partner of Fitz Oscar's flight. The dread-
ful conviction was no sooner given than
Eloisa uttering a long and fearful groan,
fell senseless to the ground. She was
restored to animation, but reason was
totally estranged, and for two succeeding
years she was like, insensible to joy or
sorrow. Sometimes a state of entire
stupefaction seemed to have suspended
all her faculties, and at others, the wildest
delirium took possession of her. Her
father at length, determined to remove226             EARL OSRIC.

her, with proper attendants, to a secluded
spot, where, by degrees, solitude and time
restored her to her long estranged senses.
As soon as an event so desirable as ascer-
tained, Earl Rosamond took her back to
the Castle, where, in spite of her altered
appearance, the addresses of Lord St.
Albert were renewed. With a heart half
broken by grief, and a frame debilitated by
long endurance, Eloisa would gladly have
been excused, from even seeing him, but
finding it still the prevailing wish of her
father's heart, she at last consented to en-
ter the nuptial state, and was led by Lord
St. Albert to the altar.

  This Almina was the early history of
my valued friend, the Countess of St.
Albert. I now come to the part of this
recital which most nearly concerns your-
self.

  The Chief Fitz Oscar, was the son of
an old friend of my father. I knew him
from infancy, and my father was so sin-
cerely attached to him, that he frequently                      EARL OSRIC.          227

compelled him to reside with us for a
great length of time. He was many years
my senior, but his conversation and war-
like stories, first I believe awakened in
my youthful mind, that love of arms and
desire of glory, which afterwards led me,
at the early age of fourteen, to enlist be-
neath the banners of the cross. A differ-
ence in opinion on political subjects, first
estranged Fitz Oscar from his early friends.
My father was loyalty itself, he saw that
Fitz Oscar's mind was tainted by the per-
nicious maxims of De Montfort and his
friends, and forseeing that it would lead
to rebellion and ruin, he adjured me, a
short time before his death, to avoid such
a confederacy, as I would the poison of
the adder. "Preserve," said he, "your
loyalty to your King, my son, but should
the unhappy principles, Fitz Oscar has
imbibed, bring him to ruin and misery,
then, for my sake, be his friend, I loved
his parents, and I would fain preserve the
son, but it will not be. His enthusiasm

                           L 6228                  EARL OSRIC.

in a wrong cause will destory him." And
so it proved-during my absence from
England, while yet a boy, I made my first
essay in arms, the events I have recorded,
took place in the family of Rosamond, de-
scended from a distant branch of the same
house, my father had always been the
Earl's firm friend and ally, and many of
my early days had been passed in the so-
ciety of Eloise and Rosalinda, who though
both my elders, treated me as a brother,
and designated me their "Little Knight,"
from my anxiety for renown and decided
inclination for war; honoured by the par-
ticular favour and friendship of the Prince,
during our expedition to Palestine, I was
constantly near him, and after an evening
spent in his tent, was returning to my own
in the camp, when I observed a person
following me, in the habit of a pilgrim.
The number of pilgrims, who were at that
time accustomed to resort to Jerusalem,
where they were permitted to visit the                Earl Osric.          229

holy sepulchre, rendered the appearance nothing extraordinary, had not his evidently keeping me in view, awakened a suspicion that he was pursuing my steps.  At the entrance of the tent, he overtook me, and addressing me in a low voice, by my name, entreated a few moments conversation, I granted his petition, though rather startled by the mystery in his appearance.  The interview, he said, must be private, and as some attendants were in outer divisions, I led the stranger into the interior of the tent, where we were no sooner alone, than throwing off his pilgrim's cloak, though altered by grief and adversity, I instantly recognized my father's friend, Fitz Oscar.  Hastily I demanded an explanation of his appearance. 

     "Well may you be surprised, Osric," said he, "to behold me here, but my fame is for ever banished, and the sun of glory set to rise no more.  You are my last resource.  To you I must open my heart, for in you, your noble father still 230           Earl Osric.

lives, and from his friendship, I should, I know, have found the only comfort that now remains for me."

     He proceeded to narrate all the events I have recounted, adding, that on quitting the Castle of Rosamond, with the misguided Rosalinda, his first object had been to place her in safety and concealment. - Here they learned, that in the bitterness of his rage, Earl Rosamond had made a fearful vow, never to regard Rosalinda as a child, and if possible, to get her again into his power, that he might seclude her for life in a monastry - dreadful no the situation of the unhappy exiles.  Tormented by the horrors of remorse, and in continual apprehensions of discovery, exposed to the inconveniences of poverty, and unprovided with any place of secure refuge.  The paternal Castle of Fitz OScar, had he dared to seek an asylum there, could no longer afford it - during his imprisonment, it had been plundered, and in part destroyed, and proscribed as he           EARL OSRIC                         231

was, he dares not make himsef known to his vassals.One only plan presented itself-- Prince Edward had once been his friend,and before the pernicious principles f De Montfort, had empoisoned his mind, had honoured him with peculiar favour.He was aware of the excellent disposition of the Prince, and knew that his Highness had been strongly attached to him.To join him in Palestine, to fight under his banners, and by firm fidelity to regain his friendship, appeared the path most desirable to pursue. But how to dispose of Rosalinda, was the perplexity that harrassed him.Undaunted by the prospect of fatigue and danger,she declared her resolution to accompany him, and in the habit of pilgrims, the immediate adoption of their hastily formed plan, secured them for discovery. They reached Palestine in safety; but Rosalinda, unaccustomed to hardships almost sunk under it. For the present, he had placed her in a small monastry, inhabited by a few nuns,232           EARL OSRIC.

a short distance from the camp, where
some other female pilgrims had sought
refuge.

  A decisive battle with the Saracens was
expected to take place in a few days. Un-
der a feigned name, the once famed Chief,
Fitz Oscar, was to server under his early
friend, the Prince. "And should heaven
prosper my endeavours, Osric," said he,
"and glory once more be mine, the will
I dare to solicit the pardon and protection
of Edward. If fate ordain otherwise, to
your friendship I commit all that remains
of me. Say, will you accept the sacred
office? Will you protect my poor deso-
lated Rosalinda. Shocked as I felt, by
such a recital, and indignant as I felt, at
the thoughtless imprudence which had
reduced the daughter of Earl Rosamond
to the complicated distressed that threa-
tened her. I remembered the injunction
of my father, and even had not my own
wishes prompted me, should unhesitating-
ly have given the promise he required. I              EARL OSRIC.            233

solemnly vowed, should he fall, to guard
Rosalinda with a brother's care, and to de-
fend her and her unborn infant, from the
rage of her offended sire. The issue of
the battle decided the fate of poor Fitz
Oscar, he fell by my side, after perform-
ing prodigies of valour. Fixing his dying
eyes on me, and grasping my hand, he
sair, " You have promised to protect my
Rosalinda, give me also an assurance that
you will be a parent to my child. Keep it
from the knowledge of Earl Rosamond,
till there is no reason to fear for its safety,
and never let it know its affinity to that
family, till it shall reach years of discre-
tion." I had only time to give the pro-
mise required, ere death seized its prey,
and mine was the sad task to bear to Rosa-
linda the tidings that consigned her to
lingering misery. Our return to our na-
tive land, shortly followed, and with infi-
nite hazard and difficulty, I procured safe
convoy for my unfortunate charges, with
some females who were in the same
134                    EARL OSRIC.

monastery. Greatly did I apprehend that
she would not survive to reach England.
Suffering and sorrow, had reduced her to
the verge of the grave, but she had a 
faithful attendant in the page Florio, who
had, with unwearied fidelity, followed the
steps of his master, witnessed his death,
and now continued his services to the
wretched widow, Rosalinda. On landing,
I was so fortunate as to procure her an
asylum, in a small remote cottage, ob-
scurely situated near the coast, it was in-
habited by an ancient female, who pro-
mised to attend her in the hour of danger,
and I left Florio in attendance on her.
My duty compelled me to attend the
Prince, now by his father's death become
King. With him I intended to please the
cause of Fitz Oscar's widow, but alas,
time was not allowed me. As soon as I
could possibly quit my Sovereign for a few
days, I flew to the retirement of Rosa-
linda, dreadful was the alteration, she ap-
peared a beautiful shadow, so altered     EARL OSRIC.     235

was her fine form, so pallid, so woe-worn
her lovely countenance. Deeply sensi-
ble of her errors, and anxious only to make her peace with heaven, I found her 
attended by a charitable Monk, whom the 
widow with whom she resided, had
sought out for her. Fortunately, he was
pious and humane, and he administered 
to her mental, as well as corporeal disease.
Humble, penitent, and resigned, I wit-
nessed her gradual decay, and each day
could perceive her nearer to her kindred 
heaven. The awful moment came, and
the hour that gave birth to her infant, ter-
minated her own existence. The deserted 
babe, was my care, it was safely convey-
ed to the ancient Castle of Osric, which
had most unexpectedly descended to me
from a distant branch of my family, in a 
remote part of Scotland, my only poses-
sion in that country. The widow, who
had so kindly received and sheltered Rosa-
linda, consented to accompany and take
charge of it, and in the solitude of the236                 EARL OSRIC.

Castle, I deemed it safe from the search which I understood the vindictive Earl Rosamond still caused to be made, after his daughter and her offspring. The solemn vow I had made to Fitz Oscar, rendered it a duty to rear my charge in concealment, and, yet, I wished her to be educated for the rank which one day I hope to see her fill. On myself, then the task devolved, for to whom could I delegate it, and yet preserve my secret. With you, Almina, it remains to prove how I have fulfilled it. The faithful Florio, never left you, but his affectionate heart could not sustain his grief for his idolized master, and soon he followed Rosalinda to the tomb. Thus, Almina, have you, from infancy, been my care. The mystery in my conduct, relating to yourself, and the anguish of Lady St. Albert, when she first beheld you, are now accounted for. Your grandmother still exists, his Lady at length brought him a male heir, who married very early, and died young, leaving one                  EARL OSRIC               237
daughter, who resides with the old Earl.
The Countess has been numbered with
the dead many years. Earl Rosamond,
now approaching to second childhood,still
secludes himself in feudal magnificence in
his own Castle, where he immures his 
grandaughter from the world, nor even
suffers her to leave him. Lady St.
Albert, at stated periods,visits the pater-
nal roof, but the remembrance it raises
are too apt to recall that fatal estrange-
ment of reason, which marked the first
years of Fitz Oscar's elopement with her
sister. As soon as she knew from me,
that a descendant of the hapless Rosa-
linda, had survived its mother, she resolv-
ed on being her protectress, and to Lord
St.Albert, revealed the tale I had told her.
That generous man,joined in her wish for
you to become one of his family, and you 
were known there as the daughter of a dis-
tant relation of mine, who had left his 
child beneath the joint guradianship of
Lord St.Albert, and myself. Thus your238             EARL OSRIC.

affinity to the famed Fitz Oscar, is unsus-
pected, nor would I wish it to be purlicly
known, till I have related the whole nar-
rative to the King. To the ear of our
gracious Sovereign, I have free access. I
know him to be kind and merciful, and in 
his eyes have no doubt that the sufferings 
of Fitz Oscar, will have expiated his
offences, and that he will endeavour only
to remember hims as an early favoured 
friend.
   The singular education, given by Earl
Rosamond to his daughters, who were
taught by a learned Ecclesiastic, the arts
of reading and writing, accomplishments
so seldom bestowed on females, enabled
your unfortunate mother to leave a memo-
rial to her child, which she desired might
not be opened and perused till she arrived 
at years of maturity. The vellum that is 
attached to this, contains words traced by
her own hand. The name of Almina was
given you by her own desire, should her
child be of her own sex. Faithfully have
              EARL OSRIC.           239

I endeavoured to xecute her wishes, and
as long as the privilege of existence i
granted him, Almina will assuredly ever
find the firmest friend in

                    EDGAR EARL OSRIC.

   Attached to the manuscript, was a
small scroll of vellum, carefully fastened
with silk, With trembling' fingers and
a palpitating heart, Almina unfolded it,
and with tearful eyes read these words:-

  "To the yet unborn infant of my fond-
est affections, are these lines addressed,
dedicated by the agitated hand of maternal
apprehensions, scarcely may they be legi-
ble at the distant period they are destined
to be read.  Yet in solitude and seclusion
awaiting that hour, which a weakened
frame, a wounded heart, tells me I can
never survive, fain would I impress on the
mind of my child, thé sentiments which
fill my distracted breast.  Mercifully has
Providence punished the errors which
have conducted me to an early death, and240             EARL OSRIC.

given me in dying, the consolation of
knowing that i shall leave my child in safe
and honourable protection. Though yet
in youth, Earl Osric is a miracle of valour,
worth, and wisdom. In him as the de-
serted Rosalinda found the kindest pro-
tector, the most generous friend. May my
infant live to pay its mother's vast debt of
gratitude, and oh, should it ever be des-
tined to behold the being most loved, most
injured by its unhappy parent, Eloisa, the
once kind sister of my heart, may its
orphan innocence procure its mother's
pardon. Perhaps, when time has in some
degree worn from her memory, the errors
of Rosalinda, and left only the recollec-
tion of their early attachments, when she
shall know the sufferings those errors have
produced, and be assured of the remorse
they have incurred, she will, with that
liberality of mind, for which she has ever
been distinguished, accord her forgiveness,
and take a child born in sorrow and peni-
tence, to her bosom. The hour in which       EARL OSRIC.     241

the fate of the too greatly beloved Fitz 
Oscar, was made known to me, was de-
cisive. For him I disobeyed my father,
for him, I deceived a confiding sister, but
it is over, and I feel that the awful hour 
approaches, which will usher one human
being into existence, and consign another
to a premature grave. On my knees
would I invoke a blessing on my poor in-
fant. Hear me great Power, whose per-
vading eye. searches the hearts of all, to
whose scrutiny the Prince and beggar are
alike exposed. Humbly would I implore 
thee to take to thy protecting care, the
child on the dawn of being. Endue its in-
fant mind with those qualities which may
ensure it eternal peace, and whether it be
destined for prosperity or adversity, whe-
ther felicity gild its days, or the dark
clouds of adversity darken its prospect,
through the vale of life, grant that no
consciousness of ill, no bitter self-approach,
may add to the pangs of calamity, but
pure in heart may it return in the appoint-242           Earl Osric.

ed time, to the bosom of its Creator.
Guided ever by thy holy precepts, may it
shun the fate of"

                             "Rosalinda"

  In solitude, were the woes of her parents,
perused by Almina, and many were the 
tears that dropped on the eventful manu-
script, that recorded them.

  "May thy pious prayers, my beloved,
my hapless mother, be granted," she ex-
claimed, "And never, Oh, never, can your
child repay to our benefactor, the benefits
he has conferred. By him, the dying 
hours of both parents were comforted,
with the assurance of protection to their
offspring, and religiously has he fulfilled
the sacred promise."

  The good Dame Maddelina, who had
been instructed by Lady de Mowbray, in
the conduct she wished her to observe
towards Almina, suffered her to vent in 
seclusion, the first burst of grief, uninter-
rupted by the intrusion of friendship, and

  

                   EARL OSRIC.                  243

when she again appeared, the cheerfulness
and judicious attention of the worthy
Dame, had the desired effect. Gradually
the violence of her sorrow subsided, leav-
ing only the deepest gratitude towards her
early friend, and at the foot of the altar
were her prayers daily offered for the ex-
piation of those sins which had led her
unfortunate parents to a premature grave.

                      M 2244                 EARL OSRIC.

                    CHAP. XIII.

"This day my Sister should the Cloister enter,
And there receive her approbation.

                     In her youth,
There is a prone and speechless dialect,
Such as moves men; besides she hath a prosperous art,
When she will play with reason and discourse,
And well she can persuade."
                                SHAKESPEARE.

THE prospects that now opened to
Almina, had power to rouse her from the
apathy produced by unconscious disap-
pointment, and the melancholy which the
perusal, of her parents misfortunes has at
first evinced, and she prepared for her
introduction to the great world, with an
eagerness that marked her anxiety to 
escape from her own reflections. She                     Earl Osric.                245

asked Dame Maddelina a thousand ques-
tions, and delighted in anticipations of the
wonders she was to behold.

  "You remind me," said the good re-
cluse, "of the days of youth, Almina, I,
like you, expected in every change, to
find increase of happiness. Far be it
from me to repress the ideal enjoyment,
for perhaps it is far more exquisite than
any reality. With me it proved so, for
after trying the world, its futile pleasures,
and varying delights, I resigned it for ever
by choice, bid it adieu, with infinitely
greater satisfaction than I had entered it."
"Is it possible?" said Almina, "My
tale," rejoined Dame Maddelina, "is
neither long nor eventful, but if it will in-
terest you sufficiently, to induce you to
give it attention, gladly will I relate it. So
far it bears a similitude to your own life,
as like you, I entered the world from a
state of seclusion, in which, like you, I
had from my birth, been immured. The 
early loss of my parents, placed me under

                    M3246            EARL OSRIC.

the care of a distant relation, the Prioress
of a remote convent, where, in entire 
seclusion and peace, many years of youth
elapsed. At length the period arrived,
when by my father's will, I was to quit
the cloister, and enter the world. A rela-
tion of my mother, resident at court, was
to present me, and I became the uncon-
trolled mistress of an affluent fortune. My
brothers, both much younger than myself,
were under the charge of other friends.
Never can I forget the ardour, the felicity
I felt, when emerging from the mono-
tonous scenes of a cloister, I first entered
the court of the Great Henry, the the
seat of pleasure and voluptuousness. Every
object I beheld, was tinted with the glow-
ing colours of a fertile imagination, and
novelty lent all around me, false charms.
Amongst the many Knights, who hovered 
round the throne, first in gallantry and
fame, was Sir Egbert de Monthermer. Of-
my own age, rich and nobly descended, he
was soon marked out for me by the world,
                EARL OSRIC.        247

and certainly, no objection could be form-
ed to his exterior. In manners and in
person, he was superior to any man I had
ever seen, and the experience of a seclud-
ed novice, presented no competitor that
could, in any respect, vie with the gay,
the brilliant Sir Egbert. Very soon was I
selected by him as the constant object of
almost reverential attention, unceasing
were his assiduties, and had I resembled
many females who imbibe readily the
most dangerous of passions, my happi-
ness might for ever have been forfeited;
but I had been early taught to guard and
examine my heart, and the brilliant quali-
ties of Sir Egbert thought they at first
dazzled my imagination, never for a mo-
ment deluded my reason. I saw that
vanity was prevailing feature in his cha-
racter, and I was followed and admired by
the many Knights, who frequented the
Court. Convinced of my own partiality,
I sedulously watched his conduct, and be-
haviour, nor even suffered myself to betray

                    M 4248       EARL OSRIC.

the slightest mark of the attachment
which was daily increasing. Happy was 
it for me, that I had been taught the task
of self-examination. Just at this eventful
period, when, notwithstanding all my
caution, I began to believe the heart of
Sir Egbert really mine, a new object in
the great world attracted all eyes. The
Lady Agnes de Morden, was presented at
Court, and of the very same age as my-
self, we soon became intimate. Gay,
beautiful, and witty, she was an universal
favourite. At first, Sir Egbert would not
allow her to be handsome, or if he did, it
was only to draw a comparison between us
in my favour. Continual intercourse dis-
covered to me, faults in Lady Agnes, which
were concealed from those who saw her
only superficially. Trifling incidents, of
which occurring in the familiarity of inti-
macy, I was enabled to trace the real mo-
tives, convinced me that self was her idol,
and that the warmth of her general man-
ner was affected, that to obtain applause             Earl Osric.        249

and admiration, at whatever price was her sole aim, and that her own feelings and wishes alone were consulted in every action.  She possessed too much discernment, not to discover the particularity of Sir Egbert towards me, which indeed he took no pains to conceal.  At every tournament he wore my colours, disclaimed every prize not given by my hand, and at my feet were all the trophies of his valour laid.  But soon was the scene changed, and now my previous caution proved my best guard.  The unceasing arts of the Lady Agnes, at length succeeded.  I plainly saw that her wit, which not the most serious subject could restrain, aided by her beauty and unceasing artifices, had attracted Sir Egbert.  Carefully I observed them, and convinced of the versatility of her character, and the consequent impossibility of happiness in an union with him, I began to mediate on what had always been a latent wish, to return to a conventual life, and with a mind yet at
                       M 5250            EARL OSRIC.

peace, spirits still unbroken, devote my
life to the praise of my Creator. In so 
doing, could I for a moment have conceiv-
ed, that I should have injured the peace
of Sir Egbert, I would have hesitated, and
allowed him a season of probation, before
I took my final resolves, but I saw that
when the Lady Agnes was present I was
forgotten, and after a given time which I
devoted to deliberation, and to observing
his conduct, I became assured of the pro-
priety of my resolution. No sooner was it
madeknown, than my recreant Knight flew
to my fect. All his former vows and pro-
testations, were renewed, without effect, 
for I had been a vigilant observer, and 
unsuspectingly, his whole heart had been 
laid open to my inspection. All of it that
was not engrossed by self-love and frivolity
was devoted in reality to me, but his love
of variety and irresolution would have
proved destructive of domestic peace, and 
all recompensed me for sacrificing higher
bones and prospects. I opened to his    EARL OSRIC.   251

view, every motive by which I was ac-
tuated, declared the resolution I had taken,
necessary to my temporal and eternal
peace, and decidedly bid him and the
world adieu.

  Scarcely had the year of my novieiate
closed, ere I learned his marriage with the
Lady Agnes, and at the alter I prayed for
their happiness.

More than twenty years have glided on,
and not once have I repented my choice of
a religious life. Had I continued in the
world, the warmth of my imagination,
the natural susceptibility of my feelings
might have involved me in error. To
what object can such qualities be safely
devoted but one, yet would I not wish all
to follow my example. The world, as well
as the cloister, should have its votaries,
and it is wisely ordained that there are
duties to be performed in each. Those of
active life, are undoubtedly attended by
temptations, from which the quiet occu-
pation of a monastry are exempt, and

    6
252             EARL OSRIC.

greater in proportion is the merit of those
who pass the ordeal unhurt. The Lady
Agnes de Monthermer, is, I understand,
still conspicuous in the great world. There
you will probably be fated to meet her."

  " I shall hate and detest her," said the
enthusiastic Almina.

  "No," said Dame Maddelina, smiling,
"you are too liberal minded, to hate or
detest and body, my dear Almina. In-
creased years may have corrected the early
errors of the Lady Agnes, and she may
now have become and estimable character."

  "I shall never like her," said Almina,
:she must be by nature deceitful and
treacherous."

  "Long since have I forgive her," said
the Dame, "considering her merely as
as instrument in the hand of heaven, to
lead me in the way marked out for me.The quiet path of seclusion and peace."
  
   The tale of Dame Maddeline, some-
what damped the sanguine excpectations of 
Almina, but her feelings were too violent               EARL OSRIC.        253

and had not the strong voice of reason
curbed them, would seldom have found a
medium.
   Lady de Mowbray's summons was now
daily expected, when a new guest joined
them at the Castle. Bertha de Wilton, an
orphan neice of Lady de Mowbray's quit-
ting the Convent, where she had been
placed at the death of her parents, came
to reside in future with her aunt. Bertha,
possessed but a very small portion, more
than sufficient, however, to procure her
admission to a cloister had not her incli-
nation opposed it. Lively and volatile she
had besought her aunt, to change her des-
tination, and the power she possessed, to 
present her with advantage at Court, had in-
duced Lady de Mowbray to comply with
her entreaties, and with delight she receiv-
ed permission to bid the Convent adicu.
With her usual consideration, her Ladyship
thought, that by associating Almina, and
the lively Bertha, a reciprocal benefit,
might be derived. The peculiar circum-254                    EARL OSRIC.

stances, under which the former had
emerged from retirement, had impressed
her air and countenance, with a pensive-
ness unnatural to her character, while the
volatility of Bertha's manners was un-
checked by sorrow or deep reflection. Al-
mina was amused by her vivacity, as they
took their daily walks, particularly to the
cottage of Edwin, who was unmercifully
rallied by his fair relation, on his love for
retirement. In one of their visits, Bertha
was rejoicing that soon should she and 
Almina quit the lonely Castle for the
gaiety of the Court.

"And how wilt thou my good Cousin,"
said she to Edwin, "support our absence.
Not all they boasted philosophy, I flatter
me, will prevent thee from missing our
society."

"There Lady, will be your substitute,"
he answered, pointing to some books.

"And how long will it be," she asked,
"before thous assumest the cowl; in time,
I hope, to be my confessor when I return                EARL OSRIC                   255

to the Castle.  Though, on recollection, I shall 
not dare to choose thee in that capacity, for 
assuredly, I shall have double penances for 
transgression."


  "Fear not," he answered, "that by me any 
penances will be inflicted.  Seclusion is 
decidedly my choice, but not that of the 
cloister.  To contemplate the wonders of nature, 
and to admire her works, as well, when only the 
starry concave above meets the eye, as when the 
sun resplendent in glory, gives them to my view, 
and to adore the Author of them, here 
unrestrained by monastic rules, is the plan of 
life that comprises all my wishes.  Perhaps, 
indeed, I might add," -he hesitated a moment, and 
then continued, "that the presence, the society 
of a congenial mind would be an addition, which I 
dared hoped for, would render this spot a 
paradise."

  "Ah, is it come to this, my good Adam?" said 
the sprightly Bertha, "Heaven saw it not good, 
that Adam should be alone."
256          EARL OSRIC.

  "Lady", said Edwin, smiling, "Then
pray look out for an Eve, as speedily as may
be." "You will probably find her," said she,
"amongst these rocks, and I hope she will
be as fond of star-gazing and moping as 
even you can wish her.  So good adam,
adieu." And taking Almina's arm, they
departed.  In silence they walked on, for
Almina was struck with the tone and man-
ner of Edwin, and the melancholy air
with which he bade her adieu.

At length, "Heaven defend him, good
youth," said Bertha, "and send him more
reasonable. Well, next to an old Hermit,
I hate a young one. Give me a brave
Knight, who will fight for me, exhibit my
portrait on his shield, and maintain the
fame of my beauty and virtue against all
competitors."

Almina smlied, "How happy is it Ber-
tha," said she, "that the Lady de Mow-
bray consented to change the destiny
alloted thee. In truth thou art as ill-
formed for a monastic as a rural life."
              Earl Osric.           257

   "I should bate either," answered she, "and were I possessed of power and fortune, the world should know it.  As it is, I must be content, to wait, till some Knight who has riches enough for both, shall offer himself to my acceptance."

    "And will wealth suffice to recommend him?"  asked Almina, "Now I own I should be more fastidious."
     
     "In truth," said Bertha, "As I can neither consent to tell my beads all my life, nor yet tend sheep, and live upon love, I do not intend to be difficult.  You, Lady, who have more beauty, and will, perhaps, be high in rank and fortune, may take your choice."
  
    "And that,' said Almina, "will probably, be to remain single.  I have little expectation of meeting in the great world the being who could form my happiness."

     "Perhaps," said Bertha, laughing, "You intend, after having thrown a dozen Knights into despair, and sent them wandering over the globe, in quest of adven-258             EARL OSIRC.

tures, to return to Adam and Paradise, for
I shrewdly suspect you are the fair Eve
who have reminded him, that "it is not
good to be alone.'"

  Almina blushed, for the same idea had
occurred to her, and had contributed to
make her wish to quit De Mowbray. Ed-
win was so amiable, that she would deeply
have lamented being the cause of injury to
his peace and his romantic disposition,
and mode of life so calculated to strengthen
and confirm an unhappy attachment
awakened all her fears.  That similar ap-
prehensions were entertained by Dame
Maddelina, she could not doubt, and all,
from various motives, became anxious for
the summous to London.

  It at length arrived-a messenger from
Fitz Oswald, brought intelligence of Earl
Osric's return there, and that he bore with
him the mandate for Almina's appearance
at Court.  The Earl himself, on the fol-
lowing day, gave her, in presence of Dame
Maddelina, the particulars of his interview        ERIC OSRIC.     259

with the king, who on hearing the tale
he recited, had unhesitatingly restored to
Almina the titles and estates of her ances-
tors, and the Queen who had heard from
Lady de Mowbray the same narrative
had graciously expressed her pity for the
deserted orphan, and a desire that she
might be presented at Court, as the Lady
Almina Fitz Oscar.

  Formally and with evident constraint,
the Earl congratulated her on her newly
acquired honour, while the bursting heart
of Almina sought relief in tears.  By the
same voice which had soothed the dying
hours of her parents, was their child res-
tored to their wealth and honours.

  "Blessed spirits," she exclaimed, drop-
ping on her knees at the feet of the Earl,
"if ye be permitted to view ought on
earth, oh, witness the gratitude of your
Almina, and may Heaven enable her to
support with piety and honour the name
of her father."  Her imagination was too
highly wrought, and her weakened spirit
260              EARL OSRIC.

could ill support the violent emotions she felt. Dame Maddelina led her to her own apartment, and the Erl saying he would see her again before she quitted De Mowbray, left the Castle.

Many circumstances had concurred to induce the Earl to make the real story of Almina known at this period; more than once he had been embarrassed by reflections thrown out, and emphatically repeated by the mother of Lady Eleanora, a woman of haughty and imperious manners, and far different from her more amiable daughter. This Lady had fancied, ever since the sudden arrival of Almina, that there was more mystery attending her birth and situation, than Earl Osric chose to explain; and she had narrowly watched his countenance, and whenever the subject of his lovely ward was introduced by the unsuspecting Eleanora or her father, who, though a man of the strictest honour,could not help, from the Earl's behaviour, harbouring suspicions that too              EARL OSRIC.             261

much resembled those his Lady enter-
tained, to allow him to be perfectly easy
on his daughter's account. Yet, the
high opinion he had ever maintained of
Earl Osric's integrity, and his known ho-
nour, deterred him from betraying what
he felt; every idea of the kind being con-
fined to his own bosom, while in his out-
ward behavior he continued to treat the
Earl with his accustomed friendship.-
Not so his more haughty consort. In
her Lord and her daughter, was centered
all affection; to the latter, she looked up
to support the honour of their noble
house, and hse thought her so perfect a
model of beauty and virtue, that it was
impossible any one could merit the bless-
ing of her hand.

  Earl Osric was the only one who had
aspired to it, that, in the partial opinion
of the high spirited Lady Fitz Oswald,
was worthy even to be thought of for this
high honour, and his tried bravery, and
exalted virtues, having rendered him asEarl Osric.
famous as his rank and vast wealth; she had never regretted the contract which in infancy engaged him to her daughter. His own justification and Almina's fame, seemed to demand from Earl and unequivocal acknowledgement of her real origin.

Earl Rosomond was in a state too nearly resembling mental derangement, to raise any obstacles to his plans, and even if he still possessed the power and the inclination to do it, the royal protection would effectually guard his ward from any danger from him.

Candour was a leading trait in the character of Earl Osric, he disdained all dissimulation, and he deeply deplored the necessity which is solemn promise, to Fitz Oscar, had imposed on him of so long throwing the veil of secresy over the history of his ward.

Eagerly was it cast aside, and bitterly  he reproached himself for the repugence he could not help feeling, to converse
                EARL OSRIC.         263
With the Fitz Oswald family on the sub-
ject. But though the tale he told, brought
perfect conviction to the minds of the
Baron and his daughter; there was a de-
gree of lurking incredulity and suspicion
in the countenance and manner of the
Baroness which not all the openness of 
Osric could entirely remove. But he
knew her temper and trusted to time for
establishing the truth of his assertions.










                END OF VOL. I.



















____________________________________________
  W. Oxberry, and Co. Printers,
        8, White Hart Yard.