I 



I 



15? 



m 



I 



FLORENCE MACARTHY 



BY 

LADY MORGAN, 

AUTHOR OF " FRANCE," " O'DONNEL," &C. 



Know thus far forth : 
By accident most strange, bountiful fortune, 
Now, my dear lady, hath mine enemies 
Brought to this shore : and by my prescience, 
I find my zenith doth depend upon 
A most auspicious star, whose influence, 
If now I court not but omit, my fortunes 

Will ever after droop. Shakespeare. 

Les femmes ne sont pas trop d'humeur a pardonner de 
certaines injures, et quand elles se promettent le plaisir de Iji 
vengeance elles n'y vont pas de main-morte. 

De Gr ammo nt. 

IN FOUR VOLUMES. 

VOL. II. 



Fonxtf) (JEuttfom 



LONDON: 
PRINTED FOR HENRY COLBURN, 

FITS L IC, LIBRARY, CONDUIT STREET, HANOVER SQUARE. 



1819. 



B. Clark b, Printer, Well Sir^et, Londoa. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



CHAPTER h 

Having both the keys 
Of officer and office, set all hearts i'the state 
To what tune pleased his ear. 

Tempest. 

Rampant et mediocre, ct Ton parvent a tout.' 

Beaumarchais. 

The Commodore had insisted on 
O'Leary's riding back his horse, and 
left the arrangement of his future resi- 
dence at the friary entirely to his direc- 
tion. He then ascended alone the steep 
hill, which, bleak, bare, and fringed 
only by a few scanty and ill-thriven 
plantations, led to the new-raised man- 
sion of Mount Crawley. The house 
was a large square, lantern -like build- 

VOL. II. n 



2 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

ing, all wyat windows and green veran- 
das, unsheltered and unadorned, save 
by a cumbrous Grecian portico, an 
evident afterthought of the architect, 
who seemed to have consulted rather 
the genius of the owner than the place; 
for all was expense without taste, and 
shew without comfort. 

It was a levee day with Mr. Crawley, 
who, from an open window of his office, 
usually transacted, at the same time, the 
opposite and multifarious business of 
agent, magistrate, county treasurer, 
land jobber, road maker, landlord, and 
attorney-at-law, captain of the Dunore 
volunteers, and commandant of the 
New-Town Mount Crawley supplemen- 
tary-auxiliary volunteer legion, which 
he had just raised, and clothed at the ex- 
pense of the — county. 

At this window, the object of many 
an anxious eye, which had watched its 
opening from the day's earliest dawn, 
now stood Mr. Crawley, en robe de 



Florence macarthy. 



3 



ehambre et bonnet denuit; his shaving 
box in one hand, and his shaving brush 
in the other, which was applied to his 
already half-lathered face. A clerk 
was seated writing at a table by his side, 
disputing and wrangling with the crowd 
of suitors who occupied the gravel-walk 
in front of the window. On one side 
stood a host of applicants, endeavour- 
ing to obtain his attention, to whom 
time was as valueless as it usually is to 
their class in Ireland, and who had come 
from all parts to solicit law, redress, 
protection, interference, work, allevia- 
tion, or a long day, for rent they were 
wholly unable to pay: on the other 
aide, and close to the window, with hard 
features, and looks f Jl of petty import- 
ance, were to be seen jobbers, drivers, 
land bailiffs, constables and overseers, 
surrounded by petitioning, whining, 
wretched cotters, spalpeans, road makers, 
and labourers. In this group also stood 
two resolute, determined-looking men, 
B 2 



4 



FLORENCE MACARTH V. 



manacled, and in custody. They had 
been taken up on the preceding night 
as Padreen Gar's boys ; a real or sup- 
posed association, less formidable to 
government, than to Mr. Crawley's 
peace of mind; and serving him as 
the ground-work of many well-got- 
up plots, as the preamble of many 
proposed bills, suggested by him to the 
Irish government, for multiplying de- 
pendants, increasing influence, and de- 
pressing, galling, harassing, and in- 
sulting, the beggared and catholic pea- 
santry: most facetiously termed acts for 
preserving the public peace, or more 
properly (because susceptible of an 
equivocal application) insurrection nets. 

These men were now waiting to go 
through the form of an examination 
previous to their committal to the county 
jail, where, guilty or innocent, they 
were perhaps destined to wear out their 
lives in misery, vice, and incarceration, 
under a form of law, known only in 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



5 



Ireland, called a Rule of Bail. Under 
the portico, with a table and some 
refreshments set before them, sat a few 
of the more sustantial tenants of the 
Dunore estate, who had just paid in 
their rents. In the front of the house 
were drawn up the mount Crawley 
legion, regaling the ears of this catholic 
multitude with the (alternately per- 
formed) tunes of " the protestant boys," 
and " croppies lie down f - the only 
tunes their military band; a fifer and 
drummer, had yet learned. A crowd of 
idle people stood a short distance out- 
side a little gate, which opened on 
the lawn; and among these, the candi- 
date tenant for Court Fitzadelm had 
placed himself out of the view of the 
great man of this characteristic Irish 
scene. 

Meantime, Jemmy Bryan, ci-devant 
driver,* but now termed the right- 



*Sce note ( 1) at the end of the volume, 
B 3 



6 



FLORENCE M AC ARTHY . 



hand man of Mr. Crawley, was endea- 
vouring to establish order among some 
persons, who, from curiosity, were led 
to examine the new scarlet frize jackets 
and worsted plumage of the legion 
more cldsely than was deemed respect- 
ful to the sacredness of their military 
calling. He was laying about his staff 
of oifice pretty actively, with " Quit, 
quit, I say. Will yez let his honor get 
a sight of his own legion, and he going 
to man-yeuvre them? 

Mr. Crawley now placed himself en 
evidence at his window, brandishing, 
not his sword, but his razor ; and hold- 
ing his nose obliquely with his left 
hand, he exclaimed authoritatively — 
" Jemmy Brian, make an era for the 
legion to go through their involutions 
in. Rare rank, take close order : mighty 
well. Where are your regimental gai- 
ters, Corporal Costello ? Oh, now while 
I think of it, Sargeant Kelly, apropos to 
my corderoys, if you don t finish them the 



FLORENCE M AC ART11Y. 7 

night, I'll send to Dublin for a pair ; and 
that's the way you sarve me for encou- 
raging the manufactory of the country, 
Mr. Kelly." 

" Plaze your honor, in regard of the 
New-Town Mount Crawley legion," 
said Sarjeant Kelly (a tailor by trade), 
stepping up with a military salute to 
the window, and in apologetic look, in- 
dicating that his new vocation had 
11 raised his soul above buttons." 

" Well, Mr. Sargeant Kelly, you must 
sarve the government first ; but that's 
no raison nor rhyme either that Pin to 
want my small-clothes ; and now fugle 
me those haroes through all them sys- 
tem of tictacs I sent you down from 
Lord Rosbrin in a castle frank last 
week, his own tictacs for the Kil-Rosbrin 
corps from the secatary's office. " 

" I shaul, your honor ; that's eyes 
right and eyes left, Sir ; and is eligant 
marchers at a quick step, plaze your 
honor, captain/ 1 

B 4 



FLORENCE MAC ART HT. 



" Well then, Sarjeant Kelly, march 
me them through a little circuitous cut 
to Paddy Scanlan's potatoe ridge ; but 
have a care of my meadow : do you 
mind, Sarjeant Kelly?" 

" I shaul, Sir. Quick march," cried 
the sergeant, while the protestant boys 
struck up, and the legion went shamb- 
ling off* in a contrary direction to that in- 
tended by Mr. Crawley, who, with that 
half of his face which was not covered 
with soap-suds, purple with rage, called 
after them : 

66 Come back here, you scampering 
sons of guns ! Halt, I say, don't you sec 
my invisible fence there before your 
eyes, you buzzards, and goes headfore- 
most rollicking over it ? Halt, I say." 

Halt was now repeated by an hun- 
dred voices to the inattentive ears of the 
Mount Crawley heroes, who, stunned 
by the noise of the drum and fife, and 
delighted with their exhibition before 
their less consequential countrymen. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 9 

were deaf to the orders of their captain- 
commandant, and went, as he termed 
it, " rollicking on," till overtaken by 
Jemmy Bryan, who brought them back 
in confusion, while Mr. Crawley yocu 
ferated : 

" Is it to Jericho ye are marching, 
ye shambling thieves, flopping over my 
hay?" 

" No, plaze your honor," replied ser- 
geant Kelly, " only to Ballydab, cap- 
tain, to be ready against the 'ruction at 
the fair, Sir, to keep the king's pace, ac- 
cording to your honors orders and the 
young sheriff s, Sir." 

" And did I bid ye go without your 
new colours, worked for you on elegant 
orange silk by Miss Crawley, Sargeanfc 
Kelly?" 

" You did nat, plaze your honor/' 
" Then draw up in a square hollow, 
according to Lord Rosbrin's tictacs, 
under the virandow of her room, and 
she'll hand them out to yez. Order si 

B 5 



10 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



trcvaiily to be bate to give her no- 
tice. 

The sergeant drew up his men, the 
revcillee was beat, the window opened, 
and Miss Crawley, the maiden sister of 
the captain commandant, appeared with 
a little flag at the viranda, which she 
lowered to Sergeant Kelly, otaerving, as 
she resigned it : 

" In presenting to brave men the 
standard that is to lead them to victory 
or death " 

" Och, murther!" interrupted Mr. 
Crawley, stretching out of* his own 
window, and looking up at his sister's 
with a look of humorous surprise. 

" In presenting to brave men,*' conti- 
nued Miss Crawley, u the standard 
which is to lead them to victory or to 
death, I feel myself placed in a situation 
out of my sphere, and inimical to my 
feelings, which are those of peace and 
good-will to all men. But Judith did 
not disdain an act of courage in her 



FLORENCE MACARTHY* 11 

country's cause ; nor should I have 
shrunk from a Judith's part had that 
Holofernes visited this devoted land, 
that great leviathan, who has threatened 
to swallow us all up." 

The intimidated legion expressed by 
their looks how little they would have 
relished being swallowed up, while Mr. 
Crawley, between jest and earnest, and 
much amused by the unexpected elo- 
quence of his sister, exclaimed : 

" There ! there's a haro in petticoats 
for you." 

" Go," continued Miss Crawley, em- 
phatically, " and may heaven crown 
your arms with meekly-borne success !" 

The " go" of the redoutable Miss 
Crawley, the deputy lady of the manor, 
as her brother was the deputy lord, was 
as commanding to the Mount Crawley 
Legion as the " march" of their sergeant, 
who now led them forth to Bailydab, 
full of their own superior influence, and 
the ascendency appertaining both to their 



12 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

political and military relations ; and ani- 
mated also by a little whiskey, ordered by 
Mr. Crawley to steep their colours in, 
they proceeded to oppose prejudice and 
ignorance, armed with power, to preju- 
dice and ignorance in subjection ; and. 
most probably (as is the usual case upon 
such occasions in Ireland,) to breed and 
foment the disturbance they were sent 
to anticipate or to quell, by tunes, co- 
lours, and speeches, long devoted to po- 
pular execration. 

Mr. Crawley dismissed himself and 
his legion together ; his clerk took his 
place at the window, and he retired to 
finish the duties of the toilette, which 
his military avocations had interrupted. 
Not so Miss Crawley : she indeed had 
retired, but retired only to return to her 
riranda with a green watering-pot and 
a sort of shepherdess's hat, added to the 
quaker-like simplicity of her dress. Her 
quick eye had lighted upon the Com- 
modore, who stood mingled but not 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 13 



confounded with the plebeian crowd ; 
and she now returned, under the plea 
of watering her geraniums, to follow up 
her reconnoitre, with a tactical skill, 
better understood and practised than 
Lord Rosbrin's system by the New- 
Town Mount Crawley legion. Mean- 
time, the Commodore, unconsciously 
" biding the keen encounter of the eye," 
walked towards the portico, and de- 
manded of a servant, who stood loung- 
ing at the door, if Mr. Crawley was at 
home. The servant said he would 
" try ;" and, after the delay of a few mi- 
nutes, returned, not with a direct an- 
swer to the inquiry, but with, " If you 
please to step in for a minute, I'll tiy if 
my master's at home, Sir. What 
name, Sir, shall I say ?' 

" My name is of no consequence : 
meerly say a gentleman, a stranger, re- 
quests the pleasure of seeing Mr. Craw- 
ley." 

" I shall Sir. Walk this way if you 
please, Sir/' 



14 



FLORENCE MACAItTHY. 



The unknown visitor followed the 
liveried cicerone through two spacious 
and splendidly furnished rooms, where 
the windows, closely blinded, and the 
hearth closely skreened, accounted for 
the chill and fusty atmosphere which 
pervaded them, and spoke the truth, 
that fresh air and good fires were rarely 
admitted into rooms kept exclusively 
for shew, and occupied but three or 
four times in the year for purposes of 
display. Two slovenly housemaids were 
uncovering the furniture of the drawing 
room ; the butler was occupied in lay- 
ing out a gorgeous sideboard of plate 
in the dining parlor ; and the ar- 
rangements every were spoke prepara- 
tions for a formal country dinner party, 
the epitome of all tedium, ennui, and 
competition. 

In that official class of life in Ireland 
to which Mr. Crawley belonged, the 
acquisition of fortune, unpurchased by 
honest, prosperous industry, but accu- 
mulated by servile arts, political delin- 



Florence macarthv. 15 



quency, and fraudulent intrigue, is 
usually too rapid to admit of a gradual 
acquaintance with every-day comforts, 
found equally among the first and mid- 
dling classes of society. A place under 
government, suddenly obtained, uniting 
wealth to influence, strikes the roots of 
ostentation deep, before the want of 
comfort and accommodation is felt by 
those whose original position was des- 
titute of both. In such establishments 
penury combines with display, discom- 
fort with expense ; and while a com- 
petition is excited with those, to whom 
splendor is an inheritance and a habit, 
the less obvious, but more enjoyable 
elegances of life, are wanting and neg- 
lected. Of this, the cold, fine, formal 
apartments of Mount Crawley, like the 
habits of life of its occupants, were 
striking proofs. 

This suite, intended to be imposing, 
terminated in a little room, into which 
the footman ushered the Commodore, and 



1G 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



then went out by an opposite door. 
Though close, un aired, and slovenly, 
this apartment had an an of pretension 
about it, tliat marked it out the retreat 
of some slip-shod muse. Soiled muslin 
draperies, vases of dead flowers, offensive 
to the sense they were meant to gratify, 
an unfinished drawing on an easel ; of 
New-Town Mount Crawley, with Dulce- 
Domum written under it, together with 
much literary lumber, and traces of 
vulgar sentimentality in every direction, 
would have decided at once the vocation 
of its proprietor, if pious books, strewed 
upon the tables, and evangelical tracts 
covering the sophas, did not indicate 
another calling than that of the muse ; 
for though here and there appeared 
much of the Sappho, there was also 
much of the saint. Piles of bibles, fill- 
ing every corner, indicated that this co- 
quettish boudoir, and holy oratory, be- 
longed to one of those persons who give 
books where they should give bread, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 17 

and lavish dogmas and credenda to 
those who want the means of existence. 
The Commodore, in the impatience 
and ennui of idle waiting, took up one 
book after another. For though all were 
not sectarian and polemical, yet none 
were to his taste. This Olla Podrida 
of sacred and profane literature con- 
sisted of namby-pamby verses, and re- 
ligious calls ; sentimental letters and 
methodist tracts ; short cuts to learning 
of every description; summary views and 
meagre abridgements, elegant extracts, 
? Alphabetical Citations," rhyming, 
biographical, geographical, scriptural, 
historical and astronomical dictionaries 
of every calibre. Here " Philosophy, 
for the Use of the Ladies,*' lay with "the 
true Religion of a Gentlewoman " the 
Wanderings of aWater Wagtail in the six- 
teenth century* ' with "Sermonettinos or 
religious Bagatelles;" u Shreds of Fancy, 
or literary Patchwork," with "an x\larm 
to the Unconverted;" " Delicate Crimes^ 



18 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



or sin, sorrow, and sensibility/' a re- 
ligious novel, with " a Call to the un- 
repenting, or Milk for Babes, and strong 
Meat forMen;'' a duodecimo "Beauties 
of all the Poets, or Pocket Inspiration/' 
with " the History of a Child who knew 
not the Lord before her fifth year, and 
who died converted to the true faith at 
seven." Controversial tracts upon all 
the new lights lay mingled with quar- 
terly, monthly, and evangelical reviews, 
u Elegant Extracts for the Flageolet," 
" Hints for theTambourine and Triangle," 
" A Method for tuning ihe Harp without 
an ear," " Mnemonic Systems for learn- 
ing Languages without study, and a 
mode of playing three Piano-fortes at 
once with two hands." This catalogue 
raisonec, or rather diraistmee, might be 
taken as epitomizing the perversion of 
human intellect, and as evincing the 
successful circulation of the folly, hy- 
pocrisy, and imposition of the day, no 
Jess than the shallowness, bad taste. 



FLORENCE MACAU THY. 1£ 

arid pretension, of the presiding mistress 
of this sanctum sanctorum. 

The Commodore had just taken up, 
and was about to throw down, in its 
turn, an historical work for youth, in 
thetitle-page of which appeared "Stories 
of the history of England, by Conway 
Townsend Crawley, Esq. Barrister-at- 
faw, dedicated to her who 'taught his 
young idea how to shoot,' to Anne 
Clotworthy Crawley, by her nephew:" 
but finding that this history of England 
omitted the trifling events of the Magna 
Charta and the revolution, as jacobinicah 
and tending to teach the young idea 
how to shoot in a direction unfavourable 
to the orthodox dictation of the day, 
the circumstance amused him, and he 
sat down to glance his eye over its pages. 
They contained an abridgement of doc- 
trines which he was vet ignorant had 
been broached in Great Britain, under 
the special protection of the constituted 
authorities (doctrines, which, if accredit- 



20 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ed, defeat the claims of the reigning 
family to the throne, and place its august 
members on a line with the mushroom 
king3 of the by-gone day). He was thus 
occupied when the door opened, and 
entered, not as he expected, Mr. Crawley, 
but Mr. Crawley's sister, with her cha- 
peau de bergere in one hand, her water- 
ing pot in the other, a marked primitive- 
ncss in her dress, and a mincing, languid, 
affected air in her gate and address : she 
commenced with a little start of surprise, 
at rinding her boudoir so occupied, then 
approached full of smiles, graces, and 
graciousness, or what she meant to be 
such: she begged the gentleman to be 
seated, let down the muslin blinds, 
to exclude, as she said, the too pro- 
pitious kindness of Sol; and then 
took her seat near the soph a she had 
pointed out to the stranger. Whatever 
impression his manly and distinguished 
figure had made upon Miss Crawley, as 
he was seen leaning over the paddock 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



21 



gate, that impression was now improved 
into boundless and enthusiastic admira- 
tion, by the singularity of his fine coun- 
tenance, the extreme ease of his address, 
that disen£a<red air, which the world 
only gives; and, above all, by a bow, 
whose foreign grace she placed at once 
to the account of supreme English bon 
ton. It was Miss Crawley who had 
received the Commodore's message, who 
had told the footman that she would 
receive him, until her brother was at 
leisure to attend to his summons ; and 
who now believed that she was doing 
the honours to some man of rank, bear- 
ing letters of introduction from the 
Marchioness of Dunore, or from some 
other person of distinction; whom, by 
her laborious exertion, she had placed 
on the list of those she called "her kind 
great friends." Such events occasion- 
ally happened ; for the beautiful tract 
of Dunore, like that of Glengariff, fre- 
quently tempts the visitors of Killarney 



22 



FLORENCE MAC ART H Y. 



to go some miles out of their way, 
and to take the coast road, in order 
to view its romantic scenery en pas- 
sant. 

Miss Crawley now opened the con- 
versation, after a few side-long looks, 
and serpentine motions, with apologizing 
for her brother's absence, enumerating 
the variety of his official, political, and 
professional engagements, stating the 
coincidence of the assizes, and the Glan- 
nacrime election, as an additional cause 
for the hurry of business ; and episodi- 
cally introducing sketches of the family 
importance in general; her second bro- 
ther being a sergeant-at-law ; her third 
a first commissioner; her eldest nephew 
being that year sheriff of the county; 
her next a major in the army, a penin- 
sula hero, covered with orders; and the 
amiable cadet, she added, " the Mag* 
aaus Apollo of the age and country, was 
a young barrister of great poetical, poli- 
tical, and diplomatic promise, her eleve, 



FLORENCE MACAKTl'Y. 23 



and, as the poet said, darling without 
end." Encouraged by the silent atten- 
tion, and occasional inclination of the 
Commodore's head, Miss Crawley add- 
ed to this information some slight notices 
of herself; and in apologizing for what 
she called 6 the literary Utter of her 
boudoir, she referred to habits, that had 
become second nature, and that required 
an almostregenerated spirit to be broken, 
a light, to make darkness visible, a super- 
human intervention; she sighed, and 
then threw up her eyes, and then added 
with an air, half primitive, half dra- 
matic, 

<c It was my good fortune, or should 
I not rather say my ill fortune, early in 
life to be distinguished by the celebrat- 
ed Lady Clotworthy, of Bath, whose 
prize poems " 

Here the Commodore involuntary 
took up his hat, and Miss Crawley sus- 
pecting that she was bestowing more of 
" her tediousness" on him than might 



24 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

suit with his previous arrangements, 

observed, 

" I have obtruded this family sketch 
upon you, in the expectation of present- 
ing you to the originals; for we hold a 
family congressherc to-day; and whether 
your visit to Dunore be a pilgrimage of 
taste, or of mere amusement, my brother 
will be happy to do the honours of these 
romantic scenes in the absence of their 
lord, whom he represents." 

" My visit, madam, has not been 
destitute of the gratifications of taste; 
but it is not a pilgrimage made merely 
in pursuit of amusement; business of a 
more serious nature." 

The word " serious" fell like an elec- 
tric spark upon the imagination of Miss 
Crawley ; and the first self-created vi- 
sion she had conjured up vanished be- 
fore another of equal interest and im- 
portance; for she was now led to believe, 
that herself, and not her brother, was 
the object of this visit ; that what she 



FLORENCE MACARTilV. 23 



had taken for temporal distinction, wa? 
" the beauty of holiness/' and that she 
saw before her, not, as she had supposed, 
a mere idle elegant English man of 
fashion, " prominant ses ennuis," in 
the wilds of Munster, but one of an 
higher calling, who might unite worldly 
elevation to that which is above the 
world's giving or taking away : some 
male Huntingdon, some imitative Wil- 
berforce, whom the odour of her new 
fangled sanctity had allured to the 
scenery of Dunore. 

Miss Crawley was of that undefined 
age which is occasionally found to vi- 
brate between the folly and suscepti- 
bility of youth, and the despondence 
and experience of disappointed senility : 
that drowning age in which female ce- 
libacy catches at every straw held out 
by hope, or offered by vanity, and 
which, with the illusive chemistry of 
self-love, converts every circumstance 
of the day's ordinary routine into the 

VOL. II. c 



26 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

chance of that change so devoutlv 
wished. She had long sighed for a fol- 
low labourer in that cause, which, like 
all other causes tinctured with human 
leaven, is best carried on with the auxi- 
liary of rank, fortune, or personal ad- 
vantage.* The object might now stand 
before her, her hour might have ar- 
rived, and the sudden hopes kindled by 
this visit (hopes always on the (jut r'/rc), 
for a moment stunned and deprived her 
of her wonted, elegant, graceful, pic- 
turesque presence of mind. The half 
conscious gaze, which, (while all these 
deep but rapid ruminations crossed her 
mind), she fixed upon the Commodore's 
face, crimsoned that face almost to the 
brow; Miss Crawley saw and caught the 
soft infection; it called a faint blush 
to her pale and sallow cheek : theft 
inhaling the odour of the offensive 
flowers, that withered in a tawdry vase 



* " A saint in crape is twice a saint in lawn." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 2/ 

©n the table, she repeated his words in 
a certain soft solemnity of voice : — 

" A more serious nature ! may I add 
my ardent wishes to my sanguine hopes, 
that whatever may be the purport of 
your visit here, success the most perfect 
may attend it." 

The Commodore bowed low, and 
even in some little confusion, but looked 
to the door for the momentarily ex- 
pected entrance of Mr. Crawley. 

" You may, perhaps, have known," 
said Miss Crawlev, " the late celebrated 
Zachariah Scare'um, of pious memory." 

w I have heard of him," replied the 
Commodore, with the conversion of the 
mysterious Mrs. Magillicuddy full in his 
memory, and again taking his hat. 

" You have heard of him/' said 
Miss Crawley, " of course: disciples of 
every sect have heard of him, though 
all do not agree with him. His gla- 
diatorial wrestte with many of the ra- 
mifying and heterodox divergencies of 
the only true and infallible light lias 



28 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



gained him a worldly distinction, he 
craves not; his sturdy and zealous op- 
position to the Sublapsarians, the 
Baxterians, Necessarians, Antinomians, 
Sabalarians, Swedenbourgians, Inde- 
pendents, Universalists, Destruction ists, 
Hutchinsonians, Millenarians, Shakers, 
Jumpers, Dunkers, Fifth-Monarchy 
men, and Muggletonions " 

Here Miss Crawley's breath and the 
Commodore's patience failed together. 
She paused for inspiration, and he rose 
to interrupt this tirade of sectarian pe- 
dantry, by demanding if he had any 
chance of seeing Mr. Crawley that morn- 
ing. With a look vibrating between 
doubt and disappointment, Miss Craw- 
ley rose and rang the bell ; but to her 
inquiries for her brother, the answer, 
as she expected, was, that he had driven 
out in his curricle to Glannacrime, 
and would not return till dinner. 

" This is unfortunate," said the 
C ommodore ; u for I am obliged to leave 
Dunore early to-morrow morning/' 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 29 

Miss Crawley grew pale with disap- 
pointment. As saint or sinner, as a tra- 
veller of rank or a missionary of distinc- 
tion, the stranger had equally obtained 
the most favourable prepossessions. 
There was a romantic cast in his counte- 
nance, an air of elevation diffused over his 
whole person, which answered to all her 
sentimental ideas of heroic beauty. There 
was also a mingled gravity and ardor 
in his look, which belong to the zealous 
in the true cause; and whatever led 
him to Mount Crawley, whatever his 
class or calling might be, Miss Crawley 
was certain that of that class or calling 
he was at the head. Such guests were 
not always to be had in the country, 
such persons were rare every where; 
and to prevent the chance of this desira- 
ble acquisition escaping from the list of 
her "kind great friends," she politely 
and warmly pressed on him an invita- 
tion to dinner for that day: for presid- 
ing in her brother's house, who was a 
c 3 



30 



FLORENCE MACARTH V. 



widower, her privileges and immu- 
nities were unlimited; and she now 
pressed her invitation with the air of 
one jivho had a right to give it,, and the 
ardor of one who had an mmt in 
its being accepted. 

This conviction at once struck on the 
apprehension of her quick-sighted guest, 
and uniting with the ex igencies of his own 
situation and business, it at once decided 
him in yielding to solicitations, which, 
coming from a woman, even such a wo- 
man, he was not, perhaps, of a character 
to reject. With that peculiar frankness* 
which characterized his manners, after 
the pause and hesitation of a moment, 
he said, 

" Well, Madam, I shall avail myself 
of your polite invitation. The few- 
words I have to say to Mr. Crawley 
can be despatched over our coffee, and 
time, precious to both, may thus be 
spared." 

lie now took his leave, and the bow 



FLORENCE MACAKTHY. - 31 

with which he departed finished the 
impression his first appearance had 
made. He had been gone near twenty 
minutes, and Miss Crawley still remained 
lounging on the sopha, in the attitude 
of one absorbed in a pleasant reverie; 
when suddenly recollecting she had 
neither asked the name or address of 
the person she had invited, and that 
he had not himself volunteered it, 
she rose and rung the bell to make 
some inquiries among the servants, 
when the arrival of two barouches and 
four, with out-riders, called off for the 
present her attention. These handsome 
and shewy equipages contained nearly 
the whole of the family congress 
alluded to by Miss Crawley. The one 
contained Serjeant and Mrs. Crawley 
and their four daughters ; and the other 
Mr. and Mrs. Commissioner Crawley, 
with a pretty daughter of the latter by 
a former marriage. The first were on 
their way to Killarney, and stopped by 
C 4 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



special invitation for a few days at Mr. 
Crawley's. The latter had come to take 
possession of an estate purchased for 
him by his eldest brother, the attor- 
ney, in the neighbourhood of Dunore ; 
whence they were to proceed on a visit 
to the bishop of the diocese. 

If ever there was a period in the history 
of a country when it might be said, that 

f 4 Crime ga?e wealth, and wealth gave impu. 
dence," 

it was that period in the history of Ire- 
land, when rebellion, excited for the 
purpose of effecting a ruinous union, 
called forth all the worst passions of 
humanity, and armed petty power with 
the rod of extermination; placing torture 
at the disposal of personal vindictive- 
ness, and making falsehood, treachery, 
and corruption, the stepping-stones to 
power, office, and emolument. 

The wealth, influence, and import- 
ance of the Crawley family took their 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 33 

date from that memorable and fright* 
fill epoch in the tragedy of Irish history, 
which produced both moral and political 
ruin to a long-devoted country, under 
every form of degradation, of which 
civilized seciety is susceptible. Previous 
to that period the three brothers had 
remained buried in the obscurity which 
belonged to their social and intellectual 
mediocrity. The eldest, Darby Crawley, 
the country attorney, found his highest 
dignity in being the factotum of the 
two Barons Fitzadelm, the agent of their 
embarrassed property, on which he lent 
them money saved by his father, in their 
service, until the little that remained of 
the estate fell into his hands. Through 
the interest of his employer he had been 
put into the commission of the peace. 
The year 179$ found him a magistrate, 
and fortune and his merits had done 
the rest. 

The second brother,, whose gravity 
was mistaken for ability by his father, 

C 5, 



34 FLORENCE MACAJtTII V. 



(the illiterate land-bailiff of the Fitza- 
delms) was made a gentleman by the 
patent of a college education, and the 
legal degreo of barrister-at-!a\v. He 
had plied in the courts with an empty 
green bag, and more empty head, year 
after year, with fruitless vigilance, till 
his energy in the melancholy prosecu- 
tions, produced by the rebellion, ob- 
tained him notice, patronage, place, 
and a silk gown. 

The third brother, at once pompous 
and officious, servile and oppressive, 
formed alike to tyrannize or cringe, had 
been placed a clerk in a government 
office ; where, by his pliancy and in- 
dustrv, he made himself useful to a 
personage of shallow endowment and 
official importance, whose political 
views and flimsy attainments rendered 
agents thus qualified necessary to his 
purposes. The dull but zealous com- 
missioner, who could not be daunted, 
because he could not feel, was deemed 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



35 



a proper person to represent a govern- 
ment borough in the Union parliament; 
and having effected " this most filthy 
bargain/' was rewarded with the place 
of first commissioner of a particular 
boards one of those boards instituted 
and perpetuated for the purpose of pay- 
ing such debts to such creditors as the 
members of the Crawley family. 

Mr. Commisioner, like his elder bro- 
thers, characteristically represented the 
Bureaucratie, or office tyranny, by 
which Ireland has been so long govern- 
ed; whose members, arrogating to 
themselves exclusively the virtue of 
loyalty, and boldly assuming its insig- 
nia and device, have become formid- 
able and oppressive to all who thwart 
their career, question their title to this 
unfounded assumption, or insinuate that 
their loyalty lies more in their places 
than their principles. The basis of for- 
tunes being thus broadly laid, industry 
and zeal were not wanting to these wise 



36 Florence macarthy. 

men of Gotham, for raising the super- 
structure to the imposing elevation which 
it now exhibited. The elder brother, 
Darby, was inferior in acquirements and 
destitute of that education which his 
father s increasing prosperity had enabled 
him to bestow upon his younger sons; 
his success, however, was equal to 
theirs, and his places and avocations 
were still more numerous. He had been 
a crown-solicitor, at a moment when 
that place was the most inordinately 
lucrative: he was treasurer of a county; 
and he united to these trust-worthy 
situations those three capacities, whose 
unity is named in the country parts of 
Ireland, " the tripple tyranny of the 
land:" he was agent to an absentee 
nobleman, an active magistrate, and 
captain of a yeomanry corps. 

As agent, he kept off the landlord by 
misrepresentations of the political and 
local state of the country, and worried 
the tenants, by obliging them to labour 



FLORENCE MACARTITY. $7 

fbrh is own personal benefit. They drew 
his turf, mowed his meadows, fenced his 
fields, thatched his out-houses > grazed 
his hunters, and contributed their poul- 
try to his table: for, in the absence of 
their natural protectors, they felt them- 
selves- thrown for favours and redress 
upon the mercy of one, whose indul- 
gencies and whose justice could alone 
be purchased by such bribes. 

As a magistrate, and the representa- 
tive of his employer, he got up grand 
juries, domineered at the sessions, cor- 
responded with the state secretaries, 
became an organ of intelligence to the 
great officers of the Irish government, 
and obtained the name of the most 
loyal man in his county. 

As captain of yeomanry,, he clubbed 
his own tenants, and labourers of the 
dominant persuasion, made his returns 
full to the government, distributed the 
money ad libitum, pocketed the sur- 
plus, kept the neighbourhood in terror, 



38 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



and apprehended, and committed to 
prison, whom he pleased, with more 
regard to prejudice and private feeling 
than to justice, or the public peace; 
for he was a man of constitutional timi- 
dity, and believing himself an object of 
popular execration, he acted as if he 
was its victim. 

Though in his magnificent house in 
Dublin, and his seat at Mount Craw lev, 
he received and entertained persons of 
the first distinction, the society he fre- 
quented, the circle in which he moved, 
had produced no influence on his mind 
or manners. The stubborn, intractable, 
incorrigible vulgarity which distinguish- 
ed both, was accompanied by a sort of 
low native humour, which gave a pecu- 
liar expression to his shrewd leering 
eye, and screwed up puckered mouth. 
But though all refinement, all mental 
illumination were placed beyond his 
possibility of acquirement, he had still 
that species of natural sagacity, that 



FLORENCE MACAKTH Y. 

subtilty of littleness, which, operating 
like instinct in small circles, attains to 
a precision proportionate to its circum- 
scription; and which has been so well 
styled by Bacon, " left-handed wis- 
dom" — he possessed, too, a certain cheer- 
fulness of temperament, a constitutional 
hilarity, which hid out the darker qua- 
lities of his character, and rendered 
even the contempt he inspired free from 
the asperity of fixed aversion. The laugh- 
ter he excited blinded many to the 
injuries he had committed; his blunders 
and humour kept his designs out of 
sight; and his ridicules were so pro- 
minent, and stood so broadly on the 
surface, that if they did not conceal his 
vices, they gave even to his arts the air 
of simplicity. 

At the period when the genius and 
worth of Ireland, combining with all 
that remained of public spirit, stood 
forward in the cause of its independence,* 

*In the year 1782. 



40 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



when the Irish parliament* and the Irish 
law courts, shone with a splendour, soon 
eclipsed, but never surpassed; it was 
the fashion of the ruling party to turn 
loose upon the scene of legal or sena- 
torial action some ruffianly humourist, 
to pick from the herd of briefless barris- 
ters some professional buffoon, whose 
vulgarity might over-bear, and whose 
unfeeling impudence might elude the 
wit and the argument it could neither 
vanquish nor refute. Low humour, coarse- 
ness that passed the bounds of decency, 
blunders that bordered on fatuity,, some- 
times the genuine products of intellec- 
tual confusion, more commonly the 
results of a long-sighted affectation, 
whatever, in short,, could divert public 
attention from public interests, replace 
gravity by laughter, stamp talent with 
opprobrium, and mark patriotism for 
proscription, was then put in requisition, 
along with the many other debasing 
schemes, for vitiating public taste, cor- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 41 

rupting principles, blunting feelings, 
and subduing the spirit of a regenerating 
and awakening people. 

In this school, and at this period, 
Darby Crawley, then a clerk in an at- 
torney's office, had studied deeply. He 
estimated every thing by its success. Ge- 
nius and patriotism, or, according to his 
own accentuation, ganius and pathretism, 
with him meant folly and disloyalty. 
But while his experience taught him the 
danger of possessing the one, or of che- 
rishing the other, he had an high and 
reverential approbation for purchased 
acquirements, for that education which 
wealth can obtain. Education had 
made gentlemen of his brothers; educa- 
tion had made a fine lady of his sister ; 
education had made his sons wiser than 
their father ; and want of education had 
left himself upon the last degree of the 
family scale whom nature had allotted 
to the first. To supply his early defi- 
ciencies, he became therefore a close 



42 FLORENCE MACARTI1Y. 

copyist of the sentimental jargon and 
foreign slip slop of his sister ; and even 
attempted the fluent verbosity and col 
lege pedantry of his youngest and most 
admired son. But the double treachery 
of a bad memory and a false ear 
plunged him into inaccuracies and mis- 
takes, which the reprehension of those 
two leading members of his family was 
in vain applied to correct. 

It was, however, curious to observe 
his natural sagacity, and the intuitive 
ability of his low, creeping, sordid, self- 
interest occasionally assuming their su- 
periority over the flimsy attaiiunents of 
his brothers and children; whose accom- 
plishments he was wont to admire, 
and who, in return, while they reverenc- 
ed his success in life, and availed them- 
selves of its advantage, blushed, and 
looked down on the ignorance and vul- 
garity by which it was accompanied. 

A wet evening in the country, during 
the long vacation, would frequently 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



43 



afford him an opportunity of displaying 
his intuitive views of advancement in 
life, for the benefit of those who stood 
indebted to education alone for their 
distinctions. Then, released from the 
necessity of representation, and indulg- 
ing to its full extent his natural vul- 
garity, seated over what he called his 
" sup of hot," or a tumbler of punch, 
he might truly be said to be in his ele- 
ment. Then, surrounded bv his family, 
his sister presiding at the tea-table, his 
three sons lounging in different parts of 
the room, his intellect quickened by his 
potations, his feelings softened into 
maudlin tenderness, his eyes half closed, 
his punch half drank, his hands half 
clasped, and his thumbs in twirling mo- 
tion, giving loose alike to prospect and 
to retrospect, thinking over what his fa- 
mily had been, and what they might 
still be, he would begin his customary 
exhortations to his sons. These do- 
mestic lectures usuallv commenced with 



44 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

drinking their health to call their atten- 
tion ; then reproving, then advising, and 
at last becoming pathetic as he grew 
fuddled, he usually concluded with his 
own death and the family ruin, which 
must ensue if his advice was neglected 
and forgotten. — " Tim, Con, Thady, 
your healths ; Anne Clotworthy, my 
sarvice to you : well then, Clotty dear, 
will never you send away that water be- 
witched? It's little the tay ever your 
mother drank at your age, though she 
got to be the taydrinkingist sowl in the 
barony before she died, poor woman. 
Why then, Tim, dear, have you nothing 
to do but to lie stretched on the broad 
of your back along my new hair-bot- 
toms, with your arm dangling down, 
and surprising them innocent animals of 
flies on the carpetthat's strewn with their 
corpses : upon my word, Tim, it would 
be fitter for you to be raiding the 'Hints 
for a Magistrate,' or ( Mack Nallifs 
Justice of Pace;' you that will be in the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 45 

commission, and high sheriff of the 
county, by promise since the Union. 
I wonder, Tim, but you'd send them 
game to the bishop you brought home 
last night, instead of giving them to 
your crony, the surveyor ; —and the 
bishop, brother to a minister ! and he 
that likes a bit of grouse above the 
world. There is nothing better be- 
stowed than that which we give to 
them that want nothing; mind my 
words, Tim. Why then, captain, I 
wish you'd quit with your rattan against 
my iligant Northumberland table, and 
get of it intirely. What use is the 
chairs but to sit on ; and if you had 
gone, as I bid you, to make your com- 
pliments to the general of the district 
the day, you wouldn't be playing your 
devil's tattoo and spoiling my Northum- 
berland. I've often told you the gene- 
ral might make a man of you with the 
Duke of York : is it by whistling and 
rapping my stick against the table for 



46 



FLORENCE M AC A Kill V. 



the length of a wet evening that / got 
on in the world ? No ; but night and 
day, wet or dry, summer or winter, 
watching the main chance, Thady; 
and when I hadn't as much as c cuddy 
would you taste,' for myself, I had still 
always a bit of a dewskure for the great, 
a Wicklow pebble, or a lump of Irish 
diamond, or an hundred of Puldoody 
oysters, or a cask of Waterford sprats, 
or some sort of a pretty bougie for my 
friends." 

" Bijou/ y interrupted Miss Crawley. 

" Well, bijou then ; but apropos de 
hot, Thady, in regard of your flopping 
fat Miss O'Flahcrry of Dunore on your 
fine mare, and riding her round the 
country, when you couldn't plaze the 
gincral's lady more than giving her that 
very mare, which only just lies here 
doing nothing at all but ating my hay 
and corn, while you are with you regi- 
ment eleven months in the year ; for the 
great likes a present, every man jack of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 47 

them ; and fat Miss O'Flaherty's a pa- 
pist, and was a marked man in the rebel, 
lion, that's her father ; and her brother 
this day in America : and is it by lend- 
ing a mare to fat Miss O 'Flaherty I got 
your ensigncy from the secatary of 
war, and made a captain of yon, over the 
heads of them might be your father ? 
No, faith, it was the Puldoodies that 
did it, and being a good friend to go- 
vernment through thick and thin. What 
is it you're writing there in them short 
lines, Conway Townsend ? Is it rhymes ? 
Why then, I wish you'd lave off with 
your foethry and your ganius: mind 
my words, Con, dear, your ganius will 
play you a dirty trick yet; for sorrow 
good ganius ever did for man or baste. 
What was it brought the country into 
jeopardy, and bull-veasied the govern- 
in the year 82? — Why, ganius. What 
was it that set the world wild with the 
Irish volunteers, the free trade, and the 
eatholic bill, and counsellor Curran, and 



4B FLORKNCE MAC Ah THY. 

ould Lord Charlemont, with his statues, 
and his pictures, and his popularity; and 
Mr. Grattan, and his people, and Irish 
eloquence, and the Irish aristocracy; — 
why, wasn't it ganius? Och! Sir, times 
is changed since then, since a man 
should talk eloquence and pathretism^ 
and all that Gally-my-jaw, as the French 
call it, to get on in the the world." 

" Galimathias," lisped Miss Crawley. 

" Well, Gally-matchaw, then, — and 
not all as one as now, Con, when a 
man has only to follow his nose, and 
walk into place or pension, just by stick- 
ing to the main-chance. Och, Sir, the 
Irish bar ( 1 ) is another thing since them 
days. Tell me, Con, dear, is it independ- 
ence will get you a silk gown ? Will ga- 
nius make you first counsel to the com- 
missioners, with your eight thousand 
a-year for doing nothing at all at all ? 
Will it make yow&deputy remembrancer, 
with your nate four thousand, which is 
the true remembrancer. Or would 



FLORENCE MAC1RTHY. 



49 



»anius, poethry,and pathretism, with the 
aristocracy at their head (that is barring 
the Union lords), get you at this mo- 
ment to be one of the thirty-one county 
sessions chairmen, all made since the 
year eighty- nine, for the encouragement 
of the rising young barristers ; or even a 
magistrate of police, or a seneschal of 
the Dublin liberties, or a missionary 
to explore disturbed districts! Troth and 
faith, they wouldn't. And could do more 
this day myself for you than the whole 
boiling of them, in respect to pushing 
you up the stick, Con, at the bar ; 
that's if you'll lave off bothering us with 
your poethry. For see here, the thing's 
as plain as pais (peas). — Sure, there's 
spectacles for all ages, as well as wigs 
and gowns. Thanks to him that served 
the country well when he was in it, and 
does to this day, for all he butters them 
up with the Catholic question, and votes, 
with his tongue in his cheek, with the 
opposition, about it ; and it's only for 

VOL. II. D 



50 FLORENCE MACAU! HY. 



him the Crawleys wouldn't be where 
they are the day. And there's a little 
bone-bush in store for you all round, if 
you will just be aisy and mind your hits, 
and drive on the ball when it comes to 
you, and be ready for your turn. For 
there is two hundred of yez, great and 
small, ould and young, walking the 
hall, with your wigs and your bags, 
and there is three hundred places to 
divide among yez — make money of that, 
Con; and not one of you but may be a 
loyal man, and an enfant trouve of 
government, as the French say, if he 
plazes." 

" Enfant cheri," interrupted Miss 
Crawley. 

" Well, enfant cherry, if yez will 
just mind your P^s and Q's; and so now 
you know the ways of the place; there's 
neither twining nor turning, but straight 
forward. So let's have no more of your 
rhymes and your ganius, and your sati- 
rical perigrams, Counsellor Con." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



51 



" Epigrams, my dear Darby." 
" Well, epigrams, then ; but — " 
<c Cant you mind what I think, and 
not what I say ; for you're not beholden 
to them, Con, with your college edu- 
cation, and your speaking French like 
a Nabob. Now, just ask yourself, is 
the chief baron a ganius ? or the coun- 
sel to the commissioners a ganius ? or 
was it poethry made a serjeant of your 
uncle r — No ; but wigging * all the 
chancellors that ever were created, and 
offering to kick a Catholic barrister, 
which he didn't after all, for a raison 
he had; — but the will, Sir, was taken 
for the deed. So come to your tay, 
Con, and be aisy with your poethry. 
Well boys, dear, I'll see the day yet, 
when I'm dead and buried, God help 
me, and in my new moleseum in Dunore 
church, when my words will come to 
pass, and you will be thinking of your 



Ear-wigging, i. e. whispering. 
D 2 



52 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ould father Darby Crawley, when some 
of yez may have titles, which, if ever 
there comes about another rebellion, as 
I expect there will, plaze God, — but 
that's neither here nor there, — only, just 
as I was saying, when I am dead and 
buried, and Clotty there places an 
epithet over me, from his affectionate 
sister, and the pew hung with black, 
like theDunores, I'll see my words come 
to pass, and you'll remember your poor 
father, that worked night and day to 
make gentlemen and loyal men of you ; 
for we must all die, boys, honey, great 
as we are. Momenti mori, as the 
tomb-stone says, and the yeomanry 
corps fire over us, the Lord help us ! 
for dirt we are, and to dirt we must 
return; the Crawleys like the rest." 

As this compound idea of death and 
supremacy rounded off the admonitory 
peroration of Mr. Crawley, snuff and 
punch had usually wound up his whining 
sensibility to its utmost excitement, and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 53 

the tears which he shed for his own 
death were commonly followed by that 
profound sleep which images it. 

On the three hopeful disciples of this 
worldly doctrine, though its letter made 
but little impression, its spirit sunk deep ; 
and the characters of the three younger 
Messrs. Crawley, were but modifications 
in various degrees, and proportions, of 
those qualities, which combined in those 
of the three elders. Timothy Harcourt, 
the high sheriff, the true representative 
of that class, contemptuously designated 
by the peasantry " the Squiranty," was 
dull, over-bearing, vulgar, and profligate; 
at the head of a party association in the 
country, gambling deeply at the clubs in^ 
Dublin, he every where assumed airs of 
importance on the strength of the family 
relations with the government, and affect- 
ed a fashionable libertinism in his morals, 
with a violent outcry in favour of church 
and state. Still, however, he pre- 
ferred a cock-fight at Dunore, or a ca- 
D 3 



54 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



rousal at the Dunore Arms with li is 
friends, the port surveyor, and the sub- 
sheriff, to the higher class of society, 
which he occasionally commanded, but 
never enjoyed. The lower classes, whom 
he oppressed, hated him to abhorrence ; 
the middle classes in the country feared 
and avoided him ; and the higher circles 
won his money, and admitted him to 
their drinking parties, where his intem- 
perance passed for joviality, and his 
vulgarity for humour. 

Major Thadeus Windham Crawley, 
(for it is the fashion among the Crawley 
class in Ireland to tack the names of 
viceroys and secretaries to their bap- 
tismal appellations) called himself a 
dasher; and was a fair illustration of 
that term, as applied in Ireland. He 
was handsome, good-humoured, vulgar, 
and self-sufficient. He had seen a little 
service in America, a good deal in the 
peninsula ; and though his residence in 
other countries had cleared away many 



i 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 5 J 

of his local prejudices and littlenesses, it 
had added little to the stock of his 
original ideas, and took nothing from 
the purity of his original brogue. His 
phrases were all broadly idiom atical ; 
his conversation enriched with regi- 
mental technicalities and Irish slang ; 
and when he had talked of bivouack- 
ing and wigwams, of making the ould 
one come down with the pipeclay, sung 
* I am the man for the leedies" and de-^ 
scribed the prince ragent's levee, (com- 
mencing every phrase with c: I'll give 
you my honor)," he had gone through 
the whole menage of his intellectual 
capabilities. The rest of his existence 
was made up with whistling, humming, 
drawing up his cravat, to make a sensa- 
tion on the appearance of a stranger, 
reading the army-list, and beating his 
rattan against his father s Northumber- 
land table. 

The character of the barrister^ Con- 
way Townsend Crawley, the Magnus 
D 4 



$6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Apollo of his aunt, and usually called 
Counsellor Con, by his father, seemed 
to have its foundation more particularly 
in temperament, and to be of a more 
definite and distinct class, as well as of 
a plus haute voice, than his brothers. 
It was obvious that both its merits and 
its defects originated in physical in- 
firmity beyond his control. Called by 
his father his posthumous son, because 
his mother died in giving him life, his 
inauspicious birth seemed to have in 
tailed upon him a bilious saturnine con- 
stitution. Even his talent, if talent it 
might be called, was but the result of 
disease. No c overflowing of the panc- 
reatic juices' had influenced the system 
of Conway Crawley, even in that age 
when the blood is balm. The dark bile, 
which from childhood sallowed his 
cheek, dimm'd his eye, and tinged the 
spirits of youth with the causticity of 
age, continued, through adolescence and 
manhood, to communicate its bitterness 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 57 

to all his views; turning his words to 
sarcasm, his ink to gall, and his pen to 
a stiletto ; and combining with an edu- 
cation, whose object was pretension, 
and whose principle was arrogance, it 
made him at once a thing fearful and 
pitiable, at war with its species and 
itself, ready to crush on the verge of the 
tomb, as to sting in the cradle, and 
leading his overweening ambition to 
pursue its object by ways, dark and 
hidden, safe from the penalty of crime, 
and exposed only to the obloquy which 
he laughed to scorn ; for opinion has no 
punishment for the base. 

If ever there was a man formed alike 
by nature and education to betray the 
land that gave him birth, and to act 
openly as the pander of political corrup- 
tion, or secretly as the agent of defama- 
tion, who would stoop to seek his for- 
tune by effecting the fall of a frail 
woman, or would strive to advance it by 
stabbing the character of an honest one > 
D 5 



58 fl6rence >f acarth y*. 



who would crush aspiring merit behind 
the ambuscade of anonymous security, 
while he came forward oj>enly in the 
defence of that vileness which rank sanc- 
tified and influence protected, that man 
was Conway Crawley. He was yet 
young ; but belonging to the day and the 
country in which he first raised his hiss, 
and shed his venom, success already beck- 
oned him, through the distant vista, 
towards her, with a smile of encourage- 
ment and a leer of contempt. Prompt, 
pert, and shameless, he had already, 
both at the bar and in society, evinced 
a well-managed talent for display and 
for evasion, a fluency that bore down 
where it could not convince, and an inso- 
lence which humility could not soften, 
nor power brow-beat. Lampoons, 
which he solemnly denied, had been 
brought home to him, and obtained a 
sort of local notoriety, while they evinced 
talents which were to pave their way 
to distinctions more solid, by means 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 50 

more ingeniously despicable than he 
had as yet been called on to exercise. 
While in every pursuit " ivisely shun- 
/ung the broad way and the green/' his 
paths were paths of darkness ; and had 
he been found guilty of one good, one 
generous action, he would " have 
blushed to find it fame." It was by 
another species of reputation that the 
gates of promotion and wealth were to 
be opened to the ambition of Conway 
Townsend Crawley. 

He was now going the Munster circuit, 
and took his father's house in his way 
between two assize towns. He did, 
however, but little in his profession^ 
notwithstanding that his father had pro- 
cured him several crown prosecutions, 
and had made him counsel to two 
boards. His views were higher than 
thus creeping through professional 
places, offices, and sinecures, such as 
are now reserved for the Irish bar. He 
was deeply interested in the Glanna- 



6*0 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



crime election, and was law-agent for 
the absent candidate, Lord Adelm Fitz- 
adelm, whom he had never seen, but 
whose character he particularly disliked. 
To his mother, the dowager mar- 
chioness, he was personally known ; 
and to her, while at the Temple, he had 
paid most obsequious attention. His 
fluency, his light literature, poetical 
scraps, and critical discussions, had 
passed upon this capricious and power- 
ful woman of fashion for talent, wit, 
and erudition : for pretension in this, 
as in every other instance, succeeded 
when it amalgamated with all the well- 
whipped froth of courtly sense. 

At the head of the females of the 
Crawley genius, with all the character- 
istics of the family, stood Miss Anne 
Clotworthy Crawley ; Anne, after her 
humble mother, Nancy M alone, a brogue- 
maker's daughter of Doneraile ; and 
Clotworthy, from a certain Lady Clot- 
worthy, who distributed poetical prizes 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6 1 

at Bath, and to whom Miss Crawley 
had rendered herself dulcis et utilis dur- 
ing a six months' residence in that city ; 
when, at a late period in life for such 
purposes, she had gone to finish her 
education. Her first simple name she 
had received at her christening, in the 
steward's room at Court Fitzadelm, 
forty-five years back ; the second she had 
adopted at her confirmation at Bath 
twenty years after. This mature re- 
naming she called her " sentimental re- 
generation and she heard with hor- 
ror a name so distinguished, so dear to 
the Muses, at least to the Bath muses, 
a3 Clotworthy, curtailed by the fraternal 
familiarity of her brother Darby into 
the endearing, but ill-sounding diminu- 
tive, of Clotty. Against this abbrevia- 
tion Miss Crawley had vainly remon- 
strated : it had seized both the imagi- 
nation and the affections of her brother; 
and with this good-humoured, but cho- 
leric relation, she dared only to go cer- 



62 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



tain lengths. Placed at the head of his 
sumptuous establishment, her alterna- 
tive was living in a boarding-house, on 
a legacy left by Lady C lot worthy ; for 
as a resident in the house of her bro- 
ther, the serjeant, or in that of the com- 
missioner, her two sisters-in-law had 
shut the door against her. To live with 
the great, to be noticed by the great, to 
influence and render herself necessary 
to the great, was the ambition and ob- 
ject of Miss Crawley's existence. For 
this purpose she took the only paths 
open to her, pretension and flattery ; 
pretension arising out of a few flimsy, 
shallow, common-place acquirements, 
the produce of every vulgar boarding- 
school,— and flattery, as consonant to the 
groveling time-serving spirit of her fa- 
mily, and to the smooth, silky, insinu- 
ating, serpentizing temper of her own 
character. At once feeble and vain, de- 
ficient and ambitious, her original en- 
dowments were below mediocrity, and 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 63 

her stock of literary and sentimental 
ideas, like the contents of her boudoir 
and library, was made up of scraps and 
fragments : her etalage de sensibilerie 
was gleaned from a class of sentimental 
novels, now gone by, whose heroines 

" Died of a rose in aromatic pain," 

her critical judgments were borrowed 
from reviews, journals, and the oft-co- 
pied opinions of orthodox authority ; 
and her musical talents, on which she 
peaked herself, consisted of a few got- 
up songs, sung in such tune as it pleased 
heaven, in two airs on the harp, one on 
the Spanish guitar, and four waltzes, 
with one bass on the piano-forte. To 
these higher endowments she united 
other little " useful uselessnesses," which 
enabled her to supply the wants of her 
great friends, which she herself first 
created. Cloth fruit and filligree bas- 
kets, daubed velvet and paper card-racks, 
French mottoes and English devices, 



6*4 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

with all the industrious arts which bad 
taste supplies to unoccupied mediocrity, 
were devoted to the drawing-rooms and 
boudoirs of the great and shallow per- 
sons who admitted her as their inmate. 
With that cunning which invariably be- 
longs to intellectual inferiority, she ra- 
pidly obtained the secret of a dominant 
weakness or a master-passion ; and she 
administered to both with an address 
worthy of higher views and better ob- 
jects. She had little valueless appro- 
priate offerings for every one : and from 
an evangelical tract, or a society bible, 
down to sugar sweatmeats or paper 
dolls, her adroitness administered, (and 
cheaply administered) to the passions, 
prejudices, and infirmities of all ages, 
characters, and classes. There were 
instances, however, where even flattery 
failed ; and there Miss Crawley sought 
the dernier resort of bold, pushing, pre- 
sumptuous intrusion, which no delicacy 
checked, no pride restrained. Many a 



FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 6d 

coronetted dame has felt the pressure of 
Miss Crawley's arm on her's in public, 
with the half-stifled swell of provok- 
ed indignation; mortified at her own 
good-natured weakness, which could 
not resist the impudent request of pro- 
tection made in the whining tone of 
humble supplication. 

With all this Miss Crawley got on ; 
and though admired but by few, laugh- 
ed at by many, and progressively found 
out by all, she contrived to obtain 
a place in society which modest genius 
could scarcely hope for, and proud in- 
dependence would scornfully reject. 
Her success, like that of her nephews, 
was the triumph of pretension; it be- 
longed to the day, and the circle, and 
the family in which she lived. 

During the first thirty-five years of 
Miss Crawley's life, she had professed 
herself devoted to friendship and the 
muse; but she by no means suited the 
action to the word. Other altars thau 



66 FLORENCE MAC AltTHY. 



those of Minerva had received lier 
adoration, and she had long coquetted 
from the bench in her brother, the 
attorney s office, to the bench of the 
Common Pleas, and Exchequer, until a 
platonic engagement and sentimental 
correspondence, with a certain Cou\:sel- 
lor O'Rafferty, induce d her to render her 
legal flirtations " moins bannales." 

This correspondence, fed by the ten- 
deresthopes, didnot prevent other views 
from being cultivated. Rank was her 
object, but in failure of her vaulting 
ambition, which might o'erleap itself, 
Counsellor O Rafferty, whom she called 
the " soft green of her soul," was kept 
in quiet reserve, until Counsellor O'Raf- 
ferty, unexpectedly elevated to the 
bench, pronounced a verdict so little 
favourable to Miss Crawley's pending 
cause, that she saw herself at forty the 
victim of a too- confiding heart, and 
found 

il What dust wo doat oa when 'tis man wc lore." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 6*7 



The. delicate line which is said to 
divide coquetry from devotion was now 
broken ; and an introduction at this 
period to some serious ladies of rank, 
who, in Dublin, preside over faith and 
tent-stitch, and dictate creeds while 
they cut out shirts, for the benefit of 
poor sempstresses and expected con- 
verts, together with the influence of an 
itinerant evangelical preacher, the ce- 
lebrated Zachariah Scare 'um, awaken- 
ed her to a vocation, which induced her 
to give to heaven all that had once been 
Counsellor O'RafFerty's. Still, how- 
ever, she coquetted with religion, as she 
had done with the bar, to agacer many 
a sturdy polemic, as she had done 
many a promising lawyer. She had 
ran in rapid succession through all the 
shades of the sectarian prism, succes- 
sively reflecting old lights, new lights, 
broad lights, and twilights, until finally 
deciding that she should never stand in 
her own light, she brought her love of 



68 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

rank, power, and ascendency, to qua- 
drate with her religious system, and 
settled down into an high church 
methodist. 

The former fantastic frippery of her 
dress was changed into that coquetish 
simplicity, adopted by ladies who ad- 
vertize to the world their inward super- 
iority, by the outward and visible signs 
of the toilette; who pin up their creed 
with their top knot, indicate their piety 
by the cut of their bonnet, and who 
look upon the bright hues and rich 
tints of heaven and nature as symptoms 
of sin and badges of iniquity; but who 
nevertheless bestow upon their osten- 
tatious reserve of costume a care, a pre- 
cision, a singularity which attracts the 
eye to their studied appearance, and 
might put the recherche taste of a 
finished Parisian milliner to the blush 
of inferiority. 

At the head of these pious petite 
maitresses stood Miss Crawley, emi- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY 6$ 

nently primitive in all the exterior 
forms of her calling; looking upon ce- 
lestial rosy red with eyes averse, 
doubting the faith that pranked itself in 
azure, — " Heaven's own proper dye/* 
giving yellow to the devil, and placing 
coquelicot beyond the pale of salvation ; 
while her own greys, fawns, puces, and 
snuff colours, " breathing a browner 
horror" over her swarthy complexion, 
were chosen with all the delicacy and 
selection which belong to the studied 
faste of the sectarian wardrobe. 

But, though dead to colours, Miss 
Crawley was not insensible to forms. 
The person of the stranger guest had 
taken possession of her evangelical 
imagination. There seemed to her a 
mystery in his visit ; and she foresaw in 
her vanity, her visionary idleness, and 
wordly romance, a conquest or a con- 
vert, a partner in her labours, or at 
least another distinguished name in her 
list of noble and literary friends. She 



*0 FLORENCE M AC ART II V. 

was, therefore, prepared to prepossess 
her family, who were now all assembled 
at Mr. Crawley's, in his favour; but the 
late arrival of the men from the assizes 
left only time for family salutations and 
greetings, when the Commodore was 
present to make his own impressions in 
propria persona. 

Mrs. Serjeant, and Mrs. Commis- 
sioner Crawley, were less marked by 
peculiarity than their sister-in-law, at 
whom they laughed, — not in contempt, 
but in envy : for they gave her credit 
for all she assumed, and hated her for 
her success as much as if she had me- 
rited it. Mrs. Serjeant Crawley, half 
Irish, half East Indian, with the hue 
of one country and the brogue of the 
other, prided herself upon the fortune 
she brought her, husband, the size of 
her house, and the accomplishments 
of her four exhibiting daughters. To 
these grounds of self-satisfaction she 
added the honour and eternal boast of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 7 1 

her intimacy with Lady Kilgobbin, an 
old lady ot rank and pretension, who 
had been left a solitary straggler on the 
Irish red bench, after the dispersion of 
the nobility by the union. Pew-fellow, 
card player, and news-monger in or- 
dinary to Lady Kilgobbin, Lady Kil- 
gobbin was with Mrs. Serjeant the 
beginning and the end of all things. 
Vv ith Mrs. Commissioner Crawley, on 
the contrary, the Lady Lieutenant was 
the alpha and omega of special refer- 
ence. Her life had however furnished 
her with other sources of pride. She 
had once been the young widow of an 
old bishop ; and when, with an unpro- 
vided daughter, and a portion of an 
hundred a year, she accepted the hand 
of the court-favoured commissioner, 
she had endeavoured to perpetuate the 
recollection of her former rank and con- 
nexion by perpetual references to the 
memory of her dear late lord. Cold, 
ar ogant, and supercilious, she mistook 



/2 FLORENCE MACARTMY. 

a dogmatizing spirit for cleverness, 
affected to despise accomplishments, be- 
cause she was too indifferent and too 
negligent of her daughter to give her 
any, and fancied herself a woman of 
fashion because people of rank came to 
her expensive parties, but who laughed 
at her for the pains she took to induce 
their visits. 

It was impossible for any daughter 
to be less like her mother, or less like 
the daughter of a bishop, than Miss 
Kate Lesley. Her education had been 
founded by the maid, who had taught 
her to read, and finished by the foot- 
man, with whom she giggled at the car- 
riage window, while her precise mother 
was paying morning visits. Not yet 
come out, she was fat, fair, slovenly, 
and fifteen, with her sleeves hanging 
off her shoulders, her comb out of her 
hair, and her slipshod shoes off her 
feet. In every thing a striking contrast 
to the four wousky-looking, slight, sal- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 73 

low, overdressed Miss Crawleys, who 
had been presented at the Irish court, 
went to parties, and played, sung, and 
waltzed, for any one who had the kind- 
ness to listen, or the benevolence to 
look at them. 



VOJL. Ii. £ 



f-f FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



CHAPTER II. 

What hempen homespun knaves have we 
swaggering here ? 

Shakespeare. 

He gives the bastinado with his tongue : 
Our ears are cudgelled with it. 

Ibid. 

I abhor such phantastic phantasms — such un- 
sociable and point device companions — such 
Fackers of orthography. 

Ibid. 

In addition to the Crawley family, 
which a six o'clock dinner-bell assem- 
bled at Mount Crawley, were a few 
guests supplied by the situation of the 
country, and the circumstances of the 
neighbourhood. They consisted of two 
barristers, friends, and (in their respec- 
tive ways) toadies of the young counsel 
lor: twoprotectees of Mr. Crawley senior, 
bearing the official dignities of sub- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 75 

sheriff and port surveyor ; two country 
gentlemen, tenants of the Marquis of 
Dunore, (the one of an ancient Catho- 
lic, the other of a respectable Protest- * 
ant family) : and the brigade-major of 
the district, who, from his strict ad- 
herence to the prudent rule of never 
dancing with the daughter where he 
had not dined with the father, had ob- 
tained from the wits of Dunore, the so- 
briquet of the " cut-mutton-jig-major." 

Of the two barristers, the elder was 
one of that class termed in London 
Old Bailey counsel. He piqued him- 
self principally upon the vulgarity of 
his humour, and the coarseness of his 
address ; wore a coat well powdered 
and ill brushed; and laughed at the 
legal coxcombs, who sought to get rid 

O ' Do 

of the dust of the courts, before they 
sat down to a circuit dinner. He might, 
however, be said rather to entertain 
the bar than to practise at it ; and to 
nick up on the circuit more jokes than 



76 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

briefs. He was now a sort of hanger- 
on — a proneur litre of Mr. Conway- 
Crawley, and was always contented to 
swallow the insolent superiority of the 
son, so long as he was permitted to 
swallow with it the claret of the father. 
The other barrister, more timid and more 
gentleman-like, followed in the track 
of the young legal Bobadil from genu- 
ine admiration, and with a firm resolve 
to adopt his course, and to trace his 
steps to promotion, whatever path he 
might take, indolently reposed on his 
higher genius for his own future for- 
tunes, and catered applause for talents 
he emulated, the jackall of another's 
vanity. 

The two country gentlemen were 
simply country gentlemen, such as they 
are found in Munster. Gay, cordial, 
courteous, hospitable at home, and \ 
convivial abroad; but a little out of 
their natural element in Mr. Crawley's 
circle, where the business of signing 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 77 

leases alone had detained them. The 
sub-sheriff and surveyor owed every 
thing to the Crawley interest ; and full 
of gratitude for favours yet to come, they 
looked up to Mr. Crawl ey, of Mount 
Crawley, with a deference evinced, in 
proportion to their expectations. The 
applause which this gentleman usually 
extorted from both, by a significant 
wink of the eye, whenever he chose to 
be witty, or was inclined to be humorous, 
was generally paid by the sub-sheriff in 
the formula of " That's nate ;" which 
the surveyor constantly confirmed by 
the echo of " Mighty nate!" 

Such were the party assembled in 
the best drawing-room of Mount Craw* 
ley ; when the commissioner observing, 
that no verbal announce of dinner fol- 
lowed the summons of the bell, turned 
to Mr. Crawley impatiently, and asked, 

" Who do we wait for ? — Do you ex- 
pect any one to dinner, Darby ?" 

" Not a Christian," returned Mr. 
£ 3 



7& FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

Crawley. M Thady, dear, give the bell 
a touch, and bid them dish." 

" You forget, brother Crawley," said 
his sister anxiously, " that I told you, 
if you would have listened to me, or to 
Any one but Jemmy Bryan, when you 
came home, that I had asked a gentle- 
man to dinner, a very distinguished 
person, that called on you this morning, 
after you were gone to GIannacrime. , ' 

u Oh, very well, he'll be here while 
dinner's dishing, I'll engage. — Did he 
lave his name ? u 

" I cannot tell you his name," said 
Miss Crawley, with a smile, " because I 
really forgot to ask it. 1 But what's in a 
name P! as Romeo says. This I however 
can tell you : he is not only the most 
distinguished, but the most poetical- 
looking person, as dear Lady Clotworthy 
would have said/' 

" You know, Anne Clotworthy, I 
am always rather a stiptic to your de- 
scriptions/' said Mr. Crawley, winking 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 79 

to the sub-sheriff, " ever since you tould 
me that that methodist preacher, who 
came to us on a visit of two days, and 
staid three months, tvas an angel with- 
out ivings. He was without wings sure 
enough, but it was a scare-crow without 
wings he was the very moral of." 
" That's nate !" said the sub-sheriff. 
iC Mighty nate !" replied the surveyor. 
" When I spoke of the angelic pro- 
perties of the Reverend Jeremiah Judd, 
I alluded to the inward man, and I was 
induced to day to believe, for a moment, 
that this gentleman had brought letters 
from him ; but though he avowed that 
his mission into this country was of a 
serious nature — " 

" Then I'll tell you once for all, Miss 
Crawley," interrupted her brother in a 
passion, " I will not have my house 
made a magdalen asylum to a parcel of 
canting methodistical thieves, who ar* 
of no use but to set aside the simple 
lethay^gy of the church service, and t* 
e 4 



80 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

substitute the errors of the Presbyte- 
rians for those of the established faith. 
With your missions and missionaries, 
conversions and perversions, have you 
left me a tinpenny in my pocket to give 
to my own poor in New-Town Mount 
Crawley? And pray, what's gone of 
my one pound note that went to make 
Christians of the black negroes ? Never 
saw a single sowl of them set foot in a 
church yet, barring Mrs. Casey's little 
black boy, that carries her prayer-book 
to early service. And I'd trouble you 
for my eleven and fourpence halfpenny, 
Miss Crawley, that you made me give 
to get King Pomarre, of the Otaheitee 
islands, to let himself be baptized ; 
though faith I believe it was king of 
the Mummers, that's king of the ham- 
mers he was? And 'bove all, where 's 
«ny sixteen and three-pence, carried off 
your * angel withoflt wings,' for 
# lighting up the dark villages;' and 
my elegant surtout, that was stolen out 
of the hall in Merrion Square, by your 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 81 

converted Jew, that was waiting for 
your c Guide to the Land of Promise.* 
I wish you had given the Devil his Jew 
(due), and left me my greatcoat; that's 
all, Miss Crawley." 

" That's nate V cried the sub-sheriff* 
looking to the surveyor. 

u Mighty nate V* echoed the sur- 
veyor, nodding his head, while Mr. 
Crawley, who had punned himself into 
good humour, as the man in the Guar- 
dian punned himself out of a fever, and 
who observed the rest of the party much 
amused at this attack upon the evan- 
gelical and dictatorial Miss Crawley, 
continued, in a milder tone, 

" Now, Clotty, dear, I tould you 
before that I never would let one of 
your angels without wings roost in my 
house to the day of my death, since 
Mr. Judd's visitation, who did nothing 
but preach and ate from morning to 
night, frightening the life out of me, 
and abusing the cook. I'd rather see 

£ 5 



%2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



the Devil come into my house than a 
methodist preacher. Lord forgive me ! 
and thinks when there's a religion by 
law established, which qualifies a man 
for every place in the state, it may serve 
our turn as well as our betters. If this 
gentleman then is one of the sarious, one 
of your missionaries—" 

" Here he is, to speak for himself; 
here at least is one of the Dunore hack 
chaises driving up the approach, bo I'll 
ring for dinner," observed the com- 
missioner. 

" Oh! a hack chaise," said his wife 
superciliously, and letting fall her spy- 
glass. 

" Is it a hack chaise ?" asked Miss 
Crawley in a tone of mortification; but 
before any other observation could be 
made, the door was opened, and the 
stranger, unannounced, appeared. He 
was in full dress; and the air with which 
he entered the room, and walked to the 
place occupied by Miss Crawley,, was 



FLORENCE MACARTOY. 83 

marked by a certain disengaged freedom, 
beyond what is merely acquired in 
society — the ease of conscious, careless 
superiority. While he stood paying his 
respects, and offering apologies for his 
late arrival to Miss Crawley, every 
countenance in the room had changed 
its expression. Some who had risen 
even forgot to sit down; others eyed 
him with curiosity: the four Miss Craw- 
leys paused for a moment in their flir- 
tation with the barristers and brigade- 
major; and Miss Kate Lesley left her 
shoe in the middle of the room, where 
it had been thrown by Major Crawley, 
whose manual gallantries she had in 
vain resisted, with " Quit now! behave, 
Thady Windham, or I will complain to 
your aunt— I will upon my honor;" to 
which the major only replied by twitch- 
ing off her slip-shod shoe, and reitera- 
ting: "Ton your honor!" The two 
Mesdames Crawley looked mortified a^ 
their demi-toilette, assumed for a family 



84 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

dinner ; and Miss Crawley's counte- 
nance was radiant with triumph, in 
spite of the Dunore hack chaise. 

Mr. Crawley, who loved company, 
when he was prepared for it, who liked 
his plate to be seen, when he took the 
trouble of displaying it, whose favourite 
aphorism on a company-day was, if 
there's enough for ten there's enough 
for twelve, and who now felt satisfied 
that his guest was not a methodist, 
from the manner in which he had sprung 
from the chaise into the portico, with 
the light bound of an impatient school* 
boy, advanced to receive him with his 
wonted overcharged civility; but when 
that guest appeared, his head uncovered, 
and his face turned full to the light, he 
staggered back a few steps, and stood 
gazing on a form and countenance, 
that seemed to burst upon his view, like 
some half-forgotten image of an unplea- 
sant dream. After a minute's silent 
pause, he took his youngest son's arm. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 85 

who stood turning over the leaves of 
the Review, and glancing a furtive 
look at the stranger, drew him into the 
open veranda, with the manner of one 
" perplexed in the extreme." 

" Con, dear," said he, " can you give 
a guess who that chap is, or what 
he is, or what brings him here at all i* 

" I am sure I have not the least idea, 
Sir," replied his son. " I don t think his 
name was announced; but I suppose 
you will soon know his business. He 
seems a confident presuming-looking 
coxcomb enough ; most likely a recruit- 
ing officer, or a maudlin traveller to the 
lakes, who will eat your dinners, and 
put us all into his book, in return for 
your hospitality." 

" I don t care where he puts us, if 
he's only a ganius," said Mr. Crawley, 
evidently relieved by this suggestion. 
"If I was sure of that, Con — " hepaused, 
and then added, " It struck me just at 
the first glance that— but what does 



86 



FLORENCE M AC ART II V. 



that prove? Sure they say that I am the 
very moral of Paddy* Duigenan about 
the corner of the mouth and the eye, 
and is no more to him, either in kith, 
kin, or relationship, than the lord chan- 
cellor, only just play-fellows, when 
slips of boys together, and great cro- 
nies." 

" Does this person resemble any one 
you know?" asked young Crawley. 

"Does he? why — but it was before 
your time; — and knows now that I'm 
entirely mistaken, only the first look, 
for its quite clean impossible/' 

" Dinner is announced, Sir," said the 
surveyor ; " and Mrs. Commissioner 
Crawley is waiting for you to hand her 
down, Sir." 

Ceremony, with all its laws of pre- 
cedence, is the cheval dc bataille of the 
demi-officials of Ireland. Every guest 
in Mr. Crawley's drawing-room knew 
his place, while the Commodore alone, 
accustomed to the manners of foreign 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 8? 

countries, where the circle of private 
salons, neutralizes all rank, offered his 
arm to Miss Crawley, because he stood 
next her; but she gently resisted the 
offer, and the procession began. Mr. 
Crawley led out Mrs. Commissioner 
Crawley, Mr. Commissioner led out 
Mrs. Serjeant, Mr. Serjeant escorted 
the elder Miss Crawley, Miss Lesley, as 
a bishop's daughter, claimed the pas 
of the four Miss Crawleys, and was 
ushered by the high sheriff; the four 
Miss Crawlevs were divided amongst 
the lawyers, the brigade-major and their 
cousins; Counsellor Con followed alone, 
proudly pre-eminent, and took his place 
at the foot of the table; the sub-sheriff 
and surveyor bowed each other out, with 
pompous solemnity; the stranger and the 
two country gentlemen, having " done 
the state no service," and being with- 
out any precise etat in this official 
hierarchy, were left to arrange their 
precedence as they might; and they 



88 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

followed last in the train which pro- 
ceeded to the dining-room. 

The tables of these demi-officials are 
distinguished by a sumptuousness, a 
luxury, an extravagance, almost un- 
known, except to the highest ranks of 
other countries. Apparently abiding 
by the maxim of 4C let us eat and be 
merry, for to-morrow we die," their 
device is frequently illustrated by the 
event. Commissioners of enquiry, sud- 
denly start up with their inquisitorial 
researches into exorbitant fees, over- 
charges, bribes, &c. &c. and by a stroke 
of their pen, convert these chambers of 
festivity into houses of mourning; while 
the government, which winks for a ne- 
cessary time at their malversations, sud- 
denly pounces on their enormities, as 
an excuse for displacing them, to make 
room for newer candidates for loyalty 
and places, where the " last fool's as 
welcome as the former," and each 
serves, rules, and is ruined in his turn. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

The dinner-table of Mr. Darby 
Crawley, attorney-at-law, differed in 
nothing from that of the Lord-Chancel- 
lor of Ireland, except in the polish of 
him that presided over it. Services and 
releves succeeded each other in due al- 
ternation. The soup, fish, and pates, 
were swallowed in solemn silence ; but 
when the first flush of appetite sub- 
sided, champaign circled, burgundy 
went round, old hock was recommend- 
ed, and every one talked across the 
table, round the table, and from the 
top to the bottom of the table : for the 
quietude and reserve of a bon-ton din- 
ner table has not yet been acquired by 
the pseudo-grandees of the desk-aris- 
tocracy, who imitate the great in no- 
thing but what money can procure. 

Mr- Crawley, who had raised his 
eyes to the strangers face between 
every spoonful of his soup, questioned 
him with great civility, but with great 
hesitation, on his opinion of the coun- 



90 FLORENCE M ACARTH Y. 

try; and, by degrees, yielded up his 
uneasy, vague, and undefinable sensations 
of perplexity, to the influence of the 
frank replies of his nameless guest, and 
to the exhilaration of his own sparkling 
champagne and burgundy. Thus 
restored to his ease, convivial, talkative, 
and ridiculous as usual, he mentally ob- 
served, as he helped himself to mock 
turtle, his favourite dish, " I wonder 
what the devil came over me, making a 
Judy Fitzsimmons of myself about no- 
thing at all — and all for a look, which 
is no proof; how could it ?" 

Thus finally chasing the unpleasant 
impressions, (whatever they might be) 
from his mind, he gave up his attention 
to a series of bad jokes and circuit anec- 
dotes, 1 6 millefois repetts" and now told, 
w ith a broad, vulgar, slang humour, by 
young Crawley's elder friend, Counsellor 
Mulligan. This facetious barrister hav- 
ing just finished a good story, of which 
Judge Aubrey and Baron Boulter (the 



FLORENCE M ACAKTHY. 91 

judges then on circuit) were the heroes, 
he observed, turning to Mr. Crawley, 

" By the bye, Sir, Judge Aubrey has 
let out the Rabragh, whom you put up 
last summer, and whom Baron Boulter 
left in Tipperary jail, under rule of 
bail/' 

" So I hear," said Mr. Crawley; " but 
bathershin (as the Irish say), mind my 
words, Counsellor Mulligan, I'll have 
the Rabragh where he wont so easily 
get lave of absence ; that's with due 
deference for Judge Aubrey: and has 
good reason to know (though nothing 
has been brought against him yet) he's 
at the bottom of every thing in this 
country, Padreen Gars boys, and all." 

" Have you seen Conway's ' Fa- 
miliar Epistle to a Jacobin Judge,' 
written on that occasion ? By jove, 'tis 
the best hit that ever was made, and 
has set the judge wild, they say/' 

6i No, I have not, Counsellor Mulli- 
gan, nor doesn't care if I never see a 



92 FLORENCE MA6ARTHY. 

scrap of his poethry again while I live ; 
and wishes he would lave off with his 
hits." 

u Me!" said Conway, tossing off a 
glass of liquor (for the dessert was now 
on the table.) " Upon my honor, I 
didn't write that lampoon, which was 
circulated at Cork, if you mean that. 1 ' 
And he felt as he spoke for the manu- 
script in his pocket. " I don t know 
how it is," he added, conceitedly, " but 
every wicked thing is laid at my door." 

"Every witty thing is," said the 
timid young barrister, with a smile. 

u Well! that comes to the same 
thing. I had just the same fatal pre- 
eminence when I was at the Temple. 
All the foundling genius of the inns of 
court was placed to my account.' ' 

u I wish/' said Mr. Crawley, fling- 
ing an apple skin violently from him, 
" there never was a ganius in the 
world. — What use in them? What 
good did ever one of them do? No, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 93 

but great harm ; and when a man is 
rared at college, and has read the clas- 
sics and the college course, what call 
has he to ganius after that ?" 

" I doubt, however, my dear Darby/' 
said the Serjeant, projecting an im- 
mense pair of bushy black eyebrows, 
in which lay all his reputation, and over 
which he exercised a singular power of 
contraction and expansion. — " I doubt 
that we should have had the classics to 
read in college, if there had not been 
authors, and what are called men of 
genius, to write them." 

u You are quite right, William," said 
his brother, the commissioner, speaking 
with the authority of one who presided 
at a board ; for if we must have books 
to read, there must be authors to write 
them, that's certain." 

" (?est clairT said Conway Crawley, 
in a tone of ridicule (frequently directed 
at his uncles), and a smile of intelligence 
at his aunt, who had hitherto vainly 



9* FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

endeavoured to draw the Commodore 
into conversation across the table. 

" C est clair indeed !" repeated Miss 
Crawley, with an affected laugh. 

" See Clare,' ' reiterated Mr. Crawley 
senior, angrily : " well, and see Clare, 
and sec Ly ttleton upon Coke, and see all 
the great crown lawyers that ever wrote, 
and see if ever one of them wrote a line 
of poethry. Chancellor Clare hadn't as 
much ganius for poethry as my foot, and 
if he had, would have been ashamed to 
own it." 

"I am not now," said Miss Crawley, de* 
lighted with the turn conversation was 
taking, " as once, an advocate for the 
(i idle visions of tfie i brain." But still I 
think no chancellor need have been 
ashamed of producing such poetry as 
Watts Hymns, nor do I see why The- 
mis and Apollo should not have their 
liaisons" 

" I am afraid, aunt/' said Conway, 
" that as my father suppose^ they 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 95 

would be e liaisons dangereuses.'— 
Blackstone, however, was a poet." 

"Yes," said Miss Crawley, "and it was 
a private traditional anecdote of Shen- 
atone in the Clotworthy family, (for La- 
dy Clot worthy was his relation,) that the 
sweet bard of theLeasowes was intended 
for the English bar ; and surely had he 
sat upon the wool-sack, he would not have 
denied being the author of that sweetly 
moral, and simply pastoral eclogue, — * 

u I have found out a gift for my fair, 

I have found where the wood. pigeon breeds." 

" Oh, dacency ! Miss Crawley," in- 
terrupted her brother Darby, winking 
at the sub-sheriff, while the ladies 
smiled, and Miss Crawley placing the 
smile to the right account, triumphantly 
went on, — 

u But let me that plunder forbear, 
She will say 'tis a barbarous deed." 

" Sorrow harm I see in robbing a 
bird's nest, Sir," said the sub-sheriff, 
addressing his critique to Mr. Crawley, 



9^ FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

in conformity to his patrons very 

humorous look at the moment— 

" For he ne'er can be true she'll aver, 
Who could rob a poor bird of his young." 

" Oh ! a most lame and impotent 
conclusion, my good auut. But for 
heaven s sake give us no more of that 
fadaise" said Conway Crawley — u that 
gone-by trashy which is worthy of the 
Delia Cruscan school, only that its still 
more insipid, and would scarcely fur- 
nish my friend of the Baviad and 
Mceviad a peg to hang a note on." 

" But your friend of the Baviad, my 
dear Conway, got out of all keeping, 
when he called Anna Matilda ' a 
wretched woman,' and other hard names, 
especially as it was known in the literary 
circles of Bath and Litchfield that 
Anna Matilda was dear Lady Clot- 
worthy." 

" Lady Clotworthy ! not a bit/' re- 
iterated Conway Crawley. " Anna Ma- 
tilda was neither more nor less than 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 97 

tJiat enfant gate of a particular set, Mrs. 
Cowley, the author of that tissue of all 
nonsense and absurdity, the Belle's 
Stratagem.* ' 

" The Belles Stratagem !" said Mrs. 
Commissioner — " Why the Lady Lieu- 
tenant bespoke it this winter. It was 
played by command ; and I had seats 
in the next box to her* 

"And I," said Mrs. Serjeant, "had 
a row in Lady Kilgobbin s box for the 
.girls and myself, and we thought it a 
charming comedy, so much fashionable 
life in it. And Letitia Hardy so talented, 
as Lady Kilgobbin said, and sung, and 
waltz'd, so delightfully 

u It certainly is a very amusing 
comedy," said the Commissioner autho- 
ritatively. 

" Very amusing," said the serjeant, 
with his eyebrows. 

u The Belle's Stratagem," said young 
Crawley, with cool insolence of look and 
tone, and folding his arms upon the 

VOL. II. f 



98 FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 

table, " is, what I have asserted it to be, 
a tissue of nonsense and absurdity. I 
repeat the words — , 'tis more, 'tis a cry- 
ing sin against good taste, good sense, 
good manners, and good morals. It's 
very title justifies every word of my 
assertion. The Belle's Stratagem ! ob- 
serve — Belle, a foolish French term for 
a young woman, according to Johnson, 
and so used by Pope, in his namby- 
pamby poem, of the Rape of the Lock. 
Stratagem, too, a term derived from the 
Greek, etymologically meaning an arti- 
fice, or ruse de guerre, a device, trick, 
imposition. The trick of a young wo- 
man, to take in a young man of fortune. 
A notable play for mothers to take their 
daughters to, truly !" 

" I wonder, my dear," said the Ser- 
jeant, with an unusual projection of the 
eyebrows, " you should take the girls 
to such a thing." 

" Lady Kilgobbin,"— interrupted Mrs. 
Crawley; but their nephew interrupting 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 99 

both, and bearing down all before him, 
poured forth a torrent of hypercriticisrri, 
imposing in proportion to its shallow- 
ness ; refining away the merits, ex- 
aggerating the faults, mis-quoting, mis- 
representing, and mis-judging, one of 
the most elegant and popular comedies 
on the English stage; until all those, 
who had given it their unequivocal ap- 
probation a few minutes before, endea- 
voured to expiate their former, hasty, 
but independent judgments, by approv- 
ing, seconding, and adopting, that of 
this formidable Zoilus of the Crawley 
family. 

During this tedious, but fluent tirade 
of pedantic critical jargon, Miss Crawley 
sat transported ; and only fearful that a 
conversation should cease, in which she 
and her el eve were alone, of all the 
race of Crawleys, calculated to shine, she 
endeavoured to keep up the ball, while 
the nephew paused to take his claret 

To force the stranger into the lists, 
f 2 



100 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

she asked him across the table: " May 
I beg to know what is your opinion 
of the English poets in general?" 

This sweeping question startled the 
Commodore into a sudden and abrupt 
ejaculation of " Madam !" Everyone 
smiled ; Mr. Crawley winked at the sur- 
veyor ; and Miss Crawley, with her 
former suspicions of the stranger s vo- 
cation, revived by his silence and gravity, 
and by the little part he had taken in a 
conversation, hitherto unworthy of the 
" elect of the Lord," added with a de- 
mure and primitive air, " Your poetica 
studies are, perhaps, from necessity, far 
from general, but Milton's divine poem 
of the Paradise Lost may have come 
under your observation, and stood the 
test of your critical acumen ; if — ? 

" The term divine, my dear aunt," 
interrupted the ' never ending, still be- 
ginning* nephew, c( is rather strong to 
be applied to any uninspired writer ; 
and most of all to such a poet, and such 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 101 

a poem as Milton, and his Paradise 
Lost. I don't, however, mean to say — 
pray hear me out, Madam,— that Mil- 
ton was not a poet, and a good poet, but 
I must add, that he was a most profane 
writer, and a most sacrilegious parodist. 
Nay, grant me your patience one 
moment.' ' 

" I only mean to say, in my own ex- 
culpation, Conway Townsend, that the 
term divine, as applied to Milton, does 
not originate with me ; that others of 
higher authority " 

" Oh, yes, I know Ma'am what you 
would say: and it is very true, that 
within the last century Milton has en- 
joyed a most preposterous fame, a most 
exaggerated, unmerited celebrity; a fame 
wholly denied to him by his cotempo- 
raries, the best judges ; for, after all, the 
trash that is talked about posterity, the 
true reputation is co temporary repu- 
tation, tangible fame, fame that one can 
lay one's finger on, that one can touch." 
F 3 



102 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



M Devil a bit, Counsellor Con ; but 1 
give you credit for that," said his father, 
cracking a nut between his teeth : 
11 touch and go, Sir, that's the ra'al 
fame for my money. Sub, hand up the 
port, and put the church in the middle 
of the parish : ergo, the salt-cellar ; 
I always take my nuts cum grano salis^ 
as the French say.'* 

" But/' continued young Crawley, 
" even the fame which posterity, that is, 
which the last century have bestowed 
on Milton, cannot be called legitimate 
fame. It is his political principles, that 
harmonize with the revolutionary sys- 
tems of the last fifty years, which have 
given to the sturdy jacobin the fame 
that is supposed to be extorted by the 
poet, a poet, by-the-bye, who has taken 
the devil for his hero, — " 

" The Lord bless us!" said Mr. Craw- 
ley, throwing down his nut-shells in 
pious horror. 

w Hell for his principle scene of ac 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 103 

tion, and rebellion for his theme/' con- 
tinued young Crawley. 

" Why then, who is he at all?" asked 
his father with vehemence. " Will no- 
body tell me?" 

" And of this I am certain, that had 
he published his Paradise Lost in the 
present day, there is not one genuine 
English review that would not have de- 
nounced him for an impious parodist, 
and condemned him, out of his own 
words, as profane, jacobinical, indecent, 
and immoral." 

Every body shook their heads, though 
nobody knew why ; while Mr. Crawley, 
stealing a timid suspicious look at the 
stranger, and then turning to his sister, 
observed : 

" 111 trouble you, Miss Crawley, not 
to mention that man, whoever he is, 
any more at my table. How do I 
know but every word of the conversation 
may be reported at the castle, and the 
secatary think I'm hand and glove with 
him." f 4 



104 FLORENCE MACARTHT, 

u It is curious/' continued Conwa\ , 
not even hearing his father, and borne 
away by the shallow rapidity of his own 
exhaustless volubility, " it is curious to 
observe Milton s hatred of kings break- 
ing out in some of his most poetical 
effusions. Thu3, in his famous si- 
mile : 

u As when the sun new risen 
Looks through the horizontal misty air 
Shorn of its beams ; or from behind the moon 
In dim eclipse, disastrous twilight sheds 
On half the nations, and with fear of change 
Pcrpleies monarchs." 

u Perplex a monarch!" exclaimed 
Mr. Crawley, inarticulate from vehe- 
mence. " Och ! the thief of the world f 
Why, then, Con, where was the Sus- 
pendeas Corpus Act? Where was the 
law of libel ? What was the attorney- 
general about ?" 

" The fact is,'* said young Crawley, 
taking snuff, and pushing on the box, 
a that, notwithstanding the legitimate 
prince was then but recently seated on 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 105 

his throne, and the reins of government 
still hung loose, this very passage nearly 
caused the suppression of the book by 
the royal licenser, and Milton and his 
Paradise Lost would then have been con- 
demned to eternal oblivion (we cannot 
say unjustly), and sacrificed to the in- 
sulted majesty of the house of Stuart." 

w Better," exclaimed the Commo- 
dore, with a sudden explosion of fiery 
indignation, that resembled the brilliant 
bursting of a sky-rocket, " better that 
the whole line of Stuarts, and the me- 
mory of that feeble, worthless, and 
despotic family, should be given to 
eternal oblivion, than that one bright 
effusion of the genius of Milton 
should be lost to the great nation, 
whose intellectual glory it has raised 
above that of all modern people. Any land 
might have produced the Stuarts; and 
one land, blushing to own them for her 
sons, twice drove them from her shores, 
a false and feeble race, whom Milton 
F 5 



10& FLORENCE MACAkTHY. 

would not flatter, and Sydney could not 
save." 

A dead silence followed this animated 
burst of uncontrolable feeling. All 
were struck, as much by the manner as 
by the matter of the unexpected apos- 
trophe, from one, whose silence, in 
spite of the personal distinction which 
had at first been so opposing, had given 
a general impression of dulness and in- 
efficiency. But if all were startled, old 
Crawley was confounded. His son, 
darkling with ire and irritation, sat for 
a moment silent as the rest ; while his 
father, whose native cowardice had 
taken the alarm, doubted whether a 
French spy, a government informer, or 
an Irish rebel, now sat at his table. He 
was even half inclined to send out an 
ukase to Jemmy Bryan and his myr- 
midons to hold themselves in readiness; 
but he first resolved, before he took any 
decided step, to give a toast as a pierre 
de touche of the strangers political 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 10? 

creed, a toast which he considered as 
the watch-word of his own dominant 
party. Passing, therefore, his hand over 
his face, so as to give a significant wink 
to his youngest son, unseen by the rest 
of the company, he exclaimed : 

" Com e, Counsellor Con, fill the gen- 
tleman's glass next you. I don't mane 
to give you an hint, Ladies, but before 
you go, you must all join in a toast, 
which I believe no one will refuse 
to drink in this house; this is, Sir," 
(nodding to the Commodore,) " the 
glorious and immortal — " 

" The glorious and immortal what, 
Sir ? M asked his guest, putting a little 
wine in his glass. 

"Why, the glorious and immortal 
memory; every loyal man knows that." 

" I hope I shall not forfeit my claim 
to that designation, by confessing I have 
yet to learn whose happy memory has 
merited these distinguished epithets." 

Mr. Crawley pulled down his little 



108 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Beresford bob, as he called his wig: 
he was not prepared to answer such an 
unexpected question; and his Son, 
seeing his perplexity, promptly came to 
his relief, observing coldly and super- 
ciliously to the stranger, " My father, 
Sir, gives a toast, which in Ireland at 
least requires no explanation; he gives 
the glorious and immortal memory o£ 
William die Third. " 

" I drink it, with all my soul," said 
the Commodore with animation, filling 
first his own glass to the brim, and 
then that of the poor catholic gentle- 
man, who sat next him, and to whom 
"the glorious and immortal" was the 
memory of the overthrow of his religion, 
the ruin of the fortunes, and the hopes of 
his family. " The memory of William of 
Nassau," continued the stranger," should 
find its monument in the breast of every 
true lover of British freedom: it is the 
memory of a great captain, chosen by a 
great nation, to lead it forth in the defence. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. lOg 

of its natural rights and dear-bought 
constitution, and to drive from the vio- 
lated sanctuary of their laws that des- 
potic bigot, whose feebleness and corrup- 
tion had forced a loyal people into the 
hazardous experience of revolution : with 
such recollections, I drink," and he arose 
as he spoke, " to the glorious memory 
of William the Third/' 

This was so new an exposition of the 
revered text of " the glorious and im- 
mortal/ ' that Mr. Crawley senior was 
not the only person present whom it 
puzzled. With this party of placemen, 
'* the glorious and immortal" had but 
one signification ; it was the watch- word 
of their own influence, the cry of their 
own petty, but powerful ascendency: 
and these genuine Tories, these advo- 
cates of their own arbitrary power, had 
been all their lives giving the Whiggish 
toast, without an idea attached to it, 
save the subjection of the catholic po- 
pulation, an unequal distribution of 



110 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

rights, and the supremacy of a narrow, 
bigotted, and impolitic intolerance; 
coupled, therefore, with the terms c glo- 
rious constitution,' and an ' emanci- 
pated people/ it produced a dead 
silence: even the 'imperturbable,' the 
overbearing and insolent Conway, was 
at a loss how to attack a definition 
which his reading told him was just 
and true ; he sat, therefore, pulling 
grape after grape from his bunch, as 
if he had not thought the stranger's 
remark worth replying to, and only 
noticing it by a supercilious sneer ; 
while Miss Crawley observing his an- 
noyance, and now wholly thrown out 
as to her former opinions of the stran- 
ger, came to her nephew's r.elief by 
observing, " Well, before I go, I must 
express my regret that a few literary 
remarks thrown out at random should 
have led to any thing like political dis- 
cussion; and in my own defence must 
say, that the eulogium I ventured to 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. Ill 



pass on Milton was wholly confined to 
his poetry; for I believe, whatever may 
have been his principles as a politician, 
he is, undeniably, a good poet. 

He has written a good poem of the 
second order," said young Crawley, ral- 
lying, u for strictly speaking, the Pa- 
radise Lost is not an epic ; and in a 
moral point of view, there is not one 
maxim of prudence or conduct to be 
drawn from it. Besides, one-half of 
his poetical beauties are downright 
plagiarisms from the ancients, in whose 
snow I can track him at every step. 
Thus: 

M As when heaven's fire has scath'd the forest 
oak," 

happens to be a cento made up from 
Homer and Virgil ; and again, 

u Thrice he essay'd to speak, &c." 

is Ovid's 1 Ter conata loqui et ter vox 
faucibus hseeit." 



112 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" So much for the bright effusions of 
this republican genius. This, Sir, how- 
ever, "and he turned to the stranger with 
a triumphant sneer, " may appear flat 
heresy to you, and a new reading of 
your favourite author." 

"New! net at all," returned the 
Commodore, carelessly : u I have read 
every word of it long since, in the dull 
forgeries of that convicted impostor, 
Lauder ; but since the ingenious de- 
tection of Douglas, I had imagined 
that Milton's plagiarisms had been at 
rest, or remembered only as warnings 
against literary credulity." 

" Shall we go, Mrs. Crawley ?" asked 
Miss Crawley, rising and colouring, 
while the complexion of her nephew 
deepened in its sallow hue, and became 
dark with ire and mortification. He was 
wholly unprepared for the detection of 
his gotten-up criticisms, even before an 
audience so insignificant. This sin^ 
gular stranger, who sat a nameless guest 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 



113 



at his fathers table, with his bursts of 
light and involutions of darkness, his- 
habitual reserve and silence, and his- 
occasional involuntary explosions of 
mind, seemed to hover like an incubus 
over the vision of his self-import- 
ance. Always the centre of his own 
circle, he was alike unused to opposi- 
tion or superiority, and from this 
moment the stranger became the ob- 
ject of that strenuous, inveterate, and 
unappeasable enmity, which springs 
from the wounded self-love of a vain, 
man. 

The retreat of the ladies, the removal 
of the great table, and the placing of a 
smaller one, the preparations for whiskey 
punch (asked for by the sub-sheriff and 
surveyor, and eminently enjoyed by 
Mr. Crawley, who confessed himself no 
accoucheur in wine), with the change 
of seats incidental to the separation of 
the sexes after dinner, occupied a con- 
siderable time ; and the Commodore? 



114 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

was on the point of taking advantage oT 
his seat next Mr. Crawley, to mention 
to him the business which had brought 
him to Mount Crawley, when he was 
interrupted by the entrance of a servant, 
bearing a letter to the master of the 
house. 

" A coronet sale/* (seal) said 
Mr. Crawley, wiping his spectacles : 
" The Dunore crest, the Marchioness's 
hand. James, come back here— Who 
brought this letter ; it isn't a post one, 
sure ?" 

" It is not, Sir; it came by express ; a 
castle express. The dragoon is just 
gone down to the horse-barrack/' 

" A castle express!" said Mr. Craw- 
ley, opening the letter with trepidation, 
while his son Conway took his seat at 
the back of his chair. 

H Hem ! Emily Dunore— Dublin 
Castle, August 25," read aloud Mr. 
Crawley, glancing his eye over the page 
to the signature and address; then rising, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 115 

he retired to a remote table with his son, 
in evident perturbation. After the perusal 
of the letter, and a few moments con- 
ference, the father and son rejoined the 
party. 

" Here is good news/' said young 
Crawley, with affected gaiety, while 
his father remained silent. 

u Lady Dunore is arrived in Dublin, 
and is coming to Dunore Castle imme- 
diately. She is merely recruiting from 
the fatigues of her voyage, with her 
friends the vice-regals, and then sets off 
with a large party." 

** Come, Sir," addressing his de- 
jected father, " we'll drink to her lady- 
ship's speedy and safe arrival.'* 

The toast went round, and many com- 
ments were made on the effects of this 
event. The Protestant country gentle- 
men observed, 

" This will give an helping hand to 
the election. The presence of Lady 
Dunore on the spot will be of infinite 



Il6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



service to her sons cause at Glanna- 
crime." 

" It will be of service/' said young 
Crawley. 

" Why I thought she had given up 
all thoughts of coming to Ireland," said 
the commissioner : " I heard Lord Ros- 
brin say so in Dublin." 

"And so she had," said old Craw- 
ley, with uncontrolable irritation, " but 
you might as well fix tlV ould weather- 
cock on the top of Dunore Court- 
house." 

" The residence of the Dunore fa- 
mily, even for a short time, will do 
great good/' said the catholic gentle- 
man. 

" Great!" said young Crawley, fill- 
ing his fathers glass, and giving the 
health of the absent candidate Lord 
Adelm Fitzadelm. 

"I wonder," said the catholic gen- 
tleman, " since the Fitzadelms have 
come in for the Dunore property, that 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 117 

they haven't tried to re-purchase the 
old house and grounds of Court Fitz- 
adelm." 

" Apropos, Mr. Crawley," said the 
stranger in a low tone of voice. " It 
is time that I should apologize for my 
intrusion on your hospitality, by ac- 
counting for it. I am desirous to be- 
come a purchaser of Court Fitzadelm ; 
for that purpose I came to Mount 
Crawley, and being obliged to leave 
Dunore to-morrow morning on urgent 
business, I availed myself of Miss 
Crawley's polite invitation, in order to 
obtain an audience from you. The time, 
I am aware, is an awkward one for bu- 
siness : all I can now expect to learn is, 
what may be my chance, and on what 
terms ?" 

" I believe, Sir," interrupted young 
Crawley, " you stand so engaged with 
Mr. Skerrett of Inchigeela, that you 
cannot open any new engagement/' 

" Mr. Skerrett !" said the old man, 



118 FLORENCE M AC A R THY* 

rousing himself, " to be sure I can't 4 
And may I presume to ask, Sir, is it to 
take back, that is, to purchase, I mane. 
Court Fitzadelm, that brought you into 
this country ? M 

" Not exactly, Sir. My wish of tak- 
ing Court Fitzadelm is merely acci- 
dental. I saw it advertised, liked the 
description, visited the grounds on my 
way hither, and liked them still better. 
I resolved to purchase if I could, and 
waited on you for that purpose/' 

Old Crawley passed his hand across 
his forehead, first looked at his son, 
and then at the stranger ; then he 
added : 

" And you mane to return to this 
country, Sir ?" 

" My hope of arranging matters with 
you will be a strong inducement for 
my doing so/ 

" Then, Sir/' said old Crawley, eager- 
ly catching at his word, " you need not 
give yourself the trouble. The place 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 119. 

is all as one as sowld to Mr. Skerrett, 
an ould acquaintance, and a residenter 
in the country ; and of course I would 
give a neighbour the preference over a 
stranger, an entire stranger/' 

" It is very natural, Sir,* said the 
Commodore. " Am I to consider this 
answer as definitive ?" 

" Certainly, Sir," returned Conway 
Crawley. " The concerns of Court 
Fitzadelm are, in fact, disposed of." 

The stranger paused for a moment, 
then took a polite leave of Mr. Crawley, 
and departed. 



120 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



CHAPTER III. 



For now enforst a farre nnfitten taske, 

to change mine oaten reeds, 

And sing ef knights' and ladies' gentle deed*, 
Whose praises, having slept in silence long, 
Me — all too mcane, the sacred musearceds 
To blazon fax. 

Spencer; 

The intended visit of the Dunore fa- 
mily to the ancient and long uninhabit- 
ed castle of their ancestors was of too 
general importance to the district and 
neighbourhood, not to excite sensation 
and awaken interest. Mr. Crawler 
had made no formal announce of the 
important circumstance, but the arrival 
of a maitre d'hotel and a French cook 
at the castle gave sufficient indication 
of the event. These chefs du menage 
were daily followed by squadrons of 
non-commissioned officers in the capa- 



FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 



121 



city of footmen, stable grooms, and 
grooms of the chamber, with light and 
heavy baggage, and all the artillery of 
luxury, comfort, and splendor, which fol- 
low in the train of the great, the opu- 
lent, and the sumptuous. 

The Marchioness of Dunore was all 
this in its fullest extent; and she now 
visited the domains of her son (whom 
she represented) with a spirit as im- 
perially extravagant, as accompanied 
the fair autocrat of the north, in her 
journies to her ancient city of Moscow; 
the means alone fell short in the ratio 
of the states of Dunore to the empire 
of all the Russias. The arrival of her 
ladyship was, however, to the full, of as 
much consequence to the inhabitants 
of the barony, as that of the great Ca- 
therine to the expecting Muscovites. 
The higher ranks looked forward to 
festivals at the castle, and balls at the 
court-house, election dinners, and can- 
vassing parties without end. Mothers 

VOL. II. G 



122 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

turned their eyes on Lord Adelm Fitz- 
adelm ; who, as it was reported, would 
join his mother from the continent. 
Daughters were not very averse from 
the same splendid speculation ; and 
with whom Lord Adelm would dance 
(the member's daughter not being in 
the country) was a subject of endless 
discussion. 

The lower orders were equally in- 
terested in an event, which awakened 
that train of idle hopes, to which the 
discontented are always victims. Pro- 
tection, interference, and redress, were 
expected by those, who, looking to all 
good, under the forms of backing, se- 
conding, and J avouring, make no refer- 
ence to justice, and have no idea of 
rights; — of rights violated in their own 
persons ; and, according to the laws of 
re-action, by them in their turn violated 
on the persons of others. To appeal 
from the powerful Crawley3 to the 
powerful masters of those Crawleys, 



FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 123 



was a favourite scheme with many, and 
in some nurtured and encouraged, by 
one who held a peculiar influence over 
all. This important agent was Terence 
Oge O Leary. 

The lower Irish entertain a respect, 
bordering on infatuation, for what they 
call learning; and much of this respect 
centres in their rustic schoolmasters, 
the depositaries of their national and 
traditionary lore. The influence of this 
order of men was deemed so formidable 
during the most unhappy period of the 
Irish rebellion, that they became ob- 
jects of peculiar suspicion; not to the 
government, but to the petty magis- 
trates, to whom the government had 
given such frightful and unqualified 
power, that ignorance, cruelty, and per- 
sonal vindictiveness, were armed all 
over the kingdom, and corporal punish- 
ments were inflicted with a barbarity 
which exceeded the horrors of the rack 
and the wheel. O'Leary, on whom 



124 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

the fever of insanity was then still 
preying, had thrown out many inco- 
herent aspersions against the Crawleys, 
having the death of the young Lord 
Fitzadelm for their chief point of re- 
ference. A note in Latin and Irish, 
found in his pocket, which Mr. Craw- 
ley could not read, served as a sufficient 
pretext for accusation, at a time, when 
a magistrate asserted to the Irish House 
of Commons " that it was necessary to 
whip many persons, of whose guilt he 
had secret information, from persons 
whose names he could not publicly dis- 
close?' Under such a system, O'Leary 
had been sentenced to the lash. To 
his plea of innocence Mr. Crawley re- 
plied, " What, you rebelly rascal, dare 
you speak after sentence f (*) 

The sentence was put in force; it 
prolonged and increased his mental irri- 
tation; but it elevated him to the honours 



* Facts. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



125 



of martydom, in the estimation of his 
sympathizing compatriots; which, add- 
ed to the benevolence of his character, 
and the supposed profundity of his eru- 
dition, gave to the feelings he inspired 
something of tenderness and deference, 
mixed with veneration. The hopes, 
therefore, which the return of the Du- 
nore family awakened among their te- 
nantry and dependants were confirmed 
by the vague, mysterious declaration of 
the oracular O'Leary, who continued 
to repeat every where, that " the fall of 
the Crawleys was handy bye, that the 
reign of the land pirates was nearly 
over, and that the red arm of the Fitz^ 
adelms would stretch forth once more 
over the land, or perhaps join that of 
the Macarthies More, as the Geraldines 
and Butlers had once done. (2) These 
mystic ravings were considered as Del- 
phic oracles; and sunset brought many 
a votarist to O'Leary's cell of Monaster- 
ny-Oriel, to consult on points concern- 
G 3 



13 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ing the validity of leases granted them 
under the Crawley regime: meantime 
O'Leary was himself convinced that 
his guest was no other than Lord Adelm 
Fitzadelm, whose incognito arrival had 
preceded his mother s by a few days, 
and whose resemblance to his unfortu- 
nate cousin had already awakened his 
affections and devotional interest. This 
" noble cspiall;" (as he termed his 
guest) upon the tricks and puppet- 
shew state of the Craw leys, which he 
likened to king Solomon's court in the 
fringes, (3) had slept but one night at the 
friary, and had left Dunore the next 
morning for Cork, with the promise of 
returning in a few days ; and took with 
him a 1 missive/ from the pedagogue 
of the preceptory to Friar O'Sulivan : 
M touching, plaze your lordship, that is 
honor I mane," said O'Leary, " the 
Ogygia of the great O'Flaherty, and the 
Histoire d'Ireland, by Abbe* O'Gaghe- 
gan, which Fra Denis will dispatch 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 127 

forthwith to me, by the Dunore car- 
rier." 

"I will bring them back myself to 
you, O'Leary," said the Commodore, 
as he mounted his Kerry steed. 

" That's too great honour entirely, 
my lord, and reminds me of the good- 
ness of him whom you liken, who 
carried Ware's Antiquities, and Lynche's 
Cambrensis Eversus, from Dingle town 
to St. Crohans for me, on one shoulder; 
and a string of curlews, and his little ould 
gun, the jewel of the world! on the 
other; for they were of great value to 
me then, that's the curlews, and helped 
to pay the rint; the ould saying being 
true, 

u A curlew, be she white or black, 
Carries twelve-pence on her back." 

The stranger departed. O'Leary 's 
doubts as to the purport of this journey, 
which were, like all his thoughts, con- 
fused and wild, became suddenly clear- 
ed up by the report of the expected 
G 4 



128 FLORENCE MACAKIHY. 

arrival of Lady Dunorc; for it Waa 
natural that Lord Adelm should go to 
Cork to meet his mother, and to return 
with her to Dunore, and then discomfit 
the Crawley faction, whom he had seen 
in all their glory. Of the result of the 
Commodore's visit to Mount Crawley ; 
as of its pretext, O'Leary remained 
ignorant, for he had made no communi- 
cation to him ; and the respectful defer- 
ence of the Fitzadelm fosterer, checked 
the suggestions of a vague, but ardent 
curiosity. 

But if the population of the barony 
of Dunore looked forward with various 
views of interest to the arrival of the 
chiefs of the territory, the Crawley s 
who had so long and powerfully governed 
it in their absence, felt little pleasure 
from the circumstance. They 1 wanted 
no change;' and the irritation of old 
Crawley's spirit could scarcely subdue 
itself, from the moment he had receiv- 
ed Lady Dunore's letter, or suffer him 



FLORENCE MAO ART HY. 129 

to listen to the prudent suggestions of 
his youngest son, 

u His bosom's counsellor, and better self." 

It was in vain that Conway enforced 
the necessity of representation, of fitting 
his conduct to existing circumstances, 
and meeting exigencies with applicable 
expediency. To all this primmer jar- 
gon of the young diplomatic apprentice 
old Crawley only replied with an ominous 
shake of the head, and the observation 
of — " And the Glannacrime business 
going on so iligant ; and that rebelly 
thief, O'Leary, drinking the downfall 
of the Crawley s at the Dunore Arms, as 
Jemmy Bryan tells me, who was on the 
look out ; and that stranger whom Miss 
Crawley flopped down on us at dinner 
the other day, lodging for a night at the 
friary, and then exeunt manent, before 
Jemmy could make out a tittle about 
him. But what signifies talking now ; 
* on time's uncertain date, eternal hours 
G 5 



130 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

depend,' as the dial-plate on the new 
clock says; and so send to Cork for co- 
loured lamps to light up Mount Craw- 
ley, for the town of Dunore is going 
to illuminate, and wouldn't be behind 
hand with it." 

" On the contrary, Sir/' replied his 
son, <c we should be before-hand, and 
light up New-Town Mount Crawley, 
and order your new corps under arms 
immediately." 

" And ay<?w-de-joy," cried old Craw- 
ley, cheering up ; for his new corps was 
the master-passion of his present ex- 
istence ; and his son well knew the 
chord by which his relaxed spirits could 
be restored to their habitual tension. 

Miss Crawley, who was not very 
deep in the family politics, was the only 
member of the house of Crawley to 
whom the arrival of the noble Mar- 
chioness and her fashionable party gave 
any pleasure. Lady Dunore had said, 
in that fatal letter which announced her 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 131 

intentions, that she meant " to instal 
the always obliging Miss Crawley (for 
whose prettily painted skreens she re- 
turned a thousand thanks) as dame du 
PALAIS, or mistress of the ceremonies 
at Dunore Castle, where she w ould her- 
self be necessarily the greatest stranger." 

From this distinguished promotion, 
Miss Crawley saw a train of delightful 
consequences, all big with influence, 
benefit, and importance. She would 
preside over the ingress and egress of 
the castle, exclude or admit whom she 
pleased, blacken and whiten according to 
her own personal feelings, towards the 
favourers or thwarters of her vanity and 
pretension. She would have the Du- 
nore patronage and the Dunore purse for 
her " subscription, cheap, charitable re- 
pository in Dublin/' where piety and 
patch-work were sold together, for her 
evangelical school at New-Town Mount 
Crawley, which stood equally opposed 
to the protestant and catholic schools at 



132 FLORENCE M AC ART II Y. 

Dunore, and for her " society for dis- 
seminating cheap tracts/' got up for the 
especial diffusion of intolerance, and 
sowing of division among the families of 
the credulous and unenlightened : but 
most of all, and best of all, she would 
have the opportunity of converting, 
saving, and governing the gay, dissi- 
pated, and worldly, but most noble 
Emily Augusta, Marchioness of Dunore; 
of accompanying her back to London, 
and founding and presiding over religious 
conversaziones atDunore House; herself 
the star of attraction to parliamentary 
saints and borough-mongering devotees; 
out-rivalling Madamoiselle Espinasse, 
who drew from her noble patroness the 
disciples of a very different sect, and, in 
the end, became chief, where she had 
debute e as follower. 

The evening destined for the arrival 
of Lady Dunore at last approached : 
not " like a pilgrim clad in sober grey," 
but like a flaunting dame, " in flame- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



133 



coloured taffetas." It was one of those 
rich, red, autumnal evenings which, in 
Ireland, make the sole, the short in- 
demnification, for eleven months of 
rain and vapour. For miles along the 
road which led to the town of Dunore, 
and which wound under the brow of 
hills, that were almost mountains, the 
expectation of her cavalcade crowded 
the acclivities with a long-waiting po- 
pulace ; and when her barouche, fol- 
lowed by two travelling carriages and 
out-riders, appeared, leaving the high 
road from Cork, and turning down Mr. 
Crawley's new made mail-coach road, 
which passed by Dunore, the old 
war-cry of the Fitzadelm family ren- 
dered the air vocal, and " Gal-ruadgh- 
aboo" shouted from a thousand voices, 
was followed by the descent of a multi- 
tude, who, with countenances and ges- 
tures as wild as their cry, swept down 
the sides of the hills, threw up their 
hats and shelelaghs in the air, surround- 



134 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

ed the carriage, and attempted to un- 
harness the horses for the purpose of 
drawing the barouche, as a token of de- 
votion and willing hereditary servitude to 
the long-absent Fitzadelm family. 

Lady Dunore (who had never before 
visited Ireland), with two gentlemen and 
one lady, occupied the barouche. Ra- 
ther agitated than frightened, she gave 
way to a strong hysterical affection. 
Her journey to Dunore, like her journey 
through life, had been subject to sudden 
alternations of excitement and lassitude, 
of emotions as opposite as their causes 
were inadequate. She had wept and 
laughed in a successive series since she 
had left Dublin, alternately amused and 
frightened as the sun shone or the 
clouds loured : she now wept and 
laughed together; and would have 
screamed had there been any chance of 
her screams becoming audible, but that 
was impossible. The cry of the " Irishry 
Mere" and the wrangling of the " Eng- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 135 



lish by blood (for Lady Dunore's sturdy 
English coachman and out-riders pro- 
tested against the carnage being drawn 
with suggans) * gave her Ladyship no 
chance for a successful exhibition of pow- 
erful emotion; she therefore concealed 
her face on Lady Georgina Vivians 
shoulder, the lady who sat next her, 
and who, infinitely more intimidated, 
expressed her fears only by a death-like 
paleness and a quickened respiration. 

Meantime, one of the two gentlemen 
who occupied the back seat in the ba- 
rouche, Lord Frederick Eversham, not 
particularly affected by the alarms of 
either lady, which he saw were perfectly 
without cause, endeavoured to dispel 
them by diverting their attention, and 
indulging his own peculiar humour. 
Standing upright in the barouche, he 
waved his hat, joined the Irish cry, and 
addressed the multitude with the same 



* Straw ropes. 



13ft FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

air of mingled drollery and affectation 
he was wont to assume in a circle at 
Almacks. 

" I believe/' he said, " I have the 
honour of addressing the respectable 
population of Dunore." 

An ill-favoured, but intelligent look- 
ing man, who was walking with his 
hand on the carriage door, and who 
was the identical travelling compa- 
nion of the pedlar at Lis-na-sleugh, re- 
plied — 

" We are the Dunore boys, plazc 
your honor, up the mountains, come 
down to welcome home the Marchio- 
ness/' 

" Then if you please, I will consider 
you as the organ of that august body, 
and beg to know the name of so en- 
lightened a representative," replied 
Lord Frederick. 

" Is it what name I have upon me, 
your honor ? I'm called Padreen Gar, 
for want of a better, Sir. Is yourself 



FLORENCE ♦ACARTHY. 137 

the young Lord, plaze your honor, the 
Marquis's brother, Sir ?" 

" I am a young Lord, my friend, and 
a Marquis's brother; but not Lord Fitz- 
adelm, if you mean that.' 3 

" It's what I mane shure enough, 
long life to your Lordship's honor. And 
is the Marchioness in it, Sir, if you 
plaze ?" 

Lord Frederick now gently drew for- 
ward. Lady Dunore, who from fits of 
crying was now convulsed with fits of 
laughter : 

" This, gentlemen," he said, " is your 
liege chieftainess, the Marchioness of 
Dunore, the mother of your absent chief, 
and this fair lady, 3 ' (drawing forward 
in her turn the still intimidated Lady 
Georgina) " is a noble Saxon dame, 
come among you to encourage your 
native manufactures. See, gentlemen, 
she wears an Irish tabinet pellisse ! que 
voulez vousP Here too is the cele- 
brated Mr. Pottenger, the Balthassar, 



138 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Castiglione, or complete courtier, of the 
Dublin Court, alias, the ca-astlc. He 
could make you a bow would astonish 
you, gentlemen, if he had but room. The 
delicate task now remains of speaking 
of myself. I am — I am very sorry for 
it — a young English lord of the pale, 
or, perhaps, more properly speaking, and 
as you must observe, a pale young 
English lord. I would have been Irish, 
gentlemen, if I had been consulted, but, 
e'est un affaire arrange, and there's no 
more to be said on the subject. If you 
have any interest in a name, not purely 
Milesian, mine is Eversham, and I have 
the honour to be in the service of the 
Irish Lord-Lieutenant, who shortly 
means to visit this oppressed barony, to 
redress all your grievances, grant all 
your petitions, banish proctors, suppress 
tithes, to permit every man to distill his 
own poteen, and every woman to drink 
it ; — that is, if she pleases : for liberty, 
gentlemen, liberty is to be the order of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 139 

the day ; so, Erin go brach ! Ireland 
for ever !" 

" Erin go brack T and " Ireland for 
ever ! n now rent the air, with a thou- 
sand " long lives" and " successes" to 
his Lordship's honor, and the Mar- 
chioness of Dunore. For though not 
one word of Lord Frederick's mock ad- 
dress had been understood, even by 
those who could speak English, and 
they were the minority, yet the ex- 
quisite good humour and gaiety of the 
speaker had their due effects upon the 
spirits, alive to every impression of 
kindness and pleasantry. The joyous- 
ness, however, that beamed in every 
wild countenance, and betrayed itself 
in every forcible gesture, was soon dis- 
pelled ; for the sound of a drum and 
fife was heard at a distance, and in a 
few minutes Mr. Crawley, accompanied 
by his sons, (the two elder and himself 
in full uniform), and riding at the head 
of the Dunore yeomanry cavalry, ap- 



140 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



proached the carriages at a gallop, 
scattering on every side the bare-footed 
crowd, which climbed up the mountain's 
acclivities, and left the captain-com- 
mandant and his troop in full possession 
of the field. They still, however, con- 
tinued their route rlong the ridge of 
the hills, parallel to the cavalcade, 
where they rolled along like a mass 
of dark vapour, borne by the evening 
breeze. 

" By Confucius," (exclaimed Lord 
Frederick, as the Crawleys and their 
troop approached), " here is the whole 
armed militia of the celestial empire, 
led on by the chief mandarin of the 
province, issuing forth to meet us on our 
imperial progress, with gongs beating, 
and colours flying. This is too much ! 
cest d mourir de rlre F 

" It is altogether too delightful, too 
odd," said Lady Dunore, in an ecstasy, 
who, a few minutes before, with sobs of 
terror, had pronounced it, "too frightful, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 141 



too barbarous." " Oh, my clear Mr. 
Crawley, how do you do ? This is so 
very kind of you, so veiy attentive !" 
She gave him her hand, which he took 
off his hat to kiss, and turned aside her 
head, not to conceal her laugh, but to 
indulge it. She then recognized Mr. 
Conway Townsend Crawley, begged to 
be presented to his brothers, enquired 
with the utmost appearance of affection 
for Miss Crawley, spoke with vehemence 
of the warm feelings of the kind-hearted 
poor Irish, introduced the Crawleys to 
her travelling companions, and, meeting 
Lord Frederick's eye, who was alter- 
nately gazing on Mr. Crawley and his 
sons through his glass, was again seized 
with a violent fit of laughter, as suddenly 
checked by a speech from Mr. Crawley 
to some of the peasantry, who still 
lingered round the carriages. 

" I suppose, my lads/' he observed, 
by no means pleased with her ladyship's 
commendations of the warm-hearted 



142 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



poor Irish; — " I suppose there is not one 
of yez but knows that your district is 
proclaimed, and that not a man Jack 
among you but is liable to be shot dead 
if he's found out of his cabin at nine 
o'clock." 

" The district proclaimed!" repeated 
Lady Dunore, in a voice of surprise and 
emotion. 

" Shot for being out of their cabins 
at nine o'clock !" re-echoed Lord Fre- 
derick, with a transient gravity. 

" Oh, yes, my lord, one wouldn't 
sleep alive in our beds only for it. Not 
one among them about the carriage 
there," he added, in a low confidential 
tone, " but is a murderer twenty times 
over and over." 

Lady Dunore sunk back in the car- 
riage, and in a voice half inarticulate, 
said, 

" I wish, sweet love, we were safe 
back in England." 

" I wish we were," replied Lady 



FLORENCE MACARTH V. 



143 



Georgina, returning the pressure of her 
friend's hand ; while Lord Frederick, 
who had been the chief cause of the 
two ladies visiting Ireland, and who 
felt himself thus indirectly reproached, 
endeavoured to turn the object of their 
fears into ridicule ; and, pointing to 
Mount Crawley, which now blazed with 
lights on the top of its high dark hill, 
he exclaimed, 

" By all that's luminous, the feast 
of lanterns ! the interior of the celestial 
empire in a blaze V 

H I fancy, Lord Frederick, 'tis an illu- 
minated air-balloon," said Mr. Pottinger. 
" We sent up one from the Castle- 
yard on the occasion of the Jubilee. 
The Lord-Lieutenant walked that night 
about the town, accompanied only by 
one aid-de-camp, and one orderly. I 
had the honour of driving through the 
streets in one of the vice-regal car- 
riages with the dear little vice-regal chil- 
dren." 



144 FLORENCE MACAKTH1. 

" Memorable events, my Potty ! ' ' 
returned Lord Frederick, solemnly. 

" But, Mr. Crawley, pray explain to 
us the device of that very brilliant object 
on the top of yonder hill : is it a tem- 
porary edifice ?" 

" No, my lord, it is nat ; it is pe- 
rennial: for it's my own sate of Mount 
Crawley ; and that part which is lighted 
up with coloured lamps and transpa- 
rencies, in honour of her ladyship's ar- 
rival, is my Grecian veshitule or por- 
tico supported by cantha rides. Its quite 
a gem, a perfect bougie, in respect of 
the architecture, I'm tould." 

A general burst of half-smothered 
laughter followed this speech ; but Mr. 
Crawley, wholly occupied with his own 
description and importance, continued — 

" That painting in the front is done 
by Miss Crawley, and is an aregorical 
device of Lady Dunore, in the cha- 
racter of the horn of plenty, throwing 
down pace and prosperity on her people. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 145 

To the lift is the great Wellington, 
bating the world before him, with a 
retrospective view of Nelson's pillar : 
and on the right the Ragent's plume ; 
and the British lion there, like a little 
dog, trampling down upon Boney-part," 

<c Crawley, Crawley, thou art mine, 
{< Crawley, Crawley, I am thine," 

murmured Lord Frederick, in a voice 
of unrepressed ecstasy. " To live with- 
out thee is impossible! to live with 
thee is death!" and he wiped the 
tears from his eyes ; while Lady Du- 
nore, no longer taking pains to con- 
ceal her risibility, said, in a sobbing 
voice, 

" But, my dear Mr. Crawley, if you 
really live on the top of that mountain, 
how am I ever to visit you ? You might 
as well expect to get my horses up 
Mount St. Gothard, or Sierra Leone." 

" Why, Lady Dunore, though Mount 
Crawley looks mighty high, seen here 

VOL. II. H 



146 FLORENCE MCCARTHY. 

from the bottom, yet when you are close 
up to it, 'tis nothing at all of a hill ; 
besides, my new approach from Du- 
nore Town, if any thing, has an incline 
downwards." 

Lady Dunore, whose hysterical af- 
fection had recently taken a tone of 
risibility, wholly beyond her own con- 
trol, now absolutely screamed with 
laughter ; while the civil Mr. Pottinger, 
full of the respectability of the Crawley 
family, and of the excellence of Mr. 
Crawley's dinners, of which he had 
often partaken, observed, in a low 
voice, 

c: I assure your ladyship, for all his 
lapsus linguae, Mr. Crawley of Merrion 
Square is a most worthy gentleman, 
and a peculiarly loyal man. He is 
asked to the private dinners at the cas- 
tle very frequently, and is a prime fa- 
vourite with the secretary." 

" You don't really pretend, Mr. Pot- 
tinger," said Lady Dunore, half haugh- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 147 

tily, half laughing, " to tell me who, or 
what Mr. Crawley is ? He happens to 
have been the man-of-business-person 
of my son's family these forty years : he 
is an excellent creature, to whom we 
are much indebted; only" (she added 
laughing violently, and speaking with 
difficulty,) "I had half forgotten his 
slip-slop ; and never having seen him 
sur son terrein, I find him too delici- 
ous, and I do not think I shall be able 
to live without him a day." 

"A day!" exclaimed Lord Frede- 
rick — "an hour, a minute. Life I see 
will now be insupportable, parted from 
Ching-Foo-Crawley of the yellow but- 
ton ! He is mine henceforth, par tous 
les dieux!* 

During this short dialogue, young 
Crawley was urging his father to with- 
draw from the side of Lady Dunore's 
carriage, and permit the party to pro- 
ceed at a more rapid rate, while he took 
his place himself, and entered into con- 
n 2 



148 FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 

versation with the marchioness. He 
had seen with the sensitive quickness of 
self-love, always on the watch to sus- 
tain its own consequence, that the blun- 
ders and vulgarity of his father, while 
they were admirably adapted to amuse 
the idleness, and feed the love of the 
ludicrous, incidental to the class with 
which he was now associated, were 
likewise throwing, by reflection, a shade 
of ridicule upon the whole family ; and 
having succeeded in removing him, he 
endeavoured to efface the impression of 
old Crawley's folly by his own intellec- 
tual superiority, and his knowledge of 
persons, whose acquaintance in London 
were calculated to increase his own con- 
sequence. He inquired for ministers, 
and men high in office, whom he had 
met at Dunore House, asking for them 
by their names, and omitting their 
titles. He told Mr. Pottinger, that he 
had been made devilish ill by their 
fritnd the Irish secretary's bad claret, 



FLORENCE M ACARTHY* 14<J 

quoted some lines to the rising moon, 
compared the present state of the south- 
ern counties to a slumbering volcano, 
and then turned the conversation to 
the Glannacrime election, to speak of 
the three hundred freeholders of his 
father and his uncle the commissioner, 
(who had lately purchased an estate in 
the county,) all registered in time fop 
the benefit of Lord Adelna, whose ab- 
sence as yet had produced no ill effect. 

" There was no doubt," he added, 
" that his own, and his father's strenu- 
ous exertions, and the influence which 
his family's personal and estated in- 
terest, carried, would ensure success. 
The hour of attack was approaching, 
and he was impatient for its arrival, for 
it would not fail to be the hour of tri- 
umph." 

All this succeeded with Lady Dunore: 
it did not wholly fail with her friend 
Lady Georgina: it produced a whis- 
pered remark from Mr. Pottinger, that 
H 3 



150 FLORENCE M A C A RT M Y * 

young Crawley was a most talented 
fellow, and a particular friend of the 
secretary. 

On the mind of Lord Frederick it 
impressed the conviction that he was 
vulgar and presuming ; for vulgarity 
and presumption were qualities readily 
discernible by the man of fashion and 
high birth, even though pedantry and 
affectation might escape him. 

The splendid cavalcade at last ar- 
rived before the turretted gates of the 
castle of Dunore ; and as the carriages 
rolled over the pavement of the gloomy 
court, and the tenants of the old rookery 
in the rear of the castle screamed their 
disapprobation of the unusual intrusion, 
Lady Dunore's susceptible spirits again 
sunk from their high-wound pitch. 

u God send »s safe out of this wild 
country," said her ladyship, with a deep 
sigh. 

" Amen," said young Crawley most 
emphatically. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 151 

"Amen," repeated Lord Frederick, 

most theatrically ; adding, 

u The raven himself is hoarse, 
That croaks the fatal entrance of Duncan 
Under my battlements." 

" Good heavens," exclaimed Lady 
Dunore, ?' how can you, Lord Fre- 
derick! you too, who were in part the 
cause of bringing me here, with your 
ridiculous accounts of the " celestial em- 
pire," and your c chop mandarins,' that 
made me die with laughter in London, 
but are a monstrous dull set out, here P 

The carriages stopped before the 
last gate; and the lights flashed full 
upon " God's providence is my inherit- 
ance" Lord Frederick read aloud the 
inscription with solemn emphasis: the 
ladies alighted, and Miss Crawley ap- 
peared in the centre of the dark oak 
hall, to welcorne them to the castle, 
and to avail herself at once of the im- 
munity which had elevated her to the 
unviable station of Dame du Palais. 
H 4 



152 FLORENCE MACARTMY. 

Lady Dunore, who had seen her 
twice in London, and had received an 
hundred pretty notes and paper presents 
from her, was, notwithstanding this 
basis of intimacy, on the point of ad- 
dressing her as the housekeeper, when 
Conway Crawley, anticipating, perhaps, 
the probable mistake, stepped up to 
obviate it, by presenting his aunt in 
form, as one " equally willing and ca- 
pable of being useful to her ladyship, 
in a place where all must be to her 
new and strange." The sliding, smil- 
ing, devoted, and reverential manner of 
Miss Crawley, all homage, zeal, and 
humility, decided at once a strong pre- 
possession in her favour; and Lady 
Dunore, familiarly taking her arm, as 
the party proceeded to the saloon, left 
the rest to follow as they might, ob- 
served, 

"My dear Miss Crawley, I must 
throw myself entirely on your kindness. 
I am afraid I shall be monstrous unpo~ 



FLORENCE MAC A "THY. 153 

pular here : I do not at all know what 
is to be done with your Irish folk : you 
understand I am expiring to be popular 
and get Fitzadelm his election; I sup- 
pose there is nothing, absolutely no- 
thing, in this old castle. Poor Dunore, I 
believe, only sent over a table service for 
a petit couvert, and the batterie de cui- 
sine ; but you can borrow plate any where, 
can t you, my dear Miss Crawley, for 
our election dinners 9 And then we must 
have cups and saucers, and cut glass 
and things for the country ladies. Some- 
body told me they are very particular in 
Ireland about those sort of machines. 
I am the plainest person in the world 
myself. I don't care in the least if I 
eat off yellow delf : I can put up with 
any thing, only let me have plenty of 
lamps and loungers. But, oh! the 
miseiy of these chairs, where one must 
sit bolt upright! This is all poor Dun- 
ore's doing, when he would have every 
thing Gothic. George , love, we shall 
h 5 



154 FLORENCE MACAKTHY. 

get the lumbago. By the bye, my dear 
Miss Crawley, have you any doctors, 
or things of that kind here? I take it 
for granted you know that we must 
put up with every sort of misery and 
inconvenience; but I am myself equal 
to any thing. Heavens! here's an old 
French parquet, and no carpet. Good 
God! is it possible to image such a thing 
in the nineteenth century! My dear 
Miss Crawley, do make me out some- 
thing to put under my feet. I don't 
care the very least in the world what it 
is ; a bit of Turkey carpet, or a Merino 
wool rug, or a bear skin, or any thing 
that is soft and warm you know : Heneage, 
will you just inquire for a couvre-pied, 
that is lying loose somewhere in the 
carriage; or one of my doe-skin travel- 
ling blankets: any thing, no matter what. 
You know I don't care in the least, 
provided I have something under my 
feet" 

Mr. Heneage arose to obey, but the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 165 

announce of dinner, ordered by Lady 
Dunore to be ready at nine o'clock, 
obliged the party to retire, and make 
some change in their dress, before they 
sat down to table : meantime the Craw- 
leys took their leave, though pressed to 
stay by Lady Dunore ; but they pleaded 
in excuse the disturbed state of the 
country, and the danger of being out 
after nine: Lady Dunore only replied, 
with a deep sigh ; and when Miss Craw- 
ley's carriage was announced, she ob- 
served, 

"Well, I hope you will muster as 
strong about me as possible, and re- 
member you all dine here to-morrow : 
and Miss Crawley, you will come over 
early in the morning. You know I am 
altogether in terra incognita/' 

Miss Crawley readily complied with 
this summons; hinting, however, that 
she was just then occupied with a 
family party, who would remain a day 
or two at Mount Crawley, and thus 



1§6 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

getting her two younger brothers 
families included in the dinner invita- 
tion already given. 

The cognizance and device assigned 
to Lady Dunore, by the fanciful gal- 
lantry of Lord Frederick, was a branch 
of the orange tree in fruit and flower, 
with the motto Le fruit ne fait pas 
tomber la Jieure ; and her fine person, 
even at forty-five, was an illustration of 
the emblem. Time indeed had faded 
some tints, and effaced some lineaments 
of loveliness, which no care, no art, 
could rescue from his touch ; yet still 
she had preserved her claims to person- 
al admiration, which were not suffered 
to lie idle for want of being asserted. — 
But if Lady Dunore s personal charms 
had slightly suffered from the effects 
of years, her character had submit- 
ted so little to their influence, that she 
preserved to senility all the incoherence 
and unregulated feeling which had dis- 
tinguished her youth; and was still as 



FLORENCE MACARTMY. 157 

fresh in folly and inexperience, as 
when at the age of eighteen she had 
eloped from a window by a ladder of 
ropes, though the hall door was free of 
egress, to marry the Honourable Gerald 
Fitzadelm, the insolvent and younger 
brother of a ruined Irish peer. The 
beautiful person and insinuating man- 
ners of Mr. Fitzadelm might have had 
their due influence; but the circum- 
stance which had decided the sole 
heiress of eighteen thousand a-year to 
elope with one, alike lost to character 
and fortune, was, that her father, the 
old eccentric Earl of L. had declared 
he would rather give his only daughter 
to an English highwayman than to an 
Irish peer. Two days after, Lady 
Emily de Vere was on her way to Scot- 
land, with the last Irishman, or rather 
the last man, that aprudent father would 
wish to become the husband of his 
daughter. 

Brought up in boundless indul- 



158 FLORENCE MAC ARTHY. 

gence, free as the winds, which she 
resembled in violence and instability, 
compliance had become to her satiety, 
and opposition enjoyment. The besoin 
de sentir was her disease; and excite- 
ment, whether a pleasure or pain, was 
necessary to her existence. Habit and 
time increased the demand for a varia- 
ble series of sensations; and her wanton 
opposition to her father's will was the 
brief abstract of her subsequent life. 

The Earl of L. had married an 
Irish lady of singular beauty and attrac- 
tion. His violence bordering on in- 
sanity, his eccentricity and humour 
drove her to despondency, and then to 
error. She was frail, divorced, remar- 
ried to the object of her imprudent 
passion, an Irishman, and intailed for 
ever after the hatred of her first hus- 
band upon a country he had never vi- 
sited. The prejudices of Lord L. 
were passions; his passions had the 
durability of principles. He vowed 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. \59 



never to see his daughter, and he died 
with his vow unbroken, leaving a sin- 
gular will of a few lines, in which he 
bequeathed to her his whole fortune, 
with the proviso that she should neither 
touch principal nor interest during her 
husband* s life. At her death it was to go 
to her second child; and from him, if 
he died without issue, to a remote con- 
nexion. 

Love had no share in the union of 
Lord Fitzadelm with the self-willed 
heiress of the house of L. and cu- 
pidity, thus disappointed, retaliated its 
mortification on its imprudent victim. 
Lady Emily, in all the humiliating pri- 
vations of indigent rank, and all the vi- 
cissitudes of a gamesters fortunes, led 
a life more consonant to her unregu- 
lated character than favourable to her 
happiness. The remote chance of a 
succession to the Dunore property and 
title enabled Lord Fitzadelm to raise 
money from credulous usury; and with 



l60 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

such sums, the emoluments of a sinecure 
place under government, and occasi- 
onal successes at the gaming-table, they 
were enabled to support an existence, 
which frequently touched upon the 
extremes of fortune, sometimes en- 
dured in a prism, sometimes enjoyed in 
a palace, until a bankrupt credit in 
England drove them, after a struggle of 
fifteen years, into an economical retreat 
in Italy. The ravages of an hereditary 
disease in the elder branch of the house 
of Fitzadelm, gradually brought her 
husband nearer to the goal of his long- 
cherished hopes. The succession was 
the die upon which Lord Fitzadelm had 
staked his fraternal feelings, his honour, 
and almost his life ; and when he was 
upon the point of obtaining the object of 
sacrifices, never to be remunerated by 
any worldly good, death snatched him 
from its enjoyment. The old Marquis 
of Dunore, his remote kinsman, having 
followed his son and his grandsons to 



FLORENCE M ACARTHY. l6l 

the grave, survived his ambitious heir, 
Baron Gerald Fitzadelm, by some years. 
By her husband's death, Lady Emily 
was at last relieved from a precarious 
existence, and restored to that immense 
fortune, of which the continuance of his 
life had so long deprived her. 

At the head of this princely property, 
and mother to the heir presumptive of 
the Marquis of Dunore, she beheld her- 
self possessed of the disposal of three 
voices in the senate, at a moment when 
even the echo of a voice had its price, 
when the British House of Commons was 
considered by the ministry as a market 
where the barter of independence was 
openly to be carried on. To this actual 
interest, Lady Emily added the chance 
of an influence over the political opinions 
of her son and his boroughs; and she 
became at once an object of anxious so- 
licitude to ministerial intrigue and politi- 
cal cupidity. One member of the ca- 
binet proposed marrying her on the 



162 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

death of his wife, whose life was limited 
to a fixed day by her physicians; ano- 
ther solicited her for his brother, and a 
third had a daughter fo' her eldest son, 
and a niece for her youngest, in whom 
her boroughs would vest at her death. 
Thus suddenly raised to the summit of 
political consideration, she found no dif- 
ficulty, on her son s succession to the 
marquisate, in obtaining for herself and 
younger child the rank of a marquis's 
wife and son. Thus equally high in 
the gay and diplomatic circles, she be- 
came queen at arms in the world of 
fashion, presided despotically over its 
heraldry, bestowed or rejected claims 
to notoriety at pleasure, and was at the 
head of that *small exclusive class of 
women, who, in London, hold in their 
own hands the keys of tne paradise of 
vogue, and give or withdraw the patent 
of bon-ton, as whim, taste, passion, or 
prejudice decide. 

Power and influence, while they in- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l6*3 

creased all the virulent and domineering 
qualities of her natural character, were 
not calculated to satisfy that craving for 
excitement which the vicissitudes of her 
former life had contributed to beget. 
In the midst of boundless prosperity she 
became therefore a hunter after afflic- 
tions, and was a woe-fancier, as she had 
been a borough and a china fancier, 
from mere caprice. She had passed her 
days in a sort of intermittent fever ; and 
when intervals of rational conduct did 
occur, they were butpauses of exhaustion 
between the paroxysms of her disease. 
Her language and her character became 
alike volcanic : all was eruption and ex- 
plosion, or darkness and silence ; she 
felt and acted par accesi her laugh was 
a convulsion, her tears hysterics; and 
her property and her affairs, partaking 
of the disorder of her character, set re- 
gularity so far at defiance, that her 
stewards and agents, like harlequin in 
the comedy, had usually their orders in 



l6'4 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

one pocket, and their counter-orders in 
the other. 

While the ministers succeeded to 
their fullest desire with the mother, 
who gave them up her votes, and talked 
more nonsense in their favour out of 
the house than their most approved and 
long-winded disciples could deliver with- 
in its walls, the sons (who were assailed, 
even before they were of age, by all the 
undermining arts which power exerts to 
seduce where it cannot convince, and to 
attain by numbers what it wants in 
efficiency) were found wholly untract- 
able. Self-willed and perverse as their 
mother, their obliquity had taken ano- 
ther direction : they laughed at her po- 
litics, and held those from whom she re- 
ceived them in utter contempt. It was 
curious also to observe the family tem- 
perament breaking out in a third gene- 
ration ; and what had been violence, 
bordering on insanity, in the grandfa- 
ther, exaggeration of feeling, even to 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 65 



childishness in the mother, terminating 
in absolute madness in the elder son, 
and betraying itself in the younger in a 
brilliancy but eccentricity of genius that 
was tinctured by all the wildness, od- 
dity, and irregularity of the family in- 
fliction. The young Lord Dunore had 
not long enjoyed his new honours, when 
it was found necessary to put him under 
strict confinement ; and his mother had 
the interest to get herself appointed his 
representative and sole guardian. 

Lord Adelm Fitzadelm, the object of 
all her solicitude, and of whatever she 
possessed of maternal affection, still 
held his supremacy by his opposition to 
her will. Dependent during his life 
upon her bounty, he turned even his de- 
pendence into a tyranny. His extrava- 
gant demands upon her purse gave occa- 
sion for that resistance and complaint 
which now formed the principal good 
of her too prosperous existence. His 
opposition to all her political ambition 



]66 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

in his favour, hi* refusing a seat in 
the house, and an office at court, were 
sources of eternal reproach, increasing 
her artificial stock of 

" Uuheedful passions, and unfruitful woes;*' 

and while his frequent absences from 
England, his eccentricities, and his 
extravagance, afforded her a constant 
supply of delightful misery, he became 
necessary to her existence in proportion 
as he tormented it: and had he been 
more amenable to her will, he would 
have been less dear to her affections. 

Lord Adelm Fitzadelm, who went 
wrong by system, and right by impulse, 
wanted only the spur of necessity to 
have become super-eminent in what- 
ever direction hi6 talent might have 
taken. But fortune had spoiled all 
that would have been a counter-balance 
to a morbid temperament. Without 
occupation, contemning the strenuous 
idleness of official inefficiency, as he 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. l6*7 

despised the political system which 
bt ght have devoted him to it, he gav^e 
himself up without reluctance to his 
natural disposition. Indolent and medi- 
tative, at once subtle and fanciful, he 
possessed the acuteness and querulous- 
ness of melancholy, without its causes. 
The victim of a metaphysical hypo- 
chondriasis, he indulged in every species 
of eccentricity, and was gratified by 
the singular reputation it acquired for 
him, where dulness and apathy, me* 
diocrity and moderation, formed the 
prevailing characteristics of his less 
gifted cotemporaries. Vain and capri- 
cious, but high-spirited and liberal, the 
shadows of his faults, like those of 
evening, fell with a breadth dispropor- 
tionate to the objects which projected 
them, and were spread far and wide 
before the world's gaze ; while his 
merits, like the rays of light collected 
on a focus, were circumscribed within 
the narrow circle of intimacy, where 



168 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

they burned brightly in proportion to 
their concentration. He had made the 
world the confidant of his errors, and 
was almost jealous of the friend who 
acknowledged that he had discovered 
his virtues. 

Lord Adelm was in Portugal in the 
pursuit of some object of dominant 
caprice, when a communication was 
made to the Marchioness of Dunore 
through Mr. Crawley, from the loyal 
corporation of Glannacrime, of their 
wish that she should set up her young- 
est son for that borough, on the demise 
of their last member, and in opposition 
to the family of O'Mahonney, notorious 
whigs, and supported by the independ- 
ent interest Lady Dunore, by the 
advice of her ministerial friends, ac- 
ceded to this request, and while her 
unconscious son was wooing the muse 
of Camoens, in the shades of Coimbra, 
she determined to have him placed m no- 
mination for the vacant borough. Thus 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. I69 

would he have been kidnapped into the 
representation of this borough (for his 
mother preserved a profound silence 
on the subject, and kept it out of the 
English papers), but for a letter he re- 
ceived, containing a few lines, without 
name or date, but with an English post- 
mark, which informed him of the whole 
intrigue. This letter had nothing sin- 
gular about it but the motto of the seal, 
which was Portuguese, and was " Sou 
utile aindaque briccando."* 

The friends or acquaintances of the 
Marchioness of Dunore were composed 
of such persons as are usually found 
following the great to their temporary 
retreats, from what is designated the 
ivorld; and were picked up by accident, 
chosen by caprice, or tolerated from 
necessity. Her dear friend and quondam 
rival (selon les regies), Lady Georgina 
Vivian, was a person of high rank and 
moderate fortune, one of the supreme 

* I am useful even when sportive. 
VOL. II. J 



170 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

exclusives of the supreme bon-ton. 
With a character vibrating between 
sentiment and libertinism, refined in her 
manners, free in her conduct, she had 
already replaced the bloom of youth by 
the complaisance of experience, and se- 
cured an ascendency over the amour-pro- 
pre of her male friends, which brighter 
charms in vain disputed. Acting with 
desperation against the world's rules, 
she obtained by her address its suffrages 
and sanction ; and with an air 

4< silent and soft as saints removed to heaven,'* 

she had the courage to venture be- 
yond those barriers of discretion, which 
others of freer deportment trembled to 
approach. 

The character and appearance of 
Lady Georgina formed opposite ex- 
tremes. Her conversation was a mur- 
mur, her look simplicity, her manner 
naivete. She coquetted through a se- 
ries of attitudes w ith her lovely children, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 7 1 

and talked of poor dear Vivian, whom 
she had left at home in the gout, with a 
tone so tender, that it was difficult to de- 
cide how so fond a mother and so 
devoted a wife could live without the 
objects of her affection. A letter re- 
ceived by her ladyship from Lord Fre- 
derick Eversham, who, on his recent 
return to England, had been appointed 
first aid-de-camp to the Irish Lord* 
Lieutenant, had been shewn by her to 
Lady Dunore. This letter contained 
a most overcharged and ludicrous de- 
scription of the country, from which 
Lord Frederick derived a salary, very 
acceptable to the younger brother of 
one of the poorest dukes in Great Bri- 
tain. But most of all, his descriptive 
ridicule rested upon the little court of 
which he formed a part, and on the 
government, out of whose arrangements 
his sinecure originated. He had vi- 
sited many courts ; was familiar with 
princes, and known to monarchs ; he 
I 2 



1J2 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

had fought in the field with emperors, 
and done the honours for sovereigns : a 
court without a government, a represen- 
tative of majesty without power, patron- 
age, or influence, seemed therefore to him 
an incongruous combination ; while the 
solemn trifling formalities, in which he 
was himself officially involved, afforded 
him endless amusement. The whole re- 
called to him something he had heard 
or read of the format puerilities which 
distinguish the government and court 
of China ; and from the moment he 
discovered the similitude, Ireland was 
to him the celestial empire, the castle 
of Dublin, * Tien Sing, or the Hea- 
venly Spot ; and secretaries, chiefs, 
and subs, aides-de-camp, and officers 
of the household, were chop-mandarins 
of every coloured button in the prismatic 
scale. 

* The castle is the residence of the Lord-Lieu- 
tenant. From this " heavenly spot," all that is 
good and great is supposed to emanate. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 173 

The letter of Lord Frederick, which 
promised amusement, the epistles of 
the Crawleys, which threatened dan- 
gers, a dead season, hatred of watering 
places, an offer from Lady Emily to 
accompany her friend, a promise from 
Lord Frederick to compose a party } Jaite 
d ravir for Dunore Castle, combined 
to fix the wavering intentions of Lady 
Dunore. She had a few weeks before 
given up all idea of attending the elec- 
tion ; and her new orders, issued with 
the promptitude of lightning, and exe- 
cuted with equal celerity, enabled her 
to reach Dublin before she could find 
leisure to inform Mr. Crawley that she 
had changed her mind, and meant to 
visit Ireland. 

The party promised by Lord Fre- 
derick to dissipate the ennui of Lady 
Dunore, consisted of Mr. Heneage, a 
young Englishman of fashion, and bro- 
ther aid-de-camp, and a Mister Pot- 
Jtinger, whom Lord Frederick had de- 
I 3 



1/4 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

scribed in his letter as " the Baldassar 
Castiglione, the Cortegiano of the Irish 
court, the very representative of its in- 
significance, formality, and obsequi- 
ousness to all the powers that be." To 
call forth the results of these qualities 
had indeed been the principal amuse- 
ment of Lord Frederick's life, since his 
arrival in Ireland ; while Mr. Pottinger, 
proud of being distinguished by any 
great man, looked up to the brother of 
a duke with a deference, which no con- 
sciousness of Lord Frederick's ridicule 
ever disturbed. 

During nine months of the year there 
is nothing to do at the Irish court ; and 
the office of viceroy, which costs the 
country near sixty thousand pounds per 
annum, would be a mere sinecure, but 
for the necessity of giving half a dozen 
dinners, and half a dozen balls during 
the short season of the Dublin winter. 
Mr. Pottinger and the aid-de-camps 
were therefore readily spared from the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 7^ 

park; and, invited by Lady Dunore, 
through Lord Frederick, they were 
charmed to accompany her ladyship 
to the south of Ireland. 

Mr. Heneage was of the rising order 
of dull dandies : he had just sufficient 
volition to choose his calling, and suf- 
ficient energy to iron the cravat that 
indicated it: he spoke little, because he 
had nothing to say, and would have 
spoken less, had it been possible in the 
necessary intercourse of life to use fewer 
words; for he believed, that to be truly 
fine, one should not speak at, all. His 
dandy aphorism was, that every lady 
should be her own link-boy; and his 
dandy system was to suffer her to be- 
so. In Dublin he looked down upon 
the dawning dandyism of the aspiring 
natives; and in Dublin, as in Lon- 
don, he. looked up to Lord Frede- 
rick Eversham, as the arbiter elegan- 
tiarum of that svstem, of which his own 
particular sect was but a subaltern 
I 4 



176 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

branch, suited to inferior spirits, and 
accommodated to their subordinate ra- 
pacities. Lord Frederick, though a 
•young man, was a dowager dandy, and 
among the original founders of that now 
degenerate and declining order. Great 
tact, savoir vivre and humour had dis- 
tinguished his early probation; when 
to be a dandy it was requisite to be 
something more than a coxcomb. Two 
years residence at Paris (where, as a 
prisoner of war on patrole, he had been 
the delices of every fashionable circle) 
had confirmed him a merveilleux ; and 
he now so pleasantly mingled the fop- 
peries of his home vocation and foreign 
calling, that it was difficult to say, 
whether St. James's Street, or the 
Chaussee d antin, had the fairest claim 
to his peculiarities: he had fought 
against France with a spirit and des- 
peration that would have raised tro- 
phies to his fame, had he been a mili- 
tary chief, instead of a subaltern; but he 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

loved her gaiety, her graces, and her 
language, with a passion that bordered 
upon prejudice. He had just returned 
from his delightful imprisonment, ex- 
claiming with Petrarch, " I am free — 
but I am wretched ;" and was too much 
embued with the spirit and grace of 
French foppery, not to contrast it with 
the dulness, silence, reserve, and cox- 
£omical pedantry of the new sect of 
dandies, that had sprung up in his 
absence: for the rest, Lord Frederick 
was one 

J< Whom folly pleases, and whose follies 
please," 

who almost dignified vanity, and ren* 
dered affectation supportable by the 
good sense and good feeling, which, in 
spite of his efforts to conceal both, 
formed the basis of his character. In 
gallantry, w aimer en courant" was 
his device; and it was literally en 
courant from Dover to Dublin, (where 
J 5 



1/8 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

his new appointment awaited him,) that 
he dropped into the opera, saw Lady 
Emily Vivian in Lady Dunore's box, 
found or fancied in her what he called 
" the delicious laissez alter ease of a 
charming French woman and after a 
few days devoted aux petit soins, left 
London in love and in despair : in Dub- 
lin he viewed every thing in a distorted 
point of view, and wrote that pleasant 
and ludicrous letter to Lady Emily ^ 
complaining of his exile to the celes- 
tial empire, and describing the cere- 
monies of the yellow skreen, and castle 
Ko-tou, which had finally effected the 
existing arrangements at the castle of 
Dunore. 

Lord Rosbrin, who did not arrive 
with this party, "Jaite d ravir" but 
who was to join it from his seat in the 
neighbourhood, was a foolish-looking 
young man, whose vacant countenance 
seemed to beg Macbeth' s question of 
u Where got'st thou that goose look?" 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 1 79 

He was born and educated in England: 

o 

iiis vast property lay in the south of 
Ireland ; and his first visit to that coun- 
try was for the purpose of enlisting him- 
self into the service of the Kilkenny 
theatricals, where his rank not obtaining 
for him a high cast of parts, he was 
contented to exhibit himself as one of 
Macheath's gang, and to appear in 
the character of mutes, senators, ge- 
nerals, and " others'' 

The intellectual capabilities of Lord 
Rosbrin went further towards overturn- 
ing the doctrine of innate ideas than 
all Locke has written on the subject; 
without, however, affording much tes- 
timony in favour of ideas acquired. — 
His mind was a tablet, upon which 
memory, the genius of fools, had made 
some traces ; and upon this stock of tag- 
rag recollections, collected from play- 
books, he had traded through life, with- 
out any one calling into question his 
property in the possession. Vain, in 



180 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



proportion as he was weak, his drama- 
tic vocation had arisen from the applause 
bestowed upon his recitations, when a 

child, a noble infant Roscius, and the 
i 

blue and silver draperies in which he 
had played Ariel at a private theatre, 
decided his calling for life : from that 
moment, to him " all the world was a 

stage, 

u And all the men and women merely players." 

His mind was stored with theatrical 
associations, stage properties, and stage 
anecdotes; scraps of Shakespeare, and 
silver spangles, with prologues, epi- 
logues, tags, and clap-traps, daggers, 
cups, and processions, 

14 Peers, heralds, bishops, ermine, gold and 
lawn," 

leaving him little better than a walking 
prompters book. While Lord Rosbrin 
only ambitioned the first cast of parts 
in the theatre he was building at Kil- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 181 

rosbrin, he lookeci down upon all 
senates, but that in Othello; and pre- 
fering the potent, grave, and reverend 
signors of Venice, to the potent, grave, 
and reverend signors of St Stephen's : 
he threw his Irish boroughs into the 
hands of a political stock-jobber, who 
dabbled so successfully for him in the 
funds of ministerial influence, that from 
a mere Irish baronet, he in a few years 
became baron, viscount, and Earl of 
Rosbrin of Kilrosbrin in Ireland, and 
Mount Wareham in England. 

To meet this party, Lady Dunore 
had sent from Dublin a most pressing 
invitation to her maternal uncle, the 
Right Honorable Hyacinth Daly, of 
Daly's Court, in the province of Con- 
naught ; who obeyed the summons 
with such alacrity, that he was seated 
at his niece's toilette the day after her 
arrival at the castle. He loved her for 
her mother's sake, whose frailty and 
■misfortunes had substituted pity for the 



182 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



resentment which had risked his life in 
a duel with her betrayer. Mr. Daly, 
now in his JOth year, of an ancient 
Irish family, which, for two centuries, 
had represented their native county, a 
privy-councillor of forty years standing, 
and one of the small minority which 
went out on the occasion of the Union, 
was in person, character, and manners, 
a genuine epitome of the ancient Irish 
gentleman. lie preserved, even at his 
advanced age, that species of chivalrous 
gallantry in his manners, which not 
long since distinguished the gentry of 
the country, and which sent them forth 
to foreign courts, the most accomplished 
cavaliers of their day, or as a monarch, 
who was himself a fine gentleman, 
named them, " the Jin est gentlemen in 
Europe'' Time, which had shed its 
snows on the venerable head of Hya- 
cinth Daly, had not ' thinned his flow- 
ing hair,' which he still wore dressed 
with infinite care, and precisely as he 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



18* 



had worn it forty-four years before, 
when he first took his place in the Irish 
House of Commons. This luxuriant 
coiffure raised itself above a forehead 
unfurrowed and fair as the brow of 
youth, and strongly contrasted with eyes 
and eyebrows, dark, and unchanged in 
hue or lustre. The beautiful person of 
Mr. Daly, and it was genuine Irish 
beauty, had, like his spirits, retained 
much of its freshness and vigour ; and 
nothing seemed changed by time, but 
those hopes, with which he had entered 
life, and which had the independence 
of his country for their object. 

Mr. Daly had distinguished himself 
in t the House of Commons, in the me- 
morable year 1782, when Ireland for a 
moment was a nation, and had kept his 
noble mansion in Dublin until the 
Union : then, having followed the 
liberties of his country from their cradle 
to their tomb, he retired for ever from 
the scene of their ruin; spent his winter 



184 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

in London, and his summer at Daly** 
Court, and never saw the capital, but to 
pass through it for the purpose of cross- 
ing the Channel. His mansion in 
Dublin, now a barrack, had been open 
to all the rank, talent, and worth of the 
land. There all that has been flatter- 
ingly said of the genius, spirit, and gaiety 
of the Irish character, was realized in 
its circles : there he had lived with the 
Charlemonts, the Burghs, the Grattans, 
the Currans, the Floods : there many 
a beauty, who had afterwards added 
splendor to the galaxy of British loveli- 
ness, had imped her wing for conquest; 
the Gunning, Munroe, or Birmingham, 
of her day. — With such recollection, 
brightening as they passed through his 
memory, Mr. Daly was little fitted to 
sit down in the fallen capital of his 
country, under the overshadowing su- 
premacy of cold formal boy politicians, 
who bring nothing into the land for all 
they take out of it; and of official clerks, 



FLORENCE M AC A R THY- 



185 



wlio, like ill-thriven weeds, impoverish 
the soil, out of whose waste they have 
sprung. Mr. Daly's arguments in 
favour of absenteeship were many and 
ingenious ; and it is melancholy to add, 
that they were not only founded in 
truth, but in genuine and indignant 
patriotism. 



18ft FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 



CHAPTER IV. 

La noblesse, de soi, est bonne ; e'est tine 
chose considerable assurement : mais elle est ac- 
compagnee dc taut de mauvaises circonstances, 

qu'il est tres bon de ne pas s'y f rotter . 

George Dakdin. 



The time, thoughts, and feelings of 
Lady Dunore, on the day after her ar- 
rival, were wholly engrossed by the 
three leading members of the Crawley 
family, whom she had received in her 
dressing-room after breakfast. 

The elder Crawley overwhelmed her 
with manorial business, plunged her in 
all the endless details of rents and roads, 
leases and fines ; bills, parchments, and 
accounts ; till her eyes were dazzled 
with figures, and her head ran round 
with fatigue. The business, upon 
which she had at first entered with 
eagerness, as being new, and out of hor 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 187 

way, became intolerably wearisome, and 
insupportably disgusting in its progress. 
Throwing from her therefore a pile of 
papers, with which Mr. Crawley had 
heaped her table, she exclaimed in a 
tone of exhaustion, 

" There, Mr. Crawley, I can hold out 
no longer ; pray remove these horrors 
from my sight, if you wish me to live. 
You are the best judge of what is for 
my son's interest. You have always 
been active in our service. Only we 
want money to carry on the war, ob- 
serve ; for you Irish are always dread* 
fully in arrears, at least so our English 
agent tells me ; and in fact, Mr. Crawley, 
we must get our rents better paid. 
For the rest, if you wish me to remain 
among you another week, never over- 
whelm me again in this way. I w r ould 
rather, she added, gradually working 
herself into a fever of annoyance, " I 
would rather be mistress of an Irish 
cabin, and live upon your Irish potatoes 



188 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

and butter-milk, than submit to this, 
Mr. Crawley ; and if this is the tax 
upon Irish property, give me back the 
'far niente' of my Italian indigence, 
where, when one enjoyed the climate, one 
enjoyed every thing ; and when time, 
patience, temper, pleasure, and health, 
were not sacrificed for leave to live in a 
melancholy old castle, on a savage sea- 
coast, at the head of a beggarly town, 
amidst clouds and storms, and among 
people, who, as Mr. Conway says, even 
when quiet, may be compared to a 
slumbering volcano." 

Old Crawley, with a mingled look of 
obsequiousness and humour, thus at- 
taining his point, swept up all his papers 
and parchments into his green bag, and 
was succeeded by the law agent for the 
election, who, in his turn, poured forth a 
tirade of invectives against the whiggish 
O'Malionneys, whom he represented as 
sturdy opponents of the present order of 
things, and as inflaming the minds of the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 18$ 

people for their own private ends. He 
spoke of strengthening the hands of her 
ladyship's ministerial friends, talked jo- 
eosely of " ive the corruptionistsj' pa- 
raded, with great pomp of words, his 
electioneering schemes, detailed his won- 
derful successes, and went through a 
general account of the large sums which 
had already been lavished in the prose- 
cution of the cause. 

To this specimen of his business ta- 
lents, he contrived to mingle some 
smart jokes, and good points, drew 
forth his u little equipage of wit," 
dealed largely in quotations, poetical 
and French scraps, and rounded off his 
peroration with a well-timed, well- 
placed, and well-received flattery, of- 
fered to the rank, political importance, 
and even personal attraction, of his no- 
ble patroness. 

"Well," interrupted Lady Dunore, 
yawning, as he attempted to return to 
some detail of the freeholders lately 



190 FLORENCE MAC A R Til V . 

registered ; " well, for the present that 
will do, Mr. Conway, but spare me the 
refrain of the eternal election. You 
have managed so well that I think we 
may promise ourselves a dull kind of 
success enough. It would set one wild 
if Fitzadelm should come over and spoil 
all though, and refuse the borough, after 
so much money has been spent upon it." 
And she added, with a look that indi- 
cated it would not be an unpleasant 
thing if he did, " but there is no chance 
of that, and so things will go on sleepily 
enough ; and I don*t think I need 
go to catch one of your Irish typhuses, 
that you describe so frightfully, by per- 
sonally canvassing your greasy corpo- 
ration people of Glannaerime. So I 
leave it all to you, Mr. Conway, only 
just don't let us say any more upon the 
subject now. But, oh dear, Miss Craw- 
ley, what pretty thing are you making 
out of that scrap of coulenr-de-rose 
note paper ? Couleur-de-rose is such 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

a relief to the eye after yellow parch- 
ments." 

" It is an invisible fly-trap, Madam, 
to catch the little epicures who come 
to feast upon hands, which, as Cleo- 
patra says, • kings have lipped," replied 
Miss Crawley with an insinuating smile. 

Miss Crawley, with scissars and 
cut-paper, now succeeded in her turn 
to her brother and nephew : but pink 
paper, like yellow parchments, and fly- 
traps, as well as elections, were soon des- 
tined rapidly to wear out the attention 
of Lady Dunore ; and Miss Crawley 
had recourse to the castle, of which she 
voted herself the Cicerone, to revive 
her flagging interest, and to engross 
her ladyship to herself for the rest of 
the day. In the course of two hours 
they had mounted to the highest turret, 
descended into the deepest dungeon, 
penetrated the darkest closet, stood 
exposed upon the rudest battlement, 
talked of ghosts and rebels, balls and 



192 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

insurrections, marked out alterations 
arid improvements, ramparts to be 
thrown down, and verandas to be 
raised, swans to be procured, and ponds 
to be cut for them, the sea to be banked 
out, and rivers to be turned in, families 
to be excluded, and families to be ad- 
mitted; with some discussions upon 
evangelical schools, some quotations 
from evangelical tracts, and many, 
very many, soft, insinuating, penetrating 
compliments from the diplomatic Miss 
Crawley on the reform, which the 
power, influence, rank, talents, and vir- 
tues, of Lady Dunore might effect in 
a dark, unfortunate, and bewildered 
people. 

Reform, with Lady Dunore, meant 
change; change was always delightful; 
and for the present so was Miss Craw- 
ley, who indicated its possibility, and 
who had already awakened so strong a 
prepossession in her intended neophyte, 
that Lady Dunore would not part with 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 193 

her, to return to Mount Crawley to dress 
for dinner, till she had promised, that 
as soon as her family visitors should 
leave her, she would come and take up 
her residence at Dunore. The male 
Crawleys had fatigued with their facts, 
the female had amused with her spe- 
culations ; both served their own pur- 
poses, while they played with her feeble- 
ness and caprice : and as Miss Crawley 
drove off from the castle in her jaunt- 
ing car, she mentally exclaimed, with 
triumph, " Dame du Palais indeed ! and 
now let Lady Clancare look to it." 

The fashionable guests at Dunore 
Castle had not met till the idle half- 
hour before dinner assembled them in 
the saloon, into which they straggled 
one by one. Mr. Pottinger was engaged 
with Debret's Peerage, Mr. Heneage 
with his cravat, and Lady Georgina in 
winding gold thread from an ivory reel, 
held by Lord Frederick, who lay loung- 
ing beside her on an ottoman, when the 

VOL. II. K 



194 FLORENCE MACARTIIY. 

whole house of Crawley, male and fe- 
male, were announced en masse, and 
made their entree together. The men 
were in inky suits of professional black, 
save the major, who was all scarlet and 
orders. The ladies were covered with 
Honiton lace, and Irish diamonds. The 
four tawny Miss Crawleys were De- 
nounced and befurbelowed, knee deep; 
and Miss Leslie dragged up her gown 
on her fat white shoulders, as she en- 
tered, with a look of innocent effrontery 
that might put even fashionable ease to 
the blush of inferiority. 

This " incursion of the Kalmucks" as 
Lord Frederick termed it, seemed to 
afford him strong motives for amaze- 
ment and delight. He, dropped the 
ivory reel, seized his glass, and mur- 
mured his observations to Lady Geor- 
gina, who seemed no less amused than 
himself, while, according to precedence, 
precise and formal, they passed up to 
the top of the room, where Mr. Pot- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 195 

tinger, with his old habits of ceremony, 
stood receiving them in the absence of 
Lady Dunore, the Lady-Lieutenant of 
the hour. The eldest Miss Crawley, 
who had for the day amalgamated her 
high-church Methodist costume, with 
the pastoral simplicity of a white chip 
hat and primrose ribbands (a sacrifice 
to the genius of the place where she 
now found herself), was the first, as 
proudly pre-eminent in ridicule, to 
attract his attention ; and he asked 
Lady Georgina,whose spy-glass followed 
the direction of his own : 

ce Now, in pity, who is that Bergere 
derangee, so withered and so wild in 
her attire? — the oldest piece of mor- 
tality, surely, that ever took shelter 
under a white chip hat ! Cela a cent ans 
sonnes ! not an hour less ! and then 
the matron, with the green necklace and 
the green eyes, set apparently by the 
same hand. And those four little 6 tawny 
tight ones,' and the fat pretty roily polly 
k 2 



19^ FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

soul, with the brogue in her shoulders ! 
c est impayable. But here comes Ching- 
foo Crawley, of the yellow button, at 
the head of the Chop Mandarins of the 
interior. I must go and do Ko-tou, and 
renew my acquaintance with him. No, 
the whole celestial empire furnishes 
nothing like my Ching-foo Crawley." 

While Lord Frederick, with great 
cordiality, returned the familiar pressure 
of Mr. Crawley's two hands, who, as 
he afterwards expressed it to Lady 
Georgina,was an " embrasseur impitoya- 
ble," Lady Dunore entered, leaning 
upon her uncle's arm, flushed and ani- 
mated by the bustle and excitement of 
the morning, and by the arrival of her 
venerable relation, who was the most 
welcome of all her guests, because he 
was the last. She received the whole 
Crawley congress, to many of whom she 
was a stranger, with an air, imposing 
from its decided, but carelessly betrayed, 
consciousness of high superiority ; and 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 197 

which was the more marked, by the ex- 
aggerated condescension of her manner 
and over-wrought cordiality, a cordiality, 
which, though eminently conciliating, 
was any thing but familiar. 

When the first salutations were over, 
the Crawley phalanx, " taking close 
order," ranged into a formal circle, and 
seated themselves in a row with the re- 
gularity of nine-pins, looked as if they 
were incorporated with their chairs, and 
remained silent, motionless, and under 
evident restraint. The women, when 
called on by Lady Dunore, minced their 
Irish accent, and spoke in monosyllables 
to conceal it : the men for the moment 
were struck dumb by the appearance of 
the " great Daly of Daly's Court," who 
was out of their cast and class, and 
whom they had never seen at the castle 
dinners. The intermitting fever of 
Lady Dunore now seized upon her 
imagination, as she contemplated the 
group of which she was the restless 
k 3 



198 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

centre. The Crawley circle was a 
circle she never could break ; the 
Crawley dulness was a dulness she 
never could dissipate ; and while she 
fluttered and floundered, as if under 
some spell, she in vain endeavoured to 
dissolve all restlessness, motion, and 
ennui. Lord Frederick, seated by 
Lady Georgina, followed her motions 
with transport, and whispered to her 
as she hovered near him: 

" Marquise de mon ame, that circle 
is your death-warrant. You die the 
death of the bored : this day, this fatal 
day, je vous en repond, bel idol mio. 
Look ! 'tis the hieroglyphical circle of 
eternity ! the serpent with his tail in his 
mouth ! an image of the durability of 
the celestial empire ! and the reign of 
the Crawley manderins and manderinas, 
w itliout beginning or end !" 

" I won't wait another minute for 
Rosbrin," said the marchioness, redden- 
ing to the eyes, and pulling the bell 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 199 

with a violence that left its cord in 
her hands. u I will have dinner di- 
rectly." 

" Wait for Rosbrin !" repeated Mr. 
Daly : " no, to be sure ; nobody waits 
for Rosbrin. His movements are more 
likely to be regulated by a prompt- 
book than a time-keeper ; for while 
your soup cools at Dunore, he is pro- 
bably ' supping, full of horrors,' at Mac- 
beth' s banquet, or flinging a shoulder 
of mutton at Catherine's head, while 
your venison drops from the spit." 

Dinner was now ordered; and its 
announce broke the spell of Lady Du- 
nore* s torment, by breaking up the 
Crawley circle ; — the consequence she 
had contemplated in hurrying the event 
which she believed could alone effect it. 

Of all the members of the Crawley 
family, old Darby, though lowest in 
professional rank, was the person most 
at ease with respect to himself, and the 
circle in which accident might place 
k 4 



200 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

him. There was a proud consciousness 
of native humour about him, which, if 
it did not enable him to distinguish 
between being laughed with, or laughed 
at, led him to risk himself in all situa- 
tions ; for, save where his worldly in" 
terests were concerned, there was an 
obtuse, inveterate, untractable dulness 
about him, which left him the most 
unguarded mark the point of ridicule 
could aim at. The distinguished atten- 
tion paid by the marchioness to his 
family, the desire to shew off before 
Mr. Daly, and to evince to him the in- 
timacy in which he stood with the Du- 
nore family, now led him to the as- 
sumption of a more than ordinary ease 
and familiarity ; and before the mar- 
chioness had finished her soup, he ad- 
dressed her, with — 

" If I'm not entirely mistaken, the last 
time I had the honour of tete-d-tete-ing 
your ladyship in a glass of wine, as the 
French say, it was at your sweet little 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 201 

villa of Sans-sijc-sous, near London : and 
I should he proud if you would allow me 
the honour of commemorating that plea- 
sure now. I remember some charming 
Madeira you had at Sans-six-sous. What 
wine does your ladyship choose, Ma- 
dam?" and he looked in vain for the 
wine glaciers of solid silver, which heated 
rather than cooled the wines of his 
own table. Miss Crawley had equally 
in vain whispered * Sans-souci' during 
this speech, while Lord Frederick, 
laying down his spoon with a look little 
short of ecstasy, called the attention of 
Lady Dunore, who was debating with 
Mr. Daly the probability of Lord Ros- 
bin's arrival, by saying, 

" Lady Dunore, Mr. Crawley is ad- 
dressing some little reminiscence to your 
unattending ear, about Sans-six-sous, 
your villa near London." 

u I am after requesting your ladyship 

to drink wine with me, added Mr. 

Crawley. 

K 5 



202 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" Oh, willingly! but I don't drink 
wine at dinner. I am upon a regimen 
just now : but I'll take soda water to 
your wine, Mr. Crawley, with all my 
heart." 

This was an innovation in Mr. Craw- 
ley s idea of good-breeding, which 
threw him entirely off his centre. In 
his circle, ladies never refused to take 
wine, whether they wished for it or no : 
and the circumstance of no wine being 
upon the table added to his confusion ; 
when the butler stepping up, and asking 
what wine he chose, relieved his per- 
plexity, and he answered, " Port, if 
you plaze ;" adding, " If your ladyship 
is upon a regiment, I should be sorry 
to make you give up your proscrip- 
tion. So I shall have the honour to 
drink your ladyship's health, solus cum 
solo." 

" Thank you, thank you, Mr. Craw- 
ley," said Lady Dunore, laughing un- 
resistingly, while Lord Frederick, wholly 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 203 



foregoing his soup, ecstasised over the 
richer feast presented him by Ching-foo 
Crawley, of the yellow button. Mean- 
time Mr. Crawley repeatedly sipped 
from his glass with a great variety 
of expression in his countenance, each 
indicating disappointment; till at last 
he bent forward, and with a face of 
great importance, said, 

" Pray, my lady, who do you dale 
with?" 

" Who do I deal with, Mr. Craw- 
ley?" 

" Yes, Madam: I'd just be glad to 
know the name of your ladyship's wine 
merchant, that's all." 

" I believe that wine was sent in, two 
years back by poor Lord Dunore. Is 
it not so, Robertson?" 

" Yes, my lady." 

" Why then, whoever he is, he does 
- not use you well/' returned Crawley, 
significantly. 



204 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

" Why, what is the matter? Is the 
wine bad? Pray taste that wine for me, 
Mr. Daly." 

Mr. Daly having put the glass to his 
lips, exclaimed, with a look of nausea, 
"Byjove, 'tis catsup. '* 

" I give you my honour," said Craw- 
ley, coolly. " I thought it was no great 
things, no more than the mare that ran 
for the whiskey; but didn't care to be 
the first to find fault; for every one to 
their taste; and I didn't know what 
might have been the bon mot of Lon- 
don in the present day." 

" Oh, but you Irishmen are such 
judges of wine," said Lady Dunore, 
smiling, " 1 suppose it is very difficult 
to please you.'* 

* We were," said Mr. Daly, " before 
the introduction of that coarse, vulgar 
beverage, port, at our tables, which the 
severe taxation at present obliges us to 
drink. In my time, every gentleman 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 205 

imported his own claret, which he 
drank out of the wood; and they tap- 
ped a hogshead of French wine as we 
now broach a barrel of small-beer. I 
remember when I first prohibited wine 
at the second table at Daly's Court, it 
caused a mutiny; and I was obliged to 
promote the livery servants to the 
steward's room; and discharge the up- 
per servants, who would not consent to 
drink punch after dinner. But if our 
present draining system of taxation con- 
tinues, I must soon come to whiskey 
punch myself; for we poor private gen- 
tlemen, who have nothing but our estates 
to live on, which, like the country, are 
daily losing in their intrinsic value, 
must give up our habits before the 
means of supporting them give us up; 
and so make a virtue of necessity." 

" It is however to that very taxation," 
said young Crawley, pertly, " together 
with other measures of equal wisdom of 



206 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



his Majesty's ministers, that we owe our 
present prosperity." 

"Exactly/' said Mr. Daly, dryly. 

" Exactly," in an emphatic tone, 
reiterated every member of the Crawley 
family; while the commissioner made a 
speech upon the flourishing state of the 
revenue, and concluded with asking 
Lady Georgina to take wine. Lady Du- 
nore taking the hint of drinking wine, 
whispered Lord Frederick — 

"Now pray do the honours, and help 
me on, or 1 shall never hold out." 

" No, no - now, pray/' said Lord 
Frederick, " it is not in my way. 
Heneage always drinks wine with the 
young ladies at the castle, as youngest 
aid-de-camp." 

Mr. Heneage, thus called on, pointed 
his spy-glass round the table to observe 
who was worthy of the distinction, and 
at last sent the butler to Miss Leslie, who 
sat within two of him ; and then lean- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 207 

ing back in his chair, and suffering his 
own man to fill his glass, instead of 
bending forward to meet the accustom- 
ed inclination of the head of the fair 
person he had challenged, he simply 
asked the servant, " Wilkie, does she 
bow?" andbeingansweredinthe affirma- 
tive by his cup-bearer, lie drew his chin 
within his impregnable citadel of starch- 
ed muslin, and again gave up his atten- 
tion to his Bechamelle. The first 
course was still removing, when the at- 
tention of the whole company was at- 
tracted to the window s by a curious sort 
of vehicle— a chaise-marine, covered 
with a canvass awning, gaudily painted 
with dramatic trophies, cups, daggers, 
and masks, surmounted by a scarier flasr, 
and drawn by four horses, with bells 
and shewy harness, driven by two boys, 
in English waggoners' frocks, and straw 
hats with green ribbands, resembling 
the carter s, formerly produced on the 
stage in Love in a Village. 



208 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



"Good heavens!" exclaimed the start- 
led, and therefore delighted Lady Du- 
nore, " what is that ?" 

Every body rose from their seats, and 
Mr. Daly observed, 

" That ! that's Lord Rosbrin's thes- 
pian car, as he calls it, which he brings 
every where with him in Ireland, and 
which is freighted with theatrical para- 
phernalia." 

" Is he so stage-struck as that?" ask- 
ed Lady Dunore of her uncle. 

" He asserts that he is so, upon poli- 
tical and national principles. Haven't 
you heard of his new system of civil- 
izing Ireland, by establishing dramatic 
encampments, and opening private thea- 
tres in the remote counties, as we found 
schools, drain bogs, or cut roads through 
the mountains, for the public good?" 

" Do you know, that I think his 
scheme excellent," said Lady Dunore, 
who, like the maitresse du tripot of 
Scarron, 1 aimoit la comedie plusque 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

sermon ou VepresJ " and I promise 
you he shall have my hearty concur- 
rence. I will have one of the turrets 
turned into a theatre immediately. 

A chariot and four, with out-riders, 
now passed the windows. 

" Here is Rosbrin himself," said Mr. 
Daly ; and at Lady Dunore's desire he 
went forth to receive his grand-nephew. 
Lord Rosbrin soon appeared, following 
his venerable kinsman, on whose coun- 
tenance a good-humoured ridicule was 
visibly marked. His lordship had made 
his toilette at the last stage, and pre- 
sented himself to the delighted and 
astonished eyes of the Crawley ladies in 
the singular and elegant costume of an 
Austrian chasseur: his belt, studded 
with mock stones, his embroidered pe- 
lisse, his yellow boots, and waving 
plumage, produced all the sensation he 
expected on those who had never seen 
him before, and even on those who had. 
After a moment's pause, he advanced ; 
and having paid his respects to Lady 



210 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

Dunore with a theatrical air, he turned 
alternately to Lord Frederick and Mr. 
Heneage, giving a hand to each, with 
" Great Glamis ! Worthy Cawdor !" 
then bowing round the table, solemnly 
pronounced—" Now good digestion 
wait on appetite, and health on both," 
and took his place by his fair hostess 
and cousin. 

" You seem out of spirits, Rosbrin," 
said Lady Dunore, observing the short 
incoherent answers he gave to some 
questions put to him by some of the 
company. 

" I care not for my spirits," he an- 
swered in the words of Celia, " if my 
legs were not weary. But I pray you 
bear with me, gentle coz. M 

" Bear with you ! Why what is the 
matter?" asked Mr. Daly. 

" Nay, mine uncle Clarence, nothing 
of moment ; but I have been fagging to 
death to get my theatre up at Kil- 
Rosbrin against November. We open 
with Macbeth ; an amazing strong cast: 



-FLORENCE MACARTHY. 211 



great tragedy forces. I mean to play 
Lady Macbeth myself. Mrs. Siddons 
is to lend me her old point, the finest, 
the only original point in the world : 
were it mine I would not exchange it 
for c one entire and perfect crysolite.' 
Apropos of the Siddons' dynasty. I 
dined in private with Kemble the other 
day : mark me c good man delver you 
will hear of an event in the dramatic 
world will € scatter wild amazement 
round? Let Drury look to it: there's 
c something rotten in the state of Den- 
mark.'' I shall allude to it in my open- 
ing prologue." 

" By-the-bye, I am enchanted with 
your theatrical scheme, Rosbrin," said 
his fair cousin, " and mean to visit you 
as soon as you open the campaign." 

" That will be ere set of sun" re- 
plied Lord Rosbrin ; " that is, I mean 
by November, in order to follow close 
upon the Kilkenny plays. Their 'fu- 
neral baked meats will coldly furnish 



212 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

forth our marriage feast ; for some of 
their principal performers join us : and 
the Lord and Lady-Lieutenant, with all 
their suit, will attend ' on our solemni- 
ties aye, 6 we'll make the welkin 
dance : well c raise the night owl in a 
catch, shall draw three souls out of 
one weaver, 3 ' 

" Out of one waver!" repeated Darby 
Crawley, who looked up with great de- 
ference to the rank of Lord Rosbrin, 
though quite at a loss to discover whe- 
ther his strange phraseology was su- 
preme fashion or absolute nonsense. 

" But you don't really mean that? M 
said Lord Frederick in a tone of vexa- 
tion. " You don't absolutely mean that 
the castle people are coming to you in 
November ?*' 

" Take this from this," said Lord 
Rosbrin, pointing to his head and 
shoulders, " if this be otherwise; 'tis 
truth, ( if truth were ever pregnant 
made by circumstance" 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 213 



(C What ! do you really mean that 
they come down in their public capacity, 
with little pages and lank aid-de-camps, 
busy chamberlains and sinecure con- 
trollers, fat battle-axes and battered ket- 
tle-drums, with the eternal e God save 
the King, and Patrick's Day, and Pa- 
trick's Hall' and the whole set out of 
the ca-astle ?" 

" All" said Lord Rosbrin, in a tone 
of absence, and going over in his mind 
the business of the stage for the per- 
formance of Henry the Fourth; " all, 
sheriff, vintner, chamberlains, drawers, 
two carriers, travellers, and attendants, 
with the sign of the Boar's Head for 
East-cheap." 

" The Lord bless us P exclaimed old 
Crawley, much astonished at this tra- 
velling equipage ; while Mr. Pottinger, 
dropping his knife and fork, and rubbing 
his hands, was about to set both gentle- 
men right by describing the real ar- 
rangements of the vice-regal tour, as 



214 FLORENCE MACARTH V. 

they occurred to his memory, with all 
necessary dates, places, names, &c, when 
he was stopped short by Lady Dunore 
addressing Lord Frederick : 

" By the bye, Lord Frederick, how 
does Lady B. get on in her new office ? 
Doesn't it bore her to death, that kind 
of representation ? It must be entirely 
out of her way, poor dear F 

" Why it does, I believe, tant soit 
peu ; but, upon the whole, she gets on 
pretty fairly. For ten months in the 
year, she lives at that bel respiro, the 
Phaynix, where she rears little pigs, 
sows mignionette seed, talks of her 
liver, and drinks chamomile tea." 

" Yes, yes. I know all her f aeons 
d la ordinaire well enough. But I mean 
as Lady-Lieutenant /— Is not that the 
Irish phrase for your viceroy s wife ? 
How does she manage ?" 

" Oh ! as she can ; like the rest of 
them, I believe; ask my Potty ; he is 
the law and the prophet on these 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 215 

points. But, on the whole, she cuts 
when she can, keeps clear of the Kal- 
mucks (except on the regular Ko-tou 
days, when the yellow skreen is ex- 
hibited), and lives toute comme une 
autre." 

Mr. Pottinger opened his eyes. This 
was flat profanation of a subject sacred 
to his imagination ; and he would have 
opened his mouth, but that Lady Du- 
nore went on, while her careless manner 
of talking of the Lady-Lieutenant and 
the castle astonished and almost mor- 
tified the Crawley mandarins as much 
as Mr. Pottinger. 

" But then, you know, Lord Fre- 
derick," continued the marchioness, 
" poor dear Lady B. is such a dowager 
dowdy, and so very little en evidence 
in the world. It's very odd, but she 
never could get on, par example ; I 
don't know why, except, I believe, 
that she fevers one so, and fusses and 
fidgets, and that sort of thing, when 



2l6 Florence macarthy. 

she is taken in for a squeeze. For 
as to an exclusive thing, she is quite 
hors du combat ; and then she talks so of 
herself, and her liver, and things. In 

short, I can't conceive Lady 13 en 

grande ceremonle ; besides, she dresses 
so ill. I used to think she spoiled the 
look of my opera-supper : didn't you, 
Georgy, love?" 

" Her excellency/* said Mr. Pot- 
tinger, solemnly, and endeavouring to 
get in a word, " goes through the ne- 
cessary forms of drawing-rooms and 
birth-days with peculiar grace and dig- 
nity ; and—" 

" And kisses all the Mrs. Magtiffins 
and Mrs. O' Gallaghers, d toute en- 
trance" interrupted Lord Frederick. 
" Then she simpers, bobs under a ca- 
nopy, and she walks in and walks out 
to 6 God save the King/ with a white 
wand, and an usher at the end of it; 
then struts forth Lord B— , bored to death 
with ' Son nez en VairJ and his heart 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 217 

under the ribs of his South-Downs, and 
followed by Grizzle, Noodle, Doodle, 
Foodie, and " others/' while we English 
all walk after, like 1 chickens, come 
cluck, 9 — to slow music, by Jove ! Only 
think of my moving to slow music ! 
Voyez vous ? like a mute in a play. 
But the fun of all fun is my Potty's 
face upon these high solemnities. Ha ! 
ha! ha!" 

Here the image of the court, of which 
he was so distinguished a member, be- 
came too ludicrous for the risible fa- 
culties of the noble aid-de-camp, and 
amidst bursts of hearty laughter, in 
which he was joined by such members 
of the company as did not consider the 
Irish court to be the Tien Sing, the 
1 heavenly spot,' he continued to repeat, 
" Moving to slow music, by Jove! 
that's the fun P 

The lengthening faces of the Craw- 
leys and Mr. Pottingcr induced Mr. 
Daly to call to order; and Lady Dunorc 

vol. II. L 



'218 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



taking the hint, arose, and left the gen- 
tlemen to Lord Frederick's further 
details of the celestial empire, — She 
conducted the ladies to the drawing- 
room, and then left them, desiring Miss 
Crawley to he her lady-lieutenant, and 
call for coffee when they wished it. 
The two friends ascended the stairs to- 
gether, on their way to their respective 
dressing-rooms, where each was in the 
habit of taking a siesta between dinner 
and tea. Lady Georgina observed, in 
her fondling way, 

" These people bore you to death, 
sweet love." 

" No, dearest," yawned Lady Dun- 
ore. 

" But," continued Lady Georgina, 
yawning in turn, " they are very good 
sort of people, I dare say, Ma 
Seller 

"Yes, I dare say they are, mignonne; 
but they need not sit in a circle for all 
that. You have no idea the effect a 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY. 21$ 

circle has on me, Georgy love, — it kills 
me." 

At this moment, her own woman 
passing, she said, " Do let some of the 
footmen go into the drawing-room, and 
place the chairs back to back; . and 
take the tables and things from the 
walls, and throw all into the middle of 
the room, and send coffee to Lady Geor- 
gina's dressing-room, and call me when 
the gentlemen come out." 

" By, bye, dearest," said Lady Geor- 
gina, kissing first one cheek, and then 
the other. 

" Day, day, love," said the mar- 
chioness, pressing her lips to her friend's 
fair forehead; and she added "Pll try 
and dose away the Crawley stupor, till 
the men come out." 

More than an hour elapsed, before 
the marchioness joined her guests : 
tea was serving as she entered. Lord 
Frederick, Mr. Daly, and Lady Geor- 
gina, occupied an ottoman on one side 
L 2 



220 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

of the fire-place; and the whole race of 
Crawley formed from that point a semi- 
circle, which reached to the other. 
The marchioness started back, and then 
raised a desponding look; but took the 
seat offered her by Mr. Pottinger. A 
dead silence ensued, interrupted first 
by the young counsellor, who had been 
upon some political subject when the 
lady entered the room, which he again 
resumed. His brothers, meantime, re- 
mained silent and stupified; the high 
sheriff not venturing a single observa- 
tion, and the major becoming absolutely 
confounded, after having made an un- 
successful effort at wig-wams and bi- 
vouacs, " the Peninsula," and " the 
Raygent's levy." 

" There," said Lord Frederick, rais- 
ing his glass to Lady Dunore's face, 
" there's a bored marchioness; this 
is a coup de grace : let her survive 
it, if she can. Mr. Po— linger," he 
exclaimed aloud, " will you sing a 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 221 

comical song, or tell a story, my Pot- 
ty » 

" That antique song" interrupted 
Lord Rosbrin : " we've had last night" 
" Music hath charms" Mr. Pottinger! 
or give us " Let us the cannikin clink" 
or " Troll us a catch;" and he ran over 
the keys of the piano- forte as he spoke. 
At the word music, Mrs, Serjeant, and 
the four Miss Serjeant Crawleys, were 
thrown into a state of gentle agitation. 
Mrs. Crawley's life had been passed in 
running about with her accomplished 
daughters, from one musical system- 
monger to another; and the many 
hours a day they practised, the various 
methods they had adopted, the public 
exhibitions in which they had assisted, 
and the jeffect they had produced at 
Lady Kilgobbins parties, were the 
eternal themes of her conversation* 
Although 3he had not before opened her 
lips, (overawed by the fashionable non 
chalance of the two great ladies); yet 
l 3 



222 FLORENCE A1ACARTHY. 

now, animated by maternal vanity, she 
ventured to observe that " music was a 
charming talent," inquired " who made 
the piano-forte' that stood in the centre 
of the room, and asked if it " was in 
tune:' the hint was immediately taken 
by the dowager Miss Crawley, always 
on the alert to puff off the family ac- 
quirements; and it followed, of course, 
that the Misses Crawley were asked to 
perform, at the sly suggestion from 
their aunt, " that they were charming 
musicians, taught in Dublin, and finish- 
ed at Bath!" 

" Oh then," said Lady Dunore, start- 
ing up, " for heaven's sake, let us have 
music, let us have any thing;" and 
scattering about the chairs from w hence 
the Crawleys, on the impulsion given 
by this mainspring of all motion, had 
risen, she begged the young ladies 
would try something. The young ladies 
unprepared, indeed, but never unwilling 
to exhibit, went to the instrument; 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 223 

while Lord Rosbrin, turning to Darby 
Crawley, asked him from the Tempest, 
" Did you ever hear the tune of our 
eatch played by the picture of no- 
body?" 

" Why then, I can t charge my me- 
mory that I ever did," replied old 
Crawley, gravely. 

" Music," continued Lord Rosbrin, 
taking hold of Mr. Crawley's button, 
a was ordained (was it not?) to refresh 
the mind of man after his studies" 

" To be sure it was, my Lord!" re- 
plied Crawley, flattered at this refer- 
ence; "and when my son Conway was 
going through his college course, he 
was ingenuous at the flute, being always 
given to sedentary habits." 

14 Here then ivell sit ; and let the 
sound of music come upon our ears, 1 ' 
said Lord Rosbrin; and he handed Mr. 
Crawley a chair. 

Meanwhile the four Miss Crawley s 
laid by their gloves and fans, and ar- 
L 4 



224 FLORENCE MACARTHV. 

ranged themselves round the instru- 
ment. Two sat down to the piano- 
forte; one stood on the right of the 
keys to get in one hand, to play the 
extreme treble, according to a new sys- 
tem of playing with five hands upon 
one piano-forte; and the other two 
prepared their voices by gentle hems! 
to sing a duet to this multifarious ac- 
companiment. They now began "Away 
with melancholy" which they sang with 
such sad faces, and tuneless voices, that 
it made every one melancholy to hear 
them; until the alto Miss Crawley, 
who had never before played out of her 
musical stocks, went rambling with her 
emancipated hand over the instrument, 
like a colt released from harness, to the 
utter confusion of her sisters, vocal and 
instrumental, and to the consternation 
and agony of her mother and aunt, she 
suddenly burst into tears, and cried out 
that " she could not play without her 
cheiroplast." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 225 

Lady Dunore, equally delighted with 
tears and laughter, exclaimed, 

" Poor little thing! what is the mat- 
ter? what is her cheiroplast? can my 
maid make it? There is nobody so in- 
genious as Dorette: what is it like?" 

Miss Crawley endeavoured to explain 
what a cheiroplast was, for Mrs. Ser- 
jeant was utterly confounded at seeing 
the labour of years thus overthrown in 
a moment, and in such a moment. The 
young ladies now arose, pulling up their 
gloves and seizing their fans, in be- 
coming emotion, while Mr. Crawley, to 
relieve the general confusion of the 
family, took fat Miss Leslie by the 
hand, and said, 

" Come Miss Leslie, honey, give us a 
touch on the piano ; a song or a coun- 
try dance in your own sprightly way. 
She has a sweet little voice. I give you 
my honour, Lord Rosbrin, and would 
rather hear her than all the bravado 
singing and Italian haberdashery in the 
L 5 



226 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

world. Kate, my dear, this is the Earl 
of Rosbrin." 

" Kate/' said Lord Rosbrin, taking 
her hand on this presentation, and in- 
stantly transformed into Petruchio, " the 
prettiest Kate in Christendom, Kate of 
Kate Hall, my super-dainty Kate, for 
dainties are all eates; and therefore, 
Kate, take this of me, Kate of my conso- 
lation" and he kissed her hand as he 
placed her at the piano-forte, while Kate 
of Kate Hall, blush ingm ore from triumph 
than shame, drew up her frock upon her 
naked shoulders, and, without further 
preface, began to sing, u My Henry is 
gone." Her song ended, was encored 
by Lord Rosbrin, applauded by Lady 
Dunore, bravoed by Lord Frederick, 
and epilogued by Darby Crawley, who, 
with a humorous wink at the gentle- 
men, said, 

u The devil is in them Henrys ! I 
never knew one of them would stav 
with a girl yet." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 227 

To Lady Dunore's horror, the Craw- 
leys were now all returning to their 
chairs and their circle, when, to her 
infinite joy, their carriages were an- 
nounced, and she bowed them out with 
as much pleasure as she had bowed them 
in : observing to Miss Crawley, as she 
came up to wish her good night — 

" When you get rid of your friends 
remember your promise; and pray get 
rid of them soon." 

" She then threw herself on a cushion 
at Lady Georgina's feet, and laying her 
head on her lap, uttered a pious ( Thank 
heaven F 

" Oh! don't think you are quitte 
four la peur" said Lord Frederick, 
" The Crawleys are yours au revoir. 
In the mean time let us call for the 
brag table." 

Cards were now brought in ; and in 
the vicissitudes of a game, in which 
Mr. Daly and Lord Frederick played 
desperately high, she forgot the Craw- 



228 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

leys, dull and clever, and their spell- 
bound circle, which, for want of some 
greater source of annoyance, had be- 
come the phantom of her easily ex- 
citable imagination, and propensity to 
annoyance, real or fancied. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 22[) 



CHAPTER V. 

4< Citizens! your voices t " 

u Cruel are the times when we are traitors 

To ourselves — when we hold rumour 

From what we fear — yet know not what we fear ; 

But float upon a wild and violent sea, 

Each way 99 

Shakespeare. 



Civilization and social happiness, 
among the ancients, may be considered 
as having been almost stationary. The 
refined philosophy and elegant accom- 
plishments of the Greeks, the vigour 
of volition and hardihood of enterprise 
of the Romans, contributed little to- 
wards the permanent prosperity of the 
species ; for mankind remained, nearly 
as in a state of nature, divided into two 
classes ; the strong and the free, and 
the feeble and the enslaved. 



230 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

In the woods of Germany were laid 
the foundations of a combination, which, 
favoured by accident, and nurtured by 
the co-operation of many causes, has 
given a new impetus to society, and has 
effected a substantial improvement in 
the human condition, equivalent almost 
to a second creation. 

The principle of representative go- 
vernment, founded in the positive 
equality of all men before the law, by 
raising the importance of the people, 
has given activity to their industry, 
combination to their efforts, illumina- 
tion to their intellect, and integrity to 
their morals. The security of property, 
and the sacredness of person, by ele- 
vating individuals in their own estima- 
tion, has inspired in them a reverence 
for the opinion of others ; and while 
they place the mere man beyond the 
physical sufferings, they raise him 
above the moral turpitude and gro- 
velling vices of slavery and subjection, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 231 

The connexion between virtue, hap- 
piness, and liberty, is inseparable ; and 
that insatiable lust of power, which had 
so repeatedly been foiled in its direct 
efforts against popular rights in these 
kingdoms, has more fatally succeeded, 
by sapping and undermining the foun- 
dations upon which they repose. A 
well organized system of corruption, 
commenced even before the reign of 
George the First, has been perseveringly 
directed to overthrow the constitution, 
by demoralizing the subject ; and has 
rendered the luxury of commercial 
prosperity an unperceived agent of po- 
litical degradation. This system, which 
in England was at first cherished in si- 
lence, and propagated in darkness, has 
from the beginning been openly and 
unblushingly pursued, and unresistingly 
admitted, amidst the dispiriting factions, 
and debilitating dissensions, which have 
constantly agitated the sister island. 

Centuries of cruelty, and injustice of 



232 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

misrule, and military violence, had not 
subdued the spirit of the pe©ple of Ire- 
land, a spirit which might be said to 
belong almost to their temperament; 
and other means were resorted to, in 
order to quench a fire, which direct op- 
pression could not extinguish. Their 
parliament, filled with men selected by 
the English government, and separated 
in feelings and in interests from the peo- 
ple, it affected to represent, set the 
country up to sale, and concluded their 
1 ?)iost Jiithy bargain, on the ruin and 
degradation of the land. 

By this act of political suicide, which 
banished at a blow the entire rank, 
illumination, and wealth of the king- 
dom, and left the manufactures to pine 
without encouragement, and the soil 
to exhaust itself under an inadequate 
and unthrifty cultivation, the political 
and legislative interests of the people 
were entrusted to a foreign and a rival 
senate of five hundred and fifty-eight 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 233 

members, diluted indeed by one hun- 
dred Irishmen, the representatives for 
the most part of the English ministry, 
and the dominant religious faction, 
and all exposed to the dissipations of 
a luxurious and expensive capital, im- 
pelled by an almost pardonable vanity 
to exceed their incomes, and thus 
thrown by their necessities at the feet 
of power, and insensibly imbued with 
the feelings, the prejudices, and the 
opinions, of those with whom they are 
sent to associate. 

Among what are vulgarly called the 
pot-wallupingboroughs of Ireland, Glan- 
nacrime stood conspicuous for its cor- 
ruption and servility to the dominant 
power of the day, whatever that power 
might be. Mr. Crawley assured Lady 
Dunore that the corporation was at her 
devotion, and that any effort on her part * 
would be but a work of supererogation. 
This assurance, so often reiterated, had 
wholly lulled that interest and solicitude 



234 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

which the chance of a strongly con- 
tested election could alone have main- 
tained alive in her capricious mind ; and 
in a few days the event would have be- 
come wholly indifferent to her, if not 
quite obliterated from her memory, but 
for the open and candid declaration of 
Mr. Daly, that whatever interest he 
possessed, or could make in Glannacrime, 
should be exerted against his grand 
nephew, and in favour of Mr. O'Ma- 
honney. 

This determination, far from annoying 
Lady Dunore, revived all her faded 
electioneering ambition ; she found the 
unbiased independent intentions of her 
uncle as he stood opposed to his own 
kinsman, and in favour of a stranger 
whom he had never seen, new, extraor- 
dinary, and therefore charming; and 
she even proposed that they should 
both set forth in the same barouche to 
canvass on their different sides, and that 
each should try a tour de force with the 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 235 

^ther. To this Mr. Daly objected, as 
giving a ludicrous air to the business ; 
but when he mentioned that he should 
ride over to Glannacrime for the purpose 
of trying his interest, Lady Dunore 
then ordered her carriage with the same 
intention ; and while he took one road 
on horseback, she, attended by Lady 
Georgina and the two Mr. Crawleys, 
took the other in an open barouche. 

With the successful electioneering 
talents of the celebrated and lovely 
Duchess of D. full in her imagination, 
(for she had read an account of the 
famous Westminster election in an old 
magazine on the night before), Lady 
Dunore, all life, spirit, and expectation, 
performed the first three miles of her 
journey with a restless and eager impa- 
tience to commence her canvass; and in- 
sisted that she should stop at the first 
freeholders residence, of whose vote 
there was any doubt. 



236 FLORENCE MACAHTHY. 

" We are now/' said young Crawley, 
with a significant look at his father, 
" within a few paces of the residence of 
a genuine Irish freeholder, who is as yet 
undetermined between the contending 
interests of Fitzadelm and O'Mahonney. 
Shall I pull the check-string, Lady 
Dunore ?" 

" Oh, by all means in the world," 
said the marchioness eagerly, and ar- 
ranging the becoming gossimer shade of 
her Brussels lace veil, while she asked 
Lady Georgina, " am I blue, Georgy, 
love, perfectly blue, with this north-east 
blast ?» 

" On the contrary, sweet love/' re- 
plied ' Georgy, love,' drawing down 
her own veil, never wholly raised in 
broad day-light, " you are absolutely 
petrie des lis et des roses" 

The coachman was now ordered to 
turn to the left, while young Crawley 
observed : 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 237 

cc It is a narrow rough road ; but I 
think your ladyship's springs are equal 
to it." 

" I'll venture my springs," returned 
Lady Dunore, gaily : u never mind the 
springs, Mr. Conway." 

The barouche now wound along the 
rutted road of a little valley. On either 
side peat mixed with rushes seemed the 
only produce of a soil almost beyond 
the reach of cultivation. The few 
patches of grass which were discernible 
were of a brown and stunted growth. 
As the carriage came in front of a small 
dunghill, which usually forms the first 
vallum to the residence of an Irish pea- 
sant, Mr. Crawley pulled the check- 
string. A hut or cabin rose behind in 
all the irregularity of architecture which 
the most extravagant lover of the pic- 
turesque could desire. The cabin itself 
was built of rounded stones, which, like 
the edifice in the Fairy Queen, were 
44 Cunningly and without mortar iaid>" 



23 S FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

The door was removed from the door- 
case, and laid cross ways, to keep in the 
children and the pigs : on each side 
were two holes, both partially stopped 
up, the one with an old hat, the other 
with straw. Another aperture in the 
roof, near the gable end, was surmounted 
by a broken pitcher, being a refinement 
upon the mere hole in the roof, and in- 
tended to exhibit an improvement little 
known in the peasant architecture of 
Ireland— a chimney. The roof of this 
curious, but not singular building, luxu- 
riated in a variety of vegetation, being 
composed of potatoe stalks and grass 
sods, it sent forth vigorous shoots, and 
bloomed amidst the surrounding sterility. 

" What is this ? Why do we stop 
here ? Can t we proceed ?" asked Lady 
Dunore, impatiently. 

" Certainly," said young Crawley, 
" but your ladyship would of course 
like to see and speak to the masters of 
this freehold." 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 23^ 

j Freehold !" repeated Lady Dunore 
faintly, and holding her eau de luce to 
her nose, as the mid day sun drew up 
the putrescent vapour of a flax pit, and as 
every gush of smoke which burst from 
the hut, and rolled over the open car- 
riage, came fraught with the stench 
of the cabin's pestilential atmosphere. 
Two little half-naked and bloated chil- 
dren, who were plucking up some dead 
brambles for firing, raised their eyes 
in stupid wonder on the carriage, and 
then ran into the cabin, with looks of 
consternation. The next moment they 
returned with a group, consisting of 
two smaller children, followed by a 
man and woman, the father and mother 
of this ill thriven brood. The man, 
like the southern peasantry of Ireland, 
many of whom are descended from a 
Spanish colony, was dark, meagre, and 
of a countenance marked by strong 
lineaments. His clothes were a patch- 
work of every colour. His worn-out 



540 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

brogues were stuffed with straw. His 
beard half an inch in length ; his long 
black hair clotted and overshadowing 
his eyes, indicated the neglect of hope- 
less and irremediable poverty. The 
woman, who came forward wiping her 
mouth, (for they had been* at their cus- 
tomary meal of potatoes and salt), in- 
quired in a whining voice and broken 
English, " what was their honour's 
will." 

Barefooted and bare-legged, her eyes 
bleared with smoke, her form attenu- 
ated by insufficient diet, her complexion 
bronzed by exposure to the inclemen- 
cies of the weather, her dress in shreds, 
she still had a cheerfulness of manner 
that seemed ill assorted to her situation. 

Such in general is the family, and such 
the dwelling of the Irish forty-shilling 
freeholder ; a class which is daily mul- 
tiplied, to the ruin of agriculture and 
the misery of the population, according 
to the exigencies and interests of in- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 241 



triguing landlords. Old Crawley, who 
was perfectly aware of his son s ma- 
nouvre, and who had sat silently enjoy- 
ing the disappointment, surprise, and 
disgust of his patroness, now exclaimed, 
in the usual tone of familiarity with 
which he addressed the lower orders, 
from whom, in manner and language, 
he was so little removed, 

u Morrow, Denis Regan : how is it 
with you, man r" 

" Musha ! long life to your honor, 
I'm brave and hearty, Sir; and hope 
you're well, Mr. Crawley, dear." 

" And how is the woman that owns 
you, Denis ? How are you, Judy ?" 

Judy dropped a courtesy to the ground. 
"Well, I thank your honors asking, 
praise to God, amen, and am glad to 
see you looking so beautiful, Mr. Craw- 
ley, Sir." 

" We are come for your vote and 
interest, Denis, for the approaching elec- 
tion ; and while I think of it, I have 

VOL. II. M 



242 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



ordered bog leave for you from the 
bailiff." 

" Och, to be sure, and why wouldn't 
you have it, Sir, to be sure, only Mr. 
O'Mahonney, Sir, vas." 

"And here's Lady Dunore cometo so- 
licit your vote in favour of her son Lord 
Fitzadelm," interrupted old Crawley. 

" See that now ! and shall have \t y 
Sir, if it was worth thousands, any 
friend of your honor's or the young 
counsellors, Sir, long life to yez ; and 
hopes my lady will spake for us to 
your honor, Sir, about the trifle of rint, 
and times going hard." 

A dead silence now ensued, the 
Crawleys purposely making an opening 
for Lady Dunore to exert that election- 
eering talent, of which she had so fre- 
quently boasted during the ride ; but, 
with her handkerchief stuffed in her 
mouth, and her look divided between 
curiosity and disgust, she remained 
sunk in the back of the carriage. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 243 

" Would your ladyship wish to 
alight?" asked young Crawley. 

" Alight! why the road is ankle deep. 
Pray let us get out of this shocking 
spot/' said Lady Dunore, with a coun- 
tenance of nausea. 

" I am afraid, however, your lady- 
ship must alight, for this road is termi- 
nated by a bog; and there will be some 
difficulty, if not danger, in turning the 
carriage in this narrow spot." 

<( Good God! how could you bring 
us into such a scrape, Mr. Conway 
Crawley i" asked Lady Dunore, an- 
grily- 

u Madam," he replied, in affected 
consternation, " I hope I did not mis- 
take your ladyship's order. I thought 
it was your wish to stop at the door of 
the first freeholder, who — " 

" Yes, yes, but I could not for a 
moment suppose that this wretched 
place, these wretched persons — in short, 
if I stay a moment here, I shall catch 
M 2 



244 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

a typhus fever, or be suffocated by the 
stench. Thompson, why don't you 
turn instantly? Do you hear me?" 

" Yes, my lady, I'll try ; but this is 
a bad bit of ground to turn in.'* 

Aware, from experience, that his 
lady's orders were indisputable, how- 
ever difficult they might be in execu- 
tion, Thompson endeavoured to turn; 
but the horses, frightened by the sudden 
flutter and flight of a flock of gccsc, 
near the cabin door, became quite un- 
manageable, resisted rein and whip, 
and ran off with a velocity neither to 
be checked nor overtaken. The Regan 
family set up the usual Irish cry, " Mil- 
lia inurthur;" while young Crawley, 
coolly looking after the flying vehicle, 
indulged in a smile, which there was 
no one to witness ; meantime the coach- 
man, with the utmost skill and effort, 
could not restrain the horses' speed, and 
every moment threatened destruction 
to the springs and wheels of the car- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 245 



riage, and fracture or dislocation to the 
limbs of its occupants; when a peasant, 
who was clamping turf in the bog^ 
sprang forward, seized the reins of the 
leaders, and with no less skill than 
strength, not only succeeded in stop- 
ping the horses, but assisted the coach- 
man in turning the carriage. 

Lady Dunore and Lady Georgina, 
recovered from their fright, were loud 
in exclamations of gratitude and admi- 
ration to their deliverer, who had re- 
fused their proffered liberality, and 
who, in answer to their inquiries as to 
his name, replied coldly, " Plaze your 
honor, my lady, its but a bad name. 
I'm Pad keen Gar, Madam, the boy 
that welcomed your ladyship home 
when we corned down from the moun- 
tains to meet yez." 

" Its by no means a bad name," said 
Lady Dunore, " and I shall take care 
not to forget it, Mr. Gore." ; 

The Cravvleys smiled significantly; 
m 3 



246 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

and Lady Dunore, offended by looks 
which had not escaped her, ordered her 
coachman to drive back to Dunore, 
conversed in Italien with Lady Geor- 
gina the whole way, preserving a dig- 
nified silence towards the Messieurs 
Crawley, who had " smiled in such a 
sort" as to throw an air of independence 
on their own opinions, which on the 
subject of Padreen Gar evidently differ- 
ed from those of her ladyship. Thus 
placed under the ban of her temporary 
displeasure, they received all its symp 
toms with the enduring complacency of 
persons whose patient servility can 
abide the stormy brow of greatness^ in 
the certain expectation of the harvest 
of its returning sunshine. 

A few days had succeeded to that on 
which the unruly horses had formed a 
sort of adventure, in an existence already 
deemed monotonous by the lady of the 
castle. Lady Dunore, who generally 
took up an opinion out of opposition, 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 247 



and supported it out of obstinacy, prais- 
ing in spite, and approving in malice, 
had dwelt with a duration unusual to 
her instability, on the gallantry of Pad- 
reen Gar, whom she persisted in calling 
Mr. Gore. 

Erected into an hero, the object of 
many of Mr. Crawley's plots and fears 
now disputed even the influence of Miss 
Crawley herself, who, since the departure 
of her friends, had become a resident in 
Dunore Castle; and she still held her 
precarious tenure by the tie of adula- 
tion, which her sex rendered unsuspi- 
cious, and her sectarian zeal sanctified. 
Lady Dunore now expressed her inten- 
tion of becoming a frequent visitant to 
a country which produced such a fine 
race of peasantry as Padreen Gar, alias 
Mr. Gore ; and time and circumstance 
had not yet worn out her prepossession 
(which, however, produced no benefit 
to its object), when a letter reached her 
hands, that broke up the spell of her 
M 4 



248 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

partiality, while it furnished new mo- 
tive for action, and agitation to her fe- 
verish existence. This letter was one 
of those productions so frequently cir- 
culated in Ireland, among the timid 
and the credulous, to excite suspicion, 
awaken distrust, and give occasion for 
those efforts of coercion and resistance 
which usually produce the very events 
they are adopted to suppress. It was 
something between a threat and a warn- 
ing. It talked of the black flag of re- 
bellion being speedily unfurled, of me- 
ditated assassinations, and intended 
massacres, of an hatred to English re- 
sidents, and Protestant ascendency ad- 
vocates ; of the noxious seeds of sedition 
being deeply sown in the breasts of the 
credulous and the poor; and of a pro- 
bable and immediate attack upon the 
castle of Dunore by Padreen Gars 
boys, who were to assemble for a moon- 
light parade on St. Gobnate's eve, near 
the holy-well of Ballydab, to plan this 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 249 

siege for the following night. To this 
was added, that Padreen Gar, accom- 
panied by his boys, who were concealed 
in the pits of the bog, had intended to 
surprise her carriage on the day of 
her proposed visit to Glannacrime, but 
were prevented by the presence of 
the two Crawleys, and that an artful 
rescue was substituted for the meditated 
attack. 

To this letter Lady Dunore gave im- 
plicit credence, merely because she 
wished it to be true. The threatened 
danger relieved the torpor of her feelings, 
gave play to her wild imagination, and 
afforded ample occupation to her la- 
borious idleness. Mr. Crawley and his 
son were on business with her when 
this letter arrived by the post, and 
bearing the office-mark of a neighbouring 
town: its contents were of course in- 
stantly communicated to them ; but 
instead of urging her immediate de- 
parture^ as they expected, it furnished 
M 5 



250 FLORENCE MACAUTHY. 

her with additional reasons for re- 
maining. To her expressions of horror 
at the state of the country, and the in- 
gratitude of a people for whom she had 
roasted an ox, young Crawley replied, 
that of all this he could have informed 
her before, even when her predilections 
for Padreen Gar ran highest ; but that 
he feared to frighten her away from the 
country, when it was his and his fathers 
wish, rather perhaps than her ladyship's 
interest, that she should remain for 
ever. 

Measures for meeting the evil were 
now discussed. Secrecy and conceal- 
ment from all the guests at the castle 
were strongly recommended ; and Lady 
Dunore " qui airnoit t enablement les 
enigmes" readily yielded her assent to 
this necessity. The object of the Mes- 
sieurs Crawley was, as they declared, 
that Lady Dunore should judge for 
herself of the state of the country, and of 
tile people : for this purpose, the band 



FLORENCE MACiRTHY. 251 



of ruffians, with the principal incen- 
diary, should be surprised and seized 
on the eve of St. Gobnate, and brought 
to the castle, on their way to Dunore 
jail. A sort of little star-chamber, or 
secret committee, should sit to take their 
examinations in presence of her lady- 
ship, where their appearance and 
countenances, as well as their confes- 
sions, should testify against them. To 
all this Lady Dunore acceded, delighted 
to be surrounded by rebels and ruffians. 
To hold a sort of presidential court, or 
special commission, in her own castle, 
was an event consonant with her feelings ; 
and while the Crawleys believed they 
were awakening her timidity and dis- 
trust, they were, in fact, flattering the 
dormant qualities of her being. Their 
low cunning aimed only at the feebleness 
of the human character, but were igno- 
rant of the varieties of which that cha- 
racter is susceptible: and accustomed to 
work with no other tools than terror and 



252 FLORENCE MACARTflV. 



intimidation, they used them with an 
universal and indiscriminate application, 
and mistook the credulity of Lady Du- 
nore for a timidity foreign to her tem- 
perament and disposition. 

The eve of St. Gobnate was still dis- 
tant by some days; and in the anxious 
interval, the Crawleys regained their 
former influence over the Lady of the 
castle, and were frequently closeted 
with her for hours, to the exclusion 
not only of the numerous visitors who 
called to pay their respects, but even of 
her domesticated guests, who were left 
to amuse themselves as they might. 
While the Crawleys thus engrossed her 
society, they directed the channel of her 
thoughts, and worked powerfully on her 
imagination. Exparte statements of 
the events of the unhappy rebellion 
of 1/98 were added to the raked-up 
horrors of the more dreadful 1 641. 
Mr. Conway Crawley, sometimes, read 
his way to her favours through murders 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



253 



and massacres, while his aunt cut hers 
through paper screens and watch pa- 
pers; and while trophies, devices, and 
card-racks, multiplied in her boudoir, 
the siege of Drogheda, by the Dean of 
Ardagh,* was dipped into ; the history 
of the Irish rebellion was commented 
upon; and the not less prejudiced work 
of Sir Richard Musgrave read almost 
entirely — thus combining the frivolous 
and the sanguinary, to occupy her mind, 
and to work upon her feelings. 

Meantime the rumour of an insurrec- 
tion had been spread through the town 
of Dunore, and had reached the 
steward's room and servants' hall of the 
castle ; whence it ascended to the draw- 
ing-room, where some laughed and 

* In this work, the dean asserts that the papist 
rebels were protected by charms, that a naked 
rebel, fired at by many bullets, remained unin- 
jured, the balls only making marks. " Of this 
many eyes were witnesses, one of which of good 
trust hath repeated it to rae." — This is deemed 
a work of great authority; and most of the ac- 
counts of that unhappy event are taken from it. 



254 FLORENCE MACA RTII Y. 

some trembled at it. Although Lady 
Dunore and the Crawleys preserved a 
profound silence on the subject, it was 
understood that a party of the New- 
Town Mount Crawley supplementa- 
ry auxiliary legion occupied the flank 
towers of the castle every night after 
sun-set. Expresses had been forward- 
ed to Dublin, and many of the Eng- 
lish servants had applied for leave 
to return to their native country. 
What, however, had spread the greatest 
consternation in the neighbourhood, 
was, that Terence Oge O'Leary's house 
had been entered by constables, his 
papers seized, and officers of justice 
stationed to arrest any persons found 
lurking about the cemetery of the 
Monaster-ny-oriel. O'Leary himself 
escaped by being absent on some of 
his usual antiquarian researches. 

On that day, observed in the coun- 
try as the feast of Saint Gobnate, Lady 
Dunore descended earlier than usual 
into the breakfast-room, her cheek 



FLORENCE M AC ARTH Y. 



255 



flushed, and her eye wandering: she 
was also dressed in black, as was usual 
with her when under the influence of 
grief or anxiety. She spoke little, and 
refused to breakfast, alleging that she 
had been drinking gunpowder-tea since 
daylight. She was restless and unquiet, 
appeared and disappeared like a phan- 
tom, despatched note after note to Mr. 
Crawley, and seemed so agitaced by ill 
suppressed emotions, that Lord Frede- 
rick, who was sipping his caffe au lait, 
and reading a French novel, at last in- 
quired of her, in his usual tone of affec- 
tation, u Mais quest ce qu'il y a done, 
belle Chatelaine? What is the matter, 
my marchioness. Are the reports we 
have heard of incipient rebellion in the 
celestial empire really true, or are they 
only got up by the chop-mandarins 
for their own special purposes ? I dare 
say that profess eur de bavardise, Duke 
Conway Townsend Crawley, of the pea- 
cock's feather, is at the bottom of all 



2b() FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



this; or that my own ching-foo, of the 
yellow button, is amusing himself with 
a plot, like the honest gentleman that 
got his own effigy shot at, to alarm the 
sleeping sensibility of the lenient 
government people at the castle.* Now 
pray speak: Are we to be roasted a la 
mode Irelandaise before a slow fire, like 
so many chesnuts, or spitted like the 
children in the old rebellion, like so 
many snipes — Voyons done!'* 

Here Lord Frederick was interrupted 
by the loud stamping of feet outside 
the door, which was suddenly burst 
open, and Lord Rosbrin, in his black 
velvet Hamlet suit, which he had been 
trying on before he dressed, with wild 
looks and wilder voice, rushed in, crying 
out — 

u Oh ! horror, horror, horror, tongue nor heart 
Cannot conceive nor name thee !" 



* Fact — the ingenious party was a magistrate, 
and pooh pudor, a clergyman. 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 257 

LadyDunore shrieked. Lord Frederick 
laughed to hysterics, and Messrs. He- 
neage and Pottinger stood aghast. Mr. 
Daly, who had been hitherto quietly 
reading the English papers, now started 
up astonished, exclaiming with vivacity: 
" Why, are you all mad ! what is the 
matter ? Rosbrin, see, you have fright- 
ened the ladies to death. What is the 
matter ?" 

" What i$~ the matter ?" reiterated 
Lord Rosbrin, seizing the well remem- 
bered lines of Macduff, " why confu- 
sion is the matter." 

t( Confusion has made his master-piece. 
Most sacrilegious murder hath broke ope 
The Temple, and stolen thence — 99 

"Murder!" said Mr. Daly, shudder- 
ing. 

" Stolen ! stolen what ?" interrupted 
Lord Frederick, becoming suddenly 
serious. 

Lady Dunore, now believing that 
there was reason for her fears, continued 



258 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

to scream louder than before ; and Lord 
Rosbrin, pointing to a letter he held in 
his hand, observed, with a little para- 
phrase in his citation, 

" Approach this letter, and destroy your sight 
"With a new gorgon." 

" Who is it from?" said Mr. Daly, 
snatching the letter, and searching for 
his spectacles. 

<c Who from?'* continued Lord Ros- 
brin, pacing up and down the room with 
frantic, but with theatrical gestures* 
'Tis from the deputy prompter of Co vent 
Garden Theatre. 

" Oh! insupportable, oh heavy hour! 

It should be now an huge eclipse o'the sun;" 

for oh ! my friends, Mrs. Siddons's point 
lace, Mrs. Siddons's lace, alas ! she has 
no lace ! but her point lace that was, 
and that / should have worn, is stolen 



FLORENCE MACAUTHY. 259 

away from her dressing-room at the 
theatre ; all, all gone ! 

u Nor left a wreck behind." 

" So," said Mr. Daly, much provoked, 
and resuming his newspaper, " so, as 
Moliere says of his capricious lady, 
4C ou fait la sottise et nous sommes le$ 
sots." 

Meantime, Lord Frederick rolled in 
convulsions of laughter ; Mr. Pottinger 
and the ladies dried their humid eyes ; 
and Mr. Heneage, smelling a flower- 
box in the window, observed, " the 
mignionette harvest had been vastly 
abundant this year." 

A servant at this moment entered, 
and presented a letter to Lady Dunore, 
which she took with trepidation, but as 
she read it, her clouded countenance 
brightened into smiles, and ere she 
finished it, she said — 

" No, never was there so fortunate 
an event. The circuit judges dine here 



4 260 FLORENCE M A CART II Y. 



to-day, and will be present at the trial. 
Well, after all I must say, there i3 
nothing like Ireland, where one is kept 
in a constant state of emotion and occu- 
pation.^ 

" Trial ! what trial i" demanded Mr. 
Daly in astonishment. 

" Why the fact is, my dear uncle,'* 
said Lady Dunore, no longer deeming 
it necessary to keep a secret, which was 
beginning tp be a charge — " the fact 
is, the castle of Dunore was to have 
been attacked this very night, on the 
feast of St. Gobnate, but for the timely 
prudence of the two Mr. Cravvleys, who 
had discovered the plot, and have 
hitherto concealed their knowledge of 
it, from political motives. They have 
succeeded this morning in surprising 
and seizing that ferocious and lawless 
banditti callen Padrcen Gar's boys; and 
I am this moment expecting their arrival 
at the castle, escorted by a party of mi- 
litary, on their way to the jail. We 



FLORENCE MACARTHV. 26l 

meant to have kept all this quiet, for 
fear of frightening Georgy, love, and 
alarming you all. .But now that the 
judges and things are coming to the 
castle to dine," she continued in a 
fever of delightful agitation, walking up 
and down the room, and fanning herself 
with a hand-screen, " now we shall 
have a regular imposing, and I dare 
say amazingly amusing trial." 

u Oh ! a regular special commission" 
said Mr. Daly, with ironical seriousness. 
" An inquest held on a parcel of shana- 
vests and caravasts must be rare sport 
for ladies. But who are the charming 
judges, who come so appropriately to 
preside in your ladyship's court, and 
to assist in getting up a scene for our 
private amusement, at the expense of 
the public character of the county ?" 

" Oh ! I know nothing in the world 
about them," said Lady Dunore, " only 
they are judges of some kind or other, 
who are on circuit, and who have invited 



262 FLQRENCE MACARTHY. 

themselves here. Mr. Crawley will 
be enchanted at this ; it will save 
him trouble. Here is their letter: 
" pray read it aloud and she tossed 
it to Mr. Daly, who read it aloud, as 
follows 

" Baron Boulter presents his respect- 
ful compliments to the Marchioness of 
Dunorc ; he purposes, with his brother 
judge, Mr. Justice Aubrey, having the 
honour of paying his respects at Dunore 
Castle this day, between his breakfast 
and sleeping stage, on his way from cir- 
cuit to Dublin, when Baron B. will be 
happy to become the bearer of any 
commands her ladyship may have for 
the metropolis. 1 ' 

" The wretched accommodations," 
observed Mr. Daly, " at Bally-na-scrog- 
gen, have, I suppose, induced Baron 
Boulter, who is a man of the world, and 
a true disciple of the savoir vivre, to 
claim your ladyship's hospitality. But 
I know not what argument has pre- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 263 

vailed on his excellent, but not always 
very accommodating, brother judge, for 
once to agree in his decisions." 

" O, it is no matter what brings 
them here provided they come. There 
never was such luck," continued Lady 
Dunore, fluttering about the room: 
<c we shall have quite a regular spe- 
cial commission, as you say, my dear 
uncle : I hope though they will not 
hang many of these wretches. You have 
no idea how I hate to have people 
hanged :" and she added, wiping away 
her now fast coming tears — t( If I heard 
sentence pronounced on a great many at 
once, and the clanking of chains, and the 
condemning cap, and things " 

" By-the-bye," interrupted Lord Fre- 
derick, " apropos to hanging, isn't 
Baron Boulter the facetious hanging 
judge who makes us all die laughing 
at the castle dinners with his bon- 
mots ? M 

u He is thought to be a leetle severe/* 



264 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 



said Mr. Pottinger, cc but he is zealous 
for government, and is perhaps the best 
punster on the bench; that is I believe 
admitted on all sides." 

" An high judicial qualification, my 
Potty/' returned Lord Frederick, gravely. 

" But should we not have something 
of a court for them r" asked Lady Du- 
nore. " Good heavens ! how unlucky 
Miss Crawley should not have returned 
yet from her evangelical school at New- 
Town Mount Crawley ; she would have 
cut me out a court ; got me up a court, 
I mean, or something in that way, in a 
minute, something that would produce 
a striking effect, something scenic you 
know." 

"Scenic! a striking effect! a good 
stage effect F- exclaimed Lord Rosbrin. 
" Leave that to me, my gentle coz, my 
pretty coz. I have all the requisite pro- 
perties with me, maces and halberds, se- 
nators' wigs, ermine, and all/' 

" We must have the packing cases re- 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 265 



moved out of the hall," continued Lady 
Dunore, " and tables, and pens, and 
ink, and things you know; for if we are 
to give the thing an air of a regular 
trial, we may as well do it hand- 
somely." 

u Trial!" repeated Lord Rosbrin, 
€€ I have the Covent Garden prompt- 
book, with the Merchant of Venice trial, 
in my pocket; here it is." 

Lord Rosbrin now pulled out a ragged 
book, with all the business of the stage 
laid down, and Lady Dunore continued: 

" Do then, dear Rosbrin, get things 
in order, you understand these matters 
so well : I'll ring the bell for the ser- 
vants to attend you." 

Lord Rosbrin caught her arm. 

" Leave every thing to me, my fair 
coz. Scene a ball." 

ie I think 1 could assist you," said Mr. 
Pottinger. 

" We shall want," interrupted Lord 

VOL. II. N 



266 



FLORENCE MACARTilY. 



Rosbrin, stopping his mouth, " trum- 
pets, marshal's staff, two aldermen, 
Archbishop of Canterbury, Duchess, of 
Norfolk, godmother. No, hang it, that's 
the christening in Henry the Eighth. 
Here is the trial scene — trumpets and 
cornets; two vergers, with short wands; 
scribes in habits of doctors. Well, 
only leave it to me. Come, Pottinger, 
you shall act as scribe or verger, or 
property boy. IVhut's in a name ?" 

The peer and Mr. Pottinger left the 
room together, followed by Lady Du- 
nore, who was all emotion and gratifi- 
cation, while Mr. Daly and Lord Fre- 
derick laughed without restraint; and « 
Lady Georgina said, " that poor thing 
will wear herself out with her strong 
feelings. There never was such a quick 
irritable sensibility as hers," 

" Oh, she is delicious !" said Lord 
Frederick, " taken in small and distant 
doses. But it were as well to live in a 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 267 



tornado as occupy the same house with 
her volcanoship for two months toge- 
ther." 

u I have never seen her thus extrava- 
gant before/' said Mr. Daly, in a tone 
of mortification. " I confess I lose all 
patience when I see her the dupe of 
these Crawley plots, or rather of her 
own caprice and whim, and of that in- 
satiable thirst for scenes and sensations 
that has made the torment and the en- 
joyment of her life. I would not wonder 
if she has worried poor Dunore out of 
his reason, and been the cause of all the 
eccentricitv of that other froward but 
clever boy, whom she has induced to 
forego his independent principles, and 
set up for this corrupt saleable Crawley 
borough. And yet I love her for her 
mother's sake ; for she was an angel,- 

at least before ill usage had " 

He paused abruptly, sighed, and re- 
sumed his newspaper ; while Lord Fre- 
N 2 



268 FLORENCE M ACARTHY. 



derick whispered Lady Georgina — fC A 
fallen one.'* 

Within the ensuing hour the judges 
Boulter and Aubrey arrived at the cas- 
tle, were announced, and received in the 
saloon, as old acquaintances, by Mr. 
Daly. 

The Right Honorable Baron Boulter 
was a collateral descendant of the cele- 
brated English ecclesiastic of that name, 
who, under the title of primate of Ire- 
land, governed the land with a crozier 
of iron. 

Bishop Boulter, in his celebrated let- 
ters, has divided Ireland into a popula- 
tion of his own party, and the natives; or, 
as he termed them, " we of the English 
nation, and the poor Irish." His grace 
added to this curious classification a 
maxim, that " Ireland is only to he go- 
verned by being divided (4), and a coun- 
sel, urging the necessity for employing 
spies and informers as proper agents of 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 26*9 

government, and worthy of being re- 
munerated and recompensed even unto 
the third and fourth generation. 

The inheritance of this family creed 
was the sole succession of Baron 
Boulter, himself the younger son of a 
younger brother ; for little was added to 
it but a rattle and bells, bequeathed him 
in his infancy by his grand-aunt, Mrs. 
Barbara Boulter, which the Baron ever 
afterwards preserved ; and which, even 
on the bench, he was wont to play with 
gaily enough, when forensic dulness 
made claims on his patience, or the 
pauses of business left leisure for inno- 
cent amusement. 

Baron Boulter had nothing of the 
saturnine and irascible spirit of his great 
political predecessor the primate. He 
was of a cheerful sanguine tempera- 
ment ; possessed an evenness of temper 
that usually supplies the absence of 
sensibility ; and, any where but in Ire- 
N 3 



270 FLORENCE MACARtllY. 

land, might have been as respectable in 
his public character as he was pleasant 
and courteous in his social deportment. 
But he had come forward at a period 
when the maxims of the Irish govern- 
ment, in every department, tended to 
national debasement ; and, like other 
aspiring barristers, weary of hawking a 
bag, light as his own spirits, and vacant 
as his heart, he submitted to the neces- 
sary probation of political corruption, 
graduated with success, and rose to pro- 
fessional eminence by a facetiousness 
that amused, and a severity that hor- 
rified. 

The rebellion was the great scene of 
action for such qualities; and to that 
period, like many others of his profes- 
sional cotemporaries, he stood indebted 
for his pre-eminence. The means of 
his rising, became the habit of his cha- 
racter, and he continued to joke and 
to condemn with a gaiety and contempt 



FLORENCE MAC ART HY, 

for human life which belonged to his 
temperament, and which served to up- 
hold the reputation of his loyalty. 

No one trifled away liberty with more 
grace, or pronounced sentence with 
more humour than Baron Boulter; and 
the culprit whom he jested to the gal- 
lows, had his love of wit borne any pro- 
portion to his fear of death, must almost 
have been reconciled to his fate by 
the gaite du cour that sealed his des- 
tiny. 

His professional interests, and politi- 
cal principles aside, which in Ireland are 
always closely connected, Baron Boulter 
was fair judging and clear-sighted; he 
came at results with the prompt but un- 
logical process of a woman's perceptions; 
but living always on one spot, within a 
narrow circle, his knowledge of human 
nature went no further than the sphere 
of his action, and his philosophy was 
as local as his jokes ; he could flatter 
an Irish chancellor, adulate an Irtish 
N 4 



272 FLORENCE MACARTHY. 

viceroy, amuse the priggish dulness 
of an Irish secretary, joke with, or 
sift to the very bottom of evasion 
and circumlocution, an Irish peasant, 
while he gaily laughed with, and secret- 
ly laughed at all. Still his human nature 
was always Irish nature; and though, as 
far as his experience went, his premises 
were just, yet they were confined, nar- 
row, and home directed: for the rest, 
social in habits, of amiable address, and 
pleasant humour, he was sought for by 
the great, whom he amused; and feared 
by the poor, whom he — hung. 

Judge Aubrey was in character a 
melange of those temperaments which 
produce a quick and irritable sensibility, 
a prompt uncalculating sympathy, and 
a warm, deep-seated, violent indigna- 
tion; qualities which form so broad a 
basis for human excellence, while they 
unfit it for a patient endurance of base- 
ness, meanness, and cupidity. These 
were powerfully worked on, and hourly 



FLORENCE MACARTHY. 273 

called into action, by the political situ- 
ation of a country, which he loved with 
all the fervour of an ancient Roman; 
and by the systematic degradation of a 
profession, he venerated as the guardian 
of human rights: his bile and his expe- 
rience increased together; the hopes of 
the patriot, and the health of the man, 
suffered in equal proportion; and the 
social simplicity and playful gaiety, 
which formed the charm of his domes- 
tic hearth, from which the world was 
shut out, deserted him in that public 
tribunal, where the liberty he worshipped 
was sacrificed, and the profession he 
revered was debased. 

Ireland, his native country, was his 
object: he had upheld her cause in the 
senate, until her independence had 
breathed its last gasp; and he retired 
from the scene of her ruin with a mino- 
rity that might be deemed 6 glorious,' 
in every sense of the word. Ireland 
was still his object; and the lowliest of 
N 5 



274 FLORENCE MAC'ARTHY- 

his children found redemption from his 
mercy, solace in his commiseration, 
and relief from his liberality. From 
the bench he expounded the causes of 
their crimes, while he lamented their 
effects : he taught while he judged, he 
wept when he condemned. 

From the period of the Union, Judge 
Aubrey had retired from what is called 
the world, from the bustling walks of 
life, and from the giddy round of fash- 
ionable circles: living for, and with a 
few, he had for many years made no 
progress in the successive modes and 
jargons of succeeding fashions; and it 
was in part to this circumstance that 
he owed much of that peculiar freshness 
of character, and something of that 
austerity of manner, which the friction 
of society is so apt to efface. This well- 
preserved individuality was set off by 
a peculiar manner, idiom, and phrase, 
which, as well as his broad accent, were 
genuinely Irish. To profound classical 



FLORENCE MACARTH ¥. 275 

reading, and considerable scientific ac- 
quirement, he added an unpretending 
simplicity, which is inseparably con- 
nected with the highest order of talent, 
though so often falsely attributed to 
mediocrity and ignorance. 

Such were the two high judicial 
characters, who, now linked in a pro- 
fessional yoke, drew as different ways 
as untrained colts in the same harness. 
Since the commencement of their cir- 
cuit, they had never agreed upon any 
one point, except the expediency of 
trying the French chef de cuisine of the 
Marchioness of Dunore, instead of rely- 
ing on the gastronomic talents of Judy 
Mulligan of the Cat and Bagpipes in the 
neighbouring town of Bally-scroggin. 



4 



NOTES, 



Xotfi (*) Page 5, — The driver is generally a 
peasant's son, taken from the spade, and hired at 
a salary of five or six pounds a-year. His occu- 
pation is to drive or distrain cattle, sheep, and 
other stock of the backward tenants ; to cart 
and sell without mercy; to threaten and impor- 
tune for money, and to be the most formidable 
of all animals to the poor. These men are fre- 
quently the objects of popular vengeance, and 
are devoted to death, with the tythe proctor, the 
police constable, &c. &c. He is ever the ready 
instrument of oppression ; whether to take a 
blunderbuss, or to take an oath ; to serve a law- 
process for the tything parson, the tax gatherer, 
or the absentee landlord ; or, in short, to bear 
the whole risk and odium of executing the sen- 
tence of harsh laws in their fullest and most 
oppressive severity. Like the robber of the 
desert, his hand is against every one, and every 
one's hand is against him. Thus there subsists 
a constant action and re-action, alike subversive 
of the public peace, and of the public morals ; 



£78 



NOTES. 



oppression and inhumanity sanctioned by law j 
and violence and bloodshed in opposition to it. 
Those in power must inevitably designate the 
peasant's resistance to the driver as outrageous 
murder, as crime of the blackest dye ; but na- 
ture, deep within the bosom of an oppressed 
and starving population, acknowleges it a ne- 
cessitated self-defence, or a just retaliation. 



(1) Page 48. — Places of emolument, rank, 
precedence, and profit, enjoyed by and distribu- 
table amongst the Irish bar, April 22, 1818, viz. 

Lord Chancellor (salary encreased j ^ 7 15,000/. for self 

since 1789) ( * and servants. 

Master of the Rolls (ditto) 1 5,000/. ditto 

Judges of the Law Courts (ditto) . . 5 12 1 fr ° m 8 ' 000 '; t0 
6 J ( S 4,000/. each. 

Masters in Chancery 4 3 to 4,000/. each, 

Deputy Remembrancer of the Ex- < j > 

chequer . ( \ same » 

Attorney General 1 about 10,000/. 

Solicitor General 1 5,000/. 

King's Serjeants S g > rank, precedence, 

( ) and profit. 

King's Counsel (formerly but 20) 

present number 

Judge of the Prerogative Court. . . 1 1,800/. 

Consistorial Court 1 600/. 



^37 | same. 



Carried forward.... 63 



NOTES. 



l£ 500/. 



Brought up . . . 63 
Muster of the Faculties uuder the 

Archbishop of Armagh 

Judge of the Admiralty Court 1 1,200/. 

Surrogates in ditto 2 200/. each. 

Recorder of Dublin Ciiy 1 1,200/. 

Chairman of the City of Dubliu C ) 

?C iS i„„3 j If '. 5CCi - 

Chairmen of Thirty-one County Ses- ( ■» 
Horace .789) J3l| 400 t. SOW. 

Counsel to Revenue Commissioners 2 6,000/. and 8,0007. 

Ditto to Masters in Chancery 4 200/. each. 

Ditto to Deputy Remembrancer. . . 1 300/. 
Ditto to Attorney General, opening t \ 

and signing pleadings ( 

Ditto to ditto in Ex gents and Cu-to- 

diani?, &.c. 
Ditto to ditto in Six Circuits, iu 

Slill Fines, &c. (since 1789) 

Ditto to ditto in Six Circuits in 

Crown Prosecutions (ditto), 

,000/. by Towns- 
end. 

Ditto to Commissioners of Wide 

Streets (ditto) 

Ditto to Barrack Hoard 1 worth 300/. 

Dilto to Ordnance ditto 1 ditto 200/. 

Ditto to Linen ditto 1 ditto 200/. 

Ditto to Bank of Ireland on Six r > 

^ la _ \ \ 6f 100/. each. 

Circuits (ditto) ( ) 

Ditto to Tost Office on Six Circuits ( ) 

(.mto) H 

Cariied forward ... . 



^ 2 1 300/. each. 
6 1 200/. each. 



^30^ 200/. each. 



Ditto to Dublin Castle (ditto) ^ 1 ^ 1 



) l£ 1,500/. 



§80 



NOTES. 



j l£ 200/. 



Brought up 163 

Counsel to Paving Board (since 

1739) 

Dilto to Dublin Police (ditto) 1 200/. 

Commissioners of Bankruptcy 25 200 to 000/. each. 

Ditto of Public Records (since 1789) 4 4007. each. 
Ditto of Inquiry into Fees, &c. c i 

(di,,,,) j 6 |l.*>M.«.ch. 

Lay Vicars Genera] of Dioceses.. 12 100/. each. 

Dublin Police Barristers(,ince 1789) 6 500/. each. 

Commissioners of Appeal 5 800/. eaeh. 

Commissioners of Accounts and 



, &i 800/. each, 
their Secretary ( i 

Directors of Inland Navigation. . . 4 1,000/. each. 

King's Inns Treasurer (since 1789) 1 500/. 

Ditto Librarian (dit;o) 1 300/. 

Cursitor Baron of Exchequer 1 200/. 

Cursitor of Chancery 1 400/. 

Examiners in Chancery 2 500/. each. 

King's Advocate General 1 300/. 

Commissioners in Lunatic Cases ... 2 200/. each. 

Secretary to Commissioners of r ) 

Charities (since 1789) } l $ 400L 

Accountant General of Chancery . 1 800/. 

Ditto ditto Exchequer. 1 800/. 
.Seneschal of Dublin Liberties, 

Doners, St. Sepulchres, St. Pa- «J 5 V. \qq 1o 20 o/. each. 

tricks, &c 

Colonial Situations inCevlon, Ca- 

. „ . YY worth 500/. to 

nada, Grenada, Prince of Wales's <10> 
« . j p / \ 5,000/. each. 

Island, &c 

Carried forward .... 259 



NOTES. £81 
Brought up. . . . 259 

1 300 guineas each 

Missionaries to explore the State of ( I visit ' ^ Pren " 

disturbed Districts, &c ) 2 \ der S est aDcl Ed ~ 

ward O'Grady, 
J &c. 

Recorders of Cities and Towns, e ) 
about ^21 j 100 to 800Z. each. 

Other Places, Sinecures, Pensions, f ) 
&e. dispersed according to Ser- < 18> 
vices and Influence, about f \ 

300 

Among two hundred barristers, besides about 
fifty more remaining unplaced. 



(2) Page 125.— The Butlers and Fitzge- 
ralds had been powerful rivals and enemies from 
the time of their arrival in Ireland with Henry II. 
The anecdote is well known of the Earl of Des- 
mond being taken prisoner by the Earl of Or- 
monde, and borne off wounded on the shoulders 
of the Ormonde followers, returned in answer 
to the taunting question of " v>here now is the 
great Lord Desmond ?" u Still on the necks of 
Butlers. " 

When a temporary reconciliation was effected 
between these powerful chiefs, a hole was cut in 
the door of the chauntry of St. Patrick's 



282 



NOTE*. 



church, that they might shake hands through it 
to prevent accidents: this hole, with a piece of 
board nailed over it, was shewn not long since at 
St. Patrick's, and may still exist. 



(3) Pas;e 126. — The H Fringes' 1 was a pro. 
cession of the trades and corporations, performed 
in Inland on Corpus Christi day, even within 

the author's recollection. King Solomon, Queen 

■» 

Shcba, with Vulcan, Venus, and Cupid, were 
leading personages upon this occasion. The ce- 
remony was the remains of an old Roman Ca- 
tholic superstition. Something in the same way- 
is still celebrated in Shrewsbury, or at least was 
a very few years back. 



Page 211. — The pr irate theatrical-, held 
annually at Kilkenny, assemble whatever Ire- 
land still retains of rank, f ishion, talent, and 
taste. There party loses its asperity, sect its 
distinction, and prejudice its bitterness. Bye- 
lazes and military lazes are there forgotten, and 
the laws of this amiable institution, lihe those of 
nature, are governed by harmony only. 



(4) Page — The system of governing 
Ireland by dividing it, is of very ancient origin. 
The following is an historical anecdote in proof. 



NOTES. 2S3 
Anno 1278, there arose civil wars, no better 
than rebellion, between M'Dermott de Moylaoge 
and Cathyeer O'Connor, King of Connaught, 
where there was great slaughter and bloodshed 
on both sides, and the King of Connaught slain. 
Raphael Jlolinsbed, in his Irish Collection, 
thiuketh that there were slain at that tyme above 
two thousand persons. The King of England 
hearing thereof!*, wae mightily displeased with 
the Lord Justice, and sent for him into England 
to yielde reason zvhy he zcould permit such 
shameful enormities under his government. Ro- 
bert Ufford substituted R. Fulbert as before, 
and satisfied the king that all was not true that 
he was charged withal; and for further content- 
ment yielded this reason: that in policy he 
thought it expedient to mink at one knave cutting 
off another, as that would save the King's cof- 
* fers, and purchase peace to the land by extermi- 
nation. Whereat the King smiled, and bade 
him return to Ireland! I — Ware. 

The spirit of the lazo, and the policy with 

which Ireland has been since governed, is con. 

tained in this passage. 

END OF VOL. II. 



B. Clarke, Printer, Well Street, London. 



BOSTON PUBLIC LIBRARY 




3 9999 05468 9508 



