CHAPTER VI

The body of English wanderers that the Alpine attractions of Switzerland had collected •during the summer, and who roamed with restless curiosity from Constance to Chammounix, in dread of passing the barrier of the Simplon, till the heats of an Italian summer should have subsided, began to pour in living torrents from the Alps down upon Milan. The Gauls and Goths of ancient times did not make the descent more eagerly, nor could have been more struck with the rich and to them hitherto unrivalled beauties of Ausonia. The great route of the Simplon was thronged with our countrymen; —the grand Milord rolled along in his easy and elegant chariot, a strange contrast with the rascally steeds, some seven or eight of them, and as rascally postillions, and the hempen harness put together a la Gordienne, through the means of which the said chariot was borne. With eyes how expressive of countless gain, beheld by the doganieri, those frontier troops, those living land-marks of each petty European territory. Perchance an English dandy, with the most obstinate, imperturbable John Bullism of idea, came driving in his tilbury over the Alps—what two words to find in juxta position—which without the slightest consciousness of the practical anachronism he drove into the court of the Aquila Nera at Sesto Calendse. Gentry of humbler pretensions came crawling in crazy caleches at the rate of thirty miles a day, brought down hill at a trot by way of favour, and walked leisurely over even a rising ground at a pace to sicken a snail, which, however, the travellers preferred, they declared, to posting, that they might be enabled to see the country.

vOL. II. B





For this laudable purpose also they so arranged, as to commence their journey always two hours before day-break, to see, I suppose, the effect of the Alps by twilight. In imitation of the ioujours des perdrix of the French proverb, the Lombards, at least all those who observed the population of roads and streets, might have exclaimed toujours des Anglais.

The Milan Gazette, in its copious barrenness of all news, does these stray visitors the honour of announcement, with orthography so ingenious as to defy any Briton to recognize his own name. In the case, however, of lords and ladies it is more particular, and the arrival of Lady Cateaton e la sua famiglia appeared in Milanese print upon one of these mornings, her ladyship being moreover announced as having taken up her residence at the palace of Duke Spino, whose Grace had found it convenient to let his very splendid second floor to her ladyship. The arrival of the English family was soon known, however, by more conspicuous means than the type of a gazette, the Cateatong' landau making its appearance on the Corso in all the pride of paint and heraldry, its black steeds and their splendid trappings throwing the old berlins and caleches of the Milanese into the ignominy they merited. Two footmen and a chasseur with a short sword and a long feather weighed down the back of the landau. Gingerbread was never finer nor more begilded at Greenwich than this chasseur, who looked more like a general officer than a domestic. It is, indeed, the continental custom, not the least strange to English eyes, that the sword, the plume and the moustache, " the pride, pomp, circumstance," denied by Austrian laws, and indeed by custom to private gentry, should be confined to the military and to menials, the latter class of persons being allowed to gird their hips with a soldier's weapon, although their masters are forbidden.



The Milanese beaus thronged about Lady Cateaton and her daughters, the parent vying with her offspring in personal beauty, and even in vivacity and playfulness of disposition. Her ladyship had been famed for loveliness and loving, and bore marks in the wreck of her noble features of both the endowment and the propensity. The one at least had now vanished, and as the love of social eminence and distinction remained, some other attraction was requisite for Lady Cateaton to possess, in order to make herself the centre of a well-bredcrowd. In England, alas ! this could no longer be—why ?—'tis not for me to decide. Therefore she tried emigration, and to ensure distinction, Lady Cateaton professed at once the extreme liberal opinions of the day: no foreign lady dare affichersuch sentiments:—an Englishwoman alone could thus give her salon this decided colour; and wherever she passed, the liberal mob of the better orders flocked to talk jacobinism, and to amuse themselves with epigrams on priests and monarchs, under the auspices of her British ladyship. This they called philanthropy, an degant and enlightened view of human affairs, exemplified in such exalted wishes as





Que le boyau du dernier pr£tre,

Senroit le cou du dernier roi.



Her ladyship, thus, in political opinion, the counterpart of my Lord Tara, was however, of a very different character. His lordship was a democrat from, stupid discontent—her ladyship from an idea that it topped the ton in continental circles. He was sincere, and (a character that abounds in England, and begins to make its appearance on the other side of the channel) a puritan in politics, bating the religion. And the shades of their respective principles differed, as did the sources whence these were drawn, his Lordship having received his from the seldom unsealed tomes where the spirit of old freedom is confined, whilst Lady Cateaton gleaned hers where Madame de Stael imbibed her philosophy, in lamp-light conversa^. tions.



Lord Tara, as soon as he heard of the arrival of Lady Cateaton at Milan, and of her proceedings, felt that he was superseded, inasmuch as in sound influence, a bachelor in inexpressibles can never contend with petticoats and an establishment. Count Luigi even, had been decoyed to her Ladyship's court at the Casa Spino, and he made a point of Lord Tara's accompanying him. Lord Tara acquiesced with a good grace, especially as the young Count vowed that the young Ladies Cateaton were lovely, affable, charming girls, and in going on this plea there was no condescension. It was amusing to witness the meeting between these male and female missionaries of liberty and liberality. They both saw through one another, and were conscious of this—the grand reason, indeed, why English hate English abroad, because from under the eye of a compatriot we do so sprout out into importance and affectation, that coming again into contact with a countryman, we are under the painful necessity of pulling in, or concealing, a variety of horns. Lord Tara knew perfectly her ladyship's London career and character. Lady Cateaton knew his lordship's political success and value at home, and this previous acquaintance rendered the presence of either a considerable damper upon the others acting ; they smiled and shook hands, however, and were delighted to meet, wishing each other as far as a wish can well extend. In the look, however, that they exchanged, there was a sort of tacit pact, by which each abjured any attempt at undermining the other's reputation, on condition of enjoying similar immunity. All this was. vastly entertaining to one who really understood it, but it was caviare to the simple Italians. To his still further defeat, Lord Tara beheld his political pupil, Count Luigi, attached to the company of the young ladies, Frances and Arabella, whose tongues, he justly feared, it were impossible to include in the tacit treaty between him and their parent. The Count seemed'





delighted, and no doubt was amazingly so, having never before enjoyed the freedom of badinage with girls, lovely and unmarried,—flirtation with a maiden of good society being a thing quite interdicted in countries southward of us. Independent of this, the conversation between the young Count and the newly arrived Englishwomen, must have been mutually delightful, each having all the information in the biographical and satirical way, (now so much prized) that the other wanted and desired. The Count knew all the amours and foibles of Lombard nobles and their ladies,—the young Cateatons were not deficient in information respecting those few compatriots that either were present, were visiting, or had been at Milan.

The sisters amiably relieved each other— one acted the satirical, the other the amiable; so that between the wit of one, the good nature of the other, and the beauty of both, the Count, as well as other young gallants, was in imminent peril. Then they talked politics too, as well as their mother, not unwisely indeed, tending their attention that way, since proficiency is certainly acquirable in affairs of state ; whereas in the staple subjects of Italian conversation, such as the arts, music, and painting, northerns are very apt, in despite of study, to betray their Gothic origin, and after having put forth mighty pretensions to taste in this and other wavs, they are apt by some one awkward blunder or unobserved mistake, to slide at once from the " pride of place," to which that country's and their own arrogance had previously raised them. Besides the young ladies had studied, had gone through conversations on political economy, conversations on chemistry, in short all the blue course prescribed by the amiable professoress and authoress of Russell-square. They had morepver been in Paris during the Cent Jours, had actually seen Napoleon, had known many and been intimate with one or two of his Marshals— how was political knowledge to be acquired, if not from all these ways and facilities ?—In short Lady Frances and Lady Arabella were republicans as violent as Lord Tara; and why the peer did not more seek and relish the society of his noble countrywomen was an enigma that Luigi could by no means solve.





Be the cause what it may, and however slighting also the mutual opinions of Tara and the, Cateatons might be of each other, the effect of both acquaintance upon Count Luigi and the Marquis was the same. Austrian despotism and Austrian insolence was the continual theme of both, and contempt, by implication, of Italians for bearing the transalpine yoke, smote the Count, as well as a great many of his young cotemporaries, and disposed them, more than the natural course of events would otherwise have done, to be discontented• and to conspire and resist upon any, the first opportunity.

Nothing can be so deeply wounding to national pride as the contempt of foreigners, especially belonging to a nation that must be respected.' And it is generally of unhappy consequences; for if ever a revolution can hope for justice and success, it is when oppression is felt on all classes equally, and arouses all to a general assertion of their rights. But this galling contempt shewn by foreigners, necessarily to only a few, and these but the higher ranks of the people, serves to separate their indignant feelings from those of the people, and to make them attempt enterprises by themselves, that in the present state of the world they can never succeed in alone and unassisted.



It would be scandalous and unfair, to set down all the instructive dialogue that passed between the Count and his fair acquaintance. In the midst of it a being entered the saloon, attired in a most extraordinary way, in a round hat and riding habit, like Clara in St. Konan's Well, boot on foot, and whip in hand, which she, for it was a female, slapped against her robe most cavalierly as she saluted Lady Cateaton. Upon removing her round hat, which she did merely to show her hair, that was cropped close to the skull; not a curl, nor a vestige of one remained. She was a beautiful .woman.



" How very odd," said Lady Frances.

" What a singular figure.'" echoed her sister. " Who is she, Lady Cateaton ?" to her mother.

" I really don't know for the life of me," replied her ladyship.

Count Luigi rose to address the figure, for I can call it nothing else, and remaining for a few minutes in conversation with rt, returned to hia scat near the young ladies of the mansion.

" Would you be so good, Count Lecco, as to inform us who that is ?" asked Lady Cateaton of the young Italian.

" The Countess. so and so—your acquaintance of yesterday."

" No—it is not possible."

" Quite possible, and certain, I assure you."

" What! the beautiful Countess, and in this attire ?"



" Merely to do you honour, to come to your assembly JtaKlle6 tout-a-fait & FAnglaise."

Lady Cateaton dropped upon a neighbouring. seat, ready to die with laughter, in which she was joined by her daughters.

" And her locks, her beautiful hair—has she really cut them in this manner, to be tout-afait Cl VAnglaise ?"

" Not a doubt thereof," said Luigi, " the Countess thinks herself this moment the paragon of English mode. It is really the most frightful specimen of Anglomania, that I have yet beheld."

The Englishwomen themselves assented to. this.

" I thought at first," said Lady Frances, " that it was Count C. in female attire."

" Or his groom,'" added the other sister, " for I can never distingush them."

The remarks were not lost upon Count Luigi Lecco, who perceived how much foreign fashionables are propitiated by the deference of imitation. However, he had not wisdom enough then to extend his conclusion to a more important sort of imitation, in which he himself was given latterly to indulge.





CHAPTER VII.

Whilst English liberals were thus shaming the Milanese into an active enmity to their Austrian rulers, the cause of freedom prospered in the south of the Peninsula. Naples had freed itself from despotism; and although the Allied Sovereigns had met to discuss the fitness of these events, at Troppau first, and subsequently at Laybach, still one of those sovereigns at least was supposed not to be averse to a people's asserting their natural rights. From Spain the torch of liberty passed across the Mediterranean, and if the hands of the peasantry did not. convey it, like the feudal torch of old, over hill and dale, the wealthy and the noble at least kept it alive, and communicated it from state to state. The examples of Spain and Naples inspired even the lukewarm with zeal and hopes of success—the townspeople longed for something like commerce, the nobles for some share of civil and political liberty ; whilst the Italian youth hoped to re-act those feats for the illustration of their own country, which in the ranks of the French armies many of them had performed for the glory of France and Napoleon.



It was a natural, and in many cases a laudable desire, but, alas! it was confined to too small a portion of Italians, to give rational hopes of success. The peasant did not participate in the feeling, and could not participate in it, originated as it was in societies, whose fundamental principle, sometimes concealed, but often avowed, was a contempt for that religion which was deep-rooted in nine-tenths of the population. Amongst the middling class, the principle of liberty was widely spread, but there was no bond of union, religion being set aside; and the principle of honour not existing in the nation, to/ be used as a motive of either honourable secrecy or honourable exertion. The materials for doing any thing great were wanting in the spirit of the people, and oppression, however considerable, was not sufficiently grievous to arouse those latent energies and virtues that slumber in the general mass, unless called into exertion by one of those moral earthquakes that agitate the national mind, and reveal its depths. The mere peasantry were neither interested, nor had they any cause to be interested in the plans meditated by those who had leisure for such meditations. He heard the foreign drum, 'tis true, and saw the foreign soldier; but his father, and his father's father, had seen the same before him— neither his memory nor his tradition went back so far as to the Viscontis, and the Sforzas,—nor if it did, was there much pride in the reflection. He had seen the French, had felt their imposi-* tions and insolence more grievous than those. of the Austrians; although the gallants of France had rendered themselves agreeable to the wives and daughters of the higher and middling ranks; from the opinions of which ranks our travellers have universally concluded, that the Lombard poor regret the French dominion.





The townspeople, a timid class, with the dread of the police ever before their eyes, certainly wished confusion to Austria and her doganiers; but the female part of their families. bad some time since re-taken the road to mass, they themselves were turning their regards back to bigotry, so that they could prove but balf-jacobins at the best. The great mass of the nobility and gentry, classes here synonymous, were, however, sufficiently imbued with old revolutionary and new liberal ideas to make up, they supposed, for lack of zeal in the multitude r and in the true spirit of aristrocracy, while professing themselves downright democrats, they presumed that the mass could not but sympathize in the feelings that actuated themselves, and: doubted not for a moment but that the passioa for liberty, which was engendered in their restlessness and leisure, had also visited the bosom of the peasant, who had not an hour nor a thought to spend on ought save his grains.



The gallant and impetuous Pisa was the emissary despatched, I believe, by the southern constitutionalists, to engage their northern brethren to imitate their example. That hot-headed soldier could descry nothing but timidity and lukewarmness in professions and promises, unaccompanied by the fervour and gesticulations of the south ; and he accordingly wrote to Naples, that nothing was to be expected from the Lombards or Piedmontese: a few months were sufficient to disprove his sagacity^

The result of the Laybach putting together of crowned heads became manifest, and the troops. of Austria were ordered to advance from the Milanese upon the new federation of Naples. The absence of the Imperial forces in this expedition was the time, if ever that time was to occur, for an insurrection against the Austrian power; but this, like the three first pages of a volume, was found sadly difficult to begin. In the French and English revolutions, those who had not arms took them, and beat those whose life had been spent in the exercise of their weapons.—this is the sign of a revolution just and called for, when the oppressed actually rise, and the wronged right themselves with ease. But, in Italy, to hope that the agriculturist would leave his ploughshare, or the artizan the instruments of his trade, for the musquet or the sword, in any cause, however fine or sacred, argues a huge ignorance of that classic Peninsula. No—there the only chance of effecting any thing in the way of revolution, is to entice those legally entrusted with arms to turn them against the sovereign—as in old Rome, the only solus revpuUicce lay with the Praetorians, who, in case of any arrears being due to them, were very ready to demand their pay by crying out liberty and constitution.



Unluckily for the Lombard patriots; they had no native troops on whom to practice their revolutionary eloquence, all the Italians in the Imperial service being wisely disposed of in Hungarian quarters, to keep down the superabundant spirits of the Croats, as the Croats kindly did by the Italians in Lombardy. The Austrian officers, at least those of the more respectable corps, are liberal enough in idea, extremely so in conversation, and publicly expressed opinions of this kind at Naples, (to the very great astonishment of the poor Neapolitans by the by) that might whisper something awful to the Emperor Francis, though his successor will be more likely to hear the same things spoken out. But this is nothing to the purpose; they could not be expected to risk any thing for such beings as they esteemed Italian Marquis. And these feudal nobles, powerful as they were to make the villains submit to the horrors of rice and meadow cultivation, could bring more of these retainers into the field. They could make them face the Tertian, but not an Aus





Irian bayonet. The townsfolks had their risotto at a fair price, and none of them could think of risking the peaceable enjoyment of good eating, the Corso, and the Marionettes, for such a dangerous divertissement, as an attempted revolution might prove. In short, there was no hope for the patriotic Lombards at home; their regards and hopes were in consequence all turned to Turin, where there was a national army, swollen by the vanity of the prince to a magnitude greater than his two Duchies could bear or support, consequently ill managed, and accessible to the friends of revolt.

Such was the state of things, and of thoughts in minds similarly disposed as those were of the Lombard marquis and his son, when an event occurred at Turin, that set the inflamed blood of the young Count in a blaze. He had of course much connection with Turin, and many friends among the young Piedmontese, especially amongst the wild youth of the University, whose freaks and mode of life have found a place in the memoirs of the poet Alfieri. The present age, however, was not one calculated for the amusement of idle freaks and gallantry, as there depicted ; more serious considerations occupied even the youth, I may say, of the present day, and in the Academia of Turin, the merits of Riego and Quiroga, Borelli and Poerio, were more discussed than either school rhetoric or gallantry.



This very unacademical taste manifested itself in a thousand petty ways, indicative of the hopes and projects upon which the thoughts of the youth were running. Some put on the old cisalpine cockade, others went so far as to mount the bonnet rouge, in the very pit, 'tis said, of the Opera House. The most insolent were arrested. Their comrades grew outrageous, grouped together, tore up the stones of the streets for weapons, and demanded of the public functionaries, whom they could find, the release of their comrades. A military force was ordered against the frantic boys, who shut themselves



up in the college, barricaded the portals and vowed to defend them against the soldiery.

The good old king had strictly commanded the troops to treat the noble youths of his kingdom with lenity; but his vindictive spouse, 'tis said, issued counter orders to the carabiniers, who, preferring the command most congenial to them, forced an entry into the square of the college, allowed the grenadiers to disperse the youths by charge of bayonet, and they themselves, especially the officers, dismounting, pursued the young fugitives through arcade and staircase, sabreing and mutilating them, I may say, in cold blood. Several young friends of Luigi Lecco were amongst the number of the wounded. As soon as the tidings reached the Count, his long gathering spleen against despotism could calm or contain itself no longer ; he turned his horse's head from Milan, and without even taking leave of his parents, rode without a stop to Turin, to join his zeal and Vol. H. c



little else, to the conspiracy that was then hatching.

His youth, my readers might suppose, would prove an obstacle to his being admitted to councils, in which the weighty project of revolutionizing a kingdom was debated ; but on the contrary, his want of a beard was his strongest recommendation. The plot was one of youth and of youth only—the united ages of all the conspirators would not complete more than the years of one sage—from this may be judged all the wisdom that went to the enterprize. In other countries, and even in Italy at any other period, rash and enterprizing associates might have been found amongst the aged, —but now all the grey-haired had the years of the revolution and its consequent wars in their memory, and a repetition of the thing was not to their taste. At any rate, age in southern climes, is a far greater soberer of enthusiasm than it proves with us; and the French acade





tnician's remark on the decay of Beccaria's literary vigour, may be extended not only to political, but to every enthusiasm in that land, unconnected with the arts.*

The heir of the house of Lecco was received with joy by the half dozen conspirators of Piedmont, and his prudence and experience was called to their aid in deciding some necessary steps, as what form of government they should

adopt, and similar questions. The Count S

R said the English or Sicilian constitution

was as pretty a one as could be framed in a summer's day. But then the obstacle was, that no one knew anything about this constitution, what it meant, or what Were its established principles. The same admiration of our consti

• " Revenu a Milan, Beccaria a fait peu de chose, et sa fin n'a pas repondu & son debut; phe'nome'necommun parmi le gens de lettres d'ltalie, qui ont un premier feu bien vif, mais qui, a ving-cinc et trente ans, se desabusent comme Salomon, et reconnoissent que la science est vanite', sans avoir attendu d'etre aussi savans que lui."



tution had been professed at Naples, but a similar objection had over-ruled it, and the simpler plan of the Spanish was preferred in both cases as more intelligible, simple, and military.

The grand object was a constitution of some kind or other; and in sooth they were too happy, too dazzled by the contemplation of such a possibility to descend to the detail of minute choice or arrangement. Another subject of consideration struck them, and it was truly the most genuine token of wisdom that they betrayed; and this was the reflection, that a revolution always wanted a head, most justly and conscientiously counting their own for nothing. To discover this, they cast their eyes around for a considerable time in vain. At length they thought they saw a proper one in General G.; but the shrewd old warrior shook his head at their scheme, smiled, and for sole answer, told them to be good boys. They scorned the old general's wholesome advice, however, and perceiving that no co-operation or support was to be had from maturity or age, they resolved on choosing a boy for a leader.



Their choice in a revolutionary chief fell upon the presumptive heir to the crown, for such the Prince of Carignan may be called, whom, however, they might talk and persuade into liberality for the moment they were with him, could not but perceive, when left to himself, that he was periling his hopes and person, not for any good or glory, but against every interest that he possibly could have, present or to come. Charles Albert, however, was an easy, flexible youth, one who had not the courage to say nay to those furious friends of his, nor yet the madness to hope for their success. Indeed the royal youth was sufficiently liberal to have joined heartily in any rational scheme for the limitation of his own future authority. The patriots talked the boy into acquiescence, importuned promises from him, which he could not in unbiassed moments think of keeping; and when he naturally did not keep them, the conspirators threw all blame from off their shoulders upon his.





CHAPTER VIII

Whilst his acquaintance and friends were meditating these important points at Turin, Lord Tara remained at Milan in a state of exceeding fretfulness and anxiety, accused by the Marchioness of having precipitated her son into the commission of some rash step, and suffering similar reproaches from the Marquis at times, whilst at others, the fickle noble indulged in •contemplating the glorious prospect of successful rebellion. Still this was but talking on the part of the Marquis, and of some idle malcontents amongst his brother nobles. The Englishman was mistrusted by the middling rank or body of * Carbonari, who refused to admit him. or one of his country into their secret, notwithstanding the self-introduction of the fair Ladies Cateaton one midnight into their retired and gloomy conciliabule. On this occasion even the voice of• gallantry was not heard—the imprudent youth, who had guided the fair candidate Carbonari, was nearly expelled at the moment—and all business was suspended until the intruders had retired. The disappointed Cateatons departed the next day to Genoa.



Lord Tara was not more successful; in despite of the mission with which he was entrusted, the secrets of which he was possessed, and the love for Italy he displayed, he could never penetrate in the secret political societies of Milan beyond a confidential conversation with a few of his own rank. He was mistrusted as a foreigner by the body, and feeling it, he at last longed to remove his revolutionary abilities to another scene. The Count's flight urged Tara to follow his example, and return to Turin ; but he feared to make the demand of the Austrian





police. The Austrian police proved, however, obliging, and made the demand of him, requesting him with a lenity unusual to it, to remove his person from the Lombard dominions with all celerity and silence. This welcome command, his Lordship obeyed at once, posting back to Turin without putting Austrian patience to any trial by delay.

Previous to his departure, however, Lord Tara was anxious to see, and for the first time speak with Beatrice Lecco, whose charms had made all the impression upon his heart, that the political ends and aims, on which it was set, would permit. It was necessary for him also to take leave of the Marchese and Marchesa : the former protested against the departure of the English politician, but as soon as Lord Tara pleaded the request of the police, the noble could make no demur to such authority. The Marchioness, like a good mother, was busied in preparing packages of necessaries and advice for her fugitive son ; and the little space allowed her for this preparation, together with the unusual distraction of the moment, procured for Lord Tara the solitary interview with the fair Beatrice, for which he had so long been sighing.



The beautiful young creature was sitting not prim or starched, as a British Miss would have been, if left alone in the presence of a youthful admirer, for as such the glances of Lord Tara, might have long since bespoken him, at least to the keen eyes of a girl. She seemed, though silent and sunk in her own thoughts, most unconscious of his presence, and unrestrained by it, and was occupied more with the delicate motion of a tiny greyhound of Italian breed at her feet, than with considering whether she was alone with a companion, or even who he might be. Lord Tara regarded her for some time in silence, that he feared to break, similar to the dread one has of entering into converse with a froward or a spirited child. At length the Englishman ventured to ask the Signorina—



*c If she had no message to communicate, no letter to be delivered to her brother ?"

The girl was amazed at finding herself addressed, but not in the least fluttered by the circumstance, however strange:

u A letter," said Beatrice, " I never wrote one. And what have I to say to Luigi ? Mother will write all."

" And have you no anxiety about Count Luigi? Do you know when or upon what business he is absent?"

. • " The Marchese tokl me he was gone to Turin," said Beatrice, " the reason I forget. I am bidden to be anxious about nothing."

" And have you always obeyed tliat command strictly, Signora Beatrice? Have you never really been anxious on any account ?"

" Never," replied Beatrice, fixing her large eyes upon the questioner.

" Never for ball, party, play, or opera ?"

Beatrice shook her head, without removing her enquiring gaze from his Lordship.



" Nor have ever felt a peculiar interest in the fate of any one acquaintance or friend—of your own sex ?"

" I never knew one scarcely, except my mother."

" And do you always intend to remain in this happy state of carelessness for all the world ?"

" Oh, no, when I am married, my mother tells me, I may have as many friends as I please."

" That will be a happy time."

" It will in truth."

" Provided you find a loving, true affectionate husband to make you happy."

" Now St. Ambrose forbid," said the damsel gaily. " That I hear is the worst that can befall me."

Lord Tara, who was anxiously pressing forward upon two legs of his chair towards the fair Beatrice, here fell back in utter discomfiture, and with an abruptness that startled the Signorina Lecco.

" What, you are amazed, my Lord," said she, " are English ladies in the habit of thinking otherwise ?"



" Somewhat," said his Lordship, " they allow their hearts to make choice of the person on whom their hands are to be bestowed."

" And supposing that they have no hearts," said the simple reasoning Italian girl, " do their hands remain as you describe, unbestowed ? For in that case, I am not surprised at the prodigious quantity of ziiette, (old maids) which I have heard you say infest your unhappy island."

Lord Tara smiled at what he considered the pert wit of the Italian damsel. It was nothing, however, but naivete. The disclosure of sentiment, slight though it was, proved sufficient to nip every tender thought that was springing in the breast of his lordship, who was quite stoick enough to rejoice at the abrupt conclusion; as thus a troublesome underplot of affection ceased to clog the progress of the grand political drama that he meditated.

Had the Marchesa overheard his lordship's audacious attempt at conversation with her daughter, no doubt he would have had to endure from her the douhle reproach of attempting to seduce her daughter into the romance of love, as he had already betrayed her son into the romance of politics. The dialogue, however, could not have taken a course more agreeable to the Marchesa's rigorous ideas respecting the intercourse of unmarried beings of both sexes. And with respect to Luigi, her reproaches were for the present spared to the parting Englishman, in hopes of his future influence being exerted at Turin to preserve the Count from any of the more rash acts to which from character he was so prone.



The parting interview between the Marquis and Lord Tara was more solemn,, and even sublime, to such a pitch were their feelings of liberty and patriotism wrought by approaching events. The manes of every classic hero were invoked by them, and Brutus and Cassius never plotted with more ardour, the Marquis^ timidity being lost in the excitement of the hour. He placed in his lordship's hands the drafts of no less than half a dozen different constitutions for the inspection and choice of the Piedmontese revolutionists, in case they should prove squeamish in taste; and promised that soon as their liberating army approached the walls of Milan, that he would come forth and second within the walls to the utmost of his influence, the adoption of an independent government in Lombardy, similar and united to them.



It grieves me to be compelled to treat in a mingled vein of ridicule, these attempts to obtain rational liberty, on the part of the Italian noble at least, feeling no such remorse in recording the conduct of the English political Quixote. Eut however honourable and justified may have been the principle, which actuated many to the attempt, viewed as a whole in the effect, as much as in the cause, by a stranger, and especially if the character of the principal actors, and their unfitness for their part be taken into the consideration, it cannot fail to strike him in a point of view more ludicrous than either hateful or demanding sympathy. The king of Piedmont was an amiable good kind of man—so were the conspirators against him an amiable well meaning set of youths, that would have conducted a barring out at school with considerable spirit; but in dragging them forward upon the stage of history, fate mistook very much their importance, and, sooth to say, at the same time lessened her own. Nor can the ridicule thrown, or attempted to be thrown, upon such deeds and personages be deemed heartless, when we know that rash, crude, ill-conceived attempts of the kind, cause a nation to retrograde for centuries, perhaps in that very path of rational liberty, which was thus sought to be achieved at once.



Lord Tara took leave of the Marchese, and with the solemn devotion of a Decius, set forth through the Vercelli gate of the city, towards Turin. Fain would he have gone round by Pavia to have passed and contemplated the famed and now envied field of Marengo; but the strictness of his passport, forbade the indulgence of a sentimental visit to that scene of Austria's first ruin.





CHAPTER IX.

Soon after passing Novara, Lord Tara began to encounter groups of military, and single soldiers, hurrying towards the Austrian frontier. In vain his Lordship stopt and questioned them as to the cause of their flight: all that they could inform him was the existence of gran romore at Turin, and a fearful rumour it certainly must have been, to have frightened away such a sturdy band of armed men.

Arriving at Ivrea, he was greeted with the delightful sounds of " Viva il Costituzione," and upon questioning the exulting soldiery who shouted forth these glorious words, they seemed ss little able to give an account of their victory as the fugitives had been to give of their discomfiture. In such blessed ignorance were these living machines of war, that the army of the realm had divided into opposite parties, and were commencing a civil war, each under the influence of such officers as chance had set over them, and guided by them, just as these better order of swordsmen were guided by hazard. Both parties, however, promised themselves some variety, better pay, and a campaign of plunder ; but as for any ideas of either loyalty on the one hand, or a love of liberty on the other, they had none; not as yet at least, since the generals on either side had not sent forth proclamations, nor put heroic words thereby into the mouths of their followers.



Every reader is aware of the leading events of the Piedmontese revolution—of its early attempts proving abortive in the capital, but successful at Alexandria, from whence the troops, who had been seduced to, or rather surprized into declaring for the constitution, marched, bringing liberty triumphant into Turin. The old king, who had secretly promised the neighbouring power that overshadowed him, to grant no form of liberal government to his subjects without its consent, would rest true to his word, and abdicated rather than consent to the demand of his insurgent subjects. As the brother and successor of Victor Amadous was absent at Modena, the Prince of Carignan was declared regent, a junta of government formed ot the successful revolutionists, and the principal chiefs appointed to the several offices of the ministry.



The old debates respecting that constitution most adapted to their choice, were solved by the young officer who first declared himself insurgent at Alexandria, and who, as he had never heard of any other than the Spanish constitution, declared for it in consequence, and thus rendered the little collection that the Marchese Lecco had entrusted to Lord Tara too late for consideration.

The few days during which Prince Carignan enjoyed the regency of the revolutionized kingdom, gave that infant Prince a surfeit of constitutional power. He was bearded, argued with, overruled, and the new ministers were so morbidly and desperately constitutional, and possessed with so intense a feeling of their responsibility, that even had the youth been attached to liberty, he could not have consented to purchase that of the nation by his own slavery. To make use of a vulgar expression, the boy-king sulked, and ran away by night from his constitutional advisers and persecutors, leaving them to rule the kingdom, and repel the Austrians in the best way they might.



The very morning after the escape of the Prince of Carignan, Lord Tara reached Turin; the troops that he had met near Novara, were those who resisted the constitution, and who, under the command of General Latour, and aided by Austria, hoped to make a stand against the revolutionists. Turin was in dread and dismay; and so precarious seemed the liberty that war offered, that even the town's-people who had all their lives been sighing for a portion of liberty, now paused and drew back from so uncertain a boon. In the midst of this general awe and pusillanimity in all hearts, where apathy did not reign, the little host of conspirators, rendered still more exalted and outrageous by success, met together, to meditate a plan for the enfranchisement of the whole peninsula.



Lord Tara leaned eagerly forth from his caleche as it drove into the streets of Turin, to catch those symptoms of popular ardour in the cause of liberty that he had anticipated. But, alas! he saw no signs of jubilee, and except a few students who patroled the streets with the tri-coloured tokens of revolution, the metropolis wore the appearance more of a frightened than a liberated city. His lordship, as soon as he descended from his vehicle, hurried on foot to the royal palace, in order to meet his liberal friends, no doubt enthroned there in their offices. Crossing the square, he was struck with



the figure of a sentinel upon guard, with a richly braided jacket and other vestments equally rich, which his post and his musket seemed in strange contrast with. The young sentinel sternly eyed Lord Tara, with a look of recognition certainly, but still without smile or greeting.

" Good Heavens !'' exclaimed his lordship, " Count Luigi Lecco is this you ?" The sentinel nodded assent. " A nd why not speak to an old friend ?" " My duty," replied the sentinel with emphasis, " forbids me to bandy words with any one. I cannot converse on my post."

" Post!—what in the name of St. Ambrose, the peaceable saint to whom thy dear mother committed thee, can have made a private soldier of thee ?"

" Liberty,"1 exclaimed the youth, " and equality, that makes the highest as well as the lowest begin with the same grade. I serve my apprenticeship." And the son of one of the proudest and wealthiest nobles of Lombardy, was evidently excited and exalted with the idea of standing private sentinel in the cause.of liberty.



" Well Count," said Lord Tara, " I think, jou might serve the cause in a more suitable station than this."

" Hear the English aristocrat," replied the youth, " carrying his love of privilege even into the ranks of republicanism. When off guard, I'll meet your lordship and inform you of our noble deeds."

Lord Tara hurried on to the royal palace, and there after a little time, he once more found his noble friends assembled, and in Debate on the conduct to be pursued since the flight of the Prince. They seemed all in the highest pitch of confidence and exultation, somewhat contrasted as even Lord Tara could not help observing, with the general apathy or dread that seemed to reign in the countenances of all their countrymen, or as they would have it, their fellow freemen. ..} ' i • ••.'• !•• '



As Joseph of Austria and Catherine of Russia entertained each other with projects of soldiery, and dividing the Turkish empire, and were perplexed, not with considering the means of conquest, but as one of them said, to know " que diablefaire avec Constantinople," so our friends, the revolutionary ministers of Piedmont, were sorely puzzled to decide what they should do with Vienna, what with the Pope,—how Italy was to be united—or where her seat of government was to be established ? Lord Tara, however, recalled them to the order of the day, by mentioning the troops that Latour was collecting against them at Novara, and the aid that the royalist general expected to receive from Austria.

The amiable minister at war, who was an elegant scholar, and a good botanist, resolved to quench these royalists at once; so he averred. And he accordingly sat down, and penned a proclamation or address to the troops, which breathed all the energy of the first Brutns. It

VOL. II, D



was ordered to be read to each regiment; and the soldiers who heard, were more alarmed at its fury than at the discharge of a whole park of Austrian cannon. The house of Austria was devoted, of course, to the infernal Gods, and the house of Bourbon, by insinuation, was prudently. hinted at, as deserving to be consigned to the same fate. It is difficult, however, to be at once wise and energetic, and the minister in question was most excusable, we think, in being forcible on paper, since deeds were not to follow of the same pith. This was the first act of the junta, when left to itself by the desertion of the Prince. . ....... •f' '-. '

For fear, however, that Austria should not think it prudent to commence hostilities, or offend the rising power of these liberators of Italy, war was declared in due form against the empire, and as the mode of announcing it by herald was a courtesy that savoured of feudal barbarism, a mob intimated to the Austrian resident, that his house would be pulled about his ears, unless he speedily departed. Nothing ever before or since equalled the boldness and chivalry of these chiefs, except perhaps the renowned secretary San Miguel, when he gallantly insulted Russia, Prussia, and Austria; and straight threw down his audacious pen, and ran.



This was not altogether what Lord Tara desired : he preferred the ways of peace, the civil acts of liberty, the glorious eloquence of national assemblies. But here was not a word of assembly or representative; the Austrians were too imminent, and to repel them first became the object in which all others merged. The council in short became a council of war. Colligno proposed at once advancing upon Milan,'not deigning to take into consideration the royalist force, nor its Austrian auxiliaries already entering upon the Piedmontese territory. Count Luigi arrived in the mean time, having discarded hismusquet, even before the hour of his guard expired, his patience not equalling his zeal. Lord Tara delivered to him his batch of constitutions all care* fully drawn up ; and the council laughed heartily at the bonhommie of the good Marchese, who furnished them such abundance of forms of government—they would have been more thankful for some of the means. They were in fact as poor as mice—and they knew that a soldier, if his canteen were replenished with no better nourishment than patriotism, would have little stomach to fight. . ■ Ii v.j :t(;'j ir■7/ .nanojaxa



However, the deficiency in breadj the minister at war was to make up in addresses. Civilians, ministers, all determined on joining the ranks, and repelling the enemy, even his grave lordship was obliged to profess his readiness to make use of a musquet against the enemy, with which engagement of his zeal his friends were considerate enough to dispense.

Rather untoward tidings arrived at this time: that their brethren and instigators, the Neapolitans, had yielded without a blow to the inva* ders; and a chill could not fail to strike them— if they could not defend their mountains and defiles, how were the Piedmontese to preserve there open territory ? But the die was cast ; it was now too late for the half dozen of conspirators to retreat, and although the country might reprofess obedience to their lawful sovereign, the scaffold or flight was all left to them ; and night from a contested field of battle seemed the most honourable mode of terminating their political existence. War then to the knife, was the final resolution — all the troops were to be hurried towards the frontier, and for fear of jealousy, each was to take the command of whatever corps or battalion was next him. The minister, in the heat of penning his addresses, thought the naming of a generalissimo quite an unnecessary regulation— although indeed the difficulty of finding a fit one might stand as a fair excuse.





CHAPTER X.

Throughout the space of a long night's dream, Lord Tarti revelled in the first campaigns that followed the French revolution. Cottnt Bubna seemed another Brunswick, commencing an arrogant and menacing attack upon a people new 'tort! to 'freedom^ and destined to experience a feVerge similar'to thai bf^lJie G I'nruui prince of manifesto-memory. General

••''tatbu* :V£ ^tne'Cnouaii tof, and Novara the La Vendee of Piedmont. And from the barfks of the Po, even to Vienna, Lord Tara's dream of conquest, ran from Alp to Alp, till in another Austerlitz he fancied to behold the house 6f Hapsburg trodden into its native dust, be

' 'rieath the arms of dveriging Italy. In his slumber the trumpet of'victory sounded—he awoke, and the same war note alarmed his ear, a very dubious prelude to the grand accomplishment which his imagination had anticipated.



Fearing to lose the glorious spectacle of Italian liberty's first victory, his lordship hastened to equip himself for the campaign, which he was entering upon, and mounting his steed, sped forthwith Count Luigi, who had appointed to accompany him, towards the theatre of war. The , ;^.b<eat to arms" of the minister's proclamation bad won from their parents and the academia, a icrowd.pf young volunteers, who thronged the road leading to Novara, more supplied with zeal than discipline. And divers regiments of . ttye line, coaxed more than led on by the officers, were proceeding in the same route. There . seemed to be little zeal or alacrity in their mo. tipns, and few shouts for a constitution that • jpqne .comprehended. .It is \rue, however, of , pen, as of other physical bodies, that motion, if $, impulse be g^ye^, is .$8 naturally perhaving begun to march towards Novara, their steps kept time in- ffiat direction; but as to any further exertions to"fife expected of them, after they had arrived there, he must have been a very sanguine constitutionalist who could have expected it.



Nevertheless, as the royalist Piedmontesewerfe reluctant to advance from the shelter of the Lombard frontier, and the expected aid that was to issue thence, the young captains of the revolutionary troops at length succeeded in congregating the respective regiments in a position not far from that of General Latour. Her* Count Luigi and Lord Tara arrived with a crowd of civilians, who seemed to have monopolized to their own share the great portion of the party's martial spirit, for truly amongst the soldiery it was lacking. And all the ministers came in state to participate in the mortal debate that was to decide respecting their continuance in office, as if it had been a cabinet dinner, where long heads are fitly in command.

Meantime the hostile armies encamped opposits to• each other, seemed to Lord Tara, who, wi$*the restless desire of an Englishman to behold declared combatants come to blows, was always 4kthe outposts of the constitutionalists, to haveno mind whatever to decide the question seriously, keeping up, on the contrary, the most amicable intercourse, which, however it may exist between the armies of great rival nations consistently with spirit, can scarcely be so with the mvete> Andnjhei revolution might Y*n ia a morp flunUnfury manner than it W3s, i^,^fiJSQB6titWtioiaal captains had not entrusted. the• advance post; \o tfe$ fceep. ing of the sltudeRt^ ••an4 ^n^&TBpj&g?. .Civilian exalttiS. • neq 9ff j fy, noirioq Jbot^ iili siBiie At length uo more forces continued to arrive. and it became necessary to attempt fo dislodge the





finest troops he bad ever beheld. But at present it was too late; the attack had been delayed precisely until Bubna had advanced to the aid of the royalists with the few regiments, chiefly ef cavalry and artillery, that he could muster ; for the whole force of the Regno LombardsV«neto had been previously marched off to Naples.

At the council of war in which the resolution to attack was decided, the victory of the next day seemed not the most important point in discussion, nor yet the occupation of Milan, to which, the Ticin once crossed behind Novara, it was but a day's march. The grand design of the war minister, and that which he seemed most eager to impress the necessity of on the rest of the council, was an expedition through the state of Modena to intercept the return of the Austrians from Naples—they were not to be permitted to pass the Roman territories on their way home. The skirmish of to-morrow would annihilate die really small force, to which the defence of Lombardy had been entrusted, and it became the hero always to look beyond the present,



.;.)••. •. ••

' Nil actum reputans, si quid superesset agendum.'

From the frequent recurrence of classic names, heroes invoked, and ancient writers referred to in the speeches of the modern Allobroges, Lord Tara, .who attended the council, half fancied himself brought back to the days of the lower empire. Polybius and Vegetius were quoted by the sapient war minister, as elucidating the tactics to be employed against the Austrians, and Cassar was an authority in this classic militaro council, that far outweighed the precepts of Montecaeuli, whose works, by the bye, the warlike mania of the late king had caused to be published, for the enlightenment of his guards, It is a marvel even, that the shield and javelin were not forthwith substituted for the nuisquet and bayonet, and a thick phalanx or legion formed of their forces, for the convenience of the enemy's cannon. :<• •! ..1 // •".«••• ai.ifo Lord Tara issued from the council in the most high-wrought mind of heroism; the eve of all his gorgeous visions being realized was at hand; and the evening itself moreover a lovely one, the sun sinking amongst the western Alps, whose summits, for it was early in April, still wore their covering of winter's snow ; the lesser and nearer ridges of the noble mountains above Masserano, not far from the hostile armies, reared themselves, like great national witnesses, in view of the approaching combat; and the ancient Ticin, that had once been red with the gallant blood of the Roman and Carthaginian, rolled in sight Unfortunately for Lord Tara's classic heroism, all the victories of the ancient Romans, at least the most renowned, were fought either for existence, or else for conquest and regovracet "jffefl early field in which the Tarquins wer•e defeated, was .too obscure to have a name attached to it in his memory; and no other classic victory, in Roman annals at least, could he discover, that he might invoke the prototype of the one about to take place.





The important morn arrived. The revolutionists, under the command of they knew not whom, for none of their chiefs had the impertinence to promote themselves to the brevet of general, advanced against Navara. Count Luigi and Lord Tara both placed themselves in the troops of St. M——. The infantry were ordered to attack, but as they begged to consider of it, or shewed an absence of all motion much to that effect, the cavalry was ordered to approach the walls of Novara, with the intent, no doubt, of storming it. And the gallant royalists within, dreading the effects of such an audacious manoeuvre, as an escalade a chevdl, commenced firing their cannons as a warning to the cavaliers. These young heroes, amongst whom was Luigi, found the martial ardour of themselves and the mettle of the horses vain against stone-walls ;



they accordingly retreated, to the great disheartenment of their friends, who expected to see Novara taken by a charge of horse. As the royalist Piedmontese, however, remained within cover of the walls, the victory and the vapouring were for a space in the hands of the patriots, until, just as they were about to send a dispatch to Turin, that a Te Deum might be sung in their honour, a cloud of dust bespoke a new and more worthy enemy.

These were the detested Austrians, the drilled slaves, and blind instruments of tyranny, vowed to destruction by the men of free Italy, as soon as encountered. Against these enemies the constitutionalist infantry regiment declared an equal reluctance to fight—when ordered against Novara, the plea of backwardness had been, that they would not spill the blood of their brethren —and when the Austrians appeared, who could not be respected as brethren, the excuse was, that those gentlemen had in no wise offended them, not even by violating le sol paternel, as



the young chiefs in imitation of French flourish, eloquently urged.

The students, the volunteers, and the young conscripts raised by the proclamation of the minister, took upon themselves to rout this new enemy, and accordingly advanced in column, as regular as their discipline admitted, against the Imperialists. The Austrian general, not aware of the raw troops with whom he had to do, and not abounding by any means in superfluous force, brought 4 park of artillery to play upon this column, which presented itself most obligingly to an enfilading fire ; and the enthusiasm of the young soldiers began to evaporate sensibly beneath a shower of grape. They observed to one another, that it was against flesh and blood they had been sent, not against flying lead and iron; and the mode of defence they declared unfair in the extreme, and cowardly. Having arrived at this estimation of their enemy's courage, it was beneath them to be slaughtered by beings they demised ; whereupon all turned and fled. ,,,..? ^p



The Austrians advanced. The horsemen,

*. I: *. /J3.)

who possessed courage really, waited to ser the irregular column of infantry broken and flying, and then charged the enemy gallantly, until they arrived near enough to discharge all their. pistols, by which feat having properly redeemed, as they thought, the national honour, they too turned bridle, and followed the foot. Count Luigi./with dr^wn. sw^d* hewing• the air ./orj lack of being near enough to an Austrian, for * considerable time was doomed to have his ardour still unsatisfied; for scarcely had he beheld the red cap of the Austrian cavalry, when the flight became general, his steed and himself borne with it irresistibly away from danger and. distinction. Lord Tara too trotted towards Tulips,; in as much admiration of Italian courage, as the precautions necessary for bis would alloitT



izzhig past them, but his good allies, the flying cavalry of the Constitution, were, each cavalie'f of them, so intent on their peculiar self-defence, that they played their sabres round in the hurried panic of flight, and heeded little whether they demolished the skull of friend or foe, provided they passed safe.

His lordship, however, did, through good fortune, reach Turin, and from the thence frontier of France, which he entered as a peaceable English subject, resolved, moreover, never to fling off that character again. He had experienced quite a Surfeit of continental politics, and he at last eveucamWto the opinion, that a seat in our" Corrupted House of Commons was a more honourable and more safe occupation for an homme d'etat, than revolutionizing the classic peninsula. In these sentiments he was perfectly joined by Count Luigi Lecco, who found it convenient to make London his residence for a considerable time. The patriotic dreams of the Marquis ended in his .being condemned to the solitary enjoyment of them in the fortress of Spielberg, and the forebodings of the Marchioness were but too strictly verified.



THE END OF IL POLITICO.





INTRODUCTION.

It is not to be expected that the portfolio of the artist should contain all finished pictures, and full length portraits. These must be intermingled with loose sketches, with traits, attitudes and expressions, hastily caught, and scarcely pencilled, with crude ideas undeveloped for want of leisure at their first suggestion, or want of humour afterwards. To work such a farrago up together on one piece of canvass, would prove a vain and an ungrateful undertaking ; whereas to offer them in their original state to the view, is certainly the best mode of making them afford entertainment to the amateur.

la the preceding tales, the reader has been presented with two specimens of his compatriots, drawn somewhat at full length (in the latter instance move perhaps than the subject merited), and now for an interval we beg him to be contented with turning over a few loose scraps, containing sketches made in divers companies, and in divers places of the Peninsula, wherever Britons mingle;—and where, indeed, do they not—



" Quse regio in terris nostri non plena laboris ?1' (

The name under which these sketches are united, may perplex some readers: I have, however, classic authority for calling the wandering English in Italy Zingari, or gipsies; the Inglesi Zingari is a common expression for us in that language and land, which we so much patronize and admire; and it has commenced more than one letter of introduction borne by English travellers from Italian refugees in England, to their friends and families in Italy.





THE BOY CONNOISSEUR.

I Do not believe that Frank Standish ever looked for two minutes consecutively at a picture for the first seven and twenty years of his life. Having spent all that time in England, he may urge, that this betrayed a taste of true and exemplary fastidiousness. But this plea shall not be allowed. Putting colour on canvas makes in our island no part of the great drama of life ; it is not here, as in Italy, like the air we breathe, or the constitution we live under, in every one's mouth; and a total indifference to it is nature, not fastidiousness. Frank did not travel in Italy to see " Correggio's and stuff," but to make the grand tour, made by every petit maitre of the day, and I had no more idea of seeing Frank metamorphosed into a connoiseur, than I had of seeing him aspire to the popedom.



Travel, however, is the hot-bed of affectation ; if there be a seed, a germ of it in the disposition, travel will force it to the light, and it is for this reason that womankind are so rarely improved by seeing foreign countries, and return in general so much more affected and ridiculous. Mankind still is far from proof; and he really is one of exemplary sagacity, who doth not return from abroad to his friends at home, with some strange whim or affectation, that but for his voyaging would have remained totally undeveloped. Some go forth ignorant, and return pedantic and overlearned ; some go forth regular and moral, and return gallants and libertines; some leave England as saints, and return to it infidels: others set out thorough John Bulls, contemning and denouncing every object they meet abroad, and return utter Jack Sprats to do the same by every thing they meet in England; the very opposite of their case, vice versa, is no uncommon consequence of tourification.



I left Frank at Paris, a gay frequenter of Tortoni's, the Opera, the Boulevards, and at times Robert's, importing coats from Cliffordstreet, and stage-coaches from Long Acre, to astonish the Parisian world at Long-champs. At Naples having questioned him if he intended to drive four.in-hand through the Toledo, he bestowed on me such a look of commiseration for the Gothic thought, as the Athenian philosopher cast upon the young charioteer. Frank had grown a man of taste and a collector of pictures, naturally enough, indeed, at Florence, where, I verily believe, if you asked a man for a loaf, he would put you off with a plaster

model or a sketch.

•.<

The first opportunity I had of learning this of Frank, surprised me much. We rode to visit, I believe, the palace of Capo di Monte. On being shown its treasures, I ventured, relying upon the certainty that I addressed a comrade of common sense and plain classic taste, uninitiated in the cant of their schools and colours, to make such remarks as a man of the world might make on one of Camuccini's pictures—something relative to the expression, the character being true to history. Frank, to my surprise, deigned no answer or comment to my remark—it was wide of the art, quite beneath him; and in order to teach his ignorant friend what ought to have been said upon such a picture, in order to display a right feeling for the art, Frank commenced a dissertation on schools and design, on colouring, grouping, and the chiaroscuro. I was dumb.

voL. II. E





" Pray, Frank, how is taste acquired with respect to the works of art, at which you have become so au fait ?"

" Cannot tell, egad," replied Frank, who wished me to believe, that the jargon he had industriously picked up, proceeded from ideas in his mind, and these from inspiration.

" Did you read any work on the subject .?r1





" Read, not I."

" How then is an ignorant man to become free of its mysteries ?"

" Learn first what is good, and then ask yourself what is good in the approved specimen.'"

That is indeed the mode of old criticism, was my reflection. However, I allowed Frank his way, succumbed and shrunk into my ignorance, whilst my friend assumed the upper tone on all topics of taste, and on the strength of his lately acquired connoisseurship,—had even the impertinence, whilst I was admiring a beautiful prospect over the Terra di Lavoro, to interrupt my enthusiasm by the remark, that " though beautiful, it was not picturesque.*1

From having been a gay, agreeable companion, with that free and disengaged attention, fresh and ready to grapple with all subjects of discussion, which peculiarly and perhaps solely marks the gentleman, from the gentleman devoted to calling or profession, and consequently having his ideas restricted to flow in a certain channel, I found my friend metamorphosed into a bore. He was as great a nuisance as a youth but a week in love, so stationary were his ideas, so tied by the



/

ligaments of affectation to his new fancy, that he could not think or speak but as the connoisseur. Being a modest man, I endured Standish's assumption of superiority in all humility, supposing that so much pretence in a character hitherto so unaffected, could not be founded slightly. Judge of my mortification on meeting a noble and rea^ connoisseur of experience in his company a few days after. He was then as much afraid to hazard an opinion as I had been in his presence; and he evidently as little understood the loftier and more mysterious jargon of the veteran, as I had comprehended his syllabizing from the primer of the art. " So," thought I, " there are grades and degrees, it seems, in the free-masonry of the arts —the novice is but free of half the glossary until he becomes master, and may frame the arbitrary rules and gimcrack tokens of the brotherhood." I was a bold man afterwards, and feared not to talk plain sense to the initiated, though it be difficult to drag them down to that level.



There are very few productions of the painter's art, that can possibly interest us of the present day, as men. As artists, all who can view them in such a light must no doubt admire them. But here is the affectation, all will regard them as artists—none have the courage to look on them as mere men, first and principally. Factitious pleasure is so much more exciting than the real, —the indulgence of vanity than the enjoyment of feeling. " The Transfiguration" of Raphael, is one of those pictures capable of striking us in both characters,—it would appal the child as well as astound the artist. Consequently every one admires it, and to admire it is consequently vulgar. Frank Standish always turned from it to Domenichino's Confession of St. Jerome—the disgusting representation of an old being receiving the sacred wafer from the hands of some richly robed bishop, with not a story, not an association connected with it, that could possibly interest an Englishman. With what preluding raptures Frank ordered the Capuchin to unveil Guido's Archangel Michael, " the Apollo of Christian art," as some connoisseur has called it. I declared it a vulgar, awkward attempt at an archangel, who seems not to have even learned the spear exercise. With what a profound regard of pity was I answered.



" Would you harness those steeds to aught save a brewer's dray ?" was asked of him as he gloated on the pye-bald Flanders mares, that the imaginative artist hath yoked to the car of Aurora.

" Why," replied hastily the indignant connoisseur, " thou mightst as well find fault with the coarse limbs and thick ancles of the goddesses of art."

" And in truth do I."

" Consider their age."

" And what hath age or antiquity to plead in excuse of the deliberate choice of such an ideal f • ••'



" But look, is there not genius in the ease, the force of that attitude, in the flesh of that very leg ?"

" Genius in the flesh of a leg, my dear fellow. But come, I can allow all that you ask, and put out of sight and consideration, by the exercise of habit and reflection, mark me, all the absurdities that mar my pleasure. And perhaps I can appreciate the pains, the genius (if you will have it so) requisite to overcome difficulties, and produce those very fine pictures, and very uninteresting representations of life. And allow me to say, that the great ruin of the art, is, that all who judge it, will judge, not as unsophisticated beholders, but as free of the craft, It is left without any guidance, or warning, or advice from the taste that is independent of it; and it goes on framing rules for itself in a path similar to that pursued by the Lakists in our poetry, who are independent of the vulgar taste of the world, and who write for none beyond poetreaders like themselves. Artists paint for artists, not the world—why? because the little world that alone dares to judge them, is altogether composed either of real or affected artists. Here in this chamber, what are all their boasted chef cTasuvres to an incredulous age, but the memorials of genius, no longer its spirit. And yet all the excellence we aim at, is an imitation of what is in itself perished ;—every wish, every effort is limited to the execution, the manner —the effect, the expression, are terms, in the artist's sense used, but taken in the world's acceptation, never thought of. Painters take such fellows as you Frank for the world, and labour to please you. They succeed. But to a man of common sense, and common taste, there are no historic pictures of the day, certainly few indeed of any day, that can convey predominant pleasure. The art is powerless, as addressed to mankind broadly, and falls in almost every instance below the preconceptions of any man. There is no other art that does not far out-top previous conceptions of it.— Poetry, music, sculpture even, each wield their thunder; but painting, even from its infancy, seems doomed to be corrupted and led astray into insignificance, and by such beings as thou art Frank. I have borne thy airs long, and now my vengeance hath overflowed upon thec."





" You had better print this tirade," said Frank, " 'tis precious nonsense."

I have obeyed him.





THE SENTIMENTAL BARONET.

It was just such an evening as that on which the Coliseum should be visited by the devout worshipper of antiquity. The grey twilight which had not long relieved the mellow glow of sunset in the task of illuminating the ancient city of the masters of the world, was itself relieved by the rising moon, which now poured its ray upon the theatre of Titus. That ray fell through the still perfect windows of the ancient edifice, and left their forms distinctly marked on the arena within. The enormous skeleton of the interior structure rested in sombre shade, save where an aperture permitted the partial illumination of a space. The crosses and statues erected round the arena, where so many martyrs had breathed their last, thus placing the triumph of Christianity in bold contrast with the ancient imperial pride of Rome, swelled materially the host of thoughts that association conjured up. And the papal sentinel established there, not so much to guard the venerable ruin, as to raise contributions on those who loved to view it " by the pale moonlight," added to the prevailing sentiment inspired, which was a comparison between the pride of ancient and the beggary of modern Rome.



Such was the night and scene, when the commanding form of an Englishman, muffled and mantled for the purpose of concealment entered the amphitheatre, and flinging a franc or two to the greedy guard, was left to pursue his meditations and perambulations, as he wished, alone. Awhile he paced the arena, gazing upwards on the carved parapet, over which the same old stars that had marked its erection, now twinkled down upon its ruin. The pines of the Caelian rustled in the blast, whilst the Briton meditated on some purpose that seemed to agitate his manly breast. He paused, spoke a moment to himself, and straight, as if he had at length adopted a resolution, he crossed the arena, and ascended the wooden staircase that leads to the upper tiers or stories of the amphitheatre. Cautiously he paced those ancient corridores, through which his form was seen to glide. What his purpose might be did not trouble the papal guardian of the ruins, all too well accustomed to the strange freaks and whims of Englishmen, and too well paid not to interfere with them, now to mind the somewhat suspicious motives of the present visitor.



Anon alit from a carriage, at the entrance of the Coliseum, a gay party, chiefly of ladies, and having in a similar way appeased the Cerberi that guarded the amphitheatre, they entered and commenced their work of contemplation and admiration. Having sufficiently enjoyed the view of the structure from below, they also proceeded up the wooden stair-case to the lofty parts of the theatre,—whither although a countryman had preceded them, still no sound or figure warned them of his presence, all on the contrary remaining silent as the grave. Here, too, where was so much food for contemplation, the sentimental repast was enjoyed by the party ; they proceeded up and around in delight, when an attendant exclaimed,



" Dear me, Lady Watkins, what is that, did you hear nothing ?" and a sound was certainly heard to issue from one of the dark recesses of the circular corridore, and reverberate through the amphitheatre.

" Good Heavens P exclaimed her ladyship, terrified.

" Boh !" cried the appalling voice from the recess.

" It is prodigiously like a calf," observed one of the gentlemen that accompanied her Ladyship, " I wonder how it could have strayed up here."



" Oh, no," said one of the young ladies, " it is the ghost of Titus Oates, that built thii theatre for his informations; so papa told ine."

" Boh!" cried the ghost of Titus Oates or Emperor, whilst Lady Watkins was nearly fainting.

" By Jupiter, I'll drag forth your ghostship," menaced Mr. . At which threat

the ghost made his appearance in the shape of the sentimental, mantled, muffled gentleman, who had preceded the party in their visit.

" Good God ! Sir William Watkins," said Lady Watkins, the ghost being no other than her own beloved husband, the baronet, " what could have brought you to the Coliseum ?"

•* To frighten you, my dear," replied the worshipper of antiquity !





THE ECONOMIST.

General Jessop was an old Indian officer of India's really golden days, when a fixed number of years broiling were certain to elevate the penny less cadet to rank, wealth, and a peccant liver. These days have passed by, we learn; a voyage to India being no more the same speculation that it used to prove to the younger brotherhood and sisterhood of the last century; but this is not to the purpose. Jessop was a shrewd, close subaltern abroad, careful of health and purse, and with an eye so fixedly bent on future prospects, that he would not move them, no, not for all the pleasures that the present could bestow. On this principle the prudent officer shut up his senses, all those at least that are traiterous avenues to the heart, against the fascinations of every fresh imported cargo of European loveliness, which flocked to the halcyon land of matrimony, under pretext of visiting uncle, brother, or cousin, as it might be.



Each year fresh blooming cheeks were wafted to those eastern shores, but Jessop had computed the exact sum that by such a time he would have amassed, and marriage would too sensibly interfere with those ways and means to be admitted within the range of practicability. He looked forward ardently to the enjoyment of independence, bachelordom, and ill humour at home in England. This was his dream; for even the most grovelling build a sort of " castles," or rather hovels " in the air." In short, Jessop was too keen a fellow to throw away his subtle head and proper person on a woman.

Home at length sailed Jessop, a general, and a nabob for wealth and consideration, supporting still that immaculate character for prudence, that had made him to be thought of by all men with contempt, and treated by them with reverence. Now, what think you, good and gentle reader, was the first act of the General's vaunted prudence, soon after he breathed again the air of Britain ? why, to take unto himself that object of his whole life's abhorrence, a wife:— True, perhaps, but then a woman of fortune and connection?—The lady's fortune consisted in three grown up daughters, marriageable, though unportioned ; and the sole connection she seemed to enjoy was that with an army-agent, for the half-yearly receipt of a subaltern's widow's pension. The General, who was a close, worldly reasoner, argued afterwards on the extreme sagacity with which he had acquired, not only a wife, but a family reared to his hand, their age averaging about a score of years each,— "What a saving," argued General Jessop, "their rearing and education for these twenty years, which had been gone irretrievably had I married my dear Letty twenty years ago in India, as I would have done, but for " and the





general struck his sapient forehead with his finger.

In despite of all these proofs of his prudence, it became in a few months a mooted point in the General's cabinet, whether he should not return to broil again in India, in order to provide the better for his cheaply acquired progeny. So nearly were his plans upset, that the roundhouse of an outward-bound Indiaman was secured for Mrs. Jessop and her daughters. Avavice, his dear, dear prudence, prompted a return to the golden service, but shame, and the " dread laugh " of his comrades, urged him in the end effectually to stay at home.

" We will stay in England, then," decided General Jessop, " I cannot think of exposing my wife and my girls to that detestable climate." Such, and in such paternal kindness was said to originate the final resolve. " But economy, Mrs. Jessop, economy, the most rigid, is the only resource. We must creep, while others fly, and yet we must wear the wings, as though we flew too. Appearances—we must be neither beggared, nor laughed at. Economy is the plan." And economy became the plan so far, that though in truth not needed, it became the sole thought of General Jessop, his very hobbyhorse and whim.



The Jessops in consequence, avoided altogether that useless expense, an establishment. They had lodgings for the winter season always in some delightful suburb of London, out of the way of the bad air and the coaches, whither it would be a false compliment to invite any one to dinner; and the General, in pressing an invitation, always took care to characterize the compliment as such. They appeared at the watering places in the demi-season, and cashiered horses and servants regularly during the months of summer. All this is very unlike the Indian character, may be observed. True indeed it is so. The generous minded and noble race of nabobs are much maligned, especially of late, caricatured in " St. Konan's Well," and quiz/ed, with more truth, however, in the " Sayings and Doings." Some sterling writer, accustomed to India life, ought to make them the amende honorable by a portraiture of the true Old Indian,—the hasty, but good-natured, the bilious, but amiable, generous, noble soldier. As for me, I do but sketch from particular life ; and the prominent life that lies attractive to the observation of the novelist, is generally more than half made up of exceptions. The continent had been several years open to us, ere the General dared to conceive the plan of going thither for the sake of economy. Had he done so at first boldly, he might have found advantage in his favourite consideration. Prudently, however, he permitted his wise countrymen to spend a few years in informing foreigners to what extent Englishmen might be imposed on; and then, vowing England was intolerably dear, General Jessop bent his course towards France. Paris, however, was quite as bad as London—the prices of beef and mutton quite as enormous, and the General declared indignantly that he would not live in a city where he could not go to market himself. However, as proficiency in dancing was a commodity to be purchased in the French capital at an exceedingly moderate rate, the Miss Clintons, so were called the General s step-daughters, were made to acquire a certain portion of that fascinating art, that as an English lady once observed, " the girls' feet might have a French accent, although their tongues might not."





The banks of the Loire were the next limit of the General's peregrination, in search, not so much of the picturesque, as of the economical. In the English colony of Tours, then flourishing under the prefetship of a Franco-Irishman, named Waters, General Jessop felt extremely happy,—it was gay for the girls, cheap for the General, the clime and scenery delicious. Then, the English residents, though at first resisted in their determination to visit the market themselves and purchase in person their provisions,— though resisted by male and female venders to a desperate extent at first, had at last reconciled these venders to cheating the gentry themselves, instead of, as before, permitting them to be cheated solely by their domestics; and John Bull being thus, on the merits of his gullibility, allowed by the peasant of Touraine free of the market, the General enjoyed the daily delight of bargaining and cheapening, and of saving liards at the expenceof several pennyworths of breath. His wine, too, with what delight he drank the sour puddle at fourteen sous the bottle, out of the vineyard fresh, and of the comet year. The girls made wry faces, as they sipped this nectar from 7w«e-glasses for grandeur-sake, though the capacity of a water-glass more befitted the beverage; and all declared it supreme. Mint-sauce, i. e. sugar, vinegar, and water, is the English liquid, that approaches nearest in taste and semblance to the nectarious juice, called wine, over the name and idea of which Britons gloat, whilst their stomachs turn at the smack.





These ways of the General proceeded from whim, however, more than from parsimony or meanness. He was a gentleman, and possessed of the feelings of such,—he soon began to find in Tours divers inconveniencies, which even the beauty and cheapness of the banks of the Loire could not compensate. Voltaire it is, I believe, who compared the English nation,—he might have said any nation,—to a barrel of their own good ale; the top all froth, the bottom dregs, and the middle very good stuff. Of English emigration, the order was of the same arrangement—the froth went forth to travel first, and lastly the dregs; which dregs came to settle, of all places, chiefly at Tours. Spendthrifts, debtors, black-legs, and ways-and-means-men, such families as can breathe the air of boarding-houses, and their half-pay dwellers therein, that must tolerate any company, began to infect the halcyon region of our economist, to ogle his daughters, not admiringly, but insolently, in the public promenade, to shoulder them at the prefet's routes, and even to quiz the nabob's queue almost within hearing. As the precious swarm thickened, duels became more frequent, and portions of the amiable history of the new colonists escaped from time to time. Some were shot to be sure—others ran away from creditors, and with friends'1 horses; but enough of the same species remained behind, always to render Tours no longer an agreeable residence for a gentleman. Thus, as in the eruption of the Goths and Vandals upon the old empire of Rome, the more wicked and ferocious Hun still pressed upon the steps of the somewhat civilized Goth, and impelled him forward,—so the older British settlers in Touraine, and such delightful spots, felt themselves compelled to raise their camp and remove their tents further south, beyond the reach of their troublesome and disgraceful countrymen.





General Jessop, in concert with about ten others of the older and more respectable emigrants at Tours, resolved to shape his course for Nice: and at that almost British colony, within the verge of the Italian frontier, the General and his family arrived without hap or harm. Here they for some time resided on the Mediterranean's verge, whilst they put in practice new schemes of economy, which generally ended, nevertheless, in leaving the expenditure of the year, much the same as it had been in the purse-consuming land of Britain, where men pay for the light of heaven, and the air they breathe :—the British atmosphere, in my mind, is worth it.

The Misses Clintons were not satisfied at Nice; they longed, as was very natural, to explore the beauties and sights of the renowned Peninsula, the having visited which, urged one of the grrls archly to her step-father, is quite a fortune in itself to a young person. The Nizzan patois too, that very faint reflection of the lingua Toscana,

Vol. si, v



was still fascinating and sweet to the ears. In short, a residence at Nice, without having previously voyaged over to Italy to satiety, was declared to be the punishment of Tantalus; and in truth the girls had reason. The General long resisted, or in other words, took a long time to reconcile the voyage to his plans of economy, but as he wasreally kind-hearted, his imagination lent an effectual aid to this, in discovering ways by which the grim genius of economy might be propitiated. And, happily, the General did at last light upon an expedient.

This was no other than the very sublime expedient of Doctor Syntax, " to make a tour, and then to write it;" not, however, any of those common place descriptions of scenery, society, antiquities, or pictures, that inundate the world in quartos. The General's was altogether another, a more original plan, and this was to publish an " Economical tour through Italy, &c." in which the prices current of the several capitals were to be accurately noted down and compared. " It will form a new era in tour writing," said the General to himself, " and cannot but interest the public. Few care for picturesque, fewer for the arts, and fewer still for antiquities,—but economy, economy, comes home to every man's heart and pocket. Eustace may tell the traveller, where he ought to be enraptured, where struck with the sacredness of some classic spot—Forsyth may intruct where to regard the modern structure with the look of contempt—and Galignani may point out the road—I for my part engage to furnish the more popular book, in teaching where a dinner is to be had cheap and good, how, of what viands,and with what cuisine. Let others lucubrate in the Vatican and the Pitti, I will be the critic of the hotel and the cellar.



Fraught with this, if not noble, at least lucrative idea, General Jessop set forth for Turin, where he found little to note, save the excellence r 2



of their cane-biscuits, of which a gentleman may devour for his dinner, a bundle resembling the Roman fasces, or a well-worn broom. The gradual blending that takes place between the French and Italian cookery in the capital of Piedmont, failed not to afford copious disquisition to the general. His labour, however, must not be forestalled in these pages, especially, as I make no doubt, they have ere this reached the book-obstetric sages of the Row.

By the time that the General had .traversed I.ombardy, making himself known and celebrated for his gourmand inquiries amongst the gourmand Milanese, his plan had transpired, and he himself considered a character, of whom a thousand anecdotes illustrative of his economy and curiosity were predicated, how true all or each of them is impossible to decide. As most .of them are apocryphal, I shall not set down, except the short sketch that chance allowed me lo make of this singular family. They • had just set out from Bologna, and were journeying



towards Florence. A party of us overtook them slowly mounting the acclivities of the Appenine, in a huge English carriage, well guarded with an economic oil-cloth. Tho ladies occupied the inside, and the General himself from the box over looked the operations of the vetturin and his mules, who were conveying him over the mountain. To have been swept over the lonely and uninteresting road, by the speed of post horses, would have cost but a few additional francs, and would have made little more than a day's journey of it. But the General loved to save those few francs, and to allow himself time and opportunity for putting queries upon the road, or information on his favourite points.

He had agreed, in consequence, with one of those keen and plush-clad tribe of Florentines, called Vetturini, to convey him, his vehicle, and his family safe to Florence, providing them with bed and suppers by the way. The female part of the family were in a state of too great subjection to protest against any of these plan*, and accordingly forth they crawled from Bologna, to make their first experiment of vetturino travelling. As for the first mile, the stout mules and their conductor walked leisurely on, the patience of the General was preserved. He applauded this easy mode of beginning a journey. But when the third, fourth, and fifth league came to be crawled over at the same pace, his placidity was distracted. The ladies put their heads forth every second from the carriage with a chiding look, that would have spurred on any other pair of animals than a mule and a Florentine. The poor General himself was chilled by the wind and scorched by the sun at the same time; the country was barren and monotonous, and all other sounds were overwhelmed in the everlasting tinkling of some thirty bells, appended from different parts of the mules' brass-bestudded harness. The General would have given up his economic francs, to see himself borne along at a moderate pace by those post-horses that he had condemned. But it was too late now to change his determination. Those infernal bells were to be endured, as well as the mules quiet pace, for no satisfaction was to be elicited from the imperturbable Tuscan:





" Is it at this pace you intend to travel to Florence?"

" Si, Slgnor."

" We shall not arrive at this rate, till the day after to-morrow."

" Hornpossibile* replied the Tuscan.

" Why, man, I could walk as fast."

" Sicuro, to be sure you could," was the consolatory answer.

The economist sought to make himself amends by feigning good humour, and entering into conversation with the snail-paced vetturino; but the Florentine's mouth was too full of aspirates to be at all intelligible, and the General was left to solitary meditation, his ears confounded with the tingling mule-bells, and his regards as sated with the unpicturesque outline of the barren, bleak Appinine, the monotony of which wa» unbroken, except here and there by a few ragged chesnut trees. He was for the first time sick of economy.



He consoled himself, however, with the thought, that he should feast at the expense of this rascally mule conductor. What was his horror, what that of his lady and her daughters, on the latter pointing out the abode where the night was to be passed ! It stood on. one of the bleakest summits of the Appenine, not a tree sheltering, or standing within many miles of it, a dark windowless tenement, bespeaking iUelf at the very first glance as the haunt of banditti. Through all the experience of past poverty, and present economy, Mrs. Jessop and her daughters had never been in so frightful a place; and the carriage rolled into the awful portal of a kind of covered court-yard, with an ominous and uncomfortable rumbling.

" What a horrid place," " what a cold, filthy dungeon !" " what a fearful hag!" were the ejaculations of the ladies, as they were conducted to the general banquetting-room of this hostelry of the Appennines. Here a table was already occupied by a band of ruffianly-looking fellows, with arms, and dogs, and vociferations, who devoured their messes with curious looks towards the newly arrived party, and grins interchanged betwixt each other. The general, the ladies, their domestics, all clustered together with the instinct of self-defence, and the looks of each, independent of its horror, spoke plainly enough, This is the fruits of economy ; we shall be robbed and murdered, all that the General might save half.a-dozen sixpences.



Whilst a filthy napkin was laid upon a table filthier, the English travellers cast their eyes

round to enumerate its discomforts. Bricks o'li . •• ••••:; •

were under foot, slates over head, and the white walls being decked with rude designs, contained entrances to all the sleeping apartments of the inn—holy dormitaries it would seem, each bear

ifiUiit .b(. : ...;•• • .i•• ) —>.•'• '



ing the title of some female saint of celebrity. The ladies chose to rest for the night under the patronage of Santa Maddalena, whilst the General committed himself to that of Santa Catherina of Sienna. Supper was brought, and the hungry travellers, in despite of the presence of the bandit party, as they seemed, gathered around the tureen that first made its appearance.

This was buona minestra, the sinister-looking hostess declared ; but which, on taste was discovered to be the better part of a loaf of bread immersed in boiling water, quite pure from unctuosity, if a few drops of floating lamp oil be excepted. To render this palateable, powdered parmesan was set before the guests to be mingled with the minestra. It would be a vain attempt to describe the looks that welcomed this meagre fare from the British travellers. After the minestra came the lesso, in semblance a skein or two of shreds of unravelled beef, so much had it been boiled for some more favoured guest's xuppa. This dish slighted, was removed by lodole on a skewer, i. e. roasted larks to the number of five, a bird for each mouth, which was devoured in solemn but uncomplaining silence, so much did they fear to anger any of the fearful inhabitants of the inn of the Appenines by ill-timed discontent. A few shrivelled apples and chesnuts finished the repast; and the General, not uncorking, indeed, but removing



9

some loose straw put in to serve the purpose of a cork, from the flagon, poured forth a pale pinkish, acrid beverage, no doubt the genial produce of the mountain vineyard, of which a sip proved sufficient for each. After which satisfactory experiment of the vetturino fare, the General retired to Santa Catherina, and the young ladies to Santa Maddalena, their mother accompanying them for protection in such a suspicious abode.

They had not long withdrawn when another party of mingled French and English travellers arrived late at the same petty inn, to whom the sinister-eyed hostess pleaded the scantiness of her accommodations, and asserted the impossibility of affording any one of them a bed, all in the house being already occupied. But the benighted partv had been accustomed to surmount such excuses, and bustled up stairs, incredulous of the landlady and in despite of her, to accommodate themselves. After much parleying, blustering, and menacing, by which a better supper was procured than had graced the repast of the Jessops, wr than indeed the house promised, the violent band of travellers proceeded to put the same means in practice for discovering beds. In vain the hostess and the host protested'that all the chambers were occupied, all full; it is an usual rule with travellers in the Peninsula not to suffer themselves to be convinced by these protestations; and accordingly the foremost of the party. proceeded to examine Santa Maddalena, and all the other saints round the hall. Italian locks were never intended for resistance; and at the first push, lo! our band of ruffians found themselves in the midst of the alarmed Mrs. Jessop and her daughters.— " Thieves, murder, General, help," rung in the solitary auberge of the Appenines, to the great mirth of the intruders; until the General who.;had been aroused by the clamour, made his appearance among them with a drawn .sword, which he brandished to their utter discomfiture. The intruders retreated hastily from the fearful sabre, into the apartment of the Santa Maddalena, whence the General had stopped all egress, and the fugitives in consequence took refuge in places, that annoyed far more than they had hitherto done, the fair family of General Jessop. The Miss Clintons ran to their armed papa, whilst he in his wrath cut at the bed posts, and Indian corn-straw pallets, beneath which the enemy had crept. With the uproar the whole population of the inn was upraised ; and host and hostess, the brigands or huntsmen, with their guns and dogs, a priest, and half-a-dozen French commis-voyageurs, all gaping, asking, yawning, and in their habiliments of night, thronged the chamber of the Santa Maddalena, which Mrs. Jessop and her daughters had chosen for their place of repose. Not a word of reproach did the General's lady address to any of the intruders; she reserved them for her husband, and she commenced them with, " Now General, what do you think of your fine plans of economy ?"





The General confessed to himself that the present was a sorry one. So rising early with aching bones from the hardest and filthiest couch he had ever lain upon, he dismissed his vetturino with his full fare, and ordering posthorses from the next ducal post, the family sped into Florence, resolved, all of them, no more to practise economy by crawling after mules, and committing themselves to the rude fare and ruder welcome of a mountain inn.

Having been myself of the Italian shooting party, whom the Jessops evidently mistook for brigands, I had witnessed the scene, and never shall forget the warlike figure of the General in his chemise, brandishing his weapon ; on his slender and diminutive limbs arose a head of enormous magnitude, so was it swathed, from beneath which head of turban, appeared his queue behind, and his ruddy, angry visage before.



Once more did I behold the General. It was in the Roman fish-market, at the foot of the Capitol. He stood amongst the finest columnar ruins of the old city, noting down carefully how" many baiocchi cost each wretched fish of the Tiber. There I left, and now leave my (Economist.





CHANGE OF AIR.

The French have a most cruel fashion of disposing, not only of their dead but their dying. They have establishments called Maisons de Santt, so named for a similar reason as Incus a non lucendo ; to which Houses of Health, those whose life is despaired of, are, unless they be amongst kind and immediate relatives, handed over. It is like an anticipated burial; and the attempt to deceive patients thus abandoned, concerning the ominous place to which they are removed, is impossible. They are told the change is for better air, for variety, for several promising reasons; but the mansion and its inmates always belie the cheat. In vain the



apartments are filled with flowers, and saturated with perfumes, the atmosphere of death that reigns there is rendered but more perceptible to the acute senses of the invalid by these means. The features too, the demeanour of the master and domestics of the fatal abode, inured to behold the last stage of life in so many victims, fail not to strike the nervous attention of the patient, who thus may be said to suffer burial twice, once at the hands of man's unkindness, before the last obsequies are to be gone through from necessity.

Saving myself been once a witness of this delicate dread of death, evinced by the host of an amiable young Englishman in Paris, I have entertained ever since an horror of the pretext, under which they got rid of the trouble of watching and soothing his last moments. This was " change of air;" such was the delusive remedy held out to him, as they caused him to be removed away from their roof and anxieties, to one of these Houses of Health, which might he termed more properly Houses of Death.



In our own country we have no custom of similar, at least of equal barbarity; still there is one, which I cannot but regard with the same feeling. This is the practice of ordering patients to the South for " change of air." Many of the physicians who issue this mandate must entertain a very erroneous idea of what the South is. No doubt they imagine it the land of eternal zephyrs, of never varying summer, sunshine, and fragrant vegetation. I fear few of them take into account the Bise or the Siroc, or that the " land of the South, the clime of the sun," is the most variable of all climes, and that perhaps in which most precaution is necessary, even on the part of the strong and healthy.

No event is to me more melancholy than one of those warrants, at once of death and exile passed upon the member of a happy family. If it be one of the heads of the family, the whole



frame and system of domestic life is disjointed, and away the wanderers are driven forth in discomfort, that they may return mourners with tripled expense, and with the unpleasant reflection of having been compelled to abandon, in a foreign soil, the remains of one that was dear to them. If the victim be of the young, the drooping plant is borne from the fresh and pure air of our isle to the hot-house of the South, there to revive for an interval in appearance, from flushed and fevered blood, and then to sink more rapidly under the influence of the most varying temperatures, extreme in all its variations. With respect to the South of France, Avignon, Montpelier, Hyeres, and neighbouring situations, Petrarch's word may still be taken, " Ibi cum vento male vivitur, sine vento pessime.""— " There with wind life is bad enough, without wind wretched." Throughout all the South of Italy, even to Florence, the extremes of heat and cold, in summer and winter, rival those of the United States. At Pisa and Lucca the very



stones perspire the winter through with the terrible Siroc. Rome hath its Malaria : and of all climates under the sun, the most variable perhaps is Naples. The duration of the cold or northern wind there is generally three days, seldom more, three, six, or nine days being the limits of its continuance. Whilst it blows, the Orkneys are not more frozen than are the beautiful shores of Naples, and even the burning Vesuvius is compelled to bear snow and ice upon its smoking and sulphuric sides. Beneath its influence you see the Neapolitan population briskly moving about enwrapped in their furred ferraioli; and in an hour afterwards, perhaps, the wind will have changed, the Siroc blowing, and you behold the same people stripped, bent, and feebly crawling under the enervating effects of a wind that actually thaws the marrow in one's bones.

An acquaintance with one victim especially of this medical edict, has led me to bestow a few pages upon it, as hastening in many instances the catastrophe, which it professes to ward off. Over- exertion in his last studies at Oxford had enfeebled the health of young Bouverie to an alarming degree. He languished even in the leisure of his paternal home. It was a languor, however, proceeding from a too continued tension of the mental powers, that a continuance of leisure and amusement would have obviated in a little time. But this time is a physician, whose aid, in some cases the only effectual one, anxious parents can seldom bring themselves to await. The expense of calling in an eminent practitioner is looked on as a sacrifice of duty, and in this case was accordingly complied with. The experienced physician saw plainly that drugs were not the remedies fit for removing mere languor ; but to order nothing, or to say nothing, after being called in, would be awkward. He mentioned casually in consequence, that a " change of air" would be recommendable.—" The continent P" " Yes, the more variety the better." And this brief dialogue was considered sufficient grounds for dispatching Augustus Bouverie with still unrallied health to the continent. Travelling was but a little physical exertion, and variety, with the " change of air," would far counterbalance it, and restore Augustus to his wonted health.





With many youths, no doubt, the simple nostrum would have been effectual; they would have joined the pleasures of companionship to those of travel, and have thus provided an antidote against the oppressive feelings of solitude and sadness, that come so unexpectedly over the solitary wanderer in foreign realms. Augustus himself was delighted with the recipe and the project, and fancied for himself worlds of amusement. But he was naturally reserved and lonely, and thought the very opposite of the French sentimentalist, who esteemed it a sad enjoyment, " to look on a beautiful scene without having a friend near, to whom he might observe, this is beautiful." The sentiment, by the bye, is thoroughly French; for my part, I should esteem any friend de trap in enjoying nature's noble scenes, and Augustus was of the same opinion; and he resolved to proceed upon his journey with as many letters of introduction to foreigners as would be necessary for his instruction and convenience; but determined to avoid, as much as possible, all connection with his countrymen.



Young Bouverie, in forming this resolution, over-rated considerably the sources of pleasure, which foreign scenes prove to the traveller ; or rather he considered falsely such enjoyment to be like a fresh ray of shunshine evenly spread over the whole of one's thoughts and time. On the contrary, he experienced the delight of foreign travel to consist in very strong momentary excitements, awakened at intervals, and at first perhaps of some duration, but gradually and in a little time of a very passing kind. The twentyfour hours subsequent to hislanding uponaforeign soil, the two hours of his first morning ramble in Paris—these were moments that indeed might be reckoned amongst the choice ones of existence, nay might for enjoyment be classed amongst those hallowed by affection and friendship,—among



" The greenest spots

On Memory's waste."



Butfor thepurposesof restoring health and relieving langour, I need not say, that the delights and amusements, which instead of being equal and continuous, are of excitement, and consequently are succeeded by a state of depression proportionate to the degree of elation, must be far more pernicious than beneficial. It is this which renders a companion in society so necessary abroad, as a soother in those intervals, when the spirits flag, and cease to be uplifted by the novel scenes in which the fancy has been revelling for some time past to satiety. Augustus Bouverie however had reckoned himself independent for amusement or companionship, or any aid more than his own thoughts, which, with the food of a new world almost before them, he could scarcely look forward too, as even to feel palled, or languid, or melancholy.



Those who have known what it is to find one's self alone in a foreign land, for the first time, surrounded with unfamiliar faces, the ears saluted by sounds harsh and unintelligible, and every object suggesting the present isolation from* sympathy or kindness—those who have experienced the fearful weight of despondency, which then presses upon the mind so lately excited to the enjoyment of these same, and now oppressive objects; they can tell how unwisely Augustus reasoned upon the inexhaustibility of his sources of self-amusement, how grievously he was disappointed by the first visitations of languor and ennui abroad. It was unexpected, discredited, and therefore doubly felt; and to shake it off ten times more impossible, than it would have been to dissipate the cloud of English spleen, which the youth had fled from at home.

If this natural feeling of uneasiness in a foreign

VOL. II. G



land be increased to the foreigner in England by the consciousness of an indispensable extrava-. gance of expence, the same feeling is heightened more to the Englishman abroad by the want of the customary comforts of his own dear isle. The walls, the floors, the furniture, are so uncouth, naked, cold, and comfortless; the windows are prison-like, and the mansion itself has the aspect of a jail, with its lodgers, its numbered rooms, and its common stairs. And oh ! what desolation is to be compared to that felt by a stranger upon a fine summer or autumnal evening, treading the promenades of a gay city, thronged with faces, of which he knows not one, and resounding with gaiety of which he cannot partake— the bustle forbidding him the enjoyment of reverie or pensive thought, whilst the heart is all too young, too aspirant after those joys in view, to allow it to moralize in cold indifference upon the scene. Augustus thought, that continuing his journey south would bring a remedy to these lonely feelings; at least, thought he,





Italian solitude will be real solitude in the midst of scenes that cannot but excite and ennoble lonely thought; and to wait here for introductions to arrive, would be useless ; the ice would be scarcely broken, when I should be obliged to continue my journey.

He proceeded southward. But for all the promised good effects of change of air, the fatigue of travel counterbalanced them, and Augustus felt his accessions of languor more frequent and deep. No doubt they were increased considerably by exile from the society of the family circle, from the genial friendly faces, in whose presence he had felt cheered and at ease. Now as he journeyed on, his solitude was often though not agreeably interrupted by formal visits, which he was obliged to pay in order to deliver a letter of introduction to some personage famed for literary or scientific acquirements. This sage perhaps conversed theatrically with the young Englishman, much such matter as he had found in their volumes, too close attention to which had worked him his present harm. In return, for which condescension he had his tribute of flattery to pay, followed by the usual superlatives of esteem on the part of the illustrious foreigner. An invitation to resume the talk at another opportunity accompanied this, and Augustus departed from the interview, nothing delighted, except with the being able to pass judgment on the personal appearance of the sage of whom he had heard so much.



To pay his passing court to the petty literary potentates became at length as irksome to Augustus, as attendance on the actual courts of the petty reigning potentates of the land would have been to him, had he been a courtier. In both cases there were the same parade and pretensions, rancour, poverty, real prejudice, and affected liberality; the same habit of cringing elsewhere, and being worshipped at home; the same want of power, disguised under a profusion of all the regalia of importance.

Amidst these and other videnda of Switzer



land and Lombardy were the attentions of poor Augustus divided, whilst his health was by no means improved under the effects of the Lombard autumnal sun, although the year was somewhat advanced. In the immense plains of the north of the peninsula too, fever and ague were known to lurk. Venice, with its dock-savouring canals, its swarms of musquitos, denial of exercise and crowded lanes, was no tempting abode for the convalescent; and moreover there, above all other places, that peculiar feeling of solitude that drove young Bouverie from Paris, reigns especially. The almost oriental seclusion of the fair, the churlishly closed gondola, the absence of all gentility from even the streets, render the queen of the Adriatic more lonely than Palmyra to the foreigner, who does not intend a stay long enough to permit any attempt to introduce himself into its society.

Hence the delicate youth betook himself to the capital of Tuscany; and here indeed society was every way accessible—Italian and English mingled or apart, high life, low life, middling life, any might be tried, for either experiment or amusement sake. His countrymen too, still on the move, wherever he had yet encountered them south of Paris, had here drawn up their reins to rest, and even of his fellow Oxonians there were sufficient to have formed a club. But Augustus, much as he admired Englishmen in their proper sphere, that is, at home, failed not to perceive how metamorphosed, spoiled, affected, they all, to a man, became abroad : their characters seemed stretched on the wheel of extravagance, were strained, and disjointed; not one remained the natural islander, the Briton; and flesh fishified is not more unpalatable than your Englishmen, babbling the virtuoso, or aping the gusto, which the Italians have for licentiousness. At Oxfora Augustus was not much given to society, his choice of companions was select; but he found many, who had been tolerable on the banks of the Isis, altogether intolerable puppies transported to those of the Arno. His state of health too, did not allow of a flow of spirits able to keep pace with that of his countrymen, excited by foreign scenes and sunshine; and even when elevated to a cheerful mood, his mind sunk at once into gloom, as soon as it came in contact with the still more buoyant feelings of his fellows.





Augustus too was a youth who could not rest contented with the second place even in the scale of mirth and wit; and he shrunk even to his late dreaded solitude, as a refuge from the more tormenting society of his young compatriots. In this determination Florence no longer suited him as a residence; it was too gay, wore too much an air offSte, and the sound of his mother tongue was by far too predominant in the streets. The English papers, journals, and publications, procured by the assiduity of Vieusseux, and allowed by the liberality of the ducal government, turned all general conversation more upon England and English affairs, than at all harmonized with the Italian sky and scene, or with the mind that gave itself up with devotion to the contemplation and enjoyment of these. Tilburies too rolled on the smooth pavement of Florence, and the graceful forms of dandies glided in its quays and places. British grooms and valets thronged its hotel doors, and their drunken cockneyisms were heard vociferated in the streets at an hour when every Florentine was in the arms of sleep, and when the restless Augustus walked forth to contemplate the delicious spectacle of an Italian moon-light night, he hoped, in the undisturbed solemnity of the hour.



All these inconveniences, joined with an irrepressible wish to tread the soil of the Eternal City, drove Augustus still farther south; and languor, sickness, and ennui were all instantly forgotten as soon as the carriage that bore him from Florence was in motion, and ascending the Appenines towards Rome.

Poor Augustus ! in that journey I happened to be his companion, and never shall I forget the





almost unearthly elevation that his spirits rose to with the consciousness of whither he was journeying. In a mind like his, the very enthusiasm of excitement was pernicious to his feeble health, and the restless desire and anxiety awakened by the approach to Rome in this journey was the original cause of the slow fever that afterwards preyed upon Augustus Bouverie, till it consumed him.

The mind and body are closely linked together certainly, and in most cases the disorder of one occasions the derangement of the other. Still that philosophy is sublime and not irrational, .which argues the contrary, and founds itself on their disunion; and however the former remark may hold true where actual pain is felt, the arguments of the latter are exemplified in the decay of the body gradually and without pain, by the withdrawing or pining away of the vital principle. It is then, that as the bodily powers sink in utter languor and prostration, the spirit still retains not only its wonted vigour, but seems to exert itself with more than usual power, to shine with unearthly splendour, and to anticipate, as it were, by the loftiness of its views and conceptions, the pure state of being which it then approaches.



It was not the wanness of the cheek of Augustus that first struck me with forebodings of his fate, but some of those eccentric flights of fancy, seldom indulged in by those who have a strong hold of life. For his own part, he seemed to lose sight altogether of his precarious state of health : one idea alone occupied his mind ; and his sole wonder was, how he could have tarried so long in that dull Lombardy and trifling Tuscany, instead of having hurried by a bird's path at once to the scenes, where all associations of past greatness centred. His day was one long, though interrupted, monologue of raving; from which he sunk, at intervals, to a dreary lethargy, and started thence again each moment to some anticipation of the immortal city, or some recollection of its story. The road by which we



travelled was one well calculated to feed the dreamy mood. Spoleto, Narni, and the Thrasymene lay upon our path, and from Hannibal to Octavian, an hundred names of heroic interest were recalled by the scenes through which we passed.

Enthusiasm of this kind lays a firmer hold on the weak frame than on the strong. The robust have their attention and interest so much excited by different external objects, that they shake off the yoke, which one predominant train of feeling would impose upon them. Long abstinence from food, even inanition, and consequent weakness, proves in this way often the strongest of all excitements to the imagination, and even to the spirits; and for a similar reason Augustus was absorbed, inspired almost, by the present exclusive object of his thoughts. He went foodless, sleepless, for both which states he might have found, indeed, an excuse in the beds and fare of Italian hotels. But such were not the causes of his abstinence. He was in conse



quence worn out completely, ere he did reach Rome ; and I shall never forget the fixed, vacant, and scarcely waking, though unwinking stare, with which he regarded the white houses and steeples of the city, as we descended to it from the hillocks of the Campagna. Before poor Augustus reached the hotel where he was to stop, he paid the strongest tribute that perhaps ever pilgrim paid to the overpowering. grandeur of Roman greatness. He had felt ill on approaching the gate; he supported himself during the continuance of the motion; but no sooner had the carriage rolled under the portal, and stopped for the inspection of the officers of police and customs stationed there, than the youth fainted utterly.

A night's repose, however, obviated the immediate bad effects of his journey: and the ardour with which he rose to commence his researches, and gratify his long-nourished curiosity, led him to flatter himself that his health was restored. Augustus wrote home in high spirits a letter to that effect; and his parents congratulated themselves on the superior restorative effect of " change of air.'1



Their son, in the meantime, shunning all society, which he deemed almost sacrilege in such a scene, given up to solitary rambles, was imbibing in long draughts the southern air of Rome, that sovereign remedy that had been prescribed for his debility. His days were spent amidst the hills and desert places of the ancient city—he roamed over the ruined Palatine, through the lanes and by-roads that transect the Coelian hill, and he more than once utterly lost his way amidst the rural solitude of the once popular Aventine. The sturdy peasant of the Church's realm seldom survives a season of labour in these spots; that the young and weak Englishman felt the little strength he had left undermined by it, is not to be wondered at. In the morn, perhaps, the youth set forth with ardour on his wanderings, but languor and sadness did not fail to accompany him home. Friendly society was that which seemed to restore him to himself most effectually; but when the gloom had begun to prey upon him, he seemed to prefer indulging it, and, like the bird fixed by the witching eye of the snake, he steadily contemplated the spirit of melancholy, until he fell a victim to its voracity.



Augustus still pined; and at Rome as in London, the same forlorn hope, in the shape of a remedy, was held out—" change of air." He allowed himself to be borne to Naples. But scenery had lost all charms for his sunken eye. The Sirocco was here far more powerful than at Rome, and blew more incessantly; and the pestiferous blast came even from the sea, whither the sick youth would have looked for pure and refreshing air. The unequalled variability of this boasted climate he found more insuiferable, more of harm, and oppressive to him, than any he had as yet visited; and the youth, at his earnest request, was again borne back to Rome. The air of the south was then declared irtef



fectual, unfit for his case; and a return to England was recommended ; but time or strength were not allowed for this new experiment. Augustus Bouverie, alone and exiled from his family, sunk gradually through all the melancholy stages of his disease, tended by the careless hands of strangers, and at last expired, the victim, I am conscious, of an idle counsel, in consequence of southern air, and of the oppressive gloom that attends unbroken solitude.





THE FORUM.

It is exceedingly difficult indeed to preserve pure/ the feelings of reverence, with which we should approach those remains of ancient or of modern grandeur, which are to be met with in Italy. The Roman Forum, for example, unless visited in the solitude of moon-light, is sure to present some object, so enormously incongruous with its past renown, as to scare away every feeling of divine awe that memory would inspire. Every one knows, that it is the Roman Smithfield at present, and as nine-tenths of the animal food made use of in the south is pigs' flesh, the business of vending and of slaughter is there chiefly practised upon droves of this unclean, but not unclassic animal. In addition to all the anti-sublimities of this characteristic of the Forum, it is the cockney promenade for the good citizens, where their unshaven males and unbodiced females walk forth in the evening as far as the arch of Titus to breathe the air of the vineyards. Join to these the dusty vehicles of visitors returning from country excursions, and the Franciscan friars returning in a contrary direction with the produce of their day's begging; and it may be conceived how aptly the Forum may be visited at sunset. In the day it is perhaps the market-place of slaughter; if not, the clanking chains of the galley-slaves grubbing amongst the ruins, in the Clivo Asyli perhaps, that was of old a refuge for wretches in similar bondage, forms no apt accompaniments to the reflections of a stranger in such a place.



All this, however, was a want of keeping, that I subsequently discovered in this classic spot. My first sight of it took in a scene more familiar to an Englishman by far, but certainly more unexpected than any of these, and which is no uncharacteristic anecdote of the English in Italy.



At this side of the Forum, which is farthest removed from the Capitoline Hill, and as it were the foot of the Palatine, stand three columns supporting a noble weight of entablature. Antiquaries of old agreed that they formerly made part of the temple of Jupiter Stator; at present they seemed to have altered their opinion, and it is more orthodox to call them the remains of the ancient Comitiae. To the ornament or support of whatever fabric these columns were applied, they are allowed to be of unrivalled beauty of proportions, especially their capitals, which though not so perfect perhaps as those in Nerva's Forum, are still esteemed the most beautiful models of the Corinthian in Rome.

For the purpose of taking casts from them, I suppose, a kind of frail scaffolding was then erected, secured by ropes thrown over the entablature, and reached by a ladder as crazy as itself; this, it seems, had been erected by the French Academicians. An English amateur, not aware of this, or at least reckoning upon the courtesy of whomsoever the scaffolding belonged to, ascended the ladder in the absence of the Gallic artists, and commenced amusing himself with examining the capitals, measuring modillons, &c. There exists a huge pique, the reader must know, between the poor and almost sans ctdotte foreign artists at Rome, and the English of the same profession, who are in general dandies of the first water—quite exquisites and men of gallantry and fashion as soon as they quit canvas and plaster.



The Frenchmen, .who, hidden in some nook of the Palatine descent, were reposing from their labours, and breakfasting on their grapes and pagnotti, espied the rival interloper, who dared to take advantage of their scaffolding, in order to be as aufait as they, the artists of the Grande Nation, at Corinthian capitals. They rushed forth in a body, ascended the ladder in ire and haste, that endangered much the ricketty column that supported them, and commenced their expostulations with our amateur in a tone, that Britons never suffer from any, much less from a Gaul.



Here was a scene, for the wrapt pilgrim to that shrine of Roman freedom and grandeur, the Forum, to witness,—a pugilistic combat on the ruins of the Comitise between several Gauls and a Briton. There was a crowd gathered in a twinkling, butchers, passengers, priests and old women from a neighbouring church, and all the urchins of the vicinity that made the Forum their play-ground. The combatants were four against one, my own countryman that one:— at this interesting sight, the shades of Cicero, Pompey, Brutus, and his fellows all vanished from my mind, and the honour of old England became predominant.

On that score I might have remained undisquieted. For the amateur, though a pigmy—I have him this moment in my mind's eye, the hero certainly that day of the Forum, as Gracchus and Caesar had been in theirs—laid his blows so classically about him, on the visages, in the very eyes and noses of the Frenchmen, that they retreated even more rapidly than they advanced, swearing vengeance in their dirty way. The last however took the vengeance, that his comrades did but swear ; for he unloosed in his descent the ladder from the scaffold, and bore it away in triumph, leaving the amateur in solitary ire, perched on the columns of the Commas, without any means of escape, exposed to the gaze and jests of the Roman crowd.



Now, an English crowd would have applauded any one, even a Frenchman, after such a victory, and in such a position; but the modern Romans, jealous of any display of that manliness which they are so conscious of wanting, looked up with pleased malevolence, and with all the sneers that they dared show at the victor; they gathered round the Briton, as they would have crowded to gaze securely upon a caged lion ; and certainly the man at once of taste and prowess, must have felt exceedingly uncomfortable, imprisoned as he was, and angered by finding his entreaties for a ladder not comprehended or listened to by the surrounding crowd. I aided with my tongue as far as it enabled me, but to no purpose, till the Englishman lost patience, quitted the scaffold, and clasping round the old column of the Augustan age, which tottered from capital to base, slid down, not without danger, and let himself free. Ere he reached the ground, every Roman spectator had fled in dismay, fearing that having even gazed upon him would bring down the vengeance of his redoubtable fist.



Such was the first interruption to those solemn and devout feelings of reverence, with which the Forum was approached by me. They were marred at another time by an event more serious, and more worthy of the place, which as a contrast to the anecdote just mentioned, I cannot refrain from narrating.

The lower order of Roman females are by no means beautiful, however picturesque their costume, and however calculated their antique cast of features may be, taken in reference to their origin, to catch and captivate the stranger. .It is in a population like this, the contrary of beautiful, that exceptions are the most striking; one is rivetted and enchanted by the apparition there of a lovely countenance, which in an English or French town could be passed by as nothing uncommon. I forget the name of the little street that runs at the back of the Forum from the chapel and prison where the Apostles are said to have been confined, up to the stupendous ruins of the supposed Basilica; although I have often chosen its way in preference to the broad one of Campo Vaccino, in order to catch a glimpse of the beautiful Agnese who dwelt there.



Latterly, however, from the number of strangers who were tempted to stroll up the same street, and gaze in at the same door, the parents of the pretty Agnese began to speculate upon turning their daughter's beauty to advantage; not in any dishonourable way exactly, but in procuring a collection of mock antiquities, which Agriese's pretty face might well persuade the ignorant stranger, even if he were a little incredulous, to be real. From hence the girl became oftener seeking than sought, frequenting the Campo Vaecino with her little stock of coins and terra cotta manufacture of lamps, lacrymaria, and such would-be relics of the old time, baked scarce a week, but artfully stained and daubed with earth, that they might seem just exhumated.



Her's was one of the very few figures that I ever remarked in the south, that united delicacy and lightness of symmetry to an antique cast of features, such being in general found in conjunction with a form robust and coarse as that which indeed prevails in those countries. Never was any thing so lovely as her profile, with a mass of hair gathered up behind, so well setting it off'. She did not wear the Roman stomacher,



that sort of abominable paste-board shelf on which the peasants expose their charms to the admiration of our pencillers; she adopted rather the vulgar corset, so much more beautiful, though so less picturesque. There was no archness in her dark eyes,—a quality that would have rendered her present trade a dangerous one; although indeed the peasant maiden in the the Roman states is little reserved, and need be in little dread of unlawful love, so rigidly, or rather so paternally, do the good priests in power guard her, that marriage must always follow, when it has not preceded a slip of the kind, no gallant daring to resist the commands of the church. And should a foreigner be guilty of an act of seduction, he is mulcted much more severely there than under any other government. This is one very good peculiarity of the empire of the priesthood, and indeed, in despite of jocular calumny, the Roman peasantry (I don't speak of the lacquey rabble of the Piazza• di Spagna and their creatures) are

TOL. II. H



the most prudent and most moral peasantry in the peninsula. Whilst that which flourishes under the liberal and enlightened government of Tuscany, is decidedly the most base and debauched.

The bright eye of Agnese spoke no other language than that of simplicity, as she plied, thanks to it, a very lucrative trade: she sold her entire stock in a shorter time than the sinister seeming lurchers of the Campo, whose very look is that of imposition declared, could sell a single lump; the value of her little merchandize was raised by that species of enhancement, which, the French say, ne g&te run.

- Numerous admirers she could not fail to have, not only amongst the passing foreigners, who purchased from her, but among her equals, the young inhabitants of the modern Forum, modern Suburra, and its vicinity. Amongst them the most assiduous, and the most odious to the pretty Agnese, was a little hunch-back or goibbo, who from his deformity and consequent incapacity





to labour, had more leisure to fall in love than other youths, though, unfortunately for him, with none of the personal qualifications that could entitle him to hope. The same leisure endowed his passion with constancy, depth, and fury ; and although ever repulsed by Agnese, the gobbo still followed her at a distance from morn till night, fed upon a distant sight of her, and could not be checked or reasoned from his passion ;

This I learned afterwards, although I remember to have often noticed the imp lurking behind the fallen fragments of the basilica, or crawling with the lizard and other reptiles amongst the few bared, spots of the old Roman pavement, in the midst of excavation and broken ground. Such unfortunate creatures, when bred up in the squalor and poverty of the lower orders, are even in our own country of sinister aspects ; but these are innocent and lovely, compared with the dark elf of southern climes, where by the bye deformity is exceedingly rare,



and consequently more abhorred. I remember wondering that he never begged ; upon enquiry, I heard that he had been in the habit of doing so, but that latterly, since he had been taken with. Agnese, he scorned the occupation, and had taken strangers especially in abhorrence. The idle and malicious gobbo was never missing frpm the Campo. Vaccino and its precincts• when Agnese, not daring to venture away from where bhe was known, amongst the squares and streets of the city, was wont to expose her store of modern antiques for the purchase of the curious. One evening that she was so employed,, it was my own fortune to betake myself to the Forum, as a place of loitering, and a gay knot of English youths, evidently just arrived, descended from the Capitol, where they had been feasting themselves, to explore the famed remains beyond. They seemed to have poured, previously to their •sallying forth, considerable libatioas down their throats in honour of that Roman divinity, by whose body medern Romans swear: and a more . :t



elated or frolicsome company never were amazed and upborne upon the wings of delight by the idea of, for the first time, treading the soil of the Forum. They advanced further, having surveyed the scattered columns, allured by the distant glimpse of the Coliseum, until a more alluring glimpse of the fair Agnese attracted their attention.

She produced her sepulchral lamps, her coins of Constantine, and of those Emperors whose effigy ha& not grown scarce in virtuoso circulation, .Agnese's visage, as a sample of Roman beauty, was more interesting to the youths than even the great Constantine's, and with ardour other than antiquarian they crowded round, and questioned the fair dealer in antiquities.

The group stood not far from the promenade. Beyond it the ground sinks for a space, and then is bounded by a few cabins, supposed to occupy the site of the little shops of the ancient Forum, from one of which Virginius snatched the knife with which he rescued his daughter's honour from the tyranny of the Decemvir. A carpenter or wheel-wright inhabited the principal of these at the time of my story, and the space between his door and the raised promenade was occupied with cars, ploughs, timber, trunks of trees, and all the materials of the workman's trade. Amongst these the hunch-back lay at length, watching from behind the trunk of a prostrate elm the only object of his thoughts, rudely, as he thought, surrounded by a gang of forestieri. The young Englishmen were in truth proceeding to make very free with the damsel, which she bore in good humour, with the hope of earning some little by the sale of her earthern treasures.



One of the party especially seemed smitten, and earnest in his addresses to the Roman maiden; he put his arm within hers and drew her away. The patience of the gvbbo here evaporated. Without uttering a word, the hunch-back drew his knife, rushed across the promenade, and had not a shout warned the young Englishman of his danger, he would certainly have received a mortal stab. Aware, he retreated, and his foot struck the face of the dwarf, so as to fling him upon his back; thwarted in one victim, the gobbo wreaked his vengeance on another; rising ere he could be secured, he rushed on the unfortunate Agnese, and stabbed her mortally in the side. Twice even the little fiend struck, and then made off,



the Englishmen remaining thunderstruck at the deed.

The Campo was full of lookers on, and not one stirred to secure the murderer, however they could not but commiserate the poor girl's fate. One or two of the Englishmen in vain endeavoured to track the steps of the fugitive. But he was never more heard of, nor were there any steps taken for his apprehension





THE BRITISH CAPPUCCIN.

By such a title was known a gallant countryman of ours, for whom the name of Captain Bellchambers may stand in the few following pages. He was an exceedingly fat son of Mars, somewhat of the calibre of the light infantry officer, caricatured not a score of years since, as The Light Bob. His campaigns abroad I am not enabled to relate, although they must have been weighty ones; his domestic feats, however, were more conspicuous, and are, no doubt, recorded in the annals of the Flags—from BondStreet to Drury-Lane inclusive—and in the memory of the frequenters of all the " Life in London'' shops of the latter quarter some ten





years ago. The Captain was then a buck and dandy, during the reign of those two successive dynasties, of the first rank of the second order ; the characteristic of which very respectable rank of fashionables I hold to be, that their spurs impinge upon the pavement oftener than upon the sides of a horse. The Captain, in short, was scarcely of the equestrian order. This, however, must have been more from humour than economy, for certainly the tassels and braiding of the gallant officer's coat would have nearly purchased a charger.

It was a pity too that the captain had not the amiable failing of being given to the turf, and of being too much inclined to sacrifice other conveniences to his steed, as this would have excused his exclusive attachment to male society, which, without such excuses, are usually attributed to the impossibility of attaining to any other. Whatever was the cause in the present instance, certainly the cards that bore the superscription of Captain Bellchambers were more often handed across a tavern table, for purposes warlike or amicable, as that might happen, than to the powdered lacquey of a family mansion; and if he did " how d'ye do" a peer in Bondstreet, the peeress in her carriage knew nothing of his lordship's gay and portly acquaintance.



Such was the humble walk of Mr. Bellchambers in London—as a gentleman dandy, who wore spurs without a steed, frequented gambling . houses without venturing a stake, and races without betting, the latter feat being performed through the medium of some friend's tilbury— just such an acquaintance as any one might salute, but would prefer passing.

But Britons, like their money, continue to rise in value as they cross the channel. Bellchambers left London, as soon as peace permitted, for very obvious reasons; and similar ones drove him still further southward, and that so speedily, that the Captain arrived and settled in Florence, before the actual dregs of English emigration had been wafted so far. He was an Englishman; that was enough then, and the simple qualification was sufficient to make him pass current in the best, the only circle of Florentine society. Even Englishmen at that time had not assumed the necessary reserve towards their countrymen abroad, that has since become requisite; to have arrived so far was, at that early period, considered to be at once a proof of birth, fortune, and taste.



It may be supposed, how much the Captain plumed himself upon this pas in life ; the use he made of it was, as is usual in such cases, to make himself supremely ridiculous. Like all his countrymen, he was possessed with a flagrant idea of Italian licentiousness, which, however true in part, Captain Bellchambers altogether mistook. If Italians intrigue, it is from genuine impulse, from feeling, from passion: whereas vanity is almost the sole incentive of the dissolute Englishman to pursue the same path. The Briton is unfit for it: he has not the soul of flame, that alone redeems, if any thing can redeem, the character from utter baseness: and nine in ten of the faux pas committed in English life have been taken more for the sake of killing ennui, than compelled by any more heart-felt or passionate thought. This was amongst the females, with whom vanity and a foppish desire of distinction cannot sway in such cases, as these petty feelings do with vainer and more selfish mankind. But our men of intrigue, if they did not excite indignation, are the most ludicrous of all objects—cold-blooded in the extreme, they have in language nothing but the cant of feeling, which is sickening enough in the mother tongue; but when put into the superlatives and exaggeration of Italian, for instance, affords the most strange specimen of the ridiculous and disgusting. If you add to all this a sufficient quantity of vulgarity in the suitor, you have a picture frequently presented to the eye abroad, of precisely that mixture of the vicious and the ludicrous that Hogarth loved to paint. Captain Bellchambers devoted his person and powers to gallantry, and as any man, be he fool or wise, dull or witty, prepossessing or the contrary, will have some sort of success with the fair, if he devotes himself altogether to them, the Captain certainly might ha\re had, especially in the sunny Tuscany, some bonnes fortunes to boast of. Thereon he grew aspirant—began to be more noticed—talked of—and his society courted, on grounds of mere curiosity, by the presiding mistresses of rout and conversation.





Unluckily, however, for his fame, Bellchambers had the audacity to fix his regards on the beautiful Contessa Beiguardi, a young, lovely, lively, fascinating dame, not long since rendered a countess by a retired connoisseur and bibliomane. She was a short, plump, round beauty of the Tuscan order, the proportions of which are as much observed in the sex of that land, as in its architecture; dark, of course, but with cheeks outblooming the deep tints of her sunny complexion; and a malicious vivacity sparkled in her eye, that might have deterred any one of more sagacity than Captain Bellchambers from daring its lightnings, whether of love or resentment. But the bold Briton, elated with past success, knew no fear, and gallantly made his approaches to the beautiful Beiguardi.



The reader will smile at his impertinence, on being informed that of the Countess's beautiful language her suitor knew scarcely a word, and was compelled to convey his addresses through the unfit medium of Anglo-French, in which frequent blunders always had the effect of breaking the spell that his eloquence was intended to produce. It would be difficult indeed to determine what the language of the gallant Captain was, for as he knew not even his own fundamentally, he was altogether unable to distinguish between the vocabularies of the three, that like tributary streams, kept pouring in, to form the grand stream of his peculiar language. It was nearest to the Lingua Franca perhaps, in which the motley rabble of the Mediterranean seaports attempt to explain their thoughts or wants.



Foreigners, saith every guide-book, are not so rude as to laugh at our mispronounciation of their language. Are they not?—On what do their thousand and one farces against the English turn than on mispronounciation ; they do laugh, and laugh heartily. The only difference is, that they ridicule behind our backs, what we smile at upon the spot, and forget. Captain Bellchambers, however, making love in his Lingua, was an object too ridiculous for national politeness to resist smiling at. I should attempt to give a sample, were I not afraid that it would be too polyglot for intelligibility.

The countess sat in her box at the Pergola, or Florentine opera, on the stage of which some wretched Tuscan singers, effectually aided by an English tenor, were murdering a piece of Cimarosa: none but a British or a Florentine ear, both equally famous for Boeotianism, could have endured the discord. The audience were not much affected by the pathetic strains of the Neapolitan composer, being as much engaged in mutual talk and observation as in the most far niente rout.



" Do observe that Zingaro," said the Countess Beiguardi to the only companion of her box, " that. Adonis of at least a dozen Roman feet round the waist. He can scarcely breathe with fullness; but, if you believe him, he is affected with a plethora of love—him with the sanguine visage, and bald head of most epicurean sleekness. That is the British Adoncino you have heard tell of: he considers himself quite killing."

" So it appears. His toilette must have cost more pains than that of any belle in the circle."

" He has learned that 'tis unfashionable to listen to the opera, so he turns his back upon the scene, and casts furtive glances all around on every female, not by the way of admiring their beauty, but of giving the world to understand the very familiar and secret intimacy that exists between him and them. How very pru . dent and considerate he seems of reputations that do not even know the fellow. We may despise our own countrymen, cam, in some points, but truly these Britons exceed the peninsula in the impudent and the ridiculous."



" Ha gusfo queilo nondimeno—he has some taste at any rate, this fellow," observed the Countess's flattering companion.

" Consummate impertinence say rather, in fixing his grey gloating eyes on me."

" Is he not rich ?"

" Come un sorrio—poor as a mouse."

" Nor noble?"

" Nessuno la conosce—no one knows him. I asked Lord B ."

" Why, I thought all the English were one or other."

" Thanks to their dignified air and our worshipful credulity."

" On what pretensions then rests he his suit to the Countess Beiguardi ?"

" That is precisely what I am dying to discover. He vows that no two beings can be so congenial in taste and disposition."



" Mazaviglia—he is an amateur of music then r

" Knows not a tenor from a basso, the barbarian. And when I asked him if he liked Mozart, he pondered profoundly for a time to discover who Mozart was; and at length replied, that he did not think the Mosaic at Florence so perfect as at Rome."

" He prides himself then in the love and knowledge of painting ?"

" Could not tell a Raphael from a Rubens. He went to sleep in the Tribune of the Gallery; and waked up to remark what damned thick legs the Venus had gotten."

" Perhaps he is a poet. For I observed that the crowds of English, who come from England hither, dubbed with that title, esteem it no shame to profess not only an ignorance, but a contempt for the sister arts."

" True, they come here by the scores, sad Goths, more ridiculous in their admiration than their contempt; but the Capitano is none of these. He is the very dregs of dullness. His profession is arms, yet he appears to me never to have seen a French soldier of the old time. His corset seems to be his only pride; deservedly his pride will be his death, for burst its lacings he must some day or other. I made him kneel and plead the other day in hopes of the catastrophe."



" You seem resolved to punish his impertinence."

" In good time no doubt an opportunity will offer."

Little aware of any prepossession existing against him in the mind of the Countess, the gallant Captain continued his suit, and by all the ways, that an ignorant, vain, cold-hearted persecutor in the shape of a lover could render himself disagreeable and ridiculous, did Bellchamber. No Italian house is shut against him who has the requisite impudence to enter it: there exists in that agreeable land no domestic circle, no churlish family set, who amuse themselves at whist or tea, defended from intrusion by the menial's ready lie. The doors of Italy know not how to lock—churches, palaces, cabins, and even gaols, are accessible and egressible at all times. So that there a suitor is in very truth a bore, that is, if females in such a land were not prepared and armed for all such impertinences or agrtmens, just as one pleases to consider them. The Captain found these ways of life extremely convenient; although he could have perhaps improved upon them. Count Beiguardi, for example, never thought of kicking him down stairs, as in England he certainly would have done: the Count, on the contrary, was polite, and called him his very dear friend. But then the Count, in all his amity, never thought of asking his very dear friend to dinner. This latter particular was, in the Captain's opinion, susceptible of improvement. However, it was some comfort to be free of the saloon, even if not so of the refectory.



Time, said Bellchambers to himself, time and perseverance will conquer any woman. I will make sure of every avenue, and then .



According to this maxim, having made his approach leisurely, the Captain began to meditate speaking forth more boldly. But the wit and wilful dullness of the Italian baffled him; a flush of resentment even, he perceived once or twice to colour the fair visage that he addressed. It is strange, Bellchambers bethought him, I never dreamed of obstacles like these in this unconstrained land. The Countess, however, he recollected, was a step above his former darings ; and some etiquette might exist, necessary to the genteel and regular management of these matters. Upon inquiry the Englishman found his surmises with respect to this etiquette correct. He learned that in Italy, as elsewhere, Plutus was the guardian of the shrine of Love, and in order that such u.nromantic preliminaries might not be discussed by those who professed themselves mutually attached from the purest motives, there were• regular ambassadors, whose office it was to act the Mercuries in all such diplomacy.



The ruffla/no establishment saves a world of nonsense, blushes, and all that folly that the northerns indulge in. It would be such outrageous modesty to feel any qualms in listening to a professional gentleman of this kind. And as no southern female is in the least insulted by an offer, however gross, the ruffian race thrive in gains, lies, and whole bones. The necessity of employing a legitimate ambassador of this tribe was hinted to our Captain, who for divers reasons did not at all relish this dire necessity, inasmuch as the fellows are the veriest cormorants that ever haunted piazza. Convenient, but expensive, thought Bellchambers, this making love by proxy; however, at Rome we must do, &c.

The niffiano was hired; the villains, although they lie nefariously in their audacious promises, seldom scruple to perform their mission boldly. More than one have been poignarded within these ten years, doing the behests of moral Britons: no doubt they can return the compliment, though indeed cold-blooded murder is a crime very rare in Italy. Not to digress, the ruffian of the present mission failed not to perform his embassy, which the lady heard, not unprepared, coolly and without indignation.



" What has been your fee, my good friend ?" said the Countess

" Quattro scudi, four crowns, Sigtwra,'1'1 replied the ruffian

" Here then are eight," said the lady, " and as much more shall be your after recompense in obeying me."

There needed no balancing on the part of the professional ruffian betweenj the weight of eight crowns and that of four, and he accordingly expressed his willingness to serve the Countess in aught that she might prescribe.

Her wishes were dictated to the ruffian, who, after duly listening to them, returned to his



*

original employer with smiling visage of success. " Siete un vomo felice," said the fellow to Bellchambers, " datemi milla franchi." Calling a man happy, and then demanding forty or fifty pounds of him, was a species of congratulation that the Captain did not admire. But having gone so far, retreat would ruin his character; and want of generosity would have been even a more ingenious cause of failure, than want of fascinations. It is but keeping a sharper look out for pigeons, thought Bellchambers: and so reconciling himself to the sacrifice, he made over all his worldly store to the avaricious Countess, as he supposed, in reality to the keen ruffiano.

" 'Sta nolle" said the fellow, " lei ti trovera qui—you will be here to-night at such an hour.

There is a masquerade at Prince B 's ; I

will bring with me a disguise, and conduct you/ al vostro paradiso.

After so serious a deposit, in the shape of purchase money, it may be supposed that the gallant Captain Bellchambers did not fail to keep his appointment with the man of the piazza, who on his part failed neither at the place nor hour appointed. Under his arm he bore a sack containing the disguise, and told the Englishman to follow him, and forward both walked from the piazza of the old palace of the Medici in the direction of the church of Santa Croce. It was one of the most solitary parts of the city, and that most removed from the residence of the Beiguardis. But then home might be no prudent place for his mistress to receive him, and the Captain felt no mistrust whatever towards his kind conductor.



Not far behind the church of Santa Croce they paused at a blank and lofty wall, which, after having reconnoitred a portal at some distance, the guide declared there was an absolute necessity of scaling. With some, but not much demur the Captain obeyed, and both found themselves in a little time within the appointed precincts. Here the fellow produced the disguise, which was that of a Capuchin friar,

VOL. II. I



the beard, the garment with its cord cincture, the cowl covering the natural tonsure of the Briton's pate.

Having enveloped himself in a similar habit, the ruffian led the way, entered the mansion, whose court they had gained by surmounting the wall, and cautiously ascending some intricate staircases, proceeded along an immense corridor or gallery, which from the little resemblance it seemed to bear to that of a palace, excited at length the suspicions of Bellchambers. It was awful too, thus gliding silently through halls, of which the daily occupants were slumbering at hand, >for most unamorous snores were the only sounds that struck upon the gallant's ear. But to chide or to betray suspicion was both dangerous and late.

The Captain followed his guide in doubt, who led the way to the chapel of the convent or nunnery, for such evidently the place now appeared to be : and on recollecting the character of such holy places, hope and confidence





once more revisited the Englishman's breast. They were at their height, when the ruffian, catching Bellchambers by the habit, pointed out to him a muffled figure, pacing expectantly in a little portico outside the chapel, but visible from it. The moonlight, though dim, rendered the form distinctly visible.

" E la Contessa—it is the Countess," said the ruffian, as he disappeared. And Bellchambers in ardour, but still cautiously approached the expectant figure. It marked his steps, and advanced to meet him with an equal ardour. The Englishman sighed forth a tender greeting, ere he reached the object of his wishes. What was his amazement on hearing himself saluted in return by no feminine voice, as the kind and tender Martha, and, moreover, on finding himself laid hold on by the swain of the said Martha, who proved to be a Capuchin, as bearded as himself.

Poor Bellchambers was thunderstruck with the trick or the mistake, he looked round for the traitorous ruffian; but there was no sign of him near. Meantime he was called to exert himself in his own self-defence, for the friar, taking his disappointment more pressing than the Captain seemed to do, was proceeding to take bodily vengeance of the intruder, whom he supposed to be some envious brother of the order. The real friar attacked like a bird of prey, unguibus et rostro; whilst the mock friar with his British fists made terrible havoc amongst the features of his opponent.



Leaving his clients thus engaged, the ruffian completed his task by seeking the belfry of the convent, and exciting a peal from above, that roused every inmate, ecclesiastic and lay, principal and servitor, from their couches; who all poured of course to the chapel, as the place of general congregation, to learn what accident, fire or earthquake, was betokened by that " fearful bell."

In their way they fell upon the two combatants, endeavouring but too late to make a retreat, breathless and bleeding, one of them at least from the nose. The mock-friar was seized, whilst the real accused him as a robber, whom he had heard stealing in to plunder the treasures of the convent. The Capuchins believed their brother; and poor Bellchambers was put under arrest upon a charge of sacrilegious robbery.



For three whole days did the Captain remain in durance, before he dared to convey an account of his case to the ambassador; but the horrors of prison at length overcame his fear of ridicule, and the gallant confessed the

whole truth. Lord B rescued him from the

hands of the friars; whilst all Florence, English and Italian, joined the Countess in her laugh at the impertinent suitor. Bellchambers made a precipitate escape from Italy altogether, betaking himself to Bagneres, I believe, whither, he hoped, the history of his adventure could not reach. In the land he departed from, the Captain was never mentioned by any other name than the English Capuchin—il Cappuccin Inglese.





I Remembeii a person, born in the Indies, and wafted for the first time to the shores of England, quitting the vessel in which he made the voyage for the nearest barge that he could hail, urging the boatmen to convey him forward with all the speed of oars—he seemed to travel with a reprieve for a brother in his pocket—leaping ashore at the Tower stairs, running through the old fortress with devouring eyes, and still on, until he reached not only St. Paul's Churchyard, but the very summit of the edifice, where he in consequence arrived some very few minutes after having put foot on English ground.



This one prime object in view was most satisfactory to him, returning to the land of his fathers. His thoughts were not distracted amongst an hundred spots equally venerable; the towering dome of the cathedral, seen from afar, and long looked for ere it was seen, held concentrated for him, in its lofty station, all the interest he felt for the renowned metropolis. On reaching its summit he was satisfied—he had seen London, all of it; he was free of its marvels, and had no restless anxiety to explore further immediately. He descended to his dinner satisfied.

Most cities have a grand magnet of the kind, which to have seen is to have seen the city—and to have passed through the place without beholding the great lion of it, is tantamount to not having been there at all. St. Peter's is mighty and majestic enough, certainly, to be this magnet, even to imperial Rome; but it is not so. One is full of antiquity on approaching the old spot, and all the glories of St. Peter's seem but of yesterday, when we pass in review all that we are to think of in connection with Rome. The postilions point out from far in the Campagna the distant, scarcely perceptible, dome to the traveller; but he is meditating the while on the Forum and the Capitol, and the glittering pinnacle shown to him is gaped at, more as marking the spot where stand the ruins of the queen of cities, than as surmounting a modern pile, however famed for sanctity or grandeur.



St. Peter's and the Vatican, in short, form not the first attraction to the visitor: they are surveyed at a distance, and reserved for a tonne louche, while the newly arrived flings himself headlong down the Capitoline descent, in search of temples, ruins, columns. Of these, in truth, he finds sufficient to occupy him for the first couple of days; and if he be a youthful lover of antiquity, without the minute love towards par





ticular objects borne by the antiquarian, a week may well pass over his head ere he turns his steps towards the dome of St. Peter's.

This is as it should be—the first week to the enjoyment of that host of reflections which spring up on beholding those scenes, and which are best, indeed only, to be enjoyed, in solitude. And then we may recur to the study of man, specimens of which now crowd in reality, as well as in effigy, the halls, aisles, and galleries of the borgo St. Pietro.

For my own part, after arriving in Rome, I had spent a week without seeking any one in the shape of friend or acquaintance; even letters of introduction lay neglected and forgotten, so overpowered was I by the realization of my earliest dreams. I rose early to wander and search, book in hand,—for any other than a mute Cicerone of the kind, however imperfect, is insufferable ; and returned to let the graver of memory run over in dreams, the scenes and objects that had traced themselves on my mind in the day. It was a week of unbroken solitude, of deep, indescribable enjoyment, that will never pass from my mind.



Satiety, however, will succeed the highest enjoyments; and in that hour, when the turn, the revolution of sentiment takes place, the mind, if it be forced still to regard the same objects, is apt to depreciate them, and become at length determinately disappointed. In this case, it is adviseable to emerge into life a little, and contemplate man,—an occupation best performed in that sharp and cynic humour produced by having become tired of things.

Owing to a resolve similarly produced, my steps were at length directed to St. Peter's, whither, it was evident on approaching the bridge of Angelo, that crowds of my fellow Zingari were betaking themselves. I mingled with the well-dressed throng—all looked dandies by the side of the slovenly Romans—and after traversing the filthy approach, did at length arrive in the famous piazza. The first glance, I must confess, was one of disappointment: the vast area enclosed by the circular colonnades, and rendered much smaller in appearance than what it really is by that enclosure, has the effect of dwarfing the front of the cathedral itself. That front too, enormous as it is, is frittered by its attics and compartments. No just idea of its grandeur is formed, till one is at the very portal and can see the breadth of the columns;—the magnitude of the whole is only arrived at from the magnitude of the parts—a manifest defect, shared, I believe, by all buildings of more than ordinary greatness and extent. St. Paul's is • more striking; perhaps because you cannot be said to get a view of it, till you are overcast with its shadow. The sky, or more often indeed the clouds, are seen behind the upper outline of our cathedral; whereas the Roman is relieved against a hill that stands behind it. St. Peter's too wants isolation: the Vatican grows, like an enormous and unnatural excrescence, no wise beautiful in itself from one of the sides of the cathedra!; whilst a little building of Pius die Sixth's, like the vestry-room of an English church, spoils it more on the other, and is itself insignificant.





In truth, no work of man's head and hands more exemplifies the vulgar proverb of Too many cooks, £fc: by its junction with the Vatican and by the colonnades, the isolated grandeur of the building was abandoned. The colonnades once resolved on, all should have been sacrificed to the grandeur of the front, which would have been perfect, if the dome rose immediately behind and over it, instead of which the dome is at the rear of the building, spoiled not only in its own grandeur, but as an aid to that of the building. The exterior was first sacrificed to the interior; and the colonnades were then invented as an after-thought to redeem the parvity of the former; instead of redeeming, they render it more conspicuous. They are useful, however, in hiding unsightly walls and .filth—and that is a reason—a very Italian one, however :—Filth, hovels, and wretchedness exist near the precincts of a palace. The Italian would never think of removing such, but builds a magnificent colonnade to conceal them.



But I wander in such discussions. At the end of the colonnade the carnages draw up, and after a short ascent, a mean little brick and vaulted passage, conducts the visitors into an interior square of the Vatican. Figure to yourself, good reader, an old stage coach London inn-yard, the Bell, or Boar, or the Swan with many necks, any of those ; if you should chance to have ever been in one — call to mind the surrounding apartments, the tiers of galleries open to the day. Such, on a large scale, but scarcely more magnificent, is this court of the Vatican ; yet in these apartments around are the chief works of ancient and of modern art; and yon galleries, so insolently compared to the crazy proppings of a London inn of past centuries, have been adorned minutely by the pencil of Raphael and his disciples. '



Here flock the Zingari to the shrine of their adoration, real or affected; for there are as many hypocrites in the devotion of sentiment and taste, as in that of religion. Mounting another staircase you enter the gallery.

" Are there no catalogues to buy ?"" demanded a Zingaro, who had no idea of an exhibition without a catalogue. Somerset-house was never worth looking at without one.

" There are no catalogues," replied the porter, " the new one has not been finished."

" Come, Mrs. R. let us turn back," said the votary of the fine arts, withdrawing his step from the Vatican, " we will return, another day, when the catalogue is finished. When will the catalogue be finished, my buon iiamo ?"

The porter, who did not seem at all flattered by this appellation of buon uomo, and who looked, as if he said " no more buon uomo than your worship,1' replied, that it might not be finished this year.

" There now Mrs. R.; I never knew you to have better fortune in your plans ; here we have come to Rome, the very year of all others that the Museum of the Vatican is without a catalogue, when we shan't be able to know Apollo from Hercules, nor the sculpture of Phidias from that of Canova."



" It is truly awkward," said the lady, " but we must make the best of it."

And in entered the Zingari, hopeless, pleasure-less and catalogue-less, to survey rows of statues, of which they had not the means of learning the names or the excellence.

" What scoundrels these Romans," reflected Mr. R. " because they know good from bad, and are acquainted with all the gods in marble, to think we are to know as much from inspiration. Here we are visiting the Vatican, not daring to open our mouths for fear of a blunder; and for the same reason forbidden ever hereafter to pretend that we have been here. It would be so foolish, if cross-questioned, to be convicted of not having known which was the Apollo Belvidere."



" I shouldn't wonder, Mr. R., if that were the Apollo Belvidere," said the lady, pointing to a clumsy god that stood in a row with the tiers etat of ancient relics. " It has something of the look."

" And I wonder," replied the more critical husband, "that you could not remember the cast better. Why, the Apollo has a kind of topknot on his head, whereas this fellow has smooth locks."

Winkellman could not set an erring student right with greater acumen, or in more unerring

taste. i

Owing to the walk or drive through Roman

sunshine, that always preceded my arrival at the Vatican, I never entered it without experiencing a drowsy inclination, and traced its labyrinths,—very labyrinths in truth,—in a most dreamy mood, which the apartments and surrounding objects were well calculated to favour. The gallery first entered is one of inscriptions, chiefly funereal ones ; and many, who have no conception of the mass of treasures that yet await their eyes in far apartments, are, on a first visit, often tempted to linger here, as on a May day in a picturesque English churchyard, spelling quaint inscriptions. The Diis Manibus, that generally commences the Heathen epitaph, is awful; there is little piquancy in them, and no rhyme, a circumstance that exceedingly astonished a young lady from Hampstead, whose amazement I heard expressed upon the spot. These funereal inscriptions are chronologically arranged. To the plain, Roman capitals that record the death and marked the ashes of the Romans of the Republic and the early empire, succeed the dove and olive branch, accompanied by some pious motto of the early Christians. There is something touching in these earliest popular memorials of our religion. Then appears the Greek again, but ill-written, and scratched, and indeed as piety increases, the inscriptions become more illegible, barbarous, and uncouth. And the arts seem at length to have declined to that pitch, that the chisel could not even produce a legible inscription of a few lines. I must express myself Goth enough to have lingered here, as long as in the chambers painted by the divine Raffaelle; and have felt inspired by these rude stories and graven characters, when not a spark of sentiment was inspired by the miracles which the artist's pencil has immortalized.





The Zingari, however, hurry on, and I with them, up a little staircase into a small apartment, containing the famous Torso, a legless, headless, even shoulderless prodigy of art. No where could the simile which Byron so beautifully and sentimentally makes use of—" the mirror, shivered into a thousand fragments, but still each fragment preserving its perfect image "—be better applied than to the glorious relics of Grecian art. The imagination can here restore in an instant for its own enjoyment those mutilated forms to perfection, which the chisel of the modern would in vain attempt.

Whither the crowd is borne afterwards into that world of marble life, I forget exactly. One wonders on, like Thalaba, in the midst of wonder and riches; and the tortuous windings of the palace increases the pleasing delusion. No history can convey an adequate idea of the swollen grandeur of the emperors, if not united with the splendid illustration, if it may be so called, of their magnificent memorials in porphyry and marble here preserved. How amusingly contrasting strike us in these solemn temples, for they are such in our veneration, the naive, astonished countenance of English girls, and the unmoved features of their worthy parent perhaps, who thinks too much admiration inconsistent with the dignity of an Englishman, and affects indifference, as he gazes, by some trivial act, the slapping of a cane against the floor, an under-toned hum, or a would-be whistle:—it would derogate so much from his importance to be observed in uncurbed admiration even of the magnificence of the Caesars. Thence we enter the hall of historic sculpture, where the effigies of all celebrated in ancient story are preserved;—the old Romans, their wives, and children, an interesting field for contemplation if the conjectures and bickerings of antiquaries did not render it one of uncertainty and doubt. Further is a chamber, that might serve as an ancient Buffon, zoology in marble,— birds and beasts—quite a petrified menagerie. And beyond these is the Cortile of the Belvidere. A fountain Sub Dio plays in a circular space, around which are four separate little buildings— temples they might be called—gods, however fallen, inhabit them. The Apollo occupies one, the Antinous another, &c. The contemplator is for the time shut out from a view of the others ; each is isolated in its grandeur; and the spectator thus left as it were tete a tete with the marble divinity, is impressed with awe undissipated, undistracted. The circumscribed space much increases the effect; it wears within the air of a sanctuary; visitors even the most boisterous hush their rude voice on entering, as though it were a chapel, and pour forth their tribute of admiration in a subdued tone. I have seen some lovely Zingari as much awed and abashed before the statue of the Apollo, as if they were undergoing presentation to a mighty sovereign, their look even of admiration was askance, and their voice a whisper.





Groups and parties pass in succession through these cells—there is scarcely room indeed for two knots of company, and there is a politeness in not disturbing a worshipper in his contemplations. It is annoying to have just marked a silent and admiring group depart, and be followed by a pair of cold, prattling connoisseurs, who feeling no portion of awe or inspiration from the sight, proceed to analyze some minor beauty of the work. The vociferous, gesticulating, real, Italian connoisseur is bearable; but the affected Zingaro, who utters the same cant, not with the Italian's vulgar and natural ardour, but in his country's cold, fashionable, apathetic tone, is such an antidote to both sublime and beautiful, that to enjoy aught except the proper ridicule of the personage in his company were impossible.



But abandoning the marbles, turn we to the Camere, that Raphael has painted—here is a famed place for expatiating, loudly speaking at the same time to a friend, but at all present. The Zingari seldom know what to make of these dingy, faded, walls, and pass the immortal frescoes most contemptuously ; sculpture of excellence speaks a plainer language, and is more generally understood—it ranks higher too at Rome, especially amongst our countrymen, who of course prize most there the excellence, which is the rarest in their native land. Here from morn till night, whilst gay crowds are passing, casting but a desultory glance, lingers the German artist, so much an admirer of Raphael and his master Perugino, that he is clothed in the costume of their figures, in a short surtout of ample skirt, his old garment curtailed into as much resemblance as possible to



his beau ideal of drapery. They wear also the small scull-cap, something like those of our blue-coat boys, with long locks flowing behind from beneath it, and a triangular beard, with a base rigidly rectilinear. With what haughty contempt they regard the dandy airs of our artists, who visit, in their turn, the slovenly, shabby poverty of their German brethren with a similar feeling.

The celebrated collection of paintings belonging to the Vatican is huddled up in a suite of garrets, to which I shall not ask the reader to mount, lest he should think that I am writing a guide to the Vatican. We will pause for a moment however in the uppermost gallery, from whence a view extends seldom equalled—the square to St. Peter's lies immediately beneath— the greater part of Rome, all the modern city is visible, and the most distant house is as conspicuous to the eye, however minute in perspective, as the street immediately adjoining. To the north west the view is bounded by the blue Appenine, wild as if civilization had never haunted its vicinity, or the first city of the universe had not existed for ages at their feet. No country can be more bleak, more wild; and that which is now but in too true unison with the city, must in its days of pride have formed a striking contrast with its splendour and its luxury. There rolls the yellow Tiber through yon waste, in the same livery as that which procured it an epithet in the days of its glory and divinity; washing, like the stream of time, now a vast extent of desert and monotony, then rushing amidst palaces and piles, and magnificence and space, and again sweeping along between reedy and inglorious margins to the sea, where it merges.



But the bright tints of day are already crimsoning into those of evening; the hum of life in the city below arises more loud and busy, than it did in the stillness and slumber of noon, and crowds of Zingari, hurrying down every staircase, and pouring across the court, warn me to quit the precincts of the Vatican. All betake themselves to St. Peter's, to promenade in its aisle, and wait till the vesper service is chaunted this feast day of Heaven knows what martyred saint. We enter. It is not like entering a hall, but passing from one open region to another—from beneath a blue sky to beneath a golden one, so high the gilded roof and vaulted dome rear themselves over head.



What a mixture ! what contrasts ! here creeps the ragged and bent votary, shuffling to some favourite shrine or chapel, where he kneels alone to his devotions, heedless of our gay countrymen who pass by laughing at the would-be witticism of some dandy, whose heels and spurs most irreverently salute the sacred pavement. These are the established at Rome, whose sight-seeing task has been concluded, and who shew that they are free of Roman mysteries, and at home even in the very shrine of papal idolatry by the nonchalance and mirth with which they promenade its aisle. More lately vol. n. K



arrived visitors betray themselves by upturned aspects, full of wonderment and strangeness, the pupils of their eyes extended as if it were dark midnight, eager to grasp all, the very mouth forgotten to be shut since the utterance of its last speech, such is the intensity of curious enjoyment. These as they up.gaze at the lofty roof, disturb the ranks of a procession, or trample upon some old supplicant, that has knelt down in mid aisle to devotion: —some grow dizzy with the magnitude, the crowd, the diversity of objects, and cover their eyes for an interval to recover from a state too like a dream. How amusing then is the astonishment of the children? Behold yon fine, redcheeked, jacketed English boy—how he stares at the passing monk, marvels at his robe, his gait, his humility, his mortified aspect, his shaven crown—how he pesters his amazed parent with questions—anon a procession meets him— it brays forth a chaunted prayer, that resounds throughout the vaulted cathedral like thunder





—the boy is actually frightened at the imposing pomp of Catholicism.

Here one may believe himself on 'Change; here lies are broached, and news retailed, private and political, defamatory of person or of government. The rustle of silks, the sliding of slippers, the chatter of female gossips are heard in the intervals of the chaunt and the psalms, that break forth from some department or chapel of the cathedral; and the great business of society, viz. inquiries for health and propagation of anecdote, is carried on in the temple, in the very face of religion. To add to the motley assembly, there is a tribe of Armenian catholics, who come here to perform their devotions, and one of them astounds us northerns by the sight of an oriental figure kneeling in this universal temple.

As you approach the great altar beneath the

dome, the true votaries become distinguished

from the Zingari visitors, who avoid the shrine,

stroll round admiring the once golden, but now only gilt lamps, and framing, and stand aloof to observe each Roman devoutly kiss the bronze toe of St. Peter. The toe and nail of the apostle are worn to the quick, by the mere dint of devout kissing, and shine a splendid proof of the strenuousness of southern osculation.



After having mingled in the crowd below, it is pleasing to mount the dome and view from the gallery above, the groups scattered over the tesselated pavement, and listen to the hum that arises. Banged around the circle beneath the cupola stand the confessional boxes, the occupation of which is marked by a wand affixed to the door; this with a glimpse caught of the kneeling figure of the penitent is all that ife visible of this famous custom 'of the Roman church, so associated in our minds, thanks more to our romancers than to our divines, with such a load of monkishness and horror.

The crowd at length deserts the aisle; and the gay chariot of the Briton rolls along beside the gilded house on springs of the Cardinal, away from the Borgo St. Pietro to the more fashionable regions of the Pincian and the Place of Spain.





THE GROGRAMS.

Mister and Mistress Grogram were an extremely honest and respectable couple, that weary of their " childless hall" in Warwickshire, drove with their own sleek horses, and sleeker coachman, to the great annoyance of all three animals, over the Alps. The sleek coachhorses were soon eaten up, all except the tails, as an Irishman would say, by flies and musquitos; and Mr. or rather Mrs. Grogram was induced to exchange the pair of skeletons with a Parmese Count for a bit of stucco framed in a glass case, with a fragment of a nose represented thereon, consisting of two transverse strokes of a brush, said to be by the inimitable Correggio.



Squire Grogram hated the smell of the sea, and therefore hated all the continent, being transmarine. His most frequent moral reflection, excited by travel, was that he had not seen a morsel of beef worth eating since he left Dover; and that article of food being wretched throughout all Lombardy, he hurried to Florence, being told that the Tuscan market was supplied with excellent meat. He was not disappointed. Better roasting viands are not to be found before the doors of the Fleet-prison, than may be carved in Tuscany; and if the rogues could be persuaded not to stuff1, anoint, and otherwise in every possible way odorize their sirloins with garlick, an Englishman might fancy himself at home for all the supererogatory sunshine. Aleatico is no bad substitute for port; the liquor having the strength, one may compound with its sweetness. And a lump of ice covered with the juice of the right purple grape, forms a beverage that even Grogram declared supreme.



What could have led the worthy man to emigrate I cannot determine; he himself averred, it was to recover a very good appetite that he had been always blessed with, until latterly it had begun to decline. For myself, I believe in my heart, the cause was no other than Mrs. Grogram's peremptory will, who being a first cousin to the Ramsbottoms, was bitten by that travelled and literary family, and thence seized by an unconquerable desire to visit foreign parts.

Grogram was one of those very few of the John.Bull tribe, who did not make the attempt to fling off hoofs and horns on passing the Alps. With George die Second, he abhorred " poetry and painting," which unfortunate arts, as discarded by her lord, Mrs. Grogram took under her especial protection. Grogram liked Turin, " it was a Christian city," he said, " where a man might find his way, the eating good, the Asti excellent, and the appetite always on the alert, owing to the sharp air of





Mount Snee;" a Piedmontese, he averred, would think nothing of eating a bundle of sticks with his dinner.—" Sticks, Mr. Grogram ?"— " Aye, Sir, sticks, a kind of brittle canes, which they devour as bread. Like egg-shells they help digestion."

Grogram censured the Milanese as blockheads, for calling a parcel of white pinnacles a dome, a sapient piece of criticism in which even Mrs. G. joined; who observed, moreover, that the course was a pretty place on the top of a wall for driving, very pleasant only for a

x

number of horse-serjeants, that kept drilling the carriages in a most tormenting manner, as if the Milanese troops drove in carriages, and charged the enemy in chariots, like the old Britons in the beginning of Goldsmith's history.

Venice, Mrs. Grogram had heard, and consequently Mrs. Grogram believed, to have been built on wood, which wood floated with all the superincumbent edifices. The wag, who ventured so far would have been contented with having passed so much on the good folks' credulity. The sagacity of the Grograms went further, and agreed, " If it floats surely it may sail.1" " No doubt,'' quoth the ready informant, " the city does once a year sail round the Mediterranean, there are three tall red masts in the midst of St. Mark's Place, if you observe, to which the sails for wafting the city are suspended." So much were the poor Zingari subdued and set astray from confidence in their common sense, by the wonders of Italy, that although they did not altogether believe this Gulliver's tale, yet they actually argued the point, and asked the possibility of such a thing's being the case, of a countryman, on whose sagacity they relied.



When Grogram arrived in Florence in search of sunshine and prime beef, 'he must have propitiated his good genius to keep him from the extreme of the ridiculous; for attempting to reach the famed gallery in company with his spouse, a lumbago seized him in the third huge flight of the staircase, and forbade any farther ascent! and Mrs. Grogram was abandoned alone to all the absurdities that the very atmosphere of a great picture gallery is fraught with to any of the Zingari. What havoc to be sure the poor laciy did make in that part of the Cruscan vocabulary, which the artist tribe have formed for their own peculiar use.



These, however, are an every day species of blunders, so common, that I should not stoop to glean them, but for another whim of Mrs. G.'s that is really well worthy of record. No rural spouse of chaste England loved her lord more than did the lady in question. To wrong the good man, even in thought, was remote from her virtuous mind—but people come abroad to be fashionable, said Mrs. Grogram, we keep our carriage, Mr. Grogram, and what can the best lord of the land here do more.

" Well, my dear," said Grogram. But the lady kept her conclusion to her owr proper breast.





This was, that having servants, horses, carriages, and all the insignia of wealth and rank, she should, like foreign ladies favoured with those blessings, superadd to them the convenience of a clcisbeo. Blame me not for the word, delicate reader—Mrs. Grogram spoke it in the best pronounciation she might, the pair of words, now used as a more decorous synonyme, being too venturous for the lady's bocca Brltanna to attempt. Far from her imagination at the time was an indelicate or unchaste idea— is it not strange, that in these connections between the sexes, foreigners can at once yield to vice, yet at the same time preserve dignity; whilst the unskilful British unite the mere semblance of vice to all that is ridiculously attached to it? Practice, practice it is that makes perfect ; certain it is that in Italians we are prepared to overlook a thousand acts that would ruin one of ourselves for ever.

Some " damned kind friend" must have persuaded poor Mrs. Grogram of the absolute neCL.ssity of this requisite to Italian fashion—" indeed what is a lady now-a-days even in England,'' said this friend, " without an ami de la maison, at least without a delicate approach to one ?" Mrs. G. felt quite out of squares, and more ashamed of her honest husband's company, than if his days of wooing were only then drawing to a termination. Unfortunate was the wight, young or old, on whom she could lay hands. Several young visiting acquaintances were at first highly flattered by the condescending attentions of Mrs. G.—but after a little time each drew back in affright from the foreseen vengeance of Mr. Grogram, which seemed as a necessary consequent upon such desperate friendships. Moreover^ though a comely personage, the dame had few of the attractions necessary to bind an Englishman to a remarked and ridiculous place by her side. A companion in her carriage, an arm at a route, was all the wish of Mrs. Grogram—the fashion of the thing in short. But no—it was impossible. Not one of her countrymen could she find amenable enough for the office, one that would condescend and at the same time comprehend the spirit of the pure and chivalric devotion which is its essence.





Numerous were her experiments and attempts, so numerous indeed, that they at last excited universal attention, and Mrs. Grogram's anxious desire to catch a cavalier became the private jest of her acquaintance. She at first flew high, and deemed herself equal to attach men of independence, rank and fashion. Mrs. Grogram beheld similar thraldrom exercised over beings as worthy by Italian dames, of no more wealth nor comeliness of person than had fallen to her own share; but the poor lady wanted the sceptre of fascination, and knew as little how to weave those bands of gossamer, as her libertyloving countrymen knew how to submit to them. So that she was at last compelled to limit her aims to whomsoever she could catch; and her angling was very amusing.



Some bcaus she succeeded in holding for an evening, some for the next day, but beyond three days could she find none of her countrymen constant; for folks seldom journey so far in search of a dinner, or even a seat in an old lady's equipage. Foreigners were all appalled by their respect for the punctilious dignity of an Englishwoman, and at the same time repelled by the countenance of the particular lady in question from daring to aspire to a place,^for which by education they were fit; and poor Mrs. Grogram would have wandered over Italy unfashionably, but that a certain Count, a real indubitable Count, though truly I cannot call to mind his name, paid Mr. Grogram a morning visit, for the purpose of asking him if he wanted to be taught Italian, to have his shoes blacked, or if any menial office of the kind was vacant in his household, which he, the Count, would be most willing and ready to undertake. Luckily, however, the Italian noble prefaced his demand by considerable circumlocution, in listening to which Mrs. Grogram displayed so much affability and graciousness, that the subtle Italian tacked and slackened sail to observe, if something better might not be made of Mrs. Grogram's mansion, than occupying a situation thus altogether menial. The Count played his cards as skilfully as it behoves hungry-men to do, and he became soon the chosen friend of the Casa Grogram) as he called it in the best pronounciation he could.



I leave to the imagination of my reader to depict the lady and her attendant, conversing both in bad French, to the considerable amusement, of every English beholder ;—as to Italians they wished their countryman joy of his good fortune, and saw nothing whatever extraordinary in the affair.





BOYHOOD ABROAD.

There is no absurdity, in the midst of the many absurdities of those impelled by the travelling mania, more reprehensible than that of bringing children abroad. For grown people, if the southern land abounds in evil example and contamination, there is still instruction and the most liberal and delightful of amusements to counterbalance them ; but mere children are exposed to all the ill, without being ripe for any of the benefit. There is not only the habits, the objects they behold ; for the laxity of foreign morals extends to an utter contempt of those minor decencies of life, the observance of which guards the purity of the English nursery : and a child at that early age suffers all the contamination of which his years are capable by merely seeing, and at length becoming accustomed to the domestic ways of foreigners. But this is not all. Live as secluded as one may in Italy, the atmosphere of the English home is left behind :—other topics engross the parent's thoughts and conversations—other objects, however censured and rallied, are alluded to in their circle, than those which in England would have been started. Then the servants—if they be foreign, a child might as well have a stone put about its neck and be thrown to perish, as have the least intercourse with them—if they be English, they must deteriorate in principle and conversation trebly as their masters. It is but natural. In all cases, what a school is youth introduced to. But it may be said, there is vice in England, in our best seminaries of education; undeniably. But, I undertake to assert, it shows itself nowhere in England without the stamp and seal of wrong being upon it—if indulged in ever so much, the impression of its heinousness is felt—and conscience is left to its natural avenging and prohibitive terrors. But the corruption of foreign life consists not so much in its greater extent or degree than elsewhere, but in the common-place, ordinary coolness with which it is regarded—every thing is for the best—crime is a pastime—delicacy a prejudice. The inhabitants of those countries are free, enlightened souls forsooth, who, however they may deign to stoop to the despotism of rulers, would scorn to bow before the dictates of virtue or even decorum.





The advantages of travel consist either in seeing mankind, or in beholding those scenes which form the delightful food of the imagination ever after. To view a lovely scene, one super-eminently lovely, is perhaps the greatest mental treasure one can lay up; it is perpetual, it is a lease for life of the spot in idea: but for either of those benefits or enjoyments children are not fit. Nay, more, their being introduced to those scenes at an age, when they are incapable of estimating the beauty and majesty of them, incapable of associating them with sentiment, of being inspired or impressed by them, not only affords them none of the pleasure that the mature mind would feel on beholding them, but further, by destroying the novelty, prevents them ever after from being struck with such, and enjoying them really. Bringing a child to Switzerland or Italy, and accustoming his infant eye to such scenes, is, to that faculty of mind which feeds on the sublime and picturesque in scenery, what dissipation and licentiousness is to the too youthful heart, both become prematurely uses; the eye of one is the heart of the other. A person accustomed from his infancy to noble scenery, never describes it with imagination; he may view it with a patriot's, but not a poet's eye. Switzerland has never produced a descriptive poet, has never inspired one of her sons. Even Rousseau, so eloquent in passion, and in the moral picturesque, fond as he was of nature's scenes, does not pourtray them feelingly. Let any one, whose youth has been spent in the lovely but tame country of England, and who subsequently has beheld the Leman burst upon him from the east summit of the Jura, say what would have been his loss, if when a child, he had been made to traverse that road without any of his present feelings of pleasure, and have so destroyed the novelty and surprise that now form the principal component of his delight!





But there are some worthy Zingari, with whom education is synonimous with a knowledge of chattering foreign tongues, and children are often dragged from their natural, pure or moral home, that they may learn French, Italian, music, dancing at the fountain head of those arts. But the French, the Italian, the music, and the dancing will be forgotten, when the morals, or rather the mode of viewing and judging morals acquired by youth in its travels, will never fade or be forgotten, and never cease to influence the life, feelings, and actions of those unfortunately accomplished at so enormous a price.



The question is, what is the proper age, at which men should travel ? Certainly not till certain prejudices are established, which may enable them to see and despise, and certainly not till the powers of imagination and mental enjoyment are fully developed. After those classic studies have been completed, it must be supreme delight to youth to travel south towards the scenes, which in anticipated imagination, have been during almost all the years of their short life before them. They will be disappointed on beholding them, so greatly does the imagination outbuild the remains and ruins of man's grandeur, whilst it always falls short of the majesty of nature. What imagination could ever have approached in anticipated idea, Chamounix or Vevay—what poet ever hath not felt his fancy shrink into insignificance before the sublime reality of those scenes. But how contrary is the effect of Rome, its Capitol and its Forum—then the reality is a mockery and a burlesque upon the colossal grandeur of our preconceptions.



An Italian youth, or an English who has seen Rome in his boyhood, can scarcely, such is the real pettyness and insignificance of the objects, enjoy his classical reading after. To the boy who has caught perch in the Avernus, the ^Eneid is a burlesque ; his imagination is superseded, his ardour palled, the whole fabric of his boyish happiness undermined. The sweetest dream of his life has been broken, and the pleasures which he has been robbed of, are unpurchaseable utterly.

I have as yet considered the subject only as to its moral fitness : but many parents, driven themselves from ennui or curiosity to Italy, carry their infant family with them, from no motives of education or of benefiting, but merely not knowing what to do with them. Such mismanagement isoftenfatal. LeavingEngland,parents are not aware of the extreme unhealthiness of



the climate, the very great danger to which it exposes the lives, even of the old—the young t run ten-fold danger. I am no physician, and would not here assume the language of one; if the slight warning might not have the effect of preserving the happiness of a family. For many English parents, affectionate as they are, have dragged their infants south, unaware of the danger they exposed them to, or of the.utter ignorance of southern practitioners. Poor Byron ! in one of the notes to Childe Harold, he gaily attributes his recovery from fever in the Morea to his disregard of his medical attendant; yet he fell a sacrifice at last to the ignorance of a physician of the same nation.

A more melancholy instance of the fatal effects of bringing children south I never saw than at Venice. A literary gentleman, a man of taste and talent, in his ardour to behold the works of ^ art and ruins of antiquity in the south, betook himself thither with his only son, in whom, for he was rather a disappointed man, were centered



all his thoughts and hopes. The latter he had withdrawn from his own fate. Too fond of his boy to leave him behind in his native air, the unfortunate parent brought him with him : he had no fear; the lad, though not strong, was healthy. ' But the rapid increase of heat had a most enervating effect on the tender constitution of the child. A man is seasoned, and a grown youth is buoyed up against the fatigue of travel, and secured from its ill effects ; but a boy, whose wish extends not beyond a ride or a short journey, has no mental antidote against the weariness of travel. And rest as often as one may, and let Ihe daily journeys be ever so short, still the exhaustion, the heat of blood and fatigue of body, caused by a continued journey, even at the moderate rate of forty miles a day, is much more considerable than any one would believe, whp has not tried it for a time.

The child pined, and in passing from Vicenza to Venice, caught the ague fever of the low. grounds. He arrived in Venice—the parent wa$

VOL II J.



distracted, called in all the medical wisdom of tjie city—in vain. The flower had been transplanted from the shade, and placed beneath the influence of the burning sun—to tend it was a sad and useless task—it drooped and died. The parent saw his offspring perish—he felt the cause had been his own fatal longing to visit Italy. He accused himself, his vain propensity, of the death of his child. " I have murdered him, I have murdered my boy," he was heard to cry; and a temporary insanity, and a succeeding melancholy, from which he never recovered, was the consequence. He had the courage to go no farther; to him the Italian land was pain to tread, to think of; and he turned short to his. native country, to die indeed of gloomy thoughts that always haunted him, and in seeking to difr-. sipate which, he had met the misfortune whicU endued them with ten-fold bitterness.





CICISBEISM.

The mania for gallantry, with which the Zingari are peculiarly infected, displays itself in so many and such strange ways, that a hundred stories would not include even the prominent specimens of this natural folly—the more worthy of blame, or ridicule, which is the only forcible blame, as it is never produced by the natural effect of beauty over their susceptibility, but by their own thirst of becoming foreigners at once.

The Briton who crosses the Alps is never at rest till he gets immersed in an intrigue—he looks not for attraction, personal or mental, nor for enjoyment; his object is an adventure with, a female who speaks Italian, and is, if possible, at least a Countess. It is astonishing the speed with which the Zingari contrive to fall in love ; they scarcely allow tinie for beholding their innamorata—the very name is often enough; which to unite with their own in any way is the grand object of their wishes.



The Zingaro in general finds considerable delay m attaining the occupation lie seeks—a place is not always vacant. Society is not very accessible at Milan, and they are rather nice and aristocratic there as to whom they associate with. Major F. was lucky, the gallant Irishman began to pay his court some five and twenty

years ago to the Duchess . He pays it

yet. His hair has grown gray in the service,.—a true and trusty swain, vindicating in the south the proverbial tenderness and truth of his country. He rivals the acknowledged excellence c*f the I<ombard Cavalier servente, long allowed to be the paragon of that noble profession, as Alfieri's hero boasts,



" L'onor gid fui de Cic.sWi Lombardi.'1

Swains twenty-five years ago however did not pour over the Alps at the rate they do now; and the crowd was then better worth the attention of Italian ladies. But now while Jenkinsons and Tomkinsons tumble down the Alps in living avalanches, it is no wonder that Italian society should have been inspired with a tutelary Inglesephobia. If these gentlemen continue their route eastward, they find thai although the male aristrocracy of Venice is no more, the female aristrocracy exists. There are a few leaders, absolute as the old inquisitors of state, and though now blen passes, they will not allow of intrigue but wndpr their cognizance. Byron incurred the dire displeasure of these dowagers for his interloping, and his making Venice his residence has ended by his being execrated there in society. ''Beppo4" was the best and most magnanimous vengeance, that the poet ever took: 'twas delicate, distant, just. If his rank, and passion, and genius did not propitiate the powers that rule Venetian society, what can a Zingaro hope ? He tries farther south, and is perhaps more lucky.



Chance, however, may so arrange, that an Englishman may find himself placed in a very short time. Darrel was an instance, so let us call the Cidsbeo Lombardo. Long had he lived a well-behaved bachelor, verging towards middle age, wanting resolution, and perhaps something else, to marry,—meantime dying of ennui, he sought Italy as a remedy; and came determined to fling his devotions at the first woman he met on the right side of the Alps.

He met one in Milan, the Countess S , how

I know not, ugly as sin, and the mother of a fine family of grown-up daughters. The Countess was charmed to have a cavalier of any country ; the Count delighted to devolve a portion of his family cares on an ami de la malson, and the young Signorine were thereby to learn English, a great accomplishment in Italy, gratis. It was an agreed thing in seven days'time, and the Zingaro was installed before he well knew where he was. From twelve in the day till perhaps two the next morning, Barrel was obliged to trot after and by the side of his new innamorata; the mornings he had to teach English and morality to the young ladies, at intervals help to manage the house, visit the tradespeople and scold the servants—" and all for love, not money." A menial could have earned a guinea a day in the place; and Barrel, after a little time, would have given a year's salary at that rate to any one who would relieve and succeed him; but escape was difficult. As to the fine passion he dreamed of, he found none of it The Countess and he talked very exaltedly and sentimentally the first week; and without the affair going a step farther in the tender or sentimental direction, the connexion sunk into the very common-place one between the lady and a convenient servant. The Count in the meantime picked his teeth, lounged at the Casin<>, and abandoned the cares and education of his family, not to mention the great part of the expense, to the kind and affectionate Barrel. I verily believe, the unfortunate cavalier serventi would have shot himself, but for a passport and a pair of post horses procured in secret, and thus administering the means of a secure escape. Poor Barrel! how he shudders at the mention of Italian gallantry !





It is really astounding to hear the coolness with which these connections are talked of, amongst those free-tongued and free-though ted females. The following anecdote was recounted by the very lady who figures in it. She was at some rout, ball, or conversazione, and there happened to make acquaintance with two Englishmen ; one had been introduced, had danced with her> and the other ignorant of a word of Italian, and knowing not a soul but his friend, consequently joined their conversation. The Z'mgan were newly arrived, and began the converse with gravity and the utmost deference. She was an extremely plain, frank, witty woman, with red eyes, I remember well; a more agreeable moves not in Florence. But at this very time her long attached friend and lover had played her an unhandsome trick, and deseVied 'her utterly. •. . . . <; . <.'-.••'.• • •



She either had not a carriage, or it was not forthcoming at the door of the rout:—the latter was her reading, and of course our Zingari each proffered an arm on each side to conduct her home, but in the most respectful and courteous manner. The lady was full of <her griefs, even to overflowing'; she could thitik and speak of nothing else, and expatiated so warmly on the perfidy .of nien, that she reached the door of her habitation .in the very midst of a very eloquent and interesting part of her story, and therefore dragged the Zingari up stairs with her, that they might not depart without hearing the conclusion. The poor .Eingari, who had been L a



behaving with all the deference and courteousness, that the given etiquette of their isle could prescribe, were considerably amazed at thi» frankness and confidence, with which they were honoured. Like Alonzo the brave by the side of the fair Imogene,

"They spoke not, they moved not, they said not a word." —

The conversation seemed getting quite beyond their depth. At length her tale advanced to the conclusion, which Wps neither more nor less than that her heart was en vacance, and a place in her equipage at the service of a courteous aspirant.

The two Zingari stared first at the lady, then at each other, jaisaient des gros yeux, and seemed to have been taken altogether by surprise. Each thought an engagement of the kind required consideration, especially with a lady blessed with red eyes ; and asked each other, by very grave and tacit glances, advice in so important a decision. Several minutes passed in profound silence, which was at length broken by the loud laugh of her of the red eyes.



The most extraordinary part of the ancedote s, that it was related by the lady herself, in very good society, to a crowd of listeners, who seemed to think it a very good joke, with nothing by any means uncommon attached to it.





EXTORTION.

It is a received opinion amongst us English., that we are eminent gulls abroad, most easily taken advantage of, and that the Italians, as the greatest rogues in existence, never fail lo cheat us at every step. We give this out ourselves, and not a few Zingari make noisy •boast .of their own and their country's gutlibility. It is a most preposterous species of vanity, doubly preposterous since it is by no means true. But as the French boast of their keenness and conquests, John Bull is always prone to publish and exaggerate his disasters. .He is Byronic in a petty prosaic way, and thinks to command respect by his sufferings; 'evert if they be suffered merely at the hands 'of waiters and postilions. Your Zingaro vaunts at times not so much all that he has seen, as all that he has been robbed of—he prides himself on his vexations, not his pleasures—and the chief recollections of his classic tour are not so much the new and Sublime sensations he has experienced, as the record of his having been



starved here, upset there, and robbed every

i * * ••"''';. '•'*!:. *•.

where.

These exaggerated complaints and vaunt's of suffering are rehearsed by returning travellers, to their countrymen setting forth, in the same manner that ancient voyagers peopled the distant realms through which they passed with dragons and dire magicians, with fire, pestilence and famine,—in short, with dangers, which to have passed denoted signal heroism. In consequence of this, the Zingari of later emigration resolved to draw their purse-strings tight, to sharpen their glances, and be determined not to be over-reached or taken in by these rascally foreigners.



Simond records the astonishment of the Genevese, on finding the English 'visitors of the nineteenth century so different from what they knew them of old—a needy, mean, suspicious, wrangling crew of adventurers, rather than the noble and affluent race that alone was wont .of yore to reach the shores of the Leman. Simond describes these economic Zingari of the present day scrupulously bargaining for the price of their cotelette, ere they would allow it to be put on the coals. The consequence is, that the English character has fallen twenty per cent, in value upon the continent. The French being nearer to the truth, sooner arrived at it, and were less amazed, at what moreover their national antipathy welcomed. But the Italians, who, from old recollections, as well as from their accounts of the political and military struggles of the war that had reached them, were po&



I

sessed with magnanimous ideas of Britons, were indeed grievously disappointed on beholding the number of mean, mistrustful, bargainers that called themselves Englishmen; and who preserved all the pride and impertinent hauteur of their more generous and noble countrymen^ without the princely qualities which rendered such tolerable. Extreme dislike to Englishmen could not fail to be the consequence.

I have been 'in several countries, England not excepted, and do think, that as the republican Swiss are the greatest rogues, the slavish Italians are the most honest people that I have encountered. Leave a purse in any shop or tavern of Italy, you will find it untouched. A diamond pin, left behind in a solitary auberge of the Apennines, has been forwarded safely through several hands for two hundred and fifty miles, till it reached the owner. I never heard of a pocket picked, or a burglary committed in the whole peninsula; bandits there are, no doubt, who are a noble set of scoundrels





ill their way> and pious to boot. But it is not of such romantic robbers the Zingaro complains, their existence fcnd feats proving rather an attraction in addition to the classic and picturesque ones of Italy.

When politics are not concerned, the Italians are in general a confiding, easy people; they are not dishonest, because they would not take the trouble to be so; besides they can live upon nothing, and do not want to rob; but in certain situations, they are coriipelled to .be exorbitant. In Rome, for instance, a beautiful quarter has been built and fitted up at great expense, for English visitors especially; but these houses are empty all through the summer's heat;—the winter occupant then must necessarily pay the rent of the whole year. Temporary lacqtreys are rogues in all .countries:; one should be prepared for their imposition ; but the Ziugari are unjust in reasoning from their want of conscience to the universal depravity of their nation. ..••.:

Being at Rome and hastening to proceed to



Kaples at a time when the roads were most thronged with banditti, I sought out companions for the venturous voyage, and did find a pair of stout Zingari bent upon the same journey. They were military folk, come to enjoy a classic tour; and as their aspects looked . defiance, I rejoiced in having fallen into such fit company for passing the frontiers of Naples and the environs of Fondi. We agreed to travel humbly and by day only;, and to offer as little temptation, and as much of the contrary as possible, to the gentlemen who were raising contributions on the road.

We had not proceeded far before I began to discover, that my companions were prepossessed^ not only with the fear of being met, stripped, and carried to the mountains for their ransomsake by the brigands, but were also fearfully upon their guard against being more quietly robbed by overcharges at the inns where we baited and slept. This was the thought that occupied them. The recollections of the glorie* connected with the ground they trod were of course unknown to them; but they were blind even to the natural beauties of the scenery, so pre-occupied were they with considerations of purse and comfort. The vetiurino were first of all to supply them with bed and supper, and this was a source of everlasting squabble— neither were ever good enough—or if there happened to be a better chamber, or better viands in the town than those provided for them, they were over-reached in idea, and a scene of wrangling ensued, in which although generally worsted and overpowered by the more voluble tongues of the Italians, still the field was fought on the part of the Zingari with vociferation as loud and as obstinate. Ten times over they would have been assassinated but for the forbearance of the Italians; in England, they certainly would have been put in the stocks, as they merited.



Of all companions in travelling, however, a military man is the most insufferable—I speak in general—especially to one, who has no occasion for any other person to swear for him. In petty comforts your soldier is the most selfish of all human beings—moreover he prides himself on this very self—and there is nothing he has so much at heart as good quarters and the best of accommodation. To a person who travels for a more refined and intellectual sort of pleasure, such a companion is not only disgusting, but exceedingly inconvenient. One is forced upon a school-boy struggle for sharpness and superiority respecting matters of trivial importance. ,



But this inconvenience was not so annoying as to perceive the system of robbery, actual fraud, carried on by these Englishmen, as a proof of their knowingness. They had heard from others, and laid it down with themselves as a rule, that a dinner such as Italians furnish to Englishmen alone, ought to be had for a few pence; and when a sum really moderate is demanded by the unfortunate innkeeper, the Zingari, strong in their sticks and party, and in the unwillingness of the poor innkeeper to get involved in a quarrel with gran signori in favour with his 'government, pay one half perhaps of the man's demands, and drive off in despite of his entreaties and imprecations.



In my present journey was a flagrant instance. The Italian who keeps the little inn in the middle of the Pontine Marshes for the accommodation of travellers, is in reason entitled to any sum, however enormous, for whatever he may set before one, were it merely for his remaining in that pestilential place. Bringing wine and food there must greatly increase their expence. Well ; the Zingari, after having eaten a •comfortable dinner here, rebelled with indignation against the demand of a few shillings—they really would not and did not pay the man the original price of the meat devoured. In vain he protested— they were strong and went off without paying move. And this fraud they called being up lo the rascally Italian. A troop of German students some days after visited the same house of entertainment, and after devouring all the provision of the house, beat the host thereof, till they nearly killed him, because he mad•c a demand of the pedestrian stragglers somewhat more than they were accustomed to pay in a wholesome town, surrounded with corn and• pasture.



Nothing was more common with these companions of mine than to threaten Italians with their canes or sticks, which in France or England they had not dared to think of. I could not help exclaiming against such cowardly tyranny, but was answered by the question of " What better treatment can an Italian wretch deserve?" And why is an Englishman superior to these wretches? For the freedom and the wealth that they do not possess, and which good fortune more than national character has bequeathed from our fathers to us. But any Zingaro gives himself credit, and takes to himself pride on the strength of his country's preeminence, affecting contempt for people less fortunate—as if nations could control their destinies. I blushed for my countrymen !





THE ARISTOCRACY OF TRAVEL.

Theee are divers sorts of pride, such as pride of birth, pride of purse, " pride of place,v and others, which, however reprehensible and . ridiculous when carried to extravagance, are at least intelligible. Now the pride of travel, a species at present more in vogue than any other, is, I must own, quite incomprehensible to me.

That a man, who has travelled over the con

7 '.if.

tinent and been conversant with its various sights and circles, should esteem himself more a man of the world than his cotemporary, who has never stirred ten miles from the metropolis during the interval, is by no means preposter.. pus. It is that there should be not only a general superiority of the travelled over the untravelled, but a gradation of rank, and consequently of airs and importance, amongst the travelled themselves, that excites a smile. Thus he, who has been at Geneva, looks down upon the performer of a mere Parisian trip—the traveller who has crossed the Alps, in turn regards with contempt the mere Swiss tourist,— and the pilgrim who has reached Rome and Naples, deems himself a far more enlightened and liberalized mortal, than one who has been deterred from encountering the wretched accommodations of the south, and who rests contented with that very fine specimen of Italy which Florence and its Apennines bestow.



It is curious to pbserve the nicety with which our Zingari mete out this scale of superiority ; I have seen a youth quite self-satisfied in having reached as far south as Pom-, peji, taken conversational precedence of indisputably by another, who had actually pene



trated some thirty miles further, to Paestum. How the Travellers' Club have arranged this very important consideration of precedence, I am not aware. I believe it requires five hundred miles' travel from the shores of England, to entitle a man to hold rank at all therein. An Italian tour is subaltern rank merely; a Northern tour, through the realms around the Baltic, is necessary for attaining the rank of captain. I knew an amiable youth, endowed as the event proved, with more ambition than strength, so exceedingly aspirant after this step, that not contented with the classic but vulgar tour of Italy, he visited Vienna, St. Petersburgh and Berlin, all in the interval of one vacation. He saw nothing— that was not his object, and travelled some eight or ten days successively with couriers, not resting a single night, in order to accomplish the desirable end of calling himself a Northern traveller. The poor young man died last year of a disorder brought on by the fatigue of a journey, undertaken to gratify so preposterous an ambition.

vOL. II. M





Then, your Egyptian voyagers and your Grecian are field officers, knights grand cross of the peripatetic order. He that has seen . the Nile is to be accosted reverentially, and he that has plucked the Attic fig, struts with the air of a Themistocles. There is a courtbearing, a gravity and importance considered necessary to the rank acquired by thus wandering ; and after having passed the vulgar limits of the Mediterranean, every degree that one removes from the longitude of Greenwich, adds an imaginary row of ermine to the robe of one's dignity.

All this is very unaccountable. Can it be, that he who has wandered over the sands of Africa, and who has been acquainted with the charming variety of the scenery of the desert, —who has conversed with the enlightened Arabs, and imbibed ancient lore from Coptic inscriptions,—can it be on the strength of having enjoyed these superior sources of information, that he assumes the great man ? Or is it on the score of the perils he has braved and escaped that he thinks himself entitled to consideration ? The survivor of the storming party in the forlorn hope puts on no airs of the kind,—how much less need the traveller do so, who has encountered no enemies more important than musquitos and exorbitant landlords ? It were to be wished that some court of heraldry or etiquette would make enquiry into these pretensions, and abate so prominent a nuisance to existing society.



One. circumstance attached to this vanity, would, if known generally to those who affect it, check it altogether; this is, that the affectation is decidedly vulgar. The fashionable and wealthy, who need but a word to be conveyed to the ends of the earth, do not sigh for objects so attainable, and travel for present enjoyment, not for future vaunt. It is only young gentlefolks with limited credit in their circular letters of introduction to the bankers of the universe, who long to encompass the earth and tread the dust of a thousand nations—just such youth as are to be met with under a gateway, in a public vehicle, or at a table d'hote.



It is not difficult to distinguish those travellers in search of j'ai vus, from those who wander for the sake of more immediate kinds of pleasure. They visit every object with such speed and minuteness, and in such order, in such unswerving allegiance to the guide-book, and wear always the same visage of satisfaction, whether they have been conducted to an imperially named heap of bricks, or to the Pantheon. What a punishment!—should the Vatican be closed during their limited stay in Rome— the Zingari in that case, the witty Romans recount, console themselves for the misfortune by leaving their cards with the custode of the gallery. Having duly performed which piece of etiquette, each may safely affirm that he has visited the Vatican,



Amongst a set of these gentlemen, who pride themselves to the extent of their vanity in having reached the southern shore of Italy, the arrival, as frequently takes place, of a Nabobino or young Anglo-Indian from his journey over the desert, is quite discomfiting. As he talks of Upper Egypt, of Thebes, and the Pyramids, the minor sights of the Coliseum, of Paestum and of Terni, shrink into insignificance before the personal narrative of him who hath half encompassed the earth ; and the Indian, who even if not vain, i.s essentially pompous, increases his travelled superiority by the oriental taste and condescension with which he deigns to converse with his equals.

In the aristocracy of travel, outrivalled certainly by no other aristocracy, whether of birth, purse or talent, in pride your Indian is certainly the most pompous, your American the most impertinent; the young Briton is so much and so universally the gentleman, that his assumption is ready at all timesj to shrink with polite good humour, into an acknowledgement of its baselessness. Your Anglo-Indian, however, who in his behaviour exaggerates, and, like scene-painters, does every thing on a large scale, in order to allow for perspective—who thinks himself derogating from the gentleman, if he wears not the air of a prince—and whose simplest nature is the most solemn coxcombry, is never inclined to abate one inch of his pretensions. He is the most kingly of the Zingari tribe Consider his dignity—bless you, he has been in Thibet, on the Caucasus, up the Red Sea—would he were laid there ! If that be the style of young civilians escaped from the Ganges to imbibe un piccolin di gusto, ere their visage and temper both exsiccate in premature old age, of aids-de-camp, and company's officers, what must be the bearing of the nabobs ipsissimi, were they to condescend to migrate elsewhere than to aristocratic England ? If there be even an arithmetical proportion observed in the pomp and pride of Indian rank, the Chiaja would not contain two of such personages.





The American, I speak of one or two examples, and perhaps exceptions, has all the pride, but little of the pomp of the Indian. What Jonathan wants however in silent, he makes up in loquacious impertinence ; and the hauteur which the plebeian cannot assume in his countenance, he affects to the utmost of his ability with his tongue. The aristocracy of republicanism (no contradiction) is in him joined with that of travel, and he looks down upon the Zingari that have not traversed the Atlantic, and who are mean enough to hold allegiance to a monarch. He is freshly arrived in an Italian port from his far continent, and having touched upon no other European land than Italy, he hath all his own prejudice against the English, joined with that of Italians against us. But he does not calculate travel by the diminution of prejudice; he has trodden the new world, and deems this a sufficient title for contemning all who have merely looked upon the common-place scenery of the old.





TORLONIA.

The Zingari all with one voice abuse TorIonia, the ducal banker at Rome; none, however, fail to attend his balls, which in the number of guests at least, and the splendour of both locale and entertainment, are unrivalled in Italy. As the vanity and ostentation of a parvenu open those halls to all ranks of foreigners, without the necessity of any preliminary introduction on their part, save a letter of credit on his dukeship's bank, there need be no reluctance or feeling of delicacy in stretching with in such precincts; although the same licence would be unpardonable, if taken with regard to more English and more select circles. Moreover, it is an entertainment, which the Zingari pay his dukeship for as dearly as if they ordered the fete at. a tavern, his grace taking care to indemnify himself for his expences in the shape of a tax on all British letters. With a candour and sense of justice, truly Roman, the fellow avows this ; so that' in fact his hotel is a tavern, where a man may .very fairly sketch at liberty.



Behold his dame, a Duchess, good Heavens! near the entrance, fatigued with the reception of a thousand guests—what a neck for a diamond necklace ! Rome, that is, all talking Rome, rung in the morning with an account of the last pugilistic combat between the pair of ducal spouses, beneath whose auspices these same talkers were now revelling. Impressed with the story, it was impossible not to regard the gold and diamond covered fingers of the Duchess with awe, and at the same time with some interest for her lord and antagonist. Thereon I sought his grace of Torlonia, and discovered in a far corner of the apartment, quite innocent of all that was going forward, a little, old, miserable, miserably clad, grey-haired being, his body stooped into all the insignificance possible, his legs twisted or rather platted together, and the termination of a scanty pair of trowsers, vainly endeavouring to reach his dress bottine, whose calibre was all " a world too wide for his shrunk shank." His grace cast up sideways, a jack-daw glance, to mark who regarded him, and tottered off to assume a pi aw by some noble dowager, under the protection of whose company he might feel more assured of a rank, which he seems to be in continual doubt of; although, since he paid a hundred thousand crowns for it, it must be his unquestionably.



" Who can that Englishman be, with that most English and noble countenance, and who dances with more spirit than even Englishmen dance ?" demanded a 1'rench lady lately arrived at Rome.



" How," replied her companion, " you have

never seen the Duke of D ?"

" The first miracle I have seen at Rome," continued the French dame, " an English aristocrat without languor or apathy, dancing with all the spirit and mauvais ton of a peasant. Peut-ltre Jest Madame aux belles epaules qut Finspire. Who is she ?"

" Une baronne Hollandaisc — Madame

But "

" Wife or widow ?"

" Both,—Monsieur le Baron and his lady arc the best friends possible en zxriture, but can never inhabit the same town. The Baron is music-mad, the Baroness ball-mad ; so the Baron hies to Naples to enjoy the St. Carlos, and the Baroness stays at Rome to display her fine shoulders at the superior balls of the papal metropolis."

" Well arranged. But what an awful figure comes yonder!"

" Ah! C'est Clytemnestre"



" Clytemnestre ?"

" Yes, an English dame of rank, so called from a menacing sort of coiffure, such as you see, and which she has worn at every ball and route during the winter."

" More Zingari."

" Out, les troij Miss sans chaperon, as well

known as Clytemnestre. And Lord K ,

touching whom, and his two mistresses, I'll recount no bad story." And the Frenchman proceeded with a sort of narrative to his fair companion, that I really could not venture to set down here for the entertainment of my readers.

Not far from me sat enthroned the beautiful

Bolognese La M . She must have been a

splendid woman, but old Time has been busy with that loving countenance. The secretary of the Russian embassy, a Pole with a name unscribable in prose or verse, is at his side— what true spaniels those Poles, and to judge from the character of those of the nation here visible, how worthy of their political fate. They want the fidelity of the spaniel—faux et caressant is their universal character.



Here comes Madame Dut to have some

chiacchera with La M . Dear me ! what

is the matter ? I declare, the pretty Dutchwoman is in a rage, and the Italian dames join her. What can it be, which so excites female indignation ? Let me join the circle.

Oh ! 'tis Demidoft's actresses and danseuses, that the old Russian imported for his own especial amusement from the banks of the Seine to those of the Tiber. It was singular, a Russian prince causing French comedy to be performed in his palace at Home, to a mingled audience of Italians and foreigners. The Roman ladies were enchanted with his jttes, until the old Russian thought proper to bring the handsome females of his corps dramatique into society, and they no better than they should be. Demidoff did all he could to make them respectable,—that is, he covered them with diamonds ;



and by so doing, succeeded in procuring their reception.

" What infamy, what an insult to every

society in Rome," exclaimed the pretty Du ,

" to bring the common creatures of the scene

amongst us, ces figurantes mats, dies

avoient de si beaux diamants.""

And the excusatory plea was evidently allowed as valid by the insulted Roman ladies.

At another side of its apartment sat a rival divinity, the gay and gallant wife of a scientific and contented English tourist. What eyes hath La D , as she is called—they tell of themselves the hundred stories that circulate respecting her,—if one half of which be true, they are enough. If they do not exactly tell, they corroborate and render credible what is told. A French

Captain L , who had left Paris for debt,

and resided at Rome for love, was paying his

ferocious addresses to La D . She forms

a pretty sample of an Englishman's Italian wife, and if D was not so very imperturbable a philosopher, I might have worked from this history a pendant to L'Amoroso. But pathos would be thrown away upon him ; if he be contented, I see no reason why the world should be otherwise on his account; and ridicule, however merited, would be cruel to such an object,



" But pray,'' asked the French lady, above introduced, of her companion, " who may that contented personage be, inclined towards his fair neighbour, and gathering with difficulty all that she utters for his edification ?"

" That," replied he, of whom the question was asked, " is the Prince of Bavaria, deaf unfortunately as a post, and so necessitated to have every word addressed to him interpreted

by the familiar voice of the Countess of Flor

into his ear. He is her cavalier by right of the Thrasymene canal."

" How may that be?"

" Why, you must know that some two hundred years since the Count's property on the bank of the Thrasymene was overflowed by the said lake, beyond his powers of freeing it from the inundation, such an expense could only be undergone by the government. But the Popes since then have been inexorable,till the friendship of the Bavarian promised to procure the said canal to be cut, through his interest with his holiness. The canal was cut, the estate drained, and behold the Prince the cavalier of the Countess. Such are the stories they relate at Rome."



The first dance is over, and the two or three Cardinals present deem it decorous to retire; not so the Monsignore, or young prelate with hispavonazzo coloured stockings, who thinks that his inferior dignity will admit of more amusement. He too in this dance of intrigue is not without his chosen dame. The Monsignore with most prelative humility, pays compliments full of emotion to Lucian's daughter, the Principessa Gabrielli. Whilst the husband of the dame, sturdy and coarse as a Roman butcher, wanders about, and amuses himself by uttering, not double entendres, not having so much wit, but rank cochonneries, in order to see, I suppose, if it be possible to make a Roman lady blush.



But I perceive some strange and unaccountable panic excited amongst my countrymen; they fly here, they give way there, some hide themselves, none look up. What is the enemy that the brave Zingari shun ? I perceive, it is a handsome, noble looking personage, Sir Richard Maltravers, who seizeth all that he can lay hold upon by the button, after the manner recorded in the Spectator, and having thus enchained his victim, puts him to the torture, by compelling him to listen to a volley of old news, Jacobin reports, surmises, hopes of the liberals, things coming to a crisis in England, thank God, at last, " the British constitution, all that sort of thing, and every thing in the world." He is quite a moral volcano in full eruption, spouting forth common-place for lava. Lo ! he holds an English peer and a commoner, each by the button, reserving them, while with head turned he addresses some highly liberal remark to a smiling prelate. What a bore ! cry the flying Zingari. Another Zingaro worthy of remark, was an automaton, for so he seemed, as he never spoke nor disturbed feature, whilst he threaded with his son under his arm, the gay and noisy throng. He was a mighty antiquarian, and called himself a poet, on the strength of having assassinated Pindar into most desperate prose. He tamed the mad Greek effectually, for surely never was seen such mild, well-behaved odes as this gentleman's Pindarics. The ridiculous part of the old gentleman's character was the silly vanity which had made him purchase, for a few thousand ducats, a Sicilian barony. He thought, forsooth, that as a Sicilian baron he was nobler than an English gentleman. Our Scriblerus ordered a huge coronet to be painted upon his cabriolet, and he was now returning to England to act the grandee, as he had set out from it to play the antiquarian. •





But to let the Zingari pass,' who is this most evident Frenchman of the old school, so bland, so killingly condescending and gracious, humbling himself with courtesy one moment, and recovering his pride with an effort at another? Who other can it be, than Monsieur de Montmorenci, ambassador of his most Christian Majesty ?—more innocent in his gallantry than his predecessor the Duke de Blacas was, a terrible faux pas on whose part, 'tis said, occasioned his recal. Monsieur de Montmorenci seems determined to avoid the same shoal, paying his attentions to Madame A , the ambassadress of Austria, dry, old, and haughty, as the very ancien regime. Monsieur de M. is what I should call an exceedingly nice man.

And here totters Demidoff, the old comedy and comedienne loving barbarian. A Zingaro has mistaken his principal actress, thanks to her diamonds, for a princess, and is resolved to pay his court assiduously to the great lady. And what a crowd of rabble—all tongues of my countrymen—broad Irish, broad Scotch, and as broad English—Peers and run-away debtors, baronets and tasteful subalterns, dandies and artists, oft united, English ladies more Italianized than the Italians themselves, delighting in the most exaggerated homage, and proving themselves worthy of Italian life, by talking loudly connoisseur and amateurship.



What a chaos of ranks, characters, and personages ! Every one thinking it a bounden duty to make love, such being here the essence of life. It is a habit, a point of etiquette, in which the heart has not more often concern than any other country less famed for the amusement. Like all customs, it sits well upon the natives; but of all ridiculous objects the most ridiculous are the Zingari, bent on gallantry prepense; all ages, sexes, alike forgetting that there is such a thing as ridicule in the world. At home our English folk fear envious tongues, scandal, and satire; but once beyond the Channel, they think they are out of the reach of the eternal and invisible censorship, that impends and reigns over English Jife. The Zingari abroad seem to have entered into a compromise or agreement, all to be as absurd as possible,— at the same time, mutually pardoning and sparing each other ; whilst John Bull is to be left totally ignorant on the tubject, and reposing in his .wonted admiration of the gravity and gentility of his countrymen, the purity and chastity of his countrywomen.





THE RENEGADE CONVERTED.

The subalterns of the Austrian army are terrible rabble, as may be supposed, except in the cavalry regiments, the Hulans, and Dragoons, in which all the officers almost are men both of rank and property. In their troops of the line, those with epaulettes—I mistake, for rank amongst them is denoted not by epaulettes, but by the number of golden bands round the hat—the officers I would say, are an ill-behaved, vociferous, beer-swilling gang of plebeians, collected too from all countries,—Poles and Hungarians, Bohemians, Gallicians, and mongrel Frenchmen from the Rhine. Amongst these «re not a few Irish, of one of whom more anon.



The Austrian occupation of Naples proved both convenient and inconvenient to theZingari. These foreign rulers broke the charms of that delicious, dreary abode; but then their military band, so superior to any Italian, iri the Villa Reale was a compensation. The converting of Partheriope into a garrison town, was agreeable to our ladies, since it filled the streets and assemblies with gay uniforms and gallants not to be despised, and moreover who were not despised. Our dandies felt upon the other hand the inconvenience: first of all, their mustachios were prohibited absolutely, the Germans appointing this as their distinguishing badge in case of popular tumult or insurrection. Furthermore, they were rivalled in society, jostled in the streets, and disturbed in their perambulations by the strictness of the Imperial sentinels. If the Hulans had set up a coach and four, and had even driven two or three tandems, England would have trembled for her allowed superiority of ton.

Although, I dare say, not more bullies than

'i 11 ,.tl.V



the military folk of all countries and establish, ments, these Austrians, and all those who, wherever born, delight in the name, are rude and vociferous; and have the appearance of being savage, even when they are not. The open-mouthed Neapolitan himself scarcely vies with their clamour. A discussion thus commenced is frequently decided by the sabre, a barbarous mode of duel, which the Italians abhor almost as much as that of the pistol, from the mangling and maiming wounds that are its consequence.

Amongst those gentry in white uniform* was an Irishman, evidently of a very low class, who took his station at the Royal Caffe continually, for the sake of quarrelling with the Zingari who frequented it. He had been in the Austrian service some three or four years, and the German pronunciation practised by him during that time had in no wise improved his brogue. Seated at a solitary table, over the ice or the sorbet, which lip certainly could ill afford^ Pat in his white jacket used to make sail attempts to enter into conversation with his cidevant countrymen. Indeed, I believe he first frequented the Gaffe for the sake of forming acquaintance and friendship with Englishmen; but as these scupulously shunned the proffered honour, the ma du pays, which had impelled the Hibernian to such communication with those who spoke his native language, became converted into spleen and deadly hatred against Britons; and to satisfy this new passion, he still frequented the Gaffe.

vOL. II, K





He no longer attempted to address any Englishman who entered for repose or refreshment, but spoke forth his spleen in soliloquies and reflections, that made every one suppose him mad, and this too in such a mixture of German, English and Irish brogue, that the listener was tnore tempted to laugh than to be angry. Hi» favourite theme was the utter ignorance of all Englishmen on the subject of military affairs i—thej had no army, no navy, no general*,





soldiers, heroes, tactics—Marlborough was an old woman, and Wellington not so much. The English government too shared his resentment of course, and if you believed him, oppression had driven him, a catholic, from the land of his fathers, to foreign service. All this was made known to the frequenters of the Caffe in a sort of soliloquy, half plaintive, half bullying. But the apathetic English heard unmoved by either mood of the Hibernian ; and without a palpable insult, which he feared to venture, the Hibernian was foiled utterly in his endeavours to strike either a friendship or a quarrel with any of his countrymen.

Nevertheless he persevered. Every day the Irish-Austrian was at Home, going through his course of spleen, and not a few betook themselves thither at the hour, to hear him hold forth. There was a something good humoured too about the fellow, that prevented his exciting serious indignation, and what with the singularity of his behaviour, his blunders, and hie desperate accent, every one felt more inclined to be amused than indignant.



There happened at the time to arrive in Naples an American, an artist too, I believe, of much the same Anti-British feelings. Although now devoted to the arts, he had been a sailor, or at least pretended to have been so; and he possessed all the Thrasonism of American seamen, joined to the conceit of a very ignorant youth arrived in the classic land of Italy. In Rome and Florence, where he had been, he had amused the Zingari population with soliloquies similar to those of the Austro-Irishman at Naples; and as the fame of both was universal, it was thought a pity not to unite two such happy tempers in the bonds of friendship; which at least would procure for each a listener, and preclude the necessity, which both were under, of telling forth their woes to waiters and tavern walls.

Chance, I believe, produced the mutual introduction, no one being willing to know enough



of either for the purpose; but effected it was, to the very great amusement of the idle Zingari, who with an air of the most perfect indifference, enjoyed the unbosoming of friendship and spleen betwixt the pair of worthies. For the space of an hour they were the best friends possible; not a shadow of a difference between them, both cursing England and Englishmen with a zeal of mutual rivalry, until the Yankee began to out-Herod the Hibernian, who liked not to be out-done. The fellow felt inclined to lore Britain once more, as soon as he found another who hated and vituperated it worse than himself, and he at length began to check the fervour of his companion's anti-Anglicism. The Yanker at length vowed that an American brig, carrying a score of guns, could overcome arid take any British man of war. Now this was a blasphemous kind of vaunt, that awoke one of the very few British prejudices of the Irishman, and he accordingly, without any further ceremony told the Yankee, that he lied in his teeth.



Several compliments of the same calibre followed, in which the gentleman in the Austrian uniform swore for England with all his might —nay, he was even ready to fight for her—so •warm a patriot no one could ever become in so short a time.

It proved as difficult to arrange the final settlement of the quarrel, as it had been natural to commence it. The Austrian soldier wished to have full play with his sabre at the limbs of the American; who seriously proposed in his turn that they should fight with cannons or culverins, which he begged the Austrian to procure for their mutual convenience. To blow each other, from a pair of great guns, was, according to him, the only mode of duel at once courageous and genteel. The Austro-Irish had no objection to hard blows, but to make his exit out of the world in a parabola, in order to please the Yankee, he by no means relished, nor was it to be rendered more palatable by the said Yankee's company in the final trip. The American however had some reason, when he argued, that hii mode would render unnecessary the attendance of seconds, whom it might prove difficult for either to procure. The difference was at length obliged to be decided by chance, on referring to which decision, the gentleman in white was allowed the choice of weapons.



He preferred the sabre, and the fosse of the castle of St Elmo was chosen as the place of combat. Some young Britons, who had amused themselves in forwarding and observing the progress of this sport, were struck with remorse at the prospect of a sanguinary termination to it, and by their interest with some of the Austrian commandants, they procured the combatants to be stopped and disarmed as they approached the ground, taking care to substitute two stout clubs for the sword in the Irishman's hand. When left at liberty, the combatants, at least one of them, resolved that they should not part without exchanging blows. The Hibernian presented one club to the Yankee, bade him defend himself, and then drubbed him with the other.



The sequel had like to have proved unpleasant to the victor ; for the officers of his corps considered themselves so disgraced by a comrade's having fought a single combat with stick, instead of steel, that they petitioned General Frimont for his removal. So that the anti-Anglican had nearly fallen a victim to an accession of patriotism. The Zingari interest, however, preserved him from this danger also, and one or two serious duels with his brother officers, again restored the Irishman to their favour. As to the Yankee, he was no more heard of. Perhaps he died after his favourite fashion, and blew himself from one of the great guns of the Castle.





I Was acquainted with an honest English country Squire, whom, Heaven knows what wild idea had driven south, wearied for a month at Rome with visiting ruins, churches, temples, palaces and pictures, ready to expire all the time, especially the latter part of it, with ennui, till at length he abandoned sight-seeing altogether, and gave himself up to the very close and attentive study of Galignani's meagre newspaper. As to high society he abhorred the name of it; the jargon of the arts and connoisseurship that reigned there was caviare to the unfortunate Zingaro, and gave him the blue devils infallibly. A chere amie consoled him, not only that, but taught him Italian, so that he began to enjoy the conversation of the people, with whom he delighted to chat. He used even to interrogate the slaves that laboured in the piazzas; which curiosity with some he asserted to be a better mode of seeing and judging of Italy, than that of running over galleries, and jabbering bad French to Princesses.



He at length formed an acquaintance with several amongst the bourgeoisie at Rome, an honest, humble class, our Squire preferring their society to that of his Zingari equals. His new friends discussed agriculture, the vintage, the ways and means of life, and instructed him, more than the company of nobles could, in those various little items of knowledge that are most material, at the same time that they are most removed from the cognizance of the common traveller. He found them far different from what Italians are supposed to be: they were neither keen, nor intriguing, nor rogues,



nor bigots, but on the contrary an easy, simple race, somewhat timorous, and therefore at first perhaps somewhat mistrustful; but on farther acquaintance frank, open and confiding, full of sharp good sense on the subjects of their limited circle, and believing that beyond Rome there existed a country called France, and farther still a nation called England, that had some years since risen from the sea. Their geography was exceedingly vague and indefinite.

With all this, their gaiety was like their sky, unclouded. The strict observance of religious duties was abandoned to the females, who performed this for the whole family, the good man of the house holding perhaps sceptical, at any rate no very rigid ideas on the score of religion —preserving at the same time a silence, even of thought, on the subject of politics, and shrugging his shoulders with a mingled expression of admiration and contempt, whenever allusion was made to the plans or feats of the Carbonari. Amusement was never slack, the guitar was familiar to every hand, and the voice of each was a gift of nature for man's recreation, there never slighted. The popular airs and music, chiefly of Neapolitan origin, that delight and are to be iieard amongst their middling ranks, were far more intelligible to the ear of the rustic Englishman than the fine drawn affectations of Rossini, or the gurgling of Davide. He entered into the spirit of the people with whom he associated, and thus acquired the key, which at once rendered every thing intelligible,—idiom, wit, popular song and proverb,—enjoyed Rome, I am certain, more in this way, than if he had frequented the Palazzo Chigi nightly.'. .



The modern Romans are great vaunters of their delightful city and its ways. . Every amusement under the sun was promised in its proper season to the Englishman; amongst others the sport of shooting in the Campagna was held out to him as far surpassing the copses or stubbles of his native country. If a man could but find sport here with his dog and gun, thought the Squire, Home would be ;no bad place of living after all. There then:he determined to await the winter, since a year he had planned to kill in Italy, it mattered not how or where. Slowly that winter came, as slowly as. an English summer; although the fertile month of October afforded to our Englishman opportunities of witnessing the holiday customs and amusements of his friends, which he joined in and observed with alacrity and delight.



At length the weather was declared favourable for shooting, and the Englishman prepared to get his gun and his gaiters in readiness. There was a great man, a Monsignore, to be of the party, and a prime day's sport stood in the Squire's expectation. In the morning he failed not to be at the rendezvous, where one or two caratelle awaited to carry the sporting company to the scene of action. They accordingly mounted, and were borne along in high glee towards the Campagna, each man, burdened with a fire-arm, from which each shot without bursting it was a miracle. The vehicles, my friend also observed, were well stored, to obviate famine during the day's sport: all the dainties of Rome seemed to have been selected: there was a couple of gallinacci, each as large as a small sheep, those enormous turkeys, that Italy alone produces—pig's flesh of all parts, and in all ways, boars' heads, sausages, dried beans, ricotta, and chocolate puddings—never was such a medley. Apparently they seemed to rely very little upon the day's sport for the adding to the feast.



Having carefully deposited their moving larder in a lone osteria of the Campagna, ordered the cooking of the dishes and the preparation of the dinner, the eating of which our Zingaro began already to suspect was to prove the chief amusement of the day, the party shouldered their guns, and marched along the Campagna. There was a great scarcity of dogs, my friend observed, and asked his companions once or twice how they hoped to raise the game, but they laughed in reply, and pointed to an owl, which a boy carefully carried on his hand. The Squire stared and marvelled at this: he had heard of hawking, but owling was a sport beyond both his experience and comprehension. However, as they seemed by their countenances to promise good sport, and anticipated his delight, which they wished to heighten by not acquainting him before hand with their novel mode of sport, he accompanied them in humble, but no very confident expectation of amusement; left off questioning, and attended the denouement of the day's sport.



At a fit place for their operations the party halted; our squire put his gun to his shoulder, in expectation of seeing a hare at least run forth; but neither bird nor beast started on his view. The Romans in the mean time had stuck in the ground a limber stake, on which they placed, tied, that he might not escape, the aforesaid civetta or owl, and then retiring from it they took shelter behind a little embankment, on which en tirailleur they rested their guns. The Briton obediently, but in amazement, followed their example. After some time the owl, left to himself, began to cry and chirrup and flutter on his stake, which had the effect desired by the hidden sportsmen. For flocks of larks began to draw near and gather round the noisy ' owl, whether for the purpose of mocking their natural enemy and enjoying his captivity, or fascinated by his music, my friend was not naturalist enough to discover.



Lying down thus in a cold and unwholesome marsh for no visible purpose \vas not-at all to his taste, and he was about to make his discontent manifest, when his keen brother sportsmen fired one after another with alacrity—at the larks; and certainly killed not a few. " What do you think of that sport ?" cried the Homans to him, as each held up one, and some a brace of poor little larks, proud as if an eagle fluttered in their grasps The Squire





281

was not only disappointed, but angry, being decoyed into what he thought disgraceful sport. He had not yet discharged his gun ; and losing his politeness in his ire, he turned his piece at the unfortunate decoy-owl, which had acted setter to the field of sportsmen, and shot the poor civetta dead.

It was now the turn of the Romans to be angry at a conduct they could not divine the reason of; but could only interpret by supposing, that-the ignorant Briton mistook the owl for the true game. And in this opinion he allowed them for peace-sake to rest, satisfied with having put an end to any further sportcouchant on that day, and resolved never again to set forth on a shooting expedition with Romans. These gentlemen were not much grieved by the fate of the owl, and the interruption of the day's sport, since it restored them sooner to the enjoyment of their dinner and osteria. Amidst the dainties, brought in such abundance from the city, the produce of the day's sport, in the shape of ten larks, was added; and towards the termination of the feast, whilst they were quaffing their purple wine, they expatiated as true sportsmen on the masterly style in which each had covered and knocked down his lark. The conversation then extended to other days of sport, in which many vaunted to have actually shot a thrush in the flagrant act of singing sweetly. A few such innocent boasts restored the Squire to his good humour; for the rest of the evening he enjoyed the gaiety of the Roman Cockneys, with whom he vowed no more to visit the Campagna.





THE ERUPTION.

We were comfortably seated in the little theatre of the Fondo at Naples, discussing the great progress and merits of the Neapolitan school of dancing, the academy for the proficiency of which art, established by Ferdinand, forms one of his noblest acts in the eyes of his subjects; they might be contented to import rulers or soldiers from France or from Austria, but it wounded their national pride to be indebted to the former for such indispensable personages as the figurantes of their ballet. Discussions of such kind and similar importance occupied the happy audience of the theatre, when a rumbling noise was heard as from a distance, followed by the clamours and hurryings of the people in the piazza without. A deeper, louder sound was heard, and the Neapolitans knew the terrible voice of old Mother Earth in agitation.



The theatre was empty in an instant. It Had been a still, though hazy moonlight, now fast disappearing. The crowd from the upper aud loftier parts'of the city were hurrying down towards the sea, along the open and flagged space between the Fondo and the castle, the battlements of which were seen crowded with Austrian soldiers, all risen to witness a scene so new and awful to them. But had thunder and earthquake both been busy at the time, I verily believe, to hear even their voices would have been impossible, so mingled, loud and frequent were the exclamations of Neapolitan tongues.

It is astonishing, that however awful the noise of the elements in combustion or commotion is, and however stunning in effect, they are rivalled by the meanest and most insignificant rumblings of the street. The clatter of a dray we often mistake for thunder ; even a heavy step over head may have to our ear all the effect of those mighty masses of cloud that shock together. At this instant Mount Vesuvius groaned no doubt in the throes that immediately preceded eruption, but the groan was drowned in the vociferations of the awakened population of the city.



In the mingled crowd was a curious contrast. The natives of the place ran forward, more to ascertain their fate, than from any unembarrassed curiosity, calling in their haste and fear upon all the saints their breath could mutter. The Zingari, on the other hand, were delighted in the extreme, each would have given half hit fortune to have witnessed an eruption; and here the terrible event had taken place. They crowded down to the mole to behold the sublime spectacle, with the same eagerness and joy, with which they had hurried to the Girandola or play of fire-works at Rome. At length, however, when the volcano did burst forth, and establish a huge pillar of fire and flame between it and the superincumbent cloud, lighting up the whole bay with a livid gleam, that each beheld in the countenance of his neighbour, at the same time that it enabled him to mark the outline of the distant Capri, the elated curiosity of the one nation, and the anxious terror of the other were blended in one feeling of silent and tremendous awe.



If the eye was turned with averted glance, through horror, from the burning mountain, it fell upon a mass of upturned faces extended citywards from the mole, and along the shore and harbour, the terror of each visage conspicuous in the bronze glare that rested upon them all. Behind them the city reared itself, its white palaces and castellated height, clothed in the same dreadful crimson, that seemed the devoted flame-coloured garment of a victim to the Inquisition. Although a Neapolitan rabble, it was utterly silenced by the first rush and



flagration sent forth by the volcano; and their breathing and rustling together, was alone heard for a time. Their presence of mind was recovered ; from muttering vows and "prayers, which at first whispered, were at length shouted forth, as the confidence of devotion rose upon the suppressed terrors of a probable catastrophe. After a time, the crowd, as at an execution, began to grow hardened, to utter exclamations little decent, to mark coolly the progress and acts of the mountain, and even to pass jokes upon the torrent of flame which it was up-pouring, and the probable causes of such a phenomenon.

Our Britons even became loud in their questions, and amongst them might be heard the delicate voice, and seen the delicate form of the young English girl, in whom curiosity to view so wondrous a sight, had overcome timidity. It was a position of no little danger, not onJy from the fearful accompaniments or consequences of the volcano's eruption, but from the crowd which pressed towards the mole, and threatened to push before it into the sea the present occupiers of so advantageous a position.



In a little time, however, the splendid sight became too terrific for curiosity: the stream of fire that the volcano had vomited forth, formed over it an immense cloud of sombre vapour, ignited and charged with lightning, which the still ascending stream of fire caused to explode. This fearful cloud that hovered over the volcano, but extended itself far and wide, even over Naples and all its Bay, kept within it a continual rattle of thunder-claps and peals, whilst from its dark depths issued forth in every part and at every instant, forked lightnings of most appalling vividness, changing the crimson glow that rested on all the scene, and on the visages of beholders, to a bright and dazzling light. From these horrors the crowd quickly dispersed, some to cellars and recesses far from the unceasing thunder and the piercing lightning



while the Lazzaroni sought the shelter of his tub, committed himself to the care of his saint, and without any of his proverbial timidity slept. In the breasts of foreigners curiosity was utterly stifled by awe, whilst they 'passed a wakeful and anxious night. Those who still dared to look forth could mark the glowing torrents of lava, coming down the dark mountain's side leisurely, winding through the unevenness of the descent like a fiery serpent, giving in their course due warning to the inhabitants of I!k: volcano's foot to retreat before them, but advancing with an irresistible tide upon their towns and tenements, oft thus destroyed before, and as oft audaciously rebuilt.

The sun rose the next morning, but could not penetrate with its bright ray the sombre cloud that still hung over Naples. The eruption had not abated . but daylight, at least what appeared of daylight, had stripped the phenomenon of much of its terrors. The Neapolitans still gazed in anxiety, whilst in the breast

voi. ii. o



of the English fear had subsided, and a curious and scientific sort of ardour seemed to impel them all towards the very centre of devastation. The ashes fell thick, like a fine and dun-coloured snow, and filled the atmosphere with their dreary shower. But the eagerness of the Zingari was not to be restrained.

Horse and foot were all in motion towards Vesuvius. Not only the young and the bold, but even fathers of families with their daughters, the women, and even children, all gallopped to view the volcano from the nearest situation consistent with safety, to observe and analyze the lava streams that poured forth, resolved to die the scientific death of old Pliny, or return as sage, or what they more esteemed, after having dared as much as he. The Neapolitans thought the good Zingari must be mad. The cui bono was a question which thev put in vain to the Britons; the irresistible curiosity of travel is a motive unintelligible and inexplicable to those who have not felt it; and indeed it should be cause of little wonder, that we, affected with a mania so mysterious to the people of the south, should seem to them guided by other rules than those of reason or common sense.



The road from Naples to Resina was thronged with Zingari, who hurried to the mountain, and with peasants fleeing with their goods and chattels to the metropolis for protection. Nothing could check the daring curiosity of our countrymen, who coasted along the currents of burning lava, and amused themselves in fixing crowns in the molten lava, which were soon mingled with it, and the lava thus blended with the silver, was taken, cooled and carried off as a trophy.

Never were days of such amusement, excitement and delight, as the eruption of Vesuvius brought to the English at Naples. It was quite a fete, a kind of Saturnalia too, where the mutual reserve betwixt the English strangers was forgotten; all eager, anxious, questioning and imparting intelligence to each other. An egregious piece of crim. con., or a separation between two spouses, in whose fate the fashionable world was interested, could not have produced a sensation in London city more dissipative of languor and ennui. For the diversion of the Zingari alone it must have been planned. In other respects it was perfectly innocent; and except that the old mountain burnt some yards of its brim, and that the ripening oranges were tinged with the ashes, and the eyes of upgazers rendered sore by the shower, no consequences further than the agremens here recorded, followed the phenomenon.



Like the old story of the " fuss about the bit of bacon," the Lazzaroni affirmed that all the thunder and flame was the threatened vengeance of heaven against the Tureschi, as in their tongue they called the Tedeschi or Germans ; and during the progress of the eruption they were in great hopes, that some sacred vengeance might fall upon• the occupiers of Naples. But not a cannon was melted, nor soldier struck by the innocent lightning, and the city returned to its old state of slavery and pleasure, and the Zingari to their sight-seeing and amusement on the following bright morrow.





MISPATRIOTISM.

I Have before observed, that it is not to be wondered at, that Englishmen shun Englishmen abroad. Our state of society at home is, first of all, replete with causes of social antipathy, to a degree unknown to any other nation or body of men in any other period. Foreigners attribute this to our natural character; but they are mistaken—it is a necessary consequence of our advanced state of civilization, of the diffusion of knowledge, wealth, even fashion, in fine of every profession or endowment that can give one man or set of men superiority over another. The tendency of the uppermost of any nation, is to isolate themselves into an aristocracy ; and this, in all states of society other



than our own, is easy, is in fact established without effort. But here the toe of the peasant treads on the kibe of the courtier too closely. The inferior ranks of life rush on to mingle and confound themselves amongst the first, not with any democratic feelings of revolutionizing or equalizing ranks, but with the same pretensions, the same airs and characteristics as are worn by those whose pre-eminence they seek to share, not debase. The world is a little too old to bow exclusively to birth ; it is too independent to submit exclusively to wealth, information is spread over the surface of all ranks; and here as there exists no real, indisputable characteristic of rank or greatness, those who are in possession of such, or fancy themselves so, have no mode left of preserving that rank, except a seclusion amongst themselves,—in forming an exclusive knot or society, the entry to which is strictly guarded, and the very internal intercourse of which is carried on, in order to deter and drive away interlopers, in a language and manner of conversation, in using which a pretender would infallibly betray himself.



And this is a mode of defence adopted, not only by the very higher circles of life, but is adopted through all, down to the lowest classes. The same aristocratic feeling pervades all ranks —the same dread of being contaminated by acquaintanceship, and of losing one's place in society by the least connection with an inferior. Englishmen all seem like cast away mariners, clinging to a wreck; each unfortunate is absorbed in considerations of the fate he can scarcely hope to escape. In the scramble for life, many must perish ; and this certainly impresses upon all selfishness, a keen care not to miss a hold or a step, nor to compromise their secure footing for the relief, or salvation of others.

Walk our streets, enter our saloons; th«re is mistrust in every face, and even in the greeting of every friend there lurks a reserve behind the show of friendship, that is chilling to the heart





that cares for aught beyond itself. Be rich,

•

titled, great, have all the claims to consideration that man can have, still some few will find a flaw, or foresee one, that counsels coldness in their salutations, wariness in their converse with you. English society resembles a parterre of thistles, full blowing, flaunting, and gay enough together, when unagitated, but at the least breath all are in motion, armed at all points against each other, and inflicting mutually a thousand petty wounds.

Abroad there is none or little of those feelings; lately indeed we have introduced it in other countries, but even where that has been effected, it has been confined to the upper classes. The French, for instance, are a proud people, proud as a nation, but as individuals not in the least so; they have none of our social quarantine laws against that most dreaded of all plagues, vulgarity. Whilst we do away with the hypothesis of physical contagion, they are beyond us, and declare there is no truth in the moral, nor do they fear any fatal consequence to their dignity even from contact with the undignified.



It is the same all over the continent. There the higher ranks are separated from the lower by a broad interval, over which both classes can cordially converse without fear of compromising the dignity of the higher. There the graduating order of men are not heaped upon one another ; all old barriers thrown down, and no defence existing, except in the by-laws and mutual understanding that link the members of each order together. There in consequence the social propensity is allowed in its full force, without a check or restraint; whilst in our state of life, it is not only counteracted, but actually driven out of the field by an antipathy to our fellows, articled as it were upon us. Abroad we rejoice at the sight of each others countenances ; here to have a strange face thrust upon one, is an accident productive of anxiety, doubt, fear, mistrust, and uneasiness.

If such be the unsocial feelings of Englishmen at home, they are increased to a trebk degree abroad. For then we are presented with foreign society, so contrasted in this respect with our own, where man is utterly free from pride, prejudice, vanity, ceremony or affectation. Grant that the Italians are not deeply read, widely informed, or skilled in the intercourses of European politics, philosophy or science, they are the more natural and agreeable companions from their ignorance. However more versed in the real enjoyments of life, which if they reason not so much with the wisdom of the stoics, as with the indifference of old Epicurus, the delights of their society are not the less fascinating. Nor can their pleasures be condemned as altogether unintellectual, when the charm of the arts is mingled with them all. The tone, the cant, which some whim of the kind—racing, or pugilism, or some sport baser still, communicates even to enlightened and high society in England, is in Italy given by the arts; and this, even if it be affectation, breathes an elegance of refinement, an air of feeling upon the general converse, that renders it more truly noble than our passing jargon can render ours. The effect too is thus permanent, and forms a pleasing characteristic of the people. Our whims and modes of speech as of dress, pass and are forgotten, as they deserve, leaving us, under the pretence of fashion, real vulgarians, both in thought and idiom.





This contrast is very striking to an Englishman, who has immersed himself altogether in foreign society, and who after thus forgetting the ways of his countrymen and country, is then presented with a specimen. The effect is often disgusting in the extreme, and productive of a dislike to one's country, which in the case of a simple individual vents itself in muttered discontent, and is forgotten in the return of that mal du pays, which fails not to. bring a recurrence of patriotism to the heart of the most voluntary exile. In a poet's case, the antipatriotism assumes the more poetic language of misanthropy, and pours forth on mankind a general indignation, excited by the uncouth and selfish prejudices of his countrymen.



This momentary antipathy to one's compatriots is a feeling, experienced more or less by all abroad, even by the humble and unrenowned. How great then must it arise in the breast of those, whose celebrity has rendered their persons even an object of interest and curiosity with these forbidding Zingari, who consequently intrude upon, and haunt the steps of the unfortunate objects of their admiration. The digito monstrari, an annoyance at the best of times, becomes in this case an evil of magnitude, a nuisance that encroaches on one's privacy and peace.

All these natural and general causes, joined with not a few private particular ones, had contributed to Lord B 's alienation from,

and dislike to Englishmen. He afterwards abated considerably from this disgust, and admitted into his intimacy one of the most singular collections of his compatriots that any nobleman or gentleman could choose. But this happened not till he had wearied himself of Italian society, and wearied Italian society of him. As he declined in years too, he drooped from the stern ideal character that he had so nobly pencilled forth for his adoration, and the solitude he loved, preyed upon him too intensely. Then, indeed, he sought refuge in the first society that chance wafted to his palace door, such society as least suited him. For his intellect, strained by poetical excitement and exertion all night, aided too by ignoble inspiration, his state during the day was that of mere exhaustion, capable merely of uttering slang, idle chat, common-place remarks, whether critical, moral, or political, which all passed as sublime, upon a set of intellects, whose flow scarcely reached the limit of his ebb.



Whilst at Venice, however, he had not ycl declined from his zenith. His muse had not altogether abandoned the frown for the leer, nor was the fierce pride of his temper yet tamed by years. He then remembered how much the strength of his character lay in its mystery ; nor could he at that period have ever been so oblivious and imprudent, as to abandon this to the vulgar crew of Philistines that since surrounded him, and shore him at once of mystery and power, and even dignity.



One should think that such a resolution as his lordship's to avoid his countrymen altogether, could have been put into execution most easily at Venice, whose lanes none but plebeians tread, and on whose watery ways the gondola of the noble is undistinguishable from that which plies for hire, except that its trappings are of deeper and truer dye. But the impertinence of admirers had recourse to all shifts, and to the utmost perseverance, to obtain a satisfactory glimpse of the great poet. In every creek facing and around his palace, gondolas full of Zingari, lurked like Mainotes waiting for their prey, and many was the crown won by the successful gondolier, who could so guide his bark as to afford his fare a view of the desired person. On the Lido swarms attended his rides, nay, though he often deferred them till twilight for the sake of solitude.



In Venetian society his Lordship even limited his visits to peculiar circles, where although idolized at first, his capricious humour and gallantry, never according to, but always against etiquette, brought him at length into disfavour with the dowagers " that were." In some instances his impoliteness was quite flagrant—only think of his slighting the advances of a reigning beauty turned of fifty, to turn his attentions towards her daughter, a girl too, with family unreared,— his taste was quite preposterous. But to let reasons rest and state the fact, his lordship had more enemies than friends among the Venetian fair, and all were willing to join in any plot against a personage whom they literally feared. What he then piqued himself most upon,



was his total seclusion from his countrymen, with one of whom, he used to boast, he had not spoken for Heaven knows how many months. He even defied their ingenuity to reach him, and would even wager that he could not be surprised into the crime of holding communion with an Englishman. He knew their tournure, their look, their air at a league's distance, and fled from the contact instinctively.

There was a young Englishman then at Venice, a very young man, quite beardless, and worshipping in all the ardour of boyhood, the genius of Byron. He had sought the halls of Venice, almost on no other account than to behold the poet, a wish that he found it impracticable to gratify. Some of the wicked matrons of Venice, however, took pity on the youth, arid engaged to procure for him not only a sight, but an acquaintance, they hoped, of a very intimate kind with the noble hermit. Some little humorsome vengeance of their own was of course to be gratified at the same time, but the youth consented to any conditions provided he could behold the bard.



Strange enough, the boy resembled Byron himself excessively, and had the same delicately cut features, approaching to beauty almost feminine. He spoke Italian perfectly, and very little tuition was sufficient to give his tongue the peculiar softness, idiom, and tone of the Venetian dialect. In less than a fortnight he lisped their " bastard Latin" to perfection, and his Venetian tongue was reckoned by those best of judges as proof against detection.

Thus prepared, he was habited as a young Venetian dame,—luxuriant curls concealed and adorned his countenance—the modest dress under which foreign dames affect to conceal their

•

charms, which they rarely abound in, was advantageous to the present deceit—and richly attired, our youth was led at midnight to Madame Albrizzi's, as a newly married lady, arrived from the Terra Firma to make her entree into the world of fashion.



The poet dropped in at his usual hour, cast his mistrustful glance around, and observing that no stranger was present to be a spy upon his unbended hour, he relaxed his haughtiness into the easy, trifling converse, which the mind accustomed to exertion loves. From fair to fair he wandered, dealing to all a portion of his peculiar capricious, and often satirical, gallantry; till at length a new face, that most rare object in the confined and unvarying circle of Italian high life, struck and fascinated his attention.

He demanded who she was, and was told a high and handsome sounding title. He approached at once, and entered into conversation with the supposed beauty, who, as may be supposed, spoke as little and as modestly as was consistent with keeping up the character assumed. Timidity in an Italian female was a new attraction. The youth, after a time, finding his tongue sufficiently feminine, which it was not difficult to be, so masculine and powerful are the tones of those southern females, one of whom he represented, took greater confidence and joined with less reserve in conversation with the poet.



At length Lord B touched on the topic

of patriotism, for he was fond of awakening those feelings in the breasts of Venetians; he loved even to indulge in a little reproof and satire, at the expence of the humble and submissive character of the living children of Venice. In rejoinders to a remark of this kind, he was not a little surprised to find his own patriotism called in question, or rather his anti-patriotism alluded to. He was even asked how he, who denied and reviled his country, dared to taunt in others the feeling which necessity enforced in them, but which caprice alone could inspire him with. Had a fly stung him with a wasp's sting, be could not have been more astonished. But he was not without his pleas, his indignant defence, the being driven to which but pleased him the more with his companion. He spoke eloquently—he dropped the mask of gallantry and trifling, and displayed the feeling, passionate being that he was; and the young Englishman enjoyed beyond all that he had anticipated the sight and conversation of the immortal poet.



I wish the truth would allow me to have added some piquant conclusion to the story, but such and no more did it tend to. The Venetian dames ardently wished that he should become enamoured of his countryman in disguise, but his lordship, though unable to detect the imposture, was proof against any false charms the disguise could possess; and the youth satisfied would not continue the deceit. He wrote the following day, confessing the trick, and begging to be allowed to visit his lordship in his proper character—no answer was returned. The poet was hurt; and the circle of the Albrizzi laughed so much at his expense, that he no longer affiched, as the French say, his antipathy to his countrymen, in that society.





THE YEOMANRY AT CONGRESS.

An idea obtained, and still obtains currency amongst the Zingari, owing to the preponderance supposed to be allowed in continental society to the military profession, that no one except a soldier is respected abroad. Nothing is more common than for a dandy, who never saw a regiment in line, even at a review, to order a red coat at his tailor's, previous to his travels, which if he finds no opportunity of sporting elsewhere, he cunningly deposits uppermost in his trunk or portmanteau, relying upon the sacred scarlet of the British uniform to defend his effects from robbery of all kinds, fiscal or otherwise, by public or private authorities. An Italian purchases a crucifix or an Agnus Del, for the same purposes of insurance, and their tutelary powers are no doubt as efficacious as the Englishman's talisman in the shape of a red coat.



To a man really military, the idea that he will be respected in the country of his natural and generous enemies for his being so, is not preposterous; nor is the making use of such a safeguard ridiculous, but what shall we say to the gallant experienced officers and commanders of yeomanry corps, carefully bringing their regimentals in their travelling baggage, in order to astonish and awe the natives. I was led into these reflections by beholding a number of English uniforms in Italy—one gentleman travelled over Calabria in the paraphernalia of the City of London Light Horse. I wish to heaven Mathews had seen him. On the summit of an Italian diligence you may spy what would certainly be stared at on the top of an English stage coach, the lieutenant of some disbanded militia, en grande tenue; and at all the levees of all the courts of Europe are to be seen men clad iu his Britannic Majesty's uniform, that by no means do the said uniform nor his Majesty's military service much honour ; for these gentry very much resemble in awkwardness of appearance the civic or national guard, who put on uniform and wear a sword some half dozen or dozen times in the year.



The late congress at Verona was dreadfully thronged with these British militalres. Poor civilian strangers were thrust out of the gates without remorse, whilst at first the red coats were admitted. They at last, however, thronged in such crowds that the uniform was no longer a protection; and all coats, red as well as black, amongst the Zingari, were ordered to evacuate the town before the coming of the emperors. An hundred voices called and clamoured to his Grace of Wellington, to exert his influence with the Austrian police, and his lordship had as much trouble in interfering for his proscribed countrymen,as in uttering the very delicate protest against imperial resolves, which he is reported to have done. He succeeded in favour of a great number of Zingari, and they were allowed to remain at Verona, to witness the festivities and courts of the great personages then assembling; they were obliged in order to avail themselves of his Grace's protection, to seem to make part of his suite, which became a more formidable one in consequence than even that of their imperial majesties.



The Congress proceeded, and the Zingari in red enjoyed the gaieties extremely. The King of Prussia, who has a peculiar taste for the minutiae of military affairs, eyed with the keen look of a military connoisseur the motley suite of his friend, the English envoy. But without seeming to allude in the least to his observations, he frequently conversed with and questioned his Grace, according to his royal custom, respecting the military force of England, of the numbers, the troops, and the species of troops that composed it. Amongst other things, he questioned him respecting the militia, and the yeomanry, concerning which force his Grace, like a soldier, replied truly, that such were scarcely reckoned to make part of the establishment.

vOL. II. P





" Strange, then," quoth his Prussian Majesty, rather impertinently at the same time laying his hand upon the button of a certain baronet in his Grace's suit, upon which button appeared very conspicuous the character of

• shire yeomanry, " that your Grace

should choose your staff officers from this temporary service ; why they are all yeoman "

cried his Majesty, examining the buttons of each.

" Your Majesty," replied his Grace, blushing deeply and not pleased, " has the eye of a soldier that cannot be deceived."

His Grace is not famed for retorts, or he could easily have made a better one. But he did not wish to hurt his yeomanry suite by prolonging the conversation. .He had not looked for any such inspection, deeming that kings, like Daggerwoods, had souls above buttons. He was disappointed very much to his momentary mortification.





ST. MARK'S.

There is no place in Italy, or in the world perhaps, in which an Englishman is so little at home as at Venice; and this in despite of his marine propensities, which can find nothing congenial to them in the gliding gondolas and stagnant canals of the ocean-built city. The very desire, that irresistible impulse that drives so many of us abroad, is perhaps at bottom a feeling of being fettered in an island, however ample—of being walled in by that indomitable fence, which we glory in. We long to go abroad, to visit Europe, not so much to behold beautiful scenery, or to survey the ways and customs of foreign nations, as simply to tread the continent to traverse its unlimited shore, and with the feelings of birds escaped from an ample cage, where they had liberty, light, and food abundant, yet sighed to enjoy the open sky, we breathe more at large, the wings of imagination are unpinioned, when we emerge from our island upon the wide surface of Europe.



To a person who has wandered abroad from the impulse of this feeling, and I confess myself one of these, Venice forms a most uncomfortable residence. For the first week indeed the imagination is lulled into the reflective dream, excited by the mighty recollection of the city, her names of heroic sound, her temples, palaces, in which the very spirit of fame seems enshrined and even hallowed by their existing solitude. Never did time effect so speedy a declension, without calling in the rude hand of destruction to its aid. It took the life, but, like a generous conqueror, left the body whole. All around this palace, these halls breathe antiquity, yet freshly. It was but thirty years since, not yet the yesterday of memory, when a Doge ruled over the realm ; when the noble senate, that in our poetic annals rivals Rome's own, was convened in solemn council, when yon arsenal was still alive with force and activity. 'Tis within the memory of all around: the aged gondolier that accompanies me, vaunting with his dulcified consonants the ,glories of his native city, witnessed them in their pride ; and the noble that shrinks in the depth of his curtained gondola back from the gaze of the stranger, was born in the enjoyment of a patrician's power and privilege. The revolution came like a flood, swept away the pride of Venice, but left all the monuments of that• pride standing.



How redolent is the scene of old cbivalrjc times—the Arabesque church, and palace, the piasetla, whence so manv expeditions have set sail to conquer Greece, to take Byzantium, to combat their rivals of the Tuscan sea. The winged lion stands upon its own old column, the gondolas—the tongue, the green lagunes, Palladio's churches—all these constitute Venice, unchanged from what she was, in feature at least, although the " mighty heart" be dead.



There can be no spot on earth that can embody or represent the past, in comparison with this. Modern Rome, with her churches, steeples, priests, and vulgar streets, shuts out the ancient city from our eyes. Even Pompeii from which one hopes so much, recalls a state of existence which does not strike us, as doth that which is here recalled. That age is too remote ; those toga'd beings who lived in their beautifully adorned cells, seem almost another race of mankind from us, so far are they removed, not only by the interval of centuries, but by habits, thoughts, hopes, interests,—all that can excite sympathy or link man to man. They too were a nameless unrenowned people, attracting even our reverence, but as having enjoyed the luxuries, and having known the arts which distinguished the then lazy masters of the world. Pom



peii is fraught with vague associations of classic antiquity; but Venice is the living spirit of the might and splendour of the middle ages. In her streets no modern custom supersedes those of centuries past—no palace rises in the whimsical taste of the day, no gaudy vehicle rivals its neighbour in splendour and trappings and noise. Time has rolled o'er Venice in a voiceless course, and generations have there been contented to succeed not only to their predecessors' fortunes, but their customs. With us the flies of the day seems the very antipodes of those of yesterday, and ten years in the ways of life form a century. But here in Venice, there has been raised no moral limit between age and age, and you look back among the scenes of her annals, as up one of those long and noble avenues of the old school of picturesque, where miles stretch before us in uninterrupted length, unvaried save where some majestic trunk protrudes itself, like a glorious feat in the city'* story.



But enough of retrospect. Let us start from this dream, and awake to St. Mark's, sucli as it is; for here are the Zingari congregated in admiration at first, a feeling that soon turns to discontent. Why, it would be impossible to tell exactly, but for some reason or other, they seldom can remain for the space of a week in the ocean-girt city, their eagerness to arrive there being only equalled by their eagerness to escape thence. This may arise from the confined feeling of being prisoned up in lanes, allowed but this one breathing place of St. Mark's Place, which one can quit but for the grim cabin of a dark gondola. The feeling of imprisonment is at times, indeed, maddening; you are willing lo bestow any sum for one hour's liberty on terra firma.

A trtan must be a Venetian to live at Venice. No Englishman can submit to drink coffee forty times a day, rise at twelve, take a lounge on the soft cushion of a gondola for exercise, and go into society to kill the night. For time is not the enemy a Venetian fears so much as the hours of darkness. If there were even brilliant shops under these piazzas, the lounger would be gayer, but alas! here is nought to tempt either eye or pocket. Even the cafes are filthy, and the fellows within mere rabble; should an Englishman seat himself with such ? They are the Pisani, the Cornari perhaps.



A Venetian lady, moreover, is never seen in her streets; seldom at her window. How should the Zingari then behold one ? Even if noble, they have not the patience to endure the noviciate requisite for a stranger to go through ere he is admitted perfectly. The Piazza is his only resource, and that is but a melancholy one, to be compelled to resort to nine or ten times in the day. At midnight, when the moon is on high, and the population gathered there, the scene is certainly delicious; but midnight is not the time that Englishmen seek to kill out of their beds. They visit St. Mark's in sunny hours, find it deserted, sultry, unat





tractive, and .barren" of either luxury or amusement. To the Zingari, the Piazza St. Marco forms in Italy the head quarters of ennui.


END OF VOL. II.
