TEMPTATION.



CHAPTER I.



"Yes Sir, she has a tongue

Thai never halts for want of argument,

She can dispute, and reason, and tell tales

As endless as the coward's vain account

Of bloody battles and heroic acts;

Or Ladv Faddle's tedious history

Of her gnu e ancestors of Faddle-hall."

Tragedy of " Sir Thomas More."

Hl-yp Vaxder Dordrecht was the son of a sage magistrate of Amsterdam, and was not a little proud of his paternal descent. His mother, Aaltje VuistSlaagen, was one of the most respectable of her profession, though rather inclined

VOL. I. B





to act the termagant. Huyp, however, was her darling; and as he gave early indications of genius, and high notions she determined that Huyp should be a great man, let the world say what it would. Aaltje, though pensioned by the magistrate, never objected to earn a penny in an honest way. Huyp was an extravagant little dog, and cost her a great deal in broken windows, and cracked sculls, for he inherited from his mother a very irritable disposition, and never scrupled to revenge himself amply for an affront.

Aaltje's patience was frequently tried to the utmost by the conduct of Huyp, but as she intended to make something of him in the end, and was not without hopes of becoming a lady herself, she bridled her passions, and endeavoured to reason him into a different line of conduct. "Perverse dog!" she would frequently exclaim, "all my remonstrances





are lost upon you! But I shall see you a magistrate yet, and then you will be glad to ask my advice. Mynheer Kik^ borsch could never in his life decide upon a case without asking his wife, neither shall you, without applying to your mother, or my name's not Aaltje."

With these pleasing thoughts Aaltje comforted herself for the trouble her thoughtless son gave her. The worthy -magistrate placed Huyp at a public school, where, though he was too idle to improve, he had sufficient natural cunning to avoid punishment. Huyp had notwithstanding some natural talent •, he could sketch a Dutch landscape with wonderful accuracy upon the leaves of his book, and was once caught with a caricature portrait of his master upon the back of his slate. Impressed with a due sense of his own abilities, Huyp must needs be an artist. The old vrouws vowed him to be a prodigy of genius, and in a few months there was scarcely n withered phiz in his neighbourhood, whose likeness was not drawn by Huyp at a demi-franc per head. These were proud times for Aaltje, - and gave her oratorical powers a fine scope. Many an hour did she proudly relate the wonderful progress of her son, and, as by dint of application she had learned by rote the names of Titian, Teniers, Lucas of Leyden, Vandyck, Murillo, and a host of other artists, she soon became famous herself for her vast knowledge, and even had the honour to be noticed by the lady of Mynheer Kikvorsch, as .she was proceeding with her portly husband to the Stadt-House, to resolve some knotty point of law.





This mark of distinction did not pass unnoticed by Aaltje* s neighbours, neither was she backward herself in giving the world information of so important an .event It was even observed, that her





cap was placed more coquettishly, and that she had added an extra chain and ornament to her necklace. Of course, Aaltje magnified the civility of Madame Kikvorsch, whom she now designated her kind friend; and as Madame was the very pattern of propriety, Aaltje had the honour of a passing nod, and howd'-y'-do? from half the Jnff'routcen of the city.

Huyp, meanwhile, was daily increasing his professional reputation. Aaltje's portrait, in tawdry guise, invited the eye in every street; and it was reported, that many a grave and moral man paid platonic-visits to the original. The VnistSlaagen family, who had scorned Aaltje when she was in adversity, now courted her good opinion, and assumed

The universal feelings of mankind

Their soul and being;

she had at least patched up her reputation, was noticed by the great, and wa* the mother of a genius, therefore they had no reasonable pretence to withhold their notice.





The Vuist-Slaagens had, from time immemorial, been of the fraternity of fishermen, and were not a little proud of the antiquity of their family. They had also the privilege of presenting the Stadtholder with the earliest herring, and sometimes, by way of recreation, smuggled a few kegs of Hollands to an obscure port, in spite of the cruizersthat watched their motions off the English coast.

Huyp was one evening wandering round the quay, with two of his idle companions, when his uncle Luitje Vuist-Slaagen, accosted him with, "Well Huyp, my brave boy! how goes it with you, and sister Aaltje? you must come and paint your cousins. But hark ye, Huyp, as your aunt is so devilish ugly, if you touch her, put somebody else's fece to the picture,—she'll like it the "***-. better, Huyp."





"Uncle," returned Huyp, with a tie-* gree of native naivete, "1 will paint her any colour she likes best, and that no time may be lost, as ladies do not generally improve as years increase, I will immediately wait upon her, and make her as handsome as Madame Kikvorsch, if she wishes me."

Luitje was by no means displeased with the spirit of his talented nephew, but sighed to think of the more exact resemblance his wife bore to Madame Kikvorsch in her disposition, than her^* person. Poor Luitje was truly one of the hen-pecked tribe. His wife was the twentieth cousin of an attendant on a petty German prince, and did not fail to give herself a due portion of consequence, from this dignified connexion, which Luitje had frequently most conscientiously cursed from his very soul.





When Huyp had quitted his uncle, and• was hastening to beautify his termagant, aunt, he accidentally met with some of his dissolute companions, who were projecting a scheme of mischief. This was exactly to his taste. For this his faculties were ever on the qui vive, and he very calmly gave his aunt and painting to the devil, and joined this party of spirited youths, who had decided to strip the orchard of his worthy sire, Mynheer Vander Dordrecht. The country residence of Mynheer was situated about half a league from Amsterdam. It was already somewhat past the time of highnoon, and the horses were harnessing to the heavy vehicle of the magistrate, in which he daily made his pilgrimage from his villa to the Stadt-house, and from the Stadt-house back to his villa. As they proceeded, however, to their inexpressible satisfaction, they learned, that it would most probably be some hours.





before he would be able to proceed, as the police had just brought a large party of offenders before his worship, to be dealt with according to law.

Huyp, and his companions, proceeded leisurely to. execute their purpose. He thought himself perfectly sure to escape detection, and his young friends trusted to his influence with his father, in case they should be caught by the police, for an exemption from the punishment awarded them by the laws.

The residence of the magistrate was surrounded by a deep moat, and had, in former times, been a small fortified tower. It had, however, been enlarged and modernized by its present possessor, though the drawbridge and gate, which still remained, plainly marked its antiquity. With little difficulty they gained admittance, under pretence of waiting the arrival of the magistrate. In this Huyp was of essential service to them, the domestics fcnew him, and did not entertain the slightest suspicion of his nefarious designs, and he kindly obliged them by sketching their heavy Dutch features, while the others stripped every tree, and made their exit undiscovered.





Huyp, understanding by a preconcerted signal that their scheme had completely succeeded, began to think it might be most prudent to follow them, and bidding the gratified domestics adieu, hastened with all possible speed from the villa, to claim his share of the plunder. He had not proceeded more than* fifty-yards before he met the carriage of his father, and to his inexpressible consternation, saw two of his comrades tied closely together, and mounted upon the coach-box.. To escape was impossible* His progress had been so rapid, that he had not observed its approach, until he was within a few paces of it. Mynheer very coolly commanded the driver ta





stop, and desired Huyp to take a place by his side. As there were no means of evading this unexpected honor, he reluctantly complied, and the whole party travelled in silence to the villa. They had no sooner passed over the drawbridge, than the wary magistrate ordered it to be drawn up, and.the young gentlemen, seeing all hope of escape cut off, implored, with all humility, the mercy of the great Vander Dorduechf.,.

"De drommcl take the young urchin," exclaimed the principal domestic of the house, when, with extended eyes, he beheld the purloined fruit borne into the mansion by the two delinquents, while young Huyp sneakingly followed his father into the parlour to await his sentence. "Was there ever such an artful young dog? to serve me such a trick too! But he is now fairly caught, and Mynheer is seldom over merciful to such idle young dogs."





The whole mansion was now thrown into the greatest consternation. Vander Dordrecht himself preserved an awful silence, and the culprits, with fear and trembling, awaited the decisive sentence of the law. Huyp, who presumed much upon his affinity to the enraged magistrate, alone seemed to be gifted with any thing like self-possession. Paternal affection, perhaps, might plead in his behalf, and in case his father should prove inexorable, his mother's well-known eloquence, perchance, might mitigate his wrath; for he knew that Aaltje would not stand calmly by, if she thought her hopeful son was in danger of being punished for any of his meritorious tricks.

This soliloquy of Huyp was at length interrupted by the voice of his father, who sternly commanded him to unpack the fruit, and place it upon the table, before him. Huyp silently complied, and the magistrate relapsed into silence. Let him do what pleases him best, thought Huyp, he can't hang me, and so all I can do is to wait the result.





Vander Dordrecht really did feel the yearnings of nature for his dissipated son. But he knew that he could not conscientiously punish his companions, and suffer him to escape, and therefore was considering the most lenient method of requiting them for their misconduct. Mynheer well knew the world; and was notwithout some trifling terror of Aaltje's recrimination, in case she should think proper to defend her son. It was a knotty point, and he at length resolved not to make the affair public, but to make the delinquents do penance in a subterraneous: cell, which, in ancient times, had been made use of as a prison, by the inhabitants of Dordrecht tower.

Thither he accordingly did them the honor personally to conduct them, and after informing them that they must for some time consider it their home, he turned the key and left them to their reflections. Huyp now began seriously to consider the awkwardness of his situation, and plentifully loaded his companions with execrations. He had discovered that what he considered to be an excellent joke, proved to be rather unpleasant in its consequences, and was fairly puzzled in what manner he should proceed to regain his liberty. His instigators were likewise not backward in their reproaches. They accused him of deviating from his promise of saving them, inasmuch as he had not said a single word to sooth the anger of his father, but had calmly submitted to be imprisoned without even attempting to plead for the slightest mitigation of the sentence pronounced upon them. It did not, however, appear likely that they would be speedily liberated, and





their complaints, at length, died away, like the distant echo of the wind, and sunk into a profound silence. Their mental reflections were by no means pleasant, and sleep was, perhaps, to them more welcome than the anxious expectation of a speedy release.





CHAPTER II.



At doore expecting him his mother sate,

Wondering her boy would stay from her so late;

Framing for him unto herselfe excuses:

And with such thoughts gladly herselfe abuses,

As that her sonne, since day grew old and weake,

Staid with the maides to runne at barlibreake:

Or that he cours'd a parke with females fraught,

Which would not runne except they might be caught,

Or in the thickets lay'd some wily snare

To take the rabbet or the pourblind hare,

Or taught his dogge to catch the climbing kid;

Thus shepherds doe; and thus she thought he did.



Browne's Britannia's Pastorals.



AALTJE's patience was now nearly exhausted. Huyp had never before staid out so late; and she was not without an anxious foreboding of misfortune. Midnight spread her sable shadows around, and still no intelligence reached her of her son. The morning dawned, and yet Huyp's well-known, footstep met not her ear. She now began to feel the most serious alarm, and, after many fruitless enquiries after the fate of her son, she resolved to hasten to the villa Dordrecht, to implore the assistance of his father, and the police, to discover his fate..





Vander Dordrecht had not risen from his pillow, when Aaltje arrived. She burst at once into his room, and, in a voice rendered almost inarticulate by sorrow, entreated him not to delay a moment his enquiries for the fate of his son. Beauty in distress has ever been dangerous to the male sex. Vander Dordrecht was now placed in a most delicate situation, and he strove by every kind endearment, to convince Aaltje that he was not insensible either to her tears or her charms. He assured her, that Huyp should be forthcoming in a short time; and softened into something like sympathy; all his former affection for her returned, and Aaltje was desiret? for the future to consider his villa as her constant home.





This was no unpleasant intelligence to Aaltje, who really was a pretty piece of Dutch frailty. Her anxiety for her son, was, however, unabated; and at length Mynheer was obliged to commission the old major domo of his household, to release the young culprit from his confinement, and conduct him into his magisterial presence. Huyp,. who was no admirer of the cold comforts of a gloomy dungeon, followed the old domestic with alacrity. Never, perhaps, was a release more acceptable to any culprit, and he was rather inclined to prefer the awful frowns of the burgomaster, than endure any longer the sufferings of confinement with his upbraiding companions, who were still left to ruminate on the follies of the past day, and to condole with each other on the prospects before them..





The emancipation ©f Huyp was, to them, by no means a pleasing event. It savoured too much of partiality, but they had too much of their national prudence to irritate the mind of Mynheer by remonstrances or complaints, which, in all probability, his faithful old servant would have reported in a manner not likely to hasten their release.

To the astonishment of Huyp, he found that the peremptory tone of the magistrate was now quite changed; and instead of being condemned to listen to a long lecture on the enormity of his offence, he was invited to partake of the morning meal, prepared for the epicurean palate of his father.

There was a mystery in all this, which Huyp could not unravel. The spell was however, soon broken by the entrance Aaltje, who, in no very gentle accents delivered her sentiments on the conduct of her son not much in his favour,. though she was inclined to think hiscompanions were worse than himself. Vander Dordrecht was her echo. Whatever she asserted he did not dare to. contradict, as he knew the oratorical accomplishments of the female branches of the Vuist-Slaagen family, and had no wish to engage in any dispute with so powerful an antagonist as the lady beside him.





In the Stadt-house he was, however, a very different personage. There he was the proud imperious magistrate, the laws were written legibly on his countenance, and the citizens of Amsterdam, were wont to observe of him and Mynheer Kikvorsch, that the one was the organ of the law, the other the organ of his wife.

Aaltje, perfectly at home at Dordrecht tower, now began to assume the consequence of its mistress. She was resolved, as she had gained a footing in the mansion of the sire of her son, to keep it; and in due time, by persuasion, or by force, to make herself the legal mistress of the place, which she now enjoyed only by the courtesy of Mynheer.





She therefore lectured Huyp, both in public and private, on his past conduct, and on the duties due from him to his father—pointed out to him the advantages likely to ensue, from his courting the good opinion, and conciliating the magistrate, who had just reason to be offended with him; and did not fail to stimulate him to obedience, by a long dissertation on the probability of his filling, in course of time, the situation of Burgomaster.

Huyp was equally ambitious as his mother. He readily, agreed to give up all his old friends, and to make the most of his power over the heart of Mynheer. His resolution was highly applauded by Aaltje, who saw with delight that his heart beat in unison with her own.





Huyp was a fine, tall, well-made youth, very like his mother in features, while his eyes beamed with a bright and fiery expression, demonstrative of the proud and impetuous nature of his disposition. The blood of the Vuist-Slaagens evidently flowed more freely in his veins, than that of the Vander Dordrechts, though Aaltje found no difficulty in persuading Mynheer, that Huyp was the very miniature picture of himself.

The preponderance of vanity over reason is so great in the human heart, that he implicitly believed her assertions, and was willing to think, that he had been in his day of youth, ere age had spread the wrinkles over his brow, a handsome fellow. Had he taken the trouble to consult his glass, he might easily have discovered, that he had never been "a marvellous proper man." His figure was short, and somewhat remarkable for pinguity. His countenance heavy and inexpressive; his eyes small, and dull as the fogs of his country; his hair long and lank, and his whole toule •ensemble evincing the dull, heavy dryness of systematic stupidity.





What little he knew, for a Dutch Burgomaster was never yet famous for depth of learning or profundity of talent, any more than their brethren of other nations, had been almost beat into his head by time. For more than twenty years he had filled an honorable situation in Amsterdam. Intellect was not necessary, as the most stupid creature in existence might decide the fate of a colprit, from a written code of laws.

But, though nature had by no means been liberal to this sage pillar of the state, fortune had shed her flowers in his path with a prodigal hand. The Caesars, clothed in imperial purple, were not more "proud of their dignity and power, than he was of his magisterial authority. In the ages of gothic barbarism, or of monkish ignorance, he might, perhaps, have passed for a prodigy, for the Hollanders were ever accustomed to term him, either in the simplicity of their hearts, or the subtlety of their wit, the GreatVander Dordrecht! Notwithstanding the natural stupidity of his mind, he was not deficient in good qualities. He was generous and charitable, particularly to the fair sex, who were lavish of their praise, whenever he became the theme of conversation. To Aaltje he had always been particularly liberal, and if she had ever proved false, the fault could not be attributed to his neglect of her pecuniary concerns.





Aaltje was perfectly aware of the goodness of his heart, and the weakness of his head. To turn both to her own ,advantage, was her sole end and aim. Huyp was the idol of her heart, and to see him rank with the proudest citizens of Amsterdam, was the height of her ambition and the settled purpose of her pursuit.





Her family, not overgifted with Christian charity, had till very lately treated her with neglect. When they held forth the olive branch, Aaltje did not refuse it, but she was of too haughty a spirit to court their favour, or to endeavour to conciliate their prejudices. That her conduct had been indiscreet she wanted not to be told, but she looked upon their prior conduct as having been far more injurious to her reputation, than the faux pas she had been guilty of. Faults should be concealed; giving them publicity seldom does any good, and reflects discredit on the family, who, by exposing them, hope to save themselves from blame.

The celebrity which Huyp's early ge*

Vol. i. c





nius had gained him from the good citizens of Amsterdam, had caused a change in their sentiments. They were proud to claim a relationship with a boy, who they doubted not would prove a second Ostade, and, besides, had some secret longings to be handed down to posterity on canvass. They were too obscure

"To point a moral, or adorn a tale;" and therefore eagerly seized on a shorter passage to fame.

The aspirations of ambition beat high in the bosom of Aaltje. To accomplish her wishes she controlled even her tongue, and shed a honied poison into the heart of Vander Dordrecht, which was far more open to the attacks of love, than his head to the influence of reason. The watery exhalations emitted from the dykes of his country had not extended their chilly influence over his passions, though they had probably clouded the dawnings of his genius. Under the old government of Holland he had been appointed to a pnblic situation: when the power of France predominated, he contrived to keep well with the ruling party, and when the family of the Stadtholder were again in possession of the land of their ancestors, he bent like a reed to his liege lord, and continued in his station.





A pliant politician, and always leaning to the right side of the question, Vander Dordrecht had amassed a very considerable property, while many of his friends who had more patriotism and less prudence, were reduced to tbe extremity of distress. Huyp was the only child of his love, and Aaltje hoped to see him the representative of the Vander Dordrechts and sole possessor of the riches of her husband.





CHAPTER III.



"Seats her then by my side, Mrs. Dicast my pride,

Feeling soul, she knows well what my calling,

And my labours to greet, brings refreshments most sweef,

While speeches still sweeter are falling.

< Deign this pottage to sip, pass this cake o'er your lip,

Here's a soft and a soothing emulsion,

You cannot but chuse, eat this pulse; nay, I'll use

To my heart's dearest treasure, compulsion.'"



THE soft blandishments of Aaltje were the very manna of delight to Vander Dordrecht. The impetuosity of her temper was softened to the most feminine gentleness, and all those little soothing attentions which imperceptibly conquer the heart of man, were employed to mould the mind of the magistrate to the will of his protege.





. "Huyp! Huyp!" exclaimed Aaltje as the heavy and antique machine of the magistrate rolled over the draw-bridge into the court yard of the tower, "yonder comes your father from the Stadthouse, place his arm chair by the fire, Huyp, and see that his pipe is ready, for the good man likes his tobacco and brandewyn as well as any magistrate of Amsterdam."

"Or an old vrouw her glass of spiced geneva," interrupted Huyp; "and faith, a cup of brandewyn and a pipe, are no bad comforters when the air blows as raw and cold as it does to day; look at Mynheer's nose, mother, it is as blue as his coat with the cold."

"Hold your tongue, you monkey," said Aaltje, "your nose will be as blue as his in time, if you do not get hanged too soon. Leave your trifling, boy, set the orange cockade in your cap, and look out for a wife."





"Not I i'faith, good mother," said Huyp, "there are plenty of horned cattle in Amsterdam already."

"Out upon you, Huyp!" cried Aaltje impatiently, "to speak so disrespectfully of the citizens of Amsterdam. It is a scandal upon the magistracy, and Madame Kikvorsch, and the kerk. You'll be reprimanded from the preekstoel, boy, if you do not curb your tongue. A pretty youth you are, Huyp, to oppose my wishes; you want another night's lodging in the dungeon, to bring you to your reason."

"Nay, an' it please you," replied Huyp, "I have had enough of that, though, perhaps, you ought to feel some degree of obligation to me for getting there; because, you know, if I had not been there, you would not have been here, so no more of the dungeon if you love your son; though, perhaps, it might be as well to give liberty to my two companions in misfortune. Therefore, whilst you are warming Mynheer's danker blaauw, I will let the poor devils of the dungeon breathe a little air."





Huyp seized the opportunity to escape from the room, and immediately hastened to the dungeon. The rusty hinges of the door grated heavily as Huyp with all his force pushed it open, and the two culprits very readily accepted his offer of emancipation, at the same time almost overwhelming Huyp with their embraces and their thanks.

"You had better trust to your heels than to my power of protecting you," said Huyp disengaging himself from their arms, "for Mynheer may not be so very obliging as to let you escape quietly when he has thawed his nose, which is almost as cold as an iceberg. Away, boys, away, and fly to Amsterdam like birds of passage; and mind, not a word that I let you out, if the old fellow should should chance to make any noise about it. But," continued Huyp, after a moment's consideration, "that is not likely for my mother's tongue would soon overpower him."





Advice was not thrown away upon the two hopeful young gentlemen, and with the speed of pursued hares, they quickly were without the precincts of Dordrecht tower.

In the mean time, Mynheer had sought the comforts of his fireside. Aaltje received him with open arms. "You are late, Vander Dordrecht," she exclaimed as she folded him in her arms, and shot forth the artillery of her eyes, which penetrated to the heart of the magistrate, "and the dinner has been ready for you these two hours. There's the UlUge soup, and the boiled meat, and the wildbraad, which I have dressed with my own hands, Mynheer. But you must take a little brandewyn, to give you an appetite. The weather grows cold, Mynheer, and if you do not take care of yourself, you may have an asthmatic or a coud, and the rheumatism you know, Mynheer, is as bad as the hipgout."





"You are a good vrouw, Aaltje," replied the portly magistrate, "and faith I am as hungry as a papist on a fish-day, not that I mean to speak ill of the Catholics, Aaltje,—no, no, it would ill become the dignity of a magistrate, to slander any description of Christians. But where is the jongeling, Aaltje, where \s Huyp 1 the lad need not hide himself, like a duck in a vyvev, because he stole my winter fruit. I remember the time, Aaltje, when I was among the foremost to plunder an apple-zolder,'but I was not a magistrate then, Aaltje."

"You were a wild lad in your youth, Mynheer," said Aaltje, smiling, "and used to follow me as quick as a postlooper, many a long day since. But we must e'en drop tales of old times for the present, Mynheer, that you may have some refreshment."





"Right, Aaltje, right, good vrouw," returned Vander Dordrecht, "fasting agrees ill with a Hollander, besides the wildbraad will be overdone, Aaltje, and I recollect what an English alderman said to me at a city feast, some years ago, that venison should be done precisely to a turn."

"And if you do not say that this is well dressed," said Aaltje as she made her exit, "condemn me to live on water gruel for a week."

Vander Dordrecht had every qualification for a legitimate magistrate. He was dull and stupid, pompous and pliant, of epicurean habits, and could listen to the longest story " thrice told," without yawning. He had ever been the favorite of fortune, and therefore never had reason to regret the want of those mental abilities which give real dignity to the man. No man had ever better exemplified the proverb of his country—





Policy is better than strength,

than the worthy magistrate. The weak est mind, if guided by policy, may overcome difficulties, which to a stronger, without it, would be overwhelming.

Whatever party was in power, Vander Dordrecht was always their firm friend. He was successively the adherent of the House of Orange, of the Revolution, of King Louis Buonaparte, of Napoleon, of the English, and at last became the second time the friend of his legitimate sovereign—Alike the votary of freedom or of slavery, his own interest was the basis of every action, and he had succeeded to his utmost wishes.

The fury of the political mania which has elevated many to power, and more to the scaffold, never troubled the mind of Vander Dordrecht. He could contemplate without emotion scenes of bloodshed and devastation in the morning, and at setting sun could bow to the minions of pride and despotism. He was what M. Laya would have termed, "an honest and frank citizen of an apostatizing soul," who never ventured to have an opinion of his own in matters of state. The party violence of a few, or the eager enthusiasm of a body, were sure to find an abettor in the magistrate. Following the advice of the Apostle, he was literally, "all things to all men;" and, though Rabaud de Saint Etienne has asserted, "that a new truth requires at least thirty years to be established among a numerous people," the profound mind of Vander Dordrecht conceived that an equal number of hours was sufficient to reconcile any wise man to the changes and caprices of political power. If the decisive opinion of Vander Dordrecht could, in any instance, have raised his country to the very pinnacle of power, it is doubtful whether he would upon an uncertainty have ventured to give it. Yet he was wont to talk of Lis country, as though he had been its guardian genius, and deprecated prudential motives, which too frequently silence the tongue of the young and enthusiastic patriot, whose powers ought to be exerted in the cause of his eountry.*





Aaltje, now, accompanied by the domestics, entered with the repast. The dull orbs of Vander Dordrecht sparkled

• "When our country is on the brink of ruin," Bays Monsieur de Calonne, "it is incumbent on each of us to endeavour, at least, to render her every service of which he is capable; and at such a time, all the prudence of fear, and all the modesty of self-love, ought to -give way to the obligations we are under to do every thing in our power that may possibly be attended with utility."





with something like pleasure, at the sight of the various savoury viands which were placed in due order upon the heavy oval table over which a cloth of snowy whiteness was spread, and tucking his napkin under his chin, he prepared to do justice to the meal which the officious zeal of Aaltje had prepared for him. Huyp also made his appearance at the apron-string of his mother, and was probably not a little indebted to the gratifying sensations excited by the viands on the table for the affectionate reception he met with from Mynheer.

"Come Aaltje, good vrouw," said Vander Dordrecht, "the wildbraad smokes like incense on the altar. Huyp, my brave jongeling, take your place—it is warmer there than in the dungeon Huyp, but no more about that, boy: I was wild enough once—ha! Aaltje?"

"Aye, aye, Mynheer, as wild as a hare, and as mischievous as a monkey; and truth to say, Huyp is father's own child, but he is as obstinate as a muilezel, and that you never were, Vander Dordrecht."





The face of the magistrate assumed a portentous longinquity as he addressed his son. "That is not good, Huyp, that is not good—you should be like the Idim'&p, jongeling, and wind yourself into the favour of the great, just as that does its tendrils round the trees. Never judge for yourself, Huyp—let others have the trouble of thinking, and if you are asked if they are in the right, always say, yaw, yaw, and then you can't give offence, Huyp."

Huyp cast an arch glance at his mother, and with as much affectation of gravity as the magistrate had assumed, elongated the "yaw" till the monosyllable bore more resemblance to a lengthened yawn than an affirmative to the advice of his father.





Had not Vander Dordrecht been more than usually dull at the moment he must have perceived that the dawning genius of Huyp, was employed in the amiable exercise of ridiculing his political foresight. Aaltje frowned on the imprudent boy, and by way of changing the current of thought, which at that moment flowed like a lagging river over its muddy bed in the mind of Mynheer, exclaimed, "The lad's head wants a little of your sense, Vander Dordrecht—he chatters as much as a young papigaai now, but older heads must teach him wisdom. Mynheer, you do not eat, yet sure the wildbraad is not spoiled!"

"Nay, nay, Aaltje, it's fine, good vrouw: but I was thinking, Aaltje, of the jongeling there, who sits eating the sweetmeats like a child. His majesty the King comes hither to-morrow, and if I could get Huyp a place at court, who knows but I might be made a baron, Aaltje, and you"





** Ah! Mynheer," interrupted Aaltje, "the kerk and the priester first, you know. But does the King in good truth, come to Amsterdam to morrow? And will it be befitting in me to go to the Stadthouse? You should have told me this before, Mynheer, for, faith I know not that my mantel-zak contains a dress fit to be worn. And then I must get me a new cap, for these trekmnts are only fit for an old vrouw in the fish market. And they say the king likes pretty women, Vander Dordrecht. He learned that in England, for the English were aye fond of a pair of black eyes,—and mine you know, Mynheer, are black as ebony!"

"And your lips sweet as granaatappel, Aaltje," returned the sapient Vander Dordrecht.

"That you should know best, Mynheer," said the fair lady, "for in good sooth you stole their blossom, you old vos; ah! you were like one of the fairy folk Vander Dordrecht at that time. If the door was shut against you, you would go round to the side wicket, and jump through the window like harlequin in a pantomine. Do you remember, Mynheer, the day that I tumbled you into the dyke? I shall never forget the fright you were in, when you cried "Aaltje, Aaltje, I can't swim"—but when you saw I only stood and laughed at you, you could float on the water as well as I ever saw a young duiker swim in my life."





"That was bad, very bad, Aaltje," said Mynheer.

"Nay," returned Aaltje, " a souse in a vyver is good for the health. Besides, Mynheer, if you had chanced to have been sinking you know I had a line and an angle rod; and if you had snapt at the fish-hook I could have drawn you ashore, and shown you for a merman. But when you did get to land again, you returned the compliment, and made me as wet as though I had been in the dyke too, and as dirty as the maid in the story book, who sat among the cinders





Vander Dordrecht laughed heartily at being thus numerously reminded of the wild tricks of his youth, and Aaltje was by no means unwilling to recapitulate them.

"And then, Mynheer," continued Aaltje, ** how jealous you were of Ryk of the Lommeryk Hoef! Many a time have I encouraged him to come, that ye might fall together by the ears. N ot that I ever liked Ryk though, Vander Dordrecht, he was too much of the puppy, and I always hated a fop. Well, well, poor Ryk is gone the way of all flesh, the dead clock tolled heavily for him, and though he wore the wapenrusting of the French, they shot him at last for desertion.





"111 wager you a stuiver, Aaltje," said Vander Dordrecht, "that you wept yourself almost blind for Ryk, though you did not like him."

"Not I, Vander Dordrecht. Truly you have a good opinion of my discretion to suppose that I should have wept for such a thing as Ryk. Trust me Mynheer, when I weep for any man he must be something worth calling up the tears for. Ryk of the Lommeryk Hoef, indeed !—but it is not becoming to speak ill of the dead, and' so I say no more. He was always fond of the shade, poor fellow, when he was alive, and now he rests under the yew tree in the kerkyard."

"You need not be so passionate, good Aaltje," said Mynheer, in a conciliating tone of voice, " nor talk till your cheeks are redder than your top-knot. I wagered you a stuiver but in jest, and then forsooth you take fire like touchwood, and defend yourself as vehemently as Madame Kikvorsch lectures her husband."





"But," returned Aaltje applying her her handkerchief to her eyes, and breathing a few hysterical sobs, "you have made me angry. To accuse me of loving Ryk!—me who have only lived for you! —Though 1 must say, Mynheer, that had my heart not been so obdurate he would never have been shot."

Here, Aaltje, who was perfectly skilled in the science of deception, sobbed most violently. Mynheer was not the most acute observer, nor capable of entering into the fine and delicate distinctions which exist between the sighs of feeling and the sobs of passion. Neither from nature nor from education did he possess the judicious faculty of directing the powers of discrimination. Penetration, which Greville very sensibly observed, seemed to him a kind of inspiration, and gave him an idea of prophecy, had no place in the frozen ideas of Vander Dordrecht. This, Aaltje had long been aware of. She was a compound of ease and gaiety, and her understanding was not so hampered and confined as that of her portly admirer.





A dewy cloud spread itself over the eyes of Vander Dordrecht while Aaltje continued her tearless sighs. Such power has the sorrow of a pretty woman over the heart of a man, even though his mind should be dull as the waters of the Lethean stream.

"Aaltje, Aaltje, woman" said Myn* heer, half inclined to bear her company in her sighs, and add his double bass notes to the shrill treble of hers; Aaltje vrouw, give over your sobbing, woman, and be blythe as the lark when he whistles in the sky on the May morn. I did but jest with you, Aaltje, when I said that you were sorry for Ryk—and now you have let the ivildbraad grow cold, whilst you were shedding forth tears till they fell upon your hands like the rain-dew on the petals of a lilly bloom,"





"Then will you be reasonable, Mynheer?" enquired Aaltje, as she slowly removed the handkerchief from her eyes, which she had gently chafed till they appeared as if swollen and red from weeping. "If we talk of old times, Mynheer, you might surely treat me with more respect, than to accuse me of weeping for him of the Lommeryk Hoef. And you well know, Vander Dordrecht, that I refused the French Commandant, and what did I do it for, but for you, you cruel unkind man? Well, well, women are generally the dupes of their own folly, and so perhaps the least I say about it the better."

"That's true," ejaculated Vander Dordrecht, who finding that he was likely to have the worst of the dispute, quietly assented to the observations of Aaltje.





"And where does the King rest him to-morrow, Vander Dordrecht?" asked Aaltje, who was impatient to learn the particulars of the royal visit. "I suppose he will take his dejeun6 at the Stadthouse, as he did the last time he came to look at the fortifications."

"Nay, Aaltje, he will come to Dordrecht Tower, and Mynheer Kikvorsch and the magistracy will meet him here, and so you had better get the coffee and sweet cakes, and the rhynsclie-wyn and the twee bak in readiness."

"The Lord help us!" replied Aaltje, "and is the King really coming to the tower?"

Delight almost deprived Aaltje of her senses. She now again was all smiles and happiness, and began to look upon Vander Dordrecht as one of the greatest personages of the land. Huyp was





already in imagination provided for, and Aaltje thought, that if Mynheer was one of those "whom the King delighted to honor," her charms were yet" powerful enough, to render her worthy of being a sharer of the sunshine of roral favour.



Vol. i





CHAPTER IV



Tis not the cold—the formal rite,

Which crafty churchmen hold so clever,

That may, or may not, yield delight—

But love's a flame that charms for ever.



Anonymous.



THE intimation of the expected arrival of the King of the Netherlands at Dordrecht tower, on the morning of the following day, put the whole establishment of the magistrate into confusion. The domestics were all anxious to make the mansion fit for the reception of the newly hatched, and scarcely fledged monarch, who, Heaven knows, has little of dignity either in his manners or his person. Mynheer alone, as if duly conscious of his -own importance, kept his place by the fireside, whilst Aaltje, the





maid servants, and all the old women who could be collected at so short a no-1 tice from the environs of the tower were busy in preparing the house for the reception of the illustrious visitor.

From the plentiful libations of water which were poured by the old gossips on the floors of every room intended to be thrown open for the reception of his Majesty, and the magistracy of the city, a stander-by might have supposed that they would have been as damp as the family sepulchre of the Orange family, the next morning. But the cleanliness of the Hollanders made it a point of duty with them not to allow the monarch to carry away with him any of the dirt of the mansion, whatever quantity his royal feet, or those of his suite, might bring into it.

"What will the magistracy think," said Aaltje, as she directed the garrulous old vrouics in their labours " when they hear that that the Koning has taken his breakfast from the hands of Aaltje VuistSlaagen? The coffee and the twee-bak, and the duiven-pattei, and the sweetmeats, shall be as good as though they had been made in France. And maybe his Majesty will call me Madame Vander Dordrecht, and it would be ill-befitting that he should not, seeing that I am at the head of the magistrate's table. And then my Huyp is a brave jongeling, many a heart will flutter when he goes among the court vronws, for they say that the perriwig-maker's son, whom he took for his page, perches on their lips like a butterfly. He is not so tall nor so handsome as Huyp, and who knows but Huyp may put him out of his place in their hearts, as easily as we old vrouws can damp the fire in a tintel-doos."





Aaltje's meditations and reflections were now interrupted by the loud exclamations of Leena, the old head of Mynbeer's female establishment, who by incessant toil had worked a hole through the bottom of the silver coffee-ean.





"God-a-mercy, Leena, you rimpled old devil, you are grown worse than an infant that has just left the breast of its mother. Did you think you were cleaning the pot-lepel or the frying-pan? What will Mynheer say, think you, when he sees the porcelain coflee-can brought out in the presence of the Koning who eats and drinks out of nothing else but goude and silver? And there is no time to send it to the zilversmid to be repaired. Your head is as soft as a modderpoel, though you have been the housewife here for these thirty years byegone."

"Yaw, yaw," replied Leena peevishly, "an old vrouw like me must give place to the fancy flights of a favorite. Ye may find a worse one than old Leena though, Aaltje vrouw, though her capability be on the wane as fast as the lemrnet of the lamp on yon coffer."





"Hear but the old railer," exclaimed Aaltje, "she's as pert as a wyntappers wife on a festival day, with her Aaltje vrouw! Let me tell you, Leena, that it would be only proper and discreet when you speak to me, to say Mevrouw or Madame, but ye're past teaching, you (heads creature ; though if you do not mend your manners, Leena, I shall represent to Mynheer the insolence of your conduct."

"Flies the bird to that bush;" said Leena in a loud tone of voice. "Woe's the day then to the old servants of Vander Dordrecht, they will be sent forth like the mists of the twilight, for the sun that shone on them is set for ever. But it is all one to old Leena. She can get her cup of coffee-drink, and a stuiverbrood to keep the life in the body, for the little space she has to struggle with the infirmities of nature, without the labours of servitude; and a grave in the lcerk-hof when it is over. But what is to become of the poor maid, and Jacobus the rentmeester. They may e'en go to one of the charity huizen, or ask alms of the elders of the kerk to save them from starving. Zeer well, zeer well, Aaltje, you come into the house like a pestilence, and sweep out the old servants of Vander Dordrecht like the sand from the kitchen floor, or the web of a spinne-kop from the ceiling."





"Peace, you whimpering disturber," returned Aaltje, " who said that you were to be turned out from house and home? though truth to tell, you deserve it for your demerit. It becomes you not to flout and scoff at me, who am your mistress and the vrouw of Mynheer, and qan moreover mould him to my will as easily as I could turn that bit of bobbin round my hhine finger. Take a little jeniver and a twee-hak ye stupid old fool, and give the good vrouws here a little to comfort them, for it is not every day that the tower is prepared for the reception of the head of the kingdom."





"Ik dank you, Mevrouw" exclaimed all the old gossips at once, into whose good graces Aaltje had now taken the best means of insinuating herself, "may you live in Dordrecht tower as happy as a duif in a duivenkot. Leena is aye cross as a teazed kitten, but, poor soul, she's falling like a seared leaf in the autumn."

"Aye, aye," said another of the suburban retailers of news and scandal, she has never been like herself since the trumpeter of the French garde du corps was killed at the battle of Austerlitz. They said he was her minnekind, but if he was not more nearly related to her than that, I'm not a christian-body, for there was not a feature that did not resemble her. rf it had not been for the kneveh on his cheeks, and he had been drest in her cloathes, one might have sworn that it was Leena herself grown young again. He her foster-child indeed! Nay, nay, if he were not her son, my old bos is a hoorndraager, which, God forbid I should ever make him."





"Bide awhile, Katryn, for that," returned her companion, "the wind blows not lovers to such old vrouwen as we are, when there are so many girls blushing like the red rose bloom, with lips as sweet as the blossom of the jasmyn. No, no, Katryn, the men will not mistake a nettle for a narcis."

"Ye might be civil, buurvrouw" retorted Katryn rather angrily, " for you are no younger than myself, and the drommel take me, if you are not more like a nettle than I am, whatever you may think of it."





"Oh! ye dwaas old vrouw," cried the former spokeswoman, "can ye not take a joke without being hot as a firebrand? But here comes Leena with the jeidver and the drink glass, so still your tongues with a tweebak, till we are ready to go on with our cleaning work."

"Have ye a korke-trekker, vrouws?" said Leena as she entered with the biscuits and the liquor, "for the bottle has been fastened up so close that I cannot draw forth the cork."

"Yaw, yaw," replied Katryn, "I'll open it, even though it has been fastened down with the seven seals of the Revelations. Trust to an old vrouw's pocket for the proper means. But ye should never be without your own korke-trekker Leena, for ye may want a little jenkver or brandewyn as well as another to chear your heart. Mercy on us, the cork is in so tight that 'tis as hard to move as the money in a priester's pocket."





"Ah! but you have drawn it though/' said her companion. "You were aye fond of a cup of jewbeer, Katryn, and it is as comfortable to our hearts, as the tci/n andthe brandewyn are to those of our betters; aye, and it keeps us from the hands of the apotheeker better than all the citron-drink and camphor . of julep."

"Right, good vrouw," returned Leena, "there is much comfort in a cup of jeniver and a pinch of rappee, when an old wife's heart is heavy. Ye remember, Katryn, what tricks Jacobus was wont to play us, by putting the pepper into the snuffdoos. But ye do not taste the jeniver, vrouicen, and we have no time to stand here praaten at this rate, for Mynheer is calling out for his coffeedrink, so mevrouw Aaltje, you had better quiet the good man's craving and leave ue to our work."

Aaltje hastened to prepare the invi





gorating beverage for the impatient Burgomaster, and left the old sybils to enjoy an uninterrupted gossip.

"Was such a thing ever thought of," exclaimed Katryn in a confidential and subdued tone of voice, as soon as Aaltje had quitted the• room, " as, that the tower of Dordrecht should come into the power of such a body. It is like a dream to me, and sure Mynheer must be grown dwaas in his old age to put himself under the governance of Aaltje Vuist Slaagen! Heard ye not how she flouted at Leena who has been in the tower so many years? trust me vrouwen, she can turn Vander Dordrecht's mind as easily as we can our spinnenwiels."

"And marked ye not," said the other, "how quiet she was when Leena spoke of the charity huizen! These are fine times, Katryn, when the Koning will give the time o'day and take his ontbyt with a marotje."





*' Yaw, vrouw," interrupted Leena, "but he is as blind as Vander Dordrecht himself. And there is the lad Huyp, who is as mischievous as the drommel, and would dig up the bodies from the church-yard, if he had nought else to employ himself, calling out Leena do this, and Leena do that, till my poor old brains go round like the wheels of a roasting jack. It's not for me, however, to speak. No, no, vronwen, Leena must forbear to speak, or to intefere in these matters, since Mynheer must be supposed to know best whom to trust." "Aye sure he must," rejoined Katryn, "and ye kenmn, Leena, that we should be like a handbell and jingle only when the wires of it is jerked. But Leena, is the jongeling Huyp to hand the Koning his coffee-drink the morrow-morn 1 He is an idle, forward lad, and will throw away Mynheer's goude as ye would corn to the poultry birds."





"There ye are wrong Katryn," said her companion, "for Mynheer likes his goude well, as Leena could tell you if she would, and knows the price of things to the value of half a stuiver. Nay, nay, Huyp, though he is a love child will not have the goude to lose at the billiard table, or cast away to the shuffle of a pack of kaarten."

"Come, Katryn, come," exclaimed Leena, "this praaten will never do the werken.We old vrouws talk as long and as loud as the klokken chime; and, ye forget that Aaltje will be here presently, to look after the koffi-kan."

The gossips took the hint given by Leena, and recommenced their work, with redoubled assiduity. To weave the web of scandal, was one of the chief occupations of their lives; their opinions affections and antipathies, were always of the most ductile nature, and capable of being moulded, according to existing





circumstances, to any form or fashion. They had no objection to abuse to the world, those whom they flattered when in their presence; and, in fact, made a trade of detraction. They were either partial advocates or passionate accusers, and it had been equally impossible to have confined the treacherous tongues of these ancient scandal-mongers, as to weary them. Their auditors too eagerly imbibed the refreshment, which their communications gave to the languid powers of the mind, and deemed not that they might, in their turns, become the theme of their unsparing animadversions. The disseminator of private scandal, is to be found in every society, and more or less pervades all ranks and classes; and there are few who have the courage to silence the babbler, with a glance -of contempt, or to banish from their presence those professors of hypocrisy, whose never-ending themes are so detrimental to social felicity. They are bred in the hovels of poverty, and nursed in the mansions of the great. Thus the sphere of their mischievous agency instead of being limited, is daily increased, and their pestilential influence is, if not encouraged, at least permitted to remain unchecked. It is allowed to pollute and poison the finer feelings of the human heart, and to check the dictates of reason and nature. Yet futile and transient is the pleasure it imparts. It is the glaring sun-beam of a moment, and fades away like the phantom of a fatiffuina: delirium. Minds must be largely possessed of an innate





"Weakness that lores on trifling points to dwell,"

to find either pleasure or amusement in the syren notes of detraction. They seem to toil for care and pain, to search for the thorns of nature, and to leave the blossoms to decay and perish. The intricate meanders of life, they strive not to render more easy—for unknown to the consciousness of shame, they scruple not to plant a sting in the bosom of the purest innocence. Aaltje found Mynheer as impatient for his repast as Leena had represented him to be. Huyp was his companion, and had been the auditor of a long lecture on the necessity of concealing his real opinions. Her appearance was a relief to Huyp who had almost become root-bound to the soil of his father's dullness, who had been labouring to instil into his mind, maxims fraught with the true groveling spirit of political idolatry.





For Huyp, he undoubtedly possessed some affection. His ambition induced him to hope that he might, under proper tuition, become a great man; but in his opinion it would be necessary for him to study and support a systematic assumption of a false character.





Huyp had given a tacit assent to the theory of the magistrate, and every thing appeared to give promise of the accomplishment of his wishes.

"The jongeling is not so obstinate, as you said he was, Aaltje," exclaimed Vander Dordrecht as the lady entered the conference apartment, and I'm blyd to think that he is so brave a lad. Ye kennen well, Aaltje vrouw, that the King has much respect for his Burgomasters, and he aye shewed great condescension to the family of Vander Dordrecht, who builded the tower on the scite of a royal boeren-hut, two hundred years and more voorUden. And Huyp must be made legitimate, Aaltje, by a royal ordinance, and keep up the name of the family, when we rest in the graf-kelder of the Dordrechts. Moreover ye will do well to be silent yourself, Aaltje, about the lack of the prtester's ceremony for the present, as it is not the ring, and the prayers in the marriage book, that can chain us together like two turth-duiven. Not that I shall say to his Majesty the morn succeeding, you are not my lawful vrouw, but ye ketinen, Aaltje, that in some instances silence is wisdom."





"And ye shall kennen too, Mynheer," replied Aaltje, elevating her voice to the highest note, "that I am not so foolish as a grundel-Jish, ye false oude vos; the spirit of the Vuist Slaagens is not to be cast down at the will of e'er a magistrate of Amsterdam; so, Vander Dordrecht, if ye like not to go before the priester, ye shall see that I like to spraaken to the Koning about the matter, for I can speak to a King as freely as I can to a Burgomaster."

"Troth, Aaltje, ye are stupid as a meeuw-vogel, it would not be discreet of you, Aaltje, to trouble his august Majesty with your nonsense, when he honors the poor house of the Dordrechts with his presence; and I am about to ask him to make Huyp a pagie of the presence, or a colour-bearer in the body guard."





"And are you ashamed of me, Mynheer," asked Aaltje, "that ye refuse the priesters ceremony? It is not that I would do aught to detriment the fortune of Huyp, who likes the kerk and the jveekstoel as little as yourself, and deems all the married men to be ftoomdraagers"

"I not like the church! Aaltje," replied Mynheer, "why I did not say that the priester should not have his fee, for the kerk ceremonial, some time or other. But Huyp must have a bridle, if he thus asperses the good name of the citizens of Amsterdam, or he will be brought before the magistracy for false allegations."

"Nay, nay, father," said Huyp,





"there is no scandal in the matter, as Mynheer Kikvorsch can testify."

"Oh! shame on you Huyp," cried Aaltje, *' it behoves not a jongeling like you, to speak thus of a magistrate. Go to your shtap-chamber till sun rise in the morn; and mind that you appear in the presence of the monarch, as spruce as though ye were already his pagie."

Huyp willingly obeyed the commands of his mother, and left her to enjoy a tete-a-tete with Vander Dordrecht.

Vander Dordrecht, though tolerably skilled in the policy of statesmen, found that Aaltje was equally so, in the wiles of love. Like Caesar she "came, saw, and conquered;" and Mynheer, in one short hour, submitted himself entirely to the will and wishes of his chere amie.

It was finally agreed, that in the course of a few days, she should be privately privileged by the church to share the fortune of her lord, and then be publicly brought forward as his "better half." These preliminaries being arranged to the satisfaction of both parties, they likewise retired to rest, somewhat impatient for the dawn of the morrow.





CHAPTER V.



O'er the seas he had fled when the skies were o'ercast,

But return'd to his land when the danger was past:

Without power to contest, and too weak to defend

His people, each renegade slave was his friend—

If abject the courtier, more gracious the king,

As bells pulled with judgment more merrily ring.



Anonymous.



THE day had scarcely dawned, before the good people of Amsterdam were busy in preparing for the reception of the Sovereign. Across the various streets leading from the barrier at which his Majesty was to enter, to the Stadt House, lines were suspended, gaily decorated with flowers and streamers. Stars, coronets, crescents, and numberless other devices, composed of the most motley materials were profusely hung from the centre of these lines, and vouched for the loyalty, if not for the taste of those good citizens, at whose expense these pantomimic decorations were provided.





The bells rang many a merry peal. The standard of the Netherlands floated heavily on the lazy air from the top of the Cathedral and the Stadthouse, and in many quarters of the city some humble paper imitations of the royal ensign graced the windows of the affectionate Hollanders.

But as his Majesty was to honour Vander Dordrecht with a visit, prior to his entering the city, we must for the present leave them to their preparations, in order to give a glance en passant at the inhabitants of the moated tower.

Aaltje, and her assistants, had spared neither labour nor expense to receive the King with proper respect. Ere the Cathedral clock had struck the hour of seven, the magistracy were in motion, and accompanied by their ladies, wheeled along towards the tower in their cumbrous travelling machines. At the mansion of Vander Dordrecht they met with a friendly, though somewhat stately reception, and were introduced by the Burgomaster himself to Madame Aaltje and her hopeful son. This honor was indeed an unexpected one to the proud dames of Amsterdam, and aroused very different sensations in the bosoms of the fair assembly. Some haughtily drew back, without deigning to notice the lady to whom Vander Dordrecht had thus formerly introduced them; while others, less fastidious, endeavoured to win her favour by the most fulsome flattery, and repeated caresses. Aaltje, whose pride was hurt by the scornful deportment of one party, was the more gratified with the condescesion of the other; and had not





VOL. I. E





the fear of offending the King mitigated her resentment, she would, without ceremony, have sent those who had thus incurred her displeasure "empty away."

But the will of the King was a law to the Burgomaster, and Aaltje well knew that they envied her the honor of entertaining the Sovereign, too much to be reconciled to her gracing the tower of Vander Dordrecht.

Madame Kikvorsch, Avho was the last of the city train that arrived at the tower, was struck with the utmost astonishment when she beheld Aaltje in the situation of the mistress of the mansion. However she was too much a woman of the world to betray the feelings of her heart, and made her curtsey to Aaltje with as much grace and politeness, as she would have done to the King himself, had he chanced to have been present.

Whispers and glances went round the whole circle at this unlooked for courtesy shown by Madame Kikvorsch to Aaltje. She had ever been considered the proudest wife in the city of Amsterdam, and her reasons for thus noting Aaltje were discussed in an underbreath.





"What singularity of opinion!" said a lady, who, like Scarron, appeared little better than an abridgement of human miseries, to her next neighbour, who need not have prided herself in the immaculate purity of her reputation. "Who would have believed that Madame Kikvorsch would have paid any attention to such a creature?"

"Ah! Mevrouw" replied her auditor, who had been accused, Heaven knows how justly, of having sacrificed her virtue and her husband's honour to a General in the service of Napoleon, for a diamond crucifix which had fallen to his share of the spoil, during the war in the Peninsula—" Ah! Mevrouw, the morality of the Hollanders will be utterly ruined, if such a marotje as Aaltje Vuist Slaagen is to take place of the wives of the honest Burgomasters. Doubtless Madame Kikvorsch has her own private reasons for being so friendly to the pretty puppet, for she certainly; is handsome, though she is vulgar as a vrouw from the waschtob, I assure you Mevrouw, I could tell you a tale—"





"Aye, and so could every vrouw in Amsterdam," said the former speaker interrupting her, "but you are aware, that this is no place to converse in."

"Ye are right, Mevrouw, ye are right. Think you that we shall be allowed any chocolate, or coffee-drink after the christian fashion, or may we expect to have it handed to us in the pot-lepel, and to eat a stale twee-bak out of a dirty koek-pan V

"Oh! you are too harsh upon the creature," returned her friend; " for though she was glad enough formerly, to use her pewter spoon and fork at dinner, and to take her coffee in a coarse basin, she'll now have her gold spoon, I'll warrant ye, and her silver fork, and her Dresden porcelain, like the superior folk! Fine times, fine times, Mevroutc, not like what they were in our younger days, —then rank was respected."





"Yaw, Mevrouw, then rank was every thing. But now, the Lord look down upon us! every nameless creature that was born and bred in a boeren-hut, thinks herself privileged to mix with our societies. What time is the Kins^ expected to arrive, Mevrouw '! Methinks we ought not to have been brought hither to be famished."

*' His Majesty certainly should have had somewhat more consideration for the comforts of his liege subjects" was the reply, "than to keep them fasting till high noon, at this cold season of the year."





The conference of the two city ladies was here interrupted by the entrance of the steward, followed by Katryn, who had been watching at one of the upper windows of the tower, to announce the approach of the royal guest. "The King, Mynheer," said the steward, but could proceed no further, as Katryn caught up his words, and continued, "is within a pistol shot of the tower gate, so ye had better run to the port, Mynheer, and if you do not move quickly, he'll be in the court, before you know he is o'er the bridge."

The whole party hastened with all possible speed to the entrance court, and arrived there at the very moment that the travelling carriage of his Majesty drew up. The Magistrates bending their unwieldy forms as low and gracefully as their size permitted, advanced to assist him, and in a few moments escorted him into the principal apartment, -where the ladies smiling and bowing, paid their respects to the head of the house of Orange.





The lips of the ladies received the honour of the royal salute, and his Majesty condescended to remark, that they were sweeter than all the suikerkollen in Amsterdam. A royal compliment is always well received, and the vanity of each of the assembled ladies was gratified by this of the Monarch.

The King was seated at a table placed at the upper end of the apartment, profusely covered with viands of every description. Aaltje prepared to assist the monarch with tea, coffee, and chocolate, while Vander Dordrecht and Huyp stood on either side to administer to the wants of the royal appetite.

Aaltje was likewise standing, but the King, gallantly rising from the chair which he occupied, commanded her to be seated, observing that it was not proper to allow the fair hostess, in her own house, to stand whilst he took his breakfast.





Aaltje curtsied and blushed deeply, then casting her eye around her with a look expressive of proud exultation, obeyed the injunction of the prince. She now felt that she enjoyed a complete triumph, and the countenances of the ladies sufficiently proved the mortification that filled their hearts.

"You have the fairest vrouw of the city, Mynheer," said the King, addressing himself to Vander Dordrecht, "and we must express our hopes to behold her at our court, ere long. A more loyal and worthy subject than yourself we have not in our dominions, and trust me our court boasts not of a lovelier lady."

"Was the like ever known?" exclaimed the ladies who had previously been indulging their propensity to scandal at the expense of Aaltje. "The creature has positively conquered the heart of the King! Ill betide the murotje; if she goes on at this rate, we may as well betake ourselves at once to a cloister."





"Your Majesty," said Vander Dordrecht, with a low obeisance to his illustrious guest, "honors your poor subject too highly. But would your Majesty deign to take this jongeling, whom I would, in all humility, crave permission to introduce as my son, under your gracious protection, and make him a pagie in your Majesty's suite, you would find Huyp as loyal as his father."

"Yaw," interrupted Aaltje, and, please your Majesty, Huyp is a lad of talent, as Madame Kikvorsch, and the whole city of Amsterdam can avouch.''

"We should ill repay the kind atten





tions of our lovely hostess," replied the King, "were we to refuse to grant her request. Therefore we here appoint him our page of the presence, for to doubt that he is worthy of the situation would be worse than heresy."

The King bowed to Aaltje as he delivered this speech, and was apparently far from being insensible to the attractions of her charms.

Huyp at the instigation of his father bent on one knee and returned thanks to the monarch, for the honor he had conferred upon him, and for the first time in his life felt his bosom swell with the heavings of ambition. A new sensation seemed to thrill through his veins, and he considered himself as the most fortunate of human beings. At different periods of life our ideas undergo a sensible change. The baubles which please us in infancy delight us not in youth, and what we were wont to admire in youth, we behold not with the same sentiments as we reach towards the maturity of manhood.





Though the indignation which rankled in the hearts of the ladies, who beheld the star of Aaltje rising in the ascendant was great, prudence confined it to their own bosoms. Envy, in this case, preyed upon its own vitals, and Aaltje looked upon them with an expression of scorn and triumph. They were now too crest-fallen to notice the hauteur of her manner, and what might have been at another time a dangerous experiment, was now most decidedly successful. There is sometimes more danger in theory than in practice. Where there appears to be danger of the most violent opposition, if the first effort fails, it generally dies away harmless. Like the reverberating echoes of a distant thunder peal it grows fainter and fainter in the distance, and at length is heard no more. It fades like the heavy mists that hover on the mountain tops, before the brightness of the sun. Aaltje was proud of her new honors, and wore them as though they had long been familiar to her. Madame de Maintenon, who had France at her command, and its monarch at her feet, could not have felt the power of her personal charms more than Aaltje did at this moment. Vanity, which is indiginous to the female heart, was gratified. Ambition, the weed which overruns the blossoms of virtue, flourished like a " green bay tree." Pride, which lives on the sweet incense of flattery, was sated even to fullness: and hope, that delusive meteor of the mind, led her to expect the most distinguished honors, while the known loyalty of Vander Dordrecht would have prevented him from refusing his sovereign the full possession of any thing that was his, even though the tenth commandment should have been violated, and rendered nugatory by his acquiescence. He acted upon the principle of the will of a King being the law of his subjects; and as long as it was the royal pleasure to allow his money to rest safely in his coffers, he conceived that he was in duty bound to give him power over all else that he possessed.





The King having partaken of his morning repast, prepared to depart for Amsterdam. This was rather inconvenient to the ladies who had been scarcely allowed sufficient time to take any refreshment. They however waived all other considerations in favour of loyalty and proceeded towards the city in the royal suite. At the inner barrier of the city, the King and the magistrates alighted, and proceeded to view the state of the fortifications, while the ladies drove to the Stadthouse, to await there the coming of the monarch. The streets were not lined by the military—they were drawn up in the Grand square— nor was the royal personage attended by a troop of guards, to prevent his being seen by his subjects.





When the King and his suite descended from the ramparts of the city, a kind of procession was formed to conduct him to the Stadthouse. First came a deputation of children of both sexes— the girls habited in fantastic costume led the way, and were followed by the boys shouldering their toy-guns, and going through many military evolutions, while ever and anon they kept discharging their little brass cannons, to the great delight of the monarch, who/ was pleased to express his satisfaction at the military skill of this miniature





army.* At some little distance from the formidable body of infant military, came the King attired in an old blue coat decorated with a star, and a hat which had once been black, in which was displayed an orange cockade; having on one side, the Commandant of the city, and on the other* Vander Dordrecht. They proceeded along the streets at a pace, which in England would have been considered as derogatory to dignity—what is vulgarly termed the dmcager-trot. No reiterated huzzas rent the air—the men stood bare headed, and the ladies waved their handkerchiefs as their" elegant and graceful" sovereign hurried forward to to the Stadthouse. When he arrived



• This is not an exaggerated picture. Those who have visited the Netherlands, and been present at any of the royal visits, can bear testimony to the accuracy of the description.





at the Grand Place, the bands of the military welcomed him with a national air, and the soldiers presented arms— at the same moment the cannon on the ramparts fired a royal salute, which was returned from the vicinity of the Stadthouse, by the artillery of the juvenile troop,

The King now expressed to the commandant his satisfaction at the state of the fortifications, though it might have been questioned, whether his Majesty in his hasty run round the ramparts of the city, had observed whether the cannon were even fixed upon their carriages! That, however, was of no material consequence. As he was a legitimate prince, none but a visionary would have expected him to possess the varied and warlike talents of a Napoleon. Besides, that great man was confined to his barren rock, by the very statesmen who had trembled at his nod, therefore they had not the fear of him before their eyes.*





* Very different were the visits of the Emperor Napoleon. Nothing escaped the keen eye of that great and ambitious man, and he was accustomed to examine into the state of the fortifications, with one single attendant—sometimes alone. Shortly after his marriage with Maria Louise, if I recollect rightly, they both paid a visit to Ostende, where they remained for some days. The Emperor daily walked round the ramparts, making his observation!! and noting down in his tablets such things as he deemed to require alteration. One morning as early as four o'clock, he discovered one of the centinels asleep at bis post, with his musquet placed by his side. Napoleon did not awake the soldier, who appeared exhausted by fatigue, but taking his musquet, did the duty of the sleeping centinel till the hour of relieving guard. At length the relief came, the centinel wakened as the watch-word passed from guard to guard, and to his consternation found the Emperor by his side. He of course (jave himself over for lost. Napoleon, however, mildly told him to lie down again, and continued to pace backward and forward with the soldier's musquet. When the officer of the guard came up, he put the centinel under arrest; and, unsuspicious





A royal eulogium was however by no means unpleasant to the feelings of the Commandant, who was himself as heavy a piece of Dutch clay as his master, and had never been suspected of having more than half an idea at a time, during the whole course of his life. Yet he was as insupportably civil and ceremonious, as the famous Mynheer Buys, whom Dean Swift has transmitted the remembrance of to posterity, in his treatise on Good Manners. Still, however, though he possessed so very moderate a portion of intellectuals, he contrived by a strict adherence to regularity, to get through the world better than many men of greater mental capabilities.



of the presence of the Emperor, threatened him with the imperial vengeance. "Hold, Sir," said Napoleon, advancing;, and, at the same moment, taking; out his watch, "let each man suffer for his own fault, I release the soldier. You are much past your time, and for that I place you under arrest." The officer silently submitted, and Napoleon in person took the command of the guard, A few days' confinement was, however, all the punishment he inflicted on the officer, who afterwards beoame one of the bravest of his soldiers, and fell fighting for the Emperor at the battle of Quatre Bras,





In fact, almost any thing does for a commandant or an ambassador, though there are some honorable exceptions. They need only be well skilled in the arts of complimenting, bowing, smiling and dancing—if they possess these requisites, all other qualifications follow of course. Political capabilities may perhaps be found in those who attend them, (if not, it matters little) and by the intrigues of their ladies, the secrets of the cabinet are sure to come to their knowledge.

The object of the royal visit having been thus fully accomplished, the carriages were drawn up in front of the Stadthouse and the Magistrates were marshalling themselves in proper order to conduct him to his, when the commandant, who had not anticipated so early a departure, besought his Majesty to honor his good city of Amsterdam by partaking of the repast which had been laid out for him in an adjoining apartment.





The King endeavoured to excuse himself, but Aaltje, who from having done the honors of her own table to that illustrious personage in the morning, conceived herself privileged to dictate to the Monarch, said "that it would be shewing much disrespect to the citizens of Amsterdam, were he to depart from the Stadthouse without tasting some of the confectionary which had been provided for the occasion, and drinking a glass of Rynsche-wyn to the prosperity of the city, and the health of its inhabitants,"

The bright eyes of Aaltje, perhaps, spoke more to the heart of the prince than her rhetoric. He immediately consented to honor the city, by attempting to do justice to the collation which their loyalty had prepared for him, and proceeded to the room in which the banquet was laid out.





Madame Kikvorsch, as the wife of the elder magistrate, or father of the city, now claimed the right of presiding at the loaded board, but by the special favour and command of the King, Aaltje shared the honor with her. That they were the two most beautiful women in Amsterdam, was universally allowed, though in character they were widely different. But private character is seldom of any consequence to princes, as too many examples have convinced the major part of the world. Had not Vander Dordrecht's head been immeasurably thick, he must have felt somewhat uneasy at the attentions of royalty. But, perhaps, the near approach of winter. which Sylvester, in his translation of Du Bartas, says, after his quaint manner,





"Perriwigs with snow the bald-pate woods,"

might have rendered his faculties more hazy. He might have known, that kings are as liable to err as mortals of a meaner rank.

Huyp, elevated almost to the third heaven, with his new dignity, and proud of the notice the Sovereign deigned to bestow on his mother, looked down with scorn upon those wealthy citizens, whom he had been wont to view with respect. He thought himself little less than a king, and conceived that the family of Vander Dordrecht stood first in the catalogue of Dutch worthies. The King entered his carriage, and Huyp, after taking a hasty adieu of Aaltje and Mynheer, jumped into the one which drew up next, and was quickly without the gates of the city. The liberality of Vander Dordrecht had been called forth, and Huyp viewed with delight the purse of Napoleons, which the magistrate had presented him with. For the first time in his life, he was in possession of a sum of money equal to his desires; and his mind was engaged in devising the means of dispersing it. This was no difficult task, but Huyp was as yet a novice in the ways of the world. The King was on a tour through his dominions, and now was proceeding towards the Pays Bos, intending to return to Brussels, by way of Ostende, Bruges and Ghent.





CHAPTER VI.



"Tis generous in you to take pity on a stranger, and not to suffer him to fall into ill bands at bis first arrival."

The Spanish Friar.



IN the multiplicity of ideas which half distracted the young mind of Huyp, his personal appearance was not forgotten. Aaltje had promised to forward his wardrobe without delay to Brussels, but Huyp thought that in this " golden age of tailorhood," as Morgiana calls it in one of the dramas of Oehlenschlaeger, he might probably do himself more service by arraying his person, of which he had no unfavourable opinion, in the costume of the butterflies of the court. Oh! ye economical fathers, weep not For the extravagance of a son. Toil day and night to gain wealth, and leave your heirs to cast it forth again into the common stock!





Huyp counted over his gold again and again, as the heavy carriage in which he rode, travelled over the still heavier roads, and ere they reached Bruges, he had decidedly resolved to eclipse, if possible, every exquisite at court; no very easy task, but youthful vanity is not easily vanquished.

As the royal cavalcade proceeded up the long avenue, which leads to the inner barrier of the city of Bruges, shaded on either side by rows of fine old trees which were now daily shedding their seared and shrivelled leaves to the keen gales of latest autumn, the . eyes of Huyp encountered those of his uncle Luitje, who was hastening to secure his place in the barge, which floats down the canal from that place Vol. I. F





to Ostende. The honest old follower of" an "ungentle trade," was transfixed to the spot on which he stood with astonishment when he beheld his graceless nephew in the train of royalty. "The young urchin has thrust his head in the tialter, as sure as my name is Luitje," he exclaimed, as he observed Huyp endeavouring to shun his glance, by throwing himself back in the carriage, "the King has surely taken the boy up to confine him in the prison. Alas, my poor sister Aaltje will break her heart when she hears of it! This romes of his painting, and his playing, and clearing the old vrouws applezoMers. I always thought that little oiiod would come of it when I saw the •jonyreling set up for a gentleman, instead of following the business of his forefathers. After all, Huyp is to be pitied, and so Til e'en turn back, and get the Burgomaster of Bruges to whisper a word to his majesty in the lad's favor. It's not that I think they'll tie the boy up like the sign over a ivyntapper s door, but I'll see what can be done for him."'





This resolution taken, Luitje hastened back to the town, to request an interview with his worship of Bruges, who was a personage of vast importance in his own estimation, and lorded it over his fellows with a most excellent grace. Luitje, however, well knew the power of gold, and its influence over the human heart. The magistrate was in attendance on the monarch, and his deputy assured Luitje that it would be in vain for him to expect to be honored with an interview, as the great man would not leave the royal presence for an instant on any consideration.

Luitje coughed and hesitated a little, but being unwilling to give up his point, he placed a glittering Napoleon in the hand of the person whom he addressed, and entreated him to use his influence with the higher powers for the liberation of Huyp. The bribe prevailed, and Luitje was assured that the necessary steps should immediately be taken for the emancipation of his nephew, and, provided his crime did not amount to any thing like treason, he was instructed to expect an immediate pardon from the clemency of the monarch, and the influence of the deputy of the first civil magistrate of Bruges.





"Treason!" exclaimed Luitje, as the third-rate man of power quitted the room—"treason! no, no, Huyp is no politician yet, whatever he may be in aftertimes, unless he plots against the .safety of the fruit in an old vrouw's orchard. They might as wrell accuse a mouse of holding traiterous opinions against the whole community of cats, or a red-breast for disloyalty to the mandates of a hawk."

Luitje anxiously awaited the return of the mediator. Every minute seemed to him an hour, and twice did he view the minute hand of his watch perform the limited boundaries of its circle before any intelligence arrived. Luitje had a good heart, and trembled for his nephew, but he thought that gold would wash away his fault. He was by no means parsimonious, and where the reputation of the family of the Vuist Slaagens was concerned, he would willingly have given all his worldly wealth to preserve it in its pristine purity. The defalcation of Aaltje had been a bitter blow to their pride, but he conceived the apparent situation of Huyp to be infinitely more derogatory to their good name.





At length the messenger returned, divested of his former hauteur, and with much ceremonious courtesy informed Luitje, that he had been admitted to the presence of Mynheer Huyp, by whom he was commanded to assure him, that his fears were wholly without foundation, and that he had the honor of being in attendance on his Majesty in quality of his page.





"Twere better that he had been a cow-driver" said Luitje, "for he will do little good for himself at the court, which is like the web of a spider into which the poor fly falls to be devoured. However," continued he, "it is well that it is no worse, though I must say that the King might have made a better choice among the jongelings of Amsterdam if he were in want of a pagie. Huyp is a likely lad though, and, perhaps, may make his way in the world, if the King, or some of the great folks would take the trouble to set him right at the outset. Well, well, when the sun shines, the insects flutter in the beams it emits, so let the lad have his day of bliss."

The great man's deputy assured fjiiitje, that he ought to be extremely grateful to his Majesty for the honor he had thus conferred upon his family, and which in all probability would prove the foundation of his nephew's fortune. If he might presume to speak of Mynheer Huyp, he conceived that from the intelligent expression of his countenance, he would shortly make, a conspicuous figure at the Dutch court.





"Very likely, Mynheer," returned Luitje.—" What think you of a fly on the top of a bramblebush? Oh! yes, Huyp will be a great personage I dare say, now he is carried away to court, as hastily as Habakkuk was to Daniel in the den. It is well for the jongeling that the world smiles upon him so soon: but I much fear that the sun of his happiness will soon set, and he will be once more lost in the dark clouds of insignificance and obscurity, as too many of the baubles of a princely protection have already been, and probably will be to the last moment that a court is in existence."





"You judge rashly of illustrious protection, Mynheer," replied his auditor. "For my own part I consider him to be on the high road to the temple of fortune, and even envy him the favour of the King, who will doubtlessly advance him to higher honors in due time."

"Yaw, yaw," returned Luitje, "you are one of the faithful, and believe in the creed of the court, though the Scripture bids you "put no faith in princes." I will give you an example of the fallacy of your opinions in the history of my vrouw's cousin, who has danced attendance at the court of his Highness the Prince of ****, for more than twenty years, without having been advanced a single step."

"The caprice of fortune, Mynheer,"





said the half-bred courtier, "sometimes militates against our wishes, and most probably hath done so in the case you have mentioned. Intrigue, Mynheer, and intrigue alone is the talisman of the court, the alpha and omega of a courtier, a statesman, a priest, and a fine lady. If Huyp should have the good fortune to meet with some of the initiated to advise him, he may, if the expression of his countenance belies him not, fill the first ministerial situations in the government of the Netherlands." . - ., "The first fop of the court, you mean," responded Luitje, "for Huyp has his quota of vanity, and the tailor will claim, as the Englishman says, the merit of creating him,* as in truth he



* "Why should you of all mankind, abuse a . tailor? not to say blaspheme him; if he can, as some think, at least go halves with God Almighty in the formation of a beau." Vide Pope's Letter to a Noble Lord, Vol. 7, p. 263. Edit. 180».





might of half the smirking, simpering, bowing fellows of the age, who think dress an equivalent for the want of sound sense, and impudence a proper substitute for old-fashioned morality. Lord help me! since the period of the Revolution, tailors have gained a most wonderful ascendancy in the state. They make statesmen, princes, and parsons, and I was going to add puppies, had not certain considerations prevented me."

The gentleman, to whom this speech was addressed, coloured highly at the conclusion of it, for he was perfectly aware that be was under great obligations to the schneider for the adornment of his person. Had not his rising wrath been checked, by the consideration that the offender was the uncle of the King's favorite page, he would probably have shewn him the door. Policy, however, induced him to pass over the offence, as he feared that Luitje might, through the means of his nephew, become a formidable enemy to him, should he venture to give vent to the momentary irritation of his feelings.





His vexation was, however, soon dissipated by the departure of Luitje, who was anxious to bid his gay nephew farewell, before the departure of the King, that he might give him some good advice, and a little wholesome reproof for his past conduct.

This was an undertaking of some difficulty, Huyp had no particular desire to see any of his plebeian relatives, for the courtly air which he had inhaled, had already made him look down upon them with sovereign contempt; and when Luitje's request of an audience for a few minutes was communicated to him, by -one of the menial attendants of majesty, he very charitably and devoutly wished him at the bottom of the ocean, or, in truth any where but in the place in which he was.





To rid himself of the troublesome importunities of his uncle, Huyp at length condescended to wait upon him. Luitje received him with the utmost kindness, and began most pathetically to lament that he had not been brought up to the occupation of his forefathers, rather than being compelled to fawn and flatter at court, for a precarious and unsubstantial existence.

To Huyp, this moralizing vein of his uncle, was by no means pleasing. The sudden advancement from insignificance to comparative consequence, had preyed so much on his mind, that he fancied himself to be degraded, by being obliged to acknowledge a relationship with a man, who boasted of no other title than that of honesty.

Pride, that fungus of the human heart, had already half obliterated the better qualities of his disposition. The frailty





of the heart triumphed exultingly over

its affections, and all was banished that

should have been preserved, as the best

gift of heaven to the sons of mortality.

The " fair-weather friends of the summer," to use an expression of Pope's, were to Huyp far more acceptable than his well-meaning adviser. He was well assured of his own capabilities, and recked little what might be the opinions of others on that subject. The buoyancy of youthful ambition, unchecked by worldly cares, gave a volatility to his spirits which neither reproof nor advice were likely to reduce to sober calmness. Vanity and pleasure had amalgamated themselves together in his bosom, and reigned there as its acknowledged sovereigns. This gaiete de cceur, is perhaps the peculiar property of youth. Alas! it is at best but the ephemera of a day, and it is equally evanescent as the brightest flashes of light, which are emitted from the dark clouds of the sky, when the tempest rages.





Huyp assured his uncle that he was perfectly happy in his new situation, and that his " blushing honors" were by no means unpleasant to himself, nor to his mother; to whose influence, he informed Luitje, he was indebted for his present consequence.

"Thou art certainly divaas, Huyp," exclaimed Luitje in unaffected amazement. "What influence can my sister Aaltje Vuist Slaagen have with the Koning? To be sure she aye was a scheming lass, but I can't think how she could get his ear, unless indeed she has been at her old tricks again."

"Then I will tell you, uncle Luitje," said Huyp, drawing his chair nearer to that on which Luitje sat, and assuming an air of importance, "the King -and all the magistrates of Amsterdam, aye, and their proud wives too, have taken their dejewie with my mother at Dordrecht tower. And finely jealous the ladies were, I promise you, when his Majesty complimented her. Then Mynheer asked him to take me under his protection, and so you see I am nowj his pagie."





Luitje was now more astonished than before. This was the first intimation he had received of AaltjVs being the avowed mistress of Dordrecht tower, and he marvelled greatly, that she possessed so much power over the heart of the Burgomaster, -who had so long been proof against all the artifices she had employed to gain the desired point. 'Luitje rejoiced most sincerely at the good fortune of his sister, and presented Huyp with a few Napoleons for pocket money, not forgetting, however, strictly to charge him not to spend them foolishly.





Huyp was not deficient in his promises of observing the advice of his uncle, though he privately resolved to forget all that had been said, as soon as he was emancipated from his control. He looked upon Luitje at best but as an unwelcome intruder, though he was not above accepting the gratuity he had presented him with. Fortunately for Huyp, who began to grow excessively weary of the company of Luitje, the bell rang for his attendance upon the King, and hastily bidding him farewell, he gladly made his retreat.

Luitje was for a few moments lost in meditation. He had been so completely astonished, that he scarcely knew whether it was the visionary occurrences of a dream, or the real events of the day. He, however, quitted the apartment, and walked forth into the great square of Bruges, wondering at the chances and changes which daily and hourly take place in the eventful drama of human life.





CHAPTER VII.



"'Sirrah, I tell you, to meditate on matrimony, ia like contemplating on deaih; for few, after either, are appointed a state of happiness. When did you ever know a married man rejoice in his translation? If they put on a serene countenance, 'tis only to disguise the truth from the world.—The wretches endeavour to appear pleased for reputation's sake, and cry,—the water 's warm—tho' their teeth chatter in their heads, to invite their fellow-creatures to plunge into equal misery. A passing bell should go during the ceremony, to give notice that all well-disposed persona might pray lor their departing frienc, who is exchanging liberty, quiet, and ease, for everlasting contention."

Tacerner's Artful Hutband.



THE inhabitant*; of Dordrecht tower •were highly elated at the visit of the King. It was the commencement of a new ajra in the annals of the mansion; a source of pride, pleasure, and vanity. Vander Dordrecht was highly delighted at the reception Aaltje had given to the legitimate ruler of his nation, and equally gratified at the marked attention hi s maj est y had honored her with. Aaltj e, whom Leena, and the rest of the menials of the domicile, had thought but a few short hours before, deserved to be cast xmt like Jezebel of old to the doge, they now lauded to the skies, and bent to the very earth at her approach, and crouched at her feet with the most respectful humility. They were lost in wonder at the events of the day, and looked upon her as one who was born to enjoy the richest gifts of fortune* in despite of the opposition of the world.





Love, which has been called the poetry of life, warmed the breast of Vander Dordrecht 'with its glowing beams, when he reflected on the homage which his royal master had paid to the charms of his mistress.





"His soul is 90 enfettered to her love,

That she may make, unmake, do what she list,

Even as her appetite shall play the god

With his weak function."



The penetration of Aaltje soon discovered the power she had obtained over his heart. She had no desire to transform him wilfully or wantonly into that strange creature called a modem husband, before she had burst asunder the bonds of prejudice which he had so long cherished against the marriage state. They had already lost somewhat of their Titanic hostility, and her aim was to banish them altogether, as the dreamy visions of the mind. In dull and heavy minds, scepticism is frequently found to be too deeply rooted, to be easily eradicated. They have not space for a second idea; and it is as difficult to move a mountain from its base, as to cast out the weeds of prejudice from the heart. Innumerable instances have proved the truth of this assertion, and until the springs of philosophy shall have flowed more freely through the human mind, fertilizing it as they wend onwards in their course, mankind will never look upon prejudice in its true shape of loathsome deformity.





Vanity had however so softened the prejudices of Vander Dordrecht, that his mind like melted wax, was ready to receive any new impression, He certainly had none of the "Phaethontic aspirations," above the comprehension of reasonable men, and was therefore more tractable than such spirits might have been found on a like occasion.

The day subsequent to that which had beamed so brightly on the possessors of the tower, by giving them the chief of the house of Nassau for a guest, Aaltje began to put her plans in execution.





"Did I not tell you Mynheer," said Aaltje as she handed him his coffee at their tete-a-tete dejeune, "that the Koning aye liked an ebon eye? You have little need now, Mynheer, to be ashamed of me, since his Majestydeigned to be so profuse in his compliments—not that I mean to say they were nothing more than compliments, for you kennen as well as I do, Vander Oordrecht, that what he said was no more than the truth. And then I heard iiim remark to Madame Kikvorsch, that my breath had the fragrance of a bed of dowers, and that he might truly call me the rose of Sharon. I hope that you mean to pay a visit to the court, as hw Majesty did you the honor to express his wishes to that effect. Indeed I shall have much trouble to wean my mind from poor Huyp, and the jongeling will grow as melancholy as a prisoned turtle-dove, now he is away from his mother arid you, Mynheer, for the lad was aye fond of seeing you, when he was but a kleine urchin."





"I shall not forget the jongelingr Aaltje," replied Vander Dordrecht, "and I was well pleased that the King did the poor house of his subject so much honor in the person of its mistress. But ye must kennen, Aaltje vrouw, that the magistracy of Amsterdam little liked that you should take precedence of their wives in his affections."

"And what of that, Mynheer?" asked Aaltje, somewhat scornfully— "may not a worm cross their path without offence to their dignity? The blood of the Vuist Slaagens rises up in judgment against them in every vein. and if it were not that I kennen the lack of the priester's ceremony gives them liberty to speak, I would soon teach the proudest vrouwen of the city to treat me with more respect, than to compare me to the klimop in the presence of the Koning, as some of them did yesterdaymorn. But you are as silly as a grundel, Vander Dordrecht, or you would have told them in his Majesty's presence* that it was ill befitting you to stand silent, when you heard me mentioned with disrespect."





"But Aaltje,—Aaltje, mevrouw—" exclaimed Vander Dordrecht, "you need not blame me in this instance, as it was at the worst but a sin of omission, and taking into consideration the respect due from me to our illustrious monarch, I think that silence in the affair you speak of was the truest wisdom."

The countenance of Aaltje assumed





rather a portentous appearance. Her eyes sparkled with rising anger, and Vander Dordrecht began to tremble for himself. The storm was evidently gathering fast, and Mynheer was mentally preparing to make the best retreat he could. For many years he had been occasionally obliged to endure the fury of Aaltje's tempests, but now he was more in her power, as he had no place of refuge to flee to. To conciliate, if possible, the irritated lady was the desire of Vander Dordrecht; for experience had taught him, that the odds were against any man who has the temerity to combat with a woman's tongue.

Aaltje, however, did not give him time to defend himself in " good set terms;" she was before hand with him on that point, and argued her own case with the pertinacity of a counsellor, who depends more on the intricacies of his opening speech, than on the justice of

VOL. I G





his cause, or the veracity of his assertions.

Sighs and tears, the defensive armour of the fair sex, were not wanting to enforce her arguments. She well knew that Vander Dordrecht was not proof against them, whatever he might be to milder reasoning—

'" For to this day—down from the first created,' The devil whisper'd, and the woman cheated."

Her greatest fear was, that Vander Dordrecht might form some other connexion, and not be exactly a St. Preux in his attachment to her. She frequently repeated to him that beautiful sentiment of Rousseau, (though as applied with respect to herself it was probably misplaced), "Ah perisse l'homme indigne qui marchande un coeur, et rend l'amour mercenaire!"— All had, however, hitherto been unavailing, but in this new effort she had the authority of the royal admiration of her personal charms to buoy up her own intercessions, and she knew that Vander Dordrecht dreaded her oratorical powers. When the Burgomaster had somewhat composed the turbulent passions of the lady, by the most abject submission to her avowed opinion of his having acted wrong in failing to resent the disrespectful conduct of the ladies of his fellow citizens, she began the contest again, by insisting upon the performance of his half-promise of making her his wife. She thought that his living in a state of celibacy was derogatory to his character as a magistrate, and felt that her own power hung as yet upon the frail tenure of his wiB. ''.-- •





"Spare yourself the trouble of conciliating me, Vander Dordrecht," she said scornfully,, " for since I am to be treated with insult by your friends, whose conduct you presume to defend, your false professions shall meet with no credit in my breast. Your antimatrimonial sentiments are doubtless very refined, and let the priester decide on their merits, for I am determined to apply to the lcerk for protection."





"And for why?" asked Mynheer, rather alarmed at the insinuation thrown out by Aaltje,which implied much more than Vander Dordrecht thought proper to understand, or even desired to do, "what hath the kerk and the priester to do, Aaltje, with the vrouweu of the city, except with regard to their spiritual concerns?"

"That you may kennen the best, Mynheer," returned Aaltje, "But it is not the rroutcen that I speak of; the priester hath ere now compelled many a father to become a husband who had renounced matrimony as solemnly as yourself. And moreover, Mynheer, the King shall be applied to, if the kerk fails to do me justice. Kenuen you now, Mynheer?"





"Yaw, I kennen well, Aaltje," said Vander Dordrecht, "but sure you would not set a Burgomaster up in the kerk-aisle iu a sackcloth wrapper, to hearken to the priester's vertcerpivg, like a ghost in the circle of a magician!"

"Will I not!" retorted Aaltje, "the Vuist Slaagens never yet had a dash of the laffen bloed in their nature; and if you think that I have, you will find yourself mistaken, Mynheer. And you will also bear in mind, Vander Dordrecht, that I have as much influence over the King as any woman in Amsterdam, therefore it will rest with yourself, Mynheer, whether you think proper to do penance according to the kerk-wetten, or to do me justice. But you were aye dilatory in love matters, and your blood is as lazy as the thick water in the dykes." ". ,





"Nay, that is not just," replied the Burgomaster, "That is not- right, Aaltje vrouw, but it would not be proper and becoming to make a magistrate do penance for the sins of his youth. Lord bless me! what a figure I should make in the kerk wrapped in a white sheet! No, no, Aaltje, that must not happen. Why I should look like—"

"Hercules with a rush light," interT rupted Aaltje, laughing heartily at the idea. -" O! you would look bravely, Vander Dordrecht, and the world would say, that your vicious taste alone prevented you from loving me as you ought." . > ,

"Ah, Aaltje!" said Vander Dordrecht," women are at once both the pleasure and the punishment of mankind.* They are the roses and the thorns of life, and their frowns are more terrible than a tempest at sea, or the overflowing of the dykes at Haarlem. I will consider what is to be done, Aaltje —I will deliberate with myself, Aaltje; for in truth you are as likely a vrouw as any man in the Netherlands could desire.—Fair as a myrtle-bloom, and stinging as a nettle-leaf. Not that I mean to say, that you are wrong, Aaltje but matrimony is a serious affair, it is like the ocean, Aaltje, when once embarked on it, if the vessel springs a leak, love and comfort go to the bottom, for ye kennen well they are heavy articles, and are not likely to float back to the shore."





* " femmes, femmes! objets chers & funestes, que la nature orna pour notre supplice, qui punissez quand on vous brave, qui poursuivez quand on vous craint, dont la haine et l'amour sont egalement nuisibles, <fe qu'on ne peut, ni rechercher, ni fuir, impunement! Beauté, charme, attrait, simpathie f être on chimère inconcevable, abîme de douleurs to de voluptés! Beauté, plus terrible aux mortals, que l'element ou l'on t'a fait naitre, malheureux qui se livre a ton calme trompeur? C'est toi qui produis les tempêtes qui tourmentent le genre humain."—Rousseau. Julie, torn. vi. pallia; •'





"You have already had sufficient time for deliberation, Vander Dordrecht," replied Aaltje, "therefore, decide at once. You shall find, Mynheer, that I will not be trifled with. An adder stings not sharper »than a woman, if once her vengeance is roused; and you will find me more than a match for you with all your cunning. Remember, Mynheer, that the Koning is my friend, and if I am to be no wife, you shall be no Burgomaster; therefore take your choice."

"The devil!" exclaimed Vander Dordrecht, starting from his 8eat with every feature paralyzed by horror, and trembling like the last leaf of autumn on an oaken bough, "You would not wish to ruin the father of your son f "Was ever one of the honorable magistracy of Amsterdam in such a situation! My head is in a perfect confusion; thoughts flying here and there like the populace after the reading of the riot act, or the ins and outs of a bee-hive on a summer's noon. What can I do to save myself? A man had better trust his whole fortune to the dice box, than his person to a wife." The latter part of this reverie of the Burgomaster's was mental. Vander Dordrecht was too wary to give Aaltje any unnecessary provocation, though he found that he was too closely entangled in the web she had woven for him to escape. "Love may be nectar," continued Vander Dordrecht, "but the (trommel take me if matrimony is not as bad as the doctor's potion; but I must take it, oc have my name at the tongue's end of all the gossips in Amsterdam who run over the catalogue of reputations as fast as a kitten would over the keys of a harpsichord. Oh! that I had been a monk! The cowl is the only excuse for celibacy that women will hear of."





Aaltje meanwhile had been watching the workings of his mind. A mirror could not have reflected an object with greater clearness, than the countenance of Vander Dordrecht did the conflict of his passions. She had gone further than she had originally intended, but her passions, like the winds, when once loosened from the cave, were not easily confined again. The Burgomaster's fears were her most powerful allies— they pleaded the cause of Aaltje, and formed a phalanx against the inclinations of Mynheer.

"Have you resolved, Mynheer?" said Aaltje, when she saw that he was settling his features into something like composure—" a wife or a whirlwind!"





"You are so hasty, Aaltje," replied Vander Dordrecht, "and you should be told that a man is not to be danced about at pleasure like a child's puppet—that is, I mean some men are very perverse and claim the benefit of their birth right; mind I say nothing of myself. But you know, Aaltje, that I have a sincere affection for you, for had I left you to the world, as some of my brother magistrates might have done, had they been in my situation, you might now, instead of being the mistress of Dorr drecht tower, have been the occupant of a boeren-hut, and pinned on your top-knots before a corner piece of a looking-glass raised to its proper, height by the support of a jenever-tub."

Aaltje reddened with anger. "Dare, you," she said with vehemence, "dare you assert, that I should have become^ such a miserable wretch, whilst one of the Vuist Slaagens had a stuiver at their command? Dare you! you stupid slanderous old dommerik! tell me about your kindness to me, when it was as difficult to get a stuiver out of your pocket, as the copper out of the mine? I, who had but yesterday the King almost at my feet, and may be yet perhaps as powerful at a certain court as Madame de Maintenon ever was at another! His Majesty did not live so many years in England without learning the true value of a pretty face. There he was taught the royal criterion of beauty, and the proper use of the abilities of women!"





Here Aaltje paused to regain her breath, and to prepare for a more violent attack on the feelings of Vander Dordrecht, For some minutes both remained silent. However, as soon as Aaltje perceived Mynheer about to address her, she negatived the motion, by having recourse to a most violent hysterical fit—the favorite resource of passionate ladies, who thinking it a sin to sigh in secret, torment the nerves, senses, and feelings of their lords with loud and repeated shrieks, while the attendants designate the man as little better than a brute.





Leena, Katryn, and the rest of the humble dependants of the mansion, rushed into the apartment to the assistance of their mistress, as soon as her screams reached their ears. "The Lord help us!" cried Katryn, who was now zealous in the cause of Aaltje, "Mevrouw will die in the hysterics, if ye do not take care, Mynheer, for they aye come on slowly—by little and little,. till they make the blood boil, like the water in a washing ketcl. Hold Mevrouw fast, Leena, for she is as strong as. a lion now the fit is upon her, and you know that she is more powerful than such weak old vrouwen, as you and I are. Half an hour since, she was singing as gay and sweet as a canary, and now she looks as pale as a corpse. Send for the apotheeker, Mynheer, for Mevrouw is worse than you deem her to be, and beside it is not proper for you to be here, now she is in the hysterics."





Vander Dordrecht passively obeyed the commands of the ancient dame; he retired, with a heavy heart, and felt equally for his own situation, as for that of Aaltje. i

The sound of the footsteps of Vander Dordrecht had no sooner died away in the distance, than Aaltje ceased struggling and screaming. "Is he gone?" said she, in a low tone of voice, to. Katryn. "Yaw, yaw, Mevrouw," replied Katryn, "he went away as crestfallen as a mouse from the claws of a katje. Mynheer little likes hysterics,





but what could we poor vrouwen do without them? I used to conquer my old bos with them—and faith, Mevrouw, many a time have I played him the trick, for the men can bear any thing better than women's shrieks."

Here comes Mynheer with the apotheeker" exclaimed Leena, "so you had better begin again, Mevrouw, for it's not good for men to know too much." f

"You are right, Leena," returned Katryn, "scream as loud as you can, Mevrouw, and we'll join you, till we make as much noise as a kennel of schoot-hondjes"

The chorus of shrill sounds instantly commenced, and was the signal to hasten the approach of Vander Dordrecht, and Monsieur le Medecin.

"Ah! mon Dieu!" exclaimed the apothecary, who was a true French petit maitre, as he placed his gold headed cane on the table. "Madame est mourante, la fievre—la fievre, Monsieur! Ah! mon Dieu! le pouls!" and drawing out his repeater, he began to reckon the pulsations with all due solemnity. Aaltje, meanwhile, continued to scream, to the great annoyance of Vander Dordrecht, who was by this time sufficiently alarmed, and willing to put an end to this scene of confusion, which, he rightly judged, would be reported greatly to his disadvantage, by the two old sybils who were in attendance. The man of physic prescribed a variety of medicines for the relief of the lady, but willing to secure himself a patient for some time, gave it as his opinion, that her state was very dangerous; though he expressed a hope, that she might eventually recover, if his prescriptions were attended to. Rest and quiet were indispensible, and Aaltje was ordered to her apartment.





Vander Dordrecht blamed himself as the cause of her illness; he really loved her, and decided to submit to the fetters of matrimony, if there were no other means of restoring her to health.

He hastened to her bed-side, and, with the countenance of a culprit who had just " fitted the halter," informed her of the sudden change his sentiments had undergone.

"You must not speak so loud, Mynheer," said Katryn, who was the argus of the chamber. "Ye kennen that mevrouw is almost in the dead-kwaal, and so ye had better Bend for the priester at once and not stand talking about it as though you were cheapening down an old vrouw in the fish market. Mevrouw Aaltje will soon be gone, Mynheer; her life is as short as the spark light in a tintel-doos. Woe to the day! I thought all would not go right when I dreamed last night of the dood-klok tolling when the klokken-gespel should have chimed! That was no good, you know, Myn





Vander Dordrecht was m a pitiable situation! Death and marriage stood foremost in his list of the calamities of life, but as he wished to clear his conscience with respect to Aaltje, believing her case to be hopeless, he resolved to go like a Iamb to the slaughter. A messenger was dispatched to the pastor of his church, and every thing prepared for the performance of the sacred ceremony. When the priest arrived, Aaltje was led to the apartment supported by Katryn and Leena. The sacred service commenced, their vows were duly plighted, and the minister gave his blessing. Till now, Aaltje had preserved the appearance of illness. It was no longer necessary, as she had accomplished her desires, to continue it. She therfore threw off her langour, and after formally thanking the priest for his servicest turned to Vander Dordrecht, and assured him that she hoped.to live long enough to see him take another jongeling to the doopfont before skft rested in the family vault.





The minister stood aghast with astonishment; and Vander Dordrecht looked like a statue of mute despair. \

j « Why do you not thank his reverence, Mynheer," said Aaltje? " Of are you listening for Katryn's dead' klokV

"Nay, nay, Aaltje—not exactly so! though you have taken me somewhat by surprize; and you cannot expect a man to walk up to the scaffold without remonstrating against the sentence that condemned him. As for Katryn, and her dream of the dood-klok, I know well now that it was no midnight phantasy; she was aye a cunning vrouw, as her old Bos could testify, God help him, for he has had a wearisome time since she got the poor devil in her power."





"The same happiness to yourself, Mynheer," said Katryn casting a sly glance at the Burgomaster, "and ye will do well not to forget the dream of the dood-klok, Mynheer, when mevrouw Aaltje has the hysterics again."

Aaltje soon taught Vancjer Dordrecht to appear at least satisfied with his metamorphosis. A married man has no alternative if such be the will of his wife, and Vander Dordrecht submitted in silence, like a criminal to the sentence of his judge.





CHAPTER VIII.



I hate

All obligation. Not that I'm dispoi'd

To evil, but I love to have my way,

And cannot brook to check my inclinations,

And think that all the world is one great madhouse,

Wherein he's maddest, who would set things right.



This is in brief

All my philosophy, and my religion.



Oehlenschlaecek.



THE apotheosis of Huyp, if I may be allowed the expression* appeared to his ardent imagination in the most vivid and glowing colours. He felt all the imaginative manifestations of happiness, which beamed full upon his soul like the resplendent rays of the noontide sun upon a flower just bursting its petals, and springing forth in all the beauties of nature.





At the court, Huyp soon, however, perceived that his fancied consequence was but a dream. A phantom, which his imagination had exhausted itself in delineating, and, which might eventually prove little better than a diabolization of life. He had anticipated pleasures which were not to be found, and felt a degree of mortification at being doomed to give up the society of the monarch for that of his fellow pages, and the ladies of the court.

Among the latter he soon found a friend. Huyp was a fine handsome youth, with but litte of the curse of modesty upon him, which at court is looked; upon as a most contemptible qualification —appalling as the mark set upon Cain by offended Providence. In truth Huyp was any thing but bashful, and' inherited from his mother, a propensity to intrigue—better credentials no young man need desire, who enters the grand theatre of life without any scruples on the score of principle or conscience.





At his first introduction to the evening assemblies of these lesser satellites of the court, Huyp had the misfortune to attract the particular attention of a lady who was the beau ideal of eccentricity. She had long been the victim of an incurable disease (the cacoethes scribendi, a very trouble* some affection of the fingers, which medical skill has never yet been able to eradicate.) She was ambitious of being looked upon as the brightest star in the hemisphere of genius; she was a medical student; a critic; a novelist; and a poetess; and had been accused of claiming the writings of other persons as her own productions. Mademoiselle Von Schryven was a has bleu by profession, and dreaded by the major part of the rougher sex, to whom she was as tormenting as an incubus. Love, literature, and pharmacy, were her favorite pursuits; and though, par parenthesis, on the wrong side of forty, she was the rival of every lady who had any pretensions to beauty or merit. Thamyris, in the Iliad, possessed not a more boundless vanity than this lady, and she delivered her opinions ex cathedra, in all circles, and to all people, in an infinite ..variety of costume, till they became as motley and diversified as the many and picturesque groups at a Venetian carnival She was still hand' some and still the votary of love. Her seal bore the impression of a Cupid discharging an arrow from his bow, and the motto of it, was a sentence .from M. de Voltaire, expressive of her own sentiments—





"Qui que tu sois, tu vois ton maitre.

II Test, le fut, ou le doit etre!"





The aspirations of vanity luxuriated in her bosom, and had taken such deep root there, that they had become indiginous plants. Huyp was presented to her by one of his fellow pages, and Mademoiselle immediately selected him for her auditor and her lover—the disciple of love, literature, and physic. One of the party maliciously told her in a whisper, that Huyp was just returned from his travels, and as she had herself paid a visit to the courts of many of the petty Italian states, she first began to question him of his adventures during his tour; and question followed question in such rapid succession, that Huyp would have found no opportunity of replying to many of them, had he been ever so desirous of doing so.

Mademoiselle Von Schryven was the oracle of the court. She was not however disposed to conciliate any party, and supported and defended her own opinions,

VOL. I. H





with all the stubbornness of a bigotted theologian, who would rather offend his best friend, than give up apoint in dispute. "You have been in Italy, I presume, Mynheer," was the first interrogation. "It certainly is a most enchanting country, and the air has a wonderful effect on the voice. I will tell you one of my first Italian adventures. The moment our party entered Italy, I thought I would try my vocal skill, and warbled, in my own opinion, most delightfully. Presently a boy, who had been driving a herd of swine towards the spot where we were resting, came up, and in dear delicious Italian accents, entreated one of the gentlemen, in the name of the Virgin, to beg me to desist, as he -could not get the pigs to pass onward, whilst the lady was making such a noise! Only conceive how provoking! Medical science is at a very low-ebb there. They are absolutely ignorant of some of the simplest principles of the profession! What do you think of their cooks'? terribly stupid, are they not? I remember, when I was at Milan, writing down some directions for an English plumb-pudding. What think you the wretches did with it? Absolutely sent the receipt to the apothecaries; and, in the evening, it was brought to us smoking hot, with a complete cargo of medicine for sauce, cut up with directions how to be taken."





Though this was one of Mademoiselle's stock stories, and had been frequently told to every individual present, except Huyp, it produced a universal burst of laughter from the whole party.

"Have you been in Greece, Mynheer?" continued the lady, "by-thebye, let me ask you whether you visited Parga? Did you see the poor unhappy natives quit their land for ever? Pray is it true that the Greek gentlemen are partial to fat old ladies? Lord Belmore is now travelling there, I believe. What a strange animal is that Count Forbin I Is it true that the Count was frightened away from Thebes by an English servant-maid in a couleur de rose spencer? * I can assure you on the authority of a private letter, that the Count behaved very rudely to her, and therefore he thought proper to make a precipitate retreat."





Huyp bowed when she had concluded the sentence, for he found himself unqualified to reply. . . -i

-*' Young as I am," resumed Mademoiselle, (the world said fifty, she owned to twenty-five) " I have applied -myself to the study of the Greek language. Physic you must know is one of my favourite pursuits, and if you should chance to have a prescription of a Greek physician by you, pray let me have it: I know not what advantage it may be of to the present generation. I hope you had a fever in Greece: how did they treat you? What was your physician's name? I will transmit his name to posterity in the next number of the Medical Review. Do tell me now, my dear Mynheer, how they treated you? Did they keep you warm or cold? I hope they gave you plenty of the sweet breeze of heaven. For my own part, I have always endeavoured to prove in my theory of medical treatment, that the faculty, for the sake of their own reputations, should either kill or cure in a week. You have heard of my patent medicine to resuscitate the dead, I dare say. It has had the most complete and ^astonishing success. Cats, dogs, and fishes, may reckon me as their greatest benefactor, for I hare practised upon many of them for the benefit of mankind—half-killed them first, and then gave them a new life myself."



* Vide Forbin's Voyage dans le Levant, en 181" et l«18. Tome i. pa. 94.





•' For Heaven's sake sell me the patent," exclaimed a young spendthrift retainer of the court who had lately lost both his parents, •* for if the medicine possesses the power of giving life to the dead, perhaps you may think proper to bring some of my ancestors back to the world again, which would be productive of the greatest inconvenience to me just at this time."

•'« Pray do not interrupt me," returned Mademoiselle, "I am at present professionally engaged. Come, Mynheer Huyp, do tell me the name of your dear Greek physician. If you are determined not to tell me, I must call him Palaeologus, or Porphyrogennetus, for it must be something like a classical appellation: what the vulgar call a hard name."





•« I have never needed a physician," replied Huyp, "therefore cannot have the felicity of obliging you,"

"How excessively singular!" said Mademoiselle. "But do you not consider the ancient Athenians to have been a very clever people? Let them say what they will to the contrary, 1 shall ever maintain my opinion on that subject with pertinacity. What do we not owe them for their discoveries! Had they not their oils and their essences for every part of the body? And I have proved to the world, in my essay on the efficacy of essences, that they are as necessary to our- health as the choice of our food. They were acquainted with the vital spirit of medicine, or they could not have known that the essence extracted from the rose was possessed of medical properties, or that the white violet was a digestive. Had they not chaplets to relieve head-aches? And were not the ivy, the myrtle, the rose, and the laurel, entwined together in these chaplets? Oh! that I had but lived in those remote ages!"





Fortunately for Huyp, Mademoiselle was summoned from them to the presence of the young Princess of Orange. His opinion of this whimsical and eccentric being, was loudly demanded, and though many of the party did not dare to laugh at her, when she was present, they readily indulged their mirth when they were not under the eye of her observation,

Huyp, who had never before been in the presence of a learned lady, was astonished at the versatility of her talent. To him she appeared a being of a superior order, for this simple reason, that she was incomprehensible—an enigma of nature which reason could not solve. His vanity was gratified by the attention she had honored him with. Mademoiselle was the elder of two daughters of Mynheer Schryven, a respectable Dutch merchant at Ostende, who had the supreme felicity of introducing to the world two children of genius. The younger sister was a professed amateur of the fine arts, and in portrait painting was really a respectable artist. She had also been more fortunate in affairs of the heart, than Mademoiselle, and had been lately united to an officer in the French service, who accepted a wife as the necessary incumbrance of a man who marries to live, not to love.





The rest of the ladies of the court, paid very little attention to Huyp. Curiosity had already been employed to discover his birth and expectations, and as neither appeared to them to be very promising, they willingly left him to the kind consideration of Mademoiselle, who was the known admirer of all young men. •





Huyp was just at that dangerous period of life, when love springs up in the heart with unchecked luxuriance; when the blandishments of woman are new and attractive, and fascination is of more power than beauty—he was but a novice in the world, and like most other young men, was doomed to purchase knowledge at the expence of happiness.

Mademoiselle Von Schryven had mentally fixed upon Huyp at first sight, as a proper companion for her through life. She had long been accustomed to torment every poor devil who came in her way, on the same subject, but without the desired success. She saw that Huyp was one whom she could astonish at pleasure, and moreover, an excellent listener; a necessary qualification for the lover or the husband of a has bleu. Her wandering thoughts had visited





"The awful ruins of the days of old;

Athens, and Tyre, and Balbec, and the waste

Where stood Jerusalem, the fallen towers

Of Babylon, the eternal pyramids,

Memphis and Thebes, and whatsoe'er of strange

Sculptured on alabaster obelisk,

Or jasper tomb, or mutilated sphynx,

Dark /Ethiopia in her desert hills conceals;"



and she would fain have persuaded those around her, that she had been there in propria persona. The Duke de St. Simon would have said of her as he did of Madame de Montchevreuil, that "she was the watch over all the women of the court," though he could not have described her person with the same degree of cynical malignity.

There was in Mademoiselle Von Schryven a great degree of frivolity, concealed under the mask of erudition. She might be said to resemble a polyglot encyclopaedia more than any other tiling in nature, except a dictionary of quotations. Intellectual ladies seldom like to be cast into the shade. They live on admiration, and without it would perish like a plant shut out from the dew and breezes of heaven.





During her absence, a contention between two elderly courtiers afforded Huyp a considerable degree of amusement. Their whole lives had been spent in continual bickerings and reconciliations. Sir Manasseh Metope, K.v. had devoted the first thirty years of his life, after his emancipation from a long minority, to the study of antiquities, and in the opinion of his brother antiquarians promised to become the Hans Sloane of the Netherlands. His museum was already one of the most valuable private collections in Europe. It contained a mummy of the mother of Ptolemy Philadelphus; almost an entire tooth of Uriah, which was extracted, (as he undertook to prove, on the authority of an ancient manuscript in his possession, that had now become perfectly unintelligible from the united depredations of damps and time,) by his wife the very day before the battle in which he lost his life. He possessed moreover, a flea from the collection of Mynheer Swammerdam, the great Dutch entomologist, and a large collection of dilapidated busts, and maimed statues, as battered, if not as valuable, as the Elgin marbles! Sir Manasseh,"in short, doated upon antiquities, and even his dress bore testimony of his veneration for things of the olden time. His coat was tattered by length of years; his wig was nearly worn bald, and the nether portions of his dress, gave such evident indications of decay—a kind of anasarca—that the ladies came into his presence with fear and trembling. In fact he" thought of every thing except himself." His friend, the Baron Von Vogel, was a tall thin spare figure of a man, with marked features, and though infinitely better dressed than Sir Manasseh, might have trembled if a passing jew had cried *< old clothes," lest he might, by natural instinct, have tumbled him into his bag as materials for mending.





The vehemence of the dispute between these two learned gentlemen, attracted the attention of Huyp. They had been for some time engaged in discussing the best method of unfolding the Herculaneum MSS. and deciding the relative and comparative merits of Davy, and the learned Scot, Lord Aberdeen, when the Baron, who suited the action to the word, by an incautious and unintentional elevation of his arm, knocked down a small terra-cotta vase of antique form, inscribed with certain





rude figures, which Sir Manasseh had placed upon a side table. He valued it beyond price, as he computed the probable date of its manufacture at full two hundred years anterior to the Christian aera.

When the Baron became sensible of the ruin he had occasioned, he looked more like a spectre than a human being, and Sir Manasseh like a male Niobe—a picture of misery, anger, and disappointment. The tears and reproaches of one party, and the apologies and contrition of the other, were of no effect. The invaluable vase was shivered into a thousand pieces, and presented a melancholy memento of temporal instability.

"This comes of your cursed conceit!" exclaimed Sir Manasseh, as soon as his faculties resumed their natural functions, "what the devil do you know about antiquities? A piece of gilt gingerbread would be quite as interesting' to you, who cannot speak without throwing your arms about, like a boy who is grasping at a butterfly. You have ruined my museum, Von Vogel! this ill-fated vase, and the foundation stone of the tower of Babel, were amongst the invaluables of my collection."





"I am very sorry," stammered Von Vogel, " very sorry for the disaster; but you know, Metope, $hat I could not help it. And as for the foundation-stone of the tower of Babel, I tell you now, as I have frequently done before, it is no such treasure. You know I analyzed a portion of the cement which adhered to it, and found that it was composed precisely of the same materials as that of the walls of Troy. It is evident, therefore, that the stone came from Troy: I proved it to you myself, Sir Metope, and more than that, let me tell you, Sir, I sent an





account of the whole process to the Society of Arts, and I expect to have the Isis medal at least sent to me, with a letter of thanks for the communication."

Sir Manasseh trembled with incipient passion. The credit of his museum seemed for the moment to be suspended by a cobweb; and he feared, if he should irritate Von Vogel, that he might in a moment of anger tell the world some secrets, of which he himself wished to be ignorant.

- It is not in the nature of antiquarians ever to acknowledge an error of judgment, or to confess that they have been imposed upon. Sir Manasseh, in his eagerness to gain possession of every thing curious and unique, not unfrequently made a bad bargain, and gave pounds for what any other person might have purchased for pence. This Von Vogel was perfectly aware of, and as Sir Manasseh knew, that some of the rarities in. the Metope museum, might be rather deteriorated than advanced in value, by a critical inspection, he proffered the olive branch, and gave his hand to. Yon Yogel as> an earnest of reconciliation*. The Baron willingly ac-! eepted it; and the first exclamation of both was* "how- can we repair the vase?" Both the gentlemen were too nervous to attempt it; but they agreed, that it certainly was possible to join the pieces so delicately together, that unless it were to be closely examined, the disaster would not be perceptible, At this critical juncture, Mademoiselle Von Schryven returned, and when she saw the misery of the two antiquarians, ma* liciously exclaimed, ^What! is Jobs potsherd broken 1 I hope he threw it not at the head of his wife, though she was provoking enough to be sure." She however kindly offered her services. which were most readily and thankfully accepted, Sir Manasseh stood like a statue of expectation:—his body bending forward, his mouth half open, his eyes fixed upon the pieces of the broken vase, and his right arm projecting in a curved line' There was something so whimsical in his attitude—so unique in the expression of his countenance, that it would have been next to impossible to have refused to please him; and Von Vogel rubbed his hands together, in an extacy of joy.





In a short time the vase was restored> almost to its pristine beauty, and the two old gentlemen proved, that man is indeed a composition of contrarieties. Grief and anger now gave way to the most extravagant ebullitions of joy, and the most eccentric demonstrations of delight. Mademoiselle had immortalized herself, as a mender of terracotta vases, and they acknowledged >with Seneca,





•* Pars sanitatis velle sanaria fuit.''

Sir Manasseh Metope scarcely knew how to be sufficiently grateful for the service she had rendered him. Probably if he could have metamorphosed her into a mummy, he would have given her a place in his museum. "I knew,"" said he, addressing himself to Von Vogel, and placing his hand upon the fair forehead of Mademoiselle, "I knew that there was genius here, from the first moment that I cast my eyes upon her countenance. By the expression of the eye, according to the theory of Lavater—"

"My dear Sir Manasseh," interrupted Mademoiselle, M pray let Lavater rest in peace. You know that I never was an advocate for his system of physiognomy; nor do I conceive with you, that the human countenance resembles that of some animal. Remember you mistook your own physiognomy, when you wrote a dissertation upon a Roman road, which eventually proved to be nothing more than an antiquarian's dream."





"Aye, aye," said Sir Manasseh, making many an uneasy motion in his chair, and tapping a huge silver snuff box, which had once been the property of the highly-gifted, but degenerate Voltaire. "I remember the mistake well, and all I gained by my dissertation, was the advice of the critical world to buy up all the unsold copies, and bury them with my mummies! Then they accused me of egotism, because in the preface prefixed to the book, I gave them a short but correct epitome of the curiosities in my museum."





Mademoiselle Von Schryven placed herself beside Huyp, and in a halfwhisper, said, ''I reviewed it."

** Well, well," returned Von Vogel, "if you conceive yourself aggrieved, my dear Metope, what must I have felt when they abused my comedy?"

"The bitterness of the critique, in any case," said Metope.

"And the cruelty of it in mine," replied Von Vogel; "they first damned it on the stage, and then damned me for sending it there. We, said they, for they generally speak of themselves in the plural number, as a body of people, —a body of locusts • rather—we would advise the Baron Von Vogel, when he next attempts to be gay, to consider that he is not employed in writing a dictionary."

Sir Manasseh gradually drew nearer to Mademoiselle, and anxious to vindicate his own claims to genius, whispered in her ear, "It was such confounded nonsense, that I was not surprized at its failure; but mice was quite different; scientific and interesting: knowledge in every page, and worthy of myself."





"'I reviewed it," said Mademoiselle to Huyp, "but I would not have them know it for the world."

"For heaven's sake, do not review me," returned Huyp, "or at least inform me, how I may conciliate your favour."

"Review you, my love!" she replied, placing her hand upon his bosom, "have you a heart? It beats— for whom?"

This was encouragement enough for Huyp, and in a soft and gentle voice, he said, "sweet love, for you.".

Mademoiselle blushed througl >er rouge, and Huyp's hand felt the soft pressure of her fingers. His heart fluttered violently with the emotions of young desire, and his eyes sparkled like two bright stars in the firmament of heaven. Mademoiselle glanced her eyes triumphantly round the circle, proud of the conquest she had made. She was almost tired of a life of single blessedness, and much wished for a partner in pharmacy, literature and love; though many heretical persons declared, that they had rather live





"With cheese and garlick in a windmill far, Than feed on cates, and have her talk to them In any summer-house in Christendom."





CHAPTER IX.



H II sembleroit que la vie est on bien qu'on ne revolt qu'a la charge de le transmettre, one sort de substitution qui doit passer de race en race, & que quiconque eut un pere est oblige de le devenir."

Rousseau, Julie, Tome vi. pa. 55.



MADEMOISELLE Von Schryven perfectly coincided in the opinion of Rousseau. She was resolved to make every effort to secure the affections of Huyp, and scarcely thought it necessary to remember, that, in all probability, she might meet with a rival. The same fleet that bore Ulysses to the devoted shore of Troy, from hostile Greece, also bore Thersites; and in

Vol. I. I





love, as in war, victory is ever uncertain. Mademoiselle might have justly claimed a place in the catalogue of Audre da Sylva Mascarenhas, who numbered the women who have become famous for the evils of which they have been the occasion, beginning with Eve, and ending with Anna Boleyn. Were the catalogue to be continued to the present time, how many more might be added to the long list! How many would be handed down in the black book to posterity! , Fortunately for the present genera

° tion, there is no Mascarenhas in existence, to note down their faults and their follies; no sour and cynical St. Simon to record a calumny, which most people love better than a joke, and think satire unentertaining if it be not bitter. Huyp received an invitation from her to a dejeune in iter boudoir, on the subsequent morning. He accepted it with pleasure; and proceeded to take his second lesson in the art of love, from the fair Rosalie Von Schryven.





She was engaged in her literary pursuits; motioned Huyp to be seated, and leisurely proceeded to conclude the idea she was subjecting to the science of expansion.

"You shall hear it, sweet love," said Mademoiselle, placing herself in an attitude, which she conceived the best adapted to give effect to her reading: and where she thought there was any thing like point in the verses, she marked the point with her upraised fingers, and gave a pretty accurate display of what, in the play books, is called picture; "and in reading it to you, I give you the greatest proof of my friendship."





THE SPIRIT OF THE STORM.

I'm the son of the wind, and I follow behind,

With swift steps from the sunless shade; And like lightning fleet, each victim I greet,

With the havoc my pinions have made. On the vessel that glides o'er the boundless tides,

With her crew in sweet slumbers bound, I love to alight when the mantle of night,

Falls in silvery vapours around;

And parting her sails with my tempest-wing'd gales,



To new victims of horror I flee,

And laugh at their woe, as I wantonly go



O'er the boundless expanse of the sea.

On many a cloud of its beauty proud,



I triumphantly ride through the air,

And then imprecate the water-fiend's hate,



To crush every hope with despair.

O'er land and o'er water, to wreck and to slaughter,



I flit like the shade of a dream,

And on the sea-shore, 'mid the element's roar,



Woo the spirits of death in the stream;

Then the foamy floods fly, and the water-fiends cry,



And the sea-mews in agony scream. When earth's beauty is lost in the flower-nippingfrost,





And her charms like a rainbow decay,

On snow and on sleet is the trace of my feet,



On the rock, on the foam-covered spray,—

And the avalanche falls from its tottering walls,



When I rest on its top by the way. Then the portals of death are wide opened beneath,

And the dirge is the plainings of woe; [kiss'd, And when twilight's pale mist, earth's bosom hath

My shroud is a mantle of snow.

In thunders I laugh, as with rapture I quaff



The shrieks of despair from the earth;

Then sullenly die 'mid the gloom of the sky,



Till Nature shall give me new birth.

"Is not that poetry?" enquired Mademoiselle, before she had given Huyp time to compliment her. "Does it not possess all the constituent qualities— sweetness, sensibility, imagination, and enthusiasm 1 Do you not think it equal to most of the soft lullaby strains of the day? Though I assure you, I have no thoughts of submitting it to the square and ride of criticism; for when the tide of imagination inundates the mind, in the impassioned language of the moment, one is apt to be sometimes incorrect. But, apropos, do tell me of your travels."





"What, from Amsterdam hither?" replied Huyp.

"No, no; what adventures you met with in Greece. You cannot conceive how I adore the Greeks—the descendants of Socrates, Plato, Sophocles, JEschylus, Euripides, Apelles, Simonides, Pythagoras, Hippocrates, and a host of ancient worthies, whom I intend to immortalize in hexameters. Bythe-bye, were you intimate with Ali Pacha? I drew up a code of laws for the better civilization of his Albanians, and sent him at the same time, almost a ton of my patent resuscitative medicine, to assist him in his contest with the Turks; for you know it would be of little consequence to him, how many the Turks killed during the day, if he had the power of bringing them to life again at night.—How did you like Greece?"





"I have never been there;" said Huyp.

"Not been in Greece!" exclaimed Mademoiselle, lifting up her hands in astonishment; "I thought you had travelled."

"From Amsterdam to Brussels," replied Huyp.

"Then we will go there together, my love," she continued, pressing his hand within her own, and casting a glance beaming with love upon his countenance, "we will travel together, and become the brightest ornaments of the literary world. Our scientific labours shall exceed those of Buckhardt, or Belzoni. We will remove one of the, pyramids of Egypt to Brussels, and try the effect of my patent medicine on the ashes of old Cheops. Thou shalt he my Pyramus, sweet love, and I will be thy Thisbe, the very apple of thine eye."





What might have been the event of this plain and open confession of Mademoiselle, of the situation of her heart, had not the interruption of a morning visitor given a check to the overflowings of two congenial souls, it is almost impossible to decide; but the entrance of Madame Robson and two of her daughters, changed the current of their thoughts.

Madame Robson was a musical mother, who had, to her inexpressible mortification, four grown up daughters to dispose of to the admirers of musical talent and matrimonial harmonics. She had contrived to worm herself into every society at Brussels, by cutting out card racks, candle-shades, and fire screens, on a new principle. She was moreover, a wonderful economist, and managed her servants, daughters, and husband, to admiration; nay even to a proverb. The daughters were compounds of affectation and pertness, and two of them had been this morning permitted to accompany Madame in her round of visits, nominally for the purpose of treating Mademoiselle with the performance of a manuscript concertante, but in truth to endeavour to make a conquest of Huyp, of whose person and pretensions, some kind friend had given them information. Madame Robson was accustomed to consider Mademoiselle as her dearest friend, though she was at times almost tempted to quarrel with her for her want of nerve, and her little consideration for affected fine feeling. There were few subjects upon which Madame Robson was not ferrS a glace—from the dissection of reputations, to the discussion of politics. She was also extremely anxious to dispose of her





daughters; for the young ladies began to fade in the presence of younger beauties, whom their obstinate mothers persisted in introducing to the world, notwithstanding her eternal lectures on the impropriety of bringing children at once from the nursery, to the card table and the assembly.

"Dear heart, how comfortable you are, Mademoiselle!" exclaimed Madame Robson as she approached to salute her dear friend. "I protest you look like an angel this morning. What! another beau! Oh you carry off all the hearts, you clever creature! This is the King's new page, I presume. Very fine flesh and blood indeed, You must introduce him to our little coterie, Mademoiselle, I am sure I shall be happy to shew him any little attentions in my power."

The young ladies had walked to the window, and Madame pointed them out to the attention of Huyp as two bashful creatures, who were terrified at the sight of a man.





"You have no idea how excessively timid they are," said Madame, " but, poor children, they are so very young, that one must excuse them. Come, come, my darlings," she continued, taking a hand of each and drawing them forward, "let me introduce you to Mynheer Huyp."

The young ladies blushed, smiled, and curtsied, and then seated themselves directly opposite to Huyp, that he might have an uninterrupted view of their personal charms. They soon >egan to laugh and talk, and evinced aore symptoms of forwardness than diffidence.

The children would come with me litis morning," said Madame Robson, "to have your opinion of some manuscript music. Alicia, my love, take your place at the piano-forte; hold up your head, child! I dislike to see girls so diffident, but you will grow bolder as you get older. Dear heart, girls in their teens, (Alicia was three-andtwenty) are as much trouble to a mother as an infant in arms." - "Pray let them play the concertante, Madame," interrupted her friend, " I am all ear— all attention."





The concertante with its variations, was performed scientifically by Alicia, her mother beating time, and to display her own musical knowledge, correcting her where in fact there was no necessity for it. Mademoiselle, ever in extremes, was in extacies. Madame assured Huyp, that she was thought to play extremely well for such a very young girl, but observed, that she must endeavour to conquer her diffidence, or she would be taken for a child just emancipated from the nursery.





Huyp had never before been gratified with such a display of musical science. To him it appeared to be almost etherial melody, and he entreated Alicia to repeat it. She modestly referred him to her Mamma; and the kind matron, nothing loth, gave her consent. Mademoiselle Van Schryven was perfectly aware of the intentions of her friend, but as she conceived herself sure of the heart of Huyp, she only smiled at what she considered to be the futile efforts of a mother almost past hope.

"Had you not better sing the new duet, Alicia," said Madame. "It is the sweetest thing you ever heard, Mademoiselle, composed by Rossini; You may go and sing with your sister, child," she continued, addressing her other daughter, who was twp years the senior of Alicia,1—" Dear heart, Susan is more timid than her sister. Would you believe it, my dear Mademoiselle, the baby has had an offer of marriage! Look up child, and don't blush so! you must go through the ceremony one day or other, though you are rather too young to think of such things yet."





Susan simpered affectedly, and took her place at the instrument by the side of her sister.

Mademoiselle was highly gratified with the duet. It was in a sweet and plaintive style—of broken vows, and hopeless love. The feelings of Madame Robson were quite overpowered: the ready handkerchief was applied to her eyes, and she exclaimed, "Excuse me, my dear Mademoiselle, you know I am all sensibility—all nerve! Poor Doctor Pontinleik, my father, always compared me to the sensitive plant, shrinking from every, breeze, and receding from the touch. Dear me; I often wish I was like other people, and had been born before nerves were in fashion





What a blessing it must be to have no feeling! I am sure I cannot compare myself to any person in this world except Philibert the bookseller, who was once a most enthusiastic admirer of gardening, but when he unfortunately cut a poor worm in twain with the spade, he voluntarily gave up the amusement as an expiation for the offence. He was all nerve, all feeling like myself. What a blessing it must be to have no nerve!"

The handkerchief was again applied to her eyes, and the children interpreting the glances of their mother, had also an ebullition of feeling, and sobbed most hysterically, till a cough from Madame informed them, that it was time to suspend their tears of sensibility, and their sighs of sentiment.

Madame continued, "my feelings, my dear Mademoiselle, you may perceive are too fine—the very ether of my existence. Dear heart, how it has unnerved me! And what a palpitation of the heart! Alicia, child, you must not give way to the impulse of your feelings, though I do. Positively you will weep yourself blind! Only look what a figure she has made of herself! If you give way to this excessive sensibility, child, you will look like an old woman before, in reality, you are a young one. Susan, my sweet love, sit upright, or you must wear your back board again. Positively she has been crying too! Did you ever see so much sensibility in such children? Doctor Pontinleik w'arned me of its ill effects, and effectually cured me of it whilst I was single, but as soon as I was married, somehow or other the old complaint returned."





"So much the worse," returned Mademoiselle; "I detest fine feelings, they. are so near akin to affectation! Thank





Heaven, I am free from such sensibility. Those fantastical complaints are peculiar to a certain description of people, though for my part I am not ashamed to own that I have ever been an entire stranger to them."

Madame drew her shawl closer round her, bit her lip, but remained silent. The young ladies audibly whispered to Huyp, " How amazingly odd!"

"Odd as it may appear to you, ladies, for I do not consider you children," continued Mademoiselle, with a pointed pronunciation of the last word, "it is true."

"Every thing affects me," said Madame.

"What sweet sensibility!" exclaimed both the young ladies in a breath. "Do you not remember fainting, Mamma," lisped Susan, "at the last concert, when they were performing Handel's Hail-stone chorus?"





"Hush child," replied Madame, placing her hand over the mouth of her daughter in a playful manner, and smiling languishingly on Huyp, "you should not expose my weakness. I was in such raptures, Mynheer, that I fell into a lethargy of delight. I am very apt to do so when I am much moved,"

"And so move the mirth of others," said Mademoiselle.

Madame Robson coloured deeply, but remained silent.

There is something in the composition of the human heart, which, though we can all feel, we find a great difficulty in describing. I allude to the desire of appearing to the world different to what we really are. It would be a task almost equal to the labours of Hercules, to define from whence it originated, and perhaps almost impossible to trace it to its primitive principles. It was this foible, this inexplicable something, which very frequently led Madame Robson into the thorny path of error; and as she was universally acknowledged to be a living letter of advice, all ber foibles were made the most of. Like many others, she frequently mistook the talking about right, for acting rightly; and her passion for interfering with the affairs of her friends sometimes involved her in very disagreeable dilemmas.





With Rosalie Von Schryven she had ever contrived to keep on good terms. She was one whose friendship might at times be turned to good account: of this Madame was perfectly aware, and like an able general, made the most of her ground. The parties of Mademoiselle were admirably calculated to display to advantage the musical abilities of her daughters ; and as young men of fashion were always to be met with there, it was a very convenient place for the ladies to exhibit their talents. "I am determined not to be offended with you, my dearest Rosalie," said Madame, "though I must confess, that had any other person said half so much to me as you have done, I would not have passed it over. But we are old friends," she continued, addressing herself to Huyp, who felt his native impudence recoil in the presence of the four ladies who attacked him en masse., "and she is one of the sweetest creatures in the world, most astonishingly clever—quite a literary star! Something new I protest," she added, taking up the manuscript lines which had been lying carelessly upon the table, and casting her eyes for half a second upon it.—" Dear heart, this is beautiful indeed I"





"Pardon me, Madame," said Huyp, "but do you usually read backwards?" for he perceived that the good lady in her eagerness to flatter her friend, had turned the verses from her, and therefore could not possibly tell whether she was looking at a poem or a prescription!





Rosalie could not restrain her mirth. Huyp laughed outright, and even the young ladies indulged themselves in a suppressed titter, at the expence of their Mamma.

** Dear me," said Madame, "what a mistake. My eyes are so weak, that I positively did not perceive it. But every thing that Mademoiselle writes is so excessively beautiful, that one's judgment cannot be wrong."

This was the best retreat that Madame Robson could make at the moment, and taking the children under her wing, she made her adieu, after giving Huyp a warm invitation to visit her en famille.





"That woman would be odious, if she were not so entertaining," said Rosalie, as soon as the family had disappeared, "Did you ever see such a pair of nonentities, as her two gawky children, as she calls them, are? She is one of the committee of scandal, where

"Fates are parcell'd, destinies unlock'd,"

and kindly cuts up the characters of all her friends* the moment they are out of earshot."





CHAPTER X.



Who e'er reached the period of his time,

When inward stirrings told him he was man;

When young desire, scarce knowing what it wish'd,

Pointing to somewhat as its aim and end,

But saw in woman, in her breath, her look,

Her touch, aye, even her presence, what it Sought,

And in one tender glance its wish fulfill'd!

Her very name is not without its charm,

Tho' doubt, deceit, sometimes mix'd up with love,

Compose her heart.

Fitzpatrick's Albert.

HUYP, like a young bird that first tries the strength of its wing, was almost giddy with his first ascension into the regions of love. He had read Ovid to he sure, but even he was a novice in the art, when compared to the ladies.

A young man at his first entrance into life, may be compared to a vessel floating upon the ocean without a pilot. He no sooner appears, than some prudent mother indirectly makes overtures to him on the behalf of a troublesome daughter, or some despairing virgin in a more direct manner singles him out for herself.





Huyp had been planet struck by the talents of one lady, and enchanted by the musical science of another. The poor lad was involved in the windings of a labyrinth. He had almost unconsciously become the victim of love, without being initiated in the previous preliminaries of the passion, But it must be remembered that he was rather the wooed than the wooer. He was a stranger, and according to the express injunction of the Scriptures, they "took him in". The ladies, in truth, were far more culpable than he was himself, for when they gave hints, which it was





next to impossible not to understand, he must have been more or less than mortal, not to have felt something beating in his bosom, which induced him to give -a ray of hope to the languishing fair ones.

"Man's a strange animal," that women may guide as they list. Huyp quitted the paternal roof of Vander Dordrecht a stranger to the sensations of love, indulging gay and airy dreams of ambition, and looking down with contempt upon the sober citizens of Amsterdam who were content with an humbler lot. Now his thoughts were diverted into a new channel, and the pursuits of young ambition were destined to be superceded by younger love, which had till now in his breast been like the kiss of the moonbeams on the waters of the ocean, touching the heart so lightly that the pressure was

VOL. I K





scarcely felt. He was a stranger to the influence of female charms, or female power; nor knew that they were "light to the eye, and transport to the heart," or that the smiles of beauty were the forerunners of the frowns of care, with all the various et cameras of domestic troubles. Could a youth just verging upon manhood, withstand the temptations of beauty? Could he fight manfully under the banner of apathy, and scorn to be moved by the blandishments of a lovely woman, or the arts of a systematic husband-hunter? Huyp was no stoic. Women already encircled and twined themselves around his heart, but he was puzzled which to choose. Rosalie besieged his heart openly, while the Robsons slyly endeavoured to make good their first entrenchments. A letter from his mother, however, broke the monotony of his present pursuits, and informed him of what had occurred during his short absence. It was as follows:





LETTER. Lieve Zoon, I suppose you have called at the post office many days geleeden, and I assure you, Huyp, that since your absence from Dordrecht Tower many things have happened, of which you shall be informed anon.

How do you like the court, Huyp 1 I suppose the Koning has been enquiring after me often since he left the Tower. Give myne compliments to his Majesty, as alsmede the humble liefde and duty of the Magislraat, whom I hope soon to induce to pay his respects to the Koning, as doubtless he ought to do now and then, seeing that he is at the head of the honorable magistracy of Amsterdam alreede, and may be a great Lord, or a Staatsdienaar, ere long, if he manngeth rightly, and then you know, Huyp, you will be a great personage yourself, and I shall be a Baroness, which none of the magistracy, though they like me little enough, have the power to prevent, for you kennen well what notice the Koning took of me the morning that he took his ontbyt at the Tower. By my faith, Huyp, I have conquered the Burgomaster, and am no louger Aaltje Vuist Slaagen I Oude Leena, and Katryn and myself, screamed out in the hysterics so loud, that Vander Dordrecht has been troubled with a dooflieid ever since, and trembles at times like a man in the ague if I do but speak a little loud. He had no twyfel at the time that I was playing him a trick, but he had liartzeer enough when he found that I was , not going to die, as he thought it •befitting me to do, as soon as the priester's ceremony was over. I cannot juist n?i schryven more to you, Huyp, but remain,





Uiven toegeneegencn Moeder, Aaltje Vander Dordrecht. Amsterdam, Nov. 1820.

Addressed,

For Mynheer Huyp, Pagie to the King,

Brussels.



Huyp was rather pleased than surprized, at the intelligence conveyed in the epistle of his mother. He had long been pretty deep in the family secrets, and felt himself much gratified at the success of his lady mother, who had kindly allowed him generally to have his own way.

Huyp had scarcely finished the perusal of this parental epistle, before Rosalie broke in upon his retirement. The hour was as yet early, and Huyp politely expressed his surprize at her being out of her chamber at so very unfashionable an hour.





"Why wonder you, sweet love," said Mademoiselle, "that I press not my pillow? Mine are no dreamless slumbers unbroken by a vision. No— I have slept and dreamed till I could dream no more. My sleep is no stagnant lethargy, no dull and unconscious stillness of the faculties, such as wretches feel who sleep in desperation to forget the toils and troubles of their waking dreams—

"Oh! the bright, the rapturous disturbances

That break my haunted slumbers! Fast they come,

They crowd around my couch, and all my chamber

Is radiant with them. There I lie and bask

In their glad promise, till the oppressed spirit

Can bear no more, and I come forth to breathe

The cool free air.''



This rhapsody, intermixed with the nectarious blossoms of poesy, called forth the risibility of Huyp, and he jestingly asked her if her dreams were of him.





Rosalie playfully placed her hand upon his shoulder, and at the same time advanced her cheek so near to the lips of Huyp, that he could not withstand the temptation of saluting it with a kiss. This was not a boldness which she was likely to resent, as fortune seldom favored her with such convincing proofs of the existence of the tender passion in the hearts of those she laid siege to.

*' You have indeed been the object of my dreamy visions," said Rosalie, "of my hopes, and my fears, for my very existence is dependent upon you, sweet love. But allow me to warn you, my dearest Huyp, against the intrigues of the Rob sons, who are, I am well aware, doing every thing in their power to entangle you in the snares they have spread."





"Then in the name of love," exclaimed Huyp, "let them do what they list,_so Alicia will but charm me with her voice."

"Is it possible that you can admire her singing,'' said Rosalie, rather disconcerted at this expression of Huyp.

"Why should you be surprized at my admiration," replied Huyp, " for you appeared to be delighted yourself with the sweet warblings of the musical enchantress?"

"Delighted!" exclaimed Mademoiselle, " you certainly could not have mistaken my sensations so strangely. It was the petites morales of society, that made me commonly civil to the languid affected creatures. They are the most troublesome and insipid animals upon the earth, and I am sure^ Madame, with her eternal nerve, tears, and fine feeling, is more like one of the plagues of Egypt, than any thing else.





I detest the sight of her, and her children. In this age of refinement, every girl is a musical genius: from the princess to the green-grocer's daughter, who carries out vegetables in the morning, and fingers the piano at night. I will introduce you to two ladies in the winter of life, who are "chaste as ice and pure as snow," and last winter, for the first time, were attacked with the musical mania: and positively took lessons of a harpist that they might surprize a party at their brother's.* Only conceive what a surprize it must have been! Figure to yourself two thin, haggard, wrinkled old women, attempting to bend gracefully over the harp, when their fingers were cramped by the rheumatism, and the body bent somewhat ungracefully by the iron hand of time. Draw the portrait of these musical graces, and then say if it favours your musical conceptions."





"You are too severe," replied Huyp.

"Not at all," interrupted Rosalie. "But my sweet love, let me direct your admiration from music to poetry, and to science. Poetry which combines all the varied qualities of painting. Poetry, in which the tine tints of Titian, the depth of coloring of Rubens, the softness of Guido, the mild beauties of Raphael, and the wild and sublime scenery of Salvator Rosa, are placed before the eye in description, and the imagination has a wide field for the display of its luxuriance. Poetry, by which the mind can be soothed even in illness or distress; for it often touches that delicate chord of the feelings, which thrills the soul, and vibrates at once to the heart."





Huyp had no desire to trouble himself with tropes and figures, antithesis and alliteration. He therefore changed the conversation, talked of love, and promised to forget the Robsons, and cleave only unto Rosalie. She was satisfied with this determination, and willing to exhibit her slave in the most public manner, proposed a ramble through the park, a large space of ground which forms the most fashionable promenade for the ladies of Brussels. As it was not Huyp's day of attendance on the King, he very cheerfully acquiesced, and they proceeded to the spot consecrated by fashion—the Bond Street of Brussels.

They had not taken many turns, before they were joined by Madame; Robson and her two very young girls, who had seen them pass by their residence, and lost not a moment in following them, to secure if possible the conquest of Huyp's heart.





"Dear heart!" exclaimed Madame with well-affected surprize, "to meet you in this place is indeed an unexpected pleasure. The children have been entreating me to walk to the palace, for they absolutely doat upon you. Bless me where are the girls? Dear heart, they are so timid, that they stand behind me trembling. Do say something to them, Mynheer, and don't let them run away;" then, placing Huyp between her daughters, she gave them a signal to walk off, and took upon herself the task of entertaining Mademoiselle.

It was an arduous undertaking. The lynx eyes of Madame wanted not the magnifying aid of spectacles to discover that she had wounded the pride of "her friend, but how to divert her mind from the subject, was now the chief occupation of her mind. Accustomed as she had long been to be all things to all people, she found that she had now undertaken a very difficult task.





"Only look how Mynheer Huyp has carried off the children," said Madame. "Dear heart, I protest I am quite surprized to think how the young men can like to notice such very young girls."

"And so am I," replied Mademoiselle in a voice rendered tremulous from agitation and incipient passion.

"Dear heart, how nervous you are," returned Madame, "and I have forgotten my eau de luce. Compose your . mind, dear love;—how could I be so foolish as to come out without my eau de luce! It is a thing I assure you that I do not do from one year's end to another. Nothing gives more relief in faintness or agitation of the spirits."'





"Nervous!" cried Rosalie, "from what cause pray?"

"My dearest friend," replied Madame, wiping her eyes, in which no traces of tears were visible, "there are few persons who possess not a delicate nerve, which like an unhealed wound, aches and pains when touched even in the gentlest manner. I protest I did not suspect you had an affair of the heart, or I would not have allowed my two children to have been persuaded to accompany him. Dear heart, I hope the poor timid things are in no danger,"

"And I hope Huyp is in no danger," said Rosalie pointedly, "for children are sometimes mischievous, even when under the eye of the most prudent and provident of mothers."

Madame Robson felt indignant at the insinuation thrown out by Rosalie, but for certain reasons forbore to notice it. It was not convenient at the moment, to cut her acquaintance, for by so doing, the children might be circumvented in their designs upon Huyp,





Madame was a professed sentimentalist—one of those sighing, weeping, Werter-admiring ladies, who clothe hypocrisy in the garb of genuine feeling, and thought with Balzac, "II y a des rivieres qui ne font jamais tant du bien, que quand elles se debordent, ainsi Vatnour n'a rien meilleur que l'exces.

Under this impression, she had instilled the same baneful sentiment into the hearts of her daughters, and found that by attempting too much, they had done nothing, and were likely to remain on hand, unless Providence sent some novice in the way, not blessed with too much penetration, who would be content to take a wife for her talents, without wishing for any other qualification. She was herself perfectly well skilled in the art of ruling a husband, and as that art is taught in a very few lessons, her daughters were proficients in the theory, and only waited for an opportunity to practise what they bad been taught, by the most aristocratic wife in Brussels.





Huyp and the young ladies prolonged their walk for a considerable time. They sighed for him, scandalized all their acquaintance of the female sex, broadly hinted, that it was time for him to make proposals for a wife, declared that their Mamma was one of the best creatures in existence, and that she was particularly partial to him, but was fearful Mademoiselle would prejudice him against their family, as she was so jealous of them, because they were more talented than herself, and concluded by entreating him to consider their mansion as his home, and Madame as his second mother.





A stripling like Huyp when so closely attacked* had little chance of easily escaping. He however did the best he could—made love to both the sisters* and left them to decide which was to be the favorite fair one.

When they returned to Rosalie and Madame, who had whiled away the intervening time by stroaming backwards and forwards on the promenade, the young ladies were almost annihilated by the tender embraces of their mother. "My dear Susan," exclaimed Madame, " I have been in agonies since you quitted me," and fixing her eyes upon her countenance with an expression the young lady well understood, said in a low whisper, "Have you succeeded?" to which Susan only replied by a significant glance.

Mademoiselle quickly withdrew Huyp from the arm of Alicia, who on her side was rather unwilling to relinquish him, and in 'good set terms' chided him for his vaccillation. Huyp, however, quickly made his peace, by assuring her that his heart had made no retrogade movement during his absence from her side.





"Sweet love," said Rosalie, with one of her sweetest and most fascinating smiles, " then the pretty idiots did make an effort to force me from your arms. But I knew you could not like creatures who have scarcely half an idea. You are more intellectual, sweet love, and cannot be fascinated by a false musical syren."

"No, no, not for a moment," replied Huyp: "I am quite immaculate, and as invulnerable as Achilles."

Madame Robson meanwhile had been questioning her daughters aside. "My dear Madam," said Susan, "he certainly is most desperately in love with Alicia, or I am no judge of those things. I never saw any man's eyes more expressive, and if you manage matters discreetly, she may very easily be disposed of in a month." This communication was like a sunbeam to the heart of Madame Robson. Alicia was caressed and cajoled, and the bridal dresses were arranged in her mind, for she did not entertain the least doubt of the successful termination of the matrimonial intrigue. Susan was also excessively delighted. She firmly believed that her sister's success would prove a stepping stone to her own emancipation, and like most unmarried ladies, she resolved whenever she should be fortunate enough to entangle a husband, he should be but a secondary person in the establishment. This amiable trait of character was her birthright. She inherited it from her mother, who, as has been before observed, was strictly tenacious of her own power, and never permitted her lord to figure away as her master





Rosalie ceremoniously took her leave of the party, who were profuse of their professions of friendship both to her and Huyp, whom they saw depart with her to their secret mortification.

." We will walk to Ibley's, my love," said Rosalie, as soon as she had got quite clear of the Robsons, "and see what there is new in the literary world, for I always make it a rule to read every new work in Dutch, French, English, Italian, and Greek. You will be amused with Ibley; he is a perfect orginal."

"Not more so than yourself," thought Huyp. He, however, willingly consented to pay his visit to the Lintot of Brussels.

Ibley had long been a celebrated bookseller at Brussels, and had probably made more money by purchasing, and parting with again, on his own account, volumes of scandal, than he could have done in a regular way of trade. He had, however, the honor of being bookseller to the court, and therefore as a matter of course, was looked up to by his contemporaries, and followed by these gems of literature with whom a name is every thing.





CHAPTER XI.



Here bright-eyed pleasure sings her sweetest song,

Glory and Beauty trooping by her side,

And kneeling Flattery, shaking from his torch

Fresh incense on their way.



George Soane.



"WELL, Ibley!" exclaimed Mademoiselle, as she entered the shop of the bookseller, "have you any thing new?"

"Nay, Jiiffvroutv," returned the man of letters, with true Dutch accentuation, and assuming a graver aspect than harmonized with the marked cunning of his physiognomy.

"I'll tell you what, Mynheer Ibley!" said the lady, "you are always a terrible plague to me, therefore now let me tell you, that I will not stir out of this musty old book shop till you do find me something new."





"Well, well, Juffvrouw" replied Ibley, "you shall have all the new publications that I have got, and more a man cannot do, though he be ever so willing."

He reached down from the shelves, a, good porter's load of books, for as he had no great desire to monopolize the society of this pest of literature, he was willing to give her no pretence for abiding long: but as she was an eternal reader, and moreover one of the principal supporters of his library, his pride yielded mechanically to his policy.

"What have we here!" said Mademoiselle skimming over the pages of a thin volume. "Poetry! Pshaw! I declare the world is inundated with poetry. Read it my love, and then we will criticize it together."





Huyp, who had never yet made a public exhibition of his reading talents, made an effort to induce Rosalie to relinquish the idea. But she was inexorable, and Huyp was necessitated to comply, and read as follows:



THE CONVENT SPECTRE.

There stood a Convent on a lofty rock

That wooed the waters rolling at its base,

And brav'd the angry tempest's loudest shock

With that majestic manner men call grace,

Some centuries since, as told by Nature's clock,

Tho' not a ruin now adorns the place,

Nor monumental stone to mark where sleep the race



Of pious sisters, who withstood the devil,

At least in theory, though 'twas said that they

Vere to a comely father ne'er uncivil,

hen the sun slumber'd at the close of day;





Yet they were guarded 'gainst the powers of evil

By an old well-bred Donna, who, they say,

Like other ladies, would have her own way.



This pious Abbess of a pious set

Was now the very pattern of propriety;

In her young days she'd been a sad coquette,

And liked in love affairs a vast variety;

Some said sad disappointments she had met,

Others that she had sicken'd of satiety,—

But at this time she was a symbol of sobriety,



And rail'd at men, as tho' the creatures were

Unworthy of their places in the nation:

But she had such divinities—such rare

And beauteous specimens of fair creation

That men could never justly blame her care.

But, to pursue the thread of my narration,

I'll paint the pious dame placed in a public station.



Her veil was plac'd coquettishly aside, To shew a head-dress of the purest white; Not to display, what it was worn to hide From the rude gaze of man's unhallowed sight; For charms to her by Nature were denied, Tho' like most ladies she looked best by night, The Convent's hesper star, but not like Hesper bright.

VOI.. I. L





And she was gentle; but she had her humouis,

As, under favour, many ladies have :—

For whispering sisters strove, by raising rumours,

To punish some, and their sweet-selves to save;

For oft offences are like twinging tumours

Which it were folly to neglect, or brave,

For oftthey'heave so high as bounds the billowy wave.



The nuns could not be call'd or young or fair;

Strictly tenacious of their reputation—

Not like some modern ladies debonair

Who wed in age to benefit the nation,

A man, a name, and jealousy, and care,

The phantoms of a maid's imagination,

And many other things not proper for narration.



One winter night—(for then in every clime

The'ladies die with terror at romances,

And I remember well enough the time

We used to while away the night with dances

While my gay heart beat true with merry chime

To the light footsteps, and the maiden's glances

So sweetly love delights, so pleasure love enhances!)



'Twas near the hour when midnight lauds are sung, And drowsy sisters chant When almost sleeping, The Convent bell was long and loudly rung,





As if old Nick was up the clapper creeping Slyly to get the godly nuns among, And take their persons in his potent keeping, Tho' 'twas in truth a harvest not much worth the reaping.

The bell again in sounding echoes peal'd Like the loud thunder o'er a mduntain's height And they beheld the master of the field, A startling spectre clad in snowy white, Of the male sex too, as its dress reveal'd— Some amorous friar, perchance, long since grown cold, Returned to choose a nun to warm him in the mould!

Confusion I what, at such a dreary hour The spectre of a man! "God save the mark!" To combat such a creature they'd no power, For (hey were talking nearly in the dark, Of fancied terrors—of the western tower Where goblins howl'd, and vanish'd, (like a spark Shot from the fire,) what time first sings the lark.

I Off flew the nuns as though they were, posses'd

Like Mary Magdalene, with a sev'n-fpld brood

Of demons quarrelling within each breast,

And gnawing every pious heart for food;—





But the good abbess ran not with the rest, Like her old Convent still and firm she stood— What should she fear?—Strange question that b' th' rood!

The last faint cries had now in silence died,

The frightened nuns were all engag'd in pray'r,

Huddling together—clinging side by side,

And trembling at each sudden gust of air

That through the high and spacious cloisters sigh'J

Starting e'en at the feeble, fragile glare

Of the dim lamp which shed its lustre there.



Meanwhile the abbess exercised the ghost,

For exorcism had availed her little

As reading o'er the ritual to a post—

But she perform'd her duty to a tittle

And where least was expected did the most.

Fie on all friars, a fat and numerous host,

To leave at large a noisy, wandering ghost!



The abbess and the ghost, a precious pair

Of godlings, unmolested kept their ground:—

It was but midnight, and the morning air

Swept not in freshness o'er the dewy ground.

The Convent had a strange suspicious air:

And from the legends I can say, moreover,

This pious lady-abbess had a lover,





Who ever came in ghostly guise to woo her,

When Madame Luna put her nightcap on,

And surely never saint possessed a truer

Sample of precision, than friar John;

No man of outward personals had fewer,

But he had won the abbess by the art

Of taking penance, like a debt, in part.



At mass or prayer the friar was in his place,

For he was pregnant with the inward light,



Which men call in their worldly language grace

Could with the devil or the fathers fight, For he was moulded from a sturdy race, And had been when his dawn of youth was bright Signore di Notte, or guardian of the night,

Alias, the Convent watchman; but a call

Had made him take the strictest vows monastic,

And tho' in preaching not another Paul,

His tongue was most surprizingly elastic;

And he devoted to perdition all

With consciences not pliable and plastic,

In anathemas long, and charmingly sarcastic.



His zeal had gain'd the lady abbess' heart,

There centinel he stood to watch the gate.

He was the watchman of her mortal part—

As for her soul—she trusted that to fate,





For, like her temper, it was somewhat tart— So John and she talk'd many pretty things As, lovers do, and clipped poor Cupid's wings.

* * * * * *



"Pshaw !"• exclaimed Rosalie, when Huyp had concluded the last stanza, "throw the volume aside, love, I marvel much, Ibley, that you, who certainly are a man of sense, should suffer such books as this to occupy a place on your shelves. Mon Dieu! I suppose I shall see myself satirized next."

Ibley shrugged up his shoulders, and attempted to look, wonderfully wise, whilst he replied in a peculiar tone of voice, and with marked emphasis, " that it was by no means unlikely."

Rosalie, reddened with rage, and overwhelmed the cunning bookseller with a torrent of bitter imprecations, while the cool composure of the one, and the fiery temperament of the other, afforded Huyp no small degree of amusement, and did not fail to remind him at the same time of Madame Aaltje; who seemed to be the very counterpart, in temper at least, of the fair and irritable Rosalie.





•' And pray, Ibley," said Rosalie ,when the first ferment of her passions had a little subsided, and the blaze of anger had somewhat evaporated, "who has dared to write against me!"

"How can I possibly tell," replied lbley.

Rosalie suffered the most intense anxiety to discover who was the calumniator alluded to by Ibley. She was aware that he was a manoeuvering bookseller, and wished her to accede to his terms for the suppression of the work he had alluded to. She had done so on a former occasion, and thus had given him an ascendancy which lie knew but too well how to make the most of. Few persons can treat ridicule with contempt when applied to themselves. The venom strikes to the heart, and is not easily eradicated. It is seldom forgotten or forgiven; and to be held up to the world's laughter is an insupportable mortification. To be exhibited "blanket robed and antic crowned," to a large and indefinite circle of friends, is an honor which few would desire, and the many wish to avoid. Rosalie knew that her mortification would be extremely gratifying to many of her dearest friends, she therefore deemed it to be nothing more than christian charity, to disappoint them, and therefore mentally resolved to become the purchaser of the manuscript.





"You must know, sweet love," said Rosalie, addressing her conversation to Huyp, "that literary persons hate one another most, cordially. I will cndeavour to initiate you in the art and mystery of literature and criticism, that you may be enabled to judge justly of ** all our tribe." It is an established maxim with usr to laud an author's work up to the very skies when, he is present, but the moment he makes his exit, delighted with the praise he has received, the spell that bound us to silence is broken, and we cut up, and criticise every sentence, until we come to that horrible word Fiiiis, which brings our labours to an end."





"That," said Huyp, "is, I suppose, what is termed friendly criticism; pointing out errors for correction."

"There you: mistake the matter, sweet love," replied Rosalie, with a languishing smile, "Those errors are, in fact, the basis of critical reputation. To detect them is to convince the world of our erudition. For my own part, I will confess to you, in confidence, that I never praised the writings of any person except my own, and those I always take care to review myself to prevent any of my dear friends having the power of retaliation."





"The- precaution perhaps is not an unnecessary one," returned Huyp, "for there are few people who would not feel happy in being able to return their thanks for your kindness."

"You know nothing of the matter, sweet love," said Rosalie,

"The same cause

"That makes the wappen'd widow wed again,"

would make them praise me. But, sweet love, I will teach thee the- rudiments of criticism "thy cunning shall* sit cheeke by jole with the sunne"s chariot; thou shalt see other's thoughts creepe on the grounde, when thine shall be stitched to the starres."

This was undoubtedly promising great things. But Rosalie was one of those personages who know no lack of words, and therefore was accustomed, to give full scope to her oratorical powers.





Rosalie was indeed a being made up ©f oddities and contrarieties—a perfect unique, and in her own opinion, was perfectly capable of filling the first station in the literary world. To shed, as Vaughan expresses it

Such a precious and enduring ray,.

As should from age to age her fair name lead,

Till rivers leave to run, and men to read—



wa» the height of her ambition which was, perhaps, with the exception of Love, the only passion that her bosom cherished.

"Apropos of criticism," resumed Rosalie, (" I believe it might now be; more properly termed P'oliticism,* for party principles are in this age the only criterion by which we judge of the works of authors—talents are out of the question—they are things out of date, known and prized by our ancestors, but derided and despised by us.) Criticism, in the modern acceptation of the term, is a kind of tattoeing of the author, marking his ideas and sentiments with as many grotesque figures, as a native of Otaheite does his body: an olla-podrida of various incongruous ingredients, with which the poor author is mixed up, like oil and vinegar in a bowl of sallad. Read one of my critiques, sweet love, you \tM find them most amusingly incomprehensible, for as I write on the loyal side of the question, I am necessitated to make verbiage answer the end of argument."





* I fear the remarks of Rosalie are, in this instance, too true.. Without intending any offence to the liberal part of the critical community, I am of opinion, that many of the reviewing

"rare politicians of the time,

Brains of some standing, elders in our crime,"

judge of books, not by their internal merits, but by the political bias of the author.





"You cannot surely hope to convince the world that you are right, by erecting an edifice on so sandy a foundation," said Huyp, smiling at the earnestness of Rosalie, who seemed to be fully aware of her own importance.

"Why not, sweet love?1" returned Rosalie.

"Because," replied Huyp, "the sensible portion of the world must be aware that such arguments are futile, and ineffective. They are like a straw borne along by the wind, which after floating for a few paces, again falls to the ground." ...: • li





This was a reproof which brought •' the bright red bloodv into the cheeks of Rosalie. It was unintentional on the part of Huyp, nevertheless it was an infliction the lady would rather have avoided. Jbley enjoyed her confusion. It was toher "a nameless new disease," a sensation which might have pleased from its novelty, had she been unobserved'.

"We will depart, sweet- love," saidRosalie placing her. arm within that of Huyp. "And Ibley, remember that I am to see this precious manuscript."

"Very well, Mademoiselle," returned Ibley, "it shall be forwarded to you in the course of the day."

Huyp and Rosalie quitted the shop.. They had walked but a very few paces* before they again encountered the Robsons, who were on the pavi in the expectation, of crossing the path of Huyp on his emerging from Ibley's. Lb was impossible to avoid meeting them, though Rosalie would have given any thing to have escaped their friendly salutations. Her colour came and went, and politeness had a severe struggle with indignation. However, certain private considerations prevailed, and she mentally resolved to meet them in amity, venturing at the same time toremark in an under breath to Huyp,. that the old woman was a terrible bore, and her two gawky children as troublesome as kittens. She had no opportunity t© say more, for Madame Robson was now at her elbow, with her speech ready for the occasion. "Dear heart," said the old lady, "we are to-day a perfect eclipse to each, other—meeting, shadowing, and enlightening. Susan, my love, can't you venture to say a word? Surely there never were such timid young creatures as my children are! Ah! Mynheer Huyp, I am afraid you haVe been saying some pretty nothings to my little Alicia, for she is as nervous as a hunted fawn."





This was undoubtedly intended as a hint to Huyp, that a declaration of love was expected. However he either did not or would not understand the friendly insinuation, and calmly replied, "that Madame had certainly mistaken the cause of Alicia's perturbation, for he was not aware of having said any thing capable of discomposing the even tenor of her mind." The timid aspirant for admiration blushed at this open avowal of indifference. Rosalie bit her lips, and could scarce conceal the smile of satisfaction that was about to play upon her countenance. Madame,. who hoped to conquer, like Fabius, by delay, ,was not disheartened, but resolved to take the earliest opportunity of bringing Huyp to, the points Her daughters





were rapidly advancing to that period in the affairs of women, when they cease to fascinate, and men cease to flatter, and unless by some lucky manoeuvre, she could unite them to some thoughtless men, who would be either too careless, or too delicate, to hint the necessity of a marriage portion, she foresaw that they would, in all probability, be the torment of her old age; no very pleasing prospect for a scheming mother, who wishes to enjoy the world to the last moment of existence. She needed not one as acute and wintered as herself to guide her in the paths of matrimonial intrigue. She had certainly

"Shuffled awhile to make her pillow ea9y3"

with success very inadequate to her efforts. Still she was not without hope of eventual conquest: her daughters ty.it





were as yet not quite withered* on their virgin stems,

"A sympathy unusual jbin'd their loves,

They paired like turtles,





nor quarrell'd for the choice"



of lovers, though they had as yet not had the happiness to be among the few that were chosen.

Rosalie was unwillingly obliged to allow the Robsons to be the companions of her morning walk, and Huyp was again destined to become the gallant of the two timid girls. Attacked on all sides, by beauty, by literature, by art, it cannot be wondered at if he felt himself somewhat confused. In truth his faculties were bewildered, and his natural abilities enchained by the sunshine with which he was surrounded'. Brussels seemed as famous for giving diseases of the heart, as Hindostan for diseases of the liver,, and Huyp was even m a worse situation than David Hume when he sat like a Sultan between two lovely Parisiennes, (not exactly Roxalanas) for the amusement of his and their friends.* The ladies certainly strove to the utmost of their power to make Huyp amusing, but it was a vain effort, he had the fear of Rosalie's lecture before his eyes, and was absolutely incapacitated for the task. Alicia was sensibly mortified at the taciturnity of her beau. Her sister on a sudden grew sentimental, and consequently insipid, and the whole party were mutually dissatisfied withone another. Rosalie alone enjoyed a secret satisfaction. Deeply skilled in the arts of women, she read in the countenances of the very young girls, unqualified disappointment, at the conduct of Huyp; and in that of their mother, an expression of regret that he should be so extremely insensible to the advances of innocence and timidity. However she had yet another lure which she was resolved immediately to put in practice. "Dear heart, exclaimed Madame, how excessively absent I am this morning, do you know I came out with the intention of inviting you to a little party this evening, to join a few of our dear and particular friends—no ceremony, not a single card issued— quite en famille—and indeed you must not refuse. Perhaps Mynheer Huyp will do me the honor also to join our little circle," The young ladies seconded this invitation with their eyes but remained silent. .





• Vide Mémoires et Correspondance de Madame D'Epinay. Tome iii. pa. 284.

The passage alluded to is as follows :—" Le célèbre David Hume, grand et gros historiographe d'Angleterre, connu et estimé par ses écrits, n'a pas autant de talens pour ce genre d'amusemens auquel toutes nos jolies femmes Pavoient décidé

propre. Il fit son début chez Madame de T;

on lui avoit destiné le rôle d'un sultan assis entre deux esclaves, employant toute son éloquence pour s'en faire aimer; lesitrouvant inexorables, il devoit chercher le sujet de leurs peines et leur résistance; on le place sur un sopha entre le deux plus jolies femmes de Paris, il les regard attentivement, il se frappe le ventre et les genoux à plusiers reprises, et ne trouve jamais autre chose à leur dire que," Eh bien! mes demoiselles—Eh bien! vous voilà donc —Eh bien 1 vous voilà—vous voilà ici?"1—Cette phrase dura un quart-d'heure, sans qu'il pût en sortir. Une d'elles se leva d'impatience: Ah! dit-elle, je m'en étois bien doutée, cot homme n'sst bon qu'à manger du veau! Depuis ce temps il est reléqué au rôle de spectateur, et n'en eat pas moins fête et cajolé. C'est en vérité une chose plaisante que le rôle qu'il joue ici; malheureusement pour lui ou plutôt pour la dignité philosophique, car, pour lui, il paroit s'accommoder fort de ce train de vie; il n'y avok aucune manie dominante dans ce pays lorsqu'il y est arrivé; on l'a regardé comme une trouvaille dans, cette circonstance, et l'effervescence de nos jeunes tètes s'est tournée de son côté. Toutes les jolies femmes s'en sont emparées; il est de tous les soupers fins, et il n'est point de bonne fête sans lui; en un mot, il est pour nos agréables ce que les Genevois sont pour mou





Huyp bowed, and engaged himself to make one of the party, Rosalie was therefore obliged also to consent, as she was not inclined to allow Huyp to make his debut in the theatre of Temptation, without being attached to him herself as an appendage in the quality of a protector. Such kindnesses were nothing new from Rosalie to her young friends of the rougher sex. She had an utter aversion to all affected delicacy, and thought the time of a woman could not be better employed than in teaching man to love. If she was in error, it was the error of the heart.

Madame Robson having arranged matters somewhat more to her own satisfaction, now made her adieux, and after relieving Huyp of her two innocents, left him aud Rosalie to return together to their apartments in the palace.





"How provoking it was of you, sweet love," said Rosalie, as soon as she was out of earshot of her friends, *' to accept the invitation of that odious old woman!"

"It was impossible to refuse her," replied Huyp, "besides I have no wish to be shut out from all society, like a caged bird."

"Umph!" returned Rosalie, "you will have cause to rue your tame acquiescence to her will, if you are not on the qui vive, for she will very kindly saddle you with one of her babies, as the pretty timid little creatures are now au desespoir."

"And you have destined me to be the victim, then," said Huyp.

"No, not so, sweet love," replied Rosalie, pressing his hand tenderly, and throwing a languishing expression into her countenance," I would save you from their machinations; but you shall know more hereafter."





They were now within the walls of the palace, and separated to prepare for the evening party of Madame Robson.





CHAPTER XII.



Lady Sadlife. Does your ladyship ever go to the play?

Lady Dainty. Never, but when I bespeak it myself, and then, not to mind the actors, for it is common to love sights: my great diversion is, in a reposed posture, to turn my eyes upon the galleries, and bless myself to hear the happy savages laugh; or when an awkward Citizen crowds herself in among us—'tis an unspeakable pleasure to contemplate her airs and dress; and they never escape me, for I am as apprehensive of such a creature's coming near me, as some people are when a cat is in the room.

The Sick Lady's Cure.



AT Madame Robson's fete, to which all the fashionable circle of Brussels were invited, Huyp was first introduced into what is generally termed Life, i.e. elegant confusion, and fashionable inconvenience. With a laudable disdain of all M creature comforts" the little family party had been increased most prodigiously, and Madame's "chair lumbered closet" was doomed to contain twice as many visitors as could be accommodated with comfort to themselves, or convenience to the lady of the night. But Madame was a great advocate for .shew, and studied effect as deeply as the manager of a theatre does on the first night of a new play, which can boast Of no other charms to recommend it to public notice.



Vol. I. M





Huyp and Rosalie were the last of the party, and as forming part of the suite of royalty, were of course looked up to as the principal persons in the room. Huyp however was the chief magnet of attraction: the wealth of Vander Dordrecht was well known,





and Madame Robson had insinuated to a few of her most particular friends that he was engaged to Alicia, therefore the young pagie was doomed to - meet the scrutinizing glances of all the maidens and matrons in the apartment. But Madame Robson had been somewhat premature in her calculations, and the experienced dames soon saw that Huyp was not a very ardent lover. This was doubtlessly a pleasant discovery to many mothers, and many a young heart beat higher, when in a gentle whisper maternal kindness gave them reason to hope there was yet a chance left for them, Rosalie received the most flattering attentions from the hostess, whose chief aim was to seperate her from Huypj that he might be en-1 aided to enjoy a little conversation with Alicia, without being subjected to the control of her learned rival. In this, however, she was again disappointed' In the recess of one of the windows sate a very lovely young woman, whose charms at once caught the heart of Huyp; by her side stood an elderly gentleman dressed in the military costume of the Netherlands, with whom she was engaged in conversation. Huyp was a novice in the fashionable world, and seemed scarcely to know what to do with himself. The gentleman observed his embarrassment, and kindly motioned him to join them. This invitation was thankfully accepted by Huyp, who felt himself lonely in the midst of the crowded circle,





"You are a stranger, I presume \ oung gentleman?" said the officer.

"I am," replied Huyp, "quite new to the scene, but after I have passed my noviciate, I trust I shall be more >m i'nit in the manners of the world, and'drop the rustic entirely."

•• Better tutors you could not have desired" said the young lady, laughing-, "• than those who have undertaken to superintend your fashionable education. They will teach you every thing except virtue and propriety, which are superseded in the vocabulary a-la-mode by laxity of morals and extravagance."





"You have made a just remark Clara," returned the officer, " immorality advances with rapid strides, and levity of manners spreads around, unchecked, its contagious mischief. For my own part I am far from approving either the conduct or the principles of the greater part of this society, and I cannot but feel sorry to see any young person cast into the meshes of their nets, without a guide to extricate him from the dangers with which he is surrounded•."

Huyp perceived that this speech was levelled at himself; his cheeks were suffused with, a deep tint of crimson* and he could not stand the eyes of Clara, which were fixed on his countenance with an archness of expression perfectly irresistable,





"If I have any skill in prognostication," exclaimed Clara, " you will be an apt pupil in the follies of fashion, Mynheer Huyp; the arbiter elegantarium of the court, from whose decision respecting fans, laces, trinklets, perfumes, and lap-dogs, it will be in vain to appeal. This is a very improving age, Sir, and report says, you are destined to prevent that timid creature Alicia from being qualified for an Ape-leader."

"In good truth, Madame," returned Huyp, "you are rather too severe upon me—I—I—"

*' Want a steady guide through this wilderness of folly and dissipation," interrupted the officer. "I am indebted to the good Burgomaster your father for many civilities, and shall feel a pleasure in returning them by using every effort to prevent your becoming the victim of designing women, and the dupe of intriguing mothers."





Huyp bowed and returned thanks. "For the future," continued the officer, "consider me as your counsellor: consult me on all occasions, and if I cannot at all times direct you as I would wish, I will at least instruct you how to avoid error."

"And if my poor services," said Clara, "should at any time be needed, you may command them. You shall be put aside as carefully as old Lady Andover's half-chicken,* and not be





• The union of meanness with excessive wealth, has seldom been exemplified with more effect, than in the instance of the late Lady Andorer. The celebrated Soame Jennings left her nearly the whole of his immense property, when she was at a very





tut off in a day at the pleasure of the• ladies."



advanced age, and neither wanted the money, nor knew how to apply it. in the manner in which it ought to have been applied. When she was told that several thousand-pounds, were to be paid for the legacy tax, she burst into tears, and declared that she was totally ruined. It is but justice, however, to state, that after the duty was paid, and the property was in her own possession, she did, in one or two instances, display a most astonishing degTee of liberality. She commissioned Mr. * * *

to take £. 10,000, to the Rev. Mr. H , and

on the very day that she had sent this splendid donation, the former gentleman was invited to ding with her. One small chicken and a few potatoes were produced on the table, and ere the dinner was began, her ladyship begged him to divide the chicken in two parts, as half of it wquld be sufficient for them, and the other half, with some hot vegetables, would serve for her dinner on the following day! This was indeed economy, and fprms a striking contrast to the conduct of tiie

equally high-born Marchioness of A , who was

.an exemplification of the truth of the observation, that prosperity too often makes people forget what they have suffered in adversity.





"You are indeed kind," returned Huyp, "and I am sure I shall very



"When simply Lady Anne H n, and not in

very comfortable circumstances, the Countess of Besborough was accustomed to invite her to dine at her table, .when, there was-no company; at those times she was a tolerated guest; but when there was a dinner party, Lady Anne was excluded;

though the kind consideration of Lady B ,

induced her to send a servant, with a plate of food to her indigent friend, whose appetite was sharpened by the absence of those viands which pamper the appetite of'the epicure. When, to the surprize

of the world, the Marquis of A led her to the

altar, her ladyship appeared but to exist for the purpose of revelling in the pleasures of the table; the dinners were seldom or never so splendid as she wished them to be, and many of the servants were discharged for their inattention in administering proper luxuries to her palate. Had the Marchioness known, that one of the domestics of her lord, had formerly been in the service of Lady Besborough, she would, probably, have.felt some slicht degree of shame at being over dainty; the very man who had been accustomed to carry her ladyship's dinner between two plates- after the eating-house fashion, to her lodgings in Mortimer.





frequently take advantage of the permission you have given me to ask your advice."

Clara gravely thanked him for the high opinion he was pleased to entertain of her abilities, but assured him that she was far better qualified to become a commentator on the actions of others, than an adviser.

Rosalie and Madame Robson began to shew symptoms of uneasiness at the dereliction of Huyp,, and both mentally resolved to propose eome amusement in which all might partake. Cross questions were proposed and negatived: the cord and ring met with a like fate, but at length acting riddles was acceded to, with the approbation of the whole party : probably this amusement was, though puerile, best adapted to the major part of the circle, as it did not require any astonishing exertion of the mental faculties, and was as frivolous in itself as those were who imported it for the gratification of the Belgians.* Most of the ladies declared that they knew of nothing so delightful. It was new and fashionable, therefore of course was preferable to vingt-un, picquette,



•.street, has been chicled, because a sumptuous repast has not had sufficient variety, to please her epicurean taste. When she was poor Lady Anne, she was thankful for any thing; bat as Marchioness of A , the case was very different:

circumstances were changed, and she was changed «lso. •••• ':





* Acting riddles is of German extraction, and found its way into Holland since the time of the memorable Congress of Vienna. In all probability this method of killing time, was brought to Brussels, with other affairs of state, by some dancing diplomatist, who, with the laudable desire of being handed down to posterity for something, took the only method in his power to preserve his name freak oblivion. Dr. Bright mentions a similar amusement, as being the fashion at Vienna, in hie •• Travels in Hungary,"





or any other game of skill and chance^ which they averred were only fit to amuse the mind of a sexagenarian beau, or stifle the melancholy reflections of a desparing. dowager.

Rosalie was among the foremost of the triflers, and with Madame, and her two representatives of timidity, retired to an adjoining room to propose the riddle and to consult together how they might best represent the different syllables of the word which they inr tended to impose, on the company the task of resolving.

"'This certainly is a very delightful pastime," said Clara, smiling at the earnestness with which those around her pursued the idle phantom of pleasure. "Till now I thought it was the privilege of old age to be dull and stupid, but it appears that the young are willing to usurp the qualities of their seniors, and add. to the neceswiry qualifications, that of being very foolish."





"You certainly pay a high compliment to the aged, Clara," said her father, "though I must in justice exonerate you from-, the ehargeof flattery."

"Thank you, my dear father," returned the lively girl, pressing his hand, and giving him an arch glance: there are plenty, of that tribe in. the world already, and believe me, I have not the slightest inclination, to add one to the number."

"You, have at least the merit of being honest," said' Huyp.

"That is but a.negative virtue," she replied; "one that is much boasted of but seldom met with in- life. When 1 hear of honesty it always reminds me of the Cherubims, of whose divine melody, we have been told, but never had the felicity of listening to."

"Probably," said. Huyp gravely,. "it perished at the time of the Deluge, or was left in the ark by mistake."





"Not at all unlikely," returned Clara, " things that are irrecoverably lost are generally spoken of as invaluable, though were they in our possession we should probably prize them as little as we do our time."

"The ladies now returned from their conference, and Rosalie took the lead in the performance, though it was evident that her eyes were rather directed towards Huyp than the company. It was certainly some satisfaction to know that every eye was turned on her, as it relieved her from the distressing idea of being overlooked as a being of little or no consequence. "Now," exclaimed Rosalie, " who will resolve my riddle;" a wine glass was brought to her into which with many significant gestures, she began to squeeze the juice of a lemon, thus representing the first syllable of the word. "Ju--ju" was reiterated from all sides, but what the next syllable .might be, none as yet presumed to guess. Rosalie and Madame again retired, while one gentleman amused the party by acting the part of a cripple, and another on a sudden counterfeited a violent attack of the asthma. "Meaux—meaux"—exclaimed Clara. "Jumeaux—jmneaux—" reiterated the whole circle, when in tottered the two antiquarians, in sheets and leading strings, making themselves as ridiculous as possible to give a correct emblem of Jurneaux.





"Now I would give something to know what opinion the dear friends of those amusing folks have formed of them," said Clara; " I dare say they have been the mirth of half an hour, and will furnish conversation for a week."





"As I fear I have already done;" replied. Huyp.

"To say truth," returned Clara, "I have heard something of the matter— the ladies are more in fault than you, I must acknowledge, though I am grieved.to be- obliged to pay my own sex. so poor a compliment."

Ere Huyp had time to reply, Rosalie had advanced, and complaining of fatigue, requested Huyp to retire. He was yet too much under her control to venture to disobey; a. smile played upon the countenance of Clam, who held forth her hand to her new acquaintance, which he shook kindly: the officer gave him his card, and reminded him that he wished to be his friend; then with a formal bow to Rosalie he took the arm of Clara, and joined the circle from which he had. till now kept apart.

They were quickly seated in the carriage which was in waiting to convey them hack to the palace. Rosalie was sullen and gloomy, and Huyp felt himself exceedingly uncomfortable. It was indicative of a coming storm, which was destined to fall on the head of Huyp.





"So, Mynheer," cried Rosalie, ** you have treated me in the most attentive and respectful manner this evening? Could I have thought, after all that has passed between us, that you would have been- so base as to neglect me so cruelly before all my friends! Oh! it will be the death of me ,—my nerves are quite shaken; I shall tremble as bad as poor. Madame Robson. To find you false—"

"False! Madam," repeated Huyp, who felt anxious to throw off the shackles which Rosalie had partially lettered him with, "in what have I been false?"





"In love," said Rosalie—" to me—• to your promises."

"Really, Madam'" replied Huyp, "your accusation is misplaced. I am not aware of having said any thing that might be construed into any thing like a promise of faith and love."

"Not conscious!" cried Rosalie, furiously, "not conscious of your expressions! It is well, Mynheer, that you can so soon forget our little endearments. Would that I could forget them too, for it seems that I am to be the sport of your capricious disposition ,—the laughing stock of Brussels."

"That must depend solely on yourself, Madam," said Huyp, who gained courage as the dispute proceeded, and knew that his conduct would meet with the approbation of Clara and her father, "it certainly does not rest with me."





Rosalie was almost choaked with incipient passion: her brain was like a whirlpool, and her bosom swelled with rage and resentment. To be again deceived in the tenderest point; to be refused by the stripling whom she had condescended to court, was insupportably mortifying. Huyp was of a nobler nature than she had deemed him to be, and to her dismay she discovered that he possessed a spirit as high as her own. How to act in this unexpected emergency she knew not. A woman's invention however is seldom quite lost. She resolved to be revenged, and by some artifice to procure his banishment from the court, since he was not likely to return her proffered love. Had not her distempered mind been cheered with the hope of being amply revenged on the insensible youth, she would have been driven almost to distraction at the idea of being left, despite of all her strenuous efforts, to wither in single blessedness. With Dante she would have exclaimed





io mi son un, ohe quando

A more spira, noto; e a qual modo

Che detta dentro, vo significando—



if the men would have listened to her.

Huyp gladly retired to the solitude of his own apartment when they reached the palace. Rosalie was grave and haughty, and affected to treat him. with contempt, though at the very moment she was meditating his ruin, she would have given worlds to have found him what she wished. That she had a powerful rival in thedovely and unaffected Clara, she did not doubt. The coldness with which the officer had saluted her was a convincing proof that he was not one of her admirers, and from the pertinacity of Hnyp, slia feared that he had heard some few whispers which were buzzed about against her in every circle at Brussels. It was impossible to recal the past or still the tongue of slander. Her indiscretions were talked of, (for people will talk of what does not concern them,) and her most particular friends were among the foremost to censure her conduct. Mothers and daughters were leagued with the male sex against her, and in fact with the latter it was an alliance for their personal safety. Still Rosalie had one advantage which she did not fail to make the best use of when her own interests required it—this was her influence at court; she had the ear of royalty, and consequently could carry a point when she represented it as matter of necessity. Monarchs are mortal, and women know too well how to play with their weakness. The cause of Rosalie's influence may be conjeetured; female influence generally orlgi* nates from one causej and the world did gay, that this secret was not unknown to Ma'amselle, Be this as it may, Rosalie was disposed to visit the sins of the lover on the head of the man, and to give a lesson to Huyp which might have the effect of teaching him to beware another time how he trifled With feelings of an ancient maiden.





It was unfortunate for him that he could not " as well tell the thoughts of a woman's hearte by her eyes, as the change of the weather by an almanacke." —He should have been learned in the love of the heart, and erudite in the language of the eyes, before he ventured to breathe the air of a court. It was as necessary as black-letter learning is to facilitate the labours of the Antiquarian.

Indulging the sweet dreams of vengeance, Rosalie saw the morning dawn Without invoking sleep. She hastily attired herself, and repaired the ravages which rage and time had made in her complexion' Anxiously she awaited the appearance of her illustrious friend and protector, that she might be enabled to retaliate on Huyp for his neglect. The moments seemed to lag with unusual slowness. She watched the hands of the time-piece which stood on the table, and was almost tempted to dash it to atoms, because it travelled on in its course with regularity. At length the moment arrived. Rosalie related her grievances, and accused Huyp of the iiigh crime and misdemeanour of being insensible to her charms. The monarch scarcely knew how to act. Rosalie was not to be appeased, and even royalty in some instances dares not to be obdurate. She was perfectly aware of the weakness of her patron's intellect, and when he made some slight objections to the conduct she wished him to pursue, she haughtily told him, that though he was dignified with the title of monarch, he was nothing more than the Vice-roy of the Duke of Wellington, a puppet, set in motion by another power, and incapable of acting for himself. This was too true to be discredited* and the cheeks of the sovereign grew red with the workings of mortified pride. He knew that it was the universal opinion of the Netherlanders, and blushed to think that Nassau was no longer free as in the olden time. A frivolous charge was quickly made out against Hiiyp— no unusual proceeding in courtly circles —and Rosalie gained her point.





She was listened to, and credited; the guards were summoned; the chamber of Huyp was surrounded, and he was desired to consider himself a prisoner; Huyp was terrified, and entreated to know the cause of this





extraordinary proceeding. It was told in a few words, and Huyp thus received his second lesson in the intrigues of the Court, through the art and machinations of a woman, who was anxious to repair a shattered reputation, and to provide for an old age of cares, the reward of a youth spent in folly and dissipation.



END OF VOL. I.



VOL. I





BY

J. C. SPENCE,

THE KNIGHTS OF RITZBERG, a Romance, by the Author of " Supreme Bon Ton," "Parga," &c. 3 vols. 16s. Gd.

The story is interesting, the moral good, and the style neither tame, nor otherwise objectionable.

Literary Chronicle.

We have read this work with considerable pleasure, and have no hesitation in saying, that it ranks among the first of the kind, exciting an interest in the mind of the reader to the close.

Observer of the Times.

These volumes are well written. From the title we expected some bombast in diction, but were agreeably disappointed. To those who admire a rapid change of incident, and the wonderful in every incident, we recommend the work, with a certainty of its yielding satisfaction.

Literary Register.

RHODOMALDI, a Romance, 8 vols. 16s.6d.

SUPREME BON TON, a Novel, 3 vols. 18*. These volumes will be found an acquisition to the library of the Novelist.

London Magazine.

The characters in this Novel are drawn to the life.

Literary Chronicle.

Printed by J. Poplett, 27, Jewin-street, Cripplegate.





TEMPTATION.





J. POPLETf, PRINTER, 27, JEWIN-STREET, CR1FPLEGATE.





TEMPTATION.



CHAPTER XIII.



Take heed you doc not as I did. Make not too much of lading beautie, -which isfaire in the cradle and foule in the grave, resembling Polyon, whose leaves are white in the morning, and blue before night; or Anyta, which being a sweete flowTe at the rising of the sun, becometh a weede, if it be not pluckt before the setting. Faire faces have no fruites, if they have no witnesses. Beautie is a slipperie good, which decreaseth whilst it is increasing, resembling the Medlar, which in the moment of his full ripenesse, is known to be in rottennesse.

Lylys Sapplw and Pkaon.



TO gain wisdom by experience is generally the lot of mankind. From our own simplicity and impatience, we are too frequently led into the very errors which we would have wished to avoid. Huyp had at length found one who had warned him of the fallacy of promises, and pointed out. the delusions of hope. He had not enjoyed the benefit of a father's advice—he had never been guarded against the deceptions of mankind—never listened to a moral lesson from a friend—no one till then had said, Huyp, you are young and inexperienced; be circumspect in your conduct, or you will lay the foundation for a train of evils, which will be the bane of your life.—Make but one false step, and your friends will kindly push you down the precipice, from which, perhaps, you can ascend no more. Shun the great, as you would a pestilence—crush every ambitious aspiration as you would a serpent, for they must inevitably prove fatal toyourpeace. Whatcomfortcanyou experience if while your face is decked in smiles, your heart be bursting with sorrow? Your gaiety can be nothing more than the mockery of care—your smiles, the garb of deception—your mirth, the feeble and transient light of the glow-worm. Bitterness of sorrow will succeed those moments of pleasure which are so eagerly seized on as the opiates of the mind—you awake from them as from a dream, and feel the misery of your situation anew, for by endeavouring to banish it for a few short hours, it is in fact renovated, and like the tares amongst corn, it springs forth more luxuriantly. If you are wretched, the world will mock your wretchedness. If you are poor, you will be insulted, and contemned; and should you chance to be proud also, you must expect to experience hourly mortifications.



Vol. it. B





Huyp, though he knew himself innocent of the charge preferred against hira by the infuriated Rosalie, trembled at the consequences which were likely to ensue. He could not divest himself of the idea, that his life would be the sacrifice exacted by Rosalie. However there he misjudged her—she would fain have terrified him into compliance with her wishes, but she thirsted not for his blood.





The news of his disgrace was swiftly spread amongst his new acquaintance, and there were few who did not commiserate his situation. Orders were . given that no one should be admitted into his presence without a written order from the commandant of the city, therefore Huyp was prevented from applying to the only person that was likely to afford him advice and assistance. He wept like an infant at his unjust confinement, and cursed the bom'that had brought one of the house of Nassau to Dordrecht Tower. From these reflections he was at length aroused by the opening of the door of his apartment. "It must be the father of Clara," he exclaimed, and advanced to the door, where instead of the visitor he expected, he met his kind-hearted, unfashionable uncle Luitje.





Huyp felt confused, and ashamed, when he recollected his treatment of him the last time they met. He could not obliterate it from his memory, and blushed to think that he was the first to visit him in the time of trouble, whom he had so lately wished to forget was his relative.

"This is not good, Huyp, my jongeling,"> said Luitje; "but for what, in the name of Saint Peter, are you shut up here like a pearl in an oyster shell, and as difficult to be got at as the Cham of Tartary? What i« it all about Huyp? You have not torn the train of the Konings robe, have you, or pinked the master of the ceremonies in a duel!"





Luitje knew little of courts and kings. A plain honest Hollander, he troubled not himself with the intrigues of state, or the cabals of courtezans, who, to the shame of royalty be it spoken, govern those who govern men, and proclaim themselves the anointed of Heaven! Perhaps it was well for him that he was a stranger to the delights of dissipation—the fascinations of fashion—the hirelings of honour. Blessed indeed are they who know nothing of the delusive pleasures of life, the phantoms that lead mankind on to their ruin.

"My dear Luitje," said Huyp, "I am equally surprized as yourself at my confinement. I am not conscious of having deserved it, and you have no reason to doubt my veracity, when I inform you, that it is the work of a woman."





"Aye, Huyp," replied Luitje, " I know them too well to doubt the truth of what you assert. Can I dare to doubt when I have the example of Mrs. Luitje Vuist Slaagen before my eyes, to say nothing of my sister Aaltje, who, bythe-bye, leads the okl Burgomaster the life of a strange dog in a kennel of old hounds.—But," he continued, "I beg your pardon, nephew, I forgot that I was speaking of your parents."

"Indeed uncle," returned Huyp, ** no apologies are necessary, you see me as I am, and for once in my life, I feel grateful for" the kind attentions you have shown me."

"The drommel take the man that would desert a friend or a relative when in trouble, jongeling," said Luitje; "but will you be so kind as to let me understand the cause of your being shut up here! This is the second fright you have given me, and I pray you, jongeling, let it be the last. They tell me in the city—"





Luitje paused. "I can guess what you have heard," said Huyp, ". and perhaps you have been told nothing more than the truth. Ever since I have been at Brussels the women have been in full cry after me, but I assure you uncle Luitje, I have been a mere passive instrument in their hands."

"Too passive, I fear," replied Luitje. M Lord bless you, Huyp, you don't know them quite so well as I do. They are as anxious to get you in their hands, as Eve was to taste the apple. But pray, Huyp, who is this lady to whom you alluded? Is she young and beautiful?"

"Neither," said Huyp. She is one of the /tave beens, and now bears more resemblance to an autumn flower, than a spring blossom. She certainly does her best to cheat Time of his fleshmarks, and prays more frequently to Love than to Heaven, but a withering rose will drop from its stem, let the florist do what he may to preserve it. She is moreover a bas bleu, reads and writes, and criticises every work in every language known to the world of letters."





"Say no more, Huyp, say no more, my poor jangeling," cried Luitje, " you have indeed fallen into bad hands. For Heaven's sake have nothing to say to her, ladT you had better marry a cookmaid. I suppose she is something like your aunt, Huyp, who lies in bed half the day (crying over the damned false sentiment of that fellow Rousseau, who had not a spark of morality on feeling,, though he wrote so much about it,) and' when she does rise^ it requires, half a bottle of brandcicyn to compose her nerves, and the patience of Job to bear with her cross humours. I am afraid Huyp, she has a little too much of the devil in her, but that is nothing as times go; have nothing to do with Rousseau and Werter loving ladies — they will contrive to be the torment of your life, and like their great prototype send their children to the parish, if they should prove in any way troublesome to themselves." *





"And their false lovers to a prison, of which I am now a melancholy instance," said Huyp. "I was unfortunately not conversant with the marks and diagnosticks of the ladies of the court, and now I suffer for my ignorance.* Oh, Luitje! why did my father neglect me in my early youth f had he guided me with a parent's care, I had been a different being! now what am I, but a creature to whom the world is new! a toy for fortune to amuse herself with! He should have told me, that



* To the eternal disgrace of Rousseau, he was guilty of this base conduct to his children, and set ull moral duties at defiance. Is the man who could betray his friends, insult his benefactors, and desert his children, worthy of the fame he has enjoyed? Common sense says, No; and Rousseau is in a fair way of being forgotten.





"lis woman's pride,

Ne'er to be duped, but ever to deceive—" f

* "There is nothing hath puzzled' philosophers more than the peculiar mark* and diagnostics of the human species: it is not that they are unknown, or that they are not obvious—the difficulty lies in selecting out those universal marks. The shape and countenance serve, as a label does, on a grocer's chest, to let us know the repository of the human mind." Vide Introduction to the "Theory of the Human Mind."

t The '' Veils," by Miss Porden, who cannot be said to flatter her own sex, by so bold an assertion.





"It was too sore a subject for him to speak of," said Luitje, "a man is not willing to proclaim himself a fool; for the world hath little pity for the man who is tied to a woman's apron string, like an aapje to the neck of a bear. Ye must know well, Huyp, that I have no right to speak, but what rests in the heart, will sometimes slip from the tongue."

Luitje indeed could not help telling the truth. It was so seldom that he had an opportunity of speaking his mind on the subject of his domestic grievances, that he felt a kind of melancholy pleasure in confiding his complaints to one, from whom he did not believe they would reach the ears of his ungentle spouse. He knew, by woeful experience, that she was apt to resent any allusions to her conduct, and he had no desire to increase the irrascibility of her nature, by assuming any further consequence, than that of a quiet domestic animal, united, or rather fettered, to a termagant woman, whom he had as yet found it impossible to tame, and whose spirit he wanted courage to subdue. Neither he, nor his brother-in-law the Burgomaster, were qualified to govern, therefore, perhaps wisely, gave up their right and title to be the lords of the creation, in favour of their wives.





The power of the fair sex, was, in these instances, absolute, though their dominion-was rather unwillingly allowed, by those whose domestic peace was at their mercy.

Huyp related to his uncle what he conceived to be 'the very head and front of his offending;' Lurtje had, at first, feared that his nephew had actually engaged himself to support the party, which still clung to the revolutionary principles ; but, though his abilities were bv no means brilliant, common sense told him, that the accusation had originated in the malice of a disappointed woman. Half an hour was the space of time allowed for his visit, and one of the guardians of the prison now entered to inform him that the time had expired. Luitje entreated Huyp not to let his spirits sink—he would immediately send to the Burgomaster, who knew more about state matters than himself, and in the meanwhile he would remain at Brussels in order to be ready to assist him in any emergency. He then affectionately shook him by the hand, with a promise to visit him again, if he could obtain permission. Huyp was affected, even to tears, at the kindness of his uncle. His goodness of heart amply compensated for his want of shewy qualifications, and it was with a feeling of deep regret, that Huyp saw him departThere are few minds that can bear





solitude patiently. Left to their own reflections, thrown back, as it were, on themselves, the consciousness of being alone in the world, they fondly think on the pleasures they have lost, and regret their loss. Fancyr though an excellent painter, unfortunately too frequently sketches scenes which are the very reverse of reality. She paints the world all delight and happiness; the misfortunes and miseries of existence find noplace on the canvass, not even to fill up the back ground of the picture, or to deepen the effect of a shade. There the sun shines and the waters are calm—the flowers are in blossom, and the birds sing from the spray. In the world how different I There a fearful and a deadly blow is given to the dreams of airy imagination. "What then is the world? What is life !—





To day it is brilliant, andf smiles, but to-morrow

The dream so delightful, is vanish'd and past;



The sunshine of joy is o'erclouded by sorrow,

And fancy's fair visions are swiftly o'ercast.



Like lightning that bursts from a storm-bearing

cloud,

Which weeps, as the bright emanation displays

The depth of the darkness, that, forming a shroud,

Hides the tints of the heavens, and mocks with

its blaze, , •



Is affliction, that bane to the comfort of life,

Which withers its flowers ere the blossoms unclose;

Blights the peace of the heart, with the tempest of

strife,

And replaces tire blossoms of pleasure with woes.



The friend of to-day, like the insect that lives

In the ray of the sunbeam, to-morrow will fly,



If fortune no longer smiles gaily, and gives

The charm that makes friendship a gem in his eye.

The heart that is seared like a storm-faded leaf, That is blighted, and lone, and deceived, and be tray'd,

Vainly hopes to experience from friendship relief, Like a gleam of the sun to enliven the shade.





Is life then a treasure? the world to be priz'd?

Say, ye lovers of pleasure, for what, or by whom? The one is a phantom, by sages despis'd—

The other but wafts on mankind to the tomb.

* * # * * *

For many hours Huyp was condemned to solitary confinement. It •was deep midnight, scarce a single star shone in the horizon; the pale moon shrouded in clouds, beamed wan and faint as a watch-light by the couch of a dying man, whose fading sight can scarce endure the feeble beams of the glimmering taper. All without was silent, save when the deep-toned voices of the centinels on duty, gave the watchword to their companions in.arnis. Huyp paced his solitary apartment with slow and sullen step. lie had no hope of immediate emancipation, and knew not what he had to expect from the malice of Rosalie. "Would to Heaven that I could escape from hence!" he exclaimed, "there are other lands where, perhaps, I might escape the persecutions of women." Huyp had been so lost in thought, that he had not heard the door open, and now, turning his eyes, he beheld the cause of his disgrace beside him. Rosalie had hoped to find him more tractable than he was at the time they parted last, and was not much pleased when the simple ejaculation of Huyp met her ear. "May I enquire to whose influence I am indebted for the honor of this visit, Madam?" said Huyp, gravely. "To the influence of affection," replied Rosalie. "Pardon me, Madam," returned Huyp, "if I am sceptical on that point; after such convincing proofs, of your power, I must decline the honorof claiming either your affection or your friendship." "Remember," saidi Rosalie, "you are still in my poaver, the King believes you to be guilty, and will, in all probability, be inclined to visit you with a severer punishment than a few da) s' confinement; the means of an honorable escape are still in your power—fulfil your engagements to me, and even now you are at liberty."





"Those are conditions, Madam," replied Huyp, "to which I am resolved never to consent; for, to use the words of Fuller, 'they that marry ancient people, merely in expectation to bury them, hang themselves in hope that one will come and cut the halter.' I never entered into any engagements with you, therefore have no promises to fulfil."

Rosalie could not brook the unpleasant truth, which she was unexpectedly forced to listen to. To be told that she was no longer young, no longer an object of adoration, was too mortifying to be endured; and she would fain have persuaded herself, that it was not love but hate, that brought her there. For some time she was silent. She knew not what to say, or how to act. Her designs on Huyp were not likely to be realized, and the world would not put a very favourable construction on her conduct. She was not disposed to hold any further conversation with Huyp; and saying, that she might, perhaps, pity, though she could not forgive, she retired, leaving Huyp still in darkness as to the result of his confinement. .





The following morning, however, brought him his release, and his dismissal from his situation at court. The one gave him pleasure, and the other no pain. He had seen enough of high life to be disgusted with it, but he had yet to prove the inconstancy of his fashionable friends. When he called on the Robsons, even they were not visible, and he received by the hands of the servant who announced him, a cold note from Madame, desiring him to think no more of her dear children, as she could not consent to allow them to receive the visits of one labouring under the displeasure of the King, and whose disgrace was the theme of common conversation. This was too bad. Huyp indignantly desired the servant to deliver the note again to his mistress, and to assure her from him that he was far from wishing to deprive her of the fair treasures which she had so lately almost forced upon him. Madame Robson was a woman of the world, and cared little for the opinions of others. She was sorry that her daughters had lost the chance of Huyp, but as his prospects in life were apparently blighted, she consoled herself with the idea that there were more men to be met with. With irritated feelings Huyp turned from the door of the Robsons. "I -must learn to endure such mortifications patiently," said he, "though I am conscious that I do not deserve them." He almost dreaded to call on Clara, lest the professions of friendship he had received both from her and her father, should be of the same nature as those of the Robsons and Rosalie. He was already in the Grand Place—the Grosvenor-square of Brussels; the house was before him—, he ascended the steps—the knocker was in his hand—his courage failed him—he started from the steps, and was about to retire, when the door opened, and the gay, laughing Clara appeared. "In what have we offended, good Sir," she exclaimed, "that you shake the dust off your feet at our door, and will not condescend to enter the house!"





Huyp was confused. He was vexed to think that he had been observed, and knew not what might be the opinion of Clara with respect to the late occurrences. It was not probable that she was unacquainted with them, when Madame Robson had asserted, that his disgrace was the general topic of conversation. Clara indeed was acquainted with every circumstance, for her father, Colonel Von Essen, was the Commandant of the city. This Huyp did not know—if he had, he would have felt more uneasv. *' You must walk in,





•• 9

and say two words to my father," said Clara, " perhaps he may have the influence to induce you to speak, though I have not." "I was in deep meditation," returned Huyp, "I have been mortified, and I may add, insulted, this morning by one of my professed friends." *f And is that matter of surprize?" said Clara. "To me, I confess it was," replied Huyp. "You are quite a simpleton in those affairs, I perceive," returned Clara, " but pray come in, and relate your grievances to my father," She led the way to the parlour, and Huyp followed. The Colonel received him with kindness, laughed at him for his timidity in not venturing to enter the house without an escort, and fixing his eyes steadfastly on his face, enquired, "why he had not seen him before?" It was a puzzling question. Huyp knew not how to reply—he wished to tell the truth, but the keen eye of Clara glanced at him from under her long eyelashes, and he dreaded her raillery—he therefore said, with some hesitation, that he had been prevented from availing himself of the kind invitation of the Colonel, by unforeseen circumstances. The Colonel smiled— Clara assured him, that she should not give credit to such excuses; and added, with a smile, that if he could give no better reason for his neglect, she should apply to Rosalie for a fuller explanation of those unforeseen circumstances. Hoyp looked alarmed, and remained silent. Clara enjoyed his momentaryconfusion, and then desired him not to be alarmed, as they were in full possession of every circumstance. "Indeed!" said Huyp.—" Yes indeed," returned Clara.—" That is very extraordinary."—" Not in the least so," said Clara, "my father signed orders for the admission of two visitors."—• "I comprehend every thing now," said Huyp.—" You have the advantage of me then," retorted Clara, "for I do not."-—The Colonel congratulated Huyp on his escape from the designs of Rosalie, and expressed a hope that he would, for the future, steer clear of the whirlpools of Temptation. Huyp assured him that he should endeavour to follow his advice. Clara was standing at the window; she curtsied to some wne in the street: the Colonel enquired





VOL. JI. C





who it was that had claimed her recognition. "It was," said Clara, "no other than Mademoiselle Rosalie: she did me the honor to make an inclination of the body, therefore I could do no less than return it. But," she continued, •♦ how different she looks to day I When I last saw her, her complexion was of the hue of a green-gage plumb, somewhat over-ripe, and now her face has been rouged and whitewashed till it bears a greater resemblance to a plate of strawberries and cream, than any thing else I can conceive."—"You are very severe, young lady," interrupted the Colonel.—" Not too severe, my dearest father," returned Clara, "but, upon my word, I forgot at the moment that her adorer was in the room!"— Huyp assured her that no apologies were necessary, and expressed a wish that Rosalie had heard the .description the had given of her.—" Barbarous man!" cried Clara, "have you so soon changed your opinions ?"—The Colonel said that a man might be excused for that, where sufficient cause was given, and in the case of Huyp, he should have felt inclined to blame him, if he had retained any respect, say nothing of affection, for the lady in question. "I believe you are right," returned Clara.—'' Perfectly so," replied Huyp, "so now for the present, if you please we will drop the subject." "Agreed," said Clara, "and for the future fail not to beware how you are led into the snares of Temptation."





Huyp took his leave, and having procured from the kind Colonel the address of Luitje, hastened to inform him that he was once more at liberty, unpatronized, and unprovided for.





CHAPTER XIV.



She U beautiful, yea, but not therefore chaste: she is comely in all parts of the bodie, but she may be crooked in some part of the minde :—she is a woman: beautie is like the blackberrie, which scemethred when it is not ripe, resembling precious stones that are polished with honie, which Oie smoother they looke, the sooner they breake.

Alexander and Campaspe.



HUYP was received with open arms by the kind-hearted Luitje; yet he could not resist the temptation of rallying him on his late ill success in love affairs. Inr deed he jestingly compared him to Hans Boobiken, who after having been properly equipped for wooing, not having the assurance to make his appearance in the presence of young ladies, went and made love to his grandmother!





It was not very pleasant to be tlms ridiculed; nevertheless, Huyp took, the vivacity of his uncle in good part, as he knew, that although his manners were not very courtly, his heart was untainted by any fashionable follies.

"Huyp, my boy," said Luitje, '' how much of thy father's gold hast thou remaining, of all that he gave thee?"

"Not even a stuiver," replied Huyp.

Luitje shook his head, and the countenance of his nephew was suffused with a crimson blush of shame for his extravagance. It was not difficult to read the thoughts of Luitje, and his countenance bore the stamp of sorrow ami astonishment.

"I perceive that you are vexed at my imprudence," said Huyp, "and for the matter of that, I am as sorry as yourself. The Burgomaster did wrong in sending me at once from a cottage to a court, and the vanity of my mother induced her to believe, that, like another Adonis, my face Mould make my fortune."





"And what think you to do now, jongeling V asked Luitje.

"Try my fortune as a soldier," replied his nephew.

"Pshaw!" peevishly exclaimed Luitje, "I warrant you, you would make a gallant warrior—such another as a certain Prince of Wales, who to shew his bravery, during the Scotch rebellion, battered a paste citadel with sugarplumbs."*



* When the royal army lay before Carlisle, the Prince, at a great supper that he gave to his court and his favourites, as was his custom when the Princess laid in, had ordered for the dessert, the representation of the citadel of Carlisle, in paste, which he in person, and the maids of honor, bombarded with sugar-plumbs!" Vide Memoires of the last Ten Years of the Reign of George the Second.





"God's blessing on thy blue nqse, uncle Luitje!" cried Huyp, "you surely do not deem me to be a coward ?','

At that moment, Huyp was so, ij.jfi? tated with the world, that he could have met death, with what the gossiping Horace Walpole would have termed, "the ease of a gentleman." But Luitje was averse to the lad sacrificing himself to the pressure of circumstances, which a few days would, in all probability, render more easy. He therefore desired him to give up all thoughts of entering the army, during the time of a profound peace, and in which there were already too many officers, who depended on the government for support.

Though the arguments of Luitje were simple, they were at the same time convincing* %wl Huyp's sudden resolution to brave the cannons roar, as suddenly gave way before the plain truths of hjs well-meaning relative.





Luitje was desirous to learn from his nephew, every particular respecting Rosalie, for common report had given him so very unfavourable a character of her, that he was inclined to thank Heaven for his escape from her power. He had also another reason for wishing to know the exact state of Huyp's heart. The generous sympathy of Clara during his short confinement, had endeared her to him; and he thought, that with Huyp's expectations from the Burgomaster, he might, if his inclinations bent that way, be honorably united to a lovely and amiable young woman, who was superior, in every respect, to those with whom he had of late been connected.

Haying this end in view, Luitje strove by every means in his power, to eradicate any lurking remains of love for Rosalie; which he feared might still be secretly cherished in the heart of his nephew. The good man, however, knew little of what was passing in the mind of Huyp at that moment, or he would have deemed such precautions needless. Indignant at the conduct of Rosalie, there was not room left in his breast for any gentler feeling, and her very name was, to him, an antidote to affection.





The conduct of Luitje was, however, by no' means ill-timed. His intentions were good, and although there was no absolute necessity for his cautions, still they served the purpose of inducing Huyp to continue in his resolutions of amendment and discretion for the future. He took especial care to represent Rosalie in so uninviting a light, that Huyp himself shuddered, while he smiled at the picture which he drew of the many imperfections of the woman, to whom all the gossips in the city of Brussels, had, but a few days before, considered him to be betrothed. Aware that nothing strikes more deeply than strong; contrast, Luitje took occasion to eulogise the vivacity and mild virtues of Clara; as also, to give Huyp intimation of the interest she had expressed for his welfare, when his situation had appeared to the world to be of a very critical de^ scription.





The countenance of Huyp brightened with satisfaction. He had not even suspected that he had any share of Claras thoughts, and the knowledge that she regarded him with favorable sentiments, in an instant dispelled his melancholy thoughts, and hope beamed in his bosom bright as the beacon flame.

He was just at that age, when love first begins to cheer the heart, and by its inward workings to discover, that the period of boyhood is past. He was proud to think thaUso, lovely a creature as dara. Von Esson» should have Togadded; him with favour, and he mentally resolved to prove himself worthy of her consideration. >'





Having satisfied himself of the safety of his nephew, Luitje was anxious to return home. His stay at Brussels had been protracted for some days, in consequence of the perils, to which, he believed his relative was exposed, and as he was now at liberty, he intended to depart without further delay. He had already written to Aaltje, by a special messenger, and doubted not she would arrive with all possible speed, to effect a restoration of her son in the favour of the monarch. Luitje had too much sense to wish that she might accomplish that point; for he knew, that private life is at all times preferable to the pomp of a court, and that happiness is more frequently the inmate of a cottage than of a palace, Neither had Huyp any desire to contend with the cabala of the de>pendents of the court. He had seem





enough to satisfy him, and he almost hoped that his mother would treat the intelligence of his desperate circumstances with neglect.

Banished from court, and consequently cast out from among the sycophantic hangers-on of royalty, Huyp was obliged to seek new connexions and new friends; a task of no ordinary difficulty, for a friend is as rarely to be met with as a phcenix. The Robsons who had acted so injudiciously on the spur of the moment, now they found that Huyp was not likely to be entirely ruined, made overtures to regain his good opinion, but music had lost its charms, and their advances met with very little encouragement. Madame Kobson apologized in vain for the insolence of her servant—the daughters in vain entreated him to believe that they were ignorant of the insult he had met with—Huyp was difficult of belief, and left them to condole and comfort one another for their disappointment.





Huyp was of a high spirit, and could not brook indignities. The behaviour of Madame Robson had made a deep impression on his mind, and although he had never felt more than a slight degree of friendship for them, those favourable impressions now gave way to feelings of the most implacable hatred, and he despised them the more for their meanness in making concessions, than he had before done for their timeservingness and illiberality.

In the society of Colonel Von Essen and Clara, he found the greatest pleasure, though at times he smarted beneath the sharpness of her satire. Still there was nothing like ill-nature in her temperament, and she strove rather to touch the follies than the feelings, of those wtiom her vivacity induced her to ridicule.





Pleasant society is at all times an attraction, both to the young- and the aged. Clara was one of those young women who seemed formed by nature to please. She was not simply beautiful, but possessed other qualities of a more lasting nature, which made her the admiration of all those who were acquainted with her. If she had. a fault, it was a propensity to satire, and of this she found it impossible to break herself. The goodness of her heart, however, more than counterbalanced her foibles, and although she was dreaded by the dissipated, she was beloved of those who were not the counterfeits of virtue.

It was not long before the partizans of the court began to remark the kindness which was shewn by the Commandant to Huyp, and Rosalie could not conceal the vexation she felt at finding herself supplanted by so young and lovely a creature as Clara. She was half inclined to hang herself for very spite, but the love of Mfe prevailed, and she wisely resolved still to exist, in hope of a favourable change of fortune. .: • . , i -. ,;>





At, the Colonel's, Rosalie had never been admitted. Voo Essen had to© great a regard for his daughter to allow her name to appear in their visiting list;; aware that no young woman can mix with dissipated and designing people, without, the danger of imbibing the taint of their principles, he took every precaution to preserve Clara from such contamination.

Owing to tlua judicious conduct: of her father, Clara was a pattern of female propriety. Though she was vivacious, her high spirits did not savour of that levity which marks the character of many young women. She enjoyed the. pleasures of life without injuring her constitution or her princir pies, and her moderation prevented1 them from palling.





Von Essen soon perceived that Huyp had a strong mind, which only wanted proper stimulus to display its own powers. He was grieved to see a fine youth left to the mercy of the world, and liable to be lost for the want of a director, and he knew that his prospects were likely to make him the mark of women; indeed it had already, and in all probability would do so still.

The Colonel had not the most distant idea that Huyp felt the dawnings of affection for his daughter, therefore his conduct could not have been actuated by interested motives. He certainly would not have objected to him for a son-in-law, if he had believed it would have been conducive to the happiness of his daughter, and as it was not in his power to leave her any fortune at his decease, he would have felt rejoiced to have seen her thus placed above want. He had been himself the soldier of fortune, and by his abilities and his bravery, had raised himself to his present rank. Military men are seldom rich, and Von Essen was one of those, •whose liberality and benevolence would have prevented him, had the means been within his reach, from amassing wealth. In him the poor ever found a friend, and where much is done with limited means, little can remain for the bestower. Clara had been brought up in habits of the strictest economy, and as she was entitled to a small pension, as the daughter of an old officer, he felt less regret at not being able to leave her a provision. He was no courtier, and knew little of royal and ministerial ingratitude, or he would have felt a hitter pang at the prospect of leaving Clara a dependant on their generosity. When the soldier is dead his services are forgotten, and unless he chance to have any interest at court, his children may starve before they can get a franc from the minister. At least it is sometimes so in the Netherlands, and, as the Earl of Liverpool can avouch* if he pleases, precisely the same in England.,, .





The Robsons who were not willing to give up all hope of being reinstated in the good opinion of Huyp, were now constant in their attentions to Clara. She was their dearest friend, and they averred that without her society life would be intolerably burthensome. They were lavish of their anathemas against Rosalie, and Madame, like a prudent mother, entreated Clara to effect a reconciliation.

Clara decidedly declined the office of mediatrix, and assured her that she could not pretend to any influence over the mind of Huyp.





- "Dear heart," exclaimed Madame, "I thought that Huyp had transferred his affections to you, and my poor gentle Alicia is breaking her heart for him. Sweet child! when she found she was deserted she first made me the confidante of her secrets, and judge how I must have been surprized. I never suspected such a thing—but for the dear child's sake I am sorry—not that I should have approved of him for her husband, but you know, a daughter's happiness is paramount to a mother's wishes," •; ;.

"Very true," said Clara with a smile. ••• . > i .

"" And she is so timid," resumed Madame, "just like what I was at her age—I used to tremble at the very sight of a man, and if my poor, dear, departed husband had not absolutely forced me to marry him, I should have passed my life in a convent."





"You have now conquered your timidity," said Clara, smiling.

Madame reddened at this reproof, and by way of hiding her confusion, applied her handkerchief to her eyes, that it might be supposed her feelings were affected by the remembrance of her husband.

*' My poor papa!" cried Susan, taking the hint and following the example of her mother. Alicia did the same, and Clara was lost in astonishment. She knew enough of the world to perceive that this was mere affectation, and before she had time to make up her mind how to act herself on the occasion, the door was thrown open, and her father entered followed by Huyp.

"What is the matter, good folks," exclaimed the Colonel, who saw by the expression of his daughter's. countenance that nothing very material had occurred, " what is the matter? If you weep thus, my fair ladies, for pleasure, you will not have a tear to spare for necessity."





Had Von Essen looked closely into the countenances of the young ladies, he would have perceived no traces of tears. "Dear heart," said Madame "you are right, Colonel. But we are, as I often say, a family of sensitive plants."

The Colonel bowed, and with difficulty refrained from smiling. He was, however too much of a gentleman to offend a lady by such rudeness. Huyp had taken his station at the window, and Clara softly stole beside him to tell him, in a gentle whisper, that Alicia was dying. , .... . „

"From what cause?" asked Huyp. :". Love," replied Clara. .,, ., y , ", Of wrhom?" he enquired.;. .<,., ,. " You, as Mamma «ays;" returned returned Clara, and tripped hastily to the seat shfe had previously occupied.





Huyp had entered the room predetermined not to take any notice of the family, but this intimation of Clara induced him to turn his eyes towards Alicia. There was a spark of vanity in his bosom which this intelligence had awakened, and indeed there are few young men who are devoid of such sensations. He therefore did look at Alicia, for curiosity got the better of resolution, her eyes met his, and forgetting her timidity, in a drawling tone of voice site said, "Then you will not speak to niel"

Without being absolutely rude, Huyp could no longer preserve silence, and he coldly enquired for their health.

This was too fair an opening to be neglected' by'■ i Madame. Hef eyes sparkled with pleasure, and her civilities were not confined within the bounds of reason. She even wept with joy, and after making many apologies for the conduct of her servant, and the Weakness of her nerves, obliquely abusing Rosalie and descanting on the virtues of eau de luce, entreated Huyp, with the Colonel and Clara to make a visit of reconciliation. The Colonel advised compliance, and Huyp therefore bowed assent. .: , • •,','. i-" ••> .





"Tempted again!" exclaimed Clara as Madame and her daughters quitted the room.—" With what? "asked Huyp. "Music," replied Clara. The Colonel smiled and Clara said no more.

it .was against the inclination of Huyp to he again on a friendly footing with the Robsons, but he had been so fairly entrapped by the idea of Alicia dying for: love, that there was now no receding. The exultation of Madame had not been unobserved by him, and he mentally wished that both she and the children had been at the bottom of the Red Sea, before they had again come in contact with him. It was an evil which he had determined to avoid, but fortune threw him in their way, and left him not a loop-hole to escape at.





However he consoled himself with the reflection that even they were preferable to Rosalie, and at his request the Robsons readily consented that she should not be of the party. In fact they were glad to gain Huyp on any terms; had he even made it a point for them to have cut her entirely, they would not have hesitated for a moment had they been assured that he was to be the. reward for their compliance. Many others would have done the same, for grown up daughters are the torment of a fashionable mother, who thinks her time can be better employed in attending fan-flapping parties, than in watching the conduct, and administering to the comforts of her children.





VOL. II.





CHAPTER XV.



I'll enter into a statute marchanl to see it answered. But if thon wilt have bonds, thou shalt have a bushell full.

Mother Bombie.



WE must now conduct our readers back to Dordrecht tower, and give a glance at the private life of the old Burgomaster and his bride. The former had followed the advice of a witty, though improvident writer,* and began a married life " with a little aversion," while the latter, to say truth, cared less for the man than his establishment, and



Sheridan.





her own reputation—a feeling which is hut too general. Love had little to do with the matter— perhaps nothing.—the season of his sovereign sway was past, and prudence ruled the heart,from whence the blind god was almost exiled.

It were well for the quiet of human life, if the passion of love were unknown, for though it may be, and perhaps is, the sweetener of existence, it may also lay claim to the distinction of being the torment of the heart. "But what," as Rosalie would have said, "would be a life without love?"—A question, perhaps, which it would be very difficult to answer in a satisfactory manner. I shall not presume to attempt it, but with all humility leave it to the decision of the ladies, who will doubtlessly solve it to their own satisfaction, and consequently to the satisfaction of all, who, like myself, bow to the decision of beauty.





Vander Dordrecht was delighted at the preferment of hie son, and Aaltje ,was very desirous of being transplanted from the soil of the old tower, to the metropolis of the Netherlands. This however, the Burgomaster was averse to. In vain Aaltje assured him that there was an absolute necessity for her visiting Brussels, for a short period, that she might be enabled to watch over the conduct of her son: Mynheer was obdurate, and insisted that the jongeling would go on much better without her interference, than with it. In this point alone Aaltje had not the best side of the question. Mynheer loved his money, and was resolved not to part with it without a severe struggle. Like many other patterns of conjugal felicity they lived in a state of continual contention, their opinions were always opposite, except on one subject, and each, either had, or fancied they had, •Teat reason to' complain of their fate. Retirement seldom softens resentment, and Aa-ltje contrived to lead Vander Dordrecht so wretched a life that he not unfrequently wished himself at the bottom of the sea, (provided she did not companion him thither) that he might be released from the miseries of existence.





Among the many capricious follies of Aaltje, was that of jealousy. The Burgomaster, to be sure, was not an object likely to attract the attention of the ladies, and even had he

"With new affection hail'd his bride,"

she would, in all probability, have been as perverse and capricious as she was at present. It was in her nature, and she was a living exemplification of an old and well known adage. Vander Dordrecht was undoubtedly rather inclined to be gay. The gossips were kind enough to give Aaltje information of his movements, and she soon fancied herself to be an injured and a neglected wife. Although she drove him from home, she complained of his absence, and wept to think, that after she had " preserved her honor as it were in a snowhouse, for these three months past," she should be thus deserted. It was indeed provoking!





Sympathy sometimes unites people more than the ties of friendship. Mynheer Kikvorsch, the fellow magistrate of Vander Dordrecht, had, like himself, a helpmate of fiery temperament. He was the confidant of the Burgomaster's sorrows, and sometimes the companion of his wanderings.

It chanced that a young woman of Amsterdam, made a serious complaint against one of this worshipful body, which the two Burgomasters, to prevent its being any disedification to the people, thought proper to investigate in their private room. As the exainir nation continued for several days, no, person was admitted into the r-oqm during the time she remained, which was generally some hours. This, intelligence was quickly communicated to Aaltje, who was resolved not to lose such an opportunity of placing both the Burgomasters at her mercy. Though to keep a secret is* to a woman, a very difficult task, Aaltje actually entrusted it to no one! She preserved a profound silence, and was highly elated at the power this circumstance would give her. over her husband. Perfectly acquainted both with the time and place, Aaljje on the following day proceeded toAmsterdam. She went to the StadtHouse, and in answer to her enquiries for Vander Dordrecht, she was informed, that he was engaged* and that order* bad been given for his not being interrupted. "If he were on. his death-bed, and making confession to a priester" exclaimed Aaltje, "I would see him, for ye kennen well that I am his wife," The man bowed and gave way, and Aaltje walked forward to the door of the private room—she opened it gently and entered—the two magistrates were seated at a table, the young woman was standing near them—they were so busily engaged in the examination, that they did not perceive the intrusion of Aaltje, until she advanced and stood close beside her husband. Her-appearance paralyzed his faculties, and he sat gazing at her in speechless surprize.





He had indeed good reason to dread the volubility of her tongue, which was now likely to be effectually unloosened. Mynheer Kikvorsch was little less embarrassed, and the poor young woman, though no insidious wanton, was transfixed to the spot where she stood. "Was the like of this ever seen!" exclaimed Aaltje, "and have I been the dupe of his designs and his duplicity 1 Ah! I see what has made him false to me. I cannot, will not bear it! What I have I kindled a pure flame in his bosom to light him on. in his intrigues?." Vander Dordrecht now took advantage of a momentary pause, to conciliate the enraged lady, and to assure- her,, that her suspicions were, in this instance at least, without foundation. Aaltje had no pretensions to claim the character of a reasonable woman, and therefore gave full scope-to her pass-ion. She was not disposed. to givecredit to the assertions of her lord—it would have been at variance with the plans she had projected, and checked her domestic dominion. "Spare your words, save your arguments," cried Aaltje. *• I will list to none of your excuses. Is .not your conduct the conversation of the whole city T





and is there a person who does not pity me ?—Yon may well be afraid of my speaking, but yon may kennen that a wife's tongue is loader than a larum bell."

"I know it, I know it, Aaltje vrouw," said the Burgomaster, with a sigh.

"It is but too true;" ejaculated Mynheer Kikvorsch.

Vander Dordrecht was emboldened by the presence of his friend, and stoutly defended himself against the attacks of his wife. Aaltje was terribly enraged at his presuming to vindicate himself with so much obstinacy, and for the first time in her life, had a real fit of hysterics. The Burgomaster thought he foresaw his troubles now bursting upon him like a deluge, wave after wave, and looking as pitifully as a whipped cur, in the face of Mynheer Kikvorsch, he said, in a low and melancholy toneof Voice, "Have I married for this ? '*





"We have sat down at the card-table, and therefore must play the gamer" replied Kikvorsch, with a heavy sigh, which was reiterated by his friend. Both the magistrates stood in the same predicament, and bitterly lamented being so undeservedly placed at the mercy of their wives. Had they merited it, they would have felt less mortified, because, then by acknowledging their error, and promising amendment, with some little present to boot, they might have obtained a cessation of hostilities.

Of this resource they were deprived, as the young woman, who was the cause of this confusion, would not submit to have a stigma thrown upon her own character, to redeem theirs from domestic suspicion. How to act they knew not. Aaltjers voice resounded in their ears, as shrill and inharmonious as the notes from a cracked organ pipe. Hartshorn and assa-foetida appeared, in this instance, to have lost their wonted efficacy: and as Aaltjeduring the intervals between her shrieks, took care to inform the by-standers of the cause, there was not a gossip in Amsterdam who was ignorant of Vander Dordrecht's supposed' infidelity. He, on his part, was on thorns, for he feared the sequel' would be worse than the commencement, and even felt his ears ring by anticipation.





Neither was Mynheer Kikvorsch less disturbed. Experience had taught him to dread the very idea of provoking his spouse, and he expected every moment to behold her at the Stadt-house.

His fears were soon verified. The intelligence had1 flown like wildfire through the city, with as many additions and amendments, as it had been told by persons,> and had eventually reached" the ears of Madame Kikvorsch, in the likeness of a long story, at proper intervals interspersed with exclamations of pity.





Female patience could not bear this. She could not believe that Aaltje would have thrown herself into hysterics, without sufficient cause, and she was determined to hasten- at once to the StadtHouse, to obtain occular proof against her husband.

There are in the world a certain set of women who take pleasure in exposing the frailties of the men, while on the contrary, there are others who assiduously strive to eonceal every foible from observation. Both of these ladies were of the former description, and were never more happy, than when they had an opportunity of detracting from the merits of mankind.

Madame Kikvorsch was quickly at the StadtvHouse. As she had-been-formerly the first to notice Aaltje, she was now the foremost to pity her, and with laudable kindness added fuel to the fire, which, at the moment, blazed but top





brightly.; t ..i I a.}. . r .. Hj ii„ , • i

Aaltje no sooner saw her friend enter the room, than; she began, most pathetically, to claim her pity. Both the magistrates trembled with incipient fear, while the unfortunate young woman, who was the cause of all this disturbance, stood at a distance, weeping for the unpleasantness of her own situation. Though she was innocent, she dreaded lest the linger of . calumny should be pointed at her, and as things were, she saw no possibility of escaping. She was indeed in a pitiable plight, and the two magistrates were not less so.

Jealousy is at all times unpleasant, but those who feel it undoubtedly suffer more than the object of suspicion. When once the germ of jealousy takes root in the heart, it is next to impossible to eradicate it. It is pregnant with strange conceits and fantastic freaks, and has the peculiar property of making every one miserable within the reach of its influence.





"God's grace! Mynheers I" exclaimed Madame Kikvorsch, il do you then make the Stadt-House a receptacle for wantons?" 'i i;. .

"And deny your lawful wife entrance?" interrupted Aaltje.'

"It is a disgrace to the city !"? cried Madame. ..... .. i| \,,<i\ y.h;j

'* A foul Wot on the dignity of the magistracy}" resumed Aaitj e. • r;:

This duet was rung in the ears of the two Burgomasters, without their venturing to say any thing to exculpate themselves. Aaltje was content to be the second voice on this occasion, although she had before always contrived to be prima tlomta. After they had sufficiently tormented the poor magistrates they turned their rage towards the young woman, who still remained in the room. Her face had not been seen, as she wore, according to the fashion of the Netherlands, a long coarse cloth cloke of a dark colour, the hood of which was drawn over her head, and being of a capacious size, completely concealed her features from observation.





The storm was now at the height, and the two. ladies conceived that they had the game completely in their own hands. Aaltje- with unsparing severity bade her display those charms to the public eye which had captivated the two-sage dispensers of the law, and even Madame had some little curiosity to behold the features of her supposed rival. The young woman drew her hood still closer over her' face, and evidently wished to conceal her countenance. Aaltje observed this; she darted forward and despite of the faint resistance of the poor girl, she pulled aside the hood.





"Jeau! Marie!" she exclaimed, when she beheld her features. Madame gave a faint shriek—the Burgomasters exchanged glances of congratulation, and those who had during the confusion caused by the hysterics of Aaltje gained admittance into the room, no longer awed by the dignity of their superiors, burst out in a loud and lengthened laugh. "Are you satisfied?" asked Vander Dordrecht, who was now great as Alexander, and as proud of his triumph. Aaltje hid her face with hei> hands, but made no reply to his interrogation.

A better lesson perhaps could not have been given to a jealous woman. The object of their jealousy was no Helen, no lovely interesting creature, whose charms were irresistible. Never perhaps had Nature made a less captivating creature, and, conscious of her own imperfections, she had striven to elude observation. Even the Burgomasters had not distinctly seen her face, till Aaltje had favoured them with a sight of it, and when they were thus? gratified, what must have been their sensations at beholding a countenance which would have acted aa a complete repellant to any tender emotions!





The cause of. her application to the Burgomasters was the defalcation of one of their worshipful body, in whose hands the little property, which, was: the sole means of her subsistence, was placed. To avoid publicity they had investigated the matter in. private, that no stigma might be cast upon the name of one of the gravest citizens of Amsterdam, whose conduct had certainly been base and crueK They were strictly tenacious of their civic dignity, and had hoped to accommodate matters between the parties, without exposing the particulars of the affair to the world.





Their good intentions were, however, foiled by the unexpected interference of their helpmates, and, in all probability, it was some lover of mystification, vulgarly termed hoaxing, that had first given rise to the report which had eventually proved so prejudicial to the interest of the man they had kindly endeavoured to serve.

Aaltje and Madame Kikvorsch were completely taken in. They knew not what to say or how to act, for there had been too many witnesses of their folly, to allow them the slightest gleam of hope that it would remain a secret. People care little at whom they laugh, and many would rather laugh at a friend than a stranger. The ladies would themselves have enjoyed the joke had it been at the expence of others; but it affected them too nearly to give pleasure; for they were nowise different to the rest of the-world in that respect, and although they would have felt little for the magistrates, they felt most acutely for themselves. They knew that the Hollanders were most determined gossips, and that they had unconsciously afforded them a most delectable treat by their own eredulity.





The Burgomasters who had" suffered full as much anxiety for themselves, a» did the worshipful, the Mayor of Jonchery when threatened with the punishment ofschldgehy the Russians,* were now in a very different situation. It was their turn now to triumph, and to exult in the purity of their own intentions. Madame Kikvorsch made a precipitate retreat, and was most bitterly enraged against those who had been the cause of leading her into the ewor she had just been guilty of.



* The mayor of Jonchety, a most determined and active Bourbonist, and much disliked by the inhabitants, had the misfortune to fall under the displeasure of the Russians, by neglecting to furnish them with. a certain, number of waggons at the time of their last visit to France. The Russians were impatient and the schliige was threatened. The schLige, like the knout, is of a twofold character. It may be a beating; on the back with the flat of a cutlass, or it may be the punishment of a schoolboy, (the application of the rod,) and the latter was designed to quicken the movements of his Worship of Jonchery.





"Poor M. Savar," says M. Jorgenson, "was in the most distressing situation: he cried aloud,' Je suis pour les Bourbons : j'ai infinement de respect pour sa Majeste l'Empereur de Russie, pour le Roi de Prusse.' But it was neither the Bourbons, Alexander, nor the King of Prussia, who could save him from the grasp of the Russians: they would not understand his logic, answering ' Biak, hjenja mat, Franzoza pas bon! Franzoza canaille!' If the drama had ended here, it might still have been tolerably well; but the Russsian officer insisted on M. Savar paying a fine of ten francs per hour, till the waggons should arrive, and as a stimulus to exertion, he was to receive schlage at intervals. This was an alarming blow to the Mayor: he had not a franc in (he house. He was





Vander Dordrecht and Aaltje left the Stadt-House for the tower. The latter was in no very enviable humour, and vexed at having made herself appear so supremely ridiculous, she uttered not a word until she arrived at the mansion of the Burgomaster. !'. I • -i • •, .•



therefore obliged to send round to the villagers, entreating them most earnestly to send some money instantly, otherwise he should certainly be murdered. The inhabitants of Jonchery being highly enraged against M. Savar for his olticiousuess in the morning, and learning, to their great satisfaction, that he was to receive schlage so long as the money and the waggons were not forthcoming, now enjoyed his distress, and were in no haste to relieve him. Tbe poor fellow was kept in a state of terror and suspense for more than two hours. The Mayor took this unworthy treatment so much to heart, that he was scarcely ever afterwards sober for two hours together unless when asleep at nights."

Vide Jorgenson'* Travels through France and Germany, in 1816—16—17.





Angry with herself, and sorry that she had no real cause of offence against Vander Dordrecht, Aaltje retired to her chamber whither she was quickly followed by Leena and Katryn, who plainly perceiving that something had gone wrong, felt a degree of curiosity to be informed of the particulars.

"And what is the matter, Mevrouw Aahje!" cried Katryn, who had more volubility of speech than her companion. "Why this morn you were f rolicksome and blithe as the vogcl, and now you are sad and sorrowful as a widowed bride."

"Aye, in good truth, and not without just and proper cause," said Leena, "or I am no judge of mankind, for Mynheer looks as blank as though all the city were bankrupt. But the men are as difficult to manage as a restive steed; they prance and kick the moment they feel the curb, and if a woman does not hold the reins tightly, she may e'en bid farewell to comfort."





"You are right, you are right, Leena," replied Katryn; "my old JBos was at first mightily inclined to strive for the mastery, but i'faith I soon taught him to sing to another tune, and though he was at one time as whimsical as a cat in a tripe shop, he is now as gentle as a pet lamb, for ye must kennen that 1 am not one to bow like a papist to the will of a priester."

Aaltje had as yet preserved a sullen silence, and Katryn was all impatience to learn the cause of her disquiet. "What can be the matter with Mevrouw?" she said apart to Leena.

Leena shook her head, but made no reply to the question.

The bell summoned Leena down stairs. She was not absent many nlinutes, and returned with a letter, which by the superscription was for Aaltje. Aaltje took the letter, and not being accustomed to receive those "manuscripts of the mind," enquired from whom it came.





"That you'll know yourself, Mevrouw," said Leena, "when you have read it, better than I do, and the messenger is waiting below for an answer, so you must e'en look it over, Mevrouw, while 1 run for the pen and the inktkoher, and ask Mynheer for the schryf-paper."

Aaltje opened the letter. Katryn, who much wished to satisfy her own curiosity, made a pretence of putting the room in order, and sidled behind her chair so as to have a complete view of the contents of the epistle over the shoulder of her mistress, and as Aaltje read much slower than she talked, Katryn had sufficient time to peruse the

VOL. II. E





letter from the beginning to the end. It was as follows.

Sister Aaltje,

The devil must surely have been in you, when you sent the jongeling Huyp to the court, where the folk all jump and caper about like so many eels in a frying-pan; and I think, under favour, that his worship the Burgomaster ought to have had more discretion, and to have corrected you, when he perceived you lacked judgment. But the mischief is done now, and Huyp is cast out on the world, like a pearl before swine, as the Bybel hath it. You had better come up to the city, Aaltje, and try your skill in getting the lad out of the difficulties you have involved him in. I foresaw what it would all come to, and you know I was always as good at a guess as any gypsey vrouw in Holland.

The lad is now at a stand-still, saving and excepting that his agitation causes him to flutter about like a duck in a gutter, for he is confined in a kleine room, and guarded by a body of musketiers, who, perhaps, may take a fancy to shoot him outright for aught that I know.





You had better shew this to his worship the Burgomaster, who will doubtless consider what is best to be done; he, being a magistrate, of course knows more of the court-folk than I do. From your brother,

Luitje Vuist Slaagen.

Postscript.—I forgot to tell you, that all this is the work of a woman, just such another as somebody that shall be nameless.

"The Lord help us!" ejaculated Katryn, unguardedly.

"Help ye, woman!" cried Aaltje, turning her head round, and looking at her, with an expression of satisfaction in her countenance, "I require no help as you may know, if you remember what influence I have over the heart of his Majesty, I shall soon set things right again. But," she continued, "my brother Luitje, aye was a little of the sapscull, and it is well for him that his wife has a spirit."





"Aye. you are right, Mevrouw," interrupted Katryn, "women are wiser now, than they were wont to be years gone by."

"And will be still wiser," said Aaltje, and walked out of the room, with the air of a court favorite, to seek the Burgomaster.

Mynheer was sleeping on the sofa when Aaltje entered the apartment. He was fatigued with the exertion of his mental powers, and happy to obtain a few minutes cessation from the tongue of his spouse. He started when he beheld her with the open letter in her hand, and wondered what was to come next.





He was not kept long; in suspense, Aaltje had now got something to descant upon, and placing the letter of Luitje in the hands of Vander Dordrecht, she bade him read it, and see what mischief his perverseness, in refusing to allow her visiting Brussels, had occasioned, He quietly obeyed, and putting on his spectacles, began to peruse the epistle, Aaltje meanwhile paced the room with all the dignity she could assume, keeping her eyes fixed on the Burgomaster, who was evidently alarmed for the safety of his son, This was what Aaltje had hoped, and her eyes glistened with satisfaction, when she perceived that the feelings of the magistrate were moved.

"These are bad doings, Aaltje, vrouw," said Vander Dordrecht.





*' Yes," retorted Aaltje, "and who is to blame but yourself] You must mew me up in this old tower, forsooth,, like a mouse in a trap, and now the lad is ruined, I suppose you will leave him to shift for himself. If I had been at Brussels, you would have seen how very different every thing would have been. Then, indeed, you might have been proud of the fortunes ofHuyp, but now it seems that even his life is in danger, and yet you sit there as quiet as an owl in a bush of ivy at noon-day."

The Burgomaster sat for some minutes in deep consideration. Aaltje watched the workings of his countenance attentively, and she was satisfied that his feelings were awakened. In fancy she was already transported to Brussels— in fancy she beheld herself the admiration of the courtly circle—the monarch at her feet, and honors at her command. The delusion was too pleasing to be banished for a moment, and Aaltje now stood on the very pinnacle of expectation.





CHAPTER XVI.



Sweet are the thoughts that smother from conceit:

For when I come and sit me downe to reste,

My chaire presents a throne of majestic;

And when I set my bonnet on my head,

Methinks I fit my forehead for a crowne;

And when I take my truncheon in my fist,

A sceptre then comes tumbling in my thoughts.

My dreams are princely, all of diadems.



Greene.

Marriage is like a game of bowls: fortune indeed makes the match, and the two nearest, and sometimes the two farthest are together, but the game depends entirely upon judgment. Still it is a game, and consequently one mast be a loser.

CONGREVE.



"WE must go to Brussels, Aaltje," said the Burgomaster, after he had duly cousidered the perilous situation of Huyp, "the lad must not be left to the mercy of his enemies."





Aaltje smiled and simpered, like a maiden when she first listens to the declaration of her lover, though any one versed in the workings of the heart, might have doubted whether she was most alarmed for her son, or gratified at the prospect of being the admiration of the metropolis. The vexatious occurrences of the morning were now in a fair way of being forgotten, and Aaltje fondled and caressed the old magistrate, till he was half smothered with her fond embraces. He was not blessed with a great share of penetration, or he would have seen through the flimsy cobweb veil which shaded the secrets of Aaltje's heart from observation. At court she was aware that he would he a person of no personal consequence, though he was politically of some dignity at Amsterdam. He was not even qualified to fllT the office of card-pointer, which at the English Court i» the honorable situation of a bishop.* As a magistrate and a citizen, he did very well; but once removed from the scene of his magisterial sway, Aaltje well knew that he must sink into insignificance, unless her charms should have influence enough to raise him into notice.





* The Bishop oft n, (Dr. P m) though

too pious to play at cards at court himself, has no objection to stand behind the chair of the King, and direct him how to play the rubber, which, on a late occasion he did with such success, that one of the party, vexed at his interference, exclaimed, with courtly politeness, " Your Lordship had better pull off your laced gloves, and take his Majesty's hand." This the prelate declined, but still continued to direct the King. In fact the bishop is one of those jovial souls, who lave a rubber, a bottle, and the ladies, as well as any layman in the kingdom, of which we can speak from proof positive; not that we think the worse of him for being gay at heart, though he is something like Crabbe's young divine, who (bought his Sunday task—

'' As much as God or man could fairly ask."

Perhaps it is his misfortune to possess too great a fund of entertainment, and, therefore from being courted, the gravity of the prelate is lost in the gaiety of the courtier, as the following anecdote will evince. He had, if I recollect ri«htlv, been.





As Mynheer had once decided to visit Brussels, Aaltje was determined that he should not change his opinion. That he might have no opportunity of asking theadvice of his'friends on the subject, she instantly commenced her preparations for their departure, and on the following morning the Burgomaster





was informed by his bustling helpmate that the carriage would be ready in half an hour to convey them from Dordrecht Tower.

"So soon, Aaltje?" exclaimed the Burgomaster.

"What would you sail on as slow as a dogger boat in the dyke pools?" cried Aaltje. "Out upon you, Vander Dordrecht, you ought to speed on like the eagle, and not crawl along like the snail.—"

Whether the magistrate was convinced or not, he at last thought proper to be silent. Poor man! his power was limited, and he found it necessary that his words as well as his days should be numbered, that he might not give offence to his spouse.

The cumbrous vehicle drew up to the door of the tower, and under the direction of Aaltje it was loaded something after the same mannner as that of the celebrated Lady Wrongbead, with the exception of the children. Boxes, parcels, eatables, liqueurs, the lap-dog-, and old Leena, filled up the major part of the vehicle, and in the reserved portion, Mynheer and Aaltje were squeezed in, with as much chance of a comfortable journey, as a person in the pillory has of escaping- the salutation of well aimed missiles. Indeed the carriage was so heavily laden, that with all the dexterity of the coachman, who applied his whip somewhat unmercifully to the sides of his horses, he found it impossible to proceed quicker than a foot pace. Had not Aaltje been meditating schemes of conquest she would doubtlessly have tried some method of quickening their motions. She \vas however so pleasantly engaged in "dreams of greatness," that she did not perceive the slowness with which they proceeded. The Burgomaster puffed his cigar, and dozed, and administered to the cravings of the appetite, and then dozed again, so that Aaltje had no one to disturb the musings of her mind. .





Vander Dordrecht was no great traveller, and after journeying a few leagues began to feel fatigued, and poor old Leena, who had been promoted to the office of lady's maid, had enough to do to poise the band boxes and parcels in their places, and keep the yelping cur of Aaltje quiet. It was the first time that Leena had ever travelled ten leagues from her native village, and, like all other waiting women, she found great difficulty in subduing her propensity to conversation. The presence of Mynlteer, however, was a restraint which she could not overcome. Awed by a sense of his dignity, and her own inferiority, Leena preserved a profound silence, and kept her observations and remarks till some more convenient season, when she might be suffered to give vent to all the thoughts and feelings which now smothered in her bosom.





With a laudable attention to his pecuniary interest, Mynheer resolved, though it lengthened the journey, to proceed to Brussels by the way of Ghent, that he might have an opportunity of collecting some debts which had for some years stood very prominently in his ledger. To this Aaltje could make no objection, and after a wearisome journey of three days, they entered the gates of that venerable and still beautiful city, which even in its decay exhibits traces of its once high and majestic grandeur. It was the day of a festival, and nearly the whole population of the city were in the streets. The canals were lined with boats, which glided over the glassy surface with many a gay and laughing party, who were hastening to witness the procession from some previously selected spot. From the high turrets of the deserted and decaying, though once magnificent religious edifices, where the recluse sought a retirement from the turmoils of the busy world, the standard of the city waved gaily to the gentle breeze, and the bells of the ancient and majestic Cathedral, whose aisles and chapels were crowded with pious devotees, who gave those hours to heaven which the younger and more thoughtless devoted to pleasure, summoned the undecided wanderers to join in the service of the church. Who that has beheld Ghent at such a time, when his soul was elated with joy, has not heaved a sigh on the following day to see the deserted streets and the cheerless aspect of this once great city 1 Its former grandeur now flits over the imagination like the remembrance of a dream, and we can almost wish that we had lived in the age of its splendour, that we might have participated in the princely pleasures of which it was the theatre in the olden time. Although now but the ruin of its former self, Ghent still possesses an interest over the mind, which its misfortunes never can eradicate. There is scarcely a spot that does not awaken some half-slumbering feeling, and melt the soul into tenderness. Here, where now the bat whirls at midnight from the high and mouldering turret, where the night raven lurks amid tottering pinnacles and half-fallen battlements, lived, in times gone by, the " flowers of courtesie and chivalry," and our own Lancaster—But those days are past, never, never, to return —the hero slumbers in the still, cold tomb, and all that remains of the beauties to whom their hearts were devoted, is a little dust. No longer the clank of their armour echoes through the vast and lofty halls—their memory is all that they have left to posterity. Even the Religious are almost exterminated, and a straggling monk, with perchance a few of those estimable women, the Sisters of Charity, mournfully remind us, as we walk through the silent streets, of the period when monarchs humbled themselves before the sackcloth-clad friar.*





But we are insensibly digressing from the narrative. Both Aaltje and Vander Dordrecht were delighted with the hilarity of the scene, while poor Leena had sufficient employment in endeavouring to prevent the yelping cur from jumping out of the window, and mixing with his brethren in the street.



* The Dominican convent at Ghent, was principally founded by Margaret of York, sister of Edward IV. of England. She was Duchess of Burgundy and Countess of Flanders, and is repeatedly mentioned in the Belgium Dominicanim, by De Jonghe, (Brussels 11VJ.)





The carriage had now reached one of numerous little bridges over the canals, with which Ghent is in so many parts intersected. The pageant was approaching, and they were obliged to halt till the procession had passed. Aaltje and Leena so fully filled up one window of the vehicle, that the old magistrate found it impossible to get even a glimpse of the ceremonial. Unfortunately he had as much curiosity in this instance as his helpmate, and although the carriage was drawn up as closely as possible to the wall of the bridge, he thrust forth his unwieldy body as far as he could from the window which fronted the water. The wall was unsafe, and the carriage was in a crazy condition; the weight of Vander Dordrecht completely destroyed its equilibrium, and with a loud crash the wall, the vehicle, and its inmates, made a precipitate descent into the bosom of the canal. Fortunately the pole of the carriage was none of the strongest, and snapt in twain with the struggling of the horses, which terrified by the screams of the by-standers, became totally unmanageable.—Aaltje who was uppermost in the descent, contrived to extricate herself from the cumbrous travelling machine, but quickly losing her hold, became exposed to the mercy of the current, adown which she floated, to the great amusement of the mischievous and idle spectators, with motions somewhat similar to those of the mechanical figures vulgarly termed dancing dolls. Leena forgetting the dignity of her master, and sensibly alive to the danger of her present situation, struggled vehemently with the Burgomaster for precedency in emancipation, while the terrified cur, who had crept to the top of the broken carriage, yelped piteously to be rescued, and at intervals most ungratefully snapped at the fingers of his master and his nurse, who were in a more pitiable plight than himself. Assistance was promptly afforded, and the magistrate was soon rescued from the water. Even Aaltje, who had reached land before hfm, could not help laughing at the deplorable figure of her lord whose habiliments were in a most tattered condition, while his hat floated like a cock-boat down the stream. It was rather an indecorous situation for a magistrate, but the accident had been unforeseen.





The rank and consequence of the party was no sooner ascertained, than the corporation of the city were anxious to render them every assistance in their power, and the magistrates stood, bowing, and complimenting and congratulating them on their escape so long that had their constitutions been very delicate they would in all probability have caught the ague, or a severe rheumatism, which would for some time have caused them to remember their journey to Ghent. At length, however, they were conducted to the mansion of the principal magistrate, whither were also conveyed all the luggage of the travellers which was not absolutely spoiled. Aaltje wept for the lost gew-waws, and Mynheer sighed heavily for the loss of his money, for he rightly judged that a large sum was thrown away in consequence of their misfortune, independently of the damage done to the carriage, which would add another and a considerable item to the account of his expenditure. To a man habitually parsimonious,





this unforeseen necessity for disbursement was of a most painful nature. It ,was money applied to no good or profitable purpose, and the Burgomaster blamed alternately himself and the bridge, the unsafeness of which had caused all his trouble.

Aaltje was more vexed at the loss of her finery, than the accident. There was still enough undamaged to set off her charms, to the best advantage. Besides the hospitality and attention of the magistracy, more than counterbalanced all the evils all of which she had so largely partaken, and she blessed herself to think that the accident had not happened at Amsterdam, where it would have afforded more mirth than Aaltje could well have endured tamely. The people of Ghent were more attentive and respectful, and Aaltje did not fail to inform them of her influence at court. Neither was the Burgomaster less honored. His entertainers did not treat him after the fashion of the Lord Chancellor Egerton, who once pithily said to a new Recorder of London, when a woodcock pie was served up to the table, "now, Master Recorder, you are welcome to a Common Council."* On the contrary, they bowed to the wisdom of his opinions, and regarded him as one of the great pillars of civic consequence.





Aaltje meanwhile enjoyed what diversions the city afforded. The bills of the theatre announced Talma for the evening, and his appearance had excited a considerable sensation among the admirers of theatrical performances. Many of the Netherlanders had already affected the Talma-shrug, the Talma-start, and the Talma-frown, and long ere the hoar appointed for the commencement of the comedie, the square leading to the neat little edifice was thronged with persons of all ranks and degrees of society, anxious to witness the performance of the pride of the Parisian stage.



* VideHowel's Familiar Letters, p. 273.





Although Vander Dordrecht would fain have excused himself and Aaltje from accompanying his entertainers to the spectacle he found all his efforts overruled, as their persuasions were strongly backed by the importunities of his wife. He had even hinted in the course of conversation, that he did not think it altogether proper and discreet for a magistrate to be present at a public exhibition, which had been denounced by the sectarians of all nations as tending to demoralize the people. This mode of reasoning was somewhat Jesuitical, and though strenuously sup

VOL. II. F





ported, failed of convincing those to whom it was addressed.

Thus obliged to be gay against his will, the Burgomaster joined the party who were going to witness the histrionic talents of Talma; when he cast his eyes on the crowd which had now nearly filled up the centre space of the square, and even occupied the branches of the trees that ornament the grass-plat, he devoutly hoped that the boxes, the parterre, and every other part of the edifice might be so completely filled, that there would remain no probability of their gaining admission. Hopes, however, are but the offspring of the mind, and are suspended betwixt expectation and reality, like the vapour between earth and heaven, and those of the Burgomaster were disappointed. Aaltje and her companions were determined to witness the merits of this far filmed tragedian, and forced their May "through the motley assemblage with determined perseverance, regardless of the pressing of the multitude, who would have elbowed royalty itself, had there been no other way of keeping their position. As it was, Aaltje had as fair a chance as any of her numerous competitors of gaining an entrance into the theatre. Regardless of the disarrangement of her dress, she pressed forward into the thickest part of the crowd, keeping fast hold of the arm of the Burgomaster, who was of a more timorous disposition than his spouse, and who repeatedly warned her of the danger to which she was thus unnecessarily exposing herself. His remonstrances were however as ineffectual as his previous excuses had been, and Aaltje desired him not to thwart her in her pleasures, as she was resolved to see Talma perform in spite of all the opposition he, or the populace, might think proper to throw in the way. Perceiving that his arguments were useless, and that his wishes were unheeded, Vander Dordrecht quietly submitted to the will of his wife, and vigorously seconded her efforts, to gain a situation among the foremost of the crowd. The size of the magistrate enabled him to bear up against the pressure which asailed him on all sides, though liis aching ribs almost every moment induced him to mutter a deep curse on the heads of those' who paid so little respect to his magisterial consequence.





At length by dint of perseverance, they reached the threshold of the entrance, and Aaltje, who clung close to the arm of Mynheer, pulled him so forcibly after her into the interior of the edifice, that he left part of the skirts of his upper garments amidst the crowd, and they eventually succeeded in gaining a seat in the parterre, at a considerable distance from the stage, '..!;..





The curtain drew op, and the last notes of the overture slowly died away on the ear. All felt the most anxious expectation. The tragedy announced in the bills was Zaire, and Talma was to enact the character of the Sultan. The first scene of the piece was scarcely attended to, though the Zaire was exquisitely lovely, but during the second act, in which the superbe Orosmane first appears sur le plane her, every whisper was hushed into such profound silence, that even a pin might have been heard to fall, although the theatre was filled to the utmost extent. Loud plaudits welcomed Talma to the task he had undertaken, which to say truth, he received as a right, rather than a favour, though he gracefully acknowledged their courtesy by a most profound obeisance. He delivered his first speech with infinite delicacy and tenderness, though his brilliant talents were somewhat disfigured by the grimaces by which, in compliancewitfothe French taste, he endeavoured to give an extra effect to the sentiments of the poet. However, with all the faults of the school to which he belongs, he is an inimitable actor. When he throws off the trammels of education, he is nature itself, and can at pleasure mould the mind to tenderness, or melt the heart to tears. I have seen old warriors weep and sympathize with him, when he has performed a part in which he has given a representation of heart-rending sufferings—I have seen the young sob and sigh as though their hearts were bursting when he has groaned in imitative agony—I have seen ladies faint, when he has pourtrayed the fiercest passions of the human breast, and I have shuddered myself at his theatric rage. A man must be of no common description who can thus enchant thousands of spectators, and they must be totally devoid of feeling, who can witness his performance without participating in the passions he pourtrays. Talma had no sooner uttered the first line of the speech, beginning,





i . i ,, • . , . \ i ,. ,, . ,> "Verteueuse Zaire, avant que l'hymenee, Joigne a jamais nos coeurs et notre destinee, J'aicmsurmes projets, survous, sur mon amour, Devoir, en Musulman, vous parler sans detour;'

than every eye was fixed on him, and him alone, and every ear attentive only to the accents which fell from his tongue. Even the languid, lounging English, who had till then laid like dormice on the seats of the boxes, roused themselves from their torpid state, and attended to the performance. Talma was on this night completely master of his histrionic powers, and wooed with the tenderness of a real lover, rather than the artificial feeling of an actor. Aaltje in common with the other ladies who graced the theatre* envied the beautiful Zaire, in whose ears Orosmane breathed his vows, and many there were who at the moment wished themselves in the place of the fair esclave Chretien who possessed the heart of the magnificent Soudan. Even Vander Dordrecht was warmed by the impressiveness of Talma's performance, and whispered to Aaltje, that it brought to his mind those hours of delight, when buoyant with youthful spirits he was wont to talk of love from sunset to midnight.





Aaltje smiled, and assured him in reply, that had he made love like Talma no woman couhl have resisted him. This silenced the Burgomaster, whose vanity had induced him to expect a complimentary reply. A worse time he could not have chosen, for the heavy Dutchman could not woo with the ardour of the impassioned and smoothtongued Talma: the latter could win a thousand hearts, while the former was meditating on laying siege to one.—But if Talma was exquisite in the first scene of Zaire, he was inimitable in the succeeding onesr and in that between him and Corasmiiv where the letter comes into his hands, the workings of his countenance defied description. Jealousy,, tenderness, and rage, by turns contracted and softened his brow, and in. the after-speech where he exclaims





"- Zaire... Zaire est centfoia phis coupable—" .

his accent and his action were terrifically sublime. It was the very acme of acting—exquisitely delightful and affecting. There was scarcely an eye undimmed by a tear. Even the Burgomaster's cheek was wetted by a pearly, intruder, and the ladies wept audibly. There is something in the portraiture of contemned love that awakens the feelings of sympathy in every bosom. A deceived, a slighted lover, has claims on our pity which the successful one cannot hope for: we are apt to rejoice with those who are happy and to weep with those who are sorrowful. Our feelings are our masters, and it is difficult to conquer them.





"Well,. Mynheer," said . Aaltje after they had quitted the theatre, and breathed the cool' and invigorating breeze in the area- of the square. "Well. Mynheer, think you now that your goude was thrown away? It would have been as foolish for you to have staid: dozing at the magistrates' while Talma was performing, as it was of the woman in the Bybel to light a candle and place it under a bushel. But you





wanted some better head than your own to advise you in emergencies. What would the magistracy of Ghent have supposed, think you\- had I not coaxed you to behave after a proper manner? It is well for you, Vander Dordrecht, that you have sueh a wife."

The Burgomaster muttered an elongated yaw,, which could neither Be construed, into an affirmative or a negative to the assertions of Aaltje. Perhaps he felt, what many other men in similar situation have done before him, that it was useless to contend with his wife. Aaltje knew her own power, and was- not disposed; to abate one tittle of it. to please any man. She had assumed the fine. lady, and like her prototype,. Lady Duberly, thought with respect to her husband that " there was no making a silken purse out of a sow's-ear." Women are very apt to under-rate the abilitieaof the male sex





•—at least the managing ladies are—and Aaltje as has been before shown, was of the latter description. With such clever helpmates, men have nothing more to do than to thank the Gods that gave them such a treasure, though, m truth-, it must be acknowledged that some of them have ungratefully disapproved of being made mere adjectives; Lord W-stm-th, for instance, (if we must look at home for examples) was not quite so patient as his father-in-law the Marquis of S—y has been through a long life,* and the daughter found that she could not rule like her mother.



* As a proof, of the extreme docility of the Mar»inis of S y, the following anecdote is inserted.

He was one morning riding in the neighbourhood of his country residence, when he met with several loaded waggons proceeding to his house On his enquiring whither they were going, several of the

drivers told him, 'tothe Marchioness of S y"s.'

At last one of them said,'to the Marquis's;' when his Lordship, giving him half-a-crown, replied, "Thank you, my. honest fellow—you are the only one that, has acknowledged me to be master of my own house \"





Mynheer was on the alert at an early hour on the following day, and was busily employed in superintending the repairing of the carriage, while Aaltje was as much engaged in putting her articles of dress in order. In this Jjeena was of little assistance, and the poor old soul had caught so violent a cold from her emersion in the canal, that her cough distracted the nerves of her mistress so much, that she was obliged in her own defence to send her out with the lap-dog. In the course of the morning the necessary repairs were completed, and Mynheer intimated to his wife that he was ready to proceed to Brussels. Aaltje was also in readiness, and after taking a formal leave of the magistracy of Ghent, they set off for the court of the IVetherlands,. where





they arrived on the morning of the succeeding day in safety,

Aaltje although she was extremelyanxious to figure away at court, thought it prudent first to make some enquiries after the welfare of her son, and finding that he was safe and lived at a very short distance from the hotel where they had taken up their abode, she did him the honor to pay him a visit during the time the Burgomaster was refreshing, himself with a slumber.





CHAPTER XVEL

'* iv W -^>' '.-* j '"i I fli. •

Popularity is nothing more than a step-ladder, for ambition to reach the summit of place and preferment. We. all hare our prices.

Sir Robert Walpak.

Misfortune oft in>mirthful guise appears,

And woe, at times, will frolic, tho' in tears.



The Veils, a Poem..

HUYP was sitting in the little apartment which he occupied of an ancient dame, who made a livelihood by letting the greater portion of the house to gentlemen, when his mother arrived. Ladies she never received, as they were more difficult to be satisfied than the other sex, and besides, having many an idle hour on their hands, they might perchance take a fancy to pay her a morning visit, and thus prevent her from attending to her domestic concerns. This laudable foresight had spared her a great deal of trouble in the course of a lengthened life; and her placard of' bon logis,' gave an intimation to the ladies, that it would be useless for them to apply..





The apartment of Huyp was situated at the back of the second floor; a few crazy though highly ornamented chairs of French manufacture were ranged around the room, while a table which would have disgraced the common room of an English ale-house occupied the centre^ in shape somewhat similar to that of a dresser, and formed of the same materials. At the further end stood a dome-topped couch, which served both for a sofa and a bed, the hangings and covering #£ which were of pale blue brocaded satin, somewhat the worse for the wear and tear of twenty years. On one side of the apartment a glass of large dimensions, a little damaged, gave evidence of its former magnificence, and was flanked on the left side, by an engraving from one of the productions of Ostade's pencil, and on the other by an etching of Napoleon from the burin of a celebrated native artist. The chimney-piece was literally loaded with ornamental china, and the centre was occupied by a plaster cast of the Virgin, over which, on a bracket bronzed and gilded, nodded Louis the Desired, whose features having been unfortunately mutilated by a fall, appeared something like one of Mrs. Heidelburg's Mandarins, and from the nose having been severed from the bust and badly re-united to it, a casual observer might have conceived his Majesty to have been an admirer of the science «f self-defence, and levelled by a well aimed blow given by some victorious antagonist. The curtains were of white linen, over which was a gay patterned English shawl which French ingenuity had tortured into drapery by no means inelegant,





Madame More, the mistress of the mansion, received Aaltje with true French politesse. . She was a little plump figure of a woman, of a ruddy complexion with a pair, of keen looking grey eyes, which doubtlessly had done great execution in their time, but were now shaded by a large pair of spectacles, which ever and anon threatened to slip over the little snub nose on which they rested. Perhaps there was something like policy in Madame More wearing eye-preservers, as her eyes had a slight squint, which certainly was rather a diminution of their brilliancy in the eyes of fastidious persons. The dress of Madame, who did not expect a visitor, by no means contributed to set her person off to the greatest advantage. She \rore a petticoat of bright green callamanco, over which was thrown a short bed-gown of dark chintz. Her head dress was composed of a night cap of linen made after the Dutch fashion, with a very high crown, and a border of extreme narrowness —as unbecoming a tete as any woman could wear, without striving to disfigure herself, and to complete her dress she had tied on a black silk apron, ornamented with several furbelows by the fair hands of a tasteful Parisian manufacturer of ladies' habiliments. Such was the figure who opened the door to Aaltje who was all pink satin, white feathers, and blond lace, and formed a striking contrast to the lady of the mansion.





Aaltje enquired for Huyp, and Madame, with a low reverence, informed her that Mynheer was in his apartment, from which she volunteered her services to summon hin*. To this movement on the part of the okd dame, Aaltje however objected, and intimated that she wished to be shewn. at once to the apartment of her son. Madame More who had till now supposed that she might be a 'bit of a sweetheart* of her young lodger's, stared, with extended eyes, when she heard Aaltje speak of him as her son, and having learned something of French flattery during the period that the continental states were under the dominion of that power, she poured forth a profusion of complimentary phrases, which were by no means displeasing to the ears of the lady to whom they were addressed. To look young, and to be thought younger than she really was, was one of the greatest pleasures that Aaltje was capable of enjoying. Ladies are ever apt to be Huyp. Madame led the way, apologizing at every step for the disorder of the house, until she reached the chamber in which Huyp was sitting, when after tapping gently, she threw open the door and ushered in Madame More. Huyp was astonished, as he had received no intimation of her arrival, but nevertheless rose up to welcome his mother, whom he would not have recognized had he passed her in the street, for she was so perfumed and bedizened, that even the Burgomaster, if taken unawares, might have doubted her identity with Aaltje Vuist Slaagen.





Scarcely had Huyp bidden his mother welcome to Brussels, before she began upon the topic of her son's indiscretion, which she averred was extremely distressing to her, and considered by the Burgomaster as a most unpardonable crime. She, in common with other foolish people, thought that the court must be a perfect paradise, and blamed Huyp for giving way to his feelings when he should only have considered his interest. To this reasoning, however, Huyp could not accede, and plainly informed his mother, that if she had visited Brussels with the intention of replacing him in the suite of Royalty, her labour would be misapplied. Aaltje started at this open avowal of her son's heretical opinions, but being aware that he was of a spirit congenial to her own, she for once forebore from giving vent to her swelling passion. It was a vexatious circumstance that he should differ so widely in opinion from herself, but she trusted that the Burgomaster would coincide in her own views, and compel Huyp once more to become the slave of the court.





As her own expectations of aggrandizement were closely connected with the conduct of Huyp, Aaltje wisely smothered her feelings, and chattered with him on indifferent subjects, till the entrance of Madame Mor6 with a cup of chocolate, gave an interrution to the conversation. This refreshment was particularly acceptable to Aaltje, who began to feel those unpleasant sensations in the throat which persons who talk incessantly for a long time, generally experience.





Madame More was, in this instance, more generous than she was wont to be. She had been so much gratified by the attentions of Aaltje that she wished to secure her friendship, and as she had politely assured Aaltje that she could not have conceived so young a woman to be the mother of Mynheer Huyp, inherent vanity had made them take a liking to each other.

Huyp was merely a passive spectator during these ebullitions of complimen♦ary discourse. He was somewhat confused at the unexpected appearance of his mother, and felt certain symptoms of terror at braving the presence of the Burgomaster, who, if Aaltje's description was correct, was terribly irritated at his misfortunes. Relations are in general the very worst persons to meet in circumstances of distress. They are lavish of their advice, comments, and taunting affectation of condolence, and frequently insult distress rather than relieve it. To use a - common expression, they are "Job's comforters,"—and like the insects that live in the bright beams of the summer's sun, the moment that fortune is shadowed by the dark and gathering clouds of adversity, they seek some kindlier atmosphere, and would be happy to hear no more of their unfortunate relatives. Huyp was not without his fears that Vander Dordrecht might





VOL. II. o





be one of this genus: and as he was come to the court, Huyp had some reason for his suspicions. However he said nothing. Aaltje desired him to repair as soon as possible to the Burgomaster, and intimated a wish that he would make his appearance in a manner not derogatory to their dignity. Huyp bowed acquiescence, and Aaltje retired, requesting that he would follow her to the hotel.

This was a relief to Huyp, who was »lad of a few minutes reprieve. His mind was engaged in preparing a defence of his conduct, for he might justly have observed with respect to the accusations against him—

"If you trace their births and xras, You'll meet with nothing but chiinaeras." *



Meston's 'Knight of the Kirk.'





Nevertheless the task was unpleasant and somewhat difficult.

When Aaltje returned to the hotel, she found Vander Dordrecht aroused from the slumber in which she had left him, and seated with an elegantly dressed female on a conversation-stool, which was formed only for the accommodation of two persons. Naturally inclined to be jealous, a dark cloud in a moment spread itself over the countenance of Aaltje. The Burgomaster perceived the symptoms with innate terror, and was about to explain the cause of being found in such a situation, when the lady rising from her seat, threw her arms around the neck 01 Aaltje, exclaiming, "Have I then the happiness to embrace the mother of my beloved Huyp?"—

In an instant the clouds were dispersed from the brow of Aaltje, who returned the embrace with ardour, when she was informed that she held a high situation at court, and might probably do much towards bringing her into fashionable notoriety. This fair visitor was no other than Rosalie, who having heard of the arrival of the Burgomaster, was resolved to make one more trial, and to see whether the influence of a parent had any power over the heart of a youth who was insensible to love.





As might have been expected, Rosalie made out her own case most admirably. A special pleader could not have done better, and long ere Huyp made his appearance she had gained the suffrages of his parents, though they must, had they been possessed of a grain of penetration have discovered that she was an incorrigible amplificateure; but the Burgomaster was blinded by the loud praises she bestowed on his wisdom, and Aaltje by the flattery of her personal charms





Rosalie saw with delight her own power, and trusted that the sequel of her efforts would prove propitious to her hopes. She was a firm believer in the opinion of the poet who asserted that "the flattered ever take your word,"— an observation true, though somewhat trite.

Amazement was pictured on the expressive countenance of Huyp when he entered the apartment, and beheld Rosalie in deep conversation with his mother. Rosalie gave him one of her sweetest smiles, and held forth her hand. Huyp did not seize it. with the captures of a lover, but bowed coldly, and took a seat on the opposite side of the room. Aaltje and the Burgomaster exchanged glances of surprize, and Rosalie applied her handkerchief to her eyes, which, if they were not dimmed., with tears, sparkled with anger. Huyp preserved a sullen, silence—Aaltje





fidgetted on her chair and seemett afraid to say much before the court favorite, lest shemight expose her own want of elegance, while Vander Dordrecht seemed little less uneasy than his seldom taciturn lady.

"Do we meet thus, my dearest Huyp?" said Rosalie, after a long pause. "Have my enemies taught you to hate me?"

"The meeting, Madam," replied Huyp, "was unsought, and unwished for by me, and is, to say truth, an extremely unpleasant one."

"Was the like ever heard!" cried Aaltje unable any longer to command her patience, "you grovelling boy, would you disgrace the Vuist Slaagens by marrying a meisje\ who is fit for nothing, save frying flounders, or making porridge for a magistrate's lacquey."

Huyp smiled. He understood from the eloquence of Aaltje, to whom he was indebted for his character, though she had abstained from mentioning names, be was perfectly aware that Clara was alluded to in so contemptuous a manner.





"I do not exactly comprehend your meaning, Madam," said Huyp, "but I certainly surmise that the maid of the koek-pan would be a far better match than the lady of the court. Marrying into a quality family, is, in fact, like thrusting your head into a bucket of water, for you are soon overwhelmed with their consequence, and heaven help the man who makes the venture."

The Burgomaster gave a tacit assent to the truth of Huyp's observations, and Aaltje, who was extremely proud of the antiquity of the Yuist Slaagen family blushed with very shame for the degeneracy of her son, who ought in her opinion to hare looked high for a wife, for she thought that the fag end> of a quality family, with a large share of pride for a portion, was preferable to the darling daughter of a rich bourgeois.—Rosalie whispered something in her ear, and Aaltje immediately turned to Vander Dordrecht and said, "Cannot you breathe a few words of reproof in your son's ear, Mynheer, or is it to be left to me ?M—" Why," returned the magistrate, "ye must kennen, Aaltje vrouw, that I know of no one more capable than yourself of lecturing the lad, so e'en take the task on yourown shoulders, for, women were aye good pleaders in the olden time, where love was the theme."





Huyp perceived that the Burgomaster was inclined to favor him, and therefore took courage. Aaltje expatiated largely on the charms and the virtues of her new friend, and charged Huyp as he valued her love to renew his addresses to the lady of her choice. Rosalie sate in silent and happy expectation, hut the spell of delight, which had entwined its cobweb texture round her heart was quickly dispelled by the reply of. Huyp. "Obedience, Madam," said he,, addressing his mother, "is certainly the duty of a son, but, where the happiness of his life is concerned, it also becomes. hi* duty to consider himself. If I were to comply, with your commands in this instance, I should doom myself to misery, and let yon fair lady, who has taken advantage of your credulity, say whether her conduct has been such as to command either, my esteem or my. love."





"This is too much," cried Rosalie rising and pacing the room in violent rage—" Your reason, Sir: am I to be contemned thus—thus, and by you?" Your reason,. Sir,, for these insinua* lions?"





"Truth is the most powerful reason," returned Huyp, "' and if you request further explanation, let me refer you to the period of my incarceration and dismissal from, the court.. Nay, ask your friends, who has a claim on the affections of my heart? Certainly not she who could persecute and injure the man whom she affected to love." Vander Dordrecht now began to comprehend the cause of Huyp's aversion to Rosalie, and drawing forth the letter of Luitje from his pocket, he enquired if this was the "woman."' to whom he had alluded as having been- instrumental to his disgrace? Huyp replied in the affirmative, and briefly related the little disagreement which had aroused the vindictive feelings of the courtly Rosalie- Aaltje could scarcely give credit to his assertions, and would fain have flattered herself,that he was prejudiced against Rosalie, and therefore questioned him closely of the affair to which he had alluded. His replies were clear and consistent, and the defence of Rosalie was of so flimsy a texture, that there was not room for a doubt.





Rosalie was now placed in a very rfelicate situation. The tide had flowed in her favour, but at the ebb her bark was likely to be stranded. It was evident that the Burgomaster was influenced by the narrative of his son, and he boldly hinted to his wife, that he would not compel the lad to act contrary to his own inclinations, even though his Majesty should intimate it to be his pleasure.. "You talk more glibly than wisely, Mynheer," said Aaltje, who was unwilling to give up the hope of being most particularly distinguished at the palace of Lacken," but you should know that I have a vote in the disposal of Huyp; and who, think ye, is so proper as a mother to choose a bride for the son?"





The Burgomaster said no more, though, with paternal anxiety, he hoped that Huyp would not seal his misery by uniting himself to a woman who would nptjeave him the power of judging for for himself in any instance. He had, in this respect, become wise from experience, by. having a managing partner, whose chief delight is to display the exT tent of her power, and to "air her vocabulary" at those times which should be sacred to domestic felicity. Though he had no objections to urge against Huyp's being wedded,, he had a multiplicity of arguments to bring forward against his being fettered ;, ajid of all the examples of human folly, he knew of none that was more likely to influence the decision of his son than his own. Though he did not dare openly to adr. vise Huyp to act according to his own inclinations, he took advantage of the opportunity which was afforded him of Aaltje's. quitting the room for a few minutes, to whisper in his ear, that he might act as he pleased, notwithstanding all that his mother might urge to tha contrary. Huyp thanked hum for this intimation,, and decided to be obstit nate.





Meanwhile Rosalie was meditating how to accomplish her point. She saw that she stood a chance of being foiled, and that Huyp was likely to dispute her pretensions. How to counteract his prejudices was now the. chief cause for consideration, and ,the interest of Aaltje was almost all that she had., to depend on. No sooner, therefore, .did Aaltje return to the apartment, in.„ which they were, than she dropped the subject of lave, and offered her services to prepare her for the court, as there was. to be a. drawing room on the following day. Her kind offers were joyfully accepted by the latter lady, who immediately gave Rosalie an invitation to remain with her for the day. This was what Rosalia wished for; and Huyp, to his dismay, discovered that he was to be tormented not only with his mother's lectures, but also with the company of the woman he had such reason to despise.





But, however, neither the rhetoric of his mother, nor the coquettish arts of Rosalie, had any effect on his resolutions. The Burgomaster persisted in remaining neuter, and left the belligerents to act as seemed best to themselves. Thus passed the first day of Aaltje's residence at Brussels, but as she could not control her propensity to, conversation, and informed Rosalie of the admiration of the monarch, she thusearly laid the foundation for subsequent mortifications,





Until now Rosalie had been ignorant that she had a rival. The communication she was unprepared f©rr and it engendered a deadly hatred in her bosom against Aaltje, which she was- resolved should not be concealed and smother in secret. Rosalie had art enough to hide her feelings, and still kept up the shew of friendship, though she was meditating vengeance.

The following day when the Burgomaster and Aaltje went to pay their respects to the monarch, their reception was of the most frigid description. As is the etiquette on those occasions, the contour of the royal countenance was decisive, and there were very few among the courtly circle who honored them with the slightest notice- Even Rosalie •lid not recognize her charming friend, who had been, on the day preceding,, the most amiable and most beloved, of her sex, and the eyes of many of the. principal persons seemed to enquire why• such people had intruded themselves into their society. Such a mortification had not been anticipated, and Aaltje felt it most acutely. The coldness of the King, who had at her first introduction to him at the tower, been more than commonly gracious towards her, was a most singular and unlooked for circumstance—and provoking in the exT treme, because she had fondly expected to have been looked up to as the favor rite—the flower of court beauties;





As these expectations had not been realized, Aaltje was willing to quit the court, indeed anxious to do so, as she had experienced so complete a failure of her hopes, and returned with the Burgomaster to the hotel in no very enviable humour, ready.to breathe forth .Lyly's beautiful curse on love.*



* O cruell Love! on thee I lay

My curse, which shall strike blinde the day,.





H'uyp was not sorry that his mother had been so woefully dissappointed, though he prudently, forebore to give utterance to his opinions, further than to intimate that she was indebted to Rosalie for her reception..



Never may sleepe, with velvet hande,

Charme thine eyes with sacred wand;

Thy jaylours shall bee hopes andfeares,

Thy prison-mates, groanes, sighes, and teares;

Thy play, to weare out weary times,

Phantasticke passions, vowes, and rimes,

Thy breade bee frownes, thy drinke bee gall;.

The bed thou liest on bee despaire,

Thy sleepe, fond dreames, thy dreames long,



care. Hope (like thy foole) at-thy bed's head Mocke thee, till madnesse strike then dead..





CHAPTER XVIII.

Oh, what a night

Of waking horrors-! Nor when morning came

Did the realities of night and day

Bring aught of comfort.



Southeys Roderick.

AMIDST all the confusion of family affaire, Huyp had an appeal to his feelings which he could not resist; Clara, the lovely and amiable Clara, was in the utmost distress. Her heart was lacerated almost to bursting, and those eyes which were wont to be so brilliant, were now dimmed by tears—the voice of pleasure was lost in loud lamentations..





Her sorrows were for her father. He was no longer in existence. The affectionate Von Essen had closed his eyes on the toils and pleasures of this sublunary world, without even breathing his dying blessing on the head of his adored daughter.

Rosalie had never forgiven the Colonel for advocating the cause of Huyp, and giving her his opinion of her conduct somewhat too plainly for " ears polite." The vengeance of a disappointed woman was not to be allayed, and she made use of her influence at court to get him removed from his command. This was a bitter blow to the worthy and amiable Von Essen, who was conscious that he deserved the praise of his Sovereign rather than his displeasure, and preyed on his spirits more, perhaps, than it ought to have done on the mind of a man who was too high spirited to become the tool of a faction, and too noble minded to persecute innocence, because it was not a favorite with the cringing courtiers, who are but the echo of a prince's will.





Clara besought him to scorn the petty malice of his enemies, and to let his spirits rise superior to such unmerited treatment, and affectionately entreated him for her sake, to treat with contempt those time-serving persons, who, when the sunshine of favor had departed, no longer knew him for their friend. Von Essen strove to comply with the wishes of his daughter, and felt proudly conscious that his fame was still without a stain.

But though he was one of the most amiable and kind-hearted of mankind, he was too much a slave to the opinions of the world with regard to the princir pie of honor. A man who has fought his own way. to consequence and, power has much to contend with.. He has to combat not only, with the envy of those who have been less fortunate than himself, but also with the jealousy of those whose pride is as hereditary as their dignity. It was thus with Von Essen. At the period subsequent to the vast and unprecedented revolutions which gave a new impulse to the minds of men, aspiring merit met with its reward; but when the sway of despotism was checked, the timid and pusillanimous refugees not content with their own restoration to the lands they had deserted, began to annoy those brave men to whose exertions they owed their recal from exile. They had cherished their petty jealousies in climes where they were fed and protected, and though experienca should have taught them wisdom, they had no sooner secured a footing in their native land than they gave full scope to the illiberality of their opinions. Five ami twenty years of exile had done little with respect to their intellectual knowledge, and there were many who expected to find the world just as they had left it. They had not calculated on the increase of information, but evinced their folly by supposing that the wisdom of others, like their own stupidity, had been at a stand still.





It was from a person of this description that the brave and generous Von Essen received an insult which terminated in his death. A challenge necessarily followed the unmerited indignity to which he had been subjected, and the high born assassin boasted that he had satisfied his honor. The news of the melancholy catastrophe no sooner reached the ears of Huyp, than he hastened to the house of mourning. The servants were in tears, and, in reply to his questions, simply pointed out to him the apartment in which Clara was indulging the agony of her grief. He entered; the shutters of the apartment were closed, and the feeble light of one single taper made the melancholy scene still more affecting. On a couch, placed in the centre of the room, laid the body of Von Essen, pale and cold as monumental marble, while the mementos of death, and the symbols of the hope of eternity, displayed the piety of his daughter. By the side of the corpse knelt Clara, pressing the cold and powerless hand of her parent, and calling on him to awake and bless her. Not a tear dimmed her eye, though her sighs seemed as if they would have burst her fair and delicate bosom. The intensity of her grief made her insensible of any person being present, and the incoherence of her words gave evidence that her mind had given way before the fatal shock that had blighted the happiness of her life. For some moments Huyp stood regarding her with speechless anxiety. He dared not trust himself to speak, lest his agitation should betray itself in the accent of his words. The placid countenance of Von Essen, and the wildness of expression which was visible in that of Clara, formed an agonizing contrast. It was exactly what a painter would have chosen to represent Despair watching the couch of Death. The feeble glimmering of the taper, the awful stillness of the mansion, the incoherent speeches of Clara, and the sobs which almost every moment burst from her bosom, all conspired to impress the mind of Huyp with the most solemn sensations of sorrow. Slowly he advanced to the side of the couch, and kneeeling down by the fair mourner pressed her hand within his own. A tear fell from his ,eye on the feverish hand of Clara. She started and gazed at him for some moments without speaking. It appeared to awaken her feelings, and kissing the tear from off her hand, she said, " you weep for my father—for him, who next to his God loved me to adoration. I cannot weep—tears will not flow at our bidding."—She then relapsed into her former wildness of manner, and called upon her father to awaken from the slumber of death and return her caresses.





It was a melancholy sight to behold so fair and amiable a creature as Clara bereaved for moments of her retentive faculties, by the pressure of heart-rending sorrow. It evinced the instability of human reason, the futility of hope end expectation. The tears that trembled in the eyes of Huyp were honorable to his feelings. He wept like a child for the agony of Clara, and in the fervency of his commiseration, silently, though deeply, cursed the man who had deprived him of a worthy friend, and Clara of the best of fathers.

Although Clara was in this melan

VOL. II. H





choly and pitiable state of mind, she was doomed to be annoyed by the impertinent intrusion of those who called themselves her friends, but whose visits might rather have been considered more of curiosity than condolence. At such a time, the cold and courtly compliments of those who bask in the sunshine and shrink from the storm, are little better than insults. We want not to be told that men must die—nor is it any consolation to the agonized mind to hear that others have also lost a father. The Robsons were the first who ventured to intrude on the sorrows of Clara, and with an officiousness, which was not prompted by real friendship, entered, unannounced, into the apartment, from which Huyp was endeavouring to lead the distracted Clara, — She started when she beheld them, and waved her hand as a token for them to retire and leave her. Madame Robson was however not inclined to understand the meaning of her motion, and began to condole with the unhappy girl on the occasion of her grief. Clara listened to her speech with listless inattention, and made no reply,





Huyp by persuasion and gentle force at length succeeded in removing her from the chamber of death, and charging the domestics not to permit her to return to it, hastened to send a physician to her relief.

A very short time elapsed before one of the ablest professional men in Brussels visited the poor disconsolate girl. He found her in a paroxysm of mental suffering, which had been brought on by the impossibility of shedding a tear. Quiet and composure he considered to be the most likely remedies to restore her, to reason, and gave strict orders that she should not be suffered to quit her bed for an instant. The kind and careful attention of the domestics did much towards her recovery, and she gradually regained a degree of composure. On the day of the funeral the deep and melancholy tones of the death bell smote her ear. She started from her bed, and rushed to the window in spite of all the exertions made by her attendants to prevent it. Returning reason whispered that it tolled for her father. For the first time a tear started to her eye, and she wept violently, It was a happy omen and relieved a heart that was almost bursting, and a brain tortured almost to madness. The funeral car, decked out with plumes and escutcheons, drew up to the door. Clara made the house echo with her shrieks, and gazed in agony at the solemn preparations which had been made to convey her father to the grave. Weak as she was, she persisted in remaining at the window. The coffin was placed





upon the car, beneath the plumed canopy and covered with, a pall—Before it marched the regiment which he had so lately commanded, with arms reversed, preceded by the band playing solemn music; next followed the priests of the Catholic Communion bearing banners and crucifixes, and chaunting the service for the departed. Immediately before the car, walked the venerable and amiable Bishop of G***, whose virtues have since marked him out for the persecution of a venal court, while between him and the priests was led the charger of the Colonel, plumed and caparisoned, whose slow and stately step made the loss of his master more apparent. Clara could bear no more. She shrieked and fell senseless on the floor, from whence she was quickly removed to her couch by her attendants. A soldier's funeral is at all times impressive: but when the solemnity of the scene is added to by the agonized feelings of lamenting relatives, it becomes one of the most awful and melancholy lessons to mankind of the insufficiency of human speculations. The procession moved on in silence, save the solemn streams of music accompanied by the muffled drum, and the tolling of the death bell. Not even the echo of a sound was heard. The dew of pity stood in every eye, and those who had during his life time experienced his goodness,' now paid the last tribute of respect to his memory by their tears. Clara was insensible to this mark of their gratitude, and suffered the most intense agony in reflecting on the loss she had sustained.





Huyp endeavoured to influence his mother to visit the lovely sufferer. He represented to the Burgomaster the various acts of friendship he had received from the Colonel, and entreated him to repay the kindness of his lost friend, by alleviating the miseries of hie daughter.





Although Vander Dordrecht loved his money, he had a heart which was not insensible to feeling, and readily seconded the entreaties of Huyp, that Aaltje should endeavour to soothe the acuteness of her sufferings.

Aaltje could not well refuse to comply with the request of her son, though she had hoped to pass her time at Brussels, in very different occupations. She was, perhaps, disposed to be somewhat intemperate in her pleasures, and to forget, that joy is but the forerunner of sorrow.*



* Intemperance is the blind side of mortals; it is our soft place, where we suffer ourselves to be stroak'd and tickled to death by the flattering serpent. This made Isaac misplace his blessing for a piece of venison, and his son to sell his birthright for a mess of pottage.

Religio BibHopola.





Neglected by the monarch whose favor she fancied would have been a passport to the highest distinctions, she was desirous to find some female friend whose connexions were such as might give somewhat more than a Pisgah view of the fascinations of fashionable life. A poor heart-broken weeping girl was not the companion a woman of Aaltje's disposition would have chosen. She, in feet, appeared to want a safety-valve for her passions, and required a curb which Vander Dordrecht had neither the power nor the courage to use. Like Panurge she wished to live, as if " periwinkles were always at par," amid a host of those who are not unaptly termed pleasant coxcombs, and engaged in every species of fashionable frivolity. The desire of notoriety was lithographed upon her mind, and all that tended not to accomplish that point she contemned.





It is one of the misfortunes and imperfections of human nature to have too much self-love—too much anxiety for self-gratification. Aaltje had her full quota of this failing, yet was astonishingly quick in discovering the same fault in others, which, as she was very much addicted to that female amusement the Spaniards strangely, though not improperly, term pelar la Pava,* a gossiping tete-a-tete, her information was undoubtedly learned from indisputable authority.

Clara was somewhat more composed when Aaltje visited her. Her strong mind had begun to resume its wonted powers, and she felt the necessity there was for her exertions. The ravage of grief had preyed both upon her mind and her person. The gay, laughing girl was now no longer to be seen, and her person was but the shadow of her former beauty. Still there was a native grace which won the heart; an innate dignity which marked the woman of superior mind.





Aaltje, who had expected to find a weeping, wailing girl, was surprized to meet with one who did not make even the slightest allusion to the sorrows which had pressed so heavily upon her heart. The first violent ebullition of despairing grief was past, and resignation, the Christian's duty, filled up the void in her heart.

She was grateful to Aaltje for hei• attentions, and entreated her to repeat her visits. This Aaltje at the mq|p»ni intended to do, but subsequent circumstances made her alter her determination.





The Colonel's affairs were considerably involved, and those to whom he was indebted feeling only for themselves proceeded, with the sanction of the law, to seize his effects, leaving poor Clara destitute of every comfort in life.

Clara bore this cruel treatment with calmness, and made no resistance to the myrmidons of oppression, who had not even the generosity to give her the only relic that she prized on earth, the portrait of her lamented father. To part with that was dreadful—there was but one thing to be done to prevent it; she wrote to Aaltje on the subject, but poor friends were not to her taste, and the letter remained unanswered and unnoticed. Clara felt indignant, and in the obscurity of an humble lodging, strove to forget that she had experienced so wretched a humiliation.





Whither she had retired, Huyp knew not, and when he picked up by accident the fragments of the note which had been written by Clara to his mother, he was almost frantic. Bitterly he cursed the mean and worldly feelings which prevented her' assisting the distressed, and as bitterly did he lament his own incapability to place a fortune in her hands. Aaltje was just going out with the Burgomaster, she was already on the stairs, when Huyp started from his chamber and arrested her steps. There was a wildness in his looks that alarmed her. She eagerly enquired what had happened, and Huyp silently placed the torn letter of Clara in her hand. For a moment she felt confused, but quickly recovering her self-possession, laughed at what she termed his folly, and said that if he was so romantic as to desire the bauble for himself he might have it, though for her own part, she did not see the use of it, as he could paint pictures for himself. She however gave him her purse, and Huyp hastened to purchase the treasure for Clara.





It was obtained for a trifling sum, far less than Huyp had expected would have been demanded for the resemblance of an excellent man—even less than the man of virtu would have given for a piece of brittle china.

The sensations of Huyp when he found this portrait his own were indescribable. His kind, amiable and valued friend seemed again to start into life, and to stand before him with a Itenignant smile upon his smooth arched brow. It was a melancholy yet pleading sensation—one of those blessed and delightful emanations of soul which ever attend the consciousness of having acted nobly, and he felt ready to exclaim to the portrait of his friend,





Farewell, dear shade of virtue's bloom,

Whom honor fondly, dearly cherish'd;



The flowers that deck thy humble tomb,

Shall shed their sweets tho' thou hast perish'd!

Farewell, a long a last farewell,

Friend of my thoughtless boyish breast;

Yet in my heart by memory's spell,

Thou still shalt live a treasur'd guest.



For oft thou hast in sorrow's hour,

To rescue me from danger, sped; Whilst Clara with kind pity's shower,.

Relieved this aching, wilder'd head.

'Tis past—no more thy Kindness lights

My path through life's entangled maze.



Thy wisdom now no more delights,

Vet thy best requiem is our praise.



To convey the portrait to Clara was the most ardent wish of his heart. The domestics knew not the place of her retreat, and were in agonies at her absence. With the little money she possessed she had paid them the sums that were due, and added a little gratification for the trouble she had given since the melancholy catastrophe which had deprived her of a father, and since that time they had neither seen nor heard .any tidings of her.





Huyp suffered the most dreadful alarm on her account. He feared that some terrible accident had befallen her, and returned home in a state of mind little short of distraction. He had no one to comfort him, no one to sympathize in his sufferings. Aaltje treated his sorrows as mere romantic notions which ought to be subdued, and desired him not to disgrace his family by an alliance with a portionless creature, which would cause them to renounce all affection for him, and leave him and his children to the mercy of the world. Huyp could bear this worldly-minded lecturing no longer; he burst from the room, and with his bosom swelling with indignation, returned to his lodgings, where he could unchecked give scope to the feelings that agitated his bosom.





CHAPTER XIX.

Where's the officer at audit but has felt your cursed gripe?? Squeez'd and tried with nice discernment, whether yet

the wretch be ripe. Like the men our figs who gather, you are skilful to discern, Which is green and which is ripe, and which is just upon

the turn. Is there one well-purs'd among us, lamb-like in heart and

life, Link'd and wedded to retirement, hating business, hating

strife? Soon your greedy eye 's upon him—when his mind is least

at home, Room and place—from farthest Thrace, at your bidding

he must come. Foot and hand are straight upon him—neck and shoulder

. in your grip, To the ground anon he's thrown, and you smite him on

the hip.

MitchelYs Arhtophanes•

SEVERAL days passed and no tidings were heard of Clara. Those who had professed themselves her friends felt little or no anxiety on her account, and the amiable Robsons, in particular, exerted themselves to set afloat a report, that she had accepted the protection of some wealthy rake, who would soon grow tired of her talents, and cloyed with her charms. This illiberal and unfounded report spread with incredible velocity. Those who had envied her personal attractions, and were themselves inferior to her in the possession of a cultivated mind repeated the base and cruel slander wherever they went, while Madame Robson pathetically lamented her fall from virtue, and expressed her gratitude to Heaven that Huyp had escaped the snare, which, she asserted, had been spread for him by Clara, to conceal her frailties.





It was not because Madame Robson believed the tale which she assisted to propagate, that she was so much on the alert to give publicity to the scandal. She wished it to reach the ears of Huyp, that her daughters might at least have one more chance of gaining a good and respectable matrimonial connexion. To accomplish this purpose, she obtained an introduction to Aaltje, and accompanied by her two daughters, called to pay her tribute of respect to the mother of the rich Burgomaster s son. The Robsons were the proper description of people for Aaltje—as frivolous and faithless as herself, and she considered the daughters to be the most elegant and accomplished ladies in Brussels. In this instance, her judgment was not very incorrect, though at the same time far from being infallibly right. They were extremely accomplished in the art of intrigue, and her estimation of their capabilities was far less ridiculous than that which Madame Talleyrand made of those of Denon, when she mistook him for Robinson Crusoe, and set the table in a roar by asking him of the welfare of his man Friday, before a circle of statesmen and literati.*





A politician in petticoats like Rosalie, and a husband-hunting mother like Madame, were more adapted by Nature to attract the attention and captivate the good opinion of the frivolous minded Aaltje, than the unpretending graces of such a woman as Clara. Madame Robson was of keen perception, and indeed she must have been unusually dull, had she not discovered instanter the weak side of her hostess. Even the heavy soul of the Burgomaster was charmed and exhilirated by the witching warbling of Susan and Alicia, who had more of the Italian than the French \



* Vide lA Voice from St. Helena.'





manner in their singing, though to gratify the magistrate, who loved to sit with

"Laughter holding both his sides,"

Alicia gave a favorite Dutch comic song with some effect, with which he was excessively delighted.

Here then was hope. All the evils of Pandora's box had been cast out— still the jewel remained in the casket. The young ladies were once more in high spirits, and played their childish sports to admiration, while the good lady, as usual read the old lectures, and endeavoured to draw out the bashful creatures, who were too young to think of marriage. Yet she contended that love was the vitality of existence, and that women were, at the same time, the bane and antidote of human bliss.* At this the Burgomaster sighed, and Aaltje triumphantly seconded the asseverations of her new friend. Indignant at tiie unworthy treatment she had met with at court, Aaltje was not behind hand in her abuse of royalty—the phantom which she had before been ready to fall down and worship, and Madame Robson, though strictly loyal at heart, muttered a half-articulate amen, to the anathemas which the disappointed lady pronounced on all those who submitted to the caprice of a prince. She had even some thoughts of making Vander Dordrecht turn patriot, and setting him up for the people's idol—the puppet of the rabble, which in all countries is ready to follow any man, who has the art of coaxing them out of the few senses they may possess. To talk loudly of corruption, till pensioned by corruption, is the patriot's duty—or more properly speaking, the task he imposes on himself. His incessant noise alarms the court, he is then tampered with by some of its satellites—proves himself not invulnerable—accepts office, or hides his principles under the shade of a coronet, and becomes the advocate of the cause he had opposed.*



* Love is the soul of the world, the vital prop of the elements, 'tis the cement of humane society, the strongest fence of nature. Earth would be a hell without it, neither can there be any heaven where this is absent. The conversation of women is no less useful than pleasant, and the dangers that attend their friendships, are recompensed by vast advantages.





ReKgio HibliopoUe.





* Sir Robert Walpole, who was undoubtedly the most unprincipled statesman that ever lived, has drawn an excellent portrait of the patriots of his time, which certainly bears some resemblance to a tew of those that are now the demi-gods of the mob. "It is," says be, " no way difficult for an aspiring commoner to convert their ignorant solicitude for the public emolument, entirely to the promotion of bis own. A staunch opposition on two or three





Aaltje made Madame the confidante of her speculations on this point, and



questions, right or wrong, to the court, gets him a name. Half a dozen impudent unmeaning speeches, the admiration; and a treasonable pamphlet, the very souls of the people. Patriotic barbers toast him in alehouses, public-spirited shoemakers harangue for him in the streets; and free-born chairmen and house-breakers sing forth his praises in every night-cellar within the bills of mortality. To quiet the minds of the mob, he gets a place. His own interest then obliges him to turn to the measures of the court. Upon this the golden idol turns instantly to a calf, and leaves the field of preferment to somebody else, who is next to share the admiration, and in due time, the curses of the vulgar. I remember I never thought my point compleatly carried, till they clapped me in the Tower. I looked upon myself then as a made man, and the event fully justified the warmth of my expectations. In reality 1 know no better friends to the constitution of this country, was it any way in danger, than this set of imaginary patriots: they struggle very heartily while they are at it, and the moment they are bought off, their preferment inspires others with a view of following their example, in order by the same means to attain the same





•as the latter was aware that her little affair required some delicacy in the management, she coalesced in her opinions. Vander Dordrecht was therefore destined like an air bubble to exist for a moment as a patriot, and then—but let the result speak for itself.

There was at this time in existence at Brussels one of those foolish debating societies, where young men enjoy the supreme felicity of haranguing a party in good set terms, and which, by the way, excluded even the slightest allusion to politics. The name of Vander Dordrecht therefore was entered as a subscriber to this delectable knot of orators, and was announced in letters of proportionate magnitude in the card of Questions for the night's discussion, as one of those who were to give the auditors the benefit of his sage observations and remarks on "The Love of our Country."



ends; and thus we always find a succession of zealous patriots, who constantly advance the good of their country by being so very strenuous about their own. Whenever you see any man endeavouring to be popular, single him out from the rest, and ,•ry, 'Hie niger est, hunc tu Romane caveto.'"

TQL. II. I





As was expected, the announcement of the Burgomaster attracted the attention of the seekers of amusement, and the apartment in which the society held their debates was filled long before the accustomed time. It was a novelty in oratory, and people were most anxious to obtain tickets to list to the speechifying of the Sir William Curtis of the Netherlands.

Vander Dordrecht, accompanied by Aaltje and the Robsons, was there at the appointed time—the meeting was held in an ancient lofty apartment, whose venerable aspect led one rather to reflect on the splendour of times gone by, than to patient attention to the frivolities of the present,





Madame Robson had not been silent on the subject, and gave every one of her circle of friends notice of the great orator's intention to display his abilities at the society's meeting: she therefore met with a great portion of her dear friends who had generously devoted an evening to quiz the magistrate.

At length the moment arrived which was to crown the Burgomaster with laurels. He rose, and great was the applause. He ejaculated, Mynheeren— paused—repeated the word—paused again, and again repeated Mynheeren. It appeared that the worthy gentleman's memory had forsaken him, and he was obliged to refer to his notes. After some minutes had elapsed, he again commenced his oration, and held forth vehemently against the established government in spite of all the efforts of the members of the society, who frequently reminded him that politics were excluded by the rules of the fraternity. Vander Dordrecht however was deaf to their remonstrances, and still talked on in the same strain, to the great delight of Aaltje, who took due credit to herself for bringing his mind to a state of perfection, till he was somewhat rudely stopped in the midst of a metaphor by the entrance of the police, who unceremoniously declared the assembly contrary to law, and forthwith pronounced it to be dissolved.





"But you will let the Burgomaster finish his speech," cried Aaltje, who was vexed at the interruption. "You must hennen that he is one of the Magistracy of Amsterdam, and has a right to speak of the national matters."

The officers of the police, however, were peremptory, and silenced the magistrate effectually by presenting him with an order to appear before the Council on the following morning, togive clear and substantial reasons for the apparent eccentricity of his conduct. Vander Dordrecht gazed on the document with extended mouth and lengthened visage, and Aaltje sunk down upon the seat from which she had just before risen, somewhat more nervous than became a fine lady. She however quickly recovered her selfpossession, and turning round to consult Madame Robson on the subject, to her astonishment perceived that she was gone. Madame had retreated at the first alarm, lest her character might suffer by being seen in public with persons whose loyalty was doubtful, and taking with her, her two daughters, hastened to= proclaim the event to the scandal-mongers of the metropolis, under a strict injunction of secresy. Aaltje perceived, that, her very dear friend had cut her, and between the workings of anger and terror, alarmed the neighbourhood by giving way to a violent fit of hysterics, the general retaliation of disappointed ladies, and was conveyed home to the hotel by the Burgomaster, shrieking like a captive damsel in the hands of a recreant knight.





Vander Dordrecht passed the night in reflecting on his own folly, which had made him the dupe of his wife's vanity, and love of notoriety. He pressed a sleepless pillow and the dawning day brought with it the dread of a royal reprimand, if not a severer punishment.

It was a delicate situation in which the old imbecile had placed himself. Two evils stared him in the face—the anger of the monarch and the domestic lectures of the gentle Aaltje. Both of these were likely to fall to his share^ and his timidity increased with the moments which began to mark the time of the sitting of the council.





In obedience to the royal mandate, Vander Dordrecht repaired to the palace, and taking his station in the antiroom, awaited the summons of the sages of the land. The clerks of the Council, who were passing and repassing almost every moment, eyed him with glances expressive of mirth, and whispered audibly to each other, that the patriot was likely to be productive of more amusement than the dry debates on national affairs.

It was impossible for the Burgomaster not to hear their observations, he, however, prudently declined noticing them, and remained politically deaf to the sneers with which he was on all sides indirectly assailed.

After dancing attendance for the space of two hours, he was ushered before the tribunal of State. There were but few of the members present, and at their bead was placed Mynheer Nycho Vanshuffle, the Flemish Chancellor of the Exchequer, who had himself been a patriot before he was placed and pensioned, and therefore was well acquainted with the tricks and turnings of the hunters after fame and fortune;. Vander Dordrecht took his station at a respectful distanro fTM^ *b«. council table, and stood bowing and nodding like a Chinese Mandarin, till he was stopped in his genuflexions by Mynheer Nycho, who, in a low tone of voice, and with saint-like aspect, questioned him respecting his conduct on the preceding night. The Burgomaster endeavoured to excuse himself, by laying the blame on his wife, who,, fortunately for him, was not near enough to hear even the echo of this accusation. The councillors smiled at the evasion of Vander Dordrecht, and Vanshuffle turning up hi* •yes with an expression of pious wonderment, reminded him,, that the Scripture enjoined wives to "obey their husbands in all tilings," audi not husbands to be subservient to their wives..





"I ketiuen that,. Mynheeren, as well as you do yourselves," said Vander Dordrecht, "but if St. Paul had been plagued with a help-mate tike unto mine, he would have, moreover, desired them to be quiet and. peaceable, which, to say truth, is, what Mevrouw Aaltje seldom is-; and*, perchance, my good Mynheeren, some of you may know from experience, what dangers and difficulties attend the man who opposes the will of his wife."

", But, Mynheer," interrupted Vanshuffle, "you should not yield your better judgment to the importunities of a woman. You should pray in the spirit fat strength of mind, to overcome the influence of her blandishments and her persuasions.**





"Aye, Mynheeren," returned the Burgomaster, "ye little kennei the ways of women, if ye think that they are to be so easily diverted from their purposes. AaLtje has as great a command of words as e'er a fish-vrouw in the market, whose importunities can only be stilled by compliance with her desire, and zeer well would ye know it, if Aaltje had ye under her government."

Many of the Council laughed outright at this* exculpation of the magistrate. Even the sanctified countenance of Vanshuffle was ornamented with something intended to resemble a smite) and the flesh, for the moment,, got the better of the spirit. Many of them were inclined to think the Burgomaster an ample demonstration of Luther's opinion of the human understandings which, he says, "resembles a drunken clown on horseback, if you set it up on one side, it tumbles over on the other." In; truth they were not short of the mark, for Vander Dordrecht's could not very properly be called his own, as he had so little control over it. He would have been a proper subject for the pencil of the modern Teniers, who wouM have given due effect to his eity honors, while he, at the same timer would also have marked his natural imbecility in as strong a light. It might, perhaps, require a Kttle manner and affectation, but the eurvettings, flouncings, and impetuosities of Aaltje, would fill up the back ground with many a laughing epi* sode, and make ample amends for its little defects.





Bearing in mind that Vander Dordrecht had been the loyal and devoted subject of whoever swayed! tfce destinies of Holland, the Council contented themselves with giving him a private reprimand, and advising him "to do all that became a man" and on no account in future to venture upon attempting more. Happy to escape out of the toils so easily,, he bowed to the very ground, and to give proof of his devotion to royalty, retired, backwards from the room in which the King was wont to. meet his counsellors, till he unluckily stumbled over the threshold of the antiroom and measured the length of his unwieldy, form on the floor, thus adding to the amusement of those who had! witnessed the manner in which he had endeavoured to exculpate himself. He however returned to the hotel,, and communicated the pleasing intelligence to. Aaltje, without giving her the slightest hint of the method he had used to exculpate himself.





Poor Huyp,. meanwhile, was a prey to> melancholy, and had to endure, the





unfeeling and unpitying remarks of his mother, on his firm attachment to the friendless Clara. He was not, however, capable of giving his feelings to the winds and banishing her from his heart. The attachment might be romantic, but it had also the merit of being disinterested- Aaltje had not now one friend to pamper her passion for frivolity. The Robsons were of too delicate feelings Uy venture again into the society of suspected persons, and Brussels was now to Aaltje little better than a desart. She was anxious to quit the scene of perplexity and mortification, and proposed their immediate return to Dordrecht Tower, as Huyp was not necessitated to remain any longer in the metropolis. To this the Burgomaster readily assented, and Huyp was obliged to accede also, though his heart ached at the idea of leaving Brussels until he had ail •pportunity of seeing Clam.. There was however nothing else to be done— he had neither money nor friends, and in great cities those who have not the for* mer, have no cause to wonder that they possess- not the latter. Wealth, not virtue, is, in this age, the criterion by which men judge of each other, and the poor man is unnoticed and unknown let his merit be what it may.. In every stage of society it is thesame, and gold pillows up a reputation which would otherwise be little better than drossr. and even he





"' who sweats for moiiarchs, is no more

Than the gilt chamberlain, whocloth'd and fee'd, Stands, sleek and slavish; bowing at his door—"

Huyp wa& therefore compelled to bid a reluctant adieu te» Brussels, and after having given the portrait of the Colonel into the care of one of the late domestics of Clara,, with a strict charge that it might be delivered as soon as the place





of her retirement should be discovered, prepared to accompany his parents to the Tower, whither they were desirous to repair as speedily as possible, that they miglit anticipate the remarks of their kind neighbours on their recent disappointments.





CHAPTER XX.

Th re to no softener of the heart'

fto sure as love. There is no power like it

Can play the tyrant in a woman's breast.

But some few months ago, and men were wont

To call me proud, and so I thought myself;

Rut now, alas, how alter'd are my thoughts!

Fain would I hide my weakness from the world:

Fain hide it from myself. Oh vain attempt!

For what is paxsion if I feel it not?

Is it the throbbing breast and kindling eye?

-Is it the burning cheeks, or quivering lips I

These are its outward signs, and these I feel;:

But there are other tokens more than these,.

That false love cannot feign, but true love suffer*..



Richard Cutiierof..



THE. friendless-and forsaken Clara was now endeavouring to forget what s*he had been,, and was nobly striving to mould her mind to a patient endurance of the evils which must inevitably be the companions of her present reduced situation.





Deserted by those who had been among the foremost to court her society in her days of affluence, she had concealed herself from the prying eye of curiosity, and the scrutiny of those who would not stretch forth their hands to save her frnm perishing,, in the solitude

of a little village within a few leagues of the metropolis of the Netherlands. It was in one of those neat little cottage residences with which the Pays Bas abounds, that Clara had secured a retreat. One little apartment was all that her slender finances would allow, but even in this humble residence, so different from that to which she had been accustomed, Clara preserved an unaffected dignity of manner that kept vulgar audacity at a proper distance, while she gained the respect and esteem of every one who had the happiness to know her, by her unassuming manners, and unostentatious kindness.





There is a degree of consequence which the poorest gentlewoman may keep up, without incurring the odious stigma of pride. This was precisely what Clara aimed at, and accomplished. It is not exactly the same in this respect with the Netherlanders as with the English—the one regard persons for what they have been, the other, for what they are—with the latter, "things in motion sooner catch the eye, than what not stirs,"—and those that fall from affluence to indigence are forgotten, or at least neglected.

Clara, aware that, as an officers daughter, she had a right to the provision allotted by the government of the country, made an application in due form, for the slender annuity, which, in her circumstances, was necessary fox her support. An evasive answer was returned, and it was even hinted to her, that her claim might be considered to be invalidated, in consequence of Colonel Von Essen having fallen in a duel. This was a heavy blow to her hopes. She was, however, resolved not to be dispirited, and, knowing Mynheer Vanshuffle to have been on terms of friendly intercourse with her father, she wrote to him a statement of her case, and enumerated the services her father had rendered his country, in a firm yet modest manner.





Wiih great difficulty, (after paying the accustomed fees to the servants of Vanshuffle, which, to the eternal disgrace of a minister of State, they encourage them to demand) she got the memorial conveyed to the Chancellor of the Exchequer. The minister was engaged, and could not be seen—therefore the memorial was left, with an assurance, that Mynheer Nycho would pay properattention to it, as soon as he could obtain a short reprieve from his necessary and more important labours.





A statesman's promise has been so frequently violated, that it has almost passed into a proverb, and become synonimous with an intention to deceive. But could any one doubt the veracity of Nycho Vanshuffle? The man whose piety had almost become proverbial, who was a strenuous advocate for the dissemination of the Gospel, and among the foremost of those, who thought it just to send—

"Sin without a rag on, shivering forth!"

Who could—who dared to doubt his goodness? Clara did not, and trusted that he would step forth as her advocate, and urge the fulfilment of those claims which were founded in the strictest justice..





Day after day she was doomed to waste hours at the office of this saint in prospectu. Nothing had been done, nothing could be done for the present. The state of the nation engrossed all his time and attention—he had not even had time to peruse the short memorial of a lovely and almost destitute girl, but the private secretary promised to remind him of it, whenever a favorable opportunity should occur for the mention of so trivial a matter. Clara thought it a hard case, but she still retained a good opinion of the Chancellor, and hoped for the best.

Fatigued and wearied almost to exhaustion, Clara one day summoned fortitude enough to call on the old domestic with whom Huyp had left the picture of her father. The meeting almost overcame her feelings, but resignation at length got the better of heartfelt sorrow, and she entered into a long, and to her, interesting conversation on the kindness and virtues of her deceased father.





It was the first time since his death, that she had ventured to touch on the subject, and, if tears dimmed her eyes, while she spoke of him who had been to her the dearest object on earth, could even a heartless stoic blame her, for giving vent to her feelings? By chance she mentioned her regret, at not being possessed of her father's portrait. The old domestic made no reply, but hastily retired into an inner room, from whence she speedily returned, with what was, to Clara, an invaluable treasure.

The mingled sensations of Clara, when she beheld it, are indescribable. She bent over it, and wetted the mild and placid countenance of her sire, with her tears; then, pressing the hand of the servant to her heart, she said, "What do I not owe you, for this considerate kindness? This amply repays me for all the misery I have endured!" "It was not my doing, lady!" said the servant—" I had not the means to purchase the relic of my poor dear master."





"To whom then is my gratitude due?" cried Clara, who felt a presentiment that the kind donor must be Huyp, and a deep flush of crimson mantled o'er her cheek, when she considered herself indebted to a young man who had obtained an ascendancy over her mind, for the most valuable present that even a monarch could have made her. The reply of the domestic convinced her that her conjectures were just. Clara was affected even to tears at this delicate proof of his attention to her wishes, and prized the beloved portrait of her father even more from its having been restored to her in so kind a maimer.





Many weeks passed without Clara having heard any thing of the memorial she had written to the Chancellor Vanshuffle. She now began to feel seriously uneasy at this ominous silence, and hoping that perseverance might effect what compassion had failed to do, she again addressed a short note to the minister, in which she entreated die honor of an interview. This note she sent up, and to her surprize, found herself admitted in the space of a few minutes into the presence of Mynheer Vanshuffle.

Elate with hope, and sanguine of success, Clara joyfully presented herself to Vanshuffle. He was a little, insignificant looking creature, and seemed to be ill placed in the splendid apartment in which he received the fair suppliant for her just rights. On his countenance was legibly written pride of place, though he endeavoured to mask, by wearing a sanctified demeauour.





Clara curtsied to the minister, who "meekly bowed his head," and motioned her to take a seat. After a pause of some few minutes which he employed in turning over the papers with which his table was literally loaded, and clearing his throat with a few preliminary hems he directed his discourse to Clara.

"You presented this memorial, I believe, Mademoiselle."

', I did, Mynheer," replied Clara. "Left destitute and desolate as I am by the decease of my father, the provision allowed by the generosity of Government is indeed requisite for my support."

The minister paused awhile at this open avowal of the expectations of Clara. "It is a hard case," said he, "but—"

VOL. II. K





"What? Mynheer," exclaimed Clara, "my claims are founded on justice."

"My dear lady," responded the minister, "it is not always in our power to act according to the dictates of our hearts. But the Scriptures tell us that the Lord chastencth those whom he loveth, therefore you must trust to him for aid. I am sorry that I can do nothing in this matter, for having mutually agreed between ourselves not to interfere in the departments of our coadjutors, I cannot, as a minister of state, be the first to violate the promise."

"I am grieved that I have given you so much trouble, Sir," said Clara, rising from her seat with the dignity of injured virtue. "To you, who were the professed friend of my father, I deemed I should not have applied in vain: but I have deceived myself, and I am the sufferer for my own credulity."—She was about to depart, when Vanshuffle, who had scarcely recovered from the. surprize her plain truths had caused, in a low tone of voice desired her to remain a few minutes till he could consider in what way he could serve her. Clara passively obeyed, and blamed herself for having been too hasty. The minister ndgetted about, and seemed scarcely to know how to act. Clara sat in silent expectation, and wondered in her own mind what scheme he was about to propose to relieve her deep and accumulated distress. At length the moment came, and Clara was shewn what right she had to expect liberality from a Saint.





"I have been thinking," said Vanshuffle drawing his chair at every syllable a little nearer to that on which Clara was sitting, " I have been thinking, my dear young friend in the Lord,— (put up your veil a little)—that, although the state will not allow your claim to the provision of a soldier's orphan, inconsequence of your father—"





"My father's conduct, Mynheer," interrupted Clara, "was such as I have no need to blush for."

"You are too hasty, my fair friend," replied the minister—" you judge of my opinions before you know what they are. I was about to say that in consequence of your father's loyalty having been of late somewhat suspected by the Court, they will not, at present, acknowledge your claim."

** Such conduct beeomes them well," returned Clara with spirit. *" They would wish to see the children of those whose best blood had been shed in their cause—whose youth has been spent in the toils of the camp—and whose age has been employed to give stability to their power, stand like beggars at the gate, and crouch them humbly at their feet, while fawning, flattering sycophants riot in that wealth which is wrested from the needy and the oppressed. You might have told me this before, Mynheer," she continued—" it needed not so much circumlocution to inform a poor friendless girl, that the great have no pity, no compassion for those who have not power and interest to back their pretensions,, and therefore the prologue might have been spared"





The minister hesitated—drew out his watch, and without looking at it, again replaced it in his pocket, His conduct was indicative of mystery and confusion, and Clara began to entertain no very favorable opinion of his heart. There was something systematic in his mode of deceiving her which evinced his desire to stand well with the court, though the per contra was largely against his conscience.

"It might have been spared cerr tainly," said Vanshuffle, "but I wished to spare your feelings, and to offer from myself a provision which I flatter myself you will not refuse to accept from the friend of your father."





The tears rushed to the eyes of Clara —it was a thing she had not hoped for, and before she had time to express the sensations that agitated her heart, Vanshuffle placed a folded paper in her hands, desiring her to peruse it and fill up the blanks with the sum she deemed requisite.

Unsuspicious of evil Clara unfolded the paper. The blush of indignation mantled o'er her cheek and flashed from her eloquent and piercing eye, when she perceived that it was a carte blanrhr. The insult was cruel and unpardonable :—a cool and deliberate attack, which, had it not been for her humiliated situation, Vanshuflle would not have ventured to attempt. 'Burning with rage, and seeming the hypocrite who could under the guise of friendship and piety, endeavour to brand her name with infamy, Clara started from her seat, and tearing the paper into atoms, trampled them under foot. Then casting her fine expressive eyes full on the countenance of the astounded statesman, she exclaimed "Have you the feelings of a man? If you have, blush for your conduct. Had my father been living you would not have dared to insult, so basely, the modesty of his daughter. You are old and childless—but if you had a daughter whom a white headed hypocrite had so striven to corrupt, you would not have acted like a father and a man had you not punished him for his baseness—I am a poor deserted creature—I have no friends ready to step forward and demand satisfaction for your insults, but from this hour, remember that I know you for what you are, and I defy your malice."





"You had better compose your mind and be reasonable, young lady," said Vanshuffle, picking up. the torn papers and throwing them into the lire, " I have no need to fear your malice. Sit down, and let us reason the matter calmly."

As he said this he took her hand, and attempted to lead her to a seat. Clara hastily withdrew her hand from his pressure, and casting a withering glance at him, replied, "If you wish to escape exposure, desist."

"Exposure!" repeated Vanshuffle, again assuming a saint-like aspect, and turning up his eyes towards the ceiling as if uttering a pious ejaculation, "Think you that the breath of slander has power to taint my good name? You are yet a novice in the world, or you would not, after this romantic fashion, prefer poverty, with its train of attendant evils, to independance and the society of a friend.





"Insult me no longer, Mynheer," exclaimed Clara, loudly, "or you may make me forget the respect that I owe to myself. To you, none is due—none you deserve—for who can feel respect for an avowed hypocrite?"

"Begone—begone "—cried the affrighted and disappointed minister, ringing the bell for the attendance of a servant, who immediately made his appearance,.. " I can hold no further converse with an impostor,"

"Impostor, Mynheer!" replied Clara who scarcely ventured to believe that she had understood him rightly, " did you term me an impostor?'

"I have been preserved from the snares of temptation," ejaculated Vanshuffle, who perceived that the domestic regarded him with a glance of incredulity, "for which, blessed be His name."





Clara burst into tears. The fullness of her heart could no longer be repressed and she sunk into a chair in speechless agony. Even the servant seemed to pity her, and the minister was evidently very uneasy. He had reason to fear that Clara would expose his hypocrisy, and though he trusted that his reputation for piety would make her assertion appear mere slander, he knew that there were many in the world who were not the votaries of credulity and duplicity, and who would consequently credit her assertions.

"Oh! my dear father," exclaimed Clara, when she had a little recovered from the first ebullition of agonized passion, what would have been your feelings had you witnessed the cruel insults to which I have this day been exposed! But for me you shall have no cause to sigh—thy long and silent slumber shall not be disquieted by me.*— Farewell," she continued, turning her eyes full on the minister—" farewell, man of little mind; let the world judge of the truth of my story, and decide whether I, or the minister, best deserve the stigma of being an impostor."





To the great relief of Vanshuffle, whose affected piety was not powerful enough to protect him against the terror of public exposure, Clara retired, and left him to his own reflections.

But she felt deeply the insults to which she had been exposed, and wept to think that her unprotected situation



Weep not for me, my death shall leave no stain

Upon your blood, nor blot on your fair name,

The honored ashes of my ancestors

May still rest quiet in their tear-wet urns,

For any act of mine.



Old Plhy.





might expose her to others of a yet more serious nature. Had not her mind been naturally strong, she must hav*. sunk under the cruel disappointments to which she had to submit.

In the solitude of her humble habitation Clara endeavoured to gain that composure which was indispensibly necessary. She took up a volume of poetry, and endeavoured to amuse herself by skimming over, rather than reading, the following little poem, of

Uon\& anti Houtjasa.

Day wanes, and scarce a. twinkling star

Beams in the skiey clouds afar;

The streams just tinged with mildest blue,

Scarce taste of heaven's descending dew,

And faint is borne by passing gale

The murmurs of a nightingale,

That, seem, as slow they float along,

Sike a seraphic spirit's song,

And butst in mild melodious numbers,





Midst Nature's calm and peaceful slumbers.

The wind swells gently from the bay,

Where now the light waves murmuring play

Gently, as on the rippling breast

Of some clear lake whose breezes rest

Pillowed upon its bosom, light

As moon-beams in the depth of night.

Who that has wander'd wild and lon«.

To peace a stranger—bliss unknown—

But feels, 'midst Nature's sweet repose,

A transient balm for heart-felt woes!

The heart delusive visions lighted,

The soul by sorrow's tempest blighted,

May catch an evanescent gleam,

Till wak'ning fancy mocks the dream.

Tis sweet to watch on some rude steep,

The winds o'er whirling billows sweep;

'Tis sweet to see above the main,

The stars just peep, and sink again

Within the world of clouds and tears,.

When the moon's faintest lustre peers.. -

So thought Louisa, woe-worn maid;

Loving, though ruin'd and betray'd,.

She. had been—(but that day was past,

Like sunny skies by clouds o'ercast)—-

She had been pure as snows that if st .





Upon an Alpine mountain's breast -

But now, deluded girl, were dying



Every charm which blossom'd fair;

The eye of icy care was prying



Into the heart where dwelt despair. Yet when beside the tide-wash'd strand'. She clasp'd her perjured lover's hand, A smile would beam across her brow, Like winter sunbeams o'er the snow.

"Thine absence hath been long, my love!

She said, as Louis met her eye; "I feel like some mate-widow'd dove, When thou, my Louis, art not nigh. Thou shouldst not thus desert me, tho'

I bear the frailest stamp of shame; for thee, i calmly bear my woe, Nor heave a sigh for banish'd fame.

Frail tho' the world may deem me, stilT

Louis, to thee alone, I'm so;— It was not caus'd by wavering will.

As thou, dear Louis, well dost know. But wilt thou not in time redeem

Thine own Louisa's blighted name? Thou wilt— and for that pleasing dream,

I'll never hate thee,, love, nor blame."He listened with that cold, calm air,





That mocks the misery of despair;

His apathetic heart was like

The rock, which billowy surges strike,

\V iihont impressing on its base

A single line to mark their trace.

Louisa wept.—Not one embrace

He gave to soothe her soul to quiet; Not one kind promise to efface

The force of grief's relentless riot— Lov'd for a moment, then forgot, One blow unkind was yet her lot— One whelming wave of bitter sorrow— Another, Louis weds to-morrow!

She heard him, and then calmly cried, "To-morrow! with another bride! To-morrow's sun may gaily rise

In that dark heav'n, my Louis !~ thru At eve 'twill sink in yonder skies,

Till morning bids him wake again. To-morrow we may meet and part.

Like sunbeams with the-evening dew— But I can ease this bursting heart,

And bid thee then a last adieu!"

Then from his presence quickly rushing.





With mingled rage and anguish blushing,

She paced with hurried steps away,

To watch the earliest dawn of day,



For her it dawn'd too sad—too soon—

A craved yet justly dreaded boon.

For every joy was deeply shaded,

Hope's gay twiu'd garland surcd.und faded,

And Peace, with all its loveliness,

Was banished by the mind's distress.

It dawn'd ;.- the gay sun tinged the wave

With a mild, softly-tinted flush,

Like timid beauty's rising blush—

The lark his matin carol gave,

And all, from dew-damp'd earth to sky,.

Seemed to awake to peace and joy.



Louisa, what was this to thee?

Thy aching heart no comfort knew;

But like a leafless, rootless tree,

Thou stoodst alone, despairing, sad,



For Louis was to thee untrue,

And broke the heart that once was glad,

That lightly beat to see him smile,

And if he-pressed her hand the while,

Her eye would beam so bright a ray,

You.night have deemed it dawn of day..





Now—now the bridal train advance,

And maidens strew the way with flowers,

Louisa, with half shuddering glance,

And eyes from whence tears fall likeshowers,

Gave one short look—the chapel door

Unclosed—they entered—and no more

Louisa wept,

Like arrow hurtling through the air, She reached the sacred spot, and there, Just as the white-stoled priest united

Their hands, and breath'd the pious prayer On him, who had her heart's peace blighted,

Urged on by maddening despair,

She to the flower-deck'd altar ran,

And, kneeling to the holy man,

She grasped his hand, and frantic cried,

Father, I was the promis'd bride!

My heart was wedded unto him,

Nor throbbed for aught on earth beside."



Senseless she fell—her every limb

Gave the convulsive throb of death—

And Louis stood with fixed eye,

And ear that listened for her breath.

But all was o'er—and all was still.



Her throbbing pulse no longer beat;

And through his heart what feelings thrill?





He knelt him lowly at her feet,

And vowed, that for her soul's reposer



Full many a solemn mass should be

Suner, till his weary life should close—



Till Time should join Eternity.

Such is the tale that peasants tell,

Of her who loved too long, too well—

And oft such omens still, they say,

Mark the false lover's bridal day!





"Poor girl!" exclaimed Clara as she cast aside the volume; " thine was a hard fate, but, unfortunately, not a singular one. Error is a draft upon happiness, which must be paid with interest sooner or later. From the demand of reflection there is no escaping—she will intrude, despite of every effort to banish her from the mind, and there are few, rf any, who are strangers to the force of her appeals."

Clara scarcely knew how to act. She had not the means of continuing even in her present humble dwelling much longer, and perfectly aware that without money she must be also without a friend, she caused an advertisement to be inserted in the Brussels Gazette, stating her wish to be engaged in quality of a companion to some lady of character and respectability, who would treat her as a friend.





A very short time eiapsed before she received a variety of letters in reply to her advertisement. They were principally penned by crabbed old dowagers, who required such a multiplicity of qualifications that Clara threw them aside v\ ith disgust. She was not exactly inclined to become the play-mate of snappish lap-dogs, nor the target at which the spleen of an ancient dame might be vented at will. She hoped for more rational employment—something that would contribute towards eradicating the remembrance of her sorrows. Indeed Clara felt that she was ill-qualified for a toad-eater, but imperative circumstances rendered it necessary that she should strive to keep off the evils of hopeless want. She had received plain and incontestible proof that the great have little feeling for the distresses of their fellow creatures.* Those who think nothing- of spending thousands upon baubles—or of lavishing their wealth upon wantonness, are too poor, too much beset with applications to give aught to relieve those who are sinking. Look but into the halls of the fashionable opulent, and mark the choice exotics wnich have been purchased, at a great expense, to make the place "look pretty"—and think, if you have the power of thinking how, many poor creatures who are wandering about friendless and forlorn, that mispent money would have clothed and fed. But they act on the principle of having something to shew for their money—• and unfortunately the gratitude and silent blessings of the poor cannot be metamorphosed into an early rose, nor placed like a china vase on a Buhl side table.*





* Lord Viscount Exin—th, who owes every sixpence he possesses to the generosity of his country, scruples not to declare, that he has made up his mind never to give any thing in private charity!!! This virtue he has gained with his patent of nobility-, and proves how quickly a man can forget what he has been, when pensioned and titled. Yet he complains that he is not used well by the nation! Does he forget that he at first refused

even to be knighted, because, "Mrs. P w

could go to market for a pound of butter, which Lady P w could not," These were his own words; and it was not till the private charity of the late Queen Charlotte, allowed her a hundred pounds per annum, that he would accept the favor of his sovereign 1 This is one of the English worthies, and those of the Pays Bas are equally consideratt towards their inferiors in wealth.





* The rage for flowers is also prevalent among

the English. The houses of the Misses Fitzc e.

Lady D—dl—y and W—rd, and Alex. B—r—g, are noted for their exotic display, though their possessors are by no means noted for their liberality. I believe it was the latter person, who asserted in a certain house, that, in his opinion, the world had become too fine. " that ale was the proper beverage for people who were not of the privileged class, and that he considered it improper for farmers to take wine." This was somewhat too aristocratic for the grandson of an Exeter clothier, whose family had attained, with wonderful celerity, immense opulence, and caused the Bishop of Ch r to remark, "that fortunate loans and American contracts, had made Mr. Alexander B forget his

own origin." His brother, Sir Thomas, has also lately evinced his feeling, by issuing a magisterial mandate, for starving the labouring classes in Hampshire, though his father did not gain less than four millions sterling, in the course of a long life.





Alas! thought Clara, Charity is indeed now nothing but a name, and at that moment her eyes inadvertently rested on the heart-rending drama of "Lover's Vows"—Her spirits were low enough before, but when she perused the scenes of bitter distress and deep feeling, which perhaps there is no one living could read without emotion, the tears chased each other down her cheeks, and her whole soul was oppressed with an intensity of feeling. Although the drama fed and fostered the deepest sensations of sadness, still she found it impossible to cast the book aside: there was a witchery, a strong and powerful impulse in the incidents and the language, that led her on to the very last page, though she felt that she was doing wrong by working so much on her feelings. But the impulse was not to be resisted. It was an infatuation which could not be checked, and Clara un* fortunately had too much sensibility, though she was perfectly devoid of the affectation of it.





CHAPTER XXI.



Passion is a tyrant fierce and wild,



Leading the thoughts from Virtue's pure career:

And spirits, in their natures calm and mild,

Are duped by flattery, or subdued by fear;

Love, that with promise to illume and cheer

The path of life, oft lures us to betray;

And hopes, that, robed in Iris hues appear

When the heart swells in youth's exulting day,

Dreaming sweet dreams alone, in darkness melt away.



Blackwood's Edinburgh Magazine.



THE despoilment of the fair prospects which had shone brightly on the head of Clara, had thrown a gloomy cloud over her spirits. She seemed no more than the shadow of what she had been: the hilarity of her disposition

VOL. II. L





was no longer perceptible, and, if a smile at times shot across her features, it was more like a smile of hopeless despair, than an emanation of the heart.

- Clara was as yet undecided how to act. She could not make up her mind to become the slave of a dowager's caprices, yet she knew of no alternative. At the moment that she began to give way to the feelings of despair, however, a letter was brought her, which gave a ray of comfort and hope to her agonized mind. It was from a lady, who most romantically assured her, that she must certainly die if she would not consent to become her companion: to induce her compliance she moreover offered her the . complete command of her house and fortune, and concluded her epistle by informing her, that she was superlatively happy that such an opportunity should have offered itself, as she was certain that Clara would become the very bosom friend she had long been in quest of, and that should her offer be refused, she should give up the world in despair. Clara easily, perceived by the style of the epistle, that the fair applicant for her society was one of those trifling non-entities, who figure away in the fashionable circles like the gay and gaudy butterflies over a bed of flowers, studious only to gratify their own vanity and to attract universal admiration. The proposal, however, deserved consideration, and Clara, at length resolved to see the lady, and, if possible, to accept the offer, which bore every appearance of liberality. Still, however, she strove not to buoy up her spirits with too much hope. She had been taught to doubt its promises, and to fear, when the prospect seemed most ftiir, the interposition of a storm. To be subjected to the questions of a frivolous tine lady, was by no means a pleasant task but in the perilous situation of Clara, it was one which could not be avoided, and (Summoning up all the fortitude she was mistress of, she hastened to make her debut, in the presence of the lady who had done her best towards flattering her vanity.





Clara proceeded to one of the most splendid hotels in Brussels, and her name was no sooner announced, than she was admitted into the presence of the lady. She was a widow, of some beauty and some accomplishments, of a certain age, which she was at great pains to conceal, and withal of an immense fortune. She was of Flemish origin, but having in early youth married an Italian prince, and visited almost every country in Europe, it might have puzzled even a philosopher to have discovered to what nation she belonged, for her manners at once struck Clara, as being singularly eccentric. The Princess Hyacintha was seated, after the Eastern, fashion, on a cushion of rich embroidered velvet, in an elegant deshabille, endeavouring to kill time, by playing Patience, with the most eame<*t perseverance, while her maid, and a smirking French friseur, were doing their best to arrange her hair in the last Parisian fashion. At the door of the apartment, squatted a little black urchin, dressed in a fanciful costume of green satin and silver, whose duty, Clara was quickly informed, was to prevent his lady's being alarmed-, by the intrusion of any supernatural visitors, of which she either had, or affected tchave, a superstitious horror* The Princess no sooner beheld Clara* than she started from her seat, regardless of the exclamation of the friseur,. who, dismayed*, beheld, the disarrangement of her welfe-> brushed hair, and clasping her in her arms, protested that it .was the happiest moment of her life. Clara could scarcely refrain from smiling at this eccentric welcome, but, however, she had sufficient command of her risible faculties, to prevent her thoughts from becoming apparent to the bystanders, who were too much accustomed to the follies of her Highness, to be surprized at any thing she might do. Clara thought she perceived beneath this garb of folly and affectation, symptoms of a good heart, and she mentally resolved, if the Princess was willing, to accept her proposals, rather than be tied to the apron of a time-touched dowager of fortune, Avho would most probably lament over the days that were past, and dread those to come, though, at the same time, the very name of death would be productive of a fit of ill humour, which must be vented on those who were the most in





her society. The Princess, meanwhile, who was, in her own opinion, a great physiognomist, was studying the countenance of Clara, which was, with the exception of being too handsome, quite to her taste. The Princess had, as has been before hinted at, a little of the romantic in her disposition, and doated upon any thing that was, in the slightest degree, mysterious, or out of the common way of life. Thus, her first knowledge of Clara endeared her to her heart, and she entreated her not to delay a moment before she commenced being her constant companion. There was something prepossessing in the Princess, notwithstanding the eccentricity of her manners and ideas, and, therefore Clara unhesitatingly promised to take up her residence with her on the morrow. The conduct of her Highness was kind, and her proposals truly liberal. In truth, Clara was both pleased with her own success, and thankful that Providence had interfered to protect her. It was preferable to being a dependant on the capricious favour of a court, and far better than the pious protection of a minister of state. Having thus arranged, the necessary preliminaries, equally to the satisfaction of herself and the Princess, she returned to her humble home, to prepare for her final departure from it. In a few hours her little wardrobe was arranged and packed up, ready to be placed in the carriage, which the Princess had promised to send, for her conveyance, at a certain hour.





Clara felt the intrusive tear start into her eye, when she quitted the cottage, which had sheltered her from the frowns of the world, and sunk back in the carriage melancholy, and thoughtful. Humble as it was, it had been to her a home, and the grateful remembrance ojf Being beloved by the inhabitants, was Mke a balm to her oppressed heart. When she again entered Brussels, perhaps to remain in it for some time, her fallen situation rushed forcibly on her mind. Not long before, she had been courted by the worlds—now she was about to become a dependant on one, whom wealth and rank alone had made her superior. Glara felt that the poor must be humble, and, with one strong effort, banished the tear from her eye; But she could not expel care from her heart; it is the incubus that preys upon the mind, while its. companions are inquietude and sorrow. At length the carriagestopped at thedoor of the hotel, Clara sprung- from it, and was ushered immediately into the presence of. the Princess Hyacintha, who almost smothered her with caresses, in the intervals of those moments she employed in overwhelming-her with expressions of gratitude. Clara thought her one of the most singular of human beings, but felt her heart yearn towards her for the kindness she received.





The Princess perceived that Clara laboured under a depression of spirits, and endeavoured, imperceptibly, to bereave her of the innate grief which was destroying her repose. Clara had of late been unaccustomed to the soothings of pity, and had become almost a stranger to the expression of compasr sion. The remembrance of this state of solitude, at the moment quite overcame her—her heart was overflowing, and she burst into tears. The Princess could not restrain a sympathetic tear, and at length, completely overcome, sunk, sobbing violently, into the arms of Clara, with

friendly Pity, full of tender sighs.

« * i , \

In a few days Clara became completety domesticated in the house of the Princess, and learned, to her great joy that she did not intend to> remain at Brussels many weeks longer. This wa& indeed tidings of joy to Clara. There every thing reminded her so much of the past, that it threw a gloom over her spirits which she found it impossible to disperse, and she fondly trusted that an absence of some months would do much towards eradicating from her mind those recollections which were at present too strongly impressed there. Notwithstanding the painful reflections which agitated her mind, Clara could not, at times, resist laughing at the oddities of the Princess, who would frequently indulge herself by inhaling the odoriferous perfume exhaled from lighted pastiles, which she inhaled from the golden tube of a superb Indian Hookah, while the favorite sable page amused her by performing a variety of ridiculous antics and contortions of the body, at which her Highness would often laugh till she sunk back exhausted on her seat of downy pillows. Clara had no cause of complaint, for she was treated rather like a, sister than, a dependent by the Princess, though she was. not unfre^ quently obliged to listen for hours to the long tales which her Highness was wont, to relate of her travels, herself, and her lovers. Her husband she never mentioned. She had married him for convenience, and most likely thought it best to let him rest in his grave in peace.. Neither did she mention her children, but once, to Clara, though her silence did not.pvoceed from any want of affection towards, them, but from a desire of being thought young, as long as the world would be kind enough to consider her so. This is, in truth, the foible of most women, nfho are generally averse to be thought





verging on towards old age. It certainly is a folly, though a harmless one; for when does a mother, look more respectable, and when can she be considered more happy than, when she is surrounded by a gay smiling offspring? It would be well if this folly were corrected, and the fair sex could be taught to remember that age, when accompanied by wisdom, not only commands our esteem, but also our attention and veneration.

Rumour soon informed the Robsons, and the others, of the circle of which Clara had been almost the idol, of her having suddenly emerged from the seclusion of a cottage, to become the favored, and, of course, they conceived the happy companion of a Princess. They now condescended to remember that there was such a person in«xistence, and Madame Robson even bad'thO'temerity to leave her cards personally for that lovely and amiable being whom she had so- lately designated as the creature! and endeavoured to brand with infamy. She even went sofar as to ask the favor of an introduction to the Princess, probably indulging a hope that one of her children might in time supplant Clara, and thus relieve her of a portion of her anxieties. Contempt, not indignation, was the sensation which Clara felt when she received the cards and the note addressed to her by Madame Robson. The Princess lived somewhat secluded, and as she had some notion of her own dignity, during her stay in the metropolis, only received persons of a certain rank. Clara shewed her the note. She simply desired her to receive them as they were her friends, kindly making, an exception in their favor. Clara soon set her right on the subject, and briefly detailed what conduct she had experienced from them. The Princess said, they deserved no mercy. Clara smiled and replied, that she believed she understood the method of punishing them, and enclosing the note and the cards in an envelope she returned them by one of the domestics, without even a line, or a message. Their conduct richly deserved such treatment, and Clara knew that they would feel it most poignantly. So in fact they did. It was a morti* fication that had never entered into their ideas, for though they scrupled not to insult others, they did not calculate on being repaid after a similar fashion. They had not those angelic feelings of their sex-—





Pity for the wretched prone to grieve;

Awake to see,, and thoughtful to relieve—



They were of a very different tempera* incut, and like the ephemera that sport in the sunbeams of fortune, and die when the sun declines.





Contrary to the expectations Clara had formed, she found that the life of a dependent is not always an existence of misery. She was perfectly mistress of herself and her time, which she contrived to make the best use of, and even endeavoured to wean the Princess from following her frivolous pursuits, by engaging her attention to the most beautiful productions of the Italian poets, which her Highness professed greatly to admire, though at. the same time she confessed.that she had never yet had the patience to read them. Clara could not help smiling at this novel and fashionable method of admiring writers who must be read to be understood; But it must be recollected that in this Age of Reviews,, people with tolerable memories may, pass for great readers, if they will take the trouble to read over. weekly, monthly, and quarterly, those delectable publications which may be met with on the breakfast tables of all those who would wish to be thought encouragers of literature. The Princess did not even take this trouble; she admired every thing but what she could understand, and what was within the sphere of her comprehension she disliked, in compliance with the prevailing fashion. It might have been imagined that the Princess had copied the inveterate idleness of Victor Alfieri, of whom she was wont to speak with the most ardent enthusiasm, and, in truth, with some reason, for she had heard nearly half of one of his celebrated tragedies! and that was surely enough for her to form her judgment by. Of Metastatio she had never read a line, and unfortunately for the depth of her erudition, she spoke of his. delightful verses so slightingly,





that Clara took the liberty of correcting; her opinions.

"Ah? ma chere bonne amie?" exclaimed the Princess, "you are too acute for my illustrious head. Remember that the Italians did think half a century ago that a noWe need not be a doctor, and of course a princess need not be learned. To be sure I could read and write before I left Flanders, which I believe is my native country, but Monica can tell you"—then, inclining her head towards the woman, she continued, "am I Flemish, Monica, for I really cannot take the trouble to recollect?"

Whether it was etiquette, or merely Dutch heaviness, which prevented Monica from smiling at this illustrious absence of mind, she replied, "Yaw, Madame, you were Flemish born, but what nation you belong to now, is more than I can say."





Clara found it impossible to silence her propensity to laughter. Even her Highness for the moment forgot her want of memory and joined with her, while Monica stood as formal and sedate, as if she had been in attendance at a funeral, without moving a muscle. The satire conveyed in the few words she did condescend to pronounce pleased Clara excessively. She appeared to Clara, not much unlike the speaking automaton of M. Kempelin, which could utter a certain number of sounds and no more. This she remarked to the Princess, who again turned her head towards Monica, and enquired whether she had not seen it at Vienna? —.She, however, had natural acuteness enough to perceive, that she was about to become the jest of her mistress, and contented herself with replying, that she too had forgotten.

"Ah!" cried her Highness, shrugging her shoulders, after the Parisian mode, "if your memory fails, Monica, what am I to do?"





"Think for yourself." was the laconic reply, for Monica had been too useful to her mistress," and too long in iter service, to stand upon trifles.

The Princess was silenced, and Clara was too delicate to say more. Her Highness was inclined to be tall, and somewhat enbonpoint, and had an air of. langour,. which, perhaps, contributed to display her charms to the best advantage; her eye was large and full, shaded by a lid most beautifully fringed with a long and silken lash, which matched well with her exquisitely polished and downy skin, while her hair which was long and soft as the bosom of a swan, fell partly in rich and luxuriant ringlets down her neck, while the longer tresses were confined from wantoning by the pressure of a comb profusely, studded. with brilliants. In short she seemed an object formed for admiration, though she had somewhat disfigured her charms by the huge patches of rouge with which she had marked her cheeks, till she had made them resemble the tint of the poppy rather than the rose. Her teeth were finely set, and of a delicate whiteness, while her little foot, which peeped out from beneath her satin petticoats at intervals, might have tempted even a Joseph to gaze upon it. In short she was superlatively beautiful, and would have looked much better had she called in less art to her assistance. But ladies are seldom content with looking well: they are always considering how they can be improved, and in this period of patents, if some adventurer would but get a legal protection for the art of improving and repairing beauty, there is little doubt but that he might become the richest man in Europe.





But, with all her faults, there was something in the manner of the Princess, which, imperceptibly, made them appear far less palpable. There certainly was an incongruity both in her words and her actions, which might with little difficulty be traced to proceed from a disease very prevalent in our days, and not unaptly termed by the reflecting portion of the community, fashionable madness. In short she was "every tiling by turns and nothing long." In one thing alone Clara and the Princess perfectly agreed, which was a predeliction for the country. The latter was wont to speak with rapturous enthusiasm of the charms of her Italian villa, where "the sky was Claude's— the foliage Poussin's," where she could indulge her indolence in bowers of fragrance, shaded by Azelias, Magnolias, Kalmias, and a host of beautiful shrubs, or lounge from boudoir to saloon casting a listless glance by the way on the productions of Raphael, Tintoretto, and Titian; perchance pause for a moment before a flower piece, and yawn over a superb Canaletti. But the Italian villa was no longer hers. The guardians of her children had taken it into their own possession, to prevent its becoming the pillage of her adulatory companions, who, aware of her weakness, had the wit to admire the most valuable articles, which she had not the power to resist presenting them with. Of this she did not fail to complain, and as she thought, with some reason. Clara however thought otherwise, as she had an ample estate and splendid mansion in her native land, which, though it could not boast of the sunny sky and brilliant verdure of Italia, was far superior in its domestic comforts. At least this was the opinion of Clara, who, it must be remembered had not been a traveller, nor migrated through those regions which have been described and re-described, till we can almost fancy we have visited them ourselves.





CHAPTER XXII.



The lying voice of Fame has been before you,

And told us wondrous news.



Richard Clithebob.



"THE young and old," says a sweet, though almost forgotten poet, " are moved by different toys," and the Dordrecht family on their return from their expedition to Brussels, proved a most forcible illustration of the truth of the observation. Vander Dordrecht was mentally calculating the expences to which he had been put, without even the slightest gain to preponderate on the other side of the question. Aaltje was gloomy and discontented, and not much

VOL. II. M





inclined to forgive the court, which had proved to her that hopes and expectations are all

Like the foundation th y were built upon,

But air—Bo more—so light—so changeable.



Huyp was silent and sorrowful, his thoughts wandering back to Clara, and his heart devoted to pity for her distressses, while old Leena, on the contrary, felt her heart bound with joy at the prospect of being once more domesticated within the quiet walls of the antique tower, from whence she had departed with, as much joy as her mistress, in quest of pleasures which she had not found. Aaltje would fain have avoided Ghent, where she had been the theme of the gossips already, but the Burgomaster overruled her objections, as, ,he hoped to strike a bargain for some articles p{ merchandize, which would, it' he succeeded, recompense him for the time and money he had thrown, away ^t Brussels. , • .





When Aaltje could spare a moment from reflecting on the mortifications she had met with, she gave vent to her spleen by endeavouring to ridicule her son out of those kindly feelings he cherished towards the daughter of Von Essen, whom she designated as one little better than a wanton. Huyp could not patiently endure to hear Clara spoken of after such a manner, and reddening with rage, demanded why his mother stigmatized the best and loveliest woman in existence; while he added, with pointed emphasis, "I could not have suspected you would have been so illiberal.'* Aaltje understood to what he alluded—the magistrate in astonishment turned his eyes upon them both, and old Leena was secretly rejoiced to find that her lady was reminded of the past, by one who dared to speak so boldly to her, which it would have been a perilous undertaking for even Vandei• Dordrecht to have ventured.





Aaltje herself seemed for some mir nutes to be thunderstruck at the presumption of her son, and undecided whether to notice it or not. Prudence whispered, not, and for once prevailed. However she was resolved not to suffer him to travel on in quietness. "God's grace, Huyp," she exclaimed, " you whine and whimper like a boy in the stocks, or a spoiled baby for the moon. Out upon you, you jongeling—it ill befits you to pine away for the loss of a pennyless girl, who, as Madame Robson says, has doubtless by this time forgotten you."

"If you trust to the reports of Madame," replied Huyp, '' where innocence and beauty are concerned, I know well that you will hear only one side of the question. She has an interest of her own in every thing she says and does, which with a little degree of penetration I conceive you might yourself have discovered."





Aaltje could not refute the arguments of her son, for she well remembered that when the unceremonious visit of Ihe police cut short the radical oration of the Burgomaster, she had been left by those kind friends to get out of the scrape how she could.. This was also fresh in the recollection of Mynheer, who now ventured to give lus opinion, which, with respect to the Robsons, coincided with those of Huyp. He was also inclined to favor the pretensions of his son to the affections of Clara, for the amiable meekness of her disposition induced him to hope that, with her, he might pass a life of domestic quiet, which he, in the winter of life, had now no hopes of. Huyp was grateful to his father for this consideration, and returned him thanks with his eyes, which at the. present time, it would have been highly imprudent to have embodied in words. Aaltje looked displeased, for her quick eye had caught the expression of those of her son, and she was mentally resolving to read the Burgomaster a long lecture on propriety, the very first opportunity that might present itself.





Onward, however, they journeyed at a rate which would have driven the fiery Alfieri to madness, but was quite to the taste of the magistrate, who thought far more of the wear and tear of his travelling vehicle, than of his own convenience.

At Ghent they remained for a few days, and Huyp, to avoid the unceasing importunities of his mother, employed his time in wandering from church to convent, which, at least, helped to divert his mind from themes of sorrovv. Here Aaltje, to her dismay, found that rumour had magnified the mortifications she had met with, and she was doomed to listen to the condolence of the city dames, who were, perhaps, not sorry, to find that her plans had been disappointed.





It was the misfortune of Huyp, to be too attractive in the eyes of the ladies. His person was now fully formed; and when to the striking elegancies of figure, were added those of a noble expression of countenance, and bright black eyes* which seemed as though they were des^ tined to pierce the inmost recesses of the soul, none can wonder that Huyp captivated the hearts of all who were ready to be caught by personal attractions.

The air of dejection* which was visible in his countenance, served also to make bim more interesting. The ladies, tender kind-hearted souls! were willing to disperse this Werter-bke cloud, if Huyp could have been induced to listen to their reasonings; but he felt it was too dense to be easily eradicated, and degenerated into a mere listener—no unprofitable member of society, where there are many whose greatest delight is to hear themselves talk.





Among those to whom the Vander Dordrechts were introduced at their second visit to Ghent, which was prolonged from three to upwards of ten days, was the widow of a rich old banker, who had, to the astonishment of every one, left her in possession of an immense fortune, to the prejudice of his children, which she was inclined to place in the hands of any handsome young man, who was willing to relieve her from worse than single blessedness. This lady, Madame de Stratton, was estimated at the value of thrice her weight in gold, or upwards of a million sterling—a very good prize for an ad





venturer, who was politic enough to prefer a portly dame of fifty-five to a blushing maiden of fifteen.

Madame De Stratton. was, as yet, in her weeds, though unwilling to lose time, which, at her period of life,, was of consequence; she had already hung out a pennon of invitation, which strange to say, in this fortune-hunting age, had failed to provide her with an acknowledged lover. She had, indeed, made several proposals herself, and, among the rest, a German Bishop, whose descent was illustrious, had the offer of her fair hand. The prelate, who was needy, was on his part very ready to close with her proposals—he wanted money, and she wanted rank—nay> report stated, that there had been sevey ral tender interviews between them, during one of which* Madame, as.(a pledge of her sincerity, destroyed severajl bonds, which had been placed in the





hands of her deceased husband, as securities for money lent. This certainly was a convincing proof of her sincerity, and a very acceptable present to the prelate, who was far more learned in the science of Chance, than in the principles of Theology, and had, some few years back, made a prominent, though somewhat ludicrous figure in the Annals ,of Gallantry. This, however, made no difference to Madame. She thought that it evinced a degree of spirit, and Was- the more anxious for the union. Both oftheseyoung lovers, (whose ages were nearly on a par) however, forgot that the• sanction of the Court was requisite. The proposal was, nevertheless laid', in due form, before the State Couhdil, which, after many hours of thfr usual dry debate, decided, that the prelate, having been born a Prince, ferald nof.'hfe: permitted to marry one, •wio^wa^^niy'^ 'subject/ TKi* wasa terrible blow to Madame De StrattonV vanity, and she began to perceive that her liberality to the Prince Bishop had been somewhat too precipitate. She had made herself the town-talk of Ghent, and was unable to bear with fortitude the smiles of derision which she met with on every side. Even the. papers —the respectable public press H whose editors had mysteriously received considerable douceurs from some unknown hand to praise her, were of necessity obliged to hint at the disappointment she had met with, and to escape hearing the remarks with which her ears were daily, and hourlyr annoyed r she, accompanied by one of the most eminent of the Flemish faculty and an almost countless train of domestic attendants, decided on a voyage to the sea coast, from whence she had returned but a few weeks previous to the arrival of the I>ordrecht family at Ghent. Madam* was a good-looking sizeable woman, rather coarse both in person and manner, and perfectly aware of the value of money, from which she derived all her consequence. Her origin was obscure in the extreme, though by artful insinuations she had contrived to inveigle Mynheer de Stratton so completely, that she had the complete command of his fortune long before his first wife died. But she assured the world, that this connection was simply platonic! a pure flame, which would not have disgraced a vestal. The ill-natured world, howeyer^ were of a different opinion, and did not scruple to say, that'the lady was a very good actress, which was delicately hinting, that they disbelieved the ; whole story. As soon as the first Madame De Stratton was in her coffin, (somesay,i the day fo/ore she.died), this worthy female became the second spouse of the infatuated banker.! Theft,





to use art Irishism, "the murder was out," The world wondered that they had been so long deceived, and Madame, to silence the clamour of public opinion, began to be profuse of her charitable donations, of course not forgetting the editors ofsomepublicpapers. This artful plan was eminently successful, and the poor and destitute blessed Heaven, that there was such an amiable being in existence. As soon as she had gained a good name, however, her charities began to slacken, and it was like "throwing bread upon the waters," to apply to her for assistance. Again the world had cause of wonder, and it was not until they received proof positive, that the richest private person in the Pays Bas, had closed her purse against the wants of the wretched, that they would believe, that, which they hoped to be untrue. But conviction soon came in all the pride of circumstance- She would not even, like the famed Sir Balaam of Pope, give farthings to the poor. When she was liberal, it was to those who wanted it not, and then, on condition that it might have proper publicity. Sometimes, however, her proffers of patronage and service were rejected. There was at Brussels a lovely and amiable young actress, famed for the sweetness of her singing, which was soft as





"The silver notes of fail Carew"

to whom Madame de Stratton pom' pously made an offer of her patronage. This amiable young woman, who contemned the fady from her very soulr declined the acceptance of her favors, and replied with much spirit, that" she preferred depending on her own exertions and the kindness of the public, whose favor had left her nothing to wish for, and therefore decidedly declined the patronage of any individual." Madame was terribly mortified. The story quickly got wind, and the spirited conduct of the young vocalist was the theme of universal praise. She is a noble minded girl," exclaimed the deaf Duke of D***, "and scorns to receive the favors of a woman whom she despises." Indeed she had an example before her eyes, of the ill effects of the patronage of Madame, in the person of Mademoiselle Voet, whom her promises and presents had seduced into a degree of extravagance, which had proved the ruin of her peace of mind and her prospects J





Always accessible to the advances of youth, Madame de Stratton mistook the cold civilities of Huyp for'timid admiration, and commiskmed one of hef crouching confidants to hint to Vander Dordrecht and Aaltjer that more direct adVanbed- would cot be ill received. The latter, "who conceived this to be a golden opportunity to raise herself to the highest distinctions that wealth can obtain, caught at the indirect proposal with avidity. Long and loud were the ,dissertations with which she favored iluyp and her husband on the advantages of countless wealth. She discovered virtues in Madame de Stratton which the most acute observer could not have espied even with the aid of the most faultless microscope. She even forgot that Madame was nearly old enough to be hermother, and, consequently, grandmamma to her son. This, however, she deemed to be of little consequence. Her, wealth would more than counterbalance such a trifling objection, and sfie decided in her own mind that Huyp .should wed the rich de Stratton. Mynh^r, ,wa^ also inclined to sanction the decision of his wife, for the prospect < it hi* son's being in possession of such





immense wealth, blinded his eyes to the faults of the widow. Huyp however had not been consulted, and the Burgomaster feared that he might raise some objections which could not easily be overruled.

"He object!"exclaimed Aaltje, with her natural impetuosity, and fixing her eyes full on the countenance of Vander .Dordrecht with an expression of resolution which he well understood, "He object indeed! I would have both you and him kennen, Mynheer, that it is my pleasure that he should accede to my will. Is he not pining and sighing himself to a skeleton, for that pretty little bauble, Clara Von Essen—not that I think that she is so very pretty, and besides, a youth like him would do wrong to take up with a girl who has nothing but her face for her portion. I$p man should be so simple nowadays, ye kennen, Mynheer."





*

"Aye, aye, Aakje," replied Vander Dordrecht, ^ I certainly should know that right well, seeing what I see, and knowing that this advice conies too late to do me any service."

There was a frown on the brow of Aaltje of portentous import. Vander Dordrecht was fearful that he had gone too far, when at the very moment that Aaltje's passion was ready for explosion, a splendid carriage of green and silver drove up, and Madame de Stratton was ushered in as a morning visitor. She bad met Buyp in the hall, who had, in consequence, been compelled in common politeness, to attend her to bis mother, and they entered the apartment together, as Madame had taken his arm, which he had politely offered her. Aaltje cast a triumphant glance at Mynheer, which seemed to say, *. you see I was right,' and then welcomed Madame de Stratton. with the affection of a mother.





Huyp certainly had fine eyes, but at this time they sparkled not with love, though both Aaltje and Madame flattered themselves that it was the cause of their brightness. Their expression was rather satirical than amorous, but that no one suspected.

Madame de Stratton seemed to be on the look-out for a formal declaration of love, and knowing that the old folks were in the secret, she expected every moment to have her blushes called up by some expression of melting tenderness, for she had not calculated on the possibility of a refusal. She thought it was very strange—particularly singular that nothing should have been said— not even a hint! It was a mystery which she could not unravel, for it was evident that Aaltje's heart was as much engaged in the matter as her own. However she was not willing to commit herself until she had consulted her confidante, and after inviting the Dordrechts to a dinner, en famille, on the morrow, was conducted by the Burgomaster to her carriage.





l" Ah! my dearest Huyp!" cried Aaltje, as soon as she was left alone with her son, "this is something like a conquest! Why, jongeling, you will be the richest man in Flanders—no disgrace to the Vuist Slaagens, and the very star of the Dordrecht family. My heart beats with joy—I am so happy.— so proud—you cannot tell how I feel."

M At any rate I cannot understand you," replied Huyp.

"Pshaw!" returned Aaltje, "do

,you think I cannot see? Leave me to

"\find out whether any person is in love

or not, and if my judgment is wrong, never trust to a woman's penetration again. But I say, you must be in love, you shall be in love, or I will disown you for my son."





"I am in love," said Huyp with calm composure.

"I knew it—I knew it—," exclaimed Aaltje with exultation, as the Burgomaster entered the apartment—" Huyp has confessed," she continued, " and I am sure there will be no difficulies on the other side. I was right Mynheer, I knew I could not be easily deceived in love affairs."

"That's a brave lad— a good jongefing-"returned Mynheer: •• but, Huyp, mind you do not let the prize slip through your fingers, for there are many who would give their ears to stand in your situation."

'' What prize, Mynheer!" enquired Huyp with assumed carelessness.





"Out upon you, jongding" said Aaltje, "do you think we are ignorant of what hag passed between you and Madame de Stratton? We know every thing, and you may marry her when you will."

"Marry her!" repeated Huyp, with a curve of the upper lip, " I would quite as soon be tied to old Leena. Marry her? Never!"

Aaltje was in a terrible passion and raved alternately at Huyp and the Burgomaster; at the one for thwarting her projects, at the other for not forcing him to aid them. There was, however, no opportunity for either of them to speak, for Aaltje had so much to say that nothing short of the application of a gag could have silenced her.

All was confusion. The Burgomaster made a precipitate retreat and Huyp, after being threatened with being turned out of doors, if he continued obstinate, also slipped away, leaving his mother to rave till exhaustion compelled her tu be quiet.





KXD OF VOLUME SECOND.



Printed bv, J. Poplett, 37, Jewin-street, Cripplegate.





BY

J. C. SPENCE,

THE KNIGHTS OF RITZBERG, a Romance, by the Author of " Supreme Bon Ton," "Parga," &c. 3 vols. 16*. 6d.

The story is interesting, th.- moral good, and the style neither tame, nor otherwise objectionable.

Literary Chronicle.

We have read this work with considerable pleasure, and have no hesitation in saying, that it ranks among the first of the kind, exciting an interest in the mind of the reader to the close.

Observer of the Times.

These volumes are well written. From the title we expected some bombast in diction, but were agreeably disappointed. To those who admire a rapid change of incident, and the wonderful in every incident, we recommend the work, with a certainty of its yielding satisfaction. .

Literary Register.

RHODOMALDI, a Romance, 3 vols. 16*. 6d.

SUPREME BON TON, a Novel, 3 vols. 18*. These volumes will be found an acquisition to the library of the Novelist.

London Magazine. ,

The characters in this Novel are drawn to the life.

Literary Chronicle.



In a Jew days, will be Published, GWENLLEAN, a Novel, in 3 vols.





TEMPTATION.





TEMPTATION.



CHAPTER XXIV.

i '. ,

"Defend me from family repasts,

Where all the guests claim kin—nephews and uncles,

And aunts and cousins to the fifth remove!

First you've the sire—a goblet in his hand—

And he deals forth his dole of admonition :—

Then comes my lady-mother, a mere homily,

, Rpproof and exhortation !—at her heels,

The aunt slips in a word of pious precept.

The grandsire last—a bass voice among trebles,

Thunder succeeding whispers, fires away.

Each pause between, his aged partner fills,



rith "lack-a-day," "good sooth," and "dearest

dear!" >' '-'

The dotard's head, meantime, for ever nods,

Encouraging her drivelling." ,



,rlj ••:;,'

UNWILLINGLY Huyp accompanied Aaltje and Mynheer to the residence of

VOL. III. B





Madame De Stratton. Aware that he was a marked man, and knowing that his lc-qkX 4*3 'ffshfa $$vlt§IW interpreted, rather as they wished, than as he intended, he stepped into the heavy vehicle, which was waiting to convey them to the, villas f Madame De Stratton, which was dignified with the name of Braambosch Lodge, and situated at a short' distance Troyi' the city, in the pleasantest part of its environs. It. was, indeed, a splendid fnodern residence, and fitted up with all the luxuries of taste, which this pttrvewue dame was determined'to enjoy whilst she lived, and where she indulged in the pleasures of dissipation, and rioted in the enjoyment of the most sumptuous viands, and the richest wines. Mental delights were not to her taste, aiid the lowness of her

the 'pursuits. Mh! a woriian was xmi Very'Hkely to



origin was continually apparent in t... lown^omr'tmrsuits.





jnake a favorable impression on.the mind of Huyp, .^boW'thoughts, weiva.fixed on the mild virtue* iflf the ^amiable Clara, whose unassuming ^manners served but. jto make her innate „worth more conspicuous. Madame de .Stratton, on the contrary^ was all shew—a complete exhibition of affected virtues—one of those every-d ay, characters, whom we are willing to forget as soon as we have seen- -,-'. r i|. - hi . . •- - \\'. .! .l.

However, M was compelled to be civil, and to endure patiently those evils which-there was no possibility of his avoiding* Aaltje had not failed to lecture him, during their drive, on the subject nearest her heart, and farthest from that of her son. , i n- " f ,i;o.

Madame de Stratton ireceived them with proper pomp and ceremony, and introduced them to the family .circle, which had been invited to meet them. Aaltje first made her curtsey to an old uncle of Madame's, who had, years since, been of the musical profession, and, as an itinerant fiddrer, had contrived to pick up a scanty livelihood. Next in rotation, came his wife, whom dress had failed to improve, and who might have been mistaken by a traveller, for one of those " fair dames" that deal in food for brutes, of edify the lower classes, by chanting doleful ditties to the vulgar herd. Aaltje was absolutely struck dumb with surprize. The Vulgarity of Madame's relatives was astonishing— -nor was her amazement less, when she was introduced to the niece. This young lady Was the very reverse of her parents—the very quintessence of affectation, but in person she very much tesembled her mother, and could not !entirely conceal an unfortunate squint with one of her' eyes, which gave them the appearance of winking, though she had tortured her*curis into everylpossible twist, to make it.less perceptible. The family physician, and the private secretary, made up the party. . "So you live at Amsterdam," said the uncle, by way, of encouraging conversation, addressing himself to Aaltje, who, but for the-hopes she entertained of her son's marrying the widow, would scarcely have deigned to notice him; H very fine place—know it very well— very fine place."





"Very fine place," repeated the aunt, who was the echo of her husband, as she had not half an idea of her own, at least in conversational matters, though she frequently attempted to play the domestic tyrant, in which, unlike Aaltje, she was seldom successful.— Aaltje gravely made an inclination of the body, in reply to the speech of the old man, while Huyp drew himself up, and assumed a degree of consequence, which made even the forward Madame de Stratton feel something like inferiority. This conduct displeased Aaltje, and whispering something to the. Burgomaster, he, in a few minutes* took an Opportunity of commanding the attention of Huyp, and informed him, that his" mother was greatly offended by his grave and haughty manners, and that ic Wag her" wish for him to make a formal Offer of his hand to Madame without d'etey; as she had reason to thfeAjithat bfltft the physician and the S»&fctary Were also candidates for her favor1. , Huyp Mentally wished his rivals every sliflrieasv &*d reminded his fatheiV tha* he had,>«ri.tfe«* preceding dayj given a decisive answer with respect' to the .jtooj,ected union. Vaftder Dordrecht bit Ms lips, and communicated the result of his conversation id his wife; The countenance of Aalfje WJdenfent a chang,e^-fbtf: & moment■ he* rhihilrwas confiweci but sheiqtfiekty recolteded— the 's^ecess' wffick'bWfl





attended a former desperate experiment* and was, deierj^ined,, that} Huyp sbpfuld be entrapped into thet fetters of muUirnony,. after.a similar manner- Tq accomplish her aim, she contrived to,draw Madame [aside, as sppn as the cloth wa.s removedJ, apd to make, on the, paijt of her son, ;prppqsals, which, she,felt as-r sured,, ,.\v0uldnpt he rejected, by the lady. So far she was right; but Aaltje neijejrcpuld be taught the necessity of examining both,, Bides of the questipn. bieft?r# shp decided on eithejr. , , ...... ,i

; Madame de Strata, as Aalt*e had anticipated, was ready to, b,e,w<H>tfdand won,> and, moreover* did not strenuously insist upon the privileges of her sepc, which, aUp wed he* to keep a lover nvth^iinpst anxious suspense, if; such was her pleasure,, until she had dispflr verpd to a pprtjauity, whetjie* thfice.! was a likelihood of obtaining one more to

fcer tasted ,Qa*the contrary,, she*was in high spirits at the conquest, which Aaltje assured her, she had gained over the affections of Huyp; and, in return for the pleasing intelligence, she gave Aaltje to understand, that from the first moment she saw Huyp, her heart had been devoted to him. Thus far then one point was gained. The only grand object to be achieved now, was to influence Huyp in her favor—a difficult task, but, in Aaltje's opinion, not a hopeless one. She had, however, to learn from experience, that young minds are, in love affairs, less easily to be moulded to the will of others, than they are willing to suppose. When the affections are placed on one particular object they are not easily subdued or set aside, by persuasions, threats, or remonstrances. Love, all-powerful love, (as the ladies have it) is not to be eradicated, like >a.wrong spelt word in a billet-doux^-it flames bright and beamy a* the beaco,n light, .that warns us of the dangers of a rocky coast. Checked it may be, rbut!ijt Cannot be extinguished,>| u ,.., Yi -ay:- ,; -. . i , .:!,; , It was now evening. The splendid saloon at Braambosch Lodge was brilliantly lighted up, and the tables placed for cards. All, except Madame and Huyp, who had an aversion to cards, sat down to Vingt-un. As was usual, they played high, and Aaltje, who was particularly fortunate at games of chance, quickly filled her purse with the losings of her competitors. This caused a domestic dispute between the aunt and uncle of the mistress of the mansion, which afforded much amusement to those around them, not even excepting their daughter, who did not attempt to conceal her contempt of the vulgarity of her parents.





'* You had better put down your cards," said the old lady to her husband





jk# iptrengtfh Q{ hie purse, ,befqrete ventured to stake a atuiver.' Their . gender j however, was qiuckly at att end, >fc.r Jhe old man, who felt his own consequence, pi., at least, the consequence of ,his cash, placed ten llouis apartfroraftiie *est, and.after replacing the purse ihhis pocket, gave them to his wife, saying loudly, "here, my love, take these—go to ^Brussels and buy yourself .a new pair of breeches, for, upon my souhyiou shall never wear rniae."-'—The daughter was quite shocked at the rudendss .of .her father, and to prove the delicacy->of her sentiments fainted in the arms of the Secretary. AIL was now confusion. •Afdtje was too, well versed in female trickery to heed this nonsense,> and aluiost wished the evening at an end. The Burgomaster comforted himself •Yffch his cigar, and the physician had foil employment in administering proper restoratives to the fainting girl, while





the poor secretary bore his> burthen with calm composure.

Madame de Stratton had in the meanwhile, contrived' to draw Huyp into a private apartment, when she artfully endeavoured to ' induce him to declare his incipient passion, for she had now no doubts respecting the strength of his love. All was however in vain. Huyp continued provokingly silent, and at length the buxom widowgave him such broad hints that herself and her fortune were at his disposal, that he could not, with propriety, affect not to understand her any longer.

As Huyp did not desire her love, he was not very thankful to Aftlrje for having drawn him into a situation, which, under the circumstances in which he was placed, was one which he would haVe most scrupulously shunned. He was now obliged to speak—and to *peak the truth. Too noble minded to fet Madame continue in error respecting the state of his heart, he frankly told her of his attachment to Clara, and declared his resolution of not sacriiU cing himself for wealth,, where he could not bestow his love in return. Madame de Stratton heard him with surprize. A refusal was what she had not anticipated and she considered Huyp little better than a fool. Huyp, however, was firm, and assured her that his mother might probably be a good judge of what was conducive to her own happiness, but in this case, at least, he must take his own opinion as to what was most likely to tend to his. An adventurer, without the high and lofty principle of Huyp, would have taken Madame for the sake of her riches—and, perhaps, have considered her as an incumbrance, which it would be justifiable to throw away again at pleasure. This possibility Madame did not consider, though, had she*consulted lier conscience, »h« might have, ait least, conceived such appoceeding. toibe'Very probable, and the distanoe-of tiirle not very! for* off;.' Bat vanity blinded her to her imperfections anit&hfe'saw herself in a-vety different fight to that-i»!iwhichshe was beheld by Oth«|8vi:;ij; Ion I:..;! 0;;-5 .mi.-/ fi;t/ b.'.ii 1 -t iMadattle* wpfgibjoiitifted and indignant, at being refused! by ayoung 'ifia* tb whom she had made such- concession* She Jihawgfetily :-quitted< the feotrtloirv tohither she- had led Ilayp . for the purpose ofibariug. a private interview, mhdiifafcttCTied to the saloon, where. dM', except Aatejie and Zander Dordrecht, ,¥|eid Ivtodebpgivrhat was1 the cause of •kteioag absence, There wats a cloud ua her farowv which1 Aaltje very wett Knew how to interpret wheirshfc rejoined the-party,: and«he Warmth of friendship vwith^whichafce had ^received them on W«ir,arrival, bad uow sunk into accfcd.





civUftyV which was hear a-kin, to; rudeness. This did not please Aalt^e, wh* was wilting to believe that she had Jla. claim to the deference and respect of alt present, and she therefore assumed* & decree of hanteur, which was intended <d give information to Madame de St ration that she was not to-'beirisidted. Huyp looked grave and cheeriest, and to the glances 'of kritjitfry-*with which he was every now and'ftheft"asi sailed by Aaltje, he gave'not;'the «Hghtest token of recognition. Maduhne iri*an while, .vented her disappointment by talking at the Vander; Ddrdrechts*, smd i Ithrew < out: so - rirany - brats .of . hfer totroteifrpt jfor people who had ho family rhiiitts^-fAr those whose''fedtofttef'; had .been imprudienC—^awl ^for1 'Tomafctie tovers^thafci Aaltje ;<Jonld - ft©*'".; logger doubtithati.tiw4s her ihtehtibh^ 'Offend thinko iAsmMadame de Btrtrtton -had iiinited that her former €OHidttct>1had"ttot been exacri^ whatthe wdrM calls proper* ^Altje feltherporide take fire, and jn her indignation she forgave; Huyp for refusing the puree proud widow. The Burgomaster sat very uneasy, for be >'*» momentarily in dread of their commencing open hostilities—and, as he knew that they were both women of violent tempers, he expected to witness a scene which would neither be very edifying to those around them, or pleasant to himself. For once he ventured to act without the sanction of his helpmate, and ringing the bell, desired the domestic to order his carriage. It was quickly announced to be in readiness, and the Vander Dordrechts exchanged a formal salute at parting, without being requested to prolong their present visit, or to make an early, or a longer one at Braambosch Lodge. Aaltje, for once, was satisfied with the conduct of her husband, and was no sooner seated m





the carriage than she gave vent to her indignation at the conduct of Madame de Stratton. "Only to conceive," she exclaimed, "that such a one as she should dare to hint that I have been guilty of improprieties! She, who, if report be not false, has not been a turtle dove to her mate, talk to me of my imprudence! Well, thank heaven, Mynheer, I did not build such a place as Braambosch Lodge with your money before you called in the Priester, and then told the world that I had a prize of ten thousand Louis in the Lottery. No, no, Vander Dordrecht, they cannot say that of me. I never had a platonic attachment for one of your clerks, and sent the carriage to bring him from Amsterdam to the tower every night with the account books—nor did 1 find out that the young man had better sleep at the tower, and other things which shall be nameless, till he preferred the maid to the mistress, and ran off with my woman, leaving* his wife and children to the cano of the Parish. I never. a«fced.ao<,Vanider: Dertlrecht!" .*.-'.-' •/.i i To thiUiithte B'argorhaster assented in as few words', as- possible, for he was aware that Aakje hadi enough to say. herself to occupy the time, until they ajaOTedlatithelt hdteM \n;-«v:l :,v.\r:\ -ui "Yon have described a character -ynthf"Marin^t'?r" nniH Hnyp. "and I *ongratuhUie youloncihe'change. of youn opinump.i''[ ;it I l.-ulj III;--- .: :i I.i i -..It ,oV Da not! speak; a word about k,'J replied Aaltje. 11". A prhtty affair indeed it Trould havfei been* if you had not been obstinate: I suppose, Mynheer would have been metamorphosed into i a Iticquey, and. I might, perhaps, have been looted upon as little better than a kjitehen. girl. Nevertheless her .'money was agreatttniifMJuioii—unu, you know, Huyp, she is not very young, and might have left yon a rich widower. But it cannot be helped now. After all, you have had a lucky escape, for she would have led you a wearisome life, or I am no judge of a woman's eyes; you would have quarrelled before you had been wedded a week, and fought long before the honey moon was on the wane."





"Such domestic felicity as that, Madam," returned Iluyp, " I am resolved to avoid. Wbero the hand is given without the heart,- it is, in fact, little better than tying a living man to a dead body." *

• Although Aaltje had forgiven Iluyp for rejecting the hand of Madame de Stratton,' she was not inclined to let him hope for her consent to his union with Clara. The very idea of it wall a thorn in the side of Aaltje, and she was anxious toeradicate, if possible, the

':—.'. '•.:[ ,-f—f-j ,','-':<— . - hH

"* " Marriage is a feast, where the gracp is sometimes better than the dinner.'" Colton's Lueon, vol. i.





memory.of an attachment which she was ever accustomed to consider, most particularly.unfortunate. Had shebeen asked to give her reasons why she had so unfavorable an opinion of Clara—• why she gave full scope to prejudices which were not founded on even the slightest basis—she would, most probably, have proved a very feeble logician. It is sometimes difficult to give a reason even when we feel convinced that our opinions are incapable of being controverted: how much more difficult must it be to frame a reason where we have no foundation for our affections or our antipathies!

There was now no plea for the Dordrechts remaining any longer at Ghent, and Mynheer was glad to take advantage of circumstances to propose departing from thence for the tower on the following day, to which Aaltje willingly acceded.





At day break the carriage was at the door, in which was placed Leena and the live stock, together with the bandboxes and the necessaire of Aaltje, and they were in a few hours some leagues on their journey homewards. »

Disappointments had not contributed to sweeten the irritable disposition of Aaltje, and she rode on railing and reviling the three human beings who were the companions of her travels. The Burgomaster comforted himself alternately with a sleep and a cigar, Huyp fixed his eyes, if not his attention, on a book, and old Leena alone without ostensible occupation, had to attend to the innumerable complaints with which the indefatigable Aaltje was endeavouring to kill the time. Every now and then Aaltje thrust her head out of the window to rate the coachman for the slowness of his progress. The poor domestic, who well knew the strength, of his mistness's.passionsviitlengthsucceeded in clashing the! horses into something -like fashionable capidiEty,. though the necks .of 'the passengers were endan.gered by travelling at little less than a gallop over a> paved road. , A child had for some minutes been endeavouring to keepup withthe carriage and supplicated •for charity. The entreaties of the boy were>not heeded by Aaltje, who thought people had no business to be poor. The Burgomaster was asleep, and Huyp had not a sous to bless himself with. Nevertheless the,child continued to run by the side of the carriage, and the horses having slackened their pace, imprudently ran in front of them to get -to the other side of the vehicle. It was a dangerous -and - a dreadful, effort—he fell beneath the:feet ofthe horses, and a loud and piercing scream, followed by Jthe: Stropping oof jthe carriage, gave intimation of an accident having oe





CHAPTER XXV.



Then yon will see me die of hunger, Mother.

t'lii i" me a little bread, I will not ask



I or more."



HUYP sprung from the carriage and caught the fainting child in hia arm*. It was little more than a skeleton; a light, and almost weightless creature, Aaltje, who was not blessed with art abundance of feeling, reprimanded him for stopping their progress. Huyp heard her not, the call of humanity made him careless of her reproaches, and he was anxious to save and protect the. senseless child.





After some time the child unclosed its eyes, and feebly called for its mother. Huyp questioned him of his home—he pointed to a little cottage at a short distance, and Huyp, taking him in his arms bore him thither, as speedily as possible. But what a sight there met his eye! It spoke of misery and devastation, and evinced all the horrors of poverty aad famine, Not a single article of furniture remained in the cottage. On the floor, stretched on a little straw, laid the mother of the boy, by tier side, emaciated and pale, reclined another of her family, an infant girl who lacked that nourishment which the breast of the famished mother could not give it. On the ground, near the feet of the wretched woman, sat another daughter so feeble, that she could with difficulty raise herself from the ground. Huyp stood aghast at the scene of horror. The boy made an effort to

VOL. III. c





jump from his arms:—he placed him on the floor, and the poor child rait towards his parent exclaiming " Bread, bread, my mother."—Tears of thankfulness started to the woman's eye at the sight of the food, which she divided equally with her children, hy whom it was devoured rather than eaten. Huyp could not endure the scene; he rushed from the cottage, and, in an instant, was at the door of the carriage.

He related what he had witnessed. Aaltje was incredulous and pronounced it to be an imposture, but at length awakened to something like feeling by the representations of Iter son, she returned with him to the cottage, and allowed him to take with him what refreshments there were in the vehicle.

Such a sight Aaltje had never before witnessed. The blood was chilled in her veins, when she beheld the wretched and perishing family, and, for once. humanity took place of pride and consequence. Relief, however, came almost too late. The infant had expired, and the mother had no strength to speak. A little wine helped to restore her, and the elder daughter, who had not for many days before tasted food, and their weak and languid bodies could not have supported life many hours longer, had not Providence sent Huyp to their assistance; for





"Consuming hunger on their vitals fed,"

and dread eternity was just within their view.

As soon as the hapless and melancholy mother could speak, she briefly related her history. Her plain narrative bore evidence of its truth, and was simply this :—

Her husband had been a soldier, and died in battle. She had toiled hard, from morn to vesper hour, to support herself and her children. Illness overtook them, and they sickened one by one. The cold unfeeling proprietor of the cottage, seized her little all for rent, and even threatened to drive them from their desolated home. The little boy, alone, was able to walk, and on his exertions they depended for food. What he got from the charitable persons around, was not sufficient to support nature, and they were too far removed from any neighbourhood for their situation to become public. Day after day they anxiously, yet vainly, hoped, that Heaven would direct some kind friend to their wretched dwelling. No one came; existence became insupportable, and they were silently awaiting the moment of dissolution.





The tear trembled in Aaltje's eye. .She felt that the man who had acted in so brutal a manner, to an afflicted and helpless family, must have been a very monster; a creature in whose composition, the nobler attributes of humanity had never entered. . Huyp enquired the name of the merciless wretch. "Alas! Sir," said the poor woman, "had it not been one of my own sex, it would not have been so bad. In my youth I lived in the family of her father, but, from some unknown cause, she is my worst enemy, though she once promised to favor and protect





me."

"Her name?" enquired Huyp.

"Mademoiselle Von Schryven," was the reply.

Huyp stood transfixed to the spot; and mentally thanked Heaven, that he had escaped from the toils.of a woman, who had no feeling for any human being besides herself.

"She is a niarotje! and worse than that!" cried Aaltje, ". you cannot think, how ill she behaved, to me-"





llnyp, who liad more consideration than his mother, here interfered, and prevented Aaltje from harrassing the nerves of the poor woman, by the recital of a long story, literally about nothing.

Aaltje, for once, took the advice of her son, and contented herself with administering comfort, without adding distress, to the distressed.

Why do not the framers of the laws decree a punishment for injustice? Is one person to hurl ruin and desolation on --the-heads of a whole family, because they have the misfortune to be poor? Are his joys increased, because they are "watered by the widow's tears"? Surely there should be some check placed on the ravages of unfeeling rapacity. The poor ought not to be crushed like a worm beneath the feet of the proud; the matof Ought not. t6 perish, that the-few may riot and revel in luxurious 'ease* •And dissipate their ill-gotten wealth in wanton profusion, and the allurement© of enticing pleasure. Nature never intended that it should he so, and Heaven never willed it.





To such people, the expression of the u retched and famished Jodelle * to the inhuman Charles the Ninth, may not he inaptly applied. "Qui se sert de. la lampe, au moins de Vhuile y met." Tbey who live by the exertions of others, ought not, in common justice, to refuse to help them in their need.



* The fate of Jodelle, perhaps, resembled too. closely that of our own Otway, and the following lines, extracted from an Ode to his memory, by one of his friends, might have been appKed with justice, to many other followers of the unprofitable profession of poetry—

"Jodelle est mort de pauvret£_

La pauvrete a eu puissance

Sur la richesse de la France.—

O Dieu! quel trait de cruaute!'

Le Ciel avoit mis en Jodelle,

Un esprit tout autre qu' humain:

La France lui ma le pain,

Tant elle fust mere cruelle I."





Aaltje, for the first time in her life, felt real pity for the distressed. She could scarcely give credence to her senses, for she was unwilling to believe it possible, that such scenes as this were to be met with in a civilized and Christian country. She was shocked to have it established as a truth, that the poor may be starved, without being assisted or pitied, by those their labour had contributed to enrich. And a painful truth it was. Whilst the ministers of the country were haranguing, about the flourishing state of the finances, and expatiating on the blessings of taxation, the poor creatures who found them the means of supporting a raise character, were sinking prematurely into the grave for want of necessary sustenance! Shame on the world, as Sterne savs,— shame on the 'millions of despotism and extravagance! j -j ..--.• ,





Aaltje, when her feelings were properly worked upon, had some little liberality. In this instance, she was in a manner compelled to contribute some assistance to the miserable victims of want, and, on the first impulse of the moment, she emptied (he contents of her purse into the hand of the famishing woman, who, with tears of gratitude, implored the blessing of the Almighty on the head of those who had given her the means of prolonging a life, which, though to her of little comfort, was, nevertheless, of consequence to the welfare of her offspring. The elder daughter, enfeebled by illness and want, fell on her knees, and eloquently looked those heart-felt thanks, which she could not utter. Even the little boy, who had beten the means of bringing relief to his almost dying mother, though too young to'comprehend the extent of the obligation they were under to Huyp, olung round him, and with endearing fondness saiH» his mother would now be better; *inoe she had got money to purchase food. Huyp trusted that his words would be prophetic, and Aaltje, resolved for once to do a good action, offered to take charge of the boy. Bui the feelings of a mother were not to be overpowered even by the pressure of adversity, ami she gratefully, though decidedly, refused to part with that dear child to whom she was, next to heaven, indebted for the assistance she had just received. Aaltje could not help honoring her feelings, and, perhaps, was Ho* sorry that her offer had not been accepted, as she hated to be troubled, and children cannot exactly be managed as easily as husbands/ '• .v\)iu )<>!





Huyp felt himself far happier than he h*d been since the absence of Claca, and comforted himself with thinking that had site been present she would have approved of his conduct. | Ufoe blessings of the family they had relieved Were repeated on their departure, and when they again entered the carriage even Aaltje felt that sweet and inexpressible calmness of delight which is ever the attendant of benevolence. The Burgomaster, heavy and inert, seemed scarcely to have any knowledge of the accident, and when he learned the particulars, contented himself with observing, that unless Huyp acquired the art of limiting his charities he would stand a chance of becoming, at some time or other, an object of charity himself.





"And for wkyv Mynheer?" said Aaltje, who had some slight suspicion that the reproof was indirectly intended for her—" Have you no% gold enough in your strong box, or are you so poor that the jongeling may not throw 9i stuiver into the cap of a beggar without being rated at for being extravagant?:" , ' . •' t, >,•"• > .»i »i:





"It's weH—it's ail well, Aaltje ntmw/? returned Vander Dordrecht, who was unwilling to enter into an argument for which he was not prepared.;

• k* Aye, and it is well," repeated Aaltje, "and it becomes you, Mynheer, to' think and to believe that every thing ii» well if it has my approbation." '•' The Burgomaster said no more, .and! meiVemainder of their journey was ndt' dikurhed either by disputes &r:accident^

'ftatryn and Jacobus received then* a* ttte^'gale'-of the towe*v attd afttfce'^M gossips in the neighbuorhood were on the qui viveto learn the particulars ot" the expedition to Brussels, and their daughters were equally anxious to eatehl a glimpse of Madame: Aaltje, that they i«ight■be> enabled , to«jferta some tfvt&gu ment of the prevailing fashions, for they deemed it unlikely that she should travel so many leagues without replenishing her wardrobe with some of the choicest articles from the Magazin des Modes. Aaltje liked any thing like attention, and therefore was not in the least displeased at the curiosity of her bumble neighbours, who, she knew: were veady to die with envy at her good fortune1::. ,, .11 /,, !,,:>. > •»/».•...! h - Having now nothing to contribute toi wean his thoughts from the haplessClaray Huyp sunk into that melancholy despondency which is,> but too frequently,.> theifoierunuer of on abberation of the mental facidties. In vain Aaltje and Aert'fiurgomaster. strove to recal his* spirits—he was wretched and unhappy, and those pleasures in which he had been wont to take delight, had now lost their charms. He became the pity of the neighbourhood, for through the agency of Leena they had become acquainted with the cause of his despondency. Nothing gwes a youngman more interest with the female sex than a disappointment in love. Hethen becomes an object of commiseration, and all are anxious to offer him their condolence and their advice,, though their officiousness too frequently gives exquisite pain to the mind, whose delicacy is wounded by the allusions continually made to the cause of- its misery. . :.,;.•





It was thus with Iluyp. He was♦ ompelled to listen to advice which he was determined not to attend to, and tobe annoyetl hy the condolence of thosetbr whom In; had not the slightest degree

of esteem. . '• . . • . .. .-"*: '.<; .

i





.....* ,-..*< -t: t• . - •* •

The steady mind, that's truly great, ... ... i . .; * t i

Surveys unmov'd, the turns of fate:

V '' It wealth and fame his pride increase,.

His fears their force control;

If adverse fortune would depress,

Hope elevates his soul.

Because he knows, the Power who brings

. - The winter, with its dreary wings,

Can make the vernal beauties grow,

'And turn our woe to bliss, or bliss to woe. .' '" .. .

Pterin by Stephen Duck

-; - .. :: '.- -l.v. .« ..... j,t .

i. ..'..; '.•!-•/ * .- . . .i,,- ;:.

CLARA and the Princess had now

taken up their residence at the splendid

villa of the latter., frotn the windows of

which the little tower of DRrdreeht

appeared like a mimic fortress raised in the grounds for the purpose of picturesque effect. The Princess had learnt from Monica of the return of the Dordrecht family from their excursion, and, as the embarassments of the trio had been the theme of general conversation at Brussels, she had some curiosity to be introduced at the tower, that she might have something to laugh at, for she had made up her mind that they must be singular beings. When she intimated her intention of calling at the tower to Clara, and proposed her accompanying her, the latter, who.4e delicacy of sentiment would, have made her recoilat the idea of thrusting herself in. a manner into the society of a family which she was aware were prejudiced Ugatost her, excused herself from being companion to the Princess under the pretext of ill health, and as her Highness had strictly adhered to her original, promise, of leaving. Clara complete





mistress of her time and her inclinations, she forbore to urge her compliance. In all probability Clara felt as much curiosity as the princess, though she was too prudent to give expression to her feelings. She therefore quietly awaited the return of the lady, from whom she was aware she should learn every particular, without being necessitated to make any enquiries.

Clara was right in her conjectures. No sooner had the Princess Hyacintha returned from visiting the family at the tower, than she began to satirize most unmercifully the pompous vulgarity of Aaltje, and the quiet composure of the wife-governed Burgomaster. Huyp alone seemed to her worthy of notice— a being so different to his parents that she could scarcely believe him to have sprung from such a stock. This opinion was highly gratifying to Clara, who had not yet found an opportunity to express her gratitudeito him for the gift of her lathers portrait.' Aaltje had given the Princessan insight into her family affairs, and had accounted for the pale and melancholy countenance of her son, by informing the noble visitor, that the jongcling had been caught by the charms of a meretricious fair one during his residence at the court, the discovery of whose faithlessness had preyed so much on his spirits that she knew not what to do to restore his mind to its former composure. The Princess, who was not without compassion for the mental and bodily distresses of her fellow creatures, expressed her hopes to Aaltje that some fair damsel would soon be found who would be able to. "light up another flame" within his bosom. Aaltje hoped so too, and in the fullness of her heart disclosed the arts she had made use of to wean him from his misplaced love, and settle him m. the world. Bright blushes lighted npthe cheeks of Clara when she learned in what a light she had been represented by Aaltje, but conscious of not having• deserved it, they quickly faded and left them of an ashy paleness. Her confusion did not pass unobserved by the Princess, and she said smilingly, " Did I not think you too demure to feel the tender passion, I should be inclined to suspect that you were the poor lad's lost love."—Clara coloured deeply, and gave a different turn to the conversation. The Princess, however, was satisfied with the discovery she had made and though she said no more, was resolved to be convinced whether she was right or wrong in her conjectures.





In a few days the Dordrechts returned the visit, and poor Huyp was again compelled to be an unwilling agent to the plans of his mother.





The principal apartments of the house were situated at the back of the mansion, and so far removed from the court yard that the arrival of visitors could not be known to the family until they were announced by the domestics. Adjoining the saloon was a little boudoir which the princess had appropriated to Clara's use, whenever she might prefer solitude to society. In this boudoir she was sitting when the Dordrechta paid their first visit to the Princess, and engaged with her music, had no suspicion that there were visitors in the saloon, for, as the door was closed, the sound of their voices had not reached her ears, Aaltje was that morning what the Princess thought vastly entertaining, for she gave her the private history of half the city of Amsterdam, not excepting even the magistracy, whom,, in her zeal to amuse, she depictured in no very estimable light. Vander Dordrecht sometimes looked grave when he heard the civic pillars of the state spoken of in so disrespectful a manner, but his significant glances were of no avail. Aaltje had entered into the subject, and a sudden dumbness alone could have caused a suspension of speech. Huyp was thoughtful and silent, and contented himself with briefly replying to the frivolous questions of the Princess. The soft and plaintive tones of Clara's harp attracted the attention of Aaltje. She expressed a wish to be introduced to the performer, but the Princess, whose suspicions were not yet quite confirmed, excused herself for the present, and informed her, that as her young friend was not in good spirits, she must beg leave to defer it until some other opportunity. Aaltje still sate listening with delight, and at this moment, Clara, unconscious of the proximity of the Dordrechts, commenced the following lively little song of





TH E SYLPH.

On the zephyr's light wing I exultingly spring. Thro' the cloud-woven ocean above;

By a rainbow conceiv'd, which a sun-beam had weav'd, i now sport like a phantom of love.

O'er my brow beams a ray, bright as dawn of the day,

When the stars twinkle faintly and fly; And the lark gaily sings, as I flutter my wings,

In the azure expanse of the sky.

1 dwell in the gleam of the Sun's golden beam.

And sport in the gentlest breeze; While to mortals I seem like the child of a dream,

Or the shadows that dance on the seas.

In the cup of a flower, sometimes for an hour.

I rest when night-dews are descending; Or sportively play in the Moon's brightest ray,'

That o'er the clear lake is impending.





The actions of man I with scrutiny scan.

Yet kindly gloss over each failing; Which I use all my power to wash off in a shower,

As through the skies' tears I am sailing.

*: I weave the web over the soul of the lover,

That binds liis heart's homage to beauty; Like Ilesper I shine, with a lustre divine.

O'er the altar of virtue and duty,

O'er the waves of the ocean, with gentlest emotion, I float like a shade on the spray; When the Sun is first peering, and silently steering, ,

His bark o'er the billows -of day.

In the topmost shrouds of the silvery clouds,

I glide like a vapour of light ~,

Till wearied I rest on Zephyr's soft breast.



My pillow the shadow of night.

On a sudden Huyp was all attention —his eyes sparkled with pleasure, and he trembled with agitation. The Princess regarded him with a glance of enquiry, but although she truly fancied that her conjectures were verified, she subdued her curiosity, and endeavoured to attract the attention of the Vander Dordrechts' from Huyp, by some common place remarks on the power of music over the mind. Huyp, meanwhile, had slided himself nearer to the door of the boudoir, while hope and fear kept his soul in the most oppressive expectation.





Clara, unconscious who was listening to her, still continued playing, and at length ended the slight doubts of Huyp, by commencing a song which he had frequently listened to, before the hand of aflliction had fallen so heavy on the heart of the sweet vocalist. He could hear his suspense no longer. His hand was on the lock of the door, and he was about to enter the boudoir, when the Princess, who had been observing him narrowly, started up from the sofa on which she was reclining, and catching him playfully by the ; arnv enquired• whither he was roaming? Huyp looked at her with a piteous expression of countenance, which-seemed to ask. permission for a liberty that he was half afraid to venture upon taking. This the Princess understood. She, however, informed him that the boudoir was as sacred as an Eastern Harem from the profanation of intruders of his sex, but she added, in a whisper, "if you will enter, like another Daniel, into the den of lions, I certainly shall not take coercive means to prevent you." Huyp bowed, and as he bent him to the princess he kissed her hand, and forthwith entered the boudoir with steps as light and gentle as the anxious child approaches the couch of an affectionate expiring parent. Aaltje had observed the gallantry of her son, and flattered herself, somewhat prematurely, that she stood a





VOL. III. D





fair chance of becoming mother-in-law to a Princess. It was but a visionary dream. A loud shriek, from Clara summoned them to the boudoir; Huyp was on his knees at her feet, and she had sunk almost fainting over the harp. Aaltje stood astonished at the scene before her. A presentiment of the truth flashed across her mind, and the presence of the Princess alone restrained her wrath within the bounds of moderation. •'•• .

Clara sate motionless with surprize and innate pleasure. Huyp regarded not the glances which his mother directed towards him, and attended only to the situation of the lovely insensible girl. As soon as Clara recovered from the temporary cessation of her faculties, she cast an imploring glance at the Princess, as if to entreat her interference. Aaltje looked proudly and scornfully around her, while the Bur





gomaster, who feared his wife and pitied his son, played with the seals of his watch, and did not venture to raise His eye towards either of them. The Princess, who, next to being admired, herself, liked to be a confidante in the loves Of others, had marked the silent disapprobation of Aaltje without being much moved in her favor. She was no advocate for unrelenting mothers and stern fathers, who would crush love like * a worm i'th'bud ' of a flower—and think pity misplaced where the affections are placed on an object not exactly formed to satisfy their expectations.

"Son!—son!"—exclaimed Aaltje, when her first impressions of astonishment had a little subsided, "what think you of yourself, and your conduct, and your reputation, when you become a brawling uproar maker in the presence of the Princess! Out upon you jmgeling, you have a little of, the blood of tne Vnist Slaagens in your reins, but," she added casting a. scornful glance at Clara, "a very kleine portion of their pride." ',,; »,..:• /,





The Princess smiled, and taking the ann of the trembling Clara, said, " you had better walk into the other room, my love, the air will contribute to revive you," ..;,,,.!..

I The astonishment of Aaltje was increased. She scarcely knew in what light to consider Clara—whether as the poor forlorn, friendless daughter of Von tLssen, or as a princess in embryo. Vander Dordrecht, who had in youth been the friend of the Colonel, could not stifle the whisperings of conscience which reminded him that his conduct was somewhat like ingratitude. However, accustomed to be the echo of his wife's, sentiments, he was obliged to. keep his own. thoughts locked up within the precincts of his bosom, and consitfered himself happy that he 'dould nft fee deprived' of the privilege Of >thfrtKf





ijfl*; j :,'->!•"" :..l' . irli: I*-)f:}i.-ii «jvuli

'Meanwhile Clara had been striving to :regain that composure of * mind whidfi :iwas now absolutely necessary to Carry her through the scene into which' she %adbeen so inadvertently drawii'J>Aluyp watched her every look, as though he vrould penetrate the"secret recesses of her heart: still there waS a Imeiancholy impressed on his countenance, which fevinced too >plainly that his mind was ill at ease—the sport Of hopes and fears. '»- ' • ', ••'' •,."':

Huyp drew his mother into the recess of the large circular window of the saloon, and implored her to consenft to make his! heart happy, now he had so fortunately discovered the mistress of his.affections. But Aaltje was still perverse as ever, and commanded hirn^ ate he valued her blessing, to forget >aiMl renounce Clara for ever. This injunction .was more easily imposed than obeyed. Huyp irritated almost to madness rushed from his mother, without venturing to trust himself to reply, and grasping the hand of Clara, besought her to unite her destiny with his. The eyes of Aaltje sparkled with fury, but before she had an opportunity of giving vent to her ire in words, the noble minded Clara checked his ardent hopes.





"Never!" said she with spirit, mingled with kindness, which showed that her heart inclined to accept the offer that her tongue rejected, "Never will 1 intrude myself into the bosom of any family who may scorn me for my poverty. Forget me, Huyp—forget me— the humble dependant on the bounty of others, has still too much pride to become the source of misery to one, whose heart beats with the kindest sentiments of sympathy for a friendless, hopeless girh"





The Burgomaster, had he dared, would have joined their hands. Aaltje was not without some uneasy sensations, but calling up her sinking courage, she advanced, and catching hold of the arm -of her son, said, " the young woman is in the right, Huyp, to refuse you, and the family of the Vuist Slaagens are, by her prudence, saved the disgrace you would have inflicted on them."'

"Disgrace! Disgrace! Madam," repeated Huyp with marked emphasis— "Disgrace, said you? Is virtue and high feeling a disgrace*—That disgrace was not to be found either in Rosalie or the Robsons, or Madame de Stratton, therefore you saw them in a different light."

"Boy!" cried Aaltje impetuously ." from this moment I disown you for my son, and discard you from my presence for ever. Go and beg, starve, or do what you will, the Burgomaster and myself -will.mo longer toil for your comfort .and your honor."





. "'Wiei have no other son, Aaltje," said the Burgomaster in a half whisper. intending to assuage her passion, i .*' But we may have another son, Mynheer," replied the lady pompously, 't"l warrant you I am not so old. as some people would fain think me."

Clara drew Huyp towards- her, and besought him not to forfeit the protection of- ins parents on her account^" as jshe would retain him in her heart, though she never could be united to anyone^ whose 'family were averse to hen..-)-, -.!- .-i '.;...) -i - .' 'I --:»

iV They; hare discarded me," returned Huyp: "they have broken down nay spirits and severed peace from my heart,, btit they never shall make me the slave ot matrimonial misery. Farewell! «ny adored Clara, I will seek that fortune .".which my parents refuse me—I live' but





for you, and we will yet be united—we will yet be happy." •

He rushed from the room, and in an instant was gone, no one knew whither. Aaltje and the Burgomaster were in the utmost consternation, and, ordering the carriage, returned to the tower execrating Clara as the cause of their son"s disobedience.

The Princess did all in her power' to console Clara, and dispatched several of her domestics in pursuit of him, that he might have an asylum under the same roof as the object of his adoration. Clara was grateful to the lady for her kindness, but at the same time, was

wretched in the extreme.

'.. i. /A

i. ;. .'- ;... , i' :;-*.;•:

.• . '-,-.- u , . .:."r.)

-ii!t \u.r ,' :;*•: . . -- • )."'i

v{,'. '•.) !•.: .'. ;f•''' i "" i* :.';:-•' -:

1*1-; *.!. -:-.:.- :.*': .— .>uv• ,' . ' . ,d'.:' i





Mrs. Formal mentions in- her letter, that his father got his good friends, Dr. Daub'em and Mr. Archdeacon Snioothtonguc, to endeavour to reason him out of ru« odd notions, but all in vain.—Well! the Lord defend nir from extremes! I am for keeping the middle way, and would have every body good, without making themsthes particular; but people, now-a-days, must b* either" samts or devils.

Conversation at a Gavre at Quadrille.



IN a state of mind bordering- on distraction, Huyp proceeded to Amsterdam, from whence he almost immediately departed for Ostend, with the intention of quitting the land ot his birth, till such time as fortune should





smile on his efforts to obtain, a competency for Clara. The world was before him, and he had not even the choice of his occupation. That which might first offer he was determined to accept, for he had now nothing save his own exertions to depend on for support. He now found that the poor and friendless have indeed a hard fate to endure. The heats of summer, and the storms of winter, are alike to the sered heart. The one warms and cherishes not—the other cannot chill with its coldness more than the iciness of misery has done before.

Huyp stood beside the light-house* on the fortifications atOstend, watching the heaving motions of the ocean. The wind blew towards the shore, and various vessels were waiting for the moment in which the signal flag should be hoisted, to enter the harbour, which, until the tide is at a certain height, thej cannot do with safety. Two of the English pacquet boats wore lying off• the bfir, and several smaller, merchant vessels, with one or two smuggling boats, were apparently striving to get ahead of them, that they might be fir** in port. Huyp quitted his station and proceeded towards the water-gate, where he arrived in time to witness the debarkation of a variety of- passengers, who had braved the dangers of the her* ring-pond for business or pleasure.





, " They think but of to-day," said Huyp, observing the gay looks and tripping steps of a party of Frenchified English people, who were laadably endeavouring to improve their taste and impoverish their country, by visiting other climes—"they think but of today, and yet, perhaps, even they;are pot happy." , At this moment a poor invalid was borne from the pacquct by toft men:. He seemed to be sp emaciated and weakened by illness, as to





fee scarcely capable- of bearing the gentle motion with which he was moved*, and' he frequently evinced a petulance of disposition, which those who'at. tended him strove to ameliorate by continually addressing him in gentle tones by the title of yonr Grace. But titles were of little avail in softening the pains of a lingering and deeply rooted disease, and claimed no respect from the dart of death, who, it was evident, would not have long to wait for another victim. .' *•' 'i ' = -;

Huyp couW not help pitying the timeworn, and emaciated peer, who was more an object of commiseration than envy. Perhaps,' witli him

," Youth pass'J brilliantly and bright;—when

his head was old and white, Strange rWerse and hard* fortune confronted"—

* ;. \ -i. ; -'', -;; ,ij /i ',. • : . . i

tj 'Whilst Huyp was contemplating this tiring picture of the instability of human greatness, his attention was diverted by the approach of a gay young man of fashion, who having just quarrelled, and parted from his tutor, was enquiring of the Captain of one of the pacquets, if he knew of a bear leader, who would be content to become the companion of bis travels, without annoying him with Homer, Horace, and Virgil, whom he, after the present polite mode, designated as cursed old quizzes, and thought inseparable from the cane and the rod. Huyp, who knew that the Captain had frequently been an agent for his father, whispered his name, and his readiness to accept the situation, in his ear. The latter took the hint, and thinking it would be an excellent joke to send two boys together into the world, as tutor and student, warmly recommended Huyp, as a proper person to finish the education of the newly emancipated beau. Although the visage of Huyp was somewhat grave* he bad nothing of the contour of countenance of a pedant, and, after undergoing the scrutiny of the eyes of his would-be pupil, who introduced himself as the Honorable George LottreH, he receded the permission of the gentleman to till up the vacancy occasioned by the loss of his old tutor, on eondi* tion that he was never to attempt filling up the vacancies of his head. To this Huyp raised no objections, though he might have questioned the liberality of his pupil, when he found that his remuneration was not to exceed one hundred per annum. Together they proceeded to the Cour hnperinle hotel, where the little hunch-backed landlady, and het tall, portly, heavy-headed , husband, were in readiness to receive them, as Mr. Luttrell had taken the precaution of sending his valet thither tfce inatank t hat h» debark oil, to prepare proper ac^





commodations and refreshments; and to announc his rank and. family com

nections?. 'ni,;,,:. .-; ''.;, '. •i.iiiiit

The Honorable Mr. Luttrell wa| a. dandy of the first class, for the adornment of whose person all the science and talent of Bond Street appeared .to. have been employed, and so effectually, that neither his face nor his figure could properly be called his own. The very boat women smiled at each other as he passed by them to enter the town, and in their hearts thought that the English must certainly be all in a state of mental derangement I

After making a tolerable meal, and partaking plentifully of Burgundy and Champagne, Mr. Luttrell prepared to adonize himself still more, that he might attract the notice of the foir Hemings. He requested Huyp t° dp the; same, as he wanted to shew hint off in his tilbury. To Huyp this was" most perplexing proposal, anil' he was necessitated to acknowledge that imtB he was able to send to Amsterdam for his clothes, he had none-other 'to wear than those which were at that time on his back. Luttrell laughed heartily at the distress of Hnyp, and ringing the bell for his valet, enquired, whether old quiz had left his portmanteaus? The man replied in the affirmative. "A good joke by Jupiter," cried Luttrell, "break them Open my lad—quickquick as though the devil were at your elbow."





The man bowed and retired.

"I will fit you out like a professor. Mynheer," continued Luttrell—" coat, gown, wig, scarf, spectacles, buckles, and walking cane! Oh! I like to travel with proper conveniences. Egad it is a lucky thing that old prosey forgot His tackle—why,man, I can metamorphose you in a twinkling into a respectable middle-aged tutor—but mind, not a word about Virgil"— -,..,_





Huyp had no great desire to be transformed into a respectable middle-aged tutor, and remonstrated with Luttrell on the folly of his speculation. But the young man would hear of no evasions, and absolutely forced Huyp to assume the new attire of his quondam attendant.

Arrayed in a full suit of drab colored cloth, the cut of the last century—a well powdered and nicely frizzed wig, Huyp scarcely knew himself. He could not help smiling at his figure as he surveyed himself in the cheval glass which was placed before him.

*' Methinks I look like a masquerading quack Doctor at the Carnital," said Huyp, "but now you have had' your whim gratified, I shall resume ray own likeness and drop the respectable middle-age, with the wig and coat."





Luttrell would not listen to bis young tutor, but taking him by the arm, literally forced him into the tilbury, which was waiting before the gate of the hotel and giving the lash to his horses sported the tutor in fine style round the grand place, then quitting the town by the western gate, gave hfs steeds the rein to the imminent danger of his own neck, without mentioning that of his young tutor.

This travelling in style over rugged roads, was not very pleasant to Huyp, and, as Luttrell was no very famous whip, he anticipated an overthrow.

Though Huyp was neither "a prophet, nor the son of a prophet," his anticipations were but too well founded, /or, from the unskilfulness of Luttrell's driving, the tilbury came in contact with the wheels of a cabriolet, followed by a train of attendants, and shattering the vehicle to pieces, left them both. stretched nearly desweless by the road side.. The driver of the eabriolet, findbig that!: an, accident had occurred, which might not be>attended with very pleasant consequences, cracked his whip loudly, and drove on towards Ostend, for the purpose, as he alledgedr of .sending some assistance to Mynheeren, leaving the young men to the icare of Providence, either to live or die. Some pedestrians however had more humanity, and conveyed' Luttrell and Huyp to a little village auberge, which was at no ^great distance from the spot where the accident happened. Among these honest hearted Flemings, was Luitje Vuist Slaagen, who did not at the moment recognize his nephew in the wigged itutor; Luttrell, who had been >BWre alarmed than hurt, soon revived, and his first question to those around him, was, rV whether the- tits' were caught?" I!,•[ . .;>iq *..! y.A.'.n ?iij





*' Yaw, yaw, and the: cnra too/' returned Luitje, who beheld before: him a creature, for which he had the most supreme contempt, a.tightly laced fop—-But you had better be thinking about the poor > old gentleman there, Mynheer, for, if I kenncn right, you have almost killed him." .: <. . < ^ The devil!" exclaimed Luttrell, rubbing his eyes, "is my new prosey knocked off the stocks already? It was my laughing at his wig, that upset the whirler. Old dad will screw up his mouth, and look cursedly queer when he hears this—but I hope it has not made fire wood .of the tilbury."

Huyp heaved a deep sigh which, evinced returning animation. Luttrell flew to the side of the table on which he was placed, where the landlady of the petite auberge was administering restore. tives, and , the Cure was waiting for an opportunity to evince . his zeal for religion, by enfolding him in the bosom of the Catholic Church before bis dissolution.





"Stand off, Father," said Luttrell, unceremoniously pushing the priest from his station, "he won't die yet—he shall not die, by Jupiter. Cheer up. my lad," he continued, shaking the hand of Huyp with gentle violence, "you are too young for the worms, and moreover uV best bear-leader in the world. Come lad, you must not die with a fleabite."

Huyp had now recovered himself sufficiently to be able to comprehend the scene before him, and in an instant his eyes were fixed on Luitje, who had done Ins best to assist in recovering him. Before, however, he had time to collect his wandering thoughts, or consider how to act for the best. Luttrell welcomed him to life with a boisterous, though not an ungenerous salutation*' Egad!"" he exclaimed, with pardonable vivacity, "I told them, you were more like a whipping post than a dead man. However, I really am glad to see you twinkle your eye-lashes again; and you look so well, and so respectable in that wig, that even your own father could not claim you as his son."





"It will be well for me, if my uncle has as little penetration," thought Huyp; afraid to trust himself to speak, lest his voice should betray him. .''

Luitje, however, had discovered something like a family likeness, and wishing to be convinced, noW expressed his hopes, that he was not seriously hurt. It was impossible to decline,'replying to so kind and civil a question, and the denoument, which Huyp had wished to avoid, was thus accelerated by the qualified suspicions of his uncle.

The moment that Huyp spoke, Luitje was satisfied, that he had .x#>t been mistaken in his conjectures. - .,:.





,," And pray may I ask, jongefatg,'' cried Luitje, " what you are masquerading about the world after this fashion for, like one of the heroes of one of your aunt's—-Mrs. Yuist Slaagen's romances? Are you mad, Iluyp, or what. the drommel ails you ? ", ... .

"Eh! what do you know my prosey, 0I4 boy?" interrupted Luttrell. "Let me tell you that he is the very best tutor in Christendom—casts Homer and Horace to old Harry, and, by the bye, likes a girl and a glass as well as I do, which is saying a great deal in favor of a bear leader "^ . ,,', ,,t .. ;;...

"An aajyie you mean, Mynheer," returned Luitje with a slight degree of sarcasm, ";for you must kennen that in our country, the monkey rides on the back.of the.bear." , r





Luttrell scarcely knew what to make of the honest, plain spoken rustic. The bystanders, by this time, began to comprehend the degree of affinity that subsisted between Luitje and Huyp, and finding that he was one of their own nation, they redoubled their attentions for his restoration, till at length Huyp was in as much danger from their kindness as he had before been from the want of skill which had made Luttrell place his life in jeopardy. There was nothing that Huyp dreaded more than an explanation, which he knew that his uncle would expect, indeed insist on. To avoid it was impossible, and willing to make the best of a bad matter, Huyp resolved to begin first.

"You probably think my senses have left me, uncle Luitje," he said after some moments of consideration, but I assure you that until I obtained this respectable situation, I had neither

VOL. III. E





home nor habitation, for my mother has thought proper to send me on my travels, because my heart and feelings could not exactly be made to conform to those opinions which she was resolved to entertain."

"And why did you forget your uncle, jongeling!" replied Luitje with the utmost kindness, "One would be inclined to suppose that you thought very little of your life, when you trusted yourself in a thing like a walnut shell."

"That is high treason against my tilbury," exclaimed Luttrell. "Let me tell you, old boy, that I like a flight above the vulgar; I love brutes, and am quite a Byronian in that respect*—Egad I keep a tyger—it is as tame as a kitten and follows me about like a lady's lap dog."





* Of the vagaries of Lord Byron much has been said, and his Lordship's penchant for brutes has caused some little surprize. A Bear, some few years since, was his favorite, and, frequently, his only companion. He would amuse himself for





hours together, by jumping from the lower windows of Newstead Abbey, that Bruin might have an opportunity of practising the same feat, and then enjoy the delectable treat of a romp with him on tin- lawn. A gentleman, whom, for some cause or other, he disliked, received an invitation from his Lordship. It was accepted. The Bear was let loose at the moment he was advancing to the door, and he had first to endure the rough salutations of the favorite, before be could be admitted into the presence of the peer! The gentleman grew frightened, and the Bear somewhat ferocious; but until he was actually in danger of being hugged to death, bis lordship did not think proper to call his favorite away. His guest felt himself insulted, and returned home. The following morning brought an apology, in the shape of a copy of verses, but they were not received as was expected.

If his Lordship ever felt affection for any creature, it was for the bear, and an old Scotchwoman, who had, I believe, been his nurse. Shortly after he became of age his medical attendants hoped to remove the affliction under which he is known to





"You need not fear being eaten by it,•' replied Luitje—your whalebone



labour, by keeping his foot immersed in oil, for the purpose of softening the contracted sinews, and nut allowing him to put it to the ground. The old woman (a female Hercules,) was accustomed at this time to bear him on her back to his carriage, take her scat by the side of the coachman, and when they arrived at the place of their destination, to repeat the same ceremony and seat on a sofa the high-born ^oet.—His Lordship indeed is a strange and singular being, and is delighted with things which would be, to others, objects of disgust rather than attraction. The wine-coolers at the abbey were, and most probably are at this time, stone coffins, from which the decayed remains of their forgotten tenants have been expelled. From these violated receptacles of mortality, once the noble proprietor thought proper to cause a few of his youthful attendants to represent something like one of the ancient " Mysteries." They were habited in sheets, or shrouds, and, for the amusement of their lord, and a few of his friends, (among whom were two of the principal poets of the present day,) most impiously attempted to give an idea of what the Resurrection would be.—This certainly was very wrong, but his Lordship was no more than an





would secure you from destruction—. you would be as indigestible as Jonah, if you did not stick in the animal's throat, which would be by no means unlikely, and depend on it, if he were to swallow you, you would be restored like the bacon St. Bridget gave to the famishing dog."*



imitator of Peter Pindar, who, with a party of his companions, who had as little sense of religion as himself, sacrificed a white pigeon, as a representation of a subject too awful, and too holy to be thought of, or mentioned without reverence I

* Saint Bridget, one of those useless saints with which the Catholic religion is encumbered, has one of those prodigious miracles recorded of her, which common sense cannot credit. According to the legend, her great charity induced her to give bacon (perhaps her only piece) to a hungry dbg, and which was, (after the dog had eaten it) again found in her kettle! How it came there,, her historian has not been so obliging as to give- any information, but of course it was, after the fashion of the times, attributed to the odour of her sanctity, which it was necessary to prove by a miracle. .. i





Luttrell was silenced. He was one of those who cannot bear the brunt of satire without being oppressed by unpleasant sensations, and the keen eye of Luitje gave intimation of the pleasure he took in ridiculing those who were the compounds of effeminacy and affectation—those who "neglect their Maker, but worship themselves."

Huyp soon explained the particulars of his situation to his uncle, who was not willing to permit him to continue in his present station. This he intimated to Luttrell who made many objections against parting with his young tutor, who in truth, knew as little of the world as he did himself.

It was, however, in vain for him to argue, or to plead the necessity of Huyp's continuance with him. Luitje was immoveable, and declared, that he would not suffer his nephew to wander about the world like a mountebank, while he had the means in his power to prevent it. Huyp was merely a passive instrument in the hands of his relative; and Luttrell found that he was condemned to look out for another tutor, to shew him the world.





"By Jupiter," cried Luttrell, "this is confoundedly vexatious! I am as badly off as a young girl, who is disappointed of an old woman to chaperon her to the Opera, or the anti-room on a drawing-room day. Quiz my caxon, if I know what to do now."

"I will tell you what you had better do," said Luitje, with impenetrable gravity; and placing bis mouth close to the ear of Luttrell, be continued, "cease playing the fool, and take common sense for your guide."

Luttrell thought him a strange animal, still there was something in his plain blunt manner, which prevented him from displaying his puppyism in an insolent manner.





Luitje had natural sagacity enough to perceive, that Luttrell was one of those whom fashion has spoiled, and though he was rather inclined to pity, than condemn him, he was determined, as far as laid in his power, to prevent his young nephew from being caught in the same snare. . .

At this moment, a countryman, who had entered the auberge for the purpose of taking some refreshment, informed them, that the equipage which had been the cause of their misfortune, was that of Madame Be Stratton, who was about to embark for England. Luttrell spoke of her conduct in terms rather disrespectful, which were immediately seconded by those around him. i . ." Kennen ye not, Mynheeren," ex^ claimed the dame of the inn, "that her heart is like a flesh kettle—hard, hollow and unfeeling. I remember well the day that she had not so much as a stuiver to buy herself a tweebak, not so much as a trekmut or an onderrok, and, moreover, confined to her bed by a broken leg, which, from want of proper applications, was like to bring her to her grave. This was at B——, Mynheeren, as many of you, perhaps, kenue/i as well, as I do. When she was in this dreadful state, whom should Providence send thither, but Doctor Millar (who is now in America) and he was told of her distress—and distress indeed it was—for she was even threatened to be turned into the street in that wretched condition. The Doctor was a humane man, and though his daughter was at the time seriously ill, he visited, and did every thing in his power, to comfort and restore the now proud Madame De Stratton. Some, few years afterwards, Doctor Millar, by speculating too largely, became embarrassed. His wife and daughter were in an obscure lodging* without even common necessaries. They conceived that were their distress known to Madame, her gratitude would induce her to assist them, and, therefore, wrote to her. No answer was returned. Again they wrote, and again they were disappointed. A friend then applied with the same success. At length an exposure was hinted at, and in less than an hour after, a lacquey brought to the bumble lodging of the estimable Millars* a note from Madame, stating, tlwit she would do herself the honor of calling on them, on the following day.. She kept riot her promise; and was reminded of it by the friend who had intimated exposure. Then, and not till then, did Madame's gratitude induce her to send jive louis, with a note, stating, that it was all she could do, unless they stated





their ease in the newspapers, when she had no objection to patronize a subscription, and to put her name down for ten more! Fortunately they were spared this humiliation; for, on that very day, they received remittances from America, which enabled them to rejoin the Doctor, and where they now enjoy a sufficiency and respect."

Luitje was almost inclined to wonder why the Almighty made dispositions so different; and Luttrell denounced her by an epithet, which need not be repeated.

Huyp now bade farewell to his pupil, and his new occupation, and under the wing of his uncle, proceeded to pay his devoirs to his romance-reading aunt.





CHAPTER XXVIII.

)

i m'

You look like one of Baal's priests in a hanging.

The Scornful Lady.

IT was in one of those romantic seaside cottages which are to be met with so frequently in the Netherlands, that Luitje had resided from manhood nearly to the age of fifty. He never was so happy as when he was surrounded by his children, and, if the caprices of his wife were sometimes productive of domestic disputes, like a wise man, he passed them over, and contrived to live tolerably comfortable, if not exactly happy.

Huyp was well received by the whole family, more especially by his aunt, who liked any thing like incident, and was, moreover, meditating on having her own likeness taken in the character of the heroine of one of her favorite romances. But the appearance of her nephew excited, at once, her admiration and her astonishment, and she decided in her own mind, that he would be a most charming companion of a winter night, as she did not doubt, from his attire, that he was as eccentric as herself. Luitje did not take the trouble to undeceive her, though he mentally resolved, that Huyp should not remain with him in a state of idleness. ,





Qri the following day, therefore, he took him out with him in his boat, and though Huyp was rather aukward in the management of the oar, by attending to the advice of his uncle, he contrived to acquit himself respectably. Unfortunately, however, be was left some time in the boat by himself, and willing to try his skill, he rowed a short distance from the shore. The tide wag receding, and, despite of all the efforts of Huyp, bore the boat with it. When too late, Huyp perceived his error. The land was still in sight, and he hoped that the boat might run aground. But, in this point, he was deceived. The current ran strongly outward, and at sun-set he was fairlylaunched upon the unfathomable ocean, without the slightest hope of ever setting his foot again on land. Night approached: the last. rays of day had departed from the wave—even the screams of the whirling sea-fowl were nO longer heard, and, save the hollow roaring of the flood, when wave lashed its fellow wave, no sound reached his ear. The light boat was but ill qualified to sustain the force of the flood, and Huyp expected every moment tat be washed into the world of waters. Fear took possession of his soul. He was chilled by the night breeze, and wet with the dashing of the spray. The hollow whistling of the wind, which sunk away in sullen murmurs in the distance, indicated the approach of a storm. Huyp trembled and gave himself over for lost. The storm came on—vivid flashes of lightning darted over the bosom of the flood, and seemed to rest for a moment on its ever undulating surface, while the sea and sky appeared to meet together. Then again, all was dark, while the thunder pealed with loud and awful violence. During the momentary light emitted from the clouds Huyp thought he could distinguish several vessels in the distance, but the .view he obtained of them was so evanescent, that he could not be sure whether it was imagination or reality. What a prospect was now before him! His life depended on the strength of the light planks which separated him from the waters, and he feared from their continual creaking, caused by the rapid motion of the waves, they would soon start. Then his fate was certain, it grew darker and darker, and the spray rose on all sides like a thick and heavy mist. At a very great distance he perceived signal lights, and heard the discharge of guns from vessels in distress. He had long Lost the power of using the oars, which, indeed, could not have been of any use to him, and he now allowed them to be washed overboard, without making an effort to retain them. He had now no hope of preservation, and he prepared to meet his fate without repining. In despair, he threw himself down at the bottom of the boat, and it was not until a prodi





gious wave washed over him, and half tilled it with water, that he aroused himself from his lethargy.

The day began to dawn faintly, and, with it, hope revived. The tempest had subsided and when it ceased, the ocean became more calm. Pieces of wreck, and casks which had probably been thrown overboard during the storm, floated past him, and reminded him that others might have perished while he was preserved. There is something in returning day that serves to dissipate Out fears, and Huyp felt so much relieved by the influence of the faint sun-beams which played upon the top of the foamcovered waves, that he again clung to life as a treasure. For some hours he was, borne along by the current. No sail met his view, and not being provided with a compass, he knew not whither he had been drifted. It was mid-day ere he had the satisfaction of seeing a vessel steering exactly in the course of •his fragile boat. He scarcely knew how to make a signal, as he had neither oar nor pole, on which to elevate it above the boat Hastily taking his neckcloth from his neck, and raising his hand as high he could do, consistent with safety, he suffered it to float to the breeze. It was soon observed; in less than an hour, Huyp found himself on board an English merchantman, where every kindness was shewn him, and he was assured of his safety, and learned that had not his signal been perceived at the time, in all probability, half an hour would have decided his fate, as the boat was drifting towards that fatal and dreaded spot known by the name of the Goodwin sands. They were now off Ramsgate. The effects of the storm were but too apparent. Dismasted vessels were labouring to gain the port, and some, more seriously disabled, were towed onwards by others that had been more fortunate. It was the first time that Huyp had beheld the white and rocky shores of England, and exhausted as he was he kept upon deck, enjoying the prospect. The noble pier was lined with anxious and expecting faces. Many of them were clouded with the traces of the most dismal apprehensions —Mothers were trembling for their sons, wives weeping for their husbands, and children calling for their absent parents, of whose fate they were yet ignorant. It was a heart-rending scene—a scene that is not easily erased from the mind.





Huyp was conducted to the house of the captain, where he experienced from each of the family, that true English hospitality, which has of late years become rather a proverb than a reality. Captain Hawkins had> however, a generous heart, and, as heaven had blessed his exertions with success, he never refused his help to those who needed it. To the fireside of a cheerful, amiable and hospitable family, Huyp was thus iutroduced, and, in a few days, the idea of his past dangers appeared nothing more than the rememhrance of a troublesome dream. Captain Hawkins had several daughters, and the youngest had that bewitching gaieti de canir which seldom fails to captivate. Matilda Hawkins was the belle of Ramsgate, and reminded Huyp most forcibly of Clara. Had not Matilda possessed some coquetry, she would have been the very counterpart of that estimable girl. Her lightness of heart was, however, her most powerful charm, and more incense was offered at the shrine of her beauty than fell to the share of any of her youthful competitors. t





Huyp regarded her with an interest which he knew not himself how to account for. Perhaps it was the similitude he traced in the features of Clara Von Essen, and those of Matilda, whose vanity induced her to make a conquest of every heart that came within the influence of her charms.





Matilda soon perceived that she was admired by the young Netherlander, and she made every effort in her power to make him declare that love which she doubted not he felt. Every opportunity that offered, she led Huyp over the romantic cliffs by which the ocean is bounded, and, in those tete-a-tete conversations, gave him to undertand that she was ready to listen to any thing that he might be inclined to say. Huyp had no objection to whisper soft nonsense, and Matilda far less to hear it. Adulation was, to her, the chief bliss of existence, and she believed implicitly the word of the flatterer. Nevertheless, with respect to Huyp, it was chiefly vanity that led her to attempt his enth raiment. She cared not a pin for any man in particular, but wished to hare a bevy of beaux at her command. Captain Hawkins laughingly told Huyp to beware of his little coquette, if he had no desire to be called out by one half of the pretenders to her favour. Huyp assured him that his heart was in no danger, and still continued to flirt away his time.





But Matilda was imperceptibly gaining ground in his affections, and he at length felt that his heart was growing less attached to the mikl virtues of her, for whom he had renounced the protection of his parents. He deliberated and was lost. Matilda became every day more necessary to his existence, and he at length ventured to disclose his passion. Matilda heard him with calm composure, and then, as calmly, assured him, that unless he could make up his mind to stand a seven years' siege,





he must not hope for her love. Huyp thought her a romantic fool, and pressed his suit more earnestly. Still Matilda was inexorable, and quoted many a trite saying which she had learned from the gossips of the neighbourhood in favour pf a long courtship. Indeed, Matilda was well skilled in the country superstitions, and would not have been wedded in the month of May, even for the dignity of a ducal coronet. Still she was a very trifler in love affairs, and, as her father truly remarked, stood a fair chance ofwitheringin virgin purity, unless she should attain a little more stamina. Huyp was iuclined to believe that he was destined from his birth to meet with nothing but crosses and trials. When, however, he seriously reflected on the disappointment Matilda had given to his views, he could not forgive himself for banishing Clara so easily from the place she had held in his heart.





Aware that his disappearance would be productive of the most anxious alarm to his friends, he wrote to Luitje a simple statement of the perils he had escaped, and of his present situation. To Clara he did not dare to write, his conscience told him that he had been guilty of injustice towards her, and he was too high minded to give her cause to accuse him of having acted with duplicity. Matilda still continued her flirtations with Huyp, who having recovered from the temporary delirium of love and regained his reason, considered himself only as a privileged friend—a kind of brother, with whom a gay young lass may coquette without danger to the peace of mind of either.

He was not destined, however, to remain long with this hospitable family. As soon as Luitje Vuist Slaagen received the intelligence of his nephew's safety, he jumped on board the first vessel about to sail for Ramsgate, and to the astonishment of Huyp, stood by his bed side one morning ere he was awake and embraced him with almost paternal affection, while his cheeks were wet with tears of delight. "I little thought ever to set eyes on you again in this world, jangeling" said Luitje, wiping the tell-tale tear from his weather-beaten cheeks—•" But, thank God, you are safe. But why did you not write to me earlier? You should have remembered that old Luitje loves you like his own son. And then your aunt—Mrs. Vuist Slaagen was in hysterics and howled like a whipped cur, till your letter came, and then she was in ecstacies. By-thebye, lad, she declares your adventures have been so delightfully romantic, that she intends to get that snarling horrorloving little scribbler, Vrouw Spectresee to weave them into a tale for the edification of her readers.





Vol. m. p





"That will be rather too bad," re» plied Huyp, "yet, my good uncle, believe me, that I am truly happy to shake you once more by the hand. But tell me, has my mother evinced any of that affection which she once felt for her son? Does she know 1 was saved?"

"Wait awhile, jongeling" responded Luitje, "and I will give you all the news, chapter and verse, as the old women have it. I no sooner found you were missing with the boat, than I suspected what had happened. We searched every spot on the coast for many leagues, but there were no tidings or traces to be met with, of you or the boat. Of course I sent off an express to the tower with the intelligence, and as soon as possible, came sister Aaltje and the Burgomaster with their eyes as red as a coral bank, and their pocket handkerchiefs as wet as one of my fishing nets. They cried, and the children cried, and I cried too, for my heart was ready to break—and Mrs. Vuist Slaagen shrieked like a sea-gull, and floundered about like a hooked fish. So when they were tired of weeping, Aaltje and the Burgomaster began to upbraid each other with having been the cause of your death, and then they both threw the blame on that pretty little girl that was so kind to you when you were in prison at Brussels "—





"Did they blame her!" cried Huyp. "She was the guardian angel of my heart —the star that would have lighted me on to happiness—For her sake, they banished me from them, and now, to screen themselves, they would fain make the world believe that Clara—"

"Pish!" interrupted Luitje, "the folks at the tower are now all as black as the inhabitants of a raven's nest, and e'en so let them remain for a time; for unless your aunt tells tales, they are not likely to know of your preservation just yet, though as I could not find it in my heart to let that good girl cry herself into a consumption, I sent her word of your safety.





«• Kind, considerate man!" cried Huyp—" but I think you acted rather cruel with respect to my mother and the Burgomaster."

"Leave me to arrange my own plans, jongeling" returned Luitje, " and unless they fail, do not question the propriety of them."

Luitje found himself quite at ease when seated by the fire side of the warm hearted Captain Hawkins. The two veterans of the ocean enjoyed their pipe and their glass, and told over many a tale of danger, heroism and love; while Huyp, when not engaged with the young ladies, sate a silent listner to tales, which sometimes bordered on the marvellous, though the relaters of them would havq deemed him guilty of little less than heresy had he presumed to question their probability or their authenticity. Sea-faring people are universally addicted to superstition—from the admiral, the monarch of his floating world, down to the poor boy who trembles at the creaking of the sails, and feels his heart misgive him when ordered to climb aloft.





Matilda who had been accustomed to listen to her father's tales, and thought the cut of a cap, or the shade of a ribbon of much more interest, playfully stopped him in the midst of one of his longest stories, by enquiring whether it was his intention to engross all the attention of his guest, or whether he would allow his daughters to hare some little share of his society. Captain Hawkins pronounced her to be a pert little jade, and Luitje, who, when his wife was not by, liked a little gallantry, imprinted a kiss on her soft cheek, and assured her that both himself and his time were completely at her disposal. Matilda made him a grateful curtsey, and congratulated herself on being able—





"To raise a flame in Cupids of threescore." '" My uncle is excessively gallant," said Huyp, eyeing Matilda through the long silken lashes that fringed them, "I am afraid, however, he will make but a poor beau."

"Why so, sir?" replied Matilda, "know you not our received and believed saying—

"To. many a man with one foot in the grave, Is better than being a young man's slave."

• " Hold! hold! young lady," exclaimed Luitje, "I am not quite so far gone as that, and have never known from boyhood to the present time, what illness is, saving and excepting a few twitches of the rheumatism, and now and then the cramp in my fingers. For my own part, I think I shall make a most excellent beau, and, besides, if you wish to give me a little consequence, you know you can easily sink the fisherman, and introduce me to the world as a rich Flemish Magistrate, come over here for the ostensible purpose of offering you himself and his fortune."





Matilda laughed heartily at the suggestion of Luitje, and suffered him to escort her into public, with the beet grace imaginable. She was delighted with the joke, and anticipated the confusion such a report would make amongst those whom she allowed to believe themselves likely to make, eventually, the conquest of her heart.

The dress of Luitje was of itself sufficient to attract attention—for his little high crowned hat—sky blue coat and large silver buckles of antique pattern, made him appear so different from the beaux who flourish at a bathing place, that he had no sooner entered the library with his fair companion, than every eye was turned towards him. The questions of, who, and what is he? naturally followed, and Matilda having hinted to some of her young friends that he was already her husband, they were soon overwhelmed with congratulations. The wiser part of the company, however, who had before experienced the wit of Matilda, kept aloof, and awaited the moment in which the laugh would be turned against them. Huyp and the Captain stood at the further end of the room, well pleased with the confusion Matilda had spread through the company. "She is a mad-brained lass," said Hawkins, "and delights in mischief, but after all, with the partiality of a father, I must say, that I take pride in sanctioning her innocent fooleries." Huyp coincided in the opinion of his generous friend, when, on a sudden, his attention M'as arrested by a circumstance as singular as unlooked for, and at the present not a little vexatious to him,





i





CHAPTER XXIX.



It is with ridicule as with compassion, we do not like to be the solitary objects of either, and whether we are laughed at or pitied, we have no objection to sharers, and fancy we can lessen the weight, by dividing the load.

Cottons Lacon, vol. ih



IT was no other than the entry of Luttrell into the library t A spectre would, at the moment, have been quite as acceptable to Huyp, for he anticipated a long recapitulation of his adventures at Ostend. Why Luttrell should have so soon returned to England, he could not conceive; and in his Opinion, he could not have chosen a more unfortunate time, for though he felt that he should be happy to renew his acquaintance with him, he was aware that a public library was the last place he would have chosen for the interview. To quit the library, without being recognized by his soi disant pupil, he knew to be impossible, for Luttrell was lounging on one of the benches directly against the door, apparently endeavouring to recognize some acquaintance. Huyp perceived that his uncle had caught his eye, though, in truth, Luitje was so much altered in appearance from the change of his costume, thaF a casual observer might have passed him without recognition. Still Luttrell kept regarding Luitje with fixed attention, at length he advanced towards him.





Huyp trembled for the consequences. He had no desire to become the laughing stock of Ramsgate, but he saw no probability of avoiding it.





Luttrell no sooner addressed Luitje, than he was recognized by the latter, who held out his hand to him with cordiality, and expressed his hopes, that he was quite recovered from the shaking he had experienced, on the day they first met.

A smile lighted up the features of Luttrell, and he replied in the affirmative; though a cloud overspread his countenance, when he said, he thought Luitje had reason to regret his depriving him of his tutor. Luitje laughed outright, and assured him, that so far from regretting the circumstance, he was extremely rejoiced at it, as it had been the means of shewing his nephew a little more of the world.

"Not of this world though, old boy," replied Luttrell. "Poor fellow! he was the very prince of his profession; I shall never find another like him, so I am going back to old dad, who has been playing the deuce with me for cutting my old prosey. However, I am really glad that I have met with you here— but," he added in a whisper, "what pretty girl have you got tucked to your side?"





'* My vrouw, to be sure;" returned Luitje, archly.

'• Bigamy—palpable bigamy!" exclaimed Luttrell, loudly, "why, what are you thinking of?" Observing a smile of sarcasm overspread the face of Luitje, he continued, "but you must not think to quiz me—by Jupiter! I am too knowing for you—it is one of your daughters."

The library was, by this time, in a roar of laughter, and those who had been among the foremost in congratulating Matilda on her marriage, were also the first to laugh at their folly. Huyp had mixed among the throng that had gathered around his uncle, and, at length encountered the eye of Luttrell.





He saw that he was recognized, and stepped forward. Luttrell received him as one restored from the grave. •* What my young prosey," he cried, "are you really, and boiu'i Jide, flesh and blood, or are you the ghost of a merman. Why lad, every body believed that you had become food for fishes, instead of worms—for my part I thought you were in heaven.''

"," And you have found me here,'" returned Huyp. • •

"He has an objection to- noise," responded Luitje, "and feared the continual crying of the cheruhims and seraphims might disturb him-?*"

Luttrell took the arm of Huyp, and most pathetically related all the grievances he had met with since they parted at the auberge. The mistress of the Cceur Imperiale had treated him in the most cavalier manner in consequence of his overthrow, and Madame de Stratton, to cover her own inhumanity, had asserted that the acccident was occasioned solely by malice prepense on his part. These assertions had rendered his stay in the Netherlands an event by no means desirable, and in obedience tothemandate of his father Lord Luttrell, he had stepped on board one of the English pacquets, and that very day again set foot on his native land.





Captain Hawkins, on finding that Luttrell was known to his new friends, politely invited him to share the hospitalities of his house—an invitation which was readily accepted, and which perhaps the bright eyes of Matilda rendered more desirable. Luttrell, like the majority of his countrymen, was easily entrapped in the snares of beauty and on this occasion he literally fell in love at first sight. It was by no means improbable that his being the son of a peer, had some weight with the gay and beautiful Matilda, and as her heart was not enfettered, she, perhaps, thought, that Luttrell with all his faults, was, with a peerage in perspective, better than an humbler lover with more stability and inferior expectations. With her, love was but a phantasy—a vapour of the mind—nevertheless she gloried in having a train of lovers, and, like other ladies, hoped in time to gain a husband.





Though Captain Hawkins was a plain man, he had too much sense to be led away by the phantoms of ambition. He certainly would have had no objection to his daughters being respectably married, even though the men of their choice had been poor as Job. But to marrying for rank, he would have opposed all his power. He hated the very name of a Lord, for in his opinion it was synonimous with pride, egotism, vanity, and extravagance, and as he was a firm republican in principle, the very idea of such an union would have been gall and wormwood to him. Of this Matilda was aware, yet in her breast, ambition was silently cherished. Never had she looked more lovely than on the day that she first saw Luttrell, and from Huyp, she soon learned the consequence of his family. To her, he appeared an object worth an effort to obtain j and female vanity soon assured her, that the conquest would not be difficult. There were but two faults in Matilda's character, vanity and ambition. The first had been fostered by her father, who was proud of seeing his child the object of universal admiration—the latter was indigenous to her own bosom. It was evident that Luttrell daily gained ground in the good opinion of Matilda. Huyp watched her with the lynx eye of jealousy, and saw, with uneasiness, that his pupil was preferred to himself. Nevertheless, he became the confidant of Luttrell, who was proud of the conquest he had made of the heart of so beautiful a creature.





Matilda, who knew that her father would not sanction the pretensions of Luttrell, contrived to keep up appearances so well, that Captain Hawkins had not the slightest suspicion that love had found shelter in her heart. Huyp had pledged himself to be silent, and they had too much confidence in las word of honor, to fear that he would betray their secret.

In a short time, however, Matilda was missing. Captain Hawkins was almost frantic, when after passing an anxious and sleepless night, the morning brought no tidings of his lost daughter. Huyp's heart smote him when he beheld the bitter distress of the fond father, who was thus deprived of the darling of his heart. He blamed himself as the cause of Matilda's flight, and lamented the folly which had led him to become a party in its concealment. Such a precipitate step as she had taken, had never once entered into his imagination. He feared she was deceived and ruined, and, if so, he could but consider himself culpable. It was an ungrateful return for the generous hospitality of her father, and he dreaded to meet his eye dimmed with the tear of sorrow.





After the lapse of a few days, a letter from Matilda relieved them of the worst part of their fears. She acknowledged that Luttrell was the companion of her flight, and concluded by informing them, that she was now his wife. Notwithstanding Captain Hawkins had an insuperable aversion to titles and consequence, he was, in his heart, glad to find things were no worse. That Lord Luttrell, whose pride was proverbial, would be highly incensed at the conduct of his son, he was well assured—but that was, to him, of little consequence. He had no desire to see his daughter noticed at the head of "Fashionable Intelligence;" and to be informed, every time he glanced over the columns of the newspapers, that she was this night at one assembly, and to-morrow would be at another. He entertained an obsolete though a just opinion of nobility, and was wont to assert without fear of contradiction, that the most respectable portion of the great world, were those whose names were seldom mentioned. Though a plain man, he was certainly right.





Irritated as Captain Hawkins was. with his favorite girl for uniting herself to a scion of the peerage, he could not find it in his heart to act by her, as Aaltje had done towards Huyp.





After some consideration, he resolved to write to her, and, as he expressed it, "tell her a bit of his mind." Luitje suffered him to do this, and then requested his permission to say something on his own part. This was simply an invitation to the young married people to pass the honey-moon at his cottage, and to remain there until they could effect a complete reconciliation with all parties. Captain Hawkins pressed the hand of Luitje, and with a tear trembling in his eye, said "You have anticipated my wishes—I should have been sorry to have seen my poor girl turned adrift on the world as yon poor yonker was, and now, after allowing a decent time for anger, I can be soothed and softened at my leisure. Matilda will be happy'to have an opportunity of seeing the world, and Luttrell, if I mistake not will have no objection to renew his friendship with Huyp.





"And if I do not punish them both," replied Luitje, good-humouredly, call me a braggart, or what you will. Egad, I'll brace the stays of that young puppy, Luttrell, or I'll chain him to the oar. It was too bad of him to run off with my lass, without asking my permission. Perhaps he may take it into his head to run off the second time—and with Mrs. Vuist Slaagen! but if he should, he will very soon be glad to bring her back again.

Here the conversation ceased. The letter was sent, and by return of post, came replies to Captain Hawkins and Luitje. Matilda wrote playfully, for she saw that her father would not prove inexorable, and they, without hesitation accepted the offer of Luitje, for which they expressed themselves under the greatest obligations.





"The fellow has a heart after all,'' said Luitje, "and perhaps may make Matilda a good husband. She appears to have something like a dash of spirit in her composition, and if she can cure him of his fooleries, they may do very well in the world.";

That the wishes of Luitje might be fulfilled was the hope of all present, Matilda had married to please herself, and the Captain trusted that she would be happy, to please him. She was now without the pale of his jurisdiction, yet perhaps he would not have hesitated to knock the man down who claimed the legal guardianship of his child, had he thought him likely to prove a villain to her. He had a great store of those honest old fashioned English notions of right and wrong, propriety, and so forth, which it was impossible to eradi- • cate.

Although Captain Hawkins warmly pressed Luitje and Huyp to prolong their stay in England, the honest hearted old Fleming could not be persuaded to remain another week away from his family. Having made the necessary arrangements for his departure, he sent Huyp to intimate the precise moment to Luttrell and Matilda, whom the Captain at present declined seeing, and at length, after bidding farewell to the kind protectors of Huyp, they set sail from Ramsgate for the Netherlands. Matilda was on board the vessel before them, and from the deck of the vessel saw her father exchange the last salutation of friendship with his departing guests. She even thought she heard him mention her name with his accustomed fondness, and would at the moment have given the world to have been again enfolded in his arms. Whilst she was hesitating how to act, her father had retired. She caught a glance of his receding figure, and bursting into tears, threw her head upon the shoulder of Lutrrell.





CHAPTER XXX.



Your sprightly love has wings,

And's ever fledged; 'tis molting time with mine:

Yet I'll up too—the hazard's not in climbing.



The Adventures of Five Hours.



WITH Luitje for a comforter, a smooth .sea, and a gentle breeze, Matilda bore the voyage with the composure of ,d heroine, and sometimes amused herself with laughing at Luttrell, who not only, in the nautical phrase, frequently "missed stays," but was also rendered somewhat uneasy by the motions of the vessel. An old sailor like Luitje was the very kind of personage to smile at his fresh water companions, and did not fail to annoy them with his good-humoured raillery. Luttrell was too unwell to practise his puppyism, and contented himself with wishing the heaving hillows were quiet as the waters of a Dutch canal. Wind and tide being in their favor, they scudded along with a breeze and in five short hours stood off the harbour of Ostend, until the accustomed signal was given for their crossing the bar.





It soon appeared; and Huyp once more stood on the land of his forefathers. Matilda was charmed with the neatness of the decaying, though once opulent town of Ostend. It bore the stamp of antiquity, and looked the skeleton of its former greatness. Like other mercantile towns, its commerce bad, in process of time, dwindled away, it became deserted by the rich, and now had only to boast of being, by its situation, the key of Flanders, and, consequently, resorted to by travellers.





The venerable church particularly attracted the attention of Matilda, and before she proceeded to the hotel, she insisted on taking a view of the ancient edifice. The Calvary raised beside the door of the church, before which several aged females were kneeling with apparent devotion, stopped her progress for a moment, and she wondered why they could not as well have prayed within the church to the Almighty himself, as at the feet of ill-carved and vilely painted images, whose dress strongly reminded her of the May-day frolics of her native land. The variety of paintings with which the walls of the church were decorated, had also charms, which to her were irresistible. Huyp acted as Cicerone, for Luitje frankly declared that with respect to the arts he Whs lamentably deficient in knowledge. "Ah!" cried Matilda, "then you too are not quite perfect L"—" Not quite so," replied Luitje, "though you did term me a Cupid of threescore "—





Matilda was all curiosity, and enquired about the legends of the saints with so much earnestness, that those within hearing of her questions set her down at once as an exemplary catholic. In these matters Huyp was also somewhat deficient, and therefore evaded satisfying her curiosity for the present, though he did not fail to point out the dilapidated spire, which had suffered from the bursting of a shell during the time that Ostend. was besieged by the Spaniards, and respecting which event the gossips had a legend, that had not the Virgin intercepted the shell at the moment that it was descending on the t*pire, and thrown it upwards with her hand, the whole fabric would have beeu demolished. Matilda smiled at the ridiculous tale, and assured Huyp that the marvellous suffered no diminution in his recital.





Luttrell, meanwhile, had proceeded to the hotel, where he found a solace for his sufferings at sea in a good breakfast, and by the time his companions rejoined him, he was quite a different creature—something like what he was when Huyp first met with him. Matilda spared him not, and begged him to do her the favor not to mistake her for a middle aged tutor and break her neck—, Luttrell assured her that she need not entertain any apprehensions, as he had neither tilbury nor tits, and therefore must be content to be jolted about in a cabriolet until old dad could be softened down into something like generosity.

After resting for a few hours they quitted Ostend for the cottage of Luitje, who, during their journey,, took occasion to inform Matilda of the concealed affection of her worthy sire, and gave her to understand, that in all probability she would very shortly see him a welcome guest at his humble residence. Tears of delight trembled in the eyes of Matilda, and her grateful looks were far more pleasing to the open-hearted Luitje, than more studied indicaiions of joy.





When they alighted at the garden gate of Luitje's cottage, it was evident that they were observed, for several faces on a sudden disappeared from the latticed window, and in less than a minute the children ran out to welcome their father. Not so did Mrs. Vuist Slaagen. She was en deshabille, and of course not fit to receive strangers. She therefore hastily started from her usual recumbent position on the sofa, and in her confusion threw the book she wa» reading into the embers, where it was smoking and gradually consuming, when the little party entered. Huyp snatched the half-burned book from the flames and observed that his aunt had, he feared, sustained an irreparable loss.





"Not at all jongeling" replied Luitje—" I dare say there is a ghost in it, and you know they invariably vanish in a flame of fire or become gradually indistinct in the embraces of a column of smoke. Put it down Huyp—put it down again—or your aunt perhaps will fancy the cottage is haunted."

The volume was already half consumed, and Huyp, finding that the part which remained could not possibly be of any service, threw it behind one o* the large logs of wood which was just brightning into a blaze, and in a few minutes both spectre and heroine were no more.

As soon as Mrs. Vuist Slaagen was attired fit to receive company, she returned to the apartment she had been obliged so hastily to quit and after curtseying to the strangers, flew to embrace her nephew. She laughed, and shrieked, and wept with joy at his safety, and talked some unintelligible nonsense about his being preserved by the love of Amphitrite, till Luitje provoked at her folly, begged her to be a little more reasonable and attend to his guests-,ivhom he now introduced to her.





Madame Luitje was a pretty,- petite figure, and.could the features of her . face have been changed probably might have been handsome.. Her visage was thin and cadaverous, and her little sharp grey eyes evinced that she was somewhat of the termagant. As for her character tJiat was not yet decided, as it was invariably copied from that of the last new heroine, and her manners were either bold or languishing according to those of the volumes' on which her character was founded. On this day she affected the interesting—and Luitje whispered his nephew that she was in one of her old fits again.





However she paid every attention to her young guests, and as there was something romantic in their story, as well as in that of her nephew's, she prepared herself to expect a tale of hair breadth scapes and thrilling horrors. Poor Huyp had to tell over again his thrice told tale, for Mrs. VuistSlaagen would hear of no evasion, and although Luitje yawned, and Luttrell evinced symptoms of drowsiness,, nothing else than unconditional compliance would have satisfied her. .

News, according to the vulgar adage, spreads like wildfire, and the return of Huyp was the topic of general conversation. Luitje was vexed to find that his plans were likely to be thus disappointed, and blamed himself for having made Mrs. Vuist Slaagen the confidant of his schemes. However the error was already committed and could not be repaired. It was provoking enough, for he had calculated on achieving great things by the restoration of his nephew to the Dordrechts—now he feared that his plans would be frustrated by the misguided tattling of his helpmate. Still he was resolved tostand firm, and impossible gain his point by stratagem.





He therefore confined Fluyp to the cottage, and when any of his neighbours enquired for his nephew, he replied, wkh a peevish kind of " Pish," that he dared to say the jongeling was doing well if the fishes had not devoured hint. The Netherlanders conceived there must be some mystery attached to Huyp's disappearance, as Luitje so studiously avoided the gratification ©f their curiosity. Many and various wete the reports which, agitated the village and its enyirons on the occasion, and not a few of the good old gossips were convinced that the lad had met his death unfairly, and therefore haunted the residence of his uncle. These impressions made them avoid the cottage, and even Mrs. Vuist Slaagen perceived that her old friends regarded her. with looks of commiseration, and greeted her appearance in the village with mysterious whispers. But the secret was impenetrable to all save Luitje and Huyp, to whom Mrs. Vuist Slaagen most pathetically related her grievances..





Luitje laughed at the earnestness of ker manner, and assured her that her uneasiness might have been spared, as it was in consequence of his having quarrelled with his neighbours. Matilda •trove to quiet her, and Luitje, tired.of Ike scene, beckoned Luttrell to follow kim, and jumping into his boat, gaijy





followed his occupation. Poor Luttrell found tugging at the oar much more difficult than flapping a lady's fan, but he was launched, on the ocean and could not escape. Luitje took care that his muscles should have sufficient motion, and boasted that he had done yeven more for him than his tutors, as he had given him an insight into an honest, profession..



i t4





CHAPTER XXXI.



"Can gold calm passion, or make reason shine *

Can we dig peace, or wisdom from the mine?

Wisdom to gold prefer, for 'tis much less,

To make our fortune than our happiness."





RUMOUR had borne the tidings o£ Huyp's reappearance to the tower of the Pordrechts. An itinerant pedlar who had picked up the news, while displaying his wares before the eyes of Katryn and old Leena, related the story with all the marvellous annotations of the gossips. Katryn stood aghast at the intelligence, for that it was not himself but merely his spirit which had beenseen at the cottage of Luitje Vuist Slaagen, she was certain. Leena ran up to her mistress as fast as her feeble limbs could carry her, and with breathless agitation communicated what she had heard. Aaltje was placing on her head tire before the glass at the moment, but in her anxiety to learn the particulars of the fate of her son, she hastily threw it on one side, and ran down forthwith to the kitchen.





"What know you of my son?" exclaimed Aaltje, catching hold of the the pedlar by the coat—" have you seen him I"

"God forbid" returned the man. crossing him with superstitious terror. "I would not have seen him, Mevrouw, for all the gold of Mynheer, the Burgomaster."'

Aaltje did not exactly comprehend his meaning, and conceiving that he spoke somewhat slightingly of Huyp,





V said, "Not see him fellow! I wish he

Mas here to horsewhip yon."

The man turned pale. "Mevrouw Aaltje," he replied, "I know that you would not like to have him here yourself seeing that a spirit gliding about like a bog-light is not so desirable."

Here the pedlar entered fully into the story of the village, till Aaltje became pale and horror-struck with the relation. Impetuous and fiery, she stood not to• consider, of the probability of the tale, but wildly accused her brother of having been accessary to the death of son.

Vander Dordrecht was at the Stadt House. The impatience of Aaltje was not to be restrained, and forcing the pedlar to accompany her,, she immediately set forth for Amsterdam.

The Burgomaster was surprized at the unexpected appearance of his wife, and more so when he was informed of the cause of her visit. He commanded the man to be brought forward, and with magisterial consequence, began to examine him on oath touching the mysterious affair, of which he had brought the first intelligence to the tower.





The poor fellow became alarmed, and deprecated the anger of the Burgomaster, as he had but spoken of that which had been told him without the slightest injunction of secresy. Vander Dordrecht having heard all that the poor fellow had to relate, informed him that as the case at present had a very mysterious aspect, he must be under the necessity of detaining him, until such time as he could obtain other testimony, either to confirm or confute his assertions. The man wished his tongue had been tightly reined, ere he had been so foolish as to give utterance to the reports he had heard, but, notwithstanding his pleading, he was obliged to submit to the mandate of the magistrate.





Vander Dordrecht and Aaltje delayed not a moment in proceeding to the cottage of Luitje. Every eye was upon them when their carriage drove through the village, and a considerable crowd of old women and young,urchins gathered together, without side the garden gate of the fisherman, anxious to learn the result of the Burgomaster's visit.

Had it not been broad day, none of them would have ventured so near the spot, which, they believed, was the haunt of a troubled spirit. However, within the cottage all was quiet. Not even a murmur met their ears, and at nightfall, their fears induced them to retire, unsatisfied, to their separate homes.

There•was, throughout the evening, much bustle and consternation in the village. Conjectures, of course, were abundant, but the most prevalent opinion was, that Aaltje was waiting for the appearance of her lost son, in order to gain from his own lips, the name of his destroyer. This opinion was partially confirmed by the Pastor of the village calling at the cottage a little after sunset, and there were few who did not expect to hear of wonderful things, long before day break.





Within side the cottage, however, things wore a very different aspect. Aaltje had been at first loud and violent, but the good-humoured raillery of her brother, soon brought her to reason. The Burgomaster read to him the deposition of the pedlar, and Luitje soon convinced him that the reports in circulation were without foundation. Matilda, who had been initiated in the secrets of Luitje, assured them that she had met him at her father's house a very few days before, and that he had proposed himself to a pretty girl, who could not boast either of family ox fortune.





This was mortifying intelligence to Aaltje, who, now she was convinced that her son was actually in existence, wished not to have her plans again thwarted by his obstinacy..

Huyp had not yet made his appearance, for Luitje, as master of the ceremonies, insisted on his remaining Oh secret, until he himself should summon him to join the family party.

Matilda having been introduced" to Aaltje by Mrs. Vuist Slaagen, as the daughter-in-law of an English peer, seemed, to claim by right a considerable share of her attention, nor could she conceal her wonder, how Luitje had formed an acquaintance with people of that rank in life. Perhaps there was a little envy also in the case, for Aaltja perceived, that her brother had, somehow or other, formed connexions equal to her own.





The Burgomaster kept his state, and seemed to think that he did Luitje great honor, by remaining so long under his roof. Aaltje, who was anxious to learn every tiding of her son, tried all the coaxing arts she was mistress of, to discover where he was, and whether he would now be likely to coincide in her views for his future aggrandizement.

"I tell you, sister Aaltje," replied Luitje, "that my hopeful young nephew has more sense than to be caught in the web of a spinnekop; so if you think to mate him with some purse-proud old vixen, you will find yourself mistaken. It would be a downright shame, sister Aaltje, to tie the jongeling to a huge golden anchor, and then tell him to B>vim on as light as a duiker. And Mrs. Vuist Slaagen, there, says, it would be against all the laws of reason—romance, I should say—to break his heart about the lass, and then not let him have her at last."





"Brother Luitje!" exclaimed Aaltje, with affected dignity, " brother Luitje! you must certainly be crazed—consider the honor of the Vuist Slaagens"

"Consider the happiness of your son. sister Aaltje." returned Luitje, "and if you cry caw—caw—caw, when he is absent, don't flap him away with your pinions again, when you once more get him in your power."

Aaltje was sitting with her back towards the door of the room, and directly in front of a large mirror, in which Mrs. Vuist Slaagen for want of better occupation, was wont to contemplate her own charms when recumbent on the sofa. The door was opened slowly and noiselessly, and Huyp placed himself behind the chair of his mother. Vander Dordrecht was easily kept silent by Luitje, who in a low whisper, bade him await Aaltje's recognition of her son before he appeared to notice his entrance, Luttrell and Matilda with difficulty checked their mirth, and Mrs. Vuist Slaagen was employed in recollecting to what romance the incident might be compared. Aaltje at length caught the reflection of her son's figure in the mirror and started. At this moment the story told by the itinerant dealer in finery rushed across her mind, and she verily believed that she had beheld his spirit from " the vasty deep.'' Her countenance grew pale, and she trembled with terror and agitation. It was some minutes ere she found courage to venture a second glance. The shadow was still there—she rose from her seat, and unconsciously turning round, encountered the eyes of her son. In a moment all her former anger was forr gotten and she clasped him to her bosom, with that excess of affection with which she had been accustomed to welcome him to his home, when a "truant disposition" had caused him to absent himself from her protection. Even the Burgomaster evinced some symptoms of kindly feeling> and a tear was observed by Matilda to steal unbidden to his eye, when he gently chided Huyp for taking Aaltje at her word, and leaving them without even saying, farewell! An explanation ensued by tacit consent, as it appeared, of all parties, not a word more was said of the cause of the offence, and the name of Clara was not once mentioned. It would have been a pity as Luitje thought, to have marred the moments of bliss with the recollections of sorrow—like the incipient canker in the rose bloom a harsh Avord would have made the fair beaming blossom perish. Neither Aaltje nor the Burgomaster were deficient in expressions of gratitude to Matilda, for the generous treatment Huyp had met with from her father: and they felt what they said. Matilda nobly replied, that her father had done no more than his duty, and that she was sure Luitje had more than repaid him for the little attentions he had bestowed upon Huyp. Aaltje did not exactly understand the meaning of this speech, for she had not as yet been informed in what manner her brother had recompensed Captain Hawkins for his kindness. Luitje perceived her curiosity, but left to Mrs. VuistSlaagenthe task of communicating the secret.





This was consequently quickly done, and Aaltje was as profuse in her expressions of congratulation as she had before been of those of gratitude.

The conduct of Luitje was a proof

VOL. III. H





that the poet fostered no fanciful theory when he said,

• , '*

High-mindedoess, a jealousy for good,

Dwells here and there with people of no name.



The Burgomaster confessed this, and acknowledged in the undisguised joy of his heart, that to him they were indebted for the preservation of their son.

Luitje was far less courtly than his brother-in-law, and frankly told him, that as he regarded Huyp with the fondness of a father, he trusted that if the lad was again made miserable by any of Aaltje's caprices, he would fly to him for refuge, for whilst he had a starrer in his pocket.it never should be said that he had turned his hack upon the blood of the Vuist Slaagens.

The Vander Oordrechts now quitted the Cottage of Luitje, and Huyp, after taking an affectionate farewell of his kind-hearted friends, stepped into it also, and was once more on his way towards the Tower. Although Aaltje much wished to caution her son against attempting to renew his intimacy with Clara, his late spirited conduct was a curb upon her tongue, and she had so much self command as not once to mention her name during their drive. When they drew near the tower, she observed with dismay, that the eyes of Huyp wandered in the direction of the villa. Willing to attract his attention to another subject, she said—





"What, can you not kennen the old tower of the Dordrechts, Huyp? There it is, a little to the left, jongeling, just beyond Katryn's boereti hut."

"And yonder stands the villa," replied Huyp with a sigh, pointing it out to his mother—" it was there we parted."

Fortunately for Aaltje, the carriage at





this 'moment rattled over the drawbridge, which still kept its place over the wide moat by which the tower was surrounded. She found that Clara had still preserved her power over the heart of Huyp, and trembled to, think that perhaps she might, even yet, be compelled to acknowledge her for her daughter. Still she was resolved to prevent it if possible, though she knew by so doing she was staking her own wishes on a desperate game, in which all the chances were against her.





CHAPTER XXXII.

I

,'

Fear is true love's cruel nurse.

Coleridge—Sibijlline Leaves.

Virtue

Lends from her unsullied source,

The gems of thought their purest force.



Helen Maria Williams.

CLARA had suffered greatly during the absence of Huyp. She accused herself of having been the cause of his misfortunes, and lamented greatly that he should have indulged a pertinacity which would, in all probability, prove fatal to his advancement in life. Soon however, she had to experience a more severe trial.. The intelligence of Huyp's supposed melancholy fate was soon spread throughout the neighbourhood of Dordrecht Tower, and reached the ears of the Princess, who incautiously communicated the sad tidings to the unhappy Clara. Agitated as she had previously been, this was a blow which she knew not how to bear. The charm which had before helped to soothe her troubled mind was now broken and dissolved, and vanished like the light circlets spread over the bosom of a clear, mirror-like pool, when some wild flower drops from its stem, and floats near the marge of the stream.





Anxious and troubled were the days and nights which succeeded. Clara found, that her firmness of mind was shaken, and at times her reason almost seemed to forsake her. Innocent as she was, she'could not help consideringherself as little better than the destroyer ©if i the generous-hearted Huyp, and had it been possible to have recalled the past, and to have restored him, she would willingly have broken the resolution to which she had so tenaciously adhered, and united her fate with his, regardless of the anger of his family, Her health daily declined—she became pale and emaciated, and a settled melancholy spread like a dense cloud over her countenance. She seemed to live like one who waited anxiously for the moment which would emancipate her from the thraldom of existence. For hours she would sit silently gazing on the portrait of her father, and a tear of heartfelt agony would steal down her pallid cheek when she called to mind, that he, who gave her that treasure, like him, had perished untimely.





The Princess Hyacintha who had become most affectionately attached to the sweet girl, strove to inspire her with the hope that the misfortune had been exaggerated. But when her messenger, whom she had dispatched to the cottage of Luitje, returned, and brought from him the confirmation of their worst fears, she could say no more, but mingled her tears with those of the wretched Clara, At length the note of Luitje was brought to the villa, bringing with it Hope, bright and beaming as—





& v' '. t - — i .

The moon lifting her silver rim

Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim i - <

Coming into the blue with all her light.

For a moment Clara was inclined to doubt the truth of the intelligence, but when she recollected the tender affection with which Luitje had advocated the cause of his nephew, all her doubt* vanished, and she was satisfied that he was noi one of those who would steal her from her sorrows by deluding her with a- palpable falsehood. The injunction of secresy too,, with which the idea of uniting himself to Clara, an event she assured him the Burgomaster would never give his consent to, and which she trusted his good sense would induce him to relinquish every thought of.





Huyp heard her patiently, and replied that he believed she knew enough of his mind on that subject, to prevent her supposing for a moment that he would sacrifice his happiness, merely to gratify her caprices. He then warmly eulogized Clara, and concluded with declaring, that if she might not be bis wife, he .was resolved never to unite himself to any other woman. - Aaltje grew passionate, and Huyp pathetic, when the entrance of the Burgomaster put a stop for the present to the conversation. Perhaps it was well that he came m at the moment-^it was a critic*! juncture of time;, for it would not have been surprizing had the mother airifi son quarrelled again, and parted, without even bidding each other farewell.





"Why Aaltje, vrouw—why Huyp, jongeling, what ails you both I" said Vander Dordrecht, alarmed at seeing a cloud on both their countenances, and fearing that the tower might be again thrown into confusion by the impetuosity and pertinacity of his spouse— "What have you said, or thoughtr or done, Huyp, that Mevrouw there, looks as stormy as the sky before thunder?"

As no reply was made by either party, the Burgomaster was left to frame what conjectures he pleased respecting their domestic infelicities.

Huyp was willing to brave the violence of his mother's temper, but he had no desire to contend with the cold phlegm of the Burgomaster, he wished not to enter into the vortex of argument in which he knew he must inevitably be involved, should'he enter at large into the subject of their conference.





Curiosity was on the rack amongst those in the environs of' the tower; to learn the particulars of Huyp's late mischances. The volubility of Katryn'S tonguewas therefore brought into full play, and: she became at once rnconteure extraordinary to the family, whilst, like most other gossiping people, she neglected her own affairs to minister to the appetites of others. There- is nothing, that the world likes better than a fctofy tinctured with a little of the marvellous, and Katryn d*d; not fail' to. introduce the spectre portion of it* M•dk knowing that with the major part of-her auditors, that would have more effect than could possibly be expected .from a reasonable relation of circumstances exactly as they had occurredi Credulity and folly indeed appear to be indigenous in the minds of the many, while thought and reason are the attributes of the few. Those who can think have in general the finest feelings— those who will not even strive to do so, may be said to resemble the current into which if you drop a pebble, it will instantly produce many light circlets on its glassy bosom, which remain buti for a few moments, ere they become imperceptible, leaving not even a shadow to shew that they have been.





At the tower, notwithstanding the serious alarm the family had been in during the absence of Huyp, they were far from being harmonious, Aaltje was of so restless and unquiet a disposition, that she could not be induced to leave the youth to act according to the impulse- of his own heart,; which* most likely, ..would>'have been. productive'' of the most'pleasing consequences, but was continually bewildering him with her advice and cheeking his hopes by commenting on the conduct of others, whom She either praised or blamed, according to the caprice of the moment, and Huyp consequently felt that she was rather talking at him than to him. Though he perfectly understood the drift of her discourse, he endeavoured to appear as though he comprehended it nojt. He was unhappy enough in his mind without the thoughtless and unfeeling comments of his mother, which, after all, were of no avail, for he was resolved onoe more to seek and see Clara, despite of all the opposition that would most probably be made to such a proceeding. Luitje had once compared his sister to the Chaldeans and Sabeans, who, thougb they plundered poor Job of his property^ could not deprive him of his thoughts,, nor his feelings, and he had justly feared when he last shook hands with hianephew, that Aaltje would try. to weave around him some of those inextricable snares, that would tend to mar that happiness which he still hoped he might meet with, by a union with Clara Von Essen.





Huyp, without the privity of any one, and without the consent of Aaltje, after two days absolute confinement in the tower, (for his mother watched him so narrowly that there was no possibility of evading her scrutiny) departed at day break for the villa of the Princess.

The pale grey smoke was just l>egin<ning to rise from the high, turret-like chimneys of the mansion, when ho arrived before the ponderous, antiquelooking gate that opened into the court yard; the porter was, at the moment, drawing back the bolts,' with which it had been secured, and ^owly pushing the gate open, saw, to his astonishment, the young man before him. A paleness overspread his countenance for a mo-ment, and it was- not until Huyp addressed, him with enquiries respecting Clara and the Princess,, that he was convinced he beheld an inhabitant of this world. Huyp smiled at his idle terror, and followed him into the mansion. The hour was so early, that no one.save die domestics,, was stirring. , They all flocked round him to welcome his return, and to congratulate him on his providential escape from death, for report had not been idle with respect to Iris return to the tower, and his manifold adventures. Even Monica, the laconic Monica, was moved by the spirit of curiosity to speak, and said, that her Jady and MademoiselleVon Essen, would Indeed be rejoiced to see him again. ,She even wished to inform them at once that he was there, but Huyp would by no means be persuaded to allow them to be disturbed", arid preferred waiting until> the usual": hour of their dejeune. '' '• ' -'I ,'.-',,' '»'" •'





Huyp.wandered from the saloon to the boudpk.. , The^e still stood the harp of Clara—he touched the strings, and started as their soft and melancholy vibrations struck upon his ear. It seemed little less than a profanation to have fin-1 gered them, for, perhaps, when they were last touched, it was at the time he had so abruptly entered the apartment. In fancy's eye he still beheld her bending over the instrument, and saw her sink fainting from her seat. The misery of their parting rushed, at once, across his mind, and the tear of sorrow came unbidden to his eye. There too was placed the portrait of Von Essen—the only picture that ornamented the walls of the boudoir. He thought it seemed tosmile on him, as toe gazed upon the fea





tures—but the mind's dream vanished in a moment—and the vision of imagination faded away, like a vapour in the cloud-world—a sound of fancy,

'" Bom of the very sigh that silence heaves."





— The sweet converse of an innocent mind, Whose words are images of thoughts refin'd, Is my soul's pleasure, and it sure must be





ANXIOUSLY did Huyp await the moment, in which he might again be allowed to clasp Clara to his heart. His mind was far from being pillowed on a bed of flowers—it was chequered with the quivering, and ever-varying shades Of doubt and fear, while gentle hope; at times;" beamed with resplendent light, like the gay and gorgeous rays of the





sun over the heathy hills, and verdant dells, profusely studded with the golden blooms of the furze, over their green and sloping surface.

Huyp knew just enough of folly, to make—

His early manhood more securely wise,

and his most ardent desire was to find quiet and happiness in some retired cottage, with the estimable Clara. Love and a cottage, is, in general, the summum bonum of a lover's wishes. After years—the probability of a young and increasing family—and the necessity of providing for them, very seldom have a place in his ideas,. If he is absent from the object of his adoration, the minutes seem hours untjl he can return, for lovers dread even a temporary separation.

I remember that the first wife of Lord Erskine, had, for many years, this ror mantic attachment to her. lord, and fretjuently would use gentle coercion to keep him at home. Indeed her tenderness and affection, in this respect, at times, amounted to something like government; and his Lordship once summoned the maid to one of these persuasive tete-a-tetes, when he desired her to purchase a piece of tape without delay, that he might forthwith fee put in leading strings; and at length her Ladyship broke her heart. Cold neglect, or even perceptible indifference, will prey on the female mind, and ,engender jealousy and uneasiness, A woman, when she finds herself neglected, either pines herself into an early grave, or seeks that solace in dissipation which she cannot find at home. Domestic duties become irksome and are neglected—the husband has no home, and the wife no happiness, while ruin, too often, hangs over them, like an impending cloud.





Huyp like most other young and inexperienced men, anticipated no such evils as these. Present difficulties were all that he considered, and those he was determined to surmount, though he was sure he should have much to contend with.

He had been so long left to himself in the saloon, that he began to doubt whether either the Princess, or Clara would quit their chambers. A thousand vague ideas rushed over his mindperhaps Clara would not see him— perhaps the Princess might have been influenced by his mother—or Clara might have accepted the devoirs of some other person. He knew she was but a woman after all. Ambition might have its weight—nay, even now she might be the wife of another. Thus he .tortured his imagination till he became restless and feverish and, had his hand on the;bell rope to summon Monica, for the purpose of sending a message to Clara, when the door was thrown open and the Princess Hyacintha was ushered in with courtly ceremony. She instantly threw herself at full length on the sofa, overcome with real or affected langour, and when Huyp advanced, to pay his respects to her, she simply waved :her hand for him to be silent for the present. ,''





This was apparently a confirmation of Huyp's worst fears. His mind became dreadfully agitated and he trem* bled for himself.

After some time the Princess motioned him to approach, while Monica, like an oW duenna, took her station behind*he sofa, armed with the necessary fimplemerits to finish'her lady's head tire, ffuyp came forward more like a culprit going to the whipping post, than> a gallant to kiss the hand of a lady.: The Princess shook him by "the hand and perceived that it was feverish and trenvbling. The cause she readily divined, and felt for his uneasiness though she was not disposed to relieve him of it. Ladies are some times very cruel in this respect. They like to torment the heart at the moment they sympathize in its sufferings. .





Huyp's first enquiry was for Clara.

The Princess almost inaudibly informed him that she had not left her chamber, at least, she supposed not, and then pathetically lamenting her want of memory, made her enquiries of Monica, who laconically replied, that she did not know.

Huyp thought it a singular thing that a tolerably young, and certainly very pretty woman, should be under the necessity of borrowing a memory. At any other time he would have smiled at her ridiculous affectation, but at the present moment his thoughts were occupied on very different subjects.





Still Clara did not appear, The Princess sat down—or rather rose up—to take her dejeune, and invited Huyp to partake of it. He mechanically complied, though he had no appetite, and even the coffee he attempted to take, seemed to him little less nauseous than the doctor's potion. Monica could not help smiling at his uneasiness, as she knew that Clara had not been informed that he was there, and had even been persuaded by the Princess to take her morning repast in her chamber. During their dejeune the Princess found enough of her memory to enquire, without the assistance of Monica, the particulars of his mischances. Huyp was little disposed to enter at large into the subject, but situated as he was, he could not excuse himself from compliance.

The Princess, despite of her excessive affectation, still had the germ of genuine feeling rooted in her heart. The

VOL. III. I





narration of Huyp awakened her sympathy and called forth her tears: her frivolity gradually became less, and at length seemed to fade away before the influence of reason. Monica was sent out of the saloon by a whisper from her mistress. In a few minutes Clara came in. Huyp flew forward to meet her, he caught her in his arms, and locked her in a fond embrace.

"Pardon me—you both must pardon me," said the Princess, smiling through the tears which delight had raised in her eyes "for having kept you from each other so long, but I like to make people happy my own way."

"It was indeed a cruel kindness,'' returned Huyp, "but my present joy repays me for my previous uneasiness. Clara, dearest Clara, shall we then part no more?"

"Hush, babbler!" rejoined Clara, "trust not the echo of the tell-tale air. Will you ever run away again? Oh! you would make an exquisite Benedict for a termagant! But you have suffered much, my poor fellow," she added in a plaintive tone—" and I have been the cause of it.''





"Chide not yourself for that, dearest Clara," responded Huyp, —" you were blameless as heaven. The impetuosity and frowardness of my mother led me to take the step which had nearly proved fatal in its consequences."

A tender explanation ensued. Clara and her lover were left quite alone.

The Princess had glided away almost without being perceived, and Monica removed the dejeune service, to prevent the necessity of their privity being intruded on by any of the domestics.

Lover's secrets should be sacred, and when the Princess, after an absence of more than two hours, returned to the saloon in which she had left her young friends, she saw a beaming smile on the countenance of Huyp, "while the features of Clara were illumined by a blush that vied with bright hue of the rose. She saw in a moment that all was right, and seating herself beside them on the sofa, she entered for a short time into the usual routine of trifling conversation. It might have been questioned whether either Clara or Huyp were desirous of her company. With them time had flown so rapidly that she scarcely appeared to have been absent for a moment.





The mind of Huyp might now truly be said to be in a delirium of happiness. Clara had promised to become his, and the buds and blossoms of life seemed to be springing up around him, without even a weed to detract from the beauty of their luxuriance.

On a sudden, however, this day dream of delight was dispelled by a circumstance no one had either anticipated or expected. A confused noise from the passage, which led to the anti-room of the saloon, struck upon their ears, and in an instant voices as if in dispute, were heard in a louder key. Clara turned pale and trembled—the Princess sate in silent wonder—and Huyp, whose quick ear had recognized the tones of Aaltje's voice, exclaimed, " it is my mother!"





And she indeed it was, armed at all points for a drawn battle. Could passionate ladies but see themselves when their paroxysms are at the height, it is more than probable that they would be shocked at the alteration their features at such times undergo; Smiles, and good humour, are always the great friends of female beauty, but passion, raving, raging passion — the minds' thunder, is its fellest foe. It is dreadful to see fair faces agonized and. distorted; till you are half inclined to think, that—





"birds of prey Must have their food before their rage can cool."

Aaltje was indeed most terribly infuriated, nor was her passion lessened when she saw her son sitting with the hand of Clara clasped within his own. She scarcely deigned to notice the civilities of the Princess, and with a rudeness, which nothing but her ill-timed rage could in any degree have excused, seized the arm of her son, and absolutely forced him from his seat.

"So—so, I find you here I" she exclaimed., panting with passion and exertion—" when you know that your father, the Burgomaster, has forbidden you to think of that yeung woman, who told you once beforethat she would have nothing to do with your love and your nonsense. You are a wicked, tindutiful jongeling, Huyp, and think nothing of breaking your mothers heart by bringing disgrace on the family of the Vuist Slaagens."





"Madam," returned Huyp, placing a chair for his mother, "let me entreat you to be calm. These bursts of passion will avail you little, for I am resolved never to give up my claim to the hand and heart of this lady. Receive her as your daughterr Madam, and make your son happy."

"Receive whom!" cried Aaltje, glancing with proud indignation, and mortified vanity at Clara, who sate mildly bearing with the ebullitions of her wrath; "receive what? the contents of the parish poor house?""

The bright red blood mounted up to the eheeks of Huyp, and, unable any longer to smother his passion he said, in a low voice, "though Clara is portionless, she is worthy of being received into the proudest and most immaculate family in Amsterdam. Remember, mother, that you brought no portion to the Burgomaster, except myself, wherefore then should you wish to seal the misery of my life. But hear me—you cannot— shall not do it. I have already suffered much from your ambition, and your illiberality, and in fact more than I will" do again."





Aaltje finding that the crisis was approaching, and fearing that she might in all probability hasten it by her passion, in an instant became calm, and only required Huyp to return with her to the tower, and learn the opinionof the Burgomaster on the subject. To this he could not reasonably object, and hoping that he had gained over his mother, prepared to accompany her home. A cold and formal salute was exchanged between Aaltje and thePrincess, while poor Clara had not even a share of her recognition, but the. affectionate embrace of Huyp more than made amends to her for Aaltje's incivility. She knew that her want of fortune was the mote that blinded the eyes of Aaltje to her virtues, and pitied the worldly-mindedness which led her to thwart the projects and happiness ofi' ber son.





CHAPTER XXXIV.



When the heart is tick,

What are your raree-shews, your masques, your revels,

Your painted ladies, or their waiting women .'

Base, empty, worthless; fit to please the fools,

The curled and scented fools, who spend their time,

The sinews of their youth, and all their hopes

Of manhood and of fame, on such light trifles.—

Out on them all!



Old Plaf.



AALTJE had scarcely ventured to expect that her son would so easily have complied with her desire for leaving the villa. Indeed had she not assumed that sudden calmness, it is more than probable that he would not have complied from coercion. In this Fespect he was something like herself, and deemed his own opinion to be of some little consequence. However they reached the tower in tolerable good humour, as Aaltje wished not to raise any cabal that might be accessary to the frustration of her hopes.





As they crossed the draw-bridge they perceived that some company were just driving up the avenue. It is my uncle, thought Huyp, and he will advocate my cause. Aaltje bade the man hasten onwards, and was at the door before the unexpected guests had alighted from the cabriolet. Huyp sprung from his mother's carriage and ran to welcome them—but, to his consternation, he saw neither Luitje, his aunt, nor Matilda, and encountered the eyes of the Robsons. He was provoked and disapt. pointed, for of all people in the world they were the very last that he would have desired to have met with. The evil however could not be avoided, and Aaltje, contrary to the expectation of Huyp, received them with open arms, and professed herself exquisitely happy to see them at the tower. At the moment Aaltje hoped that the languishing Alicia might wean him from Clara,, and hailed her presence as a favorable omen for the accomplishment of her own. views. The Robsons were more fitted to become her friends than the openhearted Clara, and besides, though they had no fortune worth mentioning, they were at least tolerated in the fashionable world, from which Clara had been driven by a cruel; reverse of circumstances.





These considerations had'their, weight with Aaltje, who was still the votary of incipient ambition, while the Robsons were always happy to make any acquaintance which might eventually b« likely to prove conducive to their own interest. Huyp liked them not and indeed had little reason to do, so.. Lney had scouted him when they thought he was friendless, though, when they disco^ vered their error, they were the unit to court him again.





-Dear heart!" exclaimed Madame Bobson, "whata charming sequestered place the tower is! It is the Hys.an fields of this country; and how happy you must be, Madame Aaltje, in having L delightful a retreat! Ob, it is a most

exquisite situation, and what taste you have-displayed both in the house and &Wunds_they are absolutely fault.

l6This compliment, though somewhat fcasome, was not too highly seasoned

Z the taste of Aaltje. She, in compU,nce with the assertion of the poe^ LvavsbeUevedthewordofthenatterer Even the Burgomaster smded at the exaggerations of the courtly dame, for both the mansion and the grounds were in very bad condition.





Alicia, who wore the weeds of a widow, strove to seduce Uuyp into a tender tete-a-tete, and gave him to understand that she had first adopted this attire when she heard of his shipwreck. But Huyp had no desire to attract like a magnet, and was merely polite, where it was expected he should be unconditionally amorous. His thoughts were fixed on the perfections of the lovely and amiable Clara, and he consequently paid but little attention to the coquetries of a designing little flirt. Alicia appeared even to have forgotten her timidity, and laid such a close siege to the heart of Huyp, that he was at length obliged to intimate to her that his affections were engaged. This was productive of evil consequences, for Alicia, like her mother, had too much of the affectation of fine feeling, and on this occasion did not fail to make a public exhibition of it. She had continually fainting fits and hysterics, though she always contrived that they should occur precisely at the moment that Huyp was mtheroom, and disengaged. But Huyp was now too wary to be deceived by such affectation. He was somewhat experienced in female artifices, and besides, held the whole family of the Robsons in the utmost aversion. Their cruel conduct towards Clara he had not forgotten or forgiven, though he was in a manner compelled to treat them with civility while they remained beneath the roof of his father. He could not help smiling at the idea of Alicia's having a widowed heart, as he knew, that she was at the very moment ready to accept the first offer that should be made—the establishment was every thing, and the man out of the question. Aaltje however, appeared to encourage the pretensions of Alicia, and made use of every art in her power to further her suit. She even chided her son for his insensibility to the charms of Alicia >. and in. her eagerness to wean his mind from Clara, forgot the neglect she had henself experienced from them. V'andecDordrecht did not at all interfere either with the affections or the occupations of his son. Huyp anxiously wished for an opportunity of communicating his sentiments and. resolutions to him, but Aaltje was ever on the watch to prevent any conversation between them, for shehad kept the magistrate completely ignorant of her present plans. In th» she was guided by the scheming Madame Robson, who assured her that it was very bad policy to let men know more than could possibly be helped. Aaltje thought she was right, and conceived that the ladies had not, even yet,





gained sufficient ascendancy to make the balance of power preponderate on their side. This advice Aaltje had no objection to follow, and the Burgomaster now stood a fair chance of becoming the veriest slave that ever wore the fetters of matrimony. To be sure he never had been very free since Aaltje had become mistress of tho tower, but a little power is certainly better than nothing, and this Vander Dordrecht acknowledged.

Long and frequent were the conferences which Aaltje held with the Rob-, sons on the subject of Clara. Vituperations against her were frequent in the mouth of both the ladies, till a standerby, not acquainted with the particulars of the affair, might naturally have conceived that Clara was one of the vilest of her sex, instead of a mild, amiable girl, who laboured under the persecutions of ill-fortune.





At length Huyp unexpectedly found himself alone with his father, and seizing the opportunity, frankly deelared to him his intentions. Mynheer heard him with patient attention, and then said, "Far be it from me, jongeling, to wish to force you to act contrary to your inclinations, but what plans your mother has taken into her head I know not, though I think the lass who has made herself so ridiculous about you, with her weeds and her fainting fits, is the one your mother has chosen to make you happy. But bear in mind, jongeling, that I have nothing to do with it—though I certainly think that pretty Clara Von Essen is more likely

to"

"What, Mynheer?" exclaimed Aakje, who had been listening at the door, and who now burst into the room, "pray what, in your sage opinion, is the daughter of Von Essen likely to do I" The Burgomaster made no reply.





Aaltje then turned all her wrath towards her son, and averred that she never would receive a beggar into her family. Huyp could not endure this, and being more able to cope with her impetuous and fiery temper than Vander Dordrecht, replied " You are both cruel and unjust—Clara is no beggar, and you forget that you were without fortune yourself, when you calumniate and despise those who have only virtue for their portion."

The face of Aaltje was suffused with the deepest dye of crimson—it was a mingled blush of rage and shame, and! at the moment, she could have annihilated her son for telling her a truth she wished not to listen to.

Huyp was vexed with himself, when be perceived that his incautious expressions had given pain to the feelings of" his mother, though he felt that she had





not only provoked him to it, but also richly deserved a severe reproof. Nevertheless the goodness of his heart induced him to regret that he had for a moment given her pain. Very different were the sensations of the Burgomaster. Afraid to speak himself/ he was happy to find that his son was likely to avenge his cause and enjoyed the mortification of his help-mate. He wished not to oppose the wishes of his son, and devoutly trusted that Clara would not follow the example of Aaltje, and reduce Huyp to a state of bondage, as severe as that which the Children of Isisael.experienced in the land of the Philistines.

Aafcje soon recovered her speech, and her first use of it, was to inform Huyp, that he never should be united to Clara, Huyp assured her, that since she had evinced so little regard for his happiness, he had made up his mind to act according to his own inclinations. It was not his desire to give her any uneasiness, but, in such a case as this, it behoved him to study his own feelings, rather than the wishes of those, who could only be the witnesses, and not the partakers, of his bliss or his misery.





"Was e'er the like of this heard?" ciied Aaltje, almost suffocated with passion; "and there you sit," she continued, addressing Vander Dordrecht, "as mute as a skeleton, though, sometimes, you chatter away like a papegie. These are fine times indeed, when a boy will not heed the advice of his mother! But I say, that Huyp never shall marry Clara I and you shall say so too, Myn' heer, or it will be worse for you."

"Yaw—yaw, Aaltje, vrouw," re turned the Burgomaster, "you know well, that I am but your echo, as, God help me! most men are, who have given up their prerogative into the hands of their wives. But with respect to Huyp, Aaltje vrouw, I will not interfere, so; I beseech you, let me hear nothing more about it."





"It is well for you then, that I have a spirit, Vander Dordrecht;" cried Aaltje, and, casting a glance of indignation at both the Burgomaster and her son, she quitted the room, to consult with her friend.

"You have my consent, jongeling" said the Magistrate, as soon as he was again alone with his son; "but, for Heaven's sake, do not tell your mother so, or I shall have both the prayer and the blessing, in the similitude of a curtain lecture."

Huyp promised him, that he would for ever be silent on the subject, and, after embracing his father, with tenderness and gratitude, left the room, and, gliding over the drawbridge, pursued his way to the villa.

The Burgomaster, who knew domestic felicity only by name, and was half inclined to consider it nothing more than a fanciful theory, engendered in a teeming brain, had now to endure, not only the passion of Aaltje, but also the pointed sarcasms of the Robsons, who considered him as the chief cause of the failure of their plans.





This conduct from those, who, certainly had no right to interfere, aroused him from his lethargy; and he, more abruptly than politely, hinted to Madame Robson, that as she had visited the tower, without waiting for the ceremony of an invitation, he begged her to consider that he felt no wish that her visit should be prolonged beyond the following day. This intimation was extremely inconvenient to Madame Robson, as she had hoped to spend some time at the tower, even if she should fail in securing Huyp for Alicia. Scandal had, of late, been so busy with respect to the Robsons, that the wily mother thought it most prudent, to quit Brussels for a season, in the hope that those unpleasant reports, which at present annoyed her, would gradually die away and be forgotten. Now, however, she scarcely knew what to do, and she had only to trust that Aaltje would, as usual, act in opposition to her husband.





For once she was mistaken. Aaltje plainly perceived, that the dislike her son bore to the Robsons, was not easily to be eradicated, and that the overtures of the widowed maid, had been the cause of his again leaving the house of his father. She was as unstable and uncertain as a weathercock; and when Madame Robson informed her, of the rudeness of the Burgomaster, she replied, "that he was, undoubtedly, master in his own house, and therefore, that she should not press them to remain beyond the time he had mentioned, lest the delicate nerves of Madame might be hurt by his incivilities."





Thiy was worse and worse; and Madame, completely foiled in her prospects, was obliged to consider who there was in the vicinity of the tower, that would be likely to receive them.

The Robsons, though they had a very numerous circle of acquaintance, could not be said to have one friend. Their character for intrigue was so notorious, that families, in which there were any young men, were afraid to admit them, lest they should ensnare them into a promise of marriage. Aware of this cautious policy, Madame scarcely knew which way to direct her steps. For the present, she wished not to return to Brussels, and her fortune was insufficient to allow her to take up her residence at an hotel. The Court was at this time removed to the Hague; and thither she

VOL. III. K





at length determined to proceed, for she trusted that her expenses would be but slight, if she could, any how, contrite to bring the musical talents of her daughters into notice there.

They, therefore, took a formal leave of the party at the tower, on the following day, to the great relief of Vander Dordrecht, who had no desire to be subjected to the control of a female administration.





CHAPTER XXXV.



And who, when smiling years had shed

Matured enchantment un her head,

Could fail to bless the very earth,

That to such loveliness gave birth!

Her marble neck, and bosom fair,

Embrac'd by clouds of sunny hair,

Her shining brow and graceful air



Might be an angel's guise;

Meek and affectionate, her mind

Of sweetest elements combined,—

While all the love of womankind,



Illumed her melting eyes.

Anonymous.



CLARA saw Huyp approaching towards the villa as she was walking with the Princess in the pleasure grounds. Her heart beat quick and lightly, and the soft blush of maiden modesty tinged her fair and delicate cheeks, when she perceived that she was observed by him. He was, as yet, at some distance from the villa, yet, when he waved his hand.to salute them, Clara almost fancied that she beheld his eyes brighten, and the sweet smile of happiness illumine his fine features. The Princess smiled at the enthusiasm of her young friend, for Clara did not think it necessary to keep any thing secret from one, to whom she was indebted for every comfort she at present enjoyed. The mind of Clara was naturally inclined to gratitude, and she had experienced so much kindness from her in her troubles, that she felt it would be unfair to conceal from her any tidings of her happingfpr-. 1% a, shojet time they were, joined hy.;H$iBP,: who, informed Clara,, that three of her. old friends-were on a visit to his mother, and were projecting the plan of a campaign against his heart, though, he assured them, it was invulnerable.





Clara smiled. "From your description of them," she said, "I should conceive that the Robsons are the guests with whom Madame Aaltje is at present engaged."

"You are right," replied Huyp^** perfectly right, but I believe they Will find, when too late, that in this instance at least, their political system is wrong. I certainly do not like either of those fair dames, who



like the cittern's sound,



When the words of love are winging,

and would fain fix themselves on any youth who would kindly take pity on them."

"You are fastidious, Mynheer," said the Princess.





"Perhaps I may be so," returned Huyp, "but even your Highness must confess that I have reason to be so: and when there is a charm, prized, dearly prized above all others that the world can bestow, should I not be culpable to renounce it?"

Clara cast her eyes towards a bed of flowers which flourished at a little distance, and the Princess acknowledged that Huyp was in the right.

Clara could not help smiling at the artifice of Madame Robson, who, she was sure, would feel most poignantly the disappointment she had met with from the determined insensibility of Huyp. Perhaps she felt something like exultation at the power she possessed over his young affections, for what is there so grateful to the susceptible heart of a young, and lovely female, as to know that she is not only beloved, but that it is not in the power of a rival to deprive her of the affections of her lover? Huyp frankly communicated to Clara the cause of his mother's objecting to his union with her, and also the secret permission the Burgomaster had given him to act according to his own inclinations. Clara and the Princess exchanged glances, which bore a significant, though to Huyp, a mysterious meaning. Nevertheless they said nothing, but left him to conjecture what he pleased. He was not inclined to jealousy, and therefore indulged no unfavourable suspicions against either of them. Indeed, he had so high an opinion of Clara's honor, and immaculate virtue, that he would have scorned to entertain a suspicion the least prejudicial to her. She had given him her word that she would unite her fate with his, and he doubted not that she would become the hesper star of his destiny. None but lovers can experience the sensations which thrilled the bosom of Huyp. Description cannot do justice to them, for all the troubles of this world were forgotten, and his whole thoughts were engaged in the anticipation of future joys and participating in present happiness.





That there was some secret with which he was unacquainted, Huyp easily discovered by the significant expressions, which, at times, passed between the Princess and Clara. There was evidently an eagerness existing with them on some subject, for every few minutes each of them watched the regular motion of their watches with apparent anxiety. Huyp was too delicate to make any enquiries, and they remained perfectly silent with respect to what they hoped or feared. Suspense is at all times irksome, and never had Huyp felt it more so, than at this moment. He knew not what to think, but at length the matter was explained. A servant entered the saloon, and with a low bow to Clara, said, that the gentleman who had waited on her the preceding day, now attended her further commands. Clara, with the permission of the Princess, desired that he might be immediately shewn into the saloon,. and addressing Huyp, said—" You will remain here—I have nothing that I wish to conceal, and I am sure you will be happy to learn that I am not likely to remain a dependant on the bounty of a kind and generous friend. Huyp pressed her hand to his heart but made no reply. The door of the saloon was thrown open, and a gentleman was shewn in. He bowed with profound respect, both to the Princess and Clara, and placing a packet of papers in the hands of the latter, said—" I have the the honor, Mademoiselle, to place those securities in your hands, and must beg leave to express my regret that they have been kept from you so long, but being ignorant of the place of your residence, 1 knew not how to proceed, till fortunately meeting with the old domestic of your father, I learned from her that you were under the protection of thjs amiable lady."





; Huyp was more astonished than ever; the mystery was rather increased than developed, and he scarcely knew whether he was awake or dreaming. What the securities were which had been given by the stranger to Clara, he cojuld not conjecture. He had never heard the most distant hint that Clara had any family elaims, and his curiosity now became intense.

Clara, with a smiling, though tearful countenance, .entreated tl>e gentleman to make no apologies, and assured hira that there was no! blame to be attached either to h\v&»W to,herself, as sheJiadjBfit expected to receive any favor from fortune, which had, of late, rather persecuted than smiled upon her.—The times were now evidently changed, yet of the particulars Huyp was not informed.





He was half inclined to follow the stranger, who made his bow as soon as he had given the papers into the hands of Clara—ibut from this delicacy dissuaded him; he had no right at present to pry into her private concerns more than she was disposed to permit him. Soon, however, the artless Clara placed the papers which had been the cause of his uneasiness, before him, and desired him to examine them. With a palpitating heart, and a trembling hand, he did so, when Clara humourously asked whether he thought that there were there reasons cogent enough to conciliate the anger of Aaltje.— . « They will be most eloquent/' replied Huyp, "appeal to every feeling', and dispel, like the exorcism of the priest, the phantoms that have haunted her imagination. Nay, she will now be pleasant as a summer's morn, and lament that in these dark, degenerate days, virtue should be contemned because it is veiled by the cloud of poverty."





Huyp was somewhat severe on the time-servingness of his mother, but he felt that she deserved it. He felt mortified that she had exposed the weak side of her character to the world, and much feared that Clara could never cordially forgive the treatment she had experienced from her. There, however, he was wrong. Clara was more inclined to pity than resentment, for she was aware that Aaltje's mind was one which was the slave of worldly considerations. All her ideas of happiness centred in ambition, and she detested that quiet which Clara only hoped for. Too many minds are formed like Aaltje's. For the baubles of existence they throw from them its brightest treasures, and then lament their fate, which has made them strangers to real happiness.





Clara had thus unexpectedly obtained a fortune, which, though not splendid, was sufficient to place her above dependence. It came from a sister, of her father's, who, though she would not in her life time, part with a single franc, had at the last considered that her little property belonged to her niece, who was the only near relative that she had in the world. At the time of her de cease, misfortunes had compelled Clara to retire from Brussels, and had not the attorney, who had been the legal adviser, and was now the executor of the old lady, and the trustee of Clara, been an honest man, he might, without fear of detection, have cancelled the will, and have substituted another in its place. Fortunately he had a better heart, and with much difficulty, discovered the place of Clara's retreat.





Huyp was anxious to communicate these welcome tidings to the Burgomaster and his mother. He requested Clara to trust him with the deeds, that he might remove all the impediments which poverty had as yet thrown in the way of his happiness, This request she readily granted, and desired Huyp to believe that she was far from indulging the slightest sentiment of enmity against her for her previous conduct. Huyp pressed her to his heart, and said that her behaviour was rather that of an angel than a woman. The Princess smiled at this hyperbole, 1 hough it was perfectly to her taste, and bade him not prolong his visit to the tower past a reasonable time, as she was anxious to learn whether gold could not soften thft tone of censure as quickly as the sun can dispel a dark cloud from the face of the horizon.





Notwithstanding her folly the Princess was well acquainted with the mechanism of the human heart, and saw sufficiently into Aaltje's character to be aware that her objections would now no longer exist. Clara was of the same opinion, though she was too delicate to hazard any remarks on the subject.

Huyp hastened to the tower with a lighter heart than he had quitted it, and, to his great joy, found that the>Robsons were gone. The Burgomaster was also absent, and would not return from the Stadt-House for some hours. Aaltje, however, was there, and her countenance evinced that she was not in a veryenviable hnmour. The gay and sprightly demeanour of her son did not contribute to make her more harmonious, and when he informed her that he was the messenger of glad tidings, she sternly replied, that she supposed, it was, that he had married a beggar. Hnyp could scarcely restrain his passion—but with much difficulty, he did contrive to curb his rising anger, and laying the papers on the table, begged her to do him the honor of perusing the documents, which gave Clara a fortune more than equal to that which he had any right to expect. Aaltje looked incredulous, but hastily taking up the papers perused them with undivided attention. and Huyp had the satisfaction of perceiving, that the cloud, which had at first darkened her brow, gradually grew fainter, and, at last, became not even perceptible to his quick and jealous eye.





"Are you sure that this is no imposition, Huyp?" were the first words she uttered. "Are you sure that this. is no trick of Mademoiselle Von Essen's, to betray me into consenting to her wishes? I am sure, if it is all right, the Robsons have used her very ill! Well, I always thought Clara was not so bad as they wished me to believe her; and really, Huyp, I don't see any reason, why you should not think of her now. But, I suppose, she will never forgive me, for crediting what the world said— indeed, it was very wicked of them, but you know, jongeling, they have said quite as much about me. Poor Clara! I really am glad to find that she is a good girl. You can't think how 1 pitied her when she lost her father; and, you remember, Huyp, that I gave you the money to purchase the portrait of the Colonel."





Huyp saw that his mother wished to gloss over her former illiberal conduct, and allowed her to think that he gave Jber credit for every thing she had asserted. He assured her, that Clara was too amiable, to harbour any resentment against her, and begged her to believe, that it was his most earnest desire, that no family bickerings should disturb the serenity of their lives.





Aaltje was not without her fears, that the memory of Clara might be too tenacious in some respects, and was both ashamed and sorry, that she had behaved in so uncourteous a manner towards her. Now she could discover that Clara possessed the most brilliant virtues, and, like most other people in similar situations, wondered that she had not perceived them before. Hnyp could have given her the most convincing reasons why she had been so blinded to perfections, which the most casual observer must have been struck with, but, as his object was conciliation, he wisely forebore to say any thing, which might have a tendency to revive those unpleasant feelings, which, he trusted, were now hushed for ever.





"Ah, Mynheer!" exclaimed Aaltje, as soon as the Burgomaster returned from the exercise of his magisterial duties, "Huyp has teized me into consenting to receive Clara as a daughter. Only think what wicked creatures those Robsons are!—and look here, Vander Dordrecht!" she continued, giving him the papers that Huyp had brought from the villa, "the dear girl will really have a tolerable fortune."

'*, Yaw, Aaltje vrouw," replied the magistrate, "and what must she think of you, who scouted and scorned her because she was so poor! So then you really have made up your mind to acknowledge her to be a fit and proper wife for Huyp? Well, God bless you, jongcling" he continued, shaking his son affectionately by the hand, and warming into something like feeling, "if you are happy I shall be happy too, and I hope that you may not be quite so much governed as your father."





Though the latter part of his speech was delivered in an under breath it did not escape the quick ears of Aaltje.

"Out upon you, for an ungrateful varlet, Vander Dordrecht," she exclaimed, "would you wish to urge the lad on to be a tyrant? However I shall interfere there "—

"Indeed you will not, my dear mother," replied Huyp. "Clara left to the impulse of~ner own heart will do very well, and needs not your skill in management to make me obey her. Tenderness and affection are the best reins with which a woman can guide a husband, all other means are futile, for believe me, when once discord begins there is no knowing where it may end."

"So much for philosophy !" cried Aaltje, with a look which Huyp well knew how to understand—" Really, son, you had better promulgate your precepts to the world, but do not reckon on the support of the ladies; they certainly will be under no obligations to you for the new system of government, which you seem to advocate."





", Speak for yourself, Aaltje vrouw," interrupted the Burgomaster. "I think the jongeling is in the right."—

"You know nothing of the matter, Vander Dordrecht," cried the lady, '* and, at any rate, you may rest assured that I shall go on after the old fashion, and therefore do not suppose that you may embrace the radicalism of your son."

Huyp smiled; — the Burgomaster sighed; — and Aaltje congratulated herself on having the ascendancy over her husband She was one of those ladies who are tenacious of the privileges of their sex, and think it little less than treason for men to question their right and title to rule both husband and family.





Huyp, on the contrary, was an advocate for equal power, He thought that neither ought to play the tyrant, and hoped to find matrimony the greatest blessing of existence—" a paradise below," but, like all others who venture into that holy state, he knew that he must soon reduce the theory to practice.





CHAPTER XXXVI.



It is sweet to meet with the one we love—

Allan Cunningham.



THAT discussion elicits truth, is an axiom universally acknowledged, and Huyp had experienced the justness of the saying in the conduct of his mother, who had, at length, acknowledged that she had been deceived with respect to Clara.

Private weaknesses are not, in general, the property of the world, and Huyp trusted that those of Aaltje would not become the topic of conversation. It was by no means pleasant to him to have her conduct called in question by those who make a trade of scandalizing their neighbours, for, though she had been at times capricious towards him, she had, nevertheless, been affectionate. Besides, she was his mother, and who that possesses the feelings of a man, can bear to hear that sacred character stigmatized! Those who have not a proper filial respect for their parents, can never become either good or valuable members of society.





Huyp was anxious to inform Clara of the success of his mission, and having the consent of Aaltje and the Burgomaster, he again proceeded to the villa, bearing with him a letter of apology to Clara from his mother, in which she attempted to gloss over her former illbehaviour, and to vindicate her conduct by Ikying the whole blame on the Robsons" and' Rosalie,- whom she now designated as wilful and base calumniators. t





Clara received her apologies with the air of one who wishes to bury past grievances in oblivion. The generosity of her conduct made a deep impression on the mind of Iluyp, and he regretted that his mother should have ever given pain to a heart so kind and affectionate, as that of the lovely girl who was soon to be his bride. The Princess was unaffectedly rejoiced to see her young friend happy, and warmly congratulated Clara on the change of her prospects.

"They are indeed changed," said Clara. "But a few weeks since I was the most wretched, the most pitiable creature in existence. I then considered myself to be culpable, and almost an unpardonable being, and now, perhaps I am one of the happiest. What do I not owe to you!" she continued, pressing the hand of the Princess to her

VOL. III. L





heart: "but for your kindness I might have been a miserable outcast, for when I lost my father, I lost every thing'—even hope. My friends deserted me, and those, who had before courted my society, became, without reason, my enemies and my calumniators. Heaves knows that I deserved not their scorn. But I suppose that mine was not a singular situation. The world think themselves privileged to deride those wbo have fallen from affluence to indigence, and forget that though their power may be curtailed, their spirit and their feelings are the same."

Clara was perfectly right in her opinions. Those who, like her, have experienced the worldling's faith, knov too well what they have to expect from the flattering insects who have preyed on them in the days of prosperity. Be but poor, and your " own familiar friend" will no longer think it necessar) to remember the ties which once united his heart to yours. Yet there are some few exceptions. A firm and steady friend is one of the greatest treasures that a human being can possess, and should death deprive you of such a one it leaves a void in the heart which cannot easily be filled up. It is a derivation which daily and hourly becomes more acutely felt, and the heart thrills with anguish when we reflect on the loss we have prematurely sustained. When for the warm grasp of friendship we clasp the chill hand of death—when for the smile of welcome, we behold the placid countenance of quickly decaying mortality—when for the laugh of joy we meet with the tears of the heart broken widow—the sighs of the fatherless child, and the sad lamentations of sorrowing friends—what heart is there that would not dissolve into tenderness? would not envy those their feelings





who could behold it unmoved—who cannot spare a tear."

The warm and generous heart of Huyp, induced him to attempt to seduce the thoughts of Clara from her past misfortunes. She was not insensible to his kindness, and the cloud which recollection had spread over her brow, gradually dispersed, and her countenance was again lighted up with the soft smile of joy.

Perhaps Clara now experienced more real happiness than she had felt since the death of her father. She knew that he had been partial to Huyp, and even tacitly encouraged him to pay her those little attentions, which distinguish delicate affection from mere friendship. The Colonel was an acurate judge of human nature, and saw that Huyp had better qualities than many of those who vaunted their virtues in all the trickery of display. This Huyp had never done. Even his youthful follies had gradually disappeared, and in his period of manhood his conduct was such that the most fastidious father need not have blushed to own him for his son.





It was not a difficult task for Huyp to persuade the fond Clara to fix the day of his happiness. This, at length, she did, with the soft blush of modesty, and Huyp ratified the preliminaries with an affectionate kiss.

"Methinks you grow bold," said Clara, as she gently disengaged herself from his embrace. "Had some persons been present they would have had a most excellent theme for scandal."'

"Why so?" enquired Huyp.

"Nay, you surely need not ask why," rejoined the Princess, "but I conceive that when there are but two ladies in company, the confidante ought to be bribed also, to induce her to keep the secret."





Huyp apologized for his omission, and saluted the protectress of his beloved Clara, with an air at once gallant and respectful. He was a great favorite with the Princess, who, though she was affected and eccentric in her own manners, liked not the society of idle, flattering puppies, who had no wish to attend to any other object than themselves. Her notions in this respect were just, for a creature made up into a beau by the tailor, cannot be expected to have much of the feelings of a man.

In a short time, Aaltje, accompanied by Vander Dordrecht, made a visit of ceremonious reconciliation at the villa. Huyp might be said to be quite domesticated there, for he was seldom absent longer than a few hours at a time, and even then he was with difficulty persuaded to leave Clara. It was not that he felt any thing like jealousy, but he had so newly found happiness that he seemed fearful that it might fade away like a pleasant dream that has been, and still exists not.





The courtesy of Aaltje was now aa overstrained as her former incivility had "been ungenerous. She even wept to think that she had been deluded into a belief of that, which she had discovered to be the most villainous scandal. Clara entreated her to say nothing more on the subject, and assured her, that she was far from thinking the efforts of undeserved malice deserving of any further consideration. This was a great relief to Aaltje, who, for the first time in her life, found a deficiency of words to> support a feeble cause. Not so the Burgomaster, who was now not under the necessity of concealing his feelings beneath the mark of indifference. He kindly embraced Clara, and told her that he trusted his son would be that friend to her, which would make a married life the happiest period of existence. Clara hlushed, and replied, that it would be ungenerous of her to doubt it for a moment. "When I lost my father," she said, "he was the only one who really felt for my situation and strove to assist me. Never will his kindness at that moment be obliterated from my heart:—never can I forget, that to him I owe the possession of the only relic of my father." Aaltje coloured deeply, and, touching the arm of her son, reminded him that she had given him the means to obtain it. Hojp felt for her confusion, and willing to place his mother in the most ainiaWe light in his power, said, "It was my mother, dearest Clara, who commixed me to present you with the portrait of your father."—Clara returned thanks to Aaltje for the gift, but her eyes at the same time glanced towards n"fP>





with that speaking expression, which proved, that though she thought it necessary to appear to credit his- assertions, she was far from believing them in her heart. Still she could not help admiring the filial affection of Huyp, who had thus generously attributed to his mother the merit of a kind action, which, she was convinced, belonged only to himself. Aaltje gradually became less abashed in the presence of the lovely and amiable young woman, whom she was conscious of having injured. Clara was so kind and considerate, that she endeavoured by every means to set her heart at ease, for she had learned from Huyp, that'Aaltje had some little feeling, though she very seldom evinced it. The Princess alsoj by the most amiable condescension, won the very soul of Aaltje, and she wondered in her own mind how she could possibly have been so blinded by the mean and cruel artifices of designing and interested persons, as not to hate perceived her virtues. Aaltje *a* wont to pique herself on her capability of discovering people's characters at a glance, but now she was obliged, unwillingly, to confess that her judgment had generally been in error. Probably had Clara continued to remain a portionless orphan, the opinions of Aahje would never have undergone their present metamorphosis. Like the generality of the world, she estimated people* worth by their property, and if an angel in the garb of a beggar had solicted her assistance, she would have turned a deaf ear to his supplications.





Aaltje was so earnest in. her entreaties, that the Princess would visit &e tower previous to the marriage of Chu»« that she consented to return with them. provided that they would consent to receive her en familh. This req«** was instantly acceded to, and the whole party were soon on their way to the residence of the Burgomaster.





It was the first time that Clara had. ever entered the mansion of those, who were so soon to become her nearest relatives. Huyp led her into the principal apartment of the tower, while the Burgomaster, with the formal gallantry of the last century, escorted the Princess. Huyp started with surprize and pleasure, when he beheld above the mantel-piece, which was oi dark oakr the likeness of Clara which he had painted from memory, and, as he thought, concealed from the knowledge of every one in the recess of his own chamber, tn the. ectasy of the moment he forgave his mother for all the miseries her unguarded conduct had brought on him, and pointing it out to Clam, «aid, "There is the best proof of my mother's sincerity. Till now I knew





not that she was aware of my having- a faint, resemblance of the dearest of human beings in my possession."

"Flatterer," replied Clara, "you do not conceive that the picture resembles me!"

"But faintly," he returned, "like a bust it gives an idea of the features, but the eye and the smile it is impossible to pourtray."

The tower was now in a state of undisturbed harmony. Aaltje even permitted the Burgomaster to be, pro tempore, the master of his own house, which, considering her love of government, was no trifling concession.. Clara was universally admired and heloved, and every heart rejoiced in the approaching happiness of Huyp.





CHAPTER XXXVII.



Old Time shall now, not lessen, but enhance

Our joys, and ripen with his fost'ring care,

Beyond the influence of Fate or Chance,



The fruits which now so fair a blossom bear:

Shall gild with rapture ev'ry fleeting hour,



Still shedding blushing honors as he flies,

And see, long c're he crops the parent flower,



Young, op'ning buds, in gay succession rise.

Jennet's Poem.



THE family from the cottage accompanied by Luttrell and Matilda* to whom an invitation had been sent by Yander Dordrecht, now joined the party at the tower. Mrs.Vuist Slaagen came prepared with a long epithalamium, which she conceived to be as indispensable at a wedding, as a godfather at a christening, and it was amusing to hear the airs of romance which she and the Princess played off against each other. Mrs. Vuist Slaagen had unfortunately been educated in too superior a style for her situation in life, and had all the frivolity of a fine lady without the means of supporting it, for although Luitje was tolerably well off", for a man of his station in life, he was far from being wealthy, and besides had too much sense to allow his wife to squander away the money he had toiled early and late to gain. The welfare of his family was the chief consideration^ and to help those who stood in need of assistance, was both his pride and his pleasure. A better man there could not exist; aud though he made no parade of his virtues, they were universally esteemed and acknowledged. He





welcomed Clara with a kind embrace, and congratulated her on the termination of her troubles. He also spoke of her father, and this to Clara was always a grateful theme. To know that his memory was venerated and cherished, was the only thing that could console her for his loss. Indeed she loved to dwell on the subject, which, though melancholy, was, nevertheless, pleasant to her souL It had a charm for her that never could be dispersedr and to speak well of him was the surest way to win her heart.

The vivacity of Matilda charmed both Clara and the Princess. She seemed to them like a creature of the air—so light, so sylph-like, that Clara forgave Huyp for suffering his affections to wander. He had frankly told Clara of his heart's dereliction, and though she at the time playfully chided him for his faithlessness, she loved him too well to have the slightest fear of a rival. Her confidence in his truth was not to be shaken by trifles, for she felt that on him alone her future happiness depended. Luttrel! almost envied Huyp the possession of so lovely a creature, and his eyes were so continually directed towards her, that Matilda, in a gentle whisper, bade him not to excite her jealousy. Clara could not help laughing at the puppyism of Luttrell, aud when she contrasted his manners with those of her own lover, the comparison was highly favorable to Huyp.





However nothing occurred to ruffle their serenity of mind. Aaltje, now her prejudices were removed, grew partial to Clara who made a point of paying her those flattering little attentions which always go a great way towards attaching the heart. To Huyp nothing could be more delightful than the scene before him, and when he could draw Clam aside, he would fondly talk over the little plans he had projected to increase their future felicity; and when he could not, with propriety, take her from the society of his friends, his fond and tender glances spoke of unabated love.





The affection which Luitje bore towards his nephew, made him rejoice to behold the felicity he enjoyed, he jokingly offered to stand sponsor to the first pledge of their love. Huyp informed him that it was rather too soon to think of that, and reminded him that there was yet a previous ceremony to be performed. "And when is that to take place, jongeling?" enquired Luitje. "If it is to be within any reasonable time, 1 shall remain here, without ceremony or further invitation, until you have put your head into the poke. But I am sure you will be happy, Huyp, for I do not believe that Clara has any thing of the vixen in her composition. Why even that gay laughimg girl, Matilda—I beg her pardon—Mrs. Luttrell—though she cannot be supposed to have much love for that essenced fop, her husband, behaves like an angel, though I confess I could forgive her if she were to treat him as he deserves. I do not know where the fellow's brains are, for I find it utterly impossible to make any thing of him— I suppose the old Lord, his father sent him out in the world to look for them— or perhaps his old prosey, as he calls him, carried them off by mistake when they parted. Yet he has not a bad heart if it were possible to clear it of the dross with which it -is encumbered."





Huyp smiled at the description his plain-spoken uncle gave of his soi disant pupil, and expressed his hope that the influence of the fair Matilda might even yet mould him into something worthy the name of a man. "Pshaw," replied Luitje, "the only way that he can be made either useful or ornamental, would , t>e to put him in the case of an Egyptian Mummy, and place him in some national collection of curiosities—he , might perhaps fetch something at the sale of some museum if he was placed on a glass case tete-a-tete with an aapj«r





This was somewhat severe of Luitjet but he was vexed to find that Luttrell was one of those who are incorrigible in their follies.

The heart of Matilda fluttered within I

her bosom when Katryn delivered a

small sealed billet into the hands of

Luitje, which bore the superscription of

her father. She was not long kept in

suspense with respect to the contents,

for Luitje had no sooner finished the

perusal of it, than he said, ** You must





prepare for the reception of another guest, Sister Aaltje; the preserver of my runaway nephew there, is arrived in Flanders, and will, with your permission, pay his respects at the tower." Matilda almost fainted whsn she found that she was to meet her father at so short a notice, and it was all the ladies could do to revive her spirits sufficiently for her to bear the interview. Both Aaltje and the Burgomaster expressed their happiness at his arrival, and trusted that he would favor them with his company for some time. Huyp took up his hat, and said, that he would instantly hasten to the cottage of his uncle, and bring back Captain Hawkins with him.

"Not so fast, if you please, Jonge&*g%" returned Luitje, "leave that task to a more experienced, I will not say an abler man. Suppose, Sister Aaltje, you and I were to be the deputies on this important occasion."— Aaltje readily consented, and they -quitted the room together.





It was evident that Captain Hawkins

was at that time within the walls of the

tower, and Huyp longed to embrace

the^kind friend who had saved him at

the moment that he had lost almost the

last hope of preservation.

i Not so felt Luttrell. He dreaded to

. meet the man whom he had deprived of

his daughter, and would gladly have

escaped for a time had it been possible

to do so. But Matilda also dreaded the

interview. She felt that she had not

treated her father with the confidence he

merited, and she feared his returning

kindness more than his reproaches.

When we are conscious of error, kindness affects us infinitely more than the keenest reproaches. Matilda felt this truth most forcibly, and though she was happy to find that her fond father was under the same roof with herself, she could not gain sufficient courage, to meet him with composure.





The kind, soothing attentions of Clara, however, did much towards calming her troubled mind, and Vander Dordrecht assured her, that be would guarantee her safety as a neutral power under his protection. Jjuttreli was half inclined to entreat the favor of being included in the preliminaries, but shame prevented him from making the request. At length the door opened, and Captain Hawkins entered, accompanied by Aaltje and her brother.

Matilda threw herself at his feet and wept. Her heart was so full that ahe could not speak, but she looked so piteously and repentant, that her father could not refuse her his pardon. All his pre-concerted plans of feigned anger vanished in a moment—he raised her from her humble and penitent position, and, kissing the tears from her cheeks, assured her that she was still his own dear child.





This kind conduct of Captain Hawkins gave confidence to Luttrell, and he also expressed his hope that he might be included in his pardon.

Captain Hawkins eyed him from head to foot, as though he was examining something rare and curious: then elevating his cane, as if about to strike him, he said, "Can any of you, good people, tell me how to act in this instance? Old Lyly says « the masculine is more worthy than the feminine aud the feminine more worthy than the neuter'—but to which of these, this young sprig of nobility belongs, I am at a loss to conjecture. Come, Sir," he continued, "speak for yourself, and tell me how you dared to carry off my daugh ter without my consent?"





Luttrell replied, that he feared, from the acknowledged dislike the Captain had to any thing like rank, that he would have refused him the hand of his daughter.

"You judged perfectly right, Sir,"

returned Captain Hawkins, "but pray

are you acquainted with my reasons for

that antipathy?"

Luttrell replied in the negative.

"Then I will tell you, Sir," rejoined

Captain Hawkins. "My poor wife was

the sister of a nobleman, and renounced

by her family, because she had married

a plebeian. Till within the last few

weeks, I have held no communication

with my noble relatives, for, when my

wife died, they did not even pay her the

respect of assuming the garments of

mourning, and then, for their want of

feeling, I renounced them. Do you

know whom you have married, Sir?"





"Your daughter, Sir," replied Luttrell.

"Pshaw!" exclaimed the Captain, ?' your comprehension is quite on a par with that of nobility in general. Sir, you have married your cousin!"

Matilda was surprized, for Captain Hawkins had carefully concealed from his children the consequence of their connexions, lest they might think themselves privileged to assume a rank superior to what he wished them. Luttrell was absolutely mute with astonishment. The indiscretion of his aunt he had frequently heard mentioned, but he had no idea that Matilda was her child.

"Perhaps," continued Captain Hawkins, "you, also, may be ashamed of your humble and untitled relatives, if you are so, speak now, and Matilda shall again have the protection of her father."

Luttrell took the hand of Matilda >

VOL. HI. M





and said, "both as my cousin and my wife, she is dear to me; and I am sure •my father -will pardon me, when be knows that I have espoused one, whose birth is equal to his own."

"He has done so already, Sir," returned the Captain. "I have written to him on the subject, and our former disputes are now buried in oblivion. You are free to return to England as soon a* you may feel disposed to do so, and, I assure you, that you need not anticipate even the slightest reproof."

"Yet he has not answered my letters,' Kaid Luttrell.

"You need not tell me that, Sir," resumed Captain Hawkins. "By my request your letters were intercepted, by my friend Luitje, who sent them, under cover, to me."

"Then my father has not seen them," said Luttrell.

"Indeed he has," replied the Cap





tain, "though, I confess, I took the iiberty of reading them first. But, nephew Luttrell, I sincerely regret with him, that you should sink the man in the monkey. For Heaven's sake, let me see you resemble your young friend there, and then, perhaps, I may thank you for relieving me of that giddy, troublesome girl."

Matilda clung round the neck of her father, and wept with joy. Huyp had now an opportunity of welcoming his kindest friend, who was not less rejoiced at seeing him so happy; for he had been informed by Luitje, of the disagreeable circumstances in which he had been placed, through the capricious temper of his mother. The Burgomaster acknowledged with gratitude the obligations he was under to him, for the preservation of his son, and congratulated the Captain on the choice his daughter had made. The ladies also did their best to reconcile him to Luttrell, who promised to render himself worthy of his esteem. Mrs. Vuist Slaagen, with her accustomed eccentricity, thought the scene sweetly romantic, and trusted that her literary friend would work up the incidents into, at least, five thick duodecimo volumes.





Huyp, meanwhile, had introduced Clara to the Captain, who was struck with her beauty and her modesty. He wondered that Aaltje had opposed the the wishes of her son, where thenwere so many estimable qualities to make amends for the want of fortune. A lovelier being than Clara he had never beheld, and he gave Huyp infinite credit for his choice of a wife. Commendation from a man like Captain Hawkins was valuable, for Huyp knew that he was not one of those who <*ive utterance to sentiments very dinerent from what thev feel. Clara received his compliments with that ease, which nothing less than real modesty can give. As she was to be united to Huyp, and sincerely loved him, she did not think it necessary to affect that diffidence, which some young ladies, in her situation, would have thought vastly interesting and becoming. Clara had none of that nonsense, she was not going to do any thing of which she was ashamed, and therefore saw no necessity of blushing at the very mention of matrimony. This high-mindedness was not lost on Captain Hawkins, who was, like herself, an enemy td any thing like affectation. He protested that he would not quit the tower until his young friend was fettered by the rites of the church, for as he had not had the pleasure of witnessing the marriage of his own daughter, he was determined to have the honor of attending that of Huyp... The Burgomaster assured him that nothing would afford him more real pleasure, for as they were indebted to him for their son's safety, he had a right to officiate as father on the occasion. Captain Hawkins said that he should claim the fulfilment of this promise, with the permission of the fair bride, for though he was himself verging towards the period of old age, he had not yet lost aH interest in the happiness of his younger friends. The Princess was quite smitten with the gallant sailor, and declared that should she again change her state, he must be the person to emancipate her from her widowhood. The Captain had not lost his gallantry, nor the Princess her love of flirtation, so that the party were amused r and Mrs. Vuist Slaagen highly gratified, by witnessing what she termed with her ut.ual romance many delicateendearments. To be sure they were experienced lovers, and it





might have been doubted whether either of them felt the slightest tendresse for the other. It was all stage effect, and every look and action told. Indeed the Princess declared that until Captain Hawkins arrived she had been like an unmated dove, for though she had received the attentions of the gentlemen she had found the want of a regular beau. The gallantries of the Captain were however sometimes rather awkward, and Matilda wickedly whispered in his ear, that perhaps a few lessons from Luttrell might be of service to him. "No>—no," he replied, "I am too old to improve, and if I can furl a sail, better than I can flap a lady's fan, I must throw myself on the mercy of the Princess, and the candour of my friends."

"Ah! brother sailor," said Luitje, "we old-fashioned, plain spoken men have our chances still, though we may not be quite so agile and shewya? our younger friends, and if we are, at times, troubled with gout and rheumatism, sensible women will prefer us to those young nondescripts, whose whole and sole attention is confined to themselves." His eyes glanced towards Luttrell as be spoke, who blushed at the indirect reproof, which was thus levelled at him. He found, that he was in the society of persons who were no advocates for modern refinement—no patrons of cosmetics and corsets—and wisely determined to alter his mode of conduct. , •





Captain Hawkins was received at- the tower like an old friend; though he was a stranger to the major-part of the family, he had been so well described by Huyp and Luitje, that they knew the peculiarities of his character* as well as if they had been acquainted with him from childhood. His amiable qualities gained him the love of every one who had the happiness to know him, and his- steadiness of mind made him a firm and valuable friend. His gallantries with the Princess were of that quiescent nature, that they formed the amusement of every one. He even walked a stately minuet to oblige her, and once attempted a waltz, in compliance -with her desires, when, though he did his best,- and attempted to spin round like a top, he managed it with so little skill, that, owing to a false step, and, perhaps, a little giddiness, he laid both himself and her Highness on the carpetClara was not backward in contributing to the.amusement of her friends, and, as her harp had been, at the request of Aaltje, brought thither from the villa, she frequently displayed1 her taste and her skill in music, by performing the most difficult compositions on that soft and sweet-toned instrument, and to oblige Luitje, she sang the following little legendary tale:





Li9t! the breeze is murmuring—soundinz

Like the mountain echoes hoar:

Hark! the ocean, hoarsely bounding.



Lashes roughly 'gainst the shore,

O'er the forest anxious glancing,



Mif a sits in latticed bower;

For her lord, on war-steed prancing,.



Will return at twilight hour.



Now the moon begins to steal

Slowly through the evening cloud,

And stars around their orbits wheel,



From beneath their airy shroud;

And those dewy gems of night,



Seemed to Mira to be weeping,

For some deed that shuns the light,



As murder wakes when fear is sleeping.





Midnight passM—her lord' came not,.

And Mira's heart grew chill and cold ^ „

And serfs were sent to tower and cot,



O'er forest, path, and louely wold.

THejr found him stretch'J upon the sand,





foam-topped waves were curling-round him. Gore stained his garments—yet his hand Grasped the steel tight clasped around him.

Mira, from the turret height.

Beheld at morning's faintest dawn, y

The sad, to her, heart-breaking sight,

That left her spirit wild and lorn.

One deep sigh proclaimed her loss—



One faint shriek was all she gave :—

Then sinking on her husband's corse,



Like him she perished in the grave.

"I did not think you were partial to such sad tales, young lady," said Captain Hawkins, "Faith, you have brought the tear into my eye—therefore, pray give us something more lively, if you are not disposed to lower our spirits."

"I did not suppose that you were so

nervous," returned Clara. "Fie! fie!

Captain Hawkins, you are growing

quite a modern fine gentleman."

Aaltje said, that he was quite excusable; and Mrs. Vuist Slaagen declared, that the Captain was just like herself. Every one smiled at this expression, and Huyp thought his aunt wasr for once, mistaken in her opinion.





Look who comes here, Sir, his love-fit's upon him:

I know it by that set smile and those congees.

How courteous he's to nothing, which indeed

Is th" next kin to woman, (only shadow's

The elder sister of the twain,) because 'tis seen, too,

See haw it kisses the tbre-fingcr still!

Beaumont & Fletcher.



AT length the- day arrived, which was destined to unite Huyp to the beloved of his heart. It was one of those line and lovely autumn mornings, which give a lightness to the soul, and add a charm even to happiness. The tower was in a bustle with the preparations for the festivities—the merry belJs rang a loud and joyous peal, and several young women, who dwelt in the vicinity of the mansion, were already arrived, laden with light wicker baskets filled with the choicest flowers, which it was their province to strew in the path of the bride. Huyp was gay and smiling, and shook hands, indiscriminately, with all those who wished to do him honor, by attending the celebration of his nuptials.





Huyp, though when Aaltje first came to reside at the Tower, had been universally considered an idle mischievous youth,, had gradually gained on the affections of those who had at first been inclined to be his enemies. His good qualities had insensibly expanded and new they considered him to be a worthy and most amiable young man. Nor were they wrong in their opinion. Huyp's power was very limited, but asfar as he could, he endeavoured to act well, and when a young man strives to gain the affections of the world by fair and honest means, he seldom fails to obtain the end he has in view.





The bridal of the young and amiable pair, was an event, which having been bruited about by the volubility of Katryn, excited considerable attention. The village church which raised its white and tapering spire at a short distance from Dordrecht Tower, was crowded with villagers of all ages. Women and children who had ranged themselves along the aisles to witness the ceremony. All was expectation— for so much had been said of the splendour of the preparations that every one was anxious to behold them. The Princess too was to be present, and as sher contrary to the practice of modern continental quality, had lived so reserved and secluded from society, ^the" knowledge of her being one of (he bridal party created a sensation not far distant from surprize.





The hour at length arrived. The cavalcade of carriages were observed to proceed from, the Tower, preceded by a group of young women arrayed hi garments of snowy whiteness, their brows bound- with garlands of roses entwined with myrtle*, scattering flowers in the path of the bride and bridegroom, who filled the first carriage^ accompanied by the Princess and Captain Hawkins. Next came that. of the Burgomaster occupied by his own relatives, and then the cabriolet of Mynheer Kikvorsch with a party of invited guests. A numerous concourse of pedestrians, decorated with bridal favors, closed the procession, which soon arrived at the door of the church. The veil which.was drawn over the face of Clara did not prevent the bright and





beaming blushes of modesty from being perceived by those around. Supported by the arm of Captain Hawkins she advanced to the altar. The ceremony immediately proceeded.—Those who had preceded and followed the bridal train formed a semicircular group round them at a short distance.

A pleasing, yet a solemn stillness pervaded the edifice, until the venerable pastor had pronounced his benediction on the young pair. Then the whispers of admiration and congratulation were heard from all—gentle as the murmuring of a summer breeze in the petals of a flower.

Clara, with graceful ease, thanked them for their good wishes and expressions of attachment, and the heart of Huyp bounded with joy. Nor was Aakje less happy than her son. Her former unfounded prejudices were now completely eradicated, and she was justly proud of having so beautifid and accomplished a being as Clara for her daughter-in-law.





At the tower the festivities were conducted after the good old fashion. The young couple were not sent away as fast as four horses could carry them to the Hague or Brussels, as though they were ashamed of their late action, but by their presence gave a zest to the general hilarity. With a liberality which none had expected from Vander Dordrecht, he that day kept open house. All were welcome, and many a mem group danced on the lawn, with " light fantastic" step round the happy pair, who sat there for some time in compliment to their rejoicing friends.

It required all the exertions, and authority of Luitje, to prevent Mrs. Vuist Slaagen from reciting her prized epithalamium for the edification of the assembly. She considered not that many of them were unlettered hinds, who liked the notes of a fiddle much better than the cadences of poesy, and knew not even the heathen deities by name, which, in her opinion, formed the great charm of the delectable composition in question. "I tell you, Mrs. Vuist Slaagen," said Luitje, "that I will not suffer you to make an aapje of yourself. Why even Luttrell has acted like inhuman being all this day, and sister Aaltje has been more reasonable than I ever saw her before in my life."





"What is that brother?" said Aaltje, who had just caught the mention of her own name.

"Only a slight compliment to yourself, sister Aaltje," returned Luitje. I feel gratified by your conduct to day, and thought myself at liberty to give my opinion on the subject."

Aaltje was pleased with the approbation of her brother, which she knew was never given on slight grounds. He was not courtly enough to flatter, and was too honest to express a sentiment that he did not feel.





Captain. Hawkins was now quite reconciled to his runaway daughter, and hinted, that as he had prolonged bis stay at the tower, for the purpose of being present at the marriage of his young friend, he must, on the morrow, bid them adieu, and deprive them of Luttrell and Matilda.

"Faithless man," said the Princess with feigned sorrow, "will you. then really leave me? What am I to do for a beau! Really, Captain, your gallantry is. very so—so "—

"My dear Madam," replied the Captain, I am one of those, I will not say unhappy—human beings, who have to labour in this world, and in truth, were you to deprive me of my occupation, I should not know what to do with my time. To-morrow 1 must cross over to England, or my other daughters will be advertising me as lost, with a reward for my restoration."





Huyp used every argument in his power, to prevail on him to remain a few days longer with them, as did also Aaltje and Vander Dordrecht, but he assured them, that he was absolutely obliged to be in England by a certain time, to meet Lord Luttrell, who had condescended to promise him a visit at his humble habitation, and as the wind promised to be fair, he thought it was best, for the sake of Matilda, to take advantage of what he termed a favorable time.

Though they were all sorry to be deprived of his society, they could say no more, and much as Clara was attached to the gay Matilda she even felt reconciled to her departure, when she considered that by being acknowledged



..





by Lord Luttrell as his relative, both by the ties of kindred and marriage, she would be the means of restoring harmony between the two families, who had unfortunately been too long disunited.

To Matilda this meeting hud it* terrors, but as it was impossible to avoid it, she endeavoured to make up her mind to it, as one of absolute necessity. Luttrell anticipated a severe chiding for his follies and his extravagance, but he trusted that the influence of Captain Hawkins, would do much towards softening the asperities of his Lordship. He would much rather have continued at the tower, where he had experienced more real pleasure, than, perhaps, he had ever before known. But his wishes could not be gratified. The hour of parting came, and Huyp, with sorrow, took leave of the man to whom he was indebted for the preser





vation of his life. Matilda and Luttrell promised Clara that they would pay her a visit early in the following Spring, and Captain Hawkins gave them all a general invitation to visit him at Ramsgate, where, he assured them, he should anxiously expect to have the pleasure of welcoming them to an Englishman's fire side.

Luitje was vexed with the Captain for depriving him of Matilda, and cordially wished that the old Lord had been at the bottom of the sea, or in the vault of his ancestors, before he had taken it into his head to send for them home. But as he knew it was all for the best, he soon bore this unexpected privation with calmness.

Huyp now united to the woman who had full possession of his affections, had nothing more to wish for. They were to reside for some time at the tower until a pretty little cottage on the confines of the garden of the Burgomaster, could be prepared, for their reception, though the Princess made them promise to give her as much of their time as could be spared from the calls of love and duty.





The Robsons were astonished when they heard of the changes that had taken place at the tower, and though they hated Clara more than ever, they were projecting schemes of reconciliation, for they conceived it to be by n* means improbable, that Clara would enjoy much distinction and attention in the fashionable world. Their letters of congratulation, however, were duly appreciated by all parties, and though Huyp was too polite to return them, he gave them to understand, that boti himself and Clara declined their acquaintance. Aaltje thought her son bad acted quite right, while the Burgomaster declared that such people ought to he scouted from all civilized Nociety.





Rosalie—the unfeeling Rosalie—has aU-o experienced the instability of greatness. The Ministry finding her power too great, arid her conduct too bad even for a court mistress, combined against her, and placing a younger and lovelier frail one in the arms of their master, succeeded in obtaining her exile from the Court.

How different has been the fate of Clara! With virtue for her handmaid, and prudence for her guide, she has attained tbe summit of earthly happiness, and enjoys the love and respect of all who have the honor to know her. There is but one moral to be inculcated, which is that Virtue is the only sure prop of human felicity. Vice

VOL. UK N





sooner or later always meets with deserved punishment, for the justice of Omnipotence slumbers not for ever.





BY

J. C. SPENCE,

THE KNIGHTS OF RITZBERG, a Romance," by the Author of "Supreme Bon Ton," *' Parga," &c. 3 vols. 16*. 6d.

The story is interesting, the moral good, and the style neither'tame, nor otherwise objectionable.

Literary Chronicle.

We have read this work with considerable pleasure, and have no hesitation in saying, that it ranks among the first of the kind, exciting an interest in the mind of the reader to the close.

Observer of the Times.

These volumes are well written. From the title we expected some bombast in dietion, but were .agreeably disappointed. To those whta admire a rapid change of incident, and the wonderful in every incident, we recommend the work, with a certainty of its yielding satisfaction.

Literary Register.

RHODOMALDI, a Romance, 3 vols. 16s. Cd

SUPREME BON TON, aNovel, 3vols. 18i. These volumes will be found an acquisition to the library of the Novelist.

London Magazine.

The characters'in this Novel are drawn to the life.

Literary Chronicle.

Printed by J. Poplett, 27, Jewin-street, Cripplegate.
